The Effect of Social Feedback in a Reddit Weight Loss Community ∗ Tiago O . Cunha 1 2 , Ingmar Weber 1 , Hamed Haddadi 3 and Gisele L . Pappa 2 1 Qatar Computing Research Institute , HBKU , Qatar 2 Federal University of Minas Gerais , Brazil 3 Queen Mary University of London , UK tocunha @ dcc . ufmg . br , iweber @ qf . org . qa , hamed . haddadi @ qmul . ac . uk , glpappa @ dcc . ufmg . br ABSTRACT It is generally accepted as common wisdom that receiving social feedback is helpful to ( i ) keep an individual engaged with a community and to ( ii ) facilitate an individual’s pos - itive behavior change . However , quantitative data on the eﬀect of social feedback on continued engagement in an on - line health community is scarce . In this work we apply Ma - halanobis Distance Matching ( MDM ) to demonstrate the importance of receiving feedback in the “loseit” weight loss community on Reddit . Concretely we show that ( i ) even when correcting for diﬀerences in word choice , users receiv - ing more positive feedback on their initial post are more likely to return in the future , and that ( ii ) there are di - minishing returns and social feedback on later posts is less important than for the ﬁrst post . We also give a description of the type of initial posts that are more likely to attract this valuable social feedback . Though we cannot yet argue about ultimate weight loss success or failure , we believe that understanding the social dynamics underlying online health communities is an important step to devise more eﬀective interventions . Keywords weight loss ; Reddit ; loseit ; social feedback 1 . INTRODUCTION According to the World Health Organization , the preva - lence of obesity has nearly doubled in the last 30 years 1 , making the condition a major public health problem . Obe - sity is associated with signiﬁcantly increased risk of more than 20 chronic diseases and health conditions [ 18 ] , and di - rectly aﬀects quality of life . It is well known that people dealing with obesity can greatly beneﬁt from support groups to helping them lose weight [ 20 ] . In the digital era , an increasing number of people suﬀering from this condition are turning to online sources , both to collect information and to connect with like - minded people to create virtual support groups . The digital data generated from these online interactions creates ∗ This is a preprint of an article appearing at ACM Digital Health 2016 1 http : / / www . who . int / gho / ncd / risk factors / obesity text / en / new opportunities to study various topics related to obesity , such as the eﬀects of online social feedback [ 2 ] , social capital [ 12 ] and social identity [ 5 ] . In this work , we explore data from a Reddit weight loss community and ask the following research questions : Q1 - Does social feedback received on the ﬁrst post have an eﬀect on the probability of users to remain engaged with the weight loss community ? , Q2 : Is social feedback on later posts as important as in the early posts for maintaining user engagement ? , and Q3 - What are the characteristics of ini - tial posts that attract more social feedback than average posts ? Reddit 2 is a social news website and forum . Its content is organized in sub - communities by areas of interest called subreddits . In 2015 it had 8 . 7 million users from 186 coun - tries writing 73 . 2 million posts and 725 . 9 million comments in 88 , 700 active subreddits 3 . For our study we look at the popular weight loss subreddit loseit 4 . In loseit , the user - generated content comprises various topics related to obesity and weight loss , such as personal experiences , recommendations and feedback about certain medications , medical procedures , diets or exercises . Last but not least there is also emotional support in the form of encouragement , sympathy , and success stories . For a given post , other users can provide feedback by ( i ) replying with a comment or ( ii ) upvoting the original post as a sign of “liking” it . We study whether these forms of social feedback have an eﬀect on a user’s propensity to continue to engage beyond their ﬁrst post . In particular we look at whether for pairs of similar initial posts by new - comer users , users who receive more feedback from the community are more likely to return to the subreddit in the future . We found robust evidence that any type of feedback does indeed increase a user’s probability to return . Furthermore , there is an eﬀect of “diminishing returns” , where social feed - back appears to be most important for a user’s initial post but the support received looses its importance for later posts . The rest of this paper is organized as follows . In the next section we review related work , in particular works investi - gating social feedback , user engagement and Reddit . Sec - 2 https : / / www . reddit . com 3 “Active” is determined by having 5 or more posts and com - ments during at least one week in 2015 . 4 http : / / www . reddit / r / loseit a r X i v : 1602 . 07936v1 [ c s . S I ] 25 F e b 2016 tion 3 then describes the data collection . Our results are presented in Section 4 , broken down in three parts . First , Section 4 . 1 shows the analysis at the heart of our work : ap - plying Mahalanobis Distance Matching and observing if the user who receives more social feedback returns more often than their less fortunate counterpart . Second , Section 4 . 2 then extends this analysis by looking at whether social feed - back is only of importance for the initial post or also for lat - ter posts . Finally , in Section 4 . 3 we describe general char - acteristics of posts that are successful in attracting social feedback . 2 . RELATED WORK The relationship between social interactions , social feed - back and health outcomes has been extensively studied in the medical literature . Research has shown that conditions such as smoking , depression and coronary disease , among others , may be controlled if individuals receive enough social feedback in the form of social support [ 19 ] . In the context of obesity , the inﬂuence of social feedback on engagement in healthy eating and physical activity , as well as on achiev - ing successful outcomes in weight reduction programs , has also been demonstrated [ 20 ] . Other studies also showed that there is an independent role of social feedback on health - related quality of life among obese individuals [ 9 ] . Encouraging continued user engagement is essential for the success of weight loss programs , previous studies showed that users who stay longer in these programs have greater success in achieving their goals [ 13 , 8 ] . The importance of user engagement also holds for online groups , where social feedback has been shown to play an important role in new - comer user engagement [ 4 ] . However , most observational studies do not control for covariates that can aﬀect the probability of receiving feedback , which limits its ability to explain the eﬀect of the feedback received . As examples of covariates , Althoﬀ et al . [ 1 ] found that posts with linguistic indications of gratitude , evidentiality , and reciprocity are more likely to receive feedback and obtain success while asking for free pizza in the subreddit“Random acts of Pizza” . In our work we reduce the bias created by such eﬀects by applying Mahalanobis Distance Matching . Reddit has been used to study diﬀerent health conditions under diﬀerent perspectives , including social feedback . For example , Choudhury et al . [ 6 ] analyzed the discourse of Reddit posts and comments looking for indications of de - pression . They found that Reddit users in certain communi - ties explicitly share information about mental health issues , potentially to gather social feedback . Eschler et al . [ 7 ] , in turn , investigated the behavior of patients in diﬀerent can - cer stages in the subreddit r / cancer . From a content analysis of the posts , they concluded that patient and survivor par - ticipants show diﬀerent types of information and emotional needs according to their illness phase , and suggested certain community reorganization to make information access easier for people with cancer in diﬀerent stages . Tamersoy et al . [ 17 ] performed an analysis of addiction in Reddit , focusing on tobacco or alcohol . They collected data from two smoking and drinking abstinence communities and identiﬁed the key linguistic and interaction characteristics of short - term and long - term abstainers . Then , they built a supervised learning framework based on the characteristics above to distinguish long - term abstinence from short - term abstinence . 3 . DATASET The data used in our analysis covers 5 years ( August 2010 to October 2014 ) and was crawled from Reddit using PRAW ( Python Reddit API Wrapper ) , a Python package that al - lows simple access to Reddit’s oﬃcial API . In Reddit users can submit content , such as textual posts or direct links to other sites , both collectively referred to as posts . The com - munity can then vote posted submissions up ( upvotes ) or down ( downvotes ) to organize the posts and determine their position on the site’s pages . Information on downvotes is , however , not exposed via the API . Users can also reply to posts with comments . The data we collected include posts , comments and other metadata ( i . e . , timestamp , user name , number of upvotes ) . In total , we obtained 70 , 949 posts and 922 , 245 comments . These data were generated by 107 , 886 unique users , of which 38 , 981 ( 36 . 1 % ) wrote at least one post and 101 , 003 ( 93 . 6 % ) at least one comment . Table 1 shows the mean , median and standard deviation ( SD ) for basic statistics of the dataset , including the length of posts and comments and the number of daily messages . Figure 1 shows the cumulative distribu - tion function ( CDF ) over posts and comments per user . Table 1 : Basic statistics of loseit dataset . Mean Median SD Posts per day 45 . 5 45 22 . 7 Comments per day 586 . 6 599 264 . 3 Upvotes per post 35 . 7 6 126 . 7 Upvotes per comments 3 . 1 2 11 . 4 Words per posts 89 . 3 64 95 . 8 Words per comments 25 . 5 14 35 . 3 Figure 1 : Cumulative distribution function of number of posts and comments per user . 4 . RESULTS 4 . 1 Mahalanobis Distance Matching In order to investigate if users who receive more social feedback on their initial post are more likely to engage in the community and return for a second activity the most obvious approach is to split the data into two cohorts : users that receive social feedback on their ﬁrst post and those that do not and then , for each cohort , compare the fraction of users returning to the subreddit . Though intuitive , this kind of analysis is strongly limited by the eﬀect of other covariates . For example , a generally optimistic user might write a ﬁrst post with a more posi - tive tone than a more pessimistic counterpart . Let us then imagine that , in response , the former user receives lots of comments and the latter receives none . Now let us further imagine that the former user returns for more activity on the subreddit later , whereas the latter user is never to be seen again . The question then arises whether the comments re - ceived“caused”the former user to return or , rather , whether that user was at a higher disposition to return anyway and the social feedback received was a mere correlate . To obtain a less biased estimate of whether the “treat - ment” of receiving social feedback has an eﬀect , we apply a matching method . Matching is a preprocessing for reduc - ing model dependence . The most commonly used match - ing method is Propensity Score Matching ( PSM ) [ 15 ] , which aims to approximate a complete random experiment . PSM ﬁrst builds a model to predict the probability of a particu - lar user to receive the treatment . Users are then matched according to their probability of receiving the treatment . However , recently King and Nielsen [ 11 ] showed that this method is suboptimal and that PSM can under certain cir - cumstances even increase the bias in the data . Here we apply the Mahalanobis Distance Matching ( MDM ) [ 16 ] which approximates a fully blocked experiment . In MDM ﬁrst we measure the distance of the users based on the covariates – in our case the content of the ﬁrst posts – then we match each “treated” user with the nearest “non - treated” user . Next , the analysis looks at whether , once correcting for diﬀerences in prior probabilities , the act of receiving the treatment aﬀects the observed outcome . To deﬁne the treated and non - treated groups , we ranked all the ﬁrst posts by the amount of feedback received , then we considered the top 40 % as the treated group and the bottom 40 % as the non - treated group . The middle 20 % were dropped from the analysis . When matching the users we started with the “most treated” ones , i . e . , those user in the top 40 % that received the largest amount of feedback , going until the “least treated” one . Each user in the treated group was matched with the nearest user in the non - treated group without replacement . To make sure that our method is matching similar users , we only considered pairs with a similarity value greater or equal to 0 . 8 . The deﬁnition of the covariates was motivated by the hy - pothesis that posts with similar content have a similar prob - ability of receiving feedback . We could include other fea - tures to the covariates , such as user attributes . However , due to the anonymous nature of Reddit , user attributes like demographics or proﬁle images are not available in loseit , and hence the sole focus on the post’s content is natural . When matching treated and non - treated users , we used a topical representation of their ﬁrst post’s content extracted by Latent Dirichlet Allocation ( LDA ) [ 3 ] . The required pa - rameters – number of topics , number of iterations , α and β – were empirically deﬁned as 100 and 1 , 000 , 1 and 0 . 1 . Then to compute the distance among users , we used the co - sine similarity . Table 2 shows parts of the most similar pair ( treated and non - treated considering the number of com - ments received ) of ﬁrst posts according to the LDA model . This pair had a cosine similarity of 0 . 99 . We applied our methodology to the ﬁrst post of 37 , 278 users in loseit . Table 3 presents the probabilities of a user returning to the community for a second activity accord - ing to the amount of feedback received in the ﬁrst post . Table 2 : Parts of the most similar pair of posts . Treated : I do eat a pretty broad variety of stuﬀ , but I’ll start out . I’m a calorie counter . I aim between 1200 - 1600 / day : one poached egg ( 70 cal ) , toast ( 100 cal ) , 3 strips center cut bacon ( 70 cal ) . . . Non - treated : My go - to 100 calorie snacks : 18 grams of peanuts , 20 grams of pepitos ( shelled pumpkin seeds ) - 10 Marys ( TM ) Crispy Crackers , 140 grams of 2 % fat greek yogurt . . . We investigated the eﬀect of four types of feedback : all comments ( 13 , 385 pairs ) , only - positive comments ( 13 , 441 ) , only - negative comments ( 13 , 620 pairs ) and upvotes ( 12 , 604 pairs ) . The sentiment of the comments was computed us - ing the Valence Aware Dictionary for sEntiment Reasoning ( VADER ) [ 10 ] . Finally , for the deﬁnition of a “return activ - ity” , i . e . , the second activity of a user in the community , we considered both of the following : ( i ) when the user comes back to create a new post , and ( ii ) when he comes back to create a new post or comment on an existing post . 5 As expected , when considering both posts and comments as a user’s second activity , the return probabilities increased signiﬁcantly , e . g . , the number of comments received increases from 32 . 5 % to 76 . 3 % for the treated users . This is explained by the fact that loseit users comment much more than create their own posts ( see Figure 1 ) . The ﬁfth row shows the rela - tive diﬀerence in probability of receiving more feedback . We found that all types of social feedback have a positive eﬀect to users coming back for a second activity . We ran a chi - square test over the probabilities of bigger and smaller and for all types of feedback , and all the diﬀerences were statis - tically signiﬁcant . We also found the eﬀect of positive - only comments is bigger than all - comments and that negative - only comments have a smaller but still positive eﬀect , possi - bly due to noise in the sentiment classiﬁer . For example , the word “lost” as in the sentence “I’ve lost a lot of weight . ” in the context of loseit is very positive , but VADER classiﬁes it as negative . 4 . 2 Diminishing returns In the previous section we have presented evidence that so - cial feedback on a user’s initial post increases their probabil - ity of returning between 14 % and 24 % . However , two ques - tions arise from these results : if there is something special about a user’s initial post and how they are “welcomed” in the community , and whether users are in ever lasting “need” of social feedback , even once they have become veterans in the community . To answer these questions , we look for eﬀects of “dimin - ishing returns” , i . e . , if receiving social feedback on a user’s later posts gives less of a boost than receiving it earlier . We also look at the amount of social feedback received , as we hypothesize that any social feedback is better than none , but that receiving four comments is only marginally better than receiving three . In Figures 2a and 2b we present the diminishing returns for the amount of feedback received from the ﬁrst until the ﬁfth post . We show results for both receiving positive com - ments as feedback , and for receiving upvotes as feedback . 5 Note that we cannot obtain information for when or if a user reads posts on Reddit . Correspondingly we cannot mea - sure the eﬀect of social feedback on the“lurking”probability . Table 3 : Probabilities of a user returning to the community to perform at least one more activity ( posts only or posts or comments ) based on the amount of feedback ( comments , positive comments , negative comments or upvotes ) received in the ﬁrst post . All - comments Only - negative comments Only - positive comments Upvotes Post Post or comment Post Post or comment Post Post or comment Post Post or comment Probability of treated return 32 . 6 % 76 . 3 % 30 . 6 % 72 . 9 % 33 . 1 % 77 . 4 % 31 . 4 % 74 . 8 % Probability of non - treated return 26 . 9 % 61 . 2 % 29 . 1 % 67 . 2 % 26 . 7 % 60 . 8 % 26 . 9 % 65 . 9 % P ( returns | “treated” ) / P ( returns | “non - treated” ) 21 . 2 % 24 . 7 % 5 . 1 % 8 . 5 % 24 . 0 % 27 . 3 % 16 . 7 % 13 . 5 % Probability of both return 9 . 2 % 47 . 2 % 9 . 4 % 49 . 2 % 8 . 9 % 47 . 4 % 8 . 8 % 49 . 7 % Probability of neither return 49 . 7 % 9 . 7 % 49 . 6 % 9 . 0 % 49 . 0 % 9 . 2 % 50 . 4 % 9 . 0 % The ﬁrst column shows the probability of a user’s later re - turn for activities in the community when receiving no feed - back at all . The following columns present the relative diﬀer - ence ( compared to receiving zero feedback ) of receiving more than 0 , more than 1 , up to more than 6 feedbacks . For each of these columns , the return probability is also compared for its signiﬁcance level against the baseline probability of receiving no feedback . The stars indicate the signiﬁcance levels for a chi - square test for equality , with the number of asterisks corresponding to the p - values , * * * for 0 . 1 % , * * for 1 % and * for 5 % . For all the cells , the number of users considered appears between parentheses . As is immediately evident from the color coding , receiving social feedback for the ﬁrst post corresponds to by far the largest relative boost in return probability . Furthermore , after receiving more than four bits of social feedback the further gains are largely irrelevant . For some rows in the ﬁgure we also observe negative values indicating a decrease in return probability . We hypothesize that this is due to random noise induced by the smaller and smaller user sets for later and later posts . 4 . 3 Qualitative analysis So far we have shown that ( i ) receiving social feedback seems to boost the return probability of a user , and that ( ii ) this boost shows “diminishing returns” and receiving so - cial feedback on later posts is less impactful . One obvious question we have not yet answered though is : what types of post receive social feedback ? Put diﬀerently , how should newcomers behave to boost their chances of receiving feed - back ? We attempt to answer this question through qualitative analysis . We sort all ﬁrst posts by their number of received comments . Then we compare the content for the top 10 % posts ( 3 , 727 posts ) to the content of the bottom 10 % posts ( 3 , 727 posts ) . For better clarity we removed the most com - mon words present in both groups ( e . g . weight , year , day , time , now , week , calorie and started ) . Examples of parts of highly - commented posts are “Su - per fat and really gross me http : / / i . imgur . com / ANON . jpg” and “ Feel like sh * t so I eat , which makes me feel like sh * t , so I . . . and so on” . Bottom posts include passages such as “I lost a lot of weight once but put it back on and much more . I’m ﬁnally ready to start again” and “I hit the gym and last year I hit 180 . I’ve drifted back up to 190 since then” . Words present in the top posts are related to feelings , food and diet . Note that the most used word in this class is “imgur” . This word is taken from an image sharing domain where people post before - after pictures showing their body transformation . 6 This suggests that loseit users feel that the 6 Shared pictures are hosted on the website http : / / imgur . com . ( a ) Positive comments . ( b ) Upvotes . Figure 2 : Diminishing returns for the number of positive comments and upvotes . ( a ) Top 10 % ( b ) Bottom 10 % Figure 3 : Word clouds showing frequently used words in the most and least commented posts . community is a safe enough environment for them to share images of themselves in swim wear . Interestingly , the cor - responding loss of anonymity does not seem to play a huge role for these sharing users and they do not seem to be fear - ing discrimination . Indeed , previous work has showed that this type of online groups can be particularly appealing to people with disabilities or social stigma , as they report mis - treatment and discrimination because of their condition [ 14 ] . At the bottom end , there appear to be posts from users expressing their desire to get back on track and lose weight . 5 . CONCLUSION We presented a study on the initial posts of 37 , 278 users to the loseit weight loss subreddit . Applying Mahalanobis Distance Matching , we provide evidence that receiving any form of social feedback on the initial post , such as replying comments or upvotes , is linked to a roughly 18 % increase in the probability to return to the community for future activ - ity . This link is not explained by variations in vocabulary of the original post . The boost in return probability is high - est for feedback received on the ﬁrst post , rather than later posts . The relative , additional gains in probability level oﬀ after receiving about 4 - 5 bits of feedback . Looking at the type of posts that are most likely to receive social feedback , we observe that posting images of oneself seems to be a good way to ensure a response from the community . Given the scarcity of studies on the eﬀects of social feedback on con - tinued engagement in health communities , we believe that these results contribute to a better understanding of the so - cial dynamics underlying weight loss . Looking back at our analysis , we were surprised to see a positive eﬀect of receiving negative comments . Though this might be partly explained by an inadequacy of using VADER for this automatic “supportive” vs . “discouraging” labeling , more likely the loseit Reddit community is “simply too nice” . In our study we did not observe any outright bit - ter or hateful comments . An example negative comment is “You f * * * ing skinny son of a b * tch . . . good on you mate . ” , which despite the chosen terms is actually supportive . We are currently investigating the feasibility of looking at Twit - ter users who state their weight loss intention and to then look at the eﬀect that receiving encouragement has on their inclination to continue posting updates . Given the promi - nence of abusive behavior such as “fat shaming” we would expect to see at least some negativity . Lastly , we intend to go beyond studying the continued engagement in the weight loss community and , instead , focus on the eﬀects on achieving actual weight loss . As a large number of community members regularly report their weight following conventions such as cw for “current weight” , we want to see if there is also a link between social feedback and weight loss . 6 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] T . Althoﬀ , C . Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil , and D . Jurafsky . How to ask for a favor : A case study on the success of altruistic requests . ICWSM , 2014 . [ 2 ] P . W . Ballantine and R . J . Stephenson . Help me , I’m fat ! Social support in online weight loss networks . Journal of Consumer Behaviour , 2011 . [ 3 ] D . M . Blei , A . Y . Ng , and M . I . Jordan . Latent dirichlet allocation . J . Mach . Learn . Res . , 3 , 2003 . [ 4 ] M . Burke , C . Marlow , and T . Lento . Feed me : Motivating newcomer contribution in social network sites . In CHI , 2009 . [ 5 ] C . - M . Chiu , H . - Y . Huang , H . - L . Cheng , and P . - C . Sun . Understanding online community citizenship behaviors through social support and social identity . Int . Journal of Information Management , 2015 . [ 6 ] M . D . Choudhury and S . De . Mental health discourse on reddit : Self - disclosure , social support , and anonymity . In ICWSM , 2014 . [ 7 ] J . Eschler , Z . Dehlawi , and W . Pratt . Self - characterized illness phase and information needs of participants in an online cancer forum . In ICWSM , 2015 . [ 8 ] R . Glasgow , C . Nelson , K . Kearney , and et al . Reach , engagement , and retention in an Internet - based weight loss program in a multi - site randomized controlled trial . J . Med . Internet Res . , 2007 . [ 9 ] M . Herzer , M . Zeller , J . Rausch , and A . Modi . Perceived social support and its association with obesity - speciﬁc health - related quality of life . Journal of developmental and behavioral pediatrics , 2011 . [ 10 ] C . J . Hutto and E . Gilbert . VADER : A parsimonious rule - based model for sentiment analysis of social media text . In ICWSM , 2014 . [ 11 ] G . King and R . Nielsen . Why propensity scores should not be used for matching . http : / / j . mp / 1sexgVw , 2015 . [ 12 ] J . S . Leroux , S . Moore , and L . Dube . Beyond the ”I” in the obesity epidemic : a review of social relational and network interventions on obesity . J Obes , 2013 . [ 13 ] K . Patrick , K . Calfas , G . Norman , and et al . Outcomes of a 12 - month web - based intervention for overweight and obese men . Ann Behav Med , 2011 . [ 14 ] R . M . Puhl and K . D . Brownell . Bias , discrimination , and obesity . Obes Res , 2001 . [ 15 ] P . Rosenbaum and D . Rubin . The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal eﬀects . Biometrika , 70 , 1983 . [ 16 ] D . B . Rubin and E . A . Stuart . Aﬃnely invariant matching methods with discriminant mixtures of proportional ellipsoidally symmetric distributions . The Annals of Statistics , pages 1814 – 1826 , 2006 . [ 17 ] A . Tamersoy , M . De Choudhury , and D . H . Chau . Characterizing smoking and drinking abstinence from social media . In Hypertext , 2015 . [ 18 ] M . Thiese , G . Moﬃtt , R . Hanowski , and et al . Commercial Driver Medical Examinations : Prevalence of Obesity , Comorbidities , and Certiﬁcation Outcomes . J . Occup . Environ . Med . , 2015 . [ 19 ] D . Umberson and J . K . Montez . Social relationships and health a ﬂashpoint for health policy . Journal of health and social behavior , 2010 . [ 20 ] M . Wang , L . Pbert , and S . Lemon . Inﬂuence of family , friend and coworker social support and social undermining on weight gain prevention among adults . Obesity , 2014 .