The Coated Pit and Macropinocytic Pathways Serve Distinct Endosome Populations Lindsay J . Hewlett , Alan R . Prescott , and Colin Watts Department of Biochemistry , Medical Sciences Institute , University of Dundee , Dundee , DD1 , 4HN , United Kingdom Abstract . Clathrin - coated vesicle endocytosis and macropinocytosis are distinct endocytic pathways demonstrable in several cell types including human epidermoid A431 cells ( West , M . A . , M . S . Bretscher , and C . Watts . 1989 . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 2731 - 2739 ) . Here we analyze the extent of mixing of macropino - cytic endosome ( macropinosome ) content with that of conventional endosomes served by coated vesicle en - docytosis . Using laser scanning confocal fluorescence microscopy we detected very little delivery of macro - pinosome content to either early or late endosomes - lysosomes as defined by labeling with transferrin or with LDL . Mixing of the contents of the macropino - somes and conventional endosomes was not induced by the addition of brefeldin A . Moreover , the mor - phology of macropinosomes was not grossly altered in the presence of brefeldin A , whilst in the same cells there were dramatic tubulation effects on conventional endosomes as reported by others . Although refractory to fusion with conventional endosomes , macropino - somes were nonetheless dynamic structures which sometimes exhibited vesiculo - tubular morphology in living cells and were capable of fusing with each other . We suggest that different endocytic mechanisms can give rise to distinct endosome populations . C LATHRIN - COated pits and the endosomal processing system they serve are recognized as the major route of entry for most endocytosed material , particularly that taken up via cell surface receptors ( reviewed in Gruen - berg and Howell , 1989 ; Hubbard , 1989 ; van Deurs et al . , 1989 ; Smythe and Warren , 1991 ) . However , it is now clear that other endocytic pathways which are not clathrin medi - ated exist on a variety of cell types ( reviewed in van Deurs et al . , 1989 ; Watts and Marsh , 1992 ) . Characterization of these pathways is at an early stage relative to the clathrin - mediated system but there appear to be distinct types based on vesicle morphology , size , sensitivity to inhibitors , and other criteria . Smooth flask shaped pits often referred to as caveolae have been frequently described on several cell types , particularly endothelial cells ( Palade , 1953 ; Fawcett , 1965 ) and it was suggested that cholera and tetanus toxins enter via such smooth pits ( Montesano et al . , 1982 ) . In fibroblasts similar cell surface invaginations are responsible for the delivery of receptor - bound folate ( Rothberg et al . , 1990a , b ) . These cav - eolae feature a distinct filamentous coat which includes a 22 - kD v - src tyrosine kinase substrate termed caveolin ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ) . A homologous protein , VIP 21 , has now been shown to reside in MDCK cell caveoli as well as in trans - Golgi network - derived vesicles ( Dupree et al . , 1993 ) . How - Address all correspondence to C . Watts , Department of Biochemistry , Med - ical Sciences Institute , University of Dundee , Dundee , DDI 2 HN , U . K . L . J . Hewlett ' s present address is MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology , University College , London . ever , morphological and biochemical criteria indicate that caveolae may operate without complete detachment from the cell surface ( Rothberg et al . , 1990a , b ; van Deurs et al . , 1993 ) . In this case clathrin - independent pinoeytosis of bulk phase markers must be mediated by alternative means . Han - sen et al . , have described distinct non - clathrin - coated pre - endosomal vesicles in HEp - 2 ceils which are 95 nm in di - ameter and which continue to form under conditions that block clathrin - coated vesicle formation , e . g . , K + - depletion ( Hansen et al . , 1991 ) . Another distinct class of non - clath - fin - coated endocytic vesicles are the macropinosomes . Macropinocytosis can occur constitutively but is dramati - cally up - regulated by growth factors or phorbol esters on some cell types ( Haigler et al . , 1979 ; West et al . , 1989 ; Swanson , 1989 ; Racoosin and Swanson , 1989 , 1992 ; Sand - vig and van Deurs , 1990 ) . Unlike clathrin - coated pits , cav - eolae and the 95 nm non - clathrin - coated vesicles , macro - pinosomes appear to be very heterogeneous in size and often form at the leading edge of cells and where membrane ruf - fling activity is maximal . We found that the activity of clath - fin - coated pits and macropinocytotic activity could be clearly distinguished based on the sensitivity of the latter to amilo - ride and amiloride analogues which inhibit Na + / H + ex - change ( West et al . , 1989 ; and L . Hewlett , unpublished re - sults ) . Although the mechanism of macropinocytosis and the basis of its sensitivity to amiloride is not yet established , growth factor induced membrane ruffling and pinocytosis ap - pears to be regulated by members of the ras family ( Bar Sagi and Feramisco , 1986 ) and particularly the rho sub - family ( Ridiey et al . , 1992 ) of ras - related GTPases . Ruffling and © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 94 / 03 / 689 / 15 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 124 , Number 5 , March 1994 689 - 703 689 pinocytosis could be stimulated following microinjection of activated rac - 1 ( V12 racl ) and growth factor - induced ruffling was inhibited by microinjection of N17 racl , which presum - ably inhibits endogenous rac - 1 function in a dominant fash - ion ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ) . The existence of as many as three distinct endocytic path - ways ( assuming all contribute to net membrane uptake ) raises several questions about the fate of the endocytic vesi - cles generated by these apparently diverse mechanisms . Re - cently , Hansen et al . ( 1993 ) have shown that markers endocy - tosed via 95 nm non - clathrin - coated vesicles deliver their contents into transferrin receptor positive early endosomes . Here we analyze the capacity of macropinosomes in EGF - stimulated A431 cells to communicate with these endosomes . Surprisingly , we find that while macropinosomes appear to be dynamic structures and can fuse with each other , their contents do not become mixed with markers such as transfer - rin and LDL delivered through coated pits . Materials and Methods Reagents EGF was purchased from AMS Eiotechnology ( Wituey , Oxon , U . K . ) . Cell culture media was from GIBCO BRL ( Paisley , Scotland ) Brefeldin A was a gift from Sandoz ( Basel , Switzerland ) or was purchased from Sigma Im - munochemicals ( St . Louis , MO ) . Texas red Dextran 70 , 000 tool wt , lysine fixable , and Texas red were purchased from Molecular Probes , Inc . ( Eu - gene , OR ) . Glass coverslips and microscope slides were from BDH Chemi - cals Ltd . ( Foole , U . K . ) . Tissue culture plastics were purchased from Costar ( Bucks , U . K . ) . Citifluor was from Agar ( Stansted , U . K . ) . All other reagents were from Sigma Immunochemicals , ( Poole , U . K . ) . Cell Culture A431 cells ( passage 35 ) , were a generous gift from Professor Colin Hopkins ( University College , London ) or were obtained from the European Collec - tion of Animal Cell Cultures ( Forton , U . K . ) and were maintained in DME , supplemented with 10 % heat - denatured FCS , I00 Ulml kanamycin and 2 mM glutamine . Cells were grown in a 37 " C incubator containing a 95 % air / 5 % COz atmosphere . Experiments were performed on cells that had al - most reached confluency in 30 mm petri dishes following subculture 2 d pre - viously . For microscopy , cells were seeded at low density onto sterile glass coverslips ( 10 s cells per 30 mm dish ) 2 d previously . Cells were not used for experiments beyond passage 45 . Before an experiment the growth medium was removed and the cells were incubated for an hour at 37°C in serum - free medium buffered with 20 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 4 , containing 2 mg / ml BSA . Preparation of Low - density Lipoproteins Low - density lipoproteins ( LDL ) 1 were prepared by serial density ultracen - trifugation of human serum ( Havel et al . , 1955 ) . VLDUs were removed by overlaying the serum with 196 mM NaCl , 0 . 27 m _ M EDTA ~ o = 1 . 0063 g / ml ) , and centrifuging for 20 h at 45 , 000 rpm at 20 " C in a rotor ( 55 . 2 Ti ; Beckman Instruments , Palo Alto , CA ) . The VLDL - containlng layer was then carefully removed . LDL was isolated by resuspending the remaining solution and adding half the volume of 2 . 46 M NaBr , 196 mM NaC1 , 0 . 27 mM EDTA ( d = 1 . 1816 g / ml ) and centrifuging at 45 , 000 rpm for 20 h at 20°C . The LDL layer was removed , dialyzed for 24 h against PBS and used for conjugation ( see below ) . Lipoprotein - deficient serum was then obtained by removing HDL from the remaining resuspended solution . The density of the solution was increased by adding half the volume of a 7 . 53 M NaBr , 196 mM NaC1 , 0 . 27 mM EDTA ( d = 1 . 4744 g / mi ) , followed by centrifuga - tion at 50 , 000 rpm for 24 h at 20°C . The HDL layer was discarded and the remaining solution was dialyzed extensively against DME buffered with Hepes , pH 7 . 4 , and used as serum to supplement normal growth medium in experiments where LDL was used . 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : LDL , Low - density lipoproteins . Preparation of Labeled Conjugates Texas red ( sulphonyl chloride ) was conjugated to transferrin . 1 nag of Texas red was dissolved in 50 t ~ l of dimethylformamide and added very slowly in an ice bath to a gently stirred solution of ferri - transferrin previously dia - lyzed into 0 . 1 M Na2COa / NaHCO3 buffer , pH 9 . 2 . The bath was allowed to warm to room temperature over a period of 2 h in the dark . Hydroxyl - amine ( 0 . 1 M , pH 8 . 0 ) was added for 1 h to hydrolyze any tyrosine esters formed . The conjugate was then passed down a 10 mi Biogel P - 10 column pre - equilibrated in PBS in order to remove unbound Texas red . Fluorescein isothiocyanate was conjugated to LDL and transferrin . The conjugation was carried out as detailed above except that the FITC was dis - solved in DMSO and the conjugation was for a period of 8 h at 4°C . 50 mM NHaC1 was added to quench the reaction for 2 h at room temperature before passing the conjugate down the column . Specificity of receptor binding was assessed by performing an incubation in the presence of an excess of the appropriately unlabeled protein . Measurement of EGF - stimulated Pinocytosis After a serum - free prmincubation each dish was washed once with medium A ( 137 mM NaC1 , 3 mM KC1 , 2 mM CaCI2 , 1 mM MgC2 , 2 rng / ml BSA , and 20 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 4 ) , and then incubated at 37 " C in 0 . 75 ml of medium A containing 2 mg / ml horseradish pemxidase ( type 2 ; Sigma Im - munochemicals ) and I00 ng / ml EGF where indicated . After various times the cells were chased where appropriate in medium A containing 20 mM glucose for various periods of time in the presence or absence of 5 / ~ g / tnl brefeldin A . The cells were then quickly rinsed in 2 ml of medium A , im - mersed in two 500 ml volumes of PBS / BSA and then placed in a beaker containing ice cold PBS / BSA . Each dish was subsequently washed with PBS / BSA six times over 30 rain . The cells were lysed in 0 . 5 ml of 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 20 min at room temperature with gentle rocking . the lysatcs were centrifuged for 5 rain at 4 " C at 14 , 000 g . The lysates were assayed for HRP activity as described previously ( West et ai . , 1989 ) . Brefeldin A Brefeldin A was dissolved in DMSO to a concentration of 10 mg / mi and used at a final concentration of 5 / ~ g / mi in experiments by diluting in medium A . Cells that were not treated with brefeldin A were incubated in medium containing an equivalent amount of DMSO . Microscopy Variations on a standard protocol were followed . Ceils were grown on 13 - mm diana glass coverslips , thickness No . 2 . After a serum - free preincuba - tion the cells were incubated by carefully inverting the coverslips onto 50 - / ~ 1 droplets on parafllm of the appropriate fluorescently labeled endocytic marker in the presence or absence of 100 ng / ml EGF at 37 " C for varying times . The coverslips were then treated appropriately , followed by washing extensively in ice cold PBS / BSA as described above . After one wash in PBS the cells were fixed for 30 rain at room temperature in 4 % paraformalde - hyde / PBS . The cells were washed briefly in PBS and then mounted onto glass slides using Citifluor . The samples were viewed using a conventional fluorescence microscope ( Zeiss Axinskop ) or a Nikon Micmphot - SA attached to a confocal laser scanning microscope ( MRC - 600 Series , Bio - Rad Laboratories , Cam - bridge , U . K . ) equipped with a Kr / Ar laser . Video prints of single optical sections ( (cid:127)1 . 0 ~ m ) or projected series of sections were obtained from a Sony color video printer ( Mavigraph ) UP - 5000R The Zeiss Axioskop was equipped with an MC 100 camera and Kodak T - max 400 film . Experiments on living cells were performed at 30 - 37 " C either on cells grown in 30 rnm dishes , to which the fluorescent marker was added with 100 ng / nfi EGF in medium A or on cells grown on 24 mm coverslips and mounted in a Dvorak - Stotler perfusion chamber ( Nicholson Precision In - struments , Gaithersburg , MD ) . Observations were made either on a Zeiss Axiovert 35 M inverted microscope equipped with a Contax 167 MT cam - era or on the systems outlined above . Results Dynamics of Macropinosome Formation We and others have described the formation of macropino - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 124 , 1994 690 somes on human A431 epidermoid carcinoma cells in re - sponse to EGF stimulation . Large , phase bright vesicles form within minutes of EGF addition and are responsible for the ( 6 - 10 - fold ) transient increase in fluid phase pinocytosis observed ( Haigler et al . , 1979 ; West et al . , 1989 ; Sandvig and van Deurs , 1990 ) . The presence of millimolar levels of arnJloride or micromolar levels of more potent analogues such as hexamethylene amiloride abolishes the stimulation of fluid phase uptake and the formation of macropinosomes without affecting coated pit mediated endocytosis ( West et al . , 1989 ; and L . Hewlett , unpublished data ) . The relation - ship between membrane ruffing and formation of macro - pinosomes was confirmed by video microscopy of living cells . Sites of growth factor - induced membrane ruffling ac - tivity were often , though not always , predictive of subse - quent macropinosome formation ( Fig . 1 a ; and see also Racoosin and Swanson , 1989 ; Swanson , 1989 ; Dowrick et al . , 1993 ) . Following their formation , the large phase bright structures frequently underwent abrupt translocations fol - lowing a period of stasis ( Fig . 1 a ) . Macropinosomes were quite heterogeneous in size . The diameters of 510 randomly chosen structures present after 6 rain of EGF stimulation were measured using the point to point measurement facility on the confocal microscope . 85 % of macropinosomes were between 0 . 5 and 2 . 5 / ~ m in diameter , with a modal size of 1 . 0 - 1 . 5 / ~ m although a significant proportion were several microns in diameter ( Fig . 2 ) . The macropinosomes persisted in the cells for at least 60 min and also appeared to fuse with other phase bright macropinosomes ( Fig . 1 a , and see Fig . 10 below ) . Macropinosomes were best observed by using fluorescent markers such as FITC dextran . Although their formation was dramatically up - regulated by EGF in A431 cells , we found that macropinosomes also form constitutively in a propor - tion of cells which , given their large volume to surface ratio compared with the (cid:127)100 nm vesicles normally associated with endocytosis , suggests that this pathway may be respon - sible for a proportion of basal fluid phase pinocytosis , at least in these cells . Although we found little evidence for tubula - tion of macropinosomes in fixed cells , observations on living cells using the confocal microscope sometimes revealed the presence of thin tubular extensions emanating from some of the brightly stained macropinosomes ( Fig . 1 b ) . The inher - ently transient nature of these extensions in living cells ( Fig . 1 c ) together with their tendency to photobleach prevented accurate quantitation of the proportion of macropinosomes showing tubular extensions . Nonetheless , in common with other cellular vacuolar systems and endosomes and lyso - somes in particular ( Hopkins et al . , 1990 ; Knapp and Swan - son , 1990 ; Tooze and Hollinshead , 1991 ) , macropinosomes in A431 cells exhibit both a vesicular and tubular mor - phology . Macropinosomes Do Not Fuse with " Early " Endosomes To analyze the fate of macropinosomes we asked whether they fused with conventional " early " endosomes as judged by mixing of their contents . A431 cells were first labeled for 20 rain with FITC - conjugated transferrin to allow complete labeling of early endosomes , recycling endosomes ( Salzman and Maxfield , 1989 ) and other elements of the transferrin receptor itinerary ( KiIlisch et al . , 1992 ) . The cells were then stimulated with EGF for 6 min in the presence of 5 mg / ml Texas red - labeled Dextran and then chased for various time periods in the absence of the fluid phase marker . FITC trans - ferrin was present throughout the chase to maintain labeling of this eadosome system . The time of exposure and concen - tration of fluid phase marker used was titrated to eliminate direct co - labeling with transferrin through the micropino - cytic activity of coated pits ( see below ) . Following fixation , the FITC and Texas red markers were observed indepen - dently and as merged images in the confocal microscope . In this cell type the FITC - labeled transferrin pathway appears as a punctate vesicle system uniformly distributed through the cell ( Fig . 3 , a , c , and e ) . In contrast , macropinosomes labeled with Texas red dextran after 6 rain of EGF treatment , were most frequently observed close to the ruffing edges of cells , were heterogeneous in size and number from cell to cell and importantly , did not co - localize with endosomes containing transferrin ( Fig . 3 b , d , and f ) . A minor propor - tion ( (cid:127)20 % ) of macropinocytic structures appeared to partially overlap with transferrin - labeled endosomes when viewed either by conventional epifluorescence microscopy or as a projection of a series of optical sections through the cell using the confocai microscope . However , detailed analy - sis of the individual optical sections ( 0 . I - 0 . 5 # m ) showed that although the two markers were sometimes in close prox - imity , the FITC - Tf - loaded vesicles were almost always lo - cated above or below the TR - dextran - loaded macropino - somes ( Figure 4 ) . By this method of analysis only five structures out of 139 inspected ( 3 . 6 % ) , in cells pulsed for 6 min with EGF and fluid phase marker , still showed evidence of coincidence with transferrin . During a 2 - h chase the Texas red - labeled macropinosomes persisted although they be - came fewer in number consistent with other data indicating recycling from these structures ( see below ) . However , we could find no evidence for co - localization of transferrin and the fluid phase marker during this chase period ( Fig . 3 , a - f ) . In contrast , when ceils were preloaded with FITC transferrin and then pulsed for 6 rain with TR - transferrin , doubly la - beled endosomes were abundant ( data not shown ) as previ - ously reported by others for various combinations of sequen - tially endocytosed markers ( Salzman and Maxfield , 1988 ; Stoorvogel et al . , 1989 ; Hopkins et al . , 1990 ) . We were concerned that the experimental protocol and subsequent analysis might give an artefactual impression of distinct endocytic systems . Firstly , it was possible that the fluid phase marker was initially fully mixed with transferrin - positive endosomes but then segregated away into physicaily distinct vesicles ( Salzman and Maxfield , 1989 ) before the first time point observed ( 6 min ) . Second , it could be argued that the two markers are simply in different parts ( vacuolar versus tubular ) of a continuous system ( Hopkins et al . , 1990 ) but that the concentration and time of exposure to the fluid phase marker is insutticient to reveal the connectivity . To ad - dress the first possibility we asked whether the extent of overlap of the two markers was greater in cells examined im - mediately after macropinosome formation . Cells were pre - loaded with FITC - transferrin and then , following stimula - tion with EGF for either 1 , 2 , or 3 min in the presence of TR - dextran , the cells were fixed immediately and examined using the confocal microscope . The results in Table I show that even after 1 rain of EGF stimulation fewer than 4 % of macropinosomes were associated with transferrin positive Hewlett et al . Macropinocytic Endosomes 691 Figure I . Dynamic behavior of macropinosomes . ( a ) After a serum - free preincubation the cells were transferred to medium A and observed on an inverted microscope maintained at 37°C . 5 mg / ml FITC - Dextran and 100 ng / ml EGF were added and the ceils recorded by time - lapse video microscopy . Photographs were taken at the time intervals ( minutes ) shown . The sequence shown was initiated 1 vain after EGF addi - tion . Phase bright structures were confirmed as corresponding to FrIC - Dextran - labeled structures by fixing and viewing by fluorescent microscopy at the end of each experiment . Note the conversion of three phase - dark membrane ruffles ( arrows , upper right ) into phase - bright macropinosomes and striking changes in the appearance of a group of macropinosomes ( between two arrows at left ) indicative of fusion The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 124 , 1994 692 150 , , , 100 I , LI X z 50 b ~ b ~ b ~ b ~ b ~ b ~ ~ b ~ b ~ b M b M b ~ b + 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 MACROPINOSOME DIAMETER ( / . / m ) Figure 2 . Macropinosomes are heterogeneous in size . A431 cells were incubated for 6 min at 37°C in the presence of 100 ng / ml EGF and 5 mg / ml TR - dextran . The ceils were washed , fixed , and the di - ameter of all macropinosomes present in random fields was mea - sured using the point to point measurement facility in the Cosmos software on the confocal microscope . A total of 510 structures were measured in two independent experiments . structures , very similar to the extent of overlap indicated above after 6 min of stimulation . As expected the cells con - tained more macropinosomes after 2 and more still after 3 min of stimulation but the extent of overlap remained low and essentially the same at all time points ( Table I ) . To address the second possibility we increased the concentration of fluid phase marker ( FITC dextran to intensify the signal ) and the time of exposure to visualize the micropinocytic activity of coated vesicles . Under these loading conditions all trans - ferrin - positive endosomes were now also labeled with the fluid phase marker ( Fig . 5 ) . However , there were additional structures which continued to label exclusively with this marker and not with transferrin . In 134 cells examined a to - tal of 2 , 510 structures labeled with the fluid phase marker were observed . 115 of these ( 4 . 6 % ) failed to overlap with transferrin and showed no connectivity with transferrin - labeled endosomes . Most , though not all of the latter vesicles were larger than transferrin - positive endosomes , were seen preferentially at the cell margins and corresponded to macro - pinosomes . Thus under conditions where transferrin recep - tor positive endosomes are also labeled with fluid phase tracer , macropinosomes are clearly visualized as distinct en - tities with characteristic size , distribution , and with no ac - cumulation of transferrin receptors . We conclude that the failure of the macropinocytotic marker to co - localize with transferrin under normal labeling conditions is due to its retention in a distinct endosome population which does not fuse with conventional endosomes . Macropinosome Content Is Not Delivered to Late Endosomes To see if macropinosome content in A431 cells was delivered to elements of the endocytic pathway not accessed by trans - ferrin we incubated A431 cells with FITC - labeled LDL for 60 min to label late endosomes and lysosomes . Under these conditions we could identify structures in the perinuclear re - gion of the cell which were labeled by LDL but not by trans - ferrin which presumably represent late endosomes or lyso - somes negative for recycling receptors ( Goldstein et al . , 1985 ; Mueller and Hubbard , 1986 ; Sehmid et al . , 1988 ; Salzman and Maxfield , 1988 ) . A431 ceils were stimulated with EGF in the presence of Texas red - labeled dextran as be - fore and chased for various time periods in the continued presence of labeled LDL . Even after prolonged chase times following EGF stimulation we could find no evidence of co - localization of macropinocytosed marker with LDL - labeled structures ( Fig . 6 ) . We conclude that macropinosomes in A431 cells do not deliver their content to any detectable ex - tent to the late endosome population labeled by LDL . Macropinosomes Are Resistant to the Effects of Brefeldin A Brefeldin A has recently been shown to dramatically en - hance the tubular character of the early endosomal system by promoting fusion of otherwise isolated tubular domains into a large anastomosing reticulum ( Hunziker et ai . , 1991 ; Lippincott - Schwartz et al . , 1991 ; Wood et al . , 1991 ; Tooze and Hollinshead , 1992 ; Klausner et al . , 1992 ) . We reasoned that brefeldin treatment of cells containing macropinosomes would therefore allow an independent assessment of their relationship to the conventional endosome system . We there - fore looked to see firstly if the morphology of macropino - somes was sensitive to brefeldin and secondly whether bre - feldin would induce mixing of markers taken up by coated vesicles or macropinosomes . A431 cells were labeled with either transferrin or with FITC dextran during EGF stimula - tion and then incubated with 5 # g / ml brefeldin A for various times . The morphology of the transferrin - loaded endocytic system changed dramatically in the presence of brefeldin such that after 10 min the scattered vesicular / tubular ele - ments became fused to produce an extensive tubular network which collapsed at later times ( Fig . 7 A ) , presumably around the MTOC , consistent with earlier studies ( Hunziker et al . , 1991 ; Lippincott - Schwartz et al . , 1991 ; Wood et al . , 1991 ; Tooze and Hollinshead , 1992 ) . In contrast the macro - pinosomal vesicular system , although having some tubular character detectable in living cells ( Fig . 1 ) showed no ten - dency to form macroscopic tubular elements in response to brefeldin A treatment and no obvious change in distribution and budding events . ( b ) Cells were incubated in the presence of 5 mg / ml FITC - Dextran and 100 ng / ml EGF for 6 min , washed briefly , and then transferred to a perfusion chamber containing medium A and 20 mM glucose for viewing over a period of time using the confocal microscope at 37 " C . Time ( minutes ) after EGF stimulation is indicated . Note the formation of a tubular extension over a 6 - min period from the macropinosome in c . Bars : ( a ) 10 # m ; ( b ) 4 # m . Hewlett et al . Macropinocytic Endosomes 693 Figure 3 . Macropinosomes do not fuse with early endosomes . Cells on coverslips were incubated at 37°C in medium A containing 2 # g / ml FITC - transferrin for 20 rain . After brief washing the cells were then stimulated for 6 min in medium containing 100 ng / ml EGF and 5 mg / ml Texas red Dextran in the continued presence of transferrin . Cells were subsequently chased for the times indicated at 37°C in medium A containing glucose , and then washed and fixed for confocal microscopy . ( a , c , and e ) represent FITC - transferrin labeling and ( b , d , and f ) represent Texas red Dextran labeling in the same cells . At each time point several macropinosomes ( arrows , in b , d and f ) are The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 124 , 1994 694 Figure 4 . Apparently overlapping structures can be distinguished by confocal sectioning . Cells were pre - loaded with 2 / ~ g / rul FITC - transferrin , stimulated for 6 rain with EGF in the presence of Texas red - labeled dextran , and then chased for 5 min in the continued presence of FITC - transferrin . In this figure the merged images of the FITC and Texas red channels are shown . ( a ) Projected image comprising 22 × 0 . 1 # m optical sections . Arrows indicate structures ( yellow ) that appear to overlap although note that they often have distinct dimen - sions and shape compared with the macropinoeytic vesicle ( double arrows ) . The macropinocytic vesicle is in fact found in section number 6 ( b ) while the two transferrin - labeled structures are in section 8 ( c ) . Bar , 5 . 0 / Lm . even after 60 min ( Fig . 7 A ) . This striking difference implied that little mixing of the two endosome types was taking place in the presence of brefeldin . To test this directly , cells were pre - labeled with transferrin , and then stimulated with EGF in the presence of fluid phase tracer and brefeldin A . In dou - bly labeled cells macropinosomes were observed as discrete vesicular structures sometimes adjacent to but clearly quite distinct from the fine brefeldin A induced web of transferrin - labeled endosomal tubules ( Fig . 7 B ) . Observation at high power in the confocal microscope confirmed that the two markers remained in distinct structures in brefeldin treated cells even after 60 min ( Fig . 8 ) . The failure to undergo exten - sive tubulation and to mix with the conventional endosome system in the presence of brefeldin A provides a striking demonstration that macropinosomes constitute a distinct population of endocytic vesicles . Although brefeldin A did not alter the morphology of the macropinosome system we did detect a significant accelera - tion in the rate of recycling of fluid phase marker following stimulation of macropinocytosis ( Fig . 9 B ) . In addition the rate of transferrin recycling in the presence of brefeldin was also somewhat increased ( not shown ) . In contrast , brefeldin had no effect on the rate of pinocytosis in EGF - stimulated cells although in the absence of EGF there was a clear in - crease in the basal rate of uptake ( Fig . 9 A ) . Consequently , the stimulation of pinocytosis by EGF was two - to threefold less in the presence of brefeldin . By microscopy there was no obvious increase in either the number ofmacropinosomes forming constitutively or in their size raising the possibility that there was either an increase in micropinocytosis or in the retention of micropinocytosed marker . Stimulation of ap - ical fluid phase pinocytosis and of basolateral to apical trans - Table L Minimal Overlap of Transferrin Positive Endosomes with Newly Generated Macropinosomes Macropinosomes Percent Macropinosomes transferrin transferrin Pulsing time Cells examined observed labeled labeled min 1 110 98 4 3 . 8 2 104 215 9 2 . 4 3 119 323 9 2 . 8 Cells on coverslips were incubated for 20 rain at 37°C in medium A containing 2 / zg / ml FITC - transferrin and then stimulated with 100 ng / ml EGF in the presence of 5 mg / ml TR - dextran for 1 , 2 , or 3 min in the continued presence of FITC - transferrin . The cells were washed , fixed , and data collected from at least 100 ceils using the confocal microscope . Every macropinosome was assessed for labeling with transferrin and structures found in the same confocal section containing both markers were deemed to be overlapping . shown . Equivalent positions are also arrowed in the FITC channel ( a , c , and e ) and demonstrate that no overlap with transferrin can be seen . An example of partial overlap of the two markers can be seen in c and d ( open arrows ) . However , in this and most other instances examined , single optical sections revealed that the vesicles containing the two markers were in different horizontal planes ( see Fig . 4 ) . Bar , 10 # m . Hewlett et al . Macropinocytic Endosomes 695 Figure 5 . Co - localization of fluid phase markers and transferrin . Cells on coverslips were incubated for 20 rain in the presence of 2 t ~ g / ml Texas red transferrin ( b ) and 20 mg / ml FITC - Dextran at 37°C ( a ) and then washed , fixed , and processed for conventional fluorescence microscopy . In this group of ceils several spontaneously generated macropinosomes can be seen ( a ) . Under these loading conditions there is extensive overlap of the two markers in conventional endosomes ( arrows ) but not in macropinosomes . Note that the size of the macropino - somes in this figure is overestimated due to " flare ~ from heavily labeled structures . Bar , 15 # m . cytosis was observed in polarized MDCK cells ( Prydz et al . , 1992 ) while in other cell types brefeldin causes striking redistribution of mannose 6 - phosphate receptors to the cell surface ( Damke et al . , 1991 ; Wood et al . , 1991 ) . Thus while the most dramatic effects of brefeldin are seen on internal membrane systems there is growing evidence that there are also effects on traffic to and from the cell surface . Further studies will be necessary to resolve the effects of brefeldin on the accumulation and reflux of fluid phase markers from both conventional and macropinocytic endosomes . Macropinosomes Are Able to Fuse with Each Other Observations of living cells undergoing macropinocytosis suggested that phase - bright macropinosomes were fusing with each other ( Fig . 1 ) . To test this directly we asked whether sequentially generated macropinosomes could fuse with each other . A431 cells were stimulated with EGF and exposed first to FITC dextran for 4 min . This was rapidly removed and replaced with Texas red dextran for a further 4 - min period . The cells were maintained at 37°C throughout the pulsing and subsequent chase . Fields of cells were then inspected for singly and doubly labeled macropinosomes . We could clearly detect the presence of doubly labeled mac - ropinosomes in cells loaded according to the above protocol . Approximately 64 % of structures positive for the first marker were also positive for the second fluid phase marker as well ( Fig . 10 ) . Thus in contrast to macropinosome - endo - some fusion macropinosome - macropinosome fusion was a comparatively frequent event . Discussion Macropinocytosis is an endocytic process distinct from both clathrin - mediated and other non - clathrin - mediated endo - cytic pathways and which can be up - regulated by specific stimuli in specific cell types ( Haigler et al . , 1979 ; West et al . , 1989 ; Swanson , 1989 ; Racoosin and Swanson , 1989 ; Sandvig and van Deurs , 1990 ; Ridley et al . , 1992 ) . Here we have analyzed the fate of macropinosomes following their formation in EGF - stimulated human A431 cells . Specifically we have asked to what extent the content of macropinosomes mixes with endosomes labeled either with transferrin or with LDL , whether tracers taken up via macropinocytosis are transported to Brefeldin A - sensitive compartments and to what extent sequentially formed macropinosomes fuse with each other . Completely selective targeting of different markers to the macropinocytotic and coated pit / vesicle driven endocytic pathways is difficult to achieve since the fluid phase markers used to measure macropinocytosis also have access to coated vesicles ( and other micropinocytic systems ) . In addition , receptors which concentrate in coated vesicles are almost certainly present to some extent on macropinosome mem - brane . However , in practice the enrichment of receptors in coated pits and the larger volume to surface ratio of macro - pinosomes allows the endocytic activity of the two systems to be distinguished and permits the extent of subsequent mix - ing of macropinosomes with conventional endosomes to be assessed . When cells were loaded under these conditions and either observed immediately or chased at 37°C we detected The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 124 , 1994 696 Figure 6 . Macropinosomes do not fuse with late endosomes . Cells previously grown in lipoprotein deficient medium were incubated at 37°C for 60 min with 5 / ~ g / ml FITC - LDL and then stimulated with 100 ng / ml EGF for 6 min in the presence of 5 mg / ml Texas red Dextran and 5 tzg / mi FFI ' C - LDL . After brief washing they were chased for the times indicated in the continued presence of F1TC - LDL , then washed , fixed , and processed for confocal microscopy as in Fig . 2 legend . At each time point labeled macropinosomes ( arrow , b , d , and f ) which do not overlap with the LDL marker ( a , c and e , equivalent positions arrowed ) can be seen . Bar , 10 gin . Hewlett et al . Macropinocytic Endosomes 697 Figure 7 . ( A ) Brefeldin A has differential effects on macropinosomes and early endosomes . ( a ) Cells were incubated at 37°C with 2 / zg / ml FITC - transferrin in the presence or absence of 5 / ~ g / ml brefeldin A for various times as shown before being fixed . ( b ) Cells were incubated in the presence of 5 mg / ml FITC - Dextran and 100 ng / ml EGF for 6 rain and then chased for various times as shown in the presence of 5 / ~ g / ml brefeldin A before being fixed and viewed as a projected stack of confocal sections . Extensive tubulation of the transferrin containing endosomes can be seen which then collapses while macropinosomes are unaffected over the same time course . ( B ) Cells were incubated with 2 pg / ml FITC - transferrin for 20 rain , followed by a 6 - min incubation with 100 ng / ml EGF , 5 mg / ml TR - dextran , and 5 / zg / ml brefeldin A in the continued presence of FITC - transferrin . The cells were then fixed and observed by conventional fluorescence microscopy . Brefeldin A induces a fine network of transferrin - labeled tubules ( a ) while in the same cells macropinosomes persist as discrete vesicular structures ( b ) . Bar , 10 / ~ m , The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 124 , 1994 698 Figure 8 . Macropinosome contents do not mix with early endosomes in brefeldin A - treated cells . Cells were in - cubated for 20 min at 37°C in the presence of 2 # g / ml F1TC - transferrin followed by a 6 - min incubation with 5 mg / ml Texas red Dextran , 100 ng / ml EGF and 5 t ~ g / ml brefeldin A . Cells were then chased in the continued presence of brefel - din A for the times indicated before being fixed , a and c represent FITC - transferrin labeling and b and d represent Texas red Dextran labeling in the same cells . Each marker remains in distinct structures ( arrows ) which are viewed in 0 . 4 t ~ m optical sections . Bar , l0 t ~ m . very little mixing of the fluid phase and ligand markers . In contrast , mixing of sequential pulses of transferrin labeled with different fluorochromes was readily detectable as re - ported by others . Most importantly macropinosomes labeled with one tracer became extensively labeled with a second tracer taken up during a second round of macropinocytosis ( Fig . 10 ) . Thus vesicle fusion events , including those involv - ing macropinosomes , could be readily detected under our experimental conditions . Delivery of small amounts of fluid phase marker from A 0 . 40 A i 0 . 3Z 0 . 24 0 . 16 0 . 08 0 . 00 f I I I I I I 0 4 8 17 ' 16 7 ' 0 7 ' 4 STIMULATION TIME ( rain ) B 022 020 0 . 18 0 . 16 0 . 14 0 . 12 0 . 10 I I I I I I I 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 CHASE TIME ( rain ) Figure 9 . Effects of brefeldin A on flux of fluid phase mark - ers . ( a ) After a serum - free in - cubation cells were incubated at 370C in DME / Hepes with or without 5 # g / ml brefeldin A for 30 min . The cells were then stimulated for various pe - riods of time with ( t ~ , o ) or without ( i , o ) 100 ng / ml EGF in the presence of 2 mg / ml HRP with ( c2 , m ) or without ( o , o ) 5 / , g / ml brefeldin A . HRP was measured as in Ma - terials and Methods . ( b ) Cells were stimulated at 37°C with 100 ng / ml EGFin the pres - ence of 2 mg / ml HRP . After washing briefly the cells were chased in the presence ( o ) or absence ( o ) of 5 # g / ml brefel - din A . Hewlett ¢t al . Macropinocytic Endosomes 699 Figure 10 . Sequentially formed macropinosomes can fuse with each other . ( a ) FITC - transferrin , ( b ) Texas red Dextran in the same cells . Note lack of colocalization of the two markers in the merged image ( c ) . Cells were incubated in 5 mg / ml FITC - Dextran and 100 ng / ml EGF for 4 min , washed briefly , and then incubated in 5 mg / ml Texas red Dextran and 100 ng / ml EGF for 4 min before chasing for 5 rrfin ( d - f ) and 20 min ( g - i ) . The cells were then washed and fixed . ( d and g ) FITC - Dextran labeling , ( e and h ) Texas red Dextran labeling in the same cells . Merged images show that some macropinosomes contain both markers ( yellow structures in f and i ) . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 124 , 1994 700 macropinosomes into conventional endosomes or transferrin receptors into macropinosomes might be difficult to detect due to dilution of the incoming marker . For this reason we could not exclude the possibility that low level exchanges oc - cur . Consequently , we sought independent evidence that macropinosomes remained fundamentally distinct from the conventional endosome system . Cells were pre - labeled with FITC - transferrin and then exposed to EGF , brefeldin A , and TR - dextran in the continued presence of labeled transferrin . In other words brefeldin - induced tubulation and mixing of early endosomes was occurring simultaneously with the for - mation of macropinosomes . Clearly if macropinosomes have significant capacity to fuse with conventional " early " endo - somes we would expect extensive labeling of the tubulated system by the macropinocytosed marker , In fact there was no mixing of the two markers : the macropinocytosed marker re - mained in discrete vesicular structures of various sizes some - times closely apposed to but distinct from the dramatically tubulated transferrin - labeled endosome system ( Figs . 7 and 8 ) . Taken together the inability of macropinosomes to fuse with conventional endosomes and their apparent resistance at the morphological level to the effects of brefeldin A argues strongly that they have a fundamentally distinct character . We have only examined the extent to which macropino - somes in A431 cells interact with endosomes . Our studies do not rule out the possibility that macropinosomes fuse with other vacuolar systems such as lysosomes or with vesicles derived from the secretory pathway . However , a major proportion of macropinocytosed marker appears to be recy - cled out of the cells and it is difficult to detect labeling of the cells after 2 h of chase . Preliminary experiments indicate that macropinocytosed markers in A431 cells are not deliv - ered to acidic compartments as defined by acridine orange retention . A recent analysis of macropinosomes in mouse bone mar - row macrophages stimulated with MCSF indicated signifi - cantly greater co - localization of macropinocytosed markers with transferrin and LDL ( Racoosin and Swanson , 1992 ) . We found that the majority of structures apparently labeled with both markers in A431 cells could be shown to be dis - tinct structures by confocal microscopy . The differential sen - sitivity of the two endosome populations to brefeldin A has not to our knowledge been tested in the macrophage system . Interestingly , while this manuscript was in preparation it was reported that macropinosomes in macrophages acquired and then lost markers such as transferrin receptor and rab 7 , eventually acquired Igp - A and finally fused with pre - existing tubular lysosomes ( Racoosin and Swanson , 1993 ) . It is pos - sible that the fate of macropinosomes in professional versus non - professional phagocytic cells may differ . Various factors may account for the failure of macropino - somes to fuse with the rest of the endosome system . In vitro and in vivo studies on endosome - endosome fusion have shown that it is a carefully regulated process requiring specific cytosolic and membrane - associated factors and only occurs efficiently between endosomes of the same type . Early endosomes fuse preferentially with other early endo - somes and not directly with late endosomes ( Gruenberg and Howell , 1989 ; Woodman and Warren , 1988 ; Colombo et al . , 1991 ) while in polarized cells apical and basolateral endocy - tosis give rise to distinct populations of early endosomes ( Bomsel et al . , 1989 ; Hughson and Hopkins , 1990 ) . Endo - some - endosome fusion events both in vitro ( Gorvel et al . , 1991 ) and in intact cells are regulated by specific members of the rab family of GTP - binding proteins ( Bucci et al . , 1992 ; van der Sluijs et al . , 1992 ) . Taken together a large body of work documents the specificity of endosome - endosome fusion . In this light the failure of macropinosomes to fuse with endosomes may be less surprising since macropinocytic vesicles differ from in - coming coated vesicles in several important respects . Firstly , they are generated by a completely different mechanism acti - vated by growth factors , phorbol esters , or members of the rho sub - family ofras - like GTPases ( Haigler et al . , 1979 ; Bar Sagi and Feramisco , 1986 ; Ridley et al . , 1992 ) . Secondly , they are extremely heterogeneous in size and thirdly , the lack of an obvious " coating " protein indicates a distinct membrane composition compared with clathrin - coated vesicles . In situ radioiodination with macropinocytosed lactoperoxidase sug - gests that " average " plasma membrane is internalized ( not shown ) supporting the suggestion that compared with con - ventional endosomes macropinosomes are " receptor poor " ( Racoosin and Swanson , 1992 ) . Downstream fusion deci - sions may be pre - determined by the mechanisms involved in coated vesicle formation . We suggest that in A431 cells mac - ropinosomes do not efficiently recruit the fusion machinery needed for interaction with the pre - existing endosome sys - tem . If macropinosomes could freely fuse with the conven - tional endosome system there might be severe disruption to its normal sorting and processing function as a result of the sudden input of vesicles which have a volume / surface ratio 10 - 30 times greater than that of incoming coated vesicles . This would not apply to other clathrin - independent endo - cytic pathways which involve the formation of uniformly sized ( 95 - nm diana ) micropinocytic vesicles ( Hansen et al . , 1991 ) . A recent study of the fate of such vesicles in K + - depen - dent HEp - 2 cells demonstrated delivery of a membrane bound marker to transferrin receptor - positive endosomes ( Hansen et al . , 1993 ) . Thus different endocytic mechanisms , which are not clathrin mediated , can apparently be distin - guished based on their fusogenic properties and the size of the vesicles produced . Nonetheless , macropinosomes can fuse with each other and probably with the cell surface as judged by recycling of their content . The requirements for macropinosome - macropinosome fusion will be interesting to define . The fate of phagocytic vacuoles seems to depend on the types of receptor engaged during uptake ( reviewed in Falkow and Isberg , 1992 ) . For example , antibody - coated toxoplasma gondii taken up via Fc receptors localizes to phagosomes which acidify and fuse with lysosomes whereas bacteria taken up in the absence of antibody or via truncated Fc receptors ( Joiner et al . , 1990 ) enter a host vacuole which fails to acidify and does not fuse . Conceivably , the fate of macropinosomes may also depend on which receptors are stimulated during their formation . Perhaps this accounts for the somewhat different behavior of macropinosomes in EGF - stimulated A431 cells versus MCSF - stimulated macro - phages ( Racoosin and Swanson , 1992 ) . Both phagocytosis ( Greenberg et al . , 1993 ) and macropinocytosis ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ; Dowrick et al . , 1993 ) are driven by rearrange - ments of the actin cytoskeleton although in A431 cells mac - ropinocytosis could not be blocked by perturbation of the cytoskeleton with microtubule and microfilament destabiliz - Hewlett et al . Macropinocytic Endosomes 701 ing drugs ( Haigler et al . , 1979 ; and L . Hewlett , unpublished data ) , treatments which abolish the analogous process in macrophages ( Racoosin and Swanson , 1989 ) . A recent report demonstrated that invasive salmonella typhimurium induced EGF receptor tyrosine phosphoryla - tion in cultured cells whereas non - invasive mutants did not ( Galan et al . , 1992 ) . Uptake of the latter could however be rescued by addition of EGE It is possible that these bacteria are taken up into EGF - stimulated macropinosomes . In summary , in growth factor - stimulated A431 ceils dis - tinct endocytic mechanisms give rise to distinct endosomal vesicle populations . Fusion between macropinosomes and conventional endosomes was virtually undetectable and in the same cells macropinosomes and conventional endosomes showed a marked differential sensitivity to the effects of brefeldin A . Macropinosomes were nonetheless able to fuse with each other and to recycle their content to the cell sur - face . The results reported here may be useful for future studies aimed at analyzing the requirements for membrane fusion along the endocytic pathway . We thank the Dundee Cancer Research Campaign group for access to con - focal microscope facilities and S . Moore , M . Marsh , E . Smythe , and M . West for helpful discussions and critical r ~ ding of the manuscript . This work was supported by the Wellcome Trust and Medical Research Council . L . J . Hewlett was the holder of a Wellcome Prize Studentship . Received for publication 21 July 1993 and in revised form 21 October 1993 . References Bar - Sagi , D . , and J . Feramisco . 1986 . Induction of membrane ruffling and fluid - phase pinocytosis in quiescent fibroblasts by ras proteins . Science ( Wash . D . C . ) . 233 : 1061 - 1068 . Bomsel , M . , K . Prydz , R . G . Parton , J . Gruenberg , and K . Simons . 1989 . En - docytosis in filter - grown Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 3243 - 3258 . Bucci , C . , R . G . Parton , I . H . Mather , H . Stnnnenberg , K . Simons , B . Hoflack , and M . Zerial . 1992 . The small GTPase rab5 functions as a regulatory factor in the early endocytic pathway . Cell . 70 : 715 - 728 . Chavrier , P . , J . P . Gorvel , E . Stelzer , K , Simons , J . Grnenberg , and M . Zerial . 1991 . Hypervariable C - terminal domain of rab proteins acts as a targeting signal . Nature ( Lond , ) . 353 : 769 - 772 . Colombo , M . I . , S . Gonzalo , P . Weidman , and P . Stahl . 1991 . Characterization of trypsin - sensitive factor ( s ) required for endosome - endosome fusion . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 23438 - 23445 . Darnke , H . , J . Klumperman , F . K . yon Figura , and T . Braulke . 1991 . Effects of brefeldin A on the endocytic route . Redistribution of mannose 6 - phos - phate / insulin - like growth factor II receptors to the cell surface . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 24829 - 24833 . Dowrick , P . , P . Kenworthy , B . McCann , and R . Warn . 1993 . Circular ruffle formation and closure lead to macropinocytosis in bepatocyte growth fac - tor / scatter factor treated cells . Fur . J . Cell Biol . 61 : 44 - 53 . Dupree , P . , R . G . Parton , G . Raposo , T . V . Kurzchalia , and K . Simons . 1993 . Caveolai and sorting in the trans - Golgi network of epithelial cells . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 12 : 1597 - 1605 . Falkow , S . , and R . R . Isberg . 1992 . The interactions of bacteria with mam - malian ceils . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 8 : 333 - 364 . Fawcett , D . W . 1965 . Surface specializations of absorbing cells . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 13 : 75 - 90 . Galan , J . E . , J . Pace , and M . J . Hayman . 1992 . Involvement of the epidermal growth factor receptor in the invasion of cultured mammalian cells by Salmonella typhimurium . Nature ( Lond . ) . 357 : 588 - 589 . Goldstein , J . L . , M . S . Brown , R . G . W . Anderson , D . W . Russell , and W . J . Schneider . 1985 . Receptor mediated endocytosis : concepts emerging from the LDL system . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 1 : 1 - 39 . Gorvel , J . P . , P . Chavrier , M . Zerial , and J . Gruenberg . 1991 . rab5 controls early endosome fusion in vitro . Cell . 64 : 915 - 925 . Greenberg , S . , P . Chang , and S . C . Silverstein . 1993 . Tyrosine phosphoryla - tion is required for Fc receptor - mediated phagocytosis in mouse macro - phages . J . Exp . Med . 177 : 529 - 534 . Gruenberg , J . , and K . E . Howell . 1989 . Membrane traffic in endocytosis : in - sights from cell - free assays . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 5 : 453 - 481 . Haigler , H . T . , J . A . McKanna , and S . Cohen . 1979 . Rapid stimulation of pinocytosis in human carcinoma cells A431 by epidermal growth factor . J . Cell Biol . 83 : 82 - 90 . Hansea , S . H . , K . Sandvig , and B . van Dears . 1991 . The preendosomal com - partment comprises distinct coated and nonceated endocytic vesicle popula - tions . J . Cell Biol . 113 : 731 - 741 . Hansen , S . H . , K . Sandvig , and B . van Deurs . 1993 . Molecules internalized by clathrin - independent endocytosis are delivered to endosomes containing transferrin receptors . J . Cell Biol . 123 : 89 - 97 . Havel , R . J . , H . A . Eder , and J . H . Bragdon . 1955 . The distribution and chemi - cal composition ofultracentrifugally separated lipoproteins in human serum . J . Clin . Invest . 34 : 1345 - 1353 . Hopkins , C . R . , A . Gibson , M . Shipman , and K . Miller . 1990 . Movement of internalized ligand - receptor complexes along a continuous endosomal reticu - him . Nature ( Lond . ) . 346 : 335 - 339 . Hubbard , A . L . 1989 . Endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 1 : 675 - 683 . Hughson , E . J . , and C . R . Hopkins . 1990 . Endocytic pathways in polarized Caco - 2 cells : identification of an endosomal compartment accessible from both apical and basolateral surfaces . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 337 - 348 . Hanziker , W . , J . A . Whitney , and I . Mellman . 1991 . Selective inhibition of transcytosis by brefeldin A in MDCK cells . Cell . 67 : 617 - 627 . Joiner , K , A . , S . A . Fuhrman , H . M . Miettinen , L . H . Kaspor , and I . Meliman . 1990 . Toxoplasma gondii : fusion competence of parasitophorous vacuoles in Fc receptor transfected fibroblasts . Science ( Wash . ) . 249 : 641 - 646 . Killisch , I . , P . Steinlein , K . Romisch , R . Hollinshead , H . Beag , and G . Griffiths . 1992 . Characterization of early and late endocytic compartments of the transferrin cycle . Transferrin receptor antibody blocks erythroid differentiation by trapping the receptor in the early endosome . J . Cell Sci . 103 : 211 - 132 . Klausner , R . D . , J . G . Donaldson , and S . J . Lippincott . 1992 . Brefeldin A : in - sights into the control of membrane traffic and organdie structure . J . Cell Biol . 116 : 1071 - 1080 . Knapp , P . E . , and J . A . Swanson , 1990 . Plasticity of the tubular lysosomal compartment in macrophages . J . Cell Sci . 95 : 433 - 439 . Lippincott - Sehwartz , J . , L . Yuan , C . Tipper , M . Amberdt , L . Orci , and R . D . Klausner . 1991 . Brefeldin A ' s effects on endosomes , lysosomes , and the TGN suggest a general mechanism for regulating organelle structure and membrane traffic . Cell . 67 : 601 - 616 . Montesano , R . , J . Roth , A . Robert , and L . Oric . 1982 . Non - coated membrane invaginations are involved in binding and internalization of cholera and teta - nus toxins . Nature ( Lond . ) . 296 : 651 - 653 . Mueller , S . C . , and A . L . Hubbard . 1986 . Receptor mediated endocytosis of asialoglycoprnteins by rat hepatocytes : receptor positive and receptor nega - tive endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 932 - 942 . Palade , G . E . 1953 . The fine structure of blood capillaries . J . Appl . Physiol . 24 : 1424 . Prydz , K . , S . H . Hansen , K . Sandvig , and B . van Dours . 1992 . Effects of brefel - din A on endocytosis , transcytosis and transport to the Golgi complex in po - larized MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 259 - 272 . Racoosin , E . L . , and J . A . Swanson . 1989 . Macrophage colony - stimulating fac - tor ( rM - CSF ) stimulates pinocytosis in bone marrow - derived macrophages . J . Exp . Med . 170 : 1635 - 1648 . Racoosin , E . L . , and J . A . Swanson . 1992 . M - CSF - induced macropinocytosis increases solute endocytosis but not receptor - mediated endocytosis in mouse macrophages . J . Cell Sci . 102 : 867 - 880 . Racoosin , E . L . , and J . A . Swanson . 1993 . Macropinosome maturation and fu - sion with tubular lysosomes in macrophages . J . Cell Biol . 121 : 1011 - 1020 . Ridley , A . J . , H . F . Paterson , C . L . Johnston , D . Diekman , andA , Hall . 1992 . The small GTP - binding protein rac regulates growth factor - induced mem - brane ruffling . Cell . 70 : 401 - 410 . Rothberg , K . G . , J . E . Heaser , W . C . Donzell , Y . S . Ying , J . R . Glenney , and R . G . Anderson . 1992 . Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae mem - brane coats . Cell . 68 : 673 - 682 . Rothberg , K . G . , Y . S . Ying , B . A . Kamen , and R . G . Anderson . 1990a . Cho - lesterol controls the clustering of the glycophospholipid - anchored membrane receptor for 5 - methyltetrahydrofolate . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 2931 - 2938 . Rothberg , K . G . , Y . S . Ying , J . F . Koihouse , B . A . Karnen , and R . G . Ander - son . 1990b . The glycophospholipid - linked folate receptor internalizes folate without entering the clathrin - coated pit endocytic pathway . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 637 - 649 . Salzman , N . H . , and F . R . Maxfield . 1988 . Intracelhilar fusion of sequentially formed endocytic compartments . J . Cell Biol . 106 : 1083 - 1091 . Salzman , N . H . , and F . R . Maxfield . 1989 . Fusion accessibility of endocytic compartments along the recycling and lysosomal endocytic pathways in in - tact ceils . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 2097 - 2104 . Sandvig , K . , and B . van Deurs . 1990 . Selective modulation of the endocytic uptake of riein and fluid phase markers without alteration in transferrin en - docytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 6382 - 6388 . Schmid , S . L . , R . Fuchs , P . Male , and I . Mellman . 1988 . Two distinct popula - tions of endosomes involved in membrane recycling and transport to lyso - somes . Cell . 52 : 73 - 83 . Smythe , E . , and G . B . Warren . 1991 . The mechanism of receptor mediated en - docytosis . Eur . J . Biochem . 202 : 689 - 699 . Sollner , T . , S . W . Whitehart , M . Brnnner , G . Erdjumeat - Bromage , S . Gerom - anos , P . Tempst , and J . E . Rothman . 1993 . Nature ( Lond . ) . 362 : 318 - 324 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 124 , 1994 702 Swanson , J . A . 1989 . Phorbol esters stimulate macropinocytosis and solute flow through macrophages . J . Cell Sci . 94 : 135 - 142 . Tooze , J . , and M , Hollinshead . 1991 . Tubular early endosomal networks in AtT20 and other ceils . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 635 - 653 . Tooze , J . , and M . Hollinshead . 1992 . In AtT20 and HeLa cells brefeldin A in - duces the fusion of tubular endosomes and changes their distribution and some of their endocytic properties . J . Cell Biol . 118 : 813 - 830 . van Deurs , B . , O . W . Petersen , S . Olsners , and K . Sandvig . 1989 . The ways of endocytosis . Int . Rev . Cytol . 117 : 131 - 177 . van Deurs , B . , P . K . Holm , K . Sandvig , and S . Hansen . 1993 . Are caveolae involved in clathrin - independent endocytosis ? Trends Cell Biol . 3 : 249 - 251 . van der $ 1uijs P . , M . Hull , P . Webster , P . Male , B . Goud , and I . Mellman . 1992 . The small GTP - binding protein tab4 controls an early sorting event on the endocytic pathway . Cell . 70 : 729 - 740 . Watts , C . , and M . Marsh . 1992 . Endocytosis : what goes in and how ? J . Cell Sci . 103 : 1 - 8 . West , M . A . , M . S . Bretscher , and C . Watts . 1989 . Distinct endocytotic path - ways in epidermal growth factor - stimulated human carcinoma A431 cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 2731 - 2739 . Wood , S . A . , J . E . Park , and W . J . Brown . 1991 . Brefeldin A causes a microtubule - mediated fusion of the trans - Golgi network and early endo - somes . Cell . 67 : 591 - 600 . Woodman , P . G . , D . I . Mundy , P . Cohen , and G . Warren . 1992 . Cell - free fu - sion of endocytic vesicles is regulated by phosphorylation . J . Cell Biol . 116 : 331 - 338 . Woodman , P . G . , and G . Warren . 1988 . Fusion between vesicles from the path - way of receptor - mediated endocytosis in a cell - free system . Fur . J . Biochem . 173 : 101 - 108 . Hewlett et al . Macropinocytic Endosomes 703