International Journal of e - Collaboration , 10 ( 2 ) , 1 - 19 , April - June 2014 1 Copyright © 2014 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . ABSTRACT At the tip of the iceberg of the global financial crisis organizations are looking for economies of scale to survive in these challenging times . The Unified Communications and Collaboration ( UC & C ) platform is the perfect answer to support an organization’s new strategies , aiming to increase employee productivity while decreas - ing costs . Our study combines recent collaboration research theories with the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology ( UTAUT ) . The authors aim to close the existing research gap by extending previous research with a cross - cultural dimension . They conducted an international field study in 34 countries involv - ing 120 employees who were users of UC & C technology . The authors found that the UTAUT constructs are mainly validated in areas in which results suggest that performance expectancy and social influence are the most influential drivers in employee acceptance and use of UC & C in organizations . Employee Acceptance and Use of Unified Communications and Collaboration in a Cross - Cultural Environment Mario Silic , Institute of Information Management , University of St . Gallen , St . Gallen , Switzerland & Zagreb School of Economics and Management , Zagreb , Croatia Andrea Back , Institute of Information Management , University of St . Gallen , St . Gallen , Switzerland Thomas Sammer , Institute of Information Management , University of St . Gallen , St . Gallen , Switzerland Keywords : Collaboration Theory , Cross - Culture , Microsoft Lync , UC & C Technology , UTAUT INTRODUCTION The use of Unified Communications and Col - laboration ( UC & C ) has become an integral part of one’s professional life . According to the 2012 survey that was conducted by IDG Enterprise , the increase in the adoption of , and investment in , UC & C technology is becoming more ob - served ; specifically in enterprise organizations , in which the biggest trigger is the explosion of consumer devices . The ability to communicate and collaborate faster , and from virtually any point , brings an unprecedented value to the corporation’s goals : flexibility , interoperability , DOI : 10 . 4018 / ijec . 2014040101 Copyright © 2014 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . 2 International Journal of e - Collaboration , 10 ( 2 ) , 1 - 19 , April - June 2014 efficiency and productivity . The UC & C can be defined as a joint venture between the commu - nication process with collaboration tools that utilize real - time information access : instant messaging ( IM ) , presence information ( user online status ) , video and audio conferencing , telephony , data sharing , call control and speech recognition ; and non - real time information sources such as : email , fax , SMS , etc . Different components of UC & C , such as instant messaging ( IM ) , have already been stud - ied from an individual perspective ( Baškarada & Koronios , 2012 ; Zhang , Köbler , Tremaine , & Milewski , 2010 ; Lou , Chau & Li , 2005 ; Ander - son , Schwager & Kerns , 2006 ) . The adoption and utilization of collaboration technologies in large organizations that support task - oriented collaboration has been widely explored by Per - van , Bajwa and Lewis ( 2005 ) . Other research has also pointed to the influence of organizational factors on the technology adoption of UC & C ( McAvoy & Butler , 2006 ; Bajwa , Lewis , Pervan & Lai , 2005 ; Bajwa et al . , 2008 ; Straub , Loch , Evaristo , Karahanna & Srite , 2002 ) . However , current studies of UC & C adop - tion in enterprise in cross - cultural environments are still rare . On one hand , the focus has mainly been on the organizational factors , which cor - relate to the culture . Several studies analyzed factors either from an individual or national perspective , without putting the spotlight on other aspects , such as culture . On the other hand , a current research gap exists in the un - derstanding of drivers that lead to employees’ acceptance of UC & C technology . This research aims to fill the current knowledge gap by answering three important questions regarding employee acceptance and use of UC & C in enterprise in cross - cultural environments : RQ1 : What are the drivers of employee ac - ceptance of UC & C in enterprise ? RQ2 : What other factors influence employee acceptance of UC & C in enterprise ? RQ3 : Will the adoption of the UC & C technol - ogy drive employee productivity ? This research aims to analyze employees’ acceptance and use of UC & C in their profes - sional environment by taking into account their cultural background . This study builds on the model proposed by Brown , Dennis , and Venkatesh ( 2010 ) . This model has been used by Brown et al . ( 2010 ) and it presents integrated theories from the collaboration research with the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology ( UTAUT ) model that was devel - oped by Venkatesh , Morris , Davis and Davis ( 2003 ) . To the best of our knowledge , this is the first empirical study that has extended the previous work done by Brown et al . ( 2010 ) . We have added cross - cultural constructs into the context of an organization . After synthe - sizing with the previous research and theory , we propose a research model that will help us explain the adoption of technology by employ - ees ; we will also discuss the use and analysis of the cross - cultural construct that investigates relationships across different countries . Firstly , we will analyze the existing re - search theory on collaboration and the UTAUT model and précis the research model with the hypotheses . Secondly , we will focus on the research methodology , followed by the data analysis and its results . Finally , we will discuss the findings and make conclusions . RELATED THEORY We will analyze relevant prior research that will be used to build the theoretical foundations for this research . Our focus will be on technological innovation and collaboration technology . There is a very strong relationship between the two areas . Kraut posits that both utility and certain normative factors influence both the success and failure of new organizational communica - tion systems - these normative factors relate to the social influence phenomenon where users tend to use a certain system more when more people within the same work group are using them ( Kraut , Rice , Cool & Fish , 1998 ) . 17 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / article / employee - acceptance - and - use - of - unified - communications - and - collaboration - in - a - cross - cultural - environment / 114170 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Journals , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Communications and Social Science , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Communications , Online Engagement , and Media eJournal Collection , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Business , Administration , and Management . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 2 Related Content The Effects of Social and Technical Factors on User Satisfaction , Sense of Belonging and Knowledge Community Usage Hui Lin , Weiguo Fan and Linda Wallace ( 2013 ) . International Journal of e - Collaboration ( pp . 13 - 30 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / the - effects - of - social - and - technical - factors - on - user - satisfaction - sense - of - belonging - and - knowledge - community - usage / 82066 ? camid = 4v1a Theatres , Metaphors , and E - Collaboration : An Examination of Web - Based Cooperation of Regional Nonprofit Theatres Julie E . Kendall ( 2006 ) . International Journal of e - Collaboration ( pp . 41 - 60 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / theatres - metaphors - collaboration / 1940 ? camid = 4v1a Theorizing Virtuality in Enterprise Social Systems James J . Lee and Jessica L . Imanaka ( 2018 ) . Entrepreneurship , Collaboration , and Innovation in the Modern Business Era ( pp . 102 - 120 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / theorizing - virtuality - in - enterprise - social - systems / 202325 ? camid = 4v1a An Empirical Evaluation of Information Sharing Between Australia - Singapore Beef Organisations in Light of Trust and ICT Diffusion Latif Al - Hakim , Melissa Johnson Morgan and Roberta Chau ( 2014 ) . International Journal of e - Collaboration ( pp . 1 - 29 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / an - empirical - evaluation - of - information - sharing - between - australia - singapore - beef - organisations - in - light - of - trust - and - ict - diffusion / 118231 ? camid = 4v1a