Analogy as a strategy for supporting complex problem solving under uncertainty Joel Chan & Susannah B . F . Paletz & Christian D . Schunn Published online : 20 July 2012 # Psychonomic Society , Inc . 2012 Abstract Complex problem solving in naturalistic environ - ments is fraught with uncertainty , which has significant impacts on problem - solving behavior . Thus , theories of human problem solving should include accounts of the cognitive strategies people bring to bear to deal with uncer - tainty during problem solving . In this article , we present evidence that analogy is one such strategy . Using statistical analyses of the temporal dynamics between analogy and expressed uncertainty in the naturalistic problem - solving con - versations among scientists on the Mars Rover Mission , we show that spikes in expressed uncertainty reliably predict analogy use ( Study 1 ) and that expressed uncertainty reduces to baseline levels following analogy use ( Study 2 ) . In addition , in Study 3 , we show with qualitative analyses that this rela - tionship between uncertainty and analogy is not due to miscommunication - related uncertainty but , rather , is primarily concentrated on substantive problem - solving issues . Finally , we discuss a hypothesis about how analogy might serve as an uncertainty reduction strategy in naturalistic complex problem solving . Keywords Problem solving . Analogy . Decision making . Reasoning . Judgment Analogy as a heuristic for complex problem solving under uncertainty Uncertainty is a driving feature of real - world complex prob - lem solving ; there is much about the past , present , and future that is uncertain , and problem solvers are repeatedly challenged with resolving many small and large uncertain - ties . There are accounts of uncertainty in finance ( Rowe , 1994 ) , management ( Priem , Love , & Shaffer , 2002 ) , medi - cine ( Brashers et al . , 2003 ) , negotiation ( Bottom , 1998 ) , military tactics ( Cohen , Freeman , & Thompson , 1998 ) , and engineering ( Wojtkiewicz , Eldred , Field , Urbina , & Red - Horse , 2001 ) . Problem solvers across these settings draw on an array of domain - specific tools and methods to deal with uncertainty , such as rapid prototyping in engineer - ing and design ( Skelton & Thamhain , 2003 ) and statistical procedures such as Monte Carlo simulations and computa - tional modeling in the sciences . Additionally , domain - general cognitive processes , such as mental simulation , appear to be important ways of dealing with uncertainty ( Christensen & Schunn , 2009 ; Trickett , Trafton , & Schunn , 2009 ) . As the range of domain - specific accounts , tools , and methods dem - onstrate , uncertainty is complex as a phenomenon and ubiq - uitous in complex real - world settings . The focus of this article is on the cognitive mechanisms problem solvers use to deal with psychological uncertainty — an internal feeling of being uncertain about information ( e . g . , data , expected utility of actions / decisions ) that may or may not be objectively uncertain ( Jousselme , Maupin , & Bosse , 2003 ; Kahneman & Tversky , 1982 ) . This psychological uncertainty can drive behavior such as decision making ( Kahneman & Tversky , 1982 ) or problem solving to reduce uncertainty to acceptable levels ( Trickett et al . , 2009 ) . If a problem solver is unaware of the uncertainty in available information , no psy - chological uncertainty exists , and no problem solving is re - quired to resolve uncertainty . Specifically , we focus on the cognitive process of analogy and how it might be an important strategy for dealing with uncertainty . Analogy is a fundamental cognitive process in which a source ( a known piece of information ) and a target ( a problem or current domain of knowledge ) are linked to one another by a systematic mapping of attributes and / or relations , J . Chan ( * ) : S . B . F . Paletz : C . D . Schunn Learning Research and Development Center , University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh , PA , USA e - mail : joc59 @ pitt . edu Mem Cogn ( 2012 ) 40 : 1352 – 1365 DOI 10 . 3758 / s13421 - 012 - 0227 - z which then allows for transfer of existing knowledge to the target ( Gentner , 1983 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1996b ) . For example , despite their differences in scale and domain , the solar system and an atom can be seen as analogous by virtue of both having a nucleus and orbiting elements . The psychological literature on analogy and problem solving has often focused on analogy ’ s role in facilitating the creation of novel concepts and solutions , such as conceptual change in scientific discovery ( Gentner et al . , 1997 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1996a ; Langley & Jones , 1988 ; Nersessian , 1999 ) , generating innovative ideas in design ( Chan et al . , 2011 ; Dahl & Moreau , 2002 ; Helms , Vattam , & Goel , 2009 ; Linsey , Laux , Clauss , Wood , & Markman , 2007 ; Wilson , Rosen , Nelson , & Yen , 2010 ) , and developing creative artistic visions ( Okada , Yokochi , Ishibashi , & Ueda , 2009 ) . A less well - studied function of analogy is its support of more " mundane " problem solving . Theoretical models of general problem solving suggest that analogy may be an important strategy for dealing with the many instances of uncertainty that occur in problem solving . Analogy has been addressed by information - processing models of problem solv - ing based on the notion of heuristic search in a problem space ( Newell & Simon , 1972 ) : Analogy is sometimes implemented as a “ weak method ” for advancing problem solving when known “ strong methods ” that take advantage of the problem structure are unavailable or unknown ( Jones & Langley , 2005 ; Langley , McKusick , Allen , Iba , & Thompson , 1991 ) . Anderson and colleagues ’ ACT – R cognitive architecture implements analogy as a way of generating potential produc - tion rules in situations where known / tested production rules are absent ( Anderson , Fincham , & Douglass , 1997 ; Singley & Anderson , 1989 ) . Across these models , analogy is used to overcome perceived cognitive obstacles . These theoretical claims have empirical support . Houghton ( 1998 ) suggested anecdotally that analogy is an important strategy for decision making under uncertainty in policymak - ing . In his in vivo studies of four microbiology labs , Dunbar ( 1997 ) reported that scientists responded to anomalies and unexpected findings with analogies . When exploring potential methodological flaws that might have produced the anoma - lies , the scientists tended to analogize from studies and processes involving the same organism ; when new causal models or modifications to theories were explored , the analogies tended to be from studies and processes involving other organisms . Finally , Ball and Christensen ( 2009 ) found , in their analysis of a professional product design team ’ s naturalistic problem - solving conversations , that increases in uncertainty were associated with analogy . Importantly , they also found that uncertainty generally returned to baseline levels immediately following analogy . Thus , there is both theoretical and empirical support for supposing that analogy might function as an uncertainty resolution strategy . However , for several reasons , additional empirical work is required to establish the relationship between uncertainty and analogy . First , there are questions surrounding the statistical robustness of existing empirical findings . Dunbar ’ s ( 1997 ) research , while rich in qualitative detail and external validity , did not include formal statistical analyses . Ball and Christensen ( 2009 ) reported statistical analyses but employed a chi - square test that assumes independence of observations . This assump - tion was likely not warranted , given interdependencies among statements from the same individual and among statements closer together in time ; thus , their inferences run the risk of being misleading or invalid ( Lewis & Burke , 1949 ; Rietveld , Van Hout , & Ernestus , 2004 ) . To validate their inferences , analyses are required that appropriately account for the inher - ent temporal dependencies in the data ( e . g . , hierarchical linear modeling , sequential analysis ) . Another gap involves the generalizability of the findings . Both Dunbar ( 1997 ) and Ball and Christensen ( 2009 ) focused on specific problem - solving contexts : microbiologists ’ rea - soning in weekly lab meetings and two brainstorming sessions of a product design team , respectively . This narrowed scope was likely a result of the highly resource - intensive nature of their methodology , trading off breadth of scope for depth of analysis . However , it is possible that analogy might be an uncertainty resolution strategy in some problem - solving con - texts ( e . g . , science and engineering ) and not others ( e . g . , negotiation , planning ) . More data across additional types of problem - solving contexts are needed . Additionally , prior work did not examine whether the link between analogy and uncertainty might be specific to particu - lar types of uncertainty ( i . e . , about the task vs . about what people said ) . For example , it is possible that in the case of Ball and Christensen ’ s ( 2009 ) designers , the analogies might have primarily been addressing uncertainty surrounding communi - cative misalignments ; for instance , one designer might express uncertainty in the context of being unsure about what another designer is saying , leading another designer to use an analogy as a clarifying explanation , thereby serving a communicative function . By contrast , the designers might express collective uncertainty about the viability of a design proposal , and an analogy might be brought in to help evaluate the proposal , thereby serving a function closer to that of an uncertainty resolution strategy for generative problem - solving purposes ( e . g . , generating solutions or predictions about solutions / prob - lems ) . Given that analogy serves a range of communicative functions in complex domains ( e . g . , persuasion , illustration , and explanation in political argumentation ; Blanchette & Dunbar , 2001 ; Whaley & Holloway , 1997 ) , it is important to clarify the nature of the uncertainty being addressed . This article addresses these gaps with detailed analyses of the interplay between uncertainty and analogy in the natu - ralistic problem solving of science and engineering teams . Three complementary streams of analyses ( here separated as studies using the same data set ) were conducted on science teams on the Mars Exploration Rover ( MER ) mission . Study 1 Mem Cogn ( 2012 ) 40 : 1352 – 1365 1353 tested whether uncertainty preceded the use of different types of analogies . Study 2 then tested whether uncertainty was significantly reduced following analogy use . Study 3 was a qualitative follow - up analysis to explore ( 1 ) the links between uncertainty and analogy across different problem - solving con - texts ( e . g . , planning , reasoning ) and ( 2 ) the extent to which analogy following uncertainty served a communication clari - fication function or facilitated problem solving . General method Before discussing the method and results of the three stud - ies , we present general information about the research con - text , data sampling methods , and coding . Research context The data analyzed in this study consist of transcribed informal , task - relevant conversations between scientists on the multidis - ciplinary MER science team ( Squyres , 2005 ) . The MER mis - sion ’ s goal was to discover evidence for a history of surface liquid water on Mars . To meet this goal , the mission involved landing two identical rovers on opposite sides of Mars and directing them to drive , photograph , and dig . The outcome of the mission was a success , with the overall team discovering conclusive evidence for a history of water within the first 90 Martian days of the mission . The path to this significant discovery involved complex problem solving on a diverse set of tasks , varying from those specific to the science and engi - neering domains of this mission ( e . g . , interpretation of geolog - ical data ) to tasks shared with all sciences ( e . g . , rover experiment planning , equipment debugging ) and general work processes ( e . g . , meeting planning , group process discussions ) . As such , this context represents a strategic choice for testing the relationship between uncertainty and analogy within sev - eral different forms of complex problem solving . The scientists were co - located at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory . The greater science team was broken into two largely independent groups ( MER A and B ) that followed each rover . Each rover science team was further made up of disciplinary science and engineering subteams . The scien - tists in the two teams knew of each other ’ s work and occasionally exchanged individuals and lessons learned but were generally separate day by day . Communication was primarily conducted via face - to - face structured and informal meetings within and between subteams . Data collection and sampling Data are taken from 20 data collection trips ( 10 observation trips of each rover team ) distributed over the 90 - day nom - inal mission . All data were collected from video cameras placed on top of large shared screens located near different subgroups ’ workstation clusters . Each trip consisted of 3 days of approximately 8 h of data collection each day , resulting in almost 500 h of video . Informed consent was obtained for videotaping . The scientists quickly became habituated to the cameras — at times , discussing personal information . We analyzed data at the level of the conversation with participants embedded in these conversations . The analyzed conversations in the data set were informal and task rele - vant . Structured , formal meetings were excluded because they were conducted in a highly formal round - robin presen - tation style . Task - relevant talk included anything regarding the mission . Off - topic talk included topics such as medical issues or family vacations . Because the conversations could include any combination of the over 100 MER scientists , conversations did not cleanly nest into stable small teams . Furthermore , given the anonymous nature of the study , the video quality , and the tendency for speakers to occasionally stand offscreen or face away from the camera , it was often not possible to identify individuals . We sampled 11 h 25 min of informal conversation clips from early and late in the mission , with the length of clips based on when conversations naturally began and stopped . The clips were then transcribed into 12 , 336 utterances . We coded whether each utterance was about MER - related pro - cesses or not , broadly speaking ( Cohen ’ s kappa 0 . 96 ) . The analyses were conducted on the 11 , 856 on - topic utterances , or roughly 11 h . These 114 conversation clips were from 8 to 760 utterances long ( M 0 104 , median 0 67 , SD 0 122 ) . Clips were of groups ranging from 2 to 10 participants . Coding of protocol data Analogy Transcript segments were coded for analogy fol - lowing the method developed by Dunbar ( 1995 , 1997 ) , where an analogy was defined as a reference to another source of knowledge , with an attempt to transfer concepts from that source to the target domain . Two independent , trained coders assessed the occurrence of analogy at the utterance level , with an interrater reliability of 99 % agreement , Cohen ' s kappa 0 . 60 . 1 All disagreements were resolved by dis - cussion . Once analogies were found , they were then coded for analogical distance ( Cohen ’ s kappa 0 . 78 ) and purpose ( Cohen ’ s kappa 0 . 78 ) . Analogical distance had two values : 1 We were not able to find systematic intercoder differences in the coding of analogy . When very rare events in large data sets are coded , there is typically a high percent reliability and a much lower kappa . The discrepancy between the two is a typical statistical pattern ; kappa was created to adjust for high percent reliability by chance in cases with one dominant code ( Smith , 2000 ) . The low kappa is also common for findings of rare events , since humans have trouble staying vigilant under such conditions . 1354 Mem Cogn ( 2012 ) 40 : 1352 – 1365 ( 1 ) Near analogies were mapped from the same or a similar specialty subject either within that MER mission or from the domain of geology or atmospheric science ( e . g . , noting that a current rock has features and / or possibilities and challenges similar to the rock the scientists analyzed the week before ) , and ( 2 ) far analogies were mapped from domains outside of MER , geology / atmospheric science , ( e . g . , when a scientist compared a rover instrument planning problem with a chess game , mapping that the order of moves is key ) . Analogies were coded for two types of purpose : ( 1 ) Problem - related analogies were used to assist in various substantive problem - solving functions , including explaining or predicting problems and generating or explaining solu - tions to problems ( Bearman , Ball , & Ormerod , 2007 ) ( e . g . , one scientist noted that the process that produced the clumpy soil they had just observed might be the same geochemical process they were debating , but acting on lucipaderiol instead of a rock ) , and ( 2 ) non - problem - related analogies were primarily used to show illustrative common - alities and differences not in the immediate context of attempting to solve a problem ( e . g . , “ this [ Martian rock formation ] reminds of the Grand Canyon ” ) . Uncertainty Two research assistants coded each utterance for the presence of uncertainty , using a syntactic approach adapted from Trickett , Trafton , Saner , and Schunn ( 2007 ) , where “ hedge words ” were used to identify utterances poten - tially containing uncertainty ( e . g . , “ I guess , ” “ I think , ” “ pos - sibly , ” “ maybe , ” “ I believe ” ) . Utterances containing these words were marked as uncertainty present only if it was also clear from context that the segment was spoken with uncertainty . Interrater reliability was acceptable ( Cohen ’ s kappa 0 . 75 ) . All disagreements were resolved by discussion . Study 1 Method To test whether situations involving uncertainty reliably spark the use of analogies , a time - lagged logistic regression analysis was employed — time - lagged because this analysis would es - timate the change in the probability of an analogy being used at time t + 1 on the basis of uncertainty levels at time t , and logistic because the outcome variable was binary ( i . e . , did a scientist use an analogy or not ) . This analysis assumed that ( 1 ) there was some baseline probability of an analogy being used in any given time slice and ( 2 ) a change in this probability as a function of uncertainty in the previous time slice would reflect the effects of uncertainty on analogy use . Because the focus of our analysis was on information exchange and the interaction between cognitive events , blocks of utterances , rather than time per se , formed the unit of analysis . Blocks were created by segmenting groups of 10 consecutive utterances into blocks , beginning with the first line of each clip . The choice of block size reflected our focus on relatively fine - grained moment - to - moment cogni - tive processes , and the relatively unanchored segmentation of the transcript into blocks approximates a random sample of fluctuations in uncertainty in the scientists ’ conversations . The data associated with each block consisted of ( 1 ) a binary variable analogy , indicating whether any analogy was used in the block , and ( 2 ) a continuous variable uncertainty , indicating the number of uncertain statements in the block ( ranging from 0 to 10 ) . Because the focus of the analysis was on predicting analogy at time t + 1 , we excluded data where potential independent – dependent variable pairs involved missing da - ta . Specifically , because the overall sample of blocks includ - ed significant conversation breaks ( i . e . , between video clips ) , dependent variable data ( analogies ) from 114 ( out of 1 , 283 ) blocks that occurred at the beginning of clips were excluded from the time - lagged analyses ; for the same rea - son , independent variable data ( uncertainty ) from the 114 blocks that occurred at the end of clips were excluded from the analyses . Additionally , most of these blocks at the end of each clip contained fewer than 10 lines . To avoid statistical noise from heterogeneity of block size , dependent variable data ( analogies ) from 108 of the 114 end - of - clip blocks were also excluded from the analyses , due to being in small blocks , resulting in a total of 1 , 063 clean time t to time t + 1 block pairs in the analyses . However , the pattern of find - ings remained unchanged with the dependent variable data from the shorter blocks included . Results In total , 94 analogies were identified , which were nested into 73 of the 1 , 063 block pairs in the analyses . Of the 94 analogies , the majority were categorized as near ( 72 % ) , with only 28 % far . Similarly , most of the analogies were problem related ( 70 % ) , rather than non - problem - related ( 30 % ) . Uncertainty occurred in about 10 % of the transcript utterances . We estimated a model predicting analogy at time t + 1 with uncertainty at time t . Because the data presented here had an inherently multilevel structure , since blocks occurred within video clips , we first ascertained whether our model needed to account for within - clip dependencies . To test for the presence of these dependencies with respect to the analogy variable , we used the Hierarchical Linear Modeling 6 program ( HLM 6 ; Raudenbush & Bryk , 2002 ) to estimate a random effects hierarchical linear model with blocks nested within clips and analogy as the dependent variable at the block level and no predictors at the block Mem Cogn ( 2012 ) 40 : 1352 – 1365 1355 level . This model tested the degree to which variations in analogy were dependent on clip - level variations . Since the clip - level variance component was not significant ( i . e . , no violation of independence of blocks or events — no nesting effect ) , simple logistic regressions were performed . Uncertainty was found to be a significant positive predictor of analogy at time t + 1 ( see Table 1 ) ; specifically , each additional uncertain statement in the current block was asso - ciated with an approximately 27 % increase in the probability of analogy at time t + 1 . The overall model was significant , χ 2 ( 1 , N 0 1063 ) 0 8 . 128 , p 0 . 004 , Negelkerke R 2 0 . 02 , and the Hosmer – Lemeshow test was not significant , indicating a model with good fit , χ 2 ( 3 ) 0 1 . 625 , p 0 . 65 . Figure 1 shows the increasing trend in the proportion of blocks with analogy as a function of the number of uncertain statements in their preceding blocks , with a noticeable in - crease in analogy rate only when the prior block had at least 40 % of the utterances involve uncertainty . The increased width of the error bars reflects the relative rarity of blocks with high uncertainty . Analysis by analogy subtype To explore how the link be - tween uncertainty and analogy might vary as a function of the distance and purpose of the analogy , the time - lagged regres - sion models were repeated for each analogy variation . Specifically , four additional models were run , each with un - certainty at time t as the predictor ( as before ) , but with the models differing in that the dependent variable was limited to a specific type of analogy : ( 1 ) analogy - near , the use of any near analogies , regardless of purpose ; ( 2 ) analogy - far , any far analogies , regardless of purpose ; ( 3 ) analogy - p + , the use of any problem - related analogies , regardless of distance ; and ( 4 ) analogy - p − , the use of any non - problem - related analogies , regardless of distance . Because these variables were not de - fined in a mutually exclusive manner and some blocks contained more than one analogy , some blocks defined as , for example , analogy - near 0 1 might also include far analogies . The results of these models are summarized in Table 2 . This exploratory analysis showed that the pattern linking uncertainty to analogy use was statistically significant with near and problem - related analogies , but not for far and non - problem - related analogies . It is difficult to infer from this analysis whether the findings imply that uncertainty triggers near analogies in general , problem - related analogies in general , or only near problem - related analogies , given that there was a significant association between distance and pur - pose ; most near analogies were problem - related analogies ( 78 % ) , χ 2 ( 1 ) 0 7 . 02 , p < . 01 . To clarify this issue , four additional models were run , each predicting one of the four possible combinations of distance and purpose — that is , analogy - near - p + , analogy - near - p − , analogy - far - p + , and analogy - far - p − ( see Table 3 ) . As with the previous set of models , each separate model had uncertainty at time t as the predictor . In this set of models , only the model for uncertainty predicting near problem - related analogies reaches statistical significance . While the N s for the other distance – purpose combinations are too small ( around N 0 10 ; see Table 3 ) for robust statistical tests when an interaction analysis is undertaken , the trends of those statistical tests nonetheless suggest that both near in general and problem - related in general analogies are triggered . Specifically , the models for both near non - problem - related and far problem - related analogies yield comparable effect sizes to the near problem - related case , with only far non - problem - related analo - gies not increasing after rises in uncertainty . Additional data would be required to verify the stability of these trends . Discussion The time - lagged logistic regression models demonstrated that situations involving uncertainty were reliable predictors of anal - ogy use . Follow - up exploratory analyses suggested that this relationship may be specific to near analogies and problem - related analogies . Because of the reduced N s for far and non - problem - related analogies , we cannot be certain that there is no relationship between those kinds of analogies and uncertainty . However , the higher base rate and co - occurrence of near problem - related analogies suggest that they are the preferred approach for dealing with uncertainty , as compared with using far and / or non - problem - related analogies . Furthermore , we might expect near analogies to be more closely related to unpacking the issue at hand and , therefore , more effective for problem solving under uncertainty . Additionally , non - problem - related analogies are unlikely to be useful for dealing with uncertainty , since they did not occur in the context of the scientists and engineers attempting to solve and / or explain problems . Finally , the reduced N s for far and non - problem - Table 1 Logistic regression of analogy at time t + 1 on uncertainty at time t 95 % C . I . for Exp ( B ) B SE Wald df p Exp ( B ) Lower Upper Constant − 2 . 99 0 . 19 254 . 65 1 . 00 0 . 050 U ncertainty 0 . 24 0 . 08 8 . 70 1 . 00 1 . 27 1 . 08 1 . 49 1356 Mem Cogn ( 2012 ) 40 : 1352 – 1365 related analogies would likely result in underpowered statisti - cal tests for follow - up analyses . Given these theoretical and pragmatic motivations , we focus in Studies 2 and 3 on near , problem - related analogies . Study 2 While Study 1 showed that analogy use tended to follow rises in uncertainty levels , additional evidence of a different kind is needed before concluding that analogy might be a strategy for dealing with uncertainty during problem solving . One natural question is whether the use of analogy tends to alleviate elevated uncertainty levels . To address this question , Study 2 explored how uncertainty levels changed before , during , and after analogy in relation to baseline levels of uncertainty . Method The MER transcript was first segmented into one of five segment types : ( 1 ) preanalogy ( pre - A ) segments , 10 utterances just prior to an analogy episode ; ( 2 ) during - analogy ( during - A ) segments , utterances from the beginning to end of an analogy episode ; ( 3 ) postanalogy ( post - A ) segments , 10 utterances immediately following an analogy episode ; ( 4 ) post - postanalogy ( post - A + 1 ) segments , 10 utterances immediately following postanalogy utterances ; and ( 5 ) baseline segments , each segment of 10 utterances at least 25 utterances away from the other segment types . The measure of uncertainty in each segment was the proportion of uncertain statements . The sampling strategy for the baseline segments was designed to provide an estimate of uncertainty levels when the scientists were not engaged in preanalogy , during - analogy , or postanalogy conversation , with the logic being that a certain amount of “ lag ” or spillover of uncertainty was assumed to take place surrounding analogy episodes . During - A segments varied by the length and number of analogies in the analogy episode : The scientists tended to use both single analogies and multiple analogies linked together in a coherent reasoning chain , most often within 20 utterances of each other , and such chains are analytically treated as one during - A segment . To illustrate , Fig . 2 graphically represents an example pre - A to post - A segment sequence surrounding a single - analogy epi - sode , in contrast with an example segment sequence surround - ing a multiple - analogy episode . A total of 65 analogy episodes were identified . In keep - ing with our focus on unpacking whether analogies sparked by uncertainty might act to alleviate that uncertainty , we focused our analysis on analogy episodes that included at least one near problem - related analogy . This filter excluded analogy episodes that consisted of only near non - problem - related or far problem - related analogies and resulted in a total of 37 analogy episodes . Additionally , some analogy episodes occurred within less than 10 uterances of either the beginning or the end of clips ; to ensure stability of the estimates of pre - and postanalogy uncertainty , these pre - and postsegments were excluded from the analysis . Of the 37 analogy episodes that included near problem - related analogies , 5 were missing a pre - A segment , and 3 were Table 2 Logistic regressions of analogy at time t + 1 on uncertainty at time t by distance and purpose 95 % CI for Exp ( B ) N w / analogy a B Exp ( B ) Lower Upper p Distance Analogy - near 0 . 26 1 . 30 1 . 09 1 . 55 . 00 57 Analogy - far 0 . 20 1 . 22 0 . 91 1 . 63 . 18 20 Purpose Analogy - p + 0 . 26 1 . 30 1 . 09 1 . 55 . 00 57 Analogy - p − b 0 . 12 1 . 13 0 . 81 1 . 57 . 46 18 a N s do not sum to the same number across distance and purpose , because some blocks contained both distance and purpose subtypes b p + 0 problem - related ; p − 0 non - problem - related 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 n = 349 n = 315 n = 198 n = 129 n = 44 n = 23 n = 6 n = 2 P r opo r t i on o f b l o cks w i t h a n a l og y Number of uncertain statements in prior block Fig . 1 Proportion of blocks with analogy at time t + 1 by number of uncertain statements ( out of 10 ) at time t . Error bars are ± standard error Mem Cogn ( 2012 ) 40 : 1352 – 1365 1357 missing a post - A segment , but none were missing both . There were a total of 908 baseline segments , which provided a stable estimate of the baseline level of uncertainty in the scientists ’ conversations . Results As Fig . 3 shows , uncertainty levels , measured in terms of the proportion of statements with coded uncertainty , in both pre - A and during - A segments were significantly greater than in baseline segments , while post - A and post - A + 1 segments were not . A one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) model was estimated with segment type as a five - level between - subjects variable and proportion uncertain statements as the dependent variable . The overall ANOVA was statistically significant , F ( 4 , 1007 ) 0 5 . 79 , p 0 . 000 , partial η 2 0 . 022 , demonstrating that uncertainty levels differed significantly across segment types . To correct for Type I error inflation due to multiple comparisons , a Dunnett ’ s t test was used to compare pre - A , during - A , post - A , and post - A + 1 segments with baseline segments . Uncertainty was found to be greater than baseline only for pre - A and during - A segments , d 0 0 . 57 ( 95 % CI 0 . 51 – 58 ) , p 0 . 022 , and d 0 0 . 77 ( 95 % CI 0 . 64 – . 78 ) , p < . 001 , respectively . Inspection of the graph yields the contextualizing insight that the average difference in uncertainty levels between pre - A and post - A segments is relatively small , which is reflected in the small standardized difference , d 0 0 . 38 ( 95 % CI 0 . 32 – . 42 ) and nonsignificant contrast . Discussion Converging on the results of Study 1 , Study 2 showed that uncertainty levels were elevated above baseline levels just prior to analogy episodes . Furthermore , uncertainty levels were found to be elevated during analogy episodes as well but returned to baseline levels immediately following the end of analogy episodes . Thus , Study 2 provided evidence that analogies — in particular , near problem - related ones — not only tend to reliably occur in the presence of increased uncertainty , but also may play a part in alleviating it . However , we also note that uncertainty was slightly higher than baseline during versus before analogies , possibly because analogies were introducing some uncertainty of their own . Alternatively , this finding might simply be an indication of a tight coupling between uncertainty and analogy use , as would be expected if analogizing is a strategy for supporting the handling of problems under conditions of uncertainty . Additionally , the difference between pre - A and post - A segments is relatively small , suggesting that the alleviating effect of analogy on uncertainty is not dramatic ( i . e . , complete resolution ) but , Table 3 Logistic regressions of analogy at time t + 1 on uncertainty at time t by distance – purpose combinations 95 % CI for Exp ( B ) N w / analogy B Exp ( B ) Lower Upper p Analogy - near - p + 0 . 26 1 . 29 1 . 06 1 . 57 0 . 01 46 Analogy - near - p − 0 . 26 1 . 30 0 . 87 1 . 92 0 . 20 11 Analogy - far - p + 0 . 23 1 . 26 0 . 88 1 . 82 0 . 21 12 Analogy - far - p − 0 . 14 1 . 15 0 . 72 1 . 85 0 . 56 8 Fig . 2 Analogy episode segmentation scheme , with two example pre - A to post - A seg - ment sequences . Single - analogy example on top , multiple - analogy example below 1358 Mem Cogn ( 2012 ) 40 : 1352 – 1365 instead , a “ good enough ” effect ( i . e . , returning to nonzero baseline levels of uncertainty ) . This more nuanced effect of analogy on uncertainty is explored further in Study 3 . Study 3 Having demonstrated that situations involving uncertainty tended to predict the onset of analogies and provided evi - dence that analogies are directly associated with a return of uncertainty to baseline levels , we now turn to our final step in investigating whether and how analogy may actually alleviate elevated uncertainty . Understanding more about the details of the connection provides more insight into the nature of the mechanism and also reduces concerns about the relationship being a spurious statistical relationship . Specifically , Study 3 had two objectives . First , recall that analogies classified as problem related in our coding scheme included a range of functions supporting problem solving , including explaining solutions to problems to other team members and generating solutions or predictions for prob - lems . In this study , we sought to determine the degree to which analogy was being used in situations of uncertainty involving communicative misalignments ( e . g . , “ I don ’ t un - derstand what you are saying ” ) versus generative problem solving per se ( e . g . , “ what are we looking at , ” “ what is the value of this potential solution , ” etc . ) . The second objective was to formulate and explore hypotheses about the precise ways in which analogy use might function to alleviate elevated uncertainty . Qualitative coding and analyses were conducted to ad - dress these research objectives . Similar to Study 2 , analyses focused on near problem - related analogies , since the link between uncertainty and analogy was clearest for those analogy subtypes . Method Communicative misalignments Qualitative judgments To explore the extent to which anal - ogies were brought in to deal with miscommunication - related uncertainty ( vs . generative problem solving ) , the first and second authors independently coded the pre - A utter - ances in each analogy episode using a binary classification scheme . A code of “ 1 ” indicated that at least one uncertain utterance expressed uncertainty about what another speaker was saying ( e . g . , “ I don ’ t understand what you are saying , ” “ I think I know what you are suggesting ” ) , and “ 0 ” indicat - ed that none of the uncertainty utterances had this feature ( i . e . , reflected uncertainty in the problem - solving task ) . Interrater agreement for this coding was perfect with a Cohen ’ s kappa of 1 . Exploring how analogy might alleviate uncertainty Uncertainty topics To explore the range of sources of un - certainty associated with analogy use , the first and second authors together , as an expert panel , coded the pre - A and post - A uncertain utterances for topic , using a classification scheme describing the major categories of problem solving that are typically seen in such contexts : science content - related issues ( e . g . , data analysis , theorizing ) , science planning - related issues ( instrumentation troubleshooting , ro - ver experiment planning ) , and work / team process issues ( Paletz , Schunn , & Kim , 2011 ) . The distinction between content - and planning - related issues is analogous to the dis - tinction between problem solving in the space of hypotheses and in the space of experiments in multiple - space search theories of science ( Klahr & Dunbar , 1988 ) . From a psychol - ogy of science perspective , it is important to know for which of these types of uncertainties analogy was most helpful . Furthermore , science is also inherently social , particularly so in this large team context , which involves additional problem solving related to social and work processes ( e . g . , assigning people to specific tasks , negotiating team meetings and work schedules , determining budgets and staffing ) . Work processes may elicit different problem - solving strategies for resolving uncertainty than are used in the core task itself , or analogy may be a common strategy for solving any kind of uncertainty . Examining the relationship of uncertainty to analogy across these major topics allows for exploration of the generality of the underlying mechanism . These three major topics were captured in the following topics coding scheme : 1 . Task - science ( 1 0 yes , 0 0 no ) : Any of the uncertain utter - ances have to do with interpreting data and discussing hypotheses about the geology or atmosphere of Mars ; Fig . 3 Mean proportion uncertainty ( ± SE ) in pre - A ( n 0 32 ) , during - A ( n 0 37 ) , post - A ( n 0 34 ) , and post - A + 1 ( n 0 32 ) segments , as compared with baseline segments ( n 0 908 ) . * p < . 05 ; * * p < . 01 . Baseline uncertainty 0 . 13 ( SE 0 . 00 ) Mem Cogn ( 2012 ) 40 : 1352 – 1365 1359 2 . Task - planning ( 1 0 yes , 0 0 no ) : Any of the uncertain utterances are about planning analyses , readings , or movements of a Mars Rover ; 3 . Process ( 1 0 yes , 0 0 no ) : Any of the uncertain utterances have to do work process issues , ( e . g . , scheduling , paper writing , division of labor ) . The codes were not mutually exclusive ; that is , a given segment could contain any or all of the three code types . Results and discussion Communicative misalignments The number of episodes with either pre - or postanalogy uncertainty is given in Table 3 . Of the 37 analogy episodes examined , 9 had no uncertain utterances in pre - A segments . Analysis focused only on preanalogy uncertainty to uncover what kinds of uncertainty would be associated with subse - quent analogy use . Out of the 28 episodes with pre - A uncertainty , none were judged to contain uncertainty stem - ming primarily from communicative misalignments . Thus , the analogies predicted by increases in uncertainty in this data set were largely serving not communicative alignment functions but , rather , more generative problem - solving functions . Exploring how analogy might alleviate uncertainty Uncertainty topics As is shown in Table 4 , the most com - mon topic of uncertainty was task - science uncertainty , with task - planning and process uncertainty approximately equal - ly prevalent . Thus , the majority of the uncertainty surround - ing analogy appeared to be directly related to the central problem - solving tasks of the mission , such as interpreting data , discussing hypotheses / theories , and planning rover measurement trips , with a smaller number of various uncer - tainties related to coordinating schedules , writing papers , and so on . Next , we present prototypical examples from each topic type to show the character of the relationship of uncertainty and analogy . In particular , we focus upon wheth - er the analogy is connected to the uncertainty and whether the analogy resolves the uncertainty . A prototypical example of how task - science uncertainty is related to analogy is illustrated in a protocol excerpt in Table 5 . For brevity and clarity , the protocol excerpts that follow are shown by speaker turn rather than utterance . In this excerpt , the scientists discuss potential explanations for some scarring patterns observed on a sample of rocks , focusing on the implications , if any , of the observed data patterns for the viability of life and historical presence of liquid surface water at this particular location on Mars . A ventifact is a rock that has been shaped , abraded , or polished by wind - driven sand . Desert varnish on Earth is a coating of inorganic and organic matter found on exposed rock surfa - ces in arid environments . At this point in the mission , historical evidence of liquid surface water had only recently been discovered , but not by this particular rover team . The scientists attempt to reason about how the rocks under analysis could have formed desert varnish , whether what they observe is indeed desert varnish , and the impli - cations for possible historical water at their site . Two analogies participate in their reasoning process . The first is to how desert varnish is formed on Earth , where “ it ’ s thought to maybe have biological implications ” ; the second is to the findings of a prior Mars mission ( “ certainly with Viking we saw frost ” ) that helped prove that Mars did have , at least , frozen water . These analogies appear to alleviate uncertainty enough for the scientists to advance their rea - soning along the same lines : Speaker 2 says that it is “ not implausible ” that frost might play a role in creating Martian desert varnish , and Speaker 1 seems to express his increas - ing certainty about an acid fog hypothesis by saying “ maybe that ’ s a good explanation of it . ” Further , Speakers 4 and 2 begin to explore additional questions , suggesting that their discussion of the desert varnish and frost hypotheses has reached a threshold of uncertainty to allow them to explore further implications . In the next , task - planning excerpt ( Table 6 ) , team members at the long - term planning workstations attempt to decide how long to have the rover take a Mössbauer spectrometer instrument reading . A pass refers to the satellite revolutions around Mars that dictate when data can be rapidly uploaded / downloaded from the rover to Earth . The uncertainty is expressed by Speaker 1 in particular . An analogy to an abstract “ go and touch ” situation generates a proposed decision rule . The scientists at this point have already coined the term “ touch and go ” to indicate an instrument reading followed by a drive ; the speaker extends this concept to mean a drive followed by an instrument reading . The absence of expressed uncer - tainty — in particular , by Speaker 1 — after the analogy - generated solution is proposed suggests that the analogy at least partially helped in resolving the uncertainty sur - rounding their decision making . Table 4 Total number of analogy episodes with any kind of uncer - tainty and by topic of the uncertainty pre - and postanalogy Task - science Task - planning Process Totals Present in pre - A 17 11 7 28 Present in post - A 15 7 8 25 1360 Mem Cogn ( 2012 ) 40 : 1352 – 1365 Finally , in an example of analogy dealing with pro - cess uncertainty ( Table 7 ) , the speakers discuss a pro - posal they sent to headquarters requesting additional time and observations . Although the rovers were initially built to last 90 Martian days ( sols ) , it became increasingly obvious that the rovers would outlast this time . In fact , Spirit lasted over 6 years , and Opportunity is still operational as of this writing , over 8 years since landing . However , the initial mission was only budgeted , scheduled , and staffed for these initial 90 days , after which the scientists were expected to return to their home institutions and the engineers were expected to shift to different projects . In this conversation , scientists from MER A on sol 77 discuss how they might continue conducting science in a sped - up , remote fashion . They express uncer - tainty regarding which parts of their proposal will be ap - proved and , consequently , for how long the MER mission would be extended and how much engineering support they should expect . Speaker 1 uses two analogies to strategize their continued functioning with a huge reduction in engineering staff . When the mission began , it took a full Martian day ( sol ) of science planning to determine a sol of rover activities ; by the end of the first 90 days , this amount had dropped to roughly 3 h ( Tollinger , Schunn , & Vera , 2006 ) . The scientists Table 5 Protocol excerpt 1 : Analogies dealing with task - science uncertainty Speaker Turn 1 I would have thought that the ventifacting would have been very late and it would have destroyed the surface . Actually maybe that ’ s why we don ’ t see the black surface of the other two rocks , which also were ventifacts , right ? Because maybe they just happened , we happened to hit faces where it had been scarred 2 And of course that , all that , would mean , if that is an injected block , all of that took place after ; it did not take place at < missing words > 1 Yea , well I mean , I don ’ t think that we can rule out that this isn ’ t some kind of desert varnish , although I don ’ t understand how desert varnish forms 2 Well that ’ s , that ’ s very controversial 1 And , and on Earth it ’ s thought to maybe have biological implications 2 Two camps , biology and nonbiology 1 But something has cemented this material and in a world that is desiccated , that has a very dry atmosphere 2 What the hell does that mean ? 1 Yea , it ’ s hard for me to see how you would do that without burying me 2 So in the nonbiological camp , it requires the interaction of desert dew with , ah , dust 4 Wetting , basically with dust at least we < missing words > 1 Of course we see frost you know we have to see it this size but certainly with Viking we saw frost . 2 Not implausible 1 And , ah , and if frost , you know , in the morning , if it doesn ’ t evaporate , if it melts quickly and 4 Can you do something with an acid fog ? I know we got sulfate and sulfurs and chlorines ; is there some way we can < missing words > 1 Certainly , yea , maybe that ’ s a good explanation of it 4 Maybe it ’ s a coating of some sort of sulfate chlorine , you know , crude 2 Instead of the interaction of dust 1 I think that the bilayers could well be the global dust that has somehow been cemented . Note . Bold shows uncertainty hedge words ; italic indicates analogy use Table 6 Protocol excerpt 2 : Analogy dealing with task - planning uncertainty Speaker Turn 1 Ok , so the idea is go , and then we ’ re going to at the end of sol [ Martian day ] 90 . At the end of the afternoon we deploy the Mössbauer to capture it . 2 Is this going to be the < missing words > 1 I don ’ t know , I think so . And then we let it integrate all night . And then , or maybe , we let it integrate , we let it integrate until some other pass at 3 o ’ clock in the morning or something and then 3 Go no go based on what ? 2 Well if you want to that ’ s kind of like a go and touch , so if they would want to do the drive and the hazcam [ a rover camera used to aid in finding safe driving paths ] and see that 1 And confirm that they can move the bar and then ah we ’ ll deploy the Mössbauer at the end of the day and let it integrate . And then we ' ll do a tube chain 3 At the end of which day ? 3 90 or 91 ? 3 91 1 90 Note . Bold shows uncertainty hedge words ; italic indicates analogy use Mem Cogn ( 2012 ) 40 : 1352 – 1365 1361 here refer to recent process improvements where the one team was able to plan 2 Martian days of rover activity in one sol and how the other was able to do a short planning session . The analogy does not completely resolve their uncertainty — a complete resolution would consist of them hearing back from headquarters — but the analogous situations appear to help the speakers understand how they might continue to manage the rover with limited staffing . As the three excerpts illustrate , the analogies in this data set often did not completely resolve the underlying issues causing the uncertainty ; rather , they seemed to help by narrowing the space of possible resolutions — for exam - ple , by generating a resolution that was then rejected or by generating a potential resolution that required addi - tional verification . In a number of cases , some residual uncertainty persisted postanalogy . Analogies were not final , definite resolutions to the problem - solving uncer - tainties but , instead , appeared to be quick , approximate aids for advancing problem solving , reasoning , and de - cision making . General discussion Summary of findings This article explored the possibility that analogy is a general strategy for problem solving under uncertainty , using three complementary streams of analyses of naturalistic records of complex problem solving . Studies 1 and 2 showed that local increases in uncertainty reliably predicted the use of mainly near problem - related analogies and that uncertainty tended to return to baseline levels immediately following these kinds of analogies . Study 3 provided evidence that the uncertain contexts that tended to predict analogy use related to more generative problem solving , such as planning rover observations , interpreting data , and dealing with work pro - cess difficulties , rather than communicative misalignments . Finally , also in Study 3 , we discussed a data - generated hypothesis that , rather than completely resolving the issue underlying the immediate uncertainty , analogy supports problem solving under uncertainty by narrowing the space of possibilities to facilitate quick , approximate problem solving , reasoning , and decision making . Study strengths and limitations An important strength of our work is its external validity . Our data consisted of recordings of diverse scientists conversing naturally , lending strength to our ability to generalize our conclusions to real - world problem solving . Another strength is the statistical sophistication of our work , in that we employed hierarchical modeling and sequential analysis to account for the possible influences of multilevel dependencies in the data , which prior work had not accounted for . Furthermore , while our findings are correlational in nature , the sequential nature of our analy - sis methods provides information of temporal order , which is one of the building blocks of inferring causality beyond simple correlations ( e . g . , B causes A is ruled out ) . This statistical sophistication and the broad consistency of our findings with prior work ( Ball & Christensen , 2009 ; Dunbar , 1997 ; Houghton , 1998 ) provide increased support for the claim that analogy is a domain - general strategy for problem solving under uncertainty . A potential limitation of our work is the focus on scientists at work . However , rather than simply focusing on a narrow range of topics , the scientists dealt with many issues , not only about Table 7 Protocol excerpt 3 : Analogy dealing with process uncertainty Speaker Turn 1 I - We ’ ve provided , we ’ ve provided enough science justification to the proposal ah that all went in , probably that was all submitted about the time at the beginning of the < missing words > . It ' s a city and it ' s a headquarters status < missing words > . I would be really surprised if it ' s not approved . 2 Yea but for how long ? Like about 90 days ? 1 Yea , I ’ ve heard some rumors like out to sol 240 eventually , so it ' s probably more than 90 days . And um I think the real issue for us is going to be the budgeting and um my guess is that it ' s going to drop to somewhere between 40 to 50 percent of the engineering staff . So what they ' re going to do is um is to . I think they ' re going to go with what it was the Opportunity was planning , and that was to - remember a few weeks ago we tried to plan two sols in 1 sol , and in Opportunity they tried to plan a sol in a very short session ? And I think what they ' re going to do is have every day , they ' re going to have two shorter sessions so that every day you both go over and start new plans . So that means like a ten hour session every day and that covers both probes . So I think that ' s what they ' re going for so … 2 But the engineers ? 1 Yea , the engineers < missing words > , so that right there allows them to cut the staffing in half . But I ' ve heard that there ' s going to be more than 50 percent cuts , so I don ' t know what that means with the < missing words > . Nobody ' s heard anything back . Note . Bold shows uncertainty hedge words ; italic indicates analogy use 1362 Mem Cogn ( 2012 ) 40 : 1352 – 1365 the science — which itself was broad ( e . g . , atmospheric , geo - chemical , geology , soil science ) — but also about how to deploy the rover and its instruments and many types of work processes ( e . g . , paper publications , obtaining future funding , scheduling ) . Thus , our conclusions are likely to generalize to many real - world problem - solving settings to the degree that those settings share one or more of these diverse problem - solving activities . Implications and conclusions Implications for complex problem solving under uncertainty The analogies the scientists used typically did not completely resolve uncertainty directly . Analogies are generally inductive in nature ; inferences generated by analogy do not provide the certainty of logical deduction but , rather , need to be checked for validity by additional reasoning or problem solving ( Gentner & Colhoun , 2010 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1996b ) . Thus , it is not entirely surprising that analogies may not completely resolve uncertainty . Furthermore , scientists and engineers do not always seek to completely eliminate uncertainty ( and indeed , some - times it is not possible to do so ) but often drive problem solving with the aim of converting it into approximate ranges sufficient to continue problem solving ( Schunn , 2010 ) . With that being said , the question remains whether anal - ogy is an adaptive cognitive strategy for dealing with un - certainty . Information in naturalistic problem solving often comes at a cost , and decisions must often be made quickly , so it may be adaptive in those situations to “ satisfice ” with a heuristic like analogy ( Shah & Oppenheimer , 2008 ; Simon , 1956 ) . Furthermore , under certain conditions , heuristics are not only more efficient than logical or statistically normative methods , but also more accurate ( Gigerenzer & Brighton , 2009 ) . For example , in so - called “ large worlds , ” informa - tion is scarce or limited , the structure of the problem envi - ronment is dynamic and unstable ( e . g . , contingencies and probabilities may change , unexpected events may occur ) , and information bearing on decision rules is incomplete or unavailable ( Luan , Schooler , & Gigerenzer , 2011 ) . Under these conditions , heuristics that selectively ignore problem - relevant information outperform more " optimal " methods that take as much information into account as possible ( Gigerenzer & Brighton , 2009 ; Gigerenzer & Gaissmaier , 2011 ) . Thus , under certain conditions ( e . g . , under tight time pressures , large worlds ) , analogy might be an adaptive or even optimal uncertainty resolution strategy . Of course , at this juncture , it is an open question whether the expert scientists in our data set succeeded in their problem solving under uncertainty because of or in spite of analogy use . Future research should examine this question , perhaps by comparing teams either using or not using analogy , or testing computa - tional simulations that pit analogies against other uncertainty reduction tools / techniques in “ large world ” conditions . Implications for analogy and theories of cognition Our findings bridge the gap between general theories of human problem solving and theories dealing specifically with anal - ogy . First , our results lend support to theory on cognitive architectures that uncertainty is an important triggering mechanism for analogy ( Jones & Langley , 2005 ; Langley et al . , 1991 ; Singley & Anderson , 1989 ) . Uncertainty is a sign of a temporary impasse , and analogy appears to be among the mechanisms to overcome such an obstacle . From the perspective of models of analogy , too , this work provides some potentially useful theoretical contributions . While many detailed computational models of the crucial components of analogy ( e . g . , retrieval , mapping , inference ) have been developed ( Forbus , Gentner , & Law , 1994 ; Gentner , 1983 ; Hofstadter & Fluid Analogies Research Group , 1995 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1989 ; Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 ; Kokinov , 1998 ) , modeling efforts have only recently begun to explicitly integrate task - specific con - straints . A notable exception is the work of Keith Holyoak , Paul Thagard , and their colleagues , whose models take into account how the pragmatic goals of the agent influence retrieval and mapping ( Holyoak & Thagard , 1989 ; Thagard , Holyoak , & Nelson , 1990 ) . Our findings suggest that uncertainty may impose an additional constraint on analogical retrieval , given that near analogies figured prominently , both in the data set generally and also with respect to the use of analogy for dealing with problems under uncertainty . Given the types of uncertainty raised ( science data analysis and interpretation , science - related planning , work process issues ) , it is not surprising that analogies from near topics were used most often . The overall preponderance of near analogies for these kinds of activities is consistent with other real - time studies of science ( Dunbar , 1995 , 1997 ; Saner & Schunn , 1999 ) and engineer - ing design ( Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ) . Near analogies drawn from the team ’ s domain of expertise are most likely to be well understood and , therefore , effectively support making predictions under uncertainty and diagnosing possi - ble problems . However , our data did not conclusively rule out the possible role of far analogies for dealing with uncer - tainty , given the lack of statistical power . Future research should continue investigating the extent to which analogies of varying distances might be used for this function . Finally , a related open question raised by our work concerns the degree to which the triggering mechanisms for analogy under uncertainty might be governed by an explicit strategy selection process ( Lovett & Schunn , 1999 ; Schunn , Lovett , & Reder , 2001 ) or more implicit mechanisms , such as associative memory retrieval or au - tomatic strategy selection ( Lovett & Anderson , 1996 ; Reder & Schunn , 1996 ) and whether these mechanisms might vary from when analogy is used in other cognitive tasks , such as learning and creative idea generation . Mem Cogn ( 2012 ) 40 : 1352 – 1365 1363 Theories of analogy would be enriched by an understand - ing of how analogy use may be triggered in different ways across different types of cognitive tasks . Author note This research was supported in part by National Sci - ence Foundation Grants SBE - 0830210 , SBE - 1064083 , through the Science of Science and Innovation Policy Program , and CMMI - 0855293 . We are grateful to Carmela Rizzo for data and research assistant coordination , Irene Tollinger , Preston Tollinger , Mike McCurdy , Tyler Klein , and Alonso Vera for help with data collection , and Lauren Gunn , Carl Fenderson , Justin Krill , Tiemoko Ballo , Rebecca Sax , Michael Ye , and Candace Smalley for help with data processing and coding . References Anderson , J . R . , Fincham , J . M . , & Douglass , S . ( 1997 ) . The role of examples and rules in the acquisition of a cognitive skill . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 23 , 932 – 945 . Ball , L . J . , & Christensen , B . T . ( 2009 ) . Analogical reasoning and mental simulation in design : Two strategies linked to uncertainty resolution . Design Studies , 30 , 169 – 186 . Bearman , C . R . , Ball , L . J . , & Ormerod , T . C . ( 2007 ) . The structure and function of spontaneous analogising in domain - based problem solving . Thinking and Reasoning , 13 ( 3 ) , 273 – 294 . Blanchette , I . , & Dunbar , K . N . ( 2001 ) . Analogy use in naturalistic settings : The influence of audience , emotion , and goals . Memory & Cognition , 29 , 730 – 735 . Bottom , W . P . ( 1998 ) . Negotiator risk : Sources of uncertainty and the impact of reference points on negotiated agreements . Organiza - tional Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 76 , 89 – 112 . Brashers , D . E . , Neidig , J . L . , Russell , J . A . , Cardillo , L . W . , Haas , S . M . , Dobbs , L . K . , & Nemeth , S . ( 2003 ) . The medical , personal , and social causes of uncertainty in HIV illness . Issues in Mental Health Nursing , 24 , 497 – 522 . Chan , J . , Fu , K . , Schunn , C . D . , Cagan , J . , Wood , K . L . , & Kotovsky , K . ( 2011 ) . On the benefits and pitfalls of analogies for innovative design : Ideation performance based on analogical distance , com - monness , and modality of examples . Journal of Mechanical De - sign , 133 , 081004 . Christensen , B . T . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 2007 ) . The relationship of analog - ical distance to analogical function and preinventive structure : The case of engineering design . Memory & Cognition , 35 , 29 – 38 . Christensen , B . T . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 2009 ) . The role and impact of mental simulation in design . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 23 , 327 – 344 . Cohen , M . S . , Freeman , J . T . , & Thompson , B . ( 1998 ) . Critical think - ing skills in tactical decision making : A model and a training strategy . In J . A . Cannon - Bowers & E . Salas ( Eds . ) , Making decisions under stress : Implications for individual and team training ( pp . 155 – 189 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychologi - cal Association . Dahl , D . W . , & Moreau , P . ( 2002 ) . The influence and value of analog - ical thinking during new product ideation . Journal of Marketing Research , 39 , 47 – 60 . Dunbar , K . N . ( 1995 ) . How scientists really reason : Scientific reason - ing in real - world laboratories . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 365 – 395 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Dunbar , K . N . ( 1997 ) . How scientists think : On - line creativity and conceptual change in science . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought : An investigation of conceptual structures and processes ( pp . 461 – 493 ) . Washington , DC : Amer - ican Psychological Association . Forbus , K . D . , Gentner , D . , & Law , K . ( 1994 ) . MAC / FAC : A model of similarity - based retrieval . Cognitive Science , 19 , 141 – 205 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . Gentner , D . , Brem , S . , Ferguson , R . W . , Wolff , P . , Markman , A . B . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 1997 ) . Analogy and creativity in the works of Johannes Kepler . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought : An investigation of conceptual structures and processes ( pp . 403 – 459 ) . Washington , D . C . : American Psycho - logical Association . Gentner , D . , & Colhoun , J . ( 2010 ) . Analogical processes in human thinking and learning . In B . Glatzeder , V . Goel , & A . von Muller ( Eds . ) , Towards a theory of thinking ( pp . 35 – 48 ) . Heidelberg , Germany : Springer . Gigerenzer , G . , & Brighton , H . ( 2009 ) . Homo heuristicus : Why biased minds make better inferences . Topics in Cognitive Science , 1 , 107 – 143 . Gigerenzer , G . , & Gaissmaier , W . ( 2011 ) . Heuristic decision making . Annual Review of Psychology , 62 , 451 – 482 . Helms , M . , Vattam , S . S . , & Goel , A . K . ( 2009 ) . Biologically inspired design : Process and products . Design Studies , 30 , 606 – 622 . Hofstadter , D . R . , & the Fluid Analogies Research Group . ( 1995 ) . Fluid concepts and creative analogies : Computer models of the funda - mental mechanisms of thought . New York , NY : Basic Books . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1989 ) . Analogical mapping by con - straint satisfaction . Cognitive Science , 13 , 295 – 355 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1996a ) . The analogical scientist . In K . J . Holyoak & P . Thagard ( Eds . ) , Mental leaps : Analogy in creative thought ( pp . 185 – 209 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1996b ) . Mental leaps : Analogy in creative thought . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Houghton , D . P . ( 1998 ) . Historical analogies and the cognitive dimension of domestic policymaking . Political Psychology , 19 , 279 – 303 . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1997 ) . Distributed representations of structure : A theory of analogical access and mapping . Psycholog - ical Review , 104 , 427 – 466 . Jones , R . M . , & Langley , P . W . ( 2005 ) . A constrained architecture for learning and problem solving . Computational Intelligence , 21 , 480 – 502 . Jousselme , A . , Maupin , P . , & Bosse , E . ( 2003 ) . Uncertainty in a situation analysis perspective . In Proceedings of the 6th International Con - ference on Information Fusion ( pp . 1207 – 1214 ) . Cairns , Australia . Kahneman , D . , & Tversky , A . ( 1982 ) . Variants of uncertainty . Cogni - tion , 11 , 143 – 157 . Klahr , D . , & Dunbar , K . N . ( 1988 ) . Dual space search during scientific reasoning . Cognitive Science , 12 , 1 – 48 . Kokinov , B . K . ( 1998 ) . Analogy is like cognition : Dynamic , emergent , and context - sensitive . In K . J . Holyoak , D . Gentner , & B . K . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , Advances in analogy research : Integration of the - ory and data from the cognitive , computational , and neural sciences ( pp . 96 – 105 ) . Sofia , Bulgaria : New Bulgarian University Press . Langley , P . W . , & Jones , R . M . ( 1988 ) . A computational model of scientific insight . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The nature of creativity : Contemporary psychological perspectives ( pp . 177 – 201 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Langley , P . W . , McKusick , K . B . , Allen , J . A . , Iba , W . F . , & Thompson , K . ( 1991 ) . A design for the icarus architecture . In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Integrated Intelligent Architectures . Lewis , D . , & Burke , C . J . ( 1949 ) . The use and misuse of the chi - square test . Psychological Bulletin , 46 , 433 – 489 . Linsey , J . S . , Laux , J . P . , Clauss , E . , Wood , K . L . , & Markman , A . B . ( 2007 ) . Increasing innovation : A trilogy of experiments towards a 1364 Mem Cogn ( 2012 ) 40 : 1352 – 1365 design - by - analogy method . In Proceedings of the ASME 2007 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences & Com - puters and Information in Engineering Conference . Lovett , M . C . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 1996 ) . History of success and current context in problem solving : Combined influences on operator selection . Cognitive Psychology , 31 , 168 – 217 . Lovett , M . C . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 1999 ) . Task representations , strategy variability , and base - rate neglect . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology . General , 128 , 107 – 130 . Luan , S . , Schooler , L . J . , & Gigerenzer , G . ( 2011 ) . A signal - detection analysis offast - and - frugal trees . Psychological Review , 118 , 316 – 338 . Nersessian , N . J . ( 1999 ) . Model - based reasoning in conceptual change . In L . Magnani , N . J . Nersessian , & P . Thagard ( Eds . ) , Model - based reasoning in scientific discovery ( pp . 5 – 22 ) . New York , NY : Kluwer Academic / Plenum . Newell , A . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1972 ) . Human problem solving . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Okada , T . , Yokochi , S . , Ishibashi , K . , & Ueda , K . ( 2009 ) . Analogical modification in the creation of contemporary art . Cognitive Sys - tems Research , 10 , 189 – 203 . Paletz , S . B . F . , Schunn , C . D . , & Kim , K . H . ( 2011 ) . Conflict under the microscope : Micro - conflicts in naturalistic team discussions . Negotation and Conflict Management Research , 4 , 314 – 351 . Priem , R . L . , Love , L . G . , & Shaffer , M . A . ( 2002 ) . Executives ’ perceptions of uncertainty sources : A numerical taxonomy and underlying dimensions . Journal of Management , 28 , 725 – 746 . Raudenbush , S . W . , & Bryk , A . S . ( 2002 ) . Hierarchical linear models : Applications and data analysis methods ( 2nd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Reder , L . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 1996 ) . Metacognition does not imply awareness : Strategy choice is goverened by implicit learning and memory . In L . M . Reder ( Ed . ) , Implicit memory and metacogni - tion ( pp . 45 – 78 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Rietveld , T . , Van Hout , R . , & Ernestus , M . ( 2004 ) . Pitfalls in corpus research . Computers and the Humanities , 38 , 343 – 362 . Rowe , R . D . ( 1994 ) . Understandinguncertainty . Risk Analysis , 14 , 743 – 750 . Saner , L . D . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 1999 ) . Analogies out of the blue : When history seems to retell itself . In Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society . Schunn , C . D . ( 2010 ) . From uncertainly exact to certainly vague : Epistemic uncertainty and approximation in science and engineer - ing problem solving . In B . H . Ross ( Ed . ) , Psychology of learning and motivation ( Vol . 53 , pp . 227 – 252 ) . San Diego , CA : Elsevier . Schunn , C . D . , Lovett , M . , & Reder , L . M . ( 2001 ) . Awareness andworking memory in strategy adaptivity . Memory & Cognition , 29 , 256 – 266 . Shah , A . K . , & Oppenheimer , D . M . ( 2008 ) . Heuristics made easy : An effort - reduction framework . Psychological Bulletin , 134 , 207 – 222 . Simon , H . A . ( 1956 ) . Rational choice and the structure of the environ - ment . Psychological Review , 63 , 129 – 138 . Singley , M . K . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 1989 ) . Transfer in the ACT * theory . In M . K . Singley & J . R . Anderson ( Eds . ) , The transfer of cognitive skill ( pp . 43 – 67 ) . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Skelton , T . M . , & Thamhain , H . J . ( 2003 ) . The human side of manag - ing risks in high - tech product developments . In Proceedings of Engineering Management Conference , 2003 . IEMC ’ 03 . Manag - ing Technologically Driven Organizations : The Human Side of Innovation and Change . Smith , C . P . ( 2000 ) . Content analysis and narrative analysis . In H . T . Reis & C . M . Judd ( Eds . ) , Handbook of research methods in social and personality psychology ( pp . 313 – 335 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Squyres , S . ( 2005 ) . Roving Mars : Spirit , Opportunity , and the explo - ration of the red planet . New York : Hyperion . Thagard , P . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Nelson , G . ( 1990 ) . Analog retrieval by constraint satisfaction . Artificial Intelligence , 46 , 259 – 310 . Tollinger , I . V . , Schunn , C . D . , & Vera , A . H . ( 2006 ) . What changes when a large team becomes more expert ? Analyses of speedup in the Mars Exploration Rovers science planning process . In Pro - ceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society . Trickett , S . B . , Trafton , J . G . , Saner , L . D . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 2007 ) . “ I don ’ t know what ’ s going on there ” : The use of spatial trans - formations to deal with and resolve uncertainty in complex visual - izations . In M . C . Lovett & P . Shah ( Eds . ) , Thinking with data ( pp . 65 – 86 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Trickett , S . B . , Trafton , J . G . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 2009 ) . How do scientists respond to anomalies ? Different strategies used in basic and applied science . Topics in Cognitive Sciences , 1 , 711 – 729 . Whaley , B . B . , & Holloway , R . L . ( 1997 ) . Rebuttal analogy in political communication : Argument and attack in sound bite . Political Communication , 14 , 293 – 305 . Wilson , J . O . , Rosen , D . , Nelson , B . A . , & Yen , J . ( 2010 ) . The effects of biological examples in idea generation . Design Studies , 31 , 169 – 186 . Wojtkiewicz , S . F . , Eldred , M . S . , Field , R . V . , Urbina , A . , & Red - Horse , J . R . ( 2001 ) . Uncertainty quantification in large computa - tional engineering models . In Proceedings of the 42nd AIAA / ASME / ASCE / AHS / ASC Strutures , Structural Dynamics , and Materials Conference . Mem Cogn ( 2012 ) 40 : 1352 – 1365 1365