Effects of team knowledge management on the creativity and ﬁnancial performance of organizational teams Sun Young Sung , Jin Nam Choi ⇑ College of Business Administration , Seoul National University , Shinlim - dong , San 56 - 1 , Gwanak - gu , Seoul 151 - 742 , Republic of Korea a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 22 August 2010 Accepted 17 January 2012 Available online 10 February 2012 Accepted by Richard Moreland Keywords : Team knowledge management Knowledge stock Knowledge utilization Intuitive cognitive style Systematic cognitive style Environmental uncertainty Team creativity Team ﬁnancial performance a b s t r a c t An increasing number of organizations are turning to teams for innovation and creativity . The present study investigated the effects of team knowledge management ( TKM ) on the creativity and ﬁnancial per - formance of organizational teams . Our analysis of data collected from 65 sales teams , across 35 branches of a Korean insurance company , showed that team knowledge utilization ( but not team knowledge stock ) was positively related to team creativity , which in turn predicted team ﬁnancial performance over the 6 - month period . The positive effects of knowledge utilization were stronger when team leaders had a sys - tematic cognitive style and when teams were exposed to high environmental uncertainty . Furthermore , the systematic cognitive style of leaders had a positive main effect on team creativity and positively mod - erated the relationship between team knowledge stock and team creativity . The implications of these ﬁndings were considered , and some possible directions for future research were suggested . (cid:2) 2012 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Introduction With the increasing appreciation of teams as the source of inno - vations ( De Dreu & West , 2001 ; Nijstad & De Dreu , 2002 ) , creativity in group settings has gained increasing research attention ( Lopez - Cabrales , Pérez - Luño , & Cabrera , 2009 ) . Working in teams is expected to lead to more novel associations and creative out - comes because of the broader set of perspectives available to mem - bers and the cross - fertilization of ideas ( Perry - Smith & Shalley , 2003 ; Tesluk , Farr , & Klein , 1997 ) . Team creativity can be deﬁned as the generation of novel and appropriate ideas , solutions , or pro - cesses in the context of team objectives ( Amabile , 1996 ) . Because the initial interest in team creativity originated from the brain - storming paradigm ( Osborn , 1957 ) , researchers have often com - pared and contrasted idea - generation processes involving groups and individuals primarily in laboratory settings ( e . g . , Nijstad & Stroebe , 2006 ; Paulus & Dzindolet , 1993 ) . Although these studies reveal drawbacks of team creative processes , such as free riding and evaluation apprehension ( Diehl & Stroebe , 1991 ; Paulus , 2000 ) , interest in team creativity among scholars and practitioners has continued to grow ( Anderson , De Dreu , & Nijstad , 2004 ) . Extant studies of team creativity have highlighted the impor - tance of group composition and team emergent states or processes , such as a supportive climate ( Gilson & Shalley , 2004 ) , intra - team communication ( Leenders , Van Engelen , & Kratzer , 2003 ) , and team conﬂict ( Chen , 2006 ) . These studies presumed that a heteroge - neous membership provides teams with diverse information and knowledge , and that certain team processes promote the efﬁcient ﬂow and exchange of such information and knowledge ( Anderson et al . , 2004 ; Hülsheger , Anderson , & Salgado , 2009 ) . Thus , research - ers have acknowledged that the ability of a team to generate novel and useful ideas is inextricably linked to task - relevant knowledge embodied in members ( Lopez - Cabrales et al . , 2009 ) as well as to the adroit exploitation of knowledge by the team ( Zahra & George , 2002 ) . In explaining individual creativity , Amabile ( 1996 ) empha - sized similar dimensions , such as domain - speciﬁc knowledge and creative processes , that promote the utilization of knowledge ( cf . Choi , Anderson , & Veillette , 2009 ) . Based on the literature , we pro - pose that team creativity is positively related to team knowledge management ( TKM ) , which includes the presence of knowledge within a team ( team knowledge stock ) and the process of using such knowledge ( team knowledge utilization ) . To understand the way teams use knowledge in performing their tasks , researchers have proposed several theoretical approaches , such as transactive memory systems ( TMS ; Liang , Moreland , & Argote , 1995 ) , shared mental models ( SMM ; Mohammed , Klimoski , & Rentsch , 2000 ) , and prior experience ( Gino et al . , 2009 ) . Studies have shown that all of these are mean - ingful predictors of group performance ( Austin , 2003 ; Mathieu , Goodwin , Heffner , Salas , & Cannon - Bowers , 2000 ) . Nevertheless , empirical support for the effects of TKM on team creativity is 0749 - 5978 / $ - see front matter (cid:2) 2012 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . obhdp . 2012 . 01 . 001 ⇑ Corresponding author . E - mail address : jnchoi @ snu . ac . kr ( J . N . Choi ) . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 118 ( 2012 ) 4 – 13 Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / obhdp generally lacking . Our study examines such effects in a sample of organizational teams . We also propose that the relationship between TKM and team creativity is moderated by internal and external factors . First , we identify cognitive problem - solving styles ( either intuitive or sys - tematic ) as a moderator of the TKM – creativity relationship , be - cause creativity involves the cognitive manipulation of information , and the cognitive process of a team can be shaped by the cognitive orientation of its constituents , particularly the lea - der of the team ( Sosik , Avolio , & Kahai , 1997 ) . Cognitive styles in - volve stable individual differences in perceiving and processing information and experiences that ultimately affect how people feel , think , and act ( Sagiv , Arieli , Goldenberg , & Goldschnidt , 2010 ) . An intuitive cognitive style is a tendency to simultaneously analyze information from various perspectives ( Scott & Bruce , 1995 ) . In contrast , a systematic cognitive style is a tendency to analyze a situation based on logic and intention ( Sagiv et al . , 2010 ) . The cognitive styles of team leaders may stimulate the cre - ative thinking of members , and thereby facilitate the identiﬁcation and utilization of knowledge for creative problem solving by the team ( Shin & Zhou , 2007 ; Taggar , 2002 ) . Second , based on institu - tional theory , which highlights the role of the external environ - ment in shaping the operations of work units ( Anderson & Tushman , 2001 ) , we posit that the TKM – creativity link can be moderated by the operational context of teams . By providing greater group - wide motivation to search for new ideas and fully exploit knowledge , for example , environmental uncertainty may strengthen the effects of TKM on creativity . Finally , responding to the call for research on the performance implications of creativity ( Shalley , Zhou , & Oldham , 2004 ) , we examine the effects of team creativity on team ﬁnancial perfor - mance . Studies of team creativity have focused mostly on anteced - ents or processes that foster creativity ( Hülsheger et al . , 2009 ) , reﬂecting the underlying assumption that creativity is beneﬁcial to performance . In this study , we propose that TKM enhances per - formance by providing creative solutions to teams . Our theoretical model is empirically validated using multi - source , longitudinal data collected from 65 teams in a large insurance company in Korea . Team knowledge management and team creativity The literature on knowledge management can be divided into two streams : the content approach and the process approach . Studies based on the content approach focus on the types and char - acteristics of knowledge , such as domain - relevant skills ( Martin & Parboteeah , 2007 ) , tacit versus explicit knowledge ( Grifﬁth & Sawyer , 2010 ) , and procedural versus declarative knowledge ( Akgün , Dayan , & Di Benedetto , 2008 ) . In contrast , research based on the process perspective focuses on the way knowledge is han - dled , shared , and utilized among individuals ( Gino et al . , 2009 ; Tiwana & McLean , 2005 ) . Similarly , previous studies of team knowledge have assumed that knowledge content provides the raw materials for generating new knowledge ( Cruz , Perez , & Ramos , 2007 ; Mathieu & Schulze , 2006 ) , whereas knowledge pro - cesses enable teams to apply relevant knowledge and thus activate the value of such knowledge in team performance ( Liang et al . , 1995 ; Moreland & Myaskovsky , 2000 ) . Shared mental models ( SMM ) reﬂect the content approach and suggest that the shared mental representation of team tasks , roles , and attitudes promotes team effectiveness by improving coordina - tion and the formation of normative principles for collective efforts ( Klimoski & Mohammed , 1994 ; Mohammed et al . , 2000 ) . Employ - ing both the content and process approaches , Wegner ( 1986 ) pro - posed a theory of transactive memory systems ( TMS ) . These systems include the knowledge possessed by each individual , along with a collective awareness of who knows what . In subse - quent TMS studies , researchers have focused mostly on the latter component and examined the processes that enable teams to identify and efﬁciently apply the knowledge distributed among members ( Liang et al . , 1995 ; Moreland , 1999 ) . Similarly , team learning ( Wilson , Goodman , & Cronin , 2007 ) involves the process of cross - fertilization among team members , thereby encouraging the ﬂow of ideas within the team . Due to the focus of existing stud - ies on the process of acquiring and sharing team knowledge , the literature has provided insufﬁcient information on the function of knowledge content in teams ( cf . DeChurch & Mesmer - Magnus , 2010 ) . Considering both the content and process approaches , we fo - cused on two TKM elements : team knowledge stock and team knowledge utilization . Based on previous studies ( Austin , 2003 ; Wegner , 1986 ) , we deﬁne team knowledge stock as a combination of task - relevant knowledge and skills possessed by members and the leader within a team . This reﬂects the content dimension of TKM . Processes related to team knowledge , such as TMS or team learning , consider the way team knowledge stock is applied to team tasks ( Moreland , 1999 ; Moreland & Myaskovsky , 2000 ) . Therefore , we propose team knowledge utilization as an overarch - ing construct that indicates the extent to which the pool of avail - able knowledge and expertise is activated and exploited within teams . This reﬂects the process dimension of TKM . The two TKM dimensions are likely to improve team creativity by offering team members a greater supply of task - related information and knowl - edge , which are the raw materials for creativity ( Paulus , 2000 ; Taggar , 2002 ; Taylor & Greve , 2006 ) , and by promoting the application and utilization of knowledge in teams ( Gino , Argote , Miron - Spektor , & Todorova , 2010 ; Gino et al . , 2009 ) . Team knowledge stock A larger knowledge reservoir gives teams the ability to accu - rately evaluate the value of new information and opportunities ( De Dreu & West , 2001 ) . Hence , by providing rich cognitive re - sources and by making diverse approaches available , a greater team knowledge stock offers more opportunities to recombine existing information and ideas , and to generate novel solutions for problems encountered ( Paulus , 2000 ; Tiwana & McLean , 2005 ) . The presence of a substantial reservoir of task - related knowledge may thus be a necessary condition ( although it may not be a sufﬁcient condition ) for teams to develop innovative solu - tions to achieve their goals ( Martin & Parboteeah , 2007 ; Taylor & Greve , 2006 ) . Hypothesis 1 . Team knowledge stock is positively related to team creativity . Team knowledge utilization Researchers have noted that the mere presence of knowledge within teams does not necessarily improve performance if such knowledge is not applied nor utilized ( Austin , 2003 ; Grifﬁth & Saw - yer , 2010 ) . Only through the utilization of knowledge resources can team members access , explore , and exploit the knowledge that they possess ( Tiwana & McLean , 2005 ) . Such utilization enhances awareness of the problem at hand by team members , thereby lead - ing to an in - depth processing of relevant information ( Smith & O’Neil , 2003 ) . Furthermore , efforts by team members to effectively utilize their knowledge base stimulates proactive learning , which allows higher - order forms of thinking to occur . These are needed for the elaborate analysis and synthesis of current issues ( Choi , S . Y . Sung , J . N . Choi / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 118 ( 2012 ) 4 – 13 5