Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) 1 3 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 019 - 00312 - w ORIGINAL PAPER Overlay technology space map for analyzing design knowledge base of a technology domain : the case of hybrid electric vehicles Binyang Song 1 · Bowen Yan 1 , 2 · Giorgio Triulzi 2 , 3 · Jeffrey Alstott 2 , 4 · Jianxi Luo 1 , 2 Received : 17 October 2016 / Revised : 6 September 2018 / Accepted : 26 February 2019 / Published online : 7 March 2019 © Springer - Verlag London Ltd . , part of Springer Nature 2019 Abstract A tangible understanding of the latent design knowledge base of a technology domain , i . e . , the set of technologies and related design knowledge used to solve the specific problems of a domain , and how it evolves , can guide engineering design efforts in that domain . However , methods for extracting , analyzing and understanding the structure and evolutionary trajec - tories of a domain’s accumulated design knowledge base are still underdeveloped . This study introduces a network - based methodology for visualizing and analyzing the structure and expansion trajectories of the design knowledge base of a given technology domain . The methodology is centered on overlaying the total technology space , represented as a network of all known technologies based on patent data , with the specific knowledge positions and estimated expansion paths of a specific domain as a subgraph of the total network . We demonstrate the methodology via a case study of hybrid electric vehicles . The methodology may help designers understand the technology evolution trajectories of their domain and suggest next design opportunities or directions . Keywords Design theory · Data - driven design · Knowledge management · Technology evolution · Network analysis and visualization · Hybrid electric vehicles 1 Introduction Technology domains , such as semiconductors , robotics and hybrid electric vehicles ( HEVs ) , encompass various technol - ogies that address interconnected engineering design prob - lems and perform closely related functions ( Layton 1974 ; Dosi 1982 ; Yayavaram and Ahuja 2008 ; Dibiaggio et al . 2014 ) . As the engineers in a domain continually explore and synthesize additional technologies beyond the domain to create new solutions to solve the problems of their domain ( Arthur 2009 ) , the scope of engineering design knowledge in the domain expands . For instance , the design of motor vehicles , initially invented in the late nineteenth century , was originally based solely on machine elements but has incrementally synthesized composite materials , electronics , communication , signaling and computing technologies over the course of its evolution . For engineers who specialize in a particular domain , it is beneficial but difficult to understand the structure and trajectories of the technological expansion of their domains and to identify potential technologies that will be useful for future design and innovation . To address this challenge , this paper introduces a data - driven methodology for estimating , visualizing and assess - ing a domain’s design knowledge base . Herein , a design knowledge base is the set of technologies and related design knowledge used to solve the specific problems of the domain . In particular , the design theory has explicated the impact of the prior knowledge base on next designs ( Hatch - uel and Weil 2009 ) , and prior empirical studies have shown that technologies based on more related knowledge bases are more likely to be synthesized to yield inventions ( Fleming 2001 ; Yayavaram and Ahuja 2008 ; Dibiaggio et al . 2014 ; He and Luo 2017 ) . Following these prior understandings , our methodology is focused on the relatedness between * Binyang Song binyang _ song @ mymail . sutd . edu . sg 1 Engineering Product Development Pillar , Singapore University of Technology and Design , 8 Somapah Road , Singapore 487372 , Singapore 2 SUTD - MIT International Design Centre , 8 Somapah Road , Singapore 487372 , Singapore 3 School of Management , Universidad de los Andes , Calle 21 # 1 - 20 , Bogotá 110311 , Colombia 4 Massachusetts Institute of Technology , 77 Massachusetts Ave , Cambridge , MA 02139 , USA 406 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 technologies for the analyzing the design knowledge base of a domain . Specifically , the methodology is centered on overlay - ing the total technology space , represented as a network of all known technologies , with the design knowledge base of a specific domain as a subgraph of the total network . In such a network , technologies are operationalized as patent classes and linked according to their pairwise relatedness that can be measured using different metrics based on pat - ent data . To address the uncertainty in selecting a related - ness metric , we introduce a statistical technique to identify the best relatedness metric and the resulting network with the highest explanatory power on the historical expansions of a domain’s design knowledge base . Then , the resulting network is used as a total technology space map to estimate , visualize and analyze the structure and evolution trajectories of the domain’s design knowledge base as a subgraph of its . Such an overlay network provides a macro and tangible picture of the relative positions and expansion trajectories of a domain’s design knowledge base , and the various unex - plored technologies beyond the design knowledge base , as well as their relatedness to the design knowledge base . It enables graph theory - based network analysis and data - driven visualizations that can help designers and managers better understand the structure and evolution trajectories of their domains or firms in the domain , compare expansion charac - teristics of different domains and firms , and suggest potential unexplored technologies for next design opportunities . We demonstrate the methodology and show its utilities via a case study of the HEV domain and the leading firms in the domain . 2 Related work 2 . 1 Design knowledge expansion A large body of literature has suggested that new designs often arise via the analogical transfer , recombination , blend - ing or synthesis of existing technologies and their related knowledge ( Fleming 2001 ; Fleming and Sorenson 2001 , 2004 ; Weisberg 2006 ; Arthur 2009 ; Taura and Nagai 2012 ; Tang and Luo 2013 ) . Meanwhile , such analogy , combination or synthesis is often made across different technical fields ( Fleming 2001 ; Fleming and Sorenson 2001 ; Yayavaram and Ahuja 2008 ) . In engineering design , researchers have pro - posed a few methodologies for facilitating design processes across fields or disciplines . For instance , infused design brings design problem representation up to a mathematical meta - level to facilitate the use of knowledge , methods and solutions across various technological fields ( Shai and Reich 2004 ) . Reich and Shai ( 2012 ) also developed the concept of an interdisciplinary engineering knowledge genome to aid in the retrieval of common knowledge and method structures in different technological fields . Likewise , design - by - analogy draws existing solutions and related design knowledge from a source field to solve design problems in a target field ( Lin - sey 2007 ; Linsey et al . 2012 ) . As the additional technological knowledge is analogized , synthesized or transferred to generate new solutions and thus new design knowledge in a domain , the domain’s design knowledge base may expand across technologies in the total technology space ( Baxter et al . 2007 ; Zdrahal et al . 2007 ; Reich and Shai 2012 ) . Such an expansion of the design knowledge base of a domain resonates with the expansion of the K - space ( where K denotes knowledge ) during a design process in the C – K theory ( Hatchuel and Weil 2003 , 2009 ; Hatchuel et al . 2004 ) . The design knowledge space expan - sion process raises a question regarding whether and how the structure of the prior design knowledge base underlying the design process might influence the prospects and directions of its expansion in the total technology space . Note that our reasoning and analysis herein primarily focus on design knowledge rather than scientific knowledge . Luo ( 2015 ) argued that the design process may use both types of knowledge as inputs . Design knowledge is related to the existing solutions , methods , tools and practices and any other artifacts in a domain of interest , whereas scientific knowledge involves the understanding of the natural phe - nomena related to the design problems of the domain . For example , the design of solar photovoltaic ( PV ) cells requires extensive domain - specific design knowledge regarding exist - ing solar PV cell designs , manufacturing methods , tools , and processes in addition to the basic scientific knowledge regarding natural phenomena of the photoelectric effect . Design knowledge is generated and accumulated during the design process , as suggested by the C – K theory ( Hatchuel and Weil 2009 ) , whereas scientific knowledge is typically created during the scientific discovery process , which is driven by curiosity . 2 . 2 Influence of knowledge relatedness Technologies are not isolated but related to each other to dif - ferent degrees . In turn , the relatedness between technologies may condition or enable the prospects of their analogies , syntheses or combinations , and the expansion of a domain’s design knowledge base . Meanwhile , the literature has sug - gested that relatedness between various technologies is a matter of degree and takes various forms , such as inter - dependency , complementarity and similarity ( Jaffe 1986 ; Fleming 2001 ; Fleming and Sorenson 2001 ; Mcnamee 2013 ; Dibiaggio et al . 2014 ; Alstott et al . 2017b ) . For instance , Fleming and Sorenson ( 2001 ) analyzed the ease of recombination of knowledge components as the reverse proxy of their “interdependency” and found that an 407 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 intermediate degree of interdependency benefits the useful - ness of inventions . Yayavaram and Ahuja ( 2008 ) investi - gated the decomposability of a firm’s knowledge base using a technology network and evidenced that a nearly decompos - able knowledge base increases inventions’ usefulness and the knowledge base’s adaptability with respect to change . Uzzi et al . ( 2013 ) found that the most impactful scientific knowledge was produced primarily based on conventional combinations ( measured as the historical combination fre - quency ) of prior knowledge . Dibiaggio et al . ( 2014 ) studied the complementarity and substitutability of a firm’s knowl - edge elements and found that complementarity positively contributes to invention quality , whereas substitutability is beneficial to explorative invention . Prior studies of design creativity have further suggested that it is easier and thus more likely for a designer to under - stand and successfully use new knowledge that is more related or similar to what he or she has already mastered ( Wuyts et al . 2005 ; Chan and Schunn 2015 ; Srinivasan et al . 2017 ) . For instance , Srinivasan et al . ( 2017 ) , via a concept generation experiment , found that designers preferred to utilize external patent stimuli proximate to rather than dis - tant from the design problem . Fu et al . ( 2013b ) constructed Bayesian networks of patents based on functional similari - ties and found that patents “near” the design problem in the network are more effective than those “far away” in stimulat - ing new design solution concepts . Via an analysis of thou - sands of design concepts from a web - based open innova - tion challenge platform , Chan and Schunn ( 2015 ) found that sources of external design inspiration are associated with the novelty of generated ideas and conceptually closer sources of design inspiration , rather than sources that are farther away , are more beneficial to the design outcome . However , these findings do not deny the potential of combining distant pieces of knowledge for more novel designs ( He and Luo 2017 ) , though such potential is difficult to transform into successful outcomes ( Fu et al . 2013b ) . Researchers have also studied the influences of knowl - edge relatedness between technologies on the exploration and diversification of deign agents at more macro levels . At the inventor level , Alstott et al . ( 2017a ) analyzed the records of more than two million inventors in the patent database of the United States Patent and Trademark Office ( USPTO ) and found inventors are much more likely to enter new tech - nology domains that are more related to their prior ones , and their relatedness is based on empirical direct citations between patent categories normalized against random cita - tions . At the level of firms , Breschi et al . ( 2003 ) found Euro - pean firms preferred to diversify into technologies that are more related to their core technologies , using co - classifica - tion similarity between technologies as proxy of knowledge relatedness . At the city level , Boschma et al . ( 2014 ) found that American cities mostly entered new technological areas that are more related to those they have entered , and their relatedness was calculated as the possibility of cities having more than average percent of patents in both technologies . Rigby ( 2015 ) measured the proximity between technologies based on citation data and concluded with similar findings . In sum , prior studies have taken different perspectives to define and measure relatedness between technologies and implied the influence of knowledge relatedness on the evolu - tion of design knowledge bases , i . e . , the design knowledge base of a domain is more likely to expand to include new technologies that are more related to those already covered in that design knowledge base . 2 . 3 Relatedness‑based patent class networks Recently , patent data have been used to calculate knowledge relatedness among technologies and then construct large - scale network maps that represent the total technology space ( Kay et al . 2014 ; Alstott et al . 2017b ; Yan and Luo 2017a ) . In such network maps , nodes represent different technologi - cal fields or types of technologies , operationalized by patent classes defined by some official patent classification system , such as the International Patent Classification ( IPC ) and the Cooperative Patent Classification ( CPC ) , and links repre - sent the knowledge relatedness between patent classes . The total technology space map can be overlaid with the patent records of a design agent , i . e . , an inventor or firm as done in Yan and Luo ( 2017b ) and Luo et al . ( 2017 ) , or the patent records related to a domain , as done in Kay et al . ( 2014 ) and Leydesdorff et al . ( 2014 ) . The overlay technique enables the analysis of a domain’s design knowledge base as a subspace of the total technology space and the visual inspection of the expansion of the subspace within the total space . The technology space maps in previous studies are based on a variety of knowledge relatedness metrics to quantify link weights between nodes in a network . One group of metrics uses patent reference information . For example , the reference - based Jaccard index is calculated as the num - ber of shared references normalized by the number of all unique references of patents in either technology class ( Jac - card 1901 ; Small 1973 ; Yan and Luo 2017a ) and implies the overlapping of the knowledge bases of patent classes . The reference - based cosine similarity index measures the vector similarity of two technology classes’ distributions of cita - tions in all patent classes ( Jaffe 1986 ; Kay et al . 2014 ; Ley - desdorff et al . 2014 ) . Another group of metrics mines patent classification information . For instance , the classification - based cosine similarity index measures the vector similarity of two technology classes’ distributions of shared patents in all patent classes ( Breschi et al . 2003 ; Ejermo 2015 ; Kogler et al . 2013 ) . The normalized co - classification index meas - ures the deviation of the empirically observed number of patents classified simultaneously in two technology classes 408 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 from the expected value that corresponds to a random classi - fication ( Teece et al . 1994 ; Dibiaggio and Nesta 2005 ) . Inter - ested readers may refer to a recent review and comparison of the most popular knowledge relatedness measures used in patent mapping ( Yan and Luo 2017a ) . In this research , a key task is to identify the most suitable measure of knowledge relatedness among the available choices for the overlay map - ping analysis of a specific domain of interest . Taken together , prior studies have suggested the influ - ence of knowledge relatedness on the expansion of design knowledge bases and the existence of various knowledge relatedness metrics for constructing technology network maps using patent data . On this basis , to further develop a network - based methodology for visualizing and analyz - ing a design knowledge base and its evolution , our research explores answers to the following questions : ( 1 ) which relat - edness measure should be chosen for patent technology net - work mapping ; ( 2 ) how to visualize a design knowledge base and estimate its expansion paths in the network map ; ( 3 ) how can network metrics deliver insights on the structure and evolution of a domain’s design knowledge base . 3 Methodology Specifically , our methodology involves the use of patent data to map the total technology space as a network of pat - ent technology classes with a properly chosen knowledge relatedness metric , and to estimate , visualize and analyze the structure and expansion paths of a domain’s design knowledge base as a subgraph of the total network . Figure 1 depicts the major steps of our methodology regarding data retrieval , metric selection , mapping , visualization , quantita - tive and qualitative analysis . Our methodology , based on patent data and network analysis , is also in line with the growing research involving the exploration of patent databases for data - driven design aids ( Szykman et al . 2000 ; Mukherjea et al . 2005 ; Fu et al . 2013a ) . Differing from these prior studies that typically focused on small patent samples related to a design prob - lem or a single patented technology , our method analyzes a technology domain and considers all technologies in the total technology space based on the entire USPTO patent database . STEP 1 : Retrieve the patent data of a domain For data - driven analyses of the design knowledge base of a tech - nology domain , the first step is to retrieve the set of util - ity patents relevant to the design artifacts in the domain . Various techniques for retrieving the patents of a specific design domain have been proposed in the literature . The most intuitive approach is to search by keywords , which are often chosen based on the field knowledge or intuition of the searchers ( Koch et al . 2009 ; Alberts et al . 2011 ) . Koch et al . ( 2009 ) created a tool called PatViz that enables patent searchers to build complex search terms iteratively and visu - ally . Boolean operators are widely used to build search que - ries by combining relevant keywords or excluding irrelevant keywords ( Alberts et al . 2011 ) . Semantic analysis has also been applied to patent retrieval ( D’hondt 2009 ; Mukherjea et al . 2005 ) . Other researchers have retrieved patents relevant to a design domain of interest by first identifying the nota - ble firms or inventors in the domain and then searching the patents granted to them ( Yayavaram and Ahuja 2008 ; Naka - mura et al . 2015 ) . Song and Luo ( 2017 ) recently proposed a heuristic and iterative method for retrieving patents relevant to a specialized technology domain by integrating the min - ing of patent texts , citation relationships and inventor infor - mation . Given the variety of patent retrieval methods in the literature , one needs to select a suitable method according to the characteristics of the domain and the specific needs of his or her analysis . STEP 2 : Choose a technology space map We use the entire USPTO patent database from 1976 to 2016 ( July ) to empirically create a technology network map that approxi - mates and represents the total space of known technologies of human society to date . The data set contains 6 , 346 , 426 US utility patents , and each of them is classified into one or multiple IPC classes . In our patent technology network , nodes represent 3 - digit IPC patent classes . IPC patent classes are defined at different aggregation levels , e . g . , 3 - digit level and 4 - digit level . We chose 3 - digit classes as nodes in the network to obtain the best resolution of the technology space and to achieve simple visualization and analysis . As a result , the network contains 122 nodes , i . e . , 3 - digit IPC classes , except for several undefined or ambiguous ones . Retrieve the patent data set of a domain Overlay visualization of the technology space map with design knowledge base and expansion paths of the domain Choose a technology space map with high explanatory power on the historical expansion of the domain’sdesign knowledge base Quantitativeanalysison the structureand evolution of the design knowledge base of the domain Identifypotential technologiesfor next move of the domain Fig . 1 Flow diagram of our methodology 409 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 To construct the technology network , a measure of knowledge relatedness between technologies is required to quantify link weights . In the literature , various knowledge relatedness metrics have been proposed for different mean - ings ( see Sect . 2 . 3 ) . The best metric of knowledge related - ness might differ for different domains as the key drivers of technology development may vary in different contexts . For example , the reference - based Jaccard index measures the extent to which the knowledge bases of two technologies overlap ; the reference - based cosine index measures the simi - larity of knowledge base distributions of different technolo - gies ; the classification - based cosine index measures substi - tutability of technologies ; the normalized co - classification index measures complementarity . Therefore , the knowledge relatedness metric needs to be selected in a case - dependent manner . For this purpose , we propose a statistical technique to compare the alterative metrics in terms of the explana - tory power of the resulting networks regarding the historical expansions of the focal domain’s design knowledge base . Specifically , we investigate the likelihood that the domain’s design knowledge base has expanded to cover unexplored technologies with higher relatedness to it instead of other less related unexplored technologies . To calculate the likelihood , the relatedness percentile of each historical technology entry to the design knowledge base is calcu - lated . Two steps are required to calculate the relatedness percentile : 1 . identify the strongest link ( i . e . , the link with the highest relatedness ) between a specific technology entry A and the previously covered technologies , e . g . , B – A ; 2 . calculate A’s relatedness percentile as the rank percentile of the relatedness value of link B – A among the related - ness values of all links connecting the previously cov - ered technology B and all unexplored technologies . The relatedness percentile indicates the percentage of links between technology B and any unexplored technologies that have a relatedness value equal to or lower than the relatedness value of link B – A . Alternatively , the relatedness percentile can be calculated using the weighted average relatedness , i . e . , the average relatedness value of an unexplored technology’s network links to all technologies previously covered in the design knowledge base , weighted by the number of domain - related patents for each covered technology . Thus , each unexplored technology will be characterized by such a weighted average relatedness percentile at the time it was first covered by the given domain’s design knowledge base . Then , we compare the explanatory power of alternative net - work maps ( resulting from alternative relatedness measures ) by evaluating the accumulative distributions of the domain’s historical technology entries according to their relatedness percentiles calculated based on alternative knowledge relat - edness measures . If a domain’s design knowledge base pref - erentially expands to cover the new technologies that are more related to those technologies already covered by the design knowledge base , the distribution of that domain’s historical new technology entries will be skewed toward a related - ness percentile of 100 % . In contrast , if new technologies are explored randomly regardless of their relatedness to the pre - viously established design knowledge base of the domain , the historical new technology entries will follow a uniform distribution . One can conduct a Kolmogorov – Smirnov test to check whether an observed distribution presents a statistically significant deviation from the reference uniform distribution . The relatedness measure and the resulting network map that survives the test and yields the most skewed distribution have the highest explanatory power regarding the domain’s his - torical technology entries . They are further suggested for the analysis and visualization of the evolution trajectories of the domain . Note that for different technology domains and con - texts , the most explanatory measure might differ and thus must be selected and validated on a case - by - case basis . STEP 3 : Overlay the technology space map with the design knowledge base and its expansion trajectories of the domain for visualization To visualize and analyze the domain’s design knowledge base , we overlay the total technology space net - work selected in the previous step with the domain’s design knowledge base and its estimated expansion trajectories . On the background map , we first highlight the technology classes to which the patents of the domain are assigned . These high - lighted classes represent the technologies constituting the design knowledge base of the domain . We further identify and highlight the most likely expansion paths from the technolo - gies that were covered in the design knowledge base earlier to those covered later . Specifically , for each new technology entry , we highlight its strongest link to any previously covered technologies in the design knowledge base . These strongest links together suggest the most likely paths through which the design knowledge base expanded from earlier - covered to later covered technologies . STEP 4 : Quantitative network analysis of the structure and evolution of the design knowledge base Once the domain’s design knowledge base has been located in the technology space map , graph - theoretic metrics can be used to assess the multi - node structure and positions of the design knowledge base within the network map . In the following , we introduce three such metrics as examples . Additional metrics can be developed for other purposes . a . Entropy The entropy of a design knowledge base is calculated using the information entropy formula ( Allaire et al . 2012 ) . 410 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 where x i is the portion of domain - related patents in class i at a given time . C is a normalizing constant equal to the maximum attainable entropy corresponding to the configuration in which patents from domain z would be equally distributed across all technology classes i . Entropy was initially a thermodynamics concept that is used to measure the thermodynamic stage of a sys - tem , with equilibrium corresponding to maximum entropy . It reveals to what extent the design knowledge base is diversified . High levels of entropy , close to the maximum value of 1 , imply an increasing limitation of the design knowledge base for further movement and evolution . b . Coherence Coherence is calculated as the weighted average relat - edness between technologies covered by a design knowl - edge base at a given point in time . where 𝜑 ij is the relatedness between technology classes i and j . x i is the portion of the domain - related patents in class i relative to all domain - related patents . Accord - ing to the literature ( e . g . , Teece et al . 1994 ; Leten et al . 2007 ) , we refer to this measure as the “coherence” among different technologies . A high coherence of the design knowledge base indicates that the designs in the corresponding domain are based on a set of technolo - gies with high knowledge relatedness to each other and can be easily combined and recombined to yield new designs . c . Expandability Expandability is calculated as the weighted sum of the relatedness between the technologies within a domain’s design knowledge base and the remaining unexplored technologies in the technology space . We also normalize the “expandability” by its maximum attainable value , ensuring that the metric is in the range of [ 0 , 1 ] and more comparable . where 𝜑 ij is the relatedness between technology classes i and j . x i is the portion of the domain - related patents in class i relative to all domain - related patents ; s j is 1 if the domain has no patent in technology class j and is 0 otherwise , so that 𝜑 ij is counted only when technology ( 1 ) Entropy = 1 C ∑ i x i × ln 1 x i , ( 2 ) Coherence = ∑ i ∑ j ( ≠ i ) x i x j 𝜑 ij ∕ ∑ i ∑ j x i x j , ( 3 ) Expandability = ∑ i ∑ j ( ≠ i ) x i 𝜑 ij s j ∕ A , class i is in the domain and technology class j is unex - plored . A is a normalizing constant and equal to the sum of the relatedness between the most connected technol - ogy class , i . e . , the technology class with the highest weighted degree centrality in the network , and the other technology classes . Given the positions and structure of a design knowledge base in the total technology space at a certain point in time , expandability indicates the potential of the design knowledge base to further expand to unexplored technologies . According to the formulas , the entropy is influenced by the distribution of the relevant patents ( indicated by x i ) in the total technology space , and coherence and expandabil - ity are additionally influenced by the topology of the total technology space ( indicated by 𝜑 ij ) . Taken together , these three metrics provide a systemic assessment of the relative positions and structure of a subspace , which represents a domain’s design knowledge base , within the total technol - ogy space from different but complementary perspectives . STEP 5 : Suggest potential technologies for the next designs Based on the positions and structure of a design knowledge base and the topology of the total technology space , one can further explore the unexplored technologies in the technology space for the next design opportunities . In particular , those unexplored technologies that have the high - est relatedness to the established design knowledge base of a domain may present most feasible opportunities , because the high innate knowledge relatedness would enable the ease for designers in the domain to comprehend these unexplored technologies . That is , design engineers in the domain are suggested to explore engineering mechanisms , techniques and solutions from those most related unexplored technolo - gies , and analogize , synthesize and relate them to the prior designs in their own domain for new design ideas and inno - vation . As a result of their exploratory efforts , the design knowledge space of the domain will be further expanded . 4 Case study : hybrid electric vehicles In this section , we demonstrate the proposed methodol - ogy by applying it to analyze the design knowledge base expansion of the HEV domain and that of the leading firms in this domain . An HEV synthesizes an internal combus - tion engine ( ICE ) with an electric powertrain to combine the benefits of both ICEs and electric powertrains . Due to HEVs’ advantages in fuel economy compared with traditional vehicles , the domain has attracted extensive attention , investment and design efforts from automo - tive companies and R & D organizations around the world . Accordingly , the design knowledge base of HEVs has 411 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 expanded substantially , especially in the past 4 decades . Varieties of HEV system configurations have been devel - oped , and varieties of technologies have been incorporated into the design of HEVs . 4 . 1 Retrieve the patent data set for the HEV domain We identified the US patents for technologies related to HEVs from the special patent category “903 – Hybrid Elec - tric Vehicles” , created by the USPTO , among nine art col - lection classes whose 3 - digit IDs start with the number 9 ( e . g . , 901 - Robotics , 977 - Nanotechnology ) . This special category contains 2392 patents that were granted between 1914 and 2015 , and assigned to 36 3 - digit IPC classes . This collection of patents is used to approximate the design knowledge base of the HEV domain . Table 1 lists all the IPC classes with their respective titles , numbers of HEV - related patents and entered years , i . e . , the earliest years in which an HEV - related patent was granted to each class . The patents , excluding 137 that were granted to individual inventors , were assigned to 257 assignees ( firms , universities , insti - tutes , etc . ) . Among the assignees , 15 firms have more than 30 HEV - related patents . 10 out of the 15 leading firms are original equipment manufacturers ( OEMs ) , while the other Table 1 Technologies covered by the HEV design knowledge base with titles , patent counts and entered years IPC3 Title Patent count Entered year B60 Vehicles in general 2 , 083 1914 F16 Machine elements 485 1930 H02 Electric power 350 1930 B62 Land vehicles 55 1934 F02 Combustion engines 286 1965 F01 Machines or engines in general 80 1972 E21 Drilling and mining 2 1980 H01 Electric elements 58 1982 F04 Pumps 10 1988 B61 Railways 1 1993 G01 Measuring and testing 44 1994 F03 Machines or engines for liquids 1 1998 F28 Heat exchange in general 2 1998 H05 Electric techniques 7 1998 B01 Physical or chemical processes 7 1999 B64 Aircraft 5 1999 C01 Inorganic chemistry 2 1999 C10 Fuels and lubricants 2 1999 G05 Controlling and regulating 83 1999 G06 Computing 160 1999 H04 Electric communication 1 2001 B66 Hoisting and hauling machines 2 2002 F22 Steam generation 1 2002 A01 Agriculture 2 2003 E02 Hydraulic and construction engineering 5 2003 F24 Heating and ventilating 1 2003 G08 Signaling 4 2003 B21 Mechanical metal working 1 2004 E01 Road , railway and bridge construction 1 2006 E03 Water supply and sewerage 1 2009 F17 Storing or distributing of liquids 1 2009 A47 Furniture and appliances 1 2010 E04 Building construction 1 2012 B63 Ships 1 2013 G07 Checking devices 2 2013 F15 Hydraulics and pneumatics 1 2014 412 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 Fig . 2 Summary statistics of HEV - related patent data 413 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 5 are suppliers . Similarly , we approximate the HEV - related design knowledge base of each assignee using its HEV - related patent portfolio . Figure 2a shows the cumulative patent count of the entire HEV domain ( the curve on the top ) and that of the leading firms in this domain over time . The curves suggest that the development of HEV - related technologies experienced a long infancy period and started to accelerate only after 1995 . Figure 2b presents the cumulative number of 3 - digit IPC classes holding the HEV patents in each patent portfolio over time , showing that the HEV domain and the leading firms have slowed down in the expansion into new IPC classes . In Fig . 2a , b , Toyota , Honda and General Motors ( GM ) have outperformed other firms since 1995 . Figure 2c plots the percentage of patents assigned to each of the top ten IPC classes in each patent portfolio . The IPC class “vehicles in general” ( B60 ) holds the most numbers of the HEV - related patents at both the domain and assignee levels , followed by “electric power” ( H02 ) , “machine elements” ( F16 ) , “com - bustion engines” ( F02 ) , and “computing” ( G06 ) . 1 4 . 2 Choose a technology space map for the HEV domain To build the network map , we experimented with the four alternative knowledge relatedness measures reviewed in Sect . 2 . 3 , namely reference - based Jaccard index , reference - based cosine index , classification - based cosine index and normalized co - classification index . Based on each measure , we calculated the relatedness percentiles of the historical new technology entries into the HEV domain when they were first covered ( i . e . , first HEV - related patent was clas - sified in that technology class ) between 1914 and 2015 . Fig . 3 Distributions of historical technology entries according to their relatedness percentiles 1 For detailed definitions of these IPC classes , please visit the web - site of the World Intellectual Property Organization : http : / / www . wipo . int / class ifica tions / ipc / en / . 414 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 Figure 3 reports the cumulative probability distributions of the technology entries according to the relatedness percentiles . The dotted diagonal lines in Fig . 3 represent the probabil - ity distribution from the random scenario ; new technologies are explored randomly regardless of their relatedness to the previously established design knowledge base of the HEV domain . The gap between each empirical probability curve and the dotted line indicates the extent to which the histori - cal exploration of new HEV technologies was conditioned by the relatedness between new technologies and the prior HEV design knowledge base , based on historical patent data . Figure 3a shows the cumulative probability distributions of the 35 historical technology entries ( except the starting entry B60 “vehicles in general” ) of the entire HEV domain . All the empirical probability curves are steep and present statistically significant deviation from the dotted diagonal line ( based on Kolmogorov – Smirnov test results reported in Table 2 ) , suggesting the HEV design knowledge base preferentially expanded to new technologies with a higher relatedness to its prior base . Particularly , the curve corre - sponding to the reference - based Jaccard index is above the others , and thus indicates that it has the highest explanatory power regarding the historical expansion of the HEV design knowledge base . According to this particular curve , all of the historical technology entries but one ( 0 . 8989 ) has a related - ness percentile higher than 0 . 9 at the time of entry . We also investigated the historical technology entries made by individual assignees rather than the HEV domain as a whole . Specifically , we calculated the relatedness percentile for each historical technology entry of each assignee and then pooled all assignee entries into one dis - tribution according to the relatedness percentile . Figure 3b shows the integrated cumulative probability distributions of all assignees’ technology entries , and they exhibit similar patterns with those in Fig . 3a . The reference - based Jaccard index still outperforms the others . According to the refer - ence - based Jaccard index distribution curve , 88 . 1 % of the historical entries of all assignees have a relatedness percen - tile higher than 0 . 9 . We also ran a robustness test using weighted average relatedness to plot the curves . The reference - based Jaccard index still yields the steepest curve among alternatives . Taken together , the reference - based Jaccard index provides the highest explanatory power on the historical expansions of the HEV domain and is the relatively best choice for later analyses of this domain . Note that , this finding implies the extent of knowledge base overlapping of the technologies ( as measured by the reference - based Jaccard index ) strongly enables new technologies to be synthesized with the ones in the prior design knowledge base of the HEV domain . For a different domain , the most explanatory knowledge related - ness metric might be different and needs to be statistically identified again using the data from that domain . We further confirm this choice with Kolmogorov – Smirnov tests on the deviation of the empirical distributions of the HEV domain and the leading firms from the random sce - nario ( i . e . , the dotted diagonal line ) . Table 2 reports the K – S statistics and corresponding p values . The positive K – S sta - tistic values confirm the design knowledge base of the HEV domain and the firms preferentially expand to cover new technologies that are more related to the previously covered technologies and ensure the chosen relatedness metric can explain such expansions of the HEV domain and the firms . Specifically , the reference - based Jaccard index is meas - ured as follows : where C i and C j denote the set of references of all patents in technology classes i and j , respectively ; C i ∩ C j is the number of patents cited in both classes i and j ; and C i ∪ C j represents the number of unique patents cited in either class i or class j . The index value is in the range of [ 0 , 1 ] and indicates the relatedness of the knowledge pieces required in the design of both technologies . If the patents in two patent classes share an identical set of references , then both technologies are designed based on a same set of knowledge pieces , and this knowledge relatedness measure is at its maximum value . ( 4 ) Relatedness = | | | C i ∩ C j | | | | | | C i ∪ C j | | | , Table 2 Results of Kolmogorov – Smirnov tests comparing the empiri - cal distributions against the uniform distribution Agent K – S statistic p value HEV domain 0 . 7905 0 . 0000E + 00 All assignees 0 . 8564 0 . 0000E + 00 Toyota 0 . 9008 1 . 7963E−13 Honda 0 . 7592 6 . 5258E−09 General motors 0 . 9455 1 . 3322E−15 Ford 0 . 9008 1 . 8561E−09 Nissan 0 . 9583 4 . 3607E−10 Aisin AW 0 . 9091 9 . 3301E−09 Hitachi 0 . 8632 4 . 5769E−09 Denso 0 . 9569 2 . 3830E−11 Suzuki 0 . 9583 6 . 0282E−06 Chrysler 0 . 8408 8 . 2547E−07 Daimler 0 . 9211 3 . 8229E−08 Bosch 0 . 9580 2 . 6191E−07 Mitsubishi 0 . 9661 1 . 0287E−10 ZF Friedrichshafen 0 . 9487 7 . 0934E−07 Hyundai 0 . 9504 1 . 2092E−05 415 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 To compute the Jaccard index for each pair of the 122 patent classes , we used the richest possible historical patent data ( i . e . , the complete USPTO utility patent records and their citation information from 1976 to 2016 ) to achieve the most accurate empirical approximation of the latent technol - ogy space . The measurements conducted using the data of each of the past few decades are highly stable and consistent , in line with prior studies of patent mapping ( Hinze et al . 1997 ; Yan and Luo 2017a ) . Such stability of the network map approximation of the latent technology space ensures its feasibility as a background map for longitudinal analyses of a domain within the total technology space . 4 . 3 Overlay visualization of the HEV design knowledge base in the total technology space We now use the total technology space map to visual - ize the structure and expansion trajectories of the HEV design knowledge base . The original technology network built based on the 3 - digit IPC classes and Jaccard index is extremely dense . Among the 7381 ( = 122 × 121 / 2 ) total pos - sible links between all pairs of technologies , only seven of them are disconnected ( i . e . , relatedness = 0 ) . A visualization using such a network will not be informative . Therefore , we apply the network filtering technique introduced by Yan and Luo ( 2017b ) to filter the original dense network . This filtered network contains only the strongest 1107 links , accounting for 15 % of the total original links , but maintains 92 % of the diversification paths of inventors across all links or pairs of technologies in the original full network map to explain the diversification of inventors ( Yan and Luo 2017b ) . In Fig . 4 , the network map of the total technology space , as the background map , is overlaid with the HEV design knowledge base by highlighting the covered technologies ( i . e . , IPC classes in which the HEV patents are assigned ) and the most likely expansion paths between them . Over the period from 1914 to 2015 , the HEV design knowledge base covered 36 technologies . They are highlighted in blue and labeled with their respective 3 - digit IPC class IDs , titles and entered years . The node size and color intensity , respec - tively , denote the total patent count and the HEV - related pat - ent count in each class ; the link width indicates the knowl - edge relatedness between each pair of classes . A directed purple arrow highlights the strongest ( in terms of the relatedness value ) link from any previously covered technologies to a newly engaged technology in the HEV design knowledge base , indicating the most likely expansion path to the new technology . In the previous step ( Sect . 4 . 2 ) , Fig . 4 Total technology space map overlaid with the HEV design knowledge base and its most likely expansion paths . The map includes the IPC class ID , title and entered year of each HEV’s historical technology entry 416 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 we have provided statistical support that the HEV design knowledge base is more likely to expand to new technologies with higher relatedness percentiles via the strongest links . The relatedness percentiles corresponding to the technology entries of the highlighted links are also reported on the map . The high values of the relatedness percentiles again suggest the domain’s strong compliance with technology relatedness in its design expansion . The overlaid network map visually reveals that the HEV design knowledge base first emerged in 1914 from “vehicles in general” ( B60 , 1914 ) , which holds the most number of HEV - related patents . In 1930 , the HEV design knowledge base first expanded to cover two more technologies , “machine elements” ( F16 , 1930 ) and “electric power” ( H02 , 1930 ) . Since then , two subtrees have gradually grown from these two technologies , and expanded to cover more and more new technologies , generally representing the mechanical parts and the electrical parts of HEVs , respectively . As seen in Fig . 4 , the tree displays a clear gradient in node color intensities ( corresponding to HEV - related patent counts ) from the root through the main stems to smaller branches and then leaves . The darkest nodes appear to constitute a “backbone” in the expansion trajectories . The gradient along the tree suggests the earlier covered technologies are generally also the ones that are more frequently used in later HEV designs . The “mechanical” subtree originating from F16 is mainly concerned with components and solutions regarding basic hybrid schemes , ICEs , transmission , lubrication and cool - ing systems of HEVs , such as “combustion engines” ( F02 , 1965 ) , “machines or engines in general” ( F01 , 1972 ) , “pumps” ( F04 , 1988 ) , “heat exchange in general” ( F28 , 1998 ) , “fuels and lubricants” ( C10 , 1999 ) and “machines or engines for liquids” ( F03 , 2009 ) , etc . The “electrical” subtree stemming from H02 is more concerned with com - ponents and solutions regarding electric drive , sensing and controlling systems of HEVs , such as “controlling & regulat - ing” ( G05 , 1999 ) , “electric elements” ( H01 , 1982 ) , “elec - tric techniques” ( H05 , 1998 ) , “measuring & testing” ( G01 , 1994 ) , “computing” ( G06 , 1999 ) , “electric communication” ( H04 , 2001 ) , and “signaling” ( G08 , 2003 ) , etc . In addition , the HEV domain also briefly branched to three technologies outside the two main trees . “Land vehicles” ( B62 , 1934 ) is highly related to the root “vehicles in general” ( B60 ) and has accumulated 55 HEV patents . Meanwhile , “railways” ( B61 , 1993 ) and “hoisting and handling machine” ( B66 , 2002 ) only host one or two HEV patents to date . Such overlay network visualization can also be applied to individual firms . Figure 3c and Table 2 statistically show the reference - based Jaccard index - based knowledge related - ness can explain the historical technology entries of each leading firm in the HEV domain , 2 and the explanatory power is indeed higher for individual firms than for the domain as a whole ( suggested by the steeper curves in Fig . 3c than those in Fig . 3a , b ) . On this basis , we choose Toyota , the leading firm in the HEV domain , to demonstrate the data - driven overlay visualization at the firm level . The HEV - related design knowledge base of Toyota is a subspace of the design knowledge base of the entire HEV domain . Figure 5 shows the same base map as shown in Fig . 4 over - laid with only Toyota’s HEV - related design knowledge base ( i . e . , IPC classes in which Toyota’s HEV - related patents are assigned ) and its most likely expansion trajectories . Similarly , Toyota’s HEV - related designs started first in 1974 from “vehi - cles in general” ( B60 , 1974 ) , and then expanded to “electric power” ( H02 , 1995 ) in 1995 . Over time , Toyota developed an HEV - related design knowledge base that covers 13 technolo - gies , in two main subtrees originating from B60 and H02 , and representing the mechanical parts and the electrical parts of HEVs , respectively . The tree also exhibits a declining color intensity as it continues to expand and branch out from the root . That is , the earlier - entered technologies are generally used more often in Toyota’s HEV designs over time . In general , the data - driven visualization of the two - subtree structure in the design knowledge base of the HEV domain resonates with our basic understanding of the archi - tecture of HEVs . The visualization also provides nuanced information on the evolutionary trajectories of the domain , i . e . , the sequence of different technologies entering the design knowledge base at different times in the history and also their relative importance for the domain . Such efficient capture and systematic observations of the structure and evo - lutionary trajectories of a domain’s design knowledge base are made possible and easy with the data - driven visualiza - tion methodology illustrated above . 4 . 4 Quantitative analysis on the structure and evolution of the HEV design knowledge base The structure and evolution of the HEV design knowledge base within the total technology space map can also be quantitatively analyzed using the entropy , expandability and coherence metrics . Specifically , the entropy increased 2 In Fig . 3c , Honda and Chrysler stand out showing several relatively “long” jumps in their expansion histories , i . e . , about 10 % of Honda’s and about 5 % of Chrysler’s technology entries have a relatedness per - centile lower than 0 . 8 . Such long jumps may suggest the intents or abilities of these firms to integrate relatively distant technologies for more novel product or system designs . However , without grounded firm - level data , we are unable to conclude on these interpretations . Interested readers and researchers may utilize more in - depth data from or within these firms to explain the observed behaviors of theirs . 417 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 rapidly during the early development stage of each design knowledge base and then entered a long steady growth stage ( Fig . 6a ) , evidencing the increasing spread and diver - sity of the HEV - related technologies . The coherence of the design knowledge base also continually decreased in gen - eral ( Fig . 6b ) , suggesting that later covered technologies are less and less related ones , but they probably only gained small weights so the change is slight at the later stage . 3 The expandability , i . e . , the potential for further expansion , con - tinually decreased ( Fig . 6c ) , suggesting that fewer and fewer technologies remain unexplored and they are less and less related to the design knowledge base . These trends confirm again that in the history the HEV domain preferentially expanded into more related unexplored technologies first , as suggested in Fig . 3 . Despite the generally similar trends for individual firms with that of the HEV domain as a whole , Fig . 6 also reveals the differences across firms . For instance , General Motors ( GM ) is the only firm whose entropy is once obviously higher than the HEV domain ( Fig . 6a ) , suggesting that the firm has rather evenly explored diversified technologies for HEV designs . In contrast , Hyundai presents the lowest entropy ( Fig . 6a ) but the highest coherence ( Fig . 6b ) and expandability ( Fig . 6c ) among all firms . As a relatively new player into the HEV domain , Hyundai actually decreased the entropy and increased the coherence in recent years , despite the general entropy increase and coherence decrease of most firms and the entire HEV domain . These observations sug - gest Hyundai has mastered a small set of highly related tech - nologies ( i . e . , low entropy and high coherence ) that are also highly connected with the rest of the total technology space ( i . e . , high expandability ) , which in turn may empower its next expansion . Denso and Daimler have the lowest coherence ( Fig . 6b ) , because of their significant presences in such domains as “electric power” ( H02 ) and “computing” ( G06 ) that are relatively distant from “vehicles in general” ( B60 ) —the dominant core of the HEV - related design knowledge bases ( Fig . 2c ) . More exploration of the technologies in the close neighborhood of B60 , such as “machine elements” ( F16 ) and “land vehicles” ( B62 ) , would increase the coherence of Fig . 5 Total technology space map overlaid with the HEV - related design knowledge base of Toyota and its most likely expansion paths 3 Meanwhile , the coherence of the HEV design knowledge base of the entire domain and individual firms is significantly greater than the average coherence among all 122 technologies in the total technology space ( the dotted line at the bottom of Fig . 6b ) . This finding implies that the design knowledge base of the HEV domain and individual firms comprise a set of highly related technologies . 418 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 Fig . 6 Quantitative assessment of the network positions and structures of the design knowl - edge bases of the HEV domain and the leading firms over time 419 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 the design knowledge base . Note that , Honda and Chrysler exhibit several long jumps in their HEV design knowledge base expansion histories ( Fig . 3c ) , but their entropy and coherence are in the mid - range of those of all the firms ( Fig . 6a , b ) , suggesting the jumps were made to technolo - gies that were not often used in their HEV designs and thus only gained small weights in their design knowledge bases . In the case of expandability , Honda and Toyota are the lowest ( Fig . 6c ) . However , among the top three firms in term of HEV - related patent grants , GM consistently presents a higher entropy , expandability and coherence than Toyota and Honda . Such observations imply not only the leadership of GM to date , but also its greater innovation potentials for the future , than Toyota and Honda in the HEV domain . In brief , such analyses and findings based on the network metrics reveal the latent structural and positional characteristics of the design knowledge bases of the competing firms within the same domain . In sum , the foregoing quantitative network analysis , together with the results in Figs . 2 and 3c , has illustrated the power of our network - based methodology by revealing the overall evolution trends of the HEV domain as well as the fundamental differences among the firms regarding the structures and evolutions of their design knowledge bases . These observations and findings are enabled by the overlay network technique that positions the design knowledge bases of the domain and the firms as subgraphs in the total tech - nology space network , and the network - based metrics that assess the subgraphs . 4 . 5 Identify potential technologies for the next move of the HEV domain Based on the overlay network maps , design engineers may further explore the unexplored technologies in the technol - ogy space for the next designs of HEV . For instance , one can start with the unexplored technologies with the highest relatedness to the established HEV design knowledge base , as a high knowledge relatedness would enable the ease for designers to exploit these technologies for new HEV design . For example , the technologies highlighted by the thick gray borders in Fig . 7 are the top 10 % unexplored technologies with the highest weighted average relatedness to all the Fig . 7 Suggested potential technologies for HEV design . The unexplored technologies most related to the HEV design knowledge base are high - lighted using thick gray borders ( only the top 10 % are shown ) 420 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 technologies already covered in the HEV design knowledge space to the end of 2015 . 4 Then , HEV design engineers are suggested to explore engineering mechanisms , techniques and solutions from those unexplored technologies and can be leverage or relate them for HEV design . For instance , technologies in “medical & hygiene” ( A61 ) and “conveying and packing devices” ( B65 ) may suggest designs of HEVs for specialty applications . Many “infographics & display” ( G09 ) technol - ogies can be adopted for displaying the operating informa - tion of the hybrid powertrains in HEVs . Likewise , it is not difficult to imagine that technologies in “plastics working” ( B29 ) and “machine tools” ( B23 ) would be useful for the design and manufacturing of parts of the electrical – mechani - cal system of HEVs . For Toyota , the top 10 % unexplored technologies that are most related ( according to weighted average relatedness ) to its established HEV - related design knowledge base are highlighted in Fig . 8 . Among the 11 technologies , “furniture & appliances” ( A47 ) , “aircraft” ( B64 ) , “building construc - tion” ( E04 ) , “electric communication” ( H04 ) and “elec - tric techniques” ( H05 ) have already been covered by the current design knowledge base of the entire HEV domain . Toyota may dedicate some design efforts to catch up in terms of these technologies and their applications to HEVs . Moreover , all the other technologies identified for Toyota’s future exploration have been suggested for the general HEV domain , suggesting a consistency in next moves of Toyota and the entire HEV domain . Toyota’s HEV designers may Fig . 8 Suggested potential technologies ( in thick gray borders ) for Toyota’s HEV design 4 There are alternative approaches to identify the unexplored tech - nologies in the total technology space that are highly related to an established design space ( i . e . , a subspace of the total space ) . For instance , instead of the top 10 % unexplored technologies according to their weighted average relatedness to the prior design knowledge base ( approach # 1 ) , one can also identify the unexplored technolo - gies , each of which is the most related to each of the covered tech - nologies in the current design knowledge base ( approach # 2 ) . We found approach # 1 better predicted the historical technology entries at the times of their respective entries based on our HEV patent data . The hit rates of approach # 1 are 49 % for the HEV domain’s histori - cal entries , 88 % for all assignees’ entries together , and 71 – 100 % for entries of individual assignees . The hit rates of approach # 2 are 37 % for the HEV domain , 24 % for all assignees pooled together , and 0 – 50 % for individual assignees . 421 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 also explore future design opportunities by exploring and leveraging such technologies for HEV design . 5 Discussion 5 . 1 Significance of the proposed methodology In this paper , we have presented a data - driven method - ology for visualizing and analyzing the design knowl - edge base of a technology domain using patent data . The core elements of the methodology include representing the total technology space as an empirical network map based on patent data and overlaying the network map with the design knowledge base of a domain ( e . g . , HEVs ) or a design agent ( e . g . , Toyota ) as a subgraph of the network . Such overlay network representations enable quantitative and visual analyses on the structure and expansion trajec - tories of the design knowledge base and on its knowledge relatedness to the unexplored technologies in the rest of the total technology space . We demonstrate this methodol - ogy via the case study of the HEV domain , and showcase the new types of structural , evolutionary and comparative insights that can be derived from the new methodology . This research contributes to the growing design research and design theory literature , including the stud - ies on infused design ( Shai and Reich 2004 ) , C – K theory ( Hatchuel and Weil 2009 ) , knowledge genomes ( Reich and Shai 2012 ) and design - by - analogy ( Fu et al . 2015 ) , which have increasingly suggested the importance of managing knowledge across and within technology areas and explor - ing the knowledge space for creativity and innovation . Our work has responded to the calls from such prior design theory and methodology research by offering a data - driven knowledge management tool . The tool may potentially help researchers , engineers and managers better under - stand the structure and evolution of the design knowledge bases underlying their own domains or firms and also sug - gest unexplored technologies for new design opportunities . The present paper may have also contributed to the prior studies on the influences of knowledge relatedness on the exploration or diversification of individual inven - tors , firms and cities across technological fields , by adding new empirical findings at the level of a design domain , e . g . , HEVs . Specifically , the statistical analyses ( Fig . 3 ) from STEP 2 of the proposed methodology have provided empirical evidence that the design knowledge bases of the entire HEV domain and the leading firms in this domain preferentially expanded toward new technologies that are more related to their prior design knowledge bases . We anticipate similar empirical analyses to be conducted on more and diverse design domains to test if the same pat - tern holds . Note that , technologies can be defined at different levels of granularity and represented by patent classes defined at different levels ( e . g . , 3 - digit , 4 - digit , 5 - digit IPC classes ) for technology network mapping and analysis . In a robust - ness test , we found that the networks using 4 - digit IPC classes yield cumulative probability distribution curves more skewed towards the relatedness percentile of 100 % than those in Fig . 3 based on 3 - digit IPC classes for the HEV domain . That is , the relatedness - driven expansion mechanism is even more evident for technologies of a higher granularity . In this paper , we chose 3 - digit IPC classes for technology network mapping because they provide the best resolution for visual analysis , whereas there are 630 4 - digit IPC classes and the network map containing all of them are cluttered and not informative . When visualizations are not required , or better visualiza - tion techniques are available , using 4 - digit IPC classes for the overlay network analysis may provide finer - grained results . In addition , although design searches in the entire tech - nology space are relatively more global than the searchers only within the existing design knowledge base of a domain , it may still become limited as the domain matures and its design knowledge base reaches a relatively steady state ( Yayavaram and Ahuja 2008 ) . As shown in Fig . 6 , with the continual expansion of the HEV design knowledge base , its expandability continually declined . It became increas - ingly difficult to identify and synthesize additional new tech - nologies purely based on knowledge relatedness . In such a case , designers are more likely to identify new design opportunities by exploiting the recombination of the tech - nologies already in the design knowledge base , which may gradually lead to search exhaustion ( Fleming and Sorenson 2001 ; Fleming 2001 ; Yayavaram and Ahuja 2008 ) . When the exploration and exploitation via knowledge relatedness reach limits in the technology space , designers may alterna - tively explore new technologies through more abstract types of bisociation ( Berthold 2011 ; Thiel and Berthold 2012 ; Younge and Kuhn 2015 ) , or explore design inspirations from nature ( Fu et al . 2014 ) or the latest scientific advances ( Luo 2015 ) . 5 . 2 Limitations and future research The proposed methodology should be positioned in the context of the following caveats . First of all , it is focused on the synthesis or analogy across technologies , whereas new technologies may also be inspired by nature or new scientific discoveries . Also , our methodology emphasizes the role of knowledge relatedness in incremental design knowledge base expansions , whereas radical and break - through innovations that arise from distant analogies , syn - theses or bisociation might ignite a new domain or cause 422 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 dramatic changes in the design knowledge base of an exist - ing domain . Therefore , it will be valuable future research avenue to develop data - driven methodologies that cap - ture the influences of new scientific discoveries , nature - inspired designs and radical or breakthrough innovations on the emergence or expansion of design knowledge bases . Second , as pointed out earlier in the paper , knowledge relatedness between technologies can be defined and meas - ured in various ways , as design knowledge base expansions may be driven by different mechanisms in different con - texts . In our case study , only four alternative knowledge relatedness metrics are compared for selection to illustrate our methodology framework . In future research , especially in different contexts , new relatedness measures should be explored and tested in terms of their explanatory powers . Likewise , another promising avenue for future research is to explore alternative and potentially better visualizations and structural layouts for the technology space network . Moreover , while the case study has illustrated the power of our data - driven and network - based methodology by providing interesting observations at the domain and firm levels , the interpretations to some of the observations are limited due to the lack of the grounded firm - level data and the focus of the paper on the methodology . To better understand the interesting patterns of the HEV domain found in the case study , more in - depth data regarding the strategic choices , operations and performances of the firms need to be collected from or within the firms in the domain . Nonetheless , the observations that are enabled by our methodology have shed light on the directions for a future research project dedicated to better understand the HEV domain and the firms in this specific domain . In addition to the deep investigation of the HEV domain , we also anticipate that the application of our methodology to more diverse technology domains and firms will yield useful insights into domain - specific prac - tices and will enable further testing and refinement of our methodology . Particularly , the present case study shows the high explanatory power ( particularly from the results in Fig . 3 ) of our data - driven methodology on the historical expansions of a single domain . This suggests the possibil - ity to build a prediction model on the future expansions of generally design domains in future research . Such a prediction model needs to consider more systemic factors than knowledge relatedness and be tested with data from more diverse domains . Acknowledgements We are grateful for the support from the Singapore Ministry of Education Tier 2 academic research Grant ( # MOE2013 - T2 - 2 - 167 ) “Theoretical Foundations of Technology Network Modeling for Innovation” and the SUTD - MIT International Design Centre . An early version of this paper was presented at the International Design Conference 2016 . The feedback we received during the conference session greatly helped us refine the research and the paper . References Alberts D , Yang CB , Fobare - DePonio D , Koubek K , Robins S , Rodg - ers M , DeMarco D ( 2011 ) Introduction to patent searching . In : Current challenges in patent information retrieval . Springer , Berlin Heidelberg , pp 3 – 43 Allaire D , He Q , Deyst J , Willcox K ( 2012 ) An information - theoretic metric of system complexity with application to engineering system design . J Mech Des 134 : 100906 Alstott J , Triulzi G , Yan B , Luo J ( 2017a ) Inventors’ explorations across technology domains . Des Sci 3 : e20 Alstott J , Triulzi G , Yan B , Luo J ( 2017b ) Mapping technology space by normalizing technology relatedness networks . Scientomet - rics 110 ( 1 ) : 443 – 479 Arthur WB ( 2009 ) The nature of technology : what it is and how it evolves . Simon and Schuster , New York Baxter D , Gao J , Case K et al ( 2007 ) An engineering design knowl - edge reuse methodology using process modelling . Res Eng Des 18 ( 1 ) : 37 – 48 Berthold M ( 2011 ) Bisociative knowledge discovery . Lecture notes in computer science , vol 7250 . Springer , Berlin , Heidelberg , pp 1 – 7 Boschma R , Balland PA , Kogler DF ( 2014 ) Relatedness and tech - nological change in cities : the rise and fall of technological knowledge in US metropolitan areas from 1981 to 2010 . Ind Corp Change 24 ( 1 ) : 223 – 250 Breschi S , Malerba F , Lissoni F ( 2003 ) Knowledge - relatedness in firm technological diversification . Res Policy 32 ( 1 ) : 69 – 87 Chan J , Schunn C ( 2015 ) The impact of analogies on creative con - cept generation : lessons from an in vivo study in engineering design . Cogn Sci 39 ( 1 ) : 126 – 155 D’hondt E ( 2009 ) Lexical issues of a syntactic approach to interac - tive patent retrieval . In : The proceedings of the 3rd BCSIRSG symposium on future directions in information access , pp 102 – 109 Dibiaggio L , Nasiriyar M , Nesta L ( 2014 ) Substitutability and comple - mentarity of technological knowledge and the inventive perfor - mance of semiconductor companies . Res Policy 43 ( 9 ) : 1582 – 1593 Dosi G ( 1982 ) Technological paradigms and technological trajecto - ries : a suggested interpretation of the determinants and direc - tions of technical change . Res Policy 11 ( 3 ) : 147 – 162 Ejermo O ( 2005 ) Technological diversity and Jacobs’ externality hypothesis revisited . Growth Change 36 : 167 – 195 Fleming L ( 2001 ) Recombinant uncertainty in technological search . Manag Sci 47 ( 1 ) : 117 – 132 Fleming L , Sorenson O ( 2001 ) Technology as a complex adaptive system : evidence from patent data . Res Policy 30 ( 7 ) : 1019 – 1039 Fleming L , Sorenson O ( 2004 ) Science as a map in technological search . Strateg Manag J 25 ( 8 – 9 ) : 909 – 928 Fu K , Cagan J , Kotovsky K , Wood K ( 2013a ) Discovering structure in design databases through function and surface based map - ping . J Mech Design 135 ( 3 ) : 031006 Fu K , Chan J , Cagan J , Kotovsky K , Schunn C , Wood K ( 2013b ) The meaning of “near” and “far” : the impact of structuring design databases and the effect of distance of analogy on design output . J Mech Design 135 ( 2 ) : 021007 Fu K , Moreno D , Yang M , Wood K ( 2014 ) Bio - inspired design : an overview investigating open questions from the broader field of design - by - analogy . J Mech Design 136 ( 11 ) : 111102 Fu K , Murphy J , Yang M , Otto K , Jensen D , Wood K ( 2015 ) Design - by - analogy : experimental evaluation of a functional analogy search methodology for concept generation improvement . Res Eng Design 26 ( 1 ) : 77 – 95 423 Research in Engineering Design ( 2019 ) 30 : 405 – 423 1 3 Hatchuel A , Weil B ( 2003 ) A new approach of innovative design : an introduction to CK theory . In : DS 31 : proceedings of ICED 03 , the 14th international conference on engineering design , Stockholm Hatchuel A , Weil B ( 2009 ) C – K design theory : an advanced formula - tion . Res Eng Design 19 ( 4 ) : 181 – 192 Hatchuel A , Le Masson P , Weil B ( 2004 ) CK theory in practice : lessons from industrial applications . In : DS 32 : proceedings of DESIGN 2004 , the 8th international design conference , Dubrovnik , Croatia He Y , Luo J ( 2017 ) Novelty , conventionality , and value of innovation . In : Proceeding of the conference on design computing and cogni - tion’17 , Evanston , IL , Untied States Hinze S , Reiss T , Schmoch U ( 1997 ) Statistical analysis on the dis - tance between fields of technology . In : Innovation Systems and European Integration ( ISE ) , Targeted Socio - Economic Research Program , 4th Framework Program of the European Commission ( DGXII ) . Frauenhofer - Institute Systems and Innovation Research ( ISI ) , Karlsruhe , Germany Indukuri KV , Ambekar AA , Sureka A ( 2007 ) Similarity analysis of patent claims using natural language processing techniques . In : Conference on computational intelligence and multimedia appli - cations . International conference on . Vol . 4 , pp 169 – 175 Jaccard P ( 1901 ) Distribution de la flore alpine dans le bassin des Dranses et dans quelques régions voisines . Bulletin de la Société Vaudoise des Sciences Naturelles 37 : 241 – 272 Jaffe AB ( 1986 ) Technological opportunity and spillovers of R & D . Am Econ Rev 76 : 984 – 1001 Kasravi K , Risov M ( 2007 ) Patent mining - discovery of business value from patent repositories . In : System sciences . HICSS 2007 , the 40th annual Hawaii international conference on , pp 54 – 54 Kauffman SA ( 1993 ) The origins of order : Self - organization and selec - tion in evolution . Oxford university Press , Oxford Kay L , Newman N , Youtie J , Porter AL , Rafols I ( 2014 ) Patent overlay mapping : visualizing technological distance . J Am Soc Inf Sci Technol 65 ( 12 ) : 2432 – 2443 Koch S , Bosch H , Giereth M , Ertl T ( 2009 ) Iterative integration of visual insights during patent search and analysis . In : IEEE sym - posium on visual analytics , pp 203 – 210 Kogler D , Rigby DL , Tucker I ( 2013 ) Mapping knowledge space and technological relatedness in US cities . Eur Plan Stud 21 : 1374 – 1391 Layton ET Jr ( 1974 ) Technology as knowledge . Technol Cult 31 – 41 Leten B , Belderbos R , Van Looy B ( 2007 ) Technological diversifica - tion , coherence , and performance of firms . J Prod Innovat Manag 24 ( 6 ) : 567 – 579 Leydesdorff L , Kushnir D , Rafols I ( 2014 ) Interactive overlay maps for US patent ( USPTO ) data based on International Patent Classifica - tion ( IPC ) . Scientometrics 98 ( 3 ) : 1583 – 1599 Linsey JS ( 2007 ) Design - by - analogy and representation in innovative engineering concept generation . ProQuest Linsey JS , Markman AB , Wood KL ( 2012 ) Design by analogy : a study of the WordTree Method for problem re - representation . J Mech Des 134 ( 4 ) : 041009 Luo J ( 2015 ) The united innovation process : integrating science , design and entrepreneurship as sub - process . Design Sci ( 1 ) : e2 Luo J , Yan B , Wood K ( 2017 ) InnoGPS for data - driven exploration of design opportunities and directions : the case of Google driverless car project . J Mech Design 139 ( 11 ) : 111416 McNamee RC ( 2013 ) Can’t see the forest for the leaves : similarity and distance measures for hierarchical taxonomies with a patent clas - sification example . Res Policy 42 ( 4 ) : 855 – 873 Mukherjea S , Bhuvan B , Kankar P ( 2005 ) Information retrieval and knowledge discovery utilizing a biomedical patent semantic web . IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 17 ( 8 ) : 1099 – 1110 Nakamura H , Suzuki S , Sakata I , Kajikawa Y ( 2015 ) Knowledge com - bination modeling : the measurement of knowledge similarity between different technological domains . Technol Forecast Soc 94 : 187 – 201 Pistorius CW , Utterback JM ( 1997 ) Multi - mode interaction among technologies . Res Policy 26 ( 1 ) : 67 – 84 Reich Y , Shai O ( 2012 ) The interdisciplinary engineering knowledge genome . Res Eng Des 23 ( 3 ) : 251 – 264 Rigby DL ( 2015 ) Technological relatedness and knowledge space : entry and exit of US cities from patent classes . Reg Stud 49 ( 11 ) : 1922 – 1937 Shai O , Reich Y ( 2004 ) Infused design . I . Theory . Res Eng Des 15 ( 2 ) : 93 – 107 Small H ( 1973 ) Co - citation in the scientific literature : a new measure of the relationship between two documents . J Assoc Inf Sci Tech 24 ( 4 ) : 265 – 269 Smojver V , Štorga M , Potočki E ( 2016 ) An extended methodology for the assessment of technical invention evolution . In : Proceedings of the 14th international design conference , Dubrovnik , Croatia Song B , Luo J ( 2017 ) Mining patent precedents for data - driven design : the case of spherical rolling robots . J Mech Design Forthcoming Srinivasan V , Song B , Luo J , Subburaj K , Elara MR , Blessing L , Wood K ( 2017 ) Understanding effects of analogical distance on per - formance of ideation : Key observations and Findings . In : Inter - national design engineering technical conferences ( IDETC17 ) , Cleveland , USA . ( accepted ) Szykman S , Sriram RD , Bochenek C , Racz JW , Senfaute J ( 2000 ) Design repositories : engineering design’s new knowledge base . IEEE Intell Syst 15 : 48 – 55 Tang V , Luo J ( 2013 ) Idea matrix and creativity operators . In : Proceed - ings DS 75 – 7 : proceedings of the 19th international conference on engineering design ( ICED13 ) , design for harmonies , Vol . 7 : human behaviour in design , Seoul , Korea , 19 - 22 . 08 . 2013 Taura T , Nagai Y ( 2012 ) Concept generation for design creativity : a systematized theory and methodology . Springer , New York Teece DJ , Rumelt R , Dosi G , Winter SG ( 1994 ) Understanding cor - porate coherence : theory and evidence . J Econ Behav Organ 23 ( 1 ) : 1 – 30 Thiel K , Berthold MR ( 2010 , December ) Node similarities from spreading activation . In : Data mining ( ICDM ) . 2010 IEEE 10th international conference , pp 1085 – 1090 Uzzi B , Mukherjee S , Stringer M , Jones B ( 2013 ) Atypical combina - tions and scientific impact . Science 342 ( 6157 ) : 468 – 472 Weisberg RW ( 2006 ) Creativity : understanding innovation in problem solving , science , invention , and the arts . Wiley , Hoboken Wuyts S , Colombo MG , Dutta S , Nooteboom B ( 2005 ) Empirical tests of optimal cognitive distance . J Econ Behav Organ 58 ( 2 ) : 277 – 302 Yan B , Luo J ( 2017a ) Measuring technological distance for patent map - ping . J Assoc Inf Sci Technol 68 ( 2 ) : 423 – 437 Yan B , Luo J ( 2017b ) Filtering patent maps for visualization of diver - sification paths . J Assoc Inf Sci Technol 68 ( 6 ) : 1551 – 1563 Yayavaram S , Ahuja G ( 2008 ) Decomposability in knowledge struc - tures and its impact on the usefulness of inventions and knowl - edge - base malleability . Admin Sci Quart 53 ( 2 ) : 333 – 362 Younge K , Kuhn JM ( 2015 ) Patent - to - Patent similarity : a vector space model . available at SSRN Zdrahal Z , Mulholland P , Valasek M et al ( 2007 ) Worlds and transfor - mations : supporting the sharing and reuse of engineering design knowledge . Int J Hum - Comput Stud 65 ( 12 ) : 959 – 982 Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations .