ORIGINAL PAPER Creativity Is Enhanced by Long - Term Mindfulness Training and Is Negatively Correlated with Trait Default - Mode - Related Low - Gamma Inter - Hemispheric Connectivity Aviva Berkovich - Ohana 1 , 2 & Joseph Glicksohn 2 , 3 & Tal Dotan Ben - Soussan 2 , 4 & Abraham Goldstein 2 , 5 # Springer Science + Business Media New York 2016 Abstract It is becoming increasingly accepted that creative performance , especially divergent thinking , may depend on reduced activity within the default mode network ( DMN ) , related to mind - wandering and autobiographic self - referential processing . However , the relationship between trait ( resting - state ) DMN activity and divergent thinking is contro - versial . Here , we test the relationship between resting - state DMN activity and divergent thinking in a group of mindful - ness meditation practitioners . We build on our two previous reports , which have shown DMN activity to be related to resting - state log gamma ( 25 – 45 Hz ) power and inter - hemispheric functional connectivity . Using the same cohort of participants ( three mindfulness groups with increasing ex - pertise , and controls , n = 12 each ) , we tested ( 1 ) divergent thinking scores ( Flexibility and Fluency ) using the Alternative Uses task and ( 2 ) correlation between Alternative Uses scores and DMN activity as measured by resting - state gamma power and inter - hemispheric functional connectivity . We found that both Fluency and Flexibility ( 1 ) were higher in the two long - term mindfulness groups ( > 1000 h ) compared to short - term mindfulness practitioners and control participants and ( 2 ) negatively correlated with gamma inter - hemispheric functional connectivity ( frontal - midline and posterior - midline connections ) . In addition , ( 3 ) Fluency was significantly correlated with mindfulness exper - tise . Together , these results show that long - term mindfulness meditators exhibit higher divergent thinking scores in correla - tion with their expertise and demonstrate a negative divergent thinking — resting - state DMN activity relationship , thus large - ly support a negative DMN - creativity connection . Keywords Creativity . Divergent thinking . Electroencephalography ( EEG ) . Gamma band . Functional connectivity . Default mode network ( DMN ) . Mindfulness Introduction Creativity is the capacity to produce work that is both novel ( i . e . , original ) and appropriate ( i . e . , useful ) ( Sternberg and Lubart 1993 ) . Behaviorally , the first component — generation of new ideas — can be measured by divergent thinking tests , whereas the second component concerning task constraints can be measured by convergent thinking tests ( Jung et al . 2013 ) . Despite a five - decade long effort to localize creative processes within the human brain ( for review , see Dietrich and Kanso 2010 ) , the notion that certain aspects of creativity can be precisely localized has not born yet a consistent pattern of brain activity that is associated with creative information pro - cessing ( Mok 2014 ) . As it is increasingly accepted that brain function relies on coordinated B networks ^ ( Bressler and Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article ( doi : 10 . 1007 / s12671 - 016 - 0649 - y ) contains supplementary material , which is available to authorized users . * Aviva Berkovich - Ohana avivabo @ edu . haifa . ac . il 1 Faculty of Education , The Edmond J . Safra Brain Research Center for the Study of Learning Disabilities , University of Haifa , Haifa , Israel 2 The Leslie and Susan Gonda ( Goldschmied ) Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center , Bar - Ilan University , Ramat Gan 52900 , Israel 3 Department of Criminology , Bar - Ilan University , Ramat Gan 52900 , Israel 4 Education and Didactics , Patrizio Paoletti Foundation , Research Institute for Neuroscience , Assisi 06081 , Italy 5 Department of Psychology , Bar - Ilan University , Ramat Gan 52900 , Israel Mindfulness DOI 10 . 1007 / s12671 - 016 - 0649 - y Menon 2010 ) , a novel approach to creativity seems warranted , targeting creative processes in the brain based on the notion of networks ( recently reviewed by Beaty et al . 2015 ; Gonen - Yaacovi et al . 2013 ) . In line with the networks approach to creativity , idea gener - ation tasks are suggested to be related to default mode network ( DMN ) activation , while idea evaluation condition is related to a dynamic DMN — frontoparietal ( FPN ) cooperation ( Beaty et al . 2016 ) . The DMN is a set of regions intensively studied by blood oxygenated level dependent ( BOLD ) functional mag - netic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) that includes the medial pre - frontal cortex , inferior parietal lobule ( IPL ) , posterior cingulate / precuneus , and the medial temporal lobe ( Buckner et al . 2008 ; Raichle et al . 2001 ) . Cognitively , elevated BOLD - DMN activ - ity has been related to heightened intrinsically oriented func - tions , including mind - wandering , autobiographic self - related processing , memorizing the past and planning the future ( Buckner et al . 2008 ) . The DMN , also called the B intrinsic network , ^ was demonstrated using fMRI to typically anti - correlate with the B extrinsic , ^ external - task - related network ( Fox et al . 2005 ; Golland et al . 2007 ) . Interposed between them is suggested to be the frontoparietal network ( FPN ) , which includes the anterior prefrontal cortex ( PFC ) , dorsolateral ( DL ) - PFC , dorsomedial superior frontal , anterior cingulate cor - tex ( ACC ) , anterior IPL , and anterior insular cortex ( Vincent et al . 2008 ) . The FPN can be broken down into two sub - networks ( Seeley et al . 2007 ) , the B executive control network ^ ( DLPFC and IPL ) and the B salience system ^ ( anterior insula and ACC ) , with the former being related to working memory , directed attention , and relational integration , while the latter being specifically attributed the role of switching between the intrinsic and extrinsic systems ( Menon and Uddin 2010 ) . The FPN cooperates with either one of these typically antagonistic systems , possibly integrating information from , and adjudicat - ing between , these two potentially competing brain systems ( Smallwood et al . 2012 ; Spreng et al . 2010 ; Vincent et al . 2008 ) . More specifically , accumulating fMRI evidence shows that divergent thinking is related to increased functional con - nectivity between the DMN and FPN , both as a state ( during the task ) and as a trait ( measured during resting state ) ( Beaty et al . 2014a , b , 2015 , 2016 ) . However , the evidence concerning the involvement of the DMN in divergent thinking is still controversial , both as a state ( during the creative task ) , but more so as a trait . Jung et al . ( 2013 ) recently reviewed evidence showing that both increased and decreased brain measures ( both structural and functional ) within the default mode network ( DMN ) are associated with creativity . On the one hand , Jung and colleagues ( 2013 ) state that B the production of something ‘ novel and useful ’ appears to depend , at least in part , on disinhibitory neuronal processes within this core network ^ ( p . 9 ) , that is , increased DMN activity could intuitively be associated with increased divergent thinking . This is in line with previous notions associating B disinhibition ^ of cognitive control mechanisms with di - vergent thinking ( Dietrich 2004 ; Martindale 1971 ) , where multiple ideas can be generated in a non - judgmental en - vironment , without selection pressures , as is the case for DMN activity . However , at the same time , Jung et al . ( 2013 ) provide evidence that this hypothesis is not well fitted by some data showing a negative relation between creativity and DMN structure integrity . Thus , the relation - ship between DMN activity , as a trait ( i . e . , during resting state and not during a task ) , and creativity remains puzzling . An independent but highly relevant line of research has related mindfulness meditation practice to reduced DMN ac - tivity and functional connectivity , as measured by fMRI ( e . g . , Berkovich - Ohana et al . 2016 ; Brewer et al . 2011 ; Farb et al . 2007 ; Hasenkamp and Barsalou 2012 ) . Mindfulness medita - tion , as often studied in research paradigms , is a technique of remaining aware and noticing the salient features of present experience while refraining from judgmental processes , con - ceptual elaboration , and mind wandering ( Kabat - Zinn 2003 ) . While the DMN is commonly studied by means of fMRI , in two previous studies , we were able to show that the DMN can also be reflected in electroencephalography ( EEG ) , as activity in the low - gamma ( 25 – 45 Hz ) band . Specifically , Berkovich - Ohana et al . ( 2012 ) employed mindfulness practitioners , in - cluding three levels of expertise and a suitable control group , reporting two major findings . The first was the manifestation of DMN deactivation as reduced low gamma power within frontal - midline regions during a time - production ( extrinsic - network related ) task compared with a resting state ( intrinsic , DMN activity ) . The second was that mindfulness practitioners generally exhibited reduced resting - state frontal low gamma power as compared to controls , suggesting a trait ( long - lasting ) effect of reduced mind - wandering and self - related processing in mindfulness practitioners . Berkovich - Ohana et al . ( 2013 ) then expanded the analysis to include functional connectivity , identifying DMN deactivation as a reduction in overall long - range gamma inter - hemispheric functional con - nectivity , showing a mindfulness - induced decrease in resting - state gamma functional connectivity in the long - term mind - fulness group . Yet another line of research has investigated the effect of meditation on creativity . Although there are many medita - tive techniques , for simplicity , we adopt here the conceptu - alization of Lutz et al . ( 2008 ) , grossly dividing meditation into two forms : Focused Attention — learned control over the focus of one ’ s attention by using a stable object with the goal of quieting the mind ( for example , a mantra ) , and Open Monitoring — maximizing the breadth and clarity of maintained attention in order to bring higher momentary awareness to internal processes ( the latter includes , for ex - ample , mindfulness and Zen ) . While it has been argued that Mindfulness meditation practice supports creativity , the evidence is in - consistent ( Horan 2009 ; Lippelt et al . 2014 ) , possibly due to the wide variety of meditation techniques and creativity measures employed . Early studies focused on Focused Attention meditation ( including Transcendental Meditation and Ananda Marga ) and found no support ( e . g . , Domino 1977 ; O ’ Haire and Marcia 1980 ) , while others provided supporting evidence ( Orme - Johnson et al . 1977 ; Orme - Johnson and Granieri 1977 ) . In contrast , later studies focused on Open Monitoring meditations , and supporting evidence started to accumulate , specifically for an Open Monitoring meditation - divergent thinking connec - tion . For example , in an early study of Zen practitioners , meditators out - performed a relaxation group in divergent thinking using the Torrance Test of Creative Thinking ( TTCT ) ( Cowger and Torrance 1982 ) . A later study showed that trait — and state — variations in mindfulness in under - graduate volunteers predict greater creative elaboration , measured by a variant of the TTCT ( Zabelina et al . 2011 ) . Another study examining cognitive rigidity , using a varia - tion of the Einstellung water jar task , found that experienced mindfulness practitioners had significantly lower rigidity scores than non - meditators ( Greenberg et al . 2012 ) . In yet another recent study , a week of integrative body – mind train - ing ( IBMT , a form of Open Monitoring ) was shown to im - prove divergent thinking , measured by the TTCT ( Ding et al . 2014 ) . Based on the accumulating evidence , Colzato et al . ( 2012 ) suggested that Focused Attention and Open Monitoring induce two almost opposite cognitive - control states that support convergent and divergent thinking , re - spectively . To test this hypothesis , they compared the im - pact of Focused Attention and Open Monitoring meditation practice on both convergent and divergent thinking , using the Remote Associates task and the Alternative Uses task , respectively . They found that while convergent thinking tended to improve after Focused Attention , divergent think - ing was significantly enhanced after Open Monitoring , as hypothesized . As the evidence in the literature is inconclusive for the creativity — trait ( resting - state ) DMN activity connection , and as mindfulness meditation has been shown to generally reduce trait DMN activity , as well as to increase creativity measures , here , we converge the above three lines of research in an attempt to add to the current state of the art in these fields . To this end , we build on our previous reports , and use the same cohort of participants , to test the following questions : ( 1 ) What is the effect of mindfulness expertise on divergent thinking ? and ( 2 ) How do measures of divergent thinking correlate with DMN activity , as measured by resting - state low gamma power and inter - hemispheric functional connec - tivity ? We specifically hypothesized that mindfulness exper - tise will increase divergent thinking and that divergent think - ing will negatively correlate with DMN activity . Method Participants A total of 48 healthy , right - handed individuals are reported in the study : 36 mindfulness meditation practitioners recruited from the Israeli Insight Society ( http : / / www . tovana . co . il ) and the Newman Society ( http : / / www . metta . org . il ) and 12 controls . All the meditation practitioners have been practicing mindfulness according to the Satipathana and Theravada Vipassan ā traditions . The mindfulness practitioners were divided into three groups ( n = 12 each ) , on the basis of accumulated hours of formal practice : Short - term mindfulness ( 5 females ; mean experience in hours : 894 ± 450 h , range 180 – 1430 h ; and experience in years : 5 . 7 ± 0 . 9 years ) , Intermediate - term mindfulness ( 3 females ; 2570 ± 471 h , 1740 – 2860 h ; 9 . 6 ± 1 . 5 years ) , and Long - term mindfulness practitioners ( 2 females ; 7556 ± 5027 h , 3870 – 23 , 000 h ; 13 . 8 ± 2 . 2 years ) . Meditation expertise was calculated using a self - report of the practitioners of all the retreats they attended ( for each retreat , they were questioned as to its length in days and number of hours with formal practice ) , as well as accumulated weekly personal practice ( to their best of memory , counting separately for the different periods since the beginning of their practice , if their practice changed over time ) . To control for possible age effects , the meditator groups ( mean ages in years : short - term : 41 . 6 ± 13 . 3 ; intermediate - term : 37 . 9 ± 10 . 4 ; long - term : 45 . 6 ± 10 . 6 ) were age - matched with the control group ( 5 females ; mean age in years , 41 ± 12 . 5 ) . In addition , in order to reduce possible self - selection effects caused by interest in meditation being higher in the meditation groups , the control group composed only of participants who scored B meditation interest ^ > 5 on a scale between 0 and 10 . The study took place in Bar - Ilan University , Israel . Participants were tested at least 3 h after their last meditation session , to enable study - ing long - term , trait effects of practice . The research was ap - proved by the Bar - Ilan University Institutional Ethical Committee , and informed consent was obtained from participants . Procedure Creativity was measured with the Alternate Uses ( AU ) task . EEG was then recorded during resting state ( 2 . 5 min eyes open and then 2 . 5 min eyes closed ) prior to a battery of tasks designed to measure temporal and spatial perception , and at - tentional skills , as well as a meditation / relaxation session of 15 min . The task battery was applied again after the meditation / relaxation session . As the participants had to sit with the EEG cap as long as 1 h ( we had a battery of tasks before and after a 15 - min meditation session ) , we attempted to reduce the length of this inconvenience . Thus , as the AU task did not require EEG measurements simultaneously , we Mindfulness performed it before the EEG session . Given that the time required to place the EEG net was around 30 min , the imme - diate effect of the AU task on the resting - state activity can be considered negligible . Given that our aim here is to study the relationship between resting - state EEG , mindfulness medita - tion expertise effects and creativity , only resting - state EEG data and AU scores from the pre - meditation condition will be reported , based on our previous reports with this cohort of participants ( Berkovich - Ohana et al . 2012 , 2013 ) . Measures The Alternative Uses ( AU ) task is a test of divergent thinking which requires participants to generate as many and unusual uses of conventional , everyday objects ( Guilford 1968 ) . In a previous study with the aim of examining changes in creativ - ity following training ( reported in Ben - Soussan et al . 2013 ) , we clustered a 908 - word database ( developed by Levy - Drori and Henik 2006 ) using hierarchical cluster analysis and grouped those words having similar ratings of concreteness , availability of context , and familiarity assigned by Levy - Drori and Henik . We then chose 18 words from the three largest clusters for which the level of concreteness , similarity on fa - miliarity , and availability features were highest ( see Table S1 ) . These 18 words were divided into two groups ( nine words in each group ) and tested on 60 pilot participants . The words were then divided into six sets of three words so that each set had a similar availability , familiarity , and concreteness ( Table S1 ) . Yet , there was a significant difference between the six sets in terms of fluency , stemming from a higher num - ber of uses in set 4 . However , we show ( detailed in the supplementary information ) that all the reported results main - tain significance when correcting the potential bias created by using set 4 . In the current study , one set of three words was shown sequentially on a computer screen before the meditation / relaxation session , with a response interval of 1 min allocated for each item . The participants were asked to name as many uses as they can think of for this item . Presentation order of these sets was counterbalanced across a larger set of partici - pants ( n = 59 meditators and n = 38 control participants ) , as a part of the PhD dissertation of the first author ( Berkovich - Ohana 2010 ) . However , after exclusion of participants who did not meet criteria for inclusion in this study ( not age - matched , medicated , and left - handed ) , as well as after dividing the meditation participants into three groups of expertise , the counter - balancing scheme was infringed . Table S2 presents complete data regarding which set was presented to the differ - ent participants of each group in the resting state ( pre - medita - tion / relaxation ) , as analyzed in this paper . From the AU , we calculated two measures : ideational flu - ency ( Fluency , the number of uses generated ) , as well as cog - nitive flexibility ( Flexibility , the number of categories employed ) . The Fluency score was defined as the mean of the total number of uses given by the participant for the three items in each session ( Snyder et al . 2004 ) . The Flexibility score was defined as the average number of different catego - ries used by the participant for these three items ( Russ 1998 ) . Hence , all responses for a given item were first divided into different independent categories ( i . e . , using an item as a mu - sical instrument or as a weapon were two independent cate - gories ) . For example , alternative uses given by a participant for the word B ladder ^ may include B climb , ^ B stand on , ^ B reach high places , ^ B hang for decoration , ^ B make a bridge , ^ B attach an enemy , ^ or B burn to warm , ^ in which case the Fluency = 7 ( total items ) , and the Flexibility = 4 categories ( category 1 is B common uses , ^ including the first three uses ; category 2 is B decoration ^ for the 4th use ; category 3 is B rebuilding ^ for the 5th use ; category 4 is B weapons ^ for the last use ) . Since Flexibility is a subjective measure , two inde - pendent raters scored the test . The inter - rater correlation was very high [ r = 0 . 915 , p < . 01 , n = 48 ] , so the average score was used in the statistical analyses . The data of one control partic - ipant is missing due to technical problems . EEG was recorded with a 65 - channel geodesic sensor net ( Electrical Geodesics Inc . , Eugene , USA ) , sampled at 500 Hz and referenced to the vertex ( Cz ) , with analog 0 . 1 – 200 Hz band - pass filtering . AC noise was removed by a 50 - Hz digital notch filter , and impedance was kept under 40 k Ω ( Ferree et al . 2001 ) . The data were referenced offline to average ref - erence and then visually screened for artifacts . Whenever elec - trodes were affected in a widespread distribution by artifacts , we excluded their data from the analysis . Whenever several channels exhibited noisy recording due to local high imped - ance ( > 40 k Ω , mean of three electrodes per epoch , in ∼ 10 % of the epochs ) , the corrected values were calculated offline by using spherical spline interpolation ( Perrin et al . 1989 ) . Data Analyses From the initial closed - eyes resting state , the first 16 non - overlapping , artifact - free epochs of 1024 sample points ( 2 . 048 s duration ) were extracted for analysis . The power ( μ V 2 ) spectral distribution was calculated by first multitapering the raw data ( using the Chronux toolbox ) ) , then applying a fast Fourier transform ( 0 . 5 Hz resolution , 1024 point block - size , Hanning window , 0 . 5 – 46 Hz ) . For each elec - trode , the absolute spectral power was first grouped into fre - quency bands , including theta ( 3 . 5 – 7 . 5 Hz ) , alpha ( 7 . 5 – 13 Hz ) , and gamma ( 25 – 45 Hz ) , then log - transformed , and averaged across the 16 epochs . Electrodes were collapsed into regions of interest ( ROIs ) , and mean log spectral power was calculated for each ROI separately . Here , we report the results of left and right frontal ( F ) and midline ( M ) ( Fig . 1 ) , previous - ly related to DMN activity . Mindfulness Functional connectivity was measured using a mean phase coherence ( MPC , Mormann et al . 2000 ) index , appropriate for non - linear and non - stationary data , as is the case in EEG sig - nals . MPC is a measure of how the relative phase is distributed over the unit circle . If two signals are phase - synchronized , the relative phase will occupy a small portion of the circle and MPC approaches the value of 1 — meaning strong phase func - tional connectivity , and vice versa — for uncorrelated signals MPC is close to zero ( Pereda et al . 2005 ) ( for further details , see Supplementary in Berkovich - Ohana et al . 2013 ) . As MPC is independent of frequency , the raw EEG signal was filtered into the different frequency bands prior to the calculation of MPC values for each electrode pair ( a total of ( 65 × 64 ) / 2 = 2080 electrode pairs ) . The MPC values were Fisher z - trans - formed and averaged across the 16 epochs . In order to reduce the dimensionality of the data , mean MPC of different ROIs was calculated as the mean MPC value of all the possible pairwise connections between the two ROIs . As our previous report identified DMN activity reflected as inter - hemispheric gamma functional connectivity , we focused here only on inter - hemispheric connections . Moreover , as we were interested in the major DMN connec - tions , we selected four classical electrode connections , chosen to capture activity covering the DMN : bilateral F - M and PO - M ( Fig . 1 ) . As this report focuses on gamma activity , a cautious stance is warranted . Cortically induced gamma activity is known to be at possible risk of contamination with muscu - lar activity ( Whitham et al . 2007 ) or saccade - related spike potentials ( SP ) due to eye movements ( Yuval - Greenberg and Deouell 2009 ) . Thus , we employed several measures to minimize these risks , including ( 1 ) using only eyes - closed conditions to eliminate saccade - related artifacts , as the SP is elicited at the onset of small saccades occurring during eyes - open fixation ( Martinez - Conde et al . 2004 ) ; ( 2 ) using lower gamma frequencies ( 25 – 45 Hz ) to mini - mize muscle artifacts , habitually peaking at 70 – 80 Hz ( Cacioppo et al . 1990 ) ; ( 3 ) excluding circumference elec - trodes from statistical analyses , to minimize eye , neck , and face muscle artifacts ( Whitham et al . 2007 ) ; and ( 4 ) we assessed the reliability of gamma power using the coeffi - cient of variation ( Fingelkurts et al . 2006 ) , showing high within - subjects internal - consistency reliability ( detailed in Berkovich - Ohana et al . 2012 ) . Results We examined whether both Flexibility and Fluency were distrib - uted normally , which they were [ kurtosis = . 568 and − . 004 ; skewness = . 484 and − . 650 , respectively ] . We then conducted a MANOVA , for Flexibility and Fluency , which uncovered signif - icant group differences [ F ( 6 , 84 ) = 2 . 84 , p = . 014 , η p2 = . 169 , obs . Power = . 865 ] . The follow - up ANOVA showed significant differences both for Flexibility [ F ( 3 , 46 ) = 5 . 51 , MSE = 169 . 54 , p < . 005 , η p2 = . 278 , obs . Power = . 919 ] and for Fluency [ F ( 3 , 46 ) = 4 . 14 , MSE = 224 . 28 , p < . 01 , η p2 = . 224 , obs . Power = . 817 ] , as hypothesized , stemming from higher scores for the intermediate and long - term mindfulness groups com - pared to the controls and short - term mindfulness group ( Fig . 2a ) . To study the relationship between creativity and DMN ac - tivity , we tested the effect of gamma power and gamma func - tional connectivity , previously shown to correspond to DMN activity ( Berkovich - Ohana et al . 2012 , 2013 ) on Alternative Uses scores , in several steps . First , to reduce the number of comparisons , we computed mean gamma power , having first checked the reliability of the three ROI values ( Left F , Right F , and Midline , α = . 90 ) . Similarly , we computed mean gamma MPC , having first checked the reliability of the four ROI values ( bilateral PO - M and F - M , α = . 85 ) . Second , we conducted a hierarchical regres - sion analysis , with the three predictors ( mean gamma power , mean gamma MPC , mindfulness expertise [ in hours ] ) being en - tered in a stepwise manner . To test the possible effect of age on the reported results , we conducted the same hierarchical regres - sion analysis same as above , but with age of the participants being forced into the equation ( detailed in the supplementary information ) . This analysis showed that age was not a significant predictor for Fluency and Flexibility . We identified one control participant as an outlier , having mean gamma MPC = 0 . 89 ( ex - cluded from Fig . 2b – c ) . To test the effect of this outlier on the reported results , we conducted the hierarchical regression analy - sis again without this participant . The results generally remained the same for Flexibility ( old vs . new : Coefficient = − 21 . 5 * vs . Fig . 1 Electrode net configuration ( left ) , ROIs used for power calculations ( center ) , and ROIs used for mean phase coherence calculations as well as intra - hemispheric long - range connections used for further analyses ( right ) Mindfulness − 23 . 24 * , respectively ; R 2 = . 125 vs . . 101 ; Adjusted R 2 = . 104 vs . . 081 ) . Similarly , for Fluency , the results are similar , but weaker , emphasizing the limitation of this study in terms of group size , as one reviewer noted ( old vs . new : Coefficient = − 24 . 7 * vs . − 23 . 5 [ only marginally significant with p = . 057 ] , respectively ; R 2 = . 262 vs . . 231 ; Adjusted R 2 = . 226 vs . . 194 ) . For both Fluency and Flexibility , it was mean gamma MPC that was negatively correlated with these indices of creativity ( Fig . 2b , c ) . We further note that the regression was much stron - ger for Fluency than for Flexibility , as indicated by the R 2 values . In addition , mindfulness meditation expertise was a significant predictor of Fluency ( Fig . 2d ) . Mean gamma power , in contrast , was not a significant predictor . Discussion Mindfulness Meditation Practice Increases Divergent Thinking We showed that long - term mindfulness practitioners score sig - nificantly higher compared to controls in both Flexibility and Fluency ( Fig . 2a ) . We also reported a significant correlation be - tween mindfulness expertise and Fluency ( Fig . 2d ) . These results are generally consistent with the contention that the practice of meditation supports creativity ( Horan 2009 ) . Our results support the Open Monitoring ( mindful - ness ) — divergent thinking hypothesis ( Colzato et al . 2012 ) . Furthermore , our results reveal an expertise effect , as shown in other Open Monitoring studies ( reviewed by Tomasino et al . 2012 ) , but has been missing in the context of meditation - related creativity research ( Capurso et al . 2013 , p . 2 ) . At first sight , it seems that our results contra - dict another study ( Colzato et al . 2014 ) , which recently reported that meditation training does not provide long - term benefits for divergent thinking . This was based on the observation that while divergent thinking benefited more from Open Monitoring meditation than from Focused Attention meditation , the same effect was found for both novices and a group of 20 practitioners . However , Colzato et al . ( 2014 ) examined meditation practitioners with an average of 3 . 3 years ’ experience . Similarly , our short - term mindfulness group , with expertise of approxi - mately 5 years , showed no difference from the control group , in accord with Colzato et al . ( 2014 ) . However , the other groups in our study ( expertise > 5 years ) demonstrat - ed enhanced Fluency and Flexibility compared to controls . Thus , our results significantly contribute to the accumulat - ing data concerning the question of the expertise effect by showing that it is only above 5 years of practice that the long - term effect of meditation is revealed in divergent thinking ( see Fig . 2a ) . Fig . 2 a The significant group differences in creativity , showing Alternative Uses scores of Flexibility and Fluency ( M ± SEM ) ; MM mindfulness meditation ; ST , IT , and LT short , intermediate , and long - term , respectively ; * * p < . 01 ; * * * p < . 0005 ; b , c Two scatterplots showing a significant negative correlation between gamma functional connectivity ( mean MPC ) and Fluency scores [ r = − . 292 , p < . 05 ] , or Flexibility scores [ r = − . 300 , p < . 05 ] , respectively . The trend line accounts for all participants ( n = 45 , one outlier excluded ) . d A scatterplot showing the significant correlation between Fluency scores and mindfulness expertise [ r = . 388 , p < . 05 ] ( n = 35 . One long - term meditator with 23 , 000 h of expertise and Fluency score of 12 was excluded for better visualization ) Mindfulness Divergent Thinking Is Negatively Correlated with Gamma Functional Connectivity , Reflecting DMN Activity We have found that both Fluency and Flexibility negatively correlate with resting - state gamma functional connectivity ( Fig . 2b – c ) . However , the creativity measures did not signifi - cantly correlate with gamma power . These results are aligned with a previous study that reported a similar relationship with other frequency bands during resting - state EEG . In the Jau š ovec and Jau š ovec ( 2000 ) study , divergent thinking scores showed a very weak positive correlation with power ( mainly within the upper alpha — lower beta bands ( 10 . 6 – 23 . 5 ) , aligned with other EEG studies ( Mok 2014 ) , as well as showing predominantly a negative correlation with func - tional connectivity , as seen by probability maps over the entire scalp ( found for all tested frequency bands , from delta ( 1 . 5 – 3 . 5 Hz ) up until the beta3 ( 23 . 6 – 31 . 5 Hz ) ) . Indeed , power and functional connectivity carry different information : while power is a measure of the local summation of electrical activ - ity of a given region , functional connectivity is a dynamical interaction characterized by synchrony ( precise phase locking ) relationships between the activities of two neuronal populations ( Florian et al . 1998 ; Varela and Thompson 2003 ) . In our results , the negative correlation was found with mean resting - state gamma functional connectivity , calcu - lated within the bilateral F - M and PO - M . Considering the fact that connectivity reflects coordinated electrophysio - logical activity , one can assume that increases in function - al connectivity indicate closer cooperation of the two re - gions in question in the respective frequency band , and vice versa , as shown by others in cognitive studies ( e . g . , Bhattacharya and Petsche 2005 ; Petsche 1996 ) . Thus , our results suggest that reduced gamma coordinated activity over the frontal - midline and posterior - midline hubs of the DMN correlate negatively with divergent thinking . While the fractionation of the DMN into sub - components is yet to be studied , it was suggested that the midline core ( pos - terior cingulate and anterior medial prefrontal cortex ) is active when people make self - relevant , affective decisions ( Andrews - Hanna et al . 2010 ) . Thus , we speculate that the less self - focused one is during the resting state , the more creative one will be during a divergent thinking task . We need to cautiously emphasize that our population for the correlation analyses comprised mainly mindfulness med - itation practitioners , who were previously shown in the litera - ture to exhibit functional and structural alterations , including within the DMN , compared to control groups ( Chiesa and Serretti 2010 ; Fox et al . 2014 ; Tang et al . 2015 ) . Thus , the results reported here cannot reflect on the general population . Nevertheless , these results support the general notion sug - gested by Jung et al . ( 2013 ) that creativity appears to depend , at least in part , on reduced activity within the DMN . Why should divergent thinking increase with reduced trait DMN activity ? A possible explanation is based on the creative - action theory of creativity , postulating that creative thought is always causally dependent on non - perceptual cre - atively generated action - schemata ( Carruthers 2007 , 2011 ) . Whenever an action - schema is activated , commands are sent to muscles necessary to control the action , and efferent copies are simultaneously used to generate a representation of the visual and proprioceptive perception . This , in turn , lies at the bottom of any type of imagery transformation . In this way , the non - conceptual mental rehearsal of an action - schema will give rise to an imagistic thought representing the action in question and thus to a conceptual verbal creative thought ( Carruthers 2007 , 2011 ) . Turning back to the mindfulness practitioners , using fMRI , it has been recently found that their eyes - closed resting - state mentation exhibits significantly less DMN acti - vation and more extrinsic ( visual ) activation compared to con - trols ( Berkovich - Ohana et al . 2016 ) . Such a trait activity pat - tern can support less conceptual reasoning , as a trait , and in - creased activity in networks related to action - schemata . This , in turn , might explain the higher divergent thinking scores in mindfulness practitioners , as well as the negative rest DMN activity and divergent thinking connection . At the same time , it was shown using fMRI for long - term mindfulness practi - tioners that during meditation the DMN - Executive network functional connectivity increases ( Brewer et al . 2011 ) . According to Mok ( 2014 ) , this B correspond to the capacity to achieve , on a moment to moment basis , optimal balance between control network activity and default network activity , and optimal coordination between these respective networks and other brain regions involved in content processing ^ ( p . 3 ) , and creative processing emerges from this optimal balance . Taken together , these explanations raise the question if the results are unique to the meditation practitioners ’ population in this study . Definitely , a replication in the regular population is highly warranted . Implications for the Disinhibitory Notion of Divergent Thinking Our results might be interpreted as arguing against the com - mon disinhibitory notion of creativity , so it seems warranted to discuss this issue in some detail . The disinhibitory notion of creativity emphasizes reduced inhibitory frontal activity as the underlying mechanism of divergent thinking ( Dietrich 2004 ) . This is based on Martindale ’ s ( 1977 ) low arousal theory of creativity , arguing that the production of original ideas more likely occurs in states of lower cortical arousal , i . e . , increased alpha activity during the creative tasks . This theory was based on the findings of Martindale and Mines ( 1975 ) , reporting that highly creative individuals displayed comparatively low cor - tical arousal while performing the Alternative Uses task , while medium and low creative subjects were strongly cortically Mindfulness aroused . Similarly , in Martindale and Hasenfus ( 1978 ) , highly creative individuals showed lower levels of cortical arousal than low creative participants during an inspirational phase ( i . e . , thinking of a story ) but not during an elaboration phase ( i . e . , writing down the story ) . The disinhibitory notion of creativity has clear predictions concerning the DMN activity during creative tasks . Indeed , it was suggested that the DMN could serve as a system which operates disinhibitory mental simulation processes , namely divergent thinking , whereas cognitive control networks , which rely on excitatory processes , would initiate selection processes and refine ideas , namely convergent thinking ( Jung et al . 2013 ; Mok 2014 ) . More specifically , divergent thinking — which relies on primary processes ( Martindale and Mines 1975 ) — is related to reduced dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( DLPFC ) executive control activity and concomitant increased DMN activity . Accumulating data supports the notion that increased DMN activity underlies divergent thinking . For example , in - creased mind wandering was shown to increase creative prob - lem solving ( Baird et al . 2012 ) . Others studied musicians using fMRI and have found that spontaneous improvisation was associated with widespread deactivation of the DLPFC along with simultaneous activation of the frontal DMN region , the medial prefrontal cortex ( Limb and Braun 2008 ; Liu et al . 2012 ) . Similarly , another study showed that a decrease in cor - tical excitability of the lateral frontal cortex , induced by trans - cranial magnetic stimulation , improved performance on a di - vergent creativity task ( Chrysikou et al . 2013 ) . Another recent study showed that exposure to high inhibition demands led to enhanced fluency in a divergent thinking task , but no such changes occurred in a convergent thinking task ( Radel et al . 2015 ) . These findings suggest that when resources for inhibi - tion were lacking , the frequency and the originality of ideas was facilitated . In addition , direct fMRI evidence shows di - verse DMN regions to activate during divergent thinking tasks , including the left lateral posterior parietal cortex — spe - cifically , the angular gyrus ( Bechtereva et al . 2004 ; Kleibeuker et al . 2013 ) and the posterior cingulate cortex ( Beaty et al . 2015 ) . Importantly , the disinhibitory notion of creativity predicts an increase in DMN activity during divergent thinking tasks , and the reviewed studies above indeed support such a state effect . But , is there a clear prediction concerning the relation - ship between DMN resting state and divergent thinking ? A hypothesis termed B spontaneous trait reactivation ^ sug - gests that the resting - state spontaneous activity reflects subtle individual differences in neuro - cognitive B traits , ^ or past ac - cumulating effects ( Harmelech and Malach 2013 ) . A number of studies appear to be compatible with this hypothesis ( e . g . , Harmelech et al . 2013 ) . According to the spontaneous trait reactivation hypothesis , if DMN activity increases during a divergent thinking task , then individuals with higher scores should exhibit also an increased resting - state DMN activity level . However , when reviewing the literature , the evidence is inconclusive . An early electrophysiological study ( Martindale 1977 ) re - ported no consistent relationship between creativity and resting - state EEG alpha power , an EEG measure which was shown by several studies to be positively related to DMN activity ( Chen et al . 2008 , 2013 ; Laufs et al . 2003 ; Mantini et al . 2007 ) . Yet , in a later study , resting - state EEG alpha power was only weakly positively correlated with divergent thinking scores , while coherence measures in all frequency bands — including alpha — negatively correlated with diver - gent thinking scores ( Jau š ovec and Jau š ovec 2000 ) . Two later fMRI resting - state functional connectivity studies revealed that higher creativity scores of divergent thinking were asso - ciated with increased rest functional connectivity within the DMN . In the first study , divergent thinking scores significant - ly and positively correlated with rFC between the medial pre - frontal cortex and the posterior cingulate cortex ( Takeuchi et al . 2012 ) , while Wei et al . ( 2014 ) found a positive correla - tion of rest functional connectivity between the left medial prefrontal cortex and the left middle temporal gyrus with di - vergent thinking scores . However , rest functional connectivity cannot be taken as a measure of the DMN activity per se , as it reflects correlation structures , i . e . , the co - activation of regions comprising fundamental networks that are activated or sup - pressed simultaneously ( Fox et al . 2006 ; Smith et al . 2009 ) . A direct measure for DMN activity was studied by Takeuchi et al . ( 2011 ) , reporting regional resting - state cerebral blood flow in the precuneus , a posterior DMN node , to significantly and negatively correlate with a divergent thinking task . Indirectly , assuming a widely accepted positive function - structure relationship ( Honey et al . 2009 ) , a few anatomical findings support a positive DMN - creativity relationship , by showing divergent thinking scores to positively correlate with gray matter volume within the DMN , including medial pre - frontal cortex and precuneus ( Kühn et al . 2014 ) and lesions in the medial prefrontal cortex to involve profound impairment in originality ( Shamay - Tsoory et al . 2011 ) . In contrast , other studies support a negative DMN - creativity relationship ( reviewed by Jung et al . 2013 ) . The first is a structural MRI study by Jung et al . ( 2010 ) , which utilized three different divergent thinking tasks to create a composite creativity index and showed it to correlate with decreased cortical thickness within several regions , including the left cuneus and inferior parietal , both of which are DMN regions . Another anatomical study showed a positive correlation be - tween originality scores and left posterior parietal lesion area ( Shamay - Tsoory et al . 2011 ) . Loss of function in the anterior temporal lobes as a result of frontotemporal dementia was found to lead in several cases to the B facilitation ^ of visual artistic skills ( Miller et al . 1998 ) . In a functional study , region - al resting - state cerebral blood flow in the precuneus was Mindfulness significantly and negatively correlated with a measure of di - vergent thinking ( Takeuchi et al . 2011 ) . Taken together , the above studies provide initial support that decrease in structural integrity and resting - state functional reductions , as well as lesions within the DMN , positively correlate with creativity measures . The evidence in the literature is thus inconclusive for the creativity — trait ( resting - state ) DMN activity connection , and more evidence is needed to conclude whether resting - state DMN activity follows the intuitive positive relationship with divergent thinking laid forth by the disinhibitory notion of creativity , or whether a counter - intuitive negative relationship may be the case . In this light , our results , which can be interpreted as arguing against the common disinhibitory no - tion of creativity , contribute new evidence to this open scien - tific question . Limitations The results reported here stem from a large group of mindful - ness meditation practitioners . This limits the generalization of the results to the wider population . Another limitation raised by one of the reviewers refers to the study design , where the AU results were acquired before the EEG resting - state ses - sion , thus might have affected the resting state . While not highly likely , this possibility is slightly plausible , and the de - sign should be reversed in further studies . Acknowledgments This paper is based on a thesis ( first author ) , super - vised by the second and fourth authors , submitted to Bar - Ilan University in partial fulfilment of the requirements toward a Ph . D . This work was supported by the Mind and Life Institute Francisco J . Varela Research Award 6546 to A . Berkovich - Ohana . References Andrews - Hanna , J . R . , Reidler , J . S . , Sepulcre , J . , Poulin , R . , & Buckner , R . L . ( 2010 ) . Functional - anatomic fractionation of the brain ’ s de - fault network . Neuron , 65 ( 4 ) , 550 – 562 . Baird , B . , Smallwood , J . , Mrazek , M . D . , Kam , J . W . , Franklin , M . S . , & Schooler , J . W . ( 2012 ) . Inspired by distraction mind wan - dering facilitates creative incubation . Psychological Science . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0956797612446024 . Beaty , R . E . , Benedek , M . , Wilkins , R . W . , Jauk , E . , Fink , A . , Silvia , P . J . , Hodges , D . A . , Koschutnig , K . , & Neubauer , A . C . ( 2014a ) . Creativity and the default network : a functional connectivity analy - sis of the creative brain at rest . Neuropsychologia , 64 , 92 – 98 . Beaty , R . E . , Silvia , P . J . , Nusbaum , E . C . , Jauk , E . , & Benedek , M . ( 2014b ) . The roles of associative and executive processes in creative cognition . Memory & Cognition , 42 ( 7 ) , 1186 – 1197 . Beaty , R . E . , Benedek , M . , Kaufman , S . B . , & Silvia , P . J . ( 2015 ) . Default and executive network coupling supports creative idea production . Scientific Reports , 5 ( 10964 ) , 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep10964 . Beaty , R . E . , Benedek , M . , Silvia , P . J . , & Schacter , D . L . ( 2016 ) . Creative cognition and brain network dynamics . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 20 ( 2 ) , 87 – 95 . Bechtereva , N . P . , Korotkov , A . D . , Pakhomov , S . , Roudas , M . S . , Starchenko , M . G . , & Medvedev , S . V . ( 2004 ) . PET study of brain maintenance of verbal creative activity . International Journal of Psychophysiology , 53 ( 1 ) , 11 – 20 . Ben - Soussan , T . D . , Glicksohn , J . , Goldstein , A . , Berkovich - Ohana , A . , & Donchin , O . ( 2013 ) . Into the square and out ofthe Box : the effects of Quadrato Motor Training on creativity and alpha coherence . PLoS One , 8 ( 1 ) , e55023 . Berkovich - Ohana , A . ( 2010 ) . Transforming meditative transcendence in - to trait : an electrophysiological approach . Ramat Gan : Bar Ilan . Berkovich - Ohana , A . , Glicksohn , J . , & Goldstein , A . ( 2012 ) . Mindfulness - induced changes in gamma band activity — implica - tions for the default mode network , self - reference and attention . Clinical Neurophysiology , 123 ( 4 ) , 700 – 710 . Berkovich - Ohana , A . , Glicksohn , J . , & Goldstein , A . ( 2013 ) . Studying the default mode and its mindfulness - induced changes using EEG functional connectivity . Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience , 5 , 1 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1093 / scan / nst153 . Berkovich - Ohana , A . , Harel , M . , Hahamy , A . , Arieli , A . , & Malach , R . ( 2016 ) . Alterations in task - induced activity and resting - state fluctu - ations in visual and DMN areas revealed in long - term meditators . NeuroImage , 135 , 125 – 134 . Bhattacharya , J . , & Petsche , H . ( 2005 ) . Drawing on mind ’ s canvas : dif - ferences in cortical integration patterns between artists and non ‐ art - ists . Human Brain Mapping , 26 ( 1 ) , 1 – 14 . Bressler , S . L . , & Menon , V . ( 2010 ) . Large - scale brain networks in cog - nition : emerging methods and principles . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 14 ( 6 ) , 277 – 290 . Brewer , J . A . , Worhunsky , P . D . , Gray , J . R . , Tang , Y . Y . , Weber , J . , & Kober , H . ( 2011 ) . Meditation experience is associated with differ - ences in default mode network activity and connectivity . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 108 ( 50 ) , 20254 – 20259 . Buckner , R . , Andrews - Hanna , J . , & Schacter , D . L . ( 2008 ) . The brain ’ s default network : anatomy , function , and relevance to disease . In A . Kingstone & B . Miller ( Eds . ) , The year in cognitive neuroscience 2008 . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences ( Vol . 1124 , pp . 1 – 38 ) . New York : New York Academy of Sciences . Cacioppo , J . T . , Tassinary , L . G . , & Fridlund , A . J . ( 1990 ) . The skeletomotor system . In L . Tassinary ( Ed . ) , Principles of psychophysiology ( pp . 325 – 384 ) . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press . Capurso , V . , Fabbro , F . , & Crescentini , C . ( 2013 ) . Mindful creativity : the influence of mindfulness meditation on creative thinking . Frontiers in Psychology , 4 , 1020 . Carruthers , P . ( 2007 ) . The creative - action theory of creativity . In P . Carruthers , S . Lawrence , & S . Stich ( Eds . ) , The innate mind : foun - dations and the future . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Carruthers , P . ( 2011 ) . Creative action in mind . Philosophical Psychology , 24 ( 4 ) , 437 – 461 . Chen , A . C . , Feng , W . , Zhao , H . , Yin , Y . , & Wang , P . ( 2008 ) . EEG default mode network in the human brain : spectral regional field powers . NeuroImage , 41 ( 2 ) , 561 – 574 . Chen , J . - L . , Ros , T . , & Gruzelier , J . H . ( 2013 ) . Dynamic changes of ICA - derived EEG functional connectivity in the resting state . Human Brain Mapping , 34 ( 4 ) , 852 – 868 . doi : 10 . 1002 / hbm . 21475 . Chiesa , A . , & Serretti , A . ( 2010 ) . A systematic review of neurobiological and clinical features of mindfulness meditations . Psychological Medicine , 40 ( 08 ) , 1239 – 1252 . Chrysikou , E . G . , Hamilton , R . H . , Coslett , H . B . , Datta , A . , Bikson , M . , & Thompson - Schill , S . L . ( 2013 ) . Noninvasive transcranial direct current stimulation over the left prefrontal cortex facilitates cogni - tive flexibility in tool use . Cognitive Neuroscience , 4 ( 2 ) , 81 – 89 . Colzato , L . S . , Ozturk , A . , & Hommel , B . ( 2012 ) . Meditate to create : the impact of focused - attention and open - monitoring training on con - vergent and divergent thinking . Frontiers in Psychology , 3 ( 5 ) , 1083 . Mindfulness Colzato , L . S . , Szapora , A . , Lippelt , D . , & Hommel , B . ( 2014 ) . Prior meditation practice modulates performance and strategy use in convergent - and divergent - thinking problems . Mindfulness , 1 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12671 - 014 - 0352 - 9 Cowger , E . L . , & Torrance , E . P . ( 1982 ) . Further examination of the quality of changes in creative functioning resulting from meditation ( Zazen ) training . Creative Child and Adult Quarterly , 7 ( 4 ) , 211 – 17 . Dietrich , A . ( 2004 ) . The cognitive neuroscience of creativity . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 11 ( 6 ) , 1011 – 1026 . Dietrich , A . , & Kanso , R . ( 2010 ) . A review of EEG , ERP , and neuroim - aging studies of creativity and insight . Psychological Bulletin , 136 ( 5 ) , 822 – 848 . Ding , X . , Tang , Y . - Y . , Tang , R . , & Posner , M . I . ( 2014 ) . Improving cre - ativity performance by short - term meditation . Behavioral and Brain Functions , 10 ( 1 ) , 9 . Domino , G . ( 1977 ) . Transcendental meditation and creativity : an empir - ical investigation . Journal of Applied Psychology , 62 ( 3 ) , 358 – 362 . Farb , N . A . S . , Segal , Z . V . , Mayberg , H . , Bean , J . , McKeon , D . , Fatima , Z . , & Anderson , A . K . ( 2007 ) . Attending to the present : mindfulness meditation reveals distinct neural modes of self - reference . Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience , 2 , 313 – 322 . Ferree , T . C . , Luu , P . , Russell , G . S . , & Tucker , D . M . ( 2001 ) . Scalp electrode impedance , infection risk , and EEG data quality . Clinical Neurophysiology , 112 ( 3 ) , 536 – 544 . Fingelkurts , A . A . , Fingelkurts , A . A . , Ermolaev , V . A . , & Kaplan , A . Y . ( 2006 ) . Stability , reliability and consistency of the compositions of brain oscillations . International Journal ofPsychophysiology , 59 ( 2 ) , 116 – 126 . Florian , G . , Andrew , C . , & Pfurtscheller , G . ( 1998 ) . Do changes in coherence always reflect changes in functional coupling ? Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology , 106 ( 1 ) , 87 – 91 . Fox , M . D . , Snyder , A . Z . , Vincent , J . L . , Corbetta , M . , Van Essen , D . C . , & Raichle , M . E . ( 2005 ) . The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic , anticorrelated functional networks . Proceedings ofthe National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 102 ( 27 ) , 9673 – 9678 . Fox , M . D . , Corbetta , M . , Snyder , A . Z . , Vincent , J . L . , & Raichle , M . E . ( 2006 ) . Spontaneous neuronal activity distinguishes human dorsal and ventral attention systems . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 103 , 10046 – 10051 . Fox , K . C . , Nijeboer , S . , Dixon , M . L . , Floman , J . L . , Ellamil , M . , Rumak , S . P . , Sedlmeier , P . , & Christoff , K . ( 2014 ) . Is meditation associated with altered brain structure ? A systematic review and meta - analysis of morphometric neuroimaging in meditation practitioners . Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews , 43 , 48 – 73 . Golland , Y . , Bentin , S . , Gelbard , H . , Benjamini , Y . , Heller , R . , Nir , Y . , Hasson , U . , & Malach , R . ( 2007 ) . Extrinsic and intrinsic systems in the posterior cortex of the human brain revealed during natural sen - sory stimulation . Cerebral Cortex , 17 ( 4 ) , 766 – 777 . Gonen - Yaacovi , G . , de Souza , L . C . , Levy , R . , Urbanski , M . , Josse , G . , & Volle , E . ( 2013 ) . Rostral and caudal prefrontal contribution to crea - tivity : a meta - analysis of functional imaging data . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 7 , 465 . Greenberg , J . , Reiner , K . , & Meiran , N . ( 2012 ) . B Mind the trap ^ : mind - fulness practice reduces cognitive rigidity . PLoS One , 7 ( 5 ) , e36206 . Guilford , J . P . ( 1968 ) . Creativity , intelligence , and their educational implications . San Diego : Robert Knapp . Harmelech , T . , & Malach , R . ( 2013 ) . Neurocognitive biases and the pat - terns of spontaneous correlations in the human cortex . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 17 ( 12 ) , 606 – 615 . Harmelech , T . , Preminger , S . , Wertman , E . , & Malach , R . ( 2013 ) . The day - after effect : long term , Hebbian - like restructuring of resting - state fMRI patterns induced by a single epoch of cortical activation . The Journal of Neuroscience , 33 ( 22 ) , 9488 – 9497 . Hasenkamp , W . , & Barsalou , L . W . ( 2012 ) . Effects of meditation experience on functional connectivity of distributed brain networks . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 6 , 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnhum . 2012 . 00038 . Honey , C . J . , Sporns , O . , Cammoun , L . , Gigandet , X . , Thiran , J . - P . , Meuli , R . , & Hagmann , P . ( 2009 ) . Predicting human resting - state functional connectivity from structural connectivity . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 106 ( 6 ) , 2035 – 2040 . Horan , R . ( 2009 ) . The neuropsychological connection between creativity and meditation . Creativity Research Journal , 21 ( 2 ) , 199 – 222 . Jau š ovec , N . , & Jau š ovec , K . ( 2000 ) . Differences in resting EEG related to ability . Brain Topography , 12 ( 3 ) , 229 – 240 . Jung , R . E . , Segall , J . M . , Jeremy Bockholt , H . , Flores , R . A . , Smith , S . M . , Chavez , R . S . , & Haier , R . J . ( 2010 ) . Neuroanatomy of creativ - ity . Human Brain Mapping , 31 ( 3 ) , 398 – 409 . Jung , R . E . , Mead , B . S . , Carrasco , J . , & Flores , R . A . ( 2013 ) . The structure of creative cognition in the human brain . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 7 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnhum . 2013 . 00330 . Kabat - Zinn , J . ( 2003 ) . Mindfulness - based interventions in context : past , present , and future . Clinical Psychology : Science & Practice , 10 ( 2 ) , 144 – 156 . Kleibeuker , S . W . , Koolschijn , P . C . , Jolles , D . D . , De Dreu , C . K . , & Crone , E . A . ( 2013 ) . The neural coding of creative idea generation across adolescence and early adulthood . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 7 ( 905 ) , 10 . 3389 . Kühn , S . , Ritter , S . M . , Müller , B . C . , Baaren , R . B . , Brass , M . , & Dijksterhuis , A . ( 2014 ) . The importance of the default mode net - work in creativity — a structural MRI study . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 48 ( 2 ) , 152 – 163 . Laufs , H . , Krakow , K . , Sterzer , P . , Eger , E . , Beyerle , A . , Salek - Haddadi , A . , & Kleinschmidt , A . ( 2003 ) . Electroencephalographic signatures of attentional and cognitive default modes in spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 100 ( 19 ) , 11053 – 11058 . Levy - Drori , S . , & Henik , A . ( 2006 ) . Concreteness and context availability in lexical decision tasks . The American Journal of Psychology , 45 – 65 . Limb , C . J . , & Braun , A . R . ( 2008 ) . Neural substrates of spontaneous musical performance : an FMRI study of jazz improvisation . PLoS One , 3 ( 2 ) , e1679 . Lippelt , D . P . , Hommel , B . , & Colzato , L . S . ( 2014 ) . Focused attention , open monitoring and loving kindness meditation : effects on atten - tion , conflict monitoring , and creativity — a review . Frontiers in Psychology , 5 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2014 . 01083 Liu , S . , Chow , H . M . , Xu , Y . , Erkkinen , M . G . , Swett , K . E . , Eagle , M . W . , Rizik - Baer , D . A . , & Braun , A . R . ( 2012 ) . Neural correlates of lyrical improvisation : an fMRI study of freestyle rap . Scientific Reports , 2 , 834 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep00834 . Lutz , A . , Slagter , H . A . , Dunne , J . D . , & Davidson , R . J . ( 2008 ) . Attention regulation and monitoring in meditation . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 12 ( 4 ) , 163 – 169 . Mantini , D . , Perrucci , M . G . , Del Gratta , C . , Romani , G . L . , & Corbetta , M . ( 2007 ) . Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 104 , 13170 – 13175 . Martindale , C . ( 1971 ) . Degeneration , disinhibition , and genius . Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences , 7 ( 2 ) , 177 – 182 . Martindale , C . ( 1977 ) . Creativity , consciousness , and cortical arousal . Journal of Altered States of Consciousness , 3 ( 1 ) , 69 – 87 . Martindale , C . , & Hasenfus , N . ( 1978 ) . EEG differences as a function of creativity , stage of the creative process , and effort to be original . Biological Psychology , 6 ( 3 ) , 157 – 167 . Martindale , C . , & Mines , D . ( 1975 ) . Creativity and cortical activation during creative , intellectual and EEG feedback tasks . Biological Psychology , 3 ( 2 ) , 91 – 100 . Martinez - Conde , S . , Macknik , S . L . , & Hubel , D . H . ( 2004 ) . The role of fixational eye movements in visual perception . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 5 ( 3 ) , 229 – 240 . Mindfulness Menon , V . , & Uddin , L . Q . ( 2010 ) . Saliency , switching , attention and control : a network model of insula function . Brain Structure and Function , 214 ( 5 – 6 ) , 655 – 667 . Miller , B . L . , Cummings , J . , Mishkin , F . , Boone , K . , Prince , F . , Ponton , M . , & Cotman , C . ( 1998 ) . Emergence of artistic talent in frontotemporal dementia . Neurology , 51 ( 4 ) , 978 – 982 . Mok , L . W . ( 2014 ) . The interplay between spontaneous and controlled processing in creative cognition . Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 28 , 1 – 5 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnhum . 2014 . 00663 . Mormann , F . , Lehnertz , K . , David , P . , & Elger , C . ( 2000 ) . Mean phase coherence as a measure forphase synchronization andits application to the EEG of epilepsy patients . Physica D : Nonlinear Phenomena , 144 , 358 – 369 . O ’ Haire , T . D . , & Marcia , J . E . ( 1980 ) . Some personality characteristics associated with Ananda Marga meditators . Perceptual and Motor Skills , 5 ( 1 ) , 447 – 452 . Orme - Johnson , D . W . , & Granieri , B . ( 1977 ) . The effects of the age of enlightenment Governor Training Courses on field independence , creativity , intelligence and behavioral flexibility . Scientific Research on the Transcendental Meditation Program Collected Papers , 1 , 103 , 713 – 8 . Orme - Johnson , D . W . , Clements , G . , Haynes , C . T . , & Badaoui , K . ( 1977 ) . Higher states of consciousness : EEG coherence , creativity , and experiences of the sidhis . Scientific Research on Maharishi ’ s Transcendental Meditation and TM - Sidhi Program , Collected Papers , 1 , 705 – 712 . Pereda , E . , Quiroga , R . Q . , & Bhattacharya , J . ( 2005 ) . Nonlinear multi - variate analysis of neurophysiological signals . Progress in Neurobiology , 77 ( 1 – 2 ) , 1 – 37 . Perrin , F . , Pernier , J . , Bertrand , O . , & Echallier , J . F . ( 1989 ) . Spherical splines forscalppotentialandcurrentdensitymapping . Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology , 72 ( 2 ) , 184 – 187 . Petsche , H . ( 1996 ) . Approaches to verbal , visual and musical creativity by EEG coherence analysis . International Journal of Psychophysiology , 24 ( 1 ) , 145 – 159 . Radel , R . , Davranche , K . , Fournier , M . , & Dietrich , A . ( 2015 ) . The role of ( dis ) inhibition in creativity : decreased inhibition improvesidea gen - eration . Cognition , 134 , 110 – 120 . Raichle , M . E . , MacLeod , A . M . , Snyder , A . Z . , Powers , W . J . , Gusnard , D . A . , & Shulman , G . L . ( 2001 ) . A default mode of brain function . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 98 ( 2 ) , 676 – 682 . Russ , S . W . ( 1998 ) . Play , creativity , and adaptive functioning : implica - tions for play interventions . Journal of Clinical Child Psychology , 27 ( 4 ) , 469 – 480 . Seeley , W . W . , Menon , V . , Schatzberg , A . F . , Keller , J . , Glover , G . H . , Kenna , H . , Reiss , A . L . , & Greicius , M . D . ( 2007 ) . Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and execu - tive control . The Journal of Neuroscience , 27 ( 9 ) , 2349 – 2356 . Shamay - Tsoory , S . G . , Adler , N . , Aharon - Peretz , J . , Perry , D . , & Mayseless , N . ( 2011 ) . The origins of originality : the neural bases of creative thinking and originality . Neuropsychologia , 49 ( 2 ) , 178 – 185 . Smallwood , J . , Brown , K . , Baird , B . , & Schooler , J . W . ( 2012 ) . Cooperation between the default mode network and the frontal - parietal network in the production of an internal train of thought . Brain Research , 1428 , 60 – 70 . Smith , S . M . , Fox , P . T . , Miller , K . L . , Glahn , D . C . , Fox , P . M . , Mackay , C . E . , & Laird , A . R . ( 2009 ) . Correspondence of the brain ’ s func - tional architecture during activation and rest . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 106 ( 31 ) , 13040 – 13045 . Snyder , A . , Mitchell , J . , Bossomaier , T . , & Pallier , G . ( 2004 ) . The crea - tivity quotient : an objective scoring of ideational fluency . Creativity Research Journal , 16 ( 4 ) , 415 – 420 . Spreng , R . N . , Stevens , W . D . , Chamberlain , J . P . , Gilmore , A . W . , & Schacter , D . L . ( 2010 ) . Default network activity , coupled with the frontoparietal control network , supports goal - directed cognition . NeuroImage , 53 ( 1 ) , 303 – 317 . Sternberg , R . J . , & Lubart , T . I . ( 1993 ) . Investing in creativity . Psychological Inquiry , 4 ( 3 ) , 229 – 232 . Takeuchi , H . , Taki , Y . , Hashizume , H . , Sassa , Y . , Nagase , T . , Nouchi , R . , & Kawashima , R . ( 2011 ) . Cerebral blood flow during rest associates with general intelligence and creativity . PLoS One , 6 ( 9 ) , e25532 . Takeuchi , H . , Taki , Y . , Hashizume , H . , Sassa , Y . , Nagase , T . , Nouchi , R . , & Kawashima , R . ( 2012 ) . The association between resting function - al connectivity and creativity . Cerebral Cortex , 22 ( 12 ) , 2921 – 2929 . Tang , Y . - Y . , Hölzel , B . K . , & Posner , M . I . ( 2015 ) . The neuroscience of mindfulnessmeditation . NatureReviewsNeuroscience , 16 ( 4 ) , 213 – 225 . Tomasino , B . , Fregona , S . , Skrap , M . , & Fabbro , F . ( 2012 ) . Meditation - related activations are modulated by the practices needed to obtain it andbytheexpertise : anALEmeta - analysisstudy . FrontiersinHuman Neuroscience , 6 ( 346 ) , 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnhum . 2012 . 00346 . Varela , F . J . , & Thompson , E . ( 2003 ) . Neural synchrony and the unity of mind : a neurophenomenological perspective . In In A . Cleeremans ( Ed . ) , The unity of consciousness ; Binding , integration , and dissociation ( pp . 266 – 287 ) . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Vincent , J . L . , Kahn , I . , Snyder , A . Z . , Raichle , M . E . , & Buckner , R . L . ( 2008 ) . Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity . Journal of Neurophysiology , 100 ( 6 ) , 3328 – 3342 . Wei , D . , Yang , J . , Li , W . , Wang , K . , Zhang , Q . , & Qiu , J . ( 2014 ) . Increased resting functional connectivity of the medial prefrontal cortex in crea - tivity by means of cognitive stimulation . Cortex , 51 , 92 – 102 . Whitham , E . M . , Pope , K . J . , Fitzgibbon , S . P . , Lewis , T . , Clark , C . R . , Loveless , S . , Broberg , M . , Wallace , A . , DeLosAngeles , D . , & Lillie , P . ( 2007 ) . Scalp electrical recording during paralysis : quantitative evidence that EEG frequencies above 20 Hz are contaminated by EMG . Clinical Neurophysiology , 118 ( 8 ) , 1877 – 1888 . Yuval - Greenberg , S . , & Deouell , L . Y . ( 2009 ) . The broadband - transient induced gamma - band response in scalp EEG reflects the execution of saccades . Brain Topography , 22 ( 1 ) , 3 – 6 . Zabelina , D . L . , Robinson , M . D . , Ostafin , B . D . , & Council , J . R . ( 2011 ) . Manipulating mindfulness benefits creative elaboration at high levels of neuroticism . Empirical Studies of the Arts , 29 ( 2 ) , 243 – 255 . Mindfulness