Received : 6March2024 Accepted : 11March2024 DOI : 10 . 1111 / srt . 13667 O R I G I N A L A R T I C L E High - resolution 3 - D scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) images of DOT TM polynucleotides ( PN ) : Unique scaffold characteristics and potential applications in biomedicine Michael James Kim 1 Hyun - Jun Park 2 Rae - Jun Jung 3 Chee - Youb Won 3 Seul - Ong Ohk 3 Hong - Taek Kim 3 Nark - Kyung Roh 4 Kyu - Ho Yi 5 , 6 1 AeonMedicalandAestheticCentre , Singapore , Singapore 2 MaylinClinic ( Chungdam ) , Seoul , SouthKorea 3 PharmaresearchCo . , Ltd . IntegratedR & D Center , Sungnam , SouthKorea 4 LeadersAestheticLaserandCosmetic SurgeryCenter , Seoul , SouthKorea 5 MaylinClinic ( Apgujeong ) , Seoul , SouthKorea 6 DivisioninAnatomyandDevelopmental Biology , DepartmentofOralBiology , Human IdentificationResearchInstitute , BK21FOUR Project , YonseiUniversityCollegeofDentistry , Seoul , SouthKorea Correspondence Kyu - HoYi , DivisioninAnatomy & DevelopmentalBiology , DepartmentofOral Biology , YonseiUniversityCollegeofDentistry , 50 – 1Yonsei - ro , Seodaemun - gu , Seoul03722 , SouthKorea . Email : kyuho90 @ daum . net Abstract Introduction : Polynucleotides ( PN ) are becoming more prominent in aesthetic medicine . However , the structural characteristics of PN have not been published and PN from different companies may have different structural characteristics . This study aimed to elucidate the structural attributes of DOT ™ PN and distinguish differ - ences with polydeoxyribonucleotides ( PDRN ) using high - resolution scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) imaging . Materials and methods : DOT ™ PN was examined using a Quanta 3 - D field emission gun ( FEG ) Scanning Electron Microscope ( SEM ) . Sample preparation involved cryo - geniccooling , cleavage , etching , andmetalcoatingtofacilitatehigh - resolutionimaging . Cryo - FIB / SEM techniques were employed for in - depth structural analysis . Results : PDRN exhibited an amorphous structure without distinct features . In con - trast , DOT ™ PN displayed well - defined polyhedral shapes with smooth , uniformly thick walls . These cells were empty , with diameters ranging from 3 to 8 micrometers , forming a seamless tessellation pattern . Discussion : DOT ™ PN’s distinct geometric tessellation design conforms to the prin - ciples of biotensegrity , providing both structural reinforcement and integrity . The presence of delicate partitions and vacant compartments hints at possible uses in the field of pharmaceutical delivery systems . Within the realms of beauty enhance - ment and regenerative medicine , DOT ™ PN’s capacity to bolster cell growth and tissue mendingcouldpotentiallytransformapproachestorejuvenationtreatments . Itsadapt - ability becomes apparent when considering its contributions to drug administration and surgical procedures . Conclusion : This study unveils the intricate structural scaffold features of DOT ™ PN for the first time , setting it apart from PDRN and inspiring innovation in biomedicine and materials science . DOT ™ PN’s unique attributes open doors to potential applica - tions across healthcare and beyond . ThisisanopenaccessarticleunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttributionLicense , whichpermitsuse , distributionandreproductioninanymedium , provided theoriginalworkisproperlycited . ©2024TheAuthors . SkinResearchandTechnology publishedbyJohnWiley & SonsLtd . SkinResTechnol . 2024 ; 30 : e13667 . wileyonlinelibrary . com / journal / srt 1of8 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / srt . 13667 2of8 KIM ET AL . KEYWORDS polydeoxyribonucleotide , Polynucleotide , scaffold , scanning electron microscopy 1 INTRODUCTION The field of aesthetic medicine has witnessed a significant increase in the utilization of biostimulatory materials , including Polylactic Acid ( PLLA ) , Calcium Hydroxylapatite ( CaHA ) , Polydioxanone ( PDO ) , Hyaluronic Acid ( HA ) , Polydeoxyribonucleotide ( PDRN ) , and Polynu - cleotide ( PN ) . 1 These materials come in various forms , ranging from absorbable threads that can be strategically inserted into the skin to powder forms that are reconstituted and injected as a liquid or gel directly into target areas . Absorbable threads , owing to their physical properties , can exert tensile forces on tissues , imparting a lifting effect and enhancing structural strength until they gradually dissolve . 2 Syn - thetic biostimulators such as PLLA and CaHA have a long history of useinaestheticmedicine , supportedbysubstantialpublishedevidence demonstratingtheirabilitytostimulatecollagenandelastinproduction within the skin . Despite this progress , the exact mechanisms behind their action remain elusive , with documented evidence suggesting an involvement of inflammatory processes . 3 , 4 However , it’s important to acknowledge certain drawbacks associ - ated with these biostimulators . Firstly , many of them are not naturally occurring molecules in the human body and are instead syntheti - cally manufactured . Additionally , the use of threads , while effective , introduces a higher level of invasiveness , potentially leading to compli - cations such as infection , dimpling , scarring , or protrusion . Injectable biostimulators , on the other hand , carry the risk of severe complica - tions like tissue necrosis and even blindness in cases of inadvertent intravascular injection . Delayed Inflammatory Reactions ( DIR ) , hyper - sensitivityreactions , andgranulomasarealsodocumentedrisks . Unlike hyaluronic acid ( HA ) , most injectable biostimulators are not reversible , making their use a careful decision . 5 Even though HA injections can be reversible with hyaluronidase , this still does not exclude its use from developing side effects . Furthermore , while inflammation is increas - ingly recognized as a significant contributor to the aging process and delayed complications , the precise mechanisms through which inflammation adversely affects aging in the broader context of the aging process remain a largely uncharted territory , warranting further investigation . 6 Polynucleotide ( PN ) , a compound gaining increasing attention in the field of aesthetic medicine , deserves an introduction to its unique characteristics . One remarkable advantage of PN is its exemplary safety profile , with no reported cases of necrosis or blindness result - ing from intravascular compromise to date . 5 Despite this promising safety record , PN’s mode of action had long been assumed to mirror that of polydeoxyribonucleotides ( PDRN ) , even though no published evidence supported this assumption . Both PN and PDRN were con - sidered A 2 A receptor agonists , believed to stimulate angiogenesis and growth factors , among other functions . 2 , 7 However , empirical observations in clinical practice began to reveal distinctdifferencesinoutcomes , withmorepronouncedimprovements observed when PN was used for aesthetic and cosmetic indications . 7 This prompted a critical question : What sets PN apart from PDRN beyond differences in size and molecular weight ? If their modes of action are ostensibly the same , why opt for PN , which can be more painful and less cost - efficient for patients ? Notably , multiple companies worldwide manufacture PN , but spe - cific details about their PN formulations remain largely undisclosed to the public . In the case of DOT ™ PN ( Rejuran ® , PharmaResearch Ltd , Republic of Korea ) , its uniqueness lies in the proprietary tech - nology , DOT ™ , employed during its production process . The base DOT ™ PN molecules are extracted from testes cells of wild chum salmon ( Oncorhynchus keta ) , harvested during their return to the river for spawning . Intriguingly , a decade ago , internal scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) imageryofDOT ™ PNrevealedanirregularscaffold - like structure with few discernible patterns or significant features . However , this enigmatic visual offered the potential to unlock the key differences between PN and PDRN , shedding light on how PN could play a distinct role in the treatment of various aesthetic / cosmetic indi - cations . Consequently , to unveil the physical structure of DOT ™ PN and differentiate it from PDRN , SEM imagery of both DOT ™ PDRN andDOT ™ PNwasundertaken , pavingthewayforfurtherinsightsinto their divergent actions and clinical applications . 2 METHODS AND MATERIALS In this study , an investigation into the structural characteristics of Polynucleotides ( PN ) ( Rejuran ® ) , specifically focusing on samples obtained from PharmaResearch Ltd . ( Republic of Korea ) was con - ducted . To facilitate this examination , a Quanta 3 - D field emission gun ( FEG ) scanning electron microscope ( SEM ) , manufactured by the Field Electron and Ion ( FEI ) Company ( USA ) , was employed . The sam - ple preparation process was conducted ensuring the integrity of the specimen for imaging . This process involved several crucial steps : Firstly , a precisely measured aliquot of 100 µL of the PN spec - imen was immobilized onto the SEM / FIB holder . To enable high - resolution imaging , cryogenic cooling techniques were employed . Liquid nitrogen was introduced for a brief duration , rapidly low - ering the temperature to well below its boiling point ( − 196 ◦ C ) . Subsequently , the specimen was swiftly immersed in this ultra - cold environment . The prepared specimen was then transferred to a spe - cialized preparation chamber meticulously maintained under vacuum conditions . At a controlled temperature of − 145 ◦ C , a delicate cleavage of the specimen was executed using a knife . Following cleavage , the KIM ET AL . 3of8 temperaturewasmaintainedatapproximately − 95 ◦ Cforadurationof 5 – 10 min to facilitate etching . To enhance imaging capabilities , the specimen’s surface was coated with a thin layer of Au / Pd metal . This metal coating process was carried out using a located target within the preparation cham - ber . The prepared specimen was then seamlessly transferred to the SEM / FIB chamber , which featured a cryo stage designed for cryogenic imaging . Subsequently , in - depth image analysis was conducted to elucidate thestructuralcharacteristicsofthePNspecimen . Cryo - FIB / SEMimag - ing experiments were conducted using the Quanta 3D FEG system , coupledwithanAlto2500cryo - transfersystemsuppliedbyGatan , Inc . ( United Kingdom ) . The imaging process entailed several critical steps : Cu - deposited polymer substrates were securely attached to a copper stub using carbon tape . Sessile droplets were sprayed onto the prepared sub - strates , whichwerethenrapidlysubmergedintoaliquidnitrogenslush within 0 . 5 s . Approximately 1 s later , the freezing chamber was effi - ciently evacuated to maintain the desired cryogenic conditions . The prepared samples were then swiftly transferred into a specialized preparation chamber , pre - and maintained within a temperature range of approximately − 120 ◦ C to − 140 ◦ C . Metal deposition on the samples was achieved through plasma sputtering , employing a 3 - mA current for a duration of 60 s . The metal - coated samples were seamlessly transferred into a dedicated microscope chamber , also pre - evacuated to a pressure of 10 − 5 mbar and precooled to a temperature within the range of − 120 ◦ C to 140 ◦ C . Cryo - SEM images were acquired using a 5 - keV electron beam of energy and an electron current of 11 . 8 pA . Focused Ion Beam ( FIB ) milling was conducted using a 30 - keV gallium ion beam and an ion cur - rent of 1 nA . For EDS spectra collection , the electron beam energy was increased to 15 keV . 3 RESULTS In Figure 1 , DOT ™ PDRN is depicted , revealing a structure that lacks distinct architectural features , appearing amorphous and unde - fined . Figures 2 – 4 offer a comprehensive view of DOT ™ PN’s unique characteristics . Notably , DOT ™ PN exhibits a well - defined structural well - defined wall pattern , forming polyhedral shapes reminiscent of cellularstructures . These polyhedral cellspresent smooth and uniform thickness walls , measuring less than 0 . 1 micrometers in thickness . The cellsappearempty , devoidofanyidentifiablecontents . Moreover , their sizes vary , with an average diameter ranging from approximately 3 to 8 micrometers , as evident in Figure 4 . The multi - directional alignment of these cell walls in cross - sections is attributed to the gel - like nature of the sample , which lends itself to fluidity . During the freezing pro - cess , the cells assume diverse alignments . Many of the spaces within DOT ™ PN take on hexagonal or pentagonal configurations , although some variations exist . A remarkable feature is the seamless tessella - tion , with no discernible empty spaces between the cells . Despite the presentationoftheseobservationsincross - sections , acloserexamina - FIGURE 1 DOT PDRN ( × 25 , 000 magnification ) [ Quanta 3D FEG ( Field Electron and Ion Company , USA ) ] . FIGURE 2 DOT Polynucleotide ( × 2500 magnification ) [ Quanta 3D FEG ( Field Electron and Ion Company , USA ) ] . tion of cells in the upper and lower regions of Figure 2 reveals that the walls enclose three - dimensional spaces within the structure . 4 DISCUSSION PN have become more popular in aesthetic / cosmetic applications around the world . It is highly biocompatible and an ingredient that is derived from chum salmon or trout gonads therefore differentiat - ingitselffromotherbiostimulatorswhicharesyntheticpolymer - based 4of8 KIM ET AL . FIGURE 3 DOT Polynucleotide ( × 5000 magnification ) [ Quanta 3D FEG ( Field Electron and Ion Company , USA ) ] . FIGURE 4 DOT Polynucleotide ( × 10000 magnification ) [ Quanta 3D FEG ( Field Electron and Ion Company , USA ) ] . products . DOT ™ PN differ from DOT ™ PDRN in that : ( 1 ) PN are extracted from testes whereas PDRN are extracted from sperm cells , ( 2 ) PN have longer nucleotide chains ( 3 ) PN have a higher molecular weight and as seen in this study ( 4 ) PN has a scaffold structure absent in PDRN . However , in terms of research and published articles , the number of PN - related papers is much lower than those on the topic of PDRN . PDRNhasbeenstudiedandpublishedextensively . From2016to2020 , there were approximately 609 published articles related to PDRN and 70 were reviewed by Kim et al . 8 A Pubmed search done independently foundapproximately57morePDRNrelatedpapersfrom2021to2023 September . As early as 1989 , Bruroni et al . used PDRN in cervical ectropion patients 9 and in 1990 , Perino et al . used PDRN for post - cauterization re - epithelialization . 10 Muratore et al . 11 in 1997 used human placental PDRN on human knee skin fibroblasts in primary culture and in 1999 , Thellung et al . published an important article on the involvement of A2A receptors in the mechanism of action for PDRN . 12 There have been additional publications on PDRN and its involvement in skin graft donorsitehealing , 13 , 14 promotionofcornealfibroblastsinculture , 15 , 16 human osteoblast proliferation , 17 , 18 and even angiogenesis . 19 , 20 One unique finding is that PDRN promoted cyclobutene pyrimidine dimer ( CPD ) repair in UVB - exposed dermal fibroblasts . 21 Recent dis - coveries showed PDRN and its properties in anti - melanogenesis , 22 , 23 anti - allodynic , 24 mitochondrialbiogenesis , 22 andevenfatbrowningfor potential anti - obesity applications . 25 On the other hand , PN are longer chains of nucleotides which have a much less robust number of research articles . Park KY et al . in 2016 showed that DOT ™ PN improved pore size , skin thickness , skin tone , melanin , wrinkles and sagging in five patients . 26 Kim JH et al . in 2018 showed the beneficial effect of DOT ™ PN forimprovementofpost - thyroidectomyscarsinarandomized , double - blinded , controlled trial of 44 patients . Those treated with PN had significantly improved Vancouver Scar Scale ( VSS ) , 3 - D analysis of height , patient satisfaction and erythema index . 27 Lee YJ et al . in 2022 performed a randomized , double - blind split face trial with DOT ™ PN and non - cross - linked hyaluronic acid filler injection in 27 subjects . The improvement rates of pore volume and roughness were higher in the PN group but the improvement was not significant for global aesthetic improvement scale , visual analog scale or dermal density . 28 In more recent developments , Kim MJ et al . published two cases where DOT ™ PN was successfully used to volumize areas in the face traditionally only treated with other dermal fillers . 5 Lee at al . surveyed 557 Korean physicians and found that a considerable majority of doc - tors used PN for a variety of facial erythema with more than 80 % finding it “effective” or “highly effective . ” 29 Important to note that in all of the above studies , ( 1 ) there were no serious adverse events reported ( safety ) and ( 2 ) there is no objective data on the mechanism of action . It is hypothesized that due to the similarity of PN and PDRN molecular structure , that PN will have its mechanismofactionsimilartoPDRN . However , uptodate , thishasnot been scientifically demonstrated . Also , as far as the authors are aware , there are no peer - reviewed publications presenting the physical images of PN . This can be signifi - cant because one of the main differences between PDRN and PN has been known to be the presence of a “scaffold - like” structure in PN since the inception of DOT ™ PN about 9 years ago . If this is a main differing factor between the two molecules , then that “scaffold” struc - ture might have the key to unlocking the Polynucleotide mechanism of action which has yet to be elucidated . The results uncovered in this study provide deeper insights into the structural intricacies of DOT ™ PN and how it sets itself apart KIM ET AL . 5of8 from DOT ™ PDRN . These revelations carry substantial implications ( in addition to above mentioned mechanism of action ) across mul - tiple domains , spanning from aesthetic applications ( rejuvenation ) , musculoskeletalregeneration , woundhealing , angiogenesis , anti - aging , bioengineering , stem cell differentiation , delivery mechanisms , and even in the realm of biotensegrity . 9 – 11 Asthemechanism ( s ) ofPNhavenotyetbeenelucidatedyet , starting out with PN morphology can be one of the starting points of investiga - tion . The data which is available from the SEM imagery in this study is limited and only some basic observations are possible . However , through these observations , the authors hope that further research and investigations will follow soon . 1 Shape Examinationofimagesrevealthatalmostallofthe“cells”or“shapes” of DOT ™ PN are 5 - sided pentagons with the majority being 6 - sided hexagons . The size and shape of all the cells are slightly different and this can be due to the gel - like consistency of the product . This is in starkcontrasttoother biostimulatorpolymerswhichhave sphericalor irregularly shaped particles . Hexagons are seen in nature in various places . As bubbles reduce their surface tension and minimize surface area , they form hexago - nal arrays . The spatial arrangement of atoms in diamonds , graphite and snowflakes are also hexagonal . This happens in nature due to the balancing of force vectors to achieve the most energetically efficient configurations . 30 In living tissues , hexagons in groups of cells can be seen as a balance between tensional forces on the internal of cells and those from the surroundings of the cells . 31 , 32 The hexagonal arrangement can also be seen in the arrangement of actin and myosin fibers in muscle in the urothelial surface , the microstructure of the avian lung , eyes of insects and of course the honeycomb of the bee . 30 The significance of polymer shape of implants was studied in 1976 by Matlaga et al . and there have been other authors discussing the effect of geometric shape on scaffold structures . 33 - 35 Hayashi et al . mentions that a scaffold with hexagonal cells is supe - rior in both porosity and mechanical strength . Also , in terms of cell responses , hexagonal channels are superior to triangular and square shaped channels . Although the study was done in relation to bone regeneration , they concluded that the shape of the scaffold yields greater effect than the surface area of each scaffold . Thus , the shape difference at the single scaffold level ( microscopic ) affects the whole system ( macroscopic ) . 33 2 Size The length of the walls of the cells ranges from approxi - mately 1 – 7 µm but the majority seem to be in the 4 – 6 µm range . The diameter of the cells also is approximately 3 – 5 µm . Evans et al . described the approximate diameter of fibroblasts to be 28 µm . 36 The DOT ™ PN scaffold structure is multiple times smaller than the size of an average fibroblasts which can allow more binding of the fibroblasts to the scaffold walls . According to the “receptor saturation” model proposed in 1987 by Dembo and Bell , 37 the number and density of receptor adhesive sites between the cell ( integrin binding sites ) and substrate ( ligand binding sites ) willaffectthefibroblastactivity . WhetherthesizeoftheDOTPN scaffoldistoosmall , toolargeorwithintheoptimalrangeforfibroblast binding is still to be determined . Varani et al . showed that in older skin , extracellular matrix ( ECM ) collagen is more fragmented and shorter leading to less attachment pointsforfibroblastsleadingtoshrinkingofthecells , lossofmechanical stimulation and eventually less production of collagen . 38 , 39 Injection of DOT ™ PN can possibly enhance the matrix scaffold in the ECM allowing fibroblasts to attach and regain functionality . Fisher et al . demonstrated that small , rounded fibroblasts placed in constrained matrixes displayed spread morphology and restored their mechanical properties . 40 3 Alignment / Tessellation One characteristic of DOT ™ PN in the SEM images is that the cells are intricately connected and arranged in a repeated pattern with - out gaps , that is , in tessellation . From a 2 - D perspective , there are only three regular polygons which can achieve tessellation : triangles , squares or hexagons . Among these three , the hexagon has the most efficient perimeter to area ratio . Of course , in the case of DOT ™ PN , thewallsofthecellsarenotequallengthbutstilltessellatethesurface . However , the product and its effect in vivo must be assessed from a 3 - D perspective . The Wearie - Phelan structure is a model to solve the problem of filling space with no gaps with cells of equal volume and minimumsurfacearea . Inotherwords , themostefficientformoftessel - lation of space . The walls of this structure are composed of pentagons and hexagons . 41 Further investigation is needed , but the pentagonal and hexagonal cell shapes of DOT ™ PN as seen in the SEM images of this study closely resemble the theoretical pentagonal and hexagonal shapes of the Wearie - Phelan structure walls . 41 More in - depth analy - sis of the 3 - D structure of DOT ™ PN can lead to understanding more about its mechanical properties and role in vivo , especially the ECM . The observations of DOT ™ PN’s polyhedral tessellation structure , as vividly depicted in the electron microscopy images , hint at a level of organizationandinterconnectednessthatevokestheelegantarchitec - ture found in living organisms . The uniform thickness of its walls and the presence of empty cells within the structure bear resemblance to the intricate cellular organization observed in nature . Apart from the documented applications regarding tissue regener - ation , this DOT ™ PN scaffold / lattice structure can be applied to stem cell research , bioengineering and as a delivery vehicle . 1 Bioengineering Douglas et al . in 2009 demonstrated that DNA can be used to build nano - structures with precise control . 42 6of8 KIM ET AL . In2023 , Michelsonetal . publishedresearchonhowDNAmolecules can be used as a nano - lattice due to its superior strength to weight ratios . When combined with other materials like silica , they can pro - duce a lightweight and high - strength framework . Since DNA assembly canproducediverselatticetypes , thisapproachcanleadtomoreexten - sive material developments with varying mechanical responses . 43 Gasperini et al . also showed that DNA crystal films formed through self - assembly can be possibly used to deter UV radiation and promote wound healing when applied on the skin . 44 2 Stem cell differentiation Keeping in mind that DOT ™ PN can modulate the elasticity of the ECM through its scaffold structure , it can be considered for future use instemcellresearchandapplicationsinthefuture , whetheritmaybein vivo or in vitro . Engler et al . suggest that “precommitting” stem cells to a specific lineage via appropriate in vitro matrix conditions can in part overcome an “inappropriate” in vivo microenvironment , emphasizing the importance of matrix / scaffold in determining the stem cell lineage specification . 45 In 2013 , Watt et al . explored how the stiffness of a substrate can affect how cells respond and differentiate to these differing ECM cues . 46 It has also been demonstrated by Teo et al . that the alignment and size of nanogratings affected the differentiation of stem cells toward certainlineageswithoutandybiomechanicalfactors . Therefore , differ - ent ECM compositions can direct stem cell differentiation . They found that cells are able to sense differences between micro and nanome - ter size gratings in addition to being more elongated on patterned nanogratings compared to “unpatterned” gratings . 17 3 Delivery Vehicle Delving deeper into DOT ™ PN’s characteristics , its thin walls and polyhedral shapes open intriguing avenues for innovative delivery mechanisms . Thepresenceofemptycellswithinthestructurepresents the prospect of these cells acting as reservoirs for encapsulated sub - stances . This , in turn , paves the way for controlled and sustained release , a critical factor in the development of advanced drug delivery systems . Theapplicationsarediverse , spanningbothoralandinjectable drugdelivery , whereprecisecontroloverdosageandreleasekineticsis paramount . Combining bioactive molecules with other scaffolds for bone tis - sue repair and bone regeneration have already been published with promising results . 4 , 17 , 47 Basic requirements for scaffolds have been discussed and have various viewpoints on what constitutes an “ideal” scaffold . Depend - ing on the application , the criteria of course will vary . Lu et al . in 2012 listed the requirements for a skin scaffold to : ( 1 ) have low antigenicity ( 2 ) be able to promote efficient and fast cell adhesion and proliferation ( 3 ) have high mechanical strength and ( 4 ) to have open and interconnected porous architecture to allow cell penetra - tion resulting in a uniform , homogenous cell distribution and tissue formation . 4 Although discussed in the context of bone scaffolds , Li et al . explained that scaffolds are made to mimic the nanofobrous collagen ECMandthusprovidea3Denvironmentforcellsandtissuetogrowon . Theyneedtoallowcellingrowthbybeinghighlyporousandatthesame time provide efficient transport of growth factors , oxygen , nutrients , and waste products . For larger scaffolds , it must also allow adequate vascularization to avoid necrosis at the core . 48 , 49 In 2023 , Krishani et al . additionally stated that a scaffold should have a biodegradation rate proportional to the rate of new tissue for - mation and exit the body without interfering with other tissues and organs . Theyalsomentionedthatthescaffoldshouldbehighlybiocom - patiblewithnegligiblechronicimmuneresponses , lastingnomorethan 2 weeks . 50 - 52 Also , the scaffold should possess similar mechanical properties as the tissue it is being implanted into . Tensile testing and compressive testing are the conventional methods that need to be done to further evaluate the compatibility of a scaffold for its intended purpose . 52 From this perspective , materials used in regenerative medicine for cosmetic purposes can have different characteristics and applications depending on the scaffold properties . Lastly , DOT ™ PNs tessellated and interlocking structural pattern can be applied to the principles of biotensegrity . Biotensegrity is a concept rooted in the tensional integrity of biological systems , underscores the significance of continuous tension and compression elements in maintaining structural stability . It also is a concept and theory connecting biology and physics that centers on how physical forces ( i . e . , from a scaffold ) regulate cellular biochemical responses in a process known as mechanotransduction . 53 Although R . Buckminster Fuller was known to have coined the term“tensegrity , ” 53 ProfessorDonaldIngberhasfurtherexpandedthe concept into biology , that is , Biotensegrity . 53 - 59 5 CONCLUSION These collective findings illuminate the unique structural attributes of DOT ™ PN , settingitapartfromDOT ™ PDRNandunveilingitsintricate polyhedral tessellation pattern . This structural distinctiveness holds significant promise for a wide array of potential applications across various scientific and medical domains , making DOT ™ PN a subject of great interest for further research and exploration In conclusion , the structural features of DOT ™ PN , as unveiled in this study , inspire innovation across diverse fields , ranging from biomedicine to materialsscience . These findings mark the beginning of an exciting journey toward harnessing DOT ™ PN’s unique attributes for the betterment of healthcare and beyond . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Thisstudy wasconducted incompliancewiththe principlessetforthin the Declaration of Helsinki . KIM ET AL . 7of8 CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT M . J . K , H . J . P . and N . K . R . are advisory board members of Pharmare - search Ltd . DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Data are available on request to corresponding author . REFERENCES 1 . YiK - H , WinayanuwattikunW , KimS - Y , etal . Skinboosters : Definitions and varied classifications . Skin Res Technol . 2024 ; 30 : e13627 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / srt . 13627 2 . Squadrito F , Bitto A , Irrera N , et al . Pharmacological activity and clinicaluseofPDRN . FrontPharmacol . 2017 ; 8 : 224 . 3 . Coleman KM , Voigts R , DeVore DP , Termin P , Coleman WP 3rd . Neo - collagenesis after injection of calcium hydroxylapatite composition in acaninemodel . DermatolSurg . DermatolSurg . 2008 ; 34 ( Suppl1 ) : S53 . 4 . Lu H , Oh HH , Kawazoe N , Yamagishi K , Chen G . PLLA – collagen and PLLA – gelatin hybrid scaffolds with funnel - like porous structure for skintissueengineering . SciTechnolAdvMater . 2012 ; 13 : 064210 . 5 . KimMJ , ParkHJ , OhSM , YiKH . Polynucleotideinjectiontreatmentfor iatrogenic fat atrophy in two patients : potential for safe volumization inaestheticmedicine . SkinResTechnol . 2023 ; 29 : e13439 . 6 . Fulop T , Larbi A , Pawelec G , et al . Immunology of aging : the birth of inflammaging . ClinRevAllergyImmunol . 2023 ; 64 : 109 . 7 . Veronesi F , Dallari D , Sabbioni G , Carubbi C , Martini L , Fini M . Poly - deoxyribonucleotides ( PDRNs ) from skin to musculoskeletal tissue regeneration via adenosine A 2A receptor involvement . J Cell Physiol . 2017 ; 232 : 2299 . 8 . Kim TH , Heo SY , Oh GW , Heo SJ , Jung WK . Anti - allergic effect of low molecular weight digest from abalone viscera on atopic dermatitis - inducedNC / Nga . MarDrugs . 2021 ; 19 : 634 . 9 . de Luca Brunori I , Battini L , Filippeschi M , Romani L , Tarani A , Urbano M . Topical therapy with placental polydeoxyribonucleotide in cervical ectopyandectropion . AnnOstetGinecolMedPerinat . 1989 ; 110 : 35 . 10 . Perino A , Genova G , Vita C , et al . The pharmacologic therapy of post - cauterizationand post - laser vaporizationwithpolydeoxyribonu - cleotide . AnnOstetGinecolMedPerinat . 1990 ; 111 : 372 . 11 . MuratoreO , PesceSchitoA , CattariniG , etal . Evaluationofthetrophic effect of human placental polydeoxyribonucleotide on human knee skinfibroblastsinprimaryculture . CellMolLifeSci . 1997 ; 53 : 279 . 12 . Thellung S , Florio T , Maragliano A , Cattarini G , Schettini G . Poly - deoxyribonucleotides enhance the proliferation of human skin fibrob - lasts : involvement of A2 purinergic receptor subtypes . Life Sci . 1999 ; 64 : 1661 . 13 . Valdatta L , Thione A , Mortarino C , Buoro M , Tuinder S . Evaluation of the efficacy of polydeoxyribonucleotides in the healing process of autologous skin graft donor sites : a pilot study . Curr Med Res Opin . 2004 ; 20 : 403 . 14 . Rubegni P , De Aloe G , Mazzatenta C , Cattarini L , Fimiani M . Clinical evaluationof the trophiceffect of polydeoxyribonucleotide ( PDRN ) in patients undergoing skin explants . A pilot study . Curr Med Res Opin . 2001 ; 17 : 128 . 15 . Lazzarotto M , Tomasello EM , Caporossi A . Clinical evaluation of cornealepithelializationafterphotorefractivekeratectomyinpatients treated with polydeoxyribonucleotide ( PDRN ) eye drops : a ran - domized , double - blind , placebo - controlled trial . Eur J Ophthalmol . 2004 ; 14 : 284 . 16 . Muratore O , Cattarini G , Gianoglio S , et al . A human placental poly - deoxyribonucleotide ( PDRN ) may promote the growth of human corneal fibroblasts and iris pigment epithelial cells in primary culture . NewMicrobiol . 2003 ; 26 : 13 . 17 . Kim DS , Lee JK , Kim JH , et al . Advanced PLGA hybrid scaf - fold with a bioactive PDRN / BMP2 nanocomplex for angiogenesis and bone regeneration using human fetal MSCs . Sci Adv . 2021 ; 7 : eabj1083 . 18 . Guizzardi S , Galli C , Govoni P , et al . Polydeoxyribonucleotide ( PDRN ) promotes human osteoblast proliferation : a new proposal for bone tissuerepair . LifeSci . 2003 ; 73 : 1973 . 19 . Altavilla D , Bitto A , Polito F , et al . Polydeoxyribonucleotide ( PDRN ) : a safe approach to induce therapeutic angiogenesis in peripheral artery occlusivediseaseandindiabeticfootulcers . CardiovascHematolAgents MedChem . 2009 ; 7 : 313 . 20 . Galeano M , Bitto A , Altavilla D , et al . Polydeoxyribonucleotide stim - ulates angiogenesis and wound healing in the genetically diabetic mouse . WoundRepairRegen . 2008 ; 16 : 208 . 21 . Belletti S , Uggeri J , Gatti R , Govoni P , Guizzardi S . Polydeoxyri - bonucleotide promotes cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer repair in UVB - exposed dermal fibroblasts . Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed . 2007 ; 23 : 242 . 22 . Kim YJ , Kim MJ , Kweon DK , Lim ST , Lee SJ . Polydeoxyribonucleotide activates mitochondrial biogenesis but reduces MMP - 1 activity and melanin biosynthesis in cultured skin cells . Appl Biochem Biotechnol . 2020 ; 191 : 540 ; 23 . NohTK , ChungBY , KimSY , etal . Novelanti - melanogenesisproperties ofpolydeoxyribonucleotide , apopularwoundhealingbooster . IntJMol Sci . 2016 ; 17 : 1448 . 24 . Lee SH , Yoo SH , Lee HJ , et al . Anti - allodynic effects of polydeoxyri - bonucleotide in an animal model of neuropathic pain and complex regionalpainsyndrome . JKoreanMedSci . 2020 ; 35 : e225 . 25 . Mannino F , Pallio G , Bitto A , et al . Targeting adenosine receptor by polydeoxyribonucleotide : an effective therapeutic strategy to induce white - to - brown adipose differentiation and to curb obesity . Pharma - ceuticals ( Basel ) . 2021 ; 14 : 728 . 26 . Park KY , Seok J , Rho NK , Kim BJ , Kim MN . Long - chain polynucleotide filler for skin rejuvenation : efficacy and complications in five patients . DermatolTher . 2016 ; 29 : 37 . 27 . Kim JH , Jeong JJ , Lee YI , et al . Preventive effect of polynucleotide on post - thyroidectomy scars : a randomized , double - blinded , controlled trial . Lasers Surg Med . 2018 ; 50 : 755 - 762 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / lsm . 22812 28 . Lee YJ , Kim HT , Lee YJ , et al . Comparison of the effects of polynucleotide and hyaluronic acid fillers on periocular rejuvena - tion : a randomized , double - blind , split - face trial . J Dermatolog Treat . 2022 ; 33 : 254 . 29 . Lee D , Kim MJ , Park HJ , et al . Current practices and perceived effectiveness of polynucleotides for treatment of facial erythema by cosmeticphysicians . SkinResTechnol . 2023 ; 29 : e13466 . 30 . Scarr GM . Biotensegrity : the structural basis of life 2nd edition , Jessica KingsleyPublishers , 2019 . 31 . McMillenP , HolleySA . Integrationof cell – celland cell – ECM adhesion invertebratemorphogenesis . CurrOpinCellBiol . 2015 ; 36 : 48 . 32 . Gibson MC , Patel AB , Nagpal R , Perrimon N . The emergence of geometric order in proliferating metazoan epithelia . Nature . 2006 ; 442 : 1038 . 33 . Hayashi K , Yanagisawa T , Kishida R , Ishikawa K . Effects of scaffold shape on bone regeneration : tiny shape differences affect the entire system . ACSNano . 2022 ; 16 : 11755 . 34 . Zadpoor AA . Bone tissue regeneration : the role of scaffold geometry . BiomaterSci . 2015 ; 3 : 231 . 35 . Rumpler M , Woesz A , Dunlop JW , van Dongen JT , Fratzl P . The effect of geometry on three - dimensional tissue growth . J R Soc Interface . 2008 ; 5 : 1173 . 36 . Evans MJ , Guha SC , Cox RA , Moller PC . Attenuated fibroblast sheath around the basement membrane zone in the trachea . Am J Respir Cell MolBiol . 1993 ; 8 : 188 . 37 . Dembo M , Bell GI . in Current topics in membranes and transport , Vol . 29 ( Eds : F Bronner , RD Klausner , C Kempf , JV Renswoude ) , Academic Press1987 , p . 71 . 8of8 KIM ET AL . 38 . Fisher GJ , Varani J , Voorhees JJ . Looking older . Arch Dermatol . 2008 ; 144 : 666 . 39 . Varani J , Dame MK , Rittie L , et al . Decreased collagen production in chronologicallyagedskin . AmJPathol . 2006 ; 168 : 1861 . 40 . Fisher GJ , Shao Y , He T , et al . Reduction of fibroblast size / mechanical force down - regulates TGF - β type II receptor : implications for human skinaging . AgingCell . 2016 ; 15 : 67 . 41 . Naga N , Jinno M , Wang Y , Nakano T . The first space - filling polyhe - drons of polymer cubic cells originated from Weaire - Phelan struc - ture created by polymerization induced phase separation . Sci Rep . 2022 ; 12 : 19141 . 42 . Douglas SM , Dietz H , Liedl T , Hogberg B , Graf F , Shih WM . Self - assembly of DNA into nanoscale three - dimensional shapes . Nature . 2009 ; 459 : 414 . 43 . AbdElrahmanM , ChungSY , SikoraP , RucinskaT , StephanD . Influence of nanosilica on mechanical properties , sorptivity , and microstructure oflightweightconcrete . Materials ( Basel ) . 2019 ; 12 ( 19 ) : 3078 . 44 . GasperiniAE , SanchezS , DoironAL , LylesM , GermanGK . Non - ionising UV light increases the optical density of hygroscopic self assembled DNAcrystalfilms SciRep . 2017 ; 7 : 6631 . 45 . Engler AJ , Sen S , Sweeney HL , Discher DE . Matrix elasticity directs stemcelllineagespecification . Cell . 2006 ; 126 : 677 . 46 . WattFM , HuckWT . Roleoftheextracellularmatrixinregulatingstem cellfate . NatRevMolCellBiol . 2013 ; 14 : 467 . 47 . Lim HK , Kwon YJ , Hong SJ , et al . Bone regeneration in ceramic scaf - folds with variable concentrations of PDRN and rhBMP - 2 . Sci Rep . 2021 ; 11 : 11470 . 48 . Holzwarth JM , Ma PX . Biomimetic nanofibrous scaffolds for bone tissueengineering . Biomaterials . 2011 ; 32 : 9622 ; 49 . Li X , Wang L , Fan Y , Feng Q , Cui FZ , Watari F . Nanostructured scaf - folds for bone tissue engineering . J Biomed Mater Res A . 2013 ; 101 : 2424 . 50 . Nikolova MP , Chavali MS . Recent advances in biomaterials for 3D scaffolds : areview . BioactMater . 2019 ; 4 : 271 - 292 . 51 . Das P , Manna S , Roy S , Nandi SK , Basak P . Polymeric biomaterials - based tissue engineering for wound healing : a systemic review . Burns Trauma . 2023 ; 11 : tkac058 ; 52 . Krishani M , Shin WY , Suhaimi H , Sambudi NS . Development of scaffolds from bio - based natural materials for tissue regeneration applications : areview . Gels . 2023 ; 9 : 100 . 53 . Ingber DE , Wang N , Stamenovic D . Tensegrity , cellular biophysics , and themechanicsoflivingsystems . RepProgPhys . 2014 ; 77 : 046603 . 54 . Ingber DE . Tensegrity - based mechanosensing from macro to micro . ProgBiophysMolBiol . 2008 ; 97 : 163 . 55 . Ingber DE . Cellular mechanotransduction : putting all the pieces togetheragain . FASEBJ . 2006 ; 20 : 811 . 56 . Ingber DE . Tensegrity II . How structural networks influence cellular informationprocessingnetworks . JCellSci . 2003 ; 116 : 1397 . 57 . Ingber DE . Tensegrity I . Cell structure and hierarchical systems biol - ogy . JCellSci . 2003 ; 116 : 1157 . 58 . ChenCS , IngberDE . Tensegrityandmechanoregulation : fromskeleton tocytoskeleton . OsteoarthrCartil . 1999 ; 7 : 81 . 59 . Ingber DE . Cellular tensegrity : defining new rules of biological design thatgovernthecytoskeleton . JCellSci . 1993 ; 104 ( Pt3 ) : 613 . How to cite this article : Kim MJ , Park H - J , Jung R - J , et al . High - resolution 3 - D scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) images of DOTTM polynucleotides ( PN ) : Unique scaffold characteristics and potential applications in biomedicine . Skin Res Technol . 2024 ; 30 : e13667 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / srt . 13667