Membrane transport between compartments in eukary - otic cells requires proteins that allow the budding and SCISSION of nascent cargo vesicles from one compartment and their targeting and fusion with another . Just as SNARES are proposed to be essential for all vesicle - fusion reactions , so CLASSICAL DYNAMINS and DYNAMIN - RELATED PROTEINS have a similar appeal as the essential vesicle - scis - sion molecules . They are involved in the scission of a wide range of vesicles and organelles , including CLATHRIN - COATED VESICLES ( CCVs ) , CAVEOLAE , phagosomes and mito - chondria ( FIG . 1 , TABLE 1 ) . Although DYNAMINS are not found in all budding reactions , the more places that are investi - gated , the more they will probably be found . The impor - tance of dynaminwas first discovered with the identifica - tion of temperature - sensitive mutants in Drosophila melanogaster 1 , 2 that gave rise to a paralytic phenotype . The locus was called shibire after the Japanese word for ‘paralysed’ ( BOX 1 ) . The shibire gene was then discovered to encode dynamin 3 , 4 . Dynamin had previously been char - acterized as a GTPase that can associate with microtubules in vitro 5 , 6 , and as a phosphoprotein in nerve terminals 7 . Since then , mutations that abolish the GTPase activity of dynamin have been widely used to characterize its functions . Dynamins are generally classified as ‘large GTPases’ . This is to distinguish them from the small Ras - like and other regulatory GTPases , such as the well studied α - subunits of heterotrimeric G - proteins and the translation factors of protein biosynthesis . In addition to having a larger GTPase domain , dynamin and dynamin - related proteins are distinguished from other GTPases by their oligomerization - dependent GTPase activation , their low GTP - binding affinities and the ability of many members of the dynamin family to interact with lipid membranes . There are many large GTPases in the database — even in prokaryotes — that have homology to dynamin only in the GTPase domains , and do not have the additional domains that allow for self - oligomerization , so we do not count these as dynamin - related proteins . Subdividing the dynamin superfamily Overall architecture . The minimal distinguishing archi - tectural features that are common to all dynamins and are distinct from other GTPases are the structure of the large GTPase domain ( ~ 300 amino acids ) and the presence of two additional domains ; the middle domain and the GTPase effector domain ( GED ) , THE DYNAMIN SUPERFAMILY : UNIVERSAL MEMBRANE TUBULATION AND FISSION MOLECULES ? Gerrit J . K . Praefcke and Harvey T . McMahon Dynamins are large GTPases that belong to a protein superfamily that , in eukaryotic cells , includes classical dynamins , dynamin - like proteins , OPA1 , Mx proteins , mitofusins and guanylate - binding proteins / atlastins . They are involved in many processes including budding of transport vesicles , division of organelles , cytokinesis and pathogen resistance . With sequenced genomes from Homo sapiens , Drosophila melanogaster , Caenorhabditis elegans , yeast species and Arabidopsis thaliana , we now have a complete picture of the members of the dynamin superfamily from different organisms . Here , we review the superfamily of dynamins and their related proteins , and propose that a common mechanism leading to membrane tubulation and / or fission could encompass their many varied functions . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 133 Medical Research Council Laboratory ofMolecular Biology , Hills Road , Cambridge CB2 2QH , UK . e - mails : gerrit @ mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk ; hmm @ mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1313 SCISSION Cleavage ofthe vesicle from the parent membrane — as in the use ofscissors to sever . SNARE ( soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein attachment protein ( SNAP ) receptor ) . SNARE proteins are a family ofmembrane - tethered coiled - coil proteins that regulate fusion reactions and target specificity in vesicle trafficking . They can be divided into v - SNAREs and t - SNAREs on the basis oftheir localization . R E V I E W S © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup CLASSICAL DYNAMINS Dynamins that show sequence homology to the protein described in 1989 as ‘dynamin’ , a microtubule - binding protein . For these classical proteins , the homology extends over the complete length ofthe protein and they have five distinct domains . DYNAMIN - RELATED PROTEINS Dynamins that lack one or more domains or have additional domains that are not present in classical dynamins . Some ofthese proteins might be functionally indistinguishable from classical dynamins . CLATHRIN - COATED VESICLE ( CCV ) . Transport vesicles that bud with the aid ofa coat protein known as clathrin . CAVEOLAE Flask - shaped invaginations of the plasma membrane that are coated with the protein caveolin . Caveolae are endocytosed in a clathrin - independent manner . 134 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S is not close . So , Shibire , the dynamin - like protein in D . melanogaster , and Arabidopsis thaliana dynamin - like protein 6 ( ADL6 ) are classical dynamins because they have the same domain structure as mammalian dynamin 1 . It is clear that there might be further subdivi - sions when more targeting domains are recognized . Our classification is not based on function , and dynamins from different families and with alternative targeting domains might , therefore , have similar functions . Overview of superfamily members Classical dynamins . Mammalian dynamins 1 , 2 and 3 are the founder members of the dynamin family . In our nomenclature we call them ‘classical dynamins’ along with other large GTPases that have the following five identifiable domains : GTPase domain , middle domain , PH domain , GED and PRD ( FIG . 2 ) . Mammalian dynamin 1 is brain - enriched , where it is concentrated in the presynapse ; dynamin 2 is ubiqui - tous ( including the brain ) ; and dynamin 3 is found in the testis , but is also brain - enriched and is found post - synaptically 9 – 11 . Web pages have been written to com - plement this review , giving more details on domains and mutants of dynamin 1 ( see Dynamin homepage in Online links ) . The single isoforms of classical dynamin in D . melano - gaster and Caenorhabditis elegans are assumed to cover the functions of the multiple isoforms in mammals . Mammalian dynamins 1 and 2 have been shown to have a role in scission of CCVs . In this process , the membrane invaginates to engulf cargo into CLATHRIN - COATED PITS ( CCPs ) , which are eventually detached from the parent membrane with the aid of dynamin . However , dynamin also functions in the budding of caveoli , in phagocyto - sis , in the formation of podosomes , and during actin rearrangements and cytokinesis . These functions have been reviewed elsewhere 12 – 17 , and so will not be discussed further in this review . In vitro , dynamin assembles on microtubules , but there is no convincing confirmation of this interaction in vivo . The potential of the long PRD , which is absent in the dynamin - related proteins and in GBPs / atlastins , to interact with many SH3 domains ( BOX 3 ) might give this protein its versatility in working with disparate vesicle - budding pathways . The exact function of classical dynamins will be the subject of more discussion below , but they have been described in vesicle budding as being responsible for the constriction of the lipid neck , the FISSION of the lipids and the regulation of the scission reaction . Whatever the exact mechanism , dynamin certainly has the potential to put energy into a thermodynamically unfavourable reaction . Dynamin - like proteins . Compared to our five - domain definition for classical dynamins , Dlps are missing the PRD . From yeast to humans , there is one Dlp homologue per organism , and this is involved in mitochondrial division 18 – 25 . There is strong evidence that Dlps oligomerize into multimers and are likely to form rings 26 – 29 . Sequence homology does not allow us to define the region between the middle domain and the which are involved in oligomerization and regulation of the GTPase activity ( FIG . 2 ) . The GTPase domain contains the GTP - binding motifs ( G1 – G4 ) that are needed for guanine - nucleotide binding and hydrolysis ( FIG . 3 ) . The conservation of these motifs is absolute except for the G4 motif in guanylate - binding proteins ( GBPs ; FIG . 3 ) . The GTPase catalytic activity can be stimulated by oligomerization of the protein , which is mediated by interactions between the GTPase domain , the middle domain and the GED . In many of the dynamin - superfamily members , this basic set of domains is supplemented by targeting domains , such as : PLECKSTRIN - HOMOLOGY ( PH ) DOMAINS ; proline - rich domains ( PRDs ) that bind to SRC - HOMOLOGY - 3 ( SH3 ) DOMAINS ; or by sequences that target dynamins to spe - cific organelles , such as mitochondria and chloro - plasts . It should also be noted that alternative targeting can arise as a result of alternative splicing 8 . It is easy to find dynamin nomenclature confusing because the various homologues and their domains have accumulated various names , which , in some cases , overlap . In BOX 2 we highlight some of the studies on plant dynamin homologues , whereas in TABLE 2 , we group dynamin and dynamin homologues across species on the basis of domain organizations . This allows us to classify proteins that have similar target - ing domains together , even if the sequence homology Figure 1 | Dynamin - superfamily members in animals and plants . We have subdivided the dynamin superfamily into ‘classical dynamins’ and ‘dynamin - related proteins’ . Classical dynamins ( maroon ) are typified by the dynamin proteins that function in the budding of clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) at the plasma membrane , cleavage furrow , Golgi and endosome , but also in non - clathrin - mediated budding events at caveolae and phagosomes . Dynamin - related proteins cover a much wider range of dynamin homologues . Dynamin - like proteins ( Dlps , grey ) are involved in division of organelles such as mitochondria and peroxisomes . The OPA1 ( optic atrophy 1 , red ) and mitofusin ( yellow ) families are also involved in reorganization of mitochondria , but probably in mitochondrial fusion , and therefore antagonize the function of Dlp . The Mx family ( pink ) are induced by interferons and confer resistance against RNA viruses . Human MxA localizes to the smooth endoplasmic reticulum and also interacts with viral ribonucleoproteins . Plants contain many different dynamin proteins ( light green ) . Some of them have similar functions to those in animals ( for example , budding of CCVs ) , but others have functions that are unique to plants , such as formation of the cell plate or chloroplast division ( see main text ) . Mgm , mitochondrial genome maintenance 1 . Phagosome ER CCV Caveolae Mitochondrion Peroxisome Endosome Nucleus Golgi Vacuole Chloroplast Cleavage furrow Viralribonucleoprotein Mitochondrialfusion site Cell plate Classical dynamin Mitofusin / Fzo1 Dynamin - like protein Plant dynamin OPA1 / Mgm1 Phagocytosed bacterium Mx Actin comet Animal cell Plant cell © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 135 R E V I E W S Mx - like proteins . Proteins within this family are miss - ing the PRD and the PH domain . Expression of the human MxA and MxB proteins is induced by type I interferons and MxA gives strong protection against viral infection 33 , 34 . Fish have many interferon - induced Mx homologues and so it can be assumed that they must live in a sea of viruses . There is no Mx equiva - lent in D . melanogaster or C . elegans , presumably because they have not developed this mechanism to protect against infections . However , A . thaliana has an Mx - like protein . All the proteins in the Vps1 and Mx families have good conservation of the GED and GTPase domains and so these proteins show oligomerization - dependent GTPase activity ( see below ) 34 , 35 . ARC5 - like proteins . The A . thaliana accumulation and replication of chloroplasts mutant 5 ( ARC5 ) - like pro - teins also lack the PRD and the PH domain . In plants , members of this family are involved in chloroplast divi - sion 36 , 37 . We have only found homologues in plants and in D . discoideum . OPA1 / Mgm1 proteins . This family of proteins , which is present from yeast to humans , has the same domain architecture as the Dlps , including a predicted PH - like domain , but has an additional amino - terminal mito - chondrial import sequence that is followed by a predicted transmembrane and coiled - coil sequence . These proteins are found between the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes and are involved in mitochondrial fusion 38 , 39 . GED of Dlps as a PH domain , but this region in A . thaliana ADL2 binds specifically to phosphatidylinosi - tol - 4 - phosphate ( PtdIns4P ) 30 and might , in fact , be a PH domain . Lipid binding does not exclude the possibility that this domain is also involved in protein – protein interactions . Given the absence of a PRD , recruitment to mitochondria probably occurs through this domain . Dictyostelium discoideum does not have a classical dynamin or a Dlp , but we have included Dynamin A ( DymA ) in the Dlp - family . It lacks the PRD of classical dynamins and also lacks a PH domain , but instead , it has a glutamine - rich domain that is typical for proteins from D . discoideum . Deletion of DymA has pleiotropic effects , including defects in cytokinesis , organelle mor - phology and , to a lesser extent , in endocytosis . Therefore DymA , like other non - classical dynamins , can function in vesicle budding in addition to other membrane - scis - sion events . Vps1 - like proteins . Proteins within this family lack the PRD , and the region between the middle domain and GED is unlikely to accommodate a PH domain . Yeast has no classical dynamin that works in plasma mem - brane endocytosis , but Vps1 ( vacuolar protein sorting 1 ) is involved in vesicle trafficking from the Golgi 31 , 32 and probably functions as a classical dynamin homologue without the necessity for multiple targeting sequences because of its limited location . In A . thaliana , the pro - teins that have a similar domain architecture are homologues of soybean PHRAGMOPLASTIN , which is involved in CELL - PLATE formation . DYNAMINS Members ofthe dynamin superfamily , which include the dynamin - related proteins , Mx proteins and GBP / atlastin . PLECKSTRIN - HOMOLOGY ( PH ) DOMAIN A protein module of ~ 100 amino acids that is present in a range ofproteins . Different PH domains interact with various phospholipids and are therefore involved in the targeting ofthe proteins . SRC - HOMOLOGY - 3 ( SH3 ) DOMAIN A protein module of ~ 80 amino acids that is present in a range of proteins and was first identified in the protein kinase Src . SH3 domains interact with proline - rich sequences that usually contain a PxxxPxR motif . CLATHRIN - COATED PIT ( CCP ) . The initial site of invagination ofa clathrin - coated vesicle . FISSION The breakage ofone object into parts — for example , fission of the lipid membrane . PHRAGMOPLASTIN Dynamin - like protein found at the phragmoplast , which is the microtubular network in dividing plant cells that transports Golgi - derived vesicles to the cell plate . CELL PLATE A flat , membrane - bound incipient cell wall at the division plane ofa plant cell . The cell plate is formed by fusion and tubulation ofGolgi - derived vesicles , which results in the outward expansion , and finally fusion , ofthe vesicles with the side walls . Table 1 | Functions of dynamin - superfamily members Organism Dynamin homologue Localization Function Animals and Classical dynamins Plasma membrane , Vesicle scission yeast trans - Golgi network and endosomes Dlp / Dnm1 Mitochondrial outer membrane , Organelle division peroxisomes OPA1 / Mgm1 Mitochondrial inner membrane Mitochondrial fusion and division Mitofusin / Fzo1 Mitochondrial outer membrane Mitochondrial fusion and division Yeast Vps1 ( a classical trans - Golgi network Vesicle scission dynamin probably performs this function in animal cells ) MxA Smooth endoplasmic reticulum Viral resistance GBPs Partially membrane associated Viral resistance and antiproliferative Atlastin1 Golgi of pyramidal neurons Neural integrity , vesical trafficking ? Plants ADL1A Cell - plate tubular network Cytokinesis ADL1C Cell plate : possibly Cytokinesis clathrin - coated - vesicle budding ADL2A Plastids Chloroplast division ADL2B Mitochondria Mitochondrial division Phragmoplastin ( ADL4 , 5 ) Cell plate Cytokinesis ADL6 trans - Golgi network Vesicle scission ARC5 Chloroplasts Chloroplast division Some of the functions and localizations of classical dynamins and dynamin - related proteins are listed . ADL , Arabidopsis thaliana dynamin - like protein ; ARC5 , accumulation and replication of chloroplasts mutant 5 ; Dlp , dynamin - like protein ; Fzo1 , fuzzy onions 1 ; Mgm1 , mitochondrial genome maintenance 1 ; OPA1 , optic atrophy 1 ; Vps1 , vacuolar protein sorting 1 . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup 136 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S mitochondrial fragmentation and this phenotype is sup - pressed by mutations in the Dlp gene of these yeast species 40 , 41 . Mitofusin / Fzo1 proteins . The mitofusin / fuzzy onions 1 ( Fzo1 ) family of proteins is present from yeast to humans 42 – 45 , and has a predicted transmembrane domain in place of the PH domain . The carboxy - ter - minal domain is predicted to be α - helical but , other than this , its homology to the GED of dynamin is weak . This is the third dynamin - related GTPase to be involved in mitochondrial dynamics and it localizes to the cytoplasmic side of the outer mitochondrial membrane . Apparently , the coordinated fission and fusion of organelles with several membranes is a complex event and so mitochondria are provided with three GTPases ( Dlp , OPA1 and mitofusin ) to coordinate fission and fusion without losing the membrane potential . However , this undoubtedly complicates the analysis of mutations in these indi - vidual GTPases . Guanylate - binding proteins / atlastins . GBPs / atlastins might fall outside the definition for dynamin - related proteins because the GTPase domain is the only sig - nificant region of sequence conservation , but the group has been included here because the proteins have probably arisen from a common ancestor ( see phylogenetic analysis in FIG . 2 ) . The crystal structure of GBP 46 , 47 shows intramolecular interactions that are similar to those that have been predicted for dynamins and so this structure might be a preliminary model for the GTPase , middle and GED domains of dynamin ( for movies of structures see DymA / GBP structures in Online links ) . The expression of GBPs is induced by type II interferon and these proteins have a role in resistance against intracellular pathogens , which is similar to , but less efficient than , that of the Mx pro - teins 48 , 49 . GBPs are not found in D . melanogaster or C . elegans , but there is a weak homologue in A . thaliana . Unlike dynamin , GBP can hydrolyse GTP not only to GDP , but also to GMP 50 . Atlastins are homologous to GBP and mutations in atlastin1 have been identified in patients suffering from hereditary spastic paraplegia ( HSP / Strümpell – Lorrain syndrome ) , a neurodegenerative disorder of the motor neuron system that causes progressive spasticity and weakness of the lower limbs 51 . The protein is associated with the cis - Golgi 52 . Another group of interferon - induced GBPs ( p47 GBPs , which include IIGP1 , see FIG . 3 ) shows biochemical and biological similarities to the dynamin superfamily 53 . However , with a size of 47 kDa , they are too small to contain all three domains and therefore were not included in our definition of the dynamin - superfamily members . Biochemical activities of dynamins For lipid fusion , the SNAREs are the universal fusion molecules that are found on many compartments in cells 54 . In a similar manner , we propose that dynamins are universal lipid - stretching / fission molecules that Mutations in human OPA1 ( optic atrophy 1 ) give rise to dominant optic atrophy ( DOA ; BOX 4 ) . The yeast homo - logues Mgm1 ( mitochondrial genome maintenance 1 ) from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Msp1 from Schizosaccharomyces pombe are clearly important in mito - chondrial fusion . Mutations of Mgm1 / Msp1 lead to ACTIVE ZONE A specialized area ofthe presynaptic plasma membrane where synaptic vesicles fuse and release their neurotransmitter content . Box 1 | Shibire In Drosophila melanogaster , temperature - sensitive ( ts ) mutants of the dynamin 1 homologue result in the reversible accumulation of endocytic profiles and a paralytic phenotype at the non - permissive temperature 114 ( see figure ) . Within 1 minute of returning to the permissive temperature , these endocytic profiles enlarge and later detach to form cisternae . Synaptic vesicles then reform from these cisternal membranes . This phenotype shows a clear role for dynamin in synaptic - vesicle retrieval in nerve terminals and led to the idea that dynamin has a mechanochemical function in vesicle scission . However , the observations are equally consistent with dynamin being a regulator of the scission reaction . No clathrin coats are visible by electron microscopy on the endocytic profiles in shibire nerve terminals 114 . This might be because uncoating of endocytic profiles occurs independently of scission . Indeed , the uptake of transferrin in COS cells is clathrin - dependent and mutants of dynamin that slow the scission reaction give rise to trapped vesicles that no longer have a clathrin coat 87 . Alternatively , the shibire phenotype might be evidence of a clathrin - independent ‘kiss - and - run’mechanism of vesicle recycling , in which the synaptic vesicle does not fully collapse into the plasma membrane . Dynamin would be responsible for the ‘run’stage — that is , the fast closure of the pore that separates the vesicle from the membrane . A number of ts mutations occur in the GTPase domain and probably inactivate dynamin at the non - permissive temperature ( see Shibire web sitein Online links ) . There are also endocytic defects in other cell types and in ts 1 ( G273D ) , the resulting paralysis of the fly occurs with amazing speed , even before there is a great depletion of the vesicles 115 . The speed of paralysis in shibire has led to suggestions that dynamin might also be involved in vesicle exocytosis , but this effect is more likely to be the result of the failure of endocytosis , which would disrupt the ACTIVE ZONE . Temperature shift Mitochondrion Synapticvesicles Collared pits 19 ° C ( permissive ) 8 min at 29 ° C ( non - permissive ) 1 min at 19 ° C Dynamin Cisternae 2 – 3 min at 19 ° C Dense body with tethered vesicles Dense body Synapticvesicles 10 – 20 min at 19 ° C Temperature shift © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 137 R E V I E W S Oligomerization - dependent GTPase activity . Dynamins are different to Ras - like GTPases in that oligomerization stimulates the GTPase activity once a ‘critical mass’is reached , and the resulting GTPase activity resembles a chain reaction ( there is cooperativity in the GTP hydrolysis ) . An oligomer normally refers to a complex of more than one monomer , but as the basic dynamin building block is a dimer or tetramer , we are using oligomerization as the ordered assembly of these build - ing blocks into rings or helices 59 – 63 . Ras - like regulatory GTPases do not oligomerize — their GTPase activity is stimulated by the binding of GTPase - activating proteins ( GAPs ) . For the oligomerized ( assembled ) form of dynamin , dynamin itself is the GAP . To understand this GAP activity , it is important that we understand the interactions between / within dynamin molecules . Electron microscopy images of dynamin oligomers and biochemical studies have shown that the GED can inter - act with the GTPase domain , the middle domain and also with itself 64 – 67 . Further structural information is required to understand this on a molecular level . The Ras - like regulatory GTPases use the kinetic control of the GTP – GDP cycle to function as a switch . In the GTP - bound form they can interact with effectors that they are unable to interact with in the GDP - bound form . There is no protein known to interact with the GTPase domain of dynamin and no PRD - interacting proteins have been adapted to function at many different compartments in the cell . Before discussing the mechanisms of dynamin action , it is useful to survey the biochemical activities that give dynamins their unique properties . GTPase activity . The conserved core of all related GTP - binding proteins is the GTPase domain of ~ 160 amino - acid residues , which consists of a mixed six - stranded β - sheet that is surrounded by five α - helices ( see BOX 5 and GTPase domain web site in Online links ) . The Ras protein , which has 184 amino - acid residues , is consid - ered to be the minimal GTP - binding protein 55 . The bio - chemical properties and biological functions of many GTP - binding proteins are influenced by insertions in their GTPase domain 56 . In the dynamin family , the GTPase domain is extended to ~ 300 amino - acid residues , the structure of which has been solved by Niemann and colleagues 57 . Dynamins are characterized by their low affinity for GTP and their even lower affin - ity for GDP ( TABLE 3 ) . Under physiological conditions , the protein is predicted to be constitutively loaded with GTP , but the protein will also be very sensitive to the energy status of the cell 58 . This contrasts with the Ras - like GTPases , which have a high affinity for GTP and GDP and require guanine nucleotide - exchange factors ( GEFs ) to catalyse nucleotide exchange . Figure 2 | Domain structure of the human dynamin superfamily . Domains are represented by different symbols and the decreasing intensities of the colours correspond to decreasing sequence homology . All dynamins contain a GTPase domain that binds and hydrolyses GTP , a middle domain and a GTPase effector domain ( GED ) that are involved in oligomerization and stimulation of GTPase activity . Additionally , most dynamins contain a domain for interactions with lipid membranes . This can be a pleckstrin - homology ( PH ) domain , a transmembrane domain or a sequence for lipid attachment . Classical dynamins contain a proline - rich domain ( PRD ) at the carboxyl terminus that interacts with Src - homology - 3 ( SH3 ) domains . Human dynamin - superfamily members have been grouped according to their domain structure and their accession numbers are shown . The family tree was calculated in MacVector using the tree building method with Poisson - corrected distances . DLP1 , dynamin - like protein1 ; GBP1 , guanylate - binding protein 1 ; OPA1 , optic atrophy 1 . Classical dynamins Dynamin - related proteins GBP - related proteins D y n a m i n s u p e r f a m il y GTPase domain PRD Mitochondrial leader sequence Predicted transmembrane domain Middle domain PH domain GED Atlastin1 ( NP _ 056999 ) Atlastin2 ( NP _ 071769 ) Atlastin3 ( NP _ 056274 ) GBP4 ( NP _ 443173 ) GBP5 ( NP _ 443174 ) GBP2 ( NP _ 004111 ) GBP1 ( NP _ 002044 ) GBP3 ( NP _ 060754 ) Mitofusin1 ( NP _ 284941 ) Mitofusin2 ( NP _ 055689 ) OPA1 ( O60313 ) MxA ( NP _ 002453 ) MxB ( NP _ 002454 ) Dlp ( NP _ 036192 ) Dynamin2 ( NP _ 004936 ) Dynamin1 ( NP _ 004399 ) Dynamin3 ( Q9UQ16 ) 0 . 196 0 . 196 0 . 076 0 . 273 0 . 315 0 . 71 0 . 141 0 . 069 0 . 069 0 . 072 0 . 072 0 . 227 0 . 227 0 . 245 0 . 245 0 . 113 0 . 408 0 . 083 0 . 359 0 . 89 0 . 759 0 . 785 0 . 095 0 . 149 0 . 35 0 . 47 0 . 512 0 . 522 0 . 109 0 . 109 1 , 000 amino acids © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup 138 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S The oligomerization of dynamin in low salt condi - tions and its ability to bind and cause tubulation of neg - atively charged liposomes 68 , 69 ( FIG . 4 ) have been used as assembly tests for other members of the dynamin family ( see Oligomerization web site in Online links ) . Dlp is a tetramer in solution and has similar domain interactions to dynamin 26 . Oligomerization in low salt conditions and with GTP analogues has also been shown . Dlp tubulates membranes when it is overexpressed in cul - tured cells as well as on synthetic liposomes 28 . A more detailed study has been done with D . discoideum DymA , which assembles into rings and helical structures even in the absence of lipids 29 , and also shows cooperative GTP hydrolysis . The first dynamin - family member to be identified in plants was called phragmoplastin , and this also assembles in low salt conditions 70 , 71 . Murine Mx1 was the first protein from the dynamin family that was shown to oligomerize 72 , 73 . In human MxA , a single point mutation ( L612K ) in the GED blocks the interaction with the middle domain and inhibits oligomerization 74 . This residue is close to the leucine mutation in the GED domain of OPA1 that is found in patients with DOA ( BOX 4 ) . MxA also assembles into oligomers in low salt conditions and binds / tubu - lates liposomes 75 . There is no direct evidence for oligomerization of Vps1 , OPA1 / Mgm1 or mitofusin / Fzo1 , although there is much circumstantial evidence from mutations and overexpression studies . GBP is a monomer in the nucleotide - free state but it can form dimers and tetramers in the presence of GTP analogues 46 . There is also recent evidence that atlastin 1 oligomerizes 52 . have been found to be specific for a certain nucleotide - bound state so far . Therefore , in this scenario , dynamin would be its own effector . However , GTP - bound dynamin can assemble more efficiently on liposomes and the assembled protein should have a higher avidity for interacting partners that contain several SH3 domains . Figure 3 | GTP - binding motifs . Only 1 GTP molecule is bound per GTPase domain , but the sequences that contribute to the interactions are spread over the domain . The key residues are shown in green . The G1 motif ( in the so - called P - loop ) coordinates the phosphates , whereas the threonine in the G2 motif is involved in catalysis and is hard to predict by sequence comparisons but has been confirmed experimentally in some cases . The glycine in the G3 motif forms a hydrogen bond with the γ - phosphate of GTP . The G4 motif is involved in base and ribose coordination . The oncogenic mutations in p21 Ras and the unusually conserved G4 base - coordination motif in GBPs / atlastins are shown in red . Accession numbers for proteins are as in FIG . 2 with the additions : mouse interferon inducible GTPase ( IIGP ) / p47 ( AAF07195 ) , human p21 Ras ( P01112 ) , human elongation factor 1 α ( EF1 α ) ( 4503471 ) . ( For further details of the importance of these residues see also GTP - binding motifs web siteand GTP - binding residues web sitein Online links . ) All sequences shown are for human proteins , except IIGP1 , which is the mouse protein sequence . DLP1 , dynamin - like protein1 ; GBP1 , guanylate - binding protein 1 ; OPA1 , optic atrophy 1 . IAVVGGQSAGKSSVLENFVG SGIVTRRPLV LVDLPGMTKV VITKLDL IVVVGTQSSGKSSVLESLVG TGIVTRRPLI LVDLPGMTKV VITKLDL IAVIGDQSSGKSSVLEALSG SGIVTRCPLV LIDLPGITRV ILTKPDL VVVVGDQSAGKTSVLEMIAQ GEMMTRSPVK LVDLPGVINT VLTKVDL VAFFGRTSSGKSSVINAMLW IGHITNCFLS LVDSPGTDVT LNNRWDA VAIVGLYRTGKSYLMNKLAG VQSHTKGIWM LLDTEGLGDV VWTLRDF VSVAGAFRKGKSFLMDFMLR NEPLTGFSWR LMDTQGTFDS IFLVRDW VAVTGETGSGKSSFINTLRG GAAKTGVVEV FWDLPGIGST VRTKVDS LVVVGAGGVGKSALTIQLIQ EYDPTIEDSY ILDTAGQEEY VGNKCDL IVVIGHVDSGKSTTTGHLIY ERGITIDISL IIDAPGHRDF GVNKMDS GxxxxGKS T DxxG NKxD T T Dynamin1DLP1MxAOPA1Mitofusin1GBP1Atlastin1IIGP1p21 Ras EF1 α Consensus G1 ( P - loop ) G4 G2 and switch 1 G3 and switch 2 Box 2 | Dynamins in plants In plants such as Arabidopsis thaliana , there are more dynamin homologues than there are in mammals , and so there is probably some functional redundancy . For example , there are at least five forms ( A – E ) of the A . thaliana dynamin - like protein 1 ( ADL1 ) . ADL1A and ADL1C are associated with cell - plate formation in dividing cells 116 , 117 . ADL1A is found on tubular networks at the cell plate 105 . In plants devoid of ADL1A , cytokinesis proceeds normally , but adl1A adl1E double mutants show defects 116 . ADL2A ( previously called ADL2 ) is found on plastids , which is consistent with its amino - terminal chloroplast transit peptide 93 . ADL2B is localized to the constriction sites of dividing mitochondria , and expression of a dominant - negative mutant of ADL2B results in the fusion and tubulation of mitochondria , which indicates a potential role in the scission reaction 118 . ADL3 shares a lot of sequence identity with ADL6 , but ADL6 is the only member of the dynamin superfamily in A . thaliana that has all five distinctive domains , and therefore represents a classical dynamin . Through the proline - rich domain , ADL6 interacts with the Src - homology - 3 ( SH3 ) domain of the A . thaliana protein AtSH3P3 , which is a homologue of mammalian amphiphysin 119 . A dominant - negative mutant of ADL6 ( K51E , where K51 is the equivalent of K44 in mammalian dynamin 1 ) causes an accumulation of lytic - vacuole - targeted cargo within the trans - Golgi network , which supports a role in trafficking from the trans - Golgi network to the vacuole 120 . ADL4 , ADL5 , At5g42080 and At2g44590 cannot be definitively sorted into the vacuolar protein sorting 1 or myxovirus - resistance - protein families . However , it is clear from sequence homology that they are the A . thaliana homologues of the soybean phragmoplastins , which are also involved in cell - plate formation . The proteins ARC5 ( accumulation and replication of chloroplasts mutant 5 ) and At1g53140 are more distant dynamin homologues , and ARC5is found on the outside of chloroplasts and is involved in their division 36 . No clear homologues of the optic atrophy 1 ( OPA1 ) / mitochondrial genome maintenance 1 ( Mgm1 ) and mitofusin / Fzo1 ( fuzzy onions 1 ) families can be found in plants , but this could be the result of low sequence homology . A simpler set of dynamin - related proteins is present in the primitive red algae Cyanidioschyzon merolae , which contains a single chloroplast and a single mitochondrion . The dynamin - related protein C . merolae Dnm1 is involved in mitochondrial division and is a close homologue of ADL1 and ADL2 . By contrast , C . merolae Dnm2 is involved in chloroplast division 37 , 121 and shows 40 % identity to A . thaliana ARC5and 25 % identity to Dictyostelium discoideum AAO51595 . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 139 R E V I E W S GTPase activation . This feature of ‘oligomerization - dependent GTPase activity on membrane binding’can now probably be extended to the dynamin superfam - ily . Therefore , although Dlps do not contain a bona fide PH domain , they localize to mitochondrial mem - branes and bind liposomes in vitro 27 , 28 . The region between the middle domain and the GED is probably involved in this . Likewise , human MxA protein is localized to the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) 75 . The OPA1 / Mgm1 proteins have a mitochondrial targeting sequence at their amino termini ( ~ 100 amino acids ) , which is followed by a possible membrane insertion domain that is cleaved by a rhomboid - like protease 81 . They also contain a PH - like domain . So OPA1 strongly associates with mitochondrial membranes . Mitofusins / Fzo1 contain a transmembrane domain in place of a PH domain , which results in its constant attachment to the exterior of the outer mitochondrial membrane 44 , 82 . Most GBPs have a CaaX box ( where ‘a’ is an aliphatic amino acid and X is any amino acid ) for Membrane binding that precedes oligomerization - dependent GTPase activity . Ras GTPase activity is con - trolled by GAPs , whereas the GTPase activity of dynamin is controlled by self - oligomerization . Fortunately for the cell , futile cycles of dynamin GTP hydrolysis are prevented , as the oligomerization is regu - lated by membrane recruitment of dynamin to its sites of action . The PH domain of classical dynamins is responsible for their interaction with negatively charged lipid membranes . The affinity of a single PH domain for head groups is low ( about 1 mM for inositol - 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ) compared to other PH domains 76 , 77 ( see PH domain web site in Online links ) . So the strong binding of dynamin to lipids relies on high avidity caused by the oligomerization of the protein . A single point mutation ( K535A ) in the PH domain of mam - malian dynamin 1 has a dominant - negative effect on endocytosis in cells 78 – 80 . This low affinity of unassem - bled dynamin for lipids and its oligomerization after lipid binding ensures that there is tight control of Table 2 | Dynamin - superfamily members in different species * Protein H . sapiens D . melanogaster C . elegans S . pombe S . cerevisiae A . thaliana D . discoideum family Classical Dynamin1 , Shibire / Dlp1 Dynamin / Dyn1 None None ADL6 Not identified dynamins dynamin2 , ( S17974 ) ( AAD50438 ) ( AAF22291 ) dynamin3 Dynamin - like Dlp ( alternative Dlp2 Drp1 Dlp Dnm ADL1 DymA names : Drp1 , ( AAF51235 ) ( AAL56621 ) ( Q09748 ) ( AAA99998 ) ( D84514 ) , ( CAA67983 ) DVLP and ADL2 Dymple ) ( NP _ 567931 ) , ADL3 ( BAA77516 ) Vps1 - like None None None Vps1 Vps1 Phragmo Not identified ( Q9URZ5 ) ( NP _ 012926 ) - plastin - like ‡ : ADL4 ( CAC19657 ) , ADL5 ( CAC19656 ) , At5g42080 ( P42697 ) , At2g44590 ( NP _ 850420 ) Mx - like Mx None None None None Mx - like Not identified ( AAB71966 ) ARC5 - like None None None None None ARC5 ARC5 - like ( NP _ 188606 ) , ( AAO51595 ) At1g53140 ( NP _ 175722 ) OPA1 / OPA1 Mgm1 Mgm1 Msp1 Mgm1 Not identified DymB Mgm1 - like ( AAL13595 ) ( CAA87771 ) ( JE0327 ) ( NP _ 014854 ) ( CAB64379 ) Mitofusin - like Mitofusin1 , Mitofusin ( fuzzy onions , Mitofusin Fzo1 Fzo1 Not identified Not identified mitofusin2 NP _ 732840 ) ( NP _ 495161 ) ( NP _ 595241 ) ( NP _ 009738 ) GBP and GBP1 , GBP2 , Atlastin Atlastin None None GBP - like Not identified atlastin - like GBP3 , GBP4 , ( NP _ 651274 ) ( NP _ 500253 ) ( BAB08252 ) GBP5 , atlastin1 , atlastin2 , atlastin3 * Using the sequenced databases we tabulate members of the dynamin superfamily in several organisms . The accession numbers for human sequences are as in FIG . 2 and others are shown beneath each protein name . The Dictyostelium discoideum genome is incomplete , at present . Note the absolute conservation from yeast to man of the three dynamin - related proteins corresponding to human Dlp , OPA1 and mitofusin that are involved in mitochondrial morphology , and at least one dynamin for vesicle scission corresponding to human classical dynamin or Vps1 . ‡ The phragmoplastin - like proteins are distinct from Vps1 but have a very similar domain organization . They are , in fact , very similar to the A . thaliana Mx - like protein , but as they are involved in vesicle trafficking , we have classified them with the Vps1 - like family at present . ADL , A . thaliana dynamin - like protein ; ARC5 , accumulation and replication of chloroplasts mutant 5 ; Dnm , dynamin ; DVLP , Dnm1 / Vps1 - like protein ; Dymple , dynamin family member proline - rich carboxy - terminal - domain less ; Dyn , dynamin ; GBP , guanylate - binding protein ; Mgm1 , mitochondrial genome maintenance 1 ; OPA1 , optic atrophy 1 ; Vps1 , vacuolar protein sorting 1 . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup 140 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S lipid interactions through their PRD and PH domains . Overexpression of GTPase mutants has been widely used to investigate the involvement of dynamins in dif - ferent pathways . It is now appreciated that the functions of dynamins are not limited to CCV scission ( FIG . 5a ) , but that they are associated with many non - clathrin vesicle budding events such as caveolae budding and phagocytosis ( FIG . 1 ) 12 – 14 . It has also become appreciated over the past few years that the mechanism of dynamin action is not clear . Dynamin was originally proposed to act as a mechanochemical enzyme by tightening a dynamin collar around the vesicle neck after GTP hydrolysis and thereby constricting it . This was known as ‘pin - chase’ activity , describing the ‘pinching off’ of vesi - cles , and was supported by the finding that GTP hydrolysis by dynamin on liposomes caused vesicula - tion 69 . Later , the mechanochemical ‘poppase’ model was proposed , in which a helix of dynamin assembles at the neck of a vesicle , and a lengthwise extension of this helix after GTP hydrolysis — caused mainly by an increase in helical pitch — results in the ‘popping off’ of vesicles from the parent membrane ( FIG . 4 and , for movies , see Dynamin web site in Online links ) . A fundamentally different role for dynamin in vesi - cle scission was presented at about the same time . This ‘regulatory’ model for dynamin function is based on comparisons with small GTPases in which a ‘catalytic arginine finger’ , which is contributed by the activating protein , points into the active site and promotes GTP hydrolysis 85 . For dynamin , it is known that self - oligomerization activates hydrolysis and so the catalytic residue is likely to be on the domain that interacts with the GTPase domain . The GED got its name from the discovery of an essential arginine residue that was shown to contribute to the GTP hydrolysis 62 . When this arginine residue was mutated , mutant dynamin still the attachment of an isoprenoid moiety to their car - boxyl terminus 83 , and mouse Gbp2 has been found to localize to vesicle - like structures in cells 84 . Finally , atlastin1 has a transmembrane domain and is found on the cis - Golgi 52 . Main functions of the dynamin superfamily Vesicle scission . Classical dynamins work in many vesi - cle scission reactions . They are recruited by protein and Box 3 | Dynamin - binding proteins Dynamin functions in the budding of many vesicle types . Given the low affinity and weak specificity of its pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain for negatively charged lipids ( see affinity measurements in PH domain in Online links ) and the widespread use of dynamin in vesicle scission , many binding partners of the proline - rich domain ( PRD ) might target dynamin to sites of action . The PRD of classical dynamins , in which up to one in every three amino acids is a proline , can potentially interact with many Src - homology - 3 ( SH3 ) - domain proteins . ( Some of these are documented in the PRD domain web sitein Online links . ) After vesicle scission has occurred , residual dynamin remains attached to the scission site on the vesicle and at this point it might form a docking site for dynamin - binding proteins that promote polarized actin assembly , as occurs in ‘actin comet’formations 17 , 122 , 123 . Dynamin interactions found in vitro , and SH3 – dynamin interactions tested in overexpression studies need to be verified carefully . Amphiphysin has been well studied as a dynamin - PRD - binding protein . As dynamin is a stable oligomer and full - length amphiphysin is a dimer , full - length amphiphysin will have a higher affinity for dynamin than for the monomeric isolated amphiphysin SH3 domain . The same scenario also applies to proteins that contain several dynamin - binding SH3 domains , for example Grb2 and intersectin , where a protein containing tandem SH3 domains will have a higher affinity and probably a better specificity for its target sequences . Overexpression studies can lead to artefactual results because levels of expression are often 10 - fold to 100 - fold above normal concentrations , so any weak dynamin - binding , monomeric SH3 domain can sequester dynamin away from its normal function in vivo . The case might be even more complex because overexpression of a dynamin - targeting protein for phagocytosis would be predicted to inhibit clathrin - mediated endocytosis and so might be called a ‘clathrin - mediated endocytic protein’ . Future experiments need to carefully characterize the budding events in which dynamin - binding proteins are implicated . Box 4 | Dominant optic atrophy and OPA1 mutations Optic atrophy 1 ( OPA1 ) is the only dynamin - related GTPase in which there are known disease - causing mutations in humans , presumably because mutations in other members of the superfamily are lethal . RNA - interference - mediated knockdown of OPA1 expression in cultured cells results in mitochondrial fragmentation , disruption of cristae structure and a loss of the mitochondrial membrane potential . Eventually , the loss of cytochrome c leads to apoptosis 124 . This is consistent with deletions of the yeast protein mitochondrial genome maintenance 1 ( Mgm1 ) ( REF . 41 ) and with OPA1 having a role in mitochondrial fusion ( see main text ) . Mutations in , or deletion of , one copy of the OPA1 gene lead to dominant optic atrophy ( DOA ) , a glaucoma that is caused by atrophy of retinal ganglion cells and the optic nerve , resulting in blindness 125 – 130 . Given the role of OPA1 in mitochondrial fusion , loss of mitochondrial integrity owing to OPA1 mutations probably leads to deficient energy metabolism , thereby compromising the highly energy demanding neurons of the optic system . A complete deletion of both copies of the OPA1 gene has not come to light . This shows that the protein is essential , and a single copy of the wild - type gene is sufficient for normal function in most cell types other than optical neurons ( which show haploinsufficiency ) . Most missense mutations in OPA1 change highly conserved residues and cluster in the GTPase domain , whereas mutations in the three residues that cause dominant - negative phenotypes in dynamin ( K44 and S45 in the G1 motif , and T65 in the G2 motif ) are not found . There is at least one mutation in the GTPase effector domain ( GED ) . In some cases there are two ( different ) missense mutations on different alleles leading to a stronger phenotype compared to one or the other single mutation , so these individual mutations are not dominant 128 . Intragenic complementation studies on the homologue Mgm1 in yeast show that the protein oligomerizes , so mutations in the GED domain of one allele can complement mutations in the GTPase domain of another allele 41 . This implies that incorporation of mutant proteins into the oligomer with the wild - type protein is inhibitory . Detailed descriptions of the various mutations can be found at The OMIMOPA1 entryin the Online links . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 141 R E V I E W S oligomerized but was defective in GTP hydrolysis . Endocytosis with this mutant was not inhibited and the authors concluded that the GTP - bound state repre - sented the active form of dynamin that positioned other proteins for the scission reaction , and so GTP hydrolysis was not the driving force behind vesicle scis - sion 62 , 86 . This regulatory model was challenged by further evi - dence for dynamin as a mechanochemical enzyme , showing that the hydrolysis of GTP was required for vesi - cle scission and that the GED contributes to the catalytic activity indirectly through oligomerization 87 , 88 . Furthermore , using dynamin assembled on nanotubes , coupling of the GTP hydrolysis to the lengthwise exten - sion of the dynamin helix was shown to be necessary for endocytosis 87 . The controversy continued with further evidence for the regulatory model when postulated ‘effector mole - cules’ — Hsc70 and auxilin — were identified , and found to interact with dynamin exclusively in the GTP - bound state 89 . It is important to know if these proteins interact with the GTPase domain . Both proteins have known functions in the regulation of clathrin assembly and disassembly and the authors suggested that the main role of dynamin is to recruit these effectorproteins to the necks of an invaginating pit and that the formation of the clathrin coat also drives fission . This clathrin - centric model for endocytosis does not , however , take into account the role of dynamins in clathrin - independent scission events such as phagocytosis or caveolae uptake . A crucial point is to test why other GTPase - defective dynamin mutants that are in the GTP bound state ( like T65A ) do not accelerate endocytosis 87 . So this contro - versy is still unresolved and no doubt there will be many more interesting papers forthcoming . We believe that the evidence presented so far for classical dynamins more strongly supports a mechanochemical model . A role for dynamin GTPases as regulators of reactions might be attrac - tive from an evolutionary point of view , as only ATPases were previously known to carry out work . However , the fact that dynamins are the common proteins that are found in many vesicle scission reac - tions and the absence of a better scission candidate points to dynamins being the mechanochemical molecules . Organelle division and fusion . Mitochondria have an inner and an outer membrane . The inner membrane is highly invaginated to form CRISTAE and is also electrically insulated to maintain the proton gradient that drives ATP synthesis . Mitochondria undergo a constant process of fission and fusion , which ensures an appro - priate distribution of mitochondria within the cell and of mitochondrial DNA in dividing cells , and might also be important in the turnover of integral membrane proteins . It might be predicted that there are two fission mole - cules , one for each of the membranes in mitochondria . However , three families of dynamin - related proteins are clearly involved in mitochondrial dynamics : Dlp , OPA1 Box 5 | Crystal structures of GTPases Our understanding of GTPases has been greatly aided by crystal structures of small GTPases bound to substrates . Here , the overall architecture of the GTPase domain is conserved and allows us to predict the residues that are essential for coordinating nucleotide binding and hydrolysis . In the figure , parts a – c show close - ups of the nucleotide - binding sites of Homo sapiens Ras , the Dictyostelium discoideum dynamin - related protein DymA and H . sapiens guanylate - binding protein 1 ( GBP1 ) . In part d , the structure of full - length H . sapiens GBP1 is compared to the GTPase domain of DymA . For a better comparison , the ribbon diagrams of the structures are coloured from amino - to carboxyl - terminus ( green to purple ) so that the corresponding regions of the proteins have the same colour . As a result , the insertions in the GTPase domains of DymA and GBP1 , with respect to Ras , are easily detectable . The conserved GTP - binding motifs G1 – G4 as described in FIG . 3 are shown in red . The bound nucleotide and critical residues are shown as ball - and - stick models and the catalytic magnesium as a sphere . Part a shows the Ras structure , in which K16 coordinates the β - and γ - phosphate of GTP , and S17 and T35 coordinate magnesium binding and waters involved in hydrolysis . All these residues are conserved and their mutation leads to hydrolysis - defective GTPases . The corresponding mutations have been useful in determining the mechanism of dynamin action ( see main text ) . The oncogenic mutations in Ras ( G12V and Q61L ) are not conserved in dynamin - related GTPases . Part b shows the GDP - bound form of D . discoideum DymA , in which parts of the SWITCH REGIONS are disordered and are shown as dotted lines . The additions and insertions in the GTPase domain shield the nucleotide from the solvent and limit the access of a possible catalytic residue from the outside . Part c shows the GBP1 structure , in which the insertions are at different positions , reflecting the distant relationship between these proteins . Again , the GTP analogue is shielded . Part d shows the DymA structure , in which a long helix extends from the core of the GTPase domain ( shown in dark blue ) , and could act as a lever arm on GTP hydrolysis . However , from the available structures , it is hard to see how movements could be coupled to hydrolysis because , as in GBP1 , this helix has no direct contact with the nucleotide - binding site . Ras ' GTP ' Q61 G12 K18 K38 S39 T75 S52 K51 T35 S17 Nucleotide + Mg 2 + DymA GDP GBP1 ' GTP ' GBP1 DymA a b c d © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup 142 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S Dlp is found at sites of constriction on mitochon - dria , and Dlp GTPase mutants are defective in mito - chondrial division . A remarkable demonstration of the importance of Dlp in mitochondrial division came from studies of a GTPase mutant of C . elegans . Here , two daughter cells , which migrate after division , were found to be connected by a narrow bridge of mitochondrial membrane owing to the failure of mitochondrial divi - sion 24 ( FIG . 5b ) . This is the only mitochondrial GTPase and mitofusin ( TABLES 1 , 2 ; FIGS 5b , c ) . Only one family , the Dlps , has been implicated in fission , whereas the others are implicated in fusion ( a function which has also been seen for dynamins in plant cytokinesis ; see below ) . All of these proteins have the GTPase , middle and GED domains , and mutations based on conserved residues in the dynamin superfamily , which have been well charac - terized in dynamin 1 , lead to changes in the dynamic structure of mitochondria 22 , 24 , 41 , 43 , 90 – 92 . Table 3 | Comparisons of nucleotide binding and hydrolysis Measurement Mammalian D . discoideum H . sapiens H . sapiens H . sapiens Mammalian dynamin DymA MxA GBP1 H - Ras G α K m 8 – 15 µM 70 µM 260 µM 470 µM Irrelevant . Irrelevant . GDP dissociation GDP dissociation is limiting is limiting k cat 190 – 260 min – 1 26 min – 1 * 27 min – 1 * 80 min – 1 * Unstimulated : Unstimulated : 0 . 028 min – 1 2 – 5 min – 1 GAP stimulated : RGS stimulated : 1200 min – 1 100 – 250 min – 1 K d 0 . 2 – 1 µM ( mGTP ) 1 µM ( mGppNHp ) 1 . 5 µM ( GppNHp ) 5 pM ( GTP ) 6 – 300 nM ( bGTP γ S ) 19 µM ( mGDP ) 20 µM ( mGDP ) 15 µM ( GDP ) 21 pM ( GDP ) 3 µM ( mGDP ) 29 µM ( GMP ) 7 . 3 µM ( GMP ) Values indicated in the table are extracted from the following references : Dynamin 63 , 87 , 136 , DymA 29 , MxA 137 , GBP 46 , 138 , 139 , Ras 140 , 141 and G α 142 , 143 . Fluorescently labelled nucleotides are Mant ( m ) and Bodipy ( b ) . Please note that most , but not all , studies were carried out at 20°C and , where labelled with a star ( * ) , the hydrolysis data were collected at 37°C . Catalytic rates for the dynamins are maximal figures . The total GTP concentration in a cell is 100 µM to 2 mM , of which 50 – 150 µM is free GTP 144 . The concentration of GDP is usually 10 - fold lower 145 . Bodipy , 4 , 4 - difluoro - 4 - bora - 3a , 4a - diaza - s - indacene ; GppNHp , β : γ - Imidoguanosine - 5 ′ - triphosphate ; GTP γ S , guanosine - 5 ′ - O - ( 3 - thiotriphosphate ) ; Mant , 2 ′ / 3 ′ - O - ( N - methylantraniloyl ) . Figure 4 | Oligomerization of dynamins . a | Classical dynamins , Dlps and Mx proteins have been reported to assemble into stable dimers / tetramers 26 , 29 , 68 , 72 , 132 – 134 . This involves inter - and intra - molecular interactions of the GTPase effector domain ( GED ) , middle and GTPase domains as illustrated in the cartoon . On the basis of electron microscopy , the building blocks for oligomeric dynamin 1 are seen as T - bar - like structures in which the pleckstrin homology domains are at the base of the T - bar , and this structure probably corresponds to the dimeric form of dynamin 1 . b | Classical dynamin , Dlps and Mx all assemble in low ionic conditions or in the presence of GTP - analogues into rings and stacks of rings . These proteins induce the tubulation of liposomes that are often seen to be decorated with helical oligomers 28 , 63 , 69 , 75 . A comparison of the in vitro oligomerization and tubulation of dynamin - family members can be found on the Oligomerization web site in Online links . Nucleotide hydrolysis ( in the case of dynamin 1 ) can lead to an increase in the pitch of the helix or to a decrease in the tubule diameter , and these are the basis for the proposed mechanical actions of dynamin . These pinchase versus poppase activities are illustrated by representative electron micrographs 63 , 69 . ( See also Dynamin assembly in Online links . ) The upper pannel of part b is reproduced with permission from REF . 132 © ( 1997 ) the American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology . The middle panels of part b are reproduced with permission from REF . 69 © ( 1998 ) Elsevier . The lower panels of part b are reproduced with permission from REF . 69 © ( 1998 ) Macmillan Magazines Ltd . A ss e m b l y i n t o r i n g s A ss e m b l y o n li p o s o m e s Stackingof rings ‘ P i n c h a s e ’ ‘ P o pp a s e ’ GTP γ S GDP GTP b a + GTP – GTP SWITCH REGIONS Regions ofnucleotide - binding proteins that have different conformations in the triphosphate - compared to the diphosphate - bound state . CRISTAE The inward folds ofthe inner mitochondrial membrane that increase its surface area . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 143 R E V I E W S As mentioned above , two mitochondrial dynamins are involved in fusion . OPA1 and its homologue in baker’s yeast ( Mgm1 ) are processed by the inner - membrane protease that is related to rhomboid , and which cleaves off the predicted transmembrane domain 81 , 98 . So OPA1 is found associated with the outer surface of the inner membrane and the inner surface of the outer membrane where it might link the two membranes together by oligomerization . RNA - INTERFERENCE - mediated loss of OPA1 causes a disorga - nization of the cristae structure and mitochondrial fragmentation , and deletion of the yeast protein results in a failure of mitochondria to fuse 39 , 41 , 98 , 99 . The third mitochondrial GTPase is mitofusin and , as its name suggests , it is implicated in mitochondrial fusion . It is found on the outside of the outer mito - chondrial membrane and has a membrane insertion domain . In immunoprecipitation experiments , the yeast Fzo1 homologue was found to interact with the yeast OPA1 homologue , and deletions of Fzo1 in yeast also resulted in a mitochondrial fusion defect 43 – 45 , 100 . Given the close association of these two mitochondrial fusion proteins , they probably function together to promote the fusion of both the inner and outer mem - branes . As such fusion has been shown to take place in areas of high membrane curvature , we suggest that the dynamin - related proteins provide this curvature by coordinating the constriction / tubulation of the outer and inner membranes ( FIG . 1 ) . It is easy to imag - ine how mitofusin molecules on opposing mitochon - dria could be involved in tethering and juxtaposing the fusagenic ends . Cytokinesis . During cytokinesis in plants , dynamins are involved in the formation of the tubular – vesicular net - work ( which is the precursor to the cell plate ) and in the retrieval of excess membrane by vesicle budding from the cell plate as it matures ( BOX 2 ) . Cytokinesis has been studied in great detail by electron microscopy . Vesicles from the trans - Golgi network fuse with the aid of a syn - taxin - like molecule 101 , and then form a tubular – vesicu - lar network , in which the tubules are covered in a ‘fuzzy’ coat and contain callose ( which forms the new cell wall ) 102 . ADL1 or phragmoplastins are concentrated at the cell plate 103 and are candidates for transforming the vesicles into tubules 104 , 105 , 116 , 117 . This formation of a tubular network allows the generation of a two - dimen - sional structure , rather than a large vesicle that subse - quently has to be flattened to form the membrane of the dividing cell . In the final stages , the tubular network is converted into a planar sheet and the membrane sur - face area is reduced by ~ 70 % , which involves budding of CCVs 104 , 105 . This form of cytokinesis might be very specialized , but cell division in other species is equally dependent on dynamin , although it might be necessary for other purposes . In D . discoideum , for example , cell division fails in the absence of DymA , and cells remain attached by a narrow membrane bridge ( FIG . 5d ) . In animal cells , dynamin is also involved in cytokinesis where it is important for vesicle budding from the CLEAVAGE FURROW 106 , 107 . that is implicated in fission and so constriction of the outer mitochondrial membrane must automatically cause the constriction of the inner membrane , which leads to a simultaneous division of both membranes . Chloroplast division also involves a dynamin , and the dynamics of other organelles such as peroxisomesinvolve similar molecules 37 , 90 , 93 – 97 . All plant PLASTIDS and some mitochondria in primitive unicellular eukaryotes have maintained a homologue of the bacterial cell - division GTPase protein FtsZ that constricts the organelle by pulling the inner membrane . Two such GTPases , which are unrelated to dynamin , are also found in the D . discoideum genome , in which sequence searches have uncovered few dynamin homologues . This indicates that the FtsZ homologues might function alongside dynamins in organelle division . PLASTIDS Organelles that are found in eukaryotic plant cytoplasm . They all contain DNA and are surrounded by a double membrane . RNA INTERFERENCE ( RNAi ) . A form ofpost - transcriptional gene silencing in which expression or transfection ofdouble - stranded RNA induces degradation — by nucleases — ofthe homologous endogenous transcripts . This mimics the effect ofthe reduction , or loss , ofgene activity . Figure 5 | Functions of dynamins . a | Vesicle scission . An electron micrograph of dynamin at the constricted neck of an endocytic vesicle 112 . Reproduced with permission from REF . 112 © ( 2003 ) National Academy of Sciences USA . b | Mitochondrial fission 24 . Divided cells in Caenorhabditis elegans are connected by the mitochondrial outer membrane in cells expressing the mutant Dynamin - like protein DRP1 ( K40A ) . Reproduced with permission from REF . 24 © ( 1999 ) Elsevier . c | Mitochondrial dynamics . Mutations in dynamin - related protein 1 ( Dnm1 ) and fuzzy onions 1 ( Fzo1 ) show opposite effects on mitochondrial morphology in yeast . Deletion of Dnm1 leads to a network of mitochondria , whereas deletion of Fzo1 leads to fragmentation 135 . Reproduced with permission from REF . 135 © ( 2000 ) The Rockefeller University Press . d | Cytokinesis . Dynamin ( DymA ) - deleted Dictyostelium discoideum cells fail to complete cell division and stay connected by long , narrow , cytoplasmic bridges 25 . Reproduced with permission from REF . 25 © ( 1999 ) the American Society for Cell Biology . e | Antiviral activity . The antiviral activity of MxA in cells transfected with MxA compared to the surrounding cells labelled for a viral protein 34 . Reproduced with permission from REF . 34 © ( 2000 ) the American Society for Microbiology . a Vesicle scission b Mitochondrial fission d Cytokinesis c Mitochondrial dynamics e Antiviral activity of MxA Fission Fusion dmn1 ∆ fzo1 ∆ © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup 144 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S and lipid membranes . It is possible that differences in the GTPase activity of the molecule will determine its ability to tubulate or to cause lipid fission . We already know that classical dynamins can cause lipid tubulation in vivo under circumstances in which vesicle scission does not work . In a recent example of this , knockdown of clathrin expression led to overexpression of dynamin 2 , which resulted in an accumulation of endocytic profiles ( long tubular invaginations from the plasma membrane ) that were surrounded by a dynamin helix 112 ( FIG . 5a ) . This is very similar to the recovery of the Shibire phenotype in the study of Kessell et al . , in which long tubules appeared when the cells were moved back to the permis - sive temperature 113 . Moving cells to a low temperature also resulted in the elongation of vesicle necks . Finally , GTPase mutants that undergo slow hydrolysis also give the same phenotype . When hydrolysis is slowed so much that there is a complete failure of vesicle scission , necks continue to grow until the compartments at the ends of these tubules , which are rich in endocytic mark - ers , fuse together forming interconnected tubules throughout the cell 87 . So classical dynamins can tubulate lipids in vivo under circumstances in which scission does not take place , and it should be expected that other dynamins also have the ability to tubulate , depending on GTPase activity and context . Although there might be many similarities , there are also many differences in the dynamin superfamily . We have already mentioned differences in recruitment to membrane compartments . There are also differences in the ability of dynamins to oligomerize — Dlps oligomerize less readily than classical dynamins in a low salt solution . It is fascinating to note how classical dynamins can tubulate liposomes in the absence of GTP hydrolysis , which shows that the energy of lipid binding and oligomerization can also do work . This might not be the case for other dynamins where GTP hydrolysis might be needed to cause deformation of membranes . The scene is set for testing how the dynamin - super - family members work in the cell . We envisage that all members will go at least part way along the following continuum . Dynamins are initially recruited and local - ized to specific sites of action by the lipid and protein interactions of the PRD , PH and PH - like domains . Here , they assemble in a stable helix and constrain the shape of the lipid membrane . GTP hydrolysis might aid this process , making it more efficient , although the primary effect of GTP hydrolysis will be to distort the helix away from its stable GTP - bound conformation . By analogy with ATP hydrolysis in myosins , it seems likely that dynamin also moves a lever arm when GTP is hydrolysed , which results in a conformational change in the oligomeric dynamin helix . For classical dynamin , we believe that this results in a lengthwise extension of the helix . Two possible outcomes can therefore be envisaged , which depend on the speed of extension , the lipid com - position and the surrounding proteins ( FIG . 6 ) . In the first scenario , the lipids might simply be pulled into a new shape , for example , an extended tubule . In the second scenario , the lipids might be sheared owing to a sudden Antiviral activity . Mx proteins were identified in mice owing to their antiviral effect against influenza virus 108 . No activity has been identified for MxB , but the human MxA protein has antiviral activity against a broad spec - trum of viruses ( FIG . 5e ) . This is a remarkable activity , the exact mechanism of which is not understood , but it might be directed at several stages of the viral replication pathway and a direct and GTP - dependent interaction of MxA with viral nucleocapsids has been shown 109 , 110 . It is known that MxA can associate with the smooth ER , through which viral proteins can pass . Furthermore , it has been suggested that the GTPase - inactive , monomeric Mx protein has anti - viral activity , which might break with the tradition that other dynamins require their GTPase activ - ities for function 34 . There have been suggestions that Mx proteins might interfere with dynamin functions , although there is no evidence that they can hetero - oligomerize with any dynamins . An anti - viral effect of human GBP1has been shown 49 but the inhibitory effect was much weaker than that of human MxA for its target viruses . GBP1 has also been shown to have antiprolifera - tive action in epithelial cells 111 . Conclusion and perspectives How dynamins work . Dynamins carry out a broad range of functions in cell biology , but there are expected to be some underlying themes . Given the domain struc - tures and biochemical information , it is not unreason - able to assume that oligomerization - stimulated GTPase activity will be common to all members . Does this mean that dynamins are always scission molecules ? Dynamins are also found in circumstances in which scission is not required — for example , in tubulation during cytokine - sis in plants 104 , in mitochondrial fusion reactions 41 and in podosome formation 17 . However , most of these cir - cumstances also involve interactions between dynamin CLEAVAGE FURROW An invagination ofthe plasma membrane in the division plane ofan animal cell that contains a contractile ring , and which leads to scission ofthe daughter cells . Figure 6 | GTPase activity and lipid distortion . A schematic of dynamin binding to a lipid vesicle , which leads to the formation of a helix on a lipid tube . Slow or uncooperative GTPase activity leads to an extension of the helix , which results in stretching and subsequent tubulation , whereas fast and cooperative dynamin GTPase activity leads to a rapid extension of the helix and fission of the tube . GTP - dependent oligomerization Lipids distorted Fast GTP hydrolysis Slow GTP hydrolysis Fission Tubulation Dynamin © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 145 R E V I E W S membrane fission . An alternative biochemical approach might be to examine whether the tubulation and vesiculation abilities of dynamin are related to the speed of GTP hydrolysis and / or to the extent of a con - formational change . On the other hand , if dynamin is not the scission molecule , then it is important to iden - tify what is . Finally , moving back into cells , we should test the importance of the speed of GTP hydrolysis on the phenotypes of various organelles by making mutants of dynamins that slow GTP hydrolysis . perturbation that rips the lipid molecules apart . So dynamins might adapt their biochemical properties to cause tubulation and / or fission , depending on the context . The key to solving how dynamins work will be the structural analysis ( preferably of a mammalian classi - cal dynamin ) in its various nucleotide states so that we can accurately determine what , if any , conforma - tional changes occur on GTP hydrolysis . If a confor - mational change does indeed occur , this should be shown to produce a force that is capable of explaining 1 . Grigliatti , T . A . , Hall , L . , Rosenbluth , R . & Suzuki , D . T . Temperature - sensitive mutations in Drosophila melanogaster . XIV . A selection of immobile adults . Mol . Gen . Genet . 120 , 107 – 114 ( 1973 ) . Identifies the Shibire , Stoned and Paralytic temperature - sensitive loci . The authors also found the Rapid Exhaustion , Bang Sensitive , and Wobbly non - temperature - sensitive loci . 2 . Suzuki , D . T . , Grigliatti , T . & Williamson , R . Temperature - sensitive mutations in Drosophila melanogaster . VII . A mutation ( para - ts ) causing reversible adult paralysis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 68 , 890 – 893 ( 1971 ) . 3 . van der Bliek , A . M . & Meyerowitz , E . M . Dynamin - like protein encoded by the Drosophilashibire gene associated with vesicular traffic . Nature 351 , 411 – 414 ( 1991 ) . 4 . Chen , M . S . et al . Multiple forms of dynamin are encoded by shibire , a Drosophila gene involved in endocytosis . Nature 351 , 583 – 586 ( 1991 ) . 5 . Shpetner , H . S . & Vallee , R . B . Identification of dynamin , a novel mechanochemical enzyme that mediates interactions between microtubules . Cell 59 , 421 – 432 ( 1989 ) . 6 . Obar , R . A . , Collins , C . A . , Hammarback , J . A . , Shpetner , H . S . & Vallee , R . B . Molecular cloning of the microtubule - associated mechanochemical enzyme dynamin reveals homology with a new family of GTP - binding proteins . Nature 347 , 256 – 261 ( 1990 ) . The first cloning of dynamin showing that it was part of a superfamily of GTPases . 7 . Robinson , P . J . , Hauptschein , R . , Lovenberg , W . & Dunkley , P . R . Dephosphorylation of synaptosomal proteins P96 and P139 is regulated by both depolarization and calcium , but not by a rise in cytosolic calcium alone . J . Neurochem . 48 , 187 – 195 ( 1987 ) . 8 . Cao , H . , Garcia , F . & McNiven , M . A . Differential distribution of dynamin isoforms in mammalian cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 2595 – 2609 ( 1998 ) . 9 . Nakata , T . , Takemura , R . & Hirokawa , N . A novel member of the dynamin family of GTP - binding proteins is expressed specifically in the testis . J . Cell Sci . 105 , 1 – 5 ( 1993 ) . 10 . Sontag , J . M . et al . Differential expression and regulation of multiple dynamins . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 4547 – 4554 ( 1994 ) . 11 . Gray , N . W . et al . Dynamin 3 is a component of the postsynapse , where it interacts with mGluR5 and Homer . Curr . Biol . 13 , 510 – 515 ( 2003 ) . 12 . Henley , J . R . , Krueger , E . W . , Oswald , B . J . & McNiven , M . A . Dynamin - mediated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 85 – 99 ( 1998 ) . 13 . Oh , P . , McIntosh , D . P . & Schnitzer , J . E . Dynamin at the neck of caveolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP - driven fission from the plasma membrane of endothelium . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 101 – 114 ( 1998 ) . References 12 and 13 are the first clear demonstrations of the involvement of dynamin in vesicle - scission events other than clathrin - mediated vesicle budding . Dynamin has now been implicated in many other budding events . 14 . Gold , E . S . et al . Dynamin 2 is required for phagocytosis in macrophages . J . Exp . Med . 190 , 1849 – 1856 ( 1999 ) . 15 . Ochoa , G . C . et al . A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 377 – 389 ( 2000 ) . 16 . van Dam , E . M . & Stoorvogel , W . Dynamin - dependent transferrin receptor recycling by endosome - derived clathrin - coated vesicles . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 169 – 182 ( 2002 ) . 17 . Orth , J . D . & McNiven , M . A . Dynamin at the actin - membrane interface . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 31 – 39 ( 2003 ) . 18 . Gammie , A . E . , Kurihara , L . J . , Vallee , R . B . & Rose , M . D . DNM1 , a dynamin - related gene , participates in endosomal trafficking in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 130 , 553 – 566 ( 1995 ) . 19 . Shin , H . W . , Shinotsuka , C . , Torii , S . , Murakami , K . & Nakayama , K . Identification and subcellular localization of a novel mammalian dynamin - related protein homologous to yeast Vps1p and Dnm1p . J . Biochem . 122 , 525 – 530 ( 1997 ) . 20 . Kamimoto , T . et al . Dymple , a novel dynamin - like high molecular weight GTPase lacking a proline - rich carboxyl - terminal domain in mammalian cells . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 1044 – 1051 ( 1998 ) . 21 . Hong , Y . R . , Chen , C . H . , Cheng , D . S . , Howng , S . L . & Chow , C . C . Human dynamin - like protein interacts with the glycogen synthase kinase 3 β . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 249 , 697 – 703 ( 1998 ) . 22 . Smirnova , E . , Shurland , D . L . , Ryazantsev , S . N . & van der Bliek , A . M . A human dynamin - related protein controls the distribution of mitochondria . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 351 – 358 ( 1998 ) . 23 . Imoto , M . , Tachibana , I . & Urrutia , R . Identification and functional characterization of a novel human protein highly related to the yeast dynamin - like GTPase Vps1p . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 1341 – 1349 ( 1998 ) . 24 . Labrousse , A . M . , Zappaterra , M . D . , Rube , D . A . & van der Bliek , A . M . C . elegans dynamin - related protein DRP - 1 controls severing of the mitochondrial outer membrane . Mol . Cell 4 , 815 – 826 ( 1999 ) . This is a clear demonstration of the function of dynamin - like proteins in mitochondrial division in live animals . 25 . Wienke , D . C . , Knetsch , M . L . , Neuhaus , E . M . , Reedy , M . C . & Manstein , D . J . Disruption of a dynamin homologue affects endocytosis , organelle morphology , and cytokinesis in Dictyostelium discoideum . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 225 – 243 ( 1999 ) . 26 . Shin , H . W . et al . Intermolecular and interdomain interactions of a dynamin - related GTP - binding protein , Dnm1p / Vps1p - like protein . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 2780 – 2785 ( 1999 ) . 27 . Smirnova , E . , Griparic , L . , Shurland , D . L . & van der Bliek , A . M . Dynamin - related protein Drp1 is required for mitochondrial division in mammalian cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2245 – 2256 ( 2001 ) . 28 . Yoon , Y . , Pitts , K . R . & McNiven , M . A . Mammalian dynamin - like protein DLP1 tubulates membranes . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2894 – 2905 ( 2001 ) . 29 . Klockow , B . et al . The dynamin A ring complex : molecular organization and nucleotide - dependent conformational changes . EMBO J . 21 , 240 – 250 ( 2002 ) . 30 . Kim , Y . W . et al . Arabidopsis dynamin - like 2 that binds specifically to phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate assembles into a high - molecular weight complex in vivo and in vitro . Plant Physiol . 127 , 1243 – 1255 ( 2001 ) . 31 . Rothman , J . H . , Raymond , C . K . , Gilbert , T . , O’Hara , P . J . & Stevens , T . H . A putative GTP binding protein homologous to interferon - inducible Mx proteins performs an essential function in yeast protein sorting . Cell 61 , 1063 – 1074 ( 1990 ) . 32 . Wilsbach , K . & Payne , G . S . Vps1p , a member of the dynamin GTPase family , is necessary for Golgi membrane protein retention in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . EMBO J . 12 , 3049 – 3059 ( 1993 ) . 33 . Staeheli , P . , Haller , O . , Boll , W . , Lindenmann , J . & Weissmann , C . Mx protein : constitutive expression in 3T3 cells transformed with cloned Mx cDNA confers selective resistance to influenza virus . Cell 44 , 147 – 158 ( 1986 ) . A direct demonstation of the antiviral effect of MxA . 34 . Janzen , C . , Kochs , G . & Haller , O . A monomeric GTPase - negative MxA mutant with antiviral activity . J . Virol . 74 , 8202 – 8206 ( 2000 ) . 35 . Kochs , G . , Haener , M . , Aebi , U . & Haller , O . Self - assembly of human MxA GTPase into highly ordered dynamin - like oligomers . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 14172 – 14176 ( 2002 ) . 36 . Gao , H . , Kadirjan - Kalbach , D . , Froehlich , J . E . & Osteryoung , K . W . ARC5 , a cytosolic dynamin - like protein from plants , is part of the chloroplast division machinery . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 4328 – 4333 ( 2003 ) . 37 . Miyagishima , S . Y . et al . A plant - specific dynamin - related protein forms a ring at the chloroplast division site . Plant Cell 15 , 655 – 665 ( 2003 ) . Uses a very interesting model organism , which has one mitochondrion and one chloroplast . Also shows a ring of dynamin constricting during organelle division . 38 . Satoh , M . , Hamamoto , T . , Seo , N . , Kagawa , Y . & Endo , H . Differential sublocalization of the dynamin - related protein OPA1 isoforms in mitochondria . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 300 , 482 – 493 ( 2003 ) . 39 . Olichon , A . et al . The human dynamin - related protein OPA1 is anchored to the mitochondrial inner membrane facing the inter - membrane space . FEBS Lett . 523 , 171 – 176 ( 2002 ) . 40 . Jones , B . A . & Fangman , W . L . Mitochondrial DNA maintenance in yeast requires a protein containing a region related to the GTP - binding domain of dynamin . Genes Dev . 6 , 380 – 389 ( 1992 ) . 41 . Wong , E . D . et al . The intramitochondrial dynamin - related GTPase , Mgm1p , is a component of a protein complex that mediates mitochondrial fusion . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 303 – 311 ( 2003 ) . 42 . Hales , K . G . & Fuller , M . T . Developmentally regulated mitochondrial fusion mediated by a conserved , novel , predicted GTPase . Cell 90 , 121 – 129 ( 1997 ) . 43 . Hermann , G . J . et al . Mitochondrial fusion in yeast requires the transmembrane GTPase Fzo1p . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 359 – 373 ( 1998 ) . 44 . Rapaport , D . , Brunner , M . , Neupert , W . & Westermann , B . Fzo1p is a mitochondrial outer membrane protein essential for the biogenesis of functional mitochondria in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 20150 – 20155 ( 1998 ) . 45 . Santel , A . & Fuller , M . T . Control of mitochondrial morphology by a human mitofusin . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 867 – 874 ( 2001 ) . 46 . Prakash , B . , Praefcke , G . J . K . , Renault , L . , Wittinghofer , A . & Herrmann , C . Structure of human guanylate - binding protein 1 representing a unique class of GTP - binding proteins . Nature 403 , 567 – 571 ( 2000 ) . 47 . Prakash , B . , Renault , L . , Praefcke , G . J . , Herrmann , C . & Wittinghofer , A . Triphosphate structure of guanylate - binding protein 1 and implications for nucleotide binding and GTPase mechanism . EMBO J . 19 , 4555 – 4564 ( 2000 ) . 48 . Staeheli , P . , Horisberger , M . A . & Haller , O . Mx - dependent resistance to influenza viruses is induced by mouse interferons α and β but not γ . Virology 132 , 456 – 461 ( 1984 ) . 49 . Anderson , S . L . , Carton , J . M . , Lou , J . , Xing , L . & Rubin , B . Y . Interferon - induced guanylate binding protein - 1 ( GBP - 1 ) mediates an antiviral effect against vesicular stomatitis virus and encephalomyocarditis virus . Virology 256 , 8 – 14 ( 1999 ) . 50 . Schwemmle , M . , Kaspers , B . , Irion , A . , Staeheli , P . & Schultz , U . Chicken guanylate - binding protein . Conservation of GTPase activity and induction by cytokines . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 10304 – 10308 ( 1996 ) . 51 . Zhao , X . et al . Mutations in a newly identified GTPase gene cause autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia . Nature Genet . 29 , 326 – 331 ( 2001 ) . 52 . Zhu , P . P . et al . Cellular localization , oligomerization , and membrane association of the hereditary Spastic Paraplegia 3A ( SPG3A ) protein atlastin . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 49063 – 49071 ( 2003 ) . 53 . Uthaiah , R . C . , Praefcke , G . J . , Howard , J . C . & Herrmann , C . IIGP1 , an interferon - γ - inducible 47 - kDa GTPase of the mouse , showing cooperative enzymatic activity and GTP - dependent multimerization . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 29336 – 29343 ( 2003 ) . 54 . Weber , T . et al . SNAREpins : minimal machinery for membrane fusion . Cell 92 , 759 – 772 ( 1998 ) . 55 . Pai , E . F . et al . Refined crystal structure of the triphosphate conformation of H - ras p21 at 1 . 35 Å resolution : implications for the mechanism of GTP hydrolysis . EMBO J . 9 , 2351 – 2359 ( 1990 ) . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup 146 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S 56 . Vetter , I . R . & Wittinghofer , A . The guanine nucleotide - binding switch in three dimensions . Science 294 , 1299 – 1304 ( 2001 ) . 57 . Niemann , H . H . , Knetsch , M . L . , Scherer , A . , Manstein , D . J . & Kull , F . J . Crystal structure of a dynamin GTPase domain in both nucleotide - free and GDP - bound forms . EMBO J . 20 , 5813 – 5821 ( 2001 ) . The first high - resolution structure of the GTPase domain of a close homologue to dynamin 1 . 58 . Krishnan , K . S . et al . Nucleoside diphosphate kinase , a source of GTP , is required for dynamin - dependent synaptic vesicle recycling . Neuron 30 , 197 – 210 ( 2001 ) . 59 . Shpetner , H . S . & Vallee , R . B . Dynamin is a GTPase stimulated to high levels of activity by microtubules . Nature 355 , 733 – 735 ( 1992 ) . 60 . Tuma , P . L . & Collins , C . A . Activation of dynamin GTPase is a result of positive cooperativity . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 30842 – 30847 ( 1994 ) . Assembly of dynamin on microtubules or acidic liposomes results in a positive cooperativity of GTP hydrolysis . This study implied that dynamin stimulates its own GTP hydrolysis on assembly . 61 . Warnock , D . E . , Hinshaw , J . E . & Schmid , S . L . Dynamin self - assembly stimulates its GTPase activity . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 22310 – 22314 ( 1996 ) . 62 . Sever , S . , Muhlberg , A . B . & Schmid , S . L . Impairment of dynamin’s GAP domain stimulates receptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature 398 , 481 – 486 ( 1999 ) . A study in which the authors suggest an alternative mechanism for dynamin as a regulatory GTPase . 63 . Stowell , M . H . , Marks , B . , Wigge , P . & McMahon , H . T . Nucleotide - dependent conformational changes in dynamin : evidence for a mechanochemical molecular spring . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 27 – 32 ( 1999 ) . A demonstration of the mechanochemical properties of dynamin , in which the authors suggest a spring or ‘poppase’ mechanism for vesicle scission . 64 . Muhlberg , A . B . , Warnock , D . E . & Schmid , S . L . Domain structure and intramolecular regulation of dynamin GTPase . EMBO J . 16 , 6676 – 6683 ( 1997 ) . 65 . Smirnova , E . , Shurland , D . L . , Newman - Smith , E . D . , Pishvaee , B . & van der Bliek , A . M . A model for dynamin self - assembly based on binding between three different protein domains . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 14942 – 14947 ( 1999 ) . 66 . Okamoto , P . M . , Tripet , B . , Litowski , J . , Hodges , R . S . & Vallee , R . B . Multiple distinct coiled - coils are involved in dynamin self - assembly . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 10277 – 10286 ( 1999 ) . 67 . Zhang , P . & Hinshaw , J . E . Three - dimensional reconstruction of dynamin in the constricted state . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 922 – 926 ( 2001 ) . 68 . Hinshaw , J . E . & Schmid , S . L . Dynamin self - assembles into rings suggesting a mechanism for coated vesicle budding . Nature 374 , 190 – 192 ( 1995 ) . 69 . Sweitzer , S . M . & Hinshaw , J . E . Dynamin undergoes a GTP - dependent conformational change causing vesiculation . Cell 93 , 1021 – 1029 ( 1998 ) . A demonstration of the mechanochemical properties of dynamin , in which the authors suggest a ‘pinchase’ mechanism of vesicle scission . 70 . Gu , X . & Verma , D . P . Phragmoplastin , a dynamin - like protein associated with cell plate formation in plants . EMBO J . 15 , 695 – 704 ( 1996 ) . The first dynamin identified in plants . 71 . Zhang , Z . , Hong , Z . & Verma , D . P . Phragmoplastin polymerizes into spiral coiled structures via intermolecular interaction of two self - assembly domains . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 8779 – 8784 ( 2000 ) . 72 . Melen , K . et al . Interferon - induced Mx proteins form oligomers and contain a putative leucine zipper . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 25898 – 25907 ( 1992 ) . The first demonstration of the oligomerization of a dynamin - superfamily member . 73 . Nakayama , M . et al . Structure of mouse Mx1 protein . Molecular assembly and GTP - dependent conformational change . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 15033 – 15038 ( 1993 ) . 74 . Schumacher , B . & Staeheli , P . Domains mediating intramolecular folding and oligomerization of MxA GTPase . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 28365 – 28370 ( 1998 ) . 75 . Accola , M . A . , Huang , B . , Al Masri , A . & McNiven , M . A . The antiviral dynamin family member , MxA , tubulates lipids and localizes to the smooth endoplasmic reticulum . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 21829 – 21835 ( 2002 ) . 76 . Klein , D . E . , Lee , A . , Frank , D . W . , Marks , M . S . & Lemmon , M . A . The pleckstrin homology domains of dynamin isoforms require oligomerization for high affinity phosphoinositide binding . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 27725 – 27733 ( 1998 ) . 77 . Lemmon , M . A . & Ferguson , K . M . Signal - dependent membrane targeting by pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domains . Biochem . J . 350 , 1 – 18 ( 2000 ) . 78 . Vallis , Y . , Wigge , P . , Marks , B . , Evans , P . R . & McMahon , H . T . Importance of the pleckstrin homology domain of dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 9 , 257 – 260 ( 1999 ) . 79 . Lee , A . , Frank , D . W . , Marks , M . S . & Lemmon , M . A . Dominant - negative inhibition of receptor - mediated endocytosis by a dynamin - 1 mutant with a defective pleckstrin homology domain . Curr . Biol . 9 , 261 – 264 ( 1999 ) . 80 . Achiriloaie , M . , Barylko , B . & Albanesi , J . P . Essential role of the dynamin pleckstrin homology domain in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Cell Biol . 19 , 1410 – 1415 ( 1999 ) . 81 . McQuibban , G . A . , Saurya , S . & Freeman , M . Mitochondrial membrane remodelling regulated by a conserved rhomboid protease . Nature 423 , 537 – 541 ( 2003 ) . The cleavage of Mgm1 by a rhomboid protease in the inner mitochondrial membrane is essential for its activity in mitochondrial fusion . 82 . Rojo , M . , Legros , F . , Chateau , D . & Lombes , A . Membrane topology and mitochondrial targeting of mitofusins , ubiquitous mammalian homologs of the transmembrane GTPase Fzo . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 1663 – 1674 ( 2002 ) . 83 . Cheng , Y . S . , Patterson , C . E . & Staeheli , P . Interferon - induced guanylate - binding proteins lack an N ( T ) KXD consensus motif and bind GMP in addition to GDP and GTP . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 4717 – 4725 ( 1991 ) . 84 . Gorbacheva , V . Y . , Lindner , D . , Sen , G . C . & Vestal , D . J . The interferon ( IFN ) - induced GTPase , mGBP - 2 . Role in IFN - γ - induced murine fibroblast proliferation . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 6080 – 6087 ( 2002 ) . 85 . Scheffzek , K . et al . The Ras - RasGAP complex : structural basis for GTPase activation and its loss in oncogenic Ras mutants . Science 277 , 333 – 338 ( 1997 ) . 86 . Sever , S . , Damke , H . & Schmid , S . L . Dynamin : GTP controls the formation of constricted coated pits , the rate limiting step in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1137 – 1148 ( 2000 ) . 87 . Marks , B . et al . GTPase activity of dynamin and resulting conformation change are essential for endocytosis . Nature 410 , 231 – 235 ( 2001 ) . Hydrolysis of GTP by dynamin is required for vesicle scission , whereas GTP binding leads to tubulation in vivo . 88 . Eccleston , J . F . , Binns , D . D . , Davis , C . T . , Albanesi , J . P . & Jameson , D . M . Oligomerization and kinetic mechanism of the dynamin GTPase . Eur . Biophys . J . 31 , 275 – 282 ( 2002 ) . 89 . Newmyer , S . L . , Christensen , A . & Sever , S . Auxilin - dynamin interactions link the uncoating ATPase chaperone machinery with vesicle formation . Dev . Cell 4 , 929 – 940 ( 2003 ) . 90 . Pitts , K . R . , Yoon , Y . , Krueger , E . W . & McNiven , M . A . The dynamin - like protein DLP1 is essential for normal distribution and morphology of the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria in mammalian cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 4403 – 4417 ( 1999 ) . 91 . Otsuga , D . et al . The dynamin - related GTPase , Dnm1p , controls mitochondrial morphology in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 333 – 349 ( 1998 ) . 92 . Fukushima , N . H . , Brisch , E . , Keegan , B . R . , Bleazard , W . & Shaw , J . M . The GTPase effector domain sequence of the Dnm1p GTPase regulates self - assembly and controls a rate - limiting step in mitochondrial fission . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2756 – 2766 ( 2001 ) . 93 . Kang , S . G . et al . Molecular cloning of an Arabidopsis cDNA encoding a dynamin - like protein that is localized to plastids . Plant Mol . Biol . 38 , 437 – 447 ( 1998 ) . 94 . Park , J . M . et al . A dynamin - like protein in Arabidopsis thaliana is involved in biogenesis of thylakoid membranes . EMBO J . 17 , 859 – 867 ( 1998 ) . 95 . Hoepfner , D . , van den Berg , M . , Philippsen , P . , Tabak , H . F . & Hettema , E . H . A role for Vps1p , actin , and the Myo2p motor in peroxisome abundance and inheritance in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 979 – 990 ( 2001 ) . 96 . Koch , A . et al . Dynamin - like protein 1 is involved in peroxisomal fission . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 8597 – 8605 ( 2003 ) . 97 . Li , X . & Gould , S . J . The dynamin - like GTPase Dlp1 is essential for peroxisome division and is recruited to peroxisomes in part by Pex11 . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 17012 – 17020 ( 2003 ) . 98 . Herlan , M . , Vogel , F . , Bornhovd , C . , Neupert , W . & Reichert , A . S . Processing of Mgm1 by the Rhomboid - type protease Pcp1 is required for maintenance of mitochondrial morphology and of mitochondrial DNA . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 27781 – 27788 ( 2003 ) . 99 . Wong , E . D . et al . The dynamin - related GTPase , Mgm1p , is an intermembrane space protein required for maintenance of fusion competent mitochondria . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 341 – 352 ( 2000 ) . 100 . Sesaki , H . & Jensen , R . E . Division versus fusion : Dnm1p and Fzo1p antagonistically regulate mitochondrial shape . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 699 – 706 ( 1999 ) . 101 . Lukowitz , W . , Mayer , U . & Jurgens , G . Cytokinesis in the Arabidopsis embryo involves the syntaxin - related KNOLLE gene product . Cell 84 , 61 – 71 ( 1996 ) . 102 . Samuels , A . L . , Giddings , T . H . , Jr . & Staehelin , L . A . Cytokinesis in tobacco BY - 2 and root tip cells : a new model of cell plate formation in higher plants . J . Cell Biol . 130 , 1345 – 1357 ( 1995 ) . 103 . Gu , X . & Verma , D . P . Dynamics of phragmoplastin in living cells during cell plate formation and uncoupling of cell elongation from the plane of cell division . Plant Cell 9 , 157 – 169 ( 1997 ) . 104 . Verma , D . P . Cytokinesis and building of the cell plate in plants . Annu . Rev . Plant Physiol . Plant Mol . Biol . 52 , 751 – 784 ( 2001 ) . 105 . Otegui , M . S . , Mastronarde , D . N . , Kang , B . H . , Bednarek , S . Y . & Staehelin , L . A . Three - dimensional analysis of syncytial - type cell plates during endosperm cellularization visualized by high resolution electron tomography . Plant Cell 13 , 2033 – 2051 ( 2001 ) . 106 . Feng , B . , Schwarz , H . & Jesuthasan , S . Furrow - specific endocytosis during cytokinesis of zebrafish blastomeres . Exp . Cell Res . 279 , 14 – 20 ( 2002 ) . 107 . Thompson , H . M . , Skop , A . R . , Euteneuer , U . , Meyer , B . J . & McNiven , M . A . The large GTPase dynamin associates with the spindle midzone and is required for cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 12 , 2111 – 2117 ( 2002 ) . 108 . Haller , O . & Kochs , G . Interferon - induced mx proteins : dynamin - like GTPases with antiviral activity . Traffic 3 , 710 – 717 ( 2002 ) . 109 . Kochs , G . & Haller , O . Interferon - induced human MxA GTPase blocks nuclear import of Thogoto virus nucleocapsids . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 2082 – 2086 ( 1999 ) . 110 . Kochs , G . & Haller , O . GTP - bound human MxA protein interacts with the nucleocapsids of Thogoto virus ( Orthomyxoviridae ) . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 4370 – 4376 ( 1999 ) . 111 . Guenzi , E . et al . The helical domain of GBP - 1 mediates the inhibition of endothelial cell proliferation by inflammatory cytokines . EMBO J . 20 , 5568 – 5577 ( 2001 ) . 112 . Iversen , T . G . , Skretting , G . , Van Deurs , B . & Sandvig , K . Clathrin - coated pits with long , dynamin - wrapped necks upon expression of a clathrin antisense RNA . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 5175 – 5180 ( 2003 ) . 113 . Kessell , I . , Holst , B . D . & Roth , T . F . Membranous intermediates in endocytosis are labile , as shown in a temperature - sensitive mutant . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 86 , 4968 – 4972 ( 1989 ) . 114 . Koenig , J . H . & Ikeda , K . Disappearance and reformation of synaptic vesicle membrane upon transmitter release observed under reversible blockage of membrane retrieval . J . Neurosci . 9 , 3844 – 3860 ( 1989 ) . Analysis of the shibire phenotype showing temperature - dependent reversible depletion and reformation of synaptic vesicles . 115 . Kawasaki , F . , Hazen , M . & Ordway , R . W . Fast synaptic fatigue in shibire mutants reveals a rapid requirement for dynamin in synaptic vesicle membrane trafficking . Nature Neurosci . 3 , 859 – 860 ( 2000 ) . 116 . Kang , B . H . , Busse , J . S . & Bednarek , S . Y . Members of the Arabidopsis dynamin - like gene family , ADL1 , are essential for plant cytokinesis and polarized cell growth . Plant Cell 15 , 899 – 913 ( 2003 ) . 117 . Kang , B . H . , Rancour , D . M . & Bednarek , S . Y . The dynamin - like protein ADL1C is essential for plasma membrane maintenance during pollen maturation . Plant J . 35 , 1 – 15 ( 2003 ) . 118 . Arimura , S . & Tsutsumi , N . A dynamin - like protein ( ADL2b ) , rather than FtsZ , is involved in Arabidopsis mitochondrial division . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 5727 – 5731 ( 2002 ) . 119 . Lam , B . C . , Sage , T . L . , Bianchi , F . & Blumwald , E . Regulation of ADL6 activity by its associated molecular network . Plant J . 31 , 565 – 576 ( 2002 ) . 120 . Jin , J . B . et al . A new dynamin - like protein , ADL6 , is involved in trafficking from the trans - Golgi network to the central vacuole in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 13 , 1511 – 1526 ( 2001 ) . 121 . Nishida , K . et al . Dynamic recruitment of dynamin for final mitochondrial severance in a primitive red alga . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 2146 – 2151 ( 2003 ) . 122 . Lee , E . & De Camilli , P . Dynamin at actin tails . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 161 – 166 ( 2002 ) . 123 . Qualmann , B . , Roos , J . , DiGregorio , P . J . & Kelly , R . B . Syndapin I , a synaptic dynamin - binding protein that associates with the neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 501 – 513 ( 1999 ) . 124 . Olichon , A . et al . Loss of OPA1 perturbates the mitochondrial inner membrane structure and integrity , leading to cytochrome c release and apoptosis . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 7743 – 7746 ( 2003 ) . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 147 R E V I E W S 125 . Delettre , C . et al . Nuclear gene OPA1 , encoding a mitochondrial dynamin - related protein , is mutated in dominant optic atrophy . Nature Genet . 26 , 207 – 210 ( 2000 ) . 126 . Alexander , C . et al . OPA1 , encoding a dynamin - related GTPase , is mutated in autosomal dominant optic atrophy linked to chromosome 3q28 . Nature Genet . 26 , 211 – 215 ( 2000 ) . References 125 and 126 show the link between dominant optic atrophy ( DOA ) and mutations in a dynamin - superfamily member OPA1 . 127 . Toomes , C . et al . Spectrum , frequency and penetrance of OPA1 mutations in dominant optic atrophy . Hum . Mol . Genet . 10 , 1369 – 1378 ( 2001 ) . 128 . Pesch , U . E . et al . OPA1 mutations in patients with autosomal dominant optic atrophy and evidence for semi - dominant inheritance . Hum . Mol . Genet . 10 , 1359 – 1368 ( 2001 ) . 129 . Thiselton , D . L . et al . A comprehensive survey of mutations in the OPA1 gene in patients with autosomal dominant optic atrophy . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 43 , 1715 – 1724 ( 2002 ) . 130 . Delettre , C . , Lenaers , G . , Pelloquin , L . , Belenguer , P . & Hamel , C . P . OPA1 ( Kjer type ) dominant optic atrophy : a novel mitochondrial disease . Mol . Genet . Metab . 75 , 97 – 107 ( 2002 ) . 131 . Marchbank , N . J . et al . Deletion of the OPA1 gene in a dominant optic atrophy family : evidence that haploinsufficiency is the cause of disease . J . Med . Genet . 39 , e47 ( 2002 ) . 132 . Carr , J . F . & Hinshaw , J . E . Dynamin assembles into spirals under physiological salt conditions upon the addition of GDP and γ - phosphate analogues . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 28030 – 28035 ( 1997 ) . 133 . Owen , D . J . et al . Crystal structure of the amphiphysin - 2 SH3 domain and its role in the prevention of dynamin ring formation . EMBO J . 17 , 5273 – 5285 ( 1998 ) . 134 . Kochs , G . , Janzen , C . , Hohenberg , H . & Haller , O . Antivirally active MxA protein sequesters La Crosse virus nucleocapsid protein into perinuclear complexes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 3153 – 3158 ( 2002 ) . 135 . Mozdy , A . D . , McCaffery , J . M . & Shaw , J . M . Dnm1p GTPase - mediated mitochondrial fission is a multi - step process requiring the novel integral membrane component Fis1p . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 367 – 380 ( 2000 ) . 136 . Binns , D . D . et al . The mechanism of GTP hydrolysis by dynamin II : a transient kinetic study . Biochemistry 39 , 7188 – 7196 ( 2000 ) . 137 . Richter , M . F . , Schwemmle , M . , Herrmann , C . , Wittinghofer , A . & Staeheli , P . Interferon - induced MxA protein . GTP binding and GTP hydrolysis properties . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 13512 – 13517 ( 1995 ) . 138 . Schwemmle , M . & Staeheli , P . The interferon - induced 67 - kDa guanylate - binding protein ( hGBP1 ) is a GTPase that converts GTP to GMP . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 11299 – 11305 ( 1994 ) . 139 . Praefcke , G . J . , Geyer , M . , Schwemmle , M . , Robert Kalbitzer , H . & Herrmann , C . Nucleotide - binding characteristics of human guanylate - binding protein 1 ( hGBP1 ) and identification of the third GTP - binding motif . J . Mol . Biol . 292 , 321 – 332 ( 1999 ) . 140 . Schweins , T . et al . Substrate - assisted catalysis as a mechanism for GTP hydrolysis of p21ras and other GTP - binding proteins . Nature Struct . Biol . 2 , 36 – 44 ( 1995 ) . 141 . John , J . et al . Kinetics of interaction of nucleotides with nucleotide - free H - ras p21 . Biochemistry 29 , 6058 – 6065 ( 1990 ) . 142 . Berman , D . M . , Wilkie , T . M . & Gilman , A . G . GAIP and RGS4 are GTPase - activating proteins for the Gi subfamily of G protein α subunits . Cell 86 , 445 – 452 ( 1996 ) . 143 . McEwen , D . P . , Gee , K . R . , Kang , H . C . & Neubig , R . R . Fluorescent BODIPY - GTP analogs : real - time measurement of nucleotide binding to G proteins . Anal . Biochem . 291 , 109 – 117 ( 2001 ) . 144 . Otero , A . D . Transphosphorylation and G protein activation . Biochem . Pharmacol . 39 , 1399 – 1404 ( 1990 ) . 145 . Bourne , H . R . , Sanders , D . A . & McCormick , F . The GTPase superfamily : a conserved switch for diverse cell functions . Nature 348 , 125 – 132 ( 1990 ) . Competing interests statement The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests . Online links DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : Flybase : http : / / flybase . bio . indiana . edu / Fzo1 | shibire Interpro : http : / / www . ebi . ac . uk / interpro / amphyphysin | dynamin Saccharomyces genome database : http : / / www . yeastgenome . org / Mgm1 | Vps1 Schizosaccharomyces pombe GeneDB : http : / / www . genedb . org / genedb / pombe / index . jsp Msp1 Swiss - Prot : http : / / us . expasy . org / sprot / atlastin | DymA | GBP1 | Mammalian dynamin 1 | Mammalian dynamin 2 | Mammalian dynamin 3 | mitofusin | MxA | MxB | OPA1 | Ras TAIR : http : / / www . arabidopsis . org / ADL2 | ADL6 | ARC5 FURTHER INFORMATION Dynamin homepage : http : / / www2 . mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk / Dynamin / Dynamin web site : http : / / www2 . mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk / Dynamin / Dynamin . html GTPase domainweb site : http : / / www2 . mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk / Dynamin / GTPase . html Dynamin assembly : http : / / www2 . mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk / Dynamin / Middle - GED . html PH domainweb site : http : / / www2 . mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk / Dynamin / PH . html PRD domainweb site : http : / / www2 . mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk / Dynamin / PRD . html DymA / GBP structures : http : / / www2 . mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk / Dynamin / DymA - GBP . html GTP - binding motifs web site : http : / / www2 . mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk / Dynamin / GTPbinding - motifs . htm GTP - binding residues web site : http : / / www2 . mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk / Dynamin / GTPbinding - residues . html Shibire web site : http : / / www2 . mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk / Dynamin / Shibire . html Oligomerization web site : http : / / www2 . mrc - lmb . cam . ac . uk / Dynamin / Oligomerisation . html The OMIM OPA1 entry : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / dispomim . cgi ? id = 605290 More dynamin information : http : / / www . mayo . edu / mcniven _ lab / family . html Mx proteins : http : / / www . ukl . uni - freiburg . de / microbio / vir / haller / groupintro . htm Access to this interactive links box is free online . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup