Mutations in twinstar , a Drosophila Gene Encoding a Cofilin / ADF Homologue , Result in Defects in Centrosome Migration and Cytokinesis Kristin C . Gunsalus , * Silvia Bonaccorsi , * Erika Williams , * Fiammetta Verni , * Maurizio Gatti , * and Michael L . Goldberg * • Section of Genetics and Development , CorneU University , Ithaca , New York 14853 ; and ~ Centro di Genetica Evoluzionistica del CNR , and Dipartimento di Genetica e Biologia Molecolare , Universit ~ di Roma " La Sapienza " , 00185 Roma , Italy Abstract . We describe the phenotypic and molecular characterization of twinstar ( tsr ) , an essential gene in Drosophila melanogaster . Two P - element induced al - leles of tsr ( tsr l and tsr 2 ) result in late larval or pupal le - thality . Cytological examination of actively dividing tis - sues in these mutants reveals defects in cytokinesis in both mitotic ( larval neuroblast ) and meiotic ( larval tes - tis ) cells . In addition , mutant spermatocytes show de - fects in aster migration and separation during prophase / prometaphase of both meiotic divisions . We have cloned the gene affected by these mutations and shown that it codes for a 17 - kD protein in the cofilin / ADF family of small actin severing proteins . A cDNA for this gene has previously been described by Edwards et al . ( 1994 ) . Northern analysis shows that the tsr gene is expressed throughout development , and that the tsr a and tsr 2 alleles are hypomorphs that accumulate de - creased levels of tsr mRNA . These findings prompted us to examine actin behavior during male meiosis to vi - sualize the effects of decreased twinstar protein activity on actin dynamics in vivo . Strikingly , both mutants ex - hibit abnormal accumulations of F - actin . Large actin aggregates are seen in association with centrosomes in mature primary spermatocytes . Later , during ana / telo - phase of both meiotic divisions , aberrantly large and misshaped structures appear at the site of contractile ring formation and fail to disassemble at the end of te - lophase , in contrast with wild - type . We discuss these re - suits in terms of possible roles of the actin - based cy - toskeleton in centrosome movement and in cytokinesis . ECULATED interactions between actin and actin bind - ing proteins provide an important structural basis for many cellular processes in eukaryotes , such as cell - cell adhesion , cell outgrowth and motility , muscle con - traction , and cytokinesis . Changes in the intracellular lo - calization and organization of actin are mediated by a rep - ertoire of actin - associated proteins . These fall into several classes based on their effects on actin assembly and dy - namics in vitro : proteins with cross - linking , bundling , cap - ping , severing , polymerizing / depolymerizing , monomer se - questering , and motor activities have been described ( reviewed by Vandekerckove and Vancompernalle , 1992 ) . However , defining the role that each actin - associated pro - tein plays in vivo and how multiple activities are coordi - nated remains a challenging task . Proteins in the cofilin / actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) 1 family have been identified in a wide range of eukaryotic organisms , from yeast to plants to humans . These small molecular mass ( 15 - 20 kD ) actin binding proteins consti - Address correspondence to Dr . M . L . Goldberg , Section of Genetics and Development , 425 Biotechnology Building , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY 14853 . Tel . : ( 607 ) 254 - 4802 . FAX : ( 607 ) 255 - 6249 . tute one of the two known classes of actin filament sever - ing proteins ; the other is comprised of the gelsolin / ffag - min / villin - type proteins ( see Vandekerckhove and Van - compernolle , 1992 ) . In addition to severing , cofilin - like proteins also display actin filament and monomer binding activities in vitro . The properties of these proteins in vitro may be influenced by pH ( Yonezawa et al . , 1985 ; Hawkins et al . , 1993 ; Hayden et al . , 1993 ; Iida et al . , 1993 ) , the pres - ence of membrane phospholipids ( Yonezawa et al . , 1990 ) , other actin binding proteins ( Nishida et al . , 1984 ; Abe et al . , 1990 ; Maciver et al . , 1991 ) , and in some cases , by phos - phorylation of the protein itself ( Morgan et al . , 1993 ) . These and other observations hint at how the activities of cofilin / ADF proteins might be regulated intracellularly . Our current appreciation of the biochemical behavior of these molecules is not reflected by an understanding of the precise roles they play in vivo , although cofilin - like pro - teins are known to provide an essential function both in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( Iida et al . , 1993 ; Moon et al . , 1993 ) and in the nematode Caenorhabditus elegans ( McKim et al . , 1994 ) . The yeast cofilin gene COF1 is re - quired for spore viability and growth , but the nature of the essential function or functions that are improperly per - © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 95 / | 2 / 1243 / 17 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , Number 5 , December 1995 1243 - 1259 1243 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m formed in the mutants is not known . In C . elegans , two slightly different cofilin - like proteins are generated by al - ternative splicing . A small deletion removing part of both transcripts is lethal ( McKim et al . , 1994 ) ; other mutations apparently affecting only one transcript are viable and re - sult in paralysis and disorganized muscle filaments ( Wa - terston et al . , 1980 ; McKim et al . , 1988 ) . Vertebrates carry at least two distinct members of this family , cofilin and ADF / destrin , which differ both in their biochemical prop - erties in vitro and in their expression patterns in different tissues and developmental stages ( Bamburg and Bray , 1987 ; Matsuzaki et al . , 1988 ; Abe et al . , 1990 ; Moriyama et al . , 1990a ) . Both porcine cofilin and destrin cDNAs can rescue the viability of S . cerevisiae coil mutant spores ( Iida et al . , 1993 ) . Thus , the biochemical differences seen in vitro between these proteins is insignificant for yeast cells , but multicellular eukaryotes may still require inde - pendent functions supplied by two or more members of the cofilin gene family . In this paper , we describe both the molecular analysis of the Drosophila gene twinstar ( tsr ) , which encodes a cofilin / ADF homologue , and the phenotypic consequences of mutations in this gene . Animals mutant for tsr die at the larval - pupal boundary and exhibit frequent failures in cy - tokinesis in both mitotic and meiotic cells . In addition , they show abnormalities in centrosome migration to the opposite ends of spermatocyte nuclei during the two mei - otic divisions . These defects appear to be related to dra - matic changes observed in the actin cytoskeleton in mu - tant spermatocytes . Materials and Methods Drosophila Stocks The twinstar I ( tsr 1 ) allele was generated in a P element screen in the labo - ratory of Dr . J . Merriam ( University of California , Los Angeles , CA ) by the transposition of the single , marked P element pLacA92 ( O ' Kane and Gehring , 1987 ) . The tsr 2 allele was identified by Dr . Trisha Wilson ( Stan - ford University , Palo Alto , CA ) by screening a different collection of mu - tations induced with the marked P element P - lacW ( Bier et al . , 1989 ) . Both alleles were maintained as heterozygotes balanced either by the sec - ond chromosome balancer CyO or by TSTL 14 , a translocation between CyO and the third chromosome balancer TM6B ( see Gatti and Goldberg , 1991 ) . The deficiency strains Df ( 2R ) or BR - 6 , Df ( 2R ) or BR11 , and Df ( 2R ) GlO - BR - 27 were constructed and kindly provided by Dr . Bruce Reed ( White - head Institute , Cambridge , MA ) . The latter deletion is associated with an inversion , In ( 2LR ) ItG " ) LBR - 27 R , constructed using autosynaptic elements ( see Gubb et al . , 1988 ) . Df ( 2R ) bwS4°is described in Simpson ( 1983 ) . Germline Transformation The 6 . 4 - kb genomic fragment shown in Fig . 7 A ( RS6 . 4 ) was subcloned from Bluescript KS II + ( Stratagene Inc . , La Jolla , CA ) into the transfor - mation vector pW8 ( Klemenz et al . , 1987 ) using the NotI and XhoI sites present in both polylinkers . This putative pW8 - tsr + construct was injected into w ; Sb e [ A2 - 3 ] / TM6 embryos , which supply the transposase required for P element transposition ( Robertson et al . , 1988 ) . pW8 carries a mini - white + gene as a selectable marker . Survivors were mated individually to Z 1 W lle4 ( Lindsley and Zimm , 1992 ) , and progeny were screened for trans - mission of the w + eye color . Several lines carrying independent insertions of pW8 - tsr ÷ were recovered . One of these lines carried a nonlethal inser - tion of pW8 - tsr ÷ on the third chromosome that was able to rescue the le - thal , mitotic , and meiotic phenotypes of both twinstar alleles when present in either one or two copies . Stocks homozygous for [ pW8 - tsr + ] and either tsr I or tsr 2 were established ; Southern analysis of genomic DNA con - firmed the presence of tsr mutant alleles and tsr ÷ transgenes in these lines ( data not shown ) . Cytology Larval Neuroblasts . Homozygous tsr larvae were selected from stocks or crosses in which mutant tsr alleles were balanced over the TSTL 14 translo - cation . Because this balancer carries the dominant larval marker Tubby ( Tb ) , homozygous mutant individuals ( phenotypically non - Tb ) can be un - ambiguously distinguished from heterozygous tsr / TSTL 14 larvae ( pbeno - typically Tb ) . Mutant and control brains were dissected , fixed , and squashed in aceto - orcein according to our usual procedure ( Gatti and Goldberg , 1991 ) . To estimate the mitotic index of tsr mutants relative to controls , we determined the average number of mitotic figures per optic field in control ( Oregon R ) and mutant brain squashes ( Gatti and Baker , 1989 ) . The optic field chosen for this analysis is the circular area defined by a phase - contrast Neofluar 100× oil - immersion Zeiss objective , using 10× oculars with the Optovar set at 1 . 25× ( Carl Zeiss , Inc . , Thornwood , NY ) . Larval Testes . To examine spermatid morphology in live material , lar - val testes were dissected in testis isolation buffer ( 183 mM KCI , 47 mM NaC1 , 10 mM Tris - HCl , pH 6 . 8 ) and gently squashed in 2 ~ zl of the same buffer under a 20 × 20 coverslip . These live preparations were immedi - ately scored by phase contrast microscopy . Two different procedures were used for cytological analysis of fixed testes . For simultaneous tubulin immunostaining and Hoechst 33258 stain - ing , testes were fixed and processed as described by Cenci et al . ( 1994 ) ; tu - bulin was detected using an anti - a - tubulin Ab raised against chick brain microtubules ( Amersham Corp . , Arlington Heights , IL ; Blose et al . , 1982 ) . For simultaneous visualization of chromatin , microtubules , and F - actin , testes squashes were prepared according to Cenci et al . ( 1994 ) , but after freezing in liquid nitrogen and removal of the coverslip , squashes were fixed for 10 min by immersion in ethanol precooled at - 20°C , fol - lowed by a 7 - min treatment with freshly made 3 . 7 % formaldehyde in PBS . Slides were then washed two times in PBS ( 5 min each ) and immersed for 30 min in PBT ( PBS + 0 . 1 % Triton - X 100 ) . After this treatment , they were incubated for 1 h with anti - ct - tubulin monoclonal Ab diluted 1 : 50 in PBS , washed two times in PBS ( 5 min each ) , and then incubated for 1 h with the secondary antibody ( sheep anti - mouse IgG , F ( ab ) 2 fragment , conju - gated with 5 ( 6 ) - carboxy - fluorescein - N - hydroxysuccinimide ester [ FLUOS ] , no . 1214616 ; Boehringer Mannheim ) diluted 1 : 15 in PBS . Tubulin immu - nostained slides , after two 5 - min washes in PBS , were incubated for 2 h at 37°C in rhodamine - labeled phalloidin ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , Ore - gon ) dissolved in PBS ( 100 I ~ l of the stock solution were vacuum dried and dissolved in 200 t ~ 1 PBS ) . After a quick wash in PBS , slides were stained with Hoechst 33258 and mounted as described by Cenci et al . ( 1994 ) . Fluorescence Microscopy Preparations stained with Hoechst 33258 and anti - tubulin Ab plus FLUOS - conjugated secondary Ab were examined with a Zeiss III photo - microscope equipped for epifluorescence with an HBO 100W mercury lamp ( Osram ) . Hoechst 33258 and FLUOS fuorescence were detected us - ing the 0 . 1 ( BP 365 / 11 , FT 395 , LP 397 ) and the 0 . 9 ( BP 450 - 490 , FT 510 , LP 420 ) Zeiss filter sets , respectively . Photomicrographs were recorded on Kodak T - MAX 100 film . Preparations stained with Hoechst 33258 , anti - tubulin Ab plus FLUOS - conjugated secondary Ab , and rhodamine - labeled phalloidin were examined with a Zeiss Axioplan microscope equipped for epifluo - rescence with an HBO 50W mercury lamp ( Osram ) and with a cooled charge - coupled device ( Photometrics Inc . , Woburn , MA ) . Hoechst 33258 , FLUOS , and rhodamine fluorescence were detected with the 0 . 1 , 10 ( BP 450 - 490 , FT 510 , LP 515 - 565 ) and 15 ( BP 546 , FT 580 , LP 590 ) Zeiss filter sets , respectively . The fluorescence signals were recorded separately as gray - scale digital images using IP Lab Spectrum software . Images were then converted to Photoshop format ( Adobe Systems , Inc . , Mountain View , CA ) , pseudocolored , and merged . Nucleic Acids Molecular techniques not specifically outlined here were performed using standard protocols ( Sambrook et al . , 1989 ) . Isolation oftwinstar Genomic and cDNAs . 0 . 5 Ixg of total genomic DNA isolated from heterozygous twinstar adults was digested with Sau3A ( for tsr 1 ) or with either EcoR1 or PstI ( for tsr2 ) . The DNA was precipitated with ethanol , dried , and then resuspended in 400 Ixl of DNA ligation buffer . Circular DNA containing one end of the P element adjacent to twinstar genomic sequences was cloned by one of two methods . For tsr ~ , the ligation was amplified with primers from the P element ends using an The Joumal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 1244 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m inverse PCR protocol ( Ochman et al . , 1988 ) . The PCR product was di - gested with restriction enzymes unique to the PCR primers and cloned into Bluescript KS II + . For tsr 2 , the ligation mix was transformed directly into XL - 1 Blue cells by the CaC12 method and desired recombinants were selected with ampicillin . This " plasmid rescue " ( Pirotta , 1986 ) was possi - ble since the P element causing the tsr 2 mutation contains a bacterial ori - gin of replication and a selectable marker for ampicillin resistance . Wild - type genomic clones were isolated from an EMBL3 phage genomic library ( kindly supplied by J . Tamkun , University of California , Santa Cruz , CA ) using the PCR product described above as a probe . Restriction fragments were subcloned into Bluescript KS II + . The full - length twinstar eDNA was isolated from a 0 - - 4 - h embryonic library ( Brown and Kafatos , 1988 ) using genomic fragment RS6 . 4 ( Fig . 7 A ) as a probe . Sequencing of Genomic and eDNAs . Sequencing of double - stranded plas - mid DNA was performed by the dideoxy method ( Sanger et al . , 1977 ) us - ing Sequenase version 2 . 0 ( United States Biochemical Corp . , Cleveland , OH ) or the Ladderman kit ( Takara Biochemical Inc . , Berkeley , CA ) , 35S - dATP ( Amersham ) , 6 % Long Ranger ( AT Biochem , Malvern , PA ) gels , and either Bluescript primers or sequence - specific primers ( Biotech - nology Synthesis and Analytical Facility , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY ) . The twinstar eDNA and the 6 . 4 - kb genomic fragment used to rescue the tsr 1 and tsr 2 mutants ( RS6 . 4 ) were completely sequenced on both strands . Sequence analysis was performed using the GCG ( Devereux et al . , 1984 ) and MacVector / AssemblyLIGN software packages ( Kodak / IBI , New Ha - ven , CT ) . Computer searches of GenBank and EMBL were performed us - ing FASTA ( Pearson and Lipman , 1988 ) . The alignment of related pro - teins was generated with the assistance of the Clustal V program included in GCG . To obtain sequences at the 5 ' end of tsr messages , RACE ampli - fication of twinstar mRNA from wild - type ( Oregon R ) or mutant animals was performed on a Hybaid OmniGene thermal cycler using a GIBCO BRL kit and three nested primers specific to the twinstar mRNA ( GIBCO BRL , Gaithersburg , MD ) . Primer 5 ' - AGTTTATTGGCGGTCGG - 3 ' was used for reverse transcription . The resulting first strand was PCR ampli - fied using primer 5 ' - CTAGAAAACTGGTCGTAC - 3 ' . This product was reamplified using primer 5 ' - TGCAGACATCAGACACAGTFACAC - 3 ' , which was located just downstream of the first ( 1 . 5 kb ) intron to ensure that final products were not due to contaminating genomic DNA . RACE products were cloned using the pCR - Script SK ( + ) cloning kit ( Strat - agene ) . Northern Analysis oftsr mRNAs . Total RNA was isolated by a modifi - cation of the method of Chirgwin et al . ( 1979 ) . Animals were homoge - nized in modified G buffer ( 6 M guanidine thiocyanate ; 0 . 025 M sodium acetate , pH 7 . 0 ; 5 mM dithiothreitol ) plus 0 . 5 % N - lauryl sarcosinate and 0 . 5 % diethylpyrocarbonate , then extracted once with an equal volume of a 1 : 1 mixture of phenol and chloroform / isoamylalcohol ( 24 : 1 ) . After cen - trifugation , the aqueous layer was recovered and RNA was precipitated by adding 1 / 50 vol of I M acetic acid and 1 / 2 vol of ethanol . This was incu - bated at - 20°C for 3 h , and the RNA pelleted by centrifugation in a mi - crocentrifuge . The pellet was resuspended in one - half the original volume of G buffer , and the RNA was repreeipitated as before . Total RNA was resuspended in sterile DEPC - treated H20 and quantitated by absorbance at 260 nm . For the developmental Northern , poly ( A ) + RNA was isolated using PolyA - Tract System III ( Promega Corp . , Madison , WI ) . Northern sample buffer was added to samples before electrophoresis on 1 . 2 % agar - ose - formaldehyde gels as described in Sambrook et al . ( 1989 ) . RNAs were then transferred to Nylon 66 ( Genescreen ; Schleicher & Schuell , Inc . , Keene , NH ) neutral membrane by electroblotting in 0 . 1x TAE or , for the developmental Northern , to Z Probe membrane ( Bio - Rad Labs . , Rich - mond , CA ) by vacuum blotting . 300 p , l of 2 . 5 mg / ml salmon sperm DNA was added to purified random hexanucleotide - primed probes labeled us - ing ~ - [ 32p ] dCTP ( Amersham ) and the mixture boiled for 5 min before hy - bridization . Membranes were prebybridized for at least 1 b at 42°C in 50 % formamide , 5x SSPE , 2x Denhardt ' s , and 0 . 1 % SDS before overnight hy - bridization at 42°C in the same buffer . Two 45 - min washes were per - formed at 42°C in 50 % formamide , 5x SSPE , 0 . 5 % SDS followed by two 20 - min washes at 65°C in lx SSPE , 0 . 5 % SDS . Membranes were then ex - posed to Kodak X - ray film at - 70°C with intensifying screens . Membranes were hybridized with a D . melanogaster rp49 clone ( O ' Connell and Ros - bash , 1984 ) as a control for loading . Results Identification of the twinstar Locus We have previously described a screening procedure to identify mutations causing aberrations during mitosis ( Gatti and Baker , 1989 ; Gatti and Goldberg , 1991 ) . One would expect that homozygosity for mutations in many genes en - coding components of the mitotic apparatus would result in lethality in late larval ( third instar ) or pupal stages . This is because the heterozygous mother of homozygous mu - tant individuals would contribute maternally supplied prod - ucts to enable the earliest rounds of embryonic and larval mitosis to proceed . However , metamorphosis could not oc - cur because the homozygous mutant zygotic genome would be unable to direct the synthesis of these molecules in imaginal discs , histoblasts , or in the larval brain . Examina - tion of cell division in mutant larval brains would there - fore reveal potential mitotic defects . This strategy has been used with considerable success to identify a variety of mitotic mutations in Drosophila ( reviewed by Ripoll et al . , 1987 ; Glover , 1989 ; Gatti and Goldberg , 1991 ) . We identified the mutation twinstafl ( tsr 1 ) by screening a collection of recessive , larval / pupal lethal mutations for mitotic abnormalities in larval brains ; the mutation twinstar 2 ( tst a ) was recovered in a similar manner in the laboratory of Dr . M . Fuller ( Stanford University School of Medicine , Palo Alto , CA ) by screening a different collection of muta - tions ( see Materials and Methods ) . ts / and tsr 2 mutants ex - hibit similar mitotic phenotypes ( see below ) and fail to complement for both lethality and cytologically detectable mitotic defects . On the basis of several criteria , the twinstar gene defined by these two mutations is located near the border between polytene chromosome intervals 60A and 60B ( bands 60A10 - 60B1 ) . First , probes containing P element - specific sequences hybridize only to this location in tst a and tsr 2 mutant sali - vary gland chromosome squashes ( data not shown ) . Sec - ond , deficiency mapping of tsr mutations places the gene in the region 60A8 - 16 ( Fig . 1 ) . Experiments kindly performed by Dr . Bruce Reed ( Whitehead Institute , Cambridge , MA ) have established that the tsr mutations are not allelic to any of the large number of genes he has previously characterized in this interval of chromosome 2R . Thus , twinstar represents a new lethal complementation group in this region . Finally , both alleles have been reverted by transposase - mediated excision of the P elements ( see Bellen et al . , 1989 ; Gatti and Goldberg , 1991 ) , demonstrat - ing that the P element insertions in the 60A10 - 60B1 inter - val are in fact the cause of both the tsr 1 and tsr 2 mutations . The Cytological Phenotype of Twinstar Mutant Neuroblasts In larval neuroblasts of tsta / tsr 1 , tsr ~ / tsr 2 , and tsta / tsr 2 indi - viduals , the major cytological consequence of lesions in the twinstar gene is the appearance of a significant proportion of polyploid cells ( Fig . 2 ; Table I ) . Other aspects of mitosis appear to be largely unaffected . The mitotic index , a pa - rameter measuring the frequency of cells engaged in mito - sis , is nearly normal ( Table I ) . The percentages of mitotic cells that are in anaphase in mutants are very similar to wild - type . Chromosomes in mutant neuroblasts seem to be normal : we see no evidence of irregular chromosome con - densation or of chromosome breakage ( Gatti and Baker , 1989 ) . The phenotype observed in both tsr 1 and tsr 2 brains is similar to that associated with mutations in a variety of Gunsalus et al . Centrosome Migration and Cytokinesis Require tsr + 1245 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Figure 1 . Deficiency mapping of the twinstar locus , twinstar fails to complement Df ( 2R ) or 8R - 6 ( 59D5 - 10 ; 60B3 - 8 ) and Df ( 2R ) or BRll ( 59F6 - 8 ; 60A8 - 16 ) ( filled bars ) , but does complement Df ( 2R ) bw TM ( 59DS - 11 ; 60A7 ) and Df ( 2R ) GlO - BR - 27 ( 59F3 ; 60A8 - 16 ) ( open bars ) . Stretches of DNA that are absent in deficiency strains are represented by solid bars , with uncertainties in deficiency break - point ends indicated by crosshatching ; the twinstar locus is thus contained within the shaded region ( 60A8 - 16 ) . The right - hand breakpoint of Df ( 2R ) or BR - 1I is shown to be distal to that of Df ( 2R ) G10 - BR - 27 based on genetic mapping against other com - plementation groups in this region ( Dr . Bruce Reed , personal communication ) . Probes containing sequences found within the P element transposons also hybridize to the region 60A10 - 60B1 in squashes of salivary gland chromosomes ( not shown ) . genes that cause defects in cytokinesis ( Gatti and Baker , 1989 ; Karess et al . , 1991 ; Castrillon and Wasserman , 1994 ; Neufeld and Rubin , 1994 ) . Successive failures in cytokine - sis would result in cells that increase their ploidy geometri - cally , giving rise to large polyploid cells such as that shown in Fig . 2 d . The normality of other mitotic parameters sug - gests that these lesions in the twinstar gene do not signifi - cantly alter other mitotic processes . An example of this specificity is shown in Fig . 2 e , which demonstrates that polyploid cells , which must already be depleted for normal tsr ÷ function , are nonetheless able to enter anaphase . Fig . 2 fshows an anaphase spindle that is multipolar due to the retention of several centrosomes in a single cell , another expected result of failures in cytokinesis . Meiotic Aberrations Associated with Mutations in twinstar Male meiosis offers a particularly suitable system for the analysis of the cytological consequences of mutations af - fecting cell division . Primary spermatocyte nuclei are ~ 25 times larger than neuroblast nuclei and exhibit compara - tively larger spindles that can be clearly detected by tubu - lin immunostaining . We have recently provided a detailed description of chromosome and microtubule organization during wild - type male meiosis , which we have been able to subdivide into cytologically well - defined stages ( Cenci et al . , 1994 ) . Because meiosis occurs in the testes of third in - Figure 2 . Mitotic defects in larval neuroblasts of tsr mu - tants . ( a ) Diploid female metaphase and ( b ) diploid anaphase from Oregon R con - trois . ( c ) Tetraploid meta - phase , ( d ) highly polyploid metaphase , ( e ) tetraploid anaphase , and ( f ) tripolar polyploid anaphase from tsta / tsr z larval brains . Bar , 5 Ixm . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 1246 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Table I . Frequency of Polyploid Cells and Mitotic Parameters in Larval Neuroblasts of tsr Mutants No . of metaphases No . of anaphases Genotype No . of brains diploid polyploid diploid polyploid No . of cells scored % polyploid figures % anaphases Mitotic index * tsrl / tsr I 23 1190 211 233 10 1644 13 . 4 tsr2 / tsr 2 10 937 108 232 3 1280 8 . 7 tsrl / tsr 2 9 519 128 117 9 773 17 . 7 Oregon R 5 478 0 94 0 572 0 . 0 14 . 8 18 . 4 16 . 3 16 . 4 0 . 78 0 . 92 0 . 84 0 . 71 * Mitotic figures were scored every fourth optic field in each brain examined q see Materials and Methods ) . star larvae , we were able to analyze the meiotic divisions in mutant tsr larvae for potential aberrations . Improper Aster Migration during ProphaselPrometaphase of Both Meiotic Divisions . A unique phenotypic consequence of lesions in twinstar occurs in primary spermatocytes at the prophase / prometaphase transition of meiosis I , and is revealed when fixed mutant testes are stained with anti - bodies directed against tubulin . In wild - type males , cen - trosomes reside just under the plasma membrane through - out most of the primary spermatocyte stage ( see Fig . 10 below ) , during which growth and gene expression prepare the cell for subsequent morphological differentiation ( Tates , 1971 ; reviewed by Fuller , 1993 ) . Near the end of this spermatocyte maturation phase , duplicated cen - trosomes ( each containing a pair of centrioles ) migrate to - gether to the nuclear membrane , where they nucleate prominent asters ( Tates , 1971 ; Cenci , 1994 ; see also Fig . 9 c below ) . During late prophase / early prometaphase of the first meiotic division ( stage Mla ) , the two asters separate from each other and migrate around the periphery of the nuclear envelope , in preparation for the establishment of the bipolar spindle . By early prometaphase , asters are lo - cated directly opposite each other on either side of the nu - cleus , in close apposition to the nuclear membrane . Wild - type spermatocytes at the Mla stage are shown in Fig . 3 a . In tsr spermatocytes at the Mla stage , the two asters of - ten remain in close proximity to each other and fail to as - sociate with the nuclear envelope ( Fig . 3 b ) . We have named the twinstar gene after this characteristic aberrant arrangement of asters . This effect occurs in a very high proportion of tsr primary spermatocytes , approaching 100 % in tsr 1 mutants ( Table II ) , but is almost never seen in wild - type . Somewhat later , in the Mlb stage , asters in tsr mu - tants can be seen to separate slightly ( Fig . 3 c ) , but remain unassociated with the nuclear membrane . It is remarkable that subsequent to the M1 stage , the spindles in tsr mutant spermatocytes progressively resume a relatively normal position and appearance and seem in - distinguishable from wild - type throughout the remainder of the first meiotic division ( Fig . 4 ) . However , after com - Figure 3 . Aster migration in meiotic prometaphase I of tsrt / tsr I males . ( Left ) Phase contrast ; ( middle ) anti - tubu - lin staining ; ( right ) Hoechst 33258 staining of DNA . ( a ) A primary spermatocyte in the Mla stage from Oregon R controls , showing well sep - arated asters closely apposed to the nuclear envelope . ( b and c ) Primary spermatocytes in ( b ) Mla and ( c ) Mlb stages from tsrl / tsr I males . Note the delay in migration and ab - normal positioning of asters with respect to the cell nu - cleus . Stage identification was based on the presence of in - tranuclear granules originat - ing from Y loop disintegra - tion and on the relative size of spermatocyte nuclei ( for details see Cenci et al . , 1994 ) . Bar , 10 txm . Gunsalus et al . Centrosome Migration and Cytokinesis Require tsr + 1247 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Table I1 . Meiotic Abnormalities in tsr Mutants Asters in prometaphase 1 Asters in prometaphase 1I Spermatids * Genotype Normal Irregular * % Irregular Normal Irregular * % Irregular 1 : 1 2 : 1 3 : 1 and 4 : 1 % Irregular tsrl / tsrl 2 117 98 . 3 34 91 72 . 8 422 108 73 30 . 0 tsr2 / tsr2 12 104 89 . 6 31 56 64 . 3 602 23 5 4 . 4 Oregon R 99 2 2 . 0 98 2 2 . 0 200 0 0 0 . 0 * Irregular positioning and / or delayed migration of asters . * Ratios refer to number of nuclei per Nebenkern . 1 : 1 , regular spermatids containing one nucleus and one Nebenkern of similar size . Failures in cytokinesis are revealed by other patterns ( see text ) : 2 : 1 , two nuclei associated with one large Nebenkern . 3 : 1 and 4 : 1 , three or four nuclei associated with one large Nebenkern . pletion of meiosis I , tsr prophase / prometaphase secondary spermatocytes ( stage M6a and M6b ) exhibit the same de - fect in aster migration and positioning observed in primary spermatocytes ( Fig . 5 ) . Here again , the spindles become more normal by metaphase II and retain a wild - type struc - ture throughout the remainder of meiosis II . Although te - lophase II tsr spindle structures look normal , we often observed an aberrant cross - like configuration of meiotic spindles that overlap at the midbody ( Fig . 5 j ) . Most likely this arrangement reflects a failure of the first meiotic cy - tokinesis and the consequent occurrence of two second di - visions within the same cell ( see below ) . The analysis of hundreds of ana - telophases of tsr mu - tants showed no evidence of irregular chromosome segre - gation during either meiotic division . We never observed lagging chromosomes or daughter nuclei of different size . In addition , tsr " onion stage " spermatids exhibit a uniform nuclear size ( see below ) . As it has been demonstrated that spermatid nuclear size is proportional to chromosome content ( Gonz ~ lez et al . , 1989 ) , this observation reinforces the conclusion that tsr does not affect chromosome segre - gation . Failure of Cytokinesis during Spermatogenesis in twinstar Larvae . During both meiotic divisions in wild - type sper - matocytes , mitochondria associate lengthwise along the spindle apparatus ( see Figs . 4 and 5 ; Cenci et al . , 1994 ) , which is pinched in half during cytokinesis , ensuring an even distribution of these organelles to each of the two daughter cells . Immediately after completion of meiosis , the mitochondria associated with each hemispindle fuse and form an interlaced conglomerate called the Nebenkern . Thus , each newly formed wild - type spermatid ( referred to as the onion stage ) consists of a round , phase - light nucleus associated with a single phase - dark Nebenkern of similar size ( Fig . 5 o ; reviewed by Fuller , 1993 ) . The most obvious defect in tsr mutants is seen in sper - matids at the onion stage . In tsr mutant testes , a substan - tial fraction of onion stage spermatids contain a single Nebenkern much larger than normal , along with four nor - mal - sized nuclei ( Fig . 5 q ; Table II ) . This phenotype re - Figure 4 . First meiotic division in tsr mutants . The three panels show the same partial cyst containing primary spermatocytes at different meiotic stages . ( Left ) Phase contrast ; ( middle ) anti - tubulin staining ; ( right ) Hoechst 33258 staining of DNA . 1 and 2 , spermatocytes in early meiotic prometaphase ( Mlb stage ) showing delayed migration and abnormal positioning of asters . 3 , prometaphase ( stage M2 ) , and 4 , metaphase ( stage M3 ) spermatocytes in which the asters have almost attained a regular bipolar arrangement . 5 , a morphologically normal mid - anaphase ( stage M6b ) . Bar , 10 I - tm . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 1248 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Figure 5 . Second meiotic di - vision and postmeiotic stages in tsr mutants , a - f show partial secondary sper - matocyte cysts observed by phase contrast microscopy ( a - c ) and after immunostain - ing with anti - tubulin Abs ( d - ] ) . ( a and d ) Prometaphase II ( stage M7 ) spermatocytes from Oregon R controls with normally positioned as - ters . ( b and e , c and f ) The same stage from tsrl / tsr l males showing delayed mi - gration and abnormal posi - tioning of asters , g - n show meiotic cells immunostained with anti - tubulin Abs ( g - j ) or stained with Hoechst 33258 ( k - n ) . ( g and k ) A metaphase cell in the M9 stage in which the asters have almost attained a regular bi - polar arrangement . ( h and l ) An early anaphase ( stage M10a ) , and ( i and m ) an early telophase ( stage Mll ) , both with regular spindles . ( j and n ) Two late telophase II occurring in the same cyto - plasm , showing overlapped central spindles , o - r show liv - ing spermatids at the onion stage observed with phase contrast . ( o ) Regular sper - matids from Oregon R con - trols with nuclei ( white discs ) and Nebenkerns ( dark discs ) of similar sizes . ( p - r ) Sper - matids from tsr mutants showing large Nebenkerns associated with ( p ) two , ( q ) four , or ( r ) three nuclei . See text for details on the origin of these aberrant sperma - rids . Bar , 10 p , m . flects a failure of cytokinesis at both meiosis I and II , as this would prevent proper subdivision of the mitochon - drial complement into four Nebenkerns ( reviewed by Fuller , 1993 ) . We also see cells with two normal - sized nuclei in association with an intermediate - size Nebenkern ( Fig . 5 p ; Table II ) , indicating a failure of cytokinesis at only one of the meiotic divisions . Because failure of cytokinesis in the first meiotic division would lead to cells containing two second division meiotic spindles ( see Fig . 5 , j and n ) that would probably encounter further difficulties in cytokine - sis , we believe that the spermatids with one Nebenkern and two nuclei are the result of second division cytokinesis failure . Finally , we observe spermatids containing one large Nebenkern plus three nuclei that are usually located in close proximity to a cell containing a normal - size Neben - kern and a single regular nucleus ( Fig . 5 r ; Table II ) . These are most likely to arise if the four hemispindles in second - ary spermatocytes derived from cytokinesis I failures ( see again Fig . 5 , j and n ) orient in such a way that mitochon - drial fusion occurs asymmetrically , yielding a small and a large Nebenkern associated with one and three nuclei , re - spectively . Molecular Analysis of the twinstar Gene Molecular Cloning and Transcriptional Analysis of twinstar . A small stretch of DNA adjacent to the P element inser - tion in tsr t was initially cloned using an inverse PCR proto - col and then used to screen a wild - type Drosophila ge - nomic library . A 6 . 4 - kb EcoR1 - SalI subclone from this library ( RS6 . 4 ) surrounds the tst a and tsr e P element inser - tion sites ( Fig . 6 A ) . Whole genome Southern analysis con - firmed the presence of P element insertions within this fragment in both tsr mutant alleles that were absent from Gunsalus et al . Centrosome Migration and Cytokinesis Require tsr + 1249 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m A R t s r 1 t s r 2 X PB P X M P BP kilobases S 4 P B V tsr 2 V tsr 1 2701 ~ cgtcg ~ gacgcg ~ cacg ~ cgc ~ tgt ~ g ~ t ~ ctttgc ~ ggcg ~ tgg ~ ccc ~ c ~ gtgcg ~ t ~ c ~ g ~ cc ~ at ~ g & tt ~ gt ~ ggttgtt ~ g 2801 t4aaagaa ~ g ~ ggaa ~ ttaaaaa ~ att ~ xjta ~ aatata ~ a ~ t ~ gg ~ gaa9 ~ agoaatt ~ xJ & g ~ attg ~ : xJ ~ g ~ a ~ a ~ ta ~ a ~ gta c M A S 0 V T V S 4401 OAT ~ - AA ~ % CTACATAC ~ ~ CAAAAA ~ ATC ~ ATG ~ CATCTTTTACATTCGCGA ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ D V C K T T Y • • I K K D K K H R Y V I F Y I R D E K Q I D V * e T 4501 ~ k ~ % GA ' ~ " GCAACGCC GAGTACGAC TATC ~ TOCGGACCTGGAGAGTGCCGgtaagttccgccggttagagacacccagac V A D R N A E Y D Q F L E D I Q K C G P G E C R 4601 ccatcgaaactaacctaatttaacatctattcgcttgcacag ~ TAcGGA ~ TGTTcGATTTcGAGTA ~ ATG ~ - cCk ~ TCAp ~ O ~ CAECT ~ TGAGAGTT ~ A Y G L F D F E Y M H ~ C Q G T S E S S 4701 AAGA ~ C ~ J ~ % k ~ CTGTTCCTTAT ~ TC ~ TGGTGTc ~ GATAcTGCcAAGgtatgtgaatagccagttgccaagtaatggcgcagaactcatttcgatatca E I Q K L F L M S W C P D T A I 4801 ca ca ccca c a gGTCAAGAAGA ~ T ~ TTGTACTCCAGCTCCTTCGATGCTC TCAAGAAGTC GCTC GTGGGCGTC CAAAAGTATATACAAGC ~ C ~ T V K K K M L Y S S S F D A L K K S L V G V Q K Y I Q A T D L 4901 TTCC ~ AA ~ CCTCCCGGGAAGCC ~ AGGAGAA ~ TCCGGGCCACCG ~ CCGCCAAt aaaotgta = gagoa ~ - tgtg = a t tgoa t t % aacaaa = aagg = a tg S E A S R E A V E E K L R A T D R 5001 oa ~ gaaaoag = gatggaaaoa ~ gtat ~ tgttgagatog = = aatttgtatgagaattttotacataat ttgtatttt ~ agtagaaataaaqaatgaaata 5101 tttaa = ttgaccaagtcgcgtttccgctgtggtaaaaatctcgtaccgcagaatacactttattataaggagcaaagattacattgtacatatgatgacg Figure 6 . Molecular analysis of twinstar . ( A ) Physical map of the twinstar genomic region . The 6 . 4 - kb genomic fragment used to rescue the twinstar mutants ( RS6 . 4 ) is shown . Approximate positions of the P elements causing the ts / and tsr 2 alleles are indicated . The twin - star cDNA ( open boxes and arrow ) , when mapped onto the genomic fragment , is interrupted by one large ( 1 . 5 kb ) and two small ( 72 and 63 bp ) introns . The direction of transcription is from left to right in this diagram ; we do not know the transcriptional polarity relative to the chromosome as a whole . Restriction sites shown : EcoR1 ( R ) , XhoI ( At ) , BamH1 ( B ) , PstI ( P ) , SmaI ( M ) , SalI ( S ) . ( B ) Excerpts from the DNA sequence of RS6 . 4 , showing regions containing the P element insertion sites and the twinstar cDNA sequence . Arrow - heads mark insertion sites of the P elements causing the ts / and tsr 2 alleles . These are located 19 bp apart : the ts / insertion site occurs 5 bp within the 5 ' UTR of the cDNA , while that of tsr 2 lies just upstream , cDNA sequence is in boldface type ; coding regions are in capi - tals , with one letter amino acid codes centered beneath each codon . Genomic sequences not present in the cDNA are italicized . The cDNA carries one noncoding G at the 5 ' end ( not pictured ) . The putative polyA addition signal sequence is underlined . Since the se - quence shown corresponds to part of the sequence from the 6 . 4 kb of RS6 . 4 , this figure uses a nucleotide numbering scheme that is rela - tive to the entire fragment . Genbank accession numbers : twinstar cDNA , U24490 ; genomic fragment RS6 . 4 , U24676 . wild - type DNA and from DNA of transposase - induced re - vertants of both alleles ( data not shown ) . Probes made from RS6 . 4 hybridized in situ to polytene chromosome in - terval 60A10 - 60B1 , in good agreement with the cytoge - netic position of twinstar . Based on Northern analysis suggesting that RS6 . 4 hy - bridizes to a single species of poly ( A ) + RNA 800 - 900 bp in length ( see below ) , we reintroduced genomic fragment RS6 . 4 into the Drosophila genome via P element - medi - ated germline transformation . A single transduced copy of RS6 . 4 corrects the lethality as well as the mitotic and mei - otic phenotypes associated with mutant alleles of tsr . Thus , tsr + genetic activity is contained within the 6 . 4 kb of ge - nomic fragment RS6 . 4 . The level of the single transcript detected by RS6 . 4 is decreased in homozygous ts / and tsr 2 mutants to no more than 20 % of wild - type and is restored to wild - type levels in rescued lines ( Fig . 7 A ) . This transcript is expressed during all stages of Drosophila development , is found in both adult males and females , and appears to peak in late larval and pupal stages ( Fig . 7 B ) . On the basis of these and other data ( see below ) , we believe that this cDNA represents the twinstar transcript . We have determined the entire nucleotide sequence of RS6 . 4 and that of an homologous 750 - bp cDNA clone ( Fig . 6 B ) . The putative tsr cDNA insert contains a single long , ATG - initiated open reading frame . The nucleotide sequence flanking this putative translational start , AAA - AATG , is consistent with the Drosophila translation initi - ation consensus ( C / A ) AA ( A / C ) ATG ( Cavener , 1987 ) . A consensus signal sequence for polyA addition is located 25 bases upstream from the polyA stretch found in the cDNA . Comparison of the genomic and cDNA sequences indi - cates that the twinstar gene is interrupted by one long ( 1 . 5 kb ) and two small ( 72 bp and 63 bp ) introns ( Fig . 6 ) , which are flanked by consensus splice donor and acceptor sites The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 1250 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Figure 7 . Northern analysis of twinstar mRNA . ( A ) Expression of twinstar in mutant and rescued lines . Lane 1 , wild type ( Ore - gon R ) ; lane 2 , tsrl / tsrt ; lane 3 , tsr2 / tsr2 ; lane 4 , tsrl / tsrl ; [ pWS - tsr + ] / [ pWS - tsr + ] ; lane 5 , tsre / tsr2 ; [ pW8 - tsr + ] / [ pWS - tsr + ] . Lanes 2 and 3 are tsr mutant strains ; lanes 4 and 5 are the same tsr mutant lines that have been rescued with wild - type genomic DNA spanning the tsr locus ( see text ) . On this blot , tsr expression in the mutants appears negligible , but we estimate from additional experiments that mutants may contain a residual level of tsr mRNA up to 20 % of wild - type . 10 ixg of total RNA isolated from third instar larvae were loaded in each lane . RNA molecular weight standards ( in kb ) are indicated at left . ( B ) Developmental expression of twin - star in wild - type animals raised at 25°C . Lanes : 0 - 24 h embryos ; first and second instar larvae ; third instar larvae ; early pupae ; late pupae ; adult males ; adult females . 5 ~ g of polyA + - selected RNA were loaded in each lane . ( C ) The same blot as in B hybridized with rp49 cDNA as a loading control . ( Mount , 1982 ) . The cDNA carries one additional non - tran - scribed G at the 5 ' end , which is thought to represent re - verse transcription of the 5 - methyl - G cap during cDNA syn - thesis ( Brown et al . , 1989 ; Ketchum et al . , 1990 ; Karess et al . , 1991 ; Rose and Weischaus , 1992 ) . No other significant open reading frames were found in RS6 . 4 , in correspon - dence with its hybridization to only a single RNA species on Northern blots . By direct sequencing of mutant DNA , we determined the precise locations of the P element insertions causing the tsr a and tsr 2 mutations to be 19 bp apart , in or very near the beginning of the tsr transcript ( Fig . 6 B ) . The longest prod - uct produced by RACE ( rapid amplification of cDNA ends ) using RNA isolated from wild - type embryos or third instar larvae extends five bases beyond the cDNA 5 ' end ( data not shown ) . This places the tsr l insertion site within the mRNA 5 ' - untranslated region ( 5 ' - UTR ) and suggests that the tsr 2 insertion point would appear to be a few nu - cleotides upstream of the start of twinstar transcription . However , we do not know precisely where tsr mRNA transcription is initiated , nor do we see an obvious TATA box . To investigate how detectable ( though reduced ) amounts of normal - sized tsr mRNA could be produced in mutant animals when at least one of the P element insertion sites appears to be located within the transcribed region ~ we also analyzed RACE products from homozygous tsr 1 and tsr 2 larvae . These products contain short ( 78 - 126 bp ) unique sequences at their 5 ' ends that appear to be spliced into the normal tsr message either at or just downstream of the P element insertion sites ( data not shown ) . We have not been able to identify the unique 5 ' regions either in the 2 kb of genomic DNA we have sequenced upstream of the insertion sites or in known sequences from the marked P elements ; however , we believe they are likely to be de - rived from within the P elements . Decreased initiation ef - ficiency or stability of these hybrid transcripts could then account for the low levels of tsr - homologous mRNAs ob - served in the mutants . Twinstar Encodes a Member of the CofilinlADF Family of Actin Associated Proteins . Conceptual translation of the open reading frame in the twinstar cDNA ( Figs . 6 B and 8 ) generates a 17 - kD polypeptide related to proteins in the cofilin / ADF family . These proteins can sever filamentous actin and also bind and sequester actin monomers , leading to depolymerization of actin filaments ( reviewed by Sun et al . , 1995 ) . A cDNA coding for the twinstar protein has also been recovered independently from a screen of a Drosoph - ila cDNA library for proteins that produce changes in cell shape when overexpressed in the fission yeast S . pombe ( Edwards et al . , 1994 ) . An alignment of the predicted twinstar protein with rep - resentative homologues from nematode , yeast , amoeba , plant , and vertebrate ( human ) species is shown in Fig . 8 . The four nonvertebrate sequences shown returned the highest scores in searches of the GenBank and EMBL da - tabases , with amino acid identities in the range of 36 - 39 % over the length of the protein when compared with twin - star . Fig . 8 highlights three regions implied in specific func - tions . Two conserved motifs found in proteins of the cofi - lin / ADF family appear to be important for actin binding based on studies with mammalian homologues , corre - sponding to twinstar residues 94 - 105 ( shaded bar ) and 112 - 118 ( filled bar ) . These regions are implicated addi - tionally in either phosphoinositide binding ( shaded bar only ) or competition with tropomyosin for binding to actin ( filled bar only ) . A third motif present in vertebrate homo - 1ogues , PXXXKKRKK ( hatched bar ) , is conserved rela - tively well in twinstar but not in homologues from other organisms . This sequence resembles the nuclear localiza - tion signal sequence of SV - 40 large T antigen , and is thought to play a role in translocation of cofilins into the nucleus under conditions of stress ( see Discussion ) . Actin Behavior in tsr Mutants The finding that twinstar encodes a Drosophila cofilin homo - logue prompted us to compare actin behavior in tsr mutant and wild - type testes ( Figs . 9 - 11 ) . We consider first F - actin distribution within primary spermatocytes through early ana - phase of the first meiotic division . In cysts of young wild - type spermatocytes ( stage $ 1 ) , actin forms a ribbon - like pat - tern that connects adjacent cells ( Fig . 9 a ) ; we believe this corresponds to an analog of the fusome , a structure that extends through the ring canals of developing oocytes ( Lin et al . , 1994 ) . These ribbons gradually disassemble , so that in mature primary spermatocytes ( stage $ 5 ) , actin is only found in a loose network of cables and spots ( Fig . 9 , b and c ) . Little or no F - actin staining is visible by the time wild - type primary spermatocytes enter prometaphase ( stage M1 ; Fig . 9 c ; see also Fig . 11 a ) or later through early ana - phase of the first meiotic division ( to stage M4b ; Fig . 11 b and data not shown ) . Testes from twinstar mutants exhibit an actin staining pattern that is similar to that of wild - type through the mature primary spermatocyte stage ( stage $ 5 ; Gunsalus et al . Centrosome Migration and Cytokinesis Require tsr + 1251 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Figure 8 . Comparison of the putative twinstar protein with members of the same family of small actin - severing proteins from other or - ganisms . Sequences shown , from top down : D . melanogaster twinstar , C . elegans Unc60B ( McKim et al . , 1994 ) , S . cerevisiae COF1 ( Iida et al . , 1993 ; Moon et al . , 1993 ) , A . castellanii actophorin ( Quirk et al . , 1993 ) , L . longiflorum ADF ( Kim et al . , 1993 ) , human cofilin ( Ogawa et al . , 1990 ) , human and porcine destrin ( Moriyama et al . , 1990b ; Hawkins et al . , 1993 ) . Overline bars indicate putative func - tional domains . The region defined by the shaded bar has been implicated in actin binding based on mutational ( Moriyama et al . , 1992 ) , cross - linking ( Yonezawa et al . , 1991a ) , and peptide inhibition studies ( Yonezawa et al . , 1991b ) . This region also interacts with certain phosphoinositides ( Moriyama et al . , 1992 ; Yonezawa , et al . , 1991b ) . The vertebrate sequence in the region indicated by the filled bar , DAIKKK , is identical to residues 2 - 7 at the NH2 terminus of tropomyosin ( Cho et al . , 1990 ) and can compete with it for binding to actin ( Yonczawa et al . , 1989 ) . The hatched bar represents a putative nuclear localization signal sequence present in vertebrate homologues that is similar to that of SV40 large T antigen ( Matsuzaki et al . , 1988 ) . Fig . 10 a and data not shown ) . Immediately afterwards , however , the distribution of actin in twinstar mutants be - comes dramatically different from that in wild - type : at the $ 6 stage ( a rapid phase of transition between the end of spermatocyte growth and the onset of meiosis ) , mutant primary spermatocytes develop a single large F - actin ag - gregate in the cytoplasm of each cell ( Fig . 10 , a and c ) . This actin cluster ( which we term a type 1 aggregate ) rapidly forms near the centrosomes at the cell cortex , just at the time they first begin to nucleate microtubules ( Fig . 10 , b and c ) . This aggregate remains in the vicinity of the asters when they assume their ectopic position in mutant primary spermatocytes at prometaphase ( stage M1 ; Fig . 10 a ; see also Fig . 11 e ) . The fact that little or no F - actin staining is seen in primary spermatocytes at the $ 5 stage immediately before the formation of type 1 aggregates indicates that this type of actin cluster is not simply a remnant of a previ - ously formed actin structure in these mutant cells . At metaphase ( stage M3 ) , the actin cluster in twinstar mutant primary spermatocytes dissociates from the asters and is usually seen at the equator of the cell ( Fig . 11 J0 - During early anaphase , type 1 aggregates essentially disappear ( data not shown ) . Additional differences in actin behavior become appar - ent by late anaphase / early telophase ( stages M4c - M5 ) . In wild - type , actin becomes concentrated at the spindle mid - zone where it forms a ring - like structure that contracts as the cell progresses toward telophase ( Fig . 11 , c and d ) . In twinstar mutants , actin also concentrates at the mid - zone of the central spindle at this time ( Fig . 11 g ) . This actin fo - cus ( a type 2 aggregate ) is more prominent than the wild - type contractile ring and exhibits unusual protuberances generally oriented along the central spindle axis . Type 2 aggregates are also more stable than normal contractile rings . Contractile rings in wild - type disassemble at the end of the first meiotic division ( stage M5 / M6 ) , and wild - type secondary spermatocytes do not exhibit prominent actin structures from interphase to mid - anaphase ( stages M6 - M10b ; data not shown ) . In contrast , type 2 aggregates per - sist until metaphase II ( stage M9 ) , often even increasing in size . Sometimes , a type 2 aggregate is found associated with the metaphase II spindle in only one of the two daughter cells produced by the first meiotic division ( Fig . 11 h ) , but is more often found associated with the spindles in both daughter cells ( Fig . 11 i ) . As the second meiotic division proceeds into anaphase II , type 2 aggregates eventually disassemble ( not shown ) . A final difference between actin behavior in wild - type The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 1252 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Figure 9 . Actin behavior in Oregon - R wild - type primary spermatocytes through prometaphase ( stages $ 1 to M1 ) . To visualize tubulin , actin and DNA , testes were immunostained with anti - tubulin Abs ( green ) and then sequentially stained with rhodamine - labeled phalloi - din ( red ) and Hoechst 33258 ( blue ) . The fluorescent signals were detected separately by a cooled charge - coupled camera and merged in pseudocolors . Yellow and orange colors indicate overlap of actin and microtubule signals . ( a ) Partial cyst containing S1 / $ 2 young pri - mary spermatocytes . F - actin staining of structures connecting adjacent cells is apparent ; we suggest these structures are fusome analogs ( see text ) . ( b ) Near mature primary spermatocytes ( stage $ 4 ) showing actin spots and cables . ( c ) Spermatocytes at stages $ 3 , $ 5 , and M1 . Note that phalloidin staining gradually disappears during these stages of development , and is absent in wild - type M1 cells . Bar , 10 ~ m . and mutant meiosis becomes apparent by late anaphase and telophase of the second meiotic division ( stages M10c - Mll ) . In wild - type , F - actin is localized in a clearly visible contractile ring that disappears after completion of the second meiotic division ( data not shown ) . At the corre - sponding stages in twinstar mutants , an F - actin containing structure ( type 3 aggregate ) assembles at the spindle mid - zone . This type 3 aggregate , like the type 2 aggregate , is more prominent than the wild - type contractile ring and has protuberances oriented along the spindle axis ( Fig . 11 j ) . Moreover , the type 3 aggregate does not disappear at the end of the second meiotic division , but persists until the on - ion stage , disassembling only during spermatid elongation ( not shown ) . We analyzed actin behavior in both tsr l and tsr 2 mutant testes , and in both cases we observed the pattern described above . The only detectable differences between the two mutant alleles are in the size and morphology of the aber - rant actin aggregates . The type 1 aggregate of tsr 2 is some - what smaller than that of tsr ~ . Similarly , the type 2 and type 3 aggregates of tsr 2 tend to be less prominent and are more regular in shape than those observed in tsr 1 . Gunsalus et al . Centrosome Migration and Cytokinesis Require tsr + 1253 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Figure 10 . Actin behavior in twinstar mutant primary spermatocytes through prophase / prometaphase ( stages $ 5 to M1 ) . Pseudocolors as in Fig . 9 . ( a ) Partial cyst containing $ 5 , $ 6 and M1 mutant primary spermatocytes . Note that F - actin clusters are absent in $ 5 mature spermatocytes , but are prominent in $ 6 spermatocytes and in M1 prometaphase cells ( type 1 aggregates ) . ( b and c ) $ 6 stage primary spermatocytes visualized with anti - tubulin antibodies ( b ) show the nascent asters in a particularly favorable preparation ( arrows ) . The same field is shown in c with both anti - tubulin antibodies and rhodamine - labeled phalloidin to show association of type 1 actin aggre - gates with nascent asters . Bar , 10 ixm . Discussion Structural Features of the twinstar Protein Based on primary sequence similarity , the relatedness of the twinstar protein to known members of the cofllin / ADF family of actin severing / depolymerizing factors is unam - biguous . Furthermore , preliminary biochemical data ( Dr . S . K . Maciver , MRC , Cambridge , England , personal com - munication ) have shown that bacterially expressed twin - star protein is able to bind and sever actin filaments , and that these activities are comparable to those of other pre - viously characterized cofilins . Thus , twinstar protein be - haves in vitro in a manner that is consistent with expecta - tion . This implies that the functionality of conserved domains known to be important for actin binding and de - polymerizing activities is retained in twinstar . The structural features that govern the biochemical ac - tivities of cofilin - like proteins have not been completely characterized , nor is it clear how the different properties displayed by these proteins influence actin dynamics in different cellular environments . As one illustration , why certain cofilins show pH - dependent activity is not known , but it is thought that this feature might contribute to cy - toskeletal changes seen upon alkalinization of the cyto - plasm in response to cell activation by growth factors ( see Sun et al . , 1995 ) . Nonetheless , several conserved motifs present in cofilin - like proteins are clearly implicated in specialized functions that may influence their activities . For example , one of the actin - binding domains identified in vertebrate homologues ( Fig . 8 , filled bar ) , which is well conserved in twinstar , competes with tropomyosin for binding to actin in vitro . This region may underlie the abil - ity of vertebrate cofilins to compete for actin binding with tropomyosin , myosin , and villin headpiece in vitro ( Nishida , et al . , 1984 ; Nishida et al . , 1985 ; Pope et al . , 1994 ) . We might therefore expect to find that twinstar also displays similar activities , which could be important for its function in vivo . In addition , the actin depolymerizing activities of mam - malian cofilin and destrin / ADF , yeast cofilin , and Acan - thamoeba actophorin are specifically inhibited by certain phosphoinositides , which bind cofilin and displace it from actin ( Yonezawa et al . , 1990 , 1991b ; Iida et al , , 1993 ; Moon et al . , 1993 ; Quirk et al . , 1993 ) . Phospholipid binding may help maintain proteins near the plasma membrane and could potentially be involved in regulating their activity in vivo . One of the motifs present in cofilins that is known to bind actin is also critical for phospholipid binding ( Fig . 8 , shaded bar ) . This same motif also influences the ability of cofilin to inhibit hydrolysis of phospholipids by phospholi - pase C ( Yonezawa et al . , 1991a , b ) , an important enzyme linking phospholipid metabolism with cellular signaling cascades . We do not know whether twinstar activity is in - fluenced by phosphoinositides , but based on the wide range of organisms in which this property is retained , the possibility seems likely . Other actin - binding proteins such as profilin and gelsolin also interact specifically with cer - tain phosphoinositides ( Lassing and Lindberg , 1985 , 1988 ; Janmey and Stossel , 1987 ) . However , the interaction of co - filins with phosphoinositides appears to be of both lower affinity and specificity than that of profilin , and the rele - vance of this feature in vivo remains to be established . Finally , mammalian and avian cofilins and ADFs con - tain a motif , PXXXKKRKK ( Fig . 8 , hatched bar ) , that is very similar to the nuclear localization signal sequence of SV - 40 large T antigen ( Matsuzaki , et al . , 1988 ) . This se - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 1254 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Figure 11 . Actin behavior in wild - type and twinstar mutant spermatocytes from prometaphase through the completion of meiosis ( stages M1 to Mll ) . a - d are from Oregon R control testes ; e - j are from tsrt / tsr t males . Pseudocolors as in Fig . 9 . ( a ) Late prophase I ( stage Mla ) and ( b ) metaphase I ( stage M3 ) wild - type primary spermatocytes without prominent actin structures . ( c and d ) Telophase I cells at the M5 stage showing contractile actomyosin rings at the central spindle midzones . Depending upon the angle of observation , these structures either appear as bars ( c ) or exhibit a circular shape ( d ) . ( e ) Mutant tsrl / tsr I primary spermatocyte at the M1 stage , show - ing a prominent type 1 aggregate ; compare with a of this figure . ( f ) Three metaphase I figures in the M3 stage associated with actin clus - ters ( type 1 aggregates ) ; compare with b of this figure . ( g ) A telophase I ( MS stage ) showing a prominent and abnormally shaped actin ring ( type 2 aggregate ) ; compare with c and d of this figure . ( h ) Two secondary spermatocytes at late prometaphase ( M8 stage ) showing a single actin cluster associated with one of these cells . Most likely this is a type 2 aggregate that persists due to a failure in actin ring dis - assembly during telophase I . ( i ) Two metaphase II figures at the M9 stage showing a single actin aggregate . This structure is located in the same area occupied by the telophase I midbody , supporting the conclusion that it is a type 2 aggregate that originates from the actin ring . ( j ) A telophase II at the Mll stage with a clearly abnormal actin structure ( type 3 aggregate ) at the central spindle midzone . Bar , 10 Ixm . Gunsalus et al . Centrosome Migration and Cytokinesis Require tsr + 1255 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m quence is required in vertebrates for the translocation of cofilin into the nucleus upon heat shock or treatment with 10 % DMSO ( Nishida et al . , 1987 ; Iida et al . , 1992 ) . Trans - location is thought to be regulated by the phosphorylation state of a serine residue immediately upstream of this mo - tif ( Ohta et al . , 1989 ; see Morgan et al . , 1993 ) . Twinstar re - tains distinct homology to the nuclear localization motif , while other nonvertebrate homologues retain only weak similarities ; yeast cofilin is unable to localize to the nucleus ( Moon et al . , 1993 ) . Based on sequence similarity , it seems possible that twinstar could translocate into the nucleus ; however , it does not have a serine residue in exactly the same position relative to the signal sequence . We have no direct evidence at present to establish whether the twin - star protein can also translocate into the nucleus when Drosophila cells are stressed . Actin Behavior in twinstar Mutants Our observations provide strong evidence that actin dy - namics are significantly perturbed in the absence of tsr ac - tivity . Staining with phalloidin , which specifically binds fil - amentous actin ( Estes et al . , 1981 ) , shows that tsr testes contain large F - actin structures that are not seen in wild - type . Type 1 aggregates are first detected during the last stage of primary spermatocyte growth ( stage $ 6 ) and then grow to reach their maximum size at the onset of the first meiotic division . We hypothesize that centrosomes serve as the foci for this abnormal accumulation of actin in ma - ture primary spermatocytes because type 1 F - actin aggre - gates begin to form when nascent asters first become visi - ble , and they remain associated with asters throughout prophase / prometaphase of meiosis I ( M1 stage ) . We speculate that a nucleation center for actin addition may exist near centrosomes in tsr mutants , and that the ab - sence of twinstar activity may lead to uncontrolled actin accumulation at this site . Although phalloidin staining does not reveal the presence of F - actin in the vicinity of centrosomes in wild - type primary spermatocytes ( data not shown ) , the actin - related protein Arpl ( also known as centractin or actin - RPV ) has been found in association with centrosomes in other systems ( Clark and Meyer , 1992 ; Lees - Miller et al . , 1992 ) . Arpl forms a short F - actin - like filament that is part of the dynactin complex ( Paschal et al . , 1993 ; Schafer et al . , 1994 ) , which stimulates minus end - directed dynein - mediated vesicle motility along mi - crotubules ( Gill et al . , 1991 ; Schroer and Sheetz , 1991 ) . It is conceivable that a dynactin - like complex may normally localize to centrosomes in primary spermatocytes . Alter - natively , if in tsr mutants the normal cytoplasmic or corti - cal anchors for a dynactin - like complex were disrupted , it could be pulled to the centrosome by its associated motor activity . In either case , this type of complex might provide a centrosomal focus for aberrant actin accumulation . Unusual F - actin foci are also present in secondary sper - matocytes and spermatids of tsr mutants ( type 2 and type 3 aggregates ) , and almost certainly result from a failure to disassemble the actin structures found during telophase at the positions of the meiosis I and II contractile rings . Scru - tiny of a large number of tsr meiotic cysts clearly shows that these telophase structures are more prominent than wild - type contractile rings and exhibit protuberances ori - ented along the spindle axis . During late telophase , these irregular rings do not disassemble as do normal contractile rings , but instead grow slightly larger and change morphol - ogy , becoming compact masses of F - actin . Type 2 actin ag - gregates eventually disappear during anaphase II in sec - ondary spermatocytes , but then F - actin reassembles into a contractile ring - like structure ( type 3 aggregate ) during te - lophase II . Derivatives of this structure appear to persist as aggregates in spermatids that gradually disassemble during the elongation process . We interpret the aberrant structures in secondary sper - matocytes and spermatids as indicating that in tsr mutants , actin can assemble at the correct times and sites required for formation of the contractile ring . However , these actin assemblies are improperly organized , may be unable to function in cytokinesis , and fail to disassemble on a normal schedule . The eventual disassembly of aberrant actin ag - gregates may be mediated either by residual tsr activity in the mutants ( neither tsr l nor tsr z is a null allele ) , or by the presence of other actin depolymerizing agents . Interest - ingly , the ribbon - like actin structure in young primary spermatocytes that we interpret as the male fusome de - grades normally in twinstar mutants . This suggests that ei - ther disassembly of this structure does not depend on twinstar activity , or residual levels of twinstar protein at these earlier stages are sufficient for its disassembly . In Vivo Functions of the twinstar Protein Centrosome Migration and Separation . During both meiotic divisions in tsr mutants , in contrast with wild - type , the as - ters fail to associate with the nuclear envelope , and their migration to opposite poles is significantly delayed . That mutations in an actin binding protein result in such a phe - notype is consistent with considerable precedent indicat - ing an interaction between centrosomes and the actin cy - toskeleton . In both yeast and nematodes , it appears that the establishment of correct spindle orientations involves a tethering of microtubules emanating from the centrosomes to specific sites on the actin cytoskeleton ( Hyman and White , 1987 ; Hyman , 1989 ; Palmer et al . , 1992 ; Waddle et al . , 1994 ) . Interestingly , in S . cerevisiae mutations in Arpl homologues ( Clark and Meyer , 1994 ; Muhua et al . , 1994 ) , dynein heavy chain ( Eshel et al . , 1993 ; Li et al . , 1993 ) , or actin , as well as mutations in 13 - tubulin that cause prefer - ential loss of astral microtubules ( Palmer et al . , 1992 ) , all result in similar misorientations of the mitotic spindle . Although our data clearly show that alterations in the actin cytoskeleton can interfere with centrosome migration and separation during male meiosis in Drosophila , further studies will be required to define the molecular mechanisms underlying these events . At present , we can envisage two possibilities . It is conceivable that centrosome movements normally depend upon the tethering of astral microtubules to cortical or perinuclear actin structures . If such actin struc - tures were incorrectly assembled in tsr mutants , they may fail to capture astral microtubules , leading to defects in cen - trosome migration and separation . Alternatively , the ab - normal concentration of actin around the centrosomes of primary spermatocytes in twinstar mutants may physically obstruct normal interactions required for these processes . We have been impressed by the apparent normality of The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 1256 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m spindle morphology and chromosome separation in mu - tant testes subsequent to the aberrant migration of asters during prophase / prometaphase of meiosis I . This argues that the meiotic spindle has considerable self - regulating properties , which may be related to the extended period of time ( between 20 and 45 min ) required for bivalents to achieve a stable bipolar configuration before anaphase on - set in these cells ( Church and Lin , 1985 ) . This might pro - vide sufficient time for the asters in twinstar mutants to mi - grate eventually to their proper position so that correct chromosome segregation can occur . Final aster positioning in the mutant is likely to be mediated , at least in part , by microtubule - kinetochore attachments that may provide positional signals to restore proper aster localization . We envision that lateral forces exerted between interdigitating microtubules emanating from the two poles also partici - pate in centrosome separation . Cytokinesis . Larvae carrying mutant tsr alleles clearly exhibit frequent failures of cytokinesis both in neuroblast cells and in male meiosis . At present we have no informa - tion regarding the primary cause of cytokinesis failure in neuroblasts . However , our observations on testes suggest two possible explanations for how a reduction in twinstar activity might affect meiotic cytokinesis . The first possibility is that the cytokinesis defect arises primarily from the abnormal migration and positioning of asters . It is clear that mechanisms must exist that transmit signals from the spindle asters to the contractile apparatus , explaining how difficulties in cytokinesis could result indi - rectly from problems in centrosome positioning within the cell . A number of experiments indicate that the spindle as - ters specify the position of the cleavage furrow midway be - tween them ( reviewed by Rappaport , 1986 ) , and some evi - dence suggests that the asters may be able to dictate this position as early as prophase ( Sluder and Miller , 1990 ) , when the irregularities in twinstar aster localization are manifested . We believe this possibility to be unlikely be - cause tsr mutants correctly localize actin structures to the midzone at the same time that normal contractile rings form . Nevertheless , it remains conceivable that a putative alteration of signals emanating from the asters could affect the responsiveness of the cortical cytoplasm without af - fecting positioning of the contractile ring . The more likely possibility is that cytokinesis is dis - rupted in tsr mutants because of abnormalities in the for - mation and / or disassembly of the contractile ring . Our observations clearly show that tsr mutants exhibit mor - phologically abnormal contractile rings that fail to disas - semble during cleavage . Most current models of cytokine - sis assert that the contractile ring is an overlapping array of actin filaments of opposite polarity attached to the plasma membrane . These actin filaments interact with bi - polar myosin - II filaments , leading to constriction of the cell periphery ( reviewed in Satterwhite and Pollard , 1992 ; Fishkind and Wang , 1995 ) . One could easily imagine sev - eral scenarios by which a cofilin - like protein such as twin - star , which can modulate actin dynamics in vitro by sever - ing and depolymerizing filaments ( S . K . Maciver , personal communication ) , might play a role in cytokinesis . Such an activity might function in the recruitment of cortical actin filaments to the contractile ring ( Cao and Wang , 1990 ) , turnover of actin within the contractile ring ( Inoue , 1990 ) , or disassembly of the contractile ring during furrowing and cleavage ( Maupin and Pollard , 1986 ) . In any event , there is substantial precedent to suggest that the twinstar protein could function in concert with other proteins to promote proper organization of contractile filaments . The cofilin homologue actophorin , in the presence of the actin cross - linking protein a - actinin , promotes formation of actin bundles in vitro ( Maciver , et al . , 1991 ) . In addition , the correct assembly of the contractile myofilament lattice in the body wall muscle of C . elegans requires an activity encoded by a cofilin - like gene : in unc - 60 mutants , thin fila - ments aggregate at the ends of the cell instead of interdigi - tating with thick filaments , which appear essentially normal ( Waterston et al . , 1980 ) . Most recently , vertebrate cofilin has been found to localize to the contractile ring in tissue culture ( Nagaoka et al . , 1995 ) . Additional Functions of the twinstar Protein We believe it unlikely that twinstar function is required only for cytokinesis or correct aster migrations in prophase . It is quite possible that the phenotypes we have examined represent only those events that are most susceptible to depletion of maternal twinstar protein stores . Neither the tsr l nor the tsr 2 allele appears to represent the null state of the twinstar locus : some mRNA is expressed in mutant an - imals and these mutations do not interfere with the open reading frame encoding the protein . Other functions of twinstar might therefore be uncovered by an analysis of phenotypes associated with either true null mutations , which can in theory be isolated by transposase - promoted imprecise excision of the tsr z or tsr 2 P elements ( Bellen et al . , 1989 ) , or conditional mutations . We expect to find that twinstar protein may also be required for muscle forma - tion , or for processes such as cellular motility or the deter - mination of cell shape in Drosophila . In this light , it is in - teresting to note that when a Drosophila cDNA clone essentially identical to our twinstar cDNA is overexpressed in S . pombe , changes in cell shape are observed in associa - tion with perturbations in actin distribution ( Edwards et al . , 1994 ) . Their results , in combination with the findings described in this paper , emphasize the importance to the cell of maintaining the proper stoichiometry of cofilin with respect to other cytoskeletal components . The authors wish to thank kindly the following : Drs . Trish Wilson and Minx Fuller for donating the tsr 2 allele , Drs . K . Edwards and D . Kiehart for sharing sequence information before publication and for helpful com - ments on the protein alignment , Dr . Bruce Reed for stocks and informa - tion on complementation groups , Dr . S . K . Maciver for early communica - tion of new biochemical data , Dr . J . Merriam for making a collection of P element - induced mutations available to us , Dr . H . Lin for helpful discus - sions about the fusome , E . Mirabile for participating in early stages of our screening procedure , and Janis Werner for microinjections . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant 5R01GM48430 to M . L . Goldberg , by National Institutes of Health Train - ing grant 5T32GM07617 to K . C . Gunsalus , and by grants to M . Gatti from Progetto Finalizzato Ingegneria Genetica and Fondazione Istituto Pas - teur - Cenci Bolognetti . Received for publication 17 May 1995 and in revised form 31 July 1995 . References Abe , H . , T . Endo , K . Yamamoto , and T . Obinata . 1990 . Sequence of cDNAs Gunsalus et al . Centrosome Migration and Cytokinesis Require tsr + 1257 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m encoding actin depolymerizing factor and cofiliu of embryonic chicken skel - etal muscle : two functionally distinct actin - regulatory proteins exhibit high structural homology . Biochemistry 29 : 7420 - 7425 . Bamburg , J . R . , and D . Bray . 1987 . Distribution and cellular localization of ac - tin depolymerizing factor . J . Cell BioL 105 : 2817 - 2825 . Bellen , H . J . , C . J . O ' Kane , C . Wilson , U . Grossniklaus , R . K . Pearson , and W . J . Gehring . 1989 . P element - mediated enhancer detection : a versatile method to study development in Drosophila . Genes & Dev . 3 : 1288 - 1300 . Bier , E . , H . Vaessin , S . Shepherd , K . Lee , K . McCall , S . Barbel , L . Ackerman , R . Carretto , T . Uemura , E . Grell , L . Y . Jan , and Y . N . Jan . 1989 . Searching for pattern and mutation in the Drosophila genome with a P - lacZ vector . Genes & Dev . 3 : 1273 - 1287 . Blose , S . H . , D . I . Meltzer , and J . R . Feramisco . 1982 . 10 nm filaments induced to collapse in ceils microinjected with antibodies against tubulin . £ Cell Biol . 95 : 229a . Brown , N . H . , and F . C . Kafatos . 1988 . Functional cDNA libraries from Dro - sophila embryos . J . MoL Biol . 203 : 425 - 437 . Brown , N . H . , D . L . King , M . Wilcox , and F . C . Kafatos . 1989 . Developmentally regulated alternative splicing of Drosophila integrin PS2 alpha transcripts . CelL 59 : 185 - 195 . Cao , L . - G . , and Y . - L . Wang . 1990 . Mechanism of formation of contractile ring in dividing cultured animal cells . II . Cortical movements of microinjected ac - tin filaments . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 1905 - 1911 . Castrillon , D . H . , and S . A . Wasserman . 1994 . diaphanous is required for cyto - kinesis in Drosophila and shares domains of similarity with the products of the limb deformity gene . Development ( Camb . ) . 120 : 3367 - 3377 . Cavener , D . R . 1987 . Comparison of the consensus sequence flanking transla - tional start sites in Drosophila and vertebrates . Nucleic Acids Bes . 15 : 1353 - 1361 . Cenci , G . , S . Bonaccorsi , C . Pisano , F . Verni , and M . Gatti . 1994 . Chromatin and microtubule organization during premeiotic , meiotic and early postmei - otic stages of Drosophila melanogaster spermatogenesis . J . Cell Sci . 107 : 3521 - 3534 . Chirgwin , J . M . , A . E . Pyrzybyla , R . J . MacDonald , and W . J . Rutter . 1979 . Iso - lation of biologically active ribonucleic acid from sources enriched in ribonu - clease . Biochemistry . 18 : 5294 - 5299 . Cho , Y . - J . , J . Liu , and S . E . Hitchcock - DeGregori . 1990 . The amino terminus of muscle tropomyosin is a major determinant for function . J . BioL Chem . 265 : 538 - 545 . Church , K . , and H . P . Lin . 1985 . Kinetochore microtubules and chromosome movement during prometaphase in Drosophila melan ~ gaster spermatocytes studied in life and with the electron microscope . Chromosoma . 92 : 273 - 282 . Clark , S . W . , and D . I . Meyer . 1992 . Centractin is an actin homologue associ - ated with the centrosome . Nature ( Lond . ) . 359 : 246 - 250 . Clark , S . W . , and D . I . Meyer . 1994 . ACT3 : a putative centractin homologue in S . cerevisiae is required for proper orientation of the mitotic spindle . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 129 - 138 . Devereux , J . , P . Haeberli , and O . Smithies . 1984 . A comprehensive set of se - quence analysis programs for the VAX . Nucleic Acids Res . 12 : 365 - 372 . Edwards , K . A . , R . A . Montague , S . Shepard , B . A . Edgar , R . L . Erikson , and D . P . Kiehart . 1994 . Identification of Drosophila cytoskeletal proteins by in - duction of abnormal cell shape in fission yeast . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 91 : 4589 - 4593 . Eshel , D . , L . A . Urrestarazu , S . Vissers , J . - C . Jauniaux , J . C . v . Vliet - Reedijk , R . J . Planta , and I . R . Gibbons . 1993 . Cytoplasmic dynein is required for nor - mal nuclear segregation in yeast . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 90 : 11172 - 11176 . Estes , J . E . , L . A . Selden , and L . C . Gershman . 1981 . Mechanism of action of phalloidin on the polymerization of muscle actin . Biochemistry . 20 : 708 - 712 . Fishkind , D . J . , and Y . - L . Wang . 1995 . New horizons in cytokinesis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 : 23 - 31 . Fuller , M . T . 1993 . Spermatogenesis . In The Development of Drosophila Mela - nogaster . Vol . I . M . Bate and A . M . Arias , editors . Cold Spring Harbor Lab - oratory Press , Plainview , NY . 71 - 147 . Gatti , M . , and B . S . Baker . 1989 . Genes controlling essential cell - cycle functions in Drosophila . Genes & Dev . 3 : 438 - 453 . Gatti , M . , and M . L . Goldberg . 1991 . Mutations affecting cell division in Dro - sophila . Methods Cell Biol . 35 : 543 - 586 . Gill , S . R . , T . A . Schroer , I . Szilak , E . R . Steuer , M . P . Sheetz , and D . W . Cleve - land . 1991 . Dynactin , a conserved , ubiquitously expressed component of an activator of vesicle motility mediated by cytoplasmic dynein . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 1639 - 1650 . Glover . D . M . 1989 . Mitosis in Drosophila . J . Cell Sci . 92 : 137 - 146 . Gonz ~ ilez , C . , J . Casal , and P . Ripoll . 1989 . Relationship between chromosome content and nuclear diameter in early spermatids of Drosophila melano - gaster Gener Res . Camb . 54 : 205 - 212 . Gubb , D . , S . McGill , and M . Ashburner . 1988 . A selective screen to recover chromosomal deletions and duplications in Drosophila melanogaster . Genet - ics . 119 : 377 - 390 . Hawkins , M . , B . Pope , S . K . Maclver , and A . G . Weeds . 1993 . Human actin de - polymerizing factor mediates a pH - sensitive destruction of actin filaments . Biochemistry . 32 : 9985 - 9993 . Hayden , S . M . , P . S . Mille , A . Brauweiler , and J . R . Bamburg . 1993 . Analysis of the interactions of actin depolymerizing factor with G - and F - actin . Bio - chemistry . 32 : 9994 - 10004 . Hyman , A . A . 1989 . Centrosome movement in the early divisions of Cae - norhabditus elegans : a cortical site determining centrosome position . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 1185 - 1193 . Hyman , A . A . , and J . G . White , 1987 . Determination of cell division axes in the early embryogenesis of Caenorhabditus elegans . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 2123 - 2135 . Iida , K . , S . Matsumoto , and I . Yahara . 1992 . The KKRKK sequence is involved in heat shock - induced nuclear translocation of the 18 - kDa actin - binding pro - tein , cofilin . Cell Struct . Funct . 17 : 39 - 46 . Iida , K . , K . Mofiyama , S . Matsumoto , H . Kawasaki , E . Nishida , and I . Yahara . 1993 . Isolation of a yeast essential gene , COF1 , that encodes a homologue of mammalian cofilin , a low - M ~ actin - binding and depolymerizing protein . Gene ( Amst . ) . 124 : 115 - 120 . Inoue , S . 1990 . Dynamics of mitosis and cleavage . Annu . NY Acad . Sci . 582 : 1 - 14 . Janmey , P . A . , and T . P . Stossel . 1989 . Gelsolin - phosphoinositide interaction . Full expression of gelsolin - inhibiting function by polyphosphoinositides in vesicular form and inactivation by dilution , aggregation , or masking of the inositol head group . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 4825 - 4831 . Karess , R . E . , X . - J . Chang , K . A . Edwards , S . Kukarni , I . Aguilera , and D . P . Kiehart . 1991 . The regulatory light chain of nonmuscle myosin is encoded by spaghetti - squash , a gene required for cytokinesis in Drosophila . Cell . 65 : 1177 - 1189 . Ketchum , A . S . , C . T . Stewart , M . Stewart , and D . Kiehart . 1990 . Complete se - quence of the Drosophila nonmuscle myosin heavy - chain transcript : con - served sequences in the myosin tail and differential splicing in the 5 ' - untrans - lated sequence . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 87 : 663 - 667 . Kim , S . - R . , Y . Kim , and G . An . 1993 . Molecular cloning and characterization of anther - preferential cDNA encoding a putative actin - depolymerizing factor . Plant Mot . Biol . 21 : 39 - 45 . Klemenz , R . , U . Weber , and W . J . Gehring . 1987 . The white gene as a maker in a new P - element vector for gene transfer in Drosophila . Nucleic Acids Res . 15 : 3947 - 3959 . Lassing , I . , and U . Lindberg . 1985 . Specific interaction between phosphatidyl - inositol 4 , 5 bisphosphate and and profilactin . Nature ( Lond . ) . 314 : 472 - 474 . Lassing , I . , and U . Lindberg . 1988 . Specificity of the interaction between phos - phatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate and the profilin : actin complex . J . Cell . Bio - chem . 37 : 255 - 267 . Lees - Miller , J . P . , D . M . Helfman , and T . A . Schroer . 1992 . A vertebrate actin - related protein is a component of a multisubunit complex involved in micro - tubule - based vesicle motility . Nature ( Lond . ) . 359 : 244 - 246 . Li , Y . Y . , E . Yeh , T . Hays , and K . Bloom . 1993 . Disruption of mitotic spindle orientation in a yeast dynein mutant . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 90 : 10096 - 11000 . Lin , H . , L . Yue , and A . C . Spradling . 1994 . The Drosophila fusome , a germline - specific organelle , contains membrane skeletal proteins and functions in cyst formation . Development ( Camb . ) . 120 : 947 - 956 . Lindsley , D . L . , and G . G . Zimm . 1992 . The genome of Drosophila melano - gaster . Academic Press , Inc . , San Diego , CA . 1133 pp . Maciver , S . K . , D . H . Wachsstock , W . H . Schwarz , and T . D . Pollard . 1991 . The actin filament severing protein actophorin promotes the formation of rigid bundles of actin filaments cross - linked with a - actiuin . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 1621 - 1628 . Matsuzaki , F . , S . Matsumoto , I . Yahara , N . Yonezawa , E . Nishida , and H . Sa - kai . 1988 . Cloning and characterization of porcine brain cofilin cDNA . J . BioL Chem . 263 : 11564 - 11568 . Maupin , P . , and T . D . Pollard . 1986 . Arrangement of actin filaments and myo - sin - like filaments in the contractile ring and of actin - like filaments in the mi - totic spindle of dividing HeLa cells . . L Ultrastruct . Mol . Struct . Res . 94 : 92 - 103 . McKim , K . M . , C . Matheson , M . A . Marra , M . F . Wakarchuk , and D . L . Baillie . 1994 . The Caenorhabditus elegans unc - 60 gene encodes proteins homolo - gous to a family of actin binding proteins . Mot . Gen . Genet . 242 : 346 - 357 . McKim , K . S . , M . F . P . Heschl , R . E . Rosenbluth , and D . L . Baillie . 1988 . Ge - netic organization of . the unc - 60 region in Caenorhabditus elegans . Genetics . 118 : 49 - 59 . Moon , A . L . , P . A . Janmey , K . A . Louie , and D . G . Drubin . 1993 . Cofilin is an essential component of the yeast cortical cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 421 - 435 . Morgan , T . E . , R . O . Lockerbie , L . S . Minamide , M . D . Browning , and J . R . Bamburg . 1993 . Isolation and characterization of a regulated form of actin depolymerizing factor . J . Cell Biol . 122 : 623 - 633 . Moriyama , K . , S . Matsumoto , E . Nishida , H . Sakai , and I . Yahara . 1990a . Nu - cleotide sequence of mouse cofilin cDNA . Nucleic Acids Res . 18 : 3053 . Moriyama , K . , E . Nishida , N . Yonezawa , H . Sakai , S . Matsumoto , K . lida , and I . Yahara . 1990b . Destrin , a mammalian actin - depolymerizing protein , is closely related to cofilin . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 5768 - 5773 . Moriyama , K . , N . Yonezawa , H . Sakai , I . Yahara , and E . Nishida . 1992 . Muta - tional analysis of an actin - binding site of cofilin and characterization of chi - meric proteins between cofilin and destrin . J . BioL Chem . 267 : 7240 - 7244 . Mount , S . M . 1982 . A catalogue of splice junction sequences . Nucleic Acids Res . 10 : 459 - 472 . Muhua , L . , T . S . Karpova , and J . A . Cooper . 1994 . A yeast actin - related protein homologous to that in vertebrate dynactin complex is important for spindle orientation and nuclear migration . Cell . 78 : 669 - 679 . Nagaoka , R . , H . Abe , K . I . Kusano , and T . Obinata . 1995 . Concentration of co - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 1258 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m filin , a small actin - binding protein , at the cleavage furrow during cytokinesis . Cell MotiL Cytoskel . 30 : l - 7 . Neufeld , T . P . , and G . M . Rubin . 1994 . The Drosophila peanut gene is required for cytokinesis and encodes a protein similar to yeast putative bud neck fila - ment proteins . Cell . 77 : 371 - 379 . Nishida , E . , S . Maekawa , and H . Sakai , 1984 . Cofilin , a protein in porcine brain that binds to actin filaments and inhibits their interactions with myosin and tropomyosin . Biochemistry . 23 : 5307 - 5313 . Nishida , E . , E . Muneyuki , S . Maekawa , Y . Ohta , and H . Sakai . 1985 . An actin - depolymerizingprotein ( destrin ) from porcine kidney . Its action on F - actin containing or lacking tropomyosin . Biochemistry 24 : 6624 - - 6630 . Nishida , E . , S . Maekawa , E . Muneyuke , and H . Sakai . 1987 . Cofilin is a compo - nent of intranuclear and cytoplasmic actin rods induced in cultured cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 84 : 5262 - 5266 . O ' Connell , P . , and M . Rosbash . 1984 . Sequence , structure , and codon prefer - ence of the Drosophila ribosomal protein 49 gene . Nucleic Acids Res . 12 : 5495 - 5513 . O ' Kane , C . J . , and W . J . Gehring . 1987 . Detection in situ of genomic regulatory elements in Drosophila . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 84 : 9123 - 9127 . Ochman , H . , A . S . Gerber , and D . L . Hartl . 1988 . Genetic applications of an in - verse polymerase chain reaction . Genetics . 120 : 621 - 624 . Ogawa , K . , M . Tashima , Y . Yumoto , T . Okuda , H . Sawada , M . Okuma , and Y . Maruyama . 1990 . Coding sequence of human placenta cofilin cDNA . Nu - cleic Acids Res . 18 : 7169 . Ohta , Y . , E . Nishida , H . Sakai , and E . Miyamoto . 1989 . Dephosphorylation of cofilin accompanies heat shock - induced nuclear accumulation of cofilin . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 16143 - 16148 . Palmer , R . E . , D . S . Sullivan , T . Huffaker , and D . Koshland . 1992 . Role of astral microtubules and actin in spindle orientation and migration in the budding yeast , Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 583 - 593 . Paschal , B . M . , E . L . F . Holzbaur , K . K , Pfister , S . Clark , and D . I . Meyer . 1993 . Characterization of a 50 - kDa polypeptide in cytoplasmic dynein prepara - tions reveals a complex with p150 G ~ °e° and a novel actin . J . BioL Chem . 268 : 15318 - - 15323 . Pearson , W . R . , and D . J . Lipman . 1988 . Improved tools for biological sequence comparison . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 85 : 2444 - 2448 . Pirotta , V . 1986 . Cloning Drosophila genes . In Drosophila : A Practical Ap - proach . D . B . Roberts , editor . IRL Press , Oxford . 83 - 110 . Pope , B . , M . Way , P . T . Matsudaira , and A . Weeds . 1994 . Characterization of the F - actin binding domains of villin : classification of F - actin binding pro - teins into two groups according to their binding sites on actin . FEBS Lett . 338 : 58 - - 62 . Quirk , S . , S . K . Maciver , C . Ampe , S , K . Doberstein , D . A . Kaiser , J . Van - Damme , J . S . Vandekerckhove , and T . D . Pollard . 1993 . Primary structure of and studies on Acanthamoeba actophorin . Biochemistry . 32 : 8525 - 8533 . Rappaport , R . 1986 . Establishment of the mechanism of cytokinesis in animal cells . Intl . Rev . Cytol . 105 : 245 - 281 . Ripoll , P . , J . Casal , and C . Gonzalez . 1987 . Towards the genetic dissection of mitosis in Drosophila . Bioessays . 7 : 204 - 210 . Robertson , H . M . , C . R . Preston , R . W . Phillips , D . M . Johnson - Schlitz , W . K . Benz , and W . R . Gehring . 1988 . A stable source of P element transposase in Drosophila melanogaster . Genetics . 118 : 461470 . Rose , L . S . , and E . Weischaus . 1992 . The Drosophila cellularization gene nullo produces a blastoderm - specific transcript whose levels respond to the nucle - ocytoplasmic ratio . Genes & Dev . 6 : 1255 - 1268 . Sambrook , J . , E . F . Fritsch , and T . Maniatis . 1989 . Molecular Cloning : A Labo - ratory Manual . Vol . 1 - 3 . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , Cold Spring Harbor , New York . Sanger , F . , S . Nicklen , and I . R . Coulson . 1977 . DNA sequencing with chain - ter - minating inhibitors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 74 : 5463 - 5467 . Satterwhite , L . L . , and T . D . Pollard . 1992 . Cytokinesis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 4 : 43 - 52 . Schafer , D . A . , S . R . Gill , J . A . Cooper , J . E . Heuser , and T . A . Schroer . 1994 . Ultrastructural analysis of the dynactin complex : an actin - related protein is a component of a filament that resembles F - actin . Z Cell Biol . 126 : 403412 . Schroer , T . A . , and M . P . Sheetz . 1991 . Two activators of microtubule - based vesicle transport . Z Cell Biol . 115 : 1309 - 1318 . Simpson , P . 1983 . Maternal - zygotic gene interactions during formation of the dorsoventral pattern in Drosophila embryos . Genetics . 105 : 615 - 632 . Sluder , G . , and F . J . Miller . 1990 . What determines when the cleavage furrow is formed ? Annu . NY Acad . Sci . 582 : 308 - 309 . Sun , H . - Q . , K . Kwiatkowska , and H . L . Yin . 1995 . Actin monomer binding pro - teins . Curt Opin . Cell Biol . 7 : 102 - 110 . Tates , A . D . 1971 . Cytodifferentiation during spermatogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster : an electron microscope study . Ph . D . thesis , Rijksuniversiteit , Leiden . Vandekerckhove , J . , and K . Vancompernolle . 1992 . Structural relationships of actin binding proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 4 : 41 - 50 . Waddle , J . A . , J . A . Cooper , and R . H . Waterson . 1994 . Transient localized ac - cumulation of actin in Caenorhabditus elegans blastomeres with oriented asymmetric divisions . Development ( Camb . ) . 120 : 2317 - 2328 . Waterston , R . H . , J . N . Thomson , and S . Brenner . 1980 . Mutants with altered muscle structure in Caenorhabditus elegans . Dev . Biol . 77 : 271 - 302 . Yonezawa , N . , E . Nishida , K . lida , I . Yahara , and H . Sakai . 1989 . An actin - interacting heptapeptide in the cofilin sequence . Eur . J . Biochem . 183 : 235 - 238 . Yonezawa , N . , E . Nishida , K . lida , I . Yahara , and H . Sakai . 1990 . Inhibition of the interactions of cofilin , destrin , and deoxyribonuclease I with actin by phosphoinositides . Z Biol . Chem . 265 : 8382 - 8386 . Yonezawa , N . , E . Nishida , and H . Sakai . 1985 . pH control of actin polymeriza - tion by cofilin . J . Biol . Chem . 260 : 14410 - 14412 . Yonezawa , N . , E . Nishida , K . Iida , H . Kumagai , I . Yahara , and H . Sakai . 1991a . Inhibition of actin polymerization by a synthetic dodecapeptide patterned on the sequence around the actin - binding site of cofilin . J . Cell Biol . 266 : 10485 - 10489 . Yonezawa , N . , Y . Homma , I . Yahara , H . Sakai , and E . Nishida . 1991b . A short sequence responsible for both phosphoinositide binding and actin binding activities of cofilin . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 17218 - 17221 , Gunsalus et al . Centrosome Mieration and Cvtokinesis Reauire tsr + 1259 on N o v e m be r 19 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m