SPECIAL ISSUE : ESB 2015 Tissue engineering constructs and cell substrates Bio - fabrication and physiological self - release of tissue equivalents using smart peptide amphiphile templates Ricardo M . Gouveia 1 • Ian W . Hamley 2 • Che J . Connon 1 Received : 11 June 2015 / Accepted : 21 September 2015 / Published online : 28 September 2015 (cid:2) Springer Science + Business Media New York 2015 Abstract In this study we applied a smart biomaterial formed from a self - assembling , multi - functional synthetic peptide amphiphile ( PA ) to coat substrates with various surface chemistries . The combination of PA coating and alignment - inducing functionalised substrates provided a template to instruct human corneal stromal ﬁbroblasts to adhere , become aligned and then bio - fabricate a highly - ordered , multi - layered , three - dimensional tissue by depositing an aligned , native - like extracellular matrix . The newly - formed corneal tissue equivalent was subsequently able to eliminate the adhesive properties of the template and govern its own complete release via the action of endogenous proteases . Tissues recovered through this method were structurally stable , easily handled , and car - rier - free . Furthermore , topographical and mechanical analysis by atomic force microscopy showed that tissue equivalents formed on the alignment - inducing PA template had highly - ordered , compact collagen deposition , with a two - fold higher elastic modulus compared to the less compact tissues produced on the non - alignment tem - plate , the PA - coated glass . We suggest that this technology represents a new paradigm in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine , whereby all processes for the bio - fabrication and subsequent self - release of natural , bio - prosthetic human tissues depend solely on simple template - tissue feedback interactions . 1 Introduction In recent years there has been an increasing change of focus within the ﬁelds of tissue engineering and regenerative med - icine towards the development of new bottom - up strategies for the bio - fabrication of complex tissues ( i . e . , using cells to synthesise native - like tissues and organs in vitro ) . These strategies beneﬁt from the increased understanding of the biochemical and biomechanical conditions required to induce differentiation , maintain viability and direct the function of cells in vivo . Furthermore , there have been considerable efforts to apply these principles to the development of new biomaterials that reproduce said conditions [ 1 ] . Some of the most innovative applications are based on hydrogel biomaterials capable of promoting cell adhesion , proliferation , and / or differentiation , and subsequently induce cell detachment by changing their characteristics in response to external physical ( temperature , magnetic ﬁeld ) , chemical ( ionic strength , pH ) , or biological ( anabolic or catabolic ) stimuli ( reviewed in [ 2 – 4 ] ) . For example , thermo - responsive polymers with different chemistries have been successfully used to create contiguous intact constructs using numerous cell types , including corneal [ 5 ] , skin [ 6 ] , oral [ 7 ] , and nasal epithelial cells [ 8 ] , cardiomy - ocytes [ 9 ] , muscle myoblasts [ 10 ] , and mesenchymal stem cells [ 11 ] . This is evidently an attractive bottom - up strat - egy , as it not only provides cells with a template to produce native - like tissues but also ensures that , by the end of the bio - fabrication process , the tissue is dissociated from the template . This approach avoids having the ﬁnal bio - product associated with artiﬁcial or exogenous biomaterials , scaf - folds , or carriers . However , these techniques have been used mainly to create cell sheets [ 12 ] , with limited control on the three - dimensional structure and hierarchical orga - nization of the tissue [ 13 ] . & Che J . Connon che . connon @ newcastle . ac . uk 1 Institute of Genetic Medicine , International Centre for Life , Newcastle University , Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ , UK 2 Department of Chemistry , University of Reading , Whiteknights , Reading RG6 6AD , UK 123 J Mater Sci : Mater Med ( 2015 ) 26 : 242 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10856 - 015 - 5581 - 5 In this study we explored the potential of peptide amphiphile ( PA ) molecules as templates to bio - fabricate scaffold - free corneal stromal tissues with native - type structure and composition , and to subsequently release such tissues under fully - deﬁned physiological conditions . PA molecules have been used for their ability to self - assemble in aqueous media at physiological pH into highly - structured nanostructures presenting speciﬁc pep - tide motifs that interact with cells and regulate cell phe - notype and extracellular matrix ( ECM ) production [ 14 , 15 ] . More recently , we developed a novel fully - synthetic , multi - functional PA comprising a mix of two different self - assembling molecules , a bio - functional one that contained an MMP1 cleavage site contiguous to the RGDS cell adhesion motif ( MMP / RGDS ) and a second molecule used as diluent ( ETTES ) [ 16 ] . This binary system PA was tested as a coating template to create corneal tissue with native - like structure and organisation , using human corneal stro - mal ﬁbroblasts ( hCSFs ) as sole source for bio - synthesis [ 17 ] . The potential application of PAs in corneal tissue engineering has recently been reviewed [ 18 ] . Here , we further evaluate the different properties of the PA - directed bio - fabricated tissues containing an ECM comprised of either highly - oriented or randomly - deposited collagen ﬁbres . This distinction in isotropy is important , as it is well known that the highly aligned spatial arrangement of the corneal stromal collagen is fundamental to the structural and functional role of the organ [ 19 ] . In order to achieve control of the orientation of deposited ECM , the binary MMP / RGDS : ETTES PA mixture was used to coat micro - rubbed PTFE on glass , an anisotropic substrate that induces the alignment of cells and ECM [ 20 ] , or on borosilicate glass coverslips , previously shown suitable for the isotropic attachment of hCSFs in serum - free medium ( SFM ) [ 21 ] . The combination of PA coatings and different substrates thus allowed the production and subsequent self - release of corneal stromal tissue equivalents with distinct structural and mechanical properties ( i . e . , collagen ﬁbre orientation , topography , stiffness ) . As such , these smart PA templates provide a promising platform for improved control of the bio - fabrication process by inﬂuencing the structural and mechanical properties of the engineered tissues . 2 Materials and methods 2 . 1 Preparation of peptide amphiphile ( PA ) coatings Peptide amphiphiles ( PAs ) were custom - synthesized by CS Bio ( Menlo Park , USA ) as [ 95 % pure triﬂuoroacetic acid salts , and their molecular weight was conﬁrmed by electrospray - mass spectrometry . Brieﬂy , the lyophilized C 16 - TPGPQG ; IAGQRGDS ( MMP / RGDS ; ; indicates cleavage site for MMP1 ) and C 16 - ETTES ( ETTES ) were weighed separately and then dissolved as a 15 : 85 mol : mol binary component solution in ultrapure water from a Barnstead Nanopure system to obtain a 1 9 10 - 2 M solution . PAs were solubilised by 15 min sonication treatment at 55 (cid:3) C , and then maintained at 4 (cid:3) C overnight to ensure extensive and homogeneous self - assembly . PA solutions were kept refrigerated until further use . Speciﬁ - cally , dry PA ﬁlm coatings were produced by using 500 l L aliquots of PA solutions at 1 . 25 9 10 - 3 M in ultrapure water to drop - spot glass slides coated with oriented stripes of polytetraﬂuoroethylene ( PTFE ) prepared as previously described [ 22 ] , or untreated borosilicate glass coverslips ( Gerhard Menzel No . 0 , Thermo - Scientiﬁc ) , and left to dry overnight at room temperature inside an aseptic Class II cell culture cabinet ( Fig . 1a ) . Resulting ﬁlms ( * 5 cm 2 ) were washed three times with sterile phosphate buffer saline ( PBS ) just prior to cell seeding . 2 . 2 Isolation and culture of human corneal stromal ﬁbroblasts Corneal tissues were obtained as by - products of grafting procedures , and kindly provided by Mr . Martin Leyland , MD , FRCOphth , following informed consent . All experi - ments were approved by the Royal Berkshire NHS Foun - dation Trust ( RBFT ) R & D Ofﬁce and in accordance with RBFT and MHRA ethical guidelines . hCSFs were isolated from epithelia - depleted corneal rings and cultured as pre - viously described [ 20 ] . Brieﬂy , human corneal rings including the limbus region were dissected into quarters and remaining scleral tissue removed . Corneal tissue was shredded using a scalpel , transferred to 1 : 1 Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle medium : Ham’s F12 ( DMEM / F12 ) sup - plemented with 2 g L - 1 of collagenase type - I ( Life Tech - nologies , USA ) and 5 % FBS ( Biosera , France ) , and incubated under rotation for 5 h at 37 (cid:3) C , followed by incubation with 0 . 25 % Trypsin – EDTA in DMEM / F12 for 10 min . Isolated hCSFs were plated onto standard poly - styrene culture plates ( Nunc , Thermo Scientiﬁc , USA ) , and maintained in culture medium ( DMEM / F12 supplemented with 5 % FBS , 1 9 10 - 3 M ascorbic acid , and 1 % peni - cillin / streptomycin ) at 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 . Medium was replaced every 2 – 3 days . Upon reaching 70 – 80 % conﬂu - ence , cells were enzyme - dissociated using TrypLE ( Life Technologies ) and passaged , or transferred to serum - free culture medium supplemented with all - trans retinoic acid ( RA ) at 1 9 10 - 5 M ( SFM ? RA ) 3 days prior to subse - quent experiments in order to inactivate hCSFs and inhibit MMP expression [ 21 ] . 242 Page 2 of 8 J Mater Sci : Mater Med ( 2015 ) 26 : 242 123 2 . 3 Adhesion and proliferation of hCSFs on PA coating templates Conﬂuent hCSF monolayers maintained for 3 days in SFM ? RA were washed twice and then triturated with sterile PBS for dissociation . Cells were seeded at a density of 2 9 10 - 4 hCSFs per cm 2 of PA ﬁlms coating PTFE - covered glass slides ( alignment - inducing template ) or borosilicate glass coverslips ( non - aligned template ) ( Fig . 1c ) . The ori - entation of hCSFs grown on both templates was monitored using a Nikon Eclipse inverted microscope ( Nikon , Japan ) coupled with a Jenoptik CCD camera ( Jenoptik AG , Ger - many ) . Cell proliferation was evaluated during tissue bio - fabrication ( at day 3 , 7 , 30 , 60 , 90 of culture ) and the 3 days immediately after tissue self - detachment ( 90 ? 1 , ? 2 , and ? 3 ) using the AlamarBlue assay ( Life Technologies ) to quantify differences in the metabolic activity of viable cells between experimental groups . Brieﬂy , cultures were incu - bated with resazurin reagent diluted 1 : 10 in SFM ? RA for 4 h at 37 (cid:3) C , with supernatants sampled ( 0 . 1 mL aliquots , in triplicate ) for ﬂuorescence emission at 590 nm , and then replaced with fresh SFM ? RA . The process was repeated for each time point evaluated . Cell number was calculated by interpolation using a standard curve for the ﬂuorescence values of 1 , 5 , 10 , 20 , 50 , and 100 9 10 3 cells . All experi - ments were performed three times , independently ( n = 3 ) . 2 . 4 Bio - fabrication and controlled self - release of tissues Corneal stromal tissue formed by hCSFs and corresponding ECM deposited during 90 days culture in SFM ? RA Fig . 1 Scheme representing tissue bio - fabrication and controlled self - release using the multifunctional MMP / RGDS : ETTES binary PA as a smart template . The diagram depicts a the application of PA in solution on PTFE - covered glass ( to induce cell alignment ; left panels ) or glass coverslips ( right panels ) to minimise unspeciﬁc cell adhesion ; b the formation of stable PA ﬁlm coatings ; c the seeding and adhesion of human corneal stromal ﬁbroblasts ( hCSFs ) to the biomaterial template ; d the culture of these cells during 90 days in serum - free , retinoic acid ( RA ) - supplemented conditions to allow the continuous deposition of corneal stroma - speciﬁc ECM components while abrogating the expression of endogenous MMPs ; and e the controlled self - release of bio - fabricated tissues ( black arrows ) subsequent to the removal of RA from the culture medium and consequent increased expression of cellular matrix metalloproteases ( MMPs ; red arrows ) , MMP - speciﬁc cleavage of PA molecules , and degradation of the adhesive template ( Color ﬁgure online ) J Mater Sci : Mater Med ( 2015 ) 26 : 242 Page 3 of 8 242 123 ( Fig . 1d ) was released as previously described [ 17 ] . Brieﬂy , the dense , multi - layered tissues attached to aligned or non - aligned biomaterial templates were washed thrice with sterile PBS and then maintained in serum - free culture medium without RA supplementation ( SFM ) for cells to resume MMP expression , and to allow speciﬁc cleavage of the cell - adhesive PA coating and tissue self - release ( Fig . 1e ) . After 3 days , the free - ﬂoating self - released tis - sues were recovered and analysed , or ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in water for 20 min at room tempera - ture , washed thrice in PBS , and then maintained in water for up to 18 months . 2 . 5 Nano - topography and mechanical properties of bio - fabricated tissues Analysis of surface topography was performed for aligned and non - aligned bio - fabricated corneal tissues in the static force mode using a Nanosurf Easyscan 2 - controlled atomic force microscope ( AFM ) equipped with commercial soft contact mode cantilevers ( ContAI - G , BudgetSensors ; res - onant frequency 13 kHz , nominal spring constant 0 . 2 N / m ) . Brieﬂy , the different tissue samples were mounted onto glass slides that were previously covered with a layer of plastic parafﬁn ﬁlm ( Paraﬁlm M ) to avoid having the very high rigidity of the glass inﬂuence the stiffness measure - ments , and minimise sample displacement and drift . Sur - face topography was analysed from three separate regions in each sample , with 512 9 two - direction lines scanned at 10 l m s - 1 at 10 nV , and with a P - and I - gain of 1 . The mechanical properties of the tissue samples were evaluated by force - distance spectroscopy . The stiffness of the tissues was evaluated from 100 force - distance curves acquired at 2 l m s - 1 from different positions across each sample , and using SPIP data analysis software ( Image Metrology A / S , Denmark ) for baseline and hysteresis correction , followed by elastic modulus calculation using the Sneddon model , applicable for soft biological materials [ 23 ] . Elastic mod - ulus was represented in terms of frequency , in percentage of measured values , within 20 MPa bins . All experiments were performed three times , independently ( n = 3 ) . 2 . 6 Statistical analysis Error bars represent the standard deviation ( SD ) of the mean , analysed a priori for homogeneity of variance . Replicates from each independent experiment were con - ﬁrmed to follow a Gaussian distribution , and differences between groups were determined using one - or two - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparison post hoc test . Signiﬁcance between groups was established for P \ 0 . 05 , 0 . 01 , and 0 . 001 , with a 95 % conﬁdence interval , and a R 2 value in the proliferation assay at days 30 , 60 , 90 , and 90 ? 1 of 0 . 86 , 0 . 83 , 0 . 88 , and 0 . 84 , respectively . The average ± SD fre - quency distribution of elastic modulus of both aligned and non - aligned tissue samples was tested for correlation , and ﬁt to Gaussian curves using a non - linear least - squares regression model , which were then analysed for indepen - dence using the v 2 test . 3 Results In this work , we combined a multi - functional PA with micro - rubbed PTFE or glass surfaces to create smart tem - plates able to control cell attachment and orientation , promote the deposition of natural ECM , and ultimately capable of degrading by the action of endogenous MMPs to release highly - structured native - like tissues comprising aligned or random - oriented collagen , respectively . As such , the usefulness of bioactive PAs as templates for tissue bio - fabrication was explored by adding its application as a coating to other functionalised substrates ( Fig . 1 ) . The different PA - substrate templates ( using PTFE or glass ) inﬂuenced cell attachment and growth . The hCSFs cultured on the PTFE alignment - inducing template ( Fig . 2 , blue bars ) proliferated up to day 60 and then maintained cell numbers up to day 90 in SFM ? RA conditions . Cells grown on PA - coated glass also proliferated , albeit at a slower rate ( Fig . 2 , orange bars ) . After 2 months in cul - ture , cells grew as part of the newly - formed tissue , and surrounded by large amounts of deposited ECM . In Fig . 2 Proliferation of hCSFs grown on multifunctional PA tem - plates during tissue bio - fabrication . Cells grown on PA - coated PTFE ( aligned ; blue bars ) or glass coverslips ( non - aligned ; orange bars ) were quantiﬁed while cultured in serum - free , RA - supplemented medium , from day 3 up to day 90 , and during the subsequent 3 days when maintained in SFM without RA ( ? 1 , ? 2 , and ? 3 ) . Bars represent average ± SD ; * , * * , and * * * correspond to P \ 0 . 05 , 0 . 01 , and 0 . 001 , respectively ; n = 3 independent experiments ( Color ﬁgure online ) 242 Page 4 of 8 J Mater Sci : Mater Med ( 2015 ) 26 : 242 123 addition , cells on the alignment - inducing PA template showed signiﬁcantly higher proliferation between days 30 and 90 compared to those grown on PA - coated glass ( Fig . 2 ) . Upon incubation with SFM without RA , hCSFs comprising the bio - fabricated tissues showed a marked decrease in numbers , particularly on the second and third days after RA removal from media ( Fig . 2 , ? 2 and ? 3 ) . Percentage - wise , a similar loss was observed in tissues grown on aligned and non - aligned templates , with a cor - responding reduction in cell numbers between day 90 and ? 3 of 21 ± 6 and 16 ± 4 % , respectively . After 3 days of RA deprivation , hCSFs comprising the newly - formed bio - fabricated tissues resumed MMP expression and elicited the cleavage and degradation of the adhesive PA template ( Fig . 1e ) . Free - ﬂoating tissues , formed either on aligned or non - aligned templates , were visually transparent and maintained their structural integ - rity after lift - off ( Fig . 3 ) . These tissue equivalents were easily manipulated , transferrable , and able to retain their original shape and size even after extensive handling ( Fig . 3a , b ) . Moreover , this structural stability was evident even in paraformaldehyde - ﬁxed tissues maintained in water for 18 months ( Fig . 3 , right panels ) . However , tis - sues bio - fabricated on alignment - inducing templates were seen to be more robust and less friable than those produced on PA - coated glass . In order to understand the ultrastructural basis for their different mechanical properties , tissues were imaged by atomic force microscopy immediately after self - release from either template . The analysis of surface topography showed that tissues produced on the alignment - inducing PA tem - plate consisted of a dense collagenous matrix , with highly - ordered collagen ﬁbres deposited in compact bundles , and predominantly aligned throughout the tissue surface parallel to the axis of the micro - rubbed lines of PTFE used as the underlying substrate during tissue bio - fabrication ( Fig . 4 , left panel ) . Tissues formed on PA - coated glass , albeit pre - senting also a very dense collagenous matrix , had collagen ﬁbres deposited more or less randomly , with occasional alignment only in restricted regions of the tissue surface ( Fig . 4 , right panel ) . In addition , the surface of aligned and non - aligned tissues also showed substantial differences in terms of roughness ( Fig . 5 ) . Speciﬁcally , false colour images demonstrated that aligned tissues had a much more uniform compact surface , with no distinctive topographical features ( Fig . 5 , upper panel ) . In contrast , non - aligned tissues showed a less compact , looser deposition of the randomly - oriented collagen ﬁbres , and a rougher topography ( as indicated by the wider colour range ; Fig . 5 , lower panel ) . Furthermore , the stiffness of both aligned and non - aligned tissues was evaluated by force - distance spec - troscopy ( Fig . 6 ) . The analysis of frequency after repeated measurements showed a statistically signiﬁcant difference ( P = 0 . 003 ) in the distribution of the values for elastic modulus , with aligned tissues presenting an increased percentage of high - modulus measurements in a wide range Fig . 3 Stability of self - released corneal bio - fabricated tissue . Pho - tographs of free - ﬂoating corneal stromal tissue equivalents immedi - ately after detachment from the smart PA template ( left ) and after 18 months in water ( right panels ) showed that bio - fabricates were able to maintain structural integrity over long periods of time . Tissues were highly transparent ( a ) , easily recovered ( b ) , and able to retain size and shape after manipulation ( c ) . Although showing no evident differences in total thickness , tissue produced on the aligned template was found to be more robust and less friable during handling . Scale bars from right and left panels = 1 and 0 . 5 cm , respectively J Mater Sci : Mater Med ( 2015 ) 26 : 242 Page 5 of 8 242 123 of values ( Fig . 6 , blue bars ) , while non - aligned tissues had lower - elastic modulus values distributed through a shorter stiffness range ( Fig . 6 , orange bars ) . Moreover , non - linear regression analysis allowed the frequency histograms from aligned and non - aligned tissues to be well ﬁtted ( R 2 = 0 . 74 and 0 . 81 , respectively ) to statistically independent Gaus - sian curves ( v 2 test ; P = 0 . 0001 ) , and with corresponding elastic modulus of 69 ± 43 and 29 ± 24 MPa . Taken together , these results show that that multifunctional PAs Fig . 4 Alignment of collagens matrix of corneal stromal tissue equivalents . False colour images of forward deﬂection scans performed by atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) of self - released corneal bio - fabricates produced on PA - coated PTFE ( aligned , left panel ) or non - aligned biomaterial templates ( right panel ) . The surface of tissues produced on the aligned template showed compact deposition of collagen ﬁbres , predominantly oriented along the axis of PTFE indentations ( arrowheads ) . In contrast , collagen ﬁbres of corneal tissues produced on the non - aligned template were oriented more or less randomly . False colour scale , 500 nm . Scale bars , 500 nm Fig . 5 Topography of corneal stromal tissue equivalents . Three - dimensional map of surface topography produced by forward deﬂection AFM scans of corneal tissue bio - fabricated on PA - coated PTFE ( aligned , upper panel ) or non - aligned biomaterial templates ( lower panel ) . Collagen ﬁbres from tissue produced on the aligned template showed predominant orientation parallel to the axis of PTFE indentations ( arrowheads ) , in contrast with the more random orientation of collagen from non - aligned tissue . False colour scale , 500 nm . Scale bars of x , y , and z axis = 1 , 1 , and 5 l m , respectively Fig . 6 Mechanical properties of corneal stromal equivalents . The elastic modulus of tissue equivalents produced on PA - coated PTFE ( aligned ; blue bars ) or glass coverslips ( non - aligned ; orange bars ) was quantiﬁed by force - distance spectroscopy immediately after tissue detachment from the smart PA templates , calculated using the Sneddon model , and represented as percentage frequency of measured values . The frequency histograms of aligned and non - aligned tissues were used to calculate Gaussian curves by non - linear regression , with a ﬁtness of 0 . 74 and 0 . 81 , and an elastic modulus of 69 ± 43 ( area in blue ) and 29 ± 24 MPa ( area in orange ) , respectively . Data is expressed as average ± SD of three independent experiments ( n = 3 ) ( Color ﬁgure online ) 242 Page 6 of 8 J Mater Sci : Mater Med ( 2015 ) 26 : 242 123 can stably coat hydrophobic materials such as PTFE and borosilicate glass , and thus can be applicable to a wide array of tissue culture substrates . Moreover , the alignment - inducing PA template is capable of enhancing not only the adhesion and proliferation of hCSFs , but also the mechanical properties of tissues bio - fabricated de novo by these cells . 4 Discussion The potential of the multifunctional MMP / RGDS : ETTES - PA to act as a template capable of inducing the formation of self - releasing tissues under physiological conditions was previously tested on low - attachment culture plates [ 17 ] . However , the present study now shows that the same PA can be applied to other functionalised substrates to further enhance the hierarchical organization of bio - fabricated tissues , or even to untreated borosilicate glass and still ensure complete tissue self - release . By combining PA coatings with the cell alignment - in - ducing PTFE - rubbed surface we were able to produce a corneal stromal tissue equivalent that closely resembles its native counterpart [ 24 , 25 ] . In particular , cells grown on PA - coated PTFE were directed to adhere , align , and pro - liferate along the axis of PTFE lines . This allowed the uniform orientation of hCSFs throughout the entire surface of the template , and consequently the formation of a more compact cell monolayer , with signiﬁcantly higher number of cells compared to the template with randomly - oriented , but still highly - viable cells [ 17 ] . In addition , the aligned cells were constrained to deposit their ECM components , namely collagen ﬁbres , along the same orientation axis . These results are in line with previous observations , where a sin - gle - function PA coating PTFE was able to enhance prolif - eration and stratiﬁcation of hCSFs while still allowing cells to align and deposit highly - oriented collagen ﬁbres [ 20 ] . Although not impairing the controlled self - release , the increased organisation of cells and ECM from the align - ment - inducing template had an obvious effect on the overall robustness of the tissue . Aligned tissues were maintained intact even after extensive manipulation , very difﬁcult to cut , and easily folded and unfolded . In contrast , and despite their stability and capacity to maintain the original shape and size even during long periods of storage in water and at room temperature , non - aligned tissues were , from the start , observed to be more difﬁcult to handle ( less robust ) and easily friable . The different structural properties at the macroscopic level were derived from the ultrastructural properties of the resolved tissues . The alignment of cells also resulted in the bio - fabrication of tissues with a more compact ECM , as observed by scanning surface topography using AFM . In addition , the aligned tissue presented a higher elastic modulus compared to non - aligned samples , previously shown to have collagen ﬁbres densely deposited in lamel - lae - like layers 2 . 6 ± 1 . 6 l m thick [ 17 ] . The twofold increase of the average elastic modulus recorded for aligned over non - aligned corneal tissue was probably the result of higher collagen ﬁbre alignment and compaction , density , or cross - linking . Recent studies have demonstrated that the stiffness of ﬁbrillar materials is substantially increased due to anisotropy [ 26 , 27 ] . In addition , similar differences were observed between plastic - compressed collagen gels sub - jected to different loads [ 28 ] . Overall , the values of 5 – 100 MPa recorded for our corneal stromal tissue equiv - alents were in line with other collagen - rich natural tissues such as cartilage ( elastic modulus of 0 . 02 – 27 MPa ; [ 29 , 30 ] ) , skin ( 0 . 05 – 10 MPa ; [ 31 , 32 ] ) , and corneal stroma ( 1 – 3 MPa ; [ 33 ] ) , but lower than those reported for isolated collagen ﬁbrils ( 300 – 2000 MPa ; [ 34 ] ) . The considerable range of values reported in the literature is due to the dif - ferent measurement conditions and cantilever geometries and sizes used , as well as to the models applied for the calculation of the elastic modulus . In this context , a direct comparison between absolute values of elastic modulus would require the use of the same experimental setup . In conclusion , the present results revealed that different PA - coated multifunctional templates are capable of instructing cells to fabricate tissues with different organi - sations and mechanical properties . Moreover , these bio - fabricated tissues were also formed by speciﬁc proteogly - cans such as the keratocan , lumican , and decorin [ 20 ] , ECM components with important structural and functional roles in the corneal stroma [ 19 ] . In the future , it will be interesting to perform further studies to characterise the proteoglycan composition and distribution in both aligned and non - aligned corneal tissues , and the inﬂuence of these molecules in the mechanical properties of bio - fabricated tissue equivalents . Acknowledgments We thank Dr C . A . Bipes from Nanosurf AG , Switzerland for his expert technical support in atomic force micro - scopy . This work was funded by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council ( BBSRC Grant Reference BB / I008187 / 1 ) . References 1 . Rice JJ , Martino MM , De Laporte L , Tortelli F , Briquez PS , Hubbell JA . Engineering the regenerative microenvironment with biomaterials . Advanced Healthc Mater . 2013 ; 2 : 57 – 71 . 2 . Jones RR , Hamley IW , Connon CJ . Chapter 4 the instructive role of biomaterials in cell - based therapy and tissue engineering . Hydrogels in cell - based therapies . Cambridge : The Royal Society of Chemistry ; 2014 . p . 73 – 94 . 3 . Liu JS , Gartner ZJ . Directing the assembly of spatially organized multicomponent tissues from the bottom up . Trends Cell Biol . 2012 ; 22 : 683 – 91 . J Mater Sci : Mater Med ( 2015 ) 26 : 242 Page 7 of 8 242 123 4 . Samchenko Y , Ulberg Z , Korotych O . Multipurpose smart hydrogel systems . Adv Colloid Interface Sci . 2011 ; 168 : 247 – 62 . 5 . Hayashida Y , Nishida K , Yamato M , Yang J , Sugiyama H , Watanabe K , et al . Transplantation of tissue - engineered epithelial cell sheets after excimer laser photoablation reduces postopera - tive corneal haze . Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 2006 ; 47 : 552 – 7 . 6 . Dworak A , Utrata - Wesolek A , Oleszko N , Walach W , Trzebicka B , Aniol J , et al . Poly ( 2 - substituted - 2 - oxazoline ) surfaces for dermal ﬁbroblasts adhesion and detachment . J Mater Sci Mater Med . 2014 ; 25 : 1149 – 63 . 7 . Takagi R , Murakami D , Kondo M , Ohki T , Sasaki R , Mizutani M , et al . Fabrication of human oral mucosal epithelial cell sheets for treatment of esophageal ulceration by endoscopic submucosal dissection . Gastrointest Endosc . 2010 ; 72 : 1253 – 9 . 8 . Hama T , Yamamoto K , Yaguchi Y , Murakami D , Sasaki H , Yamato M , et al . Autologous human nasal epithelial cell sheet using temperature - responsive culture insert for transplantation after middle ear surgery . J Tissue Eng Regen Med . 2015 . doi : 10 . 1002 / term . 2012 . 9 . Sakaguchi K , Shimizu T , Okano T . Construction of three - di - mensional vascularized cardiac tissue with cell sheet engineering . J Control Release . 2015 ; 205 : 83 – 8 . 10 . Aranaz I , Martinez - Campos E , Nash ME , Tardajos MG , Reinecke H , Elvira C , et al . Pseudo - double network hydrogels with unique properties as supports for cell manipulation . J Mater Chem B . 2014 ; 2 : 3839 – 48 . 11 . Hruschka V , Saeed A , Slezak P , Cheikh Al Ghanami R , Feich - tinger GA , Alexander C , et al . Evaluation of a thermoresponsive polycaprolactone scaffold for in vitro three - dimensional stem cell differentiation . Tissue Eng Part A . 2015 ; 21 : 310 – 9 . 12 . Sekiya S , Shimizu T , Okano T . Vascularization in 3D tissue using cell sheet technology . Regen Med . 2013 ; 8 : 371 – 7 . 13 . Matsuura K , Utoh R , Nagase K , Okano T . Cell sheet approach for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine . J Control Release . 2014 ; 190 : 228 – 39 . 14 . Boekhoven J , Stupp SI . 25th Anniversary article : supramolecular materials for regenerative medicine . Adv Mater . 2014 ; 26 : 1642 – 59 . 15 . Hamley IW . Lipopeptides : from self - assembly to bioactivity . Chem Commun . 2015 ; 51 : 8574 – 83 . 16 . Dehsorkhi A , Gouveia RM , Smith AM , Hamley IW , Castelletto V , Connon CJ , et al . Self - assembly of a dual functional bioactive peptide amphiphile incorporating both matrix metalloprotease substrate and cell adhesion motifs . Soft Matter . 2015 ; 11 : 3115 – 24 . 17 . Gouveia RM , Castelletto V , Hamley IW , Connon CJ . New self - assembling multifunctional templates for the biofabrication and controlled self - release of cultured tissue . Tissue Eng Part A . 2015 ; 21 : 1772 – 84 . 18 . Miotto M , Gouveia RM , Connon CJ . Peptide amphiphiles in corneal tissue engineering . J Funct Biomater . 2015 ; 6 : 687 – 707 . 19 . Lewis PN , Pinali C , Young RD , Meek KM , Quantock AJ , Knupp C . Structural interactions between collagen and proteoglycans are elucidated by three - dimensional electron tomography of bovine cornea . Structure . 2010 ; 18 : 239 – 45 . 20 . Gouveia RM , Castelletto V , Alcock SG , Hamley IW , Connon CJ . Bioactive ﬁlms produced from self - assembling peptide amphiphiles as versatile substrates for tuning cell adhesion and tissue architec - ture in serum - free conditions . J Mater Chem B . 2013 ; 1 : 6157 – 69 . 21 . Gouveia RM , Connon CJ . The effects of retinoic acid on human corneal stromal keratocytes cultured in vitro under serum - free conditions . Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 2013 ; 54 : 7483 – 91 . 22 . Wittmann JC , Smith P . Highly oriented thin - ﬁlms of poly ( te - traﬂuoroethylene ) as a substrate for oriented growth of materials . Nature . 1991 ; 352 : 414 – 7 . 23 . Lin DC , Horkay F . Nanomechanics of polymer gels and biolog - ical tissues : a critical review of analytical approaches in the Hertzian regime and beyond . Soft Matter . 2008 ; 4 : 669 – 82 . 24 . Holmes DF , Gilpin CJ , Baldock C , Ziese U , Koster AJ , Kadler KE . Corneal collagen ﬁbril structure in three dimensions : struc - tural insights into ﬁbril assembly , mechanical properties , and tissue organization . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2001 ; 98 : 7307 – 12 . 25 . Komai Y , Ushiki T . The three - dimensional organization of col - lagen ﬁbrils in the human cornea and sclera . Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 1991 ; 32 : 2244 – 58 . 26 . Chen B , Jones RR , Mi SL , Foster J , Alcock SG , Hamley IW , et al . The mechanical properties of amniotic membrane inﬂuence its effect as a biomaterial for ocular surface repair . Soft Matter . 2012 ; 8 : 8379 – 87 . 27 . Hamley IW , Castelletto V , Moulton CM , Rodriguez - Perez J , Squires AM , Eralp T , et al . Alignment of a model amyloid peptide fragment in bulk and at a solid surface . J Phys Chem B . 2010 ; 114 : 8244 – 54 . 28 . Foster JW , Jones RR , Bippes CA , Gouveia RM , Connon CJ . Differential nuclear expression of Yap in basal epithelial cells across the cornea and substrates of differing stiffness . Exp Eye Res . 2014 ; 127 : 37 – 41 . 29 . Loparic M , Wirz D , Daniels AU , Raiteri R , Vanlandingham MR , Guex G , et al . Micro - and nanomechanical analysis of articular cartilage by indentation - type atomic force microscopy : validation with a gel - microﬁber composite . Biophys J . 2010 ; 98 : 2731 – 40 . 30 . Stolz M , Raiteri R , Daniels AU , VanLandingham MR , Baschong W , Aebi U . Dynamic elastic modulus of porcine articular carti - lage determined at two different levels of tissue organization by indentation - type atomic force microscopy . Biophys J . 2004 ; 86 : 3269 – 83 . 31 . Achterberg VF , Buscemi L , Diekmann H , Smith - Clerc J , Sch - wengler H , Meister JJ , et al . The nano - scale mechanical proper - ties of the extracellular matrix regulate dermal ﬁbroblast function . J Invest Dermatol . 2014 ; 134 : 1862 – 72 . 32 . Crichton ML , Donose BC , Chen X , Raphael AP , Huang H , Kendall MA . The viscoelastic , hyperelastic and scale dependent behaviour of freshly excised individual skin layers . Biomaterials . 2011 ; 32 : 4670 – 81 . 33 . Lombardo M , Lombardo G , Carbone G , De Santo MP , Barberi R , Serrao S . Biomechanics of the anterior human corneal tissue investigated with atomic force microscopy . Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci . 2012 ; 53 : 1050 – 7 . 34 . Shen ZL , Kahn H , Ballarini R , Eppell SJ . Viscoelastic properties of isolated collagen ﬁbrils . Biophys J . 2011 ; 100 : 3008 – 15 . 242 Page 8 of 8 J Mater Sci : Mater Med ( 2015 ) 26 : 242 123