The Singer – Nicholson fluid mosiac concept is still the textbook model of how the cell membrane is organized . It proposes that the lipid bilayer functions as a neutral two - dimensional solvent , having little influence on membrane protein function . But biophysicists find that lipids exist in several phases in model lipid bilayers , including gel , liquid - ordered and liquid - disordered states , in order of increasing fluidity 1 . In the gel state lipids are semi - frozen , whereas at the other extreme , the liquid - disordered state , the whole lipid bilayer is fluid , as proposed by the Singer – Nicholson model . In the liquid - ordered phase , phospholipids with saturated hydrocar - bon chains pack tightly with cholesterol ( BOX 1 ) but nev - ertheless remain mobile in the plane of the membrane 2 . Despite a detailed biophysical characterization of model membranes , it has been difficult to show that lipids exist in these different phases in the complex environment of the cell . Lipid rafts A turning point came when the lipid raft hypothesis was formulated more than ten years ago 1 , 3 , 4 . It originated from studies on epithelial cell polarity , and its central postulate was the existence of lipid rafts , consisting of dynamic assemblies of cholesterol and sphingolipids ( BOX 1 ) , in the EXOPLASMIC LEAFLET of the bilayer . The pre - ponderance of saturated hydrocarbon chains in cell sphingolipids allows for cholesterol to be tightly interca - lated , similar to the organization of the liquid - ordered state in model membranes . The inner leaflet is probably rich in phospholipids with saturated fatty acids and cho - lesterol 5 , but its characterization is still incomplete . It is also not clear how the inner leaflet is coupled to the outer leaflet . One possibility is that long fatty acids of sphin - golipids in the outer leaflet couple the exoplasmic and cytoplasmic leaflets by interdigitation . Transmembrane proteins could also stabilize this coupling . The mem - brane surrounding lipid rafts is more fluid , as it consists mostly of phospholipids with unsaturated , and therefore kinked , fatty acyl chains and cholesterol . In other words , lipid rafts form distinct liquid - ordered phases in the lipid bilayer , dispersed in a liquid - disordered matrix of unsat - urated glycerolipids 1 , 6 . The raft concept has long been controversial , largely because it has been difficult to prove definitively that rafts exist in living cells . But recent studies with improved methodology have dispelled most of these doubts ( BOX 2 ) . One of the most important properties of lipid rafts is that they can include or exclude proteins to variable extents . Proteins with raft affinity include glycosylphos - phatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins 1 , 7 , doubly acy - lated proteins , such as Src - family kinases or the α - sub - units of heterotrimeric G proteins 8 , cholesterol - linked and palmitoylated proteins such as Hedgehog 9 , and transmembrane proteins , particularly palmitoylated ones 1 . GPI - anchored proteins or proteins that carry hydrophobic modifications probably partition into rafts owing to preferential packing of their saturated mem - brane anchors . It is not yet clear why some transmem - brane proteins are included into rafts , but mutational analysis has shown that amino acids in the transmem - brane domains near the exoplasmic leaflet are critical 10 . LIPID RAFTS AND SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION Kai Simons * ‡and Derek Toomre‡ Signal transduction is initiated by complex protein – protein interactions between ligands , receptors and kinases , to name only a few . It is now becoming clear that lipid micro - environments on the cell surface — known as lipid rafts — also take part in this process . Lipid rafts containing a given set of proteins can change their size and composition in response to intra - or extracellular stimuli . This favours specific protein – protein interactions , resulting in the activation of signalling cascades . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 1 | OCTOBER 2000 | 31 * Max Planck Institute for Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , Pfotenhauerstrasse 110 , D - 01307 Dresden , Germany . ‡Cell Biology / Biophysics Programme , European Molecular Biology Laboratory ( EMBL ) , Meyerhofstrasse 1 , D - 69117 Heidelberg , Germany . Correspondence to K . S . e - mail : Simons @ EMBL - Heidelberg . de EXOPLASMIC LEAFLET Lipid layer facing the extracellular space . R E V I E W S © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 32 | OCTOBER 2000 | VOLUME 1 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S cell types that lack caveolin , such as lymphocytes and neurons , can nevertheless signal through rafts . Raft distribution and trafficking The distribution of lipid rafts over the cell surface depends on the cell type . In polarized epithelial cells and neurons , lipid rafts accumulate in the APICAL and axonal plasma membrane , respectively . BASOLATERAL and SOMATO - DENDRITIC MEMBRANES also contain rafts , but in smaller amounts 4 . Interestingly , caveolae are present mainly on the basolateral side of epithelial cells 20 , which faces the blood supply and is more active during signal transduc - tion . In lymphocytes and fibroblasts , rafts are distrib - uted over the cell surface without obvious polarity . We can roughly estimate the fraction of the cell surface cov - ered by rafts by comparing the ratio of the main raft and non - raft exoplasmic leaflet lipids , sphingolipids and phosphatidylcholine , respectively . Typically , sphin - golipids make up about 45 % of the cell surface in fibroblasts 21 and roughly 30 % in lymphocytes 22 , but these values are upper limits and may also be cell - type dependent . Raft lipids are most abundant at the plasma mem - brane , but can also be found in the BIOSYNTHETIC and ENDOCYTIC PATHWAYS . Whereas cholesterol is synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , sphingolipid synthesis and head - group modification are completed largely in the Golgi 23 . As these data predict , cholesterol – sphin - golipid rafts first assemble in the Golgi 1 . Movement of lipid rafts out of the Golgi seems to be mainly towards the plasma membrane , as vesicles going back to the ER contain little sphingomyelin and cholesterol 24 . The inclusion of proteins into rafts is important for polarized delivery to the cell surface in many cell types 4 , 25 , 26 . Lipid raft trafficking does not end with surface delivery — rafts are continuously endocytosed 27 from the plasma membrane . From early endosomes , rafts either recycle directly back to the cell surface or return indirectly through recycling endosomes , which could also deliver rafts to the Golgi 28 . Raft size One reason why it has been so difficult to prove that rafts exist in cells is that they are too small to be resolved by standard light microscopy . But if raft components are crosslinked with antibodies or lectins in living cells , then raft protein and lipid components cluster together , and Palmitoylation can increase a protein’s affinity for rafts , but it is not sufficient for raft association 11 . It is likely that a given protein can associate with rafts with differ - ent kinetics or partition coefficients . For instance , a monomeric transmembrane protein may have a short residency time in rafts , spending most of its time out - side rafts . But when the same protein is crosslinked or otherwise oligomerized , its affinity for rafts increases 12 . As we will discuss below , a common theme is that the clustering of separate rafts exposes proteins to a new membrane environment , enriched in specific enzymes , such as kinases , phosphatases and perhaps palmitoy - lases and depalmitoylases . Even a small change of parti - tioning into a lipid raft can , through amplification , ini - tiate signalling cascades . These dynamic features of initial raft association have so far received little atten - tion , but we predict that they are crucial for the activa - tion of many signal transduction pathways . Caveolae One subset of lipid rafts is found in cell surface invagi - nations called caveolae ( BOX 3 ) . These flask - shaped plas - ma membrane invaginations were first identified on the basis of their morphology by Palade 13 and Yamada 14 in the 1950s . Caveolae are formed from lipid rafts by poly - merization of caveolins — hairpin - like palmitoylated integral membrane proteins that tightly bind choles - terol 15 , 16 . The general function of caveolae is not clear . They have been implicated in endocytosis 15 and TRANSCY - TOSIS of albumin and other proteins across the endothe - lial monolayer 17 . In developing myocytes , ribbons of many caveolae organize into T - tubules 18 , which are required for the calcium regulation of muscle contrac - tion . Caveolae also function during signal transduc - tion 19 , but they are not absolutely required as several Box 1 | Glossary of lipid structures HO Cholesterol H 3 C ( CH 2 ) 12 Sphingolipids CH 2 H H C HC HO NH R HC C O R ' ' R R ' Phospholipids CH 2 CH H 2 C C O O – O O R ' ' P C O O O O R , R ' , Hydrocarbon chains of fatty acids R ' ' , Head - group Box 2 | Key papers on the existence of rafts in cell membranes • Fluorescence resonance energy transfer measurements using fluorescent folate to show interactions of folate receptors when they are in proximity in rafts in living cells 31 . • Biochemical crosslinking of GPI - anchored proteins when they are in proximity in rafts 32 . • Antibody crosslinking of raft proteins into patches segregating from non - raft proteins 12 . • Photonic force microscopy measurements of the size of rafts in living cells 30 . • Visualization of rafts and clustered rafts in IgE signalling by electron microscopy 81 . TRANSCYTOSIS Transport of macromolecules across a cell , consisting of endocytosis of a macromolecule at one side of a monolayer and exocytosis at the other side . APICAL PLASMA MEMBRANE The surface of an epithelial cell that faces the lumen . BASOLATERAL PLASMA MEMBRANE The surface of an epithelial cell that adjoins underlying tissue . SOMATODENDRITIC MEMBRANE The surface of a neuron that surrounds the cell body and dendrites . BIOSYNTHETIC PATHWAY Secretory or membrane proteins are inserted into the endoplasmic reticulum . They are then transported through the Golgi to the trans - Golgi network , where they are sorted to their final destination . ENDOCYTIC PATHWAY Macromolecules are endocytosed at the plasma membrane . They first arrive in early endosomes , then late endosomes , and finally lysosomes where they are degraded by hydrolases . Recycling back to the plasma membrane from early endosomes also occurs . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 1 | OCTOBER 2000 | 33 R E V I E W S have , for example , reinforced the conclusion that the fatty acids that mediate protein binding to rafts are usu - ally saturated . Indeed , feeding cells with polyunsaturat - ed fatty acids leads to the replacement of saturated fatty acids with unsaturated ones in acylated proteins , caus - ing these proteins to dissociate from rafts 36 . Similarly , the addition of exogenous GANGLIOSIDE s to cells can lead to their incorporation into rafts and , as a result , also cause proteins to dissociate from rafts 37 . The lack of standardized methodology has led to confusion in the current nomenclature between rafts , detergent - resistant membranes and caveolae ( TABLE 2 ) . In the hope of dissipating some of this confusion , we summarize the advantages and disadvantages of some methods used to study rafts in TABLE 1 , and propose a more standardized nomenclature in TABLE 2 . Rafts in signal transduction The most important role of rafts at the cell surface may be their function in signal transduction ( TABLE 3 ) . It is well established that , in the case of tyrosine kinase sig - nalling , adaptors , scaffolds and enzymes are recruited to the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane as a result of ligand activation 38 . One way to consider rafts is that they form concentrating platforms for individual recep - tors , activated by ligand binding . If receptor activation takes place in a lipid raft , the signalling complex is pro - tected from non - raft enzymes such as membrane phos - phatases that otherwise could affect the signalling process . In general , raft binding recruits proteins to a new micro - environment , where the phosphorylation state can be modified by local kinases and phosphatases , resulting in downstream signalling . To highlight these principles , examples of signalling pathways that involve lipid rafts are described below . Immunoglobulin E signalling . The first signalling process convincingly shown to involve lipid rafts was immunoglobulin E ( IgE ) signalling during the allergic immune response 39 – 41 ( FIG . 1a ) . This signalling pathway is activated when IgE binds through its Fc segment to receptors ( Fc ε RI ) residing in the plasma membrane of MAST CELLS and BASOPHILS . Fc ε RI is monomeric and binds one IgE molecule . The receptor is activated by the bind - raft and non - raft components separate into micron - sized quilt - like patches 12 , 29 . In fibroblasts , raft proteins rapidly diffuse in assemblies of roughly 50 nm diameter 30 , corresponding to about 3 , 500 sphingolipid molecules . The number of proteins in each raft depends on the packing density , but is probably not more than 10 – 30 proteins . We do not yet know whether individual raft proteins are randomly distributed between different rafts , or whether they are grouped in specialized rafts . Clusters of up to 15 molecules of the same protein have been observed within the same raft 31 , 32 , supporting the view that some proteins are distributed non - randomly . However , other studies indicate that such clusters may only represent a small population 33 . Either way , given its small size , a raft can statistically contain only a subset of all available raft proteins . This conclusion may have profound consequences on how signalling through rafts can be dynamically activated by raft clustering , as will be discussed later . Methods to study rafts The formulation of the raft hypothesis was influenced by the discovery that , on entering the Golgi , some pro - teins form large complexes with lipids , which resist sol - ubilization by non - ionic detergents 34 . Detergent - resis - tant membrane ( DRM ) complexes float to low density during SUCROSE GRADIENT CENTRIFUGATION and are enriched in raft proteins and lipids , providing a simple means of identifying possible raft components . Despite the ease and usefulness of non - ionic detergent extraction , this method is not without pitfalls 7 . A raft protein can be connected to the cytoskeleton , so it will not float after detergent extraction . Or its association with rafts can be so weak that it is solubilized by the detergent . Moreover , changes in detergents and extraction conditions can produce strikingly different results 7 , 29 , 35 . One useful approach in raft research has been the manipulation of raft lipid constituents ( BOX 4 ) . This treatment leads to the dissociation of proteins from rafts , which can be readily detected by common meth - ods used to analyse raft association ( TABLE 1 ) . This type of methodology has greatly contributed to our under - standing of raft function in vivo . Such experiments Box 3 | Confusion about the relationship between caveolae and rafts The problem has arisen primarily because of the difficulty of isolating pure caveolae . Several methods have been used — the first was simply Triton X - 100 extraction at 4 °C ( REF . 82 ) . When it became clear that this fraction contains not only plasma membrane caveolae but rafts ( detergent - resistant membranes or DRMs ) from all cellular membranes 83 , new methods were devised . The most frequently used of these is based on density gradient centrifugation 84 but it is also not capable of isolating pure caveolae 35 . Immuno - isolation has been used with conflicting results 85 – 87 , so that the only safe method now used to identify caveolar proteins is double - label immunoelectron microscopy 80 , 88 . Confusion persists because definitions of caveolae remain vague . In a recent review , Anderson defined caveolae as “meant to encompass a membrane system with specific functions essential for normal cell behavior” 19 . Lisanti et al . describe rafts , in the absence of caveolae , as “caveola - related domains” 16 . To resolve these issues , we propose to distinguish between rafts , DRMs and caveolae . We reserve the use of the term “caveolae”for morphologically defined cell surface invaginations ( containing caveolin ) , as originally proposed half a century ago 13 , 14 . Box 4 | Common tools to disrupt rafts Cholesterol sequestration • Antibiotics : Filipin | Nystatin | Amphotericin • Pore - forming agents : Saponin | Digitonin | Streptolysin O Cholesterol depletion • Methyl - β - cyclodextrin Inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis • Lovastatin Perturbation of raft stability • Exogenous cholesterol • Exogenous gangliosides • Exogenous polyunsaturated fatty acids SUCROSE GRADIENT CENTRIFUGATION Allows separation of cellular membranes according to their size and / or density by centrifugation . GANGLIOSIDES Anionic glycosphingolipids that carry , in addition to other sugar residues , one or more sialic acid residues . MAST CELL A type of leukocyte , of the granulocyte subclass . BASOPHIL Polymorphonuclear phagocytic leukocyte of the myeloid series . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 34 | OCTOBER 2000 | VOLUME 1 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S surface cholesterol is depleted with METHYL - β - CYCLODEX - TRIN 45 . One working model for IgE signalling is that crosslinking increases the raft affinity of Fc ε RI . In this model , a change in receptor partioning would lead to increased phosphorylation of its ITAMs by raft - associat - ed Lyn kinase , possibly due to the exclusion of inhibito - ry phosphatases . Fc ε RI crosslinking could , in addition , bring small individual rafts together . Linker proteins , such as members of the BASH ( B cell adaptor contain - ing SH repeats ) family and LAT ( linker for activation of T cells ) , are good candidates for this job 46 . As a result of amplification , even small changes in receptor partition - ing could produce strong signals . One key issue to be explained is how Fc ε RI aggregates as small as dimers 42 can initiate the raft clustering process to activate the allergic response . T - cell antigen receptor signalling . The T - cell antigen receptor ( TCR ) is another multisubunit immune recog - nition receptor that engages lipid rafts during sig - nalling 47 , 48 ( FIG . 1b ) . The TCR is composed of αβ - het - erodimers which associate with the CD3 ( γδε ) complex and the ζ - homodimer . Whereas the α - and β - subunits contain the extracellular binding site for peptides that are presented by the MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX ( MHC ) class I and II proteins on the surface of ANTIGEN - PRESENTING CELLS ( APCs ) , the CD3 and ζ - subunits contain cytoplasmic ITAM motifs . The earliest signalling event after TCR engagement is the phosphorylation of ITAM tyrosine residues by the doubly acylated non - receptor Src - like tyrosine kinases , Lyn and Fyn 47 , 48 . When ZAP - 70 binds to phosphorylated ITAMs it is activated and , in ing of oligomeric antigens to receptor - bound IgE . Crosslinking of Fc ε RI by oligomeric antigens activates the transmembrane signalling process , ultimately leading to release of the chemical mediators of allergic reactions . The Fc receptor is a tetramer composed of one α - , one β - and two γ - chains 41 . The α - chain binds IgE and the β - and the γ - chains contain immune receptor tyrosine - based activation motifs ( ITAMs ) , common to all multi - subunit immune recognition receptors . Crosslinking of two or more of these receptors by antigens recuits the doubly acylated non - receptor Src - like tyrosine kinase Lyn , which is thought to initiate the signalling cascade by phosphorylating ITAMs so that they can bind to Syk / ZAP - 70 family tyrosine kinases through their phosphotyrosine residues 39 , 40 . Syk is activated by phos - phorylation and this , in turn , leads to activation of phospholipase C γ ( PLC γ ) . Finally , downstream sig - nalling results in increased calcium levels in the prox - imity of the membrane , and this triggers the release of histamine from nearby granules . IgE signalling was initially thought to be based on protein – protein interactions alone 42 . But several obser - vations indicate that rafts are involved in this process 41 . The first hint came from the finding that Fc ε RI is solu - ble in Triton X - 100 at steady state , but becomes insolu - ble in low concentrations of this detergent after crosslinking 39 . Moreover , Fc ε RI crosslinking causes the redistribution of raft components , including ganglio - sides and GPI - anchored proteins , to patches that are large enough to be seen by fluorescence microscopy 43 , 44 . This observation also indicates that raft clustering takes place following receptor activation . A last indication came from the finding that IgE signalling is abolished if Table 1 | Techniques to identify rafts Approach * Information available Live cells Comments References Flotation of detergent – Identifies putative raft association No • Easy to do 1 , 4 , 7 resistant membranes Identifies possible raft proteins • Most common approach for identifying ( DRMs ) putative proteins involved in signalling • Artefacts possible • Weak associations with rafts are difficult to detect Antibody patching and Identifies putative raft association No • Easy to do 12 , 29 immunofluorescence • Common approach microscopy • Better than flotation for detecting weak raft associations • Cell – cell variability makes quantification difficult Immunoelectron Determines location of No • Promising results 80 , 81 , 88 microscopy raft components • Requires technical expertise Chemical crosslinking Identifies native raft protein Yes • Straightforward 32 complexes • Choice of appropriate conditions and reagents is semi - empirical Single fluorophore Monitors the diffusion Yes • Requires highly specialized equipment 89 tracking microscopy and dynamics of individual and expertise raft proteins or lipids Photonic force Determines the diffusion Yes • Very informative technique 30 microscopy constant , size and • Requires highly specialized equipment dynamics of individual rafts and technical expertise • Time - consuming acquisition and analysis Fluorescence Detects whether two raft Yes • Powerful approach 31 , 33 resonance energy components are spatially close • Choice of appropriate donor and acceptor transfer ( FRET ) ( for example , < 10 nm ) probes is important * The disruption of rafts by cholesterol depletion or sequestration is especially useful as a control for each of these approaches . METHYL - β - CYCLODEXTRIN Carbohydrate molecule with a pocket for binding cholesterol . MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX A complex of genetic loci , occurring in higher vertebrates , encoding a family of cellular antigens that help the immune system to recognize self from non - self . ANTIGEN - PRESENTING CELL A cell , most often a macrophage or dendritic cell , that presents an antigen to activate a T cell . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 1 | OCTOBER 2000 | 35 R E V I E W S ated CD3 subunits 55 , or of CD3 and CD28 with anti - body - coated beads , can be used experimentally to acti - vate TCR signalling 56 . Under these conditions many proteins , including the hyperphosphorylated TCR multisubunit complex , and cytoplasmic proteins such as ZAP - 70 , Vav , PLC γ , Grb2 and phosphatidylinositol 3 - OH kinase become detergent resistant , indicating possible raft association 55 . Consistent with this inter - pretation , cholesterol depletion by methyl - β - cyclodex - trin dissociates these proteins from rafts and inactivates the signalling cascade 52 , 55 . The activation of Lck by the TCR could furthermore lead to raft clustering , perhaps turn , phosphorylates LAT , a transmembrane protein that couples TCR activation to several signalling path - ways 49 – 51 . Several GPI - linked proteins 52 , 53 and accessory molecules 54 – 56 help to amplify the T - cell activation events . Phosphatases are also required to switch these pathways on and off 57 . One remarkable feature of T - cell activation is that only 10 – 100 cognate peptide – MHC complexes , among a total pool of 10 4 – 10 5 MHC molecules expressed on an APC , have to be recognized by receptors on the T cell to generate an immune response 58 . This is possible only because the same TCR can be activated over and over again . This process can take hours to complete and is facilitated by the assembly of an immunological synapse , several micrometres in diameter , at the contact zone with the APC . A complex series of events involving the actin cytoskeleton 59 leads to the formation of the immunological synapse 60 — a contact zone between APC and T cells , where T - cell activation takes place 47 , 58 , 61 . During the formation of the immunological synapse , the T cell polarizes its actin and microtubule networks towards this contact site , and also directs membrane traffic in this direction 59 . Evidence from several laboratories indicates that clustering of rafts is an essential feature in the forma - tion of an immunological synapse 47 , 48 . As with IgE receptors , monomeric TCR complexes have only weak steady - state raft affinity 29 , 54 . After receptor crosslinking , their raft residency increases and they become partly insoluble in detergent . Although we still need to under - stand the precise mechanism of initial TCR engage - ment in vivo , artificial crosslinking of the TCR - associ - Table 3 | Signal transduction processes involving rafts Protein Selected references Fc ε RI receptor 40 T - cell receptor 47 , 48 B - cell receptor 90 EGF receptor 35 , 91 Insulin receptor 92 EphrinB1 receptor 93 Neurotrophin 94 GDNF 63 , 65 Hedgehog 68 H - Ras 66 Integrins 95 , 96 eNOS 97 , 98 Table 2 | Raft nomenclature Present raft nomenclature * Rafts | DRMs | DIGs | DICs | GPI domains | Glycosphingolipid signalling domains | Caveolae - like domains | Microdomains | LDM | Liquid - ordered domains | DIM | GEMs | TIFF Suggested raft nomenclature I . Rafts II . Clustered rafts III . DRMs IV . Caveolae Components • Glycosphingolipids • Rafts clustered by : • Rafts remaining insoluble after • Raft proteins and lipids • Cholesterol – Antibody treatment on ice with • Caveolins • Lipid - modified proteins – Lectin detergent‡ § : Triton X - 100 containing saturated – Adjacent cell proteins ( most popular ) , Brij - 58 , acyl chains : – Physiological CHAPS , NP - 40 – GPI - anchored proteins crosslinking proteins – Doubly acylated Src - type kinases • Transmembrane proteins Properties • 50 nanometres in diameter • Large , often hundreds of • Float to low density in • Morphological • Mobile ( ~ 10 – 8 cm – 2 sec – 1 ) nanometres to micrometres sucrose or Optiprep TM ‘cave - like’ invaginations • Liquid - ordered phase in size density gradients on the cell surface • Often bound to cytoskeleton Comments • Native rafts are only • Clustering is used both • Non - native ( aggregated ) raft • Raft subcategory detected in living cells artificially and • Variable effects depending on : • Highly specialized physiologically to trigger – Detergent type signalling cascades – Detergent : lipid ratio – Cell type * DRM , detergent - resistant membrane ; DIG , detergent - insoluble glycolipid - rich domain ; DIC , detergent - insoluble complex ; LDM , low - density membrane ; DIM , detergent - insoluble material ; GEM , glycolipid - enriched membrane ; TIFF , Triton X - 100 insoluble floating fraction . ‡Care should be taken when choosing solubilization conditions for co - immunoprecipitation experiments , as these popular detergents do not solubilize rafts on ice . Co - localization of proteins in rafts or DRMs could be mistaken for direct protein – protein interactions if rafts are not completely solubilized . § Rafts can be solubilized in octyl glucoside or in the detergents listed above at raised temperatures . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 36 | OCTOBER 2000 | VOLUME 1 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S stimulation , RET moves into rafts , where it associates with GFR α . Signal transduction depends on the co - localization of RET and GFR α in lipid rafts , as choles - terol depletion with methyl - β - cyclodextrin decreases GDNF signalling 63 . As with IgE receptor and TCR signalling , the issue of how signalling is activated on GDNF binding is unre - solved . GDNF is a dimer and is sufficient to trigger the initial events . Being a dimer , it could crosslink its recep - tor , but whether this is really the signal - initiating event has not yet been shown . It is also not known whether signalling can occur within a single raft , or whether it requires raft clustering to reach a signalling threshold . If both GFR α and RET are necessary for GDNF sig - nalling , you would predict that the receptor subunits should localize together in vivo . But GFR α is more widely expressed than RET in neural tissue . In fact , GDNF can also signal through GFR α in a RET - inde - pendent way 64 , 65 . Moreover , autophosphorylated RET can trigger different signalling pathways depending on whether it is inside or outside rafts ( C . Ibáñez , personal communication ) . Ras signalling . The small GTPase Ras is central to many signalling processes . It acts as a switch that , when acti - vated , recruits serine / threonine kinases of the Raf family to the plasma membrane . These , in turn , activate the ERK – MAP kinase pathway and other targets . The two Ras isoforms , K - Ras and H - Ras , are almost identical in sequence but have different signalling properties 66 . Both isoforms have a carboxy - terminal prenylated CAAX sequence , but whereas K - Ras has a polybasic region required for plasma membrane localization , H - Ras is palmitoylated 67 and therefore more likely to partition into lipid rafts . Roy et al . 66 showed that expression of a dominant - negative mutant of caveolin strongly inhibit - ed H - Ras - mediated Raf activation , but had no effect on its activation by K - Ras . The expression of this mutant led to a decrease in the number of caveolae on the cell surface , and depleted cell surface cholesterol . The mutant phenotype could be mimicked by depleting cholesterol with methyl - β - cyclodextrin and it could be rescued by addition of exogenous cholesterol . One inter - pretation of these results is that expression of the cave - olin mutant reduces the cholesterol content of the plas - ma membrane and therefore the number of functional lipid rafts . As H - Ras can signal only through rafts , it can no longer activate Raf . But K - Ras , which does not oper - ate in rafts , is not affected . Hedgehog signalling . Drosophila melanogaster Hedgehog and its mammalian homologues act as short - range morphogens during tissue patterning . In the absence of Hedgehog signalling , the sterol - sensing membrane pro - tein Patched represses the constitutive signalling activity of a second membrane protein , Smoothened , by form - ing an inactive Patched – Smoothened complex 68 . Hedgehog binding to Patched releases Smoothened , which activates a signalling cascade that culminates in the upregulation of a specific set of nuclear transcripts . Hedgehog is an interesting signalling molecule , as it through protein adaptors that are constitutively associ - ated with rafts , such as LAT 49 , 50 . This cascade of interac - tions , including scaffolding proteins and adaptors , builds up the immunological synapse on the surface of the T cell . Moreover , rafts also function to concentrate MHC class II molecules , loaded with specific peptides , on the APC side of the synapse 62 . GDNF signalling . The glial - cell - derived neurotrophic factor ( GDNF ) family of ligands is important for the development and maintenance of the nervous system . In addition , they function during differentiation of the kidney and spermatogonia . GDNF binds to a multi - component receptor complex that is composed of the GPI - linked GDNF receptor - α ( GFR α ) and the trans - membrane tyrosine kinase , RET . The receptor subunits GFR α and RET are not associated with each other in the absence of ligand 63 . But after extracellular GDNF Figure 1 | Initial signalling events in rafts for a | IgE receptor ( Fc ε RI ) - and b | T - cell antigen receptor ( TCR ) - mediated signalling . For clarity , only a small subset of involved proteins are shown . A likely sequence of the key initial events is indicated numerically . 1 | Ligand - induced receptor dimerization of the Fc receptor or TCR / CD3 probably increases its raft association , which leads to 2 | phosphorylation of the receptors’ immune receptor tyrosine - based activation motifs ( ITAMs ) by Src - family protein tyrosine kinases ( for example , Lyn , Lck and Fyn ) . 3 | Phosphorylated ITAMs act as a membrane docking site for cytoplasmic Syk / ZAP - 70 ; these are also tyrosine kinases and are activated in the raft by tyrosine phosphorylation . 4 | Syk / ZAP - 70 can , in turn , activate other proteins such as LAT , a raft - associated adaptor . Through crosslinking , LAT can recruit other proteins into the raft and further amplify the signal . The complex cascade of later downstream signalling events is not shown . 5 | One possible way of downregulating the signal may occur by binding of the cytosolic kinase Csk to the raft - associated protein CBP . Csk may then inactivate the Src - family kinases through phosphorylation 57 . γ γ β α α β 4 4 5 2 2 1 3 P P P P – P Extracellular Fc receptor Multivalent antigen IgE L A T Raft Raft a Downstream signals Downstream signals ITAMmotifs 3 Lyn L A T Syk b M HC TCR / CD3 ZAP T cell ξ Lyn Fyn Antigen presenting cell Lck Csk ? δ ε γ 1 C B P P Fc ε RI signalling TCR signalling © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 1 | OCTOBER 2000 | 37 R E V I E W S involve either displacement of the cholesterol tether or shedding of membrane vesicles from Hedgehog - pro - ducing cells . In conclusion , the requirement for lipid rafts during Hedgehog signalling is completely different from that described for other signalling processes . The cell biology of this fascinating signalling process is poor - ly understood , and awaits a detailed exploration . Models for signal initiation in rafts Although we are at a stage at which we can build work - ing hypotheses , we still do not know exactly how recep - tors signal through lipid rafts . As illustrated by the pre - ceding examples ( except for Hedgehog signalling ) a common theme is that individual rafts cluster together to connect raft proteins and interacting proteins into a signalling complex . For instance , doubly acylated non - receptor tyrosine kinases and G proteins from separate rafts could be brought into contact with a signalling receptor in this way . Receptors could behave in at least three different ways in rafts ( FIG . 2 ) . First , receptors associated at steady state with lipid rafts could be activated through ligand binding ( FIG . 2A , a ) . Second , individual receptors with weak raft affinity could oligomerize on ligand binding , and this would lead to an increased residency time in rafts ( FIG . 2A , b ) . Last , activated receptors could recruit crosslinking proteins that bind to proteins in other rafts , and this would result in raft coalescence ( FIG . 2B ) . These models are not mutually exclusive . Through formation of a raft cluster , a network of interactions between adaptors , scaffolds and anchoring proteins would be built up to organize the signal complex in space and time . This signalling complex would be insulated within the raft clusters from the surrounding liquid - disordered lipid matrix . The formation of clus - tered rafts would lead to amplification through the concentration of signalling molecules , as well as to exclusion of unwanted modulators . The interactions that drive raft assembly are dynam - ic and reversible . Raft clusters can be disassembled by negative modulators and / or by removal of raft compo - nents from the cell surface by endocytosis . The coales - cence of individual rafts to form raft clusters has been observed repeatedly , for example , when crosslinking raft components with antibodies 12 , 29 . The movement and behaviour of the raft clusters can also be influenced by interaction with cytoskeletal elements 44 , 72 , 73 and second messengers such as the phosphoinositide PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , which help organize actin assemblies on the cytoplas - mic surface of the rafts 74 , 75 . Many open issues Several aspects of raft structure and function still need to be explained . One important area is raft composition and the question of whether more than one kind of raft exists on the cell surface of different cell types 76 , 77 . Not only do we need to identify raft - associated proteins , but we also have to determine the lipid composition in both the exoplasmic and cytoplasmic leaflets of rafts . As deter - gent extraction undoubtedly leads to raft aggregation , it is not easy to isolate individual rafts or ligand - activated is post - translationally modified to introduce a choles - terol moiety at the carboxyl terminus 69 and a palmitate moiety at the amino terminus 70 . Cholesterol - modified Hedgehog is membrane bound , and has been shown to associate with lipid rafts in Drosophila embryos 9 . The cholesterol modification restricts the signalling range of Hedgehog , making it a short - range morphogen . If Hedgehog is mutated to lose its hydrophobic anchor , it is secreted and can activate cells much further away than normal 71 . So how is membrane - bound Hedgehog released from the cell where it is synthesized , to act as a signal for a target cell several cell layers away ? It seems that the association of Hedgehog with rafts is important for its function , but it is not sufficient 68 . If cholesterol is replaced with a GPI - anchor — which should still local - ize the protein to rafts — Hedgehog is no longer released from the surface of the expressing cells 71 . Another sterol - sensing protein , Dispatched , is also required for the release of Hedgehog 71 . The mechanism of release could Figure 2 | Models of how signalling could be initiated through raft ( s ) . A | In these models , signalling occurs in either single rafts ( Model 1 ) or clustered rafts ( Model 2 ) . Following dimerization ( or oligomerization ) the protein becomes phosphorylated ( blue circle ) in rafts . In single rafts this can occur by activation a | within the raft , or b | by altering the partitioning dynamics of the protein . B | In the second model we assume that there are several rafts in the membrane , which differ in protein composition ( shown in orange , purple or blue ) . Clustering would coalesce rafts ( red ) , so that they would now contain a new mixture of molecules , such as crosslinkers and enzymes . Clustering could occur either extracellularly , within the membrane , or in the cytosol ( a – c , respectively ) . Raft clustering could also occur through GPI - anchored proteins ( yellow ) , either as a primary or co - stimulatory response . Notably , models 1 and 2 are not mutually exclusive . For instance , extracellular signals could increase a protein’s raft affinity ( for example , similar to the effect of single versus dual acylation ) therefore drawing more of the protein into the raft where it can be activated and recruit other proteins , such as LAT , which would crosslink several rafts . GPI GPI Extracellular Dimerization Dimerization Dimerization Signalling Signalling a Clustering of rafts triggers signalling b GPI GPI a b c Extracellular ( antibodies , ligands ) Membrane protein ( for example , LAT ) Cytosolic ( cytoskeletal elements , adaptors , scaffolds ) Clustering agent Antibodies , ligands Antibodies , ligands A Model 1 Activation in a raft Altered partitioning B Model 2 © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 38 | OCTOBER 2000 | VOLUME 1 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S important questions if we want to understand how raft - associated receptors are downregulated . This is an exciting time for researchers studying cel - lular membranes , but the issues at hand can be clarified only by a multidisciplinary approach . After long neglect , the dynamic organization of lipid bilayers is finally back at centre stage . raft clusters in such a way that their native state is pre - served . Understanding the nature of individual rafts will probably require the development of new methods . The question of how single rafts are crosslinked to form clus - tered rafts during signal transduction also requires detailed exploration . This will require real - time imaging of the assembly of signalling complexes under normal conditions and during cholesterol depletion . A pressing issue is to clarify the function of caveolae during signal transduction . We know little about how proteins move into caveolae . Why does crosslinking of GPI - anchored proteins or gangliosides lead to their enrichment in caveolae 78 – 80 ? Could the clustering of rafts induce the formation of caveolae in caveolin - containing cells ? What are the protein signals required for caveolar trapping ? Caveolae can be internalized , but how is this process regulated ? What is the role of actin ? These are 1 . Brown , D . A . & London , E . Functions of lipid rafts in biological membranes . Annu . Rev . Cell . Dev . Biol . 14 , 111 – 136 ( 1998 ) . 2 . Sankaram , M . B . & Thompson , T . E . Interaction of cholesterol with various glycerophospholipids and sphingomyelin . Biochemistry 29 , 10670 – 10675 ( 1990 ) . 3 . Simons , K . & van Meer , G . Lipid sorting in epithelial cells . Biochemistry 27 , 6197 – 6202 ( 1988 ) . 4 . Simons , K . & Ikonen , E . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature 387 , 569 – 572 ( 1997 ) . 5 . Fridriksson , E . K . et al . Quantitative analysis of phospholipids in functionally important membrane domains from RBL - 2H3 mast cells using tandem high - resolution mass spectrometry . Biochemistry 38 , 8056 – 8063 ( 1999 ) . 6 . Schroeder , R . , London , E . & Brown , D . Interactions between saturated acyl chains confer detergent resistance on lipids and glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins : GPI - anchored proteins in liposomes and cells show similar behavior . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 12130 – 12134 ( 1994 ) . 7 . Hooper , N . M . Detergent - insoluble glycosphingolipid / cholesterol - rich membrane domains , lipid rafts and caveolae . Mol . Membr . Biol . 16 , 145 – 156 ( 1999 ) . 8 . Resh , M . D . Fatty acylation of proteins : new insights into membrane targeting of myristoylated and palmitoylated proteins . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1451 , 1 – 16 ( 1999 ) . 9 . Rietveld , A . , Neutz , S . , Simons , K . & Eaton , S . Association of sterol - and glycosylphosphatidylinositol - linked proteins with Drosophila raft lipid microdomains . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 12049 – 12054 ( 1999 ) . 10 . Scheiffele , P . , Roth , M . G . & Simons , K . Interaction of influenza virus haemagglutinin with sphingolipid - cholesterol membrane domains via its transmembrane domain . EMBO J . 16 , 5501 – 5508 ( 1997 ) . 11 . Melkonian , K . A . , Ostermeyer , A . G . , Chen , J . Z . , Roth , M . G . & Brown , D . A . Role of lipid modifications in targeting proteins to detergent - resistant membrane rafts . Many raft proteins are acylated , while few are prenylated . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 3910 – 3917 ( 1999 ) . 12 . Harder , T . , Scheiffele , P . , Verkade , P . & Simons , K . Lipid domain structure of the plasma membrane revealed by patching of membrane components . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 929 – 942 ( 1998 ) . The first demonstration that clusters of rafts segregate away from non - raft proteins . 13 . Palade , G . E . The fine structure of blood capillaries . J . Appl . Phys . 24 , 1424 ( 1953 ) . 14 . Yamada , E . The fine structure of the gall bladder epithelium of the mouse . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 1 , 445 – 458 ( 1955 ) . 15 . Parton , R . G . Caveolae and caveolins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 , 542 – 548 ( 1996 ) . 16 . Smart , E . J . et al . Caveolins , liquid - ordered domains , and signal transduction . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 , 7289 – 7304 ( 1999 ) . 17 . Schnitzer , J . E . , Oh , P . , Pinney , E . & Allard , J . Filipin - sensitive caveolae - mediated transport in endothelium : reduced transcytosis , scavenger endocytosis , and capillary permeability of select macromolecules . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1217 – 1232 ( 1994 ) . 18 . Parton , R . G . , Way , M . , Zorzi , N . & Stang , E . Caveolin - 3 associates with developing T - tubules during muscle differentiation . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 137 – 154 ( 1997 ) . 19 . Anderson , R . G . The caveolae membrane system . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 67 , 199 – 225 ( 1998 ) . 20 . Vogel , U . , Sandvig , K . & van Deurs , B . Expression of caveolin - 1 and polarized formation of invaginated caveolae in Caco - 2 and MDCK II cells . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 825 – 832 ( 1998 ) . 21 . Renkonen , O . , Kaarainen , L . , Simons , K . & Gahmberg , C . G . The lipid class composition of Semliki forest virus and plasma membranes of the host cells . Virology 46 , 318 – 326 ( 1971 ) . 22 . Levis , G . M . & Evangelatos , G . P . Lipid composition of lymphocyte plasma membrane from pig mesenteric lymph node . Biochem . J . 156 , 103 – 110 ( 1976 ) . 23 . van Meer , G . Lipid traffic in animal cells . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 5 , 247 – 275 ( 1989 ) . 24 . Brugger , B . et al . Segregation from COPI – coated vesicles of sphingomyelin and cholesterol . J . Cell Biol . ( in the press ) . 25 . Keller , P . & Simons , K . Post - Golgi biosynthetic trafficking . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 3001 – 3009 ( 1997 ) . 26 . Ledesma , M . D . , Simons , K . & Dotti , C . G . Neuronal polarity : essential role of protein – lipid complexes in axonal sorting . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 3966 – 3971 ( 1998 ) . 27 . Mukherjee , S . & Maxfield , F . Role of membrane organization and membrane domains in endocytic lipid trafficking . Traffic 1 , 203 – 211 ( 2000 ) . 28 . Puri , V . et al . Cholesterol modulates membrane traffic along the endocytic pathway in sphingolipid - storage diseases . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 386 – 388 ( 1999 ) . 29 . Janes , P . W . , Ley , S . C . & Magee , A . I . Aggregation of lipid rafts accompanies signaling via the T cell antigen receptor . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 447 – 461 ( 1999 ) . 30 . Pralle , A . , Keller , P . , Florin , E . L . , Simons , K . & Horber , J . K . Sphingolipid – cholesterol rafts diffuse as small entities in the plasma membrane of mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 997 – 1008 ( 2000 ) . Individual raft size is measured by photonic force microscopy . 31 . Varma , R . & Mayor , S . GPI - anchored proteins are organized in submicron domains at the cell surface . Nature 394 , 798 – 801 ( 1998 ) . 32 . Friedrichson , T . & Kurzchalia , T . V . Microdomains of GPI - anchored proteins in living cells revealed by crosslinking . Nature 394 , 802 – 805 ( 1998 ) . 33 . Kenworthy , A . K . , Petranova , N . & Edidin , M . High - resolution FRET microscopy of cholera toxin B - subunit and GPI - anchored proteins in cell plasma membranes . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 1645 – 1655 ( 2000 ) . 34 . Brown , D . A . & Rose , J . K . Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins to glycolipid - enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface . Cell 68 , 533 – 544 ( 1992 ) . A pioneering demonstration that GPI - anchored proteins and influenza haemagglutinin remain associated with sphingolipids and cholesterol after Triton X - 100 extraction . 35 . Waugh , M . G . , Lawson , D . & Hsuan , J . J . Epidermal growth factor receptor activation is localized within low - buoyant density , non - caveolar membrane domains . Biochem . J . 337 , 591 – 597 ( 1999 ) . 36 . Webb , Y . , Hermida - Matsumoto , L . & Resh , M . D . Inhibition of protein palmitoylation , raft localization , and T cell signaling by 2 - bromopalmitate and polyunsaturated fatty acids . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 261 – 270 ( 2000 ) . Feeding cells with polyunsaturated fatty acids leads to dissociation of doubly acylated proteins from rafts . 37 . Simons , M . et al . Exogenous administration of gangliosides displaces GPI - anchored proteins from lipid microdomains in living cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 3187 – 3196 ( 1999 ) . 38 . Hunter , T . Signaling — 2000 and beyond . Cell 100 , 113 – 127 ( 2000 ) . 39 . Field , K . A . , Holowka , D . & Baird , B . Fc epsilon RI - mediated recruitment of p53 / 56lyn to detergent - resistant membrane domains accompanies cellular signaling . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 9201 – 9205 ( 1995 ) . 40 . Sheets , E . D . , Holowka , D . & Baird , B . Membrane organization in immunoglobulin E receptor signaling . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 3 , 95 – 99 ( 1999 ) . 41 . Baird , B . , Sheets , E . D . & Holowka , D . How does the plasma membrane participate in cellular signaling by receptors for immunoglobulin E ? Biophys . Chem . 82 , 109 – 119 ( 1999 ) . 42 . Metzger , H . It’s spring , and thoughts turn to . . . allergies . Cell 97 , 287 – 290 ( 1999 ) . 43 . Stauffer , T . P . & Meyer , T . Compartmentalized IgE receptor - mediated signal transduction in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 1447 – 1454 ( 1997 ) . 44 . Holowka , D . , Sheets , E . D . & Baird , B . Interactions between Fc ε RI and lipid raft components are regulated by the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 1009 – 1019 ( 2000 ) . 45 . Sheets , E . D . , Holowka , D . & Baird , B . Critical role for cholesterol in Lyn - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of Fc ε RI and their association with detergent - resistant membranes . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 877 – 887 ( 1999 ) . This paper is the culmination of a series of studies showing the role of rafts in IgE receptor signalling . 46 . Goitsuka , R . et al . A BASH / SLP - 76 - related adaptor protein MIST / Clnk involved in IgE receptor - mediated mast cell degranulation . Int . Immunol . 12 , 573 – 580 ( 2000 ) . 47 . Janes , P . W . , Ley , S . C . , Magee , A . I . & Kabouridis , P . S . The role of lipid rafts in T cell antigen receptor ( TCR ) signalling . Semin . Immunol . 12 , 23 – 34 ( 2000 ) . 48 . Langlet , C . , Bernard , A . M . , Drevot , P . & He , H . T . Membrane rafts and signaling by the multichain immune recognition receptors . Curr . Opin . Immunol . 12 , 250 – 255 ( 2000 ) . 49 . Zhang , W . , Trible , R . P . & Samelson , L . E . LAT palmitoylation : its essential role in membrane microdomain targeting and tyrosine phosphorylation during T cell activation . Immunity 9 , 239 – 246 ( 1998 ) . 50 . Brdicka , T . , Cerny , J . & Horejsi , V . T cell receptor signalling results in rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of the linker protein LAT present in detergent - resistant membrane microdomains . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 248 , 356 – 360 ( 1998 ) . 51 . Lin , J . , Weiss , A . & Finco , T . S . Localization of LAT in glycolipid - enriched microdomains is required for T cell Links DATABASE LINKS Src kinase | caveolin | IgE | Fc ε RI | Lyn | Syk | ZAP - 70 | PLC γ | LAT | TCR | CD3 | Fyn | Vav | Grb2 | Lck | GDNF | RET | Ras | Raf | ERK | Hedgehog | Patched | Smoothened | Dispatched FURTHER INFORMATION Simons lab homepage ENCYCLOPEDIA OF LIFE SCIENCES Lipids | Membrane proteins © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 1 | OCTOBER 2000 | 39 R E V I E W S activation . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 28861 – 28864 ( 1999 ) . 52 . Moran , M . & Miceli , M . C . Engagement of GPI - linked CD48 contributes to TCR signals and cytoskeletal reorganization : a role for lipid rafts in T cell activation . Immunity 9 , 787 – 796 ( 1998 ) . 53 . Stefanova , I . , Horejsi , V . , Ansotegui , I . J . , Knapp , W . & Stockinger , H . GPI - anchored cell - surface molecules complexed to protein tyrosine kinases . Science 254 , 1016 – 1019 ( 1991 ) . 54 . Montixi , C . et al . Engagement of T cell receptor triggers its recruitment to low - density detergent - insoluble membrane domains . EMBO J . 17 , 5334 – 5348 ( 1998 ) . 55 . Xavier , R . , Brennan , T . , Li , Q . , McCormack , C . & Seed , B . Membrane compartmentation is required for efficient T cell activation . Immunity 8 , 723 – 732 ( 1998 ) . Detailed characterization of several proteins participating in T - cell activation and their raft association . 56 . Viola , A . , Schroeder , S . , Sakakibara , Y . & Lanzavecchia , A . T lymphocyte costimulation mediated by reorganization of membrane microdomains . Science 283 , 680 – 682 ( 1999 ) . Antibody - coated beads are used to activate clustering of raft components in T - cell signalling . 57 . Cary , L . A . & Cooper , J . A . Molecular switches in lipid rafts . Nature 404 , 945 – 947 ( 2000 ) . 58 . Lanzavecchia , A . , Lezzi , G . & Viola , A . From TCR engagement to T cell activation : a kinetic view of T cell behavior . Cell 96 , 1 – 4 ( 1999 ) . 59 . van der Merwe , A . P . , Davis , S . J . , Shaw , A . S . & Dustin , M . L . Cytoskeletal polarization and redistribution of cell - surface molecules during T cell antigen recognition . Semin . Immunol . 12 , 5 – 21 ( 2000 ) . 60 . Grakoui , A . et al . The immunological synapse : a molecular machine controlling T cell activation . Science 285 , 221 – 227 ( 1999 ) . 61 . Zhang , W . & Samelson , L . E . The role of membrane - associated adaptors in T cell receptor signalling . Semin . Immunol . 12 , 35 – 41 ( 2000 ) . 62 . Anderson , H . A . , Hiltbold , E . M . & Roche , P . A . Concentration of MHC class II molecules in lipid rafts facilitates antigen presentation . Nature Immunol . 1 , 156 – 162 ( 2000 ) . 63 . Tansey , M . G . , Baloh , R . H . , Milbrandt , J . & Johnson , E . M . Jr GFR α - mediated localization of RET to lipid rafts is required for effective downstream signaling , differentiation , and neuronal survival . Neuron 25 , 611 – 623 ( 2000 ) . The demonstration that GDNF signalling is a raft - dependent process . 64 . Poteryaev , D . et al . GDNF triggers a novel ret - independent src kinase family - coupled signaling via a GPI - linked GDNF receptor α 1 . FEBS Lett . 463 , 63 – 66 ( 1999 ) . 65 . Trupp , M . , Scott , R . , Whittemore , S . R . & Ibanez , C . F . Ret - dependent and - independent mechanisms of glial cell line - derived neurotrophic factor signaling in neuronal cells . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 20885 – 20894 ( 1999 ) . 66 . Roy , S . et al . Dominant - negative caveolin inhibits H - Ras function by disrupting cholesterol - rich plasma membrane domains . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 98 – 105 ( 1999 ) . This paper shows that H - Ras signals in rafts and K - Ras signals outside rafts . 67 . Hancock , J . F . , Paterson , H . & Marshall , C . J . A polybasic domain or palmitoylation is required in addition to the CAAX motif to localize p21ras to the plasma membrane . Cell 63 , 133 – 139 ( 1990 ) . 68 . Incardona , J . P . & Eaton , S . Cholesterol in signal transduction . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 193 – 203 ( 2000 ) . 69 . Porter , J . A . , Young , K . E . & Beachy , P . A . Cholesterol modification of hedgehog signaling proteins in animal development . Science 274 , 255 – 259 ( 1996 ) . 70 . Pepinsky , R . B . et al . Identification of a palmitic acid - modified form of human Sonic hedgehog . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 14037 – 14045 ( 1998 ) . 71 . Burke , R . et al . Dispatched , a novel sterol - sensing domain protein dedicated to the release of cholesterol - modified hedgehog from signaling cells . Cell 99 , 803 – 815 ( 1999 ) . 72 . Harder , T . & Simons , K . Clusters of glycolipid and glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins in lymphoid cells : accumulation of actin regulated by local tyrosine phosphorylation . Eur . J . Immunol . 29 , 556 – 562 ( 1999 ) . 73 . Laux , T . et al . GAP43 , MARCKS , and CAP23 modulate PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 at plasmalemmal rafts , and regulate cell cortex actin dynamics through a common mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 1455 – 1472 ( 2000 ) . 74 . Pike , L . J . & Miller , J . M . Cholesterol depletion delocalizes phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate and inhibits hormone - stimulated phosphatidylinositol turnover . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 22298 – 22304 ( 1998 ) . 75 . Rozelle , A . L . et al . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate induces actin - based movement of raft - enriched vesicles through WASP - Arp2 / 3 . Curr . Biol . 10 , 311 – 320 ( 2000 ) . 76 . Iwabuchi , K . , Yamamura , S . , Prinetti , A . , Handa , K . & Hakomori , S . GM3 - enriched microdomain involved in cell adhesion and signal transduction through carbohydrate – carbohydrate interaction in mouse melanoma B16 cells . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 9130 – 9138 ( 1998 ) . 77 . Roper , K . , Corbeil , D . & Huttner , W . B . Retention of prominin in microvilli reveals distinct cholesterol – based lipid microdomains within the apical plasma membrane of epithelial cells . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 582 – 592 ( 2000 ) . 78 . Mayor , S . , Rothberg , K . G . & Maxfield , F . R . Sequestration of GPI - anchored proteins in caveolae triggered by cross - linking . Science 264 , 1948 – 1951 ( 1994 ) . 79 . Parton , R . G . Ultrastructural localization of gangliosides ; GM1 is concentrated in caveolae . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 42 , 155 – 166 ( 1994 ) . 80 . Fujimoto , T . GPI - anchored proteins , glycosphingolipids , and sphingomyelin are sequestered to caveolae only after crosslinking . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 44 , 929 – 941 ( 1996 ) . 81 . Wilson , B . S . , Pfeiffer , J . R . & Oliver , J . M . Observing FceRI signaling from the inside of the mast cell membrane . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 1131 – 1142 ( 2000 ) . Clear visualization of raft clustering during IgE signalling by immuno - electron microscopy . 82 . Sargiacomo , M . , Sudol , M . , Tang , Z . & Lisanti , M . P . Signal transducing molecules and glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - linked proteins form a caveolin - rich insoluble complex in MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 789 – 807 ( 1993 ) . 83 . Kurzchalia , T . , Hartmann , E . & Dupree , P . Guilt by insolubility : Does a protein’s detergent insolubility reflect caveolar location . Trends Cell Biol . 5 , 187 – 189 ( 1995 ) . 84 . Smart , E . J . , Ying , Y . S . , Mineo , C . & Anderson , R . G . A detergent - free method for purifying caveolae membrane from tissue culture cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 10104 – 10108 ( 1995 ) . 85 . Schnitzer , J . E . , McIntosh , D . P . , Dvorak , A . M . , Liu , J . & Oh , P . Separation of caveolae from associated microdomains of GPI - anchored proteins . Science 269 , 1435 – 1439 ( 1995 ) . 86 . Stan , R . V . et al . Immunoisolation and partial characterization of endothelial plasmalemmal vesicles ( caveolae ) . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 , 595 – 605 ( 1997 ) . 87 . Oh , P . & Schnitzer , J . E . Immunoisolation of caveolae with high affinity antibody binding to the oligomeric caveolin cage . Toward understanding the basis of purification . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 23144 – 23154 ( 1999 ) . 88 . Kurzchalia , T . V . & Parton , R . G . Membrane microdomains and caveolae . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 424 – 431 ( 1999 ) . 89 . Schutz , G . J . , Kada , G . , Pastushenko , V . P . & Schindler , H . Properties of lipid microdomains in a muscle cell membrane visualized by single molecule microscopy . EMBO J . 19 , 892 – 901 ( 2000 ) . 90 . Cheng , P . C . , Dykstra , M . L . , Mitchell , R . N . & Pierce , S . K . A role for lipid rafts in B cell antigen receptor signaling and antigen targeting . J . Exp . Med . 190 , 1549 – 1560 ( 1999 ) . 91 . Couet , J . , Sargiacomo , M . & Lisanti , M . P . Interaction of a receptor tyrosine kinase , EGF - R , with caveolins . Caveolin binding negatively regulates tyrosine and serine / threonine kinase activities . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 30429 – 30438 ( 1997 ) . 92 . Mastick , C . C . , Brady , M . J . & Saltiel , A . R . Insulin stimulates the tyrosine phosphorylation of caveolin . J . Cell Biol . 129 , 1523 – 1531 ( 1995 ) . 93 . Bruckner , K . et al . EphrinB ligands recruit GRIP family PDZ adaptor proteins into raft membrane microdomains . Neuron 22 , 511 – 524 ( 1999 ) . 94 . Bilderback , T . R . , Gazula , V . R . , Lisanti , M . P . & Dobrowsky , R . T . Caveolin interacts with Trk A and p75 ( NTR ) and regulates neurotrophin signaling pathways . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 257 – 263 ( 1999 ) . 95 . Wary , K . K . , Mariotti , A . , Zurzolo , C . & Giancotti , F . G . A requirement for caveolin - 1 and associated kinase Fyn in integrin signaling and anchorage - dependent cell growth . Cell 94 , 625 – 634 ( 1998 ) . 96 . Krauss , K . & Altevogt , P . Integrin leukocyte function - associated antigen - 1 mediated cell binding can be activated by clustering of membrane rafts . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 36921 – 36927 ( 1999 ) . 97 . Shaul , P . W . et al . Acylation targets endothelial nitric - oxide synthase to plasmalemmal caveolae . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 6518 – 6522 ( 1996 ) . 98 . Garcia - Cardena , G . , Fan , R . , Stern , D . F . , Liu , J . & Sessa , W . C . Endothelial nitric oxide synthase is regulated by tyrosine phosphorylation and interacts with caveolin - 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 27237 – 27240 ( 1996 ) . Acknowledgements We thank D . Brown , R . Parton , T . Harder and T . Kurzchalia for criti - cal reading of this manuscript . C . Ibáñez provided helpful discus - sions on GDNF signalling . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 40 | OCTOBER 2000 | VOLUME 1 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S • Lipid rafts consist of dynamic assemblies of cholesterol and sphingolipids in the exoplasmic leaflet of the lipid bilayer . • Lipid rafts can include or exclude proteins selectively , and the raft affinity of a given protein can be modulated by intra - or extracellular stimuli . • They are too small to be seen by standard microscope techniques . It is also not possible to isolate lipid rafts in their native state . Detergent - resistant membranes , containing clusters of many rafts , can be isolated by extraction with Triton X - 100 or other detergents on ice . • Raft association of proteins can be assayed by manipulating the lipid composition of rafts . If cholesterol or sphingolipids are depleted from membranes , lipid rafts are dissociated , and previously associated proteins are no longer in rafts . • There is great confusion in the nomenclature for lipid rafts , and Table 2 proposes a new nomenclature . • Rafts are involved in signal transduction . Crosslinking of signalling receptors increases their affinity for rafts . Partitioning of receptors into rafts results in a new micro - environment , where their phosphorylation state can be modified by local kinases and phosphatases , modulating downstream signalling . • Raft clustering could also be involved in signal transduction . Several rafts coalesce , resulting in amplification of the signal . • Some examples for such raft - dependent signalling processes are IgE signalling during the allergic response , T - cell activation and GDNF signalling . • Rafts are also necessary for Hedgehog signalling during development but the mechanism is very different . Hedgehog is a membrane - bound ligand and needs to be released from its cell of origin so it can signal to cells several layers away . It can be released from the cell when it is anchored in rafts through its cholesterol moiety . Kai Simons received his M . D . Ph . D . degree in 1964 from the University of Helsinki , Finland . Simons then did postdoctoral research with A . G . Bearn at Rockfeller University in New York . In 1975 , he became a Group Leader at the European Molecular Biology Laboratory ( EMBL ) in Heidelberg , Germany , and he started the Cell Biology Program , which became the focal point for molecular cell biology in Europe . He is the first President of the newly formed European Life Scientist Organization . In addition , he will head the new Max Planck Institute for Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , which will start its operations in Dresden , Germany , in January 2001 . His research interests have been concerned with the life cycle of Semliki Forest virus . This virus had the simplest biological membrane known . From this early work he moved to studies of epithelial polarity and intracellular protein and lipid transport . These studies laid the ground work for the lipid raft concept that now is dominating his research interests . Derek Toomre studied Glycobiology at the Univeristy of California , San Diego ( UCSD ) , under the supervision of Ajit Varki . He obtained his Ph . D . in Biochemistry in 1996 and was subsequently attracted to the field of cell biology . He is a postdoc in Kai Simons’s lab on a Marie Curie Fellowship . His primary focus in the Simons lab has been the application of advanced videomicroscopy techniques including multicolour GFP imaging and total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIR - FM ) to study the dynamic processes of membrane sorting , trafficking and fusion in living cells . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 1 | OCTOBER 2000 | 41 R E V I E W S Src kinase http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / LocRpt . cgi ? l = 1445 Hedgehoghttp : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / list . cgi ? Q = hedge hog * & ORG = Hs caveolin http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / list . cgi ? Q = cave - olin * & ORG = Hs IgE http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / LocRpt . cgi ? l = 3497 Fc ε R1 http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / LocRpt . cgi ? l = 2205 Lyn http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / LocRpt . cgi ? l = 4067 Syk http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / LocRpt . cgi ? l = 6850 ZAP - 70 http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / LocRpt . cgi ? l = 7535 PLC γ http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / LocRpt . cgi ? l = 5335 LAT http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / LocRpt . cgi ? l = 27040 TCR http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / list . cgi ? Q = TCR * & O RG = Hs & V = 0 CD3 http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / list . cgi ? Q = CD3 * Fyn http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / LocRpt . cgi ? l = 2534 VAV http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / LocRpt . cgi ? l = 7409 Grb2 http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / LocRpt . cgi ? l = 2885 Lck http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / LocRpt . cgi ? l = 3932 GDNF http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / LocRpt . cgi ? l = 2668 RET http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / LocRpt . cgi ? l = 5979 Rashttp : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / list . cgi ? Q = ras * Raf http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / list . cgi ? Q = raf * ERKhttp : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / list . cgi ? Q = erk Hedgehog http : / / flybase . bio . indiana . edu / . bin / fbidq . html ? FBgn0004644 Patched http : / / flybase . bio . indiana . edu / . bin / fbidq . html ? FBgn0003892 Smoothened http : / / flybase . bio . indiana . edu / . bin / fbidq . html ? FBgn0003444 Dispatched http : / / flybase . bio . indiana . edu / . bin / fbidq . html ? FBgn0029088 Encyclopedia of Life Sciences : Lipidshttp : / / www . els . net / elsonline / fr _ loadarticle . jsp ? avail - able = 1 & ref = A0000711 & orig = searching & page _ num - ber = 1 & page = search & Sitemap = Lipid & searchtype = free - text & searchlevel = 4 membrane proteins http : / / www . els . net / elsonline / fr _ loadarticle . jsp ? available = 1 & r ef = A0000624 & orig = searching & page _ number = 1 & page = sear ch & Sitemap = Lipid & searchtype = freetext & searchlevel = 4 lab homepage http : / / www . embl - heidelberg . de / ExternalInfo / simons / index . html © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd