Plenary Paper PLATELETS AND THROMBOPOIESIS Platelets release mitochondria serving as substrate for bactericidal group IIA - secreted phospholipase A 2 to promote in ﬂ ammation Luc H . Boudreau , 1 Anne - Claire Duchez , 1 Nathalie Cloutier , 1 Denis Soulet , 2 Nicolas Martin , 3 James Bollinger , 4 Alexandre Par´e , 2 Matthieu Rousseau , 1 Gajendra S . Naika , 4 Tania L´evesque , 1 Cynthia Laflamme , 1 Genevi ` eve Marcoux , 1 G´erard Lambeau , 5 Richard W . Farndale , 6 Marc Pouliot , 1 Hind Hamzeh - Cognasse , 7 Fabrice Cognasse , 7 Olivier Garraud , 7 Peter A . Nigrovic , 8 Helga Guderley , 3 Steve Lacroix , 2 Louis Thibault , 9 John W . Semple , 10 Michael H . Gelb , 4 and Eric Boilard 1 1 Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Qu´ebec , Facult´e de M´edecine de l’Universit´e Laval , D´epartement de Microbiologie et Immunologie , Quebec , QC , Canada ; 2 Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Qu´ebec , Facult´e de M´edecine de l’Universit´e Laval , D´epartement de Psychiatrie et Neurosciences , Quebec , QC , Canada ; 3 D´epartement de Biologie , Universit´e Laval , Quebec , QC , Canada ; 4 Department of Chemistry , University of Washington , Seattle , WA ; 5 Institut de Pharmacologie Mol´eculaire et Cellulaire , Unit´e Mixte de Recherche 7275 , Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique - Universit´e Nice Sophia Antipolis , Valbonne , France ; 6 Department of Biochemistry , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , United Kingdom ; 7 Etablissement Franc¸ais du Sang Auvergne - Loire and Universit´e de Lyon , Saint - Etienne , France ; 8 Division of Rheumatology , Immunology and Allergy , Brigham and Women’s Hospital , and Division of Immunology , Boston Children’s Hospital , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA ; 9 Research and Development , H´ema - Qu´ebec , Quebec , QC , Canada ; and 10 The Keenan Research Center in the Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute , St . Michael’s Hospital , Toronto , ON , Canada Key Points (cid:129) When activated and in platelet storage bags , platelets release respiratory - competent mitochondria , a recognized damage - associated molecular pattern . (cid:129) Mitochondria , descendant of Rickettsia prowazekii , serve as substrate for bactericidal sPLA 2 - IIA to promote inflammation . Mitochondrial DNA ( mtDNA ) is a highly potent inflammatory trigger and is reportedly found outside the cells in blood in various pathologies . Platelets are abundant in blood where they promote hemostasis . Although lacking a nucleus , platelets contain functional mitochondria . On activation , platelets produce extracellular vesicles known as microparticles . We hypothesized that activated platelets could also release their mitochondria . We show that activated platelets release respiratory - competent mitochondria , both within membrane - encapsulatedmicroparticlesandasfreeorganelles . Extracellularmitochondriaarefound inplateletconcentratesusedfor transfusionandare presentat higherlevels inthosethat induced acute reactions ( febrile nonhemolytic reactions , skin manifestations , and cardio - vascular events ) in transfused patients . We establish that the mitochondrion is an endog - enous substrate of secreted phospholipase A 2 IIA ( sPLA 2 - IIA ) , a phospholipase otherwise specific for bacteria , likely reflecting the ancestral proteobacteria origin of mitochondria . ThehydrolysisofthemitochondrialmembranebysPLA 2 - IIAyieldsinflammatorymediators ( ie , lysophospholipids , fatty acids , and mtDNA ) that promote leukocyte activation . Two - photon microscopy in live transfused animals revealed that extracellular mitochondria interact withneutrophils in vivo , triggering neutrophil adhesiontothe endothelial wall . Our findingsidentifyextracellular mitochondria , produced by platelets , at the midpoint of a potent mechanism leading to inflammatory responses . ( Blood . 2014 ; 124 ( 14 ) : 2173 - 2183 ) Introduction Platelets are small ( 2 - 4 m m ) discoid anucleate cell fragments released by megakaryocytes present in the bone marrow . 1 During this process , megakaryocytes transfer components to daughter platelets , including mRNA 2 and microRNA , 3 as well as cytoplasmic organelles , such as granules and mitochondria . 4 , 5 Platelets are highly abundant in blood where they promote hemostasis . 6 However , platelets are also activated in multiple in - ﬂ ammatoryresponsesinwhichtheyparticipateviatheliberationoftheirbroadarsenalofmediators . 7 , 8 On platelet activation , platelet cytoplas - micgranules ( a , dense , andlysosomes ) fusewiththeplasmamembrane leading to the release of granule contents into the extracellular milieu . 9 Activated platelets also shed thrombotic and proin ﬂ ammatory mem - brane vesicles termed microparticles ( MPs ) . 7 Mitochondria are thought to be descendant of the Alphaproteo - bacterium Rickettsia prowazekii , 10 and as a result , they can generate highlypotentproin ﬂ ammatorysignalswhenpresentextracellularly . 11 - 15 In blood circulation , platelets appear as a major reservoir of mitochon - dria . Although platelet mitochondria have been implicated in platelet activationandtherebythrombosis , 16 , 17 whetherplateletscanreleasetheir mitochondria is unknown . We made the surprising observation that stimulatedplateletsrelocatemitochondriatowardthecellmembraneand then release respiratory - competent mitochondria into the extracellular Submitted May 1 , 2014 ; accepted July 18 , 2014 . Prepublished online as Blood First Edition paper , July 31 , 2014 ; DOI 10 . 1182 / blood - 2014 - 05 - 573543 . A . - C . D . and N . C . contributed equally to this work . The online version of this article contains a data supplement . There is an Inside Blood Commentary on this article in this issue . The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment . Therefore , and solely to indicate this fact , this article is hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 USC section 1734 . © 2014 by The American Society of Hematology BLOOD , 2 OCTOBER 2014 x VOLUME 124 , NUMBER 14 2173 For personal use only . on April 19 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From milieu , both as free organelles and encapsulated within microparticles . Extracellularmitochondriaareinternalizedbybystanderleukocytesand , importantly , become a substrate for bactericidal secreted phospholipase A 2 , leading to the liberation of proin ﬂ ammatory lipid mediators and mitochondrial DNA ( mtDNA ) . Taken together our work identi ﬁ es a novel mechanism by which platelets mediate in ﬂ ammation , with considerable relevance to blood transfusion , and provides a potential explanation for the increased levels of extracellular mtDNA reported in blood in multiple pathologies . 13 , 18 , 19 Methods More details are presented in supplemental Methods available on the Blood Web site . Mice All studies were approved by the institutional review board protocol ( Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Qu´ebec , Universit´e Laval ) . Guidelines of the Canadian Council on Animal Care were followed in a protocol approved by the Animal Welfare Committee at Laval University . For our studies , we used for 6 - to 10 - week - old male mice ( C57BL / 6N and BALB / c ; Charles River ) . ForinvivoexperimentsinwhichsecretedphospholipaseA 2 IIA ( sPLA 2 - IIA ) contribution is evaluated , we used C57BL / 6J ( Jackson Laboratories ) and sPLA 2 - IIA – suf ﬁ cient mice as previously reported . 20 Cells and human fluid preparation Blood was obtained from healthy humanvolunteers ( citrate as anticoagulant ) underanapprovedinstitutionalreviewboardprotocol ( CRCHUQ ; Universit´e Laval ) and in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki . Platelets , platelet MPs ( 96 % of them expressing CD41 ) , and human polymorphonuclear leukocyteswereprepared aspreviously described . 21 Platelet - freeplasma ( PFP ) was obtained from platelet storage bag preparations as previously reported . 22 Brie ﬂ y , leukoreducedplateletconcentrateswerepreparedfrom6healthyblood donors and incubated for 5 days at 20°C to 24°C with agitation . PFP samples were obtained on days 0 , 1 , and 5 and were monitored immediately after collection ( without freezing ) . An increase in platelet P - selectin expression was , 2 % during total storage time ( day 1 vs day 5 ) . Synovial ﬂ uids of rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) and osteoarthritis patients were obtained from volunteers under theapproval of the institutional review board protocol ( Brigham andWomen ’ s Hospital ) and were used to assess mitochondria - containing MPs ( mitoMPs ) . The freshly obtained synovial ﬂ uid of RA patients ( supplemental Table 1 ) was cleared of leukocytes by centrifugation at 1900 g for 30 minutes at 4°C . Isolation of mouse liver mitochondria Mitochondria were isolated from the liver of C57BL / 6N mice with the Qproteomemitochondriaisolationkit ( QIAgen ) accordingtothemanufacturer ’ s protocol . The mitochondria pellet was resuspended in Tyrode buffer , pH 7 . 4 ( 134 mM NaCl , 2 . 9 mM KCl , 0 . 34 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 12 mM NaHCO 3 , 20 mM N - 2 - hydroxyethylpiperazine - N 9 - 2 - ethanesulfonic acid , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 5 mM glucose , and 0 . 5 mg / mL bovine serum albumin ) , labeled with MitoTracker Deep Red ( 100 nM ; Invitrogen ) , and counted by ﬂ ow cytometry on a BD ﬂ uorescence - activated cell sorter ( FACS ) Canto II SORP small particle option . High - sensitivity flow cytometry configuration A forward scatter ( FSC ) coupled to a photomultiplier tube ( PMT ) “ small particles option ” ( FSC - PMT ) ( rather than the usual diode ) with a 488 - nm solid state , 100 - mW output blue laser ( rather than the conventional 20 mW ) , a 633 - nm HeNe , 20 - mW output red laser , and a 405 - nm solid state diode , 50 - mW output violet laser were mounted on the BD FACS Canto II Special Order Research Product used for all our studies ( BD Biosciences ) . The chosen parameters were optimal to detect particles from 100 to 3500 nm simultaneously on the FSC - PMT . Platelet stimulation Platelets were labeled with MitoTracker Deep Red and PKH67 Green Fluorescent Cell Linker as described above . Platelets were washed and then were left nonactivated or activated using heat - aggregated immunoglobulin ( Ig ) G ( HA - IgG ) , 1 mg / mL ; thrombin , 0 . 5 U / mL ; collagen , 5 m g / mL ; cross - linkedcollagen - relatedpeptide , 1 m g / mL ; orphorbolmyristateacetate , 100nM for 4 hours at room temperature . Platelets ( 20 m L ) were then diluted into 500 m L phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) and analyzed by ﬂ ow cytometry . For extracellular mitochondria release experiments , platelets were treated with cytochalasin B ( 20 m M ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , cytochalasin D ( 1 m M ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , cytochalasin E ( 4 m M ; Cayman Chemical ) , latrunculin A ( 10 m M ; CaymanChemical ) , ornocodazole ( 5 m M ; Sigma - Aldrich ) . Toprocessthedata quantitatively , 100000 polystyrene microspheres ( 15 m m diameter ; Poly - sciences ) were added to each tube , and 1000 microspheres were acquired . The includedMitoTracker 1 and / orPKH67 1 eventswereportrayedasFSC - PMTvs asidescatter ( SSC ) graph , andtherelativedimensionsweredisplayedaccording to the acquisition ofSkyBlue microspheresof mean diametersof 90 , 220 , 450 , 840 , and 3200 nm ( Spherotech ) . Mitochondrial activity Oxygen consumption was measured with mitochondrial preparations ( ﬁ nal concentration of ; 0 . 15 mg protein / mL ) using a temperature - controlled polarographic O 2 monitoring system with 1 - mL chambers ( Rank Brothers Ltd ) . Temperaturewas maintained at 37°Cby a circulating refrigerated water bath ( Haake G8 ; Polyscience ) . The oxygen probes were calibrated with air - saturated reaction buffer and corrected for temperature and atmospheric pressure . All components were dissolved in reaction buffer ( 140 mM KCl , 20 mM N - 2 - hydroxyethylpiperazine - N 9 - 2 - ethanesulfonic acid , and 5 mM K 2 HPO 4 , pH 7 . 3 , with 0 . 5 % fatty acid free bovine serum albumin ) , except rotenone and antimycin A , which were dissolved in 95 % ethanol . Oxygen consumption due to ﬂ ux through complexes I to IV was estimatedfromratesofpyruvate 1 malate 1 succinateoxidation ( 3 . 45 , 0 . 37 , and 6 mM ) in the presence of 5 mM adenosine 5 9 - diphosphate and corrected for residual rates after inhibition of complex I by rotenone ( 1 m g / mL ﬁ nal concentration ) and complex III by antimycin A ( 5 m g / mL ﬁ nal concentra - tion ) . Preliminary experiments showed that 5 mM adenosine diphosphate was suf ﬁ cient to maintain state 3 rates for the time required for the complete series of measurements . Preliminary experiments also established optimal substrate and inhibitor concentrations for these measurements from platelet mitochondria . MitochondriamembranepotentialwasperformedasdescribedintheJC - 1 Mitochondrial MembranePotential DetectionKit protocol ( CaymanChemical ) . Platelet supernatant was incubated with JC - 1 ( 1 / 10 ) as recommended by the manufacturer and with 5 m L of anti – CD41a - APC ( BD Biosciences ) for 30 minutes at 37°C . Samples were diluted and analyzed using high - sensitivity ﬂ ow cytometry ( hs - FCM ) . Air pouch model The air pouch model was performed on C57BL / 6N mice as previously reported . 23 Brie ﬂ y , sterile air was subcutaneous injected on days 0 and 3 . Tumor necrosis factor - a ( 50 ng ) was injected into the pouch on day 6 . On day 7 , mitochondrial membrane hydrolysis products ( 100 m L of 5 3 10 8 mitochondria treated with sPLA 2 - IIA ) , diluent ( PBS ) , sPLA 2 - IIA , or mitochondriaalonewereinjectedintheairpouch . After4hours , theairpouch was washed with 1 . 2 mL PBS . Cytokines were quanti ﬁ ed using the BD CytometricBeadArraySystem ( BDBiosciences ) by ﬂ owcytometryonaBD FACS Canto II and analyzed using FCAP Array Software ( version 3 . 0 ) . Results Distribution of mitochondria in platelets Using ﬂ uorescence and transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) , we found that unactivated platelets contain an average of ; 4 mitochondria , frequently located in the vicinity of the plasma 2174 BOUDREAU et al BLOOD , 2 OCTOBER 2014 x VOLUME 124 , NUMBER 14 For personal use only . on April 19 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From membrane ( Figure 1A - C ; supplemental Movie 1 ; supplemental Figure 1A ) . Remarkably , a fraction of these mitochondria promptly localizes in pseudopodia on activation by thrombin , a serine protease that participates in blood coagulation ( supplemental Movie 2 ; supplemental Figure 1B ) . Activated platelets release functional mitochondria In addition to promoting release of granule contents , 24 platelet activation triggerscytoplasmicmembrane buddingandthesheddingof submicronvesiclescalledMPs . 7 , 25 Takingintoaccountthelocalization of mitochondria in the vicinity of the cytoplasmic membrane , we hypothesizedthatmitochondriamaybepackagedwithinMPsandform mitochondria - containing microparticles ( mitoMPs ) . Mitochondria are recognized as the powerhouse of the cell , producing the energy ( adenosine triphosphate ) required for most metabolic reactions , mostly via oxidative phosphorylation . 26 To determine whether platelets release mitochondria , we ﬁ rst evaluated speci ﬁ c mitochondrial O 2 consumption , mediated by ﬂ ux through complexes I to IV , using speci ﬁ c inhibitors of complexes I and III ( roteonone and antimycin A , respectively ) . Unless mitochondria have been isolated and free in the milieu , permeabilization of the cytoplasmic membrane is necessary to allow the access of exogenous substrates added exogenously to stimulate mitochondrial respiration . 27 , 28 To evaluate respiration by putative mitoMPs in platelet - free supernatants , we thus used an established permeabilization method for our assays . 28 We found that the supernatant from activated platelets harvested by centrifugation ( cell - free ; supplemental Figure 2 ) consumes O 2 ( Figure 2A ) . In contrast , thesupernatantfromisolatedrestingplateletsexhibitedno detectable O 2 consumption ( Figure 2A ) . Quite unexpectedly , signi ﬁ cant O 2 consumption was detected even in the absence of detergent ( Figure 2A ) . These observations suggest that , in addition to active mitoMPs , platelets may also release respiration - competent free mitochondria ( freeMito ) into the extracellular milieu ( Figure 2B ) . We next examined the presence of freeMitos and mitoMPs , using a series of quantitative and qualitative approaches . Using a mono - clonal antibody directed against a speci ﬁ c mitochondrial outer membrane receptor ( TOM22 ; supplemental Figure 3 ) , we found intact freeMitos in the supernatants from thrombin - activated platelets , quanti ﬁ ed by a PCR approach targeting mtDNA sequences ( Figure 2C ) . TEM and confocal ﬂ uorescence microscopic analyses using ﬂ uorescent dyes to discriminate the plasma membrane and mitochondria further establish the production of freeMitos and mitoMPs by activated platelets ( Figure 2D - E ) . Whereasthetransferoforganellesfrommegakaryocytestoplatelets is mediated by cytoskeleton components , 4 we assessed whether the cytoskeleton is also involved in the extrusion of mitochondria from platelets . Using actin and tubulin polymerization inhibitors along with hs - FCM 29 to resolve the submicron particle populations ( ie , MPs , mitoMPs , and freeMitos ; Figure 2B ) produced by platelets , we observed that the release of mitochondria ( freeMitos and mitoMPs ) implicates actin and occurs independently of microtubules ( Figure 2F - G ) . Thus , via cytoskeletal contribution , activated platelets are a source of mitoMPs and respiration - competent freeMitos . Thrombin is a highly potent agonist of platelet activation , and we next aimed at determining whether thrombin and other well - recognized platelet stimuli ( supplemental Figure 4A - B ) promote the release of extracellular mitochondria . We found that all the platelet stimuli tested lead to the production of both mitoMPs and freeMitos ( Figure 2H ) . Interestingly , freeMitos were found to ful ﬁ ll thecurrentstructuralde ﬁ nitionsofconventionalMPs . Infact , freeMitos are smaller than intact platelets and have submicron dimensions and a membrane moiety ( Figure 2F ) , providing an explanation for the recognized heterogeneity found among platelet - derived MPs . 30 Relevance of extracellular mitochondria in health The broad diversity of stimuli capable of promoting concomitant releaseofmitochondria andMPspointstothebiological relevanceof this phenomenon . We thus sought to determine whether mitochon - dria are released in vivo in sterile in ﬂ ammatory pathologies where plateletMPsareknowntobeproduced . Usinghs - FCM , anti - TOM22 coprecipitation of mtDNA , and TEM , we could detect signi ﬁ cant levels of extracellular mitochondria in synovial ﬂ uid from patients with RA ( Figure 3A - C ) , consistent with the accumulation of platelet MPs 29 , 31 , 32 and mtDNA 33 reported in RA synovial ﬂ uid . For comparison , lower concentrations of extracellular mitochondria of platelet origin ( CD41 1 mitoMPs ) were measured in the synovial ﬂ uid of osteoarthritis patients ( Figure 3A ) , a joint disease in which platelet MPs are also less abundant . 31 , 32 Similar observations were made in bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂ uids from the experimental transfusion - related acute lung injury ( TRALI ) mouse model ( supplemental Figure 5A - B ) . Although the identi ﬁ ed CD41 1 mitoMPs are very likely produced by platelets , damaged cells and activated mast cells are potential sources of freeMitos . 11 , 12 We thus endeavored to con ﬁ rm the platelet origin of extracellular mitochon - dria in a relevant biological context where platelets have been reported to release MPs ex vivo . Given their pivotal functions in hemostasis , 34 platelet transfusion is frequently used to restore optimal platelet levels in thrombocytopenic patients . In contrast to red blood cell ( RBC ) concentrates , which are stored at ; 4°C for up to 42 days , platelet concentrates used for transfusion are stored at 20°C to 24°C . Adverse reactions ( febrile nonhemolytic reactions [ fever or chills ] , anaphylaxis , transfusion - related sepsis , and TRALI ) are more fre - quentlyobservedwithplateletthanRBCtransfusion . 35 , 36 Itisgenerally thought that this difference may be due to the presence of bacteria in platelet concentrates grown at permissive temperatures . From a phylo - genetic view , mitochondria are thought to have originated from the Figure 1 . Mitochondrial distribution within resting platelets . Mitochondria ( black arrows ) in resting plate - lets examined by ( A ) TEM and ( B ) confocal scanning laser microscopy ( CSLM ) . ( C ) Mitochondria are located proximally to the platelet plasma membrane ( n 5 31 ; data represent the mean 6 standard error of the mean [ SEM ] , * * * P , . 0001 , Student t test ) . BLOOD , 2 OCTOBER 2014 x VOLUME 124 , NUMBER 14 PLATELETS RELEASE EXTRACELLULAR MITOCHONDRIA 2175 For personal use only . on April 19 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From Figure 2 . Activated platelets release extracellular mitochondria . ( A ) Platelet - free supernatants resulting from the isolation of thrombin - activated platelets consume O 2 via the electron transport chain following cell permeabilization with saponin detergent ( 50 m g / mL ) . No O 2 consumption is detected in supernatants obtained from resting platelets ( n 5 4 ; data are mean 6 SEM ) . ( B ) Three predicted types of extracellular microparticles ( MPs ) produced on platelet activation : mitochondria ( freeMitos ) , mitochondria - containing MPs ( mitoMPs ) , andMPslackingmitochondria ( MPs ) . ( C ) IsolationoffreeMitosusinganti - TOM22microbeads ( orIgGcontrol ) inthrombin - stimulatedplateletsandmtDNAquantification ( n 5 4 ; data are mean 6 SEM , * * P , . 005 , Student t test ) . ( D ) TEM visualization of freeMitos ( white arrows ) , mitoMPs ( black arrows ) , and MPs ( black arrowheads ) released from thrombin - activated platelets . ( E ) Three - dimensional CSLM reconstruction of the supernatant of thrombin - activated platelets . Populations represented in image are platelets ( black arrow ) , MPs ( white arrows ) , mitoMPs ( white arrowheads ) , and freeMitos ( black arrowheads ) . ( F ) High - sensitivity flowcytometry ( hs - FCM ) analysisof resting platelets ( upper panel , top right quadrant ) and thrombin - activated platelets , which show 3 additional , distinct populations of particles , ie , freeMitos ( bottom panel , top left quadrant , blue ) , mitoMPs ( bottom panel , top right quadrant , pink ) , and mitochondria - free MPs ( bottompanel , bottomright quadrant , red ) . Bottom left quadrant of both upper and lower panelsrepresents background noise ( gray ) . FSC - PMT and SSC dot plots of platelets ( first right panel ) and 3 populations of microparticles : freeMitos ( second right panel ) , mitoMPs ( third right panel ) , and MPs ( fourth right panel ) . The relative diameters are presented according to size - defined microsphere calibrations . ( G ) Release of ( left ) freeMito , ( center ) mitoMPs , and ( right ) MPs from thrombin - activated platelets require intact actin microfilament dynamics . Mitochondrial release is significantly reduced on addition of actin inhibitors ( cytochalasin [ B , D - E ] and latrunculin [ A ] ) , but not tubulin polymerization inhibitor ( nocodazole ) ( n 5 4 ; data are mean 6 SEM , * P , . 05 , * * P , . 005 , and * * * P , . 001 , Student t test ) . ( H ) Heat - aggregated IgG ( HA - IgG ) , thrombin , collagen , cross - linked collagen related peptide ( CRP - XL ) , and phorbol 12 - myristate 13 - acetate ( PMA ) trigger the release of ( left ) extracellular freeMitos , ( center ) mitoMPs , and ( right ) MPsquantifiedbyhs - FCM ( n 5 4 ; data aremean 6 SEM . * P , . 05 , * * P , . 005 , and * * * P , . 001vssupernatantfromrestingplatelets , Student t test ) . 2176 BOUDREAU et al BLOOD , 2 OCTOBER 2014 x VOLUME 124 , NUMBER 14 For personal use only . on April 19 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From endosymbiosis of alphaproteobacteria ( Rickettsiales ) during the early evolution of eukaryotic cells . 37 We hypothesized that extracellular mitochondria ( organelles that are lacking in RBCs ) present in platelet concentrates might trigger adverse reactions similar to those observed with infectious agents . We thus evaluated the presence of extracellular mitochondria in plateletconcentratesusedforhumantransfusioninthecourseoftheir conservation . As measured using the O 2 consumption assay , as well as by TOM22 coprecipitation of mtDNA , hs - FCM , and TEM , we demonstrate signi ﬁ cant levels of freeMitos and mitoMPs in platelet concentrates ( Figure 3D - G ) . In keeping with the coupling of O 2 utilization with energy production , mitochondria present in MPs and freemitochondriainplateletconcentratesdisplayJC - 1dyeaggregates , a cationic dye that accumulates in energized cell mitochondria ( Figure 3H ) . Most importantly , we established that platelet concentrates that had been associated with adverse transfusion reactions in human recipients contain higher concentrations of extracellular mitochondria ( Figure 3I ) . Thus , extracellular mitochondria , which have the alphaproteobacterium Rickettsia prowazekii 10 as an ancestor , are present in platelet concentrates used for transfusion , particularly in those that triggered transfusion - related incidents , and exhibit a signi ﬁ cant degree of functionality . Mitochondrion is an endogenous substrate for the bactericidal secreted phospholipase A 2 - IIA What are the implications of the release of free mitochondria by platelets ? Extracellular mitochondria are already well recognized as highly potent damage - associated molecular patterns ( DAMPs ) , capable of mediating in ﬂ ammation locally 12 , 14 and systematically 13 , 15 through their bacteria - like components ( ie , N - formylated peptides and mtDNA ) . In this study , we aimed to identify unprecedented roles for extracellular mitochondria in in ﬂ ammation . The sPLA 2 - IIA , initially Figure 3 . Extracellular mitochondria are present in various situations where platelets are known to be activated . ( A ) Platelet mitoMPs ( CD41 1 MitoTracker 1 ) are found in higher concentrations in the synovial fluid of RA patients ( n 5 20 ) than in the synovial fluid of osteoarthritis patients ( OA , n 5 14 ; data are mean 6 SEM , * P , . 05 , Mann - Whitney test ) . ( B ) FreeMitos are detected in fresh SF of RA patients . Isolation of freeMitos in RA SF ( from 3 different patients ) with anti - TOM22 microbeads ( or control IgG ; supplemental Figure 3 ) and mtDNA quantification . ( C ) TEM imaging of ( left ) a freeMito and ( right ) a mitoMP from fresh RA SF . ( D ) O 2 consumption is observed in PFP obtained at the indicated time intervals from platelet storage bags . ( E ) Isolation of freeMitos ( supplemental Figure 3 ) in PFP along with mtDNA quantification reveals an abundance of freeMito at day 5 ( n 5 6 ; data are mean 6 SEM , * P , . 05 vs day 0 , paired Student t test ) . ( F ) High - sensitivity flow cytometry ( hs - FCM ) analysis of resting platelets ( upper panel , top right quadrant ) and thrombin - activated platelets , which show 3 additional distinct populations of particles , ie , freeMitos ( bottom panel , top left quadrant , blue ) , mitoMPs ( bottom panel , top right quadrant , pink ) , and mitochondria - free MPs ( bottom panel , bottom right quadrant , red ) . Bottom left quadrant of both upper and lower panels represents background noise ( gray ) . FSC - PMT and SSC dot plots of platelets ( first right panel ) and 3 populations of microparticles : freeMitos ( second right panel ) , mitoMPs ( third right panel ) , and MPs ( fourth right panel ) . The relative diameters are presented according to size - defined microsphere calibrations . ( G ) TEM imaging of PFP collected on day 5 confirming the presence of ( left ) freeMitos and ( right ) mitoMPs . ( H ) Mitochondrial membrane potential is detected in freeMitos and mitoMPs collected from PFP , as measured by a JC - 1 assay using hs - FCM ( red to green ratio ) ( n 5 5 ; data are mean 6 SEM ) . ( I ) Extracellular mitochondria ( as detected by mtDNA quantification ) are found at higher concentration in PFP of platelet storage bags that have cause adverse transfusion reaction to the recipient ( no adverse reaction group [ n 5 61 ] vs adverse reaction group [ n 5 74 ] matched in term of storage duration ; data are mean 6 SEM , * * * P , . 001 , Student t test ) . Adverse reaction measured include mainly febrile nonhemolytic reactions , skin manifestations such as itching or skin rash , and cardiovascular events such as hypotension or tachycardia . BLOOD , 2 OCTOBER 2014 x VOLUME 124 , NUMBER 14 PLATELETS RELEASE EXTRACELLULAR MITOCHONDRIA 2177 For personal use only . on April 19 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From identi ﬁ ed in platelets 38 and present abundantly in this cellular lineage ( Figure 4A ) , hydrolyzes the sn - 2 acyl bond of glycerophospholipids , resulting in the release of free fatty acids and lysophospholipids . sPLA 2 - IIA is found in plasma and is induced in chronic and acute in ﬂ ammatory conditions . 39 Although the promotion of host defense via bacterial membrane hydrolysis is an established function for this enzyme , 39 sPLA 2 - IIA is only poorly active toward the plasma membrane of eukaryotic cells , including platelets , 40 and its endoge - nous substrate in sterile in ﬂ ammation has thus far remained unclear . The ancestral similarities between bacteria and mitochondria 10 , 37 prompted us to examine whether the mitochondrial membrane is susceptible to hydrolysis by sPLA 2 - IIA . We observed that sPLA 2 - IIA binds mitochondria ( Figure 4B - C ) , leading to the release of various lysophospholipids and free fatty acids ( Fig 4D - E ) , and in so doing , severelyaffectsmitochondrialstructuralintegrity ( Figure4F ) . Similarly to bacteria , the mitochondrial genome is rich in unmethylatedCpGmotifs , arecognizedDAMP 13 andwhichisfound outside cells in multiple disorders . 13 , 18 , 19 To determine whether mitochondrialdigestionbysPLA 2 - IIAmightleadtomtDNArelease , we used confocal microscopy and an assay speci ﬁ cally designed to quantify soluble DNA . With this combination of approaches , we identi ﬁ ed sPLA 2 - IIA as an enzyme capable of promoting the liberation of mtDNA ( Figure 4G - H ) , Thus , the mitochondrion is an endogenous substrate of sPLA 2 - IIA , and its hydrolysis leads to the generation of recognized proin ﬂ ammatory signals ( arachidonic acid , 41 lysophospholipids , 42 and mtDNA 13 ) . Further , this result raises the possibility that a previously unrecognized function of sPLA 2 - IIA is to assist in the degradation of freeMitos released by platelets and potentially other cells . Extracellular mitochondria interact with neutrophils We next endeavored to identify a relevant cellular lineage that may be regulated by extracellular mitochondria . We found that ﬂ uorescent mitochondria intravenously injected in mice associate with neutrophils , a polymorphonuclear leukocyte cell lineage that plays key roles inin ﬂ ammation 43 ( Figure 5A ) . Intravital investigations in mice using 2 - photon microscopy demonstrated that extracellular mitochondria present in the bloodstream prompt neutrophil interactions with the vascular wall and rolling ( Figure 5B ; supplemental Movie 3 ) . Using qualitative scanning electron microscopy , we found that extracellular mitochondria consistently lead human neutrophils to display striking ultrastructural features , similar to pseudopodia ( Figure 5C ) . Together , these observations suggestthat extracellular mitochondria can interact with neutrophils , thereby modulating the activities of the latter . Inflammation is amplified by the combined action of extracellular mitochondria and sPLA 2 - IIA To address the possibility that the combination of sPLA 2 - IIA and mitochondria might trigger activities other than those induced by either mitochondria or sPLA 2 - IIA alone , we assessed whether Figure 4 . The mitochondrion is a substrate for the bactericidal sPLA 2 - IIA . ( A ) Quantification of sPLA 2 - IIA in human platelets by time - resolved immunofluorescence ( n 5 3 ; data are mean 6 SEM ) . ( B ) sPLA 2 - IIA immunoblotting of mitochondria isolated with anti - TOM22 microbeads reveals binding of human recombinant sPLA 2 - IIA to mitochondria ( supplemental Figure 3 ) . ( C ) Mitochondria were incubated in ( left ) the absence or ( right ) presence of Alexa488 - conjugated sPLA 2 - IIA and analyzed by hs - FCM . The significant shift in the fluorescent population size ( right ) indicates that sPLA 2 - IIA binds mitochondria . ( D - E ) Catalytic activity of human recombinant sPLA 2 - IIA ( or PBS as vehicle ) toward mitochondria . Mitochondrial membrane phospholipid hydrolysis by sPLA 2 - IIA yields ( D ) lysophospholipids and ( E ) fatty acids as quantified by mass spectrometry . ( F ) sPLA 2 - IIA affects mitochondrial structural integrity . Scanning electronic micrographs of mitochondria incubated in the ( left ) absence or ( right ) presence of human recombinant sPLA 2 - IIA . ( G ) Mitochondria ( magenta ) release mtDNA ( blue ) on incubation with recombinant sPLA 2 - IIA ( upper panels ) . Extracellular mtDNA accumulation ( arrow ) is apparent in the presence of sPLA 2 - IIA . Differential interference contrast images are shown for reference ( lower panels ) . ( H ) mtDNA extrusion is amplified in presence of human recombinant sPLA 2 - IIA ( 0 . 2 m g / mL , 30 minutes at 37 ° C ) , as quantified by Sytox Green nucleic acid stain assay ( n 5 6 ; data are mean 6 SEM , * P , . 05 , Student t test ) . 2178 BOUDREAU et al BLOOD , 2 OCTOBER 2014 x VOLUME 124 , NUMBER 14 For personal use only . on April 19 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From sPLA 2 - IIA and extracellular mitochondria could associate together with neutrophils . Interestingly , ﬂ uorescent sPLA 2 - IIA and exoge - nously labeled mitochondria rapidly associate with human neutro - phils and colocalize intracellularly ( Figure 6A - B ) through dynamin , clathrin , and caveolin - dependant endocytosis ( Figure 6C ; supple - mentalFigure6 ) . Arachidonicacid ( 20 : 4 , n - 6 ) liberatedbysPLA 2 - IIA may contribute to the biosynthesis of in ﬂ ammatory eicosanoids such as leukotrienes by neighboring leukocytes . 41 To determine whether the association of mitochondria , sPLA 2 - IIA , and neutrophils might promote cell activation , we measured the release of leukotriene B 4 ( LTB 4 ) by neutrophils . We found that neutrophils produce copious amounts of LTB 4 when both extracellular mitochondria and sPLA 2 - IIA are present ( Figure 6D ) . Importantly , such LTB 4 production is strictly dependent on sPLA 2 - IIA catalytic activity because it takes place even in presence of the cPLA 2 a inhibitor pyrrophenone , and it is not observed when a catalytically inactive sPLA 2 - IIA mutant form is used ( Figure 6D ; supplemental Figure 7 ) . Platelets are implicated in the activation of neutrophils and participate in the formation of neutrophil extracellular traps ( NETs ) , 44 a recognized feature found in RA and transfusion adverse reactions like TRALI . 45 , 46 Interestingly , freeMitos are also NET inducers , aphenomenonthatisampli ﬁ edinthepresenceofsPLA 2 - IIA ( Figure 6E ) . Consistent with their recognized proin ﬂ ammatory potency , the different hydrolytic products derived from sPLA 2 - IIA activity ( arachidonic acid , lysophospholipids , and mtDNA ) are all highly potent at inducing NETosis ( Figure 6E ) . Thus , the sPLA 2 - IIA / mitochondria complex associates with neutrophils and promotes cellular activation that is dependent on sPLA 2 - IIA activity . We next examined the signi ﬁ cance of this pathway in the in ﬂ ammatory response in vivo . In this set of experiments , we used C57BL / 6J mice ( which naturally lack sPLA 2 - IIA ) to evaluate whether mitochondrial hydrolytic products are active . Consistent with our in vitro observations , we found that the products derived from freeMitos via human recombinant sPLA 2 - IIA activity promote a rapid , signi ﬁ cant decrease of body temperature ( Figure 7A ) and induce proin ﬂ ammatory cytokine release when injected in sPLA 2 - IIA – de ﬁ cient mice ( Figure 7B ) . Conversely , intact freeMitos injected in these mice elicited only a modest response , con ﬁ rming thatfreeMitoscantriggeranin ﬂ ammatoryresponsethatisdependent on hydrolysis by sPLA 2 - IIA . To determine whether endogenous sPLA 2 - IIA can produce mediators from freeMitos in vivo , we ex - aminedtheeffectofintactfreeMitosinjectedintransgenicC57BL / 6J mice expressing sPLA 2 - IIA . Interestingly , we found that the latter treatment induced a delayed but albeit signi ﬁ cant lowering of body temperature ( Figure 7A ) , suggesting that the endogenous sPLA 2 - IIA expressionissuf ﬁ cienttopromotein ﬂ ammatoryreactions . Todetermine whether freeMitos can modulate physiological processes in discrete organs , we evaluated their localization on injection via tail vein . We observed that the bulk of injected freeMitos accumulate in the liver , kidney , lungs , and lymph nodes ( supplemental Figure 8A ) . Consistent with the concomitant localization of sPLA 2 - IIA ( supplemental Figure 8B ) and neutrophils 47 in the liver , freeMito accumulation in this organ triggers the expression of a broad variety of proin - ﬂ ammatory genes recognized as relevant to neutrophil functions ( Figure 7C ) . Our observations demonstrate that the combined activity of extracellular mitochondria and sPLA 2 - IIA generates in ﬂ ammatory signals in vivo . Discussion Mitochondrial components secreted from cells might act as auto - pathogens , a term ﬁ rst coined by Zhang and colleagues . 11 Owing to their numerous similarities to bacteria , extracellular mitochondria can stimulate the immune system and thereby trigger in ﬂ ammation . Indeed , cell - free mtDNA levels are increased in blood in several pathologies and can be used as potent biomarker . Our study establishes that platelets can release functional mitochondria ( free or shuttled via MPs ) , which can be transferred to other cells such as neutrophils . The concentration of sPLA 2 - IIA is increased in in ﬂ ammatory exudates , such as in the plasma of septic shock patients and RA synovial ﬂ uid . 48 , 49 Consistently , the sPLA 2 - IIA expressing trans - genic mice used in our study 20 display higher levels of plasma sPLA 2 - IIA and develop accelerated blood vessel in ﬂ ammation and autoimmune arthritis . 49 , 50 Although sPLA 2 - IIA is a bactericidal enzyme that has been studied for decades , its endogenous substrates insterilein ﬂ ammationwerethoughttobelimitedtodyingcells 51 and MPs . 52 Our study identi ﬁ es mitochondria as an overlooked source of biologically active mediators that can be liberated via sPLA 2 - IIA . In addition to arachidonic acid conversion to eicosanoids , 41 other lipid mediators may also promote in ﬂ ammation ( Figure 7D ) . Lysophos - pholipids are released through sPLA 2 - IIA activity toward the mitochondrial membrane and can trigger in ﬂ ammation . 39 , 42 In the context of platelet transfusion , lysophospholipid levels accumulate in platelet concentrates during storage 53 and promote adverse effects . 54 It is thus highly plausible that these lysophospholipids are in fact derived from sPLA 2 - IIA activity , which is also abundant in platelet concentrates ( supplemental Figure 9A ) , toward extracellular Figure 5 . Extracellular mitochondria interact with neutrophils . ( A ) Intravenously injected fluorescence - labeled mitochondria ( MitoTracker Deep Red ) associate with mouse neutrophils ( Gr1 1 cells ) in vivo as measured by flow cytometry ( n 5 6 ; data are mean 6 SEM , * * * P , . 001 , Student t test ) . ( B ) Intravenous injection of mitochondria induces neutrophil rolling in LysM - eGFP mice . ( Center and right ) Neutrophil ( green ) velocity is significantly reduced ( n 5 89 ; supplemental Movie 3 ) in blood ( red ) following intravenous injection of mitochondria compared with ( left ) Tyrode buffer as vehicle ( n 5 51 ; data are mean 6 SEM , * * * P , . 001 , Student t test ) ( C ) Scanning electronic micrographs of mitochondria in association with ( left ) freshly isolated human neutrophil and ( right ) ensuing neutrophil structural change ( 29 . 2 6 2 . 11 % , n 5 3 ) after a 30 - minute incubation in the presence of human recombinant sPLA 2 - IIA . BLOOD , 2 OCTOBER 2014 x VOLUME 124 , NUMBER 14 PLATELETS RELEASE EXTRACELLULAR MITOCHONDRIA 2179 For personal use only . on April 19 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From mitochondria . Beyond the release of lipid mediators , sPLA 2 - IIA also participates in the extrusion of mtDNA ( Figure 4F - H ) . This process may occur in an in ﬂ ammatory microenvironment where sPLA 2 - IIA and freeMitos ( originating from platelets , mitoMPs , or other activated / damaged cell lineages ) are both present , such as in RA , 49 as well as in the context of transfusion . Indeed , soluble mtDNA concentrations in platelet storage bags increase concomitantly with sPLA 2 - IIA levels ( supplemental Figure 9A - B ) and are higher in concentrates associated with adverse transfusion reactions ( Figure 3I ) . Because intravenous injection of mtDNA triggers lung in ﬂ ammation , 13 this may provide insight into how platelet transfusions induce lung injury . Mitochondrial components that are not dependent on sPLA 2 - IIA activity might also contribute to the promotion of in ﬂ ammation . Respiratory competence displayed by platelet - derived mitochondria implies an increased production of ATP , a recognized DAMP , 55 as well as an upsurge in extracellular reactive oxygen species , which are danger signals also . 56 Similar to bacteria , mitochondria express N - formylated peptides that can recruit leukocytes to the site ( s ) of in ﬂ ammation . 12 , 57 The presence of these different in ﬂ ammatory components , whose production does not require sPLA 2 - IIA , may ex - plain how intravenous injection of mitochondria induce neutrophil rolling along the vascular wall ( Figure 5B ; supplemental Movie 3 ) , which is typically reminiscent of neutrophil priming , and how intact mitochondria may induce signi ﬁ cant NETosis ( Figure 6E ) . Although we focused our study on innate and acute in ﬂ ammatory responses triggered by extracellular mitochondria , the latter may also be involved in adaptive immune responses and chronic in ﬂ ammation . Indeed , the generation of antibodies directed against mitochondrial components may occur in chronic rheumatic diseases in which mitochondria are constantly liberated by activated platelets and in patients repeatedly transfused with extracellular mitochondria . Interestingly , cardiolipin , a phospholipid uniquely expressed by mito - chondria ( and bacteria ) , may be also highly antigenic , providing an explanation for the prevalence of anticardiolipin in rheumatic diseases implicating platelets such as systemic lupus erythematosus and anti - phospholipid syndrome . 58 We predict that future investigations will determine to what extent mitochondria contribute in these processes . Platelet activation under ﬂ ow condition induces the formation of long tubes , called ﬂ ow - induced protrusions , and the plasma of healthy subjects contains tubular extracellular vesicles . We thus foresee that these tubular structures might also express mitochondria . 59 , 60 Keeping in mind that platelets rapidly respond to vascular injuries to prevent bleeding and that mitochondria might alsobereleasedinthis context , wefurtherspeculate thatextracellular mitochondria could contribute to the hemostatic functions of platelets . Like MPs , mitochondria might serve to tissue factor deposition and to the initiation of the coagulation cascade , which is by itself a well - controlled in ﬂ ammatory reaction . 61 Subsequent studies will undoubtedly uncover additional physiological role ( s ) played by extracellular mitochondria . Platelets are classically considered ﬁ rst and foremost as key players in hemostasis . However , mounting evidence suggests that these cells actively participate in in ﬂ ammation . 8 The identi ﬁ cation of Figure 6 . Interaction of human neutrophils with the mitochondria / sPLA 2 - IIA complex promotes the release of proinflammatory mediators . ( A ) Human neutrophils associate with the mitochondria / sPLA 2 - IIA complex in vitro as measured by flow cytometry analysis of human neutrophils incubated with fluorescently labeled mitochondria ( MitoTracker Deep Red ) in the ( left ) absence or ( right ) presence of Alexa488 - conjugated sPLA 2 - IIA . ( B ) Three - dimensional CSLM reconstruction of mitochondria ( red ) and sPLA 2 - IIA ( green ) colocalizing within neutrophils ( blue nuclei , Hoechst stain ; gray cytoplasm , CellTracker CMTPX ) . ( C ) Mitochondria are internalized in human neutrophils via an endocytosis - dependent pathway . Graph bars representation of the relative localization ( surface vs intracellular ) of the mitochondria inside neutrophils following pretreatment with indicated inhibitors ( nystatin for inhibition of caveolin - mediated endocytosis ; chlorpromazine for inhibition of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ; dynasore for inhibition of dynamin - mediated endocytosis ; nocodazole for inhibition of polymerization of microtubule [ endocytosis and phagocytosis ] ; cytochalasin B for inhibition of polymerization of actin [ endocytosis and phagocytosis ] ) . Data were obtained from 100 neutrophils per condition repeated 3 times ( n 5 3 , * P , . 01 , * * P , . 001 , and * * * P , . 0001 , Mann - Whitney test compare with diluent ) . ( D ) Mitochondrial hydrolytic products derived from the action of the mitochondria / sPLA 2 - IIA complex ( Figure 4D - E ) induce proinflammatory responses in human neutrophils . The total 5 - lipoxygenase products ( 5 - LO products ) were quantified by high - performance liquid chromatography ( n 5 4 ; dataaremean 6 SEM , * * P , . 005 vs control , Student t test ) . ( E ) The freeMito fraction induces NET formation in vitro and is enhanced by sPLA 2 - IIA . NET formation ( left panel , DNA , blue , white dotted line ) was confirmed by confocal imaging after treatment of mitochondria ( red , right panel ) with sPLA 2 - IIA . sPLA 2 - IIA significantly enhances NET formation by mitochondria ( upper right panel , n $ 7 ; data are mean 6 SEM , * P , . 05 and * * P , . 005 , Student t test ) . Hydrolysis products from mitochondria / sPLA2 - IIA complex activity also induce significant NET formation ( lower right panel , n $ 3 ; data are mean 6 SEM , * * P , . 005 and * * * P , . 001 , Student t test ) . 2180 BOUDREAU et al BLOOD , 2 OCTOBER 2014 x VOLUME 124 , NUMBER 14 For personal use only . on April 19 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From mitochondria , with their bacterial ancestry , and of a bactericidal phospholipase A 2 , sPLA 2 - IIA , as entities that are released from platelets and that work together in many in ﬂ ammatory disorders suggests that they may both be key mediators in sterile in ﬂ ammatory conditions . Acknowledgments The authors thank the Bioimaging platform , Centre Hospitalier UniversitaireResearchCenteratUniversit´eLaval , andtheServicede microscopie of the Institut de Biologie Int´egrative des Syst ` emes for technical assistance in transmission electron microscopy and scanning electron microscopy . The authors also thank Sandrine Laradi for technical assistance . This work was supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research ( E . B . , D . S . ) , the Arthritis Society ( E . B . ) , Canadian Arthritis Network ( E . B . , L . H . B . , A . - C . D . ) , and Fonds de Recherche du Qu´ebec en Sant´e ( E . B . , L . H . B . ) . E . B . is a recipient of a Canadian Institutes of Health Research new investigator award . This work was also supported by National Institutes of Health grant R37 HL36235 ( M . H . G . ) , the British Heart Foundation ( R . W . F . ) , Fonds de Recherche des Maladies Rhumatismales de l ’ Universit´e Laval ( A . - C . D . ) , National Institutes of Health , Exploratory / Developmental Research grant R21 AR062328 - 01 ( P . A . N . ) , CoganFamilyFund ( P . A . N . ) , CentreNationaldelaRecherche Scienti ﬁ que ( G . L . ) , Fondationde l ’ Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancer ( G . L . ) , Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Figure 7 . Extracellular mitochondria and sPLA 2 - IIA amplify inflammation in vivo . ( A ) Intravenous injection of mitochondrial hydrolytic products ( sPLA 2 - IIA – treated mitochondria , black triangle ) in sPLA 2 - IIA – deficient mice significant lowers body temperature ( D temperature vs PBS - injected mice of respective background ) after 4 hours ( n 5 6 / group ; data are mean 6 SEM , * * P , . 005 compared with sPLA 2 - IIA – untreated mitochondria [ n ] or sPLA 2 - IIA alone [ d ] ) . Intravenous injection of mitochondria ( sPLA 2 - IIA untreated , ☐ ) in sPLA 2 - IIA – sufficient mice significantly lowers body temperature after 24 hours . Only a modest temperature decrease was observed in sPLA 2 - IIA – untreated mitochondria ( n ) in sPLA 2 - IIA – deficient mice ( n $ 3 / group ; data are mean 6 SEM , * * P , . 005 ) . ( B ) sPLA 2 - IIA – generated mitochondrial products trigger inflammation in vivo . Mitochondria incubated in the presence of recombinant sPLA 2 - IIA and injected into the air pouch of C57BL / 6N mice induce the production of ( left ) IL - 1 b and ( right ) IL - 6 . Diluent ( PBS ) , sPLA 2 - IIA alone , or untreated mitochondria induce modest cytokine production when injected separately ( n 5 7 ; data are mean 6 SEM , * * P , . 005 compared with mitochondria incubated in the absence of sPLA 2 - IIA ) . ( C ) Mitochondria accumulation in the liver induces numerous proinflammatory genes that are amplified in the presence of endogenous sPLA 2 - IIA . mRNA expression of inflammatory genes relevant to neutrophil function was quantified in the liver of sPLA 2 - IIA – sufficient and – deficient mice intravenously injected with mitochondria ( n 5 3 per group ; data expressed as the ratio of specific mRNA expression ratio ( sPLA 2 - IIA sufficient / deficient mice ) . ( D ) Schematic representation of the mechanism of action of extracellular mitochondria and sPLA 2 - IIA in sterile inflammatory conditions . On activation , platelets release MPs , mitoMPs , and freeMitos . Mitochondrial membrane phospholipids may be hydrolyzed by sPLA 2 - IIA , generating bioactive mediators ( fatty acids , lysophospholipids , and mtDNA ) and promoting neutrophil proinflammatory responses . BLOOD , 2 OCTOBER 2014 x VOLUME 124 , NUMBER 14 PLATELETS RELEASE EXTRACELLULAR MITOCHONDRIA 2181 For personal use only . on April 19 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From Canada ( H . G . , M . R . ) , Canadian Funds for Innovation ( D . S . , E . B . ) , Agence Nationale de la Recherche grant ANR - 12 - JSV1 - 0012 - 01 , and The National Safety Agency for Drug and Health Products ( Agence Nationale de S´ecurit´e du M´edicament et des Produits de Sant´e - Appel ` a Projets de Recherche Agence Nationale de S´ecurit´e du M´edicament et des Produits de Sant´e [ ANSM ] - 2012 011 ) ( O . G . , F . C . ) . No funding bodies had any role in study design , data collection and analysis , decision to publish , or preparation of the manuscript . Authorship Contribution : E . B . , L . H . B . , N . C . , S . L . , M . P . , L . T . , J . W . S . , and M . H . G . conceived and designed the experiments ; L . H . B . , N . C . , D . S . , N . M . , A . - C . D . , J . B . , A . P . , M . R . , G . S . N . , T . L . , C . L . , and G . M performed the experiments ; P . A . N . , H . H . - C . , F . C . , O . G . , G . L . , M . H . G . , L . T . , and R . W . F . contributed critical reagents ; L . H . B . , N . C . , D . S . , N . M . , J . B . , H . G . , L . T . , M . H . G . , and E . B . analyzed the data ; and E . B . , L . H . B . , D . S . , G . L . , R . W . F . , P . A . N . , and J . W . S . wrote the manuscript . Con ﬂ ict - of - interest disclosure : L . H . B . , L . T . , M . H . G . , and E . B . have ﬁ led a provisional patent application for the detection of extracellular mitochondria in blood labile products used for transfusion . Correspondence : Eric Boilard , Centre de Recherche en Rhuma - tologie et Immunologie , Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Qu´ebec , Facult´e de M´edecine de l ’ Universit´e Laval , 2705 Laurier Blvd , Rm T1 - 49 , Quebec , QC , Canada G1V 4G2 ; e - mail : eric . boilard @ crchuq . ulaval . ca . References 1 . Thon JN , Italiano JE . Platelets : production , morphology and ultrastructure . Handb Exp Pharmacol . 2012 ( 210 ) : 3 - 22 . 2 . Denis MM , Tolley ND , Bunting M , et al . Escaping the nuclear confines : signal - dependentpre - mRNA splicing in anucleate platelets . Cell . 2005 ; 122 ( 3 ) : 379 - 391 . 3 . Landry P , Plante I , Ouellet DL , Perron MP , Rousseau G , Provost P . Existence of a microRNA pathway in anucleate platelets . Nat Struct Mol Biol . 2009 ; 16 ( 9 ) : 961 - 966 . 4 . Richardson JL , Shivdasani RA , Boers C , Hartwig JH , Italiano JE Jr . Mechanisms of organelle transport and capture along proplatelets during platelet production . Blood . 2005 ; 106 ( 13 ) : 4066 - 4075 . 5 . Machlus KR , Italiano JE Jr . The incredible journey : From megakaryocyte development to platelet formation . J Cell Biol . 2013 ; 201 ( 6 ) : 785 - 796 . 6 . Dav ` ı G , Patrono C . Platelet activation and atherothrombosis . N Engl J Med . 2007 ; 357 ( 24 ) : 2482 - 2494 . 7 . Boilard E , Blanco P , Nigrovic PA . Platelets : active players in the pathogenesis of arthritis and SLE . Nat Rev Rheumatol . 2012 ; 8 ( 9 ) : 534 - 542 . 8 . Semple JW , Italiano JE Jr , Freedman J . Platelets and the immune continuum . Nat Rev Immunol . 2011 ; 11 ( 4 ) : 264 - 274 . 9 . Koseoglu S , Flaumenhaft R . Advances in platelet granule biology . Curr Opin Hematol . 2013 ; 20 ( 5 ) : 464 - 471 . 10 . Andersson SG , Zomorodipour A , Andersson JO , et al . The genome sequence of Rickettsia prowazekii and the origin of mitochondria . Nature . 1998 ; 396 ( 6707 ) : 133 - 140 . 11 . Zhang B , Asadi S , Weng Z , Sismanopoulos N , Theoharides TC . Stimulated human mast cells secrete mitochondrial components that have autocrine and paracrine inflammatory actions . PLoS ONE . 2012 ; 7 ( 12 ) : e49767 . 12 . McDonald B , Pittman K , Menezes GB , et al . Intravascular danger signals guide neutrophils to sites of sterile inflammation . Science . 2010 ; 330 ( 6002 ) : 362 - 366 . 13 . Zhang Q , Raoof M , Chen Y , et al . Circulating mitochondrial DAMPs cause inflammatory responses to injury . Nature . 2010 ; 464 ( 7285 ) : 104 - 107 . 14 . Marques PE , Amaral SS , Pires DA , et al . Chemokines and mitochondrial products activate neutrophils to amplify organ injury during mouse acute liver failure . Hepatology . 2012 ; 56 ( 5 ) : 1971 - 1982 . 15 . Oka T , Hikoso S , Yamaguchi O , et al . Mitochondrial DNA that escapes from autophagy causes inflammation and heart failure . Nature . 2012 ; 485 ( 7397 ) : 251 - 255 . 16 . Jobe SM , Wilson KM , Leo L , et al . Critical role for the mitochondrial permeability transition pore and cyclophilin D in platelet activation and thrombosis . Blood . 2008 ; 111 ( 3 ) : 1257 - 1265 . 17 . Liu F , Gamez G , Myers DR , Clemmons W , Lam WA , Jobe SM . Mitochondrially mediated integrin a IIb b 3 protein inactivation limits thrombus growth . J Biol Chem . 2013 ; 288 ( 42 ) : 30672 - 30681 . 18 . Nakahira K , Kyung SY , Rogers AJ , et al . Circulating mitochondrial DNA in patients in the ICU as a marker of mortality : derivation and validation . PLoS Med . 2013 ; 10 ( 12 ) : e1001577 , discussion e1001577 . 19 . Kohler C , Radpour R , Barekati Z , et al . Levels of plasma circulating cell free nuclear and mitochondrial DNA as potential biomarkers for breast tumors . Mol Cancer . 2009 ; 8 : 105 . 20 . Grass DS , Felkner RH , Chiang MY , et al . Expression of human group II PLA2 in transgenic mice results in epidermal hyperplasia in the absence of inflammatory infiltrate . J Clin Invest . 1996 ; 97 ( 10 ) : 2233 - 2241 . 21 . Cloutier N , Tan S , Boudreau LH , et al . The exposure of autoantigens by microparticles underlies the formation of potent inflammatory components : the microparticle - associated immune complexes . EMBO Mol Med . 2013 ; 5 ( 2 ) : 235 - 249 . 22 . Thibault L , Beaus´ejour A , de Grandmont MJ , Lemieux R , Leblanc JF . Characterization of blood components prepared from whole - blood donations after a 24 - hour hold with the platelet - rich plasma method . Transfusion . 2006 ; 46 ( 8 ) : 1292 - 1299 . 23 . Willoughby DA , Sedgwick AD , Giroud JP , Al - Duaij AY , de Brito F . The use of the air pouch to study experimental synovitis and cartilage breakdown . Biomed Pharmacother . 1986 ; 40 ( 2 ) : 45 - 49 . 24 . Flaumenhaft R . Molecular basis of platelet granule secretion . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol . 2003 ; 23 ( 7 ) : 1152 - 1160 . 25 . Gy¨orgy B , Szab´o TG , P´aszt´oi M , et al . Membrane vesicles , current state - of - the - art : emerging role of extracellular vesicles . Cell Mol Life Sci . 2011 ; 68 ( 16 ) : 2667 - 2688 . 26 . Saraste M . Oxidative phosphorylation at the fin de si ` ecle . Science . 1999 ; 283 ( 5407 ) : 1488 - 1493 . 27 . Kuznetsov AV , Veksler V , Gellerich FN , Saks V , Margreiter R , Kunz WS . Analysis of mitochondrial function in situ in permeabilized muscle fibers , tissues and cells . Nat Protoc . 2008 ; 3 ( 6 ) : 965 - 976 . 28 . Clerc P , Polster BM . Investigation of mitochondrial dysfunction by sequential microplate - based respiration measurements from intact and permeabilized neurons . PLoS ONE . 2012 ; 7 ( 4 ) : e34465 . 29 . Cloutier N , Tan S , Boudreau LH , et al . The exposure of autoantigens by microparticles underlies the formation of potent inflammatory components : the microparticle - associated immune complexes . EMBO Mol Med . 2013 ; 5 ( 2 ) : 235 - 249 . 30 . Dean WL , Lee MJ , Cummins TD , Schultz DJ , Powell DW . Proteomic and functional characterisation of platelet microparticle size classes . Thromb Haemost . 2009 ; 102 ( 4 ) : 711 - 718 . 31 . Boilard E , Nigrovic PA , Larabee K , et al . Platelets amplify inflammation in arthritis via collagen - dependent microparticle production . Science . 2010 ; 327 ( 5965 ) : 580 - 583 . 32 . Gy¨orgy B , Szab´o TG , Turi´ak L , et al . Improved flow cytometric assessment reveals distinct microvesicle ( cell - derived microparticle ) signatures in joint diseases . PLoS ONE . 2012 ; 7 ( 11 ) : e49726 . 33 . Collins LV , Hajizadeh S , Holme E , Jonsson IM , Tarkowski A . Endogenously oxidized mitochondrial DNA induces in vivo and in vitro inflammatory responses . J Leukoc Biol . 2004 ; 75 ( 6 ) : 995 - 1000 . 34 . George JN . Platelets . Lancet . 2000 ; 355 ( 9214 ) : 1531 - 1539 . 35 . Silliman CC , Fung YL , Ball JB , Khan SY . Transfusion - related acute lung injury ( TRALI ) : current concepts and misconceptions . Blood Rev . 2009 ; 23 ( 6 ) : 245 - 255 . 36 . Shaz BH , Stowell SR , Hillyer CD . Transfusion - related acute lung injury : from bedside to bench and back . Blood . 2011 ; 117 ( 5 ) : 1463 - 1471 . 37 . Gray MW , Burger G , Lang BF . Mitochondrial evolution . Science . 1999 ; 283 ( 5407 ) : 1476 - 1481 . 38 . Kramer RM , Hession C , Johansen B , et al . Structure and properties of a human non - pancreatic phospholipase A2 . J Biol Chem . 1989 ; 264 ( 10 ) : 5768 - 5775 . 39 . Lambeau G , Gelb MH . Biochemistry and physiology of mammalian secreted phospholipases A2 . Annu Rev Biochem . 2008 ; 77 : 495 - 520 . 40 . Bartoli F , Lin HK , Ghomashchi F , Gelb MH , Jain MK , Apitz - Castro R . Tight binding inhibitors of 85 - kDa phospholipase A2 but not 14 - kDa phospholipase A2 inhibit release of free arachidonate in thrombin - stimulated human platelets . J Biol Chem . 1994 ; 269 ( 22 ) : 15625 - 15630 . 2182 BOUDREAU et al BLOOD , 2 OCTOBER 2014 x VOLUME 124 , NUMBER 14 For personal use only . on April 19 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From 41 . Funk CD . Prostaglandins and leukotrienes : advances in eicosanoid biology . Science . 2001 ; 294 ( 5548 ) : 1871 - 1875 . 42 . Silliman CC , Voelkel NF , Allard JD , et al . Plasma and lipids from stored packed red blood cells cause acute lung injury in an animal model . J Clin Invest . 1998 ; 101 ( 7 ) : 1458 - 1467 . 43 . Kolaczkowska E , Kubes P . Neutrophil recruitment and function in health and inflammation . Nat Rev Immunol . 2013 ; 13 ( 3 ) : 159 - 175 . 44 . Phillipson M , Kubes P . The neutrophil in vascular inflammation . Nat Med . 2011 ; 17 ( 11 ) : 1381 - 1390 . 45 . Yipp BG , Kubes P . NETosis : how vital is it ? Blood . 2013 ; 122 ( 16 ) : 2784 - 2794 . 46 . Caudrillier A , Kessenbrock K , Gilliss BM , et al . Platelets induce neutrophil extracellular traps in transfusion - related acute lung injury . J Clin Invest . 2012 ; 122 ( 7 ) : 2661 - 2671 . 47 . Jenne CN , Kubes P . Immune surveillance by the liver . Nat Immunol . 2013 ; 14 ( 10 ) : 996 - 1006 . 48 . Kitadokoro K , Hagishita S , Sato T , Ohtani M , Miki K . Crystal structure of human secretory phospholipase A2 - IIA complex with the potent indolizine inhibitor 120 - 1032 . J Biochem . 1998 ; 123 ( 4 ) : 619 - 623 . 49 . Boilard E , Lai Y , Larabee K , et al . A novel anti - inflammatory role for secretory phospholipase A2 in immune complex - mediated arthritis . EMBO Mol Med . 2010 ; 2 ( 5 ) : 172 - 187 . 50 . Ivandic B , Castellani LW , Wang XP , et al . Role of group II secretory phospholipase A2 in atherosclerosis : 1 . Increased atherogenesis and altered lipoproteins in transgenic mice expressing group IIa phospholipase A2 . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol . 1999 ; 19 ( 5 ) : 1284 - 1290 . 51 . Atsumi G , Murakami M , Tajima M , Shimbara S , Hara N , Kudo I . The perturbed membrane of cells undergoing apoptosis is susceptible to type II secretory phospholipase A2 to liberate arachidonic acid . Biochim Biophys Acta . 1997 ; 1349 ( 1 ) : 43 - 54 . 52 . Fourcade O , Simon MF , Viod´e C , et al . Secretory phospholipase A2 generates the novel lipid mediator lysophosphatidic acid in membrane microvesicles shed from activated cells . Cell . 1995 ; 80 ( 6 ) : 919 - 927 . 53 . Silliman CC , Dickey WO , Paterson AJ , et al . Analysis of the priming activity of lipids generated during routine storage of platelet concentrates . Transfusion . 1996 ; 36 ( 2 ) : 133 - 139 . 54 . Wyman TH , Bjornsen AJ , Elzi DJ , et al . A two - insult in vitro model of PMN - mediated pulmonary endothelial damage : requirements for adherence and chemokine release . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol . 2002 ; 283 ( 6 ) : C1592 - C1603 . 55 . Krysko DV , Garg AD , Kaczmarek A , Krysko O , Agostinis P , Vandenabeele P . Immunogenic cell death and DAMPs in cancer therapy . Nat Rev Cancer . 2012 ; 12 ( 12 ) : 860 - 875 . 56 . Zhou R , Yazdi AS , Menu P , Tschopp J . A role for mitochondria in NLRP3 inflammasome activation . Nature . 2011 ; 469 ( 7329 ) : 221 - 225 . 57 . Schiffmann E , Corcoran BA , Wahl SM . N - formylmethionyl peptides as chemoattractants for leucocytes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 1975 ; 72 ( 3 ) : 1059 - 1062 . 58 . Garcia D , Akl EA , Carr R , Kearon C . Antiphospholipid antibodies and the risk of recurrence after a first episode of venous thromboembolism : a systematic review . Blood . 2013 ; 122 ( 5 ) : 817 - 824 . 59 . Arraud N , Linares R , Tan S , et al . Extracellular vesicles from blood plasma : determination of their morphology , size , phenotype and concentration . J Thromb Haemost . 2014 ; 12 ( 5 ) : 614 - 627 . 60 . Tersteeg C , Heijnen HF , Eckly A , et al . FLow - induced PRotrusions ( FLIPRs ) : a platelet - derived platform for the retrieval of microparticles by monocytes and neutrophils . Circ Res . 2014 ; 114 ( 5 ) : 780 - 791 . 61 . Owens AP III , Mackman N . Microparticles in hemostasis and thrombosis . Circ Res . 2011 ; 108 ( 10 ) : 1284 - 1297 . BLOOD , 2 OCTOBER 2014 x VOLUME 124 , NUMBER 14 PLATELETS RELEASE EXTRACELLULAR MITOCHONDRIA 2183 For personal use only . on April 19 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From online July 31 , 2014 originally published doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2014 - 05 - 573543 2014 124 : 2173 - 2183 Lacroix , Louis Thibault , John W . Semple , Michael H . Gelb and Eric Boilard Hamzeh - Cognasse , Fabrice Cognasse , Olivier Garraud , Peter A . Nigrovic , Helga Guderley , Steve Laflamme , Geneviève Marcoux , Gérard Lambeau , Richard W . Farndale , Marc Pouliot , Hind Bollinger , Alexandre Paré , Matthieu Rousseau , Gajendra S . Naika , Tania Lévesque , Cynthia Luc H . Boudreau , Anne - Claire Duchez , Nathalie Cloutier , Denis Soulet , Nicolas Martin , James to promote inflammation 2 group IIA - secreted phospholipase A Platelets release mitochondria serving as substrate for bactericidal http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / content / 124 / 14 / 2173 . full . html Updated information and services can be found at : ( 492 articles ) Plenary Papers ( 722 articles ) Platelets and Thrombopoiesis ( 5468 articles ) Immunobiology Articles on similar topics can be found in the following Blood collections http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / site / misc / rights . xhtml # repub _ requests Information about reproducing this article in parts or in its entirety may be found online at : http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / site / misc / rights . xhtml # reprints Information about ordering reprints may be found online at : http : / / www . bloodjournal . org / site / subscriptions / index . xhtml Information about subscriptions and ASH membership may be found online at : Copyright 2011 by The American Society of Hematology ; all rights reserved . of Hematology , 2021 L St , NW , Suite 900 , Washington DC 20036 . Blood ( print ISSN 0006 - 4971 , online ISSN 1528 - 0020 ) , is published weekly by the American Society For personal use only . on April 19 , 2017 . by guest www . bloodjournal . org From