The Informationist : A New Health Profession ? P hysicians have always had a professional obliga - tion to base their decisions on the best available information , an assumption now explicitly embodied in the concept of evidence - based medicine ( 1 ) . For decades , when physicians wanted information from the published literature , they relied heavily on med - ical librarians or ofﬁce assistants to do the searches . The advent of computer - based indexes such as MEDLINE promised to change all that by putting the basic information retrieval tools directly into physicians’ hands . The disappointing reality , how - ever , is that physicians still don’t regularly search the medical literature themselves , nor do they ask for professional help in searching nearly as often as they need to . Many questions arising in clinical en - counters that can , and should , be answered on the basis of evidence from the published literature are therefore never addressed ( 2 , 3 ) . Explanations for this sad state of affairs aren’t hard to ﬁnd . First , the published evidence that cli - nicians need is scattered among thousands of jour - nals , textbooks , monographs , reports , guidelines , and the like , many of which are not electronically indexed . Second , electronic indexing of articles is far from ideal ( 4 , 5 ) , and the techniques of elec - tronic searching are still complex and arcane . As a result , electronic searches all too often yield no “hits” at all or avalanches of irrelevant citations ( 6 ) . Third , most physicians now in practice did not acquire the skills of literature retrieval during their training . And although 80 % of medical students report that their literature searching skills are adequate by the time they graduate ( 7 ) , those skills rapidly decay unless clinicians use them regularly , which few man - age to do . Finally , even using current electronic systems , ﬁnding and selecting literature - based data to solve a single patient - related problem can easily require an hour or more ( 8 ) . Physicians don’t , and never will , have that kind of time to look for the answers to most of their clinical questions themselves . Complicating the demands of literature retrieval is the need to judge the quality of the retrieved literature and extract the essential information from it , using techniques of critical appraisal . These tech - niques are not easy to teach and are time - consum - ing to apply . Moreover , once useful information has been dug out of the literature , the task of linking it to the case at hand remains . It is no wonder , then , that physicians prefer to get answers to many clin - ical questions from expert colleagues . That’s ﬁne as far as it goes , particularly when the experts are well grounded in the published evidence . But expert medical opinion is far from infallible , and it isn’t always easily available . In sum , the medical profession falls far short in its efforts to make the critical link between the huge body of information hidden away in the medical literature and the information needed at the point of care . This failure means not only that many opportunities for improved patient care and contin - ued learning are missed but also that much of the effort , creativity , and money that go into biomedical research is simply wasted . True , a few investigators have tried to develop ways to bridge the literature – practice gap ( 9 , 10 ) , but those innovations have remained largely outside the mainstream of clinical practice . Interest in link - ing literature directly to practice was also what mo - tivated a medical librarian , Gertrude Lamb , some 30 years ago when she decided to move medical reference librarians out of the stacks and onto clin - ical services , thereby creating the program known as clinical librarianship ( 11 ) . The librarians in these early programs were quick to discover that their presence on bedside rounds and in conferences made it easy for clinicians to bring up questions that would otherwise have remained unasked . Often the librarians helped clinicians formulate their questions more clearly . Once the need for information was identiﬁed , the librarians would retrieve the best in - formation they could ﬁnd , usually within a day , sometimes within hours . And over time , they even began to infer questions from the discussion and bring literature forward on their own . Several studies subsequently showed that clinical librarianship programs are , in fact , both efﬁcient and effective ( 12 – 17 ) . They add to clinicians’ knowl - edge most of the time , affect clinical decisions a substantial proportion of the time , and even im - prove certain outcomes , such as length of stay— which is more than can be said for many widely used clinical interventions . More recently , clinical librarians in at least some programs have begun to “project themselves not as information ‘servers’ who trail the team in an auxiliary capacity , but as an integral part of the group with a specialized exper - tise that can contribute vitally to clinical situations” ( 16 ) . These new - style librarians read the full text of 996 20 June 2000 • Annals of Internal Medicine • Volume 132 • Number 12 the most pertinent articles , identify and extract the relevant information , write brief synopses of their ﬁndings , and present them on rounds and at con - ferences . But with a few notable exceptions , mostly in large academic centers , clinical librarianship has failed to take root and ﬂourish . Why should a program with such obvious prom - ise remain so marginal ? Part of the problem , as usual , is lack of money . Although the current U . S . medical care nonsystem happily continues to pay billions of dollars for the information generated by millions of unnecessary or inappropriate clinical tests ( 18 ) , it unfortunately refuses to pay a dime speciﬁcally to move the rich , sophisticated knowl - edge from the medical literature to the bedside , where it not only might improve care but might actually save money . The resulting chronic , and in - creasing , budgetary constraint on medical libraries means that vital on - site library staff can’t be re - placed if they are shifted onto clinical services . Even worse , these perverse priorities have resulted in the complete elimination of many hospitals’ medical libraries in an effort to “cut costs . ” Another part of the problem may be physicians’ ambivalence about needing help in ﬁnding clinical information . After all , possession of highly special - ized , complex knowledge lies at the heart of physi - cians’ identity , a principal source of their power and prestige . But even as physicians seriously underuse that knowledge , they seem to feel the need to con - trol it completely , a posture reminiscent of their reluctance to share blood pressure measurement with nurses when that technique was ﬁrst introduced ( 19 ) . We believe it’s time to face up to the fact that physicians can’t , and shouldn’t , try to do all or even most medical information retrieval themselves . In the current environment , that makes no more sense than it would for physicians to perform all or most of their own clinical chemistries , electrocardiogra - phy , computed tomography , and the like . Better they should focus their scarce discretionary profes - sional time on reading , discussing , and reﬂecting in ways that truly deepen their conceptual and practi - cal understanding of medicine than on the mechan - ics of ﬁnding , extracting , and synthesizing informa - tion from the published literature . But if practicing clinicians don’t retrieve informa - tion from the literature themselves , who will ? Pro - fessional groups and commercial publishers are al - ready producing synoptic compendia , such as ACP Journal Club , the Cochrane Library , and Clinical Evidence ( 20 ) , secondary publications of clinical ev - idence extracted from the primary published litera - ture that are available in both print and electronic form . And hundreds of medical Web sites offer a dizzying array of clinical content to both physicians and patients . Some of these new sources may , in fact , be helpful in clinical problem solving , but few are really designed to provide information at the point of care , and their very numbers , not to men - tion their uneven quality and the difﬁculty of keep - ing them current , may compound the problem of information retrieval more than they help to solve it . The other obvious answer , therefore , is to estab - lish a national program , modeled on the experience of clinical librarianship , to train , credential , and pay for the services of information specialists . These new professionals might be called informationists ( not a graceful term , but one that parallels such terms as gastroenterologists or hospitalists ) , or clin - ical knowledge workers ( in parallel with social work - ers ) . We see no reason why they shouldn’t ultimately become a part of almost every clinical staff and service , as ubiquitous as head nurses or ofﬁce man - agers . Their services should be available to all mem - bers of the health care team—physicians , nurses , tech - nicians , administrators—as well as to patients and their families . The operating details of such a pro - gram will need to be worked out along the way , but in our view , four general principles must guide its development . First , informationists must have a clear and solid understanding of both information science and the essentials of clinical work . Two paths to this profes - sional role will therefore be necessary , one for those who begin their training as information specialists , the other for those who start with a clinical back - ground . No matter which path they take , all who become informationists will need to master a standard curriculum . Developed with input from clinicians , medical librarians , medical informaticians , educa - tors , and clinical epidemiologists , this multidisci - plinary learning experience should include a core of basic medical concepts , principles of clinical epide - miology , biostatistics , critical appraisal , and informa - tion management . Second , in addition to acquiring the requisite conceptual knowledge , informationists must learn the practical , working skills of retrieving , synthesizing , and presenting medical information and the skills of functioning in a clinical care team . This can be accomplished only through a supervised practicum , as is now required in some clinical li - brarian programs ( 15 , 16 ) . Third , training programs for informationists should be accredited , and grad - uates of those programs certiﬁed , through national agencies , as is now the case for working profession - als in almost all clinical disciplines . Finally , even well - trained and highly skilled informationists can - not contribute meaningfully to the care of patients unless clinicians , care teams , and the entire health care system recognize their importance , understand their role , and actively include them in the process of care . To that end , informationists should , in most settings , answer directly to clinical directors and 20 June 2000 • Annals of Internal Medicine • Volume 132 • Number 12 997 chiefs of staff , and their services should be paid for directly , as is done for other health care providers . Less obvious but no less important is the oppor - tunity an informationist program will create for ob - taining information about information : that is , com - plete , systematic feedback on what kinds of clinical questions are asked most often , and which questions lack satisfactory answers . Such “meta - information” could contribute importantly to the deﬁnition of clinical research agendas , both locally and nation - ally . Informationists can also play a crucial role in improving existing information retrieval systems and creating new ones by ﬁnding out more about when and how clinicians , patients , and families need in - formation , what information they need most , and in what forms it is most useful to them . Despite its obvious attractions , creation of an informationist program will not be easy . For one thing , potential turf issues in relation to library sci - ence , medical informatics , and clinical medicine will need to be resolved . In our view , an informationist program is more likely to happen if it begins on a limited basis , through national demonstration projects or pilots . These pilot programs must in - clude a carefully designed evaluation component that can show us whether participation of informa - tionists in clinical care , in both hospital and ofﬁce practice , actually improves the quality of care , as well as making it more efﬁcient and cost - effective . If meaningful beneﬁt can’t be clearly documented , the program should be given a decent burial . If it can , however , as we obviously believe it will , that docu - mentation will be crucial in establishing appropriate , full payment for informationists’ services . We believe it is unacceptable in this “information age” for medical information retrieval to remain in its current neglected and disorderly state , a poor relation in the family of biomedical research and clinical practice . The concept of the informationist is an idea whose time has come . We challenge everyone involved in health care to transform that concept into reality . Frank Davidoff , MD Editor Valerie Florance , PhD Association of American Medical Colleges Washington , DC 20037 Requests for Single Reprints : Frank Davidoff , MD , American Col - lege of Physicians – American Society of Internal Medicine , 190 N . Independence Mall West , Philadelphia , PA 19106 . Requests To Purchase Bulk Reprints ( minimum , 100 copies ) : Bar - bara Hudson , Reprints Coordinator ; phone , 215 - 351 - 2657 ; e - mail , bhudson @ mail . acponline . org . Current Author Addresses : Dr . Davidoff : American College of Physicians – American Society for Internal Medicine , 190 N . Inde - pendence Mall West , Philadelphia , PA 19106 . Dr . Florance : Association of American Medical Colleges , 2450 N Street NW , Room 419 , Washington , DC 20037 . Ann Intern Med . 2000 ; 132 : 996 - 998 . References 1 . Davidoff F . In the teeth of the evidence : the curious case of evidence - based medicine . Mt Sinai J Med . 1999 ; 66 : 75 - 83 . 2 . Smith R . What clinical information do physicians need ? BMJ . 1996 ; 313 : 1062 - 8 . 3 . Ely JW , Osheroff JA , Ebell MH , Bergus GR , Levy BT , Chambliss ML , Evans ER . Analysis of questions asked by family physicians regarding patient care . BMJ . 1999 ; 319 : 358 - 61 . 4 . Funk ME , Reid CA . Indexing consistency in MEDLINE . Bull Med Libr Assoc . 1983 ; 71 : 176 - 83 . 5 . Purcell GP , Rennels GD , Shortliffe EH . Development and evaluation of a context - based document representation for searching the medical literature . International Journal on Digital Libraries . 1997 ; 1 : 288 - 96 . 6 . McKibbon KA , Haynes RB , Dilks CJ , Ramsden MF , Ryan NC , Baker L , Flemming T , et al . How good are clinical MEDLINE searches ? A comparative study of clinical end - user and librarian searches . Comput Biomed Research 1990 ; 23 : 583 - 93 . 7 . Medical School Graduation Questionnaire . All Schools Report . Question 20 . Association of American Medical Colleges , 1999 . http : / / www . aamc . org / meded / gq . Accessed 6 March 2000 . 8 . Florance V . Clinical extracts of biomedical literature for patient - centered problem solving . Bull Med Libr Assoc . 1996 ; 84 : 375 - 85 . 9 . Sackett DL , Straus SE . Finding and applying evidence during clinical rounds : the “evidence cart . ” JAMA . 1998 ; 280 : 1336 - 8 . 10 . Cimino JJ , Elhanan G , Zeng Q . Supporting infobuttons with terminological knowledge . Proc AMIA Annu Fall Symp . 1997 : 528 - 32 . 11 . Lamb G . A decade of clinical librarianship . Clinical Librarian Quarterly . 1982 ; 1 : 2 - 4 . 12 . Scura G , Davidoff F . Case - related use of the medical literature . Clinical librarian services for improving patient care . JAMA . 1981 ; 245 : 50 - 2 . 13 . Marshall JG . The impact of the hospital library on clinical decision making : the Rochester study . Bull Med Libr Assoc . 1992 ; 80 : 169 - 78 . 14 . Veenstra RJ . Clinical medical librarian impact on patient care : a one - year analysis . Bull Med Libr Assoc . 1992 ; 80 : 19 - 22 . 15 . Giuse NB , Kafantaris SR , Miller MD , Wilder KS , Martin SL , Sathe NA , et al . Clinical medical librarianship : the Vanderbilt experience . Bull Med Libr Assoc . 1998 ; 86 : 412 - 6 . 16 . Giuse NB . Advancing the practice of clinical medical librarianship . Bull Med Libr Assoc . 1997 ; 85 : 437 - 8 . 17 . Dodson S . A clinical medical librarian program into the next millennium . http : / / healthlinks . washington . edu / hsl / liaisons / dodson . Accessed 2 March 2000 . 18 . van Walraven C , Naylor CD . Do we know what inappropriate laboratory utilization is ? A systematic review of laboratory clinical audits . JAMA . 1998 ; 280 : 550 - 8 . 19 . Crenner CW . Introduction of the blood pressure cuff into U . S . medical prac - tice : technology and skilled practice . Ann Intern Med . 1998 ; 128 : 488 - 93 . 20 . Clinical Evidence : A Compendium of the Best Available Evidence for Effective Health Care . London : BMJ ; Issue 2 , December 1999 . © 2000 American College of Physicians – American Society of Internal Medicine 998 20 June 2000 • Annals of Internal Medicine • Volume 132 • Number 12