Comparing Freshman and doctoral engineering students in design : mapping with a descriptive framework P . Carmona Marques a , b , c a Faculty of Engineering , Universidade Lusófona , Lisbon , Portugal ; b Mechanical Engineering , Polytechnic Institute of Lisbon , ISEL , Lisbon , Portugal ; c Instituto Superior Técnico , University of Lisbon , Lisbon , Portugal ABSTRACT This paper reports the results of a study of engineering students ’ approaches to an open - ended design problem . To carry out this , sketches and interviews were collected from 9 freshmen ( first year ) and 10 doctoral engineering students , when they designed solutions for orange squeezers . Sketches and interviews were analysed and mapped with a descriptive ‘ ideation framework ’ ( IF ) of the design process , to document and compare their design creativity ( Carmona Marques , P . , A . Silva , E . Henriques , and C . Magee . 2014 . “ A Descriptive Framework of the Design Process from a Dual Cognitive Engineering Perspective . ” International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation 2 ( 3 ) : 142 – 164 ) . The results show that the designers worked in a manner largely consistent with the IF for generalisation and specialisation loops . Also , doctoral students produced more alternative solutions during the ideation process . In addition , compared to freshman , doctoral used the generalisation loop of the IF , working at higher levels of abstraction . The iterative nature of design is highlighted during this study – a potential contribution to decrease the gap between both groups in engineering education . ARTICLE HISTORY Received 4 December 2014 Accepted 12 November 2016 KEYWORDS Creativity ; design cognition ; design education ; freshman and doctoral students ; engineering design 1 . Introduction Design creativity is a motivating field of study and research ( Badke - Schaub 2013 ) . Indeed , creativity is not sufficiently clarified , particularly in the context of design ( Bjorklund 2013 ) ; even so it is an inter - esting trait in thinking process of humans . Besides , design creativity and ideation are open subjects of study and responsible for the best practices as well as failures in the market ( Kelley and Littman 2004 ) . This type of research considers creativity in design as an option of attempting to identify its standard characteristics . Also , understanding deeply design and creativity is a critical part of engineering design thinking and education ( Dorst 2011 ) , conferring a stimulus for this kind of study . In engineering education , one of the goals is to qualify students to become future expert engineers ( Moreno et al . 2015 ) . A good design knowledge is considered to be crucial for graduates , since design creativity is used in major tasks of engineering design practice ( Crilly 2015 ) . It plays a central role during engineering edu - cation , being considered a distinguishing activity , and playing a focus for engineering education in recent times ( Dym et al . 2005 ; Lammi and Becker 2013 ) . One type of study , normally used in the understanding of design creativity , is the characterisation of two categories of groups : experts and novices . This allows further contributions to the enrichment of the curricula of engineering students throw reducing the gap between engineering novices and © 2016 SEFI CONTACT P . Carmona Marques p4803 @ ulusofona . pt EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION , 2017 VOL . 42 , NO . 6 , 1097 – 1112 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03043797 . 2016 . 1263277 engineering experts during engineering design problems ( Ball , Evans , and Dennis 1994 ; McCracken 1997 ; Kavakli and Gero 2002 ; Silva , Henriques , and Carvalho 2009 ; Silva and Faria 2012 ; Silva , Fontul , and Henriques 2014 ) . For the purpose of this paper , one can label freshman students as ‘ novices ’ when compared to ‘ expert ’ doctoral ones . Previous studies on the subject ( e . g . Christiaans 1992 ; Cross 2004 ; Bilalic , McLeod , and Gobet 2008 ; Bjorklund 2013 ; Crilly 2015 ) showed some important disparities between the behaviour of novice and expert designers . Novice designers use ‘ trial and error ’ tech - niques to generate a design incremental innovation instead of a breakthrough one , typically devel - oped by experts and it has also been suggested that expert designers are better at problem outlining than novice designers ( see for example Kim and Ryu 2014 ) . As well , novices tend to suggest solutions almost immediately , after reading the problem statement . Conversely , experienced designers have a more preliminary observational evaluation of the problem , before the implementation of the final sol - ution . As mentioned by Cross ( 2004 ) , experts are different partly because their experience allows them to organise knowledge more effectively and in any subject . Cross ( 2004 ) has also observed that experts categorise problems based on their ‘ deep structures ’ ( the fundamental principles involved ) while novices base problems on their ‘ surface ’ features ( what objects looked like ) . The author presented what he called a ‘ depth - first ’ approach to the problem - solving behaviour of novices , whereas experts commonly take a ‘ top - down ’ and a ‘ breadth - first ’ approach . Also , according to Ball , Ormerod , and Morley ( 2004 ) , experts tend to be better than novices at problem - solving in their own field of knowledge , but are often no better than novices , when problems occur outside of that field . Atman et al . ( 2005 ) performed a comprehensive study to analyse the behaviour of fresh - men and senior students using verbal protocol analysis . Results shown that seniors produced higher quality solutions , spent more time solving the problem , considered more alternative solutions , and made more transitions between design steps than the freshmen . In this paper , one suggests the use of the ‘ Ideation Framework ’ ( IF ) proposed by the Carmona Marques et al . ( 2014 ) to study both groups during a design situation , since the past study was promising in testing the IF and understanding individuals in design . The motivation of this paper is to achieve a better comprehension of the design process , regarding two different communities of practice and nor - mally studied among researchers in the field ( Ball , Evans , and Dennis 1994 ) . First studies are normally academia - based which allows further contributions regarding professional designers ( Silva , Fontul , and Henriques 2014 ) . It also allows to reduce the gap among these communities of practices , in particu - larwhichconcernsnewteachingstrategies , helpingeducatorstoimprovethecurriculumofengineering design ( Ting 2014 ) . In this particular case , the iterative nature of design is highlighted , despite models of design development do not show this importantcharacteristic ( PahlandBeitz2007 ) . Since the construc - tion of the IF is intended to explain and ‘ modulate ’ , from a descriptive point of view , the ideation phase – fuzzy front - end – of design , it can be used for testing and characterising groups of designers . One also expects to contribute to answering the following research question : – Are there differences – if any – between the two sets , freshmen and doctoral , most explicitly the use of gener - alization and specialization loops in design ? This paper starts with a brief description of the IF . Then , a case study using freshmen and doctoral designers is presented , reporting the mapping of the IF to both groups in a design session . Finally , the discussion and conclusion sections show the differences found between the two groups and the characteristics to reduce the gap between both in engineering education curricula . 2 . Related work : the ideation framework ( If ) ( Carmona Marques et al . 2014 ) The IF is visually represented in Figure 1 and is now summarily depicted . The IF is not linear , in the sense that several iteration loops occur in the different domains , through which a concept or set of concepts flow . The framework includes three important domains : inspiration , decomposition ( analy - sis ) , and integration ( synthesis ) . A dashed line between decomposition and integration means that 1098 P . CARMONA MARQUES there is no clear separation between the two . Within each domain , there are heuristics that act upon the flow of ideas to come up with a creative concept . These domains and heuristics will be explained in the following sub - sections . 2 . 1 . Inspiration Inspiration is needed for designing new products and driven by scientific discoveries , technology achievements , shortfalls in existing products and systems , opportunities from business and market sur - roundings , human needs , and others . The inspiration is pervasive , in the sense that there is no way in which one can state that it has no influence on the whole process of design . Different individuals or design teams will have different inspirations , depending on their educational and personal background and their lifelong experience . Within the inspiration lies not only the problem - space but also the idea - space . The former includes the problem to be solved and all the information relating to it , while the latter accommodates all the possible ideas brought in to solve a particular problem . One can say that the idea - space needs at least to intersect the problem - space or no valid idea can be found to solve the problem at hand . This intersection , as well as both spaces , has to be in inspiration if the problem is to be solved at all . One calls this intersection of problem - and idea - space the concept - space . Figure 2 ( on the top ) shows a schematic of the spaces superimposed on the IF . Some further related constructs are necessary , to recognise when one thinks about a specific designer , who may not grasp the whole of the problem - and idea - space . In this case , multiple problem - spaces and multiple idea - spaces could appear in the mind of the designer , thus originating multiple concept - spaces ( see Figure 2 – on the bottom ) . The concept - space ( s ) will therefore be formed , at the intersection of the designer ’ s interpretation of the problem - space ( s ) , with the designer ’ s interpretation of the idea - space ( s ) . 2 . 2 . Decomposition Inside decomposition , the designer essentially breaks the problems , ideas and concepts into smaller subsets . The decomposition can be an abstraction of the problem to be solved , ideally setting Figure 1 . A general view of the IF , from the decomposition to the integration ( Carmona Marques et al . 2014 ) . EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION 1099 measurable goals for the design to meet . An essential element of the IF process , is that these abstract specifications or idealised functions will be taken up by integration , in the form of abstract information ( seeFigure3 – onthetop ) . Thearrows inFigure3 meanpossibleiterations withindecomposition andthe problem statement of idealised functions and target specifications , for initial solutions and decompo - sitions . Much of the decomposition may take place in the problem - space , as the designer may not be thinking , at this point , of a solution to the problem . If however , the designer is already at this stage , ima - gining a solution to the problem and is using this to construct the idealised functions or target specifica - tions , and then one has to place this activity between the problem - space and the idea - space . 2 . 3 . Integration Integration uses all the information derived from decomposition , to explore the idea - space in search of a solution to the problem ( see Figure 3 – on the bottom ) . The ideas formed in this process Figure 2 . The problem - , idea - and concept - space ( on the top ) and multiple spaces ( on the bottom ) on the IF ( Carmona Marques et al . 2014 ) . 1100 P . CARMONA MARQUES constitute the concept - space . The concept - space is part of the idea - space that has relevant infor - mation to the problem at hand ; so , it is one of the possible intersections between idea - space and problem - space . The formation of this concept - space can be done with the help of , for example , heur - istics – such as ‘ analogy ’ – to structure the creative process behind innovative ideas ( e . g . Goldenberg and Mazursky 2002 ; Yilmaz , Seiferta , and Gonzaleza 2010 ; Linsey , Markman , and Wood 2012 ) . Evalu - ation ( ‘ EVAL ’ in Figure 3 ) of the ideas has to be done to proceed to further development . The evalu - ation is done by comparing the functions or the performance of the concept , against the functions or the specifications derived , earlier in the decomposition domain . This test can lead to three outcomes : first , the attempted concept performs all the functions and meets all the specifications , therefore becoming a possibly acceptable new concept ; second , the attempted concept shows only partial Figure 3 . The decomposition ( on the top ) and integration ( on the bottom ) of the IF ( Carmona Marques et al . 2014 ) . EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION 1101 fulfilment of both functions and specifications , but the designer believes that the concept can improve with some refinement , therefore going backwards on a specialisation loop , within the same concept - space ; and third , either the concept is completely off target or successive specialisation loops have failed to bring it to fruition and something more radical needs to happen – the designer must form another concept - space and start all over ; this is called the generalisation loop . 2 . 3 . 1 . Generalisation vs . specialisation There is evidence of specialisation and generalisation loops in the human mind , thus pointing out the inherent iterative nature of design ( Ware 2008 ) . This iterative nature of the design activity includes feedback loops : the specialisation loop – typical of concepts that are incrementally derived from existing products within the same concept - space – and the generalisation loop – typical of concepts that may constitute breakthrough innovations in different concept - spaces . Specialisation is a conver - gent loop of optimisation : the idea will be refined and the concept - space optimised within this loop , until no further improvement can be made . If no further improvement is possible , but the target spe - cifications are not met , a persistent and creative designer will bring the generalisation loop into play , introducing divergent thinking , redefining the concept - space and allowing for further development . These specialisation and generalisation loops also find an analogy in the duality of convergent and divergent thinking , present when solving a design problem ( Dym et al . 2005 ) . 3 . Methods and tools During this section , the design assignment is mapped to the IF . The objective is to understand which parts of the framework modelled the empirical observations for both design groups . The section starts with the characterisation of the design groups under study and follows with the methodology used to pursue the proposed objective . The section proceeds with results , data analysis , and a summary of the main findings . 3 . 1 . Characterising the design groups The group of ‘ freshmen ’ consisted of nine students from the 1st year of the Mechanical Engineering degree of the Technical University of Lisbon ( UTL ) . The design knowledge of the group is the one provided by the course ‘ Technical Drawing ’ where they learn the essential aspects of engineering drawing with the use of CAD . The other design group – doctoral – consisted of 10 doctoral students in Engineering Design from UTL and University of Oporto . The doctoral are all M . Sc . in engineering areas , having good knowledge of the front - end of design , acquired in a discipline of their Ph . D . , called ‘ Product Design & Development ’ , and previous working experience in design . Please note that despite the two groups involved in the experiment all the designers performed the tasks individually . 3 . 2 . Methodology Different types of techniques can be used for studying the cognitive behaviour of design engineers ( Coley , Houseman , and Roy 2007 ) , for example , thinking aloud method and respective protocol analy - sis ( concurrent and retrospective ) . Elicitation techniques can also be used , such as the case of struc - tured interviews . Interviews are very useful for ‘ elicit [ ing ] all knowledge related to a certain concept or model [ the IF ] , by continuously interrogating ’ ( Christiaans 1992 , p . 96 ) . This technique / strategy allows the understanding of data on the structure of concepts and the reasoning / explanation of a mental model . The methodology used in the design experiment was organised in the following steps ( Carmona Marques et al . 2014 ) : 1102 P . CARMONA MARQUES . Explaining the exercise to the designers : the design assignment was ‘ to produce orange juice using a device designed by individuals ( not power - assisted ) and fresh oranges ’ . . Performing the design assignment and answers to a questionnaire previously prepared : the designers were asked to spend an hour developing a sketch to solve the previous design problem . Once this process was concluded , all the designers were interviewed and the sketch pro - duced by each participant shown to assess memory retrieval . Interviews were recorded . . Data analysis : evaluation and description of the designer ’ s spaces ( see Table 4 in § 3 . 3 ) and evalu - ation , of whether the issues of iteration , evaluation , and generalisation and specialisation loops , were described by the designers ( see Table 5 in § 3 . 3 . 1 ) . The judgement of the empirical examination was performed by four individuals ( see acknowledge - ments ) , having background in Engineering Design ( Ph . D . ) and expertise in the field ( more than 10 years of practice ) . Data obtained were ‘ qualitative ’ and ‘ not quantitative ’ , thus no inter - reliability scale was performed between judgements . 3 . 2 . 1 . Questionnaire A structured questionnaire of 13 questions ( Table 1 ) was developed for this study . Particular attention was given to the phrasing of questions . All the keywords of the IF were intentionally omitted from the questions and replaced by other terms with similar meanings . 3 . 3 . Results This sub - section starts with answers from the questionnaire ( Tables 2 and 3 ) and design outputs ( Figure 4 ( a ) and ( b ) , and Figure 5 ) for two specific designers ( Freshman # 1 and Doctoral # 1 ) during the experiment . The text in Tables 2 and 3 has sentences adapted from Portuguese to English and some sentences were abridged . Tables was arranged concerning the answer for each question , the decoding of that answer , and the potential relation to a keyword of the IF . Also , some illustrative answers from the questionnaire ( Tables 4 and 5 ) and design outputs ( Figure 6 ) for two other different designers ( Freshman # 7 and Doctoral # 8 ) were summarised . One expects that the data from this four designers ( two from each group ) are sufficient to understand how data were analysed and detailed . In any case , data from other designers are available and can be obtained upon request . Table 6 summarises results of the sketching and the interview phase for the two groups , that is , the ‘ sentences ’ used to verbalise their problem - , idea - , and concept - space . Table 7 shows a mapping of Table 1 . Questionnaire . Questions The answers are related to the following keywords of the IF : 1 . Describe how do you interpret the problem ? Problem - , idea - , and concept - space 2 . What questions did you ask yourself ? 3 . Did you think about the user ’ s needs ? 4 . Do you know how your ideas arose ? 5 . What did you do with those ideas ? 6 . Are there more important aspects in your idea generation than others ? 7 . Did you feel you had run out of ideas during the experience ? Evaluation & iteration 8 . On a scale from 1 to 5 , quantify the intensity of this block state ? 9 . Was it eventually relieved ? If yes , in what way ? 10 . How did the solution to the problem arrive ? Can you describe it ? 11 . Were there situations in which you felt returning back in your approach ? 12 . Did you focus on new ideas , that is , did you think in different ways ? Generalisation & specialisation loop 13 . Did you focus on the optimisation of your original ideas ? EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION 1103 Table 2 . Questions , answers , decoding and relation to the IF ’ s keywords for Freshman # 1 ( adapted from Carmona Marques et al . 2014 ) . Question Answer Decoding Answer is potentially related to the following keywords of the IF 1 He produced two different solutions ( see Figure 5 ( a ) , ( b ) ) . The problem was addressed by parts : i ) taking things apart and observing existent variables , ii ) the necessary work to solve each problem , and iii ) joining together all the parts for an overall solution . Two different solutions and the existence of a decomposition Generalisation loop , two problem - , idea - , concept - spaces . 2 He asked himself : What can go wrong ? Not only regarding juice ’ s production but also in terms of a future production process . He had in mind the objective , the number of variables and the easiest and less expensive solution . The main idea was to find a way to push down and rotating as traditional squeezers do . He thought about a ‘ normal ’ and manual squeezer to start sketching . After , he imagined something more elaborated : an engineered solution . The main ideas to solve the problem , the use of analogy . The development of ideas The idea - space . 3 It would have been important that the squeezer had a handle to make pressure on the orange and a manual crank for spinning motion . The problem of how to cut the oranges was leaved in standby . The development of ideas and the initial concept . The idea - space and concept - space . 4 The next step of the solution was the introduction of a blade and the necessary space for it along with two cones for squeezing each part . A threaded part connected to a gear , rotating in opposite directions . Below , a filter and a glass for pouring the juice . Either he used some ideas or just threw them away . One idea was to make a lateral pressure on the orange but it would have led to spent extra energy . Optimising the process of ideas and sketching concepts . Evaluation of some ideas . The idea - space , concept - space , and evaluation . 5 Instead of a manual crank that might damage due to frequent use , a handle for pushing and twisting . Another thing to be introduced is a hinge , allowing cleaning / removing the filter , orange - by - orange . Optimising the process of ideas and sketching concepts . The idea - , concept - space . 6 It was a process of development and optimisation . The other solution is a completely different approach . It has a handle for pressing the orange and two parts with teeth shape . The first has a concave form , the second is convex . Rips should be introduced instead of holes for pouring the juice . Optimisation of the first concept . Building ideas for the second concept . New idea - space and new concept - space . 7 He did not feel blocked . The ideas were so many that he had difficulties in choosing one or two . It resembled a cloud in his head . The solution was completed by joining his best idea into a final one . Evaluation of different thoughts . Optimisation of the thoughts . Describing the solution with no apparent iteration . Evaluation . 8 N / A 9 N / A 10 The solution came as a systematic sequence of steps . He described it as : understanding the problem , establishing variables , establishing needs , and understanding he was squeezing an orange . He relied on a thoughtful market survey ; observed existing solutions , improved existent things , thus finding a way . ( Continued ) 1104 P . CARMONA MARQUES Table 2 . Continued . Question Answer Decoding Answer is potentially related to the following keywords of the IF 11 He focused himself in some type of a manual squeezer , those more traditional , saw the necessary forces , movements that were needed and ‘ mechanised ’ the squeezer with fewer movements , the minimum energy . He mentioned returning back from the end of the concept to the begin , collected ideas , discarding other , and improved some . Describing again the solution , evaluating and iterated for apparent optimisation . Idea - , concept - space . Evaluation and iteration . 12 He had ideas and to improve them he has focused on past problems : ‘ what was wrong and what could be improved ? ’ Improvement by selecting things . Specialisation loop . 13 Concerning the second solution , he tried to simplify the previous first solution or tried to address the problem in its simpler form . He saw the problem in a different way or from a different perspective , thus having new ideas . Another approach to the problem , divergent thinking . Generalisation loop . Table 3 . Questions , answers , decoding and relation to the if ’ s keywords for doctoral # 1 . Question Answer Decoding Answer is potentially related to the following keywords of the IF 1 Doctoral # 1 based idea Nr . 1 and Nr . 2 , seen in Figure 6 in his experiences . He considered the Philippe Stark ’ s squeezer and the correspondent design – an insect structure – for starting sketching , but he mentioned that he did not want to pursue that concept , as he had identified some mistakes relative to it . Two ideas for a squeezer . Use of analogy Two problem - , idea - , concept - spaces . Generalisation 2 He remembered seeing idea Nr . 2 somewhere , but with a different shape . Use of analogy to solve problems . The idea - space 3 He did not have new brilliant ideas . Usually , what he does when he sketches , is having new ideas by remembering old products , their sketches and some edges . The development of ideas and concepts The idea and concept - space 4 He projected the user to himself asking : how is he going to squeeze the orange . How to solve the problem The problem - space 5 He played some scenarios in his head , visual representations and made some movements with his hands . Development of concepts The concept - space 6 He started sketching a simple shape to visualise the squeezer and made a simple structure composed by three or four parts . He imagined different kinds of products and understood their functions . He used the shape of one object into another one . This is very common , he referred . The form of idea Nr . 1 resembles a tree . Development of concepts in term of functions , structure and analogies . The concept - space 7 The expert felt block , because he missed ‘ visual tools ’ and sketching tools , necessary to proceeded with a concept . Blocking situation in design and comparing to achieve a solution . ( Evaluation ) & Iteration 8 N / A 9 N / A 10 Comparing what exists in the market is a strategy to achieve a new concept , he said 11 He did not see the process as a systematic sequence of steps . 12 He drew idea Nr . 2 , but he came back to the notion of an orange , for achieving an improvement . Improvement of a solution / idea / concept Specialisation Loop 13 By doing this , he came up with another thought ( idea Nr . 1 ) . Another idea Generalisation Loop EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION 1105 the keywords implicitly used by the IF , by means of the observation of the sketches and the analyses of the answers during the interview ( see Tables 2 – 5 ) . 3 . 3 . 1 . Summary of findings As a summary , freshman typically characterised design as a sequential / linear activity , but they con - firmed to have iterated most of the times when enquired . The concepts have evolved mostly within a specialisation loop , representing optimisation and increments in their design . Overall , the three spaces and the specialisation loops were associated keywords to the freshmen , when mapped to the framework . For the doctoral , typically , the spaces encompassed different ideas and general func - tions for a squeezer . Some also took into consideration ergonomic aspects . Most of the concept - spaces were analogy - based . While specialisation was reported in 6 out of 10 times , generalisation was applied most of the times . The generalist loop was widely connected to the number of sketches produced for each designer . 4 . Discussion and conclusions The main difference between the two groups was found to be that doctoral tended to use more gen - eralisation than freshmen . There is only one case , in which a freshman has possibly used generalis - ation . Actually , doctoral used generalisation for producing more than one concept . Considering the group of freshmen , the developed squeezer was generally composed by a crank for twisting and a handle for applying pressure to the squeezer . This type of solution is based on specialisation . On the other hand , doctoral took a more general approach to the problem . Doctoral were typically inter - ested in developing just different ideas for a squeezer . Even so , they did not forget the main functions and general requirements of the squeezer itself . The use of analogy was reported from doctoral in developing concepts . It was also clear that generalisation was an ideation process typically used Figure 4 . Sketch produced by freshman # 1 : ( a ) part a and ( b ) part b . 1106 P . CARMONA MARQUES by doctoral , while freshmen based their approach on specialisation . Moreover , doctoral reported more blocking situations than novices , and consequently iterated more times , while freshmen described the process of creativity , as a systematic sequence of steps . The reasoning for doctoral was based on iteration and the use of generalisation loops . Typically , the doctoral group was more difficult to be decoded than freshmen . This is another difference between the both groups and reflects the fact that doctoral worked at a higher level of abstraction ( Welling 2007 ) . Figure 5 . Sketch produced by doctoral # 1 . EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION 1107 Both groups confirmed some of the previous studies performed ( Christiaans 1992 ; Cross 2004 ; Atman et al . 2005 ) . For instances , Freshman # 7 reported ‘ trial and error ’ techniques to generate a design . They also tended to suggest solutions almost immediately ( not feeling blocked ) . On the other hand , doctoral typically had a more preliminary observational evaluation of the problem ( gen - erally feeling blocked ) , before the production of several concepts . Freshmen seemed to focus their minds in the solution for the problem presented , while doctoral students took a more general approach . Being this an open - ended design problem , doctoral considered more alternative solutions and possibly made more shifts between design steps than the freshmen . Finally , doctoral used analogy to solve their problems . To end , one should recognise that difficulties occurred between the concepts of iteration , specialisation , and generalisation , as observed during the answers of the designers , in the interviewing phase . This fact , contributes to difficulties an in - depth analysis of some sketches and answers . This paper addressed the objective of characterising the differences between freshman and doc - toral engineering students , during the ideation process of design . To do that , one has established a methodology , based on a structured questionnaire and sketch observation . Then , observations and answers were mapped with the IF , for decoding the process of design . This case study confirmed some of the previous studies performed about novices ( Ball , Ormerod , and Morley 2004 and Atman et al . 2005 ) , such as the case of trial and error techniques to generate an incremental design based on a specialisation loop of though . The freshman also tended to suggest solutions almost immediately , not reporting much blocking situations and describing the process of design as sequential , thus reaching the next stage of development based on the previous one . In typical open - ended design problems , freshmen ’ results shown they do not consider much alternative sol - utions , conversely experts work typically with generalisation , which is now confirmed and in accord - ance with recent studies regarding experts ( e . g . Kim and Ryu 2014 ; Ting 2014 ; Crilly 2015 ) . There was simply one case that reported a freshman using the generalisation loop and performing divergent thinking . One argues that the designer explored more than one solution to the problem in - hand and consequently involved generalisation loops . The above conclusions are important for under - standing the gaps between both groups and reduce it in engineering design education curricula . More precisely , the iterative nature of design , presented during this study and focused by the IF , is a contribution to a better understanding of designers ’ cognitive processes , thus decreasing the exist - ent gap between experts and novices . One way to do this is to test the IF as a prescriptive framework . Table 4 . Example of questions , answers , decoding and mapping to the If ’ s keywords for Freshman # 7 ( adapted from Carmona Marques et al . 2014 ) . Question # Answer from Freshman # 7 Decoding Answer is related to the following keywords of the IF 2 ‘ I remembered when he was younger to be difficult to press and twist ’ Past thoughts Idea - space 7 ‘ I did not feel had running out of ideas during the experiment ‘ Explaining the reasoning of the solution Evaluation 12 ‘ I tried to optimize what I had . In design , I normally try to optimize previous resources ’ Describing an optimisation Specialisation loop Table 5 . Example of questions , answers , decoding and mapping to the if ’ s keywords for doctoral # 8 . Question # Answer from Doctoral # 8 Decoding Answer is related to the following keywords of the IF 4 ‘ I considered several alternatives , although not very functional but that triggered ideas ’ Different ideas for problem - solving Idea - spaces 8 ‘ I overcome this situation by stopping drawing and thought of different things ’ Post - blocking situation and divergent thinking Evaluation & iteration 12 ‘ The solution was not sequential , I thought about different perspectives ’ Describing generalisation thoughts Generalisation loop 1108 P . CARMONA MARQUES Since the ideation framework is being positively tested as a descriptive framework , there are very good possibilities for it to become a prescriptive way of enhancing creativity in design ; that is , if novices know and are taught to use correctly the IF , it can serve as instrument to achieve better sol - utions faster . To do this , a control group will test the possible use of the prescriptive framework against Figure 6 . Sketches produced by freshman # 7 ( on the top ) and doctoral # 8 ( on the bottom ) . EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION 1109 a non - control group . The control group will be the one that will not know the framework , while the non - control group will know the framework . The idea is to check if the non - control group achieve higher / better rates of creativity when compared to the control group . Of course the study presented so far as research limitations . First of all the amount of data gath - ered so far is not very high . In past studies , the study was limited to only novices but now an attempt has been made to also use experts thus providing an innovation of past studies ( see for e . g . Carmona Marques et al . 2014 and Carmona Marques 2012 ) . One believes that is a good contribution to both to understand the differences of the two groups but also to a further understanding of the IF as a descriptive framework of the design process and validity in both groups . Future studies are planned using designers in industrial environments with the same purpose . Also , more studies involving larger groups of designers could improve the ‘ validation ’ of the IF and of course the reliability of the data obtained so far . Acknowledgements Author is acknowledge to the MIT Portugal Programme and all the persons involved in this research in particular A . Silva ( IST - UL and SUTD ) , E . Henriques ( IST - UL ) , and Chris Magee ( MIT ) . Disclosure statement No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors . Table 7 . Summary of keywords used , signifying possible mapping of parts of the IF , for both groups . Note : Black – identified keyword ; grey – possible identification ; white – not identified . Table 6 . Some sentences used to characterise the spaces in both groups . Type of Space Sentences mentioned during the interview ( freshman ) Sentences mentioned during the interview ( doctoral ) Problem a mechanical solution easy to use sketching of ideas functions Idea pressure and rotation past experiences an overview several ideas Concept an handle and a cover a retainer use of analogy association 1110 P . CARMONA MARQUES Notes on contributor P . Carmona Marques received his Ph . D . in Engineering Design & Advanced Manufacturing from the University of Lisbon / MIT in 2012 and Master in Industrial Engineering in 1996 . Assistant Professor of Industrial Engineering & Management at Lusófona University ( ULHT ) , with research interests in the field of creativity , mechanical engineering and education . He is also vice - director of the B . Sc . in Industrial Engineering and a Chartered Mechanical Engineer . As published in inter - national peer reviewed journal and conferences within his subject of specialisation . He is also an Invited Professor of mechanical engineering at ISEL - IPL . ORCID P . Carmona Marques http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0003 - 4891 - 1754 References Atman , C . , M . Cardella , J . Turns , and R . Adams . 2005 . “ Comparing Freshman and Senior Engineering Design Processes : An In - depth Follow - up Study . ” Design Studies 26 : 325 – 357 . Carmona Marques , P . 2012 . “ Creativity in Product Development : A Contribution to the Understanding of Front - end Design . ” PhD Thesis . , IST , University of Lisbon . Carmona Marques , P . , A . Silva , E . Henriques and C . Magee . et al . 2014 . “ A Descriptive Framework of the Design Process from a Dual Cognitive Engineering Perspective . ” International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation 2 ( 3 ) : 142 – 164 . Badke - Schaub , P . 2013 . “ A Pleading for a Holistic Research Approach of Creativity and Innovation in Design [ in Perspectives on Design Creativity and Innovation Research ( Editorial Board of IJDCI ) ] . ” International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation 1 ( 1 ) : 1 – 42 . Ball , L . , J . Evans , and I . Dennis . 1994 . “ Cognitive Processes in Engineering Design : A Longitudinal Study . ” Ergonomics 37 ( 11 ) : 1753 – 1786 . Ball , L . , T . Ormerod , and N . Morley . 2004 . “ Spontaneous Analogising in Engineering Design : A Comparative Analysis of Experts and Novices . ” Design Studies 25 : 495 – 508 . Bilalic , M . , P . McLeod , and F . Gobet . 2008 . “ Inflexibility of Experts – Reality or Myth ? Quantifying the Einstellung Effect in Chess Masters . ” Cognitive Psychology 56 ( 2 ) : 73 – 102 . Bjorklund , T . 2013 . “ Initial Mental Representations of Design Problems : Differences Between Experts and Novices . ” Design Studies 34 : 135 – 160 . Christiaans , H . 1992 . “ Creativity in Design : The Role of Domain Knowledge in Designing . ” Ph . D . Thesis , Delft University of Technology , Delft . Coley , F . , O . Houseman , and R . Roy . 2007 . “ An Introduction to Capturing and Understanding the Cognitive Behavior of Design Engineers . ” Journal of Engineering Design 18 ( 4 ) : 311 – 325 . Crilly , N . 2015 . “ Fixation and Creativity in Concept Development : The Attitudes and Practices of Expert Designers . ” Design Studies 38 : 54 – 91 . Cross , N . 2004 . “ Expertise in Design : An Overview . ” Design Studies 25 ( 5 ) : 427 – 440 . Dorst , K . 2011 . “ The Core of Design Thinking and Its Applications . ” Design Studies 32 : 521 – 532 . Dym , C . , A . Agogino , O . Eris , D . Frey , and L . Leifer . 2005 , January . “ Engineering Design Thinking , Teaching , and Learning . ” Journal of Engineering Education 94 : 103 – 120 . Goldenberg , J . , and D . Mazursky . 2002 . Creativity in Product Innovation . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Kavakli , M . , and J . S . Gero . 2002 . “ The Structure of Concurrent Cognitive Actions : A Case Study on Novice and Expert Designers * 1 . ” Design Studies 23 ( 1 ) : 25 – 40 . Kelley , T . , and J . Littman . 2004 . The Art of Innovation : Lessons in Creativity from IDEO , America ’ s Leading Design Firm . London : Profile Books . Kim , J . , and H . Ryu . 2014 . “ A Design Thinking Rationality Framework : Framing and Solving Design Problems in Early Concept Generation . ” Human - Computer Interaction 29 ( 5 – 6 ) : 516 – 553 . Lammi , M . , and K . Becker . 2013 . “ Engineering Design Thinking . ” Journal of Technology Education 24 ( 2 ) : 55 – 77 . Linsey , J . S . , A . B . Markman , and K . L . Wood . 2012 . “ Design by Analogy : A Study of the Word Tree Method for Problem Re - presentation . ” Journal of Mechanical Design 134 : 12 . McCracken , W . 1997 . “ Portfolio assessment in design education . ” FIE , Atlanta , Georgia . http : / / www . cc . gatech . edu / edutech / dew / papers / McCrackenPos . html . Moreno , D . , L . Blessing , K . Wood , and C . Vogele . 2015 . “ Creativity predictors : findings from design - by - analogy ideation methods ’ learning and performance . ” Proceeding of the ASME 2015 International Design Engineering Conferences IDETC / CIE 2015 , August 2 – 5 , Boston , MA , USA . Pahl , G . , and W . Beitz . 2007 . Engineering Design : A Systematic Approach , 3rd ed . London : Springer - Verlag . EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION 1111 Silva , A . , and L . Faria . 2012 . “ Two Approaches to Design Teaching in a Mechanical Engineering Curriculum . ” European Journal of Engineering Education 28 : 474 – 483 . Silva , A . , M . Fontul , and E . Henriques . 2014 . “ Teaching Design in the First Years of a Traditional Mechanical Engineering Degree : Methods , Issues and Future Perspectives . ” European Journal of Engineering Education . doi : 10 . 1080 / 03043797 . 2014 . 903227 . Silva , A . , E . Henriques , and A . Carvalho . 2009 . “ Creativity Enhancement in a Product Development Course Through Entrepreneurship Learning and Intellectual Property Awareness . ” European Journal of Engineering Education 34 ( 1 ) : 63 – 75 . Ting , S . 2014 . “ Expert vs . Novice : problem decomposition / recomposition in engineering design . ” All Graduate Theses and Dissertations . Paper 3104 . http : / / digitalcommons . usu . edu / etd / 3104 . Ware , C . 2008 . Visual Thinking for Design . Burlington , MA : Elsevier . Welling , H . 2007 . “ Four Mental Operations in Creative Cognition : The Importance of Abstraction . ” Creativity Research Journal 19 : 163 – 177 . Yilmaz , S . , C . M . Seiferta , and R . Gonzaleza . 2010 . “ Cognitive Heuristics in Design : Instructional Strategies to Increase Creativity in Idea Generation . ” Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 24 : 335 – 355 . 1112 P . CARMONA MARQUES