A dramatic transformation of the architecture of the mouse conceptus takes place immediately after implantation . The implanted blastocyst is a vesicular structure compris - ing an inner cell mass ( ICM ) inside the trophectoderm ( FIG . 1a ) . Within 3 days , the polar trophectoderm and the ICM develop into an elongated structure that is made up of the ectoplacental cone ( which connects the embryo to the uterus ) , the extraembryonic ectoderm ( ExE ) , the epiblast and a layer of visceral endoderm ( FIG . 1b – d ) . Gastrulation then commences with the formation of the primitive streak ( FIG . 1e ) , through which epiblast cells ingress to form the mesoderm and the endoderm . These two tissues and the ectoderm ( the descendants of epi - blast cells that do not pass through the primitive streak ) constitute the three primary germ layers ( BOX 1 ) that con - tain progenitors of all tissues 1 , 2 . Recent studies on the early post - implantation embryo have revealed complex patterns of molecular activity in the derivatives of the ICM and the trophectoderm ; this indicates that embry - onic polarity and tissue patterning emerge well before gastrulation . These studies have also shown that the extraembryonic tissues , which are unique to mammalian embryos , are not just a connection between maternal and embryonic tissue — they are crucial for embryonic patterning . This Review focuses on the spatial and temporal deployment of transcriptional regulation and intercel - lular signalling ( Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) during development from the blastocyst to the gastrula . The information we dicuss comes from the develop - mental defects of mutant mouse embryos and direct experimentation on embryos that were grown out - side the uterine environment , involving cell imaging , microsurgical manipulation and alterations to gene activity using molecular biological techniques ( BOX 2 ) . Here we discuss the complexity of gene functions for constructing a mouse gastrula . Focusing on important recent findings , we will first discuss the origin of the cell lineages in the implanting embryo and the molecular basis of embryonic and extraembryonic tissue pat - terning , with particular emphasis on the role of tissue interactions . We will then highlight the signalling and transcription - factor activities that are required for the regulation of cell movement and the formation of the primary germ layers . Generation of cell lineages at implantation Maintaining the pluripotency of the epiblast . Before lineage allocation occurs , the precursor populations in the epiblast must be maintained in an undifferentiated , pluripotent state in order to generate the full range of cell types that make up the body . Maintenance of pluripotency requires interactions between transcription - factor complexes . Two such complexes are involved , one including POU5F1 ( POU domain class 5 transcription factor 1 , also known as OCT4 ) and SOX2 ( SRY box 2 ) , and a second involving nanog and SALL4 ( sal - like 4 ) . Pluripotency is maintained by the activity of the two complexes on downstream genes , simultaneously pro - moting expression of the genes that encode their own and each other’s constituent members 3 – 8 . Polycomb pro - teins provide a further layer of regulation by suppressing the expression of genes that promote differentiation 9 , 10 . Maintaining pluripotency of the epiblast also requires signalling by nodal , a transforming growth factor - β ( TGFB ) - related factor . In embryos that lack nodal , the epiblast differentiates prematurely to neurectoderm 11 , 12 . Nodal signalling through the intracellular effectors Embryology Unit , Children’s Medical Research Institute and Faculty of Medicine , University of Sydney , Westmead , NSW 2145 , Australia . Correspondence to P . P . L . T . e - mail : ptam @ cmri . usyd . edu . au doi : 10 . 1038 / nrg2084 Published online 27 March 2007 Conceptus All structures that develop from fertilization , including embryonic and extraembryonic structures . Implantation The attachment of the embryo to the uterine wall . In the mouse , this occurs about 4 days post coitum as the first step in establishing the maternal – fetal connection . Blastocyst The structure that the embryo adopts after the morula stage , 3 . 5 – 4 . 5 days post coitum , consisting of the trophoblast surrounding an inner cell mass and blastocoelic cavity . Gene function in mouse embryogenesis : get set for gastrulation Patrick P . L . Tam and David A . F . Loebel Abstract | During early mouse embryogenesis , temporal and spatial regulation of gene expression and cell signalling influences lineage specification , embryonic polarity , the patterning of tissue progenitors and the morphogenetic movement of cells and tissues . Uniquely in mammals , the extraembryonic tissues are the source of signals for lineage specification and tissue patterning . Here we discuss recent discoveries about the lead up to gastrulation , including early manifestations of asymmetry , coordination of cell and tissue movements and the interactions of transcription factors and signalling activity for lineage allocation and germ - layer specification . R E V I E W S 368 | MAY 2007 | VOLUME 8 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics © 2007 Nature Publishing Group Polar trophectoderm ICMPrimitive endoderm Parietal endoderm Parietal endoderm Trophoblast Visceral endoderm EpiblastExtrambryonic ectoderm Mural trophectoderm Parietalyolk sac Anterior visceral endoderm Primitive streak Mesoderm Definitive endoderm Ectoderm Parietal yolk sac and Reichert’s membrane Ectoplacental cone Ectoplacental cone Ectoplacental cone Extrambryonic ectoderm Extrambryonic ectoderm Extrambryonic ectoderm Epiblast Epiblast DVE a E4 . 0 – 4 . 25 : Implanting blastocyst b E5 . 0 : No localized visceral - endoderm thickening ( pre - DVE stage ) c E5 . 5 : DVE thickening ( DVE stage ) d E6 . 0 : Anterior visceral - endoderm or lateral visceral - endoderm thickening ( post - DVE stage ) e E6 . 5 : Primitive - streak and germ - layer formation ( early primitive - streak stage ) • Proliferation of the polar trophectoderm and the ICM • Sorting the precursors of the primitive endoderm from the ICM • Organization of the primitive endoderm into an epithelium on the blastocoelic surface of the ICM • Primitive endoderm then contributing cells to form the parietal endoderm • Proliferation of the extraembryonic ectoderm and formation of the ectoplacental cone • Primitive endoderm partitioned into visceral and parietal endoderm • Proliferation of the epiblast , which is derived from the ICM • Cavitation and epithelial morphogenesis of the epiblast • Proximal – distal patterning of the epiblast • Specification of the precursor of anterior visceral endoderm in the distal region of the visceral endoderm • Directional movement of the DVE cells to form the anterior visceral endoderm • Positioning of the primitive streak • Anterior – posterior patterning of the epiblast Gastrulation : • Formation of the primitive streak • Allocation of germ - layer precursors • Morphogenetic cell and tissue movement Extraembryonic Structures in the conceptus that do not contribute to the fetal tissues , including those derived from the trophoblast and primitive endoderm . These tissues support the growth of the embryo and are a source of signals for patterning . Epiblast A structure in the post - implantation embryo that develops from the inner cell mass , from which the ectoderm , mesoderm and definitive endoderm are derived . Gastrulation A stage of development in which the primary germ layers are formed ( ectoderm , mesoderm and definitive endoderm ) , from which all the fetal tissues will develop . Primitive streak A structure that forms in the posterior region of the embryo and is the first visible sign of gastrulation . Epiblast cells ingress through the primitive streak and are allocated to the mesoderm or definitive endoderm . Ingress The process of cells entering the primitive streak . Primary germ layers The ectoderm , mesoderm and definitive endoderm cell layers that form at gastrulation , from which all fetal and some extraembryonic tissues develop . Potency The ability of a cell to differentiate into one or more cell types . Figure 1 | Early post - implantation development in the mouse . Tissue types in the embryo are shown at five developmental stages . a | Implanting blastocyst . b | Pre - DVE ( distal visceral endoderm ) . c | DVE . d | Post - DVE and pre - primitive streak . e | Early primitive streak . The lineage relationship of the derivatives of the trophectoderm and inner cell mass ( ICM ) is described in BOX 1 . The primitive endoderm is coloured grey . The ICM in panel a and the epiblast in panel b are coloured blue . The multi - colouring of the epiblast in panels c – e indicates the regionalization of prospective germ - layer progenitors : ectoderm ( coloured blue ) , mesoderm ( coloured orange ) , definitive endoderm ( coloured yellow ) and and the primitive streak ( coloured crimson ) are shown according to the fate maps 2 . In panel c , orange represents the mesendoderm . In panel a , cells of the primitive endoderm colonize the blastocoelic surface of the mural trophectoderm and become the parietal endoderm , which , together with the trophoblast that derives from the mural trophectoderm , forms the parietal yolk sac in panel b . As the epiblast and extaembryonic ectoderm become elongated into a cylinder , the visceral endoderm covers their outer surface . The trophoblast and parietal endoderm , together with the thick basement membrane between them ( the Reichert’s membrane ) surround the entire conceptus . These are removed ( indicated by a dotted line ) in panels c – e . Nomenclature for staging is adapted from REFS 12 , 63 , 122 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 8 | MAY 2007 | 369 © 2007 Nature Publishing Group Inner cell mass Trophectoderm EctodermMesodermEndoderm Visceral endoderm Extraembryonic mesoderm Ectoplacental cone Extraembryonic ectoderm Epiblast Primitiveendoderm b a SMAD2 and SMAD3 is also required for maintaining pluripotency in human embryonic stem ( ES ) cells 13 . There is conflicting evidence regarding the role of WNT signalling in regulating cell - lineage differentia - tion . Inhibition of GSK3 ( glycogen synthase kinase 3 ) , which enhances WNT signalling by increasing the nuclear accumulation of β - catenin , promotes mainte - nance of the undifferentiated state of ES cells 14 . However , pharmacological GSK3 inhibitors are likely to have other effects , raising the possibility that pluripotency might be maintained by disrupting other unknown pathways . Conversely , in mouse embryos the epiblast will differentiate precociously into mesoderm - like cells when WNT - downstream genes are upregulated by constitutively active β - catenin 15 , and in the absence of Wnt3 ( Wingless - related MMTV integration site 3 ) 16 the epiblast continues to express the pluripotency marker Pou5f1 . In agreement with this , inhibition of endogenous WNT signals in mouse ES cells by DKK1 ( dickkopf 1 ) prevents the cells from differentiating into mesoderm 17 . On balance , the data indicate that maintenance of pluripotency requires suppression of WNT signalling , which promotes differentiation , but the possibility that WNT signalling has an additional role in maintaining pluripotency remains . Allocation and formation of the primitive endoderm . By the time the embryo implants into the uterus , a third cell lineage , the primitive endoderm ( PrE ) , has formed on the blastocoelic surface of the ICM , from which it derives ( FIG . 1a ) . The PrE then forms both the parietal endoderm , which lines the blastocoelic surface of the mural troph - ectoderm ( FIG . 1a , b ) , and the visceral endoderm , which forms an epithelium on the surface of the epiblast and ExE ( FIG . 1c – e ) . Several key questions regarding the origins and development of the PrE and its derivatives remain to be answered . When do the PrE precursors first appear ? Where in the ICM do the PrE cell arise ? How do they become an epithelium ? What is the source of patterning information for regionalizing the PrE and subsequently the visceral endoderm , and how early is regionalization detectable ? Recently , some progress has been made in finding answers to these questions . It is not known if the allocation of ICM cells to the PrE is influenced by their position in the cell cluster . A recent gene - expression study has shown intermin - gling populations of Nanog and Gata6 ( GATA - binding protein 6 ) - expressing cells in the ICM 18 . By tracing the descendants of individual ICM cells , it was shown that they can contribute to either the epiblast or the PrE , but not both 18 . Although it has yet to be formally proven , the finding implies that the Gata6 - positive cells are the progenitors of the PrE , and the Nanog - expressing cells presumably form the epiblast . GRB2 ( growth factor receptor bound protein 2 , a receptor - binding adap - tor protein and member of mitogen - activated protein ( MAP ) kinase kinase kinase signalling pathways ) is required for expression of Gata6 in the ICM and the formation of the PrE 18 , 19 , indicating a role for recep - tor tyrosine kinase signalling in the early stages of PrE formation . Box 1 | Allocation of extraembryonic and germ - layer derivatives Key cell lineages are delineated shortly before implantation . At the morula stage , when the embryo consists of a ball of about 16 cells , the outer cells express caudal type homeobox 2 ( CDX2 ) and develop epithelial characteristics 114 . These cells become the trophectoderm , from which the extraembryonic ectoderm and ectoplacental cone that make up part of the placenta are derived , shown in a . Cells on the inside express genes that are characteristic of pluripotent cells and form the inner cell mass ( ICM ) of the blastocyst , from which the epiblast derives . The ICM gives rise to the primitive endoderm , which produces the visceral endoderm lining the extraembryonic yolk sac . The epiblast consists of a population of pluripotent cells from which all the fetal tissues will form , as well as the extraembryonic mesoderm of the yolk sac , the allantois and the amnion . Before gastrulation , the body plan of the embryo is mapped onto the epiblast in gene - expression domains that correspond to the prospective anterior – posterior embryonic axis . At gastrulation , this blueprint is translated into three dimensions by the allocation of cells to the three germ layers — the ectoderm , mesoderm and endoderm . Cells from the epiblast are recruited into the primitive streak and migrate out , after which they either form a new layer of mesoderm or are incorporated into the endoderm to form the definitive ( gut ) endoderm ( outlined in b ) . Cells that remain in the epiblast form the ectoderm , which gives rise to the surface ectoderm and the neural tissues , also indicated in b . Clonal analysis shows that epiblast cells are not restricted in their lineage potency prior to recruitment and ingression 115 , 116 . It is likely that a transient cell population , known as the mesendoderm , which has the potential to form mesoderm or definitive endoderm , exists within the primitive streak . Mesendodermal cells exercise a lineage choice between endoderm and mesoderm in the primitive streak . Although these cells have not been directly identified in the mouse embryo , evidence for a bipotential cell population comes from experiments with embryonic stem ( ES ) cells . Mouse ES cells can be induced by activin to differentiate into mesendodermal progenitors , with the dual potential to form mesoderm and endoderm 93 , 117 . Cells that are allocated to the mesoderm are distributed to four main tissue compartments : the axial mesoderm ( notochord ) ; the paraxial mesoderm , which forms the somites ( the darkly stained tissue in b , which shows a whole mount in situ hybridization for Engrailed 1 ( En1 ) expression ) and subsequently the vertebral column and skeletal muscle ; the lateral plate mesoderm ( circulatory system and gut wall ) ; and the extraembryonic mesoderm ( yolk sac vasculature and blood ) . Fate mapping of the primitive streak shows that cells of the axial mesoderm and the anterior definitive endoderm of the embryonic gut ingress through the anterior - most region , the paraxial mesoderm emerges in the anterior - third region , the lateral plate mesoderm through the middle region , and those of the extraembryonic mesoderm through the posterior region 118 . During gastrulation , mesoderm cells that are recruited earlier are allocated to more anterior sites in their respective tissue compartment than those that are recruited later . In essence , the site and timing of recruitment and ingression of cells directly influence the allocation to specific tissue types and the destination of these cells in the anterior – posterior axis 119 , 120 . The definitive endoderm forms the epithelium of the gut tube , lungs and organs including the liver , pancreas and thyroid . The precursors of the definitive endoderm ingress through the anterior part of the primitive streak , and the definitive endoderm seems to be regionalized early in its development . This is reflected by the lack of ‘pan - endoderm’ gene markers , which may be expressed throughout the definitive endoderm 86 . R E V I E W S 370 | MAY 2007 | VOLUME 8 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics © 2007 Nature Publishing Group GATA6 and its transcriptional targets , Hnf4a ( hepato - cyte nuclear factor - α , a regulator of tight junction formation and epithelial cell polarity 20 , 21 ) and Dab2 ( disabled homologue 2 , a low - density lipoprotein receptor adap - tor protein 22 – 24 ) are also involved in the formation of the visceral endoderm . Although PrE formation is initiated in Gata6 – / – and Hnf4a – / – blastocysts , visceral - endoderm formation is disrupted 21 , 25 – 27 . The visceral endoderm of Dab2 – / – embryos is disorganized , and cells that express markers of the PrE and visceral endoderm are internal - ized in the epiblast 28 . Dab2 function is therefore crucial for morphogenesis , but not for specification of the vis - ceral endoderm . Laminin B1 subunit might also have a role in the formation of the visceral endoderm — it is involved in cell adhesion and is upregulated in ES cells that express Gata6 ( REF . 29 ) . Together , these studies indi - cate that the sorting of PrE cells from other ICM cells begins with receptor tyrosine kinase signalling - mediated regulation of Gata6 expression , which in turn activates other genes that are involved in cell sorting and forma - tion of an epithelial architecture . However , the precise mechanism by which cells of the ICM choose between the PrE lineage and other cell types is unclear . Signalling activity maintains the ExE , which is formed by the proliferation of the polar trophectoderm and is closely apposed to the epiblast ( FIG . 1b , c ) . Therefore , there is potential for reciprocal interactions in the con - trol of the patterning and differentiation of both tissues . The proliferation and differentiation of the ExE requires fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) signals from the ICM 30 . Fgf4 – / – embryos cannot maintain normal trophecto - derm development beyond the blastocyst stage 31 . The response by the ExE to FGF4 is likely to be mediated , at least in part , by FRS2 ( FGF - receptor substrate 2 ) 32 , a membrane - bound docking protein . Consistent with defective ExE differentiation , trophectodermal stem cells could not be derived from Frs2 – / – embryos in vitro 32 . A possible link between FGF and nodal signalling is indicated by the upregulation of Fgf4 in response to nodal signalling 30 ( FIG . 2a ) . As Frs2 activity seems to be required to maintain normal Nodal expression levels 32 , nodal and FGF4 from the epiblast might therefore work together to maintain a progenitor population in the ExE , preventing these cells from undergoing premature differentiation to trophoblasts 30 . Regionalization of the PrE and visceral endoderm The visceral endoderm , which surrounds the epiblast and ExE ( FIG . 1c – d ) , is an important source of signals for embryonic patterning . In particular , the anterior visceral endoderm ( AVE ) ( FIG . 1d ) is crucial for correct anterior – posterior patterning 33 , functioning as a source of antagonists for posteriorizing signals such as nodal and WNT 34 , 35 . The precursors of the AVE arise at the distal tip of the embryo , and are termed the distal vis - ceral endoderm ( DVE ) . These cells then migrate to the anterior side of the embryo to form the AVE ( FIG . 1c ) . On the opposite side , interactions between the poste - rior visceral endoderm and the epiblast near the border between the embryonic visceral endoderm ( EmVE ) and the extra embryonic visceral endoderm ( ExVE ) can influence gene expression in the primitive streak 36 . The formation of these localized signalling centres requires the establishment of regionalized gene - expression domains within the visceral endoderm . Is there asymmetry in the PrE ? Asymmetry of gene expression occurs before the appearance of morpho - logically distingushable anterior – posterior patterning . However , when this is first detectable is the subject of Box 2 | Tools for analysis of gene function in mouse embryos Loss - or gain - of - function mutants • Spontaneous mutations that cause a change of gene function ; for example , the Apc min mutant , which exhibits constitutive β - catenin activity 38 , and the brachyury mutant , which shows loss of transcription factor function . • Chemically induced mutations , such as those that are generated in screens using N - ethyl - N - nitrosourea ( ENU ) to induce point mutations ; for example , the Nckap1 ( NCK - associated protein 1 ) mutant , which disrupts cell migration 66 . • Gene - trap mutagenesis , in which a reporter construct inserts at random locations throughout the genome ; for example , the WNT co - receptor gene Lrp6 ( low - density lipoprotein receptor - related protein 6 ) . • Targeted mutations that result in either complete removal of all or part of the coding region , or conditional knockouts , in which a region of the gene is flanked by loxP or frt recombinase target sites . Excision is catalysed by crossing with a strain that harbours CRE or FLP recombinase with tissue - or stage - specific expression ; for example : epiblast - specific SMAD2 and SMAD3 mutants 91 , 92 , primitive - streak and endoderm - specific β - catenin mutant 121 . Dominant negative or modified sequence A modified form of a protein is expressed , which either disrupts the function of a wild - type protein or is modified in some way to alter its function . This includes constitutively active forms or precursor proteins that are resistant to cleavage ; for example , replacement of the wild - type Nodal gene with a cDNA that encodes a cleavage - resistant nodal pro - protein 55 . Knock - in : replacement or insertion into a gene of interest This includes rescue of a mutant phenotype by substitution of a sequence of the ORF of another gene , or by introduction of a reporter such as β - galactosidase or GFP into the gene ; for example , replacement of Otx2 ( orthodenticle homologue 2 ) coding sequences with a Dkk1 ( Dickkopf 1 ) cDNA 67 . Transgenic reporter A construct that contains a reporter under the control of tissue - specific promoter or enhancer elements is introduced into the genome . Expression of the transgene should reflect that of the endogenous gene that is controlled by these regulatory elements ; for example , demonstration of asymmetry in the primitive endoderm by left – right determination factor 1 ( Lefty1 ) – lacZ expression , and visualization of gene expression by Nodal – lacZ and MIX1 - homeobox - like 1 ( Mixl1 ) – GFP reporters . RNAi This might involve the introduction of small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) molecules into early embryos by electroporation , or stable expression of a short hairpin RNA ( shRNA ) construct in embryonic stem ( ES ) cells , which can then be used to create embryos for phenotypic analysis ; for example , electroporation of BMP4 ( bone morphogenetic protein 4 ) siRNA into early embryos 43 , and shRNA knockdown in ES - cell - derived embryos in tetraploid complementation assays 73 . Creation of completely ES - cell - derived embryos This method takes advantage of the inability of tetraploid cells to contribute efficiently to embryonic tissues . ES cells are introduced into a tetraploid host embryo by aggregation or injection and transferred to a surrogate mother . The tetraploid cells contribute to the extraembryonic lineages , but are excluded from the embryo itself . This contrasts with the conventional approach of making chimaeras by introducing ES cells into a diploid host embryo , which results in co - contribution of host and ES - derived cells to the embryonic tissues ; for example , the demonstration that embryos that are derived from Hnf4 – / – ( hepatocyte nuclear factor ) ES cells progress through gastrulation if they are complemented by tetraploid wild - type visceral endoderm 26 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 8 | MAY 2007 | 371 © 2007 Nature Publishing Group Visceralendoderm ExE a Visceral endoderm b Epiblast Nodal - p Nodal - p GDF3 FurinPcsk6 DVE ExVE EmVE Epiblast Cripto Nodal 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Nodal - p Nodal - p Nodal - p GDF3 FurinPcsk6 Bmp4 Epiblast Cripto Wnt3 Fgf4Fgf8 T 1 2 5 6 7 8 3 4 Nodal Nodal CER1 , LEFTY1 Proximal – distal patterning of the epiblast Presumed graded nodal signalling activity Uncleaved nodal precursor protein Processed nodal protein ExE some controversy . Asymmetrical gene expression has been observed in the visceral endoderm of embryos at the DVE stage ( FIG . 1c ) . The nodal antagonists Cer1 ( cerberus 1 homologue ) and Lefty1 ( left – right determi - nation factor 1 ) are more highly expressed on one side ( presumably the anterior ) of the DVE 37 . Similarly , next to the border of the epiblast and ExE , Wnt3 is expressed asymmetrically 36 . However , asymmetry might be established in the PrE shortly after implantation , before formation of the vis - ceral endoderm . One recent study showed transiently asymmetrical expression of Hhex ( haematopoietically expressed homeobox ) and Rhox5 ( reproductive home - obox 5 , also known as Pem ) 38 but no asymmetrical expression of Lefty1 . By contrast , two other studies indicate consistent and asymmetrical Lefty1 expression in the PrE . Expression of a Lefty1 – lacZ transgene 39 and the endogenous Lefty1 gene was observed to be skewed towards one side of the PrE 12 , 39 , and seen to continue in the visceral endoderm 12 . Although this finding has been disputed 38 , the discrepancy might be partly explained by the choice of probes . If the probe that was used in the study by Chazaud and colleagues 38 detects not only Lefty1 , it is possible that this non - specific detection could have obscured the true Lefty1 expres - sion domain . Intriguingly , asymmetrical Lefty1 – lacZ expression was detected in blastocysts that were grown in vitro without contact with uterine tissue or any physi - cal substrate . If the asymmetrical expression of Lefty1 is ultimately confirmed , this raises the possibility that embryonic asymmetry might be acquired independ - ently of any interaction with the uterus that accompanies implantation 39 . Proximal – distal patterning of the visceral endoderm . Before the appearance of anterior – posterior pattern - ing , the visceral endoderm becomes polarized in the proximal – distal dimension . Between the pre - DVE stage and the DVE stage ( FIG . 1b , c ) , differences in gene expression emerge between the EmVE , which surrounds the epiblast , and the ExVE , which surrounds the ExE . Recently , a role for nodal signalling in demarcating these two regions has been demonstrated ( FIG . 2a , steps 4 , 5 ) . In Nodal – / – embryos , genes that are normally downregu - lated in the EmVE at embryonic days E5 . 5 and E6 . 5 , continue to be expressed beyond this stage 12 . This indi - cates that an early function of nodal signalling is to divide the visceral endoderm into embryonic and extraembry - onic compartments . The visceral endoderm is further subdivided when a population at the distal tip of the embryo becomes specified as the DVE 12 ( FIG . 1c ; FIG . 2a , steps 6 , 7 ; TABLE 1 ) . Subsequently , the DVE is relocated to the prospective anterior region of the conceptus to form the AVE ( FIGS 1d , 3a ) . Interactions with the ExE and the epiblast underpin the formation of the DVE . The ExE is a source of signals for patterning the visceral endoderm . Separation of the ExE from the embryonic ( epiblast and EmVE ) fragment results in an expansion of the expression domains of DVE markers 40 , 41 . However , in Elf5 – / – ( E74 - like factor 5 ) embryos , which lack an ExE and therefore have the Figure 2 | A network of signalling activity leading to patterning of the visceral endoderm and the epiblast in the distal visceral endoderm ( DVE ) - stage embryo . The relational network is based on the data obtained by studying the effects of loss of function of nodal or other signalling cascade components and cleavage - resistant nodal precursor protein . Signalling function involves the production , translocation and processing of the signal protein , followed by positive and negative transcriptional regulation of gene expression . Gene products are circled and gene transcripts are in italics . The various steps of the network are numbered serially . a | Patterning of the embryonic visceral endoderm ( EmVE ) . In the extraembryonic ectoderm , nodal precursor protein , which is produced by the epiblast , acts by activin receptors 1B and 2A to activate the transcription of Furin and Pcsk6 ( step 1 ) , which encode convertase enzymes . The extraembryonic ectoderm ( ExE ) then secretes the convertase enzymes encoded by Furin and Pcsk6 ( step 2 ) , which cleave the nodal precursor ( step 3 ) to produce the processed form of nodal . Nodal signals from the epiblast repress genes such as Hnf4 ( hepatocyte nuclear factor ) , Gata4 ( GATA - binding protein 4 ) , Ttr ( transthyretin ) and Furin ( step 4 ) , which are normally expressed in the extraembryonic visceral endoderm ( ExVE ) after the distal visceral endoderm ( DVE ) stage . Simultaneously ( step 5 ) , nodal signals maintain the expression of embryonic visceral endoderm ( EmVE ) - related genes such as Lhx1 ( LIM - domain homebox 1 ) , Fgf5 ( fibroblast growth factor 5 ) , Fgf8 , Bmp2 ( bone morphogenetic protein 2 ) , Otx2 ( orthodenticle homologue 2 ) and Foxa2 ( forkhead box A2 ) . Nodal and GDF3 ( growth differentiation factor 3 ) working with cripto , a co - receptor , generate a proximal – distal gradient of signalling activity in the embryo ( step 6 ) , which is crucial for the specification of the DVE ( step 7 ) . Signals from the ExE , including BMP4 ( not shown ) , are also required for regionalization of the visceral endoderm and proper formation of the DVE . b | Patterning of the epiblast . In the ExE , the nodal precursor protein activates the expression of Bmp4 ( step 1 ) , in addition to the convertase enzyme genes Furin and Pcsk6 . Similar to the signalling process in patterning the visceral endoderm , the convertases process the nodal protein ( step 2 ) . A graded signalling activity , which is mediated by nodal , GDF3 and cripto ( step 3 ) , and antagonized by LEFTY1 ( left – right determination factor 1 ) and CER1 ( cerberus 1 homologue ) from the DVE ( step 4 ) , upregulates the expression of mesoendoderm - related genes in the proximal epiblast ( step 5 ) . BMP4 signal from the ExE activates a regulatory pathway involving Wnt3 ( step 6 ) , which activates T ( brachyury ) expression , initially near the epiblast – ExE region and later in the region of the forming primitive streak . Expression of FGFs is downstream of T ( step 7 ) , and is enhanced by the activity of the nodal precursor protein ( step 8 ) . R E V I E W S 372 | MAY 2007 | VOLUME 8 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics © 2007 Nature Publishing Group Table 1 | Mutations that affect patterning of the visceral endoderm and the epiblast Gene Genetic modification DVE formation DVE migration Epiblast patterning Germ - layer potential Refs Nodal signalling Nodal KO No - No primitive streak Ectopic and expanded neuroectoderm 11 , 12 , 47 Conditional KO — mosaic in epiblast derivatives Yes Variable Forms primitive streak ; anterior ( head ) truncation Forms anterior mesoderm but deficient in definitive endoderm 123 Pro - viral insertion - - Lacks any tissue patterning Some mesoderm forms 124 Hypomorphic Yes Defective Defective Normal 125 Protease - cleavage resistant - - Enlarged primitive streak Normal 55 Smad2 KO and epiblast - conditional KO No - Posteriorized Forms extraembryonic mesoderm 47 Cripto KO Yes No No primitive streak No mesoderm , ectopic or expanded neurectoderm 50 Foxh1 KO Yes Yes , for the majority ; No , in the most severe mutant Appropriate anterior – posterior patterning in the less severe mutant ; persistent proximal – distal patterning in the most severe mutant Lacks axial mesoderm , forms paraxial and extraembryonic mesoderm 51 , 88 Cer1 , Lefty1 Double KO - - Expanded anterior primitive streak or multiple primitive streaks Expanded domain of anterior primitive streak derivatives 56 Drap1 KO - - Expanded primitive streak Excess mesoderm 57 Otx2 KO Yes No , but can be rescued by DKK1 expression or reduced β - catenin Anterior truncation Loss of anterior neuroectoderm derivatives 35 , 67 BMP / TGFB signalling Bmp4 KO - - Variable — no primitive streak in some embryos No mesoderm forms 52 KD Defective Defective Primitive streak forms Reduced mesoderm 43 Bmpr1 KO - - No primitive streak No mesoderm 53 Bmpr2 KO - - No anterior – posterior patterning No mesoderm 54 Gdf3 KO Defective No Defective primitive - streak formation Reduced mesoderm and definitive endoderm 98 WNT signalling Wnt3 KO Yes Yes No primitive streak , no anterior neural patterning No mesoderm forms 16 Ctnnb1 KO ; Primitive - streak KO ; Chimaera : epiblast Yes , Cer1 - positive cells present but no Hhex - or Hesx1 - expressing cells No , for Cer1 - expressing cells No primitive streak ; defective anterior – posterior patterning No mesoderm forms 45 , 49 , 121 Lrp5 , Lrp6 Double KO Yes Yes No primitive streak No mesoderm or definitive endoderm forms 59 Macf1 KO Yes - No primitive streak Neural plate forms , no mesoderm 126 Mesd Radiation induced Yes Yes Proper proximal – distal pattern No primitive streak , mesoderm or organizer , expanded Otx2 , Cripto and Pou5f1 domain in the epiblast 127 Apc min mutation : gain of WNT function No - Acquires proximal – posterior characteristics Mesoderm forms 38 Cytoskeletal regulation Nckap1 KO Yes No ( some embryos ) Axis duplication Normal 66 Dash ( - ) indicates not directly tested . Apc , adenomatous polyposis coli ; BMP , bone morphogenetic protein ; Cer1 , cerberus 1 homologue ; Ctnnb1 , β - catenin gene ; DKK1 , dickkopf 1 ; Drap1 , DR1 - associated protein 1 ; DVE , distal visceral endoderm ; FoxH1 , forkhead box H1 ; Gdf3 , growth differentiation factor 3 ; Hesx1 , homeobox gene expressed in ES cells ; Hhex , haematopoietically expressed homeobox ; KO , knockout ; KD , siRNA knockdown ; Lefty1 , left – right determination factor 1 ; LRP , low - density lipoprotein receptor - related protein ; Macf1 , microtubule actin cross - linking factor 1 ; Mesd , mesoderm development ; Nckap1 , NCK - associated protein ; Otx2 , orthodenticle homologue 2 ; Pou5f1 , POU - domain class 5 transcription factor 1 ; TGFB , transforming growth factor - β . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 8 | MAY 2007 | 373 © 2007 Nature Publishing Group Initiation of movement of the AVE Lhx1 Amot Coordinated movement of the visceral endoderm and the defintive endoderm Lhx1 Nckap1 Dkk1 Ingression at the primitive streak Movement of the mesoderm Transcription activity influencing movement of DVE Driving forces for DVE movement Enhancing factors for DVE movement Active ( autonomous ) movement • Motile activity • Nckap1 - mediated WAVE function for morphogenetic cytoskeletal activity LEFTY1 : reduced cell proliferation DKK1 : reduced WNT signal leading to positive tactic response Nodal : elevated cell proliferation WNT / β - catenin / APC : WNT signal for guiding movement a Pre - gastrulation : cell movement in the visceral endoderm b Early gastrulation : genetic and molecular activity influencing the movement of the nascent mesoderm and the endoderm Otx2 Snai1 E - cadherin Fgfr1 Fgf8 Mesp1 , Nckap1 FOXH1 SMADs Dkk1 Lhx1Foxa2 Movement of the DVE Nodal Gdf3 3 2 2 1 3 4 5 1 Lhx1 Pcdh8 Lhx1 Dkk1 MIXl1 TGFB Foxh1 Tdgf1 ( Cripto ) ExE ExE Morula A stage of pre - implantation development in which the embryo is a ball containing 8 – 32 cells inside the zona pellucida . The outer cells will become the trophoblast and the inner cells will become the inner cell mass , from which the epiblast and subsequently the fetal tissues will form . Fate mapping An experimental approach by which the developmental fates of cells are traced from the tissue of origin to their destination and their contribution to specific types of tissues in the embryo is assessed . Primitive endoderm An extraembryonic cell layer that forms on the surface of the inner cell mass and faces the blastocoelic cavity . It gives rise to the visceral and parietal endoderm . Blastocoele A fluid - filled cavity within the blastocyst . Epithelium Cells that line the surface of a structure , characterized by tight cell junctions and polarized morphology . Regionalization The acquisition of localized morphological or molecular characteristics by cell populations within a tissue or an organ . Figure 3 | Pattern of cell movement during embryogenesis and the molecular activities that influence cell or tissue movement . a | Patterns of cell movement in the visceral endoderm of the embryo before gastrulation . Distal visceral endoderm ( DVE ) cells move to the prospective anterior side of the embryo ( indicated by a dashed arrow ) to form the anterior visceral endoderm ( AVE , indicated by blue dots ) ( step 1 ) , lateral movement of the AVE after the leading population reaches the border ( indicated by a dashed line ) of the epiblast and the extraembryonic ectoderm ( ExE ) ( step 2 ) , and distribution of the visceral - endoderm cell clones ( indicated by yellow dots ) that are derived from the inner cell mass of the blastocyst in an oblique domain in the visceral endoderm ( step 3 ) — this pattern can be seen at E5 . 5 ( before the movement of the DVE ) and at E6 . 5 at the onset of gastrulation 64 . The scheme shows the enhancing factors , the driving forces and the hierarchy of transcription activities initiated by Nodal and Gdf3 ( growth differentiation factor 3 ) on putative Nodal / Foxh1 ( forkhead box 1 ) downstream genes for regulating DVE movement ( see also TABLE 1 ) . b | Movement of the mesoderm and endoderm at early gastrulation . Movement of the endoderm is accomplished by the coordination of movement of the AVE ( again , indicated by blue dots ) to the extraembryonic yolk sac ( step 1 ) , the anterior – proximal movement of the more distally located visceral endoderm ( step 2 ) and anterior displacement of the definitive endoderm ( shown in yellow ) ( step 3 ) . Movement of the mesoderm ( shown in orange ) commences with the ingression of the progenitor cells through the primitive streak ( step 4 ) , followed by the anterior spreading of the tissue sheet ( step 5 ) . The scheme of genetic and molecular activities that affect the movement of specific cell populations in embryos was made on the basis of analysis of downstream gene activity ( in the direction of pointers shown in the boxes ) and putative functional interactions ( positive interactions are indicated by an arrow ; inhibitory interactions are indicated by a bar pointer ) . Amot , angiomotin ; APC , adenomatosis polyposis coli protein ; Dkk1 , dickkopf 1 ; FGF , fibroblast growth factor ; Lhx1 , LIM - domain homebox 1 ; Mesp1 , mesoderm posterior 1 ; Mixl1 , MIX1 homeobox - like 1 ; Nckap1 , NCK - associated protein 1 ; Otx2 , orthodenticle homologue 2 ; Pcdh8 , protocadherin 8 ; TGFB , transforming growth factor - β . R E V I E W S 374 | MAY 2007 | VOLUME 8 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics © 2007 Nature Publishing Group ectoplacental cone in contact with the epiblast , the DVE is still formed , indicating that the ectoplacental cone might supply the necessary signals for DVE formation 42 . Knockdown of Bmp4 ( bone morphogenetic protein 4 ) expression in the whole embryo showed that BMP4 might be one of the signals that is required for the nor - mal formation of the DVE 43 ( TABLE 1 ) . However , whether this is a direct effect of BMP4 on the visceral endoderm or mediated by signals from the epiblast is unknown . The involvement of WNT signalling from the epi - blast in DVE formation is hinted at by the phenotype of embryos that lack β - catenin ( encoded by Ctnnb1 ) or APC ( adenomatous polyposis coli protein , which modulates canonical WNT signalling ) ( TABLE 1 ) . Loss of Ctnnb1 function in the epiblast and the constitutive β - catenin activity that is associated with the Apc min muta - tion 44 both result in impaired DVE formation owing to defective proximal – distal regionalization of the visceral endoderm 38 , 45 . By contrast , the loss of Wnt3 does not affect the formation of the AVE 46 , indicating that DVE formation could be mediated by other WNT factors or driven by WNT - independent β - catenin activity . Nodal signalling , which originates in the epiblast ( FIG . 2a , step 6 ) and is transduced by SMAD2 in the extraembryonic tissues , is required for the formation of the DVE 47 , 48 . The identification of the nodal co - receptor teratocarcinoma - derived growth factor ( encoded by Tdgf1 , also known as Cripto ) as a candidate β - catenin downstream target points to a potential link between nodal and WNT signalling in DVE formation 49 , but loss of Tdgf1 seems to affect the ability of the DVE to move , rather than its initial specification 50 . It has been suggested that nodal signalling might work by supporting epiblast growth until there is sufficient separation between the distal EmVE and the ExE , in order to attenuate some as yet undefined inhibitory signals from the ExE for the specification of the DVE 12 . Nodal alone can induce the expression of DVE marker genes even when the ExE is removed , indicating that nodal signalling might function in both overcoming inhibitory signals from the ExE and inducing DVE formation independently of the ExE 12 . Although the DVE is formed in embryos that are homozygous for a deletion of Foxh1 ( forkhead box H1 , an inducer of nodal - dependent target genes , also known as Fast2 ) , expression of Lefty1 is absent in the DVE , con - sistent with a role for nodal in activating DVE genes 51 . Intriguingly , Lefty1 expression is also lost in the DVE of mutant embryos that have epiblast - specific abrogation of Foxh1 activity . As autoinduction of Nodal requires FOXH1 , loss of Lefty1 expression in these mice might be due to delayed or reduced autoinduction of Nodal , resulting in a reduced signal concentration . Epiblast patterning The formation of the primitive streak is an important milestone in embryogenesis ( FIG . 1e ) . It is the morphologi - cal indication of the onset of gastrulation , which results in the formation of the primary germ layers and the estab - lishment of the basic body plan of the embryo . Formation and correct placement of the primitive streak requires the prior establishment of anterior – posterior polarity in the epiblast and the overlying visceral endoderm . It has been proposed that the formation of the primi - tive streak is accompanied by the posterior migration of cells that express primitive - streak marker genes 33 . However , a recent study shows that patterns of gene expression do not necessarily reflect the migratory behaviour of the prospective primitive - streak cells . For example , expression of T ( brachyury ) is shifted to the posterior epiblast before posterior movement of epiblast cells is detected 36 . Reciprocal interactions between the epiblast and the ExE maintain the signals that are required for formation of the primitive streak . Signals from the ExE , including BMP4 , induce expression of primitive - streak mark - ers 40 , 42 , 43 , 52 – 54 ( FIG . 2b ; TABLE 1 ) . In a reciprocal interaction , nodal signalling from the epiblast maintains Bmp4 expres - sion in the ExE , which probably occurs independently of nodal processing ( FIG . 2b , step 1 ) 47 , 55 . A correct balance between the activity of nodal and its antagonists in the AVE is necessary for the anterior – posterior patterning of the epiblast and correct placement of the primitive streak 47 , 56 , 57 . Abrogation of early nodal signalling in the epiblast results in a failure of primitive - streak gene expression to shift to the posterior epiblast 51 , 58 . Analysis of embryos that express a cleavage - resistant nodal pro - protein shows that Fgf8 expression in the primitive streak might be induced by the uncleaved nodal protein 55 . The nodal antagonists CER1 and LEFTY1 , which are produced in the DVE and later the AVE , attenuate the influence of nodal signalling ( FIG . 2b , step 4 ) . In embryos that lack both antagonists , the anter - ior side of the primitive streak becomes expanded , or ectopic primitive streaks form . Cer1 / Lefty1 - deficient embryos that lack one functional Nodal allele exhibit a less severe phenotype , confirming that correctly regulated nodal signalling is necessary for epiblast patterning 56 . Primitive - streak formation requires specification of the posterior epiblast by WNT3 signalling through β - catenin and LRP5 ( low - density lipoprotein recep - tor - related protein 5 ) and LRP6 ( REFS 16 , 45 , 59 , 60 ) . Expression of Wnt3 is activated by the unprocessed form of nodal , probably through BMP4 signalling in the ExE 47 , 55 ( FIG . 2b , steps 6 , 7 ) . In turn , WNT3 activates a feedback loop that maintains nodal expression in the epiblast 55 . However , Wnt3 - dependent activity does not account for all the nodal downstream activity that affects primitive - streak formation . This indicates that , although WNT signalling works downstream of nodal signalling in primitive - streak formation , other WNT - independent nodal functions are required for this process . What drives cell movement in the embryo ? Movement of cells in the embryo is accomplished by a combination of active cell - autonomous migration and the bulk movement of the tissue 61 . Responses to environ - mental cues for inducing and directing cell movement require interaction between cellular mechanisms of loco - motion and signal transduction systems . Morphogenetic cell and tissue movements have a vital role in shaping R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 8 | MAY 2007 | 375 © 2007 Nature Publishing Group Homotypic interactions Interactions between cells with similar cell - surface characteristics or molecular properties . Epithelial - to - mesenchyme transition A process during which cells lose their epithelial chracteristics , downregulate E - cadherin , gain a less regular appearance and become migratory . Primordial germ cells Diploid germline precursors that migrate through the gut endoderm layer and enter the gonad , where they differentiate into germ cells . the embryo , but the mechanisms that direct cell move - ments have been elusive . Recent studies have revealed potential roles of differential cell proliferation , active guid - ance and homotypic interactions in directing cell movement in the visceral endoderm and germ - layer progenitors . Active versus driven movement of the DVE cells . An important step in establishing the primary body axes is the generation of anterior – posterior asymmetry . Signalling through the BMP , nodal and WNT pathways is initially located at the proximal end of the epiblast , whereas antagonists emanate from the DVE ( FIG . 2a , b ) . Translocation of the DVE to the anterior side 62 , 63 ( FIG . 3a ) transforms this proximal – distal polarity into the prospective anterior – posterior axis . However , specifi - cation of anterior – posterior polarity might take place earlier in view of the asymmetry in gene expression in the PrE of the implanting blastocyst and the asym - metrical distribution of the clonal descendants of ICM cells in the visceral endoderm 64 ( see FIG . 3a , step 3 ) . Although this has yet to be proven , it is possible that DVE movement might be a morphogenetic response to a pre - existing anterior – posterior polarity . Active migration of the DVE cells ( FIG . 3a , step 1 ) has been tracked using a Hhex – GFP reporter 65 . The migratory ability of cells is influenced by dynamic changes in the cytoskeleton that are mediated by WASF1 ( Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein family member 1 , also known as WAVE ) . WASF1 can constitutively acti - vate the actin - nucleating complex ( ARP2 / 3 ) , enabling the cell to perceive the environmental cues for migra - tion 66 . WASF1 forms a complex with NCK - associated protein 1 ( NCKAP1 or NAP1 ) , enhancing its stability and membrane localization 66 . Loss of Nckap1 results in loss of polarized morphology and no movement of the DVE 66 . DVE migration can be directed by nodal and WNT signalling activity ( FIG . 3a ) . The DVE fails to move in many mutant embryos , including those that lack the function of certain components of these two signalling pathways ( TABLE 1 ) . A potential role of WNT activity in DVE movement is shown by manipulating the activity of Dkk1 in Otx2 – / – ( orthodenticle homologue 2 ) mutant embryos 67 . The DVE is formed in the Otx2 - null mutant but fails to move 34 , 67 . The Otx2 - deficient DVE can be mobilized by expressing DKK1 ( Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) as a knock - in allele at the Otx2 locus , or by reducing the level of WNT / β - catenin activity . Several WNT genes are expressed in the pre - gastrula embryo 68 , but which of these is involved with cell movement is not known . WNT3 is unlikely to have a role , as visceral - endoderm movement is not affected in the Wnt3 – / – embryo 16 . Experimentally , movement of the DVE can be directed by localized DKK1 and WNT3A activity , which generate attractive and repulsive action , respectively . The DVE can also be driven towards and away from the site of ectopic expression of Lefty1 and Nodal , respectively . It is proposed that nodal activity elevates cell proliferation on the prospective posterior side of the embryo , whereas the inhibition of nodal by CER1 reduces cell proliferation in the anterior side . This might result in localized build - up of cells , generating the propulsive force that directs DVE movement 37 . However , regionalized accretion of cells alone cannot account for the rapid movement of DVE cells , which reach the border of the epiblast and the ExE within 4 – 5 hours 65 ( FIG . 3a , step 1 ) , or the subsequent lateral movement of the AVE cells ( FIG . 3a , step 2 ) . It is more likely that the differen - tial rate of cell proliferation that is induced by nodal is responsible for sustaining the driven movement of the visceral endoderm , combined with the WNT - regulated active movement of the visceral - endoderm cells . Cell movement through the primitive streak . The for - mation of the germ layers requires movement of the progenitor cells from the epiblast through the primitive streak , to either emerge as a new mesoderm layer or be incorporated as definitive endoderm into the pre - existing visceral - endoderm layer ( BOX 1 ) . The crucial role of FGF signalling in regulating cell movement is highlighted by the phenotypic effect of mutations of genes that encode FGF8 and FGFR1 ( fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 , see FIG . 3b , step 4 ) . In Fgfr1 - mutant embryos , epiblast cells fail to undergo the epithelium - to - mesenchyme transition , which is required for ingression through the primitive streak 69 . This defect is most likely attributable to the failure to upregulate Snai1 ( snail homologue 1 ) and to down - regulate Cdh1 ( cadherin 1 , also known as E - cadherin ) in these mutants . Fgfr1 – / – embryos also have reduced expression of the T - box genes Tbx6 and T , which affects the movement of the mesoderm . Expression of T is indi - rectly regulated by FGFR1 through an interaction with WNT signalling . In Ffgr1 – / – cells with high E - cadherin activity , alterations in the physical association between E - cadherin and β - catenin reduce nuclear localization of β - catenin , which results in downregulation of T , a direct target of WNT / β - catenin signalling 69 , 70 . A null mutation of Fgf8 causes the accumulation of mesenchyme in the vicinity of the primitive streak 71 , which is consistent with a role for FGF8 in promoting dispersion of ingressed cells from the primitive streak in the chick 72 . Recent findings point to a crucial role for homotypic interactions between cell - surface complexes in guiding cell movement during gastrulation . A screen for WNT downstream genes by expression profiling of β - catenin mutant embryos uncovered the gene that encodes IFITM1 ( interferon inducible transmembrane protein 1 , also known as Fragilis 2 or Mil2 ) , which is expressed in the pre - migratory primordial germ cells ( PGC ) in the epiblast and the embryonic mesoderm 73 , 74 . IFITM1 is a component of the cell - surface protein complex for homo - typic cell – cell interactions . PGCs that do not express Ifitm1 are repelled by Ifitm1 - expressing primitive streak cells , resulting in translocation of the PGC to the endo - derm , which does not express Ifitm1 74 . The molecular mechanism that mediates the repulsive activity between cells with different IFITM1 activity is unknown . The activity of another IFITM gene , Ifitm3 ( also known as Fragilis or Mil1 ) , which might be subject to induction by BMP 75 , seems to enable the cells to perceive the homing cue for localization to the correct sites for the PGCs 74 . It is not known if the IFITM1 - mediated repulsive action also R E V I E W S 376 | MAY 2007 | VOLUME 8 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics © 2007 Nature Publishing Group Paraxial mesoderm The precursor of the somites , which give rise to the spine , muscle and dermis of the skin . Prechordal plate A mesoderm - derived structure that lies underneath the forebrain and anterior to the notochord . navigates the movement of other Ifitm1 - negative cells , which could include the progenitors of the definitive endoderm , during germ - layer formation . Movement of the mesoderm and endoderm at gastru - lation . Lhx1 ( LIM - domain homeobox 1 , also known as Lim1 ) has a important role in the morphogenetic movement of the mesoderm and the endoderm . During gastrulation , AVE cells are dispersed to the extrae - mbryonic region ( FIG . 3b , step 1 ) , but in the Amot – / – ( angiomotin ) mutant these cells remain stationary 76 . As Amot expression is regulated by Lhx1 , movement of the endoderm 2 ( FIG . 3b , steps 2 , 3 ) in the Lhx1 – / – embryo might be blocked by the AVE cells that do not move . Loss of Lhx1 also affects the movement of the mesoderm ( see FIG . 3b , step 5 ) , accompanied by the downregulation of PAPC ( paraxial protocadherin , encoded by Pcdh8 ) 77 . In Xenopus laevis , downregulation of PAPC leads to upregulation of C - cadherin and affects cell sorting dur - ing gastrulation 78 . PAPC also interacts with Frizzled 7 receptor to activate the RhoA – JNK pathway , and might therefore function through the non - canonical WNT pathway to control cell movement 79 , 80 . However , in the mouse , whether Lhx1 function in the mesoderm move - ment is mediated by PAPC 51 or has any link to WNT signalling is not known . Movement of the mesoderm and endoderm is not obligately coupled . Embryos that lack Mesp1 ( mesoderm posterior 1 ) function exhibit retarded movement of the mesoderm but not the endoderm 81 . In the Mixl1 – / – ( MIX1 - homeobox - like 1 ) embryo , in which fewer definitive endoderm cells are recruited to the endoder - mal layer , a reduction in propulsion might underpin the lack of endoderm migration that occurs despite the movement of underlying mesoderm 82 ( FIG . 3b ) . The impact of endoderm movement on patterning . The regulation of cell movement before and during gastrula - tion is crucial , not only for shaping the embryo , but also for positioning the tissue to achieve normal inductive interactions for morphogenesis . A common feature of three types of mutant embryo that we have discussed is the duplication of the posterior body axis 66 , 83 , 84 . An expan - sion of the expression domain of Gsc ( goosecoid , which marks the anterior segment of the primitive streak ) , T and Wnt3 ( which both mark the whole primitive streak ) is found in the Lhx1 , Mixl1 and Nckap1 mutant embryo , respectively . Loss of Nckap1 affects the movement of both the visceral and definitive endoderm , whereas loss of Lhx1 and Mixl1 affects the movement of the defini - tive endoderm ( FIG . 3b ) . Consistent with the role of the visceral endoderm in the specification and positioning of the primitive streak ( see the previous section 56 , 85 ) and the role of the definitive endoderm in patterning the body axis 86 , the abnormal movement of the endoderm might cause axis duplication by disrupting the normal spatial pattern and temporal course of tissue interaction . Signals regulate lineage choices at gastrulation The progenitors of different mesoderm and endoderm tissues are allocated during gastrulation ( BOX 1 ; FIG . 4a ) . The formation of different populations of mesoderm and endoderm cells seems to depend on the deploy - ment of different levels of nodal and WNT signalling activity in the primitive streak ( FIG . 4a , b ; Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) . Loss of nodal signalling leads to the absence of ante - rior primitive - streak ( APS ) derivatives , such as the axial and paraxial mesoderm and the definitive endoderm 37 , 87 – 89 . Conversely , elevation of nodal signalling due to the loss of the transcription co - repressor or nodal antagonists ( Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) result in the overexpression of mesodermal markers 56 , 57 , 90 . The gener - ation of different mesoderm and endoderm derivatives might be a response to exposure to different intensities or durations of nodal signalling 55 . This is highlighted by differing effects on the formation of APS - derivatives when nodal signalling is disrupted to varying degrees in embryos that have different combinations of Smad2 and Smad3 alleles , or that lack the Nodal proximal epiblast enhancer 91 , 92 . Complete loss of nodal signalling prevents germ - layer formation . Progressively smaller reductions in nodal signal transduction in embryos result in vary - ing degrees of loss of axial and paraxial mesoderm , with the mildest reduction causing loss of the prechordal plate only , but not the rest of the axial mesoderm 91 , 92 . Taken together , these findings indicate that formation of the anterior derivatives of the primitive streak requires a high intensity of nodal signals , and that there is a graded response to nodal signalling in the allocation of differ - ent mesodermal derivatives . Whether a gradient of nodal signalling activity exists in the primitive streak ( FIG . 4a ) is not known . The requirement of high levels of nodal for formation of definitive endoderm is supported by the observation that endodermal marker genes are activated in mouse ES cells when high concentrations of a TGFB - related fac - tor , activin A , are present 93 . A similar effect is observed with human ES cells 94 , indicating a conserved role for SMAD2 / 3 - mediated TGFB signalling in exercizing the lineage choice for endoderm . Although specification of the definitive endoderm requires high nodal activ - ity , its formation after the initial step of specification depends on activation of Mixl1 to downregulate nodal 84 . The Mixl1 promoter contains SMAD - and FOXH1 - binding sites , which might mediate the response to TGFB signalling 95 . Nodal expression is elevated in the Mixl1 – / – mutant , indicating that MIXL1 might have a negative - feedback action ( FIG . 4b ) . Other TGFB - related factors , along with WNT and FGF ( Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) 96 – 98 , are involved in the specification of germ - layer tissues ( Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) . Bmp4 – / – embryos are deficient in posterior derivatives of the primitive streak , such as the extraembryonic and haematopoietic mesoderm 52 . Conditional ablation of Bmpr1a ( bone morphoge - netic protein receptor , type 1A ) in the epiblast results in excessive production of paraxial mesoderm 99 . This defect can be rescued by lowering the FGF signalling activity , indicating that BMP and FGF activities coun - teract each other in the allocation of paraxial mesoderm . Like the action of TGFB / nodal antagonists , amnionless R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 8 | MAY 2007 | 377 © 2007 Nature Publishing Group d c b e a a Mixl1 B M P F G F N o d a l Primitive streak Shh Twist1 Lhx1 Sox2 Wnt3 , Wnt3a Nodal Smad3 Tbx6 Smad2Foxh1 Amn Fgf8 Acvr2bAcvr1bTdgf1 Pcsk6Furin Drap1 Lefty2 Mixl1 ? T Eomes Bmp4 a Lineage allocation b Genetic activity associated with the lineages Sox17 Meox1 Rnf111 Fgfr1 ( TABLE 1 ; Supplementary information S1 , S2 ( tables ) ) , which might negatively regulate BMP signalling , is required for the formation of the paraxial and lateral - plate mesoderm , which are derived from the middle region of the primitive streak 56 , 100 . In addition , formation of the paraxial mesoderm , which is derived from both the anterior and middle primitive streak , requires WNT signalling . In Wnt3a - null mutant mice , ectopic neurec - toderm is formed in place of somites 101 . The formation of middle - primitive - streak derivatives is therefore subject to the combined action of TGFB , FGF and WNT sig - nalling 102 , whereas that of the posterior primitive streak depends on BMP activity ( FIG . 4a , b ) . Conclusions A comparison of development prior to gastrulation in different groups of vertebrates shows that the degree of conservation is , to an extent , dependent on the mode of reproduction and development that is used in that species . Although the mouse develops from a blas - tocyst of similar configuration to many mammals , the architecture of the post - implantation embryo ( FIG . 1 ) is unique to the rodents 103 . The interactions between the extraembryonic and embryonic tissues take on a much greater importance in mammalian development than in many species that have less extensive development of extraembryonic structures . Figure 4 | Gene expression and regionalized allocation of tissue progenitors in the primitive streak during gastrulation . a | Allocation of epiblast cells in the anterior - most region of the primitive streak ( the node ) to the axial mesoderm ( expressing Shh ( sonic hedgehog ) ) and the definitive endoderm ( expressing Sox17 ( SRY - box containing gene 17 ) ) ( box a ) , the anterior - third segment of the primitive streak to the paraxial mesoderm ( expressing Meox1 ( mesenchyme homeobox 1 ) ) ( box b ) , the middle - third segment of the primitive streak to the lateral plate mesoderm ( expressing Lhx1 ( LIM - domain homebox 1 ) ) ( box c ) and the posterior - third segment of the primitive streak of progenitor of the extraembryonic mesoderm ( for example , allantois , expressing Twist1 ) ( box d ) . Cells that remain in the epiblast are allocated to the ectoderm ( for example , neuroectoderm , which expresses Sox2 ) ( box e ) . The putative patterns of graded nodal and BMP ( bone morphogenetic protein ) activity and regionalized FGF ( fibroblast growth factor ) signalling activity in the primitive streak are shown schematically , with the width of the bar indicating the strength of activity . b | Genetic activity ( colour - matched with the signalling activity ) mediates the specification or allocation of the tissue progenitors in the four regions of the primitive streak ( the brackets ) . Genes in the relational network are those that , when mutated , are associated with defects in the formation of specific tissues . The connectors indicating an inter - relationship are based on known functional hierarchy and experimental demonstration of epistatic ( up - or downstream ) relation , but not transcriptional regulation . The question mark denotes an as yet undefined interaction that is related to transcriptional regulation . Acvr1b , activin receptor IB ; Acvr2b , activin receptor IIB ; Amn , amnionless ; Drap1 , DR1 - associated protein 1 ; Eomes , eomesodermin homologue ; Lefty1 , left – right determination factor 1 ; Lhx1 , LIM - domain homebox ; Mixl1 , MIX1 homeobox - like 1 ; Pcsk6 , pro - protein convertase subtilisin / kexin type 6 ; Rnf111 , ring finger 111 ( also known as arkadia ) ; T , brachyury ; Tdgf1 , teratocarcinoma - derived growth factor ; Tbx6 , T - box 6 . R E V I E W S 378 | MAY 2007 | VOLUME 8 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics © 2007 Nature Publishing Group To facilitate comparisons between these developmen - tal stages in the mouse and other systems , it is useful to conceptually flatten the cup - shaped ‘egg cylinder’ into a discoid configuration , with the ectoplacental cone removed . In this model , the epiblast is depicted at the centre of the disc surrounded by a ring of ExE , with the visceral endoderm lying underneath 2 . This configura - tion shows that the tissues on the periphery of the epiblast ( equivalent to the proximal epiblast of the cup - shaped embryo ) will be most strongly influenced by the ExE , because of their close proximity . In this way , the region - alization of the visceral endoderm and the interactions between the DVE or AVE and overlying regions of the epiblast disc can be visualized more clearly 2 , 104 . This view of the mouse embryo places the visceral endoderm in an equivalent location to the hypoblast of the chick or rabbit . The hypoblast of the rabbit , like the mouse vis - ceral endoderm , develops molecular asymmetries along the anterior – posterior axis before the epiblast exhibits anterior – posterior polarity 105 . In the chick , primitive - streak formation requires the interaction of TGFB - related molecules , such as nodal and VG1 , and WNT signals 106 – 108 . Signalling activity is modulated by WNT and nodal antagonists from the hypoblast , similar to that in the mouse DVE and AVE , for correct positioning of the primitive streak 105 , 106 . The hypoblast of chick embryos therefore functions like the DVE and AVE of the mouse as a source of inhibitory and inductive activity 109 . Genetic investigations of mouse mutants 11 , 12 , 55 , 56 , 98 and analysis of the transcriptome 110 , 111 and downstream gene activities using mutants 49 , 73 , 112 , undertaken in conjunction with experimental embryology 37 , 40 , 41 , 63 , 65 , 67 , have revealed complex morphogenetic interactions between extraem - bryonic and embryonic tissues . These interactions are accomplished through the coordination of interdepend - ent signalling pathways that are often reciprocal and autoregulatory in nature . The challenge now is to gain a holistic understanding of the multitude of processes that interact to regulate embryogenesis , by analysing gene functions in whole embryos as well as cell - and tissue - based experimental models . Recent studies using mouse and human ES - cell differentiation as a model have highlighted the conservation of signalling function in maintaining pluripotency and regulating cell - lineage choice 13 , 94 . However , one must not forget that the mouse gastrula has adopted a configuration that is not typical of the mammals 103 , and therefore the genetic and molecular paradigms for mouse embryogenesis must be road - tested in other embryonic models . The conservation of developmental controls must therefore be examined in other species with different embryonic morphology . For example , the role of inductive interaction between the juxtaposed ExE and epiblast in tissue patterning and that of the AVE in determining the axis , as shown in the mouse , might need to be verified in the guinea pig embryo , in which the ExE is not in direct contact with the epiblast 113 , and in the armadillo conceptus , which produces obligate quadruplets in which the anterior poles of the body axes converge centripetally 103 , respec - tively . Outcomes of the study of comparative embryology will tell us whether there is a common developmental paradigm for mammalian embryogenesis . 1 . Lawson , K . A . Fate mapping the mouse embryo . Int . J . Dev . Biol . 43 , 773 – 775 ( 1999 ) . 2 . Tam , P . P . L . & Gad , J . M . Gastrulation of the mouse embryo in Gastrulation 223 – 262 ( Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , New York , 2004 ) . 3 . Chew , J . L . et al . Reciprocal transcriptional regulation of Pou5f1 and Sox2 via the Oct4 / Sox2 complex in embryonic stem cells . Mol . Cell . Biol . 25 , 6031 – 6046 ( 2005 ) . 4 . Okumura - Nakanishi , S . , Saito , M . , Niwa , H . & Ishikawa , F . Oct - 3 / 4 and Sox2 regulate Oct - 3 / 4 gene in embryonic stem cells . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 5307 – 5317 ( 2005 ) . 5 . Rodda , D . J . et al . Transcriptional regulation of nanog by OCT4 and SOX2 . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 24731 – 24737 ( 2005 ) . 6 . Zhang , J . et al . Sall4 modulates embryonic stem cell pluripotency and early embryonic development by the transcriptional regulation of Pou5f1 . Nature Cell Biol . 8 , 1114 – 1123 ( 2006 ) . 7 . Sakaki - Yumoto , M . et al . The murine homolog of SALL4 , a causative gene in Okihiro syndrome , is essential for embryonic stem cell proliferation , and cooperates with Sall1 in anorectal , heart , brain and kidney development . Development 133 , 3005 – 3013 ( 2006 ) . 8 . Wu , Q . et al . Sall4 interacts with Nanog and co - occupies Nanog genomic sites in embryonic stem cells . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 24090 – 24094 ( 2006 ) . 9 . Lee , T . I . et al . Control of developmental regulators by polycomb in human embryonic stem cells . Cell 125 , 301 – 313 ( 2006 ) . 10 . Boyer , L . A . et al . Polycomb complexes repress developmental regulators in murine embryonic stem cells . Nature 441 , 349 – 353 ( 2006 ) . 11 . Camus , A . , Perea - Gomez , A . , Moreau , A . & Collignon , J . Absence of Nodal signaling promotes precocious neural differentiation in the mouse embryo . Dev . Biol . 295 , 743 – 755 ( 2006 ) . This paper shows that the epiblast of Nodal – / – embryos prematurely differentiates into neural cell types . The data show a role for nodal in repressing anterior and neural differentiation . 12 . Mesnard , D . , Guzman - Ayala , M . & Constam , D . B . Nodal specifies embryonic visceral endoderm and sustains pluripotent cells in the epiblast before overt axial patterning . Development 133 , 2497 – 2505 ( 2006 ) . This paper demonstrates that nodal signalling is required for early proximal – distal patterning of the embryo , dividing the visceral endoderm into embryonic and extraembryonic compartments . The authors show that nodal has a role in this process before the formation of the DVE . 13 . James , D . , Levine , A . J . , Besser , D . & Hemmati - Brivanlou , A . TGF β / activin / nodal signaling is necessary for the maintenance of pluripotency in human embryonic stem cells . Development 132 , 1273 – 1282 ( 2005 ) . 14 . Sato , N . , Meijer , L . , Skaltsounis , L . , Greengard , P . & Brivanlou , A . H . Maintenance of pluripotency in human and mouse embryonic stem cells through activation of Wnt signaling by a pharmacological GSK - 3 - specific inhibitor . Nature Med . 10 , 55 – 63 ( 2004 ) . 15 . Kemler , R . et al . Stabilization of β - catenin in the mouse zygote leads to premature epithelial - mesenchymal transition in the epiblast . Development 131 , 5817 – 5824 ( 2004 ) . 16 . Liu , P . et al . Requirement for Wnt3 in vertebrate axis formation . Nature Genet . 22 , 361 – 365 ( 1999 ) . 17 . Lindsley , R . C . , Gill , J . G . , Kyba , M . , Murphy , T . L . & Murphy , K . M . Canonical Wnt signaling is required for development of embryonic stem cell - derived mesoderm . Development 133 , 3787 – 3796 ( 2006 ) . 18 . Chazaud , C . , Yamanaka , Y . , Pawson , T . & Rossant , J . Early lineage segregation between epiblast and primitive endoderm in mouse blastocysts through the Grb2 – MAPK pathway . Dev . Cell 10 , 615 – 624 ( 2006 ) . This paper suggests that the PrE arises from a population of GATA6 - expressing cells that are spread throughout the ICM , rather than being formed on the basis of cell position . The authors also suggest that GRB2 is required for this process , demonstrating a role for receptor tyosine kinase signalling . 19 . Arman , E . , Haffner - Krausz , R . , Chen , Y . , Heath , J . K . & Lonai , P . Targeted disruption of fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) receptor 2 suggests a role for FGF signaling in pregastrulation mammalian development . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 5082 – 5087 ( 1998 ) . 20 . Chiba , H . et al . Hepatocyte nuclear factor ( HNF ) - 4 α triggers formation of functional tight junctions and establishment of polarized epithelial morphology in F9 embryonal carcinoma cells . Exp . Cell Res . 286 , 288 – 297 ( 2003 ) . 21 . Morrisey , E . E . et al . GATA6 regulates HNF4 and is required for differentiation of visceral endoderm in the mouse embryo . Genes Dev . 12 , 3579 – 3590 ( 1998 ) . 22 . Maurer , M . E . & Cooper , J . A . Endocytosis of megalin by visceral endoderm cells requires the Dab2 adaptor protein . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 5345 – 5355 ( 2005 ) . 23 . Huang , C . L . et al . Disabled - 2 is a negative regulator of integrin α IIb β 3 - mediated fibrinogen adhesion and cell signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 42279 – 42289 ( 2004 ) . 24 . Morrisey , E . E . et al . The gene encoding the mitogen - responsive phosphoprotein Dab2 is differentially regulated by GATA - 6 and GATA - 4 in the visceral endoderm . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 19949 – 19954 ( 2000 ) . 25 . Koutsourakis , M . , Langeveld , A . , Patient , R . , Beddington , R . & Grosveld , F . The transcription factor GATA6 is essential for early extraembryonic development . Development 126 , 723 – 732 ( 1999 ) . 26 . Duncan , S . A . , Nagy , A . & Chan , W . Murine gastrulation requires HNF - 4 regulated gene expression in the visceral endoderm : tetraploid rescue of Hnf - 4 – / – embryos . Development 124 , 279 – 287 ( 1997 ) . 27 . Fujikura , J . et al . Differentiation of embryonic stem cells is induced by GATA factors . Genes Dev . 16 , 784 – 789 ( 2002 ) . 28 . Yang , D . H . et al . Disabled - 2 is essential for endodermal cell positioning and structure formation during mouse embryogenesis . Dev . Biol . 251 , 27 – 44 ( 2002 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 8 | MAY 2007 | 379 © 2007 Nature Publishing Group 29 . Li , L . et al . Distinct GATA6 - and laminin - dependent mechanisms regulate endodermal and ectodermal embryonic stem cell fates . Development 131 , 5277 – 5286 ( 2004 ) . 30 . Guzman - Ayala , M . , Ben Haim , N . , Beck , S . & Constam , D . B . Nodal protein processing and fibroblast growth factor 4 synergize to maintain a trophoblast stem cell microenvironment . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 15656 – 15660 ( 2004 ) . 31 . Goldin , S . N . & Papaioannou , V . E . Paracrine action of FGF4 during periimplantation development maintains trophectoderm and primitive endoderm . Genesis 36 , 40 – 47 ( 2003 ) . 32 . Gotoh , N . et al . The docking protein FRS2 α is an essential component of multiple fibroblast growth factor responses during early mouse development . Mol . Cell . Biol . 25 , 4105 – 4116 ( 2005 ) . 33 . Thomas , P . & Beddington , R . Anterior primitive endoderm may be responsible for patterning the anterior neural plate in the mouse embryo . Curr . Biol . 6 , 1487 – 1496 ( 1996 ) . 34 . Perea - Gomez , A . et al . OTX2 is required for visceral endoderm movement and for the restriction of posterior signals in the epiblast of the mouse embryo . Development 128 , 753 – 765 ( 2001 ) . 35 . Kimura , C . et al . Visceral endoderm mediates forebrain development by suppressing posteriorizing signals . Dev . Biol . 225 , 304 – 321 ( 2000 ) . 36 . Rivera - Perez , J . A . & Magnuson , T . Primitive streak formation in mice is preceded by localized activation of Brachyury and Wnt3 . Dev . Biol . 288 , 363 – 371 ( 2005 ) . 37 . Yamamoto , M . et al . Nodal antagonists regulate formation of the anteroposterior axis of the mouse embryo . Nature 428 , 387 – 392 ( 2004 ) . This paper demonstrates the role of nodal signalling in movement of the DVE to the anterior side . Ectopic nodal expression can drive cell proliferation in the visceral endoderm , whereas nodal antagonists LEFTY1 and CER1 suppress cell proliferation on the future anterior side , providing a mechanism for visceral - endoderm migration . 38 . Chazaud , C . & Rossant , J . Disruption of early proximodistal patterning and AVE formation in Apc mutants . Development 133 , 3379 – 3387 ( 2006 ) . A loss - of - function mutation in APC that leads to constitutive β - catenin activity shows that restriction of WNT signalling is important for early proximal – distal patterning . The epiblast assumes a proximal character , causing suppression of the DVE and promoting expression of posterior mesendodermal genes . 39 . Takaoka , K . et al . The mouse embryo autonomously acquires anterior – posterior polarity at implantation . Dev . Cell 10 , 451 – 459 ( 2006 ) . In this paper , the authors provide evidence of asymmetry in gene expression in the PrE at the time of implantation . This is particularly interesting as it occurs independently of any influence of the uterine environment . 40 . Rodriguez , T . A . , Srinivas , S . , Clements , M . P . , Smith , J . C . & Beddington , R . S . Induction and migration of the anterior visceral endoderm is regulated by the extra - embryonic ectoderm . Development 132 , 2513 – 2520 ( 2005 ) . Embryological experiments show an inhibitory role for the ExE in the formation of the DVE . In embryos in which the ExE has been removed , markers of the AVE and DVE are expressed in a expanded domain . When ectopic ExE is added , AVE genes are repressed . 41 . Richardson , L . , Torres - Padilla , M . E . & Zernicka - Goetz , M . Regionalised signalling within the extraembryonic ectoderm regulates anterior visceral endoderm positioning in the mouse embryo . Mech . Dev . 123 , 288 – 296 ( 2006 ) . 42 . Donnison , M . et al . Loss of the extraembryonic ectoderm in Elf5 mutants leads to defects in embryonic patterning . Development 132 , 2299 – 2308 ( 2005 ) . 43 . Soares , M . L . et al . Functional studies of signaling pathways in peri - implantation development of the mouse embryo by RNAi . BMC Dev . Biol . 5 , 28 ( 2005 ) . 44 . Su , L . K . et al . Multiple intestinal neoplasia caused by a mutation in the murine homolog of the APC gene . Science 256 , 668 – 670 ( 1992 ) . 45 . Huelsken , J . et al . Requirement for β - catenin in anterior – posterior axis formation in mice . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 567 – 578 ( 2000 ) . 46 . Liu , Y . , Festing , M . H . , Hester , M . , Thompson , J . C . & Weinstein , M . Generation of novel conditional and hypomorphic alleles of the Smad2 gene . Genesis 40 , 118 – 123 ( 2004 ) . 47 . Brennan , J . et al . Nodal signalling in the epiblast patterns the early mouse embryo . Nature 411 , 965 – 969 ( 2001 ) . 48 . Waldrip , W . R . , Bikoff , E . K . , Hoodless , P . A . , Wrana , J . L . & Robertson , E . J . Smad2 signaling in extraembryonic tissues determines anterior – posterior polarity of the early mouse embryo . Cell 92 , 797 – 808 ( 1998 ) . 49 . Morkel , M . et al . β - Catenin regulates Cripto - and Wnt3 - dependent gene expression programs in mouse axis and mesoderm formation . Development 130 , 6283 – 6294 ( 2003 ) . 50 . Ding , J . et al . Cripto is required for correct orientation of the anterior – posterior axis in the mouse embryo . Nature 395 , 702 – 707 ( 1998 ) . 51 . Yamamoto , M . et al . The transcription factor FoxH1 ( FAST ) mediates Nodal signaling during anterior – posterior patterning and node formation in the mouse . Genes Dev . 15 , 1242 – 1256 ( 2001 ) . 52 . Winnier , G . , Blessing , M . , Labosky , P . A . & Hogan , B . L . Bone morphogenetic protein - 4 is required for mesoderm formation and patterning in the mouse . Genes Dev . 9 , 2105 – 2116 ( 1995 ) . 53 . Mishina , Y . , Suzuki , A . , Ueno , N . & Behringer , R . R . Bmpr encodes a type I bone morphogenetic protein receptor that is essential for gastrulation during mouse embryogenesis . Genes Dev . 9 , 3027 – 3037 ( 1995 ) . 54 . Beppu , H . et al . BMP type II receptor is required for gastrulation and early development of mouse embryos . Dev . Biol . 221 , 249 – 258 ( 2000 ) . 55 . Ben Haim , N . et al . The nodal precursor acting via activin receptors induces mesoderm by maintaining a source of its convertases and BMP4 . Dev . Cell 11 , 313 – 323 ( 2006 ) . Using a nodal mutant that is resistant to cleavage by pro - protein convertases , the authors show that the immature nodal protein takes part in a regulatory loop that maintains the source of convertases , induces BMP4 and WNT3 , and ultimately upregulates nodal expression . 56 . Perea - Gomez , A . et al . Nodal antagonists in the anterior visceral endoderm prevent the formation of multiple primitive streaks . Dev . Cell 3 , 745 – 756 ( 2002 ) . 57 . Iratni , R . et al . Inhibition of excess nodal signaling during mouse gastrulation by the transcriptional corepressor DRAP1 . Science 298 , 1996 – 1999 ( 2002 ) . 58 . Norris , D . P . , Brennan , J . , Bikoff , E . K . & Robertson , E . J . The Foxh1 - dependent autoregulatory enhancer controls the level of Nodal signals in the mouse embryo . Development 129 , 3455 – 3468 ( 2002 ) . 59 . Kelly , O . G . , Pinson , K . I . & Skarnes , W . C . The Wnt co - receptors Lrp5 and Lrp6 are essential for gastrulation in mice . Development 131 , 2803 – 2815 ( 2004 ) . 60 . Mohamed , O . A . , Clarke , H . J . & Dufort , D . β - catenin signaling marks the prospective site of primitive streak formation in the mouse embryo . Dev . Dyn . 231 , 416 – 424 ( 2004 ) . 61 . Zamir , E . A . , Czirok , A . , Cui , C . , Little , C . D . & Rongish , B . J . Mesodermal cell displacements during avian gastrulation are due to both individual cell - autonomous and convective tissue movements . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 19806 – 19811 ( 2006 ) . 62 . Thomas , P . Q . , Brown , A . & Beddington , R . S . Hex : a homeobox gene revealing peri - implantation asymmetry in the mouse embryo and an early transient marker of endothelial cell precursors . Development 125 , 85 – 94 ( 1998 ) . 63 . Rivera - Perez , J . A . , Mager , J . & Magnuson , T . Dynamic morphogenetic events characterize the mouse visceral endoderm . Dev . Biol . 261 , 470 – 487 ( 2003 ) . 64 . Weber , R . J . , Pedersen , R . A . , Wianny , F . , Evans , M . J . & Zernicka - Goetz , M . Polarity of the mouse embryo is anticipated before implantation . Development 126 , 5591 – 5598 ( 1999 ) . 65 . Srinivas , S . , Rodriguez , T . , Clements , M . , Smith , J . C . & Beddington , R . S . P . Active cell migration drives the unilateral movements of the anterior visceral endoderm . Development 131 , 1157 – 1164 ( 2004 ) . 66 . Rakeman , A . S . & Anderson , K . V . Axis specification and morphogenesis in the mouse embryo require Nap1 , a regulator of WAVE - mediated actin branching . Development 133 , 3075 – 3083 ( 2006 ) . Some mouse embryos that lack NCKAP , a component of the WAVE actin regulatory complex , have a duplicated body axis . Others show a failure to close the neural tube and form a single heart tube . This paper reveals a connection between cytoskeletal organization and body - plan organization . 67 . Kimura - Yoshida , C . et al . Canonical Wnt signaling and its antagonist regulate anterior – posterior axis polarization by guiding cell migration in mouse visceral endoderm . Dev . Cell 9 , 639 – 650 ( 2005 ) . This paper provides evidence that the DVE moves by active cell migration , controlled by WNT signalling . The authors show that WNT functions as a repulsive cue , whereas the WNT inhibitor DKK1 works as an attractant . They also show that DKK1 can substitute for OTX2 function in visceral - endoderm migration . 68 . Kemp , C . , Willems , E . , Abdo , S . , Lambiv , L . & Leyns , L . Expression of all Wnt genes and their secreted antagonists during mouse blastocyst and postimplantation development . Dev . Dyn . 233 , 1064 – 1075 ( 2005 ) . 69 . Ciruna , B . & Rossant , J . FGF signaling regulates mesoderm cell fate specification and morphogenetic movement at the primitive streak . Dev . Cell 1 , 37 – 49 ( 2001 ) . 70 . Yamaguchi , T . P . , Takada , S . , Yoshikawa , Y . , Wu , N . & McMahon , A . P . T ( Brachyury ) is a direct target of Wnt3a during paraxial mesoderm specification . Genes Dev . 13 , 3185 – 3190 ( 1999 ) . 71 . Sun , X . , Meyers , E . N . , Lewandoski , M . & Martin , G . R . Targeted disruption of Fgf8 causes failure of cell migration in the gastrulating mouse embryo . Genes Dev . 13 , 1834 – 1846 ( 1999 ) . 72 . Chuai , M . et al . Cell movement during chick primitive streak formation . Dev . Biol . 296 , 137 – 149 ( 2006 ) . 73 . Lickert , H . et al . Dissecting Wnt / β - catenin signaling during gastrulation using RNA interference in mouse embryos . Development 132 , 2599 – 2609 ( 2005 ) . 74 . Tanaka , S . S . , Yamaguchi , Y . L . , Tsoi , B . , Lickert , H . & Tam , P . P . IFITM / Mil / Fragilis family proteins IFITM1 and IFITM3 play distinct roles in mouse primordial germ cell homing and repulsion . Dev . Cell 9 , 745 – 756 ( 2005 ) . 75 . Saitou , M . , Barton , S . C . & Surani , M . A . A molecular programme for the specification of germ cell fate in mice . Nature 418 , 293 – 300 ( 2002 ) . 76 . Shimono , A . & Behringer , R . R . Angiomotin regulates visceral endoderm movements during mouse embryogenesis . Curr . Biol . 13 , 613 – 617 ( 2003 ) . 77 . Hukriede , N . A . et al . Conserved requirement of Lim1 function for cell movements during gastrulation . Dev . Cell 4 , 83 – 94 ( 2003 ) . 78 . Chen , X . & Gumbiner , B . M . Crosstalk between different adhesion molecules . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 572 – 578 ( 2006 ) . 79 . Medina , A . , Swain , R . K . , Kuerner , K . M . & Steinbeisser , H . Xenopus paraxial protocadherin has signaling functions and is involved in tissue separation . EMBO J . 23 , 3249 – 3258 ( 2004 ) . 80 . Unterseher , F . et al . Paraxial protocadherin coordinates cell polarity during convergent extension via Rho A and JNK . EMBO J . 23 , 3259 – 3269 ( 2004 ) . 81 . Saga , Y . et al . MesP1 is expressed in the heart precursor cells and required for the formation of a single heart tube . Development 126 , 3437 – 3447 ( 1999 ) . 82 . Tam , P . P . et al . Sequential allocation and global pattern of movement of the definitive endoderm in the mouse embryo during gastrulation . Development 134 , 251 – 260 ( 2007 ) . 83 . Shawlot , W . & Behringer , R . R . Requirement for Lim1 in head - organizer function . Nature 374 , 425 – 430 ( 1995 ) . 84 . Hart , A . H . et al . Mixl1 is required for axial mesendoderm morphogenesis and patterning in the murine embryo . Development 129 , 3597 – 3608 ( 2002 ) . 85 . Kimura , C . , Shen , M . M . , Takeda , N . , Aizawa , S . & Matsuo , I . Complementary functions of Otx2 and Cripto in initial patterning of mouse epiblast . Dev . Biol . 235 , 12 – 32 ( 2001 ) . 86 . Lewis , S . L . & Tam , P . P . Definitive endoderm of the mouse embryo : formation , cell fates , and morphogenetic function . Dev . Dyn . 235 , 2315 – 2329 ( 2006 ) . R E V I E W S 380 | MAY 2007 | VOLUME 8 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics © 2007 Nature Publishing Group 87 . Beck , S . et al . Extraembryonic proteases regulate Nodal signalling during gastrulation . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 981 – 985 ( 2002 ) . 88 . Hoodless , P . A . et al . FoxH1 ( Fast ) functions to specify the anterior primitive streak in the mouse . Genes Dev . 15 , 1257 – 1271 ( 2001 ) . 89 . Episkopou , V . et al . Induction of the mammalian node requires Arkadia function in the extraembryonic lineages . Nature 410 , 825 – 830 ( 2001 ) . 90 . Meno , C . et al . Mouse Lefty2 and zebrafish antivin are feedback inhibitors of nodal signaling during vertebrate gastrulation . Mol . Cell 4 , 287 – 298 ( 1999 ) . 91 . Vincent , S . D . , Dunn , N . R . , Hayashi , S . , Norris , D . P . & Robertson , E . J . Cell fate decisions within the mouse organizer are governed by graded Nodal signals . Genes Dev . 17 , 1646 – 1662 ( 2003 ) . 92 . Dunn , N . R . , Vincent , S . D . , Oxburgh , L . , Robertson , E . J . & Bikoff , E . K . Combinatorial activities of Smad2 and Smad3 regulate mesoderm formation and patterning in the mouse embryo . Development 131 , 1717 – 1728 ( 2004 ) . 93 . Kubo , A . et al . Development of definitive endoderm from embryonic stem cells in culture . Development 131 , 1651 – 1662 ( 2004 ) . 94 . D’Amour , K . A . et al . Efficient differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to definitive endoderm . Nature Biotech . 23 , 1534 – 1541 ( 2005 ) . 95 . Hart , A . H . , Willson , T . A . , Wong , M . , Parker , K . & Robb , L . Transcriptional regulation of the homeobox gene Mixl1 by TGF β and FoxH1 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 333 , 1361 – 1369 ( 2005 ) . 96 . Cheng , S . K . , Olale , F . , Bennett , J . T . , Brivanlou , A . H . & Schier , A . F . EGF – CFC proteins are essential coreceptors for the TGF β signals Vg1 and GDF1 . Genes Dev . 17 , 31 – 36 ( 2003 ) . 97 . Andersson , O . , Reissmann , E . , Jornvall , H . & Ibanez , C . F . Synergistic interaction between Gdf1 and Nodal during anterior axis development . Dev . Biol . 293 , 370 – 381 ( 2006 ) . 98 . Chen , C . et al . The Vg1 - related protein Gdf3 acts in a Nodal signaling pathway in the pre - gastrulation mouse embryo . Development 133 , 319 – 329 ( 2006 ) . 99 . Miura , S . , Davis , S . , Klingensmith , J . & Mishina , Y . BMP signaling in the epiblast is required for proper recruitment of the prospective paraxial mesoderm and development of the somites . Development 133 , 3767 – 3775 ( 2006 ) . 100 . Kalantry , S . et al . The amnionless gene , essential for mouse gastrulation , encodes a visceral - endoderm - specific protein with an extracellular cysteine - rich domain . Nature Genet . 27 , 412 – 416 ( 2001 ) . 101 . Yoshikawa , Y . , Fujimori , T . , McMahon , A . P . & Takada , S . Evidence that absence of Wnt - 3a signaling promotes neuralization instead of paraxial mesoderm development in the mouse . Dev . Biol . 183 , 234 – 242 ( 1997 ) . 102 . Marikawa , Y . Wnt / β - catenin signaling and body plan formation in mouse embryos . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 , 175 – 184 ( 2006 ) . 103 . Eakin , G . S . & Behringer , R . R . Diversity of germ layer and axis formation among mammals . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 , 619 – 629 ( 2004 ) . 104 . Behringer , R . R . , Wakamiya , M . , Tsang , T . E . & Tam , P . P . A flattened mouse embryo : leveling the playing field . Genesis 28 , 23 – 30 ( 2000 ) . 105 . Idkowiak , J . , Weisheit , G . , Plitzner , J . & Viebahn , C . Hypoblast controls mesoderm generation and axial patterning in the gastrulating rabbit embryo . Dev . Genes Evol . 214 , 591 – 605 ( 2004 ) . 106 . Bertocchini , F . & Stern , C . D . The hypoblast of the chick embryo positions the primitive streak by antagonizing nodal signaling . Dev . Cell 3 , 735 – 744 ( 2002 ) . 107 . Bertocchini , F . , Skromne , I . , Wolpert , L . & Stern , C . D . Determination of embryonic polarity in a regulative system : evidence for endogenous inhibitors acting sequentially during primitive streak formation in the chick embryo . Development 131 , 3381 – 3390 ( 2004 ) . 108 . Skromne , I . & Stern , C . D . Interactions between Wnt and Vg1 signalling pathways initiate primitive streak formation in the chick embryo . Development 128 , 2915 – 2927 ( 2001 ) . 109 . Albazerchi , A . & Stern , C . D . A role for the hypoblast ( AVE ) in the initiation of neural induction , independent of its ability to position the primitive streak . Dev . Biol . 301 , 489 – 503 ( 2006 ) . 110 . Loh , Y . H . et al . The Oct4 and Nanog transcription network regulates pluripotency in mouse embryonic stem cells . Nature Genet . 38 , 431 – 440 ( 2006 ) . 111 . Gu , G . et al . Global expression analysis of gene regulatory pathways during endocrine pancreatic development . Development 131 , 165 – 179 ( 2004 ) . 112 . Shimono , A . & Behringer , R . R . Isolation of novel cDNAs by subtractions between the anterior mesendoderm of single mouse gastrula stage embryos . Dev . Biol . 209 , 369 – 380 ( 1999 ) . 113 . Ilgren , E . B . The in vitro morphogenesis of the guinea pig egg cylinder . Anat . Embryol . 163 , 351 – 365 ( 1981 ) . 114 . Strumpf , D . et al . Cdx2 is required for correct cell fate specification and differentiation of trophectoderm in the mouse blastocyst . Development 132 , 2093 – 2102 ( 2005 ) . 115 . Lawson , K . A . , Meneses , J . J . & Pedersen , R . A . Clonal analysis of epiblast fate during germ layer formation in the mouse embryo . Development 113 , 891 – 911 ( 1991 ) . 116 . Nicolas , J . F . , Mathis , L . , Bonnerot , C . & Saurin , W . Evidence in the mouse for self - renewing stem cells in the formation of a segmented longitudinal structure , the myotome . Development 122 , 2933 – 2946 ( 1996 ) . 117 . Tada , S . et al . Characterization of mesendoderm : a diverging point of the definitive endoderm and mesoderm in embryonic stem cell differentiation culture . Development 132 , 4363 – 4374 ( 2005 ) . 118 . Robb , L . & Tam , P . P . Gastrula organiser and embryonic patterning in the mouse . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 , 543 – 554 ( 2004 ) . 119 . Tam , P . P . & Beddington , R . S . Establishment and organization of germ layers in the gastrulating mouse embryo . Ciba Found . Symp . 165 , 27 – 41 ( 1992 ) . 120 . Kinder , S . J . et al . The orderly allocation of mesodermal cells to the extraembryonic structures and the anteroposterior axis during gastrulation of the mouse embryo . Development 126 , 4691 – 4701 ( 1999 ) . 121 . Lickert , H . et al . Formation of multiple hearts in mice following deletion of β - catenin in the embryonic endoderm . Dev . Cell 3 , 171 – 181 ( 2002 ) . 122 . Downs , K . M . & Davies , T . Staging of gastrulating mouse embryos by morphological landmarks in the dissecting microscope . Development 118 , 1255 – 1266 ( 1993 ) . 123 . Lu , C . C . & Robertson , E . J . Multiple roles for Nodal in the epiblast of the mouse embryo in the establishment of anterior – posterior patterning . Dev . Biol . 273 , 149 – 159 ( 2004 ) . 124 . Conlon , F . L . et al . A primary requirement for nodal in the formation and maintenance of the primitive streak in the mouse . Development 120 , 1919 – 1928 ( 1994 ) . 125 . Lowe , L . A . , Yamada , S . & Kuehn , M . R . Genetic dissection of nodal function in patterning the mouse embryo . Development 128 , 1831 – 1843 ( 2001 ) . 126 . Chen , H . J . et al . The role of microtubule actin cross - linking factor 1 ( MACF1 ) in the Wnt signaling pathway . Genes Dev . 20 , 1933 – 1945 ( 2006 ) . 127 . Li , Y . , Lu , W . , He , X . & Bu , G . Modulation of LRP6 - mediated Wnt signaling by molecular chaperone Mesd . FEBS Lett . 580 , 5423 – 5428 ( 2006 ) . Acknowledgements We thank M . Shen for comments on the manuscript and H . Hamada for discussion . Our work is supported by the National Health and Medical Research Council ( NHMRC ) of Australia and Mr . J . Fairfax . P . P . L . T . is an NHMRC Senior Principal Research Fellow and D . A . F . L . is a Kimberly - Clark Research Fellow . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : Entrez Gene : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = gene Bmp4 | Cer1 | Dab2 | Fgf4 | Gata6 | Gsc | Hnf4a | Lefty1 | Lhx1 | Mixl1 | POU5F1 | T | Tdgf1 | Wnt3 UniProtKB : http : / / ca . expasy . org / sprot β - catenin | DKK1 | GRB2 | GSK3 | FGFR1 | nanog | NCKAP1 | nodal | PAPC | SALL4 | SMAD2 | SMAD3 | SOX2 FURTHER INFORMATION CMRI Embryology Research Unit : http : / / www . cmri . com . au / cmri . php ? page = 361 Edinburgh Mouse Atlas Project : http : / / genex . hgu . mrc . ac . uk / intro . html Gastrulation : From Cells to Embryo : http : / / www . gastrulation . org The Mouse Genome Informatics Gene Expression Database : http : / / www . informatics . jax . org SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article : S1 ( table ) | S2 ( table ) Access to this links box is available online . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 8 | MAY 2007 | 381 © 2007 Nature Publishing Group