Population Modelling by Examples II Robert Smith ? The University of Ottawa , Ottawa , ON , Canada rsmith43 @ uottawa . ca Bruce Y . Lee Johns Hopkins University , Baltimore , MD , USA brucelee @ jhu . edu Aristides Moustakas Queen Mary University of London , London , UK arismoustakas @ gmail . com Andreas Zeigler , University of Lubeck , Lubeck , Germany ziegler @ imbs . uni - luebeck . de M´elanie Prague Harvard H . T . Chan School of Public Health , Boston , MA , USA mprague @ hsph . harvard . edu Romualdo Santos Federal University of Sergipe Rosa Elze , Brazil romu . ﬁsica @ gmail . com ADDITIONAL AUTHORS 1 . Matthias Chung , Virginia Tech , USA , mcchung @ vt . edu . 2 . Robin Gras , University of Windsor , Canada , rgras @ uwindsor . ca . 3 . Valery Forbes , University of Minnesota , USA , veforbes @ umn . edu . 4 . Sixten Borg , Lund University , Sweden , sixten . borg @ med . lu . se . 5 . Tracy Comans , Grifﬁth University , Australia , t . comans @ grifﬁth . edu . au . 6 . Yifei Ma , Virginia Tech , USA , yifeima @ vt . edu . 7 . Nieko Punt , Medimatics , The Netherlands , punt @ medimatics . net . 8 . William Jusko , University at Buffalo , USA , wjjusko @ buffalo . edu . 9 . Lucas Brotz , University of British Columbia , Canada , lucasbrotz @ gmail . com . 10 . Ayaz Hyder , Ohio State University , USA , hyder . 22 @ osu . edu . ABSTRACT Population modelling spans many domains and techniques , and new technologies offer cutting - edge opportunities to a growing ﬁeld . The population modelling working group has SummerSim - SCSC 2016 July 24 – 27 Montreal , Quebec , Canada c (cid:13) 2016 Society for Modeling & Simulation International ( SCS ) been recently active in coordination amongst different popu - lation modellers of different ﬁelds . One activity is mapping the population modelling domain by examples of work . This is the second collaborative paper by group members . This pa - per includes new examples and new authors in an attempt to deﬁne the ﬁeld . Some analysis and discussion is provided in view of the existing examples . Author Keywords Population Modelling , Deﬁnition , Multi Disciplinary INTRODUCTION The Population Modelling Working group is active under the Interagency Modelling and Analysis Group ( IMAG ) umbrella [ 1 ] . The group conducts several activities such as webinars , collaborative papers and meetings . Members of this group meet annually at the MSM ( Multi - Scale Modelling ) / IMAG meeting at the US National Institutes of Health alongside other groups . The working group maintains a web portal [ 2 ] and a mailing list [ 3 , 4 ] . The group has recently grown and increased its activity . This was apparent last year when the group published its ﬁrst col - laborative paper [ 5 ] . The paper showed activities of different group members by examples . One goal was an attempt to de - ﬁne the ﬁeld boundaries and better deﬁne the term . The initial deﬁnition of the ﬁeld was “Modelling a collection of entities with different levels of heterogeneity” . This deﬁnition was broad and required more details . The group addressed this by providing speciﬁc examples of work self - deﬁned as popula - tion modelling . Those were initially posted to the mailing list and then gathered into the collaborative paper . In the year after the publication of the ﬁrst paper , new popu - lation modellers joined the group and introduced their work . This added to the examples to better deﬁne the ﬁeld . This pa - per gathers these examples according to discipline and pro - vides discussion regarding the ﬁeld . 354 The majority of individual contributions are motivated by problems that arise in medicine and the biomedical sciences . We have attempted to revise the previous deﬁnition , although we note that any attempt to do so will remain extremely broad . Expanding on the previous deﬁnition , we have : “Tack - ling real - life problems that are relevant at the population level using a range of mathematical tools” . By its very nature , these deﬁnitions are imprecise , but they are reaching towards a fun - damental understanding of what it means to be population modellers . However , the goal of this work is not to provide a concise , one - line deﬁnition but rather to illustrate the ﬁeld by way of examples . We believe that this will ultimately provide a clearer insight into both the complexity and the usefulness that is population modelling . We have organised this paper into sections by topic , in order to illustrate the applications and provide a way of navigat - ing through the ﬁeld . Such organisation is of course limited , with both an overlap of several topics and also an acknowl - edgement that many different structures could have been em - ployed . To that end , we have also provided two different perspectives on the organisational structure in the discussion , which illustrates the content through a different prism . The structures we have chosen give perspectives on the ﬁeld that focus on some of its key interests at the moment . We expect these to change in the future , as the ﬁeld grows and evolves , but we hope this paper will serve as a useful snapshot in time of where the ﬁeld is currently situated . EXAMPLES INFECTIOUS DISEASES Robert Smith ? ( Note that the question mark is part of this author’s name . ) A few years ago , a group of researchers proposed a program for HIV called “Test and Treat” [ 6 ] . The idea was to test ev - eryone in the world ( or as many as they reasonably could ) and , if someone was found to be HIV positive , then they would start treatment immediately . This sounds like a good idea in theory . . . but it doesn’t account for the rise of drug re - sistance . Imperfect treatment can have a direct impact on the development of drug resistance , which wasn’t included in the model . The mathematical model that was used was ﬂawed [ 7 ] , but the World Health Organisation adopted it anyway and began this widescale program . Our modelling took the orig - inal model but added in both drug resistance and also educa - tion ( manifested through behaviour changes ) [ 8 ] . We showed that , in the absence of education but with drug resistance in - cluded , then the “test and treat” program was highly likely to make matters worse , leading to widespread treatment failure down the line . However , if good - quality education was pro - vided , either at the time of treatment or subsequently , then the effects of drug resistance could be overcome . This is true even if education is only partially effective . Polio is a disease that’s almost been eradicated from the world . . . but not quite . In 2013 , the number of cases doubled from the previous year , prompting the World Health Organ - isation to declare a polio emergency . We have a good vac - cine ( although in some cases , the vaccine itself can give you polio ) , but a key question is when to take it . Many coun - tries undertake mass vaccinations , on National Immunisation Days ( NIDs ) . A single NID can result in millions of chil - dren being vaccinated at once . However , different countries vaccinate at different times . We wondered if these should be synchronised ? Using impulsive differential equations to model pulse vaccinations , we see the beneﬁts of synchroni - sation : they overcome the issue of migration , because mi - grants aren’t lost between different NIDs [ 9 ] . We proved that , under some conditions , synchronising the pulses is a lo - cal minimum and hence the best strategy . However , seasonal effects can change the picture : it’s important to vaccinate be - fore the high - transmission season . If migration is low , then two countries with different seasonal patterns should de - link their NIDs . ( Something that was not done recently when it should have been . ) However , if migration is high , then this will swamp the effects of seasonality and neighbouring coun - tries with high migration should re - synchronise their NIDs . It follows that understanding the effects of human behaviour is crucial if we are to eradicate this disease in the next few years . Bruce Y . Lee In order to address various public - health issues , it is critical to develop computational models and tools that decision - makers can utilise . One of those tools is an agent - based model ( ABM ) , which uses individual characteristics , behaviours and interactions to describe a system as a collection of agents . These agents are autonomous , decision - making entities that can assess situations , make decisions and compete or co - operate based on pre - deﬁned rules . We developed RHEA ( Regional Healthcare Ecosystem An - alyst ) , a software platform that can generate an ABM of a health - care system with detailed representations of the health - care facilities and the patients moving among these facilities and the surrounding community [ 10 ] . We applied this to all the acute and long - term care facilities in Orange County , Cal - ifornia . We have used this model to better understand the spread and control of various healthcare - associated pathogens such as methicillin - resistant Staphylococcus aureus ( MRSA ) [ 11 ] , norovirus [ 12 ] and carbapenem - resistant Enterobacteri - aceae ( CRE ) [ 13 ] . Large - scale ABMs can serve as virtual representations of entire towns , cities , counties and states to better under - stand the spread and control of both communicable and non - communicable diseases . These include ABMs of the Wash - ington , DC , metropolitan area and Pennsylvania . During the 2009 inﬂuenza pandemic , the US Health and Human Services used our models to help with the national response [ 14 ] . Aristides Moustakas Bovine Tuberculosis ( TB ) is a major problem for the agricul - tural industry in several countries . TB can be contracted and spread by species other than cattle , and this can cause a prob - lem for disease control . In the UK and Ireland , badgers are a recognised reservoir of infection , and there has been substan - tial discussion about potential control strategies . Strategies in England consist largely of badger control , whereas Wales 355 is focused on cattle testing ; Scotland had a high - risk surveil - lance testing policy until 2009 , when Scotland was declared TB free . We developed a coupling of individual - based models of bovine TB in badgers and cattle , which captured key details of the natural history of the disease and of both species at ap - proximately county scale [ 15 ] . Factors such as bigger herds and keeping cattle inside for winter could explain the rise in TB in recent decades . We showed that housing cattle in large sheds over winter could potentially double the number of in - fected animals by creating conditions where TB can spread . This is likely to be signiﬁcantly more effective than culling badgers . We followed this with time - series statistical analysis of public data regarding TB incidence and prevalence in different re - gions in the UK [ 16 ] . By comparing different strategies used in different countries , we concluded that more frequent test - ing is leading to lower TB infections in cattle both in terms of TB prevalence as well as TB incidence . BIOMARKERS Andreas Zeigler Biomarkers are tools that enhance cardiovascular risk esti - mation . However , the value of biomarkers on risk estima - tion beyond standard risk scores remains unclear . Their com - parative impact among different European regions and their role in personalised medicine also remains to be elucidated . As part of the the “Biomarker for Cardiovascular Risk As - sessment in Europe” ( BiomarCaRE ) project , we assessed the value of established and emerging biomarkers for cardiovas - cular risk prediction using standard statistical approaches as well as machine - learning methods , such as random forests or support - vector machines [ 17 ] . The strength of BiomarCaRE lies in its well - deﬁned primary and secondary prevention co - horts , including over 300 , 000 participants from 13 European countries . M´elanie Prague Models based on ordinary differential equations ( ODEs ) are tools for describing dynamical systems . They may be used to estimate and predict trajectories of individual biomarkers . Data from each subject can be sparse , making it difﬁcult to precisely estimate individual parameters . However , informa - tion can often be gained from between - subject variability us - ing non - linear mixed effect ( NLME ) models on parameters of the ODEs . We call these NLME - ODE models mechanistic because they are based on a medical understanding of the dy - namics of biomarkers . Mechanistic models often suffer from identiﬁability issues linked with the complexity of ODE mod - els . We proposed an algorithm using a Bayesian approach to make use of a priori knowledge of parameters . It relies on the maxi - mization of a penalized likelihood using an approximation of the posterior distribution . We developed both methodologi - cal aspects — including validation of asymptotical properties , development of statistical convergence criteria and model - choice theory — and technical tools [ 18 ] . In particular , we released a software called NIMROD ( Normal approximation Inference in Models with Random effects based on Ordinary Differential equations ) using parallel computing [ 19 ] . These mechanistic methods can be use to describe the dynamics of biomarkers for HIV progression under treatment [ 20 ] . It is then possible to optimize treatment in HIV - infected patients by individualising the treatment and hence reducing side ef - fects of lifelong treatment . Observations for a given patient can be used to dynamically tune the dose , and we can deﬁne the individual optimal dose so that the infection is controlled with a high probability [ 21 ] . POPULATION MODELLING Romualdo Santos Knowledge of population growth of a particular region is of great importance for resource allocation and planning , with political , cultural and economic implications . We used Malthusian modelling to study population growth in Sergipe , Brazil’s smallest state [ 22 ] . Until 1920 , Sergipe exhib - ited sub - optimal growth , compared to the surrounding areas . However , growth subsequently increased , passing the sur - rounding areas after 1970 . Using both differential equations and difference equations , we found that the estimation of pop - ulation growth for Sergipe shows a decrease in the coming decades until 2050 ; at this time , the Malthusian model can no longer be applied and the growth model changes from contin - uous to discrete . Matthias Chung Inferring information from observed population dynamics onto population interactions is inherently difﬁcult . We con - sider parameter estimation methods to overcome such obsta - cles . Let us assume the dynamics of interacting species can mathematically be modelled by a generalised Lotka – Volterra system (cid:126)y (cid:48) = diag ( (cid:126)y ) ( (cid:126)r + A(cid:126)y ) . Here the vector function (cid:126)y describes the time - dependent dy - namic , (cid:126)r captures the intrinsic growth , and A describes the interaction between species y j . Notice that , in higher dimen - sions ( more than two species ) , the dynamics of (cid:126)y are highly sensitive to small changes in the interaction A . Hence infer - ring A from longitudinal observations (cid:126)d is notably difﬁcult . Single - and multiple - shooting methods are standard methods for point estimation of ordinary differential equations . How - ever , these methods are known to fail for highly sensitive equations such as population dynamical systems . To over - come this issue , the underlying parameter estimation problem is reformulated as min (cid:107) m ( (cid:126)s ) − (cid:126)d (cid:107) + a (cid:107) (cid:126)s (cid:48) − diag ( (cid:126)s ) ( r + A(cid:126)s ) (cid:107) , where (cid:126)s is an adequate parameterised function approximation of (cid:126)y , m is a projection of that function onto the observation space , (cid:107) · (cid:107) is the Euclidian norm and a is an appropriate reg - ularisation parameter , while we optimise over A and (cid:126)s . These continuous - shooting methods have been shown to generate robust estimates for the inferred parameters A [ 23 , 24 ] . 356 Robin Gras Artiﬁcial - life - simulated ecosystems can be used to study the evolutionary process and the emergence of species . We devel - oped an individual - based , evolving predator – prey ecosystem simulation called EcoSim [ 25 , 26 ] . The agents evaluate their environment ( e . g . , distance to predator / prey , distance to po - tential breeding partner , distance to food , energy level ) , their internal states ( e . g . , fear , hunger , curiosity ) and choose among several possible actions such as evasion , eating or breeding . The behavioural model of each individual is unique and is the outcome of the evolution process . One major and unique con - tribution of this simulation is that it combines a behavioural , an evolutionary and a speciation mechanism . This approach allows interesting studies on theoretical ecology and artiﬁcial life in collaboration with biologists . For example , it is used to study the species - abundance distribution , patterns and rates of speciation , the evolution of sexual and asexual populations , the interaction and diffusion of an invasive species or the ef - fect of toxic chemicals in an existing ecosystem . EcoSim is an individual - based model including three trophic levels ( primary producers , prey and predators ) in a large ( 1000 × 1000 cells ) toroidal discrete world . Each individ - ual possesses its proper behavioural model implemented by a Fuzzy Cognitive Map [ 27 ] composed of perception , internal and action concepts linked by excitatory and inhibitory edges allowing for positive and negative feedback loops to appear . The behavioural model and the physical characteristics ( such as size , speed and vision range ) of each individual are coded in its genome , allowing for the evolution of new behaviours and physical characteristics . Species are also represented as populations of individuals with high genomic similarities . Species can emerge or disappear at any time step due to the evolution , birth and death of their individuals [ 28 ] . Each in - dividual is also associated with a reserve of energy that can be reﬁlled through food consumption and a metabolism func - tion determining its energy usage based on its physical char - acteristics , the complexity of its behavioural model and the type of action performed , sexual reproduction being a partic - ularly costly one . An important property of our model is that it does not rely on any pre - deﬁned ﬁtness function [ 29 ] . In - stead , ﬁtness emerges from the multiple interactions between the individuals and their changing environment . With hundreds of thousands of unique individuals simultane - ously living in a large and dynamic environment and being subject to evolution for thousands of generations , many bi - ological and ecological theories can be investigate through EcoSim . EcoSim has been validated through studies show - ing clear coherence of the features generated by the simula - tion with empirical data such as species - abundance patterns , chaotic and multi - fractal patterns and species – area relation - ships . Valery Forbes Population modelling can be used to assess the risks of toxic chemicals and other stressors , such as extrapolating from toxic effects at the individual level to consequences for popu - lation dynamics . Population modelling can add value to eco - logical risk assessment by reducing uncertainty when extrap - olating from ecotoxicological observations to relevant eco - logical effects . Population models have the potential for adding value to ecological risk assessment by incorporat - ing better understanding of the links between individual re - sponses and population size and structure , and by incorporat - ing greater levels of ecological complexity [ 30 ] . HEALTH ECONOMICS Sixten Borg Heterogeneity in patient populations is an important issue in health - economic evaluations , as the cost - effectiveness of an intervention can vary between patient subgroups , while an intervention that is not cost - effective in the overall popula - tion may be cost - effective in particular subgroups . Identify - ing such subgroups is of interest in the allocation of health - care resources . We modelled disease activity in a heteroge - neous patient population , by dividing it into more homoge - neous subgroups and using a ﬁnite - mixture - model framework to identify subgroups and ﬁt a disease - activity model to each subgroup [ 31 ] . The ﬁtted models can evaluate interventions using cost - effectiveness analysis and could indicate which in - tervention to use in a given subgroup . Tracy Comans The delivery of health - care services presents difﬁcult prob - lems that simulation modelling can address . We used discrete - event simulation to model the most efﬁcient way of providing hospital orthopaedic outpatient services [ 32 ] . This work was used to inform a service - delivery change at a local hospital and has since been extended to a larger health district with four hospitals . BIG DATA Yifei Ma Emergent technologies such as big data and high - performance - computing technologies offer the potential to improve simulation systems such as modelling and simula - tion of public - health policy for epidemic outbreaks . This al - lows us to improve both social behaviour modelling ﬂexibil - ity and simulation efﬁciency [ 33 ] . With this improvement , the latency of evaluating policies in the laboratory for real - time epidemic control is reduced . We can also evaluate the effectiveness of two strategies during an epidemic outbreak — self - motivated prevention behaviours and community - led interventions — by simulating the strategies in US cities dur - ing an inﬂuenza outbreak [ 34 ] . PHARMACOKINETICS AND PHARMACODYNAMICS Nieko Punt Over the past decades , the relationship between the pharma - cokinetic ( PK ) properties of antibiotics , minimum inhibitory concentrations and clinical effects has been increasingly well understood . Inter - patient variability in the PK proﬁle , how - ever , has only recently been recognised as a major factor in predicting the outcome in individual patients and estab - lishing breakpoints for clinical susceptibility . Most predic - tions to date have used data from healthy volunteers [ 35 ] . One of the modelling tools we have developed is Edsim + + 357 [ 36 ] . Edsim + + is an object - oriented visual pharmacokinet - ics / pharmacodynamics ( PKPD ) modelling tool used in re - search and education . One of the unique feature of Edsim + + is its programmability ( C # language ) at multiple levels . These include programming at the low - level PKPD active pharma - ceutical ingredient for building new ( web ) applications , pro - gramming new PKPD objects for visual use ( or re - use ) and programming plugins for adding new functionality . William Jusko Drug regimens for treatment of pancreatic cancer primarily include gemcitabine with its limited efﬁcacy . The addition of a second drug with a complementary mechanism offers the possibility of synergistic effects . The search for improved combination therapies typically starts with the use of pancre - atic cancer cell cultures and xenografts in mice [ 37 ] . Cell - culture studies have been improved by moving from single time - point measurement to assessment of the time course of cell growth , quantitation of cell - cycle kinetics and application of mathematical models that recognize the sites and mecha - nisms of drug action and interactions in causing either inhi - bition of growth or enhanced cytotoxicity . Xenograft studies have likewise become more quantitative in utilizing combined population modelling and physiologically based models for pharmacokinetics and in reﬂecting growth , speciﬁc mecha - nisms of action and insightful drug - interaction relationships . FUZZY LOGIC Lucas Brotz Fuzzy set theory and fuzzy logic , originally developed by Zadeh [ 38 ] , allow the representation of variables according to a gradation or degree of membership , rather than the classic true / false membership of conventional Boolean sets . Fuzzy logic also allows a conclusion to be reached with an associ - ated gradation or degree of belief . As such , fuzzy set theory and logic provide a useful system for combining information of variable cardinality and / or conﬁdence . Fuzzy set theory is ﬁrmly established in engineering and science , and is in - creasingly being used for ecological applications [ 39 ] . Using fuzzy logic , we developed a framework for the dynamics of jellyﬁsh populations around the globe . This allowed us to combine data of different “types” together in order to evalu - ate the underlying signals [ 40 ] . INTERDISCIPLINARITY Ayaz Hyder Determinants of human health — environmental , social , bi - ological — operate at multiple levels ( individual , neighbour - hood , regional ) . We use systems - science thinking and com - putational epidemiology to bring together theory , data and methods from multiple disciplines . This has applications in satellite - based air - pollution - exposure assessment and birth outcomes [ 41 ] , predictive validation of agent - based models for inﬂuenza [ 42 ] , testing hypothesis regarding social depri - vation and burden of inﬂuenza [ 43 ] and modelling the natural history of esophageal cancer with a cost - effectiveness analy - sis [ 44 ] DISCUSSION The initial attempt to deﬁne the ﬁeld of population modelling as “Modelling a collection of entities with different levels of heterogeneity” clearly falls short of a catch - all deﬁnition . Through the use of a heterogeneous range of examples , in both this paper and its predecessor , we hope to illustrate the way the ﬁeld has been conceptualised and evolved , while still acknowledging that we are in no way at the limit of the ﬁeld’s potential . Some of these topics have overlap with the previous paper ( such as disease modelling , big data and agent - based modelling ) , while others were not previously covered . The content of this paper could of course be organised along different application topics or by methodology . Table 1 gives a different perspective on the content of this paper , with an illustration of the overlapping nature of research areas , as well as a list of the methods used to tackle these problems . The various examples provided here demonstrate the wide range of applications that population modelling has : from in - fectious diseases to population growth , from health - care ser - vices to cancer treatment , from policy to pharmacodynam - ics . The modelling tools range from simulation - based ( agent - based models , artiﬁcial - life - simulated ecosystem ) to the theo - retical ( difference , differential and impulsive equations ) . Yet there is also unity , with a focus on the utilisation of computa - tional and theoretical methods as useful tools for tackling the wide range of problems that can be elucidated by advanced techniques . Nevertheless , many challenges still remain . As data become increasingly available , questions of privacy and security be - come more prominent . Big data are an excellent resource but uncontrolled access can also result in big privacy vio - lations , as seen with the recent Ashley Madison hack [ 45 ] . Like Wikileaks [ 46 ] or Edward Snowden’s NSA data release [ 47 ] , gathering large amounts of data in one place opens that data up to susceptibility to hacking or wide release on a scale that was unprecedented only a few years ago . This can be a force for public good or a massive violation of privacy . As scientists , it behooves us to consider the ethical and moral implications of our work . A growing challenge is the melding of the physical sciences with the social sciences . If human behaviour is to be truly understood , modelling must draw upon ﬁelds that have ex - pertise in the qualitative understanding of social , cultural and behavioural norms in order to improve our quantitative mod - els [ 48 ] . This paper , in conjunction with its predecessor , is a cu - mulative effort of all contributors who responded to the population - modeller call . Each contributor sent text to the mailing list . The editing process is documented in the list archives [ 4 ] . Readers are welcome to read the longer ver - sions in the archives and join this discussion on the mailing list [ 3 ] . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors are grateful to Jacob Barhak for advice and assistance , as well as reviewers Donald Combs and Olaf 358 Dammann for suggestions that served to greatly improve the manuscript . REFERENCES 1 . IMAG Population Modeling Working Group , http : / / www . imagwiki . nibib . nih . gov / content / population - modeling - working - group 2 . SimTk : Population Modeling Workgroup Project , https : / / simtk . org / home / popmodwkgrpimag 3 . Population Modeling mailing list , PopModWkGrpIMAG - news , https : / / simtk . org / mailman / listinfo / popmodwkgrpimag - news 4 . The PopModWkGrpIMAG - news Archives , https : / / simtk . org / pipermail / popmodwkgrpimag - news / 5 . Population Modeling Workgroup , Population Modeling by Examples ( WIP ) — SpringSim 2015 , April 12 – 15 , Alexandria , VA , USA . Proceedings of the Symposium on Modeling and Simulation in Medicine , 61 – 66 http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2887741 & CFID = 764108956 & CFTOKEN = 12623832 6 . Granich , R . M . , Gilks , C . F . , Dye , C . , De Cock , K . M . and Williams , B . G . Universal voluntary HIV testing with immediate antiretroviral therapy as a strategy for elimination of HIV transmission : a mathematical model . The Lancet 373 , 9657 ( 2009 ) , 48 – 57 . 7 . Wagner , B . G . and Blower , S . Voluntary universal testing and treatment is unlikely to lead to HIV elimination : a modeling analysis , Nature Precedings 3917 , 1 ( 2009 ) . 8 . Al - arydah , M . and Smith ? , R . J . Adding education to “test and treat” : Can we overcome drug resistance ? Journal of Applied Mathematics 2015 , Article ID 781270 . 9 . C . Browne , C . , Smith ? , R . J . and Bourouiba , L . From regional pulse vaccination to global disease eradication : insights from a mathematical model of Poliomyelitis Journal of Mathematical Biology 71 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 215 – 253 . 10 . Lee , B . Y . , Wong , K . F . , Bartsch , S . M . , Yilmaz , S . L . , Avery , T . R . , Brown , S . T . , et al . The Regional Healthcare Ecosystem Analyst ( RHEA ) : simulation modeling tool to assist infectious disease control in a health system . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 20 , e1 ( 2013 ) , e139 – 146 . 11 . Lee , B . Y . , Bartsch , S . M . , Wong , K . F . , Singh , A . , Avery , T . R . , Kim , D . S . , et al . The importance of nursing homes in the spread of methicillin - resistant Staphylococcus aureus ( MRSA ) among hospitals . Medical Care 51 , 3 ( 2013 ) , 205 – 15 . 12 . Bartsch , S . M . , Huang , S . S . , Wong , K . F . , Avery , T . R . and Lee , B . Y . The spread and control of norovirus outbreaks among hospitals in a region : a simulation model . Open Forum Infect Diseases 1 , 2 ( 2014 ) . 13 . Lee , B . Y . , Bartsch , S . M . , Wong , K . F . , McKinnell , J . A . , Slayton , R . B . , Miller , L . G . , et al . The potential trajectory of carbapenem - resistant Enterobacteriaceae , an emerging threat to health - care facilities , and the impact of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention toolkit . American Journal of Epidemiology 183 , 5 ( 2016 ) , 471 – 479 . 14 . Brown , S . T . , Tai , J . H . Y . , Bailey , R . R . , Cooley , P . C . , Wheaton , W . D . , Potter , M . A . , et al . Would school closure for the 2009 H1N1 inﬂuenza epidemic have been worth the cost ? A computational simulation of Pennsylvania BMC Public Health 11 , 1 ( 2011 ) , 353 . 15 . Moustakas , A . and Evans , M . R . Coupling models of cattle and farms with models of badgers for predicting the dynamics of bovine tuberculosis ( TB ) . Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment 29 , 3 ( 2015 ) , 623 – 635 . 16 . Moustakas , A . and Evans , M . R . , 2016 . Regional and temporal characteristics of bovine tuberculosis of cattle in Great Britain . Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment 30 , ( 2016 ) , 989 – 1003 . 17 . Zeller , T . , Hughes , M . , Tuovinen , T . , Schillert , A . , Conrads - Frank , A . , Ruijter , H . , Schnabel , R . B . , Kee , F . , Salomaa , V . , Siebert , U . , Thorand , B . , Ziegler , A . , Breek , H . , Pasterkamp , G . , Kuulasmaa , K . , Koenig , W . and Blankenberg , S . BiomarCaRE : rationale and design of the European BiomarCaRE project including 300 , 000 participants from 13 European countries . European Journal of Epidemiology 29 , 10 ( 2014 ) , 777 – 90 . 18 . Prague , M . , Commenges , D . Guedj , J . , Drylewicz , J . and Thi´ebaut , R . NIMROD : A program for inference via a normal approximation of the posterior in models with random effects based on ordinary differential equations . Computer methods and programs in biomedicine 111 , 2 ( 2013 ) : 447 – 458 . 19 . Normal approximation Inference in Models with Random effects based on Ordinary Differential equations , Institut de Sant´e Publique d’Epid´emiologie et de D´eveloppement http : / / www . isped . u - bordeaux . fr / NIMROD 20 . Perelson , A . S . and Nelson , P . W . Mathematical analysis of HIV - 1 dynamics in vivo . SIAM review 41 , 1 ( 1999 ) : 3 – 44 . 21 . Prague , M . , Commenges , D . , Drylewicz , J . and Thi´ebaut , R . Treatment Monitoring of HIV - Infected Patients based on Mechanistic Models . Biometrics 68 , 3 ( 2012 ) , 902 – 911 . 22 . Santos , R . S . Application of Mathematical Modeling to study the population growth of Sergipe . International Journal of Education Studies 1 , 3 ( 2014 ) , 119 – 123 . 23 . Ramsay , J . Principal differential analysis : data reduction by differential operators . Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B Methodology 58 ( 1996 ) , 495 – 508 . 24 . Chung , M . , Krueger , J . and Pop , M . Robust Parameter Estimation for Biological Systems : A Study on the Dynamics of Microbial Communities . ArXiv : http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1509 . 06926 ( 2015 ) . 359 25 . Gras , R . , Devaurs , D . , Wozniak , A . and Aspinall , A . An individual - based evolving predator – prey ecosystem simulation using a Fuzzy Cognitive Map model of behavior . Artiﬁcial Life 15 , 4 ( 2009 ) , 423 – 463 . 26 . Gras , R . , Golestani , A . , Hosseini , M . , Khater , M . , Majdabadi Farahani , Y . , Mashayekhi , M . , Sina , M . , Sajadi , A . , Salehi , E . and Scott , R . EcoSim : an individual - based platform for studying evolution . European Conference on Artiﬁcial Life ( 2011 ) , 284 – 285 27 . Kosko , B . Fuzzy cognitive maps . International Journal of Man – Machine Studies 24 ( 1986 ) , 65 – 75 . 28 . Aspinal , A . and Gras , R . K - means clustering as a speciation method within an individual - based evolving predator – prey ecosystem simulation , Lecture Notes in Computer Science 6335 ( 2010 ) , 318 – 329 . 29 . Gras , R . , Golestani , A . , Hendry A . and Cristescu M . Speciation without pre - deﬁned ﬁtness functions , PLoS ONE 10 , 9 ( 2015 ) , e0137838 . 30 . Forbes , V . E . , Calow , P . and Sibly , R . M . The extrapolation problem and how population modeling can help . Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 27 10 ( 2008 ) , 1987 – 1994 . 31 . Borg , S . , Gerdtham , U . - G . , Ryd´en , T . , Munkholm , P . , Odes , S . , Moum , B . , Stockbr¨ugger , R . and Lindgren , S . Cost - Effectiveness and Heterogeneity : Using Finite Mixtures of Disease Activity Models to Identify and Analyze Phenotypes Working Papers , Department of Economics , Lund University 5 ( 2015 ) . 32 . Standﬁeld , L . B . , Comans , T . A . and Scuffham , P . A . An empirical comparison of Markov cohort modeling and discrete event simulation in a capacity - constrained health care setting The European Journal of Health Economics ( 2015 ) , 1 – 15 . 33 . Bisset , K . R . , Chen , J . , Deodhar , S . , Feng , X . , Ma , Y . and Marathe , M . V . Indemics : An Interactive High - Performance Computing Framework for Data Intensive Epidemic Modeling . ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation ( TOMACS ) , Special Issue on Simulation in Complex Service Systems 24 1 ( 2014 ) , 4 . 34 . Marathe , A . , Lewis , B . , Barrett , C . , Chen , J . , Marathe , M . , Eubank , S . and Ma , Y . Comparing Effectiveness of Top - Down and Bottom - Up Strategies in Containing Inﬂuenza . PLoS ONE 6 , 9 ( 2011 ) , e25149 . 35 . Mouton , J . W . , Punt , N . and Vinks , A . A . A retrospective analysis using Monte Carlo simulation to evaluate recommended ceftazidime dosing regimens in healthy volunteers , patients with cystic ﬁbrosis , and patients in the intensive care unit . Clinical Therapeutics 27 , 6 ( 2005 ) , 762 – 772 . 36 . Edsim + + : Pharmacokinetic Pharmacodynamic Modeling http : / / www . medimatics . net / projects / objsim 37 . Miao , X . , Koch , G . , Straubinger , R . M . and Jusko , W . J . Pharmacodynamic modeling of combined chemotherapeutic effects predicts synergistic activity of gemcitabine and trabectedin in pancreatic cancer cells . Cancer Chemotherapy Pharmacology 77 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 181 – 93 . 38 . Zadeh , L . A . Fuzzy sets . Information and Control 8 , 3 ( 1965 ) , 338 – 353 . 39 . Adriaenssens , V . , Baets , B . D . , Goethals , P . L . M . and Pauw , N . D . Fuzzy rule - based models for decision support in ecosystem management . Science of the Total Environment 319 , 1 – 3 ( 2004 ) , 1 – 12 . 40 . Brotz , L . , Cheung , W . W . L . , Kleisner , K . , Pakhomov , E . and Pauly , D . Increasing jellyﬁsh populations : Trends in large marine ecosystems . Hydrobiologia 690 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 3 – 20 . 41 . Hyder , A . , Lee , H . J . , Ebisu , K . , Koutrakis , P . , Belanger , K . and Bell , M . L . PM2 . 5 exposure and birth outcomes : use of satellite - and monitor - based data . Epidemiology 25 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 58 – 67 . 42 . Hyder , A . , Buckeridge , D . L . and Leung , B . Predictive validation of an inﬂuenza spread model . PLoS ONE 8 , 6 ( 2013 ) , e65459 . 43 . Hyder , A . and Leung , B . Social deprivation and burden of inﬂuenza : Testing hypotheses and gaining insights from a simulation model for the spread of inﬂuenza . Epidemics 11 ( 2015 ) , 71 – 79 . 44 . Hyder , Ayaz . Development and validation of a microsimulation model to evaluate the cost - effectiveness of innovative screening and surveillance for early detection of esophageal cancer . The 36th Annual Meeting of the Society for Medical Decision Making ( 2014 ) . 45 . Mansﬁeld - Devine , S . The Ashley Madison affair . Network Security 2015 , 9 ( 2015 ) , 8 – 16 . 46 . Benkler , Yochai . Free Irresponsible Press : Wikileaks and the Battle over the Soul of the Networked Fourth Estate , A . Harvard Civil Rights – Civil Liberties Law Review 46 ( 2011 ) : 311 – 397 . 47 . Lucas , George R . NSA management directive # 424 : Secrecy and privacy in the aftermath of Edward Snowden . Ethics & International Affairs 28 , 1 ( 2014 ) : 29 – 38 . 48 . Fanelli , D . and Gl¨anzel , W . Bibliometric Evidence for a Hierarchy of the Sciences . PLoS ONE 8 , 6 ( 2013 ) , e66938 . 360 Contributor M a n a g i ng d i s ea s e s p r ea d R e s ou r ce p l a nn i ng a nd a ll o ca ti on P r e d i c ti ng d r ug e ff ec t s R i s k a ss e ss m e n t E c o s y s t e m m a n a g e m e n t T e s ti ng t h e o r y E p i d e m i o l ogy a nd pub li c h ea lt h Summary of Methods Robert Smith ? x x x Ordinary and impulsive differential equations , Latin hypercube sampling , Monte Carlo simulations Bruce Y . Lee x x Agent - based models AristidesMoustakas x Agent - based models AndreasZeigler x Random forests , support - vector machines M´elaniePrague x x x Ordinary differential equations with nonlinear mixed effect models , control theory RomualdoSantos x x Differential equations , difference equations , Malthusian modelling MatthiasChung x Robust and efﬁcient point estimator methods for ordinary differential equations RobinGras x x Agent - based models , fuzzy cognitive maps ValeryForbes x x Matrix population models , individual - based population models , dynamic energy budgets , mechanistic effect models SixtenBorg x x x Finite mixtures of disease activity models , cost - effectiveness analysis TracyComans x x Discrete - event simulation of health services , cost - effectiveness analysis YifeiMa x x x Network models , database simulation , diffusion dynamics , multi - theory methodology Nieko Punt x Pharmacokinetics / pharmacodynamics modelling , two - stage Bayesian parameter estimation WilliamJusko x x Pharmacokinetics / pharmacodynamics modelling , ordinary differential equations LucasBrotz x x Fuzzy logic analysis of population dynamics to investigate trends AyazHyder x x x x Agent - based models , microsimulation models , cost - effectiveness analysis , computational exposure science Table 1 . A two - dimensional view of the organisational structure of this paper . 361