138 Intelligent Coaching Systems : Understanding One - to - many Coaching for Ill - defined Problem Solving EVEY JIAXIN HUANG , Delta Lab , Northwestern University , USA DANIEL REES LEWIS , Delta Lab , Northwestern University , USA SHUBHANSHI GAUDANI , Delta Lab , Northwestern University , USA MATTHEW EASTERDAY , Delta Lab , Northwestern University , USA ELIZABETH GERBER , Delta Lab , Northwestern University , USA One - to - many coaching is a common , yet difficult , coaching technique used in environments with many novices learning to solve ill - defined problems . Intelligent systems might be designed to support 1 - to - many coaching but designing such systems requires a 1 - to - many coaching model that details novices’ challenges , coaches’ strategies , and coaches’ goals . To build such a model , we conducted interaction analysis on 24 1 - to - many coaching sessions with novices developing new products in a university incubator and conducted retrospective analyses with 3 coaches and 30 novices . We contribute a model that demonstrates that coaches in a 1 - to - many setting not only need to help novices develop metacognitive skills ( just as in 1 - to - 1 coaching ) , but also need to utilize the presence and expertise of a group of novices to learn from each other , to mitigate their fear of failures , and provide them accountability . Our model informs design implications for future intelligent coaching systems to ( 1 ) assist coaches in monitoring and comparing many novices’ progress , learning , and expertise ; ( 2 ) provide novices with checklists , templates , and scaffolds to help them self - evaluate , seek - help , and summarize learning ; ( 3 ) showcase failures and growth ; and ( 4 ) publicize planning and progress to provide accountability . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Computer supported cooperative work . Additional Key Words and Phrases : Informal learning environments , Coaching , Ill - defined problems , Design education , Entrepreneurship , Qualitative study , Interaction analysis ACM Reference Format : Evey Jiaxin Huang , Daniel Rees Lewis , Shubhanshi Gaudani , Matthew Easterday , and Elizabeth Gerber . 2023 . Intelligent Coaching Systems : Understanding One - to - many Coaching for Ill - defined Problem Solving . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 7 , CSCW1 , Article 138 ( April 2023 ) , 24 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3579614 1 INTRODUCTION In 1 - to - many coaching , one coach simultaneously coaches multiple novices who are each tackling different , ill - defined problems that have many possible solution paths , are highly domain - specific , Authors’ addresses : Evey Jiaxin Huang , eveyhuang @ u . northwestern . edu , Delta Lab , Northwestern University , Segal Design Institute , 3 . 230 2133 Sheridan Rd , Evanston , Illinois , USA , 60208 ; Daniel Rees Lewis , Delta Lab , Northwestern University , Segal Design Institute , 3 . 230 2133 Sheridan Rd , Evanston , Illinois , USA , 60208 , daniel - lewis @ northwestern . edu ; Shubhanshi Gaudani , Delta Lab , Northwestern University , Segal Design Institute , 3 . 230 2133 Sheridan Rd , Evanston , Illinois , USA , 60208 , shubhanshigaudani2024 @ u . northwestern . edu ; Matthew Easterday , Delta Lab , Northwestern University , Segal Design Institute , 3 . 230 2133 Sheridan Rd , Evanston , Illinois , USA , 60208 , easterday @ northwestern . edu ; Elizabeth Gerber , Delta Lab , Northwestern University , Segal Design Institute , 3 . 230 2133 Sheridan Rd , Evanston , Illinois , USA , 60208 , egerber @ northwestern . edu . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . 2573 - 0142 / 2023 / 4 - ART138 $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3579614 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . 138 : 2 Evey Jiaxin Huang et al . and do not have one best answer [ 35 , 51 ] . It is a coaching technique commonly used in learning environments like start - up incubators and design studios that have a large number of novices but limited coaches with limited time . These coaches report being overburdened by the amount of work required to monitor , diagnose , and provide assistance to many novices and have inadequate technological support [ 61 ] . Intelligent , collaborative coaching systems could reduce the burden of 1 - to - many coaching . Systems that can use novices’ input to automatically provide assistance and facilitate novices to learn from each other could help coaches offload some of their work . For example , a system could monitor many novices’ progress , automatically diagnose novices’ challenges , and suggest appropriate strategies to coaches . However , designing such an intelligent , collaborative system requires a model that details what strategies coaches employ in 1 - to - many coaching settings , when the coaches use these strategies and the goals coaches have for using them [ 47 ] . The existing theoretical model of coaching describes coaches’ strategies and goals in 1 - to - 1 coaching settings [ 28 , 29 ] , but we know little about how coaching strategies and goals change , if at all , in 1 - to - many settings where coaches need to attend to a group of novices working on different problems simultaneously . Furthermore , the existing coaching model does not describe what novice challenges these strategies are employed to support . Knowing the specific challenges that the strategies are employed to support can inform how intelligent systems model novices’ states and detect moments when novices require assistance . Lastly , the existing model studies coaching primarily in a formal curricular setting that is highly resourced and constrained by academic schedules [ 22 ] . It is unclear how the model applies to more informal coaching settings that occur in environments like the workplace and extracurricular programs . In these informal settings , there are often no dedicated instructors to control the environment nor organizational expectations around novices’ completion , participation , and investment [ 65 ] . These settings also often have fewer coaching resources [ e . g . , see 21 ] and novices’ projects can take months or even years [ 16 ] . The extended timeline on novices’ projects and lack of coaching resources may require novices to be more self - directed and motivated in order to complete their projects . We do not know what strategies coaches may employ to support novices in such informal coaching settings . To create a model of 1 - to - many coaching in the context of ill - defined problems , we ask the following questions : • ( Challenge ) What are the challenges faced by novices that coaches help them overcome through 1 - to - many coaching ? • ( Strategy ) What coaching strategies do coaches use to help novices overcome these challenges ? • ( Goal ) What do coaches aim to achieve in employing these strategies ? We first conducted an interaction analysis [ 6 , 36 ] of video recordings of 24 1 - to - many coaching sessions to identify coaching strategies . Then , we conducted interviews and retrospective analysis with 3 coaches to understand novices’ challenges which these strategies are employed to support and coaching goals . Based on this analysis , we built a model of 1 - to - many coaching that details how coaches monitor , diagnose , and assist many novices simultaneously . As predicted by the existing 1 - to - 1 coaching model , we found that coaches helped novices develop metacognitive skills , the ability to monitor and reflect on their problem - solving process [ 77 ] . We also found unique features that are not explained by the existing model : • Extract applicable knowledge : Coaches help novices distill their knowledge into takeaways that are applicable to peers who are working on different problems . • Support peer learning : Coaches direct novices to needed expertise and knowledge , and scaffold help - seeking to support peer learning . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . Intelligent Coaching Systems : Understanding One - to - many Coaching for Ill - defined Problem Solving 138 : 3 • Mitigate fear of failures : Coaches help novices mitigate their fear of failures by facilitating them to test their ideas or prototypes with peers in a safe and supportive learning environment , normalize experiences of failures , and re - frame such experiences as opportunities to learn . • Provide accountability : Coaches utilize the presence of peers to hold novices accountable in planning and execution by publicizing novices’ plans and checking in on their progress with peers present . These differences could be explained by 1 - to - many coaches having to utilize and manage a wide range of peer expertise but also having to overcome the challenges of novices working on different projects , lack of organizational expectations on novices’ investment , and completion [ 65 ] , and lack of coaching resources . We make two contributions to HCI and CSCW communities : ( 1 ) Our fine - grained analysis contributes a detailed model that advances our understanding of 1 - to - many coaching in ill - defined problems . Prior to this study , we only had models of 1 - to - 1 coaching in curricular settings , where we knew that coaches support novices in developing metacognitive skills [ 28 , 29 ] . Now we know that in a 1 - to - many informal coaching setting , coaches also need to scaffold peer learning , provide accountability , and mitigate novices’ fear of failures . This model is useful in three ways : ( 1 ) it can inform the design of intelligent systems capable of supporting 1 - to - many coaching ; ( 2 ) for coaching environments that want to employ 1 - to - many coaching , it can serve as a guideline to train new coaches ; and ( 3 ) for coaches who are already using 1 - to - many coaching , it can help coaches reflect on and improve their coaching practices . ( 2 ) Design implications for intelligent systems to support 1 - to - many coaching in ill - defined problems . To build intelligent systems capable of supporting 1 - to - many coaching , we recom - mend systems to ( 1 ) assist coaches in monitoring , diagnosing , and comparing many novices’ progress , learning , and expertise ; ( 2 ) provide novices with checklists , templates , and scaffolds to help them self - evaluate , seek - help , and summarize learning ; ( 3 ) showcase failures and growth to re - frame the experience of failures as an opportunity for growth ; and ( 4 ) publicize planning and progress to support accountability . CSCW researchers have been designing technology to support coaching across a variety of domains [ e . g . , see 10 , 18 , 39 , 66 , 68 ] . Using user - centered methods like task analysis and retrospective analysis , we contribute a model that can help future CSCW researchers understand a novel form of coaching , 1 - to - many coaching , and build intelligent technology to support it [ 23 ] . Our findings tap into the fundamental questions within CSCW regarding the “social - technical gap” between the flexible , nuanced , and contextualized coaching activities that we want to support and what we can support technically [ 1 ] . Specifically , our model can help future researchers understand this gap and design technology that can potentially reduce it . Furthermore , our findings and design implications contribute to the ongoing discussion regarding the need to build intelligent systems that augment human users’ abilities instead of replacing them [ 1 , 31 ] . Lastly , our findings lend support to previous CSCW research that argues for making communication and information visible to enable learning [ 33 ] . Specifically , our study expands existing knowledge and provide more nuances on what kind of communication and information to make visible and how to make it visible in the context of 1 - to - many coaching in ill - defined problem - solving . 2 BACKGROUND In this section , we review related literature in ill - defined problem solving , 1 - to - 1 coaching , intelligent coaching technology , and 1 - to - many leadership . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . 138 : 4 Evey Jiaxin Huang et al . 2 . 1 Coaching Novices to Solve Ill - defined Problems Novices struggle to solve ill - defined problems that are complex and poorly defined , have many possible solution paths , are highly domain - specific , and do not have one best answer [ 35 , 51 ] . Ill - defined problems are challenging for novices because they require novices to define the problem and understand needs of multiple stakeholders . Further , they must apply metacognitive skills like making effective plans to solve problems , monitoring progress , and evaluating whether they have achieved their goals [ 35 , 62 – 64 , 67 ] . One of the most effective ways to support a novice ( or novice team ) to solve ill - defined problems is for a dedicated coach to provide tailored support and guidance [ 13 , 27 , 48 ] . While definitions of coaching vary , we draw from the design and engineering education research communities to define coaching as a form of adaptive education that supports novices in learning cognitive and metacognitive strategies and processes that resemble those of experts to solve real - world , complex problems [ 13 ] . Commonly used in problem - based learning [ 28 , 29 ] , project - based learning [ 22 ] , and design education [ 62 ] , coaching involves a range of activities including diagnosing novices’ challenges , supporting novices in defining and achieving goals , modeling how to do certain tasks , and prompting novices to reflect [ 13 , 22 ] . However , the difficulty of coaching can vary based on the context that coaching is used . In problem - based learning and project - based learning , coaches often support one novice or one team of novices at a time to solve a limited set of problems that are often scoped by coaches and have solutions known to coaches [ 29 ] , while coaches in design education need to support many novices who are each solving different problems scoped by novices themselves with solutions unknown to coaches [ 62 ] . Thus coaching in design education might be more challenging than the other contexts . The theoretical model of 1 - to - 1 coaching suggests that a coach helps a novice develop metacog - nitive skills using coaching strategies like monitoring the novice’s understanding of problems and solutions , asking open - ended questions to push the novice to justify their thinking and reflect on their problem - solving process , and planning for effective next steps [ 28 , 29 ] . By doing so , a coach helps a novice realize the limitations of his or her understanding of the problem and solution , and helps the novice make effective plans to address the limitations . While effective , 1 - to - 1 coaching is time - consuming and labor - intensive [ 27 , 48 , 60 ] . In learning environments with many novices but a limited number of coaches , coaches may meet sequentially with each novice or team for an hour each week to provide 1 - to - 1 coaching [ e . g . , 61 ] . As learning environments such as design studios and start - up incubators have increased in popularity with students , many have adopted 1 - to - many coaching . One coach may meet for one hour with up to 10 novices or teams who are each working on different problems synchronously . Despite the increasing popularity of 1 - to - many coaching , we have a limited understanding of what coaches do to support novices in this context and how we might ease the burden on coaches . 2 . 2 Intelligent Coaching Technology Automated health coaching systems that use Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) techniques to monitor and diagnose a patient’s input to provide 1 - to - 1 coaching directly have shown success in providing patients tailored support and guidance , thus easing the burden on healthcare professionals [ e . g . , see 55 , 56 , 72 ] . Informed by expert coaching models and theoretical frameworks like the Fogg Behavioral Model ( FBM ) [ 17 ] , intelligent coaching systems track patients’ health data like steps , dietary intake , and self - reported motivation , evaluate these data against the patient’s health goals , and provide automated , 1 - on - 1 coaching that encourages patients to exercise more [ 72 ] or change their diet [ 55 ] . This line of work shows great promise and inspiration of what intelligent systems Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . Intelligent Coaching Systems : Understanding One - to - many Coaching for Ill - defined Problem Solving 138 : 5 can achieve once we have a detailed understanding and model of 1 - to - many coaching for ill - defined problem - solving . In the education domain , the majority of the existing intelligent systems support novices in well - defined problems like solving algebra or physics equations , and learning to read [ e . g . , 8 , 38 , 71 , 73 ] . For example , the Andes system [ 71 ] can automatically provide novices hints and feedback on their physics problems . This intelligent system uses well - defined solutions and paths to evaluate novices’ progress and automatically provide them coaching that a human coach might otherwise provide . In recent years researchers have started to build intelligent systems that can support novices in solving some ill - defined problems like inventing an index for physical science [ 41 ] , designing a website [ 43 ] , and writing persuasive arguments [ e . g . , 75 , 76 ] . However , these systems support novices in 1 - on - 1 settings and focus on individual needs and learning . They might not be able to support many novices who are working on different , ill - defined problems to learn from and support each other , as needed for 1 - to - many coaching . Computer - Supported Collaborative Learning ( CSCL ) researchers have built intelligent and col - laborative systems that can support groups of novices in solving one well - defined problem together [ e . g . , 58 , 73 , 74 ] . For example , Virvou and colleagues developed a system that supports groups of novices to learn a foreign language by writing one essay collaboratively . Novices can ask for help from or discuss new ideas with their peers by messaging them directly in the system [ 73 ] . Uchidiuno and colleagues developed a system that can detect when a novice needs help and direct this novice to peers who may be able to provide help in a math classroom [ 58 ] . We imagine that intelligent , collaborative systems can not only provide novices direct support but also loop in peers to provide help and assistance , potentially offloading the amount of work required of coaches in 1 - to - many coaching . However , the existing CSCL systems support novices who are collaborating on or learning about the same problem . They may not be able to support groups of novices who are working on different , ill - defined problems simultaneously , as needed for 1 - to - many coaching . Designing intelligent systems to support 1 - to - many coaching in ill - defined problem - solving requires a detailed understanding of what strategies coaches use , and when and why they use them [ 47 ] . Understanding when coaches use certain strategies can inform moments when novices require assistance . By understanding what strategies coaches use , systems can respond to those moments with the appropriate strategy . Lastly , understanding why coaches use certain strategies can help systems assess the intended impact of the strategies and evaluate whether novices have achieved the desired outcomes . The existing coaching model [ 28 , 29 ] offers us valuable insights on what strategies coaches use and why they use them in a 1 - to - 1 setting where the coach supports a single learner or one team of novices who are collaboratively working on a single problem . While we might expect that coaches in 1 - to - many settings also support novices’ metacognitive skills , we do not know what additional strategies and goals coaches may employ when they need to synchronously attend to a group of novices who are working on different problems . Because the existing model in 1 - to - 1 coaching may not be sufficient to explain 1 - to - many coaching and inform the design of intelligent systems , we need to build a fine - grained model that describes the goals , processes , and heuristics required for 1 - to - many coaching . By doing so , we would be able to ( a ) improve the existing model on coaching to include 1 - to - many and informal coaching contexts and ( b ) help future researchers design intelligent systems that can support 1 - to - many coaching in ill - defined problems . 2 . 3 One - to - many Leadership CSCW researchers have found that leaders play a critical role in groups’ ability to collaborate on ill - defined problems by designing the projects and managing each individual member during the Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . 138 : 6 Evey Jiaxin Huang et al . collaborative process [ 49 , 50 ] . However , leaders are often overburdened by the need to monitor many members’ progress regularly , provide each member support and feedback , and plan for future steps , resulting in many collaborative projects to fail [ 50 ] . Leadership can become more effective by distributing some of the leaders’ work to members of the team and technology [ 50 , 81 , 82 ] . For example , Luther and colleagues distributed leaders’ work on monitoring members’ progress to a system that can automatically track and surface members’ activities . Furthermore , this system distributed leaders’ work of assigning tasks to members of the team by allowing members themselves to choose and sign up for their desired parts of the project [ 50 ] . We might imagine that distributing some work in 1 - to - many coaching to technology and novices could make coaching more effective , yet the existing leadership theory may not apply to 1 - to - many coaching and inform the design of technology . Similar to leaders , coaches are overburdened by the work required to monitor many novices’ learning , provide novices’ support , and plan for future steps [ 60 ] . However , in 1 - to - many coaching , novices are not collaborators , but are working on their own projects at their own pace . Coaches also do not own novices’ projects as leaders do . We do not know what different strategies coaches may employ and what parts of coaching can be distributed to novices under this context . By building a detailed model of 1 - to - many coaching , we will be able to see whether and how coaches’ strategies overlap with those of leaders , whether and how coaches already distribute their coaching burdens to novices or technology , and how we might design technology to better offload burdens from coaches . 3 METHODS 3 . 1 Context : University Incubator We choose to study 1 - to - many coaching in a university incubator because of the growing number of incubators , the ill - defined nature of the problems novices at incubators tackle , and the often limited number of coaching resources available . University incubators are also an important context for novices to learn to innovate and solve real - world , complex problems [ 7 ] . Over the past decade , university incubators have proliferated as universities assume responsibility for preparing the next generation of entrepreneurs [ 20 ] . Within these incubators , novice entrepreneurs learn how to develop and implement solutions to real - world , ill - defined problems [ 34 ] that have no clear solutions , problem definitions , or specific , well - described problem - solving processes [ 51 ] . These incubators rarely can provide 1 - on - 1 coaching for the amount of novices they attract ; instead , they employ 1 - to - many coaching [ 12 , 59 ] . Innovation incubators are also different from formal classrooms . Unlike in classrooms where instructors scope out projects for novices to work on , novices at innovation incubators choose and scope projects themselves . As a result , everyone is working on a different problem . Furthermore , unlike in classrooms where novices are expected to turn in their projects at the end of a semester , there are no organizational expectations on novices’ investment and completion at informal settings like incubators [ 65 ] . As a result , novices can work on their projects for months or even years , and everyone is in different stages of their projects . A better understanding of 1 - to - many coaching in university incubators can help us understand 1 - to - many coaching in other ill - defined learning domains such as STEM inquiry learning environ - ments [ 38 , 45 ] , research labs [ 80 ] , and medicine [ 28 , 29 ] . Furthermore , it will help us understand coaching in other informal settings like the workplace where workers are working on different projects at different paces . If we can design and build better intelligent systems to support 1 - to - many coaching in entrepreneurship , these technologies might be able to apply to other domains as well . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . Intelligent Coaching Systems : Understanding One - to - many Coaching for Ill - defined Problem Solving 138 : 7 3 . 2 Participants and Setting We observed 1 - to - many coaching at a university incubator at a medium sized mid - western US university . Each year , this incubator hosts approximately 25 coaches and 100 teams ( 1 - 4 team members per team ) working to create and launch innovative products . Teams solve a range of ill - defined problems ranging from how to detect wild - fires to how to help international students learn about American colleges . For our study , we worked with a semester - long ( 10 weeks ) program that engaged 30 novice entrepreneurs who worked between 5 - 15 hours a week on their projects . They did not receive academic credit for their work . Three coaches ( 2 women and 1 man ; ages 24 - 44 ) had between 3 - 6 years experience coaching novice entrepreneurs . Novice entrepreneurs included 22 undergraduate students ( ages 18 - 22 ) and 8 graduate students ( ages 22 - 30 ) who had no prior entrepreneurship experience . Novice entrepreneurs included 15 women and 15 men . Coaches and students communicated in English . Novice entrepreneurs at the incubator each worked on their own projects and were in different stages of their projects . To become a member at the incubator , novices submitted written applications describing their project ideas . After admission , novices gained access to the incubator space and 1 - to - many coaching sessions that we observed . This study was approved by University IRB . To preserve anonymity , we are using pseudonyms for all participants . 3 . 3 Data Collection 3 . 3 . 1 Video recordings of one - to - many coaching . We collected video recordings of 24 virtual coach - ing sessions ( in total of 14 hours spanning across 8 weeks ) between three coaches and 30 novices in Spring 2021 . Due to the global pandemic , coaching sessions between the coach and novices were held via the video conferencing platform , Zoom . Each of the coaching sessions , facilitated by one coach , lasted 30 minutes , and included a group of 3 - 5 novice entrepreneurs each solving a different ill - defined problem . Each group met with their coach once every two weeks . There were seven groups and each group met a total of four times during this semester . We received consent from all participants except for 1 participant who chose not to participate in the study . We did not record coaching sessions of the group that the participant was in and did not transcribe the whole group’s actions . 3 . 3 . 2 Audio recordings of coach retrospectives . To understand coaches’ reasoning , we conducted retrospective analysis by asking coaches to watch video recordings of their previous coaching sessions , and to explain their coaching strategies as they watched the recordings [ 69 , 78 ] . Specifically , we selected a representative sample of video segments of different strategies , showed them to the coaches , and asked the coaches to talk about their reasons for why they used that strategy . Each interview lasted 50 minutes to an hour . We transcribed each interview immediately afterwards and resulted in around 60 pages of transcript in total . 3 . 3 . 3 Slack messages . Coaches created a channel for each of the 1 - to - many coaching groups on Slack to communicate with novices in each group . There were in total of 6 channels created . One researcher joined all of the channels as a silent observer and recorded the messages both coaches and novices shared during the 10 - week period of the whole semester to investigate whether coaching happened over Slack . 3 . 4 Data Analysis 3 . 4 . 1 Analysis 1 : Interaction analysis to analyze coaching strategies . We conducted an interaction analysis [ 6 , 36 ] on the video recordings and Slack messages to identify different coaching strategies and novice entrepreneurs’ challenges these strategies are employed to support . Guided by the Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . 138 : 8 Evey Jiaxin Huang et al . existing models of 1 - on - 1 coaching [ 28 , 29 ] , two researchers used a mixture of deductive and inductive coding [ 14 ] to tag data with low - level codes associated with coaching strategies and grouped codes into categories . Codes emerged from this stage include asking about learning from tests , checking completion of goals , and asking to share learning with peers . Then , by constantly comparing the codes across groups , we sorted the codes into appropriate themes [ 14 ] and compared the themes against strategies in the existing models of 1 - on - 1 coaching [ 28 , 29 ] . After developing the coding scheme through grounded theory , we conducted the second phase of analysis to test inter - rater reliability . The purpose of this analysis was to test whether two researchers , given the same data , could independently and reliably use the categories in the coding scheme to identify coaching strategies . Using the coding scheme , researchers applied these codes to transcripts from three of the coaching sessions ( 10 percent of all the data ) that were chosen randomly . Two researchers successfully achieved inter - rater agreement ( Cohen’s kappa = . 72 ; [ 42 ] ) by independently coding these transcripts using the coding scheme . 3 . 4 . 2 Analysis 2 : Retrospective tasks analysis to understand coaches’ reasoning . Three researchers independently analyzed the retrospective analysis data using the emergent themes approach [ 78 ] following an iterative coding process [ 14 ] because the purpose of this analysis was to create an empirically - grounded task model of 1 - to - many coaching . We began with rounds of inductive coding and identified codes such as novices falling in love with the solution not the problem and coaches helping peers to learn from peers’ success stories . Then , using the method of constant comparisons [ 14 ] , we merged codes into preliminary themes of closely related concepts , such as novices are scared of their product failing and coaches help transfer knowledge to everyone . Finally , we iteratively reviewed and discussed preliminary themes to arrive at final themes as shown in Table 1 . 4 FINDINGS In this section , we present a model of 1 - to - many coaching ( Table 1 ) that captures novices’ challenges , and corresponding goals and strategies coaches use to overcome these challenges through 1 - to - many coaching in informal coaching settings . We first present the finding that coaches help novices develop metacognitive skills , as predicted by the prior theoretical 1 - to - 1 coaching model [ 28 , 29 ] . Next , we present the four unique challenges , goals , and coaching strategies in 1 - to - many coaching . Throughout , we introduce design implications for future technology . In the discussion , we will illustrate an example system informed by our model and design implications . 4 . 1 Coaches Help Novices Develop Metacognitive Skills As predicted by existing 1 - to - 1 coaching model [ 28 , 29 ] , coaches in 1 - to - many coaching helped novices develop metacognitive skills . They used strategies like monitoring novices’ understanding of the problem , asking open - ended questions to help novices realize the limitations of their knowledge , and helping novices set an effective goal to address these limitations . In a 1 - to - many coaching session , Fatima , a novice working on a sustainable women’s clothing start - up , told the coach that she changed her website design and photo - shoot style to be more minimalist . The coach ( P1 ) asked her an open - ended question , “What inspired the change ? ” This question led Fatima to reflect on her reasoning process , and told the coach , “We thought it could be better and a little more minimalist because we’re targeting a slightly older demographic now . And we didn’t want it to be like , so young . ” The coach did not stop there , but kept on pushing her , “Have you tested that hypothesis ? ” This series of questioning could help Fatima realize that she made the hypothesis that an older demographic would like minimalist design without having any concrete evidence . This could be the limitation of her knowledge about her target customer that she should address . Afterward , the coach told her about how she should go about testing this hypothesis , and Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . Intelligent Coaching Systems : Understanding One - to - many Coaching for Ill - defined Problem Solving 138 : 9 Novices’ challenges Coaches’ goals Coaching Strategies 1 . ( Predicted ) Coaches help novices develop metacognitive skills Novices have yet to fully develop metacognitive skills to monitor and evaluate their progress and plan effective actions . Coaches help novices realize the limitations of their knowledge and make effective plans to address the limitations ( 1 ) Monitor novices’ progress ( 2 ) Ask open - ended questions ( 3 ) Plan for effective next steps 2 . Coaches extract applicable knowledge to share with peers a . Novices are not yet aware of relevance between themselves and peers , thus refrain from sharing learning Coaches encourage novices to share learning with peers ( 1 ) Request details of how a novice achieved something ( 2 ) Remind novices why their experience might be relevant and useful to their peers ( 3 ) Ask a novice to summarize high - level takeaways from their learning b . Novices are not yet aware which part of their learning is applicable to their peers’ project Coaches help novices summarize high - level knowledge that is applicable to peers in the group ( 1 ) Ask novices to summarize learning from their processes and methods ( 2 ) Summarize novices’ learning into applicable knowledge 3 . Coaches locate expertise and scaffold help - seeking to support peer learning a . Novices are not yet aware of peers’ expertise , thus do not know who to seek help from Coaches direct novices to needed expertise and knowledge ( 1 ) Refer novices to peers who have needed expertise ( 2 ) Tell a peer’s story as an example b . Novices are still developing effective help - seeking skills Coaches help novices formulate effective help requests ( 1 ) Model for help - seeking ( 2 ) Ask novices to provide more details on their help request ( 3 ) Ask novices to reflect on goals behind help requests 4 . Coaches help novices mitigate their fear of failures a . Coaches facilitate novices to test with peers in a supportive environment ( 1 ) Facilitate novices to test with peers ( 2 ) Model for testing with peers ( 3 ) Recognize and encourage progress Novices fear the possibility of failures and thus avoid testing b . Coaches normalize the experience of failures and re - frame this experience as an opportunity to learn ( 1 ) Ask novices to discuss obstacles they face ( 2 ) Recognize and encourage progress ( 3 ) Ask novices to summarize learning from testing 5 . Coaches utilize peers to provide accountability Novices stall to make progress due to lack of motivation or accountability Coaches utilize peers to hold novices accountable in making progress ( 1 ) Publicly announce novices’ goals in front of peers ( 2 ) Record novices’ goals in public communication channel ( 3 ) Ask novices to update their progress in front of their peers Table 1 . 1 - to - many coaching model : Coaches help novices develop metacognitive skills , extract high - level learnings , locate expertise and scaffold help - seeking , mitigate their fear of failures , and utilize peers to provide accountability Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . 138 : 10 Evey Jiaxin Huang et al . helped her make a plan for testing it for the coming weeks . Just like in 1 - to - 1 coaching , coaches in 1 - to - many coaching closely monitored each novice’s progress , used a series of open - ended questions to help novices realize the limitation of their knowledge , and helped novices address this limitation effectively . We observed coaches using these strategies with all coaching groups in every coaching session . Design Implications One way for intelligent systems to augment 1 - to - many coaching is first to augment novices’ ability in communicating progress and externalizing thinking so that coaches can monitor many novices’ progress and diagnose their challenges quickly and effectively . Typically in problem - based learning environments , coaches meet with one or one team of novices for 30 - min to an hour each week during which the majority of the coaching time is spent on novices communicating their progress and coaches asking a series of open - ended questions to help them externalize their thinking [ 60 ] . This phenomenon is aligned with what we observed in 1 - to - many coaching , except that coaches were supporting 3 - 5 novices who were working on different problems synchronously , thus needed to be updated 3 - 5 times . In the end , even less time was spent on diagnosing novices’ challenges and assisting them . Having novices fill in carefully designed templates that contain the key information coaches need to monitor novices’ progress and diagnose their challenges before coaching sessions have shown success in helping novices communicate progress and externalize thinking so that coaches can jump straight into diagnosing and assisting [ 62 , 80 ] . For example , before meeting with coaches , novices fill out a “sprint log” that guides them to report how much time they have spent on each of their goals , obstacles they have encountered , and what they have tried to tackle the obstacles [ 80 ] . During coaching sessions , coaches , within a quick glance , can monitor how much a novice has accomplished and diagnose what the novice might need help with . Similarly , Rees Lewis and colleagues designed a canvas that outlines key aspects of design projects . Having novices fill out the canvas before coaching session helps novices externalize their thinking and reasoning to help coaches diagnose novices’ challenges [ 62 ] . However , one template may not fit all novices’ and coaches’ needs across different coaching contexts because the effectiveness of a template is highly dependent on individual coaches’ preferences , the types or domains of ill - defined problems novices work on , and the problem - solving stage each novice is in [ 5 ] . Intelligent systems can assist 1 - to - many coaches in developing templates that contain key information they require to monitor and diagnose novices’ progress and provide novices with relevant templates that are appropriate to their current problem and problem - solving stages . HCI researchers have previously explored AI - techniques that can analyze and summarize transcripts of educational videos to create graphs or maps of important concepts and knowledge , and collaborate with coaches to generate scaffolds that can support novices’ learning [ 44 , 46 ] . We might imagine similar techniques can be applied in analyzing transcripts of coaching sessions and assisting coaches in developing effective templates based on common questions coaches ask during coaching sessions . After novices fill in the appropriate templates , intelligent systems can also augment coaches’ ability in making sense of novices’ responses , diagnosing their challenges , prioritizing who may need help the most , and determining who share similar needs and who may be able to help each other out . Guo has developed a tool to assist coaches in monitoring many novices’ programming progress simultaneously by showing their codes side by side . But this tool still requires coaches to diagnose and assist novices one by one individually [ 24 ] . In recent years , AI researchers have made tremendous progress on machine learning models and techniques that can ingest and synthesize complex and unstructured text to retrieve key concepts and assist human sense - making and decision making [ 30 , 40 ] . Future coaching system designers can explore how to use these techniques in Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . Intelligent Coaching Systems : Understanding One - to - many Coaching for Ill - defined Problem Solving 138 : 11 the 1 - to - many coaching domain to assist coaches in making sense of many novices’ progress and making decisions on what coaching strategies to use . Lastly , another possible route to assist coaches’ ability in diagnosing many novices’ challenges is to scaffold novices in evaluating their progress themselves with a list of common criteria and questions that coaches use . Doing so can not only surface challenges novices may be experiencing , offload the work required of coaches , but also help novices develop self - directed learning skills [ 5 ] . In summary , to build intelligent systems that can assist coaches in monitoring , diagnosing , and assisting many novices , we recommend designing intelligent systems that can ( 1 ) Assist coaches in developing templates and scaffolds to effectively monitor many novices’ progress and diagnose their challenges . ( 2 ) Assist coaches in making sense of many novices’ progress to diagnose challenges and provide novices with checklists to assist them in self - evaluation . ( 3 ) Provide some automated analysis on novices’ templates and self - evaluations to suggest appropriate coaching strategies to coaches . Based on our model of 1 - to - many coaching , systems can detect whether novices are experiencing challenges outlined in the model and suggest appropriate coaching strategies to coaches . Next , we present the four unique challenges , strategies , and goals in 1 - to - many coaching that are not accounted for in the existing 1 - to - 1 coaching model [ 28 , 29 ] . 4 . 2 Coaches Extract Applicable Knowledge to Share with Peers In one - to - many coaching , a group of novices who are working on different ill - defined problems and in different stages of problem - solving is coached together synchronously . Together the novices possess a wide range of experiences and learning that , after coaches’ selection and improvement , can become knowledge that is applicable to other novices in the group . However , coaches reported that , because novices in 1 - to - many coaching were working on different problems , they often did not know other novices’ progress and thus did not perceive their experience as useful and relevant to their peers ( P1 , P2 ) . We did not see novices voluntarily share learnings from their experiences with their peers . Instead , we observed coaches explicitly requesting details of how they achieved something , reminding them why their experience might be relevant and useful to their peers , and helping them summarize their experience into high - level knowledge applicable to their peers . We will illustrate our findings with an example from one specific coaching group , Zhang , Jayla , Fatima , and Sean . Zhang had been building his prototype of a wild - fire detection device . Jayla was exploring the need for an online platform for small businesses . Fatima had been building an e - commerce website for sustainable clothing , and Sean had been testing his disease management platform with real patients . In one of the coaching sessions , Sean told the coach ( P1 ) that he conducted A / B testing on his online advertisements materials to see what kind of language could attract more customers . The coach then asked Sean , “What did you learn ? Any advice for Fatima , Zhang , and Jayla ? I think they will soon start testing , right ? ” Here the coach explicitly invited Sean to share his learning with his peers and reminded him why his learning might be relevant and useful to his peers : because his peers would also be testing soon . Novices also might not know which of their experiences would be applicable to their peers . For example , in the same coaching session from the previous example , after the coach asked Sean to share , Sean went into details about the results from his A / B testing on his online advertisement materials . He described which keywords had the highest click - through rates for his target patients . The coach asked him again , “What was your high - level takeaway for Fatima , Zhang , and Jayla ? ” to Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . 138 : 12 Evey Jiaxin Huang et al . encourage him to summarize his learning into applicable knowledge for his peers . Sean thought for a moment , and told the group , You need to be comfortable with testing a bunch of stuff . . . I think I overthought it before I started , and I think I should [ have started testing earlier ] . But if you just run them , run ads , and you rotate them , you’re going to learn tons of stuff , and you’re going to continue to make some progress . Compared to his previous sharing on which keywords could attract more patients , this advice on testing early might have been more applicable to his peers because they were all going to test soon and might all experience the challenge of “overthinking too much” . Lastly , the coach summarized Sean’s experience into key takeaways for his peers one more time by saying , So I think high level takeaways . . . you can get stuck in like the over - planning phase for anything , right ? Like over planning , overthinking , whatever . So . . . especially for when you’re testing things , just getting something out there sooner rather than later . And iterating is the best way to go . In this example , the coach first explicitly asked Sean to share his learning with peers , reminded him how his learning might be relevant , and helped him summarize his learning into knowledge applicable to his peers . We saw coaches use these strategies regularly in coaching sessions . When asked about their goals behind these strategies , coaches suggested that they hoped to “transfer learning to everyone in the group” ( P2 ) and that the peers who were listening to these takeaways could remember them and use them in the future when they encounter similar situations . Coaches reported to us that , while novices’ specific domain knowledge may not be identical , their underlying processes and methods for problem - solving might be applicable to their peers ( P2 , P3 ) . For example , even though Jayla may not need Sean’s knowledge on different diseases , she would soon start testing her own prototype , and thus would benefit from learning about how Sean approached testing and how he turned testing results into concrete design changes on his platform . Listening in on their peers’ interaction with the coach during coaching sessions could create a unique opportunity to expose novices to their peers’ resources , methods , and processes . Yet , as we saw from the previous example , novices , when prompted to share , often shared only domain specific knowledge . Coaches helped them reflect and summarize learning from their underlying processes and methods to share with peers . Design Implications Researchers have previously studied the benefits of peer learning and built various tools to support it [ e . g . , see 11 , 19 , 39 , 54 , 79 ] . For example , Kulkarni and colleagues built PeerStudio , an online platform , to pair up novices to provide each other feedback on their assignments in a MOOC environment [ 39 ] . Chiang and colleagues built a tool that supports crowd workers who are working on the same problems to give each other advice on how to solve the problems more effectively [ 11 ] . However , existing systems have mainly focused on contexts where novices are collaborating on or learning about the same problems . Under these contexts , novices can support each other by sharing domain - specific knowledge since they are working on the same problems . In our analysis , we discovered unique challenges of peer learning when novices are each working on a different problem : they did not know how or which part of their learning might be relevant to their peers , and focused on only domain - specific knowledge rather than their underlying processes and methods that may be more applicable to their peers . We observed coaches explicitly encouraging novices to share , surfacing relevance and similarities among novices’ work , and helping them synthesize and summarize their learning into higher - level knowledge that was applicable to many . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . Intelligent Coaching Systems : Understanding One - to - many Coaching for Ill - defined Problem Solving 138 : 13 We imagine this challenge may be also common in other informal coaching contexts like the workplace where everyone is working on different projects . For intelligent systems to support peer learning in 1 - to - many coaching , we recommend systems to : ( 1 ) Analyze and surface relevance between novices : Coaches currently rely on their frequent interactions with novices and memory of novices’ progress to build awareness of common challenges and identify what kind of learning may be useful to many . Intelligent systems can support 1 - to - many coaching by utilizing the data on all novices’ current and historical records to analyze and surface relevance . Specifically , we can first use coaches’ knowledge of common methods and processes to generate a set of tags , such as " A / B testing " and " marketing " , which novices can use to tag their weekly update . Then , the system can analyze and compare across novices to surface relevance and similarities and which part of their experience might be relevant to peers . ( 2 ) Provide novices templates to summarize and share high - level learning applicable to peers : Based on the common challenges and learning needs generated by coaches , intelligent systems can provide novices with templates that guide them to summarize their experience into knowledge that is applicable to peers automatically . Previously researchers have used blogs to facilitate novices in summarizing and sharing high - level learning with peers when they are solving the same problem [ 26 ] . To support novices who are working on different problems , intelligent systems can scaffold novices to reflect on learning from their underlying processes and methods to share with their peers . 4 . 3 Coaches Locate Expertise and Scaffold Help - seeking to Support Peer Learning One - to - many coaching provided novices the unique benefit of having access to a group of peers they could learn from . Yet , because novices were working on different ill - defined problems and in different stages of their projects , they often had challenges in recognizing and utilizing their peers’ expertise and locating appropriate peers to seek help from . Furthermore , they also had challenges in formulating effective help requests . In order to support peer learning , coaches directed novices to peers who could help , modeled help - seeking , and helped novices formulate help requests . For example , in one coaching session , Sherry , a novice working on a volunteering platform start - up , needed advice on how to work with a marketing group on campus . The coach ( P2 ) told Sherry , “I will put you in contact with students who have worked with them [ the marketing group ] before . ” Here the coach helped Sherry to locate other peers who had the needed expertise , experience working with the marketing group , and referred Sherry to those peers . When asked about his goals behind using this strategy , the coach said that he was trying to show the novices that their peers had faced similar challenges before and had worked with the marketing group , thus could be the most helpful to the novice . We also observed coaches telling other peers’ stories as anecdotes to share knowledge with novices . For example , Renyu , a novice working on a website that reviewed oversized clothing from fashion brands , struggled with finding users to populate her site . The coach ( P3 ) told her , “I know one thing that other community - based projects found really useful is to find relevant subreddits and posts your sites there " . Here the coach , instead of referring Renyu to a peer , told Renyu about other peers’ learning directly . Novices might also have challenges formulating effective help requests that could help coaches provide help directly or identify the needed expertise . We observed coaches modeling for help - seeking and providing novices feedback on how to make their help requests more effective . For example , in one session , Sherry told the coach ( P2 ) that she needed help with finding social media Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . 138 : 14 Evey Jiaxin Huang et al . resources that could help with the marketing of her platform . The coach helped her to formulate a more effective help request by asking her , “Which platform are you thinking about building on , and what the goal of your social media strategy would be ? ” By helping Sherry to narrow down on the specific help she was looking for and specify what she aimed to achieve , the coach was more likely to understand Sherry’s need , provide the needed help , and identify the right peer who had needed expertise . Design Implications The challenge in locating needed expertise is also common in large organizations where members collectively share a lot of knowledge but have challenges in identifying and locating it when needed [ 53 ] . Previous CSCW researchers have taken two approaches to address this challenge : one is “object - centric” , where organizations extract knowledge from members , store it , and help members access it when needed [ 3 , 4 ] ; the second is “people - centric” , where organizations record expertise each member has , and help whoever is in need to identify the member with needed expertise [ 2 ] . Our analysis demonstrated that , 1 - to - many coaches were doing both : ( 1 ) When novices shared their knowledge , coaches stored it in their head and retold it later when someone else needed it ; ( 2 ) Coaches stored each novice’s expertise in their heads and directed novices to the peer who could help with their needs . However , 1 - to - many coaches we observed relied solely on their memory to map out and retrieve the complex network of knowledge and expertise among all novices they coach . As the number of novices increase , the burden on coaches’ memory also increases . In order to support coaches in managing and locating expertise and knowledge among novices , we recommend intelligent systems to : ( 1 ) Build and store a network of expertise and knowledge : Novices’ regular check - ins and plans are valuable first steps that intelligent systems can utilize to help coaches build and store a network of both expertise and knowledge among all the novices . Yet , as we described earlier , novices themselves may not know which part of their knowledge may be relevant to their peers . In order to extract valuable knowledge and information about novices’ expertise , systems can invite novices to reflect and tag their own methods and processes with tags generated by coaches . Furthermore , systems can provide coaches tools to quickly capture important knowledge from their interactions with novices so that they can reference and share later when needed . ( 2 ) Provides coaches tools to search and access the network of expertise : Not only should intelligent systems help coaches map out and store a network of expertise and knowledge , but they should also provide coaches with tools that can help them quickly and easily search and access this network to identify relevant peers and knowledge to provide novices support in real time . ( 3 ) Provide novices templates and scaffolds for writing effective help - requests : Intelligent systems can provide novices templates and scaffolds that can guide novices through writing effective help requests to offload the amount of work required of coaches and help novices develop help - seeking skills [ 32 ] . 4 . 4 Coaches Help Novices Mitigate Their Fear of Failures Testing is crucial for solving ill - defined problems because it helps novices iteratively refine their understanding of the problem and stakeholders’ needs [ 9 , 62 ] . However , novices often avoided testing because of the possibility of failures defined as their products and ideas being not viable or desirable , and the embarrassment or shame that might come from encountering these situa - tions . In our analysis , we observed coaches helping novices mitigate their fear of failures and Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . Intelligent Coaching Systems : Understanding One - to - many Coaching for Ill - defined Problem Solving 138 : 15 hesitancy towards testing by normalizing the experience of failures , facilitating novices to test with peers , providing novices encouragement and support , and re - framing the experience of failures as opportunities to learn . In each of the 1 - to - many coaching sessions , coaches openly invited each novice in the group to discuss the obstacles they were experiencing and encouraged peers in the group to assist the novice in tackling those obstacles . By doing so , coaches aimed to help novices see the experience of obstacles as a natural part of the process in entrepreneurship as they heard about their peers’ experiences of obstacles regularly , and saw their peers in the group as supportive as they stepped in to provide assistance . Coaches facilitated novices to test with peers in a safe and supportive environment to help novices feel more comfortable with testing and getting feedback . In one coaching session , Renyu , the novice building a platform to review oversized clothing from fashion brands , had recently finished building her platform and was nervous about testing it with real users . Upon hearing that , the coach ( P3 ) invited Renyu to share her website in the group and walk through it so her peers could give her feedback . Compared to testing with strangers , testing with peers who novices already knew might be a much safer and more supportive experience . Not to mention that peers were already present , avoiding the need of finding testers . Coaches helped novices to reflect and summarize learnings from testing in order to re - frame the experience of failures as a surprise and opportunity to learn . After novices conducted tests , we saw coaches asking novices , “what was something surprising you learned from your tests ? ” ( P3 ) By first calling results that were not expected as surprises instead of failures , coaches aimed to help novices see them in a more positive light . By asking novices to summarize their learnings from the unexpected results , coaches aimed to help them see the encountering of these experiences as opportunities to learn . Design Implications The possible reasons for novices’ fear of failure may include novices “fall [ ing ] in love with the solution , not the problem” ( P2 ) , taking failure personally , and attributing failures to their self - worth [ 15 ] rather than to work ( P1 ) . Furthermore , novices may be accustomed to traditional classroom environments where everyone puts forward their best work for critique from instructors and peers . This type of environment can create a culture of success and potentially lead novices to experience stigma around risk - taking and failures [ 37 ] , and “lack the courage to fail and be vulnerable” ( P3 ) . As a result , novices often avoid putting themselves in a position like testing the product with a real user where the real users may tell them they don’t like their product or it won’t work and feel nervous about sharing and talking about “failures” in front of the coach and peers . While the fear of failure and the importance of testing have been studied in design and innovation literature [ e . g . , 9 , 62 ] , they have not been identified in the existing coaching models . We also did not know how coaches in 1 - to - many coaching might support novices in mitigating their fear of failures . Researchers have studied expert designers’ strategies in mitigating their own fear of failures and re - framing their experience of failures as not something to avoid , but to pursue actively as learning opportunities [ 37 , 57 , 70 ] . Torres et al . , discovered that expert designers use strategies like building a supportive community that showcases both successes and failures to normalize the experience of failures and providing each other encouragement to re - frame experiences of failures [ 70 ] . Nicholas and colleagues found that experts intentionally keep unsuccessful attempts around to help them think about how they might improve their work [ 57 ] . Experts even create a resume of failures to showcase their failed work as a way to own their mistakes and view them as opportunities for growth rather than shame [ 37 ] . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . 138 : 16 Evey Jiaxin Huang et al . Inspired by how coaches support novices and how expert designers mitigate their fear of failures , we recommend intelligent systems to : ( 1 ) Facilitate novices to test and learn with peers in a safe and supportive environment : Peers in 1 - to - many coaching are valuable resources for novices to test their ideas and proto - types with . Intelligent systems can automatically pair them up to test in a safe and supportive environment by also providing them with templates or suggestions on giving supportive and positive feedback . Furthermore , systems can provide novices templates to summarize learnings from their tests to help them see the tests as opportunities to learn , no matter of the outcome . ( 2 ) Showcase failures and growth : Intelligent systems can help normalize the experience of failures by showcasing novices’ experience of failures among novices in the coaching group . Furthermore , systems can keep track of novices’ learning from tests over time to showcase novices’ growth . 4 . 5 Coaches Utilize Peers to Provide Accountability Informal coaching settings often have fewer coaching resources [ e . g . , 21 ] and novices’ projects can take months or even years [ 16 ] . Furthermore , because novices are working on different projects at their own pace , they may have limited ways to share and compare their own progress with those of their peers . These characteristics , also common in other informal coaching settings like the workplace , may possibly result in novices to experience reduced motivation and accountability , in turn stalling their progress . We observed that , in 1 - to - many coaching , coaches utilized the presence of peers to provide novices accountability in planning and execution by publicizing novices’ actionable plans and checking in on their progress in front of their peers . At the end of each coaching session , coaches asked novices to take turns publicly telling the group what they planned to accomplish before the next coaching session and published each novice’s goals in the group’s Slack channel as a record . Then , in the following session , coaches would publicly announce each novice’s goals from the previous session and check in on their progress with their goals in front of their peers . For example , Alice , a novice working on an online marketplace for local organic produce , told the group that her goal for the next two weeks was to test a UI styling concept with one or two customers . The coach ( P1 ) wrote down this goal and posted it in the group channel . In the coaching session two weeks later , the coach asked her in front of the group , “‘Test UI styling concept with one or two customers’ , did it happen ? ” , to check on Alice’s progress with her goal . By publicly announcing , recording , and checking in on novices’ goals in front of the whole group , coaches aimed to hold novices accountable for making progress . However , coaches reported that , if someone in the group started to give “wishy - washy” goals and put in less effort , it could lead others in the group to think it was acceptable . They would then soon start to follow , ultimately downgrading accountability ( P2 ) . Thus coaches gave novices feedback on their goals to turn “wishy - washy” goals into concrete and actionable goals that novices were more likely to accomplish and to show the rest of the group what was expected of them . For example , in one coaching session , the coach asked Ashley what she planned to achieve in the next two weeks . Ashley told the coach that she planned to “work on social media and branding” . As a response , the coach said , “Are there any concrete steps you want to finish by the end of the semester ? ” ( P2 ) . Here the coach requested Ashley to decompose her goal into specific and concrete steps so that she would be more likely to accomplish her goal . Furthermore , as the rest of the group observed , they could learn that they were also expected to set concrete and specific goals . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . Intelligent Coaching Systems : Understanding One - to - many Coaching for Ill - defined Problem Solving 138 : 17 Design Implications Our finding suggests that novices in 1 - to - many coaching can hold each other accountable , which is crucial for learning in informal , extracurricular settings . However , accountability can be undermined if some novices in the group do not follow the expected high standards of planning and execution . Thus , we suggest intelligent systems to : ( 1 ) Publicize novices’ plans and progress to provide accountability : Intelligent systems can publicize novices’ progress and plans among peers in the 1 - to - many coaching group as a way to provide novices accountability . ( 2 ) Provide coaches tools to monitor peer - learning and give novices feedback publicly : Publicizing novices’ plans and execution can be a double - edged sword . While it can provide accountability when novices do good work , it can also lead novices to follow low - quality work if it goes unchecked . Thus systems should provide tools that can help coaches monitor learning among novices and tools to publicly provide feedback . 5 DISCUSSION In this section , we first discuss how our model of 1 - to - many coaching aligns and differentiates with existing 1 - to - 1 coaching model and model of leadership in creative collaborations , and the possible reasons for the differences . We then summarize design implications for future intelligent systems to support 1 - to - many coaching in ill - defined contexts . Lastly , we describe an example intelligent system informed by our model . 5 . 1 One - to - many versus 1 - to - 1 coaching Our findings demonstrated that coaches in a 1 - to - many setting need to help novices develop metacognitive skills ( as in 1 - to - 1 coaching ) . They also need to curate and extract high - level learnings that are applicable to every novice in the group , locate expertise and scaffold help - seeking , help novices mitigate their fear of failures , and utilize peers to provide accountability . These differences might be a result of coaches trying to utilize many novices’ experience and learning , and having to overcome the challenges of novices each work on different problems at difference paces . Unlike 1 - to - 1 coaching where coaches only support one or one group of novices at a time [ 28 , 29 ] , coaches support many novices synchronously in 1 - to - many coaching . Peers can be valuable sources of knowledge in 1 - to - many coaching as novices observe and learn from peers’ coaching and learn from peers directly . Thus it is important for coaches in 1 - to - many coaching to utilize this resource and facilitate peer learning . Yet , because novices are each working on different problems , they may not be aware of which part of their learning could be relevant and useful to their peers . In order to facilitate peer learning , coaches need to be aware of all the novices’ learning needs and stages of their problem - solving in order to identify learnings that could potentially be useful to others in the group and to distill them into bits that are applicable to others . Novices also have difficulties in identifying and locating the needed expertise , a common challenge also studied in large organizations [ 53 ] . To help novices in locating the needed expertise , coaches need regular updates on all the novices’ progress and to remember this information . Furthermore , while peer learning can be valuable , novices can also learn undesirable behaviors from each other . Thus it is important for coaches to monitor peer - peer learning and correct undesirable behaviors from spreading . Coaching a group of novices simultaneously creates an environment where novices can provide each other critique and feedback , yet only putting their best work forwards could potentially Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . 138 : 18 Evey Jiaxin Huang et al . create a stigma around risk - taking and failures [ 37 ] . We saw coaches building a supportive envi - ronment among peers by normalizing the experiences of failures and re - framing such experiences as opportunities to learn . The differences could also be explained by the differences in contexts . The existing 1 - to - 1 coaching model is based on a formal curricular setting that is highly resourced and where novices work on projects scoped by coaches within a semester [ 22 ] , while our model is based on data collected in an informal coaching setting . In informal settings , there are no dedicated instructors to scope and control novices’ projects , nor organizational expectations around novices’ participation , investment , and completion [ 65 ] . As a result , novices’ projects can cover a wide range of topics and take months or even years . Compared to formal settings , informal settings also often have fewer coaches resources [ e . g . , 21 ] . The extended timeline on novices’ projects and lack of coaching resources may require novices to be more self - directed and motivated to complete their projects . As a result , we saw coaches help novices develop self - directed learning skills and utilize the presence of peers to provide novices accountability to plan and execute . 5 . 2 One - to - many Coaching Versus Leadership Similar to leaders of creative collaboration projects [ 50 ] , coaches in 1 - to - many coaching monitor novices’ work , help novices tackle obstacles , and make effective plans . However , because each novice is working on different projects instead of collaborating on one , coaches are monitoring , planning , and problem - solving for 3 - 5 different projects simultaneously . Novices themselves also may not voluntarily seek help from each other when they are not aware of others’ expertise and progress . As a result , coaches can be overwhelmed by constantly switching contexts during coaching sessions , monitoring and recalling many different projects’ progress , and managing peer - to - peer learning . Currently , coaches only distribute the coaching tasks of assistance to novices by inviting some novices to step in and provide help . We might imagine coaching can become more effective if future intelligent systems can help coaches distribute more coaching tasks to systems and novices . For example , tasks like monitoring and locating expertise can be distributed to intelligent systems . Novices can offload some tasks in evaluating or diagnosing by using a checklists of coaches’ evaluation criteria to self - evaluate . Systems can also provide novices with scaffolds and templates to support help - seeking and giving among peers . We will describe more detailed implications in the next section . 5 . 3 Design Implications Our goal for this research is to develop an empirical model that can inform the design of future intelligent systems capable of supporting 1 - to - many coaching in ill - defined problems . Based on this model , we summarize design implications informed by our model of 1 - to - many coaching ( Table 2 ) . To illustrate the implications , we describe a potential intelligent coaching system below . 5 . 3 . 1 The system automates monitoring novices’ progress . The system automates the routine and repetitive tasks of monitoring novices’ progress by notifying novices each week to update their progress and set goals with a template that includes the key information coaches needed to monitor and diagnose novices’ progress . The system then provides novices with a checklist to help them evaluate their own planning : whether they are concrete , actionable , and relevant . The system thus scaffolds the goal - setting process necessary for self - directed learning [ 5 , 25 ] , and partially automates the coach’s role in monitoring and scaffolding the process . 5 . 3 . 2 The system automates some diagnoses and coaching . Based on novices’ input , the system can first conduct some automated diagnoses and provide novices immediate feedback . For example , Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . Intelligent Coaching Systems : Understanding One - to - many Coaching for Ill - defined Problem Solving 138 : 19 One - to - many Coaching Model Design Implications 1 . Coaches help novices develop metacognitive skills for planning and monitoring ( 1 ) Assist coaches in developing templates and scaffolds ( 2 ) Assist coaches in making sense of and diagnosing novices’ progress ( 3 ) Provide some automated analysis on novices’ input and suggest appropriate coaching strategies to coaches 2 . Coaches extract high - level learnings to build shareable knowledge ( 1 ) Analyze and surface relevance between novices ( 2 ) Provide novices templates to summarize and share high - level learning applicable to peers 3 . Coaches locate expertise and scaffold help - seeking to support peer learning ( 1 ) Build and store a network of expertise and knowledge ( 2 ) Provides coaches tools to quickly search and access the network ( 3 ) Provide novices templates and scaffolds for effective help - requests 4 . Coaches help novices mitigate the fear of failure ( 1 ) Facilitate novices to test and learn with peers in a safe and supportive environment ( 2 ) Showcase failures and growth 5 . Coaches utilize peers to provide accountability ( 1 ) Publicize novices’ plans and progress to provide accountability ( 2 ) Provide coaches tools to correct and give novices feedback publicly Table 2 . Design implications : future intelligent coaching systems to ( 1 ) assist coaches in monitoring , comparing , and accessing many novices’ progress , learning , and expertise ; ( 2 ) provide novices with checklists , templates , and scaffolds to help them self - evaluate , seek - help , and summarize learning ; ( 3 ) showcase failures and growth ; and ( 4 ) publicize planning and progress to support accountability using Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) and rule - based reasoning , the system may be able to evaluate novices’ planning : whether novices’ goals are too broad and unspecific , thus giving novices the feedback of decomposing their goals to be more actionable and specific . It is reasonable to doubt the system’s ability to accurately judge the quality of novices’ goals in the early stage . We can imagine using “learning loops” that begin with first having novices rate their own plans with a checklist and having peers or coaches manually rate their plans , and then gradually automate more and more of the work to the system as it gets better at predicting what coaches would do [ 52 ] . By analyzing historical records of a novice’s progress , the system may detect that the novice has not conducted any tests in the past few weeks , thus reminding novices to test and even suggest a peer who may share similar project stage or project interests the novice can test with . Furthermore , the system can provide novices with a dashboard that highlights their learning from each test , no matter successful or not , to remind them of their growth , recognize their progress , and encourage them to test more . 5 . 3 . 3 The system collaborates with coaches and peers to provide coaching . We don’t want the system to replace human coaching , it will instead loop in coaches or peers to provide coaching on parts where their expertise is most desired and assist their ability to coach . While the system is good at recording and monitoring novices’ progress , human coaches are the best at diagnosing novices’ challenges and identifying potential risks that may lead novices’ products to fail [ 62 , 80 ] . If the novices are not conducting any tests even after the system has reminded them to do so many times , the system can loop in the coach to meet with novices one - on - one to further diagnose the reasons behind the lack of testing and understand what other challenges the novices might be experiencing . When a novice notes down a specific challenge , the system can automatically recommend the Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . 138 : 20 Evey Jiaxin Huang et al . novice peers who have encountered similar challenges before and connect the novice with those peers to learn about how they have solved those challenges . We envision a system as such can combine the intelligence between computers and humans to achieve better coaching in ill - defined domains by : ( a ) involving and connecting larger numbers of coaches and novices , ( b ) recording and retrieving strategies and resources effectively , and ( c ) learning from its own experience to become even more effective overtime [ 52 ] . 5 . 4 Limitations and Future Work Data collection was limited to 24 coaching sessions with 30 novice entrepreneurs in the same Midwest university incubator . While we reached data saturation within this setting , to understand the generalizability of the model , we plan to collect data across a set diverse of ill - defined domains ( such as research training and STEM inquiry learning ) and countries where attitudes towards ill - defined problem solving , learning , interaction failure , transparency , incentives , and more may differ . Further data collection was limited to coaches’ perceptions of novices’ challenges . While percep - tions drive coaching behavior , in future work , we plan to interview novices about what is hard for them and why to better help coaches ( and ultimately intelligent systems ) to more accurately interpret novice behavior . Our work investigates 1 - to - many coaching that happens in a synchronous setting . However , it is also very common for coaches to support many novices asynchronously . Future work is needed to understand if our coaching model applies to 1 to many coaching that happens in asynchronous contexts as well as in other ill - defined domains such as research labs , design studios , and coaching training to test the generalizability of our findings . 6 CONCLUSION In this paper , we investigated 1 - to - many coaching , a novel and increasingly popular form of coaching yet our empirical understanding is limited . Our finding extends the existing model on 1 - to - 1 coaching by contributing a detailed model that outlines unique challenges , goals , and strategies in 1 - to - many coaching . This model demonstrates that coaches in 1 - to - many , informal settings not only need to help novices develop metacognitive skills ( just as in 1 - to - 1 coaching ) , but also need to utilize the presence and expertise of a group of novices to learn from each other , mitigate their fear of failures , and provide accountability . These differences could be explained by 1 - to - many coaches having to utilize and manage peer expertise , but also having to overcome the challenges of peers all working on different projects , extended project timelines , and lack of coaching resources . To build intelligent systems capable of supporting 1 - to - many coaching , we recommend systems to ( 1 ) assist coaches in monitoring , comparing , and accessing many novices’ progress , learning , and expertise ; ( 2 ) provide novices with checklists , templates , and scaffolds to help them self - evaluate , seek - help , and summarize learning ; ( 3 ) showcase failures and growth ; and ( 4 ) publicize planning and progress to support accountability . —— – REFERENCES [ 1 ] Mark S . Ackerman . 2000 . The Intellectual Challenge of CSCW : The Gap Between Social Requirements and Technical Feasibility . Human – Computer Interaction 15 , 2 - 3 ( Sept . 2000 ) , 179 – 203 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / S15327051HCI1523 _ 5 [ 2 ] Mark S . Ackerman , Juri Dachtera , Volkmar Pipek , and Volker Wulf . 2013 . Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View of Knowledge Management . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 22 , 4 - 6 ( Aug . 2013 ) , 531 – 573 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 013 - 9192 - 8 [ 3 ] M . S . Ackerman and T . W . Malone . 1990 . Answer Garden : a tool for growing organizational memory . In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOIS and IEEE CS TC - OA conference on Office information systems ( COCS ’90 ) . Association for Computing Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . Intelligent Coaching Systems : Understanding One - to - many Coaching for Ill - defined Problem Solving 138 : 21 Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 31 – 39 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 91474 . 91485 [ 4 ] MarkS . AckermanandDavidW . McDonald . 1996 . AnswerGarden2 : mergingorganizationalmemorywithcollaborative help . In Proceedings of the 1996 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work ( CSCW ’96 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 97 – 105 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 240080 . 240203 [ 5 ] Susan A . Ambrose , Michael W . Bridges , Michele DiPietro , Marsha C . Lovett , and Marie K . Norman . 2010 . How learning works : Seven research - based principles for smart teaching . Jossey - Bass , San Francisco , CA , US . Pages : xxii , 301 . [ 6 ] Marcela Borge , Craig H . Ganoe , Shin - I Shih , and John M . Carroll . 2012 . Patterns of team processes and breakdowns in information analysis tasks . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1105 – 1114 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145369 [ 7 ] Rodney Brooks , William Scott Green , R . Glenn Hubbard , Dipak C . Jain , Linda Katehi , George McLendon , James Plummer , Myron Roomkin , and Richard Newton . 2007 . Entrepreneurship in American Higher Education . SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 1291290 . Social Science Research Network , Rochester , NY . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2139 / ssrn . 1291290 [ 8 ] C . J . Butz , S . Hua , and R . B . Maguire . 2004 . A Web - Based Intelligent Tutoring System for Computer Programming . In IEEE / WIC / ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence ( WI’04 ) . 159 – 165 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / WI . 2004 . 10104 [ 9 ] Spencer E . Carlson , Daniel G . Rees Lewis , Leesha V . Maliakal , Elizabeth M . Gerber , and Matthew W . Easterday . 2020 . The design risks framework : Understanding metacognition for iteration . Design Studies 70 ( Sept . 2020 ) , 100961 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2020 . 100961 [ 10 ] Joel Chan , Steven Dang , and Steven P Dow . 2016 . Improving crowd innovation with expert facilitation . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , CSCW , Vol . 27 . 1223 – 1235 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2820023 [ 11 ] Chun - Wei Chiang , Anna Kasunic , and Saiph Savage . 2018 . Crowd Coach : Peer Coaching for Crowd Workers’ Skill Growth . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 2 , CSCW ( Nov . 2018 ) , 37 : 1 – 37 : 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274306 [ 12 ] Bart Clarysse , Mike Wright , and Jonas Van Hove . 2016 . A Look Inside Accelerators in the United Kingdom : Building TechnologyBusinesses . In TechnologyEntrepreneurshipandBusinessIncubation . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1142 / 9781783269778 _ 0003 [ 13 ] Allan Collins , John Seely Brown , and Susan E . Newman . 1989 . Cognitive apprenticeship : Teaching the crafts of reading , writing , and mathematics . In Knowing , learning , and instruction : Essays in honor of Robert Glaser . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc , Hillsdale , NJ , US , 453 – 494 . [ 14 ] A . Corbin , J . & Strauss . 2015 . Basics of Qualitative Research : Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory ( 4th Edition ) . arXiv : 1011 . 1669 [ 15 ] P . G . Dodgson and J . V . Wood . 1998 . Self - esteem and the cognitive accessibility of strengths and weaknesses after failure . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 75 , 1 ( July 1998 ) , 178 – 197 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / / 0022 - 3514 . 75 . 1 . 178 [ 16 ] Matthew W . Easterday , Elizabeth M . Gerber , and Daniel G . Rees Lewis . 2018 . Social Innovation Networks : A New Approach to Social Design Education and Impact . Design Issues 34 , 2 ( April 2018 ) , 64 – 76 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1162 / DESI _ a _ 00486 Conference Name : Design Issues . [ 17 ] BJ Fogg . 2009 . A behavior model for persuasive design . In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Persuasive Technology ( Persuasive ’09 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1541948 . 1541999 [ 18 ] Eureka Foong , Steven P . Dow , Brian P . Bailey , and Elizabeth M . Gerber . 2017 . Online Feedback Exchange : A Framework for Understanding the Socio - Psychological Factors . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 4454 – 4467 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025791 [ 19 ] Eureka Foong , Joy O . Kim , Mira Dontcheva , and Elizabeth M . Gerber . 2021 . CrowdFolio : Understanding How Holistic and Decomposed Workflows Influence Feedback on Online Portfolios . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW1 ( April 2021 ) , 22 : 1 – 22 : 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3449096 [ 20 ] Gensler . 2021 . The Rise of Academic Incubators . https : / / www . gensler . com / blog / the - rise - of - academic - incubators [ 21 ] Elizabeth Gerber . 2014 . Design for America : Organizing for Civic Innovation . Interactions 21 ( March 2014 ) , 42 – 47 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2567840 [ 22 ] Debra M . Gilbuena , Benjamin U . Sherrett , Edith S . Gummer , Audrey B . Champagne , and Milo D . Koretsky . 2015 . Feedback on Professional Skills as Enculturation into Communities of Practice . Journal of Engineering Education 104 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 7 – 34 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jee . 20061 _ eprint : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1002 / jee . 20061 . [ 23 ] Jonathan Grudin . 1988 . Why CSCW applications fail : problems in the design and evaluationof organizational interfaces . In Proceedings of the 1988 ACM conference on Computer - supported cooperative work - CSCW ’88 . ACM Press , Portland , Oregon , United States , 85 – 93 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 62266 . 62273 [ 24 ] PhilipJ . Guo . 2015 . Codeopticon : Real - Time , One - To - ManyHumanTutoringforComputerProgramming . In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software & Technology ( UIST ’15 ) . Association for Computing Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . 138 : 22 Evey Jiaxin Huang et al . Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 599 – 608 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2807442 . 2807469 [ 25 ] Allyson Hadwin , Sanna Järvelä , and Mariel Miller . 2017 . Self - Regulation , Co - Regulation , and Shared Regulation in Collaborative Learning Environments . In Handbook of Self - Regulation of Learning and Performance ( 2 ed . ) , Dale H . Schunk and Jeffrey A . Greene ( Eds . ) . Routledge , 83 – 106 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 9781315697048 - 6 [ 26 ] Hazel Hall and Brian Davison . 2007 . Social software as support in hybrid learning environments : The value of the blog as a tool for reflective learning and peer support . Library & Information Science Research 29 , 2 ( June 2007 ) , 163 – 187 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . lisr . 2007 . 04 . 007 [ 27 ] Cindy E . Hmelo - Silver . 2004 . Problem - Based Learning : What and How Do Students Learn ? Educational Psychology Review 16 , 3 ( Sept . 2004 ) , 235 – 266 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / B : EDPR . 0000034022 . 16470 . f3 [ 28 ] Cindy E . Hmelo - Silver and Howard S . Barrows . 2006 . Goals and Strategies of a Problem - based Learning Facilitator . Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem - Based Learning 1 , 1 ( May 2006 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7771 / 1541 - 5015 . 1004 [ 29 ] Cindy E . Hmelo - Silver and Howard S . Barrows . 2008 . Facilitating Collaborative Knowledge Building . Cognition and Instruction 26 , 1 ( Jan . 2008 ) , 48 – 94 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370000701798495 Publisher : Routledge _ eprint : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370000701798495 . [ 30 ] Tom Hope , Doug Downey , Oren Etzioni , Daniel S . Weld , and Eric Horvitz . 2022 . A Computational Inflection for Scientific Discovery . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2205 . 02007 arXiv : 2205 . 02007 [ cs ] . [ 31 ] Eric Horvitz . 1999 . Principles of mixed - initiative user interfaces . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 1999 ) , 159 – 166 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 302979 . 303030 ISBN : 0201485591 . [ 32 ] Julie S . Hui , Darren Gergle , and Elizabeth M . Gerber . 2018 . IntroAssist : A Tool to Support Writing Introductory Help Requests . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173596 [ 33 ] Edwin Hutchins . 1995 . How a Cockpit Remembers Its Speeds . Cognitive Science 19 , 3 ( 1995 ) , 265 – 288 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15516709cog1903 _ 1 _ eprint : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1207 / s15516709cog1903 _ 1 . [ 34 ] David Jonassen , Johannes Strobel , and Chwee Beng Lee . 2006 . Everyday Problem Solving in Engineering : Lessons for Engineering Educators . Journal of Engineering Education 95 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 139 – 151 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / j . 2168 - 9830 . 2006 . tb00885 . x _ eprint : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1002 / j . 2168 - 9830 . 2006 . tb00885 . x . [ 35 ] David H . Jonassen and Woei Hung . 2008 . All Problems are Not Equal : Implications for Problem - Based Learning . Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem - Based Learning 2 , 2 ( Oct . 2008 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7771 / 1541 - 5015 . 1080 [ 36 ] Brigitte Jordan and Austin Henderson . 1995 . Interaction Analysis : Foundations and Practice . Journal of the Learn - ing Sciences 4 , 1 ( Jan . 1995 ) , 39 – 103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327809jls0401 _ 2 Publisher : Routledge _ eprint : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327809jls0401 _ 2 . [ 37 ] Joy Kim , Avi Bagla , and Michael S . Bernstein . 2015 . Designing Creativity Support Tools for Failure . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & amp ; C ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 157 – 160 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2757226 . 2764542 [ 38 ] Kenneth R . Koedinger , Emma Brunskill , Ryan S . J . d . Baker , Elizabeth A . McLaughlin , and John Stamper . 2013 . New Potentials for Data - Driven Intelligent Tutoring System Development and Optimization . AI Magazine 34 , 3 ( Sept . 2013 ) , 27 – 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1609 / aimag . v34i3 . 2484 [ 39 ] Chinmay Kulkarni , Michael S . Bernstein , and Scott Klemmer . 2015 . PeerStudio : Rapid peer feedback emphasizes revision and improves performance . In L @ S 2015 - 2nd ACM Conference on Learning at Scale . Association for Computing Machinery , Inc , New York , NY , USA , 75 – 84 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2724660 . 2724670 [ 40 ] Vivian Lai , Chacha Chen , Q . Vera Liao , Alison Smith - Renner , and Chenhao Tan . 2021 . Towards a Science of Human - AI Decision Making : A Survey of Empirical Studies . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2112 . 11471 arXiv : 2112 . 11471 [ cs ] . [ 41 ] Marianna Lamnina , Helena Connolly , and V . Aleven . 2018 . The Invention Coach : A computer - based environment that supports the transfer of STEM concepts . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1119 / perc . 2017 . pr . 052 [ 42 ] J . Richard Landis and Gary G . Koch . 1977 . The Measurement of Observer Agreement for Categorical Data . Biometrics 33 , 1 ( 1977 ) , 159 – 174 . https : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2529310 Publisher : [ Wiley , International Biometric Society ] . [ 43 ] Chunggi Lee , Sanghoon Kim , Dongyun Han , Hongjun Yang , Young - Woo Park , Bum Chul Kwon , and Sungahn Ko . 2020 . GUIComp : A GUI Design Assistant with Real - Time , Multi - Faceted Feedback . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376327 [ 44 ] Yoonjoo Lee , John Joon Young Chung , Tae Soo Kim , Jean Y Song , and Juho Kim . 2022 . Promptiverse : Scalable Generation of Scaffolding Prompts Through Human - AI Hybrid Knowledge Graph Annotation . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3502087 [ 45 ] Marcia Linn , Kevin McElhaney , Libby Gerard , and Camillia Matuk . 2018 . Inquiry learning and opportunities for technology . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . Intelligent Coaching Systems : Understanding One - to - many Coaching for Ill - defined Problem Solving 138 : 23 [ 46 ] Ching Liu , Juho Kim , and Hao - Chuan Wang . 2018 . ConceptScape : Collaborative Concept Mapping for Video Learning . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173961 [ 47 ] Marsha C . Lovett . 1998 . Cognitive Task Analysis in Service of Intelligent Tutoring System Design : A Case Study in Statistics . In Intelligent Tutoring Systems , Barry P . Goettl , Henry M . Halff , Carol L . Redfield , and Valerie J . Shute ( Eds . ) . Springer , Berlin , Heidelberg , 234 – 243 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 3 - 540 - 68716 - 5 _ 29 [ 48 ] Jingyan Lu , Susan Bridges , and Cindy E . Hmelo - Silver . 2014 . Problem - based learning . In The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences , Second Edition . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9781139519526 . 019 [ 49 ] Kurt Luther and Amy Bruckman . 2008 . Leadership in online creative collaboration . In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work ( CSCW ’08 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 343 – 352 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1460563 . 1460619 [ 50 ] Kurt Luther , Casey Fiesler , and Amy Bruckman . 2013 . Redistributing leadership in online creative collaboration . In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported cooperative work ( CSCW ’13 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1007 – 1022 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2441776 . 2441891 [ 51 ] Collin F Lynch , Kevin D Ashley , Vincent Aleven , and Niels Pinkwart . 2006 . Defining “Ill - Defined Domains” ; A literature survey . ( 2006 ) , 10 . [ 52 ] Thomas W . Malone . 2018 . How Human - Computer ’Superminds’ Are Redefining the Future of Work . MIT Sloan Manage - ment Review 59 , 4 ( 2018 ) , 34 – 41 . https : / / www . proquest . com / docview / 2057250594 / abstract / 191CBE32E9BE490BPQ / 1 Num Pages : 34 - 41 Place : Cambridge , United States Publisher : Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , MA Section : COLLECTIVE INTELLIGENCE . [ 53 ] David W . McDonald and Mark S . Ackerman . 2000 . Expertise recommender : a flexible recommendation system and architecture . In Proceedings of the 2000 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work ( CSCW ’00 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 231 – 240 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 358916 . 358994 [ 54 ] Robert C . Miller , Haoqi Zhang , Eric Gilbert , and Elizabeth Gerber . 2014 . Pair research : matching people for collaboration , learning , and productivity . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing ( CSCW ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1043 – 1048 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531703 [ 55 ] Elliot Mitchell , Noemie Elhadad , and Lena Mamykina . 2022 . Examining AI Methods for Micro - Coaching Dialogs . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3501886 [ 56 ] Elliot G . Mitchell , Rosa Maimone , Andrea Cassells , Jonathan N . Tobin , Patricia Davidson , Arlene M . Smaldone , and Lena Mamykina . 2021 . Automated vs . Human Health Coaching : Exploring Participant and Practitioner Experiences . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW1 ( April 2021 ) , 99 : 1 – 99 : 37 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3449173 [ 57 ] Molly Jane Nicholas , Sarah Sterman , and Eric Paulos . 2022 . Creative and Motivational Strategies Used by Expert Creative Practitioners . In Creativity and Cognition ( C & amp ; C ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 323 – 335 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3527927 . 3532870 [ 58 ] Judith Odili Uchidiuno , Jessica Hammer , Ken Koedinger , and Amy Ogan . 2021 . Fostering Equitable Help - Seeking for K - 3 Students in Low Income and Rural Contexts . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Number 684 . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445144 [ 59 ] Charlotte Pauwels , Bart Clarysse , Mike Wright , and Jonas Van Hove . 2016 . Understanding a new generation incubation model : The accelerator . Technovation 50 - 51 ( apr 2016 ) , 13 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . technovation . 2015 . 09 . 003 [ 60 ] Daniel Rees Lewis , Elizabeth Gerber , Spencer Carlson , and Matthew Easterday . 2019 . Opportunities for educational innovations in authentic project - based learning : understanding instructor perceived challenges to design for adoption . Educational Technology Research and Development 67 ( May 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11423 - 019 - 09673 - 4 [ 61 ] Daniel Rees Lewis , Elizabeth Gerber , and Matthew Easterday . 2019 . Assessing Iterative Planning for Real - world Design Teams . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 13140 / RG . 2 . 2 . 20452 . 83840 [ 62 ] Daniel Rees Lewis , Jamie Gorson , Leesha Maliakal , Spencer Carlson , Elizabeth Gerber , Matthew Easterday , and Christopher Riesbeck . 2018 . Planning to Iterate : Supporting Iterative Practices for Real - world Ill - structured Problem - solving . Presented at the 13th International Conference of the Learning Sciences , London , 2018 . [ 63 ] Horst W . J . Rittel and Melvin M . Webber . 1973 . Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning . Policy Sciences 4 , 2 ( 1973 ) , 155 – 169 . https : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 4531523 Publisher : Springer . [ 64 ] Donald A . Schon . 1987 . Teaching artistry through reflection in action . [ 65 ] Richard A . Schwier . 2010 . Focusing Educational Technology Research on Informal Learning Environments . Contempo - rary Educational Technology 1 , 1 ( March 2010 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 30935 / cedtech / 5965 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 . 138 : 24 Evey Jiaxin Huang et al . [ 66 ] Amy Shannon , Jessica Hammer , H . Thurston , Natalie Diehl , and Steven Dow . 2016 . PeerPresents : A Web - Based System for In - Class Peer Feedback during Student Presentations . Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901816 [ 67 ] Herbert A . Simon . 1977 . The Structure of Ill - Structured Problems . In Models of Discovery : And Other Topics in the Methods of Science , Herbert A . Simon ( Ed . ) . Springer Netherlands , Dordrecht , 304 – 325 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 94 - 010 - 9521 - 1 _ 17 [ 68 ] Ryo Suzuki , Niloufar Salehi , Michelle S . Lam , Juan C . Marroquin , and Michael S . Bernstein . 2016 . Atelier : Repurposing Expert Crowdsourcing Tasks as Micro - internships . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2645 – 2656 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858121 [ 69 ] ColbyTofel - GrehlandDavidF . Feldon . 2013 . CognitiveTaskAnalysis – BasedTraining : AMeta - AnalysisofStudies . Jour - nal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making 7 , 3 ( Sept . 2013 ) , 293 – 304 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1555343412474821 Publisher : SAGE Publications . [ 70 ] Cesar Torres , Sarah Sterman , Molly Nicholas , Richard Lin , Eric Pai , and Eric Paulos . 2018 . Guardians of Practice : A Contextual Inquiry of Failure - Mitigation Strategies within Creative Practices . In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1259 – 1267 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3196709 . 3196795 [ 71 ] Kurt VanLehn , Collin Lynch , Kay Schulze , Joel A . Shapiro , Robert Shelby , Linwood Taylor , Don Treacy , Anders Weinstein , and Mary Wintersgill . 2005 . The Andes Physics Tutoring System : Lessons Learned . International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 15 , 3 ( Jan . 2005 ) , 147 – 204 . https : / / content . iospress . com / articles / international - journal - of - artificial - intelligence - in - education / jai15 - 3 - 02 Publisher : IOS Press . [ 72 ] Madhurima Vardhan , Narayan Hegde , Srujana Merugu , Shantanu Prabhat , Deepak Nathani , Martin Seneviratne , Nur Muhammad , Pranay Reddy , Sriram Lakshminarasimhan , Rahul Singh , Karina Lorenzana , Eshan Motwani , Partha Talukdar , and Aravindan Raghuveer . 2022 . Walking with PACE - Personalized and Automated Coaching Engine . In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Conference on User Modeling , Adaptation and Personalization ( UMAP ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 57 – 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3503252 . 3531301 [ 73 ] Maria Virvou , Christos Troussas , and Sotirios - Christos Sidiropoulos . 2012 . Collaborative Support in a Multilingual Tutoring System . In 2012 Eighth International Conference on Intelligent Information Hiding and Multimedia Signal Processing . 502 – 505 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / IIH - MSP . 2012 . 127 [ 74 ] Erin Walker , Nikol Rummel , and Kenneth R . Koedinger . 2014 . Adaptive Intelligent Support to Improve Peer Tutoring in Algebra . International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 24 , 1 ( Jan . 2014 ) , 33 – 61 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40593 - 013 - 0001 - 9 [ 75 ] Thiemo Wambsganss , Tobias Kueng , Matthias Soellner , and Jan Marco Leimeister . 2021 . ArgueTutor : An Adaptive Dialog - Based Learning System for Argumentation Skills . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445781 [ 76 ] RainerWinkler , MatthiasSöllner , andJanMarcoLeimeister . 2021 . Enhancingproblem - solvingskillswithsmartpersonal assistant technology . Computers & Education 165 ( May 2021 ) , 104148 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2021 . 104148 [ 77 ] Philip H . Winne and Roger Azevedo . 2014 . Metacognition . In The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences , 2nd ed . Cambridge University Press , New York , NY , US , 63 – 87 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9781139519526 . 006 [ 78 ] B . L . William Wong . 2003 . Critical Decision Method data analysis . The handbook of task analysis for human - computer interaction , 327 – 346 . [ 79 ] Anbang Xu , Shih - Wen Huang , and Brian Bailey . 2014 . Voyant : generating structured feedback on visual designs using a crowd of non - experts . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing . ACM , Baltimore Maryland USA , 1433 – 1444 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531604 [ 80 ] Haoqi Zhang , Matthew W . Easterday , Elizabeth M . Gerber , Daniel Rees Lewis , and Leesha Maliakal . 2017 . Agile Research Studios : Orchestrating Communities of Practice to Advance Research Training . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 220 – 232 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998199 [ 81 ] Haiyi Zhu , Robert Kraut , and Aniket Kittur . 2012 . Effectiveness of shared leadership in online communities . In ProceedingsoftheACM2012conferenceonComputerSupportedCooperativeWork ( CSCW’12 ) . AssociationforComputing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 407 – 416 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145269 [ 82 ] Haiyi Zhu , Robert E . Kraut , Yi - Chia Wang , and Aniket Kittur . 2011 . Identifying shared leadership in Wikipedia . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 3431 – 3434 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979453 Received July 2022 ; revised October 2022 ; accepted January 2023 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 7 , No . CSCW1 , Article 138 . Publication date : April 2023 .