1 Ena / VASP clustering at microspike tips involves Lamellipodin but not I - BAR proteins , and absolutely requires unconventional Myosin - X Thomas Pokrant a , # , Jens Ingo Hein a , # , Sarah Körber a , Andrea Disanza b , Andreas Pich c , Giorgio Scita b , Klemens Rottner d , e and Jan Faix a , 1 a . Institute for Biophysical Chemistry , Hannover Medical School , Carl - Neuberg - Strasse 1 , 30625 Hannover , Germany ; b . IFOM ETS - The AIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology , and Department of Oncology and Haemato - Oncology , University of Milan , Milan , Italy ; c . Research Core Unit Proteomics , Hannover Medical School , Carl - Neuberg - Strasse 1 , 30625 Hannover , Germany ; d . Division of Molecular Cell Biology , Zoological Institute , Technische Universität Braunschweig , Spielmannstrasse 7 , 38106 Braunschweig , Germany ; e . Molecular Cell Biology Group , Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research , Inhoffenstrasse 7 , 38124 Braunschweig , Germany . # These authors contributed equally to this work 1 Author for correspondence Jan Faix Email : faix . jan @ mh - hannover . de 2 Phone : + 49 - 511 - 532 - 2928 Fax : + 49 - 511 - 532 - 5966 Abstract Sheet - like membrane protrusions at the leading edge , termed lamellipodia , drive 2D - cell migration using active actin polymerization . Microspikes comprise actin - filament bundles embedded within lamellipodia , but the molecular mechanisms driving their formation and their potential functional relevance have remained elusive . Microspike formation requires the specific activity of clustered Ena / VASP proteins at their tips to enable processive actin assembly in the presence of capping protein , but the factors and mechanisms mediating Ena / VASP clustering are poorly understood . Systematic analyses of B16 - F1 melanoma mutants lacking potential candidate proteins revealed that neither inverse BAR - domain proteins , nor lamellipodin or Abi are essential for clustering , although they differentially contribute to lamellipodial VASP accumulation . In contrast , unconventional myosin - X ( MyoX ) identified here as proximal to VASP was obligatory for Ena / VASP clustering and microspike formation . Interestingly , and despite the invariable distribution of other relevant marker proteins , the width of lamellipodia in MyoX - KO mutants was significantly reduced as compared to B16 - F1 control , suggesting that microspikes contribute to lamellipodium stability . Consistently , MyoX removal caused marked defects in protrusion and random 2D - cell migration . Strikingly , Ena / VASP - deficiency also uncoupled MyoX cluster dynamics from actin assembly in lamellipodia , establishing their tight functional association in microspike formation . Significance Statement Unlike filopodia that protrude well beyond the cell periphery and are implicated in sensing , morphogenesis and cell - to - cell communication , the function of microspikes consisting of actin - filament bundles fully embedded within lamellipodia is less clear . Microspike formation involves specific clustering of Ena / VASP family members at filament - barbed ends to enable processive actin 3 polymerization in the presence of capping protein , but the factors and mechanisms mediating Ena / VASP clustering have remained unknown . Here , we systematically analyzed these processes in genetic knockout mutants derived from B16 - F1 cells and show that Ena / VASP clustering at microspike tips involves Lamellipodin , but not inverse BAR - domain proteins , and strictly requires unconventional Myosin - X . Complete loss of microspikes was confirmed with CRISPR / Cas9 - mediated MyoX knockout in Rat2 fibroblasts , excluding cell type - specific effects . Introduction Thin , sheet - like membrane protrusions at the leading edge of cells , known as lamellipodia , drive cell migration in physiological and pathological conditions . The protrusion of the cell front is driven by actin polymerization with the expansion of the polymer directly pushing the membrane forward ( 1 ) . Actin assembly in the leading edge is driven by the actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex - mediated formation of dendritic actin filament networks downstream of WAVE regulatory complex ( WRC ) activation and Rac subfamily GTPase signaling ( 2 , 3 ) . The barbed ends of newly formed filament branches are eventually capped by heterodimeric capping protein ( CP ) ( 4 ) . However , actin - filament elongation factors such as Ena / VASP or formin family proteins can protect filament ends from capping and also significantly accelerate filament elongation rate ( 5 ) . Aside from the branched network , the lamellipodium harbours actin - filament bundles , called microspikes , that span the lamellipodium without protruding beyond the cell edge ( 6 , 7 ) . These structures can display various tilt angles relative to the moving network , the extent of which determines both rates of bundle polymerization and lateral motion ( 6 , 7 ) . Microspikes can convert into filopodia by protruding beyond the cell periphery , and thus separating their polymerization rates from the lamellipodium network ( 6 , 8 ) . However , despite being comprised of parallel actin - filament bundles sharing common constituents , microspikes and filopodia differ considerably . Unlike microspikes , filopodia can form independently of lamellipodial actin networks ( 9 – 11 ) . Moreover , filopodia can be formed around the entire cell periphery or the dorsal surface ( 12 – 14 ) , and kink , bend or even contribute to the formation of 4 contractile arrays ( 6 ) . In line with this , ultrastructural analyses recently revealed microspike filaments to be less densely bundled and straight and more bent as compared to filopodial filaments ( 15 ) . Ena / VASP proteins are powerful actin polymerases that drive the processive elongation of filament - barbed ends ( 5 , 16 ) . Vertebrates express three paralogs : vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) , mammalian Ena ( Mena ) , and Ena - VASP - like ( Evl ) . All family members harbor an N - terminal Ena / VASP - homology 1 ( EVH1 ) domain essential , but not sufficient , for subcellular localization , followed by a proline - rich region capable of recruiting profilin - actin complexes for actin assembly or interaction with Src - homology 3 ( SH3 ) domain - containing proteins , and a C - terminal EVH2 domain encompassing G - actin and F - actin binding sites and a short coiled - coil motif ( Tet ) mediating tetramerization ( 17 ) . Compared to formins , Ena / VASP tetramers are weakly processive and poorly protect barbed ends from CP in solution ( 5 , 16 ) . However , when clustered at high density on beads , their mode of action is markedly changed allowing them to drive processive and long - lasting actin - filament elongation despite high CP concentrations ( 5 , 18 ) . Ena / VASP proteins were shown to localize to various sites of active actin assembly including the periphery of the leading edge ( lamellipodium tip ) and the distal tips of actin - bundles termed microspikes and filopodia ( 17 ) . Consistently , Ena / VASP proteins were previously shown to be important for filopodium formation in Dictyostelium and mammalian cells ( 19 , 20 ) . Moreover , contrary to previous assumptions ( 21 ) , but in agreement with their ability to enhance intracellular motility of Listeria ( 22 ) or motility of beads in reconstituted systems ( 23 ) , Ena / VASP proteins have recently been shown to positively regulate cell migration in B16 - F1 melanoma cells and fibroblasts ( 24 ) . Of note , Ena / VASP - deficient B16 - F1 cells displayed perturbed lamellipodium architecture and were virtually devoid of microspikes , albeit still capable of forming filopodia ( 24 ) . Since Ena / VASP clustering is presumably key for the formation of microspikes , it is instrumental to identify participating factors and determine their specific contributions . According to our current state of knowledge , both insulin receptor substrate of 53 kDa ( IRSp53 ) and lamellipodin ( Lpd , also known as Raph1 ) have been implicated in Ena / VASP clustering ( 16 , 25 – 27 ) . IRSp53 is a member of the inverted 5 Bin - Amphiphysin - Rvs167 ( I - BAR ) protein family that senses and / or creates negative membrane curvature by its N - terminal I - BAR domain ( also known as IMD ) , which forms crescent - shaped homodimers ( 28 ) that can interact with acidic phospholipids such as PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 ( 29 ) . The C - terminal SH3 domain of IRSp53 mediates interactions with proline - rich regions of other proteins such as Ena / VASP members ( 30 ) or WAVE2 ( 31 ) . The remaining four I - BAR protein family members include IRTKS ( Baiap2l1 ) , ABBA ( MTSS1L ) , MIM ( MTSS1 ) and Pinkbar ( Baiap2l2 ) , albeit the latter appears to be specifically expressed in epithelial cells ( 32 ) . Notably , IRSp53 was shown to promote recruitment of VASP into leading edge foci in fibroblasts and mediate clustering on beads in vitro to initiate VASP - mediated actin assembly in the presence of CP ( 25 ) . This is supported by very recent work using elaborate in vitro reconstitution systems , showing that IRSp53 can recruit and cluster VASP to assemble actin filaments locally on PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - containing membranes , leading to the generation of actin - filled membrane protrusions resembling filopodia ( 27 ) . Lpd on the other hand is a vertebrate member of the Mig - 10 / RIAM / Lpd ( MRL ) family of adaptor proteins that localizes to the rim of the leading edge and the tips of microspikes and filopodia ( 2 ) . The Lpd homodimer is targeted through its Ras - Association and Pleckstrin Homology ( RA - PH ) domain to the membrane ( 33 ) , but actin filament binding through highly basic C - terminal sequences lacking the RA - PH domains was also implicated in Lpd recruitment to the leading edge ( 34 ) . Lpd was assumed to be obligatory for Ena / VASP protein recruitment by its 6 EVH1 - binding motifs to the leading edge to promote lamellipodia protrusion ( 33 , 34 ) , but its genetic elimination challenged this view ( 35 ) . The actin filament - binding activity of Lpd , which can occur independently of Ena / VASP binding , was proposed to trigger Ena / VASP clustering and tether the complexes to growing barbed ends , thereby increasing their processive polymerase activity ( 34 ) . More recent work proposed the initial formation of small leading edge - Lpd clusters devoid of IRSp53 that expand , fuse and subsequently recruit VASP to induce filopodia / microspike formation in B16 - F1 cells ( 26 ) . To resolve the controversy on which proteins are required for VASP clustering at the leading edge and for microspike formation , we employed CRISPR / Cas9 - technology combined with proteomics to 6 systematically analyze VASP clustering and microspike formation in genetic mutants derived from B16 - F1 cells , which have emerged as excellent model system for the dissection of lamellipodium protrusion and microspike formation . Results Generation of a B16 - F1 - derived mutant cell line devoid of all I - BAR proteins To investigate the function of the I - BAR family in cell migration , we first employed semi - quantitative , reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction ( RT - PCR ) to compare expression levels of the 5 known family members in B16 - F1 mouse melanoma cells ( SI Appendix , Figs . S1 A and B ) . Compared to control PCRs , conducted with plasmid DNA templates harboring respective full - length cDNAs , we could amplify IRSp53 and IRTKS at high and comparable levels from a B16 - F1 cDNA library . ABBA and MIM , on the other hand , were amplified only at low or very low levels , respectively , while the epithelial - specific Pinkbar was not expressed . Consistent with previous observations ( 36 – 39 ) , ectopic expression of IRSp53 , IRTKS , ABBA and MIM fused to EGFP showed accumulation of the fusion proteins at the tips of protruding lamellipodia and at intracellular vesicles ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 C ) . These findings prompted us to employ CRISPR / Cas9 technology and sequentially inactivate the four respective genes to obtain a B16 - F1 mutant cell line devoid of all expressed I - BAR family members . Successful , consecutive inactivation of IRSp53 ( designated as 1xKO ) and IRSp53 / IRTKS ( 2xKO ) in independent clonal cell lines was confirmed by TIDE sequence trace decomposition analyses ( 40 ) , and further validated by immunoblotting ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 D ) . Subsequent elimination of ABBA in the 2xKO mutant yielded the IRSp53 / IRTKS / ABBA 3xKO mutant , and the 4xKO mutant devoid of IRSp53 / IRTKS / ABBA / MIM was obtained by elimination of MIM in the 3xKO mutant . Successful disruption of the Mtss2 and Mtss1 genes encoding ABBA and MIM , respectively , was confirmed by TIDE analysis and sequencing of genomic target sites ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1E ) . Loss of I - BAR proteins impairs 2D random cell migration and lamellipodia formation 7 Migration rates of B16 - F1 wild - type and mutant cells of each genotype were then analyzed on laminin by phase - contrast , time - lapse microscopy . Interestingly , consecutive removal of the most highly expressed IRSp53 and IRTKS caused an increasing phenotype in 2D - migration rate , ranging from a modest reduction to 1 . 25±0 . 36 µm min - 1 in single IRSp53 - KO mutants ( 1xKO ) as compared to control ( 1 . 44±0 . 42 µm min - 1 ; mean±SD ) to 1 . 00±0 . 33 µm min - 1 in the IRSp53 / IRTKS double - KO ( 2xKO ) ( Fig . 1 A ) . Additional elimination of ABBA and MIM , on the other hand , had virtually no further effect on cell speed as compared to the double mutant , with 1 . 03±0 . 31 µm min - 1 in the 3xKO and 1 . 04±0 . 34 µm min - 1 in the 4xKO ( Fig . 1 A ) . This was accompanied by a gradual , but moderate increase in directionality , again culminating in 2xKO mutant cells that were about 20 % more directional as compared to the wild - type ( SI Appendix , Fig . S2 ) . Finally , we calculated the mean square displacement ( MSD ) in wild - type cells and the entire collection of mutants to assess their effective directional movement . In spite of their slightly higher directionality , presumably owing to their lower speed , the 1xKO and 2xKO I - BAR - mutant cells displayed incrementally decreasing and lower MSD values as compared to wild - type , while 3xKO and 4xKO were again indistinguishable from the 2xKO mutant ( Fig . 1 B ) . Most reports on B16 - F1 cells focus on a subpopulation of migrating cells harboring prominent lamellipodia . Although time - lapse video microscopy data prove that virtually every B16 - F1 wild - type cell is capable of forming productive lamellipodia , the percentage of cells with fully - developed lamellipodia will only correspond to app . 40 % at any given time ( 41 ) . To test how I - BAR proteins contribute to lamellipodia shapes , we compared morphologies of wild - type and all I - BAR - mutant clones focusing on their leading edge morphologies , which we here classified as smooth or rough by imaging after phalloidin staining ( Fig . 1 C ) . In contrast to wild - type , in which 30 . 8±7 . 9 % of the cells formed smooth lamellipodia according to this categorization , this proportion was gradually decreased by 70 % to 9 . 1±0 . 7 % in 4xKO cells ( Fig . 1 D ) . Notably , I - BAR protein removal mostly increased the cell fraction lacking lamellipodia ( without ) , but only slightly affected the percentage of cells with rough edges ( Fig . 1 D ) , suggesting that I - BAR proteins particularly optimize the formation of smooth lamellipodia . 8 Since 2D random cell migration on flat surfaces is largely driven by lamellipodial actin assembly in B16 - F1 cells , we then analyzed actin - filament ( F - actin ) content in wild - type and I - BAR KO cells after phalloidin staining . In contrast to controls , which displayed prominent lamellipodia containing numerous microspikes , I - BAR KO cells developed increasingly compromised lamellipodia that somewhat unexpectedly though still formed microspikes ( Fig . 1 E and see below ) . The average width of lamellipodia in the quadruple mutant was reduced by about 21 % to 1 . 8±0 . 5 µm when compared to control ( 2 . 2±0 . 5 µm ) , and lamellipodial actin - filament density was similarly reduced ( Figs . 1 F and G ) . Finally , we asked to which extent lamellipodia protrusion was affected . To this end , we recorded wild - type and I - BAR - deficient cells randomly migrating on laminin by time - lapse , phase - contrast microscopy , and determined respective protrusion rates by kymograph analyses ( SI Appendix , Figs . S3 A and B ) . Quantification revealed lamellipodia protrusion to be less coordinated and reduced by about 20 % in the quadruple mutant as compared to control ( SI Appendix , Figs . S3 C and Movie S1 ) . In addition to reduced protrusion , lamellipodia persistence was also diminished by roughly 25 % ( SI Appendix , Figs . S3 D ) , strongly suggesting that I - BAR family proteins capable of contributing to negative membrane curvatures at cell edges significantly contribute to the efficacy and stability of lamellipodial protrusions . I - BAR proteins are dispensable for the formation of microspikes and filopodia IRSp53 and IRTKs have been assumed to be essential regulators of filopodia formation , since they couple Rho - GTPase signaling to actin cytoskeleton and membrane remodeling ( 30 , 42 , 43 ) . Hence , we analyzed microspike and filopodia formation in the I - BAR mutants in more detail . Notably , microspikes , which are usually fully embedded into lamellipodia in B16 - F1 cells , frequently protruded in an unusual manner beyond the plane of the plasma membrane in the 4xKO mutant ( SI Appendix , Fig . S4A ) . Quantification further revealed microspikes to be statistically significantly longer in 4xKO mutant ( 3 . 17±0 . 94 µm ) as compared to B16 - F1 control ( 2 . 89±0 . 69 µm ) cells ( SI Appendix , Fig . 4B ) . Thus , considering their narrower lamellipodia ( Fig . 1 F ) , the quadruple mutant formed microspikes that were almost twice as long as the lamellipodia they are associated with , whereas microspikes in wild - type cells 9 were comparable in length to the width of their lamellipodia ( SI Appendix , Fig . 4C ) . Surprisingly , however , the quadruple mutant showed no noticeable change in the average number of microspikes per cell as compared to control ( SI Appendix , Fig . 4D ) . This finding was unanticipated , as each microspike bundle should harbor a VASP cluster at its tip to allow processive actin - filament elongation in the presence of CP . Since prominent VASP clusters were still formed at the membrane even in the absence of I - BAR proteins ( SI Appendix , Fig . 4E ) , these factors alone are evidently not mandatory for the formation of microspikes and the clustering of Ena / VASP proteins at their tips . To our surprise , the majority of 4xKO cells devoid of prominent lamellipodia also formed numerous filopodia as evidenced by localization of VASP at their tips ( SI Appendix , Fig . 4E ) . Thus , to further assess whether loss of I - BAR function affects the formation of filopodia , we first explored B16 - F1 and 4xKO cells after ectopic expression of EGFP - tagged , full - length myosin - X ( MyoX ) or the constitutively active variant of the formin mDia2 ( mDia2  DAD ) , both of which are well known to induce filopodia ( 12 , 44 , 45 ) ( SI Appendix , Fig . S5A ) . Notably , quantification of induced filopodia revealed no significant difference between the quadruple mutant as compared to wild - type cells ( SI Appendix , Fig . S5B ) , suggesting that I - BAR proteins are also dispensable for filopodia formation in B16 - F1 cells . We then induced filopodia in the absence of lamellipodia in B16 - F1 and 4xKO I - BAR cells by inhibiting Arp2 / 3 complex with high concentrations of CK666 combined with cell seeding on low laminin concentration ( 24 ) . Analyses of phalloidin - stained cells revealed 4xKO I - BAR mutant cells forming more than twice the number of filopodia compared to control ( SI Appendix , Figs . S5C and D ) . To test whether this effect was cell - type specific , we then consecutively eliminated the two most abundant I - BAR proteins IRSp53 and IRTKs in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts by CRISPR / Cas9 technology ( SI Appendix , Figs . S5E and F ) . Since filopodia formation is rare in fibroblasts when migrating on high fibronectin , we again treated these cells with CK666 on low fibronectin concentrations . In this case , analyses of wild - type and 2xKO mutant fibroblasts showed no marked differences in filopodium formation ( SI Appendix , Figs . S5G and H and Movie S2 ) , suggesting that the enhanced filopodia formation after loss of I - BAR proteins is cell - type 10 specific . Nevertheless , these data further indicate that I - BAR proteins are dispensable for filopodia formation . Loss of Lpd perturbs microspike formation An alternative potential candidate implicated in VASP clustering at the lamellipodial edge is Lamellipodin ( Lpd ) , since it was reported to form small leading - edge clusters that subsequently recruit VASP and initiate actin assembly ( 26 ) . Notably , both VASP and Lpd also bind filamentous actin ( 34 ) , suggesting that clustering might even be accomplished by shared interactions between these three proteins . However , the genetic disruption of Lpd has not eliminated Ena / VASP targeting to the leading edge of lamellipodia ( 35 ) . This notwithstanding , the formation of microspikes and VASP clustering in Lpd - deficient cells have hitherto not been analyzed . Thus , to explore potential functions of Lpd and VASP in these processes , we first expressed and purified previously characterized dimeric GCN4 - Lpd 850 - 1250 ( WT ) and its actin - binding deficient variant GCN4 - Lpd 850 - 1250 ( 44A ) ( 34 ) , additionally carrying an N - terminal SNAP - tag . After coupling of the proteins to SNAP - capture magnetic beads , we monitored actin assembly in the absence or presence of soluble VASP and CP by TIRF imaging ( Fig . 2 A ) . Unexpectedly , Lpd - WT was already sufficient to initiate weak actin assembly in the absence of VASP on the bead surface ( Fig . 2 B ) . In contrast , VASP addition resulted in strong actin assembly on the surface of Lpd - derivatized beads , with the filaments elongating about three times faster in the presence of the Lpd - 44A mutant as compared to Lpd - WT ( Fig . 2 B , SI Appendix , Fig . S6 and Movie S3 ) . This shows not only that both Lpd - constructs are very effective to recruit VASP from solution and form clusters on the bead surface to initiate processive actin - filament elongation in the presence of CP , but in addition that the F - actin binding site in Lpd is dispensable and counterproductive for actin assembly , at least in vitro . Given the conceivable role of Lpd in microspike formation and VASP clustering , possibly in conjunction with I - BAR - family proteins , we eliminated Lpd by CRISPR / Cas9 in independent quadruple mutants . Protein elimination in a representative set of mutants used for further detailed analyses was confirmed 11 by TIDE analyses and immunoblotting ( Fig . 2 C ) . We then analyzed F - actin distribution in parental , previously described 1xKO Lpd clone # 8 ( 35 ) and the newly generated 5xKO I - BAR / Lpd mutant # 14 - 21 - 6 - 3 - 23 after phalloidin staining ( Fig . 2 D ) . Compared to B16 - F1 control cells , which exhibited prominent lamellipodia with numerous microspikes , Lpd - KO cells developed regular lamellipodia largely consistent with previous findings ( 35 ) , except that they appeared to form fewer microspikes . Unexpectedly , and as opposed to the commonly rough and more chaotic nature of the I - BAR quadruple mutant , combined loss of Lpd - and I - BAR - functions in the 5xKO mutant led to exaggerated and exceptionally smooth lamellipodia , which contained fewer microspikes ( Movie S4 ) . Notably , F - actin content in microspikes was reduced by about 20 % in Lpd - KO and 5xKO I - BAR / Lpd mutants compared to wild - type , while it was more moderately affected ( reduction by 10 % ) in 4xKO cells , suggesting microspike bundles to contain fewer actin filaments particularly after loss of Lpd ( Fig . 2 E ) . Furthermore , the average width of lamellipodia was even increased in the 5xKO I - BAR / Lpd mutant by about 10 % to 2 . 5±0 . 5 µm as compared to B16 - F1 control with 2 . 3±0 . 5 µm , while it was reduced by 23 % ( 1 . 8±0 . 3 µm ) in the Lpd - KO or 22 % with ( 1 . 8±0 . 4 µm ) in 4xKO I - BAR mutant , respectively ( Fig . 2 F ) . Quantification of F - actin content in lamellipodia revealed no changes in the 5xKO when compared to wild - type , while the levels in 1xKO Lpd and in 4xKO I - BAR mutant cells were found here to be reduced by 23 % and 19 % , respectively ( Fig . 2 G ) . To better understand these complex lamellipodial phenotypes , we then stained the cells for the marker proteins VASP , WAVE2 and Arp2 / 3 complex . Notably , despite comparable expression levels , VASP accumulation in the tips of lamellipodia of the 5xKO I - BAR / Lpd mutant was again comparable to wild - type , while it was reduced by almost 25 % in both the 1xKO Lpd and the 4xKO I - BAR mutants ( SI Appendix , Figs . S7A - C ) . WAVE2 , on the other hand , was only diminished by about 25 % in lamellipodia in 4xKO I - BAR as compared to the other cell lines ( SI Appendix , Figs . S7D - F ) . Unexpectedly , the expression levels of WAVE2 in the 4xKO I - BAR and 5xKO I - BAR / Lpd mutant were reduced by about 20 % as compared to the other cell lines as assessed by immunoblotting and densitometry , explaining diminished accumulation in lamellipodia of the 4xKO I - BAR mutant , but not in the 5xKO I - BAR / Lpd 12 mutant . Interestingly , Arp2 / 3 complex accumulated in the 5xKO mutant in a peripheral band even broader than observed in wild - type lamellipodia ( increased by 14 % ) , but with roughly 17 % lower intensity , whereas Lpd - KO and 4xKO cells exhibited 20 % narrower bands as compared to wild - type ( SI Appendix , Figs . S7G - I ) . These rather unexpected findings were validated by comparable analyses with a full set of independent mutants to exclude potential off - target effects during somatic genome editing ( SI Appendix , Figs . S8 ) . This was corroborated by a side - by - side comparison of the expression levels of relevant lamellipodial marker proteins from all these mutants and revealed that only the WRC components WAVE2 and Abi1 were specifically reduced to a similar extent in the independent clonal cell lines after I - BAR protein removal ( SI Appendix , Fig . S9 ) . Thus , despite lower WAVE2 expression , the combined loss of Lpd and I - BAR functions apparently alleviates defects in lamellipodium formation , at least in part , by improved VASP and WAVE recruitment as compared to the isolated I - BAR or Lpd - KO conditions . Since loss of Lpd exhibited the greatest impact on microspike formation both with and without I - BAR family members , we finally compared the ability of EGFP - tagged , full - length Lpd - WT and Lpd - 44A constructs to rescue microspike formation in Lpd - KO and I - BAR / Lpd - KO cells ( Fig . 2 H ) . Although both constructs could rescue microspike formation reasonably well , only Lpd - WT accumulated prominently both at the tips of microspikes and the leading edge . By contrast , Lpd - 44A was only detected in microspike tips , but failed to accumulate along the lamellipodial cell front . In line with diminished recruitment of Lpd - 44A to the protruding front , the extent of microspike rescue in reconstituted Lpd - KO and 5xKO I - BAR / Lpd mutant cell lines revealed the rescue to be more effective with the Lpd - WT construct ( Fig . 2 I ) . Interestingly , the combined elimination of Lpd and the I - BAR family proteins resulted in a stronger defect in microspike formation as compared to the Lpd - KO mutant , suggesting that both protein families synergize to some extent in this process , although Lpd clearly has the greater impact as compared with I - BAR proteins . Considering that microspikes always harbor a VASP cluster at their tips , these rescue experiments of Lpd - KO and 5xKO I - BAR / Lpd cells were also confirmed to restore VASP cluster formation in a comparable manner ( SI Appendix , Fig . S10 ) . Taken 13 together , all these results show that Lpd contributes , but is not essential for microspike formation and VASP clustering in the lamellipodium . Abi recruits VASP to the leading edge but is dispensable for clustering Staining 5xKO I - BAR / Lpd mutant cells for endogenous VASP , we detected prominent clusters of the protein in the leading edges of these cells , clearly suggesting the existence of factors additional to the I - BAR family and Lpd apparently operating in Ena / VASP clustering ( Fig . 3 A ) . Notably , the latter were previously shown to directly interact with the WRC component Abi in different cell types ( 46 – 48 ) . Moreover , activated WRC was reported to form large , oligomeric complexes in protruding regions of the plasma membrane ( 49 ) , suggesting that Abi might contribute to Ena / VASP clustering at microspike tips . Since Abi binds by virtue of proline - rich stretches in its C - terminus to the EVH1 - domain of Ena / VASP ( 48 ) , we generated and purified artificially - dimerized SNAP - tagged fragments of WT ( Abi1 331 - 424 ) and an Abi mutant ( Abi1 331 - 424 - mut ) , in which the critical proline residues were replaced by alanines ( Fig . 3 B ) . Additionally , we inactivated the Abi1 - SH3 domain because Ena / VASP proteins can also interact with SH3 - domains ( 30 ) . After coupling of the proteins to SNAP - capture magnetic beads , we again monitored actin assembly in the absence or presence of soluble VASP and CP by TIRF imaging ( Fig . 3 C and Movie S5 ) . Abi1 - WT promoted recruitment of VASP followed by prominent actin assembly on the bead surface in the presence of CP , whereas filament growth was not detectable on Abi1 - mut - derivatized beads , suggesting that Abi could be involved in Ena / VASP clustering also in cells . To explore this potential role of Abi , we then simultaneously eliminated Abi1 and Abi2 by CRISPR / Cas9 in the 5xKO I - BAR / Lpd cells yielding 7xKO I - BAR / Lpd / Abi mutants . Loss of both proteins was confirmed by immunoblotting ( Fig . 3 D ) . Consistent with previous work ( 10 , 41 , 50 ) , loss of functional WRC in independent 7xKO mutants was associated with complete loss of canonical lamellipodia ( SI Appendix , Fig . S11 ) . Reconstitution of 7xKO cells with EGFP - tagged , full - length Abi1 - WT and Abi1 - mut revealed that both constructs efficiently rescued lamellipodium formation as assessed by staining for the WRC component WAVE2 ( Figs . 3 E and F ) . However , only cells expressing EGFP - Abi1 - WT 14 were able to efficiently recruit VASP to the leading edge , whereas VASP accumulation in Abi1 - mut expressing cells was diminished by about 84 % ( Figs . 3 E and F ) . The dependence of VASP accumulation in pseudopods or mammalian cell lamellipodia on the presence of WRC was already previously established using complementary experimental approaches ( 47 , 51 ) , but the data shown here confirm a major role in this process for the WRC subunit Abi and its proline - rich domains . In contrast , however , in cells expressing EGFP - Abi1 - mut , VASP was still capable of associating in prominent clusters at microspike tips ( Fig . 4 E and SI Appendix , Fig . S12 ) , suggesting that while being required for VASP recruitment to the lamellipodium edges in between microspikes , its recruitment to and clustering at microspike tips can occur independently of Abi . Myosin - X is essential for VASP clustering and microspike formation To expedite identification of proteins relevant for Ena / VASP clustering , we employed a BioID approach , which exploits a promiscuous Aquifex aeolicus biotin ligase ( BioID2 ) fused to a bait that biotinylates proteins in close proximity ( 52 ) . To identify exclusive or shared components in protein complexes , we generated BioID2 baits with full - length VASP and Evl , but omitted Mena due to its tendency to form aggregates . The empty BioID2 plasmid was used as negative control . After transfection of respective constructs into Ena / VASP - deficient B16 - F1 mouse melanoma cells ( 24 ) , protein expression in B16 - F1 cells was confirmed by silver staining of analytic samples from BioID2 pulldowns on streptavidin - coated Dynabeads ( SI Appendix , Fig . S13A ) . As opposed to empty control , both BioID - VASP and - Evl rescued microspike formation in cells , and localized to and biotinylated proteins at focal adhesions and in the leading edge including the microspike tips ( SI Appendix , Fig . S13B and C ) . To reveal the identity of endogenous proteins , large - scale pull downs of biotinylated proteins were analyzed by mass spectrometry ( MS ) analysis . Besides numerous proteins implicated in actin dynamics and Ena / VASP binding including IRSp53 , Lpd , and Abi , our results also interestingly revealed an almost 2000 - fold enrichment of unconventional myosin - X ( MyoX , Myo10 ) with both baits over control ( Fig . 4 A ) . MyoX is a widely expressed , plus - end directed molecular motor that accumulates at filopodial tips and has been 15 implicated in VASP transport to these sites ( 45 , 53 ) . The knockdown of MyoX has previously been reported to decrease filopodia in Hela cells ( 13 ) . Quantification of filopodia in endothelial cells derived from Myo10 - null mouse strains subsequently revealed a ~ 50 % decrease in filopodia , strongly suggesting that MyoX promotes the formation of normal filopodia numbers ( 54 ) . Comparable to VASP , we identified ectopically expressed , EGFP - tagged MyoX as well as endogenous MyoX in prominent clusters at the tips of microspikes in B16 - F1 cells ( Fig . 4 B ) . Although filopodia and microspikes represent different molecular entities ( 17 , 24 ) , previous work has also indicated suppression of microspikes upon siRNA - mediated knockdown of MyoX in COS7 cells ( 55 ) . Thus , to determine whether this phenomenon can be extended to other cell lines , we disrupted the Myo10 gene encoding MyoX in B16 - F1 cells by CRISPR / Cas9 . Loss of MyoX was confirmed by immunoblotting in independent mutants ( Fig . 4 C ) . Due to their highly similar phenotype , we then analyzed the morphology and F - actin distribution of B16 - F1 wild - type versus MyoX - deficient cells ( clone # 13 ) on laminin after phalloidin staining ( SI Appendix , Fig . S14A ) . In contrast to controls , in which approximately 60 % of cells formed lamellipodia in these experiments and conditions , this fraction was increased to over 80 % in MyoX - deficient cells ( SI Appendix , Fig . S14B ) . In addition , the mutant cells frequently displayed multiple fronts compared with wild - type cells , which typically formed one leading edge ( SI Appendix , Fig . S14C ) . Interestingly , despite a comparable F - actin content in lamellipodia , the mutant cells exhibited 15 % narrower lamellipodia compared to control ( SI Appendix , Figs . S14D and E ) . Yet , loss of MyoX resulted in significantly decreased random migration rate ( 30 % lower ) as compared to control ( SI Appendix , Fig . S14F ) . Although this was accompanied by a 15 % increase in directionality , presumably because of their much lower protrusion rates , the MyoX - KO mutants also showed lower MSD values as compared to B16 - F1 control ( SI Appendix , Figs . S14F - I ) . This was confirmed by analyses in the independent MyoX - KO clone # 5 ( SI Appendix , Fig . S15 ) . Notwithstanding this , the distribution and intensity of the prominent lamellipodia markers VASP , WAVE2 and cortactin in MyoX - null cells remained virtually unchanged compared to wild - type ( SI Appendix , Fig . S16 ) . 16 Next , we analyzed microspike formation and VASP clustering in wild - type , mutant and reconstituted cells . In contrast to B16 - F1 cells , which displayed prominent microspikes embedded into the protruding cell edge , MyoX - null cells exhibited a complete loss of microspikes associated with a total absence of VASP clusters ( Figs . 4 D - F and Movie S6 ) . Given the evident lack of microspikes , we stained for the actin - crosslinking protein fascin , a well - established constituent of microspikes in B16 - F1 cells ( 56 ) . Consistently , the MyoX mutant lacked fascin - containing bundles , as opposed to wild - type , despite comparable , global expression of fascin in the mutant ( SI Appendix , Fig . S17 ) . This was corroborated by live cell imaging of wild - type and MyoX - KO cells expressing EGFP - fascin ( Movie S7 ) . To ensure that the observed phenotype was MyoX - specific , the same parameters were analyzed in independent MyoX - KO mutant cells ectopically expressing low levels of EGFP - MyoX . Re - expression of MyoX and of a MyoX variant lacking its C - terminal MyTH / FERM cargo domain ( MyoX  F ) , but not a motor dead mutant ( G437A ) efficiently rescued microspike formation and VASP clustering at their tips ( Figs . 4 D - F and SI Appendix , Fig . S18 ) , demonstrating not only that the MyTH / FERM is dispensable for transport of VASP to microspike tips , but also revealing a crucial role for MyoX motor activity in microspike formation . Notably , and consistent with a recent report analyzing functional domains of MyoX in filopodium formation ( 57 ) , reconstituted MyoX - KO cells expressing MyoX  F formed shorter microspikes ( 20 % reduction ) lacking Lpd at their tips ( SI Appendix , Fig . S19 ) , once again illustrating the accessory role of Lpd in this process . Finally , we also completely abolished microspike formation and VASP clustering by eliminating MyoX in Rat2 cells by CRISPR / Cas9 ( SI Appendix , Fig . S20 ) , establishing MyoX , besides its critical function in filopodia formation , as an essential factor in the formation of microspikes and VASP clustering at their tips in different cell types . VASP is essential for tethering of MyoX clusters to the actin network The impaired microspike formation in Lpd - KO mutants , their marked decrease in Ena / VASP - deficient EVM - KO cells , and their complete loss in MyoX - KO cell lines prompted us to investigate the potential interplay between these proteins in more detail . Previous work proposed initial formation of small 17 leading - edge Lpd clusters that expand , fuse and subsequently recruit VASP to induce filopodia / microspike formation ( 26 ) . We therefore examined the pairwise localization of MyoX , Lpd and VASP in all combinations in a 1 µm wide region of interest ( ROI ) at the leading edge in reconstituted MyoX - KO and EVM - KO cells expressing low levels of EGFP - tagged MyoX and VASP by confocal microscopy . Subsequent analyses strongly suggest colocalization of MyoX with VASP , of MyoX with Lpd and of VASP with Lpd as evidenced by respective Pearson correlation coefficients yielding values of 0 . 79 , 0 . 77 and 0 . 83 ( Figs . 5 A - C ) . However , the existence of Lpd precursor assemblies devoid of VASP could not be experimentally confirmed ( Fig . 5 C ) . Given the striking correlation coefficient of 0 . 84 , MyoX and VASP also appear to perfectly colocalize in Lpd - deficient cells ( Fig . 5 D ) , strongly suggesting that Lpd does not operate upstream of MyoX in the molecular pathway leading to Ena / VASP clustering . In line with this notion and as opposed to wild - type or EVM - KO cells , MyoX - deficient cells were incapable of forming any Lpd clusters ( Figs . 5 E and F ) . Thus , due to the outstanding role of MyoX and VASP in this process , we used TIRF time - lapse microscopy to compare the behavior of MyoX clusters in MyoX - KO and EVM - KO cells expressing low levels of EGFP - MyoX . In stark contrast to reconstituted MyoX - KO cells , in which the MyoX clusters translocated predominantly straight forward within the advancing cell front largely as expected from known microspike behavior ( 7 ) , we observed a dramatically increased lateral movement of MyoX clusters along the lamellipodium tip in EVM - KO cells ( Fig . 5 G and Movie S8 ) . This was corroborated by comparison of MyoX cluster dynamics in reconstituted MyoX - KO versus EVM - KO cells by adaptive kymograph analyses , in which the intensity profiles of MyoX in the advancing leading edge were plotted over time ( Fig . 5 H ) . Quantifications revealed that the lateral speed of EGFP - MyoX clusters in the EVM - MO mutant ( with 5 . 15±0 . 99 µm min - 1 ) was on average nearly one order of magnitude faster than that in reconstituted MyoX - KO cells ( 0 . 61±0 . 51 µm min - 1 ) , and still about 4 times faster than the fastest laterally moving MyoX clusters in reconstituted MyoX - KO cells ( Fig . 5 I ) . This implies that in the absence of Ena / VASP , MyoX clusters , which also contain Lpd ( SI Appendix , Fig . S21 ) , are not accurately tethered to the lamellipodial actin network . To test this , we examined F - actin accumulation beneath MyoX clusters in both cell lines ( Fig . 18 5 J ) . In contrast to reconstituted MyoX - KO cells where the clusters localized at the tips of microspikes that were oriented close to perpendicular to the membrane , in EVM - KO cells we detected short , tortuous actin comets at the MyoX clusters that nestled against the membrane . Notably , these comets did not contain fascin , as opposed to the microspikes of reconstituted MyoX - KO cells ( Fig . 5 J and Movie S9 ) . Combined , these findings not only demonstrate that MyoX is obligatory for clustering of Ena / VASP proteins to initiate processive actin - filament elongation at microspike tips . They further imply that the development of genuine microspikes initiated by a functional tip complex harboring MyoX and Lpd specifically requires Ena / VASP proteins , for tethering these complexes to dendritic precursor filaments to promote processive actin assembly of bundles stabilized by shaft proteins including fascin . Discussion In this work , we dissected the molecular pathways required for VASP clustering and microspike formation in B16 - F1 cells . IRSp53 was a prime candidate since it localizes to lamellipodia and filopodia tips and has been assumed an essential regulator of filopodia formation ( 30 ) . Moreover , it is capable of recruiting and clustering VASP on beads or synthetic membranes to initiate processive actin assembly in vitro ( 25 , 27 ) . Consistent with the ability of I - BAR proteins to directly interact with Ena / VASP proteins ( 30 ) , the 4xKO mutants exhibited diminished VASP recruitment to the leading edge associated with reduced cell migration rates . Unexpectedly , however , in the cellular context we found no evidence for a critical role of IRSp53 or one of the other I - BAR family proteins in VASP clustering or microspike formation . Thus , the previously reported VASP recruitment in in vitro experiments could just lead to molecular crowding of VASP on the bead surface , which is dense enough to mimic clustering and initiate actin assembly . To our surprise , the loss of I - BAR proteins did also not decrease the formation of filopodia induced by expression of active mDia2 or MyoX . The combined loss of the most abundant I - BAR family members IRSp53 and IRTKS in NIH 3T3 fibroblast confirmed this view , which overall argues against a prominent role for these proteins in filopodia formation . Nevertheless , I - BAR protein deficiency resulted in quite chaotic cell morphologies , with much lower fractions of cells forming 19 smooth lamellipodia . This might be either caused by reduced levels of Ena / VASP proteins and the Arp2 / 3 complex activator WAVE2 at the cell front , the diminished global levels of the WRC components WAVE2 and Abi or perturbation of other signaling pathways that are known to coordinate the actin cytoskeleton ( 58 ) . Consistent with the presence of 6 EVH1 - binding sites for Ena / VASP proteins in Lpd ( 26 , 34 ) , we found its loss to be associated with reduced recruitment of VASP to the leading edge in the 1xKO mutant . This was particularly relevant in the context of reduced microspike formation in the absence of Lpd , a parameter not explored in our initial characterizations of Lpd - deficient cells ( 35 ) . The accompanying , moderate decrease in lamellipodial F - actin intensity and width also teased out for Lpd single - KO cells in current analyses , perfectly matches all these observations . Notably , the latter has also been missed in our previously published experiments ( 35 ) , partially because of being subtle , more likely though due to potential variations in reagents , fixation protocols and experimental conditions . Notwithstanding this , all these new data are fully compatible with our previous conclusion that Lpd is not essential for , but optimizes cell edge protrusion ( 35 ) . Unexpectedly , however , the combined loss of I - BAR family members and Lpd resulted in a reversion of the 4xKO phenotype , both with respect to recruitment of VASP or other relevant lamellipodial factors and to F - actin distribution , although these cells also exhibited reduced expression levels of the WRC components WAVE2 and Abi . The precise mechanistic reasons for these observations , however , have remained unclear and need to be explored in future work . Consistent with previous work using the Drosophila ( 48 ) or Dictyostelium model systems ( 47 ) , and as also suggested by the analysis of B16 - F1 cells lacking functional WRC , but harboring non - canonical , lamellipodia - like structures ( 51 ) , we find here that the WRC subunit Abi plays a major role in the recruitment of VASP to the leading edge in mammalian cells . In contrast to the loss of Lpd , however , the combined loss of Abi1 and 2 on top of I - BAR and Lpd ( 7xKO ) did not noticeably perturb VASP clustering at the cell edge . Mechanistically , the actin filament - binding activity of Lpd , which can occur independently of Ena / VASP binding , was proposed to elicit Ena / VASP clustering and tether the complexes to growing 20 barbed ends , thereby boosting their processive polymerase activity ( 34 ) . However , VASP - mediated actin assembly on beads conjugated with the actin - binding deficient mutant Lpd - 44A was even stronger as compared to Lpd - WT in the presence of CP ( Fig . 2 B ) . Moreover , filaments on Lpd - 44A beads also grew about three times faster thus forming longer filaments as compared to Lpd - WT control , clearly arguing against decreased VASP processivity in the presence of the Lpd - 44A mutant . Most importantly , expression of Lpd - 44A was effective in rescuing the microspike defect of 5xKO I - BAR / Lpd mutants in a fashion comparable to full length Lpd - WT , in spite of the failure of the mutant to target to the leading edge . Thus , in cells the polybasic clusters located within the putative , C - terminal actin - binding site of Lpd could regulate its membrane positioning and / or stabilization by interaction with acidic phospholipids , as shown previously for IRSp53 ( 59 ) . However , in vitro and in the absence of these phospholipids , Lpd - WT is likely to compete with VASP for recruitment of the negatively charged actin monomers , which in turn is expected to reduce overall charging of VASP with monomers , and hence , the VASP - mediated filament elongation ( 5 ) . For the reasons stated above , and given that RIAM , the second member of the two - protein MRL family in vertebrates is also absent in B16 - F1 cells ( 35 ) , the mechanism proposed for Lpd family mode of action appears unlikely . On the other hand , Lpd does clearly contribute to microspike formation , as average microspike numbers are reduced to half upon Lpd removal . Moreover , F - actin intensities in microspikes of Lpd - mutants are reduced by  20 % , suggesting fewer filaments in these bundles . Thus , although not essential , Lpd constitutes a relevant accessory protein supporting Ena / VASP clustering and promoting the formation of microspikes with optimal filament numbers . Here , we also identified MyoX as factor proximal to VASP and Evl , and showed that besides its critical function in filopodia formation , MyoX is obligatory for both Ena / VASP clustering and microspike formation in different cell types . Notably , and despite normal recruitment of VASP and other relevant proteins to the edge of the lamellipodium , the latter is significantly reduced in width in MyoX - KO as compared to B16 - F1 control , potentially suggesting that microspikes could support lamellipodium architecture and boost cell migration . 21 Our Ena / VASP BioID2 biotinylation approach allows the identification of proteins located within a  10 nm - range to baits , so cannot discriminate between direct and indirect binding . However , MyoX and VASP were previously reported to co - immunoprecipitate ( 60 , 61 ) , supporting the view that both proteins are components of the same complex or even directly interact with each other . The coincident dependence of MyoX and Ena / VASP proteins on microspike formation is reminiscent of equivalent observations for DdMyo7 and DdVASP in filopodia formation in Dictyostelium , where loss of either protein abrogates the process ( 20 , 62 ) . Nevertheless , there are some marked differences , for instance regarding recruitment mechanisms . In Dictyostelium , DdMyo7 fails to be recruited to the leading edge in the absence of DdVASP , implying that DdVASP - mediated actin assembly and bundling is needed for DdMyo7 activation ( 63 ) . In contrast , MyoX acts upstream of Ena / VASP and Lpd in microspike formation in B16 - F1 cells , since even after Ena / VASP removal or lack of Lpd recruitment in MyoX - KO cells expressing MyoX  MF , MyoX clusters at the leading edge are still being formed . Moreover , while expression of a constitutively active filopodial formin partly rescued DdMyo7 recruitment and filopodium formation of DdVASP - deficient cells ( 63 ) , formin - driven actin assembly by active variants of mDia2 , FMNL2 or - 3 were all insufficient to rescue the defect in microspike formation in Ena / VASP - deficient B16 - F1 cells ( 24 ) . Notably , MyoX has been previously implicated in intrafilopodial transport of Ena / VASP proteins towards the tip of the growing filopodium ( 60 ) . Although this would be mechanistically sufficient for explaining sustained elongation of filopodia at steady state , it falls short in explaining the formation of a functional tip complex to initiate filopodium formation . Assuming that clustering of Ena / VASP proteins is instrumental for initiating processive actin assembly in the presence of CP , we can sketch a working model for microspike formation in mammalian cells . The MyoX tail encompasses a coiled - coil region for antiparallel dimerization and three pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domains that target MyoX to phosphatidylinositol ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) - trisphosphate ( PIP3 ) - rich regions of the plasma membrane , followed by a MyTH4 - FERM ( MF ; myosin tail homology - band 4 . 1 , ezrin , radixin , moesin ) domain at its C - terminus ( 64 ) . MyoX is assumed to be a monomer prior to activation , but binding to PIP3 apparently opens up 22 the molecule and promotes activation and dimerization at the leading edge . By hitherto uncharacterized activities , MyoX dimers then associate to higher - order clusters , which also harbour Lpd . These clusters in turn are likely to recruit and cluster Ena / VASP proteins and tether them onto lamellipodial actin network filaments . The accompanied , processive assembly of parallel actin filaments drives the emergence of bundles , which are continuously stabilized by fascin to yield microspikes ( 56 ) . Material and Methods Constructs Constructs used in this study : pEGFP - C1 - IRSp53 , pEGFP - C1 - IRTKS , pEGFP - C1 - ABBA , pEGFP - C1 - MIM , pEGFP - C1 - Abi1 , pEGFP - C1 - Abi1 - mut , pEGFP - Lpd ( 33 ) , pEGFP - C1 - Lpd44A , Lifeact - EGFP ( 65 ) , pEGFP - C1 - MyoX , pEGFP - C1 - MyoX ( G437A ) , pEGFP - C1 - MyoX  MF , pEGFP - C1 - mDia2ΔDAD ( 12 ) , pEGFP - C1 - VASP ( 24 ) , pmCherry - VASP , pmCherry - MyoX , pGEX - 6P1 - IRSp53 , pGEX - 6P1 - IRTKS , pGEX - 6P1 - Pinkbar , pGEX - 6P1 - ABBA , pGEX - 6P1 - MIM , pGEX - 6P1 - hVASPdDGAB4M , pQE - 30 - SNAP - GCN4 - Lpd 850 - 1250 WT , pQE - 30 - SNAP - GCN4 - Lpd 850 - 1250 44A , pQE - 30 - SNAP - GCN4 - Abi1 328 - 481 - WT , pQE - 30 - SNAP - GCN4 - Abi1 328 - 481 - mut , pQE - 30 - SNAP - GCN4 - Abi2 326 - 446 - mut , pQE - 30 - MyoX 1197 - 1509 , pQE - 30 - CapZ ( 66 ) . Detailed information is described in SI Appendix , Materials and Methods . Semi quantitative RT - PCR Total RNA of B16 - F1 cells by standard procedures . Respective cDNAs were synthesized with the Maxima H Minus First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit . Subsequently , respective control plasmids and B16 - F1 cDNA were used as templates for PCR reactions to assess relative I - BAR protein expression levels in B16 - F1 cells . Detailed information is described in SI Appendix , Materials and Methods . Cell culture , transfection , and genome editing by CRISPR / Cas9 23 sgRNAs for elimination of mouse Irsp53 , Irtks , Mtss2 , Mtss2 , Abi1 , Abi2 and mouse or rat Myo10 were ligated into expression plasmid pSpCas9 ( BB ) - 2A - Puro ( PX459 ) V2 . 0 ( 67 ) . The targeting construct for the Raph1 gene has been reported ( 35 ) . After transfection and selection with puromycin of B16 - F1 , NIH 3T3 , Rat2 and derived cells , routinely cultivated at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 in high - glucose DMEM culture medium supplemented with 1 % penicillin - streptomycin , 10 % FBS , and 2 mM UltraGlutamine , clonal cell lines were validated by the TIDE sequence trace decomposition web tool ( 40 ) and immunoblotting . Detailed information is described in SI Appendix , Materials and Methods . Protein purification GST - and His - tagged fusion proteins were expressed in E . coli strains Rossetta 2 or M15 , respectively , and purified by affinity chromatography according to the instructions of the manufacturers . The tags were cleaved off by PreScission protease ( GE Healthcare ) and the proteins were further purified by size - exclusion chromatography ( SEC ) using an Äkta Purifier System . The purification of capping protein ( 66 ) and actin ( 68 ) have been described . Detailed information is described in SI Appendix , Materials and Methods . Immunoblotting and immunofluorescence Immunoblotting and immunofluorescence were performed essentially as described ( 24 ) . Detailed information is described in SI Appendix , Materials and Methods . Live cell imaging Live cell imaging was performed essentially as described ( 24 ) . Detailed information is described in SI Appendix , Materials and Methods . Induction of filopodia in absence of lamellipodia 24 Induction of filopodia was performed essentially as described ( 24 ) . Detailed information is described in SI Appendix , Materials and Methods . TIRF assays For TIRF bead assays SNAP - capture magnetic beads were coated with 10 µM of SNAP - GCN4 - Lpd 850 - 1250 , - Lpd 850 - 1250 ( 44A ) , - Abi1 331 - 424 - WT or - Abi1 331 - 424 - mut and were subsequently split into two fractions . One was incubated with coupling buffer and served as negative control , while the other was incubated with 0 . 5 µM soluble His - VASPDdGAB in coupling buffer . TIRF assays were performed as previously described ( 18 ) . Images were acquired with a Nikon Eclipse TI - E inverted microscope equipped with a TIRF Apo 100x objective . Detailed information is described in SI Appendix , Materials and Methods . BioID2 pulldown and mass spectrometry BioID2 assays and mass spectrometry were performed essentially as previously reported ( 52 , 69 ) . Detailed information is described in SI Appendix , Materials and Methods . Statistical analyses Statistical analyses was performed as described ( 24 ) . Detailed information is described in SI Appendix , Materials and Methods . Acknowledgements We thank Brigitte Jockusch and Sabine Buchmeier for fascin antibody . This work was supported in part by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( individual grants FA330 / 9 - 2 and FA330 / 13 - 1 to J . F . and Research Training Group GRK2223 / 1 to K . R . ) , and by funding from the Helmholtz Society ( to K . R . ) . GS was supported by the Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro ( AIRC IG # 18621 and 25 5Xmille # 22759 ) and the Italian Ministry of University and Scientific Research ( PRIN 2017 , 2017HWTP2K ) . References 1 . Blanchoin L , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Sykes C , Plastino J ( 2014 ) Actin dynamics , architecture , and mechanics in cell motility . Physiol Rev 94 ( 1 ) : 235 – 63 . 2 . Krause M , Gautreau A ( 2014 ) Steering cell migration : lamellipodium dynamics and the regulation of directional persistence . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 ( 9 ) : 577 – 90 . 3 . Rottner K , Stradal TEB , Chen B ( 2021 ) WAVE regulatory complex . Curr Biol 31 : R512 – R517 . 4 . Edwards M , et al . ( 2014 ) Capping protein regulators fine - tune actin assembly dynamics . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 : 677 – 89 . 5 . Breitsprecher D , et al . ( 2011 ) Molecular mechanism of Ena / VASP - mediated actin - filament elongation . EMBO J 30 ( 3 ) : 456 – 467 . 6 . Small JV , Stradal TEB , Vignal E , Rottner K ( 2002 ) The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol 12 ( 3 ) : 112 – 20 . 7 . Oldenbourg R , Katoh K , Danuser G ( 2000 ) Mechanism of Lateral Movement of Filopodia and Radial Actin Bundles across Neuronal Growth Cones . Biophys J 78 ( 3 ) : 1176 – 1182 . 8 . Svitkina TM , et al . ( 2003 ) Mechanism of filopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J Cell Biol 160 ( 3 ) : 409 – 421 . 9 . Koestler SA , et al . ( 2013 ) Arp2 / 3 complex is essential for actin network treadmilling as well as for targeting of capping protein and cofilin . Mol Biol Cell 24 ( 18 ) : 2861 – 75 . 10 . Steffen A , et al . ( 2006 ) Filopodia formation in the absence of functional WAVE - and Arp2 / 3 - complexes . Mol Biol Cell 17 ( 6 ) : 2581 – 91 . 11 . Wu C , et al . ( 2012 ) Arp2 / 3 Is Critical for Lamellipodia and Response to Extracellular Matrix Cues but Is Dispensable for Chemotaxis . Cell 148 ( 5 ) : 973 – 987 . 12 . Block J , et al . ( 2008 ) Filopodia formation induced by active mDia2 / Drf3 . J Microsc 231 ( 3 ) : 506 – 517 . 26 13 . Bohil AB , Robertson BW , Cheney RE ( 2006 ) Myosin - X is a molecular motor that functions in filopodia formation . Proc Natl Acad Sci 103 ( 33 ) : 12411 – 12416 . 14 . Pellegrin S , Mellor H ( 2005 ) The Rho Family GTPase Rif Induces Filopodia through mDia2 . Curr Biol 15 ( 2 ) : 129 – 133 . 15 . Dimchev G , Amiri B , Fäßler F , Falcke M , Schur FK ( 2021 ) Computational toolbox for ultrastructural quantitative analysis of filament networks in cryo - ET data . J Struct Biol 213 ( 4 ) : 107808 . 16 . Hansen SD , Mullins RD ( 2010 ) VASP is a processive actin polymerase that requires monomeric actin for barbed end association . J Cell Biol 191 ( 3 ) : 571 – 584 . 17 . Faix J , Rottner K ( 2022 ) Ena / VASP proteins in cell edge protrusion , migration and adhesion . J Cell Sci 135 ( 6 ) : jcs259226 . 18 . Brühmann S , et al . ( 2017 ) Distinct VASP tetramers synergize in the processive elongation of individual actin filaments from clustered arrays . Proc Natl Acad Sci 114 ( 29 ) : E5815 – E5824 . 19 . Dent EW , et al . ( 2007 ) Filopodia are required for cortical neurite initiation . Nat Cell Biol 9 ( 12 ) : 1347 – 1359 . 20 . Han Y - H , et al . ( 2002 ) Requirement of a Vasodilator - stimulated Phosphoprotein Family Member for Cell Adhesion , the Formation of Filopodia , and Chemotaxis in Dictyostelium . J Biol Chem 277 ( 51 ) : 49877 – 49887 . 21 . Bear JE , et al . ( 2000 ) Negative regulation of fibroblast motility by Ena / VASP proteins . Cell 101 ( 7 ) : 717 – 28 . 22 . Laurent V , et al . ( 1999 ) Role of Proteins of the Ena / VASP Family in Actin - based Motility of Listeria monocytogenes . J Cell Biol 144 ( 6 ) : 1245 – 1258 . 23 . Samarin S , et al . ( 2003 ) How VASP enhances actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 163 ( 1 ) : 131 – 142 . 24 . Damiano - Guercio J , et al . ( 2020 ) Loss of ENA / VASP interferes with lamellipodium architecture , motility and integrin - dependent adhesion . Elife 9 : e55351 . 25 . Disanza A , et al . ( 2013 ) CDC42 switches IRSp53 from inhibition of actin growth to elongation by clustering of VASP . EMBO J . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2013 . 208 . 26 . Cheng KW , Mullins RD ( 2020 ) Initiation and disassembly of filopodia tip complexes 27 containing VASP and lamellipodin . Mol Biol Cell 31 : 2021 – 2034 . 27 . Tsai F - C , et al . ( 2022 ) Activated I - BAR IRSp53 clustering controls the formation of VASP - actin - based membrane protrusions . bioRxiv . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 03 . 04 . 483020 . 28 . Millard TH , et al . ( 2005 ) Structural basis of filopodia formation induced by the IRSp53 / MIM homology domain of human IRSp53 . EMBO J 24 : 240 – 250 . 29 . Mattila PK , et al . ( 2007 ) Missing - in - metastasis and IRSp53 deform PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - rich membranes by an inverse BAR domain - like mechanism . J Cell Biol 176 : 953 – 964 . 30 . Krugmann S , et al . ( 2001 ) Cdc42 induces filopodia by promoting the formation of an IRSp53 : Mena complex . Curr Biol 11 : 1645 – 1655 . 31 . Miki H , Yamaguchi H , Suetsugu S , Takenawa T ( 2000 ) IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of membrane ruffling . Nature 408 : 732 – 5 . 32 . Pykäläinen A , et al . ( 2011 ) Pinkbar is an epithelial - specific BAR domain protein that generates planar membrane structures . Nat Struct Mol Biol 18 : 902 – 7 . 33 . Krause M , et al . ( 2004 ) Lamellipodin , an Ena / VASP ligand , is implicated in the regulation of lamellipodial dynamics . Dev Cell 7 ( 4 ) : 571 – 83 . 34 . Hansen SD , Mullins RD ( 2015 ) Lamellipodin promotes actin assembly by clustering Ena / VASP proteins and tethering them to actin filaments . Elife 4 : 1 – 29 . 35 . Dimchev GA , et al . ( 2020 ) Lamellipodin tunes cell migration by stabilizing protrusions and promoting adhesion formation . J Cell Sci 133 : jcs239020 . 36 . Suetsugu S , et al . ( 2006 ) Optimization of WAVE2 complex - induced actin polymerization by membrane - bound IRSp53 , PIP3 , and Rac . J Cell Biol 175 : 571 – 585 . 37 . Lin J , et al . ( 2005 ) Differential regulation of cortactin and N - WASP - mediated actin polymerization by missing in metastasis ( MIM ) protein . Oncogene 24 : 2059 – 2066 . 38 . Saarikangas J , et al . ( 2008 ) ABBA regulates plasma - membrane and actin dynamics to promote radial glia extension . J Cell Sci 121 : 1444 – 1454 . 39 . Robens JM , Yeow - Fong L , Ng E , Hall C , Manser E ( 2010 ) Regulation of IRSp53 - Dependent Filopodial Dynamics by Antagonism between 14 - 3 - 3 Binding and SH3 - Mediated Localization . Mol Cell Biol 30 : 829 – 844 . 28 40 . Brinkman EK , Chen T , Amendola M , van Steensel B ( 2014 ) Easy quantitative assessment of genome editing by sequence trace decomposition . Nucleic Acids Res 42 ( 22 ) : e168 . 41 . Schaks M , et al . ( 2018 ) Distinct Interaction Sites of Rac GTPase with WAVE Regulatory Complex Have Non - redundant Functions in Vivo . Curr Biol 28 ( 22 ) : 3674 - 3684 . e6 . 42 . Kast DJ , Dominguez R ( 2019 ) IRSp53 coordinates AMPK and 14 - 3 - 3 signaling to regulate filopodia dynamics and directed cell migration . Mol Biol Cell 30 : 1285 – 1297 . 43 . Sudhaharan T , et al . ( 2016 ) The rho GTPase rif signals through IRTKS , EPS8 and WAVE2 to generate dorsal membrane ruffles and filopodia . J Cell Sci 129 : 2829 – 40 . 44 . Yang C , et al . ( 2007 ) Novel roles of formin mDia2 in lamellipodia and filopodia formation in motile cells . PLoS Biol 5 : e317 . 45 . Berg JS , Cheney RE ( 2002 ) Myosin - X is an unconventional myosin that undergoes intrafilopodial motility . Nat Cell Biol 4 ( 3 ) : 246 – 250 . 46 . Tani K , et al . ( 2003 ) Abl interactor 1 promotes tyrosine 296 phosphorylation of mammalian enabled ( Mena ) by c - ABL kinase . J Biol Chem 278 : 21685 – 92 . 47 . Litschko C , et al . ( 2017 ) Differential functions of WAVE regulatory complex subunits in the regulation of actin - driven processes . Eur J Cell Biol 96 ( 8 ) : 715 – 727 . 48 . Chen XJ , et al . ( 2014 ) Ena / VASP proteins cooperate with the WAVE complex to regulate the actin cytoskeleton . Dev Cell 30 ( 5 ) : 569 – 84 . 49 . Pipathsouk A , et al . ( 2021 ) The wave complex associates with sites of saddle membrane curvature . J Cell Biol 220 : e202003086 . 50 . Tang Q , et al . ( 2020 ) WAVE1 and WAVE2 have distinct and overlapping roles in controlling actin assembly at the leading edge . Mol Biol Cell 31 : 2167 – 2178 . 51 . Kage F , et al . ( 2022 ) Lamellipodia - like actin networks in cells lacking WAVE regulatory complex . J Cell Sci 135 ( 15 ) . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 260364 . 52 . Kim DI , et al . ( 2016 ) An improved smaller biotin ligase for BioID proximity labeling . Mol Biol Cell 27 ( 8 ) : 1188 – 1196 . 53 . Kerber ML , et al . ( 2009 ) A Novel Form of Motility in Filopodia Revealed by Imaging Myosin - X at the Single - Molecule Level . Curr Biol 19 : 967 – 73 . 29 54 . Heimsath EG , Yim YI , Mustapha M , Hammer JA , Cheney RE ( 2017 ) Myosin - X knockout is semi - lethal and demonstrates that myosin - X functions in neural tube closure , pigmentation , hyaloid vasculature regression , and filopodia formation . Sci Rep 7 : 17354 . 55 . Tokuo H , Mabuchi K , Ikebe M ( 2007 ) The motor activity of myosin - X promotes actin fiber convergence at the cell periphery to initiate filopodia formation . J Cell Biol 179 : 229 – 38 . 56 . Vignjevic DM , et al . ( 2006 ) Role of fascin in filopodial protrusion . J Cell Biol 174 : 863 – 75 . 57 . Miihkinen M , et al . ( 2022 ) Myosin - X recruits lamellipodin to filopodia tips . bioRxiv : 2022 . 08 . 17 . 504298 . 58 . Kast DJ , et al . ( 2014 ) Mechanism of IRSp53 inhibition and combinatorial activation by Cdc42 and downstream effectors . Nat Struct Mol Biol 21 ( 4 ) : 413 – 22 . 59 . Won DH , et al . ( 2006 ) PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 lipids target proteins with polybasic clusters to the plasma membrane . Science ( 80 - ) 314 : 1458 – 1461 . 60 . Tokuo H , Ikebe M ( 2004 ) Myosin X transports Mena / VASP to the tip of filopodia . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 319 – 220 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2004 . 04 . 167 . 61 . Lin WH , Hurley JT , Raines AN , Cheney RE , Webb DJ ( 2013 ) Myosin X and its motorless isoform differentially modulate dendritic spine development by regulating trafficking and retention of vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein . J Cell Sci ( 126 ) : 4756 – 4768 . 62 . Tuxworth RI , et al . ( 2001 ) A role for myosin VII in dynamic cell adhesion . Curr Biol 11 : 318 – 329 . 63 . Arthur AL , Crawford A , Houdusse A , Titus MA ( 2021 ) VASP mediated actin dynamics activate and recruit a filopodia myosin . Elife 10 : e68082 . 64 . Houdusse A , Titus MA ( 2021 ) The many roles of myosins in filopodia , microvilli and stereocilia . Curr Biol 31 : R586 – R602 . 65 . Riedl J , et al . ( 2008 ) Lifeact : a versatile marker to visualize F - actin . Nat Methods 5 ( 7 ) : 605 – 607 . 66 . Breitsprecher D , et al . ( 2008 ) Clustering of VASP actively drives processive , WH2 domain - mediated actin filament elongation . EMBO J 27 ( 22 ) : 2943 – 2954 . 67 . Ran FA , et al . ( 2013 ) Genome engineering using the CRISPR - Cas9 system . Nat Protoc 8 ( 11 ) : 2281 – 2308 . 30 68 . Spudich JA , Watt S ( 1971 ) The regulation of rabbit skeletal muscle contraction . I . Biochemical studies of the interaction of the tropomyosin - troponin complex with actin and the proteolytic fragments of myosin . J Biol Chem 246 ( 15 ) : 4866 – 71 . 69 . Stieglitz F , Gerhard R , Pich A ( 2021 ) The Binary Toxin of Clostridioides difficile Alters the Proteome and Phosphoproteome of HEp - 2 Cells . Front Microbiol 12 : 725612 . Figures : Fig . 1 . Loss of I - BAR proteins impairs 2D - cell migration and affects lamellipodial dynamics in B16 - F1 cells . ( A ) Consecutive gene disruption of the two most highly expressed I - BAR family members IRSp53 and IRTKs increasingly diminished cell migration on laminin , whereas additional loss of ABBA and MIM were negligible . ( B ) Analyses of mean square displacement of wild - type versus mutant cells . Error bars represent means±SEM . ( C ) Morphologies of lamellipodia in B16 - F1 and 4x - KO I - BAR mutant cells . Cells migrating on laminin were stained for F - actin with phalloidin . Bar , 15 µm . ( D ) Quantification of lamellipodia formation in wild - type and mutant cells . Bars represent arithmetic means±SD . ( E ) Representative examples of lamellipodia in B16 - F1 cells and derived I - BAR mutants after phalloidin staining . Bar , 15 µm . ( F and G ) Quantification of lamellipodium widths and F - actin intensities in 31 lamellipodia of wild - type and mutant cells . ( C and E ) Insets , enlarged images of boxed regions . ( A , F , G ) Notched boxes in box plots indicate 50 % ( 25 - 75 % ) and whiskers 90 % ( 5 - 95 % ) of all measurements . Arithmetic means are highlighted in red and dashed black lines depict medians . ( A , F ) Kruskal - Wallis test or ( G ) 1 - way ANOVA were used for statistical analysis . * p≤0 . 05 , * * p≤0 . 01 , * * * p≤0 . 001 ; n . s . ; not significant . n , number of cells . A - B , D , F - G show pooled data from at least three independent experiments . 32 Fig . 2 . Lpd contributes to microspike formation . ( A ) Scheme of TIRF - M assays analyzing VASP - mediated actin assembly on SNAP - Lpd - derivatized beads in the presence of capping protein ( CP ) . ( B ) Still images from time - lapse TIRF - movies using 1 µM actin ( 10 % Atto488 - labelled ) together with 25 nM CP and either wild - type Lpd 850 - 1250 ( Lpd - WT ) or mutant Lpd 850 - 1250 ( Lpd44A ) on derivatized beads 33 pre - incubated with buffer or soluble VASP . Bar , 10 µm . ( C ) Loss of Lpd in 1xKO Lpd or 5xKO I - BAR / Lpd mutant cells was confirmed by immunoblotting . GAPDH was used as loading control . ( D ) Representative images of wild - type and mutant cells as indicated and stained for F - actin . Bar , 15 µm . ( E ) Quantification of microspike intensities in wild - type and mutants cells . Bars represent means±SD . ( F ) Quantification of lamellipodium width . ( G ) Quantification of F - actin intensity . ( H ) Positively charged residues in the C - terminus of Lpd are critical for membrane targeting . Representative images of 1xKO Lpd and 5xKO I - BAR / Lpd mutant cells reconstituted with full - length Lpd - WT versus Lpd - 44A fused to EGFP . Fixed cells were stained for the F - actin and EGFP signals enhanced with nanobodies . Bar , 20 µm . ( I ) Quantification of microspikes in wild - type , mutant and reconstituted mutant cells . ( D and H ) Insets , enlarged images of boxed regions . ( E - G , I ) Notched boxes in box plots indicate 50 % ( 25 - 75 % ) and whiskers 90 % ( 5 - 95 % ) of all measurements ; arithmetic means are highlighted in red and dashed black lines depicting the medians . ( E - F , I ) Kruskal - Wallis test or ( G ) 1 - way ANOVA were used for statistical analysis . * p≤0 . 05 , * * p≤0 . 01 , * * * p≤0 . 001 ; n . s . ; not significant . n , number of cells . E - G and I show pooled data from three independent experiments . 34 Fig . 3 . Abi1 recruits VASP to the leading edge , but is not essential for VASP clustering at microspike tips . ( A ) 5xKO cells lacking I - BAR proteins and Lpd expression still form VASP clusters at microspike tips . Gallery displays a cell stained for F - actin and endogenous VASP . Bar , 20 µm . ( B ) Domain organization of Abi1 depicting the homeodomain homologous region ( HHR ) , the proline - rich regions ( PRD ) and the C - terminal SH3 domain . Numbers indicate amino acid residues . In the Abi1 mutant ( Abi1 - mut ) , the indicated proline ( P ) residues of the PRD were substituted with alanine ( A ) residues , and the highlighted tryptophan ( W ) was replaced by glycine ( G ) to inactivate the SH3 domain . ( C ) Abi1 328 - 481 - WT but not the Abi1 - mut were able to recruit soluble VASP and initiate processive actin - filament elongation on the surface of SNAP - Abi1 - derivatized beads in the presence of 1 µM G - actin ( 10 % Atto488 - labelled ) and 25 nM CP . Representative images from TIRF - movies are shown . Time in sec . Bar , 10 µm . ( D ) Combined loss of Abi1 and 2 in the 7xKO I - BAR / Lpd / Abi mutant was confirmed by immunoblotting . Loading control : GAPDH . ( E ) Representative images of 7xKO mutant cells ( # 14 - 21 - 6 - 3 - 6 ) reconstituted with full - length Abi1 - WT and Abi1 - mut fused to EGFP . Images display cells stained for F - actin and expressed EGFP - tagged or endogenous proteins as indicated . Insets , enlarged 35 images of boxed region . Bar , 20 µm . ( F ) Quantification of WAVE2 and VASP intensities at the tips of lamellipodia in control 5xKO and reconstituted 7xKO cells . Notched boxes in box plots indicate 50 % ( 25 - 75 % ) and whiskers 90 % ( 5 - 95 % ) of all measurements ; arithmetic means are highlighted in red and with dashed black lines depicting the medians . WAVE2 data sets were analyzed by 1 - way ANOVA and VASP data sets by Kruskal - Wallis test . * * * p≤0 . 001 ; n . s . ; not significant . n , number of cells . F shows pooled data from three independent experiments . Fig . 4 . Loss of MyoX eliminates microspike formation due to abolished VASP clustering . ( A ) Graphical representation of combined MS data from BioID2 pulldowns . Enrichment of identified proteins in BioID2 - Evl and - VASP pulldowns over control is shown . Proteins implicated in migration , adhesion or signaling are highlighted in red . ( B ) Ectopically expressed and endogenous MyoX accumulates at microspike tips like VASP . Cells stained with phalloidin and for endogenous or EGFP - tagged MyoX . Bars , 20 µm . ( C ) Confirmation of MyoX loss in two , independently generated MyoX - KO clones by 36 immunoblotting . Loading control : GAPDH . ( D ) B16 - F1 and MyoX - KO cells stained for endogenous VASP and F - actin showing complete loss of microspikes and VASP clusters in the mutant despite prominent localization of VASP at the leading edge ( upper and middle panel ) . Re - expression of EGFP - MyoX and of MyoX  MF in mutant cells rescues microspike formation ( lower two panels ) . Bars , 20 µm . ( B and D ) Insets , enlarged images of boxed regions . ( E - F ) Quantification of microspikes and VASP clusters in wild - type , mutant and reconstituted cells . Notched boxes in box plots indicate 50 % ( 25 - 75 % ) and whiskers 90 % ( 5 - 95 % ) of all measurements ; arithmetic means are highlighted in red and dashed black lines depicting the medians . ( E , F ) Statistical analysis by Kruskal - Wallis test . * p≤0 . 05 ; * * * p≤0 . 001 ; n . s . ; not significant . n , number of analyzed cells . E and F show pooled data from at least three independent experiments . 37 Fig . 5 . Loss of Ena / VASP dramatically increases lateral flow of MyoX clusters at the leading edge . ( A - C ) VASP , MyoX and Lpd colocalize in microspike tip clusters . Inverted images of representative leading edges in reconstituted MyoX - KO and EVM - KO cells expressing constructs as indicated ( left panels ) . Bar , 10 µm . The intensities of respective protein pairs were measured in an 1 µm wide sector of the leading edge to generate cytofluorogram with respective intensity distributions ( right panels ) and to calculate corresponding Pearson correlation coefficients ( r ) and mean±SD . ( D ) Equivalent analysis of MyoX and VASP in Lpd - deficient cells . ( E ) Loss of MyoX completely suppressed Lpd cluster 38 formation , whereas EVM - KO cells were still able to form some Lpd clusters . Representative images of wild - type , EVM - KO and MyoX - KO cells stained for endogenous Lpd . Insets , enlarged images of boxed regions . Bar , 20 µm . ( F ) Quantification of Lpd clusters in wild - type and mutant cells . ( G ) Representative images from TIRF microscopy time - lapse movies of MyoX - KO or EVM - KO mutant cells expressing low levels of EGFP - MyoX . White arrowheads indicate the position of the same MyoX cluster in respective cell lines over time . Bar , 10 µm . ( H ) Adaptive kymographs illustrate dramatically increased lateral flow of MyoX clusters in EVM - KO cells as opposed to reconstituted MyoX - KO cells . Heat map indicates pixel intensities in 8 - bit unsigned integer range . ( I ) Quantification of lateral MyoX cluster speed at the leading edge in MyoX - KO or EVM - KO mutant cells expressing low levels of EGFP - MyoX . ( J ) Representative images of MyoX - KO and EVM - KO cells expressing EGFP - MyoX and stained for F - actin ( upper panel ) or endogenous fascin ( lower panel ) . Bars , 5 µm . Notched boxes in the box plot indicate 50 % ( 25 - 75 % ) and whiskers 90 % ( 5 - 95 % ) of all measurements ; arithmetic means are highlighted in red and dashed black lines depicting the medians . ( F , I ) Non - parametric , Mann - Whitney - U - test was used for statistical analysis . * * * p≤0 . 001 . n , number of cells ( F ) or clusters ( I ) . A - D , F and I show pooled data from three independent experiments .