The Interactive Thread : Exploring Methods for Multi - disciplinary Design Wendy E . Mackay LRI & INRIA Futurs , Université Paris - Sud , , 91400 Orsay , France * mackay @ lri . fr ABSTRACT The Interactive Thread is a design method that helps us gather detailed , contextualised data from a large user population while sharing interaction design methods with professional designers from different disciplines . We developed a set of 10 - 15 minute exercises drawn from design , social and computer science and presented them as a series woven throughout two interaction design conferences . Our goals were to provide an entertaining , interactive conference activity , to teach and share multi - disciplinary design methods , and to gather information that would otherwise be too labour - intensive for us as designers . This paper reflects on our experiences , including what worked and what did not . We discuss how others may reuse this strategy in other settings , including workshops , conferences and corporate retreats and we include an appendix with the specific interactive thread exercises . Author Keywords Design Methods , Empirical Methods , Interactive Thread , Interdisciplinary Design , Multidisciplinary Design , Participatory Design , Scenario , Storyboard , StoryTable , Technology Probe , User - Centred Design ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 2 [ User Interfaces ] : Evaluation / methodology , Proto - typing , Theory & methods , User - centred design General Terms : Design , Human Factors INTRODUCTION Participatory design ( Greenbaum & Kyng , 1991 ) is an established methodology that emphasizes close work with a small numbers of users in the cooperative design of a new technology . This strategy allows designers to collect contextualised data about work practices , engenders high user acceptance and actively incorporates user input throughout the design process . However , as McGrath et al . ( 1982 ) point out , any individual methodology has advantages and disadvantages and requiring trade offs among goals . The standard critique of participatory design is that the emphasis on developing systems in context results in a corresponding lack of generality . One can always claim that a particular set of users is not representative and that , even if the system being designed meets their needs , it may be inappropriate in some important sense for other users . We have been exploring design methods that help us deal with this dilemma in our own work . One solution is to triangulate ( Mackay & Fayard , 1997 ) , i . e . to use multiple design methods from different design disciplines to provide alternate types of data and insights . If the results from these sources of information converge , even though drawn from disciplines with different underlying assumptions , we can be relatively confident of our design choices . In our own work , we borrow research methods and design techniques from the social sciences ( e . g . , technomethodology , Button & Dourish , 1996 ) , software engineering , ( e . g . , prototyping methods , Beaudouin - Lafon & Mackay , 2000 ) and design ( e . g . , cultural probes , Gaver & Dunne , 1999 ) . We are also interested in methods that explicitly combine different perspectives within the same activity , such as technology probes ( Hutchinson et al . , 2003 ) . The above techniques represent diverse perspectives in the design process , whether they help us gather information about users , generate new design ideas or develop and refine specific designs . However , even a diverse set of methods , if applied to a single small group of users , still lacks generality . So , while we remain convinced by the fundamental efficacy of a participatory design approach with a small set of users , we also recognize the need for additional strategies that gather information and ideas from a wider group of potential users . The usual method for gathering information from large groups of people are surveys or questionnaires ( Patton , 1990 ) . They can be administered to a large group of people in a short period of time and permit quantitative as well as qualitative analyses . However , question types are often limited to multiple - choice to facilitate data entry and later analysis , which reduces the kind of information one can gather and the conclusions that can be drawn . Methods that _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ * Projet InSitu , Pôle Commun de Recherche en Informatique du plateau de Saclay ( PCRI ) , CNRS , Ecole Polytechnique , INRIA , Université Paris - Sud . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . DIS2004 , August 1 - 4 , 2004 , Cambridge , Massachusetts , USA . Copyright 2004 ACM 1 - 58113 - 787 - 7 / 04 / 0008 . . . $ 5 . 00 . 103 require trained researchers , such as one - on - one interviews and focus groups , allow greater flexibility in the types of questions but are significantly more expensive in time , personnel , and later analysis . Our own multi - disciplinary design work has shown us that methods come with associated assumptions , some of which may not be relevant ( Djkstra - Erikson et al , 2001 ) . If we take a scientific view , for example , we value objective observation and we assume that researchers and users are different people , with specific , well - defined roles . However , if we move to a more multi - disciplinary , participatory design view , we begin to question the absolute nature of these roles . In participatory design , users are considered design partners ( Druin et al . , 1999 ) and contribute throughout the design process . We applied this change in perspective to conference participants , engaging them as both users and designers and allowing them to alternate between these roles . In order to succeed , we needed a way to quickly teach a large group of design professionals particular design techniques in the context of an activity that was both interesting for them and useful for us . This paper describes the Interactive Thread , a multi - disciplinary design method that creates a limited form of participatory design with a large group of users . We ask participants at a conference , who are also members of our target user population , to act as both users and designers and engage them in a variety of focused tasks . This enables us to use what are usually highly labour - intensive techniques with large groups of people in an inexpensive ( and enjoyable ! ) way . We provide a brief overview of our research project , interLiving , to provide the context for this work , and then describe our experiences using the Interactive Thread at the DIS ' 02 and Tales ' 03 conferences . We describe the design of the Interactive Thread activities , what worked well and what did not , and conclude with ideas for how others might use a similar strategy in other contexts . Context : the interLiving project The interLiving project 1 explored new technologies to support communication within and across multi - household families . The project , part of the European 5th - Framework Disappearing Computer Initiative , was a longitudinal participatory design project involving three Swedish and three French families over three years . Our research groups in Sweden and France were both multi - disciplinary ( including computer science , social science and design ) and we have explored a variety of research methods for engaging family members , from young children to 1 http : / / interliving . kth . se grandparents , in each phase of the design process ( Westerlund et al . , 2003 ) . We interviewed family members at home and assigned various kinds of ' homework ' , including creating maps of family relationships and making home movies . We also gathered stories from family members about recent events in their lives , using a variation of Flanagan ' s ( 1954 ) critical incident technique . We held numerous brainstorming ( Clark , 1989 ) and design workshops ( fig . 1 ) , both in our labs and at their homes . We worked with the families to develop many of these stories further into detailed scenarios ( Carroll , 1995 ) , which they then illustrated with storyboards , and developed into paper and video prototypes ( Mackay et al . , 2000 ) . Figure 1 : Video Prototyping at an interLiving workshop for French families Although this form of participatory design is time - consuming , it allowed us to get to really know the participating families . Our collaborations on design ideas resulted in a variety of technologies that we have implemented , installed and tested in their homes , over periods of weeks or months . This has provided us with a rich , detailed picture of these particular families and their diverse reactions to these novel technologies . This basic strategy , i . e . working with a small number of families over a long period of time , was fundamental to this project and our efforts to identify previously - unarticulated communication needs . However this approach has a cost : it gives us little to say about families in general . While we believe that creating technologies that make sense for these particular families is likely to be more generally useful , nothing in our basic methodology guarantees this . ( In fact , the interLiving families are self - selected as being relatively " happy " and highly - communication - oriented , which clearly influenced the interfaces we designed . ) We decided that it would be beneficial to find out about a wider group of people and learn more about how they communicate with their families . The standard strategy in this situation would be to create a survey or questionnaire , with quantitative , easily - summarized questions , and give it to a large number of people . However , such questionnaires do not provide the rich detail we need for design . We decided to try another strategy , taking advantage of two conferences , Designing Interactive Systems , DIS ' 02 which occurred about a year into the project , and the Tales of the Disappearing Computer , Tales ' 03 conference , which occurred a year later . Both conferences involve an interdisciplinary mix of researchers and designers interested in novel interactive systems , with an emphasis on the role of the user . Both conferences also involve people with distributed families , i . e . members of our target user population . Inspired by the collaborative design activity integrated in the DARE ' 00 conference ( Mackay , 2000 ) , we decided to create an interactive event , woven through each conference . We had multiple goals . A s researchers on the interLiving project 2 , we wanted to obtain a more diverse view of inter - family communication from people with experience as family members and also as design professionals . We hoped to gather as much information as possible on how families communicate across households . As conference planners , we wanted to spark discussion and facilitate interaction among conference attendees , to highlight the multi - disciplinary nature of the field and to provide a forum for discussing design issues . Perhaps most importantly , we wanted to provide an enjoyable means for participants to learn design techniques from other disciplines . We were very explicit about these goals , including the last and conference attendees were free to participate or not , as they liked . Interactive Thread at DIS ' 02 The first test of the Interactive Thread was held at the Designing Interactive Systems conference 2002 ( DIS ' 02 ) . The conference , held over three days in June , 2002 at London ' s British Museum , had over 300 participants , with backgrounds divided evenly between HCI ( human - computer interaction ) and design professionals . Since most participants were part of a multi - household family and all were presumably interested in HCI and design issues , it seemed the perfect opportunity to try a new design method . We created the Interactive Thread Participatory Design Toolkit , consisting of ten method cards . Each card describes a design method on one side and a corresponding activity , concerning inter - family communication , on the other ( fig . 2 ) . We distributed a method card at the end of each conference session , explained it and asked participants to try the activity ( fig . 3 ) . We planned ten exercises , each 2 The interLiving project funded the design and development of the printed materials as well as travel and registration costs for the exercise leaders at both DIS ' 02 and Tales ' 03 . occurring at the end of a DIS ' 02 paper session . InterLiving members and student volunteers helped with the logistics of handing out cards and other materials , answering questions , and generally observing what happened . Figure 2 : Sample method card from DIS ' 02 Front : general technique and instructions Back : specific exercise to try in the session Figure 3 : Bill Verplank showing the audience how to draw a starman for a relationship map The first version used an A6 format , either stand - alone or folded accordion - style for the longer storyboards . Each method card contains one exercise , designed to be completed by one to four people in about ten minutes . The front describes the design method and its parent discipline , as well as general instructions on what to do . The back is the " creative side " , with a design activity specifically tailored to the interLiving project , with space for users to write or draw . ( See appendix for a list of method cards ) . We selected techniques that we know and have either used or developed ourselves , e . g . , Mackay ( 2002 ) . They represent a variety of disciplines , from the social sciences , engineering and design . When juxtaposed , it is easy to compare and contrast them and they encourage discussion about the benefits and disadvantages of different techniques . We organized them into three main categories : finding out about users , generating new ideas and selecting and implementing a design . We initially hoped that the audience would be able to use this sequence of methods to collaborate on a shared design problem . We presented the activities in the main auditorium , but were also allocated a three - meter space in the outside corridor leading to the auditorium , next to the technical exhibition . We commissioned a large poster to fill this space , based on our initial studies of the Swedish and French families ( fig . 4 ) . The illustrator , Henrik Färling , reviewed their scenarios and created a large illustration that captured the diversity of situations described by the families . The resolution of the image was very high and included people of all ages in many physical settings engaged in a variety of activities . Figure 4 : Detail from the conference poster illustrating day - to - day family activities We placed the poster where it would be easily seen by all conference participants . By itself , the poster was amusing and fun to look at and encouraged conference participants to talk to each other and compare family experiences . However , the poster became even more interesting as the focal point of the Interactive Thread ( fig . 5a ) . At the end of each session , we asked participants to go to the poster and pin their cards to a relevant illustration ( fig . 5b . ) . For example , if the participant had just interviewed someone about an incident on the beach , she would find a corresponding illustration and attach it there . This was very popular , especially the first day : people talked to each other and reflected on the different design activities ( fig . 5c ) . Figure 5 : a . The poster served as a focal point b . Participants posted their cards next to relevant illustrations in the poster c . Participants read each others ' contributions Interactive Thread at DIS ' 02 : Reactions We asked participants to fill out a questionnaire about the Interactive Thread at the end of the conference . Over half of the DIS ' 02 attendees replied . Respondents were evenly divided between research and industry . ( Students counted themselves in the ' research ' category . ) Participants identified their backgrounds , with 30 % computer science , 34 % design and 34 % social science . ( However , many people reported a mix of disciplines in their backgrounds . ) The overall reaction to the Interactive Thread was very positive : most people liked its interactive nature and the breadth of design activities and many said it was their favourite part of the conference . We were inundated with requests for the cards by both academics and industry professionals and we ended up making the cards available on - line . 3 We use the cards ourselves as a teaching device and as a simple , easily - accessible method for explaining these diverse design techniques to our Disappearing Computer colleagues . We were also pleased to see that Ideo , whose founder Bill Moggeridge gave a keynote address at the conference , have recently created IDEO method cards ( IDEO , 2003 ) , with 51 different methods printed on playing cards . The first day was the most clearly successful . Most of the audience participated throughout the day and many people gathered around the poster outside the main auditorium , which was quickly covered with cards . They had no trouble finding ( or interpreting as relevant ) scenarios in the poster illustration and enjoyed making a direct connection with their experiences . Participants were fresh , interested in the novelty of the activities , and perhaps most importantly , were able to complete the exercises in the allotted time . We gathered a huge amount of information relevant to the interLiving project , with a diverse collection of stories and some common themes . We received over 100 critical incident interviews and almost as many cultural probes and relationship maps . ( For the cultural probes , we handed out Polaroid cameras and asked participants to take a photo of a personal object and explain who it reminded them of and why . ) The interviews gave us a large collection of anecdotes about communication break - downs in multi - household families , and the relationship maps turned out to be very useful later , when we were trying to clarify some hypotheses about the size and scope of intimate family networks . The cultural probes were popular with participants , but we found them to be less directly useful for inspiring design ideas . We also asked participants to collaborate on a questionnaire . They posted 19 of them and other participants answered their questions . In retrospect , we realized that we made a major error on the second day . After the first day , the poster was completely 3 http : / / interliving . kth . se / publications / thread covered with cards . Since they almost completely obscured the illustration , we decided to remove most of them to make room for the second days ' exercises . Although we left what we thought was a representative set , it reduced the level of interest in the poster . Before , people milled around reading anecdotes and chatting with the people around them . After , people were less inclined to stand around the poster and this reduced the level of interest . The exercises involved brainstorming ideas , from classic brainstorming to an exercise in which people " augment " an object , using transluscent paper . These activities involved groups of four , so we received significantly fewer results . A few professional designers refused to post their ideas , even though they were happy to provide us with information about how they communicate with their families . ( As one said : " I do this for a living ; I don ' t need to give you my ideas here ! " ) Interestingly , from our perspective as researchers on InterLiving , the specific stories about family life were far more useful than the brainstormed ideas we received . Attendance dropped significantly by the third day , although we retained a core of about 80 people throughout . ( Some missed the sessions and came only for the Interactive Thread . ) A number of people commented that it was hard to sit through a full paper session and then do the Interactive Thread afterwards : they were simply too tired . We were also exhausted by this point : we had to attend every session and did not have sufficient preparation time beforehand . The third day involved the most difficult design exercises . Some people were frustrated because the sessions built upon each other : if they missed a paper session , it meant that they also missed an important segment of the Interactive Thread . The other problem was that the third day ' s exercises took longer than the time allocated . An interview or brainstorming a few ideas is easy to do in ten minutes ; creating a scenario and storyboarding it is another matter . Participants willingly gave us the results of the short exercises , but were reluctant to give us the longer ones , especially storyboards , since they were not finished . We received only five completed design scenarios ( and those were returned only after a lunch break ) . This caused us to modify the final exercise : we used a scenario from two audience members and asked them to act it out while being video taped . Although it was unfortunate that we did not really finish the final exercises , some people appreciated the fact that all the exercises together represent a complete design cycle . Although the overall response to the Interactive Thread at DIS ' 02 was positive , it was clear that some things could be improved . In the final survey , several people suggested that we create sessions devoted to the Interactive Thread , rather than trying to tie them to each paper session . We decided to Figure 6 : Critical Incident Technique ( front ) explanation and general instructions , ( back ) specific activity to try try this at the Tales of the Disappearing Computer Tales ' 03 , in Santorini , Greece . This conference was smaller , with approximately 100 participants . Most attendees were either HCI or computer science professionals , with fewer professionally - trained designers . Interactive Thread at Tales ' 03 Based on useful feedback we received at DIS ' 02 , we revised the method cards and tried a new format , making it wider , with additional space for the exercises and explanations . The cards each had the same " footprint " , but the storyboards were folded accordion style . The cards fit together into a binder that explained the concept of the Interactive Thread and how to use the cards . Fig . 6 shows the front and back of the " critical incident technique " cards in the new format . As at DIS ' 02 , we had several complementary goals . We wanted to " break the ice " and get participants to talk to each other . We also wanted share the design methods with a multidisciplinary design audience , all of whom were involved in the research and design of " disappearing computers " . Finally , we wanted to gather additional data for the interLiving project . We set aside two separate plenary sessions of 45 minutes each , and provided a third , interactive event ( a technology probe ) which was available throughout the conference . We included a short paper in the proceedings ( Mackay et al . , 2003 ) which explained the technology probe ( StoryTable ) and the format of the Interactive thread . Session one included an interview ( critical incident ) and a cultural probe ( rela - tionship map ) which clearly contrast design approaches and had provided the most useful data for us in the previous instantiation of the Interactive Thread . Session two included two design exercises . We asked participants to create " augmented objects " , using layers of translucent paper to overlay their design ideas with respect to those of their colleagues . We also performed a live demonstration of a video prototyping session , based on ideas brainstormed by the audience and including participation by several volunteers . We also tried a new method . We have been exploring the concept of a technology probe ( Hutchinson et al . , 2003 ) and wanted to use the Interactive Thread as a way to obtain feedback on our new StoryTable . The StoryTable consists of a screen , a video camera and a table with an RFID tag reader hidden underneath , which can read up to three tags at a time ( fig . 7a ) . These tags control memberships in groups ( up to three participants ) and the recording and playing of superimposed video . For example , one group member might shoot a 30 - second clip of himself dancing in front of the table . Another group member could later view this clip and / or overlay an image of herself , imitating the first person ' s movements . A third group member could leave a hand - written message floating in the air above the first two . Subsequent clips begin to overwrite the earlier clips . The purpose of this probe was to explore how groups of users collaborate , by providing them with a tangible interface for creating shared videos . Each member of a group could record a 30 - second video clip . Later video recordings ( up to three ) were super - imposed on the previous clips ( fig . 7b ) , which provided a novel form of communication over time . We provided a long plastic card with a RFID tag on either end ( fig . 7c ) as a tangible interface for establishing these small groups and controlling the video . Since all participants at the conference already belonged to at least one Disappearing Computer Initiative project , we also created special cards for their groups ( with 4 - 10 people ) . Figure 7 : Technology probe at Tales ' 03 a . StoryTable ( tangible shared video editor ) b . Collaborative creation of overlaid video images c . Creating a group with cards ( double - RFID ) We set up the StoryTable in the corridor , outside the conference room where we held the Interactive Thread sessions . Participants were encouraged to use the RFID - tagged cards to create collaborative videos , either with members of their existing groups or with their friends . Showing the StoryTable in the context of the Interactive Thread provided a focal point similar to the DIS ' 02 poster : it encouraged everyone to participate . We received a great deal of useful feedback from and about the StoryTable and tested the concept of technology probes in a new setting . The StoryTable later evolved into a prototype that we tested with one of the French families . After Tales ' 03 , we showed the StoryTable to the French families . One child commented that it reminded her of her puppet theater , since she could use both to create her own stories . Based on what we learned during the Interactive Thread , as well as ideas from her and her family , we created a miniature version of the StoryTable , which she played with in her room ( fig . 8 ) . ( In her version , the camera is movable and she uses the cards to create different stories , rather than different groups . ) The evolution of the StoryTable was an interesting side - effect of the Interactive Thread . Of course , we probably would have had useful feedback if we had treated it as a standard conference demo . But our goal was not to demonstrate what we had already designed , but rather to gather design ideas by placing the technology probe in a setting in which people would actually use it and reflect on it . Placing the StoryTable in the context of the Interactive Thread accomplished this . Once we had the idea of a child ' s puppet theater , we could incorporate feedback from the Interactive Thread with her wishes and transform the StoryTable into something new . Figure 8 : The StoryTable technology probe at Tales ' 03 was turned into a working prototype tested at home by one of the French children In conclusion , running the Interactive Thread at the Tales ' 03 conference worked better , although we obtained less data . Concentrating on two sessions with two exercises each , plus the StoryTable technology probe exercise , gave us more time to prepare each event . As a consequence , exercises were less rushed and participants found the experience invigorating rather than tiring . As at DIS ' 02 , we received a number of requests for additional copies of the Participatory Design Toolkit . Recommendations The Interactive Thread is a flexible idea that we believe can be applied in a variety of different contexts , for different purposes . However , finding the right level of interaction , without overdoing it , can be difficult . Placing an interactive event at the end of a longer session has the advantage of livening up the conference , but risks tiring out the participants , especially if the exercises appear after every session . Providing a focal point for discussion , such as the DIS ' 02 poster or the StoryTable at Tales ' 03 worked very well . However , interest in the focal point can change over the course of the conference . If you decide to create your own method cards , it is important they be clear and concise , with activities that can actually be done in the time allocated . We pilot tested the exercises on several users and went through several iterations of the method cards before each conference . Also , it is important that the ideas can be presented to the audience quickly . If we were to do this again at a general conference , we would emphasize exercises with pairs of participants , which worked better than those requiring small groups of four people . This is especially true if participants are seated in an auditorium and cannot move their chairs to see each other . Finally , we found that people particularly liked to see a contrast among techniques and , not surprisingly , most liked trying techniques that they did not already know . Summary and Conclusions The interLiving project explored the design of novel communication technologies for families , especially those that support inter - and intra - family communication across households . We normally worked with six European families , each with a small number of family members distributed over several households , using a variety of participatory design techniques . However , we were also interested in finding out about other families , outside or small group . We felt that standard techniques , such as questionnaires , would be of very limited use , because they provide little context . Our challenge was to find an enjoyable , accessible way to engage a group of people so as to obtain anonymous but real family stories and generate grounded inspirations for design . We created the Interactive Thread , a multi - disciplinary design method that takes advantage of the dual role of conference participants , as both professionals and family members . We asked participants at the DIS ' 02 and Tales ' 03 conferences to participate in a series of design activities woven throughout each conference . Sometimes they acted as designers , such as when they conducted critical incident interviews on their colleagues or design survey questions . Sometimes they acted as users , as when they answered interview questions or generated scenarios . Sometimes they were both , as in a participatory design context , when they were collaborating on design ideas with their fellow conference participants . We learned a great deal from trying the Interactive Thread during two conferences . The overall experience was very positive , and we received many requests for additional copies of the cards by participants , who wanted to use them in teaching or other contexts . In both cases , the conference organizers ' goal was clearly met , i . e . to create an enjoyable activity that " broke the ice " and engaged participants in discussions about the subject of the conference . In the DIS ' 02 questionnaire , over 75 % of participants said they were able to successfully meet new people . Also , 67 % said they learned new design methods . Many had useful suggestions for improving the Interactive Thread for future conferences or other uses . One person reported later that she has translated the cards into German and uses them as an exercise after her research seminar , both to teach the methods to a multi - disciplinary design team and to bring the group together . We have also continued to revise the cards and add to them , using them for teaching and tutorials . As researchers , we found both variations of the Interactive Thread to be useful , but for different reasons . The critical incident interview proved to be the most valuable from the DIS ' 02 conference , because they provided us with many more anecdotes and stories of how people manage communication across house - holds within their families . Interestingly , although this is generally viewed as a social science technique , we found it more interesting as inspiration for design . The participants provided us with many specifics , which we could compare and contrast with those provided by the interLiving families , and gave us a different perspective when evaluating our design ideas . One of the interesting effects of delegating the interviewing task to the conference participants , who acted as both interviewer and interviewee , is that this switches the responsibility and the interpretation of the interview . Instead of giving a story to a " designer " or " researcher " in their official role , you are telling a story to another colleague , often someone you have not met , and are not under pressure to figure out what the interviewer " wants " and craft the response accordingly . Thus , we probably have a different set of responses than if we had conducted all the interviews ourselves . Despite the generally positive overall reaction , we found the DIS ' 02 Interactive Thread to be exhausting , both for us and for the audience . The version at Tales ' 03 , which was limited to two sessions , plus time at the StoryTable technology probe , was much more manageable and enjoyable . The audience size was smaller , so we obtained less information overall . On the other hand , presenting the StoryTable in the context of the Interactive Thread proved to be extremely useful for the later design of a real prototype . If we were to do it again , we would re - introduce the idea of the poster as a central focus for the Interactive Thread , and limit it to one session per day , with at most two exercises per session . An interesting future direction for would be to create customized Interactive Threads at other types of professional conferences or events . For example , gaining access to medical doctors or fighter pilots is difficult , but they do attend professional conferences and debriefing meetings . If these users were given a brief overview of how do perform a critical incident interview and asked to question their neighbours , the researchers would have a large number of detailed interviews , conducted by experts in the domain , in a very short period of time . The Interactive Thread would also be useful in corporate or research settings , to help multi - disciplinary design teams learn each other ' s design methods and collaborate together . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS My thanks to Helen Evans , for her elegant design of the method cards and to Heiko Hansen for his clever logo design . Thanks also to Bill Verplank for his " Starman " demo , showing everyone how to sketch ideas quickly and to Henrik Färling for his insightful illustrations . My thanks to Alastair Sutcliffe and the DIS ' 02 committee and to Irene Mavrommati and the Tales ' 03 committee for supporting the Interactive Thread at each conference . Finally , thanks to Bosse Westerlund , Helena Tobiasson , Sinna Lindqvist , Michel Beaudouin - Lafon and Bill Gaver for their ideas and support during the conferences . REFERENCES 1 . Beaudouin - Lafon , M . and Mackay , W . E . ( 2002 ) Prototyping Development and Tools . In J . A . Jacko and A . Sears ( Eds ) , Handbook of Human - Computer Interaction . New York : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 2 . Button , G . and Dourish , P . ( 1996 ) Technomethodology : Paradoxes and Possibilities . Proceedings of the CHI ' 96 conference companion on Human factors in computing systems , pp . 19 - 26 3 . Carroll , J . ( 1995 ) Scenario - Based Design : Envisioning Work and Technology in System Development . NY : Wiley 4 . Clark , C . ( 1989 ) Brainstorming : How to Create Successful Ideas . CA : Wilshire Book Co . 5 . Djkstra - Erikson , E . , Mackay , W . E . and Arnowitz , J . ( 2001 ) Trialogue on Design of . ACM / Interactions , pp . 109 - 117 , March 6 . Druin , A . , Bederson , B . , Boltman , A . , Miura , A . , Knotts - Callahan , D . , & Platt , M . ( 1999 ) . Children as our technology design partners . A . Druin ( Ed . ) , The design of children ' s technology ( pp . 51 - 72 ) . San Francisco , CA : Morgan Kaufmann . 7 . Flanagan , J . ( 1954 ) The Critical Incident Technique . Psychological Bulletin . 51 ( 4 ) . pp . 327 - 358 8 . Gaver , W . and Dunne A . ( 1999 ) Projected Realities , Conceptual Design for Cultural effect . Proceedings of ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI ' 99 , p . 600 - 607 9 . Greenbaum , J . , & Kyng , M . ( Eds . ) ( 1991 ) . Design at work : Cooperative design of computer systems . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . 10 . H . Hutchinson , W . Mackay , B . Westerlund , B . B . Bederson , A . Druin , C . Plaisant , M . Beaudouin - Lafon , S . Conversy , H . Evans , H . Hansen , N . , Roussel , B . Eiderbäck , S . Lindquist , Y . Sundblad ( 2003 ) Technology Probes : Inspiring Design for and with Families , Proceedings of ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI 2003 , Fort Lauderdale ( USA ) , April 2003 , CHI Letters 5 ( 1 ) , ACM Press 11 . Mackay , W . E . and Fayard , A - L . ( 1997 ) HCI , Natural Science and Design : A Framework for Triangulation Across Disciplines . Proceedings of ACM DIS ' 97 , Designing Interactive Systems . Amsterdam , Pays - Bas : ACM / SIGCHI , pp . 223 - 234 12 . Mackay , W . E . ( Ed . ) 2000 , DARE 2000 , Conference on Designing Augmented Reality Environments , Elsinor , Denmark , ACM Press 13 . Mackay , W . E . ( 1998 ) Triangulation within and across HCI disciplines . Human - Computer Interaction . Hillsdale , New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Invited Commentary on the article : " Damaged Merchandise ? A Review of Experiments that Compare Usability Evaluation Methods " , W . D Gray and M . C . Salzman . Vol . 13 , # 3 , pp . 310 - 315 , 1998 14 . Mackay , W . E . ( 2002 ) Using Video to Support Interaction Design . DVD Tutorial , CHI ' 02 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Minneapolis , MN ACM / SIGCHI 15 . Mackay , W . E . , Ratzer , A . , and Janecek , P . ( 2000 ) Video artefacts for design : Bridging the gap between abstraction and detail . Proceedings of ACM DIS 2000 , Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . Brooklyn , New York . ACM Press . pp . 72 - 82 16 . Mackay , W . E . , Evan , H . , Hansen , H . , Gaudron , N . & Dachary , L . ( 2003 ) Weaving an Interactive Thread : An Interactive Event for Tales . in Tales of the Disappearing Computer , 2003 , Santorini , Greece . 17 . McGrath , J . , Martin , J . & Kulka , J . ( 1982 ) Judgment Calls in Research . CA : Sage Publications 18 . Patton , M . Q . ( 1990 ) Qualitative Interviewing . In Qualitative Evaluation an Research Methods , CA : Sage Publications 19 . Westerlund , B . , Lindqvist , S . , Mackay , W . , and Sundblad , Y . ( 2003 ) Co - design methods for designing with and for families . Proceedings of EAD ' 03 , the fifth European Academy of Design conference , Barcelona , Spain 20 . IDEO ( 2003 ) IDEO Method Cards : 51 Ways to Inspire Design W . Stout Architectural Books , San Francisco methodcards @ ideo . com Appendix : DIS ' 02 Interactive Thread exercises : 1 . Critical incident technique ( human factors ) : Each participant interviews another audience member about a particular memorable communication event in the past week with a member of their family . 2 . Relationship Map ( design ) : After viewing a short demonstration of Bill Verplank ' s " how to draw starmen " each participant was asked to draw a map of the current relationships between himself and other family members , using geographical , emotional , technical or other organizing principle . 3 . Cultural Probe ( design ) : Pairs of participants were given disposable instant cameras and asked to take a photograph of an object that they were wearing that reminded them of someone in their family . They were then to attach the photograph to the card and explain . 4 . Questionnaire ( sociology ) : Groups of four participants were asked to collaborate to create a questionnaire with four quantitative questions related to problems in family communication . Later , others answered these questions when they were posted . 5 . Use Scenario ( HCI ) : Groups of four participants were asked to share anecdotes about recent breakdowns in communication among family members and then to create a synthesis of these stories , illustrated in a storyboard . The card for this exercise was accordion - folded into four sections , each representing an event in the story . 6 . Brainstorming ( Psychology ) : Groups of participants were asked to brainstorm and write a list of ideas for new technologies to support communication among family members . 7 . Augmented Object ( design ) : Groups of participants were asked to choose and draw an existing physical object , and then draw different ways to augment it to enhance communication among family members , with one idea for each of the attached sheets of tracing paper . ( People could either build on each other ' s work or create separate augmentations . ) 8 . Constraints ( design ) : Groups of participants were asked to pick a single sensory medium ( such as a still image , a noise , pressure ) and a single communication function and then illustrate or write about a situation in which it addressed a breakdown of communication among family members . 9 . Design Scenario ( HCI ) : Groups of participants were asked to build upon an existing use scenario and revise it with an idea for a new technology derived from one or more of the previous idea - generation exercises . 10 . Walkthrough ( Software Engineering ) : Groups of participants were asked to take different roles and systematically walkthrough a design scenario , offering ideas and suggestions for improvement . ( We did not have enough design scenarios to conduct this exercise , so we ran a live video prototyping session instead . Two audience members were asked to act out their design scenario in front of the audience and we videotaped the result . )