Evidence of DNA : protein interactions that mediate HSV - 1 immediate early gene activation by VP16 Steven J . Triezenberg / Karen L . LaMarco , and Steven L . McKnight Department of Embryology , Camegie Institution of Washington , Baltimore , Maryland 21210 USA The viral genes first expressed upon lytic infection by herpes simplex virus type 1 ( HSV - 1 ) encode the five immediate early ( IE ) proteins . IE gene expression is potently and specifically induced by a virion protein termed VP16 . Previous studies have shown that the activating properties of VP16 are IE gene specific and mediated by upstream regulatory elements common to each IE gene . Paradoxically , however , VP16 does not appear to be a sequence - specific DNA - binding protein . To understand the specificity of VP16 activation , we identified the cis - regulatory sequences of an IE gene that mediate VP16 response . Two distinct DNA sequence motifs enable the ICP4 gene to respond to VP16 . Biochemical fractionation of nuclear proteins from uninfected cells revealed the existence of cellular proteins that bind directly to each of these VP16 cis - response elements . These observations , in concert with the identification of functional domains of the VP16 protein , lead to the hypothesis that VP16 achieves activation specificity via protein : protein , rather than protein : DNA , interactions . [ Key Words : VP16 ; IE gene activation ; HSV - 1 ; sequence - specific DNA - binding proteins ] Received March 8 , 1988 ; revised version accepted May 13 , 1988 . Lytic infection by herpes simplex virus type 1 ( HSV - 1 ) involves the temporally regulated expression of three classes of viral genes ( Honess and Roizman 1974 ; Clements et al . 1977 ) . The products of these genes are termed immediate early ( IE ) , delayed early ( DE ) , and late ( L ) polypeptides . The transcriptional activation of IE genes can occur in the absence of new protein synthesis and is induced in trans by a factor present in mature virus particles ( Post et al . 1981 ) . This ' virion factor ' is specified by the product of an L gene and has been iden­ tified as a 65 - kD phosphoprotein variously termed Vmw65 or VP16 ( Campbell et al . 1984 ) . The mechanism by which VP16 activates IE gene ex­ pression has been considered in a number of previous studies . Activation is known to require cis - acting DNA sequences that occur upstream of IE genes ( Post et al . 1981 ) . A variety of different reports have underscored the importance of a nonanucleotide sequence , 5 ' - TAAT - GARAT - 3 ' ( R = purine ) , common to each of the five IE genes ( Mackem and Roizman 1982a , b ; Cordingley et al . 1983 ; Kristie and Roizman 1984 ; Gaffney et al . 1985 ; Bzik and Preston 1986 ; O ' Hare and Hayward 1987 ) . The upstream sequences of at least one IE gene exhibit en­ hancerlike properties ; i . e . , they are capable of activating transcription from a heterologous promoter in a dis­ tance - and orientation - independent manner ( Lang et al . 1984 ; Preston and Tannahill 1984 ) . Importantly , v ^ hen fused to a heterologous gene , IE upstream DNA se - ^ Present address : Department of Biochemistry , Michigan State Univer­ sity , East Lansing , Michigan 48824 USA . quences cause that gene to become VP16 responsive ( Post et al . 1981 ; Mackem and Roizman 1982a ) . Despite numerous indications of the specificity of VP16 action , attempts to demonstrate direct interaction between VP16 and IE upstream sequences have consis­ tently failed ( Marsden et al . 1987 ; S . Triezenberg , un - publ . ) . We have addressed this paradox in two ways . First , we have carefully delineated the IE cis - acting DNA sequences that facilitate VP16 response . Second , we have fractionated nuclear extracts derived from un­ infected cells with the goal of identifying and isolating proteins that bind selectively to these sequences . These efforts have identified two distinct DNA sequence motifs that mediate VP16 response and have provided evidence for two corresponding proteins that bind to these sequences in vitro . Results Two distinct cis - regulatory elements facilitate virus - mediated trans - induction Several previous studies have shown that DNA se­ quences located within 400 bp upstream from the IE gene encoding ICP4 ( infected cell protein 4 ; also called VMW175 and a4 ) specify response to tr ^ izs - induction by VP16 ( Post et al . 1981 ; Mackem and Roizman 1982a ; Cordingley et al . 1983 ; Bzik and Preston 1986 ) . To study the nature of the regulatory DNA sequences associated with the ICP4 gene , we excised a restriction fragment carrying these sequences and fused it to two derivatives of the HSV - 1 thymidine kinase ( tk ) gene that lacked the 730 GENES & DEVELOPMENT 2 : 730 - 742 © 1988 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory ISSN 0890 - 9369 / 88 $ 1 . 00 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on January 17 , 2020 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from HSV - 1 IE gene activation native tk promoter ( see Materials and methods ) . The two ICP4 / tic chimeric genes differed by only 11 bp ; one chimera bore the ICP4 regulatory sequences fused to the tk gene at a point 25 bp downstream from the normal start site of tk transcription ( pICP4tic25 ) , whereas in the other construct , the two genes were fused 36 bp downstream from the tk mRNA start site ( pICP4tic36 ) . Chimeric ICP4 / tic mRNAs transcribed from both templates could be detected by a primer extension assay , using a synthetic oligonucleotide complementary to nu­ cleotides 55 - 78 of tk mRNA ( Graves et al . 1985 ) . Be­ cause the fusion points in the two chimeric genes dif­ fered by 11 bp , the primer extension products were of distinguishable sizes . Thus , the two ICP4 / tA chimeras provided both an experimental template for systematic in vitro ( pICP4tic25 ) mutagenesis and an unaltered con­ trol template that served as an internal reference for transient transfection and viral trans - induction assays . Two systematic sets of deletions extending into ICP4 regulatory DNA sequences were prepared in vitro ( see Materials and methods ) . Each deletion mutant was transfected , along with an equal amount of the internal reference template , into a single dish of cultured mouse L cells . One day later , the transfected cells were split equally into two fresh culture dishes . Two days post - tranfection , one of the dishes was superinfected with a tic - deficient strain of HSV - 1 in the presence of cyclohex - imide . The remaining dish was mock infected . Total RNA was harvested from each dish 2 hr postinfection , and expression from the transfected templates was mon­ itored by primer extension ( see Materials and methods ) . The first series of mutants to be examined included deletions that removed ICP4 regulatory sequences starting at a point 325 bp upstream of the native 1CP4 mRNA cap site ( termed 5 ' - deletions ) . The results of transient expression assays of the 5 ' - deletion mutants are shown in Figure la . The top panel shows the expres­ sion level of each deletion mutant in cells that had been superinfected with HSV - 1 ( conditions that we term In­ duced ' ) . The bottom panel shows the expression level of the same mutants in mock - infected cells ( conditions that we term ' basal ' ) . The autoradiogram shown in the bottom panel was exposed fivefold longer than that shown in the top panel . We estimate the HSV - 1 superin­ fection stimulates transcription of the unmutated ICP4 / tic templates by 15 - to 30 - fold . Deletion of 1CP4 sequences to a point 290 bp up­ stream from the mRNA cap site resulted in no dele­ terious effect on either the induced or basal levels of ex­ pression . The two subsequent deletions , bearing end - points 270 and 256 bp upstream from the mRNA cap site , were clearly impaired when tested under induced conditions . The deletion mutant that retained 270 bp of DNA flanking the ICP4 mRNA cap site was expressed only 20 % as efficiently as the internal control template , whereas expression from mutant retaining 256 bp was at only 5 % of the control . The behavior of these deletion mutants was quite different when monitored under con­ ditions of basal expression ; both mutants were expressed at an efficiency equivalent to the internal control tem­ plate . Basal expression declined only after deletion of se­ quences up to or beyond a point 241 bp from the mRNA cap site . Inspection of the ICP4 DNA sequence in intervals sep­ arating the aforementioned deletion endpoints revealed three putative cis - regulatory DNA sequence motifs . The hexanucleotide 5 ' - GGGCGG - 3 ' , the canonical sequence specifying interaction with the transcription factor Spl ( Briggs et al . 1986 ) , is located between the endpoints of mutants 5 ' - 256 and 5 ' - 241 . Five additional GC hexanu - cleotides occur within the ICP4 regulatory element ( in­ dicated by black boxes in Fig . 1 ) . The interval between mutants 5 ' - 256 and 5 ' - 270 contains the sequence 5 ' - TAATGAGAT - 3 ' . Previous reports have pointed out that this sequence is common to each of the HSV - 1 IE genes ( Mackem and Roizman 1982b ) . Moreover , in inde­ pendent studies , Preston and colleagues have shown that deletion of the TAATGARAT ( R = purine ) consensus sequence interferes with ' virion factor ' response ( Cor - dingley et al . 1983 ; Preston et al . 1984 ; Bzik and Preston 1986 ) . Aside from its location in the - 256 to - 270 in­ terval , closely related derivatives of this same sequence occur at sites 360 and 110 bp upstream from the ICP4 mRNA cap site ( designated by open boxes in Fig . 1 ) . Fi­ nally , the interval between mutants 5 ' - 270 and 5 ' - 290 contains three direct repeats of the sequence 5 ' - GCGGAA - 3 ' ( designated by a hatched box in Fig . 1 ) . The possible involvement of this ' GA ' - rich element has been noted previously for the ICP4 ( Bzik and Preston 1986 ) and ICP27 ( Kristie and Roizman 1984 ) regulatory re­ gions . This hexanucleotide is present in the 5 ' - flanking region of all IE genes and is generally found in close proximity to at least one TAATGARAT motif . Contrary to the relatively common occurrence of GC hexanucleo - tides within transcriptional regulatory elements ( McKnight and Tjian 1986 ) , neither TAATGARAT nor the GCGGAA sequence motif is known to play a role in the expression of other viral or cellular genes . The regulatory sequences associated with the ICP4 gene were analyzed further by the construction and assay of a series of 3 ' deletion mutants . In this case , DNA sequences were removed progressively in a 3 ' - > 5 ' direction ( relative to the orientation of transcription ) starting at a naturally occurring £coRI restriction site 110 bp upstream from the ICP4 mRNA cap site . Results of transient expression assays using 3 ' - deletion mutants are shown in Figure lb . As with the series of 5 ' - deletion mutants , induced expression was eliminated in two dis­ cernible steps . In this case , however , the two steps were separated by a great distance ( - 150 bp ) . A substantial drop in expression occurred upon deletion of sequences between the EcoRI site and a point 131 bp upstream from the mRNA cap site . The second notable decrease did not occur until the endpoint of 3 ' deletion reached residue - 292 . Neither of these stepwise drops in expres­ sion was observed when the same deletion mutants were assayed under conditions of basal expression . The two incremental reductions in induced expression ob­ served from the analysis of 3 ' - deletion mutants corre­ lated with the locations of TAATGARAT ( positioned at GENES & DEVELOPMENT 731 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on January 17 , 2020 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from Triezenberg et al . H n 0 GGGCGG TAATGA ^ AT A GCGGAA a . - 400 - 300 5 ' deletion mutant O 1 - O a > CO y - co o o o CM in CM CM 5 CM CM CM - 200 o CM oo o in r * CM CO ■100 1—1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 ^ + 1 ■ ^ ' T— » - mRNA - ► Experimental Control Experimental Control HSV Infected mock Infected - 300 - HZZZZZ2 - - 200 - 100 + 1 - y / - r mRNA - t n O O C M C O r - t O i n O O O C M C O OO CM T - T - o > | x . r ^ t n ^ C O C O T - W CO C O C O C O C M C M C M C M C M C M C M C M r - T - S « n « « ^ 5 y deletion Experimental Control Experimental Control HSV infected mock infected Figure 1 . Effects of deletion mutations upon expression from the ICP4 promoter . ICP4 upstream sequences ( - 335 to + 30 relative to the ICP4 mRNA cap site ) were fused to the HSV - 1 tk gene at nucleotide + 25 ( experimental ) or nucleotide + 36 ( control ) . Deletion mutants of the experimental template were constructed in vitro . The deletion endpoint of each mutant that was assayed is indicated above its respective gel lane . Experimental and control templates ( 1 | xg each ) were transfected into mouse L cells . One day after transfection , the cells of each 60 - mm plate were trypsinized and split equally onto two 60 - mm plates . Two days after transfection , one plate of each pair was infected with HSV - 1 in the presence of 100 ixg / ml cycloheximide , and the other plate was mock infected . Two hours after infection , cells were lysed , and total cellular RNA was isolated . Steady - state levels of tic - specific mRNA were quantitated by primer extension , gel electrophoresis , and autoradiography . The control template yielded primer extension products 11 nucleotides shorter than the experimental template . Autoradiograms in panels representing mock - infected cells ( lower panels of both a and b ) were exposed four to five times longer than autoradiograms representing HSV - 1 infected cells , [ a ] Primer extension products from transient expression assays , using 5 ' - deletion mutants , ( b ) Primer extension products from transient expression assays , using 3 ' deletion mutants . 732 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on January 17 , 2020 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from HSV - 1 IE gene activation residue - 115 ) and GCGGAA ( positioned at residue - 280 ) motifs . The observations outlined in the preceding paragraph , coupled with results obtained from the analysis of 5 ' - de­ letion mutants , raised the possibility that two different DNA sequence motifs specify response by the ICP4 gene to the tr ^ us - inducing effects of HSV - 1 superinfection . One motif , characterized by the nonanucleotide se­ quence TAATGARAT ( R = purine ) , is present at three locations in the ICP4 regulatory element . The other motif , characterized by the hexanucleotide sequence GCGGAA , occurs as three direct repeats at one location within the regulatory element . The identification of two cis - regulatory elements re­ quired for virus - mediated tr ^ rzs - induction was deduced from the effects of deletion mutations . Deletions create new and artificial DNA sequence arrangements and , thus , can affect the function of transcriptional regula­ tory elements in spurious and unanticipated ways . To test the roles of the TAATGARAT and GCGGAA motifs more rigorously , we introduced clustered point mutations into ICP4 DNA sequences in a manner that led to the selective elimination of these elements ( see Materials and methods ) . Four contiguous transversions were introduced into each of the TAATGARAT motifs . By recombining these clustered point mutants at naturally occurring restric­ tion sites located between TAATGARAT motifs , we were able to construct each possible double mutant , as well as the triply mutated variant that bore three disrupted TAATGARAT motifs . Results of transient assays using these clustered point mutants are shown in Figure 2 . Mutation of TAATGARAT site 1 or 2 , alone or in combination with mutation of site 3 , led to a modest decrease in induced expression . Mutation of all three TAATGARAT sites reduced expression markedly , yet not down to the basal level of uninduced expression . Consistent with the results of deletion mutagenesis , elimination of any or all of the TAATGARAT motifs in no way altered basal expression ( Fig . 2 , bottom panel ) . We considered two hypotheses to account for the fact that mutation of all three TAATGARAT motifs failed to completely eliminate response of ICP4 regulatory se­ quences to virus - mediated tr ^ ns - induction . On the one hand , residual response could be due to the activity of a different cis - regulatory motif ( namely , the GCGGAA motif ) . Alternatively , the clustered base changes that were introduced into each TAATGARAT motif may not have fully neutralized TAATGARAT function . To test the first hypothesis , we introduced clustered point mu­ tations into the GCGGAA motif of ICP4 regulatory ele­ ments containing either native or mutated TAAT­ GARAT motifs . As shown in the left - hand panel of Figure 3 , mutation of the GCGGAA motif alone had a minor but reproducible effect on virus - mediated trans - induction . The variant mutated at all three TAAT - - 400 © - 300 © - 200 © - 100 + 1 I— / / t mRNA Sites 1 2 3 X XX X X X XX X X XX Experimental Control Experimental Control Figure 2 . Effects of clustered point mutations within TAATGARAT sites on expression from the ICP4 promoter . Four contiguous transversion mutations were introduced into TAATGARAT sites 1 , 2 , and 3 ( indicated by open boxes in the schematic diagram ) , using ohgonucleotide - directed mutagenesis ( see Materials and methods ) . Mutants bearing all combinations of the clustered point mutations were created by recombination in vitro , using convenient restriction sites . Mutants were tested in transient expression assays , as described for Figure 1 . The top panel shows an autoradiogram of primer extension products representing RNAs from HSV - 1 - infected cells . The bottom panel shows an exposure fourfold to fivefold longer of an autoradiogram of primer extension products representing RNAs from mock - infected cells . GENES & DEVELOPMENT 733 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on January 17 , 2020 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from Triezenberg et al . + HSV - 1 < + VP16 ? 1 1 H i plasmid . ^ 1 1 T " < o - - . 1 1 T ; 2 Figure 3 . Clustered point mutations in TAATGARAT and GCGGAA sequence motifs affect trcns - induction by VP16 . Mutant templates were constructed that contained clustered point mutations in all three TAATGARAT sites ( TAAT " ; see Fig . 2 ) , in the promoter - proximal GCGGAA repeat ( GA " ) , or in both the TAATGARAT and GCGGAA sites ( TAAT - / GA - ) . Experimental and control templates were transfected into L cells , as described in Figure 1 . Trans - induction was achieved by infection with HSV - 1 { left panel ) or by inclusion of 1 | jLg of a VP16 expression plasmid in the transfection mix { right panel ) . Expression of ICP4 / tA - specific mRNAs was quantitated by primer extension , as described in Figure 1 . CARAT motifs , as well as at the GCGGAA motif , did not respond to the tr ^ ^ rzs - inducing effects of FiSV - 1 su­ perinfection . It is notable that the variant carrying clustered point mutations at the CCCCAA motif alone ( leaving all three TAATGARAT motifs intact ) is substantially more responsive to virus induction than the 5 ' - deletion mu­ tant that removed the CCCCAA motif without im­ pinging on the site - 2 copy of TAATGARAT ( 5 ' - 270 ) . This disparity may be accounted for by the fact that the 5 ' - deletion mutant ( 5 ' - 270 ) had removed all three copies of the CCCCAA motif , whereas the clustered point mu­ tant had disrupted only the most gene - proximal motif ( see Materials and methods ) . Altematively , or addition­ ally , the deletion mutant 5 ' - 270 had removed TAAT­ GARAT site 1 , whereas the clustered point mutant at the CCCCAA motif did not . VP16 acts via both TAATGARAT and GCGGAA cis - regulatory motifs Preston and colleagues have identified the FISV - 1 gene that encodes VP16 and have shown that a recombinant copy of the VP16 gene can tr ^ izs - induce expression from an IE gene in a transient cotransfection assay ( Campbell et al . 1984 ) . Because our deletion analyses of the ICP4 regulatory region suggested the involvement of two dif­ ferent CIS - acting DNA sequences in response to virus in­ fection , we wondered whether VP16 operated via both sequences . Alternatively , the mature virion might harbor a second tr ( 322S - activator , or the process of viral penetration of the host cell might trigger an intracellular event that subsequently activated an endogenous trans­ acting factor . These hypotheses were tested by examining the ability of a cloned VP16 gene to trans - actiYatc expres­ sion from ICP4 regulatory elements that lacked either TAATGARAT or the CCCCAA motif ( or both ) . A plasmid carrying the VP16 gene was cotransfected into cultured mouse L cells , along with plasmids bearing clustered point mutations in which alteration had elimi­ nated either of the cis - acting motifs required for virus - mediated trans - induction . The results of these transient cotransfection assays , presented in the right panel of Figure 3 , mirrored those obtained when virus infection was used to induce IE gene expression . Tr ^ jizs - induction by VP16 was slightly impaired by the CCCCAA muta­ tion , moderately impaired by the TAATGARAT muta­ tions , and eliminated by changes in both cis - regulatory motifs . It thus appears that VP16 - mediated induction acts via both the TAATGARAT and CCCCAA motifs . VP16 trans - induction is highly gene specific The inducing function of VP16 displays strict specificity with respect to the array of HSV - 1 genes that it acti­ vates ; it induces the expression of IE genes to the exclu­ sion of DE and L genes ( Post et al . 1981 ) . Certain other viral regulatory proteins , such as the El A gene product of adenovirus ( Nevins 1987 ) , or the immediate early gene products of various herpesviruses ( Treisman et al . 1983 ) , activate gene expression with less specificity . Members of this latter class of viral regulatory proteins tend to activate gene expression via promoter - proximal cis - regulatory sequences ( e . g . , see Craves et al . 1985 ) and , in a number of instances , have been shown to play an interfering role in expression guided by promoter - distal elements such as enhancers ( e . g . , see Borrelli et al . 1984 ) . In contrast , VP16 activates the expression of its IE genes via cis - acting sequences that exhibit enhancerlike properties . Perhaps VP16 represents a general activator of enhancer function , and the TAATGARAT and CCCCAA motifs that specify response by IiSV - 1 IE genes represent only a subset of the repertoire of se­ quences through which VP16 can act . To test this possi­ bility , we examined the ability of VP16 to activate gene expression via the enhancers of four other viruses . Expression of the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase ( CAT ) gene was directed by the enhancers of SV40 , po­ lyoma virus , Rous sarcoma virus , Moloney murine sar­ coma virus , or the ICP4 gene . The enhancer - CAT plasmids were transfected into mouse L cells . Parallel culture dishes were either infected with HSV - 1 or mock infected . CAT enzymatic activity in protein extracts of transfected cells was monitored by thin layer chroma­ tography . The results of these assays , presented in Figure 4 , showed that HSV - 1 infection actually reduced the level of CAT expression generated by four of the en - 734 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on January 17 , 2020 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from HSV - 1 IE gene activation pSVO SV40 Py RSV HSV - 1 : mm ICP4 Figure 4 . HSV - 1 infection does not trans - induce other viral enhancers . Plasmids were constructed or obtained that express the bacterial CAT gene , driven by enhancers and promoters from SV40 , polyoma virus ( Py ) , Rous sar­ coma virus ( RSV ) , Moloney murine sarcoma virus ( MSV ) , or the HSV - 1 ICP4 gene . The parental plasmid pSVO - CAT lacks eukaryotic enhancer and promoter sequences . Mouse L cells were transfected and subsequently replated onto duplicate plates , as described in Figure 1 . Cells were mock infected ( - ) or HSV - 1 infected ( + ) in the presence of cy - cloheximide ( 100 ixg / ml ) . Three hours postinfection , cy - cloheximide - containing medium was replaced with me­ dium containing 10 | JLg / ml actinomycin - D . Two hours later , cells were lysed and assayed for CAT enzyme ac­ tivity ( Gorman et al . 1982 ) . The autoradiogram shows re­ action products reflecting the CAT enzyme activity ' present in equivalent amounts of extract from each sample . hancers . The only CAT construct that exhibited an ele­ vated level of expression foUov ^ ing HSV - 1 superinfection w ^ as that containing the IE enhancer derived from the HSV - 1 ICP4 gene . Thus , VP16 is not a general activator of enhancers but a very specific inducer of IE gene ex­ pression . Host cell proteins bind directly to the TAATGARAT and GCGGAA cis - regulatory elements The simplest mechanism by which VP16 might achieve tr ^ iis - activation is through direct binding to IE cis - regu­ latory sequences . Were this to be the case , the data pre­ sented thus far v ^ ould require VP16 to interact Mrith tv ^ o different DNA sequence motifs ( TAATGARAT and GCGGAA ) . Although DNA - binding proteins have been identified that are capable of recognizing more than one recognition site on DNA ( Johnson et al . 1987 ; Pfeifer et al . 1987 ) , this does not appear to be a property of VP16 . Indeed , purified VP16 appears to be incapable of binding DNA ( Marsden et al . 1987 ) . Given such observations , we reasoned that VP16 must operate indirectly , perhaps via cellular factors that bind directly to the TAATGARAT and GCGGAA motifs . We chose to examine rat liver nuclei for cellular pro­ teins that might bind to IE cis - regulatory DNA se­ quences . Several considerations favored this decision . First , rat liver provides an ample source of nuclear pro­ tein . Because we expected the putative TAATGARAT and GCGGAA binding proteins to be relatively rare and because our ultimate goal was to purify the proteins to homogeneity , our efforts required large amounts of starting material . Second , HSV - 1 is capable of infecting a broad range of host cells ( Whitley 1982 ) ; thus , if any cel­ lular proteins are required to facilitate VP16 action , they should exist in liver . Finally , procedures for the isolation of sequence - specific DNA - binding proteins from rat liver were currently in use in our laboratory ( Graves et al . 1986 ; Johnson et al . 1987 ) . Soluble extracts prepared from ~ 10 ^ ° rat liver nuclei were fractionated by standard methods of column chro­ matography . Sequence - specific DNA - binding activities were assayed by DNase I footprinting ( Galas and Schmitz 1978 ) , using an end - labeled ICP4 DNA frag­ ment that contained TAATGARAT sites 1 and 2 , the GCGGAA motif , and three GC hexanucleotides . The fractionation scheme that was employed is diagramed in Figure 5a . Rat liver nuclear extract was initially sub­ jected to anion exchange chromatography using DEAE - cellulose . Because the DEAE flow through was pre­ sumed to contain cationic proteins , subsequent fraction­ ation was conducted using a cation exchange resin ( Bio - Rex 70 ) . Finally , affinity chromatography was per­ formed using double - stranded salmon sperm DNA that had been coupled to cyanogen - bromide - activated Sepha - rose 4B . Two chromatographically separable , cationic DNA - binding activities were detected . One activity eluted from the DNA Sepharose column at 0 . 3 M KCl ( fraction A ) and produced a footprint over each of the GC hexanucleotides ( Fig . 5b ) . Although we have not charac­ terized this activity in detail , we assume that it repre­ sents the rat equivalent of the HeLa transcription factor , Spl ( Briggs et al . 1986 ) . Indeed , Jones and Tjian ( 1985 ) have shown that purified Spl binds to this same set of ICP4 GC hexanucleotides . Footprint analysis of cationic nuclear proteins re­ vealed a second DNA - binding activity specific for ICP4 regulatory DNA sequences . This second activity eluted from the DNA affinity column between 0 . 3 and 0 . 7 M KCl ( fraction B ) . As shown in Figure 5b , the B fraction activity bound at two locations on the ICP4 enhancer . The two sites of DNase I protection established by the B GENES & DEVELOPMENT 735 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on January 17 , 2020 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from Triezenberg et al . fraction coincided with TAATGARAT sites 1 and 2 . The protein fraction that bound to DEAE - cellulose was step eluted with 0 . 4 M KCl , dialyzed to 0 . 1 M KCl , and subjected to affinity chromatography on DNA Seph - arose . Protein that eluted at 0 . 3 M KCl ( fraction C ) was tested for binding activity by DNase I footprinting . Sur­ prisingly , this pool of anionic proteins contained a se­ quence - specific DNA - binding activity . Figure 5b shows a . that the C fraction activity selectively protected the GCGGAA motif from DNase I digestion . To examine the specificity of the ICP4 binding activi­ ties observed in rat liver nuclear extracts , we conducted DNase I footprint assays in the presence of unlabeled competitor DNA fragments specific to each of the ICP4 cis - regulatory sequences that had been defined by in vitro mutagenesis . Double - stranded oligonucleotides Rat Liver Nuclear Extract DE - 52 Rowthrough 0 . 8 M Ka BioRex 70 0 . 4M Ka DNA - Sepharose 0 . 3 M Ka 0 . 7 M Ka DNA - Sepharose 0 . 3 M Ka © ® ® - 400 - 350 I I - 300 I - 250 I b . ^ zzzza—c © ® ® - ) + ) ■ ) - ) + ) - ) - ) + ) - ) Figure 5 . Nuclear extracts from uninfected cells contain proteins that bind specifically to cis - regulatory elements upstream from the ICP4 gene . RLNE were fractionated , as diagramed in panel a . Procedures for chromatographic separation are described in Materials and methods . The presence of sequence - specific DNA - binding proteins in three fractions ( A , B , C ) was demonstrated by DNase I footprinting assays , shown in panel b . For this purpose , a DNA fragment derived from the ICP4 regulatory region was radioactively labeled at an Ncol restriction site ( nucleotide - 211 ) . The purified probe was incubated in the presence ( + ) or absence ( - ) of the various protein fractions before digestion with DNase I ( as described in Materials and methods ) . The autoradiogram shows DNase I cleavage products after separation on a 7 % polyacrylamide / 8 M urea electrophoresis gel . cis - regulatory elements within this region of the ICP4 gene are depicted in the schematic diagram following the conventions of Figure 1 . 736 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on January 17 , 2020 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from HSV - 1 IE gene activation corresponding to the GC hexanucleotide motif , the TAATGARAT motif , and the GCGGAA motif were synthesized and added to footprint reactions to test for specific competition with the aforementioned DNA - binding activities ( see Materials and methods ) . To ex­ amine the competitive effect of each synthetic binding site on each DNA - binding activity , unfractionated nu­ clear extract was used as the protein source . Under these conditions , the activity that binds to the TAATGARAT motif was difficult to detect . Instead of occupying a 20 - bp area surrounding the TAATGARAT motif at site 2 , the region of binding appeared to be limited to only two sites of DNase I cleavage . Although modest in ap­ pearance , the site of binding corresponded precisely to the location of TAATGARAT site 2 and was competed specifically and exclusively by the appropriate oligonu­ cleotide ( see subsequent Results ) . The data presented in Figure 6 show that the synthetic GC hexanucleotide eliminated DNase I protection at the locations of the two GC hexanucleotides within the ICP4 DNA fragment . It did not , however , interfere with either of the two other DNA - binding activities . Like­ wise , the synthetic GCGGAA motif eliminated the DNase I footprint at its cognate site but interfered with neither the GC hexanucleotide - binding activity nor the TAATGARAT - binding activity . Finally , the synthetic TAATGARAT motif interfered with the activity that footprinted over TAATGARAT site 2 but did not block interaction at either of the two other cis - acting motifs associated with the ICP4 regulatory element . The activities in the B and C fractions bind , respec­ tively , to the two cis - acting motifs that render the ICP4 gene responsive to VP16 . If these cellular DNA - binding activities play a role in the induction of IE gene expres­ sion in vivo , one might predict that their capacity to bind to the TAATGARAT and GCGGAA motifs would be eliminated by the clustered point mutations in each of the motifs that had been shown previously to inter­ fere with VP16 - mediated gene expression ( see Figs . 2 and 3 ) . This prediction was tested by examining the binding affinities of the partially purified B and C fractions for ICP4 regulatory sequence bearing clustered point muta­ tions in the TAATGARAT and GCGGAA motifs . The results of these assays are presented in Figure 7 . Binding of the B fraction activity to TAATGARAT site 1 was eliminated by the cluster of four point mutations that were found to neutralize the functional activity of this cis - regulatory element . Similar results were observed for TAATGARAT site 2 ( data not shown ) . Figure 7 also shows that the clustered point mutations introduced into the GCGGAA motif interfered with binding of the C fraction activity . In this case , however , a residual level of binding was observed over the gene - distal portion of the motif . This binding might be ex­ plained by the fact that the clustered point mutations were restricted to the gene - proximal GCGGAA repeat , leaving the two gene - distal copies of the motif intact ( see Materials and methods ) . This explanation is consis­ tent with the observation that the phenotypic effect of the clustered point mutations in the GCGGAA motif was less severe than the mutation that deleted all three GCGGAA repeats ( see Figs . 1 and 2 ) . As a final comment , we point out that under our assay conditions for DNA binding , mutation of TAATGARAT site 1 did not interfere with the binding of the C fraction activity to the GCGGAA motif , nor did mutation of the GCGGAA motif alter binding of the B fraction activity to TAATGARAT site 1 ( Fig . 7 ) . This absence of interac - D iiniin I 1 ^ m W / / / A 1 1 GGGCGG GCGGAA TAATGA ? AT A Figure 6 . Synthetic oligonucleotides compete specifically for binding of nuclear proteins to ICP4 cis regulatory sequences . A DNA fragment spanning the ICP4 regulatory region was labeled at a Sail restriction site ( nucleotide - 396 ) . The pattern of DNase I fragments from the unprotected probe is shown in the left lane , adjacent to reaction products obtained after incuba­ tion with crude nuclear extract . The locations of the various footprints are indicated schematically at the right side of the figure . Footprints over the GC hexanucleotide and the GCGGAA motif are easily visible . The footprint over the TAATGARAT motif ( site 1 , according to the numerology of Fig . 2 ) is more difficult to discern using the crude extract than when partially purified fractions were used ( see Fig . 5 ) . In­ creasing amounts of synthetic double - stranded oligonucleo­ tides representing each of the three sequence motifs were added to extract : probe incubations prior to digestion with DNase I . The competitors used in each reaction ( see Materials and methods ) are indicated above the autoradiogram . GENES & DEVELOPMENT 737 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on January 17 , 2020 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from Triezenberg et al . tion was not simply a result of the biochemical separa­ tion of the B and C activities . That is , unfractionated rat liver nuclear extracts also failed to show any evidence of binding cooperativity , even in the case of the two most closely juxtaposed motifs ( TAATGARAT site 2 and the GCGGAA site ) . Discussion Detailed mutational analysis of the ICP4 regulatory ele­ ment has revealed the presence of three distinct cis - reg - ulatory motifs . Two of these motifs , TAATGARAT and GCGGAA , are uniquely required for response to the HSV - 1 tr ^ i35 - activator protein , VP16 . Mutational elimi­ nation of these motifs produced no deleterious effect on basal expression from the ICP4 regulatory element but completely eliminated trans - induction by VP16 . The third cis - regulatory motif is specified by GC hexanu - cleotides that bind Spl ( Briggs et al . 1986 ) . The Spl - binding sites appear to be necessary for basal expression from the ICP4 regulatory element ( see Fig . 1 ) . In a series of experiments not included in this paper , we have selec­ tively eliminated Spl - binding sites by the introduction of clustered point mutations . The results of those exper­ iments indicated that Spl also plays a role in facilitating response to VP16 ( S . Triezenberg , unpubl . ) . However , Spl clearly does not endow VP16 responsiveness to a transcriptional regulatory element ; neither the HSV - 1 tk promoter ( Post et al . 1981 ) nor the SV40 early promoter ( see Fig . 4 ) is VP16 responsive , despite the fact that they contain multiple Spl - binding sites ( Dynan and Tjian 1983 ; Jones et al . 1985 ; McKnight and Tjian 1986 ) . VP16 is similar to the adenovirus El A gene product in that it somehow achieves trflns - activation , despite its inability to bind directly to DNA . However , in contrast to El A , VP16 displays strict specificity with regard to its target genes . We believe that we have pinpointed the two cis - regulatory motifs that mediate VP16 action ( TAATGARAT and GCGGAA ) . One might speculate that the exceptional specificity of VP16 is related to the combinatorial use of two different cis - regulatory motifs . However , the data presented herein indicate that both TAATGARAT and GCGGAA are capable of acting in­ dependently . We speculate instead that HSV - 1 has ac­ quired the ability to achieve stimulation of IE gene tran­ scription via two distinct cellular DNA - binding proteins and that perhaps it is this property that allows HSV - 1 to infect a broad range of host cells . Because purified VP16 does not appear to bind DNA in either a specific or nonspecific maimer , it probably acts indirectly through cellular factors that themselves bind to the TAATGARAT and GCGGAA motifs . Several studies ( Kristie and Roizman 1987 ; McKnight et al . 1987 ; Preston et al . 1988 ) have reported evidence of a HeLa DNA - binding activity that interacts specifically with IE cis - regulatory sequences . Likewise , we report the existence of liver nuclear proteins that bind to ICP4 cis - regulatory sequences . No direct evidence demon­ strates that the cellular proteins that bind to these sites in vitro mediate VP16 action in vivo . However , because mutational disruption of the two VPI6 - specific motifs I ! 5 ^ < B 2 S < Figure 7 . Clustered point mutations prevent binding of nu­ clear proteins to ICP4 cis - regulatory elements . Three DNA fragments spanning the ICP4 regulatory region were radiola­ beled at a Sail site ( nucleotide - 396 ) . The fragments contained either the native ICP4 sequence { left lanes ) , clustered point mutations in TAATGARAT site 1 { middle lanes ) , or clustered point mutations in the promoter - proximal GCGGAA repeat { right lanes ) . Each fragment was incubated in the presence ( - I - ) or absence ( - ) of nuclear protein fraction B { lower lanes ) or fraction C { top lanes ) prior to DNase I digestion . The locations of regions of DNase I protection are indicated schematically at the right . 738 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on January 17 , 2020 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from HSV - 1 IE gene activation ( TAATGARAT and GCGGAA ) eliminate both VP16 - de - pendent transcription and sequence - specific binding by the B and C fraction activities , we speculate that the proteins that specify these activities indeed represent the host cell factors that participate in VP16 - mediated trd22S - induction . How , in a mechanistic sense , might VP16 activate IE gene expression ? Perhaps upon entry into the host cell cytoplasm , VP16 triggers a cascade of catalytic events that leads ultimately to activation of the B and C DNA - binding activities . Alternatively , VP16 may be trans­ ported to the nucleus of the infected cell where it in­ teracts directly with the B and C fraction proteins . Two recent discoveries offer support to the latter model . In an elegant study , Preston and colleagues ( Preston et al . 1988 ) have shown that VP16 , the TAATGARAT motif , and a cellular DNA - binding activity form a ternary com­ plex that is stable to electrophoresis in low ionic strength buffer . Additionally , Roizman and colleagues ( Kristie and Roizman 1987 ; McKnight et al . 1987 ) have reported two separable HeLa protein fractions that con­ tain activities that bind ICP4 cis - regulatory DNA se­ quences . Antibody reagents were used to show that VP16 is capable of forming a complex with one of the two binding activites . The accompanying paper also provides support for a model involving direct interaction between VP16 and host - cell proteins that bind to ICP4 regulatory DNA se­ quences ( Triezenberg et al . 1988 ) . Mutational studies of the VP16 gene product have revealed several functional domains . One of these domains is embedded within the carboxy - terminal 78 amino acids of the VP16 polypep­ tide and is required for the transcriptional activating function of the protein . The carboxy - terminal region of VP16 is highly acidic , thereby resembling the transcrip­ tional activating domains of two yeast regulatory pro­ teins , GCN4 ( Hope and Struhl 1986 ) and GAL4 ( Ma and Ptashne 1987 ) . Because GCN4 and GAL4 achieve tran­ scriptional activation only after binding to cis - regulatory sequences adjacent to their target genes , we predict that VP16 must make intimate , if not direct , contact with the ci5 - regulatory elements of HSV - 1 IE genes . As out­ lined in the accompanying paper , we predict that VP16 achieves this task via specific protein : protein interac­ tions with cellular factors that bind directly to the TAATGARAT and GCGGAA motifs . Materials and methods Plasmid construction and mutagenesis Cloning vectors pEMBL 18 - H andpEMBL19 + were derived from pEMBL8 - H and pEMBL9 + ( Dente et al . 1983 ) by S . Lazarowitz , using the polylinker from M13mpl9 ( Norrander et al . 1983 ) . Plasmid pICPtA25 , used as an indicator of IE gene expression , contained regulatory sequences of the ICP4 gene fused to the HSV - 1 tk gene . A Smal - BamHI fragment spanning nucleotides - 332 to - 1 - 27 , relative to the ICP4 mRNA cap site ( Cordingley et al . 1983 ; McGeoch et al . 1986 ) , was cloned into pEMBL18 - h following addition of an Xbal linker to the Smal terminus of the fragment . The IE sequences were then excised from the pEMBL vector , using Sail and BamHl . The protein - coding seg­ ment of the HSV - 1 tk gene was derived from a 5 ' - deletion mu­ tant that contains a BamHl linker at nucleotide + 25 relative to the tk mRNA cap site ( McKnight and Kingsbury 1982 ) . A BamHl - Hindlll fragment carrying the tk gene was inserted along with the Sall - BamHl ICP4 promoter fragment into pBR322 . Plasmid pICPtA36 , used as an internal control in ex­ pression assays , was constructed in an identical manner , except that the tk gene fragment began at nucleotide - 1 - 36 relative to the tk mRNA cap site . A plasmid containing additional ICP4 upstream sequences ( to nucleotide - 396 ) , designated pSJT703 , was constructed from pICPtA25 by insertion of a Smal fragment ( - 396 to - 333 ) bearing 5 ^ 71 and Xbal linkers at its distal and proximal termini , respectively . Deletion mutations were derived from pICPtA25 by removing sequences from either end of the ICP4 upstream regulatory re­ gion . To construct 5 ' - deletion mutants , pICPtA25 was linear­ ized at the Xbal site ( nucleotide - 332 ) and then digested se­ quentially with ^ exonuclease III and nuclease SI ( Sakonju et al . 1980 ) . Synthetic Xbal linkers were ligated to the ends of deleted molecules . Following digestion with Xbal and Kpnl ( which cleaves within the tk gene ) , fragments were size fractionated by agarose gel electrophoresis . Purified fragments were ligated to an Xbal - Kpnl vector fragment derived from pICPtA25 . The 3 ' - deletion mutants were constructed by digesting pICPtA25 with BamHl , followed by exonuclease III and nuclease SI . £coRI linkers were ligated to the deleted molecules , which were then digested with £coRI and Hindlll . Appropriately sized fragments were purified after agarose gel electrophoresis and ligated to an £coRI - - ffindIII fragment derived from pICPtic25 . Deletion end - points for individual mutants were identified by DNA se­ quencing , using the chemical cleavage method ( Maxam and Gilbert 1980 ) . Clustered point mutations were introduced at selected sites within the ICP4 upstream regulatory region by oligonucleo - tide - directed mutagenesis . Oligonucleotides 24 or 25 residues in length were designed to introduce three or four transversion mutations , as shown below : 5 ' - TAATGARAT - 3 ' 5 ' - - CCGT 3 ' 5 ' - GCGGAACGGAAGCGGAAAC - 3 ' 5 ' A - T - C 3 ' Oligonucleotides were synthesized using an Applied Bio - systems automated synthesizer , purified by HPLC , and phos - phorylated using polynucleotide kinase and ATP . Single - stranded template DNA was prepared from an M13 recombi­ nant clone containing the Sall - BamHl ICP4 fragment of pSJT703 . Each mutagenic oligonucleotide , together with the M13 sequencing primer ( Boehringer Mannheim ) , was annealed to the template , extended , and ligated , using the conditions of ZoUer and Smith ( 1982 ) . The reaction products were digested with BamHl and Sail . Fragments corresponding to the ICP4 reg­ ulatory sequences were purified by gel electrophoresis before ligation into a BamHl - Sall vector fragment prepared from pSJT703 . Bacterial transformants were screened by colony hy­ bridization , using the corresponding mutagenic oligonucleotide as a probe . The identity of mutant plasmids was confirmed by chemical sequencing . The plasmid used to express VP16 in transient cotransfection experiments contained 76 bp of the VP16 5 ' - untranslated re­ gion , the entire VP16 open reading frame , and —900 nucleotides of 3 ' - flanking sequences . The long terminal repeat ( LTR ) of Moloney murine sarcoma virus ( Graves et al . 1985 ) , was fused to VP16 - coding sequences to provide transcriptional regulatory sequences ( including the LTR enhancer , promoter , mRNA cap GENES & DEVELOPMENT 739 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on January 17 , 2020 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from Triezenberg et al . site , and 27 bp of 5 ' - untranslated region ) . This VP16 expression plasmid was termed pMSVP16 A1D3 . Transient expression assay Mouse L cells { tk - , aprt ~ ] were obtained from B . Sollner - Webb . Atk - mutant of HSV - 1 which produces no tk mRNA , termed A35 , was provided by J . Smiley ( Halpem and Smiley 1984 ) . One day prior to transfection , 8 x 10 ^ L cells were plated per 60 - nmi plastic culture dish in Dulbecco ' s modified Eagle ' s medium ( GIBCO ) , supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum ( Hyclone ) and antibiotics . CsCl - purified DNAs were transfected into the cells , using the DEAE - dextran method ( Lopata et al . 1984 ) . Each plate received 1 | xg of an ICP4 - tA test plasmid ( pICP4tA25 , pSJT703 , or a mutated derivative ) and 1 fxg of the internal con­ trol plasmid pICP4tA36 . Twenty - four hours after tranfection , the cells receiving any given test DNA were trypsinized , pooled , and replated onto duplicate 60 - mm plates to ensure uni­ form transfection efficiency . Forty - four hours after tranfection , one plate was mock infected and the other plate was infectdd with HSV - 1 A35 virus at a multiplicity of 5 - 10 pfu per cell , in the presence of 100 jig / ml cycloheximide . Two hours postin­ fection , total RNA was harvested by the proteinase K / DNase I method ( Eisenberg et al . 1985 ) . Primer extension assays were performed to quantitate expression from the lE - tk chimeric plasmids ( Eisenberg et al . 1985 ) . The primer used was a syn­ thetic oligonucleotide complementary to sequences between + 55 and - H78 , relative to the tk mRNA cap site . The major extension products observed from transcripts of pICP4tic25 and pICP4tA36 were 81 bases and 70 bases , respectively . Preparation of rat liver nuclear extract Crude rat liver nuclear extracts ( RLNE ) were prepared from Spraque - Dawley rats , as described by Gorski et al . ( 1986 ) , with minor modifications . Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride ( PMSF ) , dithiothreitol ( DTT ) , benzamidine , spermidine , and spermine were added to buffers immediately prior to use in the concen­ trations specified below . All manipulations were carried out at 0 - 4°C . Minced liver tissue ( 125 g ) was resuspended in 150 ml oi homogenization buffer [ 10 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 6 ) , 25 mM KCl , 1 mM EDTA , 2 M sucrose , 10 % glycerol , 0 . 15 mM spermine , 0 . 5 mM spermidine , 0 . 2 mM PMSF , and 2 mM benzamidine ) . Tissue was mixed in a Waring blendor for 15 sec and homogenized with a Teflon - glass homogenizer until > 90 % of the cells were disrupted . The homogenate ( - 100 ml ) was diluted with homog­ enization buffer to 500 ml , and 29 - ml aliquots were layered over 10 - ml pads of the same buffer containing 2 M sucrose and centrifuged at 24 , 000 rpm for 30 min in an SW 28 rotor . Pelleted nuclei were resuspended in nuclear lysis buffer [ 10 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 6 ] , 100 mM KCl , 3 mM MgClj , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM DTT , 0 . 1 mM PMSF , and 10 % glycerol ] , ahquoted into 30 - ml Beckman ultracentrifuge tubes , and lysed by the addition of 0 . 1 volume of 4 M ammonium sulfate . The tubes were rocked for 30 min and centrifuged at 35 , 000 rpm for 2 hr in a 50 . 2Ti rotor . Protein was precipitated from the supematant by the addition of ammonium sulfate ( 0 . 3 g / ml ) and neutralized with 1 M NaOH ( 1 p - l / g ammonium sulfate ) . After ammonium sulfate precipitation , the protein precipitate was dissolved in and dia - lyzed against HGEDKlOO buffer [ 20 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 6 ] , 10 % glycerol , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM DTT , and 100 mM KCl ] . Protein fractionation Unless otherwise stated , the standard column buffer was HGEDK , with the K ( potassium chloride ) concentration varied as appropriate . RLNE was applied to a 25 - ml bed volume DEAE - cellulose ( DE - 52 , Whatman ) column equilibrated with HGEDKlOO - The column was washed with 5 volumes of HGEDKlOO and developed with two sequential steps of in­ creased KCl ( 0 . 4 and 1 . 0 M ) . Protein - containing fractions , as as­ sessed by absorbance at 280 nm , were pooled according to their various salt concentrations . The protein that flowed through the DE - 52 column was applied directly to a 15 - ml Bio - Rad 70 column , which was developed exactly as described for the DE - 52 column . Protein in the 0 . 4 M KCl step elution was pooled , dialyzed to 0 . 1 M KCl , and applied to a 20 - ml bed volume salmon sperm DNA - Sepharose column ( Graves et al . 1986 ) . After loading , the column was eluted by step increases of 0 . 1 , 0 . 3 , and 0 . 7 M KCl . Protein - containing fractions were as­ sayed individually for specific DNA - binding activity by DNase I footprinting ( Galas and Schmitz 1978 ) . The 0 . 4 M KCl pool from the DE - 52 column was dialyzed to 0 . 1 M KCl and further chromatographed on DNA - Sepharose , exactly as described for the 0 . 4 M KCl fraction derived from the Bio - Rad 70 column . Preparation of ICP4 DNA fragments for DNase I footprinting End - labeled DNA fragments containing ICP4 regulatory se­ quences were excised by Sall / BamHl digestion of pSJT703 . After Sail digestion , DNA was treated with calf intestinal phosphatase and labeled with [ 7 ^ ^ P ] ATP , using T4 polynucleo­ tide kinase . Subsequent BamHl digestion yielded a 400 - bp probe that was purified by agarose gel electrophoresis . To label the opposite strand , plasmids were cut and end labeled at a unique Ncol site , followed by digestion with Sail , to yield a 180 - bp fragment . DNase I footprinting Footprinting assays were performed as described by Johnson et al . ( 1987 ) . Protein - containing fractions were added to a 50 - | xl reaction containing 25 mM Tris - Cl ( pH 7 . 9 ) , 2 mM MgCl , 10 % glycerol , 0 . 5 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 mM DTT , 0 . 1 - 1 . 0 jxg of poly ( dl - dC ) ( Boeringher - Marmheim ) , and an end - labeled DNA fragment ( ~ 5 fmole ) . The final salt concentration was determined by the ionic strength of the extract and varied between 40 and 80 mM . The reaction mixtures were incubated on ice for 15 min then transferred to a 22°C water bath . After 2 min , 5 | xl of DNase I ( Worthington ) , freshly diluted with 25 mM CaClj , was added to the reaction mixture . Sixty seconds later , the reaction was ter­ minated by the addition of 100 | JL1 of DNase I stop buffer ( 1 % SDS , 100 jjig / ml tRNA , 200 mM NaCl , 20 mM EDTA , and 200 fxg / ml proteinase K ) . Proteinase K digestion was allowed to pro­ ceed for 20 min at 50°C . DNA was separated from protein by phenol - chloroform extraction , recovered by ethanol precipita­ tion , and boiled for 3 min in 3 - 5 p . l of 99 % formamide con­ taining appropriate tracking dyes . The samples were electro - phoresed on 7 % polyacrylamide / 8 M urea gels , which were sub­ sequently dried and autoradiographed with Kodak XAR - 5 film . For the oligomer competition assays , footprint reactions were performed as described above , except that they were carried out in the presence of 15 - 150 ng of one of the following double - stranded oligomers : TAATGARAT : 5 ' - GATCCGGTTCGGTAATGAGATACGAGA - 3 ' 3 ' - GCCAAGCCATTACTCTATGCTCTCTAG - 5 ' GA : 5 ' - GCGGAACGGAAGCGGAAACCGCCGCATCGGGCGCGGCAACGAG - 3 ' 3 ' - CGCCTTGCCTTCGCCTTTGGCGGCGTAGCCCGC - 5 ' 740 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on January 17 , 2020 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from HSV - 1 IE gene activation Spl : 5 ' - CCCCCCATCAGGGGCGGGGATTGGGGCGGGGTAGG - 3 ' 3 ' TAGTCCCCGCCCCTAACCCCGCCCCATCC - 5 ' Acknowledgments We thank Bob Kingsbury for excellent technical assistance , Peter Johnson and Bill Landschulz for advice on protein frac­ tionation , and Shirley Whitaker for careful clerical help . S . j . T . was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship stipend from the Helen Hay Whitney Foundation , K . L . L . by a postdoctoral fel­ lowship stipend from the Leukemia Society of America , and S . L . M by a faculty research award from the American Cancer Society . This work was otherwise funded by a grant award to S . L . M . from the National Institutes of Health . References Borrelli , E . , R . Hen , and P . Chambon . 1984 . Adenovirus - 2 ElA products repress enhancer - induced stimulation of transcrip­ tion . Nature 312 : 608 - 612 . Briggs , M . R . , J . T . Kadonaga , S . P . Bell , and R . Tjian . 1986 . Purifi­ cation and biochemical characterization of the promoter - specific transcription factor , Spl . Science 234 : 47 - 52 . Bzik , D . J . and CM . Preston . 1986 . Analysis of DNA sequences which regulate the transcription of herpes simplex virus im­ mediate early gene 3 : DNA sequences required for en­ hancer - like activity and response to transactivation by a virion polypeptide . Nucleic Acids Res . 14 : 929 - 943 . Campbell , M . E . M . , J . W . Palfreyman , and CM . Preston . 1984 . Identification of herpes simplex virus DNA sequences which encode a trans - acting polypeptide responsible for stimulation of immediate early transcription . / . Mol . Biol . 180 : 1 - 19 . Clements , J . B . , R . J . Watson , and N . M . Wilkie . 1977 . Temporal regulation of herpes simplex virus type 1 transcription : Lo­ cation of transcripts on the viral genome . Cell 12 : 275 - 285 . Cordingley , M . G . , M . E . M . Campbell , and CM . Preston . 1983 . Functional analysis of a herpes simplex virus type 1 pro­ moter : Identification of far - upstream regulatory sequences . Nucleic Acids Res . 11 : 2347 - 2365 . Dente , L . , G . Cesareni , and R . Cortese . 1983 . pEMBL : a new family of single stranded plasmids . Nucleic Acids Res . 11 : 1645 - 1655 . Dynan , W . S . and R . Tjian . 1983 . The promoter specific tran­ scription factor Spl binds to upstream sequences in the SV40 early promoter . Cell 35 : 79 - 87 . Eisenberg , S . P . , D . M . Coen , and S . L . McKnight . 1985 . Promoter domains required for expression of plasmid - borne copies of the herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase gene in virus - in­ fected mouse fibroblasts and microinjected frog oocytes . Mol . Cell . Biol . 5 : 1940 - 1947 . Gaffney , D . F . , J . McLauchlan , J . L . Whitton , and J . B . Clements . 1985 . A modular system for the assay of transcription regu­ latory signals : The sequence TAATGARAT is required for herpes simplex virus immediate early gene activation . Nu­ cleic Acids Res . 13 : 7874 - 7862 . Galas , D . and A . Schmitz . 1978 . DNase footprinting : A simple method for the detection of protein - DNA binding speci­ ficity . Nucleic Acids Res . 5 : 3157 - 3170 . Gorman , CM . , L . F . Moffat , and B . H . Howard . 1982 . Recombi­ nant genomes which express chloramphenicol acetyl trans­ ferase in mammalian cells . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 : 1044 - 1051 . Gorski , K . , M . Cameiro , and U . Schibler . 1986 . Tissue - specific in vitro transcription from the mouse albumin promoter . Cell 47 : 767 - 776 . Graves , B . , R . N . Eisenman , and S . L . McKnight . 1985 . Delinea­ tion of transcriptional control signals within the Moloney murine sarcoma virus long terminal repeat . Mol . Cell . Biol . 5 : 1948 - 1958 . Graves , B . , P . F . Johnson , and S . L . McKnight . 1986 . Homologous recognition of a promoter domain common to the MSV LTR and the HSV tk gene . Cell 44 : 565 - 576 . Halpem , M . E . and J . R . Smiley . 1984 . Effects of deletions on ex­ pression of the herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase gene from the intact viral genome : The amino terminus of the enzyme is dispensible for catalytic activity . / . Virol . 50 : 733 - 738 . Honess , R . W . and B . Roizman . 1974 . Regulation of herpesvirus macromolecular synthesis . I . Cascade regulation of the syn­ thesis of three groups of viral proteins . / . Virol . 14 : 8 - 19 . Hope , LA . and K . Struhl . 1986 . Functional dissection of a eu - karyotic transcriptional activator protein , GCN4 of yeast . Cell 46 : 885 - 894 . Johnson , P . F . , W . H . Landschulz , B . J . Graves , and S . L . McKnight . 1987 . Identification of a rat liver nuclear protein that binds to the enhancer core element of three animal viruses . Genes Dev . 1 : 133 - 146 . Jones , K . A . and R . Tjian . 1985 . Spl binds to promoter sequences and activates herpes simplex virus ' immediate - early ' gene transcription in vitro . Nature 317 : 179 - 182 . Jones , K . A . , K . R . Yamamoto , and R . Tjian . ( 1985 ) . Two distinct transcription factors bind to the HSV thymidine kinase pro­ moter in vitro . Cell 42 : 559 - 572 . Kristie , T . M . and B . Roizman . 1984 . Separation of sequences defining basal expression from those conferring a - gene rec­ ognition within the regulatory domains of herpes simplex virus 1 a - genes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 81 : 4065 - 4069 . . 1987 . Host cell proteins bind to the cis - acting site re­ quired for virion - mediated induction of herpes simplex virus 1 a - genes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 84 : 71 - 75 . Lang , J . C , D . A . Spandidos , and N . W . Wilkie . 1984 . Transcrip­ tional regulation of a herpes simplex virus immediate early gene is mediated through an enhancer - type sequence . EMBO J . 3 : 389 - 395 . Lopata , M . A . , D . W . Cleveland , and B . SoUner - Webb . 1984 . High level transient expression of a chloramphenicol acetyl transferase gene by DEAE - dextran mediated DNA transfec - tion coupled with a dimethyl sulfoxide or glycerol shock treatment . Nucleic Acids Res . 12 : 5707 - 5717 . Ma , J . and M . Ptashne . 1987 . Deletion analysis of GAL4 defines two transcriptional activating segments . Cell 48 : 847 - 853 . Mackem , S . and B . Roizman . 1982a . Differentiation between promoter and regulator regions of herpes simplex virus 1 : The functional domains and sequence of a movable a regu­ lator . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 79 : 4917 - 4921 . . 1982b . Structural features of herpes simplex virus a gene 4 , 0 , and 27 promoter regulatory sequences which confer a regulation on chimeric thymidine kinase genes . / . Virol 44 : 939 - 949 . Marsden , H . S . , M . E . M . Campbell , L . Haarr , M . C Frame , D . S . Parris , M . Murphy , R . G . Hope , M . T . Muller , and CM . Preston . 1987 . The 65 , 000 - Mr DNA - binding and virion tr < 322s - inducing proteins of herpes simplex virus type 1 . / . Virol . 61 : 2428 - 2437 . Maxam , A . and W . Gilbert . 1980 . Sequencing end - labeled DNA with base - specific chemical cleavages . Methods Enzymol . 65 : 499 - 560 . McGeoch , D . J . , A . Dolan , S , Donald , and D . M . K . Brauer . 1986 . Complete DNA sequence of the short repeat region in the GENES & DEVELOPMENT 741 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on January 17 , 2020 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from Triezenberg et al . genome of herpes simplex virus type 1 . Nucleic Acids Res . 14 : 1727 - 1745 . McKnight , J . L . C . , T . M . Kristie , and B . Roizman . 1987 . Binding of the virion protein mediating a gene induction in herpes simplex virus 1 - infected cells to its cis site requires cellular proteins . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . 84 : 7061 - 7065 . McKnight , S . L . and R . Kingsbury . 1982 . Transcriptional control signals of a eukaryotic protein - coding gene . Science 217 : 316 - 324 . McKnight , S . L . and R . Tjian . 1986 . Transcriptional selectivity of viral genes in mammalian cells . Cell 46 : 795 - 805 . Nevins , J . R . 1987 . Regulation of early adenovirus gene expres­ sion . Microbiol . Rev . 51 : 419 - 430 . Norrander , J . , T . Kempe , and J . Messing . 1983 . Construction of improved M13 vectors using oligodeoxynucleotide - directed mutagenesis . Gene 26 : 101 - 106 . O ' Hare , P . and G . S . Hayward . 1987 . Comparison of upstream sequence requirements for positive and negative regulation of a herpes simplex virus immediate - early gene by three virus - encoded trans - SLCting factors . / . Virol . 61 : 190 - 199 . Pfeifer , K . , T . Prezant , and L . Guarente . 1987 . Yeast HAPl acti­ vator binds to two upstream activation sites of different se­ quence . Cell 49 : 19 - 27 . Post , L . E . , S . Mackem , and B . Roizman . 1981 . Regulation of a genes of herpes simplex virus : Expression of chimeric genes produced by fusion of thymidine kinase with a gene pro­ moters . Cell 24 : 555 - 565 . Preston , CM . and D . Tannahill . 1984 . Effects of orientation and position on the activity of a herpes simplex virus immediate early gene far - upstream region . Virology 137 : 439 - 444 . Preston , CM . , M . G . Cordingley , and N . D . Stow . 1984 . Analysis of DNA sequences which regulate the transcription of a herpes simplex virus immediate early gene . / . Virol . 50 : 708 - 716 . Preston , CM . , M . C Frame , and M . E . M . Campbell . 1988 . A complex formed between cell components and an HSV structural polypeptide binds to a viral immediate early gene regulatory DNA sequence . Cell 52 : 425 - 434 . Sakonju , S . , D . F . Bogenhagen , and D . F . Brown . 1980 . A control region in the center of the 5S RNA gene directs specific ini­ tiation of transcription : I . The 5 ' border of the region . Cell 19 : 13 - 25 . Treisman , R . , M . R . Green , and T . Maniatis . 1983 . cis and trans activation of globin gene transcription in transient assays . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 80 : 7428 - 7432 . Triezenberg , S . J . , R . Kingsbury , and S . L . McKnight . 1988 . Func­ tional dissection of VP16 , the transactivator of herpes sim­ plex virus immediate early gene expression . Genes Dev . 2 : 718 - 729 . Whitley , R . J . 1982 . Epidemiology of herpes simplex viruses . In The herpesviruses ( ed . B . Roizman ) , vol . 3 , pp . 1 - 44 . Plenum Press , New York , London . Zoller , M . J . and M . Smith . 1982 . Oligonucleotide - directed mu­ tagenesis using M13 - derived vectors : An efficient and gen­ eral procedure for the production of point mutations in any fragment of DNA . Nucleic Acids Res . 10 : 6487 - 6500 . 742 GENES & DEVELOPMENT Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on January 17 , 2020 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from 10 . 1101 / gad . 2 . 6 . 730 Access the most recent version at doi : 2 : 1988 , Genes Dev . S J Triezenberg , K L LaMarco and S L McKnight early gene activation by VP16 . Evidence of DNA : protein interactions that mediate HSV - 1 immediate References http : / / genesdev . cshlp . org / content / 2 / 6 / 730 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 46 articles , 19 of which can be accessed free at : License Service Email Alerting click here . right corner of the article or Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the top Copyright © Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press on January 17 , 2020 - Published by genesdev . cshlp . org Downloaded from