ARTICLE Creative exploration as a scale - invariant search on a meaning landscape Yuval Hart 1 , 2 , 3 , Hagar Goldberg 2 , 4 , Ella Striem - Amit 5 , 6 , Avraham E . Mayo 2 , 3 , Lior Noy 2 , 3 & Uri Alon 2 , 3 Can knowledge accumulated in systems biology on mechanisms governing cell behavior help us to elucidate cognitive processes , such as human creative search ? To address this , we focus on the property of scale invariance , which allows sensory systems to adapt to envir - onmental signals spanning orders of magnitude . For example , bacteria search for nutrients , by responding to relative changes in nutrient concentration rather than absolute levels , via a sensory mechanism termed fold - change detection ( FCD ) . Scale invariance is prevalent in cognition , yet the speci ﬁ c mechanisms are mostly unknown . Here , we screen many possible dynamic equation topologies , to ﬁ nd that an FCD model best describes creative search dynamics . The model further predicts robustness to variations in meaning perception , in agreement with behavioral data . We thus suggest FCD as a speci ﬁ c mechanism for scale invariant search , connecting sensory processes of cells and cognitive processes in human . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 OPEN 1 Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA . 2 The Theatre Lab , Weizmann Institute of Science , 76100 Rehovot , Israel . 3 Department of Molecular Cell Biology , Weizmann Institute of Science , 76100 Rehovot , Israel . 4 Department of Neurobiology , Weizmann Institute of Science , 76100 Rehovot , Israel . 5 Department of Psychology , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA . 6 Department of Psychology , Ben Gurion University of the Negev , 8410501 Beer - Sheva , Israel . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to U . A . ( email : uri . alon @ weizmann . ac . il ) NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2018 ) 9 : 5411 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 89 0 ( ) : , ; S ymmetries and invariances are powerful concepts in phy - sics 1 – 4 . Seeking invariances has also been fruitful in biolo - gical systems , especially in the study of how cells make sense of their environment . For example , in order to search for food , E . coli climbs gradients of nutrients using a sensory mechanism that has scale invariance , responding to the fold - change in inputs rather than to their absolute level 5 – 7 . This scale invariance is known as fold - change detection ( FCD ) : the dynamic response ( including amplitude and response time ) is invariant to multiplying the input by a scalar . Thus , the dynamics to a step of signal from 1 to 2 is identical to a step from 2 to 4 , because both have twofold - change . FCD allows bacteria to optimally ﬁ nd maximal nutrient levels despite varying level of attractant sources ( the source strength multiplies the input ﬁ eld by a constant , and FCD normalizes this constant out ) 8 . FCD mechanisms appear in diverse cell signaling pathways 9 , as well as in human sensory systems such as vision and hearing , explaining the well - known Weber - Fechner and Stevens laws 10 , 11 in which response is scaled to the background signal . FCD combines two general features of sensory systems : exact adaptation in which the output returns to a baseline level that is independent on background input signal , and Weber ’ s law , in which the response amplitude depends on the relative change in input and not the absolute change . FCD is more restrictive than Weber ’ s law , since it requires the entire dynamic response — including amplitude and response time — to depend only on relative changes in input . Thus , FCD makes search dynamics robust to a global change of scale 5 . FCD is a constraint that limits the possible mechanisms at play to a small class of circuits with mathematical homogeneity properties 7 , 12 , 13 . In fact , only two main classes of circuits - an incoherent feedforward loop and a nonlinear integral feedback loop - provide FCD in known cases . Based on its success in cells , one can ask if FCD mechanisms can also help us understand human cognitive behavior . Scaling invariance has been suggested to occur widely in cognition — where people ’ s behavior is nearly identical across several orders of mag - nitude . Consequently , scale invariance was suggested as a shared principle for human behaviors 14 , 15 such as perception 16 , 17 , mem - ory 18 – 20 , decision making 21 , reaction times 22 , 23 , motor control 23 – 25 , and language generation 26 . For example , Brown and Chater dis - cussed the prevalence of scale invariance in perceptual mechan - isms 16 which yields Weber - Fechner and Stevens laws . They later developed theories for memory dependence on timing and decision based on sampling that produce similar scale invariance behaviors in experiments 19 , 21 . Other studies have shown that scale invariance emerges also in neural activity on the network level 27 , 28 and in speci ﬁ c areas such as the dopamine neurons of the reward sys - tem 29 – 31 . One explanation of scale invariance in neural and behavioral data portrays the cognitive process as a dynamical system at the edge of criticality , where correlations across orders of magnitude yield power - law - like behavior seen in scale invariant systems . It would be important to complement this view with mechanisms similar to biological physics , which employ feedforward and feedback loops circuits 5 , 32 , with no need to invoke criticality arguments . Here , we test for FCD mechanisms in a human cognitive task , creative search . We analyze experimental data on high - resolution measurements of behavior and individual differences in the creative foraging game ( CFG ) task 33 . CFG is an online game in which players search a space of geometric shapes made of ten connected squares . Players create shapes made of 10 connected squares , moving one square at a time , to ﬁ nd new shapes ( Fig . 1a ) . In their search , players are asked to collect ‘ interesting and beautiful ’ shapes to a gallery ( Fig . 1a ) . We recorded players ’ entire trajectories including every square move , its timing , and the gallery choices they made 33 , 34 . The creative foraging game showed the following salient features . ( i ) Players ’ trajectories consisted of two phases — exploration and a b Exploration duration ( log steps ) E x p l o i t a t i on du r a t i on ( l og s t ep s ) c 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 8 2 . 0 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 8 2 . 0 ‘English Letters’ ‘Animals’ ‘Hebrew Letters’ ‘Airplanes’ Fig . 1 The creative foraging game as a paradigm to study creative search . a A schematic of the creative foraging game screen that players use to search for shapes . Each step is a move of one square , keeping the ten squares connected . Players can choose shapes to a gallery ( previously chosen gallery shape is presented in the gray square area at the top right ) . b In exploitation phases , players typically collect shapes from distinct visual categories ( e . g . , ‘ English Letters ’ , ‘ Animals ’ , ‘ Hebrew Letters ’ , ‘ Airplanes ’ , etc … ) . Each row of shapes is one exploitation phase of a player in the game . c Variation between players shows a high correlarion between each player ' s median durations of exploration and exploitation phases . Blue points indicate players ’ median search durations in the exploration - exploitation duration plane ( in log steps ) . Topographic map indicates lines of equal density of exploration - exploitation durations ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 2 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2018 ) 9 : 5411 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications exploitation . ( ii ) In each exploitation phase , players collect shapes from a distinct visual meaning category ( e . g . , ‘ English letters ’ , ‘ Digits ’ , ‘ Animals ’ , etc … ) . Different players ﬁ nd similar categories in their search ( Fig . 1b ) . ( iii ) Players leave an exploitation phase long before the category is depleted , to start a meandering exploration phase . Exploration ends when a new category is discovered , initiating a new exploitation phase , and so on . ( iv ) Players ’ exploration and exploi - tation durations were highly correlated : players with long exploration also had long exploitation phases . People thus varied along a one - dimensional continuum between a mercurial strategy of quick - to - discover a new category but quick - to - drop the category , and a more thorough slow - to - discover / slow - to - drop behavior ( Fig . 1c ) . Known search processes such as simulated annealing and naive Bayesian search cannot account for such patterns . Here , we asked what mechanism can underlie such behavioral results , and suggest a way to understand human search in this game using FCD concepts . Results The game induces multi - layered meaning landscapes . To understand creative search dynamics , we start by constructing a meaning landscape on the network of shapes . The network of shapes describes all 36 , 446 shapes made of ten squares . Each node is a shape , and edges connect shapes that can be reached by moving one of the squares . Shapes have a median of 57 neighbors . Players moved on this network of shapes , one edge at a time , during the game . In order to form models of the search process , we began by assigning meaning to each shape . We assigned to each shape a meaning vector ~ s with M dimensions . Each dimension corresponds to one of the six categories most commonly found by players ( Fig . 2 ) . For example , s 1 is the ‘ English letters ’ meaning dimension , s 2 is the ‘ Digits ’ dimension and so on . The categories were de ﬁ ned in ref . 33 by clustering shapes found in exploitation phases by different players . To de ﬁ ne the meaning landscape , we assigned high - meaning value s i to shapes in a meaning category i that were discovered by many players ( meaning value is proportional to the number of players that found the shape ) . We call these shapes core shapes . For example , core shapes in the digit category resemble prototypical digits 5 , 7 , 9 and so on . The meaning assigned to other shapes decays exponentially with their distance along the network from the core shapes ( Fig . 2a , b and see Methods and Supplementary Information ) . Shapes close to two shapes with meaning categories i and j are thus assigned meaning in both meaning vector components s i and s j . Shapes far from any core shape have low meaning in all dimensions ( Fig . 2 and Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . Brain activity responds to relative meaning score induction . We next assessed the correlation of human brain activity with the present meaning landscape structure . In a functional imaging experiment 35 ( fMRI , see Methods ) , we showed shapes with varying meaning scores to 15 subjects while scanning their brain activity ( fMRI , see Methods and Goldberg et al . 35 ) . A parametric correlation analysis between brain activity and the meaning score of shapes showed that speci ﬁ c areas in the visual regions , most predominantly the lateral occipital cortex ( LOC ) , activate parametrically with the meaning score ( Fig . 3a ) . In a parallel study , Goldberg et al . 35 asked subjects to rate these shapes according to their iconicity value . This independent score , ranked by participants of the brain study , showed high correlation with the meaning score built from players of the creative foraging game ( Spearman correlation , r = 0 . 83 , p < 10 − 5 ) . Moreover , the parametric correlation of brain activity with the iconicity score showed high overlap with the meaning score parametric activity map ( Supplementary Fig 2a , see ref . 35 ) . Thus , our meaning landscape correlates with LOC activity of people when presented with discovered shapes . The brain activity measures allowed us to further ask what the best function for induction of meaning between neighboring shapes is , an exponential decay or a linear decay . In the construction of the meaning landscape we used an induction function of meaning that decays in a constant rate with each distance unit ( i . e . , meaning decays exponentially with distance d as λ − d and meaning is measured on a relative scale ) , but Core shapes ‘Airplane’ meaning dimension - s 3 ‘Digits’ meaning dimension - s 2 ‘Letters’ meaning dimension - s 1 Multidimensionalmeaninglandscape Attention focuses interest on a specific meaning dimension Network of shapes Walker a b c Fig . 2 Players ’ dynamics induces multi - layered meaning landscapes . a A searcher walks on the network of shapes . The network of shapes consists of core shapes ( marked in red ) , gallery shapes ( marked in green ) and all other shapes ( marked in blue ) . Shapes are connected by one move of a square . b The meaning landscape built on top of the network of shapes . Close by core shapes typically belong to different meaning categories . c The meaning landscape is composed of a multi - layered space of meaning dimensions . Each shape has M dimensions of meaning , corresponding to M meaning landscapes which show high meaning for shapes in the core of the corresponding category ( ‘ airplanes ’ , ‘ digits ’ , ‘ letters ’ etc … ) . The attention vector focuses the searcher to do hill - climbing along a speci ﬁ c meaning dimension NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2018 ) 9 : 5411 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications 3 other decay functions are possible as well . To that aim , we repeated the procedure of meaning landscape construction with a linear decay function ( i . e . , meaning decays with distance by – λ d , hence meaning is measured on an absolute level ) . We ﬁ nd that brain activity is best explained by the exponential decay model with a decay rate of about λ = 10 ( see Fig . 3b , Methods ) . With λ = 10 , beta activity in the LOC area correlates sizably and signi ﬁ cantly with the meaning score of shapes ’ blocks ( Spearman correlation , left LOC , r = 0 . 65 , p < 0 . 0002 . right LOC , r = 0 . 48 , p < 0 . 02 , Fig . 3c ) . These ﬁ ndings suggest that LOC brain activity responds to relative changes rather than absolute levels of meaning induction . What mechanism might then explain people ’ s creative search on this meaning landscape ? Creative search model with attention and saturation variables . We next built dynamic models of the search process on the network . Our goal is to capture the basic experimental obser - vations ( features ( i ) – ( iv ) above ) : existence of exploration - exploitation phases , collection of shapes from the same meaning category in each exploitation phase , dropping of a category far before it is depleted to search for new categories , and variation between players along a mercurial - thorough continuum . In the model , an agent walks on the network of shapes , seeking to climb gradients of the meaning landscapes . To avoid being stuck on a local maximum , the walk is self - avoiding . We begin with a naive hill - climbing model in which the searcher moves to the neighbor with highest meaning in any dimension . The next shape ~ s ð t þ 1 Þ is thus ~ s t þ 1 ð Þ ¼ arg max s 2 s t ð Þ Neighbors ~ s t ð Þ ð 1 Þ This model disagreed with the experiment : Instead of ﬁ nding a sequence of shapes from the same category ( e . g . digit , digit , digit ) before moving to a new category , the hill - climbing model resulted in sequential shapes from different categories ( e . g . letter , airplane , digit ) , etc . ( Fig . 4a ) . It thus had no exploitation phases focused on a single category . The failure is due to the fact that highest meaning shapes are interleaved on the network of shapes : close to a shape with high meaning in one category are high - meaning shapes from other categories . The agent thus requires a mechanism to stay in one category . To supply this , we added an attention variable , a i ( t ) , to the agent , to focus moves to a single meaning dimension once a meaning threshold is crossed . If attention is below threshold T 1 , a random neighbor is chosen . If attention in a certain dimension crosses the threshold , the shape with most meaning in that dimension ~ s (cid:2) ~ a is chosen ~ s t þ 1 ð Þ ¼ Random neighbor max a ! t ð Þ (cid:3) T 1 arg max s 2 s t ð Þ Neighbors s ! t ð Þ (cid:2) a ! t ð Þ max a ! t ð Þ > T 1 ( ð 2 Þ This allows the agent to search for new shapes but only on the meaning dimension in which attention is currently a b c (cid:2) (cid:3) Left LOC activity correlation with meaning (cid:2) (cid:3) Right LOC activity correlation with meaning Meaning (cid:4) r i gh t L O C Meaning (cid:4) l e ft L O C Meaning 6 8 10 12 14 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 – 0 . 4 – 0 . 2 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 – 8 2 . 14 t ( 14 ) ( corrected ) P < 0 . 05 6 8 10 12 14 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 – 0 . 4 – 0 . 2 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 6 8 10 12 14 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 6 8 10 12 14 0 . 050 . 10 0 . 501 p - v a l ue p - v a l ue 0 . 001 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 Fig . 3 Brain activity correlates with a fold decay of the meaning across shapes ’ network . a Parametric mapping . Cortical activity maps of multi - subject , random effect , parametric GLM analysis of meaning presented on an unfolded cortex ( N = 15 ) , map is corrected for multiple comparisons , p < 0 . 05 . Color scale indicates t - values . Yellow - orange scale represents regions , which showed positive parametric relation with meaning scores ( A non - parametric , t - max correction analysis to control for FWER showed a t - value of 1 . 7 for α = 0 . 05 , see Methods ) . Blue - green scale represents regions which showed negative parametric relation with meaning scores . b Analysis of brain activity correlation strength ( Inset , p - value ) as a function of the decay factor from a core shape ( x - axis – decay factor λ , where meaning decays by λ - d where d is the distance on the network of shapes ) . Maximal correlation and p - value are attained at a fold decay of about λ = 10 ( see Supplementary Information for linear and power - law decay functions analysis ) . c Correlations of LOC activity and meaning . Scatter plots present the relation between the averaged meaning of blocks ( x - axis ) and the averaged brain activity ( N = 15 , normalized beta weight , y - axis ) in bilateral LOC . Each dot represents one block . Spearman correlation ; left LOC , r = 0 . 65 , p < 0 . 0002 . right LOC , r = 0 . 48 , p < 0 . 02 ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 4 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2018 ) 9 : 5411 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications high — the attention is like blinders that keep other meaning categories from affecting the dynamics . We reasoned that the dynamics of this attention vector are such that attention increases according to the meaning of the current shape , and self - ampli ﬁ es to lock the search and ignore nearby meaning peaks except for a single dimension of meaning . Thus , for the attention component at each dimension we have : a i ( t + 1 ) = a i ( t ) + a i s i – γ a a i ( here γ a is the reduction rate of attention ) . This type of model yielded discovery of a single meaning category at a time ( Fig . 4b ) — for example , digit , digit , digit . However , unlike human players , the agents rarely escaped from this category and instead depleted all possible digit shapes . Thus , we have exploitation , but there is no exit from the exploitation phase . To allow exit from the exploitation phase , we must include a second variable , that inhibits the attention vector once enough meaning has been collected . Previous work in the ﬁ eld of semantic search 36 – 39 suggest that people switch between exploration and exploitation when the expected exploitation gain of the current category is equal to the expected gain of searching for new categories , i . e . people switch to exploration when the exploited category is depleted of words . In our paradigm , we ﬁ nd that players leave shape categories well before they are depleted 33 ( see Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . Thus , creative search seems to transition from exploitation to exploration upon depletion in the novelty of shapes rather than the number of shapes remaining in a given category . We therefore term the parameter driving the end of exploitation as ( novelty ) Saturation ( marked by the vector b i ( t ) ) . When enough shapes from a category have been found , attention is shifted to new categories by the increase in the saturation variable . Saturation begins to rise when attention crosses a threshold T 2 . Saturation therefore has dynamics like b i ( t + 1 ) = b i ( t ) + Θ ( a i – T 2 ) a i s i – γ b b i . Saturation then inhibits attention , for example : a i ( t + 1 ) = a i ( t ) + a i s i / b i – γ a a i . This process allows the searcher to return to exploration and discover new meaning dimensions ( Fig . 4c ) . We conclude that for a model to capture the behavioral observations it needs the following basic features : 1 . Two internal variables , attention and saturation 2 . Both attention and saturation accumulate with meaning . 3 . Saturation inhibits attention ( Fig . 4d ) . While the speci ﬁ c model discussed so far resembles a feedforward loop architecture , the general framework of meaning - attention - saturation can be implemented by other possible models . In order to scan a wide space of possible models , we borrowed a technique from scanning of circuits in biological physics 13 , 40 – 44 . We constructed a framework with all possible signs of interactions between meaning , attention and saturation . We use the update rule ( 2 ) . Attention rises with meaning and is inhibited by saturation . This class of models has two dimensionless parameters : the meaning accumulation rate d e 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 Exploration duration [ log steps ] E x p l o i t a t i on du r a t i on [ l og s t ep s ] s a b a b c 160 180 200 220 160 180 200 220 0 . 0 0 . 00 . 20 . 40 . 60 . 81 . 01 . 21 . 4 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 5 S a t u r a t i on ( b ) A tt en t i on ( a ) S hape s m ean i ng ( s ) 2 . 0 Digits Airplanes Hebrew Letters Steps 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 S hape s m ean i ng ( s ) Steps A model with no attention vector ( a ) : Digit - Letter - Airplane 80 100 120 140 160 0 2 4 6 8 10 S hape s m ean i ng ( s ) Steps A model with no saturation vector ( b ) : Digit - Digit - Digit - . . . A model with attention and saturation captures human behavior 160 180 200 220 Steps 80 100 120 140 160 Fig . 4 Attention and saturation variables capture behavioral exploration - exploitation . a Search with no attention jumps between categories . b Search with no saturation is stuck at a single category . c Search with both attention and saturation variables can produce human - like search . a – c Line colors represent different meaning dimensions . d The general circuit for creative search — shapes with meanings induce attention in a speci ﬁ c meaning dimension to grow , attention ( a ) can increase its own levels , inhibit attention in other meaning dimensions , and above a certain threshold attention levels increase saturation ( b ) which in turn , inhibits attention . Solid lines are obligatory connection of the circuit . Dashed lines mark possible connections between variables . e An FCD circuit ( see Eqs . ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) ) with different parameters ( red dots ) captures similar dynamics of the exploration - exploitation plane as the behavioral data ( marked by lines of equal density of players ’ exploration - exploitation durations ) . The correlation of the simulated data is similar to the behavioral data ( FCD : Spearman correlation , r = 0 . 71 , p < 10 − 5 , Behavioral data : Spearman correlation , r = 0 . 73 , p < 10 − 5 ) NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2018 ) 9 : 5411 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications 5 g and the ratio of thresholds α = T 1 / T 2 ( see Fig . 4d ) : a i t þ 1 ð Þ ¼ a i t ð Þ þ g a w 1 i s w 2 i b w 3 i a i P a i (cid:2) (cid:3) w 4 (cid:4) a w 5 i s w 6 i b w 7 i a i P a i (cid:2) (cid:3) w 8 (cid:2) (cid:3) ð 3 Þ b i t þ 1 ð Þ ¼ b i t ð Þ þ Θ a i (cid:4) α ð Þ a w 9 i s w 10 i b w 11 i a i P a i (cid:2) (cid:3) w 12 (cid:4) a w 13 i s w 14 i b w 15 i a i P a i (cid:2) (cid:3) w 16 ð 4 Þ where w i = 0 , ± 1 , indicates activation , inhibition or no interac - tion between the different components of the search . The term a i P a i in Eq . ( 3 ) represents the relative attention spent in the speci ﬁ c meaning dimension i , as in neuronal models 45 – 48 . Each choice of a set of w i is a speci ﬁ c realization of the general model , each such realization we term a circuit . In total , there are about 43 million different potential circuits . The number of circuits reduces to 6561 when we demand that meaning increases both saturation and attention , that saturation inhibits attention , and that saturation does not decay , so that searchers do not return to meaning dimensions already exploited ( see Methods ) . FCD circuits capture creative search behavioral dynamics . We now invoke the scale invariance assumption for the search behavior . We scanned which of the 6561 circuits has FCD . A circuit is FCD if multiplying the meaning landscape scores by a scalar keeps the dynamics of the search unchanged . Our scan indicated that out of the 6561 circuits only 64 circuits show scale invariance . These circuits are all realizations of the FCD circuits known from cell - based circuits . In these FCD circuits , search is inherently robust to the absolute levels of the meaning scores , and senses only fold - changes of meaning . Below , we compare the 64 FCD circuits with 64 non - FCD circuits that demonstrate similar dynamics and have similar structure ( see Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 ) . All circuits ( both FCD and non - FCD ) consist of two internal variables ( attention and saturation ) , a ﬁ xed meaning landscape , and 2 model parameters ( g and α ) . Therefore , the difference between circuits lies in the circuits ’ topology ( i . e . , the connections between the different variables ) while the number of variables and parameters is kept identical between different circuits . To gather statistics on the dynamic behavior of the circuits , we simulated each circuit 25 , 000 times . For this purpose , we sampled 500 values of the parameters g and α log - uniformly from a wide range of values : α ϵ [ 1 , 1000 ] , g ϵ [ 0 . 01 , 100 ] . For each pair of ( g , α ) we performed 500 runs with different random seeds ( Methods ) . First , we analyzed how robust is the exploration - exploitation behavior of each circuit by calculating the fraction of runs across ( g , α ) - parameter - space that show distinct periods of exploration and exploitation and cover at least 3 out of the 6 meaning dimensions of the simulated meaning landscape . FCD circuits showed higher probability for exploration - exploitation behavior , with all ten leading circuits being FCD ( FCD median percentage of successful runs = 61 % , 95 % CI = [ 57 % , 66 % ] , non - FCD median percentage of successful runs = 50 % , 95 % CI = [ 44 % , 58 % ] , Mann – Whitney test U = 2377 , p = 0 . 002 , effect size = 0 . 33 ) . This ﬁ nding suggests that FCD circuits capture better the observed human exploration - exploitation behavior . To further discern which circuit topology best describes the observed human behavior , we evaluated each circuit for the probability that its search dynamics produce exploration - exploitation durations that fall inside the convex hull of the experimental variation between different players ’ exploration - exploitation durations ( Fig . 4e ) . This probability measure indicates the ability of each circuit to capture the individual variations between human players by means of different model parameters . We ﬁ nd that 6 of the 9 leading circuits are FCD ( see Supplementary Table 3 ) . The leading circuit is an FCD circuit with the following dynamics ( Eqs . ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) with parameters — w 1 , w 6 , w 7 , w 8 , w 11 , w 12 = 0 , w 2 , w 4 , w 5 , w 9 , w 10 = 1 , w 3 = − 1 ) : a i t þ 1 ð Þ ¼ a i t ð Þ þ g s i b i a i P a i (cid:4) a i (cid:2) (cid:3) ð 5 Þ b i t þ 1 ð Þ ¼ b i t ð Þ þ Θ a i (cid:4) α ð Þ a i s i ð 6 Þ Its best counterpart out of the non - FCD circuits is given by ( Eqs . ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) with parameters — w 1 , w 3 , w 5 , w 6 , w 8 , w 9 , w 11 , w 12 = 0 , w 2 , w 4 , w 7 , w 10 = 1 ) : a i t þ 1 ð Þ ¼ a i t ð Þ þ g s i a i P a i (cid:4) b i (cid:2) (cid:3) ð 7 Þ b i t þ 1 ð Þ ¼ b i t ð Þ þ Θ a i (cid:4) α ð Þ s i ð 8 Þ We next preformed a model selection test for the different complexity incurred by the different topologies of the circuits . We used the Bayesian Information Criterion ( BIC ) to balance between model ﬁ delity and complexity ( similar results are found using the Akaike Information Criterion ) . We consider each interaction between variables in the circuit as a degree of freedom and compute the likelihood of each circuit by calculating the probability of the human behavioral data given the distribution created by simulations of the circuit . We ﬁ nd that among the ten leading circuits , seven circuits are FCD circuits and only three are non - FCD . The leading circuit is the same circuit presented in Eqs . ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) ( see Supplementary Table 4 ) . The main difference between the two circuits above is that in the FCD circuit , different meaning - landscape scales show similar dynamics since a scalar can be gauged out from the circuit ’ s equations . This invariance to scale occurs because the saturation variable b i normalizes out meaning s i in Eq ( 5 ) . In the non - FCD case , the system dynamics is affected strongly by multiplying the meaning landscape by a scalar in each meaning dimension . An analytical treatment of the leading FCD circuit dynamics is derived in Supplementary Note 4 . Below we discuss simulation results of the model running on the meaning landscape . FCD circuits capture the exploration - exploitation correlation . We analyzed the 25 , 000 simulations of the leading FCD circuit to see if it displays the correlation observed in players ’ data between exploration and exploitation durations , which fall along a line - like continuum . We ﬁ nd that the variation between human players is captured by a single model parameter , g , the rate of meaning accumulation ( see Fig . 5 ) . The accumulation of meaning shortens the duration of the exploration phase and speeds the exit from a speci ﬁ c meaning dimension . Thus , different values of g allow modeling different ‘ search personalities ’ ranging from mercurial to thorough ( Fig . 5 ) . Similarly , the perpendicular axis of variation is primarily affected by the other parameter α , the normalized threshold for saturation to start accumulating ( Fig . 5 ) . We note that since FCD circuits are scale invariant , g is the only time - scale in the circuit , regardless of the average meaning score of different meaning dimensions , and hence naturally accounts for the correlation between exploration and exploitation phases . ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 6 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2018 ) 9 : 5411 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications FCD dynamics are robust to variations in meaning perception . We next asked what might be the bene ﬁ ts of search dynamics governed by an FCD mechanism compared to a non - FCD mechanism ? One possible answer is that FCD circuits provide search dynamics that is invariant to multiplying each different meaning dimension by a different scalar . We tested these predictions against the natural variations between meaning dimensions in the behavioral data and against larger variations induced in simulations . A measure for the robustness of circuit dynamics to different meaning dimensions is the variance in exploration and exploita - tion durations ( Methods ) . For both FCD and non - FCD circuits we ﬁ nd a strong correlation between phase duration and its variance ( FCD , Spearman correlation r = 0 . 95 , p < 10 − 5 , non - FCD , Spearman correlation r = 0 . 84 , p < 10 − 5 ) . As predicted , the FCD circuit shows smaller variation compared with the non - FCD circuit ( FCD , slope = 0 . 74 , 95 % CI = [ 0 . 71 , 0 . 77 ] , non - FCD , slope = 1 . 04 , 95 % CI = [ 1 , 1 . 08 ] , p < 0 . 001 , Fig . 5a ) . Furthermore , the variation observed for the FCD circuit is close to the variation observed in the behavioral data ( slope = 0 . 65 , 95 % CI = [ 0 . 61 , 0 . 69 ] , Fig . 6a ) . We next compared the sensitivity of search dynamics to a global change in the meaning landscape for FCD and non - FCD circuits . The global change was introduced by multiplying each meaning dimension by a random scalar , sampled uniformly in log space between 10 − 2 and 10 2 , thus creating large differences in the average meaning scores in different meaning dimensions ( but maintaining their relative meaning within a category ) . For both FCD and non - FCD circuits we run for each parameter set of ( g , α ) , 50 simulations of 200 moves each ( Methods ) . We ﬁ nd that FCD search dynamics were robust to these global changes ( Fig . 6b ) whereas search dynamics of the non - FCD circuit changed drastically ( Fig . 6c ) . To quantitate these changes , we calculated the change in median durations of exploration and exploitation . This change is the distance in the exploration - exploitation plane between the original point ( simulation runs before the global change ) and the shifted point after meaning rescaling . We ﬁ nd that the median distance in non - FCD is more than 2 . 5 times larger compared with FCD search ( FCD , median arrow norm = 2 , 95 % CI = [ 1 . 4 , 2 . 2 ] , non - FCD , median arrow norm = 5 . 2 , 95 % CI = [ 4 . 1 , 6 . 3 ] , Mann – Whitney Test , U = 1207 , p < 10 − 5 , effect size = 0 . 64 , Fig . 6d and Supplementary Fig . 5 ) . Notably , due to the large impact of the global meaning scaling on search dynamics in the non - FCD case , parameter sets initially providing search dynamics that lie in the convex hull of the human behavioral data are three times more likely to yield an exploration - exploitation relation that does not reside in the behavioral convex hull after the random scaling ( FCD , % exit = 13 % , 95 % CI = [ 7 % , 21 % ] , non - FCD , % exit = 45 % , 95 % CI = [ 33 % , 56 % ] , see Fig . 6b , c ) . The phenomenon of scale invariance has been previously linked with the concept of criticality . Evidence of critical - like neuronal activity was shown in in - vitro tissues recordings 49 , in vivo 50 , and fMRI data during rest and task performance 28 , 51 , 52 . These activities show the criticality hallmark of a 1 / f β power spectrum , indicating activity at many temporal and spatial scales 28 , 53 , 54 . Similar to FCD mechanisms , systems at criticality were shown to increase the system ’ s dynamic range 27 , 49 , 55 . Yet , there are important differences between the two scale invariant mechanism classes . First , a system at criticality inherently has many temporal scales . Therefore , it achieves a large dynamic range by virtue of all the temporal scales that already exist in the system . In contrast , an FCD circuit has one time scale and the circuit exactly adapts to the current scale of the input . Thus , a system at criticality would exhibit many time scales in its exploration - exploitation search dynamics , which is at odds with the well - de ﬁ ned exploration - exploitation time scale shown in FCD circuits and in our behavioral data ( Supplementary Fig . 6 ) . A second difference between criticality and FCD is that a system at criticality with its long memory and correlations is more susceptible in its search dynamics to global scale changes and noise in parameters or inputs ( see Supplementary Fig . 7 ) . In contrast , an FCD circuit shows robust exploration - exploitation dynamics over a wide range of parameter sets and global scale changes . Discussion Scale invariance plays an important role in cognition , where many processes exhibit similar behavior over several orders of magnitude 14 – 16 , 19 . Scale - invariant systems exhibit a large dynamic range , which allows them to respond accurately even if their inputs change drastically . However , there are few circuit - mechanisms that can explain scale invariance in behavior . Here , we show that creative search demonstrates scale invariance and suggest a speci ﬁ c mechanism , fold - change detection ( FCD ) , as a governing design principle of creative search , narrowing down the set of possible circuits to a very few . Our study shows that creative search can be modeled as a scale invariant search on a meaning landscape . This search mechanism 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 Exploration E x p l o i t a t i on Log [ (cid:5) ] = 0 . 2 Log [ g ] – 1 . 0 – 0 . 8 – 0 . 6 – 0 . 4 – 0 . 2 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 Exploration E x p l o i t a t i on Log [ (cid:5) ] = 0 . 6 Log [ g ] – 1 . 0 – 0 . 8 – 0 . 6 – 0 . 4 – 0 . 2 0 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 Exploration E x p l o i t a t i on Log [ (cid:5) ] = 1 . 2 Log [ g ] – 1 . 0 – 0 . 8 – 0 . 6 – 0 . 4 – 0 . 2 0 0 . 2 Fig . 5 FCD model captures the variation between individuals in the durations of exploration - exploitation . In the FCD circuit ( Eqs . ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) ) , a single parameter , g , the rate of meaning accumulation , sets the correlation between durations of exploration and exploitation . Shown are different simulation runs , grouped by different α values , while g values vary according to the color bar . Small g values show a thorough slow - to - discover / slow - to - drop behavior , while large g values show a mercurial quick - to - discover / quick - to - drop behavior , both as seen in the behavioral data . The second parameter , α , the attention threshold to saturation increase , controls the perpendicular principal component of behavioral data variation ( see Supplementary Fig . 4 , for similar simulation of the non - FCD circuit , Eqs . ( 7 ) and ( 8 ) ) NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2018 ) 9 : 5411 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications 7 is different from known search paradigms such as simulated annealing and naive Bayesian inference search 56 . It offers an effective temperature that rises with the recent success of the search ( saturation variable ) and a self - focusing mechanism ( attention variable ) that allows exploration of one speci ﬁ c meaning dimension at a time . Thus , the focus of the search shrinks and expands in exploitation and exploration phases in an organic way according to the progress of the search . This search process allows humans to achieve a dif ﬁ cult task — quickly ﬁ nding meaningful solutions in a high - dimensional space of possibilities . Due to scale invariance , different players with different basal meaning attribution to shapes exhibit a common search pattern , consistent with our experimental results . A single parameter , the rate of meaning accumulation ( g ) , explains the variation in players ’ exploration - exploitation durations . FCD in creative foraging predicts a search that is indifferent to the absolute scale of perceived meaning . Therefore , regardless of the content of the search , FCD ensures robust detection of the maxima of the sensed signal 5 , 13 . Thus , individual search strategies such as thorough explorations or mercurial discovery can be maintained despite differences in the basal meaning score of the meaning dimensions ( e . g . , search on the ubiquitous ‘ digits ’ dimension vs . a search on the scarcer ‘ airplanes ’ dimension ) . Lastly , FCD sensing allows comparing between different meaning dimensions on a ratiometric basis 7 . A ratiometric comparison for different categories was demonstrated in other cognitive abilities such as associating tones with crime severity 57 , weighing different types of rewards 30 , comparing performances at different domains ( e . g . , different sports and musical performances ) and predicting future success from previous performance at other tasks ( e . g . , undergraduate GPA from 1st grade reading skills 57 ) . We ﬁ nd that scale - invariant FCD circuits are more likely to show the observed exploration - exploitation behavior than non - FCD circuits . To understand why , we note that FCD circuit search dynamics depend only logarithmically on the parameters ( g , α ) , thus maintaining a strong correlation between exploration and exploitation ( see Figs . 5 and 6 ) , whereas non - FCD circuits carry a larger change in response to changes in ( g , α ) . Further - more , since FCD search dynamics are robust to the global scale , the order of entry to different meaning dimensions does not change the exploration - exploitation dynamics , whereas in non - FCD circuits , the search can show a ﬁ nite exploration - exploitation on one meaning dimension , but diverge on other meaning dimensions which differ in their basal meaning scale . Recent studies have pointed to criticality as a possible mechanism for scale invariance in neuronal activity 49 , 50 . Here , we suggest a complementary class of mechanisms , FCD circuits , which provides scale invariant search dynamics . These two classes have different hallmarks that can be seen at the behavioral level . First , an FCD circuit carries a single well - de ﬁ ned time a b c Exploration duration [ log steps ] Exploration duration [ log steps ] E x p l o i t a t i on du r a t i on [ l og s t ep s ] E x p l o i t a t i on du r a t i on [ l og s t ep s ] d C hange i n c i r c u i t d y na m i cs a ft e r r ando m m ean i ng c h ange 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 FCD Non - FCD Real data 5 10 15 20 25 5 10 15 20 25 Average phases duration A v e r age du r a t i on s S T D FCD Non - FCD 0 5 10 15 20 Fig . 6 FCD dynamics are robust to variations in meaning perception . a The variance of the FCD circuit ( blue ) is signi ﬁ cantly lower than that of the non - FCD circuit ( orange ) , and aligns with the behavioral data ( red ) ( FCD ( blue ) : slope = 0 . 74 , 95 % CI = [ 0 . 71 , 0 . 77 ] , non - FCD ( Orange ) : slope = 1 . 04 , 95 % CI = [ 1 , 1 . 08 ] , Behavioral data ( red ) : slope = 0 . 65 , 95 % CI = [ 0 . 61 , 0 . 69 ] ) . b , c FCD circuit dynamics are robust to large variations in meaning dimension ’ s average meaning score , while the non - FCD circuit dynamics change drastically . Arrows indicate the change in dynamics upon a random scaling of meaning dimensions for FCD response ( blue arrows , b ) , and non - FCD response ( red arrows , c ) . d Average arrow length in the case of b and c . FCD , median arrow norm = 2 , 95 % CI = [ 1 . 4 , 2 . 2 ] , non - FCD , median arrow norm = 5 . 2 , 95 % CI = [ 4 . 1 , 6 . 3 ] , Mann – Whitney Test , U = 1207 , p < 10 − 5 , effect size = 0 . 64 . Center line in each box is the median value , box bounds are 25 % , 75 % quantiles , and whiskers show max and min values of data ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 8 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2018 ) 9 : 5411 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications scale for search dynamics ( enabling the variation along a mer - curial / thorough search continuum due to the variation in this time scale between players ) . In contrast , criticality entails many time scales in activity , which predicts wide variability in exploration - exploitation dynamics within a single player ( which are not observed in the human behavioral experiments ) . Second , due to its long correlations and memory , a system at criticality may respond more slowly to changes in the input compared with the fast response time of FCD circuits . The exact adaptation of FCD circuits drives its increased dynamic range , whereas systems at criticality achieve dynamic range by ﬂ uctuations at all scales of activity 27 , 49 , 55 . Lastly , while FCD search dynamics are robust to ﬂ uctuations in the meaning landscape , robust to global changes in meaning scaling , and robust to changes in the circuit ’ s para - meters , a system at criticality may exhibit high sensitivity to noise in the inputs , changes of parameters and global changes in the input scale ( but see also ref . 58 ) . The search for meaning through a network of shapes is akin to previous work on search in semantic networks 59 – 62 . These studies support Mednick ’ s theory of ﬂ at association curves 63 by a com - putational analysis on networks of word associations 59 . Similarly , in our creative search model the parameter g , the accumulation rate of meaning , explains the variations in people ’ s association curves as expressed by their position on the exploration - exploitation corre - lation line . Thus , an interesting application of our results is testing whether in semantic search the exploration - exploitation times of different players are also correlated and span a continuum . A further test is whether semantic search dynamics are invariant across word categories , suggestive of an underlying FCD circuit . An important question raised by our ﬁ ndings is which brain networks can implement an FCD circuit to support human creative search . A compelling answer may come from functional connectivity analysis that maps the relations between different brain networks during rest and task performance in creativity tasks 60 , 61 , 64 . In particular , Beaty and colleagues 60 , 61 show that three main brain networks co - activate during a creativity task ( Alternative Uses Test , AUT ) — the default network , salience network , and executive control network . The functions of these networks seem to correspond to the three components of the proposed creative search model . The default network , involved in imagination , future - thinking , and assigning internal meaning 64 , 65 , can drive the values of shapes ’ meaning . The sal - ience network , involved in bottom - up attention to external and internal information and dynamic tuning between the default and executive control systems 66 , 67 can drive the attention variable in creative search . Lastly , the executive control network , involved in evaluation of the creative process 68 – 70 , can drive the saturation variable . Notably , these co - activated networks antagonize each other in other cognitive tasks . This type of paradoxical activity , where the system ’ s components both drive and repress each other is akin to the incoherent FFL implementation of FCD 5 , 11 – 13 . FCD may be also related to other systems in the brain . For example , studies of dopamine neurons in the reward system point to a sensing mechanism that perceives relative increase in rewards rather than absolute reward levels in static and dynamic com - parisons 29 – 31 . Future studies can assess brain activity changes during the game itself , studying the correlation of activity in different brain regions during the game , in order to compare with the model ’ s predictions of attention and saturation variables , to attempt to locate brain dynamics that correspond to the dynamics of these variables . The current model does not account for possible differences in the meaning accumulation rate for different meaning dimensions , nor for cultural and context dependent differences that may be critical to the understanding of individual creative search trajec - tories . Introducing a different meaning accumulation rate per meaning dimension can account for these modi ﬁ cations . More - over , our current model is deterministic , ignoring noisy percep - tion , and stochastic effects on our attention buildup and decision making . Future models can explore the effects of noise and sto - chasticity on creative foraging . Taken together , our results suggest a scale invariant fold - change detection mechanism as a sensing mechanism for robust search that spans organisms from E . coli chemotaxis to human creative search . Methods Ethics statement . All experiments in this study adhere to the regulations and guidelines on the use of human subjects . The behavioral experimental protocol was approved by the Hebrew University IRB committee , and the brain activity experimental protocol was approved by the Weizmann Institute of Science ethics committee . All participants gave their informed consent to participate in the experiments . Meaning landscape construction . Every meaning category has a set of unique shapes that are not shared with other categories , these shapes are de ﬁ ned as core shapes . To construct the meaning landscape , we assign core shapes meaning scores in their speci ﬁ c dimension , by the amount of times that shape was chosen as a gallery shape by players . The more times a shape is chosen , the more meaning it has in that meaning dimension . Next , each core shape acts as a meaning source , spreading meaning to neighboring gallery shapes with an exponential decay of 10 − d , where d is the minimal distance between the source shape and the receiving shape on the network of gallery shapes . Finally , each gallery shape acts as a source for all other shapes on the network of shapes with the same exponential decay of 10 − d 1 , where d 1 is the minimal distance between the source shape and the receiving shape on the network of all shapes up to three shapes away . We ﬁ nd that every shape is at most three steps away from a gallery shape . Pruning general model ’ s plausible circuits . There are 3 16 = 43 , 046 , 721 possible circuits in the general model . This number reduces to 177 , 147 under the assumptions that going back to a previous category is not allowed ( hence b i does not decay , removing the term a w 13 i s w 14 i b w 15 i a i P a i (cid:2) (cid:3) w 16 ) , and that saturation ( b i ) dynamics should be activated by meaning , to make sure it represents meaning accumulation ( hence w 10 = 1 ) . Preventing exponential growth of saturation by its own levels ( setting w 11 = 0 ) , assuming saturation cannot increase attention levels ( restricting ( w 3 , w 7 ) = ( − 1 , 0 ) , ( 0 , 1 ) , ( − 1 , 1 ) ) , and assuming that meaning must con - tribute to increasing attention levels ( setting w 2 = 1 ) results with a further reduc - tion to 6561 circuits . The model search is robust to model parameters . In order to estimate para - meter sensitivity , we scanned a range of 3 – 4 orders of magnitude in the model ’ s parameters . We randomly chose parameters from a log - uniformly distributed parameter range : α ϵ [ 1 , 1000 ] , g ϵ [ 0 . 01 , 100 ] . We ran the model with 500 different parameter sets , each parameter set 500 times , with a cutoff of 500 steps per run . Each simulation produced a vector of meaning scores for each meaning dimension . We de ﬁ ned exploitation durations as the number of steps between the event of crossing the meaning threshold to the event of meaning score returning to threshold . Next , we de ﬁ ned exploitation durations as the number of steps between end of an exploitation phase to the start of the next one . A successful run is de ﬁ ned as a run where the simulated searcher ﬁ nds at least three different meaning cate - gories and that the exploitation phases do not overlap , i . e . , there is a positive exploration phase duration . We ﬁ nd that for a large set of parameters , the models exhibit an exploration - exploitation behavior within the ﬁ rst 500 steps ( see Sup - plementary Table 1 ) . In particular , when measuring the median exploration and exploitation phase durations in the model and comparing it with the convex hull of players ’ data , parameters range can vary over a 100 - fold range : FCD model : α ϵ [ 1 , 170 ] , g ϵ [ 0 . 1 , 2 ] , non - FCD model : α ϵ [ 3 , 856 ] , g ϵ [ 1 , 93 ] . Calculation of phase duration - variance relation . We compared the variability in exploration and exploitation durations in the FCD and non - FCD circuits . For each parameter set ( g , α ) that is in the convex hull of the behavioral data ( 93 ( g , α ) pairs for the FCD circuit and 102 ( g , α ) pairs in the non - FCD circuit ) we calculated the median and median deviation in exploitation duration and exploration duration across 500 simulations . We next plot the relation between the square root of the sum of variances ( ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ σ 2R þ σ 2T p ) vs . the mean of the median durations ( 12 t R þ t T ð Þ ) . For a similar result that computes the geometric mean of phases ’ duration , see Supplementary Fig . 5 ) . Simulations of large variations in averaged meaning score . We compared the FCD circuit and the non - FCD circuit response to large changes in the average score of each meaning dimension . For each parameter set ( g , α ) ( 93 FCD , 102 non - FCD ) NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2018 ) 9 : 5411 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications 9 we created two types of simulations — First , we ran 50 simulations with the original meaning landscape and different random seeds ( resulting in different search tra - jectories ) . Taking the median of exploration and exploitation durations over the 50 simulations de ﬁ ned the reference point in the exploration - exploitation plane . Next , we ran 50 simulations with the original meaning landscape rescaled by a random vector , which was sampled log - uniformly between [ 0 . 01 , 100 ] . Taking the median of exploration and exploitation durations and computing the median response across the 50 simulations de ﬁ ned the shifted point in the exploration - exploitation plane . The distance between the shifted point and the reference point determine the scaling effect for that speci ﬁ c parameter set . Brain activity measurements . Participants : Seventeen healthy right handed sub - jects ( ages 28 ±3 . 8 , 10 females ) participated in the fMRI experiments . Fifteen of them participated in the full set - up of the experiment and their results are pre - sented here . Fourteen ﬁ lled a beauty , iconicity and weirdness evaluation ques - tionnaire 35 post the fMRI scan and their results are presented in Supplementary Fig . 2 . Stimuli : During the fMRI scan the created shapes were presented in blocks lasting 9s , followed by a 9s ﬁ xation screen . Each block consisted of nine images ( 1s each ) : eight images in light green and one image in dark green . To reduce scan novelty effect , an extra block ( which was not analyzed ) was added to the beginning of each experiment , 29 blocks were presented in total . Each subject watched the same sequence of blocks . In the task , subjects were required to classify the stimuli according to color ; light green ( press 1 ) or dark green ( press 2 ) . MRI data acquisition and preprocessing : The data were acquired on a 3 Tesla Trio Magnetom Siemens scanner at the Weizmann Institute of Science . Functional images of blood oxygenation level dependent ( BOLD ) contrast comprising of 46 axial slices were obtained with a T2 * - weighted gradient echo planar imaging ( EPI ) sequence ( 3 × 3× 3mm voxel , TR = 3000 ms , TE = 30 , ﬂ ip angle = 75° , FOV 240 mm ) covering the whole brain . Anatomical images for each subject were acquired in order to incorporate the functional data into the three - dimensional ( 3D ) Talairach space using 3 - D T1 - weighted images with high - resolution ( 1 ×1 × 1mm voxel , MPRAGE sequence , TR = 2300 ms , TE = 2 . 98ms ) . The ﬁ rst 7 - images of each functional scan ( including the extra initial block and rest ) were discarded . Functional scan preprocessing included 3D motion correction and ﬁ ltering out of low frequency noise ( slow drift ) , and spatial smoothing using an isotropic Gaussian kernel of 6 mm full - width - half - maximum ( FWHM ) . The functional images were superimposed on 2D anatomic images and incorporated into the 3D data sets through trilinear interpolation . Statistical analysis was based on a general linear model in which all stimuli conditions were de ﬁ ned as predictors , and convolved with the hemodynamic response function ( HRF ) . Data analysis : To relate blocks ' meaning to brain activity , a parametric GLM analysis was conducted . In this multi - subject , random effect analyses each block of shapes received a weight according to its meaning score , which was represented in the model as differential amplitude of the BOLD signal . T - max correction analysis : To control for the Family - wise Error Rate ( FWER ) , we repeated the parametric GLM analysis 1000 times with randomly permuted values of the meaning scores . We accumulated the t - values across the 1000 repeats and voxels to calculate the t - value distribution . We ﬁ nd that the t - value at α = 0 . 05 was t - value = 1 . 7 , which is lower than the t - values of the parametric map ( see Fig . 3 ) . Fitting of decay functions to brain activity data . To ﬁ nd the best description of the meaning landscape , we calculated the correlations with brain activity data in the bilateral LOC region of human subjects ( LOC was de ﬁ ned independently using an external localizing task 35 ) . We built three different versions of the meaning landscape , where each meaning landscape induces meaning to neighboring shapes in a different way . First , we used the same meaning landscape construction process as described above , where meaning decays by a constant factor with each step to a neighboring shape , f 1 ( λ ) = λ − d . Thus , shapes one move away decay by a factor of λ , shapes two moves away decay by a factor of λ 2 and so on . We assigned for each shape in the brain imaging experiment its maximum meaning score across meaning dimensions , and then calculated the Spearman correlation and p - value for changing values of λ . We ﬁ nd that maximal correlation is achieved at λ ’ 10 ( see Fig . 6c ) . The maximal correlation plots are shown in Fig . 6d . We repeated the same construction process for a linear decay function f 2 ( λ ) = − d λ . We ﬁ nd that this decay function results in poor and non - signi ﬁ cant correlations for positive meaning values . Code availability . Custom code for analysis of behavioral data and simulation of circuit topologies was written in Mathematica 11 . 3 ( Wolfram ) and can be found in the following link — https : / / github . com / uvhart / scaleinvariantcreativesearch . The analysis ﬁ le contains : 1 . Behavioral data analysis code , 2 . FCD and Non - FCD circuit simulations code 3 . fGn and fBm simulations and analysis code 4 . Analysis of BIC / AIC scores for the FCD and non - FCD circuits compared to the behavioral data . Brain data analysis was done using Brain Voyager QX 2 . 6 software package for brain imaging data analysis . Data availability Behavioral data is available at https : / / github . com / uvhart / scaleinvariantcreativesearch . Brain activity data will be available from the authors upon request . Received : 3 January 2018 Accepted : 7 November 2018 References 1 . Noether , E . & Tavel , M . A . Invariant variation problems . Transp . Theory Stat . Phys . 1 , 186 – 207 ( 1971 ) . 2 . Gell - Mann , M . Symmetries of baryons and mesons . Phys . Rev . 125 , 1067 – 1084 ( 1962 ) . 3 . Cardy , J . Scaling and Renormalization in Statistical Physics ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK , 1996 ) . 4 . Hand , L . N . & Finch , J . D . Analytical Mechanics ( Cambridge University Press , 1998 ) . 5 . Shoval , O . et al . Fold - change detection and scalar symmetry of sensory input ﬁ elds . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . 107 , 15995 – 16000 ( 2010 ) . 6 . Lazova , M . D . , Ahmed , T . , Bellomo , D . , Stocker , R . & Shimizu , T . S . Response rescaling in bacterial chemotaxis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 13870 – 13875 ( 2011 ) . 7 . Hart , Y . , Mayo , A . E . , Shoval , O . & Alon , U . Comparing apples and oranges : Fold - change detection of multiple simultaneous inputs . PLoS ONE 8 , e57455 ( 2013 ) . 8 . Mesibov , R . , Ordal , G . W . & Adler , J . The range of attractant concentrations for bacterial chemotaxis and the threshold and size of response over this range . Weber law Relat . Phenom . J . Gen . Physiol . 62 , 203 – 223 ( 1973 ) . 9 . Adler , M . & Alon , U . Fold - change detection in biological systems . Curr . Opin . Syst . Biol . 8 , 81 – 89 ( 2018 ) . 10 . Keener , J . & Sneyd , J . Mathematical Physiology ( Springer , New York , USA , 1998 ) . 11 . Adler , M . , Mayo , A . & Alon , U . Logarithmic and power law input - output relations in sensory systems with fold - change detection . PLoS Comput . Biol . 10 , e1003781 ( 2014 ) . 12 . Shoval , O . , Alon , U . & Sontag , E . Symmetry invariance for adapting biological systems . SIAM J . Appl . Dyn . Syst . 10 , 857 – 886 ( 2011 ) . 13 . Adler , M . , Szekely , P . , Mayo , A . & Alon , U . Optimal regulatory circuit topologies for fold - change detection . Cell Syst . 4 , 171 – 181 . e8 ( 2017 ) . 14 . Chater , N . & Brown , G . D . A . From universal laws of cognition to speci ﬁ c cognitive models . Cogn . Sci . 32 , 36 – 67 ( 2008 ) . 15 . Kello , C . T . et al . Scaling laws in cognitive sciences . Trends Cogn . Sci . 14 , 223 – 232 ( 2010 ) . 16 . Chater , N . & Brown , G . D . A . Scale - invariance as a unifying psychological principle . Cognition 69 , B17 – B24 ( 1999 ) . 17 . Gilden , D . L . Cognitive emissions of 1 / f noise . Psychol . Rev . 108 , 33 – 56 ( 2001 ) . 18 . Maylor , E . A . , Chater , N . & Brown , G . D . A . Scale invariance in the retrieval of retrospective and prospective memories . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 8 , 162 – 167 ( 2001 ) . 19 . Brown , G . D . A . , Neath , I . & Chater , N . A temporal ratio model of memory . Psychol . Rev . 114 , 539 – 576 ( 2007 ) . 20 . Rhodes , T . & Turvey , M . T . Human memory retrieval as Lévy foraging . Phys . Stat . Mech . Appl . 385 , 255 – 260 ( 2007 ) . 21 . Stewart , N . , Chater , N . & Brown , G . D . A . Decision by sampling . Cogn . Psychol . 53 , 1 – 26 ( 2006 ) . 22 . Farrell , S . , Wagenmakers , E . - J . & Ratcliff , R . 1 / f noise in human cognition : is it ubiquitous , and what does it mean ? Psychon . Bull . Rev . 13 , 737 – 741 ( 2006 ) . 23 . Medina , J . M . 1 ∕ f ^ α noise in reaction times : A proposed model based on Piéron ’ s law and information processing . Phys . Rev . E 79 , 011902 ( 2009 ) . 24 . Fitts , P . M . The information capacity of the human motor system in controlling the amplitude of movement . J . Exp . Psychol . 47 , 381 – 391 ( 1954 ) . 25 . Lacquaniti , F . , Terzuolo , C . & Viviani , P . The law relating the kinematic and ﬁ gural aspects of drawing movements . Acta Psychol . ( Amst . ) 54 , 115 – 130 ( 1983 ) . 26 . Kello , C . T . , Anderson , G . G . , Holden , J . G . & Van Orden , G . C . The pervasiveness of 1 / f scaling in speech re ﬂ ects the metastable basis of cognition . Cogn . Sci . 32 , 1217 – 1231 ( 2008 ) . 27 . Kinouchi , O . & Copelli , M . Optimal dynamical range of excitable networks at criticality . Nat . Phys . 2 , 348 – 351 ( 2006 ) . 28 . He , B . J . , Zempel , J . M . , Snyder , A . Z . & Raichle , M . E . The temporal structures and functional signi ﬁ cance of scale - free brain activity . Neuron 66 , 353 – 369 ( 2010 ) . 29 . Tobler , P . N . , Fiorillo , C . D . & Schultz , W . Adaptive coding of reward value by dopamine neurons . Science 307 , 1642 – 1645 ( 2005 ) . ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 10 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2018 ) 9 : 5411 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications 30 . Levy , D . J . & Glimcher , P . W . Comparing apples and oranges : using reward - speci ﬁ c and reward - general subjective value representation in the brain . J . Neurosci . Off . J . Soc . Neurosci . 31 , 14693 – 14707 ( 2011 ) . 31 . Howe , M . W . , Tierney , P . L . , Sandberg , S . G . , Phillips , P . E . M . & Graybiel , A . M . Prolonged dopamine signalling in striatum signals proximity and value of distant rewards . Nature 500 , 575 – 579 ( 2013 ) . 32 . Goentoro , L . , Shoval , O . , Kirschner , M . & Alon , U . The incoherent feedforward loop can provide fold - change detection in gene regulation . Mol . Cell 36 , 894 – 899 ( 2009 ) . 33 . Hart , Y . et al . Creative foraging : An experimental paradigm for studying exploration and discovery . PLoS ONE 12 , e0182133 ( 2017 ) . 34 . Noy , L . et al . A quantitative study of creative leaps . In International Conference on Computational Creativity 72 - 76 ( Association for Computational Creativity , 2012 ) . 35 . Goldberg , H . , Hart , Y . , Mayo , A . , Alon , U . & Malach , R . Neuronal components of evaluating the human origin of abstract shapes . Preprint at https : / / www . biorxiv . org / content / early / 2017 / 11 / 01 / 085902 ( 2017 ) . 36 . Hills , T . T . , Jones , M . N . & Todd , P . M . Optimal foraging in semantic memory . Psychol . Rev . 119 , 431 – 440 ( 2012 ) . 37 . Hills , T . T . , Todd , P . M . , Lazer , D . , Redish , A . D . & Couzin , I . D . Exploration versus exploitation in space , mind , and society . Trends Cogn . Sci . 19 , 46 – 54 ( 2015 ) . 38 . Hills , T . T . , Todd , P . M . & Goldstone , R . L . Search in external and internal spaces . Psychol . Sci . 19 , 802 – 808 ( 2008 ) . 39 . Wilke , A . , Hutchinson , J . M . C . , Todd , P . M . & Czienskowski , U . Fishing for the right words : Decision rules for human foraging behavior in internal search tasks . Cogn . Sci . 33 , 497 – 529 ( 2009 ) . 40 . Tyson , J . J . , Chen , K . C . & Novak , B . Sniffers , buzzers , toggles and blinkers : dynamics of regulatory and signaling pathways in the cell . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 221 – 231 ( 2003 ) . 41 . Ma , W . , Trusina , A . , El - Samad , H . , Lim , W . A . & Tang , C . De ﬁ ning network topologies that can achieve biochemical adaptation . Cell 138 , 760 – 773 ( 2009 ) . 42 . Chau , A . H . , Walter , J . M . , Gerardin , J . , Tang , C . & Lim , W . A . Designing synthetic regulatory networks capable of self - organizing cell polarization . Cell 151 , 320 – 332 ( 2012 ) . 43 . Cahan , P . et al . CellNet : network biology applied to stem cell engineering . Cell 158 , 903 – 915 ( 2014 ) . 44 . Hart , Y . , Antebi , Y . E . , Mayo , A . E . , Friedman , N . & Alon , U . Design principles of cell circuits with paradoxical components . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . 109 , 8346 – 8351 ( 2012 ) . 45 . Carandini , M . & Heeger , D . J . Normalization as a canonical neural computation . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 13 , 51 – 62 ( 2011 ) . 46 . Louie , K . , Khaw , M . W . & Glimcher , P . W . Normalization is a general neural mechanism for context - dependent decision making . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . 110 , 6139 – 6144 ( 2013 ) . 47 . Seilheimer , R . L . , Rosenberg , A . & Angelaki , D . E . Models and processes of multisensory cue combination . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 25 , 38 – 46 ( 2014 ) . 48 . Rosenberg , A . , Patterson , J . S . & Angelaki , D . E . A computational perspective on autism . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . 112 , 9158 – 9165 ( 2015 ) . 49 . Beggs , J . M . & Plenz , D . Neuronal avalanches in neocortical circuits . J . Neurosci . 23 , 11167 – 11177 ( 2003 ) . 50 . Petermann , T . et al . Spontaneous cortical activity in awake monkeys composed of neuronal avalanches . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . 106 , 15921 – 15926 ( 2009 ) . 51 . He , B . J . Scale - free properties of the functional magnetic resonance imaging signal during rest and task . J . Neurosci . 31 , 13786 – 13795 ( 2011 ) . 52 . Ciuciu , P . , Varoquaux , G . , Abry , P . , Sadaghiani , S . & Kleinschmidt , A . Scale - free and multifractal properties of fMRI signals during rest and task . Front . Physiol . 3 , 186 ( 2012 ) . 53 . Chialvo , D . R . Emergent complex neural dynamics . Nat . Phys . 6 , 744 – 750 ( 2010 ) . 54 . Levina , A . , Herrmann , J . M . & Geisel , T . Dynamical synapses causing self - organized criticality in neural networks . Nat . Phys . 3 , 857 – 860 ( 2007 ) . 55 . Shew , W . L . , Yang , H . , Petermann , T . , Roy , R . & Plenz , D . Neuronal avalanches imply maximum dynamic range in cortical networks at criticality . J . Neurosci . 29 , 15595 – 15600 ( 2009 ) . 56 . Lucas , C . G . , Bridgers , S . , Grif ﬁ ths , T . L . & Gopnik , A . When children are better ( or at least more open - minded ) learners than adults : developmental differences in learning the forms of causal relationships . Cognition 131 , 284 – 299 ( 2014 ) . 57 . Kahneman , D . Thinking , Fast and Slow ( Farrar , Straus and Giroux , New York , 2011 ) . 58 . Schwab , D . J . , Nemenman , I . & Mehta , P . Zipf ’ s law and criticality in multivariate data without ﬁ ne - tuning . Phys . Rev . Lett . 113 , 068102 ( 2014 ) . 59 . Kenett , Y . N . , Anaki , D . & Faust , M . Investigating the structure of semantic networks in low and high creative persons . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 8 , 407 ( 2014 ) . 60 . Beaty , R . E . , Benedek , M . , Silvia , P . J . & Schacter , D . L . Creative cognition and brain network dynamics . Trends Cogn . Sci . 20 , 87 – 95 ( 2016 ) . 61 . Beaty , R . E . et al . Robust prediction of individual creative ability from brain functional connectivity . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . 115 ( 5 ) 1087 - 1092 ( 2018 ) . 62 . Kenett , Y . N . et al . Flexibility of thought in high creative individuals represented by percolation analysis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . 115 , 867 – 872 ( 2018 ) . 63 . Mednick , S . The associative basis of the creative process . Psychol . Rev . 69 , 220 – 232 ( 1962 ) . 64 . Zabelina , D . L . & Andrews - Hanna , J . R . Dynamic network interactions supporting internally - oriented cognition . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 40 , 86 – 93 ( 2016 ) . 65 . Andrews - Hanna , J . R . , Smallwood , J . & Spreng , R . N . The default network and self - generated thought : component processes , dynamic control , and clinical relevance . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1316 , 29 – 52 ( 2014 ) . 66 . Uddin , L . Q . Salience processing and insular cortical function and dysfunction . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 16 , 55 – 61 ( 2015 ) . 67 . Beaty , R . E . , Benedek , M . , Kaufman , S . B . & Silvia , P . J . Default and executive network coupling supports creative idea production . Sci . Rep . 5 , 10964 ( 2015 ) . 68 . Dosenbach , N . U . F . et al . Distinct brain networks for adaptive and stable task control in humans . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 104 , 11073 – 11078 ( 2007 ) . 69 . Ellamil , M . , Dobson , C . , Beeman , M . & Christoff , K . Evaluative and generative modes of thought during the creative process . NeuroImage 59 , 1783 – 1794 ( 2012 ) . 70 . Liu , S . et al . Brain activity and connectivity during poetry composition : Toward a multidimensional model of the creative process . Hum . Brain Mapp . 36 , 3351 – 3372 ( 2015 ) . Acknowledgements We thank the Braginsky Center for the Interface between Science and the Humanities , at the Weizmann Institute of Science , for support . E . S . A . thanks the European Union ’ s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Program under Marie Sklodowska - Curie Grant Agreement 654837 . U . A . is the incumbent of the Abisch - Frenkel professorial chair . Author contributions Y . H . , H . G . , A . E . M . , L . N . and U . A . conceptualized the study , H . G . collected and analyzed brain data , Y . H . and E . S . A . calculated t - max corrections , Y . H . , H . G . and A . E . M . analyzed behavioral data and its correlations with brain data , Y . H . and A . E . M . analyzed circuit topologies and compared to criticality theory , Y . H . , H . G . , A . E . M . , L . N . and U . A . wrote the paper , U . A . supervised the study . Additional information Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 . Competing interests : The authors declare no competing interests . Reprints and permission information is available online at http : / / npg . nature . com / reprintsandpermissions / . Publisher ’ s note : Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁ liations . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adaptation , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Creative Commons license , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . © The Author ( s ) 2018 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2018 ) 9 : 5411 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07715 - 8 | www . nature . com / naturecommunications 11