Barend Mons’s first objective would be ambitious enough for most people : to meld some of the most important biomedical databases into a single information resource . But that’s just the beginning . Mons , a bioinformatician at the Erasmus Medical Centre in Rotterdam , the Netherlands , also wants to apply the Wikipedia philosophy . He’s inviting the whole research community to help update a vast store of interlinked data . If he and his colleagues can pull it off — and even the project’s advocates are not sure they can — they could transform the databases that are central to the work of many life scientists . A test version of the project , provisionally dubbed Wiki for Professionals ( www . wikiprofessional . info ) , is due to launch in the next month . It already contains data from key sources , such as protein information from Swiss - Prot and gene descriptions from Gene Ontology . Over the past year , Mons’s team has woven together these and other archives to create what , from a user’s point of view , seems to be a single database . The page on the muscular - dystrophy protein dystrophin , for example , contains data from Swiss - Prot together with links to disease information from the US National Library of Medicine , as well as explanatory text . Links to relevant publications in PubMed are also available . Existing databases interlink to an extent , although the new resource is more comprehensive . But the next stage is the really radical bit . Biomedical research produces hundreds of thousands of papers a year , overwhelming database curators . To clear this bottleneck , Mons and his colleagues are allowing anyone to edit the entries , modifying and adding text and links as new work is published . That’s an attractive proposition , say database administrators . Michael Ashburner , a geneticist at the University of Cambridge , UK , helps run FlyBase , a collection of gene data on the model organism Drosophila melanogaster . The database receives around US $ 4 million a year from the US National Institutes of Health and employs up to five full - time curators , but still can’t keep up with the relevant literature , says Ashburner , who is working with Mons on the new project . “We have a list of around 12 journals that we try to cover . Even that’s tough . ” Anyone motivated to register can curate Wiki for Professionals . Visitors to the dystrophin entry , for example , can update almost any of the information on the page , such as statements about the role of the protein in disease . Users can also start new pages , and from later this year will be given the option of creating pages for themselves , with links to relevant publications . A final function , and the one that most excites Mons , is the availability of text - mining software . This will allow users to probe links between proteins , genes and disease that may be revealed only by comparing a large number of papers and other data . “Mons is a visionary , ” says Amos Bairoch at the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics in Geneva , a collaborator on the project and the creator of Swiss - Prot . “This will be a revolution . ” Yet realizing the vision will be difficult . Top of the list of challenges is persuading the community to get involved . Adding one’s own data is likely to be the biggest motivator — Bairoch and Ashburner say they get several calls a week asking for updates to databases , usually from researchers who want their own papers added . Whether this will be enough to keep the database fresh remains to be seen , given that employers and funders tend not to value updating information highly . Wiki for Professionals will also have to ensure that additions don’t just reflect individual researchers’ pet theories . Mons hopes scientists will adopt entries relevant to their work and use automated systems to alert them to changes , which they can then amend if necessary . The original data in Swiss - Prot and other databases will also be protected . The resource has been set up by Knewco , a scientific computing company based in Rockville , Maryland , and co - founded by Mons . The firm raised around $ 2 million in private funding to pay for the initial effort , and says basic access will be free . Revenue will be generated by charging drug firms and other users for premium services , such as the option to run a private version of the system incorporating proprietary data . ■ Jim Giles Key biology databases go wiki BUBBLE FUSION Find Nature ’s March 2006 investigation into bubble fusion online . www . nature . com / news / bubblefusion same day as Suslick , Putterman and others reported their attempt to replicate Taleyar - khan’s claims in an experiment built to his specifications 8 . They did not find any evi - dence that fusion was occurring . Suslick , Putterman and Taleyarkhan had received funding from the US Department of Defense’s Advanced Research Projects Agency ( DARPA ) for a project to test Taleyar - khan’s original claims . Taleyarkhan has spent around US $ 200 , 000 of this money on his bubble - fusion experiments . A spokeswoman for DARPA , Jan Walker , told Nature that although Purdue has not formally notified the agency of the inquiry or its results : “We are aware that an inquiry has taken place and are currently reviewing what , if any , action is required on our part . ” ■ Eugenie Samuel Reich 1 . Xu , Y . & Butt , A . Nucl . Eng . Des . 235 , 1317 – 1324 ( 2005 ) . 2 . Taleyarkhan , R . P . et al . Phys . Rev . Lett . 96 , 034301 ( 2006 ) . 3 . Reich , E . S . Nature doi : 10 . 1038 / news060306 - 1 ( 2006 ) . 4 . Reich , E . S . Nature 444 , 664 – 665 ( 2006 ) . 5 . Naranjo , B . Phys . Rev . Lett . 97 , 149403 ( 2006 ) . 6 . Taleyarkhan , R . P . et al . Phys . Rev . Lett . 97 , 149404 ( 2006 ) . 7 . Naranjo , B . Preprint at http : / / arXiv . org / physics / 0702009 ( 2007 ) . 8 . Camara , C . G . et al . Phys . Rev . Lett . 98 , 064301 ( 2007 ) . Protein databases could be transformed by extra features . A . P A S I E K A / S P L L . F R EE N Y / U S D E P T E N E R G Y “This will be a revolution . ” 691 NATURE | Vol 445 | 15 February 2007 NEWS (cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:4)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:0)(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:0) (cid:0)(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:11)(cid:17)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:18)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:22)