Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - I995 Computer Support for Distributed Asynchronous Software Design Teams : Experimental Results on Creativity and Quality Rosalie Ocker S . Roxanne Hiltz Murray Turoff Jerry Fjermestad Rutgers University Newark , NJ Abstract Previous research has indicated that the creative task of deciding upon the initial specijcations for a sofhyare SySfem can benejt from a structured process to guide group interaction in Face - to - Face meetings , and can benejt p o m computer support . This 2x2 experiment is the j r s t to look at the joint effects of a distributed asynchronous computer conferencing mode of communication ( CC , as compared to Face to Face ) , and a structured process , on sofhyare design outcomes . Subjects were teams of graduate students in computer science and business , who designed an automated post ofJice as a course assignment . Though the quality of solution produced by the CC groups was judged to be higher , it was not significantly so . However , the CC groups were considerably more creative . There were no main effects for the structuredunstructured factor , nor an ? , signijkant interactions . 1 : Introduction As the business world increases in complexity , so does the nature of problems which information systems must support . Basic systems dealing with structured and routine problems are a wave of the past . Today ' s problems are unstructured , nonroutine , and even wicked [ 61 , 591 . Within systems development , it is recognized that the stages of requirements definition and high - level design are important , and even crucial to the development of effective software 171 . Collaborative designers and users work to achieve some consensus on the general characteristics of the new system in question [ 51 ] . Decisions made during these initial stages drive the decisions made throughout the remainder of the development process . To provide effective support , it has been increasingly suggested that the development of information systems in general , and the definition of high - level requirements and design , specifically , could benefit from the infusion of creative and innovative solutions [ e . g . , 6 , 18 , 65 ] . 1060 - 3425 / 95 $ 4 . 00 0 1995 IEEE 4 New Jersey Institute of Technology Newark , NJ One approach is to provide support for design through the use of group support systems [ 16 , 33 , 10 ] . In this paper , we report on an experiment which investigated the usefulness of computer - conferencing to support design groups working ( 1 ) on the early stages of design ( 2 ) in a distributed asynchronous environment . Asynchronous refers to the dimension of time - - at different times - - while distributed refers to the dimension of space - - at different Dlaces . Thus , members of distributed asynchronous groups " meet " or communicate with one another at different times , from different places . The distributed asynchronous form of group interaction has obvious benefits . Group members do not have to physically be in the same place to meet , nor must they communicate with one another at the same time . These two characteristics of distributed asynchronous communication greatly extend the definition of what constitutes a meeting . These loosened constraints can add value to the organization by increasing the means with which groups can accomplish work . However , there are also disadvantages . Points of reference for indexing communication by time , place , and talk sequence are all missing 1261 . As communication occurs over time , days can elapse between communication events , resulting in communication that can seem disjointed Another coordination problem is finding workable substitutes for temporal sequence as an ordering mechanism . In an asynchronous discussion , the norm is for many topics and subtopics to be active at once , and sometimes more than one person makes entries simultaneously , perhaps on different topics . How does the group order and coordinate what can seem chaotic ? One approach for dealing with these problems of coordination is to ( 1 ) provide structuring mechanisms for groups to use to organize their communication and ( 2 ) sequence the problem solving process followed by groups to accomplish work . Where creative solutions to difficult problems are the desired outcome , some degree of structure can be a stimulus to triggering ideas [ e . g . , brainstorming ] . However , too much structure , or the wrong structure , can Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - I995 limit the creative process . In the distributed asynchronous environment , structure becomes an important component in the organization and comprehension of the group view [ 66 , 301 . While synchronous groups can often vary the degree and type of structure dynamically as needed , this is more difficult for distributed asynchronous groups that are dependent upon both structure and process rules for coordination . Hence , understanding in detail the tradeoff between structure and creativity becomes critical for the design of an asynchronous process . In this paper , we report on results of the first experiment conducted to investigate the usefulness of the distributed asynchronous mode of interaction and communication for groups working on the early stages of design . We also investigate the usefulness of a structured problem solving approach for accomplishing this activity . The dependent variables we report on are ( 1 ) creativity of design solution and ( 2 ) quality of design solution . Distributed asynchronous groups use a computer conference ( CC ) to conduct all of their work . These groups are referred to as CC groups throughout the remainder of this paper . 2 : Background 2 . 1 : Design Activity The early stages of design include the determination of high - level requirements and high - level design . Early design work is categorized as ill - structured [ 6 11 , due to incomplete and ambiguous specification of the problem , no predetermined solution path , and the need to integrate multiple knowledge domains . In order to reach a design solution , there is a need to structure the design problem . The ability to structure the problem is a fbnction of the previous experience of the designer . There is empirical evidence showing that individual designers use a structured , top - down approach to accomplish design , where aspects of the overall system are designed first , and then the system is progressively decomposed into increasingly greater levels of detail [ 1 , 34 , 35 ] . It appears that the use of a structured , top - down approach to design is appropriate when the problem is well - structured . Deviations from a structured approach have been observed when the problem is in some way novel or complex to the designer [ 24 ] . For ill - structured problems , a method or structure which locks the designer into a strict order of activities may be inapprqpriate . Considering design from the perspective of the group , Olson et al . [ 52 ] characterize design discussions as a form of argumentation where various issues are raised and alternative design possibilities are discussed . In their field study of groups working freely on the early stages of design , Olson et al . [ 52 ] found that design discussions exhibited patterns of design activity interspersed with discussions of management ( e . g . , coordination ) issues . Meeting participants clearly stated issues , alternatives , and criteria for evaluating alternatives , in addition to managing the design process . It was found that group design discussions , although observed to be chaotic , when content analyzed , were actually found to have a natural structure and a regular pattern of activity . 2 . 2 : Group Creativity and Quality Design is an inherently creative process [ 21 ] . The end - product is the creation of an artifact - something that previously did not exist . Creativity at the group level is not merely the summation of each group members ' individual creativity . Group creativity is influenced by group composition ( e . g . , diversity ) , group characteristics ( e . g . , cohesiveness ) , and proup processes ( e . g . , problem - solving strategies and social information processes ) [ 7 11 . Group composition and group characteristics : West [ 70 ] proposes that an atmosphere that is perceived as " interpersonally non - threatening " can enhance creativity [ p . 3111 . Thus , cohesive groups are more likely to be considered safe by group members . However , West argues that group homogeneity is an important attribute of cohesive groups but that it can lead to groupthink [ 32 ] and thereby inhibit creativity . Nystrtim [ 50 ] advocates that loosely joined , heterogeneous groups are needed during the early stages of work on a problem in order to facilitate the production of creative ideas . Communication within the group is viewed as vital to effective performance on research teams [ 44 , 56 , 68 , 71 ] . The sharing of ideas is a stimulus which can increase not only the quantity but the novelty of ideas . Minority influence theory [ 45 , 37 ] offers one explanation of how group interaction processes result in a creative group outcome . Minority influence is a construct that describes the situation where minority opinion holders win - over and thus influence the opinions of the majority opinion - holders . It has been argued that minority influence leads to greater levels of group member independence and to more divergent and creative thinking [ 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 ] . Problems are considered from a wider variety of perspectives which leads to the development of new , more creative and higher quality solutions [ 55 , 49 , 41 ] . Hoffman [ 31 ] argues that a diversity of viewpoints within a group is essential for creativity , but that these differences of opinion must be tolerated . Minority influence research suggests that a consistent and confident presentation of arguments by the minority is most likely to lead to attitude change and creativity . Group Processes - social information and problem solving : Groups can draw on the knowledge and resources of the various group members in order to 5 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 positively impact task performance . However , social information , consisting of verbal and non - verbal cues , influences perceptual , attitudinal and behavioral outcomes [ cf . 22 , 231 . It has been found that perceptions of unstructured problem - solving tasks which require high levels of creativity are more susceptible to social influence than are structured routine tasks which do not require high levels of creativity [ 4 ] . Finally , the problem solving approach used by the group necessarily af€ects group interaction and therefore group creativity . For example , the process of brainstorming was designed to limit the evaluation of ideas being generated and thus to encourage the quantity of ideas , thereby increasing the likelihood of generating creative ideas . 2 . 3 : Coordination , distributed asynchronous communication and problem solving approach Coordination is the set of tasks and processes by which groups of actors carrying out activities manage interdependencies , in order for them to perform effectively as a group . Coordination can be viewed in terms of actors performing interdependent activities aimed at achieving goals [ 40 ] . Empirical findings indicate that actual design activities account for less than half of the meeting time of unsupported face - to - face design teams working on the early stages of design , while coordination activities required at least 20 % of the meeting time [ 52 ] . Although the need for coordination is inherent in all group problem solving activities , as previously described , distributed asynchronous groups have additional and unique coordination problems beyond those experienced by face - to - face groups . To address coordination problems of distributed asynchronous communication associated with temporal sequencing and ordering of communication , we developed a rational problem solving approach incorporating highly structured communication . Given the successfbl use of a design rationale for accomplishing design [ 72 ] and for encoding actual design activity [ 52 ] , we combined two speclfic design rationale approaches : 1 ) Issue Based Information System ( IBIS ) originally developed by Kunz and Rittel [ 38 ] for use in argumentation and 2 ) Design Space Analysis , developed by MacLean , Young , Bellotti , and Moran [ 39 ] . IBIS was developed for the purpose of supporting argumentation by explicitly structuring communication for both pro and con ideas regarding the generation of various alternative solutions . IBIS has been implemented to document design meetings , as a historical record of the problem solving and decision making process [ 72 ] . Design Space Analysis @ SA ) is used durinp the urocess of design , to actively build the structures of argumentation as design discussions take place . We combine aspects of IBIS and DSA to ( 1 ) sequence the process of design activity and ( 2 ) to structure the argumentation surrounding the various issues of the design process . 3 : Research framework , experimental design and hypotheses Hackman and Morris [ 25 ] propose that a major portion of variation in measured group performance is controlled by three general summiuy variables : ( a ) the knowledge and skills of group members , ( b ) performance strategies used by the group in carrying out the task and ( c ) the amount of coordination and effort exerted by group members on the task . They argue that it is possible to substantially af€ect the level of group effectiveness by controlling or influencing these three summary variables , and that the relative importance of each summary variable is contingent upon the task at hand . For a task requiring creativity , the development of new strategies and increased member skill are of paramount importance . However , for CC communication , coordination of member effort is also very important . Each summary variable is impacted by the type of interaction such that either process gains or process losses [ 64 ] occur ( see table 1 ) . These gains and losses in turn impact the performance effectiveness ( outcome ) of the group . Group effectiveness can be improved above the level expected resulting from process losses by altering the input factors . Figure 1 is a modified version of the Hackman and Moms model , and highlights the independent variables used in this experiment . Table 1 Summary of Proposed functions of group interaction 1 . member knowledge and slulls process losses - interaction is less - than - perfect means for applying member talents to the task potential gains - interaction is means for generation of new knowledge or skill by members process losses - interaction serves to implement less - than - perfect preexisting strategies potential gains - interaction serves to reformulate strategic plans to increase their task - appropriateness 3 . level and coordination of member effort process losses - interaction is less - than - perfect means to coordinate member effort potential gains - interaction enhances coordination and member effort 2 . performance strategies for carrying out the task 6 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Independent Variables Communication 0 Mode of - FtF - cc 0 Problem Solving Approach - Structured - Unstructured Figure 1 . Theoretical Framework Group process Gains & Losses Effectiveness Member Knowledge Quality and Skill Performance Strategies 1 e Coordination of Member Effort Figure 2 . Impact of Summary Variables on Quality and Creativity Decision Reduced Social Equal Information Sharing Member Knowledge + + - + Participation Increased Increased Quality Increased Information , Consistent - New Performance - Creativity of Opinion Behavior Strategies Increased f d + Conflict + i Uninhibited + Loosely J o i n e L Diversity Behavior Groups L I Minority Influence Our experiment uses a 2 X 2 factorial design . Mode of communication compares groups communicating face - to - face ( @ with those communicating in a Cc mode using a computer conferencing system . The problem solving approach compares groups who followed a highly structured and imposed process to unstructured groups having no imposed process . We use the model in figure I to frame our hypotheses , and draw on empirical research comparing computer - mediated communication versus unsupported face - to - face groups , along with the previously cited background research , in developing our hypotheses . We make the following speculations , which are depicted in figure 2 . CC groups will feel less threatened than face - to - face groups due to reduced social cues [ 63 ] . Coupled with more equal participation [ 9 , 12 , 15 , 27 , 60 , 69 ] , CC groups will experience increased information sharing . This will positively impact the level and amount of member knowledge ( summary variable ) , resulting in problem solutions of higher quality . Evidence of more uninhbited behavior in individuals communicating electronically [ 12 , 36 , 60 , 63 , 691 points to the likelihood that members of CC groups will feel less pressure to conform . Additionally , distributed groups are by their nature loosely joined , and therefore not likely to be as cohesive as their face - to - face counterparts [ 281 . These characteristics coupled with more equal participation should lead to the sharing of more diverse opinions within the group [ 58 ] . Diverse opinions lead to divergent thought [ 54 , 19 , 20 , 67 ] and conflict [ 57 ] . Although these conditions will increase the probability for a creative solution , it is necessary that the minority opinion holder @ ) exhibit consistent behavior patterns over time in order to have influence over the majority opinion holders [ 451 . CC groups have an increased opportunity for communication , and more timefless pressure when developing and presenting their opinions . They must work harder and communicate longer [ 3 , 9 , 15 , 17 , 69 ] . Therefore , we speculate that minority opinion holders in the CC groups will be perceived as more consistent than their face - to - face counterparts , and thus be more likely to exert influence . In fact , it has been found that groups communicating electronically experienced higher amounts of minority influence than unsupported face - to - face groups [ 43 , 51 . Minority influence should increase the chances for the development of new performance strategies ( summary variable ) and therefore novel solutions to the problem , resulting in increased levels of creativity [ 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 ] . Therefore we hypothesize the following main effects : HI . H2 . CC groups will produce solutions of higher quality than face - to - face groups . CC groups will produce more creative solutions than face - to - face groups . I Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - I995 Face - to - face communication and interaction is much richer than asynchronous communication [ SI . Although the problem solving structure was chosen due to its capability to structure communication which includes a diversity of opinions and also for its fit with the activity of design , it has been argued that face - to - face design groups do not need this added coordination [ 52 ] . It is suggested that the activity of high - level design has its own inherent structure naturally embedded within the task , and that adhering to an IBIS derivative of argumentation would impede the productivity of face - to - face groups working on design . However , we argue that the opposite is true for CC groups ; coordination is difficult [ 17 , 62 ] and some structure [ 3 , 13 ] is required to ease the cognitive burden of distributed asynchronous groups . Due to the need for differing amounts of coordination ( summary variable ) between the face - to - face and CC groups , we predict that there will be an interaction effect such that : H3 . CC structured groups and face - to - face unstructured groups will produce solutions of higher quality than CC unstructured groups and face - to - face structured groups . 4 : Method study , distributed as follows : Structured 10 11 Unstructured 10 10 There are a total of 41 groups included in this CC Face - to - face Task The Automated Post Office ( MO ) is the task used in this experiment . Groups were required to reach consensus on the initial requirements of the APO and to submit these requirements in a formal remrt at the end of the experiment ; each group produced a single report . The report was to cover the functionality of the APO along with implementation considerations and was also to contain a description of the user interface design . This is a modification of the same task used by Olson et al . [ 1993 ] , with an added emphasis on the design of the user interface . Olson et al . characterize this task as incorporating Planning , Creativity , Decision - Making , and Cognitive Conflict [ 42 ] . Subjects Subjects consisted of graduate students in the CIS and MIS majors at the New Jersey Institute of Technology ( NJIT ) and MBA students from Rutgers University . For their participation , all subjects received course credit . The majority of subjects had coursework and / or job experience directly relevant to systems design . Groups were assigned to conditions so that each condition was balanced according lo academic major . Group size ranged from 4 to 7 persons for all groups with the exception of one group which contained only 3 members . Average group size was 5 . 2 people . Subjects were scheduled to meet based on availability for scheduled sessions . Structured Approach The groups in the structured conditions followed a sequence of steps contained in three main phases : ( 1 ) Generation of alternatives : Each group member individually develop his or her own design alternative of an automated post office . There is no group interaction during this phase , i . e . , each person works alone . The outcome of this phase is the individual design alternatives - one design alternative per group member . ( 2 ) Period of critical reflection and individual evaluation of alternatives : Each group member reviews other members ' design alternatives , making pro and con comments on each alternative . Pro comments are comments in support of various aspects of a design alternative ; con comments are comments critiquing aspects of a design alternative . These comments are attached to the alternative so that all members have access to them . The outcome of this phase is the individual evaluation of each design alternative . ( 3 ) Group evaluation of alternatives and consensus reaching : The goal of each group is to reach consensus on the contents of the final design and write the formal report containing details of the design . Three steps are completed in this phase : ( a ) Each group member individually reviews other members ' design alternatives and pro and con comments , noting aspects of each alternative he or she feel should be included in the formal design . ( b ) The group develops a list containing possible alternatives . ( c ) The group uses this list to debate and discuss the design alternatives to reach consensus on the formal report . Steps ( b ) and ( c ) are iterative and can be repeated as many times as necessary , within the allotted time - frame . The outcome of this phase is the formal report describing the group ' s design of the automatic post office . Technology and Facilitation The CC groups communicated using the EIES 2 computer conferencing system developed at NJIT . Each CC group communicated in its own conference set up on EIES 2 . The conferences were minimally facilitated . The conference facilitator ' s role was that of a technical assistant , helping groups with equipment problems and answering questions of a technical nature . Training The experiment lasted two weeks . All groups met face - to - face for training and used the same practice problem , called Entertainment for Dutch Visitors [ 53 ] . CC groups were trained on the communication 8 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 features of EIES 2 while the structured groups were trained on the steps in the approach . ( Thus , the CC process groups were trained on both the use of EIES 2 and the structured approach ) . Training was completed within two hours for CC groups , after which they departed to work on the M O task on - line . Training for face - to - face groups was completed within one hour . The face - to - face groups remained together to begin work on the APO task . For data collection purposes , all participants completed a background questionnaire . Procedures The CC structured groups followed a strict schedule . Phase 1 was to be completed within two days after training and phase two within five days after training . Phase three , steps ( a ) and ( b ) were to be completed within 11 days after training , while step ( c ) was to be completed within 14 days from the training date . The CC unstructured groups were not given any process or structure to follow . They were simply told that by the end of the two - week period , their group report had to be submitted on - line . All CC groups were explicitly instructed to communicate only within their respective computer conference . Face - to - face groups met for two sessions , spaced exactly two weeks apart . In session one , members of the face - to - face structured groum had one hour to complete their individual design alternative ( phase 1 of the imposed process ) . At the end of the session , the design alternatives were collected by the facilitator and copies were made . One copy of each alternative was then mailed to each group member on the day following session one . During the two - week interim period , each group member completed phase two of the structured approach . Group members brought pro and con comments back with them to session two , where they were read by each group member . In session two , groups had 2 - 1 / 2 hours to work on phase 3 of the structured approach The face - to - face unstructured groups worked on the APO task for one hour in session one . Group members were permitted to work independently on the APO task during the two - week interim between sessions 1 and 2 ; they were instructed not to communicate with fellow group members during this time . Session two consisted of the groups working on the APO task for 2 - 1 / 2 hours . The content and layout of the formal report was determined by each group . Most face - to - face groups were provided with a word processor to use in the second session , at their discretion , in order to write their report . Two groups were unable to use a word processor due to technical problems . Their reports were handwritten and later transcribed using a word processor . This did not seem to negatively effect their performance , as both groups produced two of the longer reports for this condition . All groups had a leader who volunteered for the role at the end of the training session , sometimes with encouragement from the facilitator . For the face - to - face groups , the leader was only responsible for ensuring that any materials generated in session one were brought to the second session . For the CC groups , the leader was only responsible for ensuring that the formal report was submitted on EIES 2 by the end of two weeks . All groups completed a task and post - experiment questionnaire . For each face - to - face group , the facilitator completed an observation form at the end of the second session , rating the group on such aspects as general group atmosphere and type of coordination used . It was also noted whether the group completed their work early , or had to rush to finish the assignment . Debriefing Face - to - face groups were debriefed in a face - to - face session . CC groups were either debriefed in a special on - line conference or in a face - to - face session . All participants in the face - to - face conditions were questioned regarding their adherence to the rules for communication outside the two sessions . Measures of the Dependent Variables quality of solution was measured by a panel of three expert judges , all of whom had academic and / or professional experience in systems design . All groups ' formal reports were printed using the same word processing package and aspects of each group ' s mode of communication were masked . The judges rated each group on various aspects of the design ( e . g . , functionality and interface ) , managerial issues , written presentation and overall quality of the analysis [ 53 ] . The level of creativity contained in each group ' s design was also measured by the panel of judges . According to Amabile , a " product or response is creative to the extent that appropriate observers independently agree it is creative " [ 2 : 359 ] . Additionally , there is no agreement as to the appropriate subcategories to use in order to rate creativity . Therefore , we did not provide the expert judges with explicit details . Rather , we instructed them to rate the creativity of each group using the general category of " Creativity of Solution . " Overall 5 : Results Analysis of variance for an unbalanced design was performed to detect significant effects . Table 2 presents the descriptive statistics along with the ANOVA values for the dependent variables . The panel of three expert judges had an acceptable level of agreement when rating overall quality of solution ( Chronbach ' s alpha = . 74 ) and creativity of solution ( Chronbach ' s alpha = . 78 ) . 9 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - I995 TABLE 2 - Mean ( Standard Deviation ) & ANOVA for Dependent Variables QUALITY Structured Unstructured Column Means ANOVA Source CC / FtF Structured / Unstruct . Interaction CREATIVITY Structured Unstructured Column Means ANOVA Source CC / FtF StructuredlUnstruct . Interaction cc 7 . 33 ( 1 . 80 ) 7 . 27 ( 1 . 56 ) 7 . 30 - DF 1 1 1 cc 6 . 46 ( 1 . 91 1 6 . 60 ( 1 . 92 ) 6 . 53 - DF 1 1 1 FtF 6 . 03 ( 1 . 70 ) 6 . 80 ( 0 . 88 ) 6 . 41 TvDe 3 SS 8 . 01 1 . 26 1 . 79 FtF 5 . 06 ( 1 . 831 4 . 63 ( 0 . 961 4 . 85 TvDe 3 SS 29 . 10 0 . 22 0 . 8 . Intercorrelations among expert - rated dependent variables were computed . The level of association between overall quality and creativity ( R = . 68 ) indicates that they are related but distinct dimensions in the judges ' minds . In discussing results , signlficance levels of . 05 or better will be considered " statistically significant . " Levels between . 10 and . 05 indicate findings that suggest a relationship may exist . Since this is the first experiment of its type , such findings are worthy of note for further study . Oualitv : Overall quality was consistently higher for the CC groups ; however , the significance level was only . 07 . There was no main effect for the structured problem solving factor , nor any interaction effects . For the CC groups , overall quality was almost exactly the same for the structured and unstructured groups . For the face - to - face groups , though the means for unstructured groups are higher , as predicted , the difference is not significant . When quality ratings are examined according to their components , the only components for which the differences are large and consistent enough to approach statistical significance are those concerned with the system " design " and " interface . " Aspects of the groups ' reports dealing with managerial issues ( personnel requirements , costhenefit ratios , etc . ) or with the quality of the written presentation itself show practically no differences . Creativitv : The CC groups were considerably more creative than the face - to - face groups ( p = . 003 ) . There were no hfferences associated with the structuredunstructured factor , nor any interactions . Row Means 6 . 68 7 . 03 F 3 . 42 0 . 54 0 . 76 Row Means 5 . 76 5 . 62 F 0 . 08 0 . 28 10 . 00 P R - SQ . = . 12 - . 07 . 47 . 39 P R - SQ . = . 22 . 063 . 78 . 60 6 : Summary , Discussion and Conclusions In sum , the results are : H1 , not supported : The quality of solution produced by the CC groups was not judged to be significantly better than that of the face - to - face groups ( p = . 07 ) . H2 , supported : The solutions produced by the CC groups were judged to be significantly more creative than those produced by the face - to - face groups @ = . 003 ) . H3 , not supported : There was no interaction effect between mode of communication and the structure of the problem solving approach . The main objective of this study was to explore the effects of distributed asynchronous communication and problem solving on software design teams working on a creativity task . As hypothesized , the CC groups significantly outperformed the face - to - face groups , as rated by judges on the dimension of creativity . " Supporting creative group problem solving requires that the group be provided an environment and tools which help minimize the blocks to creativity of members , enhances creative traits and skills of individuals , and enables them to proceed through creative problem solving processes " [ 14 : 290 ] . Evidently , the act of communicating asynchronously in a dispersed setting over a period of time enhances creativity . Whv was there no interaction between mode of communication and the Droblem solving approach on measures of aualitv ? The structured problem solving approach was largely based on the IBIS method which was developed to support the process of argumentation and conflict resolution resulting during the analysis of ill - structured , complex problems . The imposed process was 10 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - I995 hypothesized to benefit the CC groups by providing the added coordination which is missing in this form of communication . We can offer several speculations why this did not occur . Concerning the design of the N O , a strong metaphor is available in the form of automatic teller machines . This might have reduced the need for coordination - instead of the problem being ill - structured , perhaps it was only semi - structured or even well - structured . If this was the case , then groups already had a good idea of how to proceed to the solution , so that the need for coordination would be greatly reduced . A second possibility is that IBIS - related methods are simply not the appropriate means for structuring and coordinating distributed asynchronous computer conferences , as compared to face - to - face meetings . Is there a relationshiD between distributed asvnchronous communication and aualitv ? The results were not significant ( p = . 07 ) . However , the findings suggest that there is a positive relationship between distributed asynchronous communication and quality of solution , as groups in both CC conditions were rated higher than their face - to - face counterparts . Aspects of our study can be compared to those of Olson et al . [ 53 ] who found that synchronous groups supported by a collaborative writing tool performing design work produced reports of higher quality than unsupported groups . Although the use of a joint editor in a " decision room " may seem completely different than the use of a computerized conferencing system in a distributed mode , in fact , there are some similarities in terms of the effects on group process and thus on group outcome . Both computer systems allowed work in parallel , and then the combining of written ideas . Perhaps the aspects of groups working in parallel and producing a written memory , by helping to reduce the number of lost ideas , positively impacts quality . Perhaps the increased connectivity of the CC groups also positively impacts quality . Maybe if the CC groups had not experienced difficulty trying to get into a busy , over - loaded system ( see Limitations of Study , next section ) , quality would have been significantly better . Limitations of study : Svstem Limitations : One limitation of this study has to do with shortcomings of EIES 2 at the time of this study ( the 1993 - 94 academic year ) The current default text editor on EIES 2 is a line editor , rather than a full screen editor which can be very frustrating to use . Also , the interface was command driven , with no graphic representation . The structure imbedded in EIES is hierarchical , and as a result , can be difficult to maneuver around in . Additionally , access to EIES 2 can be very difficult in the evening during the peak hours of 7 - 1 1 p . m . Numerous complaints were received about subjects ' inability to connect onto the system . Hopefully , these problems will be resolved in the near future , and replications of the distributed asynchronous conditions with improved system features and access might well result in sigmficantly better quality . Methodological limitations : By its very nature , it is impossible to assure full control of the behavior of distributed asynchronous groups . The group members could ignore the instructions limiting their communication . However , direct questioning of face - to - face groups during debriefing , and daily observation of the CC groups , did not indicate any evidence of circumventing the experimental manipulation . A design limitation was that we did not explore the relative effectiveness of different modes of designating a leader or motivating and defining the leaders ' role . Because the " leaders " in this experiment had only a very limited role , we do not think it would make much difference whether they volunteered or were elected or appointed . Future Research : Additional communication conditions would strengthen our ability to draw conclusions . For instance , face - to - face groups were restricted from communicating with one another outside of the two meetings . Allowing these groups to communicate via the telephone would afford them the opportunity to stay connected throughout the experiment . A second , more equivocal design task is worthy of exploration . Also , we plan to add a synchronous computer conferencing condition . With the inclusion of this condition , we could more definitively conclude whether distributed asynchronous communication fosters creativity , rather than computer - mediated communication in general . At this point , we have a firm foundation from which to further investigate the relationship between mode of communication and creativity for systems design tasks . REFERENCES 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 5 . Adelson , B . and Soloway , E . 1985 . The role of domain experience in software design . IEEE Transactions on Sofiare Engineering , 1 1 : 135 1 - 1 360 . Amabile , T . M . 1983 . The social psychology of creativity : A componential conceptualization . Journal of Personalily and Social Psychologv , 45 ( 2 ) : 357 - 376 . Arunachalam , V . 1994 . Computer - mediated communication and structure interaction in transfer pricing negotiation . Journal of Information Systems . Bateman , , T . S . , Griffin , R . W . , L Rubinstein , D . 1987 . Social information processing and group - induced shifts in response to task design . Group & Organization Studies , 12 : Clapper , D . L . , McLean , E . R . , Watson , R . T . 1991 . An experimental investigation of the effect of a group decision support system on normative influence in small groups . Proceedings of the Twevth ICIS , 273 - 282 . 88 - 108 . 11 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 6 . Couger , J . D . , Higgins , L . F . , & McIntye , S . C . 1993 . ( Un ) structured creativity in information systems organizations . MIS Quarterly , December : 375 - 397 . 7 . Curtis , B . , Krasner , H . , & Iscoe , N . 1988 . A field study of the software design process for large systems . Communications ofthe ACM , 31 : 1268 - 1287 . 8 . Daft , R . L . and Lengel , R . H . 1986 . Organizational information requirements , media richness and structural design . Management Science , vol . 32 ( 5 ) : 554 - 57 1 . 9 . Daly , B . 1993 . The influence of face - to - face versus computer - mediated communication channels on collective induction . Accounting , Management & Information Technology , 3 ( 1 ) : 1 - 22 . 10 . Daniels , Jr . , R . M . , Dennis , A . R . , Hayes , G . , Nunamaker , J . F . , Valacich , 3 . 199 I . Enterprise analyzer : electronic support for group requirements elicitation . Proceedings of the Twentyfourth Hawaii Intemational Conference on System Sciences , vol . 3 , 43 - 52 . 11 . Dennis , A . R . and Valacich , J . S . 1993 . Computer brainstorms : More heads are better than one . Journal of Applied Psychology , 78 ( 4 ) : 53 1 - 537 . 12 . Dubrovsky , V . J . , Kiesler , S . , and Sethna , B . N . 1991 . The equalization phenomena : Status effects in computer - mediated and face - to - face decision making groups . Journal of Human - Computer Interaction , 6 : 119 - 146 . 13 . Dufner , D . , Hiltz , S . , and Turoff , M . 1994 . A preliminary analysis of the effects of the use of voting tools and sequential processing . Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , vol . 14 . Duncan , N . and Paradice , D . 1992 . Creativity in GDSS : An integration of creativity , group dynamics , and problem solving theory . Proceedings of the Twenty - Fifth Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , vol . 4 : 277 - 287 . 15 . Eveland , J . D . & Bikson , T . K . 1989 . Work group structures and computer support : A field experiment . ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems , 6 , 4 : 354 - 379 . 16 . Finholt , T . , Sproull , L . , & Kiesler , S . 1990 . Communication and performance in ad hoc groups . In J . Galegher , R . Kraut , & C . Egido ( Eds . ) , Intellectual teamwork : Social and tec ~ Inologicalfoundation ofcooperative work . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 17 . Galegher , J . and Kraut , R . 1990 . Computer - mediated communication for intellectual teamwork : A field experiment in group writing . Proceedings of CSCW 90 , November 1990 , 65 - 78 . 18 . Galletta , D . F . , Sampler , J . L . , & Teng , T . C . Strategies for integrating creativity principles into the system development process . Proceedings of the Twenty - Ffth Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , vol . 41268 - 276 . 19 . Gallupe , R . B . , Bastianutti , L . M . , t Cooper , W . H . 1991 . Unblocking brainstorms . Journal of Applied Psychology , 20 . Gallupe , R . B . , Dennis , A . R . , Cooper , W . H . , Valacich , J . S . , Bastianutti , L . M . , & Nunamaker , J . F . 1992 . Electronic brainstorming and group size . Academy of Management Journal , 35 : 350 - 369 . 411 14 - 123 . 76 ( 1 ) : 1 37 - 142 . 2 I . Glass , R . and Vessey , I . 1994 . Sofiware tasks : Intellectual , clerical . . . or creative ? Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh Hawaii Intemational Conference on System Sciences , vol . 22 . Griffin , R . W . 1983 . Objective and social sou ~ ces of information in task redesign : A field experiment . Administrative Science Quarterly , 28 : 184 - 200 . 23 . Griffin , R . W . , Bateman , T . S . , Wayne , S . J . , k Head , T . S . 1987 . Objective and social factors as determinants of task perceptions and responses : An integrative perspective and empirical investigation . Academy of Management Journal , 24 . Guindon , R . 1990 . Designing the design process : Exploiting opportunistic thoughts . Human - Computer Interaction , 25 . Hackman , J . R . & Moms , C . G . 1975 . Group tasks , group interaction processes , and group performance effectiveness : A review and proposed integration . In L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psychology , 8 : 47 - 99 . New York : Academic Press . 26 . Hiltz , S . , Dufner , D . , Holmes , M . , and Poole , S . 1991 . Distributed group support systems : Social dynamics and design dilemmas . Joumal of Organizational Computing , 27 . Hiltz , S . , Johnson , K . , Aronovitch , C . and Turoff , M . 1980 . Face - to - face vs . computerized conferences : A controlled experiment . Research Report Number 12 , volume 1 , New Jersey Institute of Technology , Newark , NJ . 28 . Hiltz , S . , Johnson , K . , & Turoff , M . 1986 . Experiments in group decision making , 1 : Communications process and outcome in face - to - face vs . computerized conferences . Human Communication Research , 13 ( 2 ) : 225 - 252 . 29 . Hiltz , S . Turoff , M . , & Johnson , K . 1988 . Experiments in group decision making , 3 : Disinhibititon , deindividuation , and group process in pen name and real name computer conferences . Decision Support Systems , 5 : 1 - 16 . 30 . Hiltz , S . and Turoff , M . The Network Nation , Cambridge : MITPress , 1993 . 3 1 . Hofhan , 1961 . Conditions for creative problem solving . Journal ofPsychology , 52 : 429 - 444 . 32 . Janis , I . L . 1982 . Groupthink , 2nd ed . Boston : Houghton MifXin . 33 . Jarvenpaa , S , Rao , R . & Huber , G . 1988 . Computer support for meetings of medium - sized groups working on unstructured problems : A field experiment . MIS Quarterly , 4 : 377 - 382 . 3050 1 - 523 . 5 : 305 - 344 . 2 ( 1 ) : 135 - 159 . 121645 - 665 . 34 . Jeffnes , R . , Tumer , A . , Polson , P . , & Atwood , Me E . 198 I . The processes involved in designing sottware . In J . R . Anderson ( Ed . ) , Cognitive skills and their acquisition , Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 35 . Kant , E . , and Newell , A . 1984 . Problem solving techniques for the design of algorithms . Information Processing ad Management , 28 : 97 - 118 . 36 . Kiesler , S . , Zubrow , D . , Moses , A . & Geller , V . 1985 . Affect in computer - mediated communication : An experiment in synchronous terminal - to - terminal discussion . Human Computer Interaction , 1 : 77 - 104 . 12 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 37 . King N . and Anderson , N . , 1990 . Innovation in working groups . In M . A . West and J . L . Farr ( Eds . ) Innovation and Creativity at Work , Chichester : Wiley and Sons . 38 . Kunz , W . and Rittel , H . 1970 . Issues as elements of information systems . Working paper no . 131 , Institute of Urban and Regional Development , llniversity of California at Berkeley . 39 . MacLean , A . , Young , R . , Bellotti , V . and Moran , T , 1991 . Questions , options , and criteria : elements of design space analysis . Human - Computer Interaction . 6 ( 4 ) : 20 1 - 250 . 40 . Malone , T . and Crowston , K . 1990 . What is coordination theory and how can it help design cooperative work systems ? CSCW 90 Proceedings , pp . 357 - 370 . 4 1 . Maass , A . and Clark , R . D . 1983 . Internalization versus compliance : differential processes underlying minority influence and conformity . European Journal of Social P . ~ c ~ o ~ o Q , 1 3 : 1 97 - 2 1 5 . 42 . McGrath , J . 1984 . Groups : Interaction and pe $ ormance , Prentice Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ . 43 . McLeod , P . L . and Elston , S . E . 1994 . Minority opinion and private opinion change : moderating effects of GSS use and anonymity . Paper presented at Academy of Management Meeting . 44 . Meadows , I . S . G . 1980 . Organic structure and innovation in small work groups . Human Relations , 33 : 369 - 382 . 45 . Moscovici , S . & Nemeth , C . 1974 . Social Influence E : Minority influence . In C . Nemeth ( Ed ) Social Psychology : Classic and contempora y integrations . pp . 2 17 - 249 . Chicago : Rand McNally . 46 . Nemeth , C . J . 1986 . Differential contributions of majority and minority influence . Psychological Review , 94 : 23 - 32 . 47 . Nemeth , C . J . & Chiles , C . 1988 . Modeling courage : the role of dissent in fostering independence . European Journal of Social Psychology , 18 : 275 - 280 . 48 . Nemeth , C . J . & Kwan , J . 1987 . Minority influence , divergent thinking and the detection of correct solutions . Journal ofApplied Social Psychology , 17 : 788 - 799 . 49 . Nemeth , C . J . and Wachtler , J . 1983 . Creative problem solving as a result of majority vs . minority influence . European Joumal of Social Psycholog ) : 13 : 45 - 55 . 50 . Nysmm , H . 1970 . Creativity and Innovation . New York : Wiley . 51 . Olson , G . M . , and Olson , J . S . 1991 . IJser - centered design of collaboration technology . Journal of ( 3rganizational Computing , 1 . 6 1 - 83 . 52 . Olson , G . M . , Olson , J . S . , Carter , M . , and Storrosten , M . 1992 . Small group design meetings : An analysis of collaboration . Human Computer Interaction , 7 ( 4 ) : 347 - 374 . 53 . Olson , J . S . , Olson , G . M . , Storrosten , M . and Carter , M . 1993 . Groupwork close up : A comparison of the group design process with and without a simple group editor . ACM Transactions on Ofice Information Systems , 1 1 ( 4 ) : 321 - 348 54 . Osbom , A . F . 1953 . Applied Imagination , New York : Scri bner’s . 55 . Panneter , S . M . and Gaber , J . D . 1971 . Creative scientists rate creativity factors . Research Management , November , 65 - 70 . 56 . Payne , R . 1990 . The effectiveness of research teams : a review , In M . A . West and J . L . Farr ( Eds . ) Innovation and Creativity af Work , Chichester : Wiley & Sons . 57 . Poole , M . S . , Holmes , M . , & DeSanctis , G . 1991 . Conflict management in a computer - supported meeting environment . Management Science , 37 ( 8 ) : 926 - 953 . 58 . Rao , V . S . & Jarvenpaa , S . L . 1991 . Computer support of groups : Theory - based models for GDSS research . Management Science , 37 : 1347 - 1 362 . 59 . Rittel , H . 1972 . On the planning crisis : systems analysis of the first and second generations . Institute fir Grundlagen der Planung LA . , Universitat Stuttgart ; Stuttgart , Germany . 60 . Siege ] , J . , Dubrovsky , V . , Kiesler , S . , & McGuire , T . 1986 . Group processes in computer - mediated communication . Organizational Behavior & Human Decision Processes , 61 . Simon , H . A . 1973 . The structure of ill - structured problems . ArtiJicial Intelligence , 4 : 145 - 1 80 . 62 . Smith J . Y . and Vanecek , M . T . 1990 . Dispersed group decision making using nonsimultaneous computer conferencing : A report of research . Joumal of Management Information Systems , 7 ( 2 ) : 71 - 92 . 63 . Sproull , L . & Kiesler , S . 1986 . Reducing social context cues : Electronic mail in organizational communication . Management Science , 32 ( 11 ) : 1492 - 1512 . 64 . Steiner , I . V . 1972 . Group Process and Productiviv , New York : Academic Press . 65 . Telem , M . 1988 . Information requirements specification brainstorming collective decision - making approach . Information Processing and Management , 24 ( 5 ) : 549 - 566 . 66 . Turoff , M . Computer - mediated - communication requirements for group support . 199 1 . Joumal of Organizational Computing , 1 ( 1 ) : 85 - 113 . 67 . Valacich , J . , Paranka , D . , George , J . & Nunamker , J . 1993 . Communication concurrency and the new media : A new dimension for media richness . Communication Research , 20 ( 2 ) : 249 . 68 . Visart , N . 1979 . Communication between and within research units . In F . M . Andrews , ( Ed . ) , Scientrjk Productivity , Cambridge University Press , pp . 223 - 25 1 . 69 . Weisband , S . 1992 . Group discussion and first advocacy effects in computer - mediated and face - to - face decision making groups . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 5 3 , 3 52 - 3 80 . groups . In M . A . West and J . L . Farr ( Eds . ) Znnovation and Creativity at Work , Wiley and Sons : Chichester . theory of organizational creativity . Academy of A4anagement Review , 18 ( 2 ) : 292 - 32 1 . 72 . Yakemovic , K . C . Burgess and Conklin , E . J . 1990 . Report on a development project use of an issue - based information system . CSCW 90 Proceedings , pp . 105 - 1 18 . 3711 57 - 187 . 70 . West , M . A . 1990 . The social psychology of innovation in 71 . Woodman , R . , Sawyer , J . & Griffin , R . 1993 . Toward a 13