131 The influence of local powers on Participatory Design processes in marginalized conflict areas Chiara Del Gaudio Unisinos Design School Luiz Manoel Gonzaga 744 Porto Alegre ( RS ) , Brazil chiara . delgaudio . d @ gmail . com Alfredo Jefferson de Oliveira Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro Marquês de São Vicente 225 Rio de Janeiro ( RJ ) , Brazil afferson @ puc - rio . br Carlo Franzato Unisinos Design School Luiz Manoel Gonzaga 744 Porto Alegre ( RS ) , Brazil cfranzato @ unisinos . br ABSTRACT This paper explores the influence of local forces on Participatory Design processes aiming at promoting access and inclusion , carried out in marginalized conflict areas . Social contexts are the synthesis of the forces exerted by local actors which become more and more influent on contextual dynamics in situations of local instability and struggles . We present and analyse a Participatory Design project developed in a Rio de Janeiro slum , within an NGO . Through a conceptual framework on power and on its exercise , we explain how project partners , participants , and local institutions and groups have influenced the project , to the point of preventing its implementation . The intention is to show how the context may condition the design project , to point out the difficulties in acting in conflict areas and to present factors that will help designers in dealing with them . Author Keywords Participatory Design , local powers , slum , marginalized conflict area , NGO . ACM Classification Keywords Design . INTRODUCTION Although the democratic essence of the Participatory Design ( PD ) process makes it a tool for promoting a more equal society , its application in marginalized conflict areas to foster more egalitarian dynamics , processes and relationships still needs to be better explored . There , it could be used to connect and link people together , and to initiate community behaviours thus rebuilding local social fabric . Yet , this kind of application is challenging due both to the unfamiliarity of these contexts with democratic processes and to the contextual adaptation of the participatory methodology ( Light and Akama , 2012 ) . As Light and Akama ( 2012 ) state , it is not possible to separate PD methodology from its application . Indeed , when applied , it is never pure , but always influenced by those who participate in the process . Therefore , there is a need for better understanding of the dynamics of implementation in these territories . In this paper we focus on the elements that may influence a PD process in marginalized conflict areas , in this way contributing towards broadening the knowledge related to PD methodology . This paper shows that not only participants might influence the process , but other local actors , power structures and mechanisms as well . The description of a field study , the analysis of the occurred dynamics , and the intersection between design and the context lead to a better understanding of the designer’s difficulties in managing his practice and his context of action . Also about the factors that might have an influence on the designer’s actions even causing inability of managing the design process . Our results highlight as working in conflict areas asks the designer a deeper understanding of the context dynamics and more training in dealing with them . At the same time , questions arise about the designer’s partnership with local actors and about the political implications of such a partnership . The paper is structured as follow : review of the potentiality of PD in marginalized conflict areas ; description of an experience developed in a Rio de Janeiro slum ; closer consideration of the concept of power and of the use of power to understand the main topics of the design experience . Finally , research results are presented . Both the experience description and even more its analysis is presented in a confessional style that aims “to convey impression of the inquiry in process and recreate the sense of uncertainty encountered by the researcher” ( Bjørn and Boulus , 2011 , p . 287 ) . Actually , the use of thoughts and reflections , as they were collected during field research , aims to show the difficulties and the contradictions experienced by the designer and so how project development expectations diverged from the encountered reality . At the same time , they help explain invisible and not objective situations , motivations , and dynamics that play a great influence in this kind of project . PARTICIPATORY DESIGN IN MARGINALIZED CONFLICT AREAS One of the core concepts of PD is the one of Participatory Democracy ( Sanoff , 2007 ; Rizzo , 2009 ) . It is based on the idea that the decision making - process has to be Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . PDC ' 14 , October 06 - 10 2014 , Windhoek , Namibia Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2256 - 0 / 14 / 10 … $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2661435 . 2661440 132 decentralized to all the different sectors of society , in order to let everyone take part in the decisions that affect their own lives ( Sanoff , 2007 ) . PD applies this principle and includes the user from the opening phases of the design process ( Bjerknes , Ehn and Kyng , 1987 ) . In this way , the user takes part in all the undertaken activities , which means that he has the power to influence the design process . This is possible because his or her abilities and knowledge are recognized and because of the comprehension of the existence of a collective intelligence ( Fischer et al . , 2005 ) . Collective intelligence is the one expressed by a group of individuals doing things collectively . The user’s involvement brings a better understanding of his or her real needs and it allows taking into consideration the characteristics of the context too , unknown to the designer . PD allows the development of more significant solutions because they are based on people’s implicit knowledge ( Binder and Brandt , 2008 ; Spinuzzi , 2005 ) and the solutions are developed in the context of implementation . The connection between PD and Participatory Democracy is enhanced by the understanding of the Design project as an exercise of power . According to Bratteteig and Wagner ( 2012 ) the design process is a power process because it implies several decisions , and is affected by these . Steen ( 2011 ) shares this idea and points out the different distribution of power in the design process : “Each project can be conceived of a series of decisions , in which certain knowledge of certain people is privileged over other knowledge of other people . With each decision , power is exercised and some actors have more agency in the decision - making process than others” ( Steen , 2011 , p . 47 ) . Consequently , as he highlights , sharing power in project development is an exercise of Democracy . If sharing power fosters more democratic processes , designing together may be a tool for a more democratic society and PD stands as an approach that aims at this democratization . The PD contribution to a more equal society is through the empowerment of people . This happens in several ways . First of all , users acquire more power over their lives because they develop problem - solving and decision - making activities that promote their self - consciousness , empowering them . Moreover , they learn how to share decisions and to collaborate . This can be the first step in developing community ties which are a precondition of a democratic society . Present and potential application of PD The ability of the PD approach to foster Democracy can make it a fundamental tool to promote a more egalitarian social structure in all social contexts that are not used to democratic processes . This means that it could be used for the sustainable development of marginalized conflict areas , and of all the places where local conflicts impede the existence of a sense of community and collective decision - making . A clearer conceptualization of social context and of marginalized conflict areas will show its full range of potentialities . First of all , social contexts include the combination of land , infrastructure , social relationships , services , culture , art , habits , religions and government within which a certain social group exists and interacts ( Barnett and Casper , 2001 ) . These can be cities , regions , neighborhoods , and communities : dynamic contexts that change rapidly due to local and external forces . A marginalized conflict area is a part of a social context characterized by being chaotic and hyper - politicized in nature , by the absence of public security and formal institution , and whose dynamics are determined by social divisions and fights for power among actors with conflicting agendas ( UNDP , 2012 ) . This is a kind of situation that generates , and successively is fed by , social exclusion : a multidimensional process that place individuals far from social relationships and prevent their participations in the activities of their society ( Silver , 2007 ) . Even though participatory and collaborative processes have been seen , since the Seventies , as the way in which Design can act in the social field to promote better life conditions , it is still unknown how they may be applied in marginalized conflict areas . What will happen when PD processes are applied in areas of conflict and exclusion ? What might challenge the designer‘s action ? At the moment , there is not enough information to answer these questions and there is a need for more research efforts on this field . PD application surely changes with contexts and participants . So , as PD method and techniques strictly depend on the context , as Light and Akama ( 2012 ) point out , in order to promote this practice it is necessary to understand what happens when it is applied specifically in marginalized conflict areas . Recent case studies developed in marginalized areas have stressed this challenge . Hardy et al . ( 2007 ) , for instance , undertook a project with an Aboriginal community in north Queensland aimed at fostering local use of internet - based applications , and explained how , in that context , power relationships and cultural manners may oppose participants’ empowerment in design process . More studies have to be undertaken to reveal local micro - dynamics of participation and its invisible paths and obstacles . These micro - dynamics are at the core of the process because PD depends on the relationship between the designer and the participants , the relationship among the participants , and the way in which different actors participate ( Light and Akama , 2012 ) . In the specific case of marginalized conflict areas , which is the focus of this paper , the understanding of these contexts unfamiliarity with collective decision - making led us to presume that forces that oppose this kind of approach may exist . In order to better understand how this manifests itself and what might cause difficulties for the designer , we will present and analyze a field study developed in a Rio de Janeiro slum . We used a PD approach to promote the collective revitalization of an abandoned square , together with local inhabitants . A CASE STUDY The PD case presented here was developed in 2012 , between March and October , in a slum of Rio de Janeiro . It was carried out as the second phase of a PhD research 133 whose purpose was to investigate the influence of the context on participatory design experiences aiming at fostering local social innovation processes in marginalized urban conflict areas . The authors chose action - research as the research strategy and the collaboration with a local partner as a fundamental element for the field study and project development . Action - research strategy would have allowed a deep understanding of the context and of its dynamics , and stronger results due to shared research and aims . Notwithstanding , several difficulties in sharing research , objectives and actions , that will be presented here , emerged and prevented the development of an action - research . Therefore , all along the field study participatory observation was used as data collection strategy . In this research phase , the authors selected the specific context and the project partner – an NGO , and then applied a PD method in the effort to redesign an abandoned local public square . Specifically , one of them was more involved on the field than the others . The project objective was identified together with the partner and its strategic aim was to involve local inhabitants in its redesign , to empower them through the Design process and to promote democratic attitudes . The process was made up of three main stages : firstly a phase of integration in the context and in the partner’s organization , then the selection of the project object and the definition of the main strategies , and finally the realization of two public meetings aimed at discussing at promoting co - creative activities . All these moments are presented in the paper . Through this field study , we wished to better understand the dynamics and challenges in using PD approach in marginalized conflict areas , and to explore its potential to promote local collaborative networks and processes of active citizenship . The context Figure 1 . Complexo de favela da Maré , Rio de Janeiro . Rio de Janeiro slums , better known as favelas cariocas , are an example of a vulnerable , marginalized and conflict area . They suffer from several social problems . Among the most worrisome , there are social exclusion , inequity , the absence of the State in supplying the most basic services , poverty and the presence of everyday situations of violence and crime . Rio de Janeiro has 1094 favelas ( IBGE , 2010 ) . Different in size , shape , and local actors , they are geographically an integral part of the city , even if these places actually are in a situation of spatial segregation from the upper and dominating part of society ( Souza e Silva , 2001 ) . Social and economic differences are undeniable , as is the situation of inferiority and invisibility in which their inhabitants live . In fact , their citizenship is in practice not recognized since the most basic rights are not guaranteed ( i . e . public security , respect and protection from public armed forces , public infrastructure etc . ) . One of the main causes for this situation has been the historical implementation of incomplete social and urban policies . Actually , over time local criminal groups have grown in power by taking the government’s place in satisfying people’s basic needs . Nowadays they dominate and manage these territories through the power of arms ( Souza e Silva , 2004 ) . This is a peculiar characteristic of Rio de Janeiro slums that makes them a place of political and armed conflict . These territories are contested both between the government and criminal groups , and among the different criminal organizations that exist in the city . In these contexts people can’t exercise their rights , their voice is not heard by public institutions and a situation of unsatisfied necessities , insecurity and fears feeds an individualistic attitude and limits and impedes community ties and behaviors ( Souza e Silva , 2003 , 2010 ) . For these reasons , a favela carioca was selected as the place where to explore the potentialities and challenges of PD in marginalized conflict areas . Specifically , the research case has been developed in Complexo de favelas da Maré . Situated in the Northern part of the city , it is known for its size , high population density , infrastructural problems and crime . It is made up of 16 small favelas whose territory is divided and claimed by three local armed criminal groups whose struggles and influence dominate the life of the almost 130 . 000 local inhabitants . The project was sited in one of the favelas , called Nova Holanda , were the design partner has its main base . The local design partner Before starting the field study , we decided that it would be essential to the development of a project in the selected territory to collaborate with a local NGO . Thus , a medium size NGO , consisting most of all of local inhabitants that have been involved in local transformation projects for more than twenty years , was selected as project partner . The main selection criterion was the analysis of its projects’ aims and methods . Its several projects showed that it shared the same objectives and work methods : in fact , the NGO addressed the integrated development of the territory , and was based on people’s involvement and on the promotion of community activities . After the selection of the NGO , and few months before the beginning of the field study , we organized several meetings with some of the NGO’s most influent representatives . Research and project aims and potentialities were presented . The NGO agreed : it would participate to a field study where a PD project would be developed with a design goal identified together after the 134 designer’s immersion phase in the territory and by the analysis of the collected data . The final aim would be to promote local active citizenship processes . This partnership seemed fundamental to access the territory and operate . First of all , the local crime situation demanded an unspoken permission to access the territory and to operate ; this could be avoided working with the NGO which already had the permission . Secondly the NGO knew the territory and its rules , and could therefore guide the designer in exploring it and in the implementation of actions . Finally , the organization was already supplied with infrastructure and it was recognized locally . For all these reasons , we decided to collaborate with the NGO , which meant we entrusted it to mediate with the context . The first phase The field study started with a first stage of deep immersion in the territory . A better understanding of this unknown environment and integration into the local partner was necessary in order to identify , together with the NGO , the strategic objective of action . So , one of the authors spent a couple of months exploring Complexo de favelas da Maré , participating in local activities and collaborating with the partner . Actually , the NGO placed the designer side by side with the main members of the territory mobilization sector . This is the part of the organization involved with activities to foster inhabitants’ emancipation , community awareness and democratic participation . This allowed the designer to become familiar with the context , its inhabitants , the local actors and the organization . The aim was to give the designer an adequate understanding of the context and the intangible tools that would allow him to interact directly within it . This includes local unspoken rules , habits , the understanding of local dynamics , time , resources , and , finally , to be recognized by local inhabitants and actors . In order to encourage changes and to promote inclusive processes , the designer had to become an integral element of this new context and of its social fabric . After this starting period , the design goal was selected together with the partner : a local run - down square . The design goal Complexo de favelas da Maré , as other Rio de Janeiro slums , has high density of houses , few unoccupied public and green spaces and an urban derelict physical environment . Uncollected waste on the ground , small streets overcrowded by cars and motorcycles , spoiled and destroyed buildings are the common landscape in which people live . At the same time , local inhabitants are used to spend much of their spare time outside , due to the small size of houses and , often , the high number of family members . There is the need of more pleasant and safe public spaces where people can spend time together , socialize and relax , and where children can play . Living together and sharing activities like parties , concerts , and playing can be vital to encourage community attitudes and feelings . During the project’s first phase , this awareness led the designers and the NGO to focus their efforts on a local abandoned square . The square was one of the NGO’s suggestions for design goal from the beginning , but the designer agreed only after completing the first phase and his research observations . This decision was taken also because of the NGO’s interest in the project which could reveal itself a strong support in the implementation of actions . Figure 2 . Aerial photograph of the square . The square contained five areas : an area for public events , a playground , a space supplied with stone tables and chairs , a skateboard area and a football field . At the time , only the last area was actually used by local people , most of all for football training for children . The others were not frequented due to lack of maintenance , visible in the broken infrastructure and the large amount of waste on the ground , and due to the interest of the local armed criminal group in the space . Figure 3 . The playground . The local criminal group was particularly interested in the first area , which it used for building commercial kiosks and to sell them to whom was interested in starting a local 135 Figure 4 . The kiosks area . business . Kiosks used both to attract young people at the weekend when they come back from raves organized by the criminal group in the neighborhood ; and to impede different kind of activities with their expansive presence . In addition , the square was frequented by local drug addicts that found an ideal place for their activities in its abandonment . Working together for revitalizing and redesigning the square could create community ties among local inhabitants . For this reason , we decided to involve different kind of people , from children to elders , which we could reach through the different projects of the NGO . Local people would be the key actors in the process of change and the designer would promote collaborative dynamics . The second phase After the integration phase and the selection of the design focus of action , the designer collected some information about the dynamics that characterized the area and about local inhabitants’ possible interest in the place . The aim was both to deepen the understanding of that micro - system and to confirm that our idea really corresponded to a need and to something that people wanted . This first analyses led to suggested several co - creation activities to the NGO , to be developed together with its members . The activities aimed at first developing ideas about how to raise people’s interest in using the space . The second step would have been to implement these activities in order to get inhabitants’ interest and , lastly , PD activities would have been with the inhabitants . We thought that to create interest would have to be the first step . In our idea , this would have caused people’s spontaneous participation : the redesign would then take the shape of a natural endogenous local community process , that means it would have been more effective and easily to bring forward . In fact , when a solution is developed by people and recognized as their own this has more possibility to be accepted and absorbed because it is perceive as not imposed from outside ( Couto , 1991 ) . This was not possible because the NGO didn’t support our suggestion to start with a first phase of internal co - creation activities and development of ideas aimed at fostering people’s interest . Instead , it proposed to first organize some public meetings to discuss the situation with the community . Its experience taught it that this was the best way to communicate with people and to legitimize the project to the other local forces , as associations and criminal organizations . This kind of precautions and politic - strategic actions turned out to be common along the whole process . On several occasions we realized that the NGO paid special attention to the other actors that might be interested in the management of the space – as local associations , organizations , shop owners and criminals , with the exception of the people that should have been the main protagonist . One example was the need to organize a meeting with the president of the Local Inhabitants Association to decide with him what would be the result of the project . We started to perceive that invisible power structures existed and political dynamics were occurring on a different level , outside of our managing range . Notwithstanding , hindered to act differently without the NGO , the designer accepted its suggestions . The third phase The first meeting , which took place in the end of July , and its organization were carried out following the standard procedures of the NGO . This contrasted with the need of a different kind of action which was agreed upon at the beginning of the field experience . Little space was left to the designer’s initiative : in fact , he could hardly apply any of his ideas neither in organizing the event nor in publicizing it . After several tries he had to accept his inability to influence and manage this process and he accepted the NGO’s choices in order to go on with the project . The event consisted of a public meeting where some NGO members presented the situation regarding the square and the importance of a different one . Few people participated . Figure 5 . The first meeting : the designer speaking with the few participants . However , on that occasion , the designer succeeded in speaking with local inhabitants during the event and collecting ideas and wishes . He did it through using interaction tools he developed to make it the first step of a participatory process . Despite this , the meeting ended with the NGO inviting people to a future event where they could see the project’s final shape based on their wishes . However , a process which was quick and not shared was incompatible with the initial purpose . 136 Figure 6 . The second meeting : the kiosk owners’ intervention . The second meeting took place in the end of August and was similar to the first one . The designer presented a possible future scenario for the square aiming at using it as a tool for exchanging ideas and involving people rather than at choosing a solution as the NGO previously stated . Fewer inhabitants participated , and unlike the previous one , they were most of all kiosk owners . They dominated the event with the expression of their ideas and stressing the importance of considering their needs in defining the new square design . The NGO ended the meeting praising the presented scenario and calling it “project result” . No more events were carried out , even though the designer went on interacting with the NGO for two more months trying to understand if new meetings would take place and to promote them . In the period between March and October 2012 , the PD of the square did not take place . None of the meetings succeeded in getting the participation of people whose interest in participating had never been stimulated and who had never been in touch with PD tools and processes . All along the project , the designer was not able to manage the Design process , to be inside the process as one of the active participants , to allow people to do the same and to decide where , when and which kind of actions that would have to be developed . Field work resulted in the designer’s inability of managing the process : the incapability to make decisions , the lack of space for research and action , and the sensation of not leading but being led . He was given small practical tasks by the NGO but he had no power in promoting and enabling different strategies of action . The designer’s aim to manage the process was not about deciding the results , but about allowing local inhabitants’ participation . While this inability sometimes was the result of a visible decision from the NGO , other times it was caused by local actors’ decisions and actions unknown to the designer , and everyday situations and difficulties . For instance : emergency situations , elections , other events etc . We believe that both these kinds of situations were related to the influence of local forces on the design process as the next section will illustrate through some theoretical concepts and some examples from the field . CHALLENGES FOR PD IN MARGINALIZED CONFLICT AREAS The research project presented here represents a situation in which the designer lost the ability of managing the PD process . Bratteteig and Wagner ( 2012 ) affirm that in implementing a PD process the designer loses part of the power he usually detains , that he has to accept different opinions , and that other actors will acquire some power . In a participative project , in opening the process , the designer allows the participants to exert some of this power , which means to decide some of the actions to be implemented , in this way actively participating in defining the transformation . Thus , the whole process is influenced and led both by the designer and by the participants . Designer’s difficulties in project management are common in open processes . However , we believe that other factors may influence the project process and determine the amount of the designer’s loss of power and the possibility of change . This is what happened in this case study , where the designer didn’t just share his power , but it lost it and his ability of provoking a transformation . The designer’s loss of power was not due to opening the process to the local population , but to other factors . We explain this phenomenon through the influence exercised by indirect actions , related both to the design process and object , and also to the context dynamics . The exercise of power According to Foucault ( 1982 ) power defines a relation between partners and it is defined by them . However , he adds that its exercise “is not simply a relationship between partners , individual or collective , it is a way in which certain actions modify others” ( Foucault , 1982 , p . 788 ) . Each actor exercises an influence on the others’ actions through his own . This influence is the exercise of his power . Thus , stressing its transformative essence : power is the capacity of altering others’ actions and aims . From this point of view , the relationship that exists among the actors of the same design network is the expression of the power dynamics that characterize it . This means that the design network is an expression of the power that each actor exerts on the others and it is defined by the power relationships that are established among them . Thus being , the design network structure potentially pre - determines and directs the kind of action that each actor may take . Considering a PD project implemented in marginalized conflict areas , the designer’s act of opening up the design process to other actors may be seen as an attempt to transform the local power structures and exercise of power . According to Foucault ( 1979 ) influence may be the result of intentional actions , which he named tactics , or of non - subjective articulation of different intentional actions , which he named strategies . Considering a design project in its context of implementation , this happens both when the actor belongs to the established design network and when he is just one of the actors of the context . Local actors’ action can influence the design process development . Thus , the context where PD is carried out which its ruled by power mechanisms that the designer 137 wants to change may be seen as the space synthesis of local powers exercised by local actors that may directly or indirectly influence the project . And it can be exerted through pre - existing mechanisms of power , ( that are unknown to the designer ) . This comprehension is fundamental in order to understand what happens to a design project when it is implemented . Local powers and the exercise of power may not be visible ( Broum and Enderud , 1981 ) , and their origin and shape may be unknown to those who are influenced by them . This happens not only because they may manifest themselves as indirect effects of other actions or are generated by actors outside of the design network . There actually exist different ways and procedures that allow an actor to manage projects , including the management of conflicts and collaborations , without showing his agenda – meaning his plan and his main intentions , or how these have been established . Bachrach and Baratz ( 1963 ) explain that power is exercised both when actors participate directly in decisions that affect other actors , and when they direct their efforts in practices that limit others’ possibility of discussing issues that may hinder the first actors’ aims . This means that they limit decision - making to safe issues using nondecisionmaking mechanisms , which means mechanisms that avoid policy conflicts and limit decision - making to non - controversial matters . Insights from the field : the influence of local forces on PD process In a PD project the power exercised by an actor may manifest itself through actions which both directly and indirectly influence others’ . This happens both with actors that belong to the Design network and with the ones that belong only to the context . The focus of our analysis is the case of indirect influence . Strategies as nondecisionmaking , hidden agendas or exercising power through indirect secondary actions are at the base of this phenomenon . Local actors’ influence on the designer’s actions can be seen and understood through the research case presented here . All along the project the square appeared to be the object of several and differing interests and aims . Actually , it was valuable to four groups : 1 ) local inhabitants , even if at the time they might not have realized their interest in the place ; 2 ) the local armed criminal group which was interested in selling some of the areas for business activity ; 3 ) the local inhabitants association wishing to build the infrastructure requested by local actors ( churches , associations… ) in order to received their vote during elections ; 4 ) the NGO . During the experience each of them expressed attitudes and took choices determined by their own , declared or not , interests and related agendas . Consequently , all of them , except the inhabitants , exercised a power over the space influencing its dynamics . As explained by Foucault ( 1982 ) actors’ actions are an exercise of power because they influence , directly or indirectly , the context dynamics and so the others . As seen above , these actors’ use of power occurs both through their actions and the decisions they make . In addition , in the analyzed case , these powers were based on different interests and objectives , which were conflicting , making the square a place of conflict . The result was that the dynamics generated by local powers influenced both the action of the local actors and of those belonging to others contexts and who wanted to operate there , such as the designer . We are going to present two situations that can exemplify both hidden and indirect power exercise . The influence of hidden agendas The situation where hidden agendas influence the design process can be better understood through the example of the NGO’s action and the understanding of its unspoken aims . During the field work , at different stages , we could observe three different positions taken by the NGO with which we closely collaborated . At the beginning , our Design partner manifested an interest in the public renovation of the square . It would have been the only way to give it back to local inhabitants , to foster community feelings and empowerment . The NGO agreed that co - designing with them was a key element in this process . This agreement led the designer to go forward with the project and the collaboration . However , after the first phase the partner never accepted the designer’s suggestions , as for example realizing a co - creative workshop with inhabitants . This opposition was always justified with the NGO’s better knowledge of the context and its work within it . It never expressed a wish of a different involvement of local inhabitants in the process . Finally , after the two meetings the organization asked the designer to meet with the local Secretary of Parks and Gardens with the intention of showing him some sketches developed along the process . We realized that , according to local financing rules , this would be the first step for the NGO to start a funding application process . A later analysis of the experience and of the NGO’s requests and behaviors allow us to identify this as its real interest . It was completely different from what had been decided with the designer at the beginning . All the actions that the NGO supported and permitted seemed to be aimed at developing documents to be used to get funds for the square renovation . In the NGO’s view getting money and using it to renovate the place was the best way to give it back to local inhabitants . The NGO wanted the good for the population , but it chose to pursue it in a different way from what had been agreed . As we realized , according to the standard rules that regulate its projects , in its opinion this was the quickest and most effective way to succeed . In fact , later one of the NGO directors affirmed : “I think that the approach you bring requires time . If you really want to get the others’ sincere participation you have to make them understand what kind of process this is . So , you cannot just come and say : we will do it this way . No , the person has to participate in the construction process . In order to do it , a construction time is needed . So , I think 138 that the idea to change the situation through a collective process requires a lot of time . A lot of time . ” ( personal communication ) . As shown here , the NGO had different and concealed aims that it tried to pursue both through ambiguous behaviors and avoiding the construction of a shared agenda for change , and through keeping the designer far from the possibility to intervene in the process . Thus , it exerted power over the whole process by nondecisionmaking mechanisms . The influence of contextual dynamics The situation where the design process is influenced indirectly by the actions implemented by all the local existing actors , appears evident observing a situation where their mutual position had a key role . We consider here , for instance , the position taken by the NGO in relation to the local armed organization . It was a position of confrontation . To fight against local crime was mandatory in order to get better living conditions for local inhabitants . This attitude could be observed for instance the day the NGO found out that local criminals intended to build a new kiosk right on the wall of its main building . As soon as possible , the same night , the NGO called a bricklayer to create a door on the wall exactly in the place the kiosk was planned . The day after , it was not possible anymore to build a kiosk without a direct confrontation between the two actors . In the next period , the consciousness of being in the middle of a fight restricted the designer in his actions and consequently influenced the design process . This situation and similar ones highlighted the existence of power mechanisms and dynamics that were unknown to the designer and outside of his possibility to control and successfully deal with . This example may illustrate that when PD processes are implemented in the real world the context dynamics influence the designer’s action . In the presented case , it was influenced by the power exercised by local actors through decisions that were not directly related to the design goal . FINAL CONSIDERATIONS The paper discusses the development of PD projects in the real world , especially in areas of conflict . In particular , it analyzes the elements that might influence or hinder the design process and the designer’s ability of project management . A case study carried out in a Rio de Janeiro slum and focused on the collective revitalization of a neglected square , provides the scenario of our discussion . We present how setting up and developing a PD project in a marginalized territory , characterized by conflicts between local actors and by unfamiliarity with democratic processes , is challenging . We encounter not only the usual difficulties of PD projects - as sharing power , unexpected events , new contexts , managing actors with different backgrounds - but also that local dynamics might strongly influence the design process . Foucault’s interpretation of the concept of power and of its implementation together with Bacharach and Baratz’s understanding and their ideas on agenda management helps analyze the experience and some of the occurred dynamics , and to explain them . In fact , we show how the design process might be affected by the unseen and indirect use of power which is hard to identify and to manage for the designer . We present two different kinds of situation . The first one is the case in which the power exercised is hidden on purpose . This may happen when the other actors act with hidden agendas and through nondecisionmaking mechanisms . In the second situation power is exerted through actions not taken to directly influence the design goal . These situations are not easily managed by the designer . What can he do to prevent these forces to influence the project ? In this kind of project the designer acts in contexts ruled by unfamiliar dynamics . As stated by Winschiers - Theophilus , Bidwell and Blake ( 2012 ) , the designer is an outsider and inexperienced with local dynamics . As presented in the previous section , the context may be seen as the synthesis of local powers and may be ruled by local pre - existing power mechanisms . A designer that uses a PD approach suggests a dynamic that opposes local power structure , but at the same time he finds himself acting through it and inside it . Pre - existing power mechanisms are his conditions of action . They represent the path for the designer’s acting but at the same time they may prevent his actions . From this perspective a deeper understanding and knowledge of the context and of its mechanisms of power and power structures allows the designer to find out which dynamics will have an influence on the process - supportive or preventive - and to develop strategies to deal with them . In this framework the design network may turn out to be a key element of the strategy . This means that the selection of actors , the configuration of their relationships , interaction , ways and means , may be a key element in the definition of a different power structure that opposes the existing one . More studies are needed on this area . At the same time , when the designer acts in this kind of territory , he places himself in the middle of a local conflict , both on a political and on a physical level , and it is necessary to be prepared for this . Local actors struggle for domination over people , physical spaces , and money . A similar situation is the one experienced by anthropologists researching in a dangerous field . Kovats - Bernat ( 2002 ) explains how acting in an area that threatens personal safety affects the research and the anthropologist’s approach and way of conducting it . He stresses that methodology has to be responsive to the encountered reality and that research methods are inseparable from research findings . The same happens with a designer working in dangerous settings . Although marginalized conflict areas are an important context of action there is a need to understand how PD processes may be applied there . To consider local conflicts and to define strategies for dealing with them becomes a priority because unless this is done , the designer risks to become a pawn used by local actors to achieve their results and the process risks to become the place where the conflict among local actors is played out . 139 The case study shows how the understanding of local dynamics , interests , hidden agendas and unspoken rules emerged in time . Thus , in addition to the preceding suggestions , a longer initial phase of getting to know the context appears to be necessary , analyzing it , discovering problems and developing and implementing strategies to deal with them . Finally , it is evident that a design partner may be a strength , but also an obstacle . This means that a different way of dealing with the design partner is needed . The experimentation of design dynamics with the partner in the initial phase in order to test the collaboration may promote and result in a better partnership . This paper shows that there is a need of future studies on applying PD processes in marginalized conflict areas where the designer finds himself acting among local power dynamics . REFERENCES Bachrach , P . and Baratz , M . S . Decisions and Nondecisions : An Analytical Framework . The American Political Science Review , 1963 , 57 ( 3 ) : 632 - 42 . Barnett , E . and Casper , M . A Definition of Social Environment . American Journal of Public Health , 2001 , 91 ( 3 ) : 465 . Binder , T . and Brandt , E . The Design : Lab as a platform in participatory design research . CoDesign , 2008 , 7 ( 1 ) : 115 - 129 . Bjørn , P . , and Boulus , N . Dissenting in reflective conversations : Critical components of doing action research , Action Research Journal . 2011 , 9 ( 3 ) : 282 - 302 Bjerknes , G . , Ehn , P . and Kyng , M . Computers and Democracy : A Scandinavian challenge . Brookfield , Gower . 1987 Borum , F . and Enderud , H . Konflikter i organisationer . Nyt Nordisk Forlag Arnold Busck , Copenhagen . 1981 Bratteteig , T . and Wagner , I . Disentangling power and decision - making in participatory design . Proc . PDC 2012 , 41 - 50 . Couto , R . O ensino da disciplina de Projeto Básico sob o enfoque do Design Social . Master dissertation in Education , PUC - Rio , Rio de Janeiro , Brazil . 1991 Fischer , G . , Giaccardi E . , Eden H . , Sugimoto M . and Yel Y . Beyond binary choices : integrating individual and social creativity . Human - Computer studies , 2005 , 63 : 482 - 512 . Foucault , M . Discipline and Punish : The Birth of the Prison , Vintage Books Edition , 1979 . Foucault , M . The Subject and Power . Critical Inquiry , 1982 , 8 ( 4 ) : 777 - 95 . Hardy , D . , Bidwell , N . , Cadet - James , Y . and Atkinson , I . Domesticating design by a disenfranchised community . Proc . SIMtech 2007 , 1 - 4 . IBGE . Censo demográfico 2010 . Aglomerado subnormais . Primeiros resultados . Rio de Janeiro , Brazil . 2010 , ( accessed 23 rd December 2013 from ) http : / / www . ibge . gov . br / home / estatistica / populacao / ce nso2010 / aglomerados _ subnormais / agsn2010 . pdf Light , A . and Akama , Y . The Human Touch : participatory practice and the role of facilitation in designing with communities . Proc . PDC 2012 , 61 - 70 . Kovats - Bernat , J . C . Negotiating Dangerous Fields : pragmatic Strategies for Fieldwork Amid Violence and Terror . American Anthropologist , 2002 , 104 ( 1 ) : 208 - 222 . Puri , S . K . , Byrne , E . , Nhampossa , J . L . and Quraishi , Z . B . Contextuality of participation in IS design : A developing country perspective . Proc . PDC 2004 , 42 - 52 . Rizzo , F . Strategie di co - design . Teorie , metodi e strumenti per progettare con gli utenti . Francoangeli Ed . , Milan , Italy . 2009 . Sanoff , H . Editorial . Special issue on participatory design . Design Studies , 2007 , ( 28 ) : 213 - 25 . Silver , H . Social Exclusion : Comparative Analysis of Europe and Middle East Youth . 2007 , ( accessed 23 rd December 2013 from ) http : / / www . shababinclusion . org / files / 558 _ file _ Silver _ Paper _ final . pdf Souza e Silva , J . A pluralidade das identidades no Bairro Maré - Rio de Janeiro . GEOgraphia , 2001 , 5 : 99 - 114 . Souza e Silva , J . Sobre a vivência dos moradores das favelas carioca , in : Rede social de Justiça e Direitos Humanos ( org ) : Direitos Humanos no Brasil 2003 . Global Exchange , São Paulo , Brazil , 171 - 76 , 2003 . Souza e Silva , J . As Unidades Policiais Pacificadoras e os novos desafios para as favelas cariocas . Observatório de Favelas , Rio de Janeiro , Brazil , 2010 . ( accessed 23 rd December 2013 from ) http : / / observatoriodefavelas . org . br / wp - content / uploads / 2013 / 06 / Aspectos - humanos - das - favelas - cariocas . pdf Spinuzzi , C . The methodology of participatory design . Technical Communication , 2005 , 52 ( 2 ) : 163 - 74 . Steen , M . Tension in human - centred design . CoDesign , 2011 , 7 ( 1 ) : 45 - 60 . Winschiers - Theophilus , H . , Bidwell , N . J . and Blake , E . Design beyond participation . Design Issues , 2012 , 28 ( 3 ) : 89 - 100 . UNDP . Supporting Capacity Development in conflict and fragile contexts . New York , USA . 2012 , ( accessed 23 rd December 2013 from ) http : / / www . undp . org / content / dam / undp / library / crisis % 20prevention / 2012SupportingCapacityDevelopment inConflictFragileSettings . pdf