F . F . - H . Nah ( Ed . ) : HCIB / HCII 2014 , LNCS 8527 , pp . 3 – 14 , 2014 . © Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014 Exploring Interaction Design for Advanced Analytics and Simulation Robin Brewer 1 and Cheryl A . Kieliszewski 2 1 Northwestern University , 2240 Campus Drive , Evanston , Illinois 60208 2 IBM Research – Almaden , 650 Harry Road , San Jose , California 95120 rnbrewer @ u . northwestern . edu , cher @ us . ibm . com Abstract . Enterprise businesses are increasingly using analytics and simulation for improved decision making with diverse and large quantities of data . However , new challenges arise in understanding how to design and implement a user interaction paradigm that is appropriate for technical experts , business users , and other stakeholders . Technologies developed for sophisticated analyses pose a challenge for interaction and interface design research when the goal is to accommodate users with different types and levels of expertise . In this paper we discuss the results of a multi - phase research effort to explore expectations for interaction and user experience with a complex technology that is meant to provide scientists and business analysts with expert - level capability for advanced analytics and simulation . We find that while there are unique differences in software preferences of scientists and analysts , that a common interface is feasible for universal usability of these two user groups . Keywords : Simulation , modeling , expert , analysis , interviews , disruption , ideation . 1 Introduction Federal lawmakers want to propose a coast - to - coast high - speed rail transportation system to the public . Being that this is a large investment of taxpayer dollars , they want to make the first proposal the optimal proposal so as not to upset citizens . They also realize many decisions are often made with good information and insight such as future needs , demand , and geographic location . Such information is spread across different sources . Assistance is needed aggregating appropriate data sources and models for a large - scale benefit analysis . What would you recommend for developing a seamless high - speed rail infrastructure that reduces airplane and automobile emissions while being cost - efficient , improving overall quality of life for customers , and that is accessible to customers quickly ? Above is an example of a complex problem for which modeling and simulation can provide a solution . Technologies for advanced analytics and simulation are often very complex , requiring specialized knowledge to use them , and are created for experts in a particular domain ( domain expert ) . As an ‘expert’ , the expectation is that she has 4 R . Brewer and C . A . Kieliszewski mastered a set of tasks and activities that are performed on a regular basis , and these tasks often become automatic . In turn , this automation can make it difficult to elicit detailed information from the expert about a set of tasks because she may unintentionally leave out important details or essential steps when describing the tasks [ 1 , 2 ] . The research presented in this paper was conducted within the context of a modeling and simulation ( M & S ) tool called SPLASH ( Smarter Planet Platform for Analysis and Simulation of Health ) [ 3 ] . Through SPLASH , end users with varying degrees of expertise in analytics and simulation can design simulation experiments to apply in a variety of fields including finance , urban planning , healthcare , and disaster planning . This range of fields and end users poses challenges for how to accommodate a wide array of expertise in M & S – that is , for people with deep domain knowledge about the construction of models and simulations to people with skill and expertise in running the simulation system and analyzing the output within a particular field . In addition , the domain of modeling and simulation tends to emphasize algorithm design and implementation rather than interface and interaction design . Without a body of evidence of how scientists and analysts use modeling or simulation tools , we had to work with a community of our intended end users to identify expectations and interface design features . This paper describes the method and results of using exploratory interviews , disruptive interviews , and participatory ideation to elicit information from experts in the field of M & S to inform the design of the SPLASH interaction . 2 Background The goal of SPLASH is to facilitate the creation of complex , interconnected system - of - systems to advise and guide ‘‘what - if’’ analyses for stakeholders and policy makers . In contrast to the tradition of developing isolated models of phenomena , SPLASH takes a slightly different approach to the question , can we use M & S to help policy makers envision the trades - offs of complex policy and planning problems in a more holistic way ? Specifically , SPLASH affords being able to examine real - world complex systems by reusing and coupling models and data of individual systems into a more comprehensive simulation [ 4 ] . As such , providing a way to consider the effects of change on the complete system rather than through the independent lens of individual systems models . Smarter Planet Platform for Analysis and Simulation of Health is intended to help the stakeholders consider as much about a complex system as possible to avoid negative unintended consequences by using relevant constituent components ( i . e . , data , models , simulations ) for their desired level of system abstraction and analysis [ 5 ] . Our role in the development of SPLASH was to initiate the design of the user interface and end user interaction model . 2 . 1 Composite Modeling Methodology Modeling and simulation is a complex research area that typically draws from mathematics , statistics , and business [ 6 ] . The process to create models and