Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID - 19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID - 19 . The COVID - 19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect , the company ' s public news and information website . Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID - 19 - related research that is available on the COVID - 19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories , such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re - use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source . These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID - 19 resource centre remains active . Journal Pre - proof SARS - CoV - 2 Infections in Children Eric J . Chow , MD , MS , MPH , Janet A . Englund , MD PII : S0891 - 5520 ( 22 ) 00015 - 0 DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . idc . 2022 . 01 . 005 Reference : IDC 1114 To appear in : INFECTIOUS DISEASE CLINICS OF NORTH AMERICA Please cite this article as : Chow EJ , Englund JA , SARS - CoV - 2 Infections in Children , INFECTIOUS DISEASE CLINICS OF NORTH AMERICA ( 2022 ) , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . idc . 2022 . 01 . 005 . This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance , such as the addition of a cover page and metadata , and formatting for readability , but it is not yet the definitive version of record . This version will undergo additional copyediting , typesetting and review before it is published in its final form , but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article . Please note that , during the production process , errors may be discovered which could affect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . © 2022 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . 1 SARS - CoV - 2 Infections in Children Eric J . Chow , MD , MS , MPH * 1 and Janet A . Englund , MD 2 1 Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , Department of Medicine , University of Washington , Seattle , Washington 2 Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases , Department of Pediatrics , University of Washington , Seattle Children’s Research Institute , Seattle , Washington Key Words ( 4 - 8 words ) : SARS - CoV - 2 , COVID - 19 , pediatrics , adolescents , MIS - C , vaccinations Disclosure Statement : EJC has no conflicts of interest to disclose . JAE reports research support from AstraZeneca , Merck , and Pfizer , and consultant for Sanofi Pasteur , Meissa Vaccines , Teva Pharmaceuticals , AstraZeneca * Corresponding author : Eric J . Chow , MD , MS , MPH , Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , University of Washington , 1959 NE Pacific Street Box 356423 , Seattle , Washington 98195 , E - mail : ejchow @ uw . edu , Fax : 206 - 616 - 3892 Synopsis : SARS - CoV - 2 infections in children generally have milder presentations but severe disease can occur in all ages . MIS - C and persistent post - acute COVID - 19 symptoms can be experienced by children with previous infection and emphasize the need for infection prevention . Optimal treatment for COVID - 19 is not known and clinical trials should include children to guide therapy . Vaccines are the best tool at preventing infection and severe outcomes of COVID - 19 . Children suffered disproportionately during the pandemic not only from SARS - CoV - 2 infection but because of disruptions to daily life , access to primary care and worsening income inequalities . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 2 Key Points  Children are at risk for COVID - 19 although the proportion of severe disease is lower than in adults ; optimal treatment for pediatric COVID - 19 has not been fully vetted through clinical trials  FDA - authorized and ACIP - or WHO - approved pediatric COVID - 19 vaccines are available in the US and in other countries , with varying indications for booster doses . SARS - CoV - 2 vaccinations are safe and effective in preventing severe COVID - 19 and by early 2022 , vaccinations have been authorized for use in children aged > 5 years .  The identification of SARS - CoV - 2 variants may impact the severity of pediatric COVID - 19 and community transmissibility as well as modify the effectiveness of approved vaccine and COVID - 19 therapeutics ; studies of new biologics to address COVID - 19 caused by viral mutations are ongoing  The multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children ( MIS - C ) is a hyperinflammatory condition resulting in significant morbidity but low mortality .  The pandemic has affected child health contributing to delays in healthcare , decreases in routine childhood vaccination rates , disruption to education and impact on mental health . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 3 Introduction Since the start of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 ( SARS - CoV - 2 ) pandemic in 2020 , acute coronavirus disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) has affected children of all ages . 1 , 2 Overall , the number and incidence of reported infections and cases of severe disease in children are fewer than those reported in adults . 3 Treatment of pediatric COVID - 19 has largely been extrapolated from adult trials , but management has been focused on prevention and mitigation of transmission . Among the many complications associated with COVID - 19 , the multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children ( MIS - C ) has drawn much attention due to the hyperinflammatory findings and acuity at hospital presentation . SARS - CoV - 2 vaccinations will likely play an important role in infection prevention in children as more are vaccinated . By the beginning of 2022 , the safety and efficacy of vaccinations in the < 5 - year - old age - group remain under evaluation . New studies will expand our knowledge of SARS - CoV - 2 epidemiology , change our understanding of disease processes and improve clinical management recommendations . Here , we summarize the current epidemiology , clinical features and management of SARS - CoV - 2 infection in children . Epidemiology Children of all ages are at risk for SARS - CoV - 2 infection and severe COVID - 19 . 4 , 5 However , the number of infections and disease severity varies by age with higher number of infections and cases of severe disease in older age - groups . There have been fewer reported cases of COVID - 19 in children than in adults and assessments of the true SARS - CoV - 2 incidence in the pediatric population has been challenging as early data relied upon observational studies and convenience sampling . Children more frequently experience asymptomatic and mild disease , and early SARS - J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 4 CoV - 2 testing was prioritized to cases of severe disease , 6 - 8 leading to underreporting of pediatric cases at the start of the pandemic . 9 Lock - down procedures may have disproportionately mitigated transmission in children . As schools and childcare centers closed , children remained at home reducing their exposure to SARS - CoV - 2 , thus likely reducing the role children played in community transmission early in the pandemic . By the fall of 2021 , children returned to in - person school attendance in many locales , although the effect on community SARS - CoV - 2 burden remains unclear . Stark differences in pediatric cases between communities of high and low vaccination rates illustrate the importance of vaccination campaigns in pediatric disease mitigation . The spread of SARS - CoV - 2 variants are also likely to alter the epidemiology of COVID - 19 including its impact on pediatric infections . As further steps are taken to reopen communities by governments around the world , additional impact of SARS - CoV - 2 in pediatric populations is anticipated . There are limited data on the global pediatric COVID - 19 burden due to highly variable SARS - CoV - 2 testing and changes in community mitigation efforts throughout the course of the pandemic . As of December 2021 , UNICEF estimates that 0 . 4 % of global deaths due to COVID - 19 occurred in individuals aged < 20 years with 58 % of those deaths occurring in adolescents aged 10 - 19 years and 42 % in children aged 0 - 9 years . 10 These data likely underestimate the total COVID - 19 mortality given the disparities of resources , testing capability , differential reporting between regions , and the lack of inclusion of new variant viruses . Among Sub - Saharan African countries , pediatric COVID - 19 is estimated to be 9 % of confirmed cases and 2 . 4 % of reported deaths with variations in testing protocols by country . 11 Seroprevalence studies involving the detection of antibodies in response to infection have been undertaken to expand our J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 5 understanding of the true burden of COVID - 19 . These studies show that SARS - CoV - 2 infections in children have been frequently underdiagnosed . 12 - 14 Many of these studies conducted in different countries before 15 - 18 and after vaccine availability 19 showed a lower number of infection - derived SARS - CoV - 2 antibody detection in children compared to adults . However , country and regional study differences conducted at varying timepoints during the pandemic have reported mixed results . 20 In the US , individuals aged < 18 years comprise 22 % of the population , 21 yet only 13 % of COVID - 19 cases have been reported in children . 3 While the true incidence of pediatric SARS - CoV - 2 infections is unknown , the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) estimates the cumulative incidence in the US to be 25 , 844 , 005 total infections among those aged 0 - 17 years with an infection rate of 35 , 490 per 100 , 000 individuals between February 2020 - September 2021 ( Table 1 ) . 22 In a summary of reported SARS - CoV - 2 infections from March 1 - December 12 , 2020 , 17 . 4 % of infections occurred in individuals aged 0 - 4 years , 25 . 7 % among those aged 5 - 10 years , 18 . 6 % in those aged 11 - 13 years and 39 . 3 % among those aged 14 - 17 years . 2 Early in the pandemic from March 1 - July 25 , 2020 , age - groups comprising the greatest proportion of hospitalized children in the US were 12 - 17 years ( 42 % ) , 0 - 2 months ( 19 % ) and 5 - 11 years ( 17 % ) with a hospitalization rate of 8 per 100 , 000 individuals . 5 The appearance and spread of SARS - CoV - 2 variants had led to subsequent waves of infection across all age - groups . By mid - June 2021 , US pediatric hospitalizations were at its lowest with a rate of 0 . 3 per 100 , 000 children prior to the spread of the Delta ( B . 1 . 617 . 2 lineage ) 23 SARS - CoV - 2 variant . 24 Thereafter , the predominance of the Delta variant led to higher numbers of US pediatric emergency room visits and hospital admissions particularly in regions where community - wide vaccinations were J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 6 low . 25 In August 2021 , the cumulative hospitalization rate for pediatric COVID - 19 rose to 49 . 7 per 100 , 000 individuals . 24 Similarly , SARS - CoV - 2 seropositivity had increased in children in England coinciding with the spread of the Delta variant , reduction of lock - down procedures and the start of the academic school year . 26 On November 26 , 2021 , the Omicron ( B . 1 . 1 . 529 ) SARS - CoV - 2 variant was designated by the WHO as a variant of concern due to early evidence of increased transmissibility 27 and viral mutations allowing the evasion of prior immunity leading to rapid global spread and a spike in infection numbers . 28 In the US , the spread of the Omicron variant 29 was associated with a rapid increase in COVID - 19 - associated pediatric hospitalizations . 30 With communities pursuing varying stages of re - opening , the identification of new variants and the increased availability of vaccinations for younger age - groups , fluctuations in SARS - CoV - 2 cases are likely to continue . The pandemic has accentuated racial and ethnic disparities among people in the US . 31 - 36 A disproportionate number of children with COVID - 19 who experience severe outcomes including hospitalizations and death come from communities of underrepresented racial and ethnic groups . 5 , 36 , 37 Among American Indian and Alaskan Natives , incidence of COVID - 19 among those aged < 18 years was three times that of white , non - Hispanic individuals . 38 Hispanic and Latinx adults and children have experienced some of the highest rates of SARS - CoV - 2 test positivity 39 , 40 particularly during community - wide shelter - in - place directives . 35 Among individuals aged < 18 years old with SARS - CoV - 2 infection , rates of hospitalization were highest among Hispanic and Latinx children . 5 , 39 The cause of these disparities is likely multifactorial including disproportionate burden of chronic conditions , 33 decreased access to healthcare and testing , 41 difficulty with social distancing in multigenerational households , 35 and greater J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 7 representation in essential and in - person occupations with exposure risk to COVID - 19 42 within the Hispanic and Latinx communities . 39 Survey studies also suggest that Black and Hispanic parents had a lower willingness to immediately vaccinate their children against COVID - 19 highlighting the need for outreach , education and messaging of the benefits of vaccination to these specific communities . 43 See Chapter 4 on Equity and Racial and Ethnic Disparities . Pediatric SARS - CoV - 2 Transmission Lockdown procedures , including closure of schools , 44 were first implemented in 2020 to reduce community transmission . 45 , 46 As communities have reopened and schools resumed in - person learning , questions remain about how best to limit the ongoing spread of SARS - CoV - 2 and establish the role children play in community transmission . 47 - 49 Past experiences with other viruses demonstrate that children carry the community burden of influenza and respiratory syncytial viral infections , 48 and public health interventions 50 such as vaccination of children can reduce community - wide infections . 51 - 53 Thus far , data show fewer and milder pediatric SARS - CoV - 2 infections compared to adult cases . The primary mode of person - to - person transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 is by respiratory spread 54 and the use of face coverings , social distancing and school closures contributed to community mitigation of infection early in the pandemic . 44 , 55 - 57 Children are both at risk for acquiring infection and spreading SARS - CoV - 2 . 49 , 58 , 59 Factors influencing individual transmissibility include symptomology , viral load , and behavioral patterns . 60 Both biological and social - behavioral factors vary by age as a child aged < 5 years has different risks than adolescents . Vaccination status likely modifies an individual’s risk of transmission and vaccine availability to J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 8 younger age - groups will further influence SARS - CoV - 2 epidemiology . The impact vaccines play in transmission by children will become evident as uptake and availability in younger age - groups continues . The first reports of pediatric COVID - 19 were identified within household transmission investigations , 61 - 64 where pediatric index cases of household SARS - CoV - 2 infections were less common . 58 , 59 , 64 - 66 One study of household transmissions where the index case was a child showed fewer index cases in the those aged 0 - 3 years , but a higher risk of household transmission in that age group than in index cases aged 14 - 17 years . 58 These findings suggest an individual’s risk of transmission may have nuanced age - related associations . Younger age - groups may be less likely to socially distance , cover their mouths when sneezing or coughing , or consistently wear masks – behaviors expected of older children and adults . 49 Furthermore , families are likely to physically interact more with younger ill children leading to an increased risk for viral transmission . 49 , 67 Secondary attack rates ( SAR ) are calculated as the rate of infection among susceptible individuals from an index case and can be a helpful measure of person - to - person transmission . A systematic review of factors associated with SAR demonstrated higher rates for adult contacts than for children ; pooled SAR was not associated with the index case’s age . 68 These studies were limited to smaller sample sizes 69 and more finely defined age data were not available . The risk of SARS - CoV - 2 transmission has also been shown to be higher in exposed contacts of cases with higher viral loads . 70 - 72 In one community - based surveillance study , SARS - CoV - 2 viral loads were similar regardless of symptoms and age . 73 Children experienced fewer J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 9 symptoms for shorter duration when ill with COVID - 19 and the presence of symptoms was correlated with a higher viral load than asymptomatic cases . Given that more children experience asymptomatic SARS - CoV - 2 and viral load is lower in asymptomatic cases , children may play a smaller role in transmission than adults . The possibility of fecal - oral transmission has been raised as infectious SARS - CoV - 2 virus has been cultured from fecal samples of infected individuals 74 with prolonged shedding and higher levels of viral particles in pediatric fecal samples . 75 , 76 Thus far , significant fecal oral transmission in close contacts of children with persistent fecal detection of SARS - CoV - 2 has not been reported . 75 SARS - CoV - 2 reinfection has been documented in children although the degree at which it occurs is unknown . 77 With the appearance of novel variants , immune evasion may become more common . The understanding of school and daycare - based transmission dynamics of SARS - CoV - 2 is evolving . One systematic review of SAR found lower pediatric rates in school than household settings . 78 One early investigation in Ireland , where reported SARS - CoV - 2 cases were screened for recent school attendance , reported no confirmed cases among school contacts . 79 An analysis of childcare centers in Washington , DC found a limited number of outbreaks associated with each facility , with the majority of cases acquired outside the facility . 80 A Delta variant outbreak investigation at a California elementary school involving an unvaccinated teacher as the index case found higher risks of infection with seating proximity to the teacher . 81 All students were unvaccinated at the time and had a reported high adherence to social distancing and mask wearing . A study in Los Angeles schools found that school - associated SARS - CoV - 2 case rates among those aged 5 - 17 years were lower than community case rates but fluctuated with changes in the general community incidence . 82 In a series of school - based studies , the risk of a SARS - J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 10 CoV - 2 outbreak was 3 . 7 times higher in schools without mask requirements 83 and larger increases of county case rates were seen when school mask mandates were optional . 84 These findings suggest that school - based transmission and community - wide case counts can be mitigated by implementing public health interventions as children return to school . To minimize disruptions to attendance of in - person learning , some grade schools implemented the “Test to Stay” ( TTS ) strategy where unvaccinated individuals who experienced a school - related SARS - CoV - 2 exposure were allowed to stay in school if certain criteria were met . TTS required that both the index case and the close contact had to have been masked when exposed and during the quarantine period , the close contact may remain in school provided they remain asymptomatic while wearing a mask and practiced social distancing and submitted to regular testing after the exposure . Schools adopting TTS between August and October 2021 in Illinois and California found a low SAR and low tertiary transmission after TTS implementation while minimizing loss of in - person school days . 85 , 86 SARS - CoV - 2 Vaccinations in Children The most significant public health breakthrough during the pandemic has been the development of SARS - CoV - 2 vaccines ( Table 2 ) . As of December 17 , 2021 , the World Health Organization ( WHO ) has approved nine vaccines against COVID - 19 under their Emergency Use Listing process 87 including the Pfizer - BioNTech ( BNT162b2 ) vaccine for those aged > 12 years 88 ( See Chapter X on Vaccines ) . More recently , individual countries have granted EUA to vaccinations for younger children ( vaccines produced by Pfizer - BioNTech , Cadila , Bharat , Sinopharm , and Sinovac ) . Given limited vaccine availability in many countries , the WHO has prioritized vaccine J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 11 use for those most at risk for severe disease including adults and children aged 12 - 17 years who have high - risk underlying conditions . The CDC Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices ( ACIP ) recommends the SARS - CoV - 2 vaccine for all individuals aged > 5 years . 89 - 91 Since December 11 , 2020 , the mRNA based SARS - CoV - 2 vaccine produced by Pfizer - BioNTech at a 30 ug dose has been approved for individuals > 16 years , 92 receiving full FDA approval on August 23 , 2021 . 93 On May 10 , 2021 , this vaccine was granted EUA in those aged 12 - 15 years , 94 with a 10 ug dose receiving EUA on October 29 , 2021 for those ages 5 - 11 years . 95 Booster doses of vaccine were first authorized by the FDA on November 19 , 2021 to adults followed by approval for those aged 16 and 17 years on December 9 , 2021 96 and for those aged 12 - 15 years on January 3 , 2022 . 97 Booster doses administered > 5 months after completion of primary series are increasingly important with the spread of the Omicron variant . 98 A third primary dose of Pfizer - BioNTech has been authorized by the FDA for moderately or severely immunocompromised children aged > 5 years . 97 On December 8 , 2021 , the FDA granted EUA to tixagevimab / cilgavimab ( Evusheld ) , a combination monoclonal antibody , for those aged > 12 years and weighing > 40 kg who are not currently infected with SARS - CoV - 2 , have moderate to severely compromised immune systems , or a history of severe adverse reactions to the approved SARS - CoV - 2 vaccines , as pre - exposure prophylaxis . 99 As of January 2022 , pediatric data with this new long - acting monoclonal antibody have not been published but approval offers an alternative to vaccinations in those who are unable to mount sufficient immunity to approved vaccines or those whom current vaccines are not clinically recommended . Vaccine trials and real - world effectiveness studies have shown that SARS - CoV - 2 mRNA vaccines are highly effective against COVID - 19 . Prior to the predominance of SARS - CoV - 2 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 12 variants , the Pfizer - BioNTech vaccine reported vaccine efficacy of 95 % against confirmed COVID - 19 in those aged > 16 years . 100 In a subsequent analysis on the safety and efficacy of the same vaccine in participants aged 12 - 15 years , vaccine efficacy was 100 % against confirmed COVID - 19 after completion of the two dose series . 101 The Phase 2 - 3 vaccine trial ( conducted between June 7 , 2021 and October 8 , 2021 ) evaluating the Pfizer - BioNTech mRNA vaccine in the 5 - 11 year old age group found a vaccine efficacy of 91 % with no observation of myocarditis or pericarditis up to 2 months after the second dose of the vaccine . 102 Similarly , clinical trials with the Moderna ( mRNA - 1273 ) vaccine conducted between December 9 , 2020 and February 28 , 2021 showed no cases of acute COVID - 19 in adolescents aged 12 - 17 years 2 weeks post second injection while 4 cases were reported in the placebo group . 103 Although early booster studies only included children aged 16 - 17 years , a reduction in confirmed SARS - CoV - 2 infections and severe illness was seen in those who received a booster dose of the Pfizer - BioNTech vaccine than those who did not . 104 Vaccine effectiveness ( VE ) studies have been integral in understanding the effectiveness of vaccines in real - world settings at various stages of the pandemic . In one VE study in adolescents aged 12 - 18 years from June - September 2021 when the Delta variant was the predominant virus , the Pfizer - BioNTech vaccine was found to have a VE of 93 % against COVID - 19 hospitalizations . 105 Another VE study of the Pfizer - BioNTech vaccine in adolescents aged 12 - 17 years from July - December 2021 ( when the Delta variant was widespread but before the predominance of the Omicron variant ) , VE against SARS - CoV - 2 infection was 92 % . 106 In a population - based study of SARS - CoV - 2 infection incidence rates also occurring during the Delta variant wave , the incidence rate ratio of laboratory - confirmed SARS - CoV - 2 infections was 8 . 9 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 13 comparing unvaccinated to vaccinated adolescents aged 12 - 17 years . 107 Furthermore , early data show the protective effects of SARS - CoV - 2 vaccination against MIS - C with a lower incidence with vaccination 108 and an estimated VE of 91 % in adolescents 12 - 18 years who had completed a primary vaccine series with the Pfizer - BioNTech vaccine . 109 Despite vaccine availability and effectiveness , the percentage of vaccinated eligible children was < 65 % as of December 30 , 2021 with < 15 % of children aged 5 - 11 years full vaccinated . 110 In some situations , there may be discordance in vaccine hesitancy between parents and guardians and their children . There remains regional variability of minor consent laws where minors are allowed to consent to medical interventions which include vaccines . 111 Overall , SARS - CoV - 2 vaccines have had a favorable safety profile among children aged 5 - 17 years . 100 , 101 , 112 Most vaccine reactions to the Pfizer - BioNTech vaccine reported were local or mild systemic reactions 112 , 113 with the exception of a small group of individuals , overwhelmingly male adolescents and younger adults , who reported self - limited cases of myocarditis and pericarditis . 114 In a nationwide study , the Pfizer - BioNTech vaccine was associated with an excess risk of 1 to 5 events per 100 , 000 vaccinated persons of all ages compared to the excess risk of 11 . 0 events per 100 , 000 persons after SARS - CoV - 2 infection . 115 Myocarditis after SARS - CoV - 2 vaccination was more common in younger age - groups , whereas pericarditis more common in older individuals with onset generally within 3 days of vaccination . 116 , 117 Among individuals aged < 30 years with data reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System , cases of myocarditis , pericarditis and myopericarditis after SARS - CoV - 2 vaccines occurred in individuals with a median age of 19 years ( range : 12 - 29 years ) with 96 % hospitalized and no deaths . 118 Given the severe outcomes of SARS - CoV - 2 infection J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 14 including myocarditis , 119 the ACIP concluded that the benefits of vaccination outweighed the risk posed by these rare adverse events . Clinical Course and Manifestations of Acute COVID - 19 in Children The clinical picture and severity of SARS - CoV - 2 infection in children of all ages can vary from no symptoms to critical illness . When symptoms develop , most children will experience respiratory tract symptoms or an exacerbation of underlying conditions . Children with COVID - 19 not requiring hospitalization have more subclinical , asymptomatic infection and upper respiratory tract symptoms than adults . 8 , 120 One systematic review of early studies on pediatric COVID - 19 found that 2 % of SARS - CoV - 2 infections in children were categorized as severe while 0 . 6 % had critical COVID - 19 , 121 although the spread of variants and increased exposure to SARS - CoV - 2 may lead to increased numbers of infection and severe presentations of disease . As in adults , the incubation period likely ranges from 2 - 14 days ( mean , 6 days ) . 122 , 123 Illness duration is estimated to be a median of 6 days but prolonged illness > 28 days can occur . 124 Overall , symptom duration is shorter in younger children . 124 Symptoms vary by age - group ( Table 3 ) and study type . In an early surveillance report of pediatric COVID - 19 , fever and cough were the most commonly reported symptoms with headache a common symptom in older children . 9 In a longitudinal cohort study of infected school - aged children , headache and fatigue were the most common symptoms identified with sore throat , altered taste or smell , and fever also frequently reported . 124 Neonates and infants may experience non - specific symptoms such as feeding difficulty with fever so COVID - 19 should be considered in the workup for infectious etiologies . 125 The presence of gastrointestinal ( GI ) symptoms such as abdominal pain , nausea , J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 15 vomiting , and diarrhea are also common in pediatric acute COVID - 19 . Altered taste or smell is more commonly reported in older age - groups . 9 , 124 The National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) developed COVID - 19 severity categories to unify treatment recommendations : asymptomatic or presymptomatic , mild , moderate , severe and critical acute COVID - 19 ( Table 4 ) . 126 Given these definitions are extrapolated to pediatric infections , normal vital signs and symptoms will differ by age . The diagnosis of asymptomatic or pre - symptomatic infection in younger children will rely on clinical history provided by the caregiver and findings on physical exam . Minimally symptomatic children will require careful assessment of vital signs and physical exam to ensure appropriate counseling is given . Weak cry , grunting , retractions , nasal flaring , head bobbing may also be indicators of respiratory distress , and acute COVID - 19 should be suspected in younger children especially in the absence of alternative explanation . Rapid clinical deterioration with abrupt changes in respiratory status may occur a week into the illness course . 127 In children with critical illness , careful consideration should be given in distinguishing cases of acute COVID - 19 , MIS - C , and other diseases as evaluation and management may differ . There remains a paucity of data on risk factors associated with severe outcomes of pediatric acute COVID - 19 . Data extrapolated from adult reports and observational studies highlight several chronic diseases in children that increase risk for infection , hospitalization , admission to the intensive care unit ( ICU ) and death . 128 - 132 In a study of hospitalized children aged < 18 years with COVID - 19 when the Delta variant was widespread , 67 . 5 % had one or more underlying medical conditions . 133 In another study of individuals aged < 21 years , at least one underlying J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 16 medical condition was associated with 75 % of SARS - CoV - 2 . 129 There does not appear to be a significant risk of severe disease associated with male gender , as there is in adults . 134 Some studies suggest that younger children ( infants aged < 1 year ) did not have increased risk for severe disease 131 although early reports showed higher proportions of severe and critical illness in the younger age - groups . 1 , 132 In a cross - sectional study of children with acute COVID - 19 , risk of hospitalization or severe COVID - 19 was highest in those with obesity , sleeping disorders , diabetes ( type 1 or type 2 ) , congenital heart disease , neurodevelopmental disorders , psychiatric illness , hypertension and seizure disorders . 135 Among children aged 12 - 18 years , those with asthma were at increased risk for severe illness . 135 Other possible conditions at risk for severe outcomes in children include complex medical conditions , 135 genetic disorders such as trisomy 21 , 136 sickle cell disease , 137 congenital heart disease 138 and immunosuppression . 139 , 140 However , few published reports of pediatric patients with these conditions are available , making statistical inferences challenging . Experience with other viral infections suggest that individuals with these chronic conditions should be treated as having a higher risk of severe disease . The CDC maintains a list of underlying medical conditions with higher risk of severe COVID - 19 reported in the literature , although this list is not specific to pediatric patients . 141 Although uncommon , newborns are also at risk for SARS - CoV - 2 infection with the highest risk when the mother or other caregiver has COVID - 19 onset around delivery . With proper precautions , mothers and newborns may room safely together . 142 , 143 Additionally , there has been little evidence to suggest transmission via breast milk and breastfeeding is encouraged for those who are interested . 143 SARS - CoV - 2 infection commonly results in respiratory tract illness with extra - pulmonary manifestations documented in case reports or case series in children . A variety of neurological J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 17 complications associated with pediatric acute COVID - 19 has been described including encephalopathy , seizures , encephalitis , Guillain - Barre Syndrome , acute demyelinating syndromes , movement disorders and psychiatric disorders . 144 Acute COVID - 19 in children can also be complicated by cardiovascular events including myocarditis , 145 , 146 pericarditis , 147 , 148 pulmonary embolic events , 149 arrhythmias , 150 and acute myocardial infarction . 151 So - called “COVID toes , ” or pseudo - chilblains , caused by inflammation of small blood vessels with painful sores can also be seen in pediatric acute COVID - 19 . 152 , 153 GI 154 - 156 and renal 157 complications have also been described . Invasive mold infections ( e . g . pulmonary aspergillosis and mucormycosis ) are increasingly recognized complications of severe COVID - 19 in adults 158 although rarely reported in children . 159 There remains little information on COVID - 19 - associated fungal infections in children possibly owing to fewer cases of severe COVID - 19 . Laboratory and Imaging Findings Diagnosis of SARS - CoV - 2 infection requires laboratory confirmation . Suspected cases may be identified based on characteristic symptoms and exposure to an individual with laboratory - confirmed SARS - CoV - 2 infection ( see Chapter 6 ) . Adult acute COVID - 19 has been associated with characteristic laboratory abnormalities including lymphopenia in early disease , elevated inflammatory markers , and findings of a hypercoagulable state 160 that have been used to predict severe disease . In pediatric acute COVID - 19 , laboratory findings have been more variable , differ by age and are less predictive of severe disease . 140 , 161 In addition to lymphopenia and hypercoagulability , markers of inflammation in children may be abnormal , including D - dimer , lactate dehydrogenase , fibrinogen , ferritin , procalcitonin , interleukin - 6 , C - reactive protein , aspartate aminotransferase , alanine aminotransferase and erythrocyte sedimentation rate . 160 , 162 , J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 18 163 Elevations of creatine kinase , pro B - type natriuretic peptide , and troponin can be seen in those with end organ disease . 162 Significantly elevated inflammatory markers with cardiovascular involvement should also prompt clinical consideration of an MIS - C diagnosis . Chest radiographic findings including characteristic multifocal ground glass opacities and pulmonary consolidations may be the most common imaging abnormalities in pediatric acute COVID - 19 . 164 , 165 Children may have abnormalities of chest imaging even with asymptomatic and presymptomatic infection . 165 Except in cases of severe disease or workup of alternative conditions , computed tomography is unlikely to provide additional clinical information when a diagnosis of acute COVID - 19 is already known . Clinical Management Considerations and COVID - 19 Therapeutics Management of symptomatic acute COVID - 19 depends on the severity of the illness ( Table 4 ) and special consideration should be given to the evolution of SARS - CoV - 2 variants including the appearance of the Omicron variant , as they alter the landscape of effective monoclonal antibodies and available therapeutics . 166 Most children will not require specific therapy , especially with milder disease . Children with underlying medical conditions may be at greater risk for severe outcomes , thus close follow up and baseline control of chronic illnesses may help mitigate the effects of infections . The mainstay of management in children with mild to moderate acute COVID - 19 is supportive care , although cases of poor feeding or dehydration may prompt admission to the hospital for nutritional resuscitation . Children whose symptoms worsen may require higher levels of care due to progression of disease , end - organ complications , and co - infections . If new or worsening symptoms evolve , workup should be pursued to identify the etiology of the clinical change . During the pandemic , the use of antibiotics has exceeded the J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 19 estimated prevalence of bacterial co - infections , leading to overuse in cases of COVID - 19 . 167 Continuation of antibiotics should be guided by culture results and risk factors , and generally reserved for severe or critical COVID - 19 with presumed or confirmed bacterial co - infection . Acute COVID - 19 can lead to a hypercoagulable state ; the use of thromboprophylaxis should be considered based on individual risk factors for coagulopathy . Monoclonal antibodies have been used for risk reduction of severe disease in adults in those with predisposing factors , but some approved therapies have diminished effectiveness against novel variants including the Omicron variant . Currently , bamlanivimab - etesevimab , casirivimab - imdevimab and sotrovimab are the only therapies available through EUA for individuals aged > 12 years and > 40kg who have mild to moderate acute COVID - 19 at risk of severe COVID - 19 and are not hospitalized for COVID - 19 ( See Chapter 7 ) . Bamlanivimab - etesevimab and casirivimab - imdevimab were authorized as post - exposure prophylaxis for those exposed and at high risk of severe COVID - 19 . The EUA for bamlanivimab - etesevimab has also been extended to younger children ( from birth and older ) including those who are hospitalized between birth and 2 years of age for treatment of mild to moderate acute COVID - 19 , but circulating variants have limited their use . 168 Hospital admission thresholds may be lower for neonates and young children who develop mild to moderate COVID - 19 , hence the EUA extension of its use during hospitalization for this younger age - group . There remains limited data regarding the use of monoclonal antibodies in children 169 with pediatric experts recommending against its routine use in children including those with risk factors for severe disease . 170 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 20 Antiviral therapy has formed the basis for COVID - 19 therapy early in the illness course . Remdesivir , a nucleoside analog and viral RNA polymerase inhibitor , has been available through EUA since May 1 , 2020 . On October 22 , 2020 , remdesivir became the first US FDA approved antiviral treatment for use in hospitalized individuals aged > 12 years and weighing > 40 kg with COVID - 19 . 171 It remains available under EUA to children weighing 3 . 5 kg to < 40 kg or those aged < 12 years and weighing > 3 . 5 kg . 171 The data to support the use of remdesivir in COVID - 19 has been derived from clinical trials of adult COVID - 19 . A 5 - day course of remdesivir was associated with a reduction in median time to recovery , but not mortality in severe COVID - 19 . 172 - 174 The NIH recommends remdesivir for children > 12 years and weighing > 40 kg with new or increasing oxygen requirement with risk factors for severe disease 169 and allows for the off - label treatment of non - hospitalized children with mild to moderate COVID - 19 at risk for severe disease within 7 days of symptom onset . 175 They also recommend remdesivir for children aged > 16 years with acute COVID - 19 and new or increasing oxygen requirement regardless of the presence of severe disease risk factors . 169 Although there are data to support early remdesivir to mitigate severe acute COVID - 19 in outpatients with symptomatic SARS - CoV - 2 infection , 176 a panel of pediatric experts recommends the use of remdesivir for mild to moderate acute COVID - 19 only in the context of a clinical trial , and 5 days of remdesivir therapy in children with severe and critical acute COVID - 19 . Up to 10 days of remdesivir could be considered in critical acute COVID - 19 . 177 WHO has recommended against the use of remdesivir for children , citing a lack of important clinical differences in mortality and severe outcomes . 178 In general , remdesivir is well tolerated . Reports of sinus bradycardia associated with its use have been documented in pediatric cases of COVID - 19 , 179 which appears to self - resolve after drug discontinuation . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 21 In December 2021 , the FDA granted EUA to two additional antiviral agents for the treatment of mild to moderate acute COVID - 19 which include molnupiravir , 180 a ribonucleoside analogue and nirmatrelvir / ritonavir ( Paxlovid ) , 181 a novel combination protease inhibitor . Molnupiravir may be associated with abnormalities in bone and cartilage development in children and as such , only nirmatrelvir / ritonavir has been granted approval for use in pediatric patients aged > 12 years of age and weight of > 40 kg with SARS - CoV - 2 infection and high risk for progression to severe disease within 5 days of symptom onset . Careful consideration should be given to its use given the potential for drug - drug interactions . Immune dysregulation likely contributes to the progression of severe disease and various immunomodulators have been proposed as treatment to mitigate inflammatory effects . Trials show that glucocorticoids in adults , specifically dexamethasone , can reduce days of mechanical ventilation and mortality in those with severe or critical disease , 182 - 184 however data in children are lacking . 185 The NIH recommends dexamethasone in patients requiring high - flow oxygenation , mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation . 169 A panel of pediatric experts maintains that glucocorticoids be considered for critical disease preferentially in the context of a clinical trial , and should still be used in other non - COVID - 19 conditions in which steroids are indicated ( e . g . asthma exacerbation ) . 186 Dexamethasone use , typically up to 10 days or until discharge , 185 may be of more importance in older children and adolescents who have immune system physiology similar to adults . Among other immunomodulators including interleukin - 6 ( IL - 6 ) inhibitors ( e . g . , tocilizumab ) , IL - 1 ( e . g , anakinra ) , and JAK inhibitors ( e . g . , baracitinib ) have shown some clinical benefit in adult COVID - 19 , but in children , these study data are also lacking . Guidance from a panel of pediatric experts encourage the use of IL - 1 or IL - J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 22 6 inhibitors in the setting of a clinical trial for the treatment of critical acute COVID - 19 whereas they recommend against the use of JAK inhibitors except for in cases of a clinical trial 186 despite their authorization for use in these younger age - groups . Consultation with pediatric rheumatologists and infectious disease specialists may be helpful in stratifying patients benefitting most from these therapies where clinical trials are not available . Convalescent plasma has been used as an adjunctive therapy for many different viral infections and the data supporting its use in COVID - 19 is sparse . As such , NIH has recommended against its use generally in pediatric acute COVID - 19 except in the setting of a clinical trial . 169 Other antivirals and anti - inflammatory agents had been considered for COVID - 19 treatment early in the pandemic including hydroxychloroquine , lopinavir - ritonavir , and ivermectin . No data support the use of these medications for pediatric ( or adult ) acute COVID - 19 of any severity . Treatment guidelines have routinely recommended against their use given the lack of efficacy in reducing severe outcomes . 169 , 177 , 178 Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children Associated with SARS - CoV - 2 Infection The multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children ( MIS - C ) is a systemic hyperinflammatory condition seen after SARS - CoV - 2 infection . It is one of the most dramatic manifestations associated with COVID - 19 where multiple organ systems are affected ; shock can sometimes occur prompting ICU admission . 187 In April 2020 , European clinicians reported unusual clusters of pediatric patients admitted to the hospital with hyperinflammation 188 and clinical features resembling Kawasaki disease ( KD ) , 189 toxic shock syndrome 190 and myocarditis . 191 Many patients were previously healthy with symptoms appearing 2 to 6 weeks after the first wave of J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 23 COVID - 19 in Europe . While few patients tested positive by SARS - CoV - 2 PCR , most cases had antibody evidence of prior infection . 187 , 192 , 193 US cases were soon reported in New York following the first surge of SARS - CoV - 2 infections . 192 Initially called the pediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome temporally associated with SARS - CoV - 2 ( PIMS - TS ) , 194 , 195 a new case definition and naming of the condition MIS - C was published by the CDC . 196 The name change was made to allow for cases in adults which have now been described . 197 - 200 Several epidemiologic case definitions are published to describe MIS - C ( Table 5 ) each requiring clinical , virologic and inflammatory marker data . 194 , 196 , 201 Of note , the CDC case definition specifically requires severe illness and hospitalization highlighting an important distinction between the definitions . Although a clinically significant condition , MIS - C is thought to be rare . Early estimates in New York State showed that while laboratory - confirmed SARS - CoV - 2 infection in people < 21 years old was 322 per 100 , 000 individuals , the number of MIS - C cases over the same timeframe was 2 per 100 , 000 individuals . 192 Using surveillance data from US jurisdictions reporting MIS - C cases , the incidence between April and June 2020 was estimated to be 5 . 1 persons per 1 , 000 , 000 person - months with 316 MIS - C cases per 1 , 000 , 000 SARS - CoV - 2 infections . 202 Few MIS - C cases were reported in China and other countries in eastern Asia early in the pandemic with possible explanations including differences in SARS - CoV - 2 burden , changes in the virus , or the implementation of different public health interventions . 203 Cases of MIS - C have now been reported in these regions . Despite efforts to uncover the underlying mechanism of disease , the pathophysiologic cause of the syndrome is not fully understood . 203 Hypotheses based on associations with KD , a form of J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 24 childhood vasculitis which shares clinical features with MIS - C , and the clinical course after acute COVID - 19 , suggests an immune - mediated process possibly driven by auto - antibody activity . 204 Immune profiling in those with KD , acute COVID - 19 and MIS - C show differences in cellular subtypes and inflammatory protein composition that distinguish the three different diagnoses . 204 Antibody profiling also showed evidence of possible cardiac specific auto - recognition suggesting a mechanism for the cardiovascular and coronary damage characteristic of both MIS - C and KD . 204 Additional research will be needed to further stratify the immune differences between these two conditions and to identify the mechanisms that may provide clues to future therapies . Children with MIS - C tend to be older and more racially and ethnically diverse than those with KD . 205 , 206 One US population - based study of MIS - C found the median age of children with MIS - C to be 9 years 207 with children as young as < 1 month old reported in the literature . 192 , 205 Whether race is an important risk factor in developing MIS - C after acute COVID - 19 is still being investigated . Early studies showed a disproportionate risk of MIS - C in communities of color , 190 , 207 initially considered a reflection of disparities seen in acute SARS - CoV - 2 infection . 208 , 209 However , more recent studies comparing MIS - C and COVID - 19 showed an unexplained independent risk of MIS - C that continues to exist for those of Hispanic ethnicity or Black race . 210 , 211 Children affected by MIS - C tend to have fewer underlying medical conditions , with obesity a common diagnosis if chronic conditions were present . 192 , 207 While MIS - C case definitions allow for the use of SARS - CoV - 2 PCR , antibodies , antigen or exposure as virologic confirmation , most children will have evidence of prior infection via SARS - CoV - 2 antibodies . 207 As more children are vaccinated , use of anti - SARS - CoV - 2 antibody tests other than spike protein J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 25 antibodies will be required to differentiate between immunity from prior infection and vaccination . In the absence of SARS - CoV - 2 testing , exposure to an individual with diagnosed COVID - 19 or COVID - 19 compatible symptoms also satisfy case definition requirements . Clinical features of MIS - C vary by case and by age - group . 192 All current MIS - C case definitions require fever during the illness as part of the diagnosis . Fever may be subjective or measured ( > 38°C ) , and is commonly persistent , lasting about 6 days in most children . 193 Many children will present to the hospital still febrile . 192 Other common symptoms at hospital presentation include GI symptoms ( e . g . , abdominal pain , diarrhea , nausea and vomiting ) , headache and neck pain , lymphadenopathy , myalgias , fatigue , sore throat and mucocutaneous findings ( e . g . , rash , red tongue , cracked lips and conjunctivitis ) . 192 , 212 - 214 Severe GI complications ( e . g . adenomesenteritis , appendicitis , abdominal fluid collections , pancreatitis and intussusception ) were frequently diagnosed in children with acute COVID - 19 and MIS - C . 213 Chest pain and symptoms of myocarditis are more common in older children and adolescents . 192 Patients with MIS - C may have respiratory symptoms such as cough and shortness of breath , but these are more common in patients with acute COVID - 19 . 207 At hospital admission , vital signs seen in patients with MIS - C include fever , tachycardia , and tachypnea typically without hypoxemia . 192 Symptoms of shock including hypotension were seen in about one third of the cases described in New York State . 192 Subsets of patients may fulfill criteria for the diagnosis of KD , particularly those in the younger age - groups . 192 Laboratory findings show evidence of severe systemic inflammation . Complete blood count results can include neutrophilia , lymphopenia , anemia and thrombocytopenia . 192 , 193 , 212 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 26 Inflammatory markers are broadly elevated which generally include C - reactive protein ( CRP ) , erythrocyte sedimentation rate , fibrinogen , ferritin , D - dimer , lactate dehydrogenase , procalcitonin , alanine aminotransferase and IL - 6 levels . 192 , 193 Other laboratory abnormalities such as hypoalbuminemia , hyponatremia and prolonged international normalized ratio may be present . 192 , 193 Evidence of cardiovascular injury with elevated troponin , brain natriuretic peptide ( BNP ) or N - terminal pro - BNP is also common . 192 Specific level cutoffs and the predictive ability of individual tests for MIS - C diagnosis have not been established , although one observational study found that MIS - C patients may have lower absolute counts of lymphocytes and platelets as well as greater CRP concentrations than children without MIS - C who are evaluated for outpatient febrile illness . 215 MIS - C is frequently associated with echocardiographic findings including evidence of ventricular dysfunction with depressed ejection fraction , pericardial effusion , valvular dysfunction and coronary artery dilatation or aneurysms . 192 , 216 Given the prominent GI symptoms at presentation , children with MIS - C may also undergo abdominal imaging to rule out other etiologies including appendicitis . Common abnormal findings seen on abdominal ultrasonography or CT include liver and spleen enlargement , mesenteric adenopathy , trace ascitic or pelvic fluid , inflammation of the intestines and appendix with bowel - wall thickening and fluid filled bowel loops . 192 In children who receive chest radiography , evidence of pulmonary opacities or infiltrates may be present . 217 The hospital course for children with MIS - C may include admission to the ICU for close clinical monitoring , vasopressor support and less frequently mechanical ventilation . 192 , 193 ECMO may be required in a small number of patients . 192 , 193 Despite the morbidity associated at hospital presentation , children with MIS - C are often discharged within a week of admission , 192 mortality remains low 207 and long - term outcomes including functional outcomes , have been minimal 218 with resolution of most cardiac J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 27 findings at subsequent follow up visits . 219 Among those with persistent cardiovascular abnormalities , aneurysmal changes were seen in one group of children followed longitudinally . 219 Whether MIS - C can re - occur in children who experience re - infection is unknown however one published case study showed no reoccurrence of MIS - C with subsequent SARS - CoV - 2 infection . 77 American College of Rheumatology , American Academy of Pediatrics and the PIMS - TS National Consensus Management Study Group have provided a tiered guidance approach for the workup and management of MIS - C ( Table 6 ) . 220 - 222 Cases of MIS - C likely constitute a spectrum of disease with mild cases less frequently represented in the literature . Children with evidence of critical illness require workup for alternative diagnoses including , but not limited to , acute COVID - 19 , acute non - SARS - CoV - 2 infection and KD . For children in whom MIS - C is considered , basic laboratory workup should be pursued . If there is evidence of inflammation , a broader scope of inflammatory markers should be obtained to help differentiate between MIS - C and other etiologies of inflammation . Chest and abdominal radiography can be considered , especially in the workup of other disease processes , but a diagnosis of MIS - C cannot be made based on these results alone . Given the prominence of cardiovascular findings , guidance extrapolated from the workup of KD has been recommended which includes obtaining laboratory markers of cardiac injury ( BNP and troponin ) , echocardiography and EKG . Treatment is also extrapolated from the management of KD ; expert panelists note that not all patients will require immunomodulatory therapy . When therapy is considered , immunomodulators include IVIG with or without glucocorticoids as well as biologics are options . Biologics such as anakinra or infliximab are used if the patient’s disease is refractory to the first - line therapies of IVIG and J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 28 glucocorticoids . To date , there have been no clinical trial data available to guide the treatment of MIS - C . Observational data comparing IVIG with glucocorticoid and IVIG alone suggested that combined therapy was associated with fewer days of fever and may be associated with lower risk of new or persistent MIS - C associated cardiovascular dysfunction . 223 , 224 Post - acute Sequelae of COVID - 19 in Children A picture of long - term symptoms experienced by children after SARS - CoV - 2 infection is emerging . First recognized in adults , post - acute sequelae of COVID - 19 ( PASC ) or “long COVID - 19 , ” is a constellation of persistent symptoms affecting different organ systems reported by patients recovering from all spectrums of acute COVID - 19 including those with asymptomatic infection . 225 , 226 Currently , no formal definition or diagnostic criteria describes PASC , and individuals experiencing longer term symptoms likely represent a heterogenous cohort . The prevalence of PASC is unknown , although a review of published reports show variability by study from 4 to 66 % . 227 Among the few studies describing persistent symptoms in children , fatigue , persistent cough , difficulties with concentration , chest pain , heart palpitations dyspnea , headache , dizziness , sore throat and sleep disturbances were experienced up to 8 months after acute infection . 228 - 232 Short - term cognitive and psychiatric complications have also been observed in the aftermath of acute COVID - 19 and whether these will persist in the long - term is not known . 233 Similar to adults , these symptoms may relapse and remit over the illness course . Information on the cause and optimal management of these patients is unknown and may require interdisciplinary rehabilitation 234 directed toward specific symptoms experienced by the individual . Long term follow up studies of children recovering from SARS - CoV - 2 infection , J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 29 including the UK CLoCK 235 and NIH RECOVER 236 studies , will be helpful to further characterize PASC in children . Other Health Impacts on Children During the COVID - 19 Pandemic In addition to the direct health effects of COVID - 19 , the pandemic has had adverse collateral health impacts on children due to the impacts of COVID - 19 in adults , community - wide mitigation efforts and school closures . Early in the pandemic , the number of primary care preventative and acute care visits decreased . 237 Changes in health - care seeking behavior have led to decreased routine screening tests such as blood lead level testing 238 and a decrease in childhood vaccination rates . 239 Delays in care have exacerbated health related outcomes including appendicitis , 240 asthma exacerbation , 241 and cancer treatment . 242 The global prevalence of depression and anxiety in children highlight the persistent exacerbation of mental health illnesses . 243 In addition to these acute medical issues , the pandemic has altered the daily habits of families resulting in decreases in physical activity 244 and increase in hours of screen time in children . 245 These and other social disruptions have had substantial adverse effects on mental health 246 , 247 and behavior . 248 Families units have also been disrupted due to the deaths of parents and caregivers as a result of COVID - 19 249 exacerbating income inequalities 250 and food insecurity . 251 , 252 Early studies during the pandemic suggested increases in cases of child abuse and neglect , 253 , 254 however there is some evidence to suggest that the increase in family time and strengthening of family support systems helped mitigate instances of physical abuse of children . 255 With school closures , learning was adapted to minimize face - to - face contact . 256 Although schools have resumed in - person learning for the most part , the full impact of changes in childhood education during the pandemic has yet to be fully quantified . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 30 Summary The SARS - CoV - 2 pandemic has led to unprecedented world - wide morbidity and mortality impacting children of all ages . Pediatric acute COVID - 19 has likely been underestimated given the milder presentation of disease and testing paradigms , although severe outcomes have been experienced by all age - groups . The post - acute sequelae of acute COVID - 19 including MIS - C and chronic persistent symptoms experienced by children who recovered from acute COVID - 19 emphasize the importance of infection mitigation . Safe and effective SARS - CoV - 2 vaccines are available to most pediatric age - groups and are becoming more available world - wide , with booster doses available in some settings . There is a dearth of clinical trial data to determine the ideal treatment in children ; future studies must include children to help guide therapy . In addition to direct impacts of infection , children have suffered disproportionately given the closure of schools , loss of adult caregivers and disruption to household stability . Further changes in the pandemic are likely as SARS - CoV - 2 variants arise and public health measures are loosened , but community - wide public health interventions aimed at curbing the pandemic will have important consequences for children’s health . Clinical Care Points  SARS - CoV - 2 infections are more commonly asymptomatic with milder disease presentations of COVID - 19 in children , although children of all ages are at risk for severe outcomes ; SARS - CoV - 2 vaccines remain a mainstay of COVID - 19 prevention in children . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 31  MIS - C and persistent symptoms after SARS - CoV - 2 infection are important post - acute COVID - 19 sequelae in children and emphasize the need for preventing pediatric infections .  The management of acute COVID - 19 and MIS - C requires clinical and laboratory investigations to rule out alternative etiologies for which treatment is available and follow up may be required .  Optimal therapy for acute COVID - 19 and MIS - C is unknown and is guided by expert panels ; consultation with subspecialists is advised when therapy is considered in children .  Maintaining regular preventative care and ensuring high rates of childhood vaccine uptake are vital to prevent long - term consequences of non - COVID - 19 disease and other infectious disease outbreaks .  Indirect impacts of the SARS - CoV - 2 pandemic threaten the health and wellbeing of children worldwide . TABLES Table 1 SARS - CoV - 2 Point Estimates of Cumulative Incidence and Rates of COVID - 19 Outcomes by Age - Group – United States , February 2020 – September 2021 ( From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Estimated COVID - 19 Burden . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . cdc . gov / coronavirus / 2019 - ncov / cases - updates / burden . html ) Infections Hospitalizations Deaths J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 32 Estimated Cumulative Incidence Estimated Rates per 100 , 000 Estimated Cumulative Incidence Estimated Rates per 100 , 000 Estimated Cumulative Incidence Estimated Rates per 100 , 000 0 - 17 years 25 , 844 , 005 35 , 490 266 , 597 366 645 0 . 9 18 - 49 years 75 , 179 , 070 54 , 860 1 , 996 , 830 1 , 457 60 , 355 43 . 7 50 - 64 years 27 , 407 , 088 43 , 656 2 , 009 , 141 3 , 200 159 , 489 253 . 5 > 65 years 18 , 012 , 882 32 , 363 3 , 232 , 213 5 , 807 700 , 882 1296 . 5 Overall 146 , 585 , 169 37 , 764 7 , 506 , 029 2 , 286 921 , 371 280 . 7 Table 2 SARS - CoV - 2 Vaccines Available in the US Vaccine Name Manuf acturer Vaccine Type Reported Vaccine Efficacy in Children Schedule Approva l for Children Approval Dates BNT162b2 ( Comirnaty ) Pfizer - BioNTech mRNA ( Intramuscular ) 1 . 100 % vaccine efficacy against confirmed COVID - 19 in individuals aged 12 - 15 years 101 2 . 90 . 7 % vaccine efficacy against confirmed COVID - 19 in individuals aged 5 - 11 years 102 1 . 2 dose primary series separated by 21 days 2 . 1 additional primary dose in immunocompromised persons * ( > 28 days since 2nd dose ) 3 . Booster dose > 5 months after last dose in primary series 1 . FDA approved for individuals > 16 years of age 2 . FDA EUA for individuals 5 - 15 years of age 3 . Booster dose approval for individuals aged > 12 years 4 . Third primary series dose for certain immunocompromi 1 . December 11 , 2020 - FDA EUA for individuals > 16 years 92 2 . May 10 , 2021 - FDA EUA for individuals 12 - 15 years 94 3 . August 12 , 2021 - FDA EUA for third primary dose for certain immunocompromised individuals * 257 4 . August 23 , 2021 - FDA approved for individuals > 16 years 93 5 . September 22 , 2021 - FDA updated EUA to allow for single booster dose for high - risk populations * * aged > 18 years administered at least 6 months after completion of primary series 258 6 . October 20 , 2021 - FDA updated EUA to allow for heterologous booster dose in eligible J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 33 sed children > 5 years individuals . 7 . October 29 , 2021 - FDA EUA for individuals 5 - 11 years 95 8 . November 19 , 2021 - FDA updated EUA to allow for single booster dose for all individuals aged > 18 years 259 9 . December 9 , 2021 - FDA updated EUA to allow for single booster dose in individuals aged 16 - 17 years 96 10 . January 3 , 2022 – FDA updated EUA to expand use of booster dose in individuals aged 12 - 15 years ; shorten time interval for booster dose to > 5 months and allow for third primary series dose for certain immunocompromised children aged 5 - 11 years . 97 mRNA - 1273 Moderna mRNA ( Intramuscular ) Vaccine efficacy against COVID - 19 in adolescents aged 12 - 17 years showed 100 % efficacy 14 days after second primary dose although not statistically significant given low incidence of infection ( 4 cases in placebo group and none in vaccine arm ) 103 1 . 2 dose primary series separated by 28 days 2 . 1 additional primary dose in immunocompromised persons * ( > 28 days since 2nd dose ) 3 . Booster dose > 5 months after last dose in Not approved by FDA for children 1 . December 18 , 2020 - FDA EUA for individuals > 18 years 260 2 . August 12 , 2021 - FDA EUA for third primary dose for certain immunocompromised individuals * 260 3 . October 20 , 2021 - FDA updated EUA to allow for booster dose for high - risk populations * * aged > 18 years administered at least 6 months after completion of primary series including the use J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 34 primary series of a heterologous booster dose in eligible individuals 260 4 . November 19 , 2021 - FDA updated EUA to allow for single booster dose for all individuals aged > 18 years 260 5 . January 7 , 2022 – FDA updated EUA to shorten interval between completion of primary vaccine series to booster to > 5 months for all individuals > 18 years 261 Ad26 . C OV2 . S Janssen / Johnson & Johnson Viral vector ( Intramuscular ) Data not available 1 . Single primary dose 2 . Booster dose > 2 months after primary dose Not approved by FDA for children 1 . February 27 , 2021 - FDA EUA for individuals > 18 years 262 2 . October 20 , 2021 - FDA updated EUA to allow for a single booster dose at least 2 months after completion of the single - dose primary series for all individuals aged > 18 years and allows for the use of a heterologous booster dose in eligible individuals 262 3 . December 16 , 2021 - CDC ACIP recommendations updated preferring approved mRNA vaccines over Janssen vaccine for primary and booster vaccinations 263 * Moderately to severely immunocompromised persons may include ( not limited to ) individuals undergoing active treatment for solid tumor and hematologic malignancies , receiving a solid - organ transplant and taking immunosuppressive therapy , receiving chimeric antigen receptor T - cell or hematopoietic cell transplant ; individuals who have moderate or severe primary immunodeficiency , advanced or untreated HIV infection , receiving active treatment with high - J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 35 dose corticosteroids , alkylating agents , antimetabolites , transplant - related immunosuppressive drugs , cancer chemotherapeutics agents classified as severely immunosuppressive , tumor necrosis factor blockers and other immunosuppressive or immunomodulatory biologic agents * * High - risk populations include individuals 65 years of age and older ; individuals 18 - 64 years with an underlying medical condition putting them at high risk for severe COVID - 19 and individuals 18 - 64 years with frequent institutional or occupational exposure to SARS - CoV - 2 putting them at risk for serious complications of COVID - 19 including severe COVID - 19 ; Interim updated CDC list of high - risk underlying conditions include but are not limited to : asthma , cancer , cerebrovascular disease , chronic kidney disease , certain types of chronic lung diseases , certain types of chronic liver disease , cystic fibrosis , diabetes mellitus ( type 1 and type 2 ) , Down syndrome , heart conditions , HIV < hypertension , immune deficiencies , certain mental health disorders ( i . e . mood disorders , schizophrenia spectrum disorders ) , obesity ( BMI > 30 kg / m 2 ) and overweight ( BMI > 25kg / m 2 but < 30 kg / m 2 ) , pregnancy and recent pregnancy , sickle cell disease , smoking ( current and former ) , solid organ or blood stem cell transplantation , substance use disorders , thalassemia , tuberculosis , and use of corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive medications ( an ongoing updated list of high - risk underlying conditions can be found on the CDC website ) 141 Table 3 Symptom Frequency in Pediatric Patients with Acute COVID - 19 Symptoms CDC Surveillance Report - United States 9 Longitudinal Cohort of School - Aged Children - UK 124 Overall Age - group Overall Age - group 0 to 9 years 10 - 19 years 5 to 11 years 12 to 17 years % % % % % % Cough 40 37 41 26 25 26 Fever 38 46 35 38 44 35 Headache 34 15 42 62 55 66 Sore Throat 24 13 29 46 36 51 Myalgias 24 10 30 16 9 20 Diarrhea 14 14 14 7 8 7 Shortness of breath 13 7 16 10 4 12 Nausea 10 10 10 17 16 17 Runny Nose 8 7 8 - - - Change in sense of taste or smell 7 1 10 40 22 48 Abdominal pain 7 7 8 21 28 17 Fatigue - - - 55 44 61 Dizziness - - - 22 14 26 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 36 Anorexia - - - 22 20 22 Eye soreness - - - 19 15 22 Voice change - - - 13 11 14 Chest pain - - - 10 6 12 Confusion - - - 6 3 7 Red Welts - - - 3 3 3 Blisters - - - 2 1 2 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 37 Table 4 Definitions of Acute COVID - 19 Severity and Available Treatment Severity of COVID - 19 General Definition Pediatric Considerations Treatment Recommendations Asymptomatic Infection An individual who tests positive for SARS - CoV - 2 but does not exhibit any symptoms over the course of the infection Diagnosis of asymptomatic or presymptomatic SARS - CoV - 2 infections in infants and toddlers are reliant on clinical history gathering and specific questions to the child ' s caregiver . Symptoms may be subtle and difficult to ascertain in the non - verbal child . Supportive care and ensuring caregivers and close contacts take appropriate precautions including encouraging SARS - CoV - 2 vaccine uptake , if eligible . SARS - CoV - 2 directed therapies should only be used in the context of a clinical trial . Monoclonal antibodies are available by EUA to individuals > 12 years and > 40 kg who are at risk for severe disease * but preferably be used in the context of a clinical trial . The EUA for bamlanivimab - etesevimab has been extended to children of all ages including hospitalized children from birth to 2 years of age ; with the Omicron variant , sotrovimab is the only approved monoclonal antibody with maintained efficacy against the new virus and should be administered within 10 days of symptom onset Presymptomatic Infection An individual who tests positive for SARS - CoV - 2 and does not exhibit symptoms at the time , but then develops symptoms later in the illness course Supportive care and ensuring caregivers and close contacts take appropriate precautions including encouraging SARS - CoV - 2 vaccine uptake , if eligible . SARS - CoV - 2 directed therapies should only be used in the context of a clinical trial ; when symptoms develop , treatment provided based on level of severity Mild An individual who tests positive for SARS - CoV - 2 and has signs or symptoms consistent with COVID - 19 which may include fever , cough , sore Children , particularly younger age - groups , may also have non - specific symptoms of feeding refusal , fussiness , runny nose , or nasal congestion . Supportive care and ensuring caregivers and close contacts take appropriate precautions including encouraging SARS - CoV - 2 vaccine uptake , if eligible . Remdesivir and other therapies J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 38 throat , malaise , headache , muscle pain , nausea , vomiting , diarrhea , change in sense of taste or smell . These individuals have no evidence of lower respiratory tract disease including no shortness of breath , dyspnea or abnormal chest imaging including nirmatrelvir / ritonavi r should only be used in the context of a clinical trial ; if remdesivir is used in an outpatient setting , this would be an off - label indication ; molnupiravir is not approved for use in children given concerns for interference with normal bone and cartilage development . Moderate An individual who tests positive for SARS - CoV - 2 and has signs or symptoms consistent with lower respiratory tract disease including shortness of breath or dyspnea , abnormal chest imaging . These individuals have normal baseline oxygen saturation typically In young children , a weak cry , grunting , tracheal tugging , nasal flaring , head bobbing , sternal or intercostal retractions are additional indicators of respiratory distress may also suggest a lower respiratory tract infection Supportive care and ensuring caregivers and close contacts take appropriate precautions including encouraging SARS - CoV - 2 vaccine uptake , if eligible . Remdesivir and other therapies including nirmatrelvir / ritonavi r should only be used in the context of a clinical trial ; if remdesivir is used in an outpatient setting , this would be an off - label indication ; molnupiravir is not approved for use in J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 39 > 94 % on room air children given concerns for interference with normal bone and cartilage development . Severe An individual who tests positive for SARS - CoV - 2 and has oxygen saturation < 94 % or below baseline , ratio of arterial partial pressure of oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen ( PaO2 / FiO2 ) < 300 mmHg , respiratory rate > 30 breaths / min , or lung infiltrates > 50 % Radiographic abnormalities may be common in children and findings should be considered in the context of other symptoms including hypoxemia Normal respiratory rate by age group : 264 Newborn 40 - 60 breaths / minute < 1 year 24 - 38 breaths / minute 1 - 3 years 22 - 30 breaths / minute 4 - 6 years 20 - 24 breaths / minute 7 - 9 years 18 - 24 breaths / minute 10 - 14 years 16 - 22 breaths / minute 14 - 18 years 14 - 20 breaths / minute 1 . Caregivers and close contacts take appropriate precautions including encouraging SARS - CoV - 2 vaccine uptake , if eligible 2 . Remdesivir - can be used as an antiviral in those with severe or critical acute COVID - 19 weighing at least 3 . 5 kg . A multicenter pediatric COVID - 19 guideline committee suggests using respiratory support requirement as the indicator for its use . 177 3 . Dexamethasone * * - can be considered in critical disease particularly in older age - groups 4 . Interleukin - 6 ( e . g . , tocilizumab ) or interleukin - 1 ( e . g . , anakinra ) inhibitors - can be considered in critical disease , preferably in the setting of a clinical trial J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 40 Critical An individual who tests positive for SARS - CoV - 2 and develops respiratory failure , septic shock or organ dysfunction Careful consideration should be made to distinguish cases of critical COVID - 19 and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children ( MIS - C ) . See Table 5 * Risk factors based on the consensus by a multicenter panel of pediatric providers include : children with medical complexity , young age < 1 year , older age > 12 years , immunocompromised state , underlying severe cardiac or pulmonary disease , obesity and diabetes . 177 * * If there is a concurrent condition for which steroids are indicated , steroids should be used as part of the treatment course ( e . g . , asthma exacerbation ) J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 41 Table 5 Case Definitions of the Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children Institution US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 196 World Health Organization 201 Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health 194 Age Group An individual aged < 21 years presenting with : Children and adolescents 0 - 19 years of age with : A child presenting with : Fever fever > 38 . 0 ⁰ C for > 24 hours , or report of subjective fever lasting > 24 hours fever > 3 days persistent fever > 38 . 5 ⁰ C AND AND AND Inflammation laboratory evidence of inflammation including , but not limited to , one or more of the following : elevated C - reactive protein ( CRP ) , erythrocyte sedimentation rate ( ESR ) , fibrinogen , procalcitonin , d - dimer , ferritin , lactic acid dehydrogenase ( LDH ) , or interleukin 6 ( IL - 6 ) , elevated neutrophils , reduced lymphocytes and low albumin Elevated markers of inflammation such as ESR , C - reactive protein or procalcitonin Inflammation ( neutrophilia , elevated CRP and lymphopenia ) AND AND AND Severity of Illness evidence of clinically severe illness requiring hospitalization AND J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 42 Organ System Involvement with multisystem ( > 2 ) organ involvement ( cardiac , renal , respiratory , hematologic , gastrointestinal , dermatologic or neurological ) Two of the following : 1 . Rash or bilateral non - purulent conjunctivitis or muco - cutaneous inflammation signs ( oral , hands or feet ) . 2 . Hypotension or shock . 3 . Features of myocardial dysfunction , pericarditis , valvulitis , or coronary abnormalities ( including echocardiogram findings or elevated troponin / NT - proBNP . 4 . Evidence of coagulopathy ( by PT , PTT , elevated d - Dimers ) . 5 . Acute gastrointestinal problems ( diarrhea , vomiting , or abdominal pain ) . Evidence of single or multi - organ dysfunction ( shock , cardiac , respiratory , renal gastrointestinal or neurological disorder ) AND AND AND with additional features * AND Alternative Explanations No alternative for plausible diagnoses No other obvious microbial cause of inflammation including : Exclusion of any other microbial cause including : Bacterial sepsis Bacterial sepsis Staphylococcal or Streptococcal shock syndromes Staphylococcal or Streptococcal shock syndromes Infections associated with myocarditis ( such as enterovirus ) AND AND AND Virologic Testing Positive for current or recent SARS - CoV - 2 infection by RT - PCR , serology , or antigen test ; or exposure to a suspected or confirmed COVID - 19 case within Evidence of COVID - 19 ( RT - PCR , antigen test or serology positive ) , or likely contact with patients with COVID - 19 SARS - CoV - 2 PCR testing may be positive or negative J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 43 the 4 weeks prior to the onset of symptoms . Additional Comments Some individuals may fulfill full or partial criteria for Kawasaki disease but should be reported if they meet the case definition for MIS - C This may include children fulfilling full or partial criteria for Kawasaki disease Consider MIS - C in any pediatric death with evidence of SARS - CoV - 2 infection * Additional features : abnormal fibrinogen , high D - dimer , high ferritin , hypoalbuminemia , acute kidney injury , anemia , coagulopathy , high IL - 10 , high IL - 6 , proteinuria , raised CK , raised LDH , raised triglycerides , raised troponin , thrombocytopenia , transaminitis J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 44 Table 6 MIS - C Workup and Treatment American College of Rheumatology 220 American Academy of Pediatrics 222 PIMS - TS National Consensus Management Study Group 221 Children presenting with unremitting high fever , an epidemiologic link to SARS - CoV - 2 and suggestive clinical symptoms of MIS - C Persistent fever ( > 3 days ) without a clear clinical source accompanied by symptoms concerning in their severity or coincident with recent exposure to a person with COVID - 19 Children presenting to the hospital with fever , abdominal pain , gastrointestinal , respiratory or neurological symptoms who are stable Laboratory studies Tier 1 : Complete blood cell count with differential , complete metabolic panel , erythrocyte sedimentation rate , C - reactive protein and testing for SARS - CoV - 2 ( by PCR or serology ) ; If ESR or CRP are elevated and at least 1 other laboratory feature : lymphopenia , neutrophilia , thrombocytopenia , hyponatremia or hypoalbuminemia , then proceed to tier 2 ; Tier 2 : includes cardiac assessment and markers of systemic inflammation which may include : D - dimer , ferritin , procalcitonin , lactate dehydrogenase , cytokine panels ( including IL - 6 , tumor necrosis factor , or IL 10 ) , Cardiac laboratory values : troponin , B - type natriuretic peptide ; Initial : Complete blood cell count with differential , urine analysis , ESR and CRP Subsequent studies based on initial clinical suspicion or evidence of inflammation : Ferritin , LDH , comprehensive metabolic panel , pro - BNP , troponin and fibrinogen In addition to above , hospitalized children should also obtain : triglycerides , creatinine kinase , amylase , blood and urine culture , D - dimer , prothrombin time / partial thromboplastin time , INR , SARS - CoV - 2 PCR and SARS - CoV - 2 serology ( prior to the administration of IVIG ) In severely ill Initial : Full blood count , CRP , urea , creatinine , electrolytes and liver function Second - line ( done within 12 hours of admission ) : blood gas and lactate , fibrinogen , ferritin , D - dimer , troponin , N - terminal pro - B - type natriuretic peptide , lactate dehydrogenase , SARS - CoV - 2 RT - PCR test and SARS - CoV - 2 serology , septic and viral screen ( lumbar puncture only if specifically indicated ) J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 45 a peripheral blood smear for assessment of microangiopathic changes can be considered appearing or hemodynamically fragile patients , laboratory testing should be obtained regardless of duration of fever Imaging Echocardiogram ; Cardiac computed tomography should be considered in patients with suspected distal coronary artery aneurysms not well visualized on echocardiogram Chest radiograph , consider echocardiogram and / or cardiac MRI under consultation with pediatric cardiology Done within 12 hours of admission : chest radiograph ; echocardiogram ( daily in those who are physiologically unstable ) Abdominal ultrasound to rule out alternative diagnoses Other Studies EKG every 48 hours ; telemetry in those with conduction abnormalities EKG EKG J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 46 Treatment Depending on the severity of symptoms , in addition to supportive care , the following therapies are recommended : First tier : IVIG ( 2g / kg ) should be given to MIS - C patients who are hospitalized and / or fulfill KD criteria ; Adjunctive : low to moderate dose steroids can be considered in children with milder forms of MIS - C who are persistently febrile and symptomatic despite IVIG ; low to moderate dose glucocorticoids should be used with IVIG in those with severe or refractory disease ; high and pulse dose glucocorticoids can be considered in those who don ' t respond to IVIG and low to moderate dose glucocorticoids Refractory disease : Anakinra ( > 4 mg / kg / day ) can be considered in those refractory to IVIG and glucocorticoids . Low - dose aspirin ( 3 - 5 mg / kg / day ) should be used until normalization of platelet count and IVIG ( 2 grams / kg with max of 100 grams ) In patients who do not improve either clinically or by laboratory values , additional treatment can include steroid therapy ( 2 - 30 mg / kg / day of methylprednisolone depending on illness severity ) and biologics ( anakinra , 2 to 10 mg / kg / day , subcutaneously or intravenously , divided every 6 to 12 hours ) All patients with MIS - C should be started on low - dose aspirin ( except for those with platelets < 100 , 000 or active bleeding ) Continue treatment for presumed sepsis until microbiological culture are available and preferred enrollment in a clinical trial for additional therapies ; in the absence of a clinical trial , then the following was recommended : Children with KD - like phenotype ( fulfills complete or incomplete KD criteria ) : First - line : IVIG ( 2g / kg single or divided dose ) is recommended and a second dose can be considered for children who partially responded or have not responded at all to the first dose ; Second - line : methylprednisolone is recommended ( 10 - 30 mg / kg per day for 3 days ) 24 hours after IVIG if child remains unwell ; given at the same time as IVIG in high - risk children ( e . g . age < 12 months and those with coronary artery changes ) Third line : biological therapy is recommended with infliximab as biological therapy of choice for KD - like phenotype Children with non - specific presentation and evidence of coronary artery abnormality , meeting criteria for toxic shock syndrome , evidence of progressive disease or extended duration of fever > 5 days : First - line : IVIG ( 2g / kg J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 47 normal coronary arteries at > 4 weeks after diagnosis ( except in those with active bleeding , risk of bleeding or platelet count < 80 , 000 / ul ) MIS - C patients with coronary artery aneurysm with z - score > 10 should be treated with low - dose aspirin and therapeutic anticoagulation with enoxaparin or warfarin single or divided dose ) is recommended and a second dose can be considered for children who partially responded or have not responded at all to the first dose ; Second - line : methylprednisolone is recommended ( 10 - 30 mg / kg per day for 3 days ) Third - line : biological therapy is recommended ( may include anakinra , infliximab and tocilizumab ) All children < 12 years should wear compression stockings Follow local KD guidelines for aspirin dosing and continued for a minimum of 6 weeks Follow local protocols for children with a thrombotic event Discuss with hematologist regarding long - term antiplatelet and anticoagulation therapy in children with abnormal coronary arteries Follow up Echocardiogram : 7 - 14 days then 4 - 6 weeks after presentation ; consider 1 year echocardiogram in those with cardiac abnormalities Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging at 2 - 6 months in those with moderate to severe left ventricular dysfunction EKG : at each follow up ; consider a Holter Close follow up 1 - 2 weeks after discharge with pediatric cardiology and , if steroids or biologics were used , pediatric rheumatology Recommended follow up at 1 - 2 weeks and 6 weeks after discharge with echocardiography ; multidisciplinary follow up with pediatric infectious disease , immunology and cardiology in those with coronary artery abnormalities or who have required organ support J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 48 monitor in those with conduction abnormalities References 1 . Dong Y , Mo X , Hu Y , et al . Epidemiology of COVID - 19 Among Children in China . Pediatrics . Jun 2020 ; 145 ( 6 ) doi : 10 . 1542 / peds . 2020 - 0702 2 . Leidman E , Duca LM , Omura JD , Proia K , Stephens JW , Sauber - Schatz EK . COVID - 19 Trends Among Persons Aged 0 - 24 Years - United States , March 1 - December 12 , 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Jan 22 2021 ; 70 ( 3 ) : 88 - 94 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7003e1 3 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . COVID Data Tracker : Demographic Trends of COVID - 19 Cases and Deaths in the US Reported to CDC . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / covid . cdc . gov / covid - data - tracker / # demographics 4 . Team CC - R . Coronavirus Disease 2019 in Children - United States , February 12 - April 2 , 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Apr 10 2020 ; 69 ( 14 ) : 422 - 426 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm6914e4 5 . Kim L , Whitaker M , O ' Halloran A , et al . Hospitalization Rates and Characteristics of Children Aged < 18 Years Hospitalized with Laboratory - Confirmed COVID - 19 - COVID - NET , 14 States , March 1 - July 25 , 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Aug 14 2020 ; 69 ( 32 ) : 1081 - 1088 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm6932e3 6 . Lu X , Zhang L , Du H , et al . SARS - CoV - 2 Infection in Children . N Engl J Med . Apr 23 2020 ; 382 ( 17 ) : 1663 - 1665 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMc2005073 7 . Davies NG , Klepac P , Liu Y , et al . Age - dependent effects in the transmission and control of COVID - 19 epidemics . Nat Med . Aug 2020 ; 26 ( 8 ) : 1205 - 1211 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41591 - 020 - 0962 - 9 8 . Yousaf AR , Duca LM , Chu V , et al . A Prospective Cohort Study in Nonhospitalized Household Contacts With Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Infection : Symptom Profiles and Symptom Change Over Time . Clin Infect Dis . Oct 5 2021 ; 73 ( 7 ) : e1841 - e1849 . doi : 10 . 1093 / cid / ciaa1072 9 . Stokes EK , Zambrano LD , Anderson KN , et al . Coronavirus Disease 2019 Case Surveillance - United States , January 22 - May 30 , 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Jun 19 2020 ; 69 ( 24 ) : 759 - 765 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm6924e2 10 . UNICEF : Child Mortality and COVID - 19 . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / data . unicef . org / topic / child - survival / covid - 19 / 11 . Rodriguez Velasquez S , Jacques L , Dalal J , et al . The toll of COVID - 19 on African children : A descriptive analysis on COVID - 19 - related morbidity and mortality among the pediatric population in Sub - Saharan Africa . Int J Infect Dis . Sep 2021 ; 110 : 457 - 465 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijid . 2021 . 07 . 060 12 . Indenbaum V , Lustig Y , Mendelson E , et al . Under - diagnosis of SARS - CoV - 2 infections among children aged 0 - 15 years , a nationwide seroprevalence study , Israel , January 2020 to March 2021 . Euro Surveill . Dec 2021 ; 26 ( 48 ) doi : 10 . 2807 / 1560 - 7917 . ES . 2021 . 26 . 48 . 2101040 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 49 13 . Jeewandara C , Guruge D , Abyrathna IS , et al . Seroprevalence of SARS - CoV - 2 Infection in the Colombo Municipality Region , Sri Lanka . Front Public Health . 2021 ; 9 : 724398 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpubh . 2021 . 724398 14 . Zinszer K , McKinnon B , Bourque N , et al . Seroprevalence of SARS - CoV - 2 Antibodies Among Children in School and Day Care in Montreal , Canada . JAMA Netw Open . Nov 1 2021 ; 4 ( 11 ) : e2135975 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamanetworkopen . 2021 . 35975 15 . Pollan M , Perez - Gomez B , Pastor - Barriuso R , et al . Prevalence of SARS - CoV - 2 in Spain ( ENE - COVID ) : a nationwide , population - based seroepidemiological study . Lancet . Aug 22 2020 ; 396 ( 10250 ) : 535 - 544 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0140 - 6736 ( 20 ) 31483 - 5 16 . Stringhini S , Wisniak A , Piumatti G , et al . Seroprevalence of anti - SARS - CoV - 2 IgG antibodies in Geneva , Switzerland ( SEROCoV - POP ) : a population - based study . Lancet . Aug 1 2020 ; 396 ( 10247 ) : 313 - 319 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0140 - 6736 ( 20 ) 31304 - 0 17 . Tonshoff B , Muller B , Elling R , et al . Prevalence of SARS - CoV - 2 Infection in Children and Their Parents in Southwest Germany . JAMA Pediatr . Jun 1 2021 ; 175 ( 6 ) : 586 - 593 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2021 . 0001 18 . Rostami A , Sepidarkish M , Leeflang MMG , et al . SARS - CoV - 2 seroprevalence worldwide : a systematic review and meta - analysis . Clin Microbiol Infect . Mar 2021 ; 27 ( 3 ) : 331 - 340 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cmi . 2020 . 10 . 020 19 . Stringhini S , Zaballa ME , Pullen N , et al . Seroprevalence of anti - SARS - CoV - 2 antibodies 6 months into the vaccination campaign in Geneva , Switzerland , 1 June to 7 July 2021 . Euro Surveill . Oct 2021 ; 26 ( 43 ) doi : 10 . 2807 / 1560 - 7917 . ES . 2021 . 26 . 43 . 2100830 20 . Maltezou HC , Krumbholz B , Mavrouli M , et al . A study of the evolution of the third COVID - 19 pandemic wave in the Athens metropolitan area , Greece , through two cross - sectional seroepidemiological surveys : March , June 2021 . J Med Virol . Nov 23 2021 ; doi : 10 . 1002 / jmv . 27465 21 . United States Census Bureau Quick Facts . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . census . gov / quickfacts / fact / table / US / AGE295219 # AGE295219 22 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Estimated COVID - 19 Burden . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . cdc . gov / coronavirus / 2019 - ncov / cases - updates / burden . html 23 . Dhar MS , Marwal R , Vs R , et al . Genomic characterization and epidemiology of an emerging SARS - CoV - 2 variant in Delhi , India . Science . Nov 19 2021 ; 374 ( 6570 ) : 995 - 999 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . abj9932 24 . Delahoy MJ , Ujamaa D , Whitaker M , et al . Hospitalizations Associated with COVID - 19 Among Children and Adolescents - COVID - NET , 14 States , March 1 , 2020 - August 14 , 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Sep 10 2021 ; 70 ( 36 ) : 1255 - 1260 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7036e2 25 . Siegel DA , Reses HE , Cool AJ , et al . Trends in COVID - 19 Cases , Emergency Department Visits , and Hospital Admissions Among Children and Adolescents Aged 0 - 17 Years - United States , August 2020 - August 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Sep 10 2021 ; 70 ( 36 ) : 1249 - 1254 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7036e1 26 . Oeser C , Whitaker H , Linley E , et al . Large increases in SARS - CoV - 2 seropositivity in children in England : Effects of the delta wave and vaccination . J Infect . Nov 30 2021 ; doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jinf . 2021 . 11 . 019 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 50 27 . Ito K , Piantham C , Nishiura H . Relative instantaneous reproduction number of Omicron SARS - CoV - 2 variant with respect to the Delta variant in Denmark . J Med Virol . Dec 30 2021 ; doi : 10 . 1002 / jmv . 27560 28 . World Health Organization . Classification of Omicron ( B . 1 . 1 . 529 ) : SARS - CoV - 2 Variant of Concern . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . who . int / news / item / 26 - 11 - 2021 - classification - of - omicron - ( b . 1 . 1 . 529 ) - sars - cov - 2 - variant - of - concern 29 . Team CC - R . SARS - CoV - 2 B . 1 . 1 . 529 ( Omicron ) Variant - United States , December 1 - 8 , 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Dec 17 2021 ; 70 ( 50 ) : 1731 - 1734 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7050e1 30 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . New Admissions of Patients with Confirmed COVID - 19 per 100 , 000 Population by Age Group , United States . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / covid . cdc . gov / covid - data - tracker / # new - hospital - admissions 31 . Chowkwanyun M , Reed AL , Jr . Racial Health Disparities and Covid - 19 - Caution and Context . N Engl J Med . Jul 16 2020 ; 383 ( 3 ) : 201 - 203 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMp2012910 32 . Gold JAW , Wong KK , Szablewski CM , et al . Characteristics and Clinical Outcomes of Adult Patients Hospitalized with COVID - 19 - Georgia , March 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . May 8 2020 ; 69 ( 18 ) : 545 - 550 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm6918e1 33 . Webb Hooper M , Napoles AM , Perez - Stable EJ . COVID - 19 and Racial / Ethnic Disparities . JAMA . Jun 23 2020 ; 323 ( 24 ) : 2466 - 2467 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jama . 2020 . 8598 34 . Bhala N , Curry G , Martineau AR , Agyemang C , Bhopal R . Sharpening the global focus on ethnicity and race in the time of COVID - 19 . Lancet . May 30 2020 ; 395 ( 10238 ) : 1673 - 1676 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0140 - 6736 ( 20 ) 31102 - 8 35 . Chamie G , Marquez C , Crawford E , et al . Community Transmission of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Disproportionately Affects the Latinx Population During Shelter - in - Place in San Francisco . Clin Infect Dis . Jul 30 2021 ; 73 ( Suppl 2 ) : S127 - S135 . doi : 10 . 1093 / cid / ciaa1234 36 . Bandi S , Nevid MZ , Mahdavinia M . African American children are at higher risk of COVID - 19 infection . Pediatr Allergy Immunol . Oct 2020 ; 31 ( 7 ) : 861 - 864 . doi : 10 . 1111 / pai . 13298 37 . McCormick DW , Richardson LC , Young PR , et al . Deaths in Children and Adolescents Associated With COVID - 19 and MIS - C in the United States . Pediatrics . Nov 2021 ; 148 ( 5 ) doi : 10 . 1542 / peds . 2021 - 052273 38 . Hatcher SM , Agnew - Brune C , Anderson M , et al . COVID - 19 Among American Indian and Alaska Native Persons - 23 States , January 31 - July 3 , 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Aug 28 2020 ; 69 ( 34 ) : 1166 - 1169 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm6934e1 39 . Martinez DA , Hinson JS , Klein EY , et al . SARS - CoV - 2 Positivity Rate for Latinos in the Baltimore - Washington , DC Region . JAMA . Jul 28 2020 ; 324 ( 4 ) : 392 - 395 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jama . 2020 . 11374 40 . Goyal MK , Simpson JN , Boyle MD , et al . Racial and / or Ethnic and Socioeconomic Disparities of SARS - CoV - 2 Infection Among Children . Pediatrics . Oct 2020 ; 146 ( 4 ) doi : 10 . 1542 / peds . 2020 - 009951 41 . Tan TQ , Kullar R , Swartz TH , Mathew TA , Piggott DA , Berthaud V . Location Matters : Geographic Disparities and Impact of Coronavirus Disease 2019 . J Infect Dis . Nov 13 2020 ; 222 ( 12 ) : 1951 - 1954 . doi : 10 . 1093 / infdis / jiaa583 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 51 42 . Kong STJ , Lee RY , Rodriguez F , Scheinker D . Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Household Contact with Individuals at Higher Risk of Exposure to COVID - 19 . J Gen Intern Med . May 2021 ; 36 ( 5 ) : 1470 - 1472 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11606 - 021 - 06656 - 1 43 . Rane MS , Robertson MM , Westmoreland DA , Teasdale CA , Grov C , Nash D . Intention to Vaccinate Children Against COVID - 19 Among Vaccinated and Unvaccinated US Parents . JAMA Pediatr . Dec 6 2021 ; doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2021 . 5153 44 . Honein MA , Christie A , Rose DA , et al . Summary of Guidance for Public Health Strategies to Address High Levels of Community Transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 and Related Deaths , December 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Dec 11 2020 ; 69 ( 49 ) : 1860 - 1867 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm6949e2 45 . Haston JC , Pickering LK . Non - household transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 underscores importance of stay - at - home orders . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . aappublications . org / news / 2020 / 05 / 21 / mmwr052120 ? utm _ source = TrendMD & ut m _ medium = TrendMD & utm _ campaign = AAPNews _ TrendMD _ 1 46 . Ghinai I , Woods S , Ritger KA , et al . Community Transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 at Two Family Gatherings - Chicago , Illinois , February - March 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Apr 17 2020 ; 69 ( 15 ) : 446 - 450 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm6915e1 47 . Rajmil L . Role of children in the transmission of the COVID - 19 pandemic : a rapid scoping review . BMJ Paediatr Open . 2020 ; 4 ( 1 ) : e000722 . doi : 10 . 1136 / bmjpo - 2020 - 000722 48 . Kelvin AA , Halperin S . COVID - 19 in children : the link in the transmission chain . Lancet Infect Dis . Jun 2020 ; 20 ( 6 ) : 633 - 634 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1473 - 3099 ( 20 ) 30236 - X 49 . Coffin SE , Rubin D . Yes , Children Can Transmit COVID , but We Need Not Fear . JAMA Pediatr . Nov 1 2021 ; 175 ( 11 ) : 1110 - 1112 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2021 . 2767 50 . Wu JT , Cowling BJ , Lau EH , et al . School closure and mitigation of pandemic ( H1N1 ) 2009 , Hong Kong . Emerg Infect Dis . Mar 2010 ; 16 ( 3 ) : 538 - 41 . doi : 10 . 3201 / eid1603 . 091216 51 . Weycker D , Edelsberg J , Halloran ME , et al . Population - wide benefits of routine vaccination of children against influenza . Vaccine . Jan 26 2005 ; 23 ( 10 ) : 1284 - 93 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . vaccine . 2004 . 08 . 044 52 . Anderson EJ , Daugherty MA , Pickering LK , Orenstein WA , Yogev R . Protecting the Community Through Child Vaccination . Clin Infect Dis . Jul 18 2018 ; 67 ( 3 ) : 464 - 471 . doi : 10 . 1093 / cid / ciy142 53 . Cohen SA , Chui KK , Naumova EN . Influenza vaccination in young children reduces influenza - associated hospitalizations in older adults , 2002 - 2006 . J Am Geriatr Soc . Feb 2011 ; 59 ( 2 ) : 327 - 32 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1532 - 5415 . 2010 . 03271 . x 54 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Scientific Brief : SARS - CoV - 2 Transmission . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . cdc . gov / coronavirus / 2019 - ncov / science / science - briefs / sars - cov - 2 - transmission . html 55 . Yehya N , Venkataramani A , Harhay MO . Statewide Interventions and Coronavirus Disease 2019 Mortality in the United States : An Observational Study . Clin Infect Dis . Oct 5 2021 ; 73 ( 7 ) : e1863 - e1869 . doi : 10 . 1093 / cid / ciaa923 56 . Courtemanche C , Garuccio J , Le A , Pinkston J , Yelowitz A . Strong Social Distancing Measures In The United States Reduced The COVID - 19 Growth Rate . Health Aff ( Millwood ) . Jul 2020 ; 39 ( 7 ) : 1237 - 1246 . doi : 10 . 1377 / hlthaff . 2020 . 00608 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 52 57 . Zhou L , Ayeh SK , Chidambaram V , Karakousis PC . Modes of transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 and evidence for preventive behavioral interventions . BMC Infect Dis . May 28 2021 ; 21 ( 1 ) : 496 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s12879 - 021 - 06222 - 4 58 . Paul LA , Daneman N , Schwartz KL , et al . Association of Age and Pediatric Household Transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 Infection . JAMA Pediatr . Nov 1 2021 ; 175 ( 11 ) : 1151 - 1158 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2021 . 2770 59 . Park YJ , Choe YJ , Park O , et al . Contact Tracing during Coronavirus Disease Outbreak , South Korea , 2020 . Emerg Infect Dis . Oct 2020 ; 26 ( 10 ) : 2465 - 2468 . doi : 10 . 3201 / eid2610 . 201315 60 . Rostad CA , Kamidani S , Anderson EJ . Implications of SARS - CoV - 2 Viral Load in Children : Getting Back to School and Normal . JAMA Pediatr . Oct 1 2021 ; 175 ( 10 ) : e212022 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2021 . 2022 61 . Su L , Ma X , Yu H , et al . The different clinical characteristics of corona virus disease cases between children and their families in China - the character of children with COVID - 19 . Emerg Microbes Infect . Dec 2020 ; 9 ( 1 ) : 707 - 713 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 22221751 . 2020 . 1744483 62 . Kam KQ , Yung CF , Cui L , et al . A Well Infant With Coronavirus Disease 2019 With High Viral Load . Clin Infect Dis . Jul 28 2020 ; 71 ( 15 ) : 847 - 849 . doi : 10 . 1093 / cid / ciaa201 63 . Chan JF , Yuan S , Kok KH , et al . A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus indicating person - to - person transmission : a study of a family cluster . Lancet . Feb 15 2020 ; 395 ( 10223 ) : 514 - 523 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0140 - 6736 ( 20 ) 30154 - 9 64 . Posfay - Barbe KM , Wagner N , Gauthey M , et al . COVID - 19 in Children and the Dynamics of Infection in Families . Pediatrics . Aug 2020 ; 146 ( 2 ) doi : 10 . 1542 / peds . 2020 - 1576 65 . Maltezou HC , Vorou R , Papadima K , et al . Transmission dynamics of SARS - CoV - 2 within families with children in Greece : A study of 23 clusters . J Med Virol . Mar 2021 ; 93 ( 3 ) : 1414 - 1420 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jmv . 26394 66 . Li F , Li YY , Liu MJ , et al . Household transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 and risk factors for susceptibility and infectivity in Wuhan : a retrospective observational study . Lancet Infect Dis . May 2021 ; 21 ( 5 ) : 617 - 628 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1473 - 3099 ( 20 ) 30981 - 6 67 . Hall CB , Douglas RG , Jr . Modes of transmission of respiratory syncytial virus . J Pediatr . Jul 1981 ; 99 ( 1 ) : 100 - 3 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0022 - 3476 ( 81 ) 80969 - 9 68 . Madewell ZJ , Yang Y , Longini IM , Jr . , Halloran ME , Dean NE . Factors Associated With Household Transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 : An Updated Systematic Review and Meta - analysis . JAMA Netw Open . Aug 2 2021 ; 4 ( 8 ) : e2122240 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamanetworkopen . 2021 . 22240 69 . Grijalva CG , Rolfes MA , Zhu Y , et al . Transmission of SARS - COV - 2 Infections in Households - Tennessee and Wisconsin , April - September 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Nov 6 2020 ; 69 ( 44 ) : 1631 - 1634 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm6944e1 70 . Kawasuji H , Takegoshi Y , Kaneda M , et al . Transmissibility of COVID - 19 depends on the viral load around onset in adult and symptomatic patients . PLoS One . 2020 ; 15 ( 12 ) : e0243597 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0243597 71 . Goyal A , Reeves DB , Cardozo - Ojeda EF , Schiffer JT , Mayer BT . Viral load and contact heterogeneity predict SARS - CoV - 2 transmission and super - spreading events . Elife . Feb 23 2021 ; 10doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 63537 72 . Marks M , Millat - Martinez P , Ouchi D , et al . Transmission of COVID - 19 in 282 clusters in Catalonia , Spain : a cohort study . Lancet Infect Dis . May 2021 ; 21 ( 5 ) : 629 - 636 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1473 - 3099 ( 20 ) 30985 - 3 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 53 73 . Chung E , Chow EJ , Wilcox NC , et al . Comparison of Symptoms and RNA Levels in Children and Adults With SARS - CoV - 2 Infection in the Community Setting . JAMA Pediatr . Oct 1 2021 ; 175 ( 10 ) : e212025 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2021 . 2025 74 . Xiao F , Sun J , Xu Y , et al . Infectious SARS - CoV - 2 in Feces of Patient with Severe COVID - 19 . Emerg Infect Dis . Aug 2020 ; 26 ( 8 ) : 1920 - 1922 . doi : 10 . 3201 / eid2608 . 200681 75 . Hua CZ , Miao ZP , Zheng JS , et al . Epidemiological features and viral shedding in children with SARS - CoV - 2 infection . J Med Virol . Nov 2020 ; 92 ( 11 ) : 2804 - 2812 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jmv . 26180 76 . Han MS , Seong MW , Kim N , et al . Viral RNA Load in Mildly Symptomatic and Asymptomatic Children with COVID - 19 , Seoul , South Korea . Emerg Infect Dis . Oct 2020 ; 26 ( 10 ) : 2497 - 2499 . doi : 10 . 3201 / eid2610 . 202449 77 . Buddingh EP , Vossen A , Lamb HJ , van der Palen RLF , Brinkman DMC . Reinfection With Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Without Recurrence of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children . Pediatr Infect Dis J . Dec 1 2021 ; 40 ( 12 ) : e491 - e492 . doi : 10 . 1097 / INF . 0000000000003280 78 . Viner R , Waddington C , Mytton O , et al . Transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 by children and young people in households and schools : a meta - analysis of population - based and contact - tracing studies . J Infect . Dec 22 2021 ; doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jinf . 2021 . 12 . 026 79 . Heavey L , Casey G , Kelly C , Kelly D , McDarby G . No evidence of secondary transmission of COVID - 19 from children attending school in Ireland , 2020 . Euro Surveill . May 2020 ; 25 ( 21 ) doi : 10 . 2807 / 1560 - 7917 . ES . 2020 . 25 . 21 . 2000903 80 . Kim C , McGee S , Khuntia S , et al . Characteristics of COVID - 19 Cases and Outbreaks at Child Care Facilities - District of Columbia , July - December 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . May 21 2021 ; 70 ( 20 ) : 744 - 748 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7020a3 81 . Lam - Hine T , McCurdy SA , Santora L , et al . Outbreak Associated with SARS - CoV - 2 B . 1 . 617 . 2 ( Delta ) Variant in an Elementary School - Marin County , California , May - June 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Sep 3 2021 ; 70 ( 35 ) : 1214 - 1219 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7035e2 82 . Yin S , Barnes K , Fisher R , Terashita D , Kim AA . COVID - 19 Case Rates in Transitional Kindergarten Through Grade 12 Schools and in the Community - Los Angeles County , California , September 2020 - March 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Sep 3 2021 ; 70 ( 35 ) : 1220 - 1222 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7035e3 83 . Jehn M , McCullough JM , Dale AP , et al . Association Between K - 12 School Mask Policies and School - Associated COVID - 19 Outbreaks - Maricopa and Pima Counties , Arizona , July - August 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Oct 1 2021 ; 70 ( 39 ) : 1372 - 1373 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7039e1 84 . Budzyn SE , Panaggio MJ , Parks SE , et al . Pediatric COVID - 19 Cases in Counties With and Without School Mask Requirements - United States , July 1 - September 4 , 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Oct 1 2021 ; 70 ( 39 ) : 1377 - 1378 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7039e3 85 . Nemoto N , Dhillon S , Fink S , et al . Evaluation of Test to Stay Strategy on Secondary and Tertiary Transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 in K - 12 Schools - Lake County , Illinois , August 9 - October 29 , 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Dec 31 2021 ; 70 ( 5152 ) : 1778 - 1781 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm705152e2 86 . Harris - McCoy K , Lee VC , Munna C , Kim AA . Evaluation of a Test to Stay Strategy in Transitional Kindergarten Through Grade 12 Schools - Los Angeles County , California , August J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 54 16 - October 31 , 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Dec 31 2021 ; 70 ( 5152 ) : 1773 - 1777 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm705152e1 87 . World Health Organization . COVID - 19 vaccines WHO EUL issued . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / extranet . who . int / pqweb / vaccines / vaccinescovid - 19 - vaccine - eul - issued 88 . World Health Organization . COVID - 19 advice for the public : Getting vaccinated . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . who . int / emergencies / diseases / novel - coronavirus - 2019 / covid - 19 - vaccines / advice 89 . Oliver SE , Gargano JW , Marin M , et al . The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices ' Interim Recommendation for Use of Pfizer - BioNTech COVID - 19 Vaccine - United States , December 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Dec 18 2020 ; 69 ( 50 ) : 1922 - 1924 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm6950e2 90 . Wallace M , Woodworth KR , Gargano JW , et al . The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices ' Interim Recommendation for Use of Pfizer - BioNTech COVID - 19 Vaccine in Adolescents Aged 12 - 15 Years - United States , May 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . May 21 2021 ; 70 ( 20 ) : 749 - 752 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7020e1 91 . Woodworth KR , Moulia D , Collins JP , et al . The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices ' Interim Recommendation for Use of Pfizer - BioNTech COVID - 19 Vaccine in Children Aged 5 - 11 Years - United States , November 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Nov 12 2021 ; 70 ( 45 ) : 1579 - 1583 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7045e1 92 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration : FDA Takes Key Action in Fight Against COVID - 19 By Issuing Emergency Use Authorization for First COVID - 19 Vaccine . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / news - events / press - announcements / fda - takes - key - action - fight - against - covid - 19 - issuing - emergency - use - authorization - first - covid - 19 93 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration : FDA Approves First COVID - 19 Vaccine . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / news - events / press - announcements / fda - approves - first - covid - 19 - vaccine 94 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration : Coronavirus ( COVID - 19 ) Update : FDA Authorizes Pfizer - BioNTech COVID - 19 Vaccine for Emergency Use in Adolescents in Another Important Action in Fight Against Pandemic . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / news - events / press - announcements / coronavirus - covid - 19 - update - fda - authorizes - pfizer - biontech - covid - 19 - vaccine - emergency - use 95 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration . FDA Authorizes Pfizer - BioNTech COVID - 19 Vaccine for Emergency Use in Children 5 through 11 Years of Age . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / news - events / press - announcements / fda - authorizes - pfizer - biontech - covid - 19 - vaccine - emergency - use - children - 5 - through - 11 - years - age 96 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration . Coronavirus ( COVID - 19 ) Update : FDA Expands Eligibility to Pfizer - BioNTech COVID - 19 Booster Dose to 16 - and 17 - Year - Olds . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / news - events / press - announcements / coronavirus - covid - 19 - update - fda - expands - eligibility - pfizer - biontech - covid - 19 - booster - dose - 16 - and - 17 97 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration . Coronavirus ( COVID - 19 ) Update : FDA Takes Multiple Actions to Expand Use of Pfizer - BioNTech COVID - 19 Vaccine . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / news - events / press - announcements / coronavirus - covid - 19 - update - fda - takes - multiple - actions - expand - use - pfizer - biontech - covid - 19 - vaccine J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 55 98 . Cameroni E , Bowen JE , Rosen LE , et al . Broadly neutralizing antibodies overcome SARS - CoV - 2 Omicron antigenic shift . Nature . Dec 23 2021 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 021 - 04386 - 2 99 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration . Coronavirus ( COVID - 19 ) Update : FDA Authorizes New Long - Acting Monoclonal Antibodies for Pre - exposure Prevention of COVID - 19 in Certain Individuals . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / news - events / press - announcements / coronavirus - covid - 19 - update - fda - authorizes - new - long - acting - monoclonal - antibodies - pre - exposure 100 . Polack FP , Thomas SJ , Kitchin N , et al . Safety and Efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid - 19 Vaccine . N Engl J Med . Dec 31 2020 ; 383 ( 27 ) : 2603 - 2615 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMoa2034577 101 . Frenck RW , Jr . , Klein NP , Kitchin N , et al . Safety , Immunogenicity , and Efficacy of the BNT162b2 Covid - 19 Vaccine in Adolescents . N Engl J Med . Jul 15 2021 ; 385 ( 3 ) : 239 - 250 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMoa2107456 102 . Walter EB , Talaat KR , Sabharwal C , et al . Evaluation of the BNT162b2 Covid - 19 Vaccine in Children 5 to 11 Years of Age . N Engl J Med . Jan 6 2022 ; 386 ( 1 ) : 35 - 46 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMoa2116298 103 . Ali K , Berman G , Zhou H , et al . Evaluation of mRNA - 1273 SARS - CoV - 2 Vaccine in Adolescents . N Engl J Med . Dec 9 2021 ; 385 ( 24 ) : 2241 - 2251 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMoa2109522 104 . Bar - On YM , Goldberg Y , Mandel M , et al . Protection against Covid - 19 by BNT162b2 Booster across Age Groups . N Engl J Med . Dec 23 2021 ; 385 ( 26 ) : 2421 - 2430 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMoa2115926 105 . Olson SM , Newhams MM , Halasa NB , et al . Effectiveness of Pfizer - BioNTech mRNA Vaccination Against COVID - 19 Hospitalization Among Persons Aged 12 - 18 Years - United States , June - September 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Oct 22 2021 ; 70 ( 42 ) : 1483 - 1488 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7042e1 106 . Lutrick K , Rivers P , Yoo YM , et al . Interim Estimate of Vaccine Effectiveness of BNT162b2 ( Pfizer - BioNTech ) Vaccine in Preventing SARS - CoV - 2 Infection Among Adolescents Aged 12 - 17 Years - Arizona , July - December 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Dec 31 2021 ; 70 ( 5152 ) : 1761 - 1765 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm705152a2 107 . Naleway AL , Groom HC , Crawford PM , et al . Incidence of SARS - CoV - 2 Infection , Emergency Department Visits , and Hospitalizations Because of COVID - 19 Among Persons Aged > / = 12 Years , by COVID - 19 Vaccination Status - Oregon and Washington , July 4 - September 25 , 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Nov 19 2021 ; 70 ( 46 ) : 1608 - 1612 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7046a4 108 . Levy M , Recher M , Hubert H , et al . Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children by COVID - 19 Vaccination Status of Adolescents in France . JAMA . Dec 20 2021 ; doi : 10 . 1001 / jama . 2021 . 23262 109 . Zambrano LD , Newhams MM , Olson SM , et al . Effectiveness of BNT162b2 ( Pfizer - BioNTech ) mRNA Vaccination Against Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children Among Persons Aged 12 – 18 Years — United States , July – December 2021 . MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report . 2022 ; 110 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Demographic Trends of People Receiving COVID - 19 Vaccinations in the United States . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / covid . cdc . gov / covid - data - tracker / # vaccination - demographics - trends J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 56 111 . Morgan L , Schwartz JL , Sisti DA . COVID - 19 Vaccination of Minors Without Parental Consent : Respecting Emerging Autonomy and Advancing Public Health . JAMA Pediatr . Oct 1 2021 ; 175 ( 10 ) : 995 - 996 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2021 . 1855 112 . Hause AM , Baggs J , Marquez P , et al . COVID - 19 Vaccine Safety in Children Aged 5 - 11 Years - United States , November 3 - December 19 , 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Dec 31 2021 ; 70 ( 5152 ) : 1755 - 1760 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm705152a1 113 . Hause AM , Gee J , Baggs J , et al . COVID - 19 Vaccine Safety in Adolescents Aged 12 - 17 Years - United States , December 14 , 2020 - July 16 , 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Aug 6 2021 ; 70 ( 31 ) : 1053 - 1058 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7031e1 114 . Truong DT , Dionne A , Muniz JC , et al . Clinically Suspected Myocarditis Temporally Related to COVID - 19 Vaccination in Adolescents and Young Adults . Circulation . Dec 6 2021 ; doi : 10 . 1161 / CIRCULATIONAHA . 121 . 056583 115 . Barda N , Dagan N , Ben - Shlomo Y , et al . Safety of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid - 19 Vaccine in a Nationwide Setting . N Engl J Med . Sep 16 2021 ; 385 ( 12 ) : 1078 - 1090 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMoa2110475 116 . Diaz GA , Parsons GT , Gering SK , Meier AR , Hutchinson IV , Robicsek A . Myocarditis and Pericarditis After Vaccination for COVID - 19 . JAMA . Sep 28 2021 ; 326 ( 12 ) : 1210 - 1212 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jama . 2021 . 13443 117 . Dionne A , Sperotto F , Chamberlain S , et al . Association of Myocarditis With BNT162b2 Messenger RNA COVID - 19 Vaccine in a Case Series of Children . JAMA Cardiol . Dec 1 2021 ; 6 ( 12 ) : 1446 - 1450 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamacardio . 2021 . 3471 118 . Gargano JW , Wallace M , Hadler SC , et al . Use of mRNA COVID - 19 Vaccine After Reports of Myocarditis Among Vaccine Recipients : Update from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices - United States , June 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Jul 9 2021 ; 70 ( 27 ) : 977 - 982 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7027e2 119 . Boehmer TK , Kompaniyets L , Lavery AM , et al . Association Between COVID - 19 and Myocarditis Using Hospital - Based Administrative Data - United States , March 2020 - January 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Sep 3 2021 ; 70 ( 35 ) : 1228 - 1232 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7035e5 120 . Li B , Zhang S , Zhang R , Chen X , Wang Y , Zhu C . Epidemiological and Clinical Characteristics of COVID - 19 in Children : A Systematic Review and Meta - Analysis . Front Pediatr . 2020 ; 8 : 591132 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fped . 2020 . 591132 121 . Liguoro I , Pilotto C , Bonanni M , et al . SARS - COV - 2 infection in children and newborns : a systematic review . Eur J Pediatr . Jul 2020 ; 179 ( 7 ) : 1029 - 1046 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00431 - 020 - 03684 - 7 122 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . COVID - 19 : Information for Pediatric Healthcare Providers . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . cdc . gov / coronavirus / 2019 - ncov / hcp / pediatric - hcp . html 123 . Lauer SA , Grantz KH , Bi Q , et al . The Incubation Period of Coronavirus Disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) From Publicly Reported Confirmed Cases : Estimation and Application . Ann Intern Med . May 5 2020 ; 172 ( 9 ) : 577 - 582 . doi : 10 . 7326 / M20 - 0504 124 . Molteni E , Sudre CH , Canas LS , et al . Illness duration and symptom profile in symptomatic UK school - aged children tested for SARS - CoV - 2 . Lancet Child Adolesc Health . Oct 2021 ; 5 ( 10 ) : 708 - 718 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S2352 - 4642 ( 21 ) 00198 - X J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 57 125 . Ng KF , Bandi S , Bird PW , Wei - Tze Tang J . COVID - 19 in Neonates and Infants : Progression and Recovery . Pediatr Infect Dis J . Jul 2020 ; 39 ( 7 ) : e140 - e142 . doi : 10 . 1097 / INF . 0000000000002738 126 . National Institutes of Health . COVID - 19 Treatment Guidelines : Clinical Spectrum of SARS - CoV - 2 infection . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . covid19treatmentguidelines . nih . gov / overview / clinical - spectrum / 127 . Gandhi RT , Lynch JB , Del Rio C . Mild or Moderate Covid - 19 . N Engl J Med . Oct 29 2020 ; 383 ( 18 ) : 1757 - 1766 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMcp2009249 128 . Shekerdemian LS , Mahmood NR , Wolfe KK , et al . Characteristics and Outcomes of Children With Coronavirus Disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) Infection Admitted to US and Canadian Pediatric Intensive Care Units . JAMA Pediatr . May 11 2020 ; DOI : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2020 . 1948doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2020 . 1948 129 . Bixler D , Miller AD , Mattison CP , et al . SARS - CoV - 2 - Associated Deaths Among Persons Aged < 21 Years - United States , February 12 - July 31 , 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Sep 18 2020 ; 69 ( 37 ) : 1324 - 1329 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm6937e4 130 . Bailey LC , Razzaghi H , Burrows EK , et al . Assessment of 135794 Pediatric Patients Tested for Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Across the United States . JAMA Pediatr . Feb 1 2021 ; 175 ( 2 ) : 176 - 184 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2020 . 5052 131 . Ouldali N , Yang DD , Madhi F , et al . Factors Associated With Severe SARS - CoV - 2 Infection . Pediatrics . Mar 2021 ; 147 ( 3 ) doi : 10 . 1542 / peds . 2020 - 023432 132 . Gotzinger F , Santiago - Garcia B , Noguera - Julian A , et al . COVID - 19 in children and adolescents in Europe : a multinational , multicentre cohort study . Lancet Child Adolesc Health . Sep 2020 ; 4 ( 9 ) : 653 - 661 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S2352 - 4642 ( 20 ) 30177 - 2 133 . Wanga V , Gerdes ME , Shi DS , et al . Characteristics and Clinical Outcomes of Children and Adolescents Aged < 18 Years Hospitalized with COVID - 19 - Six Hospitals , United States , July - August 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Dec 31 2021 ; 70 ( 5152 ) : 1766 - 1772 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm705152a3 134 . Tsabouri S , Makis A , Kosmeri C , Siomou E . Risk Factors for Severity in Children with Coronavirus Disease 2019 : A Comprehensive Literature Review . Pediatr Clin North Am . Feb 2021 ; 68 ( 1 ) : 321 - 338 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . pcl . 2020 . 07 . 014 135 . Kompaniyets L , Agathis NT , Nelson JM , et al . Underlying Medical Conditions Associated With Severe COVID - 19 Illness Among Children . JAMA Netw Open . Jun 1 2021 ; 4 ( 6 ) : e2111182 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamanetworkopen . 2021 . 11182 136 . Newman AM , Jhaveri R , Patel AB , Tan TQ , Toia JM , Arshad M . Trisomy 21 and Coronavirus Disease 2019 in Pediatric Patients . J Pediatr . Jan 2021 ; 228 : 294 - 296 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jpeds . 2020 . 08 . 067 137 . Arlet JB , de Luna G , Khimoud D , et al . Prognosis of patients with sickle cell disease and COVID - 19 : a French experience . Lancet Haematol . Sep 2020 ; 7 ( 9 ) : e632 - e634 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S2352 - 3026 ( 20 ) 30204 - 0 138 . Sanna G , Serrau G , Bassareo PP , Neroni P , Fanos V , Marcialis MA . Children ' s heart and COVID - 19 : Up - to - date evidence in the form of a systematic review . Eur J Pediatr . Jul 2020 ; 179 ( 7 ) : 1079 - 1087 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00431 - 020 - 03699 - 0 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 58 139 . DeBiasi RL , Song X , Delaney M , et al . Severe Coronavirus Disease - 2019 in Children and Young Adults in the Washington , DC , Metropolitan Region . J Pediatr . Aug 2020 ; 223 : 199 - 203 e1 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jpeds . 2020 . 05 . 007 140 . Kosmeri C , Koumpis E , Tsabouri S , Siomou E , Makis A . Hematological manifestations of SARS - CoV - 2 in children . Pediatr Blood Cancer . Dec 2020 ; 67 ( 12 ) : e28745 . doi : 10 . 1002 / pbc . 28745 141 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Underlying Medical Conditions Associated with Higher Risk for Severe COVID - 19 : Information for Healthcare Providers . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . cdc . gov / coronavirus / 2019 - ncov / hcp / clinical - care / underlyingconditions . html 142 . Walker KF , O ' Donoghue K , Grace N , et al . Maternal transmission of SARS - COV - 2 to the neonate , and possible routes for such transmission : a systematic review and critical analysis . BJOG . Oct 2020 ; 127 ( 11 ) : 1324 - 1336 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 1471 - 0528 . 16362 143 . American Academy of Pediatrics . FAQs : Management of Infants Born to Mothers with Suspected or Confirmed COVID - 19 . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . aap . org / en / pages / 2019 - novel - coronavirus - covid - 19 - infections / clinical - guidance / faqs - management - of - infants - born - to - covid - 19 - mothers / 144 . Ray STJ , Abdel - Mannan O , Sa M , et al . Neurological manifestations of SARS - CoV - 2 infection in hospitalised children and adolescents in the UK : a prospective national cohort study . Lancet Child Adolesc Health . Sep 2021 ; 5 ( 9 ) : 631 - 641 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S2352 - 4642 ( 21 ) 00193 - 0 145 . Trogen B , Gonzalez FJ , Shust GF . COVID - 19 - Associated Myocarditis in an Adolescent . Pediatr Infect Dis J . Aug 2020 ; 39 ( 8 ) : e204 - e205 . doi : 10 . 1097 / INF . 0000000000002788 146 . Lara D , Young T , Del Toro K , et al . Acute Fulminant Myocarditis in a Pediatric Patient With COVID - 19 Infection . Pediatrics . Aug 2020 ; 146 ( 2 ) doi : 10 . 1542 / peds . 2020 - 1509 147 . Raymond TT , Das A , Manzuri S , Ehrett S , Guleserian K , Brenes J . Pediatric COVID - 19 and Pericarditis Presenting With Acute Pericardial Tamponade . World J Pediatr Congenit Heart Surg . Nov 2020 ; 11 ( 6 ) : 802 - 804 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 2150135120949455 148 . Dimopoulou D , Spyridis N , Dasoula F , et al . Pericarditis as the Main Clinical Manifestation of COVID - 19 in Adolescents . Pediatr Infect Dis J . May 1 2021 ; 40 ( 5 ) : e197 - e199 . doi : 10 . 1097 / INF . 0000000000003096 149 . Panjabi AL , Foster RC , McCarthy AM , et al . Pulmonary Embolism as the Initial Presentation of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in Adolescents . Pediatr Infect Dis J . May 1 2021 ; 40 ( 5 ) : e200 - e202 . doi : 10 . 1097 / INF . 0000000000003106 150 . Samuel S , Friedman RA , Sharma C , et al . Incidence of arrhythmias and electrocardiographic abnormalities in symptomatic pediatric patients with PCR - positive SARS - CoV - 2 infection , including drug - induced changes in the corrected QT interval . Heart Rhythm . Nov 2020 ; 17 ( 11 ) : 1960 - 1966 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . hrthm . 2020 . 06 . 033 151 . Persson J , Shorofsky M , Leahy R , et al . ST - Elevation Myocardial Infarction due to Acute Thrombosis in an Adolescent With COVID - 19 . Pediatrics . Aug 2021 ; 148 ( 2 ) doi : 10 . 1542 / peds . 2020 - 049793 152 . Andina D , Belloni - Fortina A , Bodemer C , et al . Skin manifestations of COVID - 19 in children : Part 1 . Clin Exp Dermatol . Apr 2021 ; 46 ( 3 ) : 444 - 450 . doi : 10 . 1111 / ced . 14481 153 . Andina D , Belloni - Fortina A , Bodemer C , et al . Skin manifestations of COVID - 19 in children : Part 2 . Clin Exp Dermatol . Apr 2021 ; 46 ( 3 ) : 451 - 461 . doi : 10 . 1111 / ced . 14482 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 59 154 . Paz L , Eslava E , Ribes M , Mayer EF . Acute Pancreatitis in a Teenager With SARS - CoV - 2 Infection . Pediatr Infect Dis J . Apr 1 2021 ; 40 ( 4 ) : e161 - e162 . doi : 10 . 1097 / INF . 0000000000003046 155 . Brisca G , Mallamaci M , Tardini G , et al . SARS - CoV - 2 Infection May Present as Acute Hepatitis in Children . Pediatr Infect Dis J . May 1 2021 ; 40 ( 5 ) : e214 - e215 . doi : 10 . 1097 / INF . 0000000000003098 156 . Perez A , Kogan - Liberman D , Sheflin - Findling S , Raizner A , Ahuja KL , Ovchinsky N . Presentation of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome - Coronavirus 2 Infection as Cholestatic Jaundice in Two Healthy Adolescents . J Pediatr . Nov 2020 ; 226 : 278 - 280 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jpeds . 2020 . 07 . 054 157 . Stewart DJ , Hartley JC , Johnson M , Marks SD , du Pre P , Stojanovic J . Renal dysfunction in hospitalised children with COVID - 19 . Lancet Child Adolesc Health . Aug 2020 ; 4 ( 8 ) : e28 - e29 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S2352 - 4642 ( 20 ) 30178 - 4 158 . Marr KA , Platt A , Tornheim JA , et al . Aspergillosis Complicating Severe Coronavirus Disease . Emerg Infect Dis . Jan 2021 ; 27 ( 1 ) doi : 10 . 3201 / eid2701 . 202896 159 . Dulski TM , DeLong M , Garner K , et al . Notes from the Field : COVID - 19 - Associated Mucormycosis - Arkansas , July - September 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Dec 17 2021 ; 70 ( 50 ) : 1750 - 1751 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7050a3 160 . Samprathi M , Jayashree M . Biomarkers in COVID - 19 : An Up - To - Date Review . Front Pediatr . 2020 ; 8 : 607647 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fped . 2020 . 607647 161 . Henry BM , Benoit SW , de Oliveira MHS , et al . Laboratory abnormalities in children with mild and severe coronavirus disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) : A pooled analysis and review . Clin Biochem . Jul 2020 ; 81 : 1 - 8 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . clinbiochem . 2020 . 05 . 012 162 . Irfan O , Muttalib F , Tang K , Jiang L , Lassi ZS , Bhutta Z . Clinical characteristics , treatment and outcomes of paediatric COVID - 19 : a systematic review and meta - analysis . Arch Dis Child . Feb 16 2021 ; doi : 10 . 1136 / archdischild - 2020 - 321385 163 . Wang Y , Zhu F , Wang C , et al . Children Hospitalized With Severe COVID - 19 in Wuhan . Pediatr Infect Dis J . Jul 2020 ; 39 ( 7 ) : e91 - e94 . doi : 10 . 1097 / INF . 0000000000002739 164 . Qiu H , Wu J , Hong L , Luo Y , Song Q , Chen D . Clinical and epidemiological features of 36 children with coronavirus disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) in Zhejiang , China : an observational cohort study . Lancet Infect Dis . Jun 2020 ; 20 ( 6 ) : 689 - 696 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1473 - 3099 ( 20 ) 30198 - 5 165 . Shelmerdine SC , Lovrenski J , Caro - Dominguez P , Toso S , Collaborators of the European Society of Paediatric Radiology Cardiothoracic Imaging T . Coronavirus disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) in children : a systematic review of imaging findings . Pediatr Radiol . Aug 2020 ; 50 ( 9 ) : 1217 - 1230 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00247 - 020 - 04726 - w 166 . Cameroni E , Saliba C , Bowen JE , et al . Broadly neutralizing antibodies overcome SARS - CoV - 2 Omicron antigenic shift . bioRxiv . Dec 14 2021 ; doi : 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 12 . 12 . 472269 167 . Langford BJ , So M , Raybardhan S , et al . Antibiotic prescribing in patients with COVID - 19 : rapid review and meta - analysis . Clin Microbiol Infect . Apr 2021 ; 27 ( 4 ) : 520 - 531 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cmi . 2020 . 12 . 018 168 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration . Fact Sheet for Health Care Providers Emergency Use Authorization ( EUA ) of Bamlanivimab and Etesevimab . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / media / 145802 / download J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 60 169 . National Institutes of Health . COVID - 19 Treatment Guidelines . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / files . covid19treatmentguidelines . nih . gov / guidelines / covid19treatmentguidelines . pdf 170 . Wolf J , Abzug MJ , Wattier RL , et al . Initial Guidance on Use of Monoclonal Antibody Therapy for Treatment of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in Children and Adolescents . J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc . May 28 2021 ; 10 ( 5 ) : 629 - 634 . doi : 10 . 1093 / jpids / piaa175 171 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration : Veklury ( remdesivir ) EUA Letter of Approval , reissued 10 / 22 / 2020 . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / media / 137564 / download 172 . Beigel JH , Tomashek KM , Dodd LE , et al . Remdesivir for the Treatment of Covid - 19 - Final Report . N Engl J Med . Nov 5 2020 ; 383 ( 19 ) : 1813 - 1826 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMoa2007764 173 . Goldman JD , Lye DCB , Hui DS , et al . Remdesivir for 5 or 10 Days in Patients with Severe Covid - 19 . N Engl J Med . Nov 5 2020 ; 383 ( 19 ) : 1827 - 1837 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMoa2015301 174 . Spinner CD , Gottlieb RL , Criner GJ , et al . Effect of Remdesivir vs Standard Care on Clinical Status at 11 Days in Patients With Moderate COVID - 19 : A Randomized Clinical Trial . JAMA . Sep 15 2020 ; 324 ( 11 ) : 1048 - 1057 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jama . 2020 . 16349 175 . National Institutes of Health . The COVID - 19 Treatment Guidelines Panel ' s Statement of Therapies for High - Risk , Nonhospitalized Patients with Mild to Moderate COVID - 19 . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . covid19treatmentguidelines . nih . gov / therapies / statement - on - therapies - for - high - risk - nonhospitalized - patients / 176 . Gottlieb RL , Vaca CE , Paredes R , et al . Early Remdesivir to Prevent Progression to Severe Covid - 19 in Outpatients . N Engl J Med . Dec 22 2021 ; doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMoa2116846 177 . Chiotos K , Hayes M , Kimberlin DW , et al . Multicenter Interim Guidance on Use of Antivirals for Children With Coronavirus Disease 2019 / Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 . J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc . Feb 13 2021 ; 10 ( 1 ) : 34 - 48 . doi : 10 . 1093 / jpids / piaa115 178 . World Health Organization : Therapeutics and COVID - 19 : Living Guidelines . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . who . int / publications / i / item / WHO - 2019 - nCoV - therapeutics - 2021 . 3 179 . Chow EJ , Maust B , Kazmier KM , Stokes C . Sinus Bradycardia in a Pediatric Patient Treated With Remdesivir for Acute Coronavirus Disease 2019 : A Case Report and a Review of the Literature . J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc . Oct 27 2021 ; 10 ( 9 ) : 926 - 929 . doi : 10 . 1093 / jpids / piab029 180 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration . Coronavirus ( COVID - 19 ) Update : FDA Authorizes Additional Oral Antiviral Treatment of COVID - 19 in Certain Adults . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / news - events / press - announcements / coronavirus - covid - 19 - update - fda - authorizes - additional - oral - antiviral - treatment - covid - 19 - certain 181 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration . Coronavirus ( COVID - 19 ) Update : FDA Authorizes First Oral Antiviral for Treatment of COVID - 19 . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / news - events / press - announcements / coronavirus - covid - 19 - update - fda - authorizes - first - oral - antiviral - treatment - covid - 19 182 . Villar J , Ferrando C , Martinez D , et al . Dexamethasone treatment for the acute respiratory distress syndrome : a multicentre , randomised controlled trial . Lancet Respir Med . Mar 2020 ; 8 ( 3 ) : 267 - 276 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S2213 - 2600 ( 19 ) 30417 - 5 183 . Group RC , Horby P , Lim WS , et al . Dexamethasone in Hospitalized Patients with Covid - 19 . N Engl J Med . Feb 25 2021 ; 384 ( 8 ) : 693 - 704 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMoa2021436 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 61 184 . Tomazini BM , Maia IS , Cavalcanti AB , et al . Effect of Dexamethasone on Days Alive and Ventilator - Free in Patients With Moderate or Severe Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome and COVID - 19 : The CoDEX Randomized Clinical Trial . JAMA . Oct 6 2020 ; 324 ( 13 ) : 1307 - 1316 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jama . 2020 . 17021 185 . World Health Organization : Corticosteroids for COVID - 19 . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . who . int / publications / i / item / WHO - 2019 - nCoV - Corticosteroids - 2020 . 1 186 . Dulek DE , Fuhlbrigge RC , Tribble AC , et al . Multidisciplinary Guidance Regarding the Use of Immunomodulatory Therapies for Acute Coronavirus Disease 2019 in Pediatric Patients . J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc . Dec 31 2020 ; 9 ( 6 ) : 716 - 737 . doi : 10 . 1093 / jpids / piaa098 187 . Whittaker E , Bamford A , Kenny J , et al . Clinical Characteristics of 58 Children With a Pediatric Inflammatory Multisystem Syndrome Temporally Associated With SARS - CoV - 2 . JAMA . Jul 21 2020 ; 324 ( 3 ) : 259 - 269 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jama . 2020 . 10369 188 . Paediatric Intensive Care Society Statement : Increased number of reported cases of novel presentation of multisystem inflammatory disease . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / pccsociety . uk / wp - content / uploads / 2020 / 04 / PICS - statement - re - novel - KD - C19 - presentation - v2 - 27042020 . pdf 189 . Verdoni L , Mazza A , Gervasoni A , et al . An outbreak of severe Kawasaki - like disease at the Italian epicentre of the SARS - CoV - 2 epidemic : an observational cohort study . Lancet . Jun 6 2020 ; 395 ( 10239 ) : 1771 - 1778 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0140 - 6736 ( 20 ) 31103 - X 190 . Riphagen S , Gomez X , Gonzalez - Martinez C , Wilkinson N , Theocharis P . Hyperinflammatory shock in children during COVID - 19 pandemic . Lancet . May 23 2020 ; 395 ( 10237 ) : 1607 - 1608 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0140 - 6736 ( 20 ) 31094 - 1 191 . Grimaud M , Starck J , Levy M , et al . Acute myocarditis and multisystem inflammatory emerging disease following SARS - CoV - 2 infection in critically ill children . Ann Intensive Care . Jun 1 2020 ; 10 ( 1 ) : 69 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s13613 - 020 - 00690 - 8 192 . Dufort EM , Koumans EH , Chow EJ , et al . Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children in New York State . N Engl J Med . Jul 23 2020 ; 383 ( 4 ) : 347 - 358 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMoa2021756 193 . Feldstein LR , Rose EB , Horwitz SM , et al . Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in U . S . Children and Adolescents . N Engl J Med . Jul 23 2020 ; 383 ( 4 ) : 334 - 346 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMoa2021680 194 . Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health . Guidance : Paediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome temporally associated with COVID - 19 . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . rcpch . ac . uk / sites / default / files / 2020 - 05 / COVID - 19 - Paediatric - multisystem - % 20inflammatory % 20syndrome - 20200501 . pdf 195 . Levin M . Childhood Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome - A New Challenge in the Pandemic . N Engl J Med . Jul 23 2020 ; 383 ( 4 ) : 393 - 395 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMe2023158 196 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children ( MIS - C ) Associated with Coronavirus Disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) . Accessed October 28 , 2021 . https : / / emergency . cdc . gov / han / 2020 / han00432 . asp 197 . Morris SB , Schwartz NG , Patel P , et al . Case Series of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Adults Associated with SARS - CoV - 2 Infection - United Kingdom and United States , March - August 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Oct 9 2020 ; 69 ( 40 ) : 1450 - 1456 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm6940e1 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 62 198 . Hekimian G , Kerneis M , Zeitouni M , et al . Coronavirus Disease 2019 Acute Myocarditis and Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Adult Intensive and Cardiac Care Units . Chest . Feb 2021 ; 159 ( 2 ) : 657 - 662 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chest . 2020 . 08 . 2099 199 . Davogustto G , Clark DE , Hardison E , et al . Characteristics Associated with Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome Among Adults with SARS - CoV - 2 Infection . JAMA Network Open . 2021 ; 200 . Chow EJ . The Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Adults With SARS - CoV - 2 Infection - Another Piece of an Expanding Puzzle . JAMA Netw Open . May 3 2021 ; 4 ( 5 ) : e2110344 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamanetworkopen . 2021 . 10344 201 . World Health Organization . Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children and Adolescents Temporally Related to COVID - 19 . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . who . int / news - room / commentaries / detail / multisystem - inflammatory - syndrome - in - children - and - adolescents - with - covid - 19 202 . Payne AB , Gilani Z , Godfred - Cato S , et al . Incidence of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children Among US Persons Infected With SARS - CoV - 2 . JAMA Netw Open . Jun 1 2021 ; 4 ( 6 ) : e2116420 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamanetworkopen . 2021 . 16420 203 . Rowley AH . Understanding SARS - CoV - 2 - related multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children . Nat Rev Immunol . Aug 2020 ; 20 ( 8 ) : 453 - 454 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41577 - 020 - 0367 - 5 204 . Consiglio CR , Cotugno N , Sardh F , et al . The Immunology of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children with COVID - 19 . Cell . Nov 12 2020 ; 183 ( 4 ) : 968 - 981 e7 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2020 . 09 . 016 205 . Godfred - Cato S , Bryant B , Leung J , et al . COVID - 19 - Associated Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children - United States , March - July 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Aug 14 2020 ; 69 ( 32 ) : 1074 - 1080 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm6932e2 206 . Sharma C , Ganigara M , Galeotti C , et al . Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children and Kawasaki disease : a critical comparison . Nat Rev Rheumatol . Dec 2021 ; 17 ( 12 ) : 731 - 748 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41584 - 021 - 00709 - 9 207 . Feldstein LR , Tenforde MW , Friedman KG , et al . Characteristics and Outcomes of US Children and Adolescents With Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children ( MIS - C ) Compared With Severe Acute COVID - 19 . JAMA . Mar 16 2021 ; 325 ( 11 ) : 1074 - 1087 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jama . 2021 . 2091 208 . Lee EH , Kepler KL , Geevarughese A , et al . Race / Ethnicity Among Children With COVID - 19 - Associated Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome . JAMA Netw Open . Nov 2 2020 ; 3 ( 11 ) : e2030280 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamanetworkopen . 2020 . 30280 209 . Abrams JY , Godfred - Cato SE , Oster ME , et al . Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children Associated with Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 : A Systematic Review . J Pediatr . Nov 2020 ; 226 : 45 - 54 e1 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jpeds . 2020 . 08 . 003 210 . Stierman B , Abrams JY , Godfred - Cato SE , et al . Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children in the United States , March 2020 to February 2021 . Pediatr Infect Dis J . Nov 1 2021 ; 40 ( 11 ) : e400 - e406 . doi : 10 . 1097 / INF . 0000000000003294 211 . Javalkar K , Robson VK , Gaffney L , et al . Socioeconomic and Racial and / or Ethnic Disparities in Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome . Pediatrics . May 2021 ; 147 ( 5 ) doi : 10 . 1542 / peds . 2020 - 039933 212 . Ahmed M , Advani S , Moreira A , et al . Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children : A systematic review . EClinicalMedicine . Sep 2020 ; 26 : 100527 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eclinm . 2020 . 100527 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 63 213 . Lo Vecchio A , Garazzino S , Smarrazzo A , et al . Factors Associated With Severe Gastrointestinal Diagnoses in Children With SARS - CoV - 2 Infection or Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome . JAMA Netw Open . Dec 1 2021 ; 4 ( 12 ) : e2139974 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamanetworkopen . 2021 . 39974 214 . Young TK , Shaw KS , Shah JK , et al . Mucocutaneous Manifestations of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children During the COVID - 19 Pandemic . JAMA Dermatol . Feb 1 2021 ; 157 ( 2 ) : 207 - 212 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamadermatol . 2020 . 4779 215 . Carlin RF , Fischer AM , Pitkowsky Z , et al . Discriminating Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children Requiring Treatment from Common Febrile Conditions in Outpatient Settings . J Pediatr . Feb 2021 ; 229 : 26 - 32 e2 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jpeds . 2020 . 10 . 013 216 . Sperotto F , Friedman KG , Son MBF , VanderPluym CJ , Newburger JW , Dionne A . Cardiac manifestations in SARS - CoV - 2 - associated multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children : a comprehensive review and proposed clinical approach . Eur J Pediatr . Feb 2021 ; 180 ( 2 ) : 307 - 322 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00431 - 020 - 03766 - 6 217 . Kaushik A , Gupta S , Sood M , Sharma S , Verma S . A Systematic Review of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children Associated With SARS - CoV - 2 Infection . Pediatr Infect Dis J . Nov 2020 ; 39 ( 11 ) : e340 - e346 . doi : 10 . 1097 / INF . 0000000000002888 218 . Penner J , Abdel - Mannan O , Grant K , et al . 6 - month multidisciplinary follow - up and outcomes of patients with paediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome ( PIMS - TS ) at a UK tertiary paediatric hospital : a retrospective cohort study . Lancet Child Adolesc Health . Jul 2021 ; 5 ( 7 ) : 473 - 482 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S2352 - 4642 ( 21 ) 00138 - 3 219 . Davies P , du Pre P , Lillie J , Kanthimathinathan HK . One - Year Outcomes of Critical Care Patients Post - COVID - 19 Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children . JAMA Pediatr . Dec 1 2021 ; 175 ( 12 ) : 1281 - 1283 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2021 . 2993 220 . Henderson LA , Canna SW , Friedman KG , et al . American College of Rheumatology Clinical Guidance for Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children Associated With SARS - CoV - 2 and Hyperinflammation in Pediatric COVID - 19 : Version 2 . Arthritis Rheumatol . Apr 2021 ; 73 ( 4 ) : e13 - e29 . doi : 10 . 1002 / art . 41616 221 . Harwood R , Allin B , Jones CE , et al . A national consensus management pathway for paediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome temporally associated with COVID - 19 ( PIMS - TS ) : results of a national Delphi process . Lancet Child Adolesc Health . Feb 2021 ; 5 ( 2 ) : 133 - 141 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S2352 - 4642 ( 20 ) 30304 - 7 222 . American Academy of Pediatrics : Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children ( MIS - C ) Interim Guidance . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . aap . org / en / pages / 2019 - novel - coronavirus - covid - 19 - infections / clinical - guidance / multisystem - inflammatory - syndrome - in - children - mis - c - interim - guidance / 223 . Ouldali N , Toubiana J , Antona D , et al . Association of Intravenous Immunoglobulins Plus Methylprednisolone vs Immunoglobulins Alone With Course of Fever in Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children . JAMA . Mar 2 2021 ; 325 ( 9 ) : 855 - 864 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jama . 2021 . 0694 224 . Son MBF , Murray N , Friedman K , et al . Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children - Initial Therapy and Outcomes . N Engl J Med . Jul 1 2021 ; 385 ( 1 ) : 23 - 34 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMoa2102605 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 64 225 . Nalbandian A , Sehgal K , Gupta A , et al . Post - acute COVID - 19 syndrome . Nat Med . Apr 2021 ; 27 ( 4 ) : 601 - 615 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41591 - 021 - 01283 - z 226 . Ashkenazi - Hoffnung L , Shmueli E , Ehrlich S , et al . Long COVID in Children : Observations From a Designated Pediatric Clinic . Pediatr Infect Dis J . Dec 1 2021 ; 40 ( 12 ) : e509 - e511 . doi : 10 . 1097 / INF . 0000000000003285 227 . Zimmermann P , Pittet LF , Curtis N . How Common is Long COVID in Children and Adolescents ? Pediatr Infect Dis J . Dec 1 2021 ; 40 ( 12 ) : e482 - e487 . doi : 10 . 1097 / INF . 0000000000003328 228 . Ludvigsson JF . Case report and systematic review suggest that children may experience similar long - term effects to adults after clinical COVID - 19 . Acta Paediatr . Mar 2021 ; 110 ( 3 ) : 914 - 921 . doi : 10 . 1111 / apa . 15673 229 . Buonsenso D , Munblit D , De Rose C , et al . Preliminary evidence on long COVID in children . Acta Paediatr . Jul 2021 ; 110 ( 7 ) : 2208 - 2211 . doi : 10 . 1111 / apa . 15870 230 . Brackel CLH , Lap CR , Buddingh EP , et al . Pediatric long - COVID : An overlooked phenomenon ? Pediatric pulmonology . Aug 2021 ; 56 ( 8 ) : 2495 - 2502 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ppul . 25521 231 . Radtke T , Ulyte A , Puhan MA , Kriemler S . Long - term Symptoms After SARS - CoV - 2 Infection in Children and Adolescents . JAMA . Jul 15 2021 ; doi : 10 . 1001 / jama . 2021 . 11880 232 . Say D , Crawford N , McNab S , Wurzel D , Steer A , Tosif S . Post - acute COVID - 19 outcomes in children with mild and asymptomatic disease . Lancet Child Adolesc Health . Jun 2021 ; 5 ( 6 ) : e22 - e23 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S2352 - 4642 ( 21 ) 00124 - 3 233 . Kumar S , Veldhuis A , Malhotra T . Neuropsychiatric and Cognitive Sequelae of COVID - 19 . Front Psychol . 2021 ; 12 : 577529 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2021 . 577529 234 . Morrow AK , Ng R , Vargas G , et al . Postacute / Long COVID in Pediatrics : Development of a Multidisciplinary Rehabilitation Clinic and Preliminary Case Series . Am J Phys Med Rehabil . Dec 1 2021 ; 100 ( 12 ) : 1140 - 1147 . doi : 10 . 1097 / PHM . 0000000000001896 235 . Stephenson T , Shafran R , De Stavola B , et al . Long COVID and the mental and physical health of children and young people : national matched cohort study protocol ( the CLoCk study ) . BMJ Open . Aug 26 2021 ; 11 ( 8 ) : e052838 . doi : 10 . 1136 / bmjopen - 2021 - 052838 236 . National Institutes of Health . RECOVER : Research COVID to Enhance Recovery . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / recovercovid . org / 237 . Schweiberger K , Patel SY , Mehrotra A , Ray KN . Trends in Pediatric Primary Care Visits During the Coronavirus Disease of 2019 Pandemic . Acad Pediatr . Nov - Dec 2021 ; 21 ( 8 ) : 1426 - 1433 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . acap . 2021 . 04 . 031 238 . Courtney JG , Chuke SO , Dyke K , et al . Decreases in Young Children Who Received Blood Lead Level Testing During COVID - 19 - 34 Jurisdictions , January - May 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Feb 5 2021 ; 70 ( 5 ) : 155 - 161 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7005a2 239 . DeSilva MB , Haapala J , Vazquez - Benitez G , et al . Association of the COVID - 19 Pandemic With Routine Childhood Vaccination Rates and Proportion Up to Date With Vaccinations Across 8 US Health Systems in the Vaccine Safety Datalink . JAMA Pediatr . Jan 1 2022 ; 176 ( 1 ) : 68 - 77 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2021 . 4251 240 . Gerall CD , DeFazio JR , Kahan AM , et al . Delayed presentation and sub - optimal outcomes of pediatric patients with acute appendicitis during the COVID - 19 pandemic . J Pediatr Surg . May 2021 ; 56 ( 5 ) : 905 - 910 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jpedsurg . 2020 . 10 . 008 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 65 241 . Levene R , Fein DM , Silver EJ , Joels JR , Khine H . The ongoing impact of COVID - 19 on asthma and pediatric emergency health - seeking behavior in the Bronx , an epicenter . Am J Emerg Med . May 2021 ; 43 : 109 - 114 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ajem . 2021 . 01 . 072 242 . Graetz D , Agulnik A , Ranadive R , et al . Global effect of the COVID - 19 pandemic on paediatric cancer care : a cross - sectional study . Lancet Child Adolesc Health . May 2021 ; 5 ( 5 ) : 332 - 340 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S2352 - 4642 ( 21 ) 00031 - 6 243 . Racine N , McArthur BA , Cooke JE , Eirich R , Zhu J , Madigan S . Global Prevalence of Depressive and Anxiety Symptoms in Children and Adolescents During COVID - 19 : A Meta - analysis . JAMA Pediatr . Nov 1 2021 ; 175 ( 11 ) : 1142 - 1150 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2021 . 2482 244 . Chaffee BW , Cheng J , Couch ET , Hoeft KS , Halpern - Felsher B . Adolescents ' Substance Use and Physical Activity Before and During the COVID - 19 Pandemic . JAMA Pediatr . Jul 1 2021 ; 175 ( 7 ) : 715 - 722 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2021 . 0541 245 . Tandon PS , Zhou C , Johnson AM , Gonzalez ES , Kroshus E . Association of Children ' s Physical Activity and Screen Time With Mental Health During the COVID - 19 Pandemic . JAMA Netw Open . Oct 1 2021 ; 4 ( 10 ) : e2127892 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamanetworkopen . 2021 . 27892 246 . Gassman - Pines A , Ananat EO , Fitz - Henley J , 2nd . COVID - 19 and Parent - Child Psychological Well - being . Pediatrics . Oct 2020 ; 146 ( 4 ) doi : 10 . 1542 / peds . 2020 - 007294 247 . Raffagnato A , Iannattone S , Tascini B , et al . The COVID - 19 Pandemic : A Longitudinal Study on the Emotional - Behavioral Sequelae for Children and Adolescents with Neuropsychiatric Disorders and Their Families . Int J Environ Res Public Health . Sep 19 2021 ; 18 ( 18 ) doi : 10 . 3390 / ijerph18189880 248 . Hanno EC , Fritz LS , Jones SM , Lesaux NK . School Learning Format and Children ' s Behavioral Health During the COVID - 19 Pandemic . JAMA Pediatr . Jan 10 2022 ; doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2021 . 5698 249 . Hillis SD , Unwin HJT , Chen Y , et al . Global minimum estimates of children affected by COVID - 19 - associated orphanhood and deaths of caregivers : a modelling study . Lancet . Jul 31 2021 ; 398 ( 10298 ) : 391 - 402 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0140 - 6736 ( 21 ) 01253 - 8 250 . Dooley DG , Bandealy A , Tschudy MM . Low - Income Children and Coronavirus Disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) in the US . JAMA Pediatr . Oct 1 2020 ; 174 ( 10 ) : 922 - 923 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2020 . 2065 251 . Parekh N , Ali SH , O ' Connor J , et al . Food insecurity among households with children during the COVID - 19 pandemic : results from a study among social media users across the United States . Nutr J . Aug 30 2021 ; 20 ( 1 ) : 73 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s12937 - 021 - 00732 - 2 252 . Adams EL , Caccavale LJ , Smith D , Bean MK . Food Insecurity , the Home Food Environment , and Parent Feeding Practices in the Era of COVID - 19 . Obesity ( Silver Spring ) . Nov 2020 ; 28 ( 11 ) : 2056 - 2063 . doi : 10 . 1002 / oby . 22996 253 . Swedo E , Idaikkadar N , Leemis R , et al . Trends in U . S . Emergency Department Visits Related to Suspected or Confirmed Child Abuse and Neglect Among Children and Adolescents Aged < 18 Years Before and During the COVID - 19 Pandemic - United States , January 2019 - September 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Dec 11 2020 ; 69 ( 49 ) : 1841 - 1847 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm6949a1 254 . Ortiz R , Kishton R , Sinko L , et al . Assessing Child Abuse Hotline Inquiries in the Wake of COVID - 19 : Answering the Call . JAMA Pediatr . Aug 1 2021 ; 175 ( 8 ) : 859 - 861 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2021 . 0525 J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f 66 255 . Sege R , Stephens A . Child Physical Abuse Did Not Increase During the Pandemic . JAMA Pediatr . Dec 20 2021 ; doi : 10 . 1001 / jamapediatrics . 2021 . 5476 256 . Parks SE , Zviedrite N , Budzyn SE , et al . COVID - 19 - Related School Closures and Learning Modality Changes - United States , August 1 - September 17 , 2021 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Oct 1 2021 ; 70 ( 39 ) : 1374 - 1376 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7039e2 257 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration . Coronavirus ( COVID - 19 ) Update : FDA Authorizes Additional Vaccine Dose for Certain Immunocompromised Individuals . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / news - events / press - announcements / fda - authorizes - booster - dose - pfizer - biontech - covid - 19 - vaccine - certain - populations 258 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration . FDA Authorizes Booster Dose of Pfizer - BioNTech COVID - 19 Vaccine for Certain Populations . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / news - events / press - announcements / fda - authorizes - booster - dose - pfizer - biontech - covid - 19 - vaccine - certain - populations 259 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration . Coronavirus ( COVID - 19 ) Update : FDA Expands Eligibility for COVID - 19 Vaccine Boosters . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / news - events / press - announcements / coronavirus - covid - 19 - update - fda - expands - eligibility - covid - 19 - vaccine - boosters 260 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration . Moderna COVID - 19 Vaccine . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / emergency - preparedness - and - response / coronavirus - disease - 2019 - covid - 19 / moderna - covid - 19 - vaccine 261 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration . Coronavirus ( COVID - 19 ) Update : FDA Shortens Interval for Booster Dose of Moderna COVID - 19 Vaccine to Five Months . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / news - events / press - announcements / coronavirus - covid - 19 - update - fda - shortens - interval - booster - dose - moderna - covid - 19 - vaccine - five - months 262 . U . S . Food and Drug Administration . Janssen COVID - 19 Vaccine . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . fda . gov / emergency - preparedness - and - response / coronavirus - disease - 2019 - covid - 19 / janssen - covid - 19 - vaccine 263 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . CDC Endorses ACIP ' s Updated COVID - 19 Vaccine Recommendations . Accessed January 12 , 2022 . https : / / www . cdc . gov / media / releases / 2021 / s1216 - covid - 19 - vaccines . html 264 . A Manual for Pediatric House Officers : The Harriet Lane Handbook . 21 ed . Elsevier ; 2018 . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f