Neuron , Vol . 47 , 695 – 708 , September 1 , 2005 , Copyright ©2005 by Elsevier Inc . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2005 . 08 . 010 LIM Kinase1 Controls Synaptic Stability Downstream of the Type II BMP Receptor Benjamin A . Eaton and Graeme W . Davis * Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics University of California , San Francisco San Francisco , California 94143 Summary Here , we demonstrate that the BMP receptor Wishful Thinking ( Wit ) is required for synapse stabilization . In the absence of BMP signaling , synapse disassembly and retraction ensue . Remarkably , downstream Smad - mediated signaling cannot fully account for the stabi - lizing activity of the BMP receptor . We identify LIM Kinase1 ( DLIMK1 ) - dependent signaling as a second , parallel pathway that confers the added synapse - sta - bilizing activity of the BMP receptor . We show that DLIMK1 binds a region of the Wit receptor that is nec - essary for synaptic stability but is dispensable for Smad - mediated synaptic growth . A genetic analysis demonstrates that DLIMK1 is necessary , presynapti - cally , for synapse stabilization , but is not necessary for normal synaptic growth or function . Furthermore , presynaptic expression of DLIMK1 in a wit or mad mu - tant significantly rescues synaptic stability , growth , and function . DLIMK1 localizes near synaptic micro - tubules and functions independently of ADF / cofilin , highlighting a novel requirement for DLIMK1 during synapse stabilization rather than actin - dependent axon outgrowth . Introduction Throughout the vertebrate nervous system , precisely wired neural circuitry is established through an initial overproduction of synaptic connections followed by the selective loss of a subset of these synapses . The molecular mechanisms that specify which synapses will be retained and which will be lost are unknown . There is additional complexity because synapse disas - sembly occurs coincidently with synapse growth in most systems . For example , live imaging studies have shown that single motoneurons can simultaneously dis - assemble synapses at some target muscles while increasing the size of synaptic connections at other muscle targets ( Kasthuri and Lichtman , 2003 ; Keller - Peck et al . , 2001 ) . Similar observations have been made in live imaging studies of dendritic remodeling of vertebrate central neurons ( De Paola et al . , 2003 ; Lom and Cohen - Cory , 1999 ; Wu et al . , 1999 ) . Thus , a molec - ular understanding of synapse development and neural circuit formation will require investigation of both syn - aptic growth and stabilization and an understanding of how these two processes are coordinately controlled ( Goda and Davis , 2003 ) . It is well established that cell growth , synapse forma - * Correspondence : gdavis @ biochem . ucsf . edu tion , and synaptic competition are influenced by the ac - tion of trophic signaling molecules ( Huang and Reichardt , 2001 ; Katz and Shatz , 1996 ; Purves and Lichtman , 1980 ) . Increased expression or activity of the neurotrophins can promote synapse formation ( Engert and Bonhoef - fer , 1999 ; Nguyen et al . , 1998 ; Sin et al . , 2002 ) and en - hance synapse dynamics ( Cohen - Cory , 1999 ; Horch et al . , 1999 ) . Conversely , impaired neurotrophin signaling can lead to decreased synapse number through effects on synaptic growth and stability in both the central and peripheral nervous systems ( Belluardo et al . , 2001 ; Gonzalez et al . , 1999 ; Rico et al . , 2002 ) . The current challenge is to dissect the signaling systems down - stream of these trophic receptors to determine how re - ceptor activation could influence the seemingly dispa - rate processes of synaptic growth , synaptic stability , and synapse disassembly . To investigate this , we have turned to a trophic signaling system recently identified at the Drosophila NMJ . The canonical bone morphogenic protein ( BMP ) sig - naling system has been implicated in diverse cellular and developmental processes ranging from cell growth to tissue patterning ( Massague , 1998 ; Ten Dijke et al . , 2002 ) . At the Drosophila NMJ , a BMP signaling system has been identified that controls synaptic growth via canonical Smad - mediated signaling to the cell body ( Aberle et al . , 2002 ; Marques et al . , 2002 ; McCabe et al . , 2003 ; Rawson et al . , 2003 ) . It has been demon - strated that mutations in the BMP ligand glass bottom boat ( gbb ) , the type I and type II BMP receptors thick veins ( tkv ) and wishful thinking ( wit ) , and the Smad ho - mologs mad and medea all significantly impair synaptic growth and function . These data define a retrograde trophic signaling system that functions through tran - scriptional mechanisms in the cell soma to control mo - toneuron synaptic growth . In this study , we demon - strate that BMP signaling at the Drosophila NMJ is not only required for normal synaptic growth , but also for synaptic stabilization . In the absence of BMP signaling , we observed significant increases in synapse retraction and disassembly . We then demonstrate that signaling downstream of the BMP receptors can be genetically separated into two pathways : Smad - dependent synap - tic growth and LIM Kinase1 - dependent synaptic sta - bility . LIM Kinase1 ( LIMK1 ) is a cytoplasmic serine / threo - nine kinase that was originally isolated in screens for novel kinases expressed in the nervous system ( Ber - nard et al . , 1994 ; Cheng and Robertson , 1995 ; Mizuno et al . , 1994 ; Proschel et al . , 1995 ) . Findings in LIMK1 knockout mice reveal defects in dendritic spine mor - phology and activity - dependent plasticity , although neither synaptic growth nor synaptic stability has been specifically analyzed ( Endo et al . , 2003 ) . In the Dro - sophila central nervous system , DLIMK1 has been im - plicated in the mechanisms of axonal outgrowth during metamorphosis , acting through ADF / cofilin to modulate the actin cytoskeleton , a mechanism also documented in other tissues ( Arber et al . , 1998 ; Ng and Luo , 2004 ; Ohashi et al . , 2000 ) . Neuron696 Figure 1 . BMP Signaling Is Necessary for Synaptic Stability ( A ) Schematic representation of a presynap - tic retraction event resulting in a “synaptic footprint” ( see Results ) . ( B ) Image of a wild - type synapse costained for presynaptic synapsin ( green ) and post - synaptic Discs - large ( red ) . Note the perfect opposition of these two markers throughout the synapse . ( C ) Examples of synaptic footprints ( arrows ) at wit mutant synapses identified as sites of organized postsynaptic Discs - large ( red ) without juxtaposed presynaptic nc82 ( green in [ i ] ) or juxtaposed presynaptic synapsin ( green in [ ii ] ) . Scale bars , 10 (cid:1) m . ( D ) Graph represents quantification of the average bouton number normalized to wild - type . All changes compared to wild - type are statistically significant ( p < 0 . 001 , Student’s t test ) . wit rescue - full represents animals in which the full - length wit cDNA is expressed neuronally by elav - GAL4 in the wit mutant background . Error bars represent the stan - dard error of the mean ( SEM ) . ( E ) Graph represents the number of NMJs with footprints as a percentage of the total number of NMJs examined . wit and gbb have significantly greater numbers of foot - prints compared to wild - type ( p < 0 . 001 , test of proportions ) . There is no significant differ - ence in the number of footprints between wild - type and the wit rescue - full NMJs . The number of NMJs analyzed for footprints is presented above each bar . Our genetic analyses define a new function for DLIMK1 during synaptic stability in comparison with its function in axonal outgrowth . We find that synaptic DLIMK1 is closely associated with the synaptic microtubule cy - toskeleton . In addition , genetic manipulation of ADF / cofilin activity does not affect synaptic stability at the NMJ . These data highlight differences in LIMK1 func - tion during the rapid , dynamic process of axon out - growth compared to the slower , more prolonged mech - anisms that govern synapse stabilization at the NMJ . Together , our data define genetically separable signal - ing pathways downstream of the BMP receptor that could allow a single trophic signaling event to coordi - nately control synaptic growth and synaptic stabili - zation . Results We have previously established an assay to quantify synaptic retraction at the Drosophila NMJ and have used this assay to identify molecules involved in synap - tic stability ( Figure 1A ; Eaton et al . , 2002 ) . This assay is based on the demonstration that the formation of orga - nized postsynaptic muscle membrane folds , termed the subsynaptic reticulum ( SSR ) , requires the presence of the presynaptic nerve terminal ( Guan et al . , 1996 ; Saitoe et al . , 2001 ) . Therefore , the SSR and proteins that localize to this structure will only be present at sites where the nerve terminal resides , or where it has recently resided . Thus , observed sites of organized postsynaptic SSR that lack opposing presynaptic neu - ronal markers identify regions of the neuromuscular junction ( NMJ ) where the nerve terminal once resided and has since retracted . This interpretation has been confirmed in previous studies using light - level , ultra - structural , and electrophysiological analyses ( Eaton et al . , 2002 ; Pielage et al . , 2005 ) . Sites of synapse retrac - tion are referred to as “retraction events” or “synaptic footprints” and represent a quantitative assay for syn - aptic stability . In our prior studies , we used a wide array of pre - and postsynaptic markers to clearly define syn - aptic retraction events . Synaptic retractions can be identified with equal efficiency using antibodies that recognize diverse presynaptic antigens including cyto - plasmic , membrane - associated , cytoskeleton , or vesi - cle - associated proteins ( Eaton et al . , 2002 ; Pielage et al . , 2005 ) . Several postsynaptic markers have also been used to quantify synapse retractions , including Discs - large , Shaker - GFP , and the clustered postsynaptic glu - tamate receptors ( Eaton et al . , 2002 ; Pielage et al . , LIM Kinase1 Controls Synaptic Stability 697 2005 ) . A subset of these pre - and postsynaptic markers is used in the present study . Presynaptic BMP Signaling Is Necessary for Synapse Stabilization We have used our retraction assay to test whether BMP signaling in Drosophila motoneurons is required for synapse stabilization ( Figure 1 ) . We first confirmed that mutations in the BMP type II receptor Wit and the BMP ligand Gbb cause a significant decrease in bouton number ( Figure 1D ) ( Aberle et al . , 2002 ; Marques et al . , 2002 ; McCabe et al . , 2003 ; Rawson et al . , 2003 ) . We now demonstrate that these mutations also cause a significant increase in synaptic footprints , demonstrat - ing that synaptic stability is significantly compromised in the absence of BMP signaling ( Figures 1B , 1C , and 1E ) . Synaptic footprints were identified in equal num - bers using multiple presynaptic markers , including anti - Synapsin and anti - nc82 , which recognizes an antigen at the presynaptic active zone ( Figures 1B and 1C ) . We also demonstrate that synaptic footprints can be res - cued in the wit mutant background by neuronal expres - sion of the full - length wit transgene , demonstrating that synapse destabilization is caused by the absence of the presynaptic Wit receptor . ( Figures 1D and 1E ; see Figure 3 for an example of a rescued wit NMJ that lacks footprints ) . The number of synapse retractions is slightly , but statistically significantly , less in gbb compared with that in wit . This could be due to the fact that wit is a null mutation , whereas the gbb genotype that we used is not ( McCabe et al . , 2003 ) . Null mutations in gbb do not survive through larval development and , therefore , we have used the genetic combination previously used in studies of its effects on synaptic growth ( McCabe et al . , 2003 ) . We next extended our analysis to mutations that dis - rupt additional downstream components of the canoni - cal BMP signaling cascade ( Figure 2A ) . We tested mu - tations in the BMP type I receptor thick - veins ( tkv ) , the Smad homolog mad , and the co - Smad medea ( Figure 2 ) . We find that all three mutations decrease bouton numbers to levels that are statistically identical to those observed in the wit and gbb mutations , confirming pre - vious reports ( Figure 2B ) ( McCabe et al . , 2003 ; Rawson et al . , 2003 ) . We now demonstrate that all three muta - tions also cause a statistically significant increase in synaptic footprints compared to wild - type ( Figure 2C ; p < 0 . 001 ) , demonstrating that canonical BMP signaling is necessary for synaptic stability as well as for growth . The fact that synaptic footprints in wit can be res - cued by neuronal expression of UAS - wit suggests that BMP signaling is necessary in the motoneuron for syn - aptic stability . To confirm that Smad - mediated signaling is also required within the motoneuron for synaptic sta - bilization , we neuronally overexpressed the inhibitory Smad dad ( Figures 2B and 2C ; dad gain of function , DAD GOF ) . Genetic evidence suggests that this manip - ulation can block both Mad and DSmad2 signaling ( Marquez et al . , 2001 ) . We find that neuronal DAD GOF decreases bouton numbers and increases synaptic footprints to levels that are near those observed in tkv , mad , and medea ( Figures 2B and 2C ) . Finally , in order to examine whether Smad signaling is required in the cell soma for synaptic stabilization , we examined a ge - Figure 2 . Canonical BMP Signaling Is Necessary for Synaptic Growth and Synaptic Stability ( A ) Diagram of the retrograde BMP signaling pathway known to regulate synaptic growth at the Drosophila NMJ . ( B ) Graph represents quantification of the average bouton number normalized to wild - type . All changes compared to wild - type are statistically significant ( p < 0 . 001 ) . Error bars represent SEM . ( C ) Graph represents the number of NMJs with footprints as a per - centage of the total number of NMJs examined . tkv , mad , med , and neuronal dad expression ( DAD - GOF - nerve ) have significantly more footprints than wild - type , and wit mutant synapses have signifi - cantly greater numbers of footprints compared to tkv , mad , med , and neuronal dad expression ( DAD - GOF - nerve ) . The number of NMJs analyzed for footprints is presented above each bar . netic interaction between the wit mutation and the overexpression of a dominant - negative Glued trans - gene ( DN - Glued ) that disrupts retrograde axonal trans - Neuron698 Table 1 . Synaptic Growth and Retraction Analysis Genotype a Bouton # ( SEM ) a p value b Footprints per NMJ ( n ) c Footprints per NMJ ( % ) d p value e Wild - type Third instar larvae 17 . 8 ( 0 . 45 ) — 13 / 256 ( 24 ) 5 . 0 — Growth - impaired Futsch N94 8 . 9 ( 0 . 34 ) < 0 . 001 9 / 144 ( 14 ) 6 . 2 n . s . Fasciclin II e86 / eb112 12 . 4 ( 0 . 51 ) < 0 . 001 6 / 101 ( 10 ) 5 . 9 n . s . Dlar 5 . 5 / 13 . 2 10 . 3 ( 0 . 72 ) < 0 . 001 5 / 94 ( 13 ) 5 . 3 n . s . All fly strains and analyses are described in the Experimental Procedures . a Bouton numbers represent the average number of boutons from the synapse on muscle 4 in segment A3 . b P values for bouton counts were determined by comparison to third instar wild - type using a standard t test analysis . SEM = standard error of the mean . c Footprints per NMJ = number of NMJs with a footprint / total number of NMJs scored ; n = number of animals analyzed . d Footprints per NMJ ( % ) = ( number of NMJs with a footprint / total number of NMJs scored ) × 100 . e p values for footprint analysis were determined using a test of proportions analysis with a confidence interval of 0 . 01 . n . s . = not significant . port . Previous work has demonstrated that impairment of dynactin function in motoneurons disrupts retro - grade axonal transport and causes synapse retraction at the NMJ ( Eaton et al . , 2002 ; LaMonte et al . , 2002 ) . We find that the number of retractions in the DN - Glued ; wit double mutant ( 36 . 6 % , n = 91 synapses ) is not addi - tive with respect to the wit mutation or DN - Glued over - expression ( 44 . 5 % , n = 137 synapses for wit ; 29 . 6 % , n = 98 synapses for DN - Glued ) . Although the overex - pression of DN - Glued cannot be considered a null mu - tant condition , it is sufficient to block the accumulation of nuclear phospho - Mad and therefore prevents BMP signaling to the nucleus ( Allan et al . , 2003 ; McCabe et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , we conclude that Smad - mediated sig - naling to the motoneuron cell soma is necessary for both synaptic growth and synaptic stability . Together , these data establish an in vivo link between retrograde axonal transport , an essential trophic signaling system , and the mechanisms of synaptic stabilization . Analysis of Synaptic Stability in Synaptic Growth Mutations We performed additional experiments to test whether mutations that decrease the number of boutons always increase the number of footprints . In these experi - ments , we analyzed mutations that decrease bouton number but which have not been implicated in the BMP signaling system . Bouton numbers are significantly de - creased in these three independent mutations : the cell adhesion molecule fasciclin II ( fasII ) ( Schuster et al . , 1996 ; Stewart et al . , 1996 ) , the tyrosine phosphatase Dlar ( Krueger et al . , 1996 ) , and the microtubule binding protein futsch ( Roos et al . , 2000 ) . In each of these three mutations , bouton numbers are significantly decreased whereas the number of synaptic footprints remains un - changed ( Table 1 ) . It has also been shown that impaired synaptic growth in a presynaptic calcium channel mu - tant does not alter synaptic stability ( Rieckhof et al . , 2003 ) . From these data we can conclude that impaired synaptic growth does not necessarily impair synaptic stabilization . By extension , we conclude that BMP sig - naling is required for two separable processes , synap - tic growth and synaptic stability . Identification of a Smad - Independent Synapse - Stabilizing Activity for the BMP Receptor While all of the mutations in canonical BMP signaling molecules decrease bouton numbers to the same ex - tent , there are significantly fewer synaptic footprints in the tkv , mad , and medea mutations ( as well as in DAD GOF ) when compared to the wit mutation ( Figure 2C ) . Thus , while canonical BMP signaling is required for both synaptic growth and stability , the Wit receptor has an additional stabilizing influence on the NMJ that can - not be accounted for by the downstream Smad signal - ing system . We therefore pursued experiments to in - vestigate the mechanism of Wit - mediated synaptic stability that appears to be independent of Smad - medi - ated signaling . We first determined whether the signaling associated with synaptic stabilization and synaptic growth might map to different regions of the cytoplasmic tail of the Wit receptor . To do so , we took a transgenic rescue approach that involves neuronal expression of either the full - length wit transgene or a truncated wit trans - gene in the wit mutant background . The truncated Wit receptor lacks a C - terminal portion that is not required for Smad signaling in mammalian systems ( Wieser et al . , 1993 ) and has been shown to restore viability to the wit mutation ( Marques et al . , 2002 ) . First , we demon - strated that presynaptic expression of the full - length wit transgene in the wit mutant background rescues synaptic growth and synaptic stability ( Figures 3A , 3F , and 3G ) . However , while presynaptic expression of the truncated wit transgene ( wit - dCT ) completely rescues synaptic growth , it is unable to fully restore synaptic stability to wild - type levels ( Figures 3B , 3F , and 3G ) . We have confirmed that the Wit - dCT receptor is able to ac - tivate downstream Smad signaling , by showing that neuronal expression of the wit - dCT construct rescues the presence of nuclear phospho - Mad in the wit mutant background ( Figures 3C – 3E ) . We have also controlled for possible differences in expression levels of the wit - dCT transgene that could account for incomplete res - cue of synaptic stability ( Figure S1 ) . Together , these data identify a region of the Wit receptor that is neces - sary for synapse stabilization , but is not required for nuclear Smad signaling , synaptic growth , or synaptic function ( see below ) . We next pursued experiments to investigate how this region of the Wit receptor influ - ences synaptic stability . Drosophila LIM Kinase Binds the Wit Receptor and Is Necessary for Synaptic Stability The C - terminal tail of mammalian BMP type II receptors has been shown to interact with and regulate the activ - LIM Kinase1 Controls Synaptic Stability 699 Figure 3 . The C - Terminal Region of the Wit Receptor Is Necessary for Synaptic Stability ( A and B ) Images of synapses fixed and co - stained for synapsin ( green ) and Discs - large ( red ) from wit mutant animals neuronally ex - pressing either the full - length wit transgene ( wit rescue - full length ) or a truncated wit transgene ( wit rescue - dCT ) as indicated . Scale bar , 10 (cid:1) m . ( C – E ) Images show anti - phospho - Mad stain - ing in motoneuron nuclei in the third instar larval CNS from wild - type ( C ) , wit ( D ) , and wit neuronally expressing the truncated wit trans - gene ( E ) . Motoneuron nuclei were identified by anti - Even - Skipped costaining ( circles in - dicate the outline of Eve - positive cells , stain - ing not shown ) . Phospho - Mad is restored in wit by neuronal expression of the truncated wit transgene ( asterisks in [ E ] ) . ( F ) Graph represents quantification of average bouton numbers normalized to wild - type . Neuronal expression of either the full - length wit transgene ( wit rescue - full ) or the truncated wit transgene ( wit rescue - dCT ) rescues bou - ton numbers to wild - type levels ( p < 0 . 01 ver - sus wit mutant ) . Error bars represent SEM . ( G ) Graph represents the number of NMJs with footprints as a percentage of the total number of NMJs examined . The difference in footprints between wit rescue - full and wit rescue - dCT is significant ( asterisk , p < 0 . 01 ) ; wit is significantly different compared to all conditions . Number of NMJs examined is presented above each bar . ity of LIMK1 in vitro ( Foletta et al . , 2003 ; Lee - Hoeflich et al . , 2004 ) . Here , we demonstrate that Drosophila LIM Kinase1 ( DLIMK1 ) binds the C - terminal tail of the Wit receptor that is deleted in the wit - dCT transgene ( Fig - ures 4A and 4B ; Figure S4 ) . Peptides corresponding to the N - terminal region of DLIMK1 containing either the tandem LIM and PDZ domains together ( LIM - PDZ ) or containing the tandem LIM domains alone ( LIM only ) interact with the C - terminal region of the Wit receptor ( C - Term ) , but not with the kinase domain ( Kinase ) in a yeast two - hybrid binding assay ( Figures 4A and 4B ) . We were unable to detect interactions between the PDZ domain of DLIMK1 and the Wit receptor in this analysis . In addition , we were also able to demonstrate an interaction between the C - terminal region of the Wit receptor ( Wit - CT - FLAG ) and full - length DLIMK1 ( DLIMK1 - HA ) when these proteins are coexpressed in Drosophila S2 cells ( Figure S4 ) . These observations suggest that the LIM domains of DLIMK1 mediate specific binding to the C - terminal tail of the Wit receptor , consistent with findings reported for LIMK1 binding to mammalian BMP receptors ( Foletta et al . , 2003 ; Lee - Hoeflich et al . , 2004 ) . We then tested whether DLIMK1 is required for syn - aptic growth and / or stabilization . We acquired a P ele - ment insertion ( DLIMK P1 ) that resides in a 5 # untrans - lated exon of the DLIMK1 gene as well as two deficiency chromosomes that uncover the DLIMK1 lo - cus ( Figure 4C ) . Northern analysis demonstrates that DLIMK P1 / DLIMK P1 results in the near absence of de - tectable message , indicating that this is a strong - hypo - morphic or null mutation ( Figure 4C ) . The DLIMK1 muta - tions , including DLIMK P1 / DLIMK P1 , DLIMK P1 / Y , DLIMK P1 / Df ( 1 ) JA26 , and DLIMK P1 / Df ( 1 ) HF368 are all viable . This is consistent with the observation that LIMK1 knockout mice are homozygous viable ( Meng et al . , 2002 ) . Here we demonstrate that DLIMK P1 / DLIMK P1 , DLIMK P1 / Y , DLIMK P1 / Df ( 1 ) JA26 , and DLIMK P1 / Df ( 1 ) HF368 all cause a significant increase in synaptic footprints ( p < 0 . 001 ) without decreasing synaptic bouton number ( Figures 4D and 4E ) . These genetic data indicate that DLIMK1 is necessary for synaptic stability , but is not required for normal synaptic growth . Since the number of synaptic footprints is comparable when DLIMK P1 is analyzed in trans to deficiency chromosomes that uncover the DLIMK1 locus , we conclude that this P element inser - tion represents a strong loss - of - function mutation . DLIMK1 Functions Presynaptically to Control Synaptic Stability To support our conclusion that DLIMK1 function is nec - essary for synapse stabilization and to determine whether DLIMK1 functions in the nerve or the muscle to control synaptic stability , we pursued transgenic rescue experiments and overexpression experiments using a dominant - negative DLIMK1 transgene . We found that neuronal expression of a dominant - negative , kinase - inactive DLIMK1 ( DN - DLIMK1 ) transgene significantly increases synaptic retractions while muscle - specific expression of DN - DLIMK1 has no effect ( Figures 5A and 5B ) . There was a slight decrease in bouton number observed when DN - DLIMK1 was expressed neuronally that was not observed in the DLIMK1 mutations ( Figure 5A ) . This may represent a dominant effect of this trans - gene . However , this decrease in bouton number is sig - nificantly less than that observed following disruption of BMP signaling . Finally , in agreement with experi - ments using a dominant - negative transgene , we found that neuronal expression of a wild - type DLIMK1 trans - gene ( UAS - DLIMK1 ) restores synapse stability to the hemizygotic DLIMK P1 / Y loss - of - function mutation with - out altering other aspects of synapse development Neuron700 Figure 4 . DLIMK1 Is Required Presynapti - cally for Synaptic Stability ( A ) Schematic representations of the Wit re - ceptor and DLIMK1 indicate peptide regions investigated in yeast two - hybrid binding as - says . ( B ) Yeast two - hybrid assay showing a specific interaction between the C - terminal tail of the Wit receptor ( C - Term ) and the N - terminal portion of DLIMK1 ( either LIM - PDZ or LIM alone ) . ( C ) Diagram of the insertion site for the P element EY08757 ( DLIMK P1 ) . Flanking sequence published for this P ele - ment insertion indicates that it resides in the first exon 112 bp upstream of the ATG in DLIMK1 ( CG1848 ) . Two deficiencies uncover the region in which the DLIMK1 P1 locus re - sides ( Df ( 1 ) JA26 , Df ( 1 ) HF368 ) . Northern analy - sis of 1 (cid:1) g / lane of mRNA extracted from wild - type ( wt ) or DLIMK P1 / DLIMK P1 ( LK ) larvae found that two bands of w 6 kb ( RA / RC ) and w 4 kb ( RD ) were clearly decreased in the DLIMK P1 / DLIMK P1 background compared to wild - type . These bands are consistent with the size of the predicted transcripts for CG1848 ( DLIMK1 - RA , DLIMK1 - RC , and DLIMK1 - RD ) . The same blot was stripped and rehybrid - ized with a probe for actin to control for loading . ( D ) Graph represents the quantifica - tion of average bouton numbers normalized to wild - type . Mutations in DLIMK1 including a homozygous P element ( DLIMK P1 / DLIMK P1 ) , hemizygous P element ( DLIMK P1 / Y ) , DLIMK P1 / Df ( 1 ) JA26 , and DLIMK P1 / Df ( 1 ) HF368 do not decrease bouton numbers . Note that the DLIMK P1 / Df ( 1 ) HF368 , thehomozygous DLIMK P1 / DLIMK P1 , and the hemizygous DLIMK P1 / Y have slightly significant increases in bouton number compared to wild - type ( p < 0 . 05 ) . ( E ) Graph represents the number of NMJs with footprints as a percentage of the total num - ber of NMJs examined . All differences are significant compared to wild - type ( p < 0 . 001 ) except for the DLIMK1 rescue ( DLIMK P1 / Y ; D42 DLIMK1 ) . The number of NMJs with footprints in the hemizygous DLIMK1 P1 / Y background is significantly reduced by the neuronal expression of UAS - DLIMK1 ( wt ) ( * = p < 0 . 001 ) . The number of NMJs is presented above each bar . ( F ) Graph represents the quantification of average bouton numbers normalized to wild - type . Heterozygotic mutations of wit ( wit A12 / + ) , DLIMK1 ( DLIMK P1 / + ) , as well as transheterozygotic DLIMK1 ; ; wit mutants ( DLIMK P1 / + ; ; wit A12 / + ) have no effect on synaptic growth . ( G ) Graph represents the number of NMJs with footprints as a percentage of the total number of NMJs examined . The DLIMK P1 / + ; ; wit A12 / + mutants have a significant increase in the numbers of footprints compared to both wild - type and the individual heterozygous mutations ( p < 0 . 001 ) . Error bars represent SEM . ( Figures 4D and 4E ) . Together , these data support the conclusion that DLIMK1 is specifically required in the presynaptic motoneuron for synaptic stabilization . DLIMK1 Functions Downstream of the Wit Receptor to Control Synaptic Stability The observation that DLIMK1 binds the Wit receptor and is required presynaptically for synapse stabilization suggests that DLIMK1 functions downstream of the Wit receptor and may confer the added synapse - stabilizing activity of the Wit receptor . To address this possibility , we have examined genetic interactions between the wit and DLIMK1 mutations . Animals harboring one mutant copy of wit and one mutant copy of DLIMK1 ( DLIMK P1 / + ; wit A12 / + ) show a significant increase in synaptic foot - prints without a change in bouton number and without a change in synaptic function compared to wild - type ( Figures 4F and 4G and data not shown ) . In compari - son , heterozygous mutations in either gene alone do not show a significant increase in synaptic footprints compared to wild - type and have normal bouton num - bers ( Figures 4F and 4G ) . We also neuronally overex - pressed the DN - DLIMK1 in the wit mutant background and did not observe an additive effect on the number of NMJs with retractions with respect to the wit muta - tion or the overexpression of DN - DLIMK1 alone ( Fig - ures 5A and 5B ) . The strong transheterozygous interac - tion between the wit A12 mutation and DLIMK1 P1 , as well as the lack of an additive effect in the number of NMJs with footprints when DN - DLIMK1 is overexpressed in the wit mutant background , supports the conclusion that DLIMK1 functions in the same genetic pathway as wit to control synaptic stability . LIM Kinase1 Controls Synaptic Stability 701 Figure 5 . Presynaptic DLIMK1 Is Required for Synaptic Stability Independent of ADF / Cofilin ( A ) Graph represents the quantification of average bouton numbers normalized to wild - type . Neuronal expression of a dominant neg - ative version of DLIMK1 ( elav DN - DLIMK1 ) results in a significant reduction in bouton numbers compared to wild - type ( p < 0 . 01 ) . Muscle expression of the same construct ( mhc DN - DLIMK1 ) or neuronal expression of wild - type DLIMK1 ( elav DLIMK1 ) had no ef - fect on synaptic growth . ( B ) Graph repre - sents the number of NMJs with footprints as a percentage of the total number of NMJs examined . Expression of the dominant nega - tive DLIMK1 in the motoneuron ( elav DN - DLIMK1 ) resulted in a significant increase in the numbers of footprints compared to wild - type ( p < 0 . 001 ) . Neuronal expression of DN - DLIMK1 in the wit mutant background does not increase footprints compared to wit alone ( compare to Figure 2C ) . ( C ) Graph rep - resents the quantification of average bouton numbers normalized to wild - type . Neuronal expression of wild - type slingshot ( elav SSH - wt ) , a phosphatase - inactive slingshot ( elav SSH - CS ) , or an activated twinstar ( elav tsr - S3A ) had no effect on synaptic growth . ( D ) Graph represents the number of NMJs with footprints as a percentage of the total number of NMJs examined . Neuronal expression of wild - type slingshot ( elav SSH - wt ) , a phosphatase - inactive slingshot ( elav SSH - CS ) , or an activated twinstar ( elav tsr - S3A ) had no effect on synaptic stability . Error bars represent SEM . We next investigated whether overexpression of UAS - DLIMK1 could rescue synaptic stability in the wit mutant background . To do so , we neuronally expressed the wild - type DLIMK1 transgene ( UAS - DLIMK1 ) in the wit mutant background . When we expressed UAS - DLIMK1 in the wit mutant background using either a pan - neuronal ( elav - GAL4 ) or motoneuron - specific ( OK6 - GAL4 ) GAL4 driver , we were able to rescue defects in both synaptic growth and synaptic stability ( Figures 6C , 6E , and 6F ) . Importantly , strong presynaptic expression of UAS - DLIMK1 by elav - GAL4 raised at 29°C resulted in complete rescue of synaptic footprints to wild - type levels ( Figure 6F ; see Figure S1 for additional control data regarding the effects of temperature on synapse development ) . In all rescue experiments , including overexpression of DLIMK1 in the wit background , we have confirmed the presence of the wit mutation ( Fig - ure S2 ) . These data , in combination with the demon - stration that DLIMK1 binds the Wit receptor and the genetic interactions observed between wit and DLIMK1 , support the conclusion that DLIMK1 functions downstream of wit to control synaptic stability . Remarkably , rescue of the wit mutation by UAS - DLIMK1 not only restores synaptic growth and stability , but also rescues animal viability . wit mutant animals normally die during midlarval life and are never ob - served to mature into adult flies . Neuronal expression of DLIMK1 ( with elav - GAL4 ) in the wit mutant back - ground restores adult viability . Adult flies emerge in large numbers and are able to climb normally the verti - cal sides of a plastic vial . A further analysis demonstrated that DLIMK1 expres - sion restores synaptic function to the wit receptor mu - tation ( Figure 7 ) . Electrophysiological analysis of the wit mutant synapse demonstrated a severe impairment of synaptic transmission including a dramatic decrease in the excitatory postsynaptic potential ( EPSP ) amplitude ( w 80 % decrease , p < 0 . 0001 ) , a significant decrease in the average amplitude of the spontaneous miniature release events ( mEPSP , p < 0 . 001 ) , and a dramatic de - crease in presynaptic release as estimated by the average EPSP / average mEPSP ( Figure 7 ) ( Aberle et al . , 2002 ; Marques et al . , 2002 ) . Expression of UAS - DLIMK1 restores all aspects of synaptic function to near wild - type levels , including EPSP amplitude , mEPSP ampli - tude , and quantal content ( Figure 7 ) . The degree of res - cue with UAS - DLIMK1 is not statistically different from that observed when wit is rescued by the full - length wit transgene ( p > 0 . 2 ) . We also observed a slight but significant decrease in quantal content in the DLIMK P1 / DLIMK P1 homozygotes compared to wild - type ( p < 0 . 01 ) , although this decrease is much less than that observed in wit or mad mutants ( Figure 7C ) ( Rawson et al . , 2003 ) . We therefore conclude that DLIMK1 is able to rescue the wit electrophysiological defects even though it is not normally involved in BMP - dependent regulation of synaptic function ( Figure 7C ) . Thus , DLIMK1 expression can restore all of the essential functions of the Wit re - ceptor in the wit mutant background . Evidence that DLIMK1 Functions in Parallel to Mad - Mediated Signaling We next tested whether the rescue of synaptic growth and stability by DLIMK1 expression in the wit mutant background is caused by activation of downstream Mad signaling that is independent of the Wit receptor . We first demonstrated that mad mutations have a sig - nificant increase in synaptic footprints and a significant reduction in bouton number ( Figures 2 and Figures 6B , 6G , and 6H ) . We found that neuronal expression of Neuron702 Figure 6 . DLIMK1 Restores Synaptic Growth and Stability to Mutations in wit and mad ( A ) Image of a wild - type synapse costained for presynaptic synapsin ( green ) and post - synaptic Discs - large ( red ) . ( B ) Image of a mad mutant synapse costained for presynaptic sy - napsin ( green ) and postsynaptic Discs - large ( red ) . Arrows indicate examples of synaptic footprints observed in mad mutants . ( C ) Im - age of a synapse from a wit mutant neu - ronally expressing DLIMK1 costained for presynaptic nc82 ( green ) and postsynaptic Discs - large ( red ) . Note the normal opposition of these two markers throughout the syn - apse . ( D ) Image of a synapse from a mad mutant neuronally expressing DLIMK1 co - stained for presynaptic nc82 ( green ) and postsynaptic Discs - large ( red ) . Note the normal opposition of these two markers throughout the synapse . Scale bar , 10 (cid:1) m in ( A ) – ( D ) . ( E ) Graph represents the quantifica - tion of average bouton numbers normalized to wild - type . Neuronal expression of DLIMK1 in the wit mutant background ( wit rescue - DLIMK1 ) using a pan - neural driver ( elav - Gal4 ) or a motoneuron - specific driver ( OK6 - Gal4 ) significantly rescues bouton numbers compared to wit mutants ( p < 0 . 001 ) . Rescue with the elav - Gal4 results in no significant difference in bouton numbers compared to wild - type , and rescue with the OK6 - Gal4 re - sults in slightly fewer boutons than wild - type ( * = p < 0 . 01 ) . ( F ) Graph represents the num - ber of NMJs with footprints as a percentage of the total number of NMJs examined . Neu - ronal expression of DLIMK1 in the wit mutant background significantly suppresses the number of footprints found in wit alone ( p < 0 . 001 ) . The number of footprints remain ele - vated compared to wild - type at room tem - perature ( p < 0 . 01 ) , but not with enhanced expression at 29°C ( see also Figure S1 ) . ( G ) Graph represents the quantification of average bouton numbers normalized to wild - type . Neuronal expression of DLIMK1 in the mad mutant background ( mad rescue - DLIMK1 ) using a pan - neural driver ( elav - Gal4 ) signifi - cantly rescues bouton numbers compared to mad mutants ( * = p < 0 . 001 ) . Rescue with the elav - Gal4 results in no significant difference in bouton numbers compared to wild - type . ( H ) Graph represents the number of NMJs with footprints as a percentage of the total number of NMJs examined . Neuronal expression of DLIMK1 in the mad mutant background significantly suppresses the number of footprints found in mad alone ( p < 0 . 001 ) . There is no significant difference in the number of footprints observed in mad rescue - DLIMK1 animals compared to those in wild - type . Error bars represent SEM . DLIMK1 in the mad mutant background rescues both synaptic growth and stability to wild - type levels ( Fig - ures 6D , 6G , and 6H ) . However , unlike expression of DLIMK1 in the wit mutant background , expression of DLIMK1 does not restore viability to the mad mutant background . This difference is likely due to the expres - sion of mad outside of the nervous system , whereas wit expression is largely restricted to the nervous system . Thus , DLIMK1 is sufficient to promote synaptic growth and stability in the absence of Mad - mediated signaling . These data support the conclusion that DLIMK1 func - tions in parallel to Mad - mediated signaling in the moto - neuron to control synaptic stability and growth . Presynaptic Localization of DLIMK1 We next investigated the localization of DLIMK1 in the presence and absence of the Wit receptor . The UAS - DLIMK1 transgene used in our rescue experiments har - bors an HA epitope tag that we have used to visualize DLIMK1 at the NMJ ( Figure 8 ) . Staining for HA in ani - mals with neuronal expression of UAS - DLIMK1 re - vealed a filamentous DLIMK1 localization throughout the presynaptic nerve terminal ( Figures 8A – 8E ) . This staining pattern is identical in wild - type or wit mutant animals that neuronally express UAS - DLIMK1 ( data not shown ) . Surprisingly , we find DLIMK1 - HA in very close association with the synaptic microtubules identified by anti - Futsch ( Map1B - like protein ) ( Figure 8C ) . However , although DLIMK1 - HA is closely associated with anti - Futsch , the two markers do not colocalize . Rather , the DLIMK1 - HA staining appears as an independent con - tinuous filament that extends throughout the NMJ . We have pursued two additional experiments to test whether the DLIMK1 - HA staining pattern requires the LIM Kinase1 Controls Synaptic Stability 703 Figure 7 . Neuronal Expression of DLIMK1 Restores Synaptic Function at BMP Mutant Synapses ( A ) Representative EPSP traces demonstrat - ing rescue of synaptic function in the wit mu - tant background due to neuronal expression of a full - length wit cDNA ( wit rescue - full ) , neuronal expression of a C - terminally trun - cated wit cDNA ( wit rescue - dCT ) , and neu - ronal expression of a wild - type DLIMK1 transgene ( wit rescue - DLIMK1 ) . ( B ) Quantifi - cation of mepsp amplitude . There is a signifi - cant decrease in mEPSP amplitude in wit that is restored to wild - type levels in each of the rescue conditions , including expression of a full - length DLIMK1 cDNA in wit ( wit res - cue - DLIMK1 ) . A homozygous mutation in DLIMK1 ( DLIMK1 P1 / DLIMK1 P1 ) has no signif - icant effect on mEPSP amplitude ( p > 0 . 2 ) . ( C ) Quantification of presynaptic quantal content as estimated by the average EPSP / average mepsp amplitude . Decreased quantal content is restored to wild - type levels in each of the rescue conditions . The homo - zygous mutation in DLIMK1 ( DLIMK1 P1 / DLIMK1 P1 ) has a modest reduction in quantal content ( p < 0 . 05 ) . Error bars represent SEM . Scale , 10mV and 200 ms . integrity of the synaptic microtubule cytoskeleton . We first overexpressed DLIMK1 - HA in the futsch mutant background , which severely disrupts the synaptic microtubule cytoskeleton ( Roos et al . , 2000 ) . Filamen - tous DLIMK1 - HA staining remains in the futsch muta - tion , indicating that DLIMK1 filaments are independent of stable synaptic microtubules ( Figure 8D ) . We next examined whether DLIMK1 - HA is perturbed following treatment of the synapse with nocadozole at a concen - tration that we have found to eliminate dynamic micro - tubule plus ends ( C . P . , B . A . E . , and G . W . D . ; unpublished data ) . We found that nocadozole treatment slightly de - creases the intensity of DLIMK1 - HA staining , but clear filamentous staining remains ( Figure 8E ) . These data suggest that DLIMK1 - HA filaments are closely associ - ated with synaptic microtubules , but can be stable in the absence of a continuous synaptic microtubule cy - toskeleton . Finally , this staining pattern does not re - semble the synaptic localization of actin - GFP , which concentrates into randomly distributed patches through - out the NMJ ( Figure 8F ) . Thus , DLIMK1 concentrates into a unique compartment within the presynaptic nerve terminal that , to our knowledge , has not been previously described . In addition , we found instances in which this compartment approached the synaptic plasma membrane , where it could associate with mem - brane receptors such as the Wit receptor ( Figure 8B ) . Finally , we cannot rule out the possibility that low levels of DLIMK1 are present throughout the cytoplasm and in association with synaptic actin , since we are examining steady - state protein distribution in fixed tissue . Evidence that DLIMK1 Functions Independently of ADF / Cofilin during Synapse Stabilization The role of LIMK1 during axon outgrowth and growth cone motility is largely due to LIMK1 phosphorylation and inactivation of ADF / cofilin , which alters actin turn - over ( Endo et al . , 2003 ; Ng and Luo , 2004 ) . In these studies , the phosphorylation of ADF / cofilin by LIMK1 is antagonized by the Slingshot ( Ssh ) family of phospha - tases ( Niwa et al . , 2002 ) . Therefore , if ADF / cofilin is the target of LIMK1 , then the overexpression of the Ssh phosphatase should mimic LIMK1 loss of function in this signaling cascade . We found that overexpression of the ssh cDNA in the motoneuron ( elav UAS - SSH wt ) had no effect on synaptic growth , synaptic stability ( Figures 5C and 5D ) , or synaptic function ( data not shown ) . We confirmed that Ssh protein traffics to the synapse in these experiments and found that it has a cytoplasmic localization that does not resemble what we observed for DLIMK1 - HA ( Figure S3 ) . Finally , over - expression of a constitutively activated cofilin trans - gene ( elav UAS - tsr - S3A ) also had no effect on synaptic growth or stabilization ( Figures 5C and 5D ) . In combina - tion with the observation that the distribution of synap - tic DLIMK1 does not resemble the distribution of syn - aptic actin , these data suggest that LIMK1 is not acting through ADF / cofilin to control synaptic stability . These data highlight differences in LIMK1 function during the rapid , dynamic process of axon outgrowth versus the slower , more prolonged mechanisms that govern syn - apse stabilization at the NMJ . Discussion Here , we demonstrate that BMP - receptor signaling at the Drosophila NMJ controls both synaptic growth and synaptic stabilization . Our data support a model in which signaling from the BMP receptor can coordi - nately activate two genetically separable develop - mental programs : ( 1 ) cell - wide regulation of neuronal growth via nuclear Smad signaling and ( 2 ) LIMK1 - dependent synaptic stabilization . This organization of synaptic signaling systems involved in synaptic growth versus synaptic stabilization could have important con - sequences for neural development . First , since a single Neuron704 Figure 8 . DLIMK - HA Has a Filamentous Staining Pattern Closely Associated with Synaptic MTs ( A – C ) Triple staining of the synapse at muscle 6 / 7 from a larva in which DLIMK1 harboring an HA epitope tag is neuronally expressed in the wit mutant background ( wit rescue - DLIMK1 ) . The synapse was costained with anti - HRP , anti - HA , and anti - Futsch , as indicated . In ( B ) , regions of the synapse denoted by arrows are shown at higher magnification with anti - HRP ( panels i and iii ) and anti - HA ( all panels ) . In ( C ) , the region of the synapse denoted by the asterisk is shown at higher magnification with anti - HRP ( panel i ) , anti - Futsch ( both panels ) , and anti - HA ( both panels ) . Note that HA immunoreactivity of DLIMK1 - HA is found closely associated with anti - Futsch staining , but does not perfectly colocalize ( C ) . Scale bar in ( A ) and ( C ) , 10 (cid:1) m . ( D ) Muscle 4 synapses from futsch N94 mutant animals neuronally expressing DLIMK - HA were fixed and costained with anti - HA ( Di ) and anti - Futsch ( Dii ) . ( E ) Muscle 4 synapses from wild - type animals neuronally expressing DLIMK - HA were subjected to nocodazole treatment . Synapses were costained for anti - HA ( Ei ) and anti - Futsch ( Eii ) . Note that DLIMK - HA filaments and Futsch - stained MTs are largely resistant to nocodazole . ( F ) Synapse at muscle 4 expressing actin - GFP within the motoneuron was imaged live ( [ Fii ] , green ) , then subsequently fixed and costained with anti - HRP ( [ Fi ] , blue ) and anti - Futsch ( [ Fi ] , red ) . Note that the pattern of actin - GFP does not appear to be closely associated with the synaptic MT cytoskeleton as observed for DLIMK1 in ( C ) . Scale bar in ( D ) – ( F ) , 10 (cid:1) m . trophic receptor can increase both cell - wide growth and synaptic stabilization , the efficiency of trophic sig - naling could be increased due to the coupling of new synapse growth with synaptic stabilization and reten - tion . Another scenario is also possible that could help to explain how synaptic growth and elimination could occur simultaneously at the terminals of a single moto - neuron . If LIMK1 functions locally at the synapse , then cell - wide growth signaling could be uncoupled from the local control of synaptic stability . Thus , the loss of tro - phic signaling at a single muscle target could lead to target - specific synapse destabilization while the same trophic signaling system at other muscle targets could simultaneously promote synaptic growth throughout the motoneuron via cell - wide growth signaling . While we do not have any direct evidence that LIMK1 func - tions locally at the synapse , the synaptic activation of kinase signaling downstream of the BMP receptor could support such a model . Evidence that DLIMK1 Functions Downstream of Wit and in Parallel to Smad - Mediated Signaling Our data support a model in which DLIMK1 functions downstream of the Wit receptor and in parallel to Smad - mediated nuclear signaling in order to achieve wild - type synaptic stability . First , several lines of evi - dence indicate that DLIMK1 functions downstream of the Wit receptor . We show that DLIMK1 binds to a re - gion of the Wit receptor that is necessary for synaptic stabilization , but which is dispensable for Smad - medi - LIM Kinase1 Controls Synaptic Stability 705 ated synaptic growth . We find that DLIMK1 mutations specifically disrupt synaptic stabilization and find that both DLIMK1 and Wit are necessary within the presyn - aptic neuron for synapse stability . We demonstrate a strong transheterozygotic genetic interaction between mutations in DLIMK1 and wit , resulting in a specific loss of synaptic stability . We further show that neuronal overexpression of a dominant negative DLIMK1 in the wit mutant background does not result in an additive increase in the number of synapse retractions . From these data , we conclude that DLIMK1 functions down - stream of Wit to control synaptic stability . Finally , we show that the stabilizing activity of DLIMK1 does not require the presence of the Smad signaling system , since expression of DLIMK1 in either the wit or the mad mutant background is able to restore synaptic stability to the NMJ . While these data are consistent with DLIMK1 functioning either downstream or in parallel to Smad - mediated signaling , we favor the conclusion that DLIMK1 functions in parallel to Smad because DLIMK1 binds a region of the Wit receptor that is dispensable for Smad - mediated synaptic growth . Smad - Independent versus Smad - Dependent Regulation of Synaptic Stability Our data demonstrate that signaling via the Wit recep - tor stabilizes the synapse via both Smad - dependent and LIMK1 - dependent signaling . Mutations in mad , medea , and expression of the inhibitory Smad dad ( DAD - GOF ) all cause an increase in synapse retractions as well as a decrease in bouton number . Our data indi - cate that Smad - mediated signaling accounts for ap - proximately 50 % of the stabilizing activity of the Wit receptor , and LIM Kinase functions in parallel to medi - ate the other 50 % of the Wit receptor’s stabilizing activ - ity . We hypothesize that the stabilizing functions of Smad signaling and LIMK1 signaling are quite different . First , we suspect that Smad - dependent synaptic stabi - lization is directly coupled to the growth - promoting function of the nuclear Smad signaling system . It is hy - pothesized that Smad - dependent growth regulation in - volves transcriptional programs that produce the nec - essary raw material for synaptic growth ( Aberle et al . , 2002 ; Keshishian , 2002 ; Marques et al . , 2002 ) . In the absence of Smad signaling , these raw materials may become limiting , not only for new growth but also for the maintenance of the existing synapse , since synap - tic proteins will need to be turned over and replaced at some rate . According to this logic , the synapse re - tractions caused by mutations in the Smad signaling system are related to synaptic atrophy . In contrast , DLIMK1 is necessary for synaptic stability , but is not required for normal synaptic growth . Thus , we suspect that synapse retractions observed in DLIMK1 mutants are caused by modulation of the synaptic stabilization machinery resident at the synapse . Evidence that BMP Signaling Activates LIMK Smad - independent signaling of TGF - β , including the BMP receptors , has been observed in a number of systems and includes the activation of other diverse signaling cascades such as MAPK , PI3K , Rho - like GTPases , and LIMK1 ( Derynck and Zhang , 2003 ; Fo - letta et al . , 2003 ; Lee - Hoeflich et al . , 2004 ) . However , only LIMK1 has been associated biochemically with the region of the BMP type II receptor that we find is spe - cifically required for synaptic stabilization in the Wit re - ceptor ( Foletta et al . , 2003 ; Lee - Hoeflich et al . , 2004 ) . In vitro kinase assays demonstrate that the interaction of LIMK1 with the BMPRII tail leads to changes in LIMK1 kinase activity ( Foletta et al . , 2003 ; Lee - Hoeflich et al . , 2004 ) . Although these studies reached different conclusions about the effects of receptor binding on LIMK1 activity , both studies support a model in which binding of BMP to the receptor complex leads to an increase in LIMK1 activity . We propose that ligand bind - ing to the Wit receptor activates DLIMK1 to stabilize the NMJ . DLIMK1 Restores Synaptic Growth , Function , and Viability to Animals Lacking an Essential BMP Growth Receptor It is remarkable that the overexpression of DLIMK1 res - cues all aspects of the wit receptor mutant phenotype , including synaptic growth , synaptic function , and ani - mal viability . DLIMK1 expression is also sufficient to re - store synaptic growth and stability to the mad muta - tion . These data contrast with our genetic analysis demonstrating that DLIMK1 is necessary for synaptic stability but is not required for normal synaptic growth and has only a minor role in functional synapse devel - opment . How can DLIMK1 expression restore synaptic growth , function , and viability in the absence of the BMP receptor ? Even if DLIMK1 independently signals to the nucleus ( Yang et al . , 2004 ) , it seems unlikely that DLIMK1 activity would be sufficient to restore the entire transcriptional program normally mediated by nuclear Smad signaling . Instead , we propose that the overex - pression of DLIMK1 in the wit receptor mutant back - ground hyperstabilizes the synapse , consistent with synaptic stabilization being the primary function of DLIMK1 . If UAS - DLIMK1 hyperstabilizes the synapse , a second , parallel growth factor signaling system may thereby be allowed to assume the growth - promoting functions normally mediated by BMP signaling . This hy - pothesis invokes the existence of an unidentified sec - ond growth factor signaling cascade at the Drosophila NMJ . It seems likely that additional growth factor sig - naling exists since the synapse still grows to nearly 50 % of its normal size in the wit mutant background ( Aberle et al . , 2002 ; Marques et al . , 2002 ) . One candi - date for a second synaptic growth signaling system is the activin signaling system ( Raftery and Sutherland , 1999 ) . In the Drosophila central nervous system , ecdy - sone - regulated axonal remodeling during metamorpho - sis is regulated , in part , by signaling via the activin type I receptor Babo , the type II BMP receptor Put , and DSmad2 ( Zheng et al . , 2003 ) . It should be noted , how - ever , that the Put type II receptor lacks the C - terminal DLIMK1 binding region found in the Wit receptor . Therefore , the Put receptor probably does not normally signal via direct interactions with DLIMK1 during the remodeling of the CNS or during stabilization at the NMJ . Neuron706 LIMK1 and Degenerative Diseases of the Neuromuscular System In lower motor diseases , such as ALS , two events are thought to contribute significantly to disease pro - gression : ( 1 ) the loss of nuclear trophic signaling due to impaired axonal transport , and ( 2 ) the loss of access to trophic signal due to synapse retraction ( Bruijn et al . , 2004 ; Scheff and Price , 2003 ; Hafezparast et al . , 2003 ) . The ability of LIMK1 to stabilize the NMJ in the absence of trophic signaling might suggest a model in which ac - tivation of stability - promoting proteins , such as LIMK1 , may counteract inappropriate synaptic disassembly during disease . It is interesting to note that LIMK1 has been shown to accumulate within the presynaptic nerve terminal during the late maturation of the mam - malian NMJ , after the period of developmental plastic - ity observed during embryonic and early postnatal development ( Wang et al . , 2000 ) . This observation sup - ports an intriguing model in which the maturation of the mammalian NMJ from a highly plastic synapse early in development to a more stable adult synapse involves both the reduction of plasticity - associated proteins , such as CAP - 23 and GAP - 43 ( Aigner et al . , 1995 ; Caroni et al . , 1997 ; Caroni and Becker , 1992 ) , and the enrich - ment of stability - promoting proteins such as LIMK1 . It remains to be determined whether synaptic loss in de - generative disease is directly related to the loss of sta - bilizing factors such as LIMK1 and , indeed , whether en - hanced signaling from these factors could lead to restabilization of diseased synapses . However , the pos - sibility that LIMK1 may function locally at the NMJ to promote synaptic stabilization , even in the absence of an essential source of trophic signaling , suggests a po - tent activity of LIMK1 in the nervous system that may have important therapeutic value as a future avenue for intervention in neuromuscular degenerative disease . Experimental Procedures Fly Strains Flies were maintained at 25°C on normal food . All strains were ob - tained from the Bloomington Stock Center unless indicated in acknowledgments . The DLIMK1 P element allele , P [ EY08757 ] ( DLIMK P1 ) ( Bellen et al . , 2004 ) , was obtained from the Bloomington Stock Collection and analyzed as a male hemizygote ( DLIMK P1 / Y ) , female homozygotes ( DLIMK P1 / DLIMK P1 ) , or female heterozygote allelic combinations with the deficiency lines Df ( 1 ) JA26 and Df ( 1 ) HF368 ( Craymer and Roy , 1980 ) . The following BMP mutations were analyzed as heterozygote allelic combinations : wit A12 / wit B11 , mad 10 / mad 12 , medea 2 / medea 4 , gbb 2 , UAS - gbb 99 / gbb 1 , and tkv 7 / tkv 16713 . The following GAL4 lines were used in this study : elav - GAL4 C155 ( Lin and Goodman , 1994 ) , OK - 6 - GAL4 ( Aberle et al . , 2002 ) , MHC - Gal4 ( DiAntonio et al . , 1999 ) , and D42 - GAL4 ( Parkes et al . , 1998 ) . The UAS - DAD , UAS - SSH wt 29 , UAS - SSH CS 11 , UAS - DLIMK1 ( wt ) , UAS - DLIMK1 ( KI ) ( DN - DLIMK1 ) , and UAS - Actin - GFP transgenes were analyzed as transheterozygotes with the corre - sponding GAL4 drivers . Flies analyzed in rescue experiments had the following genotypes : ( 1 ) wit rescue , full - length : elav - GAL4 C155 / + ; UAS - wit cDNA ( full - length ) / + ; wit A12 / wit B11 , ( 2 ) wit rescue - dCT : elav - GAL4 C155 / + ; UAS - wit cDNA ( dCT ) / + ; wit A12 / wit B11 , ( 3 ) wit rescue - DLIMK1 : elav - GAL4 C155 / + ; UAS - DLIMK1 ( wt ) / + ; wit A12 / wit B11 , ( 4 ) mad rescue - DLIMK1 : elav - GAL4 C155 / + ; UAS - DLIMK1 ( wt ) , mad 12 / mad 10 , and ( 5 ) DLIMK1 rescue : DLIMK P1 / Y ; UAS - DLIMK1 ( wt ) / + ; D42 - GAL4 / + . The dCT Wit receptor is truncated past the kinase domain at aa 576 ( Marques et al . , 2002 ) . Microscopy Primary antibodies were used at the following dilutions : monoclo - nal antibodies against Drosophila synapsin ( Klagges et al . , 1996 ) , nc82 ( Wucherpfennig et al . , 2003 ) , and the Drosophila glutamate receptor IIA subunit at 1 : 50 ( GluRIIA [ Saitoe et al . , 1997 ] ) ; polyclonal antibody against dlg at 1 : 5000 ( Budnik et al . , 1996 ) ; polyclonal anti - HA ( US Biological ) at 1 : 500 ; and Cy5 - conjugated polyclonal anti - body against HRP ( ICN / Cappel ) at 1 : 500 . All secondary antibodies ( ICN / Cappel ) were used at a dilution of 1 : 200 . Processing of larvae for immunofluorescent analysis was performed as previously de - scribed ( Eaton et al . , 2002 ) . For nocodazole treatment , animals were dissected normally in dissecting saline and incubated with 75 (cid:1) M nocodazole in saline for 20 min at room temperature prior to fixation . Images were digitally captured using a wide - field micros - copy ( Zeiss Axioscope 2000M ) and a cooled CCD camera ( Roper Scientific ) . Data capture and analysis were achieved using Slide - book software ( Intelligent Imaging Innovation ) . Images of DLIMK1 - HA ( Figure 8 ) were subjected to the nearest neighbor deconvolution ( Slidebook ) . For footprint analysis , third instar larvae of a given ge - notype were costained with antibodies for Synapsin and Discs - large and every NMJ at muscle 6 / 7 was analyzed for the presence of a footprint ( defined as any region of Discs - large staining without opposing Synapsin staining of at least one bouton ) . The number of boutons per NMJ was quantified at the synapse on muscle 4 ( seg - ment A3 ) in third instar larvae and corrected for muscle size . At least 18 – 20 NMJs were analyzed for each genotype . The percent change in bouton numbers that we observed in every genotype documented here is quantitatively identical for muscles 6 / 7 and muscle 4 , based upon our own observations ( data not shown ) and in comparison to previously published data ( Aberle et al . , 2002 ; McCabe et al . , 2003 ; Rawson et al . , 2003 ) . For live imaging of GFP - actin , third instar larvae neuronally expressing UAS - Actin - GFP were dissected normally , imaged in dissecting saline , and immedi - ately fixed and processed normally . Northern Analysis Poly - A RNA was obtained from total RNA isolated from a mixture of second and third instar larvae using the Oligo - Tex kit ( Qiagen ) . A full - length cDNA probe ( LD15137 ; Drosophila Genome Resource Center ) was labeled and used as described in the DIG - High Prime DNA labeling and Detection Starter Kit II ( Roche ) instruction manual . Electrophysiology The synapse on muscle 6 in segment A3 of the third instar larvae was recorded using sharp microelectrodes ( 15 – 20 M Ω ) as pre - viously described ( Eaton et al . , 2002 ) . Quantal size was determined as the average mEPSP amplitude by measuring at least 100 indi - vidual events per recording . Average EPSP amplitude represents the average maximal EPSP averaging 30 successive stimuli deliv - ered at 1 Hz . Data were collected in hemolymph - like ( HL3 ) saline with 0 . 5 mM calcium . Yeast Two - Hybrid Analysis Plasmids containing the full - length wit cDNA ( Michael O’Connor ) or the full - length DLIMK1 cDNA ( see Northern Analysis ) were used as PCR templates in standard PCR reactions . PCR products corre - sponding to either the intracellular C - terminal tail ( aa 570 – 3 # end ) or the kinase domain ( aa 224 – 531 ) of the Wit receptor were cloned into pGBKT7 / bait plasmid ( Clontech ) . PCR products corresponding to the N - terminal LIM and PDZ domains ( aa 0 – 285 ) , the PDZ do - main only ( aa 18 – 285 ) , or the tandem LIM domains only ( aa 0 – 186 ) of DLIMK1 were cloned into the pGADT7 prey plasmid ( Clontech ) , and analysis of interactions was performed according to the Matchmaker GAL4 two - hybrid system protocol ( Clontech ) . Supplemental Data Supplemental data include four figures with legends , Supplemental Methods , and a Supplemental Reference and are available with this article online at http : / / www . neuron . org / cgi / content / full / cgi / 47 / 5 / 695 / DC1 / . Acknowledgments The authors would like to gratefully thank the following individuals for the gifts of the indicated fly stocks : medea 2 and medea 4 , from LIM Kinase1 Controls Synaptic Stability 707 Laurel Raftery ; gbb 2 , UAS - gbb 99 , and gbb 1 , from Brian McCabe ; UAS - DAD , from Tom Kornberg ; UAS - wit cDNA ( full - length ) and UAS - wit cDNA ( dCT ) , from Michael O’Connor ; UAS - DLIMK1 ( wt ) and UAS - DLIMK1 ( KI ) , from Tadashi Uemura ; and UAS - SSH wt 29 , UAS - SSH CS 11 , and UAS - tsr S3A , from Julian Ng . The authors also thank Michael O’Connor , for the pACp - Wit - HA plasmid , and Ta - dashi Uemura , for the pUAST - HA - DLIMK1 plasmid . The authors thank Mario Lioubin and Jessica Tierney , for technical assistance , and Mark Von Zastrow , Robert Edwards , Jan Pielage , and Kira Poskanzer , for comments on earlier versions of the manuscript . This work was supported by an NIH National Research Service Award to B . A . E . and NIH grant # NS047342 to G . W . D . Received : March 14 , 2005 Revised : June 6 , 2005 Accepted : August 10 , 2005 Published : August 31 , 2005 References Aberle , H . , Haghighi , A . P . , Fetter , R . D . , McCabe , B . D . , Magalhaes , T . R . , and Goodman , C . S . ( 2002 ) . wishful thinking encodes a BMP type II receptor that regulates synaptic growth in Drosophila . Neu - ron 33 , 545 – 558 . Aigner , L . , Arber , S . , Kapfhammer , J . P . , Laux , T . , Schneider , C . , Bot - teri , F . , Brenner , H . R . , and Caroni , P . ( 1995 ) . Overexpression of the neural growth - associated protein GAP - 43 induces nerve sprouting in the adult nervous system of transgenic mice . Cell 83 , 269 – 278 . Allan , D . W . , St Pierre , S . E . , Miguel - Aliaga , I . , and Thor , S . ( 2003 ) . Specification of neuropeptide cell identity by the integration of ret - rograde BMP signaling and a combinatorial transcription factor code . Cell 113 , 73 – 86 . Arber , S . , Barbayannis , F . A . , Hanser , H . , Schneider , C . , Stanyon , C . A . , Bernard , O . , and Caroni , P . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of actin dy - namics through phosphorylation of cofilin by LIM - kinase . Nature 393 , 805 – 809 . Bellen , H . J . , Levis , R . W . , Liao , G . , He , Y . , Carlson , J . W . , Tsang , G . , Evans - Holm , M . , Hiesinger , P . R . , Schulze , K . L . , Rubin , G . M . , et al . ( 2004 ) . The BDGP gene disruption project : single transposon inser - tions associated with 40 % of Drosophila genes . Genetics 167 , 761 – 781 . Belluardo , N . , Westerblad , H . , Mudo , G . , Casabona , A . , Bruton , J . , Caniglia , G . , Pastoris , O . , Grassi , F . , and Ibanez , C . F . ( 2001 ) . Neuro - muscular junction disassembly and muscle fatigue in mice lacking neurotrophin - 4 . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 18 , 56 – 67 . Bernard , O . , Ganiatsas , S . , Kannourakis , G . , and Dringen , R . ( 1994 ) . Kiz - 1 , a protein with LIM zinc finger and kinase domains , is ex - pressed mainly in neurons . Cell Growth Differ . 5 , 1159 – 1171 . Bruijn , L . I . , Miller , T . M . , and Cleveland , D . W . ( 2004 ) . Unraveling the mechanisms involved in motor neuron degeneration in ALS . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 27 , 723 – 749 . Budnik , V . , Koh , Y . H . , Guan , B . , Hartmann , B . , Hough , C . , Woods , D . , and Gorczyca , M . ( 1996 ) . Regulation of synapse structure and function by the Drosophila tumor suppressor gene dlg . Neuron 17 , 627 – 640 . Caroni , P . , and Becker , M . ( 1992 ) . The downregulation of growth - associated proteins in motoneurons at the onset of synapse elimi - nation is controlled by muscle activity and IGF1 . J . Neurosci . 12 , 3849 – 3861 . Caroni , P . , Aigner , L . , and Schneider , C . ( 1997 ) . Intrinsic neuronal determinants locally regulate extrasynaptic and synaptic growth at the adult neuromuscular junction . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 679 – 692 . Cheng , A . K . , and Robertson , E . J . ( 1995 ) . The murine LIM - kinase gene ( limk ) encodes a novel serine threonine kinase expressed pre - dominantly in trophoblast giant cells and the developing nervous system . Mech . Dev . 52 , 187 – 197 . Cohen - Cory , S . ( 1999 ) . BDNF modulates , but does not mediate , ac - tivity - dependent branching and remodeling of optic axon arbors in vivo . J . Neurosci . 19 , 9996 – 10003 . Craymer , L . , and Roy , E . ( 1980 ) . Report of new mutants : Drosophila melanogaster . Drosoph . Inf . Serv . 55 , 200 – 204 . De Paola , V . , Arber , S . , and Caroni , P . ( 2003 ) . AMPA receptors regu - late dynamic equilibrium of presynaptic terminals in mature hippo - campal networks . Nat . Neurosci . 6 , 491 – 500 . Derynck , R . , and Zhang , Y . E . ( 2003 ) . Smad - dependent and Smad - independent pathways in TGF - beta family signalling . Nature 425 , 577 – 584 . DiAntonio , A . , Petersen , S . A . , Heckmann , M . , and Goodman , C . S . ( 1999 ) . Glutamate receptor expression regulates quantal size and quantal content at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction . J . Neu - rosci . 19 , 3023 – 3032 . Eaton , B . A . , Fetter , R . D . , and Davis , G . W . ( 2002 ) . Dynactin is neces - sary for synapse stabilization . Neuron 34 , 729 – 741 . Endo , M . , Ohashi , K . , Sasaki , Y . , Goshima , Y . , Niwa , R . , Uemura , T . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2003 ) . Control of growth cone motility and mor - phology by LIM kinase and Slingshot via phosphorylation and de - phosphorylation of cofilin . J . Neurosci . 23 , 2527 – 2537 . Engert , F . , and Bonhoeffer , T . ( 1999 ) . Dendritic spine changes asso - ciated with hippocampal long - term synaptic plasticity . Nature 399 , 66 – 70 . Foletta , V . C . , Lim , M . A . , Soosairajah , J . , Kelly , A . P . , Stanley , E . G . , Shannon , M . , He , W . , Das , S . , Massague , J . , and Bernard , O . ( 2003 ) . Direct signaling by the BMP type II receptor via the cytoskeletal regulator LIMK1 . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 1089 – 1098 . Goda , Y . , and Davis , G . W . ( 2003 ) . Mechanisms of synapse assem - bly and disassembly . Neuron 40 , 243 – 264 . Gonzalez , M . , Ruggiero , F . P . , Chang , Q . , Shi , Y . J . , Rich , M . M . , Kraner , S . , and Balice - Gordon , R . J . ( 1999 ) . Disruption of Trkb - medi - ated signaling induces disassembly of postsynaptic receptor clus - ters at neuromuscular junctions . Neuron 24 , 567 – 583 . Guan , B . , Hartmann , B . , Kho , Y . H . , Gorczyca , M . , and Budnik , V . ( 1996 ) . The Drosophila tumor suppressor gene , dlg , is involved in structural plasticity at a glutamatergic synapse . Curr . Biol . 6 , 695 – 706 . Hafezparast , M . , Klocke , R . , Ruhrberg , C . , Marquardt , A . , Ahmad - Annuar , A . , Bowen , S . , Lalli , G . , Witherden , A . S . , Hummerich , H . , Nicholson , S . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Mutations in dynein link motor neuron degeneration to defects in retrograde transport . Science 300 , 808 – 812 . Horch , H . W . , Kruttgen , A . , Portbury , S . D . , and Katz , L . C . ( 1999 ) . De - stabilization of cortical dendrites and spines by BDNF . Neuron 23 , 353 – 364 . Huang , E . J . , and Reichardt , L . F . ( 2001 ) . Neurotrophins : roles in neu - ronal development and function . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 24 , 677 – 736 . Kasthuri , N . , and Lichtman , J . W . ( 2003 ) . The role of neuronal iden - tity in synaptic competition . Nature 424 , 426 – 430 . Katz , L . C . , and Shatz , C . J . ( 1996 ) . Synaptic activity and the con - struction of cortical circuits . Science 274 , 1133 – 1138 . Keller - Peck , C . R . , Walsh , M . K . , Gan , W . B . , Feng , G . , Sanes , J . R . , and Lichtman , J . W . ( 2001 ) . Asynchronous synapse elimination in neonatal motor units : studies using GFP transgenic mice . Neuron 31 , 381 – 394 . Keshishian , H . ( 2002 ) . Is synaptic homeostasis just wishful think - ing ? Neuron 33 , 491 – 492 . Klagges , B . R . , Heimbeck , G . , Godenschwege , T . A . , Hofbauer , A . , Pflugfelder , G . O . , Reifegerste , R . , Reisch , D . , Schaupp , M . , Buch - ner , S . , and Buchner , E . ( 1996 ) . Invertebrate synapsins : a single gene codes for several isoforms in Drosophila . J . Neurosci . 16 , 3154 – 3165 . Krueger , N . X . , Van Vactor , D . , Wan , H . I . , Gelbart , W . M . , Goodman , C . S . , and Saito , H . ( 1996 ) . The transmembrane tyrosine phospha - tase DLAR controls motor axon guidance in Drosophila . Cell 84 , 611 – 622 . LaMonte , B . H . , Wallace , K . E . , Holloway , B . A . , Shelly , S . S . , Ascano , J . , Tokito , M . , Van Winkle , T . , Howland , D . S . , and Holzbaur , E . L . ( 2002 ) . Disruption of dynein / dynactin inhibits axonal transport in motor neurons causing late - onset progressive degeneration . Neu - ron 34 , 715 – 727 . Neuron708 Lee - Hoeflich , S . T . , Causing , C . G . , Podkowa , M . , Zhao , X . , Wrana , J . L . , and Attisano , L . ( 2004 ) . Activation of LIMK1 by binding to the BMP receptor , BMPRII , regulates BMP - dependent dendritogen - esis . EMBO J . 23 , 4792 – 4801 . Lin , D . M . , and Goodman , C . S . ( 1994 ) . Ectopic and increased ex - pression of Fasciclin II alters motoneuron growth cone guidance . Neuron 13 , 507 – 523 . Lom , B . , and Cohen - Cory , S . ( 1999 ) . Brain - derived neurotrophic factor differentially regulates retinal ganglion cell dendritic and axo - nal arborization in vivo . J . Neurosci . 19 , 9928 – 9938 . Marques , G . , Bao , H . , Haerry , T . E . , Shimell , M . J . , Duchek , P . , Zhang , B . , and O’Connor , M . B . ( 2002 ) . The Drosophila BMP type II receptor Wishful Thinking regulates neuromuscular synapse morphology and function . Neuron 33 , 529 – 543 . Marquez , R . M . , Singer , M . A . , Takaesu , N . T . , Waldrip , W . R . , Krayts - berg , Y . , and Newfeld , S . J . ( 2001 ) . Transgenic analysis of the Smad family of TGF - beta signal transducers in Drosophila melanogaster suggests new roles and new interactions between family members . Genetics 157 , 1639 – 1648 . Massague , J . ( 1998 ) . TGF - beta signal transduction . Annu . Rev . Bio - chem . 67 , 753 – 791 . McCabe , B . D . , Marques , G . , Haghighi , A . P . , Fetter , R . D . , Crotty , M . L . , Haerry , T . E . , Goodman , C . S . , and O’Connor , M . B . ( 2003 ) . The BMP homolog Gbb provides a retrograde signal that regulates syn - aptic growth at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction . Neuron 39 , 241 – 254 . Meng , Y . , Zhang , Y . , Tregoubov , V . , Janus , C . , Cruz , L . , Jackson , M . , Lu , W . Y . , MacDonald , J . F . , Wang , J . Y . , Falls , D . L . , and Jia , Z . ( 2002 ) . Abnormal spine morphology and enhanced LTP in LIMK - 1 knock - out mice . Neuron 35 , 121 – 133 . Mizuno , K . , Okano , I . , Ohashi , K . , Nunoue , K . , Kuma , K . , Miyata , T . , and Nakamura , T . ( 1994 ) . Identification of a human cDNA encoding a novel protein kinase with two repeats of the LIM / double zinc fin - ger motif . Oncogene 9 , 1605 – 1612 . Ng , J . , and Luo , L . ( 2004 ) . Rho GTPases regulate axon growth through convergent and divergent signaling pathways . Neuron 44 , 779 – 793 . Nguyen , Q . T . , Parsadanian , A . S . , Snider , W . D . , and Lichtman , J . W . ( 1998 ) . Hyperinnervation of neuromuscular junctions caused by GDNF overexpression in muscle . Science 279 , 1725 – 1729 . Niwa , R . , Nagata - Ohashi , K . , Takeichi , M . , Mizuno , K . , and Uemura , T . ( 2002 ) . Control of actin reorganization by Slingshot , a family of phosphatases that dephosphorylate ADF / cofilin . Cell 108 , 233 – 246 . Ohashi , K . , Hosoya , T . , Takahashi , K . , Hing , H . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2000 ) . A Drosophila homolog of LIM - kinase phosphorylates cofilin and induces actin cytoskeletal reorganization . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 276 , 1178 – 1185 . Parkes , T . L . , Elia , A . J . , Dickinson , D . , Hilliker , A . J . , Phillips , J . P . , and Boulianne , G . L . ( 1998 ) . Extension of Drosophila lifespan by overex - pression of human SOD1 in motorneurons . Nat . Genet . 19 , 171 – 174 . Pielage , J . , Fetter , R . D . , and Davis , G . W . ( 2005 ) . Presynaptic spec - trin is essential for synapse stabilization . Curr . Biol . 15 , 918 – 928 . Proschel , C . , Blouin , M . J . , Gutowski , N . J . , Ludwig , R . , and Noble , M . ( 1995 ) . Limk1 is predominantly expressed in neural tissues and phosphorylates serine , threonine and tyrosine residues in vitro . On - cogene 11 , 1271 – 1281 . Purves , D . , and Lichtman , J . W . ( 1980 ) . Elimination of synapses in the developing nervous system . Science 210 , 153 – 157 . Raftery , L . A . , and Sutherland , D . J . ( 1999 ) . TGF - beta family signal transduction in Drosophila development : from Mad to Smads . Dev . Biol . 210 , 251 – 268 . Rawson , J . M . , Lee , M . , Kennedy , E . L . , and Selleck , S . B . ( 2003 ) . Dro - sophila neuromuscular synapse assembly and function require the TGF - beta type I receptor saxophone and the transcription factor Mad . J . Neurobiol . 55 , 134 – 150 . Rico , B . , Xu , B . , and Reichardt , L . F . ( 2002 ) . TrkB receptor signaling is required for establishment of GABAergic synapses in the cere - bellum . Nat . Neurosci . 5 , 225 – 233 . Rieckhof , G . E . , Yoshihara , M . , Guan , Z . , and Littleton , J . T . ( 2003 ) . Presynaptic N - type calcium channels regulate synaptic growth . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 41099 – 41108 . Roos , J . , Hummel , T . , Ng , N . , Klambt , C . , and Davis , G . W . ( 2000 ) . Drosophila Futsch regulates synaptic microtubule organization and is necessary for synaptic growth . Neuron 26 , 371 – 382 . Saitoe , M . , Tanaka , S . , Takata , K . , and Kidokoro , Y . ( 1997 ) . Neural activity affects distribution of glutamate receptors during neuro - muscular junction formation in Drosophila embryos . Dev . Biol . 184 , 48 – 60 . Saitoe , M . , Schwarz , T . L . , Umbach , J . A . , Gundersen , C . B . , and Ki - dokoro , Y . ( 2001 ) . Absence of junctional glutamate receptor clus - ters in Drosophila mutants lacking spontaneous transmitter re - lease . Science 293 , 514 – 517 . Scheff , S . W . , and Price , D . A . ( 2003 ) . Synaptic pathology in Alzhei - mer’s disease : a review of ultrastructural studies . Neurobiol . Aging 24 , 1029 – 1046 . Schuster , C . M . , Davis , G . W . , Fetter , R . D . , and Goodman , C . S . ( 1996 ) . Genetic dissection of structural and functional components of synaptic plasticity . I . Fasciclin II controls synaptic stabilization and growth . Neuron 17 , 641 – 654 . Sin , W . C . , Haas , K . , Ruthazer , E . S . , and Cline , H . T . ( 2002 ) . Dendrite growth increased by visual activity requires NMDA receptor and Rho GTPases . Nature 419 , 475 – 480 . Stewart , B . A . , Schuster , C . M . , Goodman , C . S . , and Atwood , H . L . ( 1996 ) . Homeostasis of synaptic transmission in Drosophila with genetically altered nerve terminal morphology . J . Neurosci . 16 , 3877 – 3886 . Ten Dijke , P . , Goumans , M . J . , Itoh , F . , and Itoh , S . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of cell proliferation by Smad proteins . J . Cell . Physiol . 191 , 1 – 16 . Wang , J . Y . , Wigston , D . J . , Rees , H . D . , Levey , A . I . , and Falls , D . L . ( 2000 ) . LIM kinase 1 accumulates in presynaptic terminals during synapse maturation . J . Comp . Neurol . 416 , 319 – 334 . Wieser , R . , Attisano , L . , Wrana , J . L . , and Massague , J . ( 1993 ) . Sig - naling activity of transforming growth factor beta type II receptors lacking specific domains in the cytoplasmic region . Mol . Cell . Biol . 13 , 7239 – 7247 . Wu , G . Y . , Zou , D . J . , Rajan , I . , and Cline , H . ( 1999 ) . Dendritic dy - namics in vivo change during neuronal maturation . J . Neurosci . 19 , 4472 – 4483 . Wucherpfennig , T . , Wilsch - Brauninger , M . , and Gonzalez - Gaitan , M . ( 2003 ) . Role of Drosophila Rab5 during endosomal trafficking at the synapse and evoked neurotransmitter release . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 609 – 624 . Yang , E . J . , Yoon , J . H . , Min do , S . , and Chung , K . C . ( 2004 ) . LIM ki - nase 1 activates cAMP - responsive element - binding protein during the neuronal differentiation of immortalized hippocampal progeni - tor cells . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 8903 – 8910 . Zheng , X . , Wang , J . , Haerry , T . E . , Wu , A . Y . , Martin , J . , O’Connor , M . B . , Lee , C . H . , and Lee , T . ( 2003 ) . TGF - beta signaling activates steroid hormone receptor expression during neuronal remodeling in the Drosophila brain . Cell 112 , 303 – 315 .