PAPERS CHI 98 . 18 - 23 APRIL 1998 Insight Lab : An lmmersive Team Enviroriment Linking Paper , Displays , and Data Beth M . Lange , Mark A . Jones , James L . Meyers Andersen Consulting Center for Strategic Technology Research 3773 Willow Road Northbrook , IL 60062 - 62 12 USA + 18477142418 lange @ cstar . ac . com , mark . a . jones @ ac . com , jlmeyers @ cstar . ac . com ABSTRACT The Insight Lab is an immersive environment designed to support teams who create design requirements documents . Requirements emerge from a deep understanding of a problem domain , which is achieved through in - depth analysis of large amounts of qualitative data . The goal of the Lab is to facilitate the data analysis process through the seamless interaction of computer - based technologies with objects in the environment . Team members can use paper and whiteboards to sketch , annotate , and display their analysis work . Barcodes are used to link papers and whiteboard printouts to the multimedia data stored in the computer . Keywords Interaction design , collaboration , analysis methods , video analysis , hybrid paper electronic interfaces , digital documents , group memory , barcode technology INTRODUCTION Identifying and developing the design requirements for a new system , service or product is a complex problem . Designers need to understand and organize vast amounts of qualitative data collected about the work and environment in which the system will be used . By analyzing data about an environment , its work practices , and the technology in use , the designers can base the requirements on evidence of the current practices . Achieving a full understanding of a problem domain may involve an in - depth review of audio and video recordings , photos , interview notes , and other materials . A team needs to find the important content and organize it in meaningful ways . A successful design document organizes the volumes of data into manageable units such as the key dimensions of a problem , the inter - dependence among contributing factors of a problem , and th . : major shifts expected from implementing a new system . Permission to make digital / hard copies ofall or part oftbis material for personal or classroom use is ganti without fiz provided tbat the copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage , the copy - right notice . the title of the publication and its dataappear , and notice is given that copyright is by permission of the ACM , Inc . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on szwrs or to redistribute to lists , requires specific permission and / or f & CHI 9s Los Angeles CA USA cop > light 1998 0 - & 9791 - 975 - 019814 . . ss . 00 The Insight Lab was built to improve how teams create requirements documents by supporting the process of transforming data into insights . In the spirit of Video Mosaic [ lo ] , we attempt to support an iterative process that relies on sketching ideas , viewing and displaying a lot of material at one time , and utilizing the spatial relationships between materials to provide meaning for the work being done . It is important to enable a team to manipulate , record , and review its work , in any format used , throughout the entire design process . Enabling a team to effectively create requirements documents is based on three separate , but interdependent elements that are highlighted in the paper : 1 . Analysis Framework An analysis framework and a structured process are necessary to facilitate the analysis of enormous amounts of qualitative data [ 7 ] , [ 20 ] . Without 3n agreed - upon process , the team spends valuable time negotiating a process ; and lack of an analy , , is framework can lead to ad - hoc and possibly incomplete analysis . 2 . Managing and Displaying the Data Software tools to digitize , store , index , and access large amounts of multimedia data enable a team to easily work with any of the data by following established links [ 3 ] , [ 19 ] . 3 . Connecting Paper to the Computer It is important to create a working environment that facilitates team interaction as well as the capture of design rationales through the innovative , integrated use of paper , whiteboards , and computers [ I 61 , [ 21 ] , [ 20 ] , Ul , uo1 . The Insight Lab is an immersive team environment . It consists of software tools to manage multimedia dard , numerous display devices and writing surfaces , and the use of barcodes to link paper , displays , and data . This paper presents the key features of the Insight Lab : the Analysis Framework , Managing the Data , Displaying the Data , and Connecting Paper to the Computer . Examples of use are presented throughout the paper . The paper closes with reflections on our experiences using the Insight Lab . CHl 98 . 18 - 23 APRIL 1998 PAPERS BACKGROUND Our own experiences transforming data into requirements documents led to the creation of the Insight Lab . Over the past few years we have participated in projects to develop knolvledge management systems , collaborative tools for multi - site project teams , mobile computing applications , and interactive multimedia applications . For example , in late 1996 , we completed an extensive project to develop a knowledge management vision for an organization . The resultant documents - a Vision Report , and the supporting Human - Centered Design Analysis Report - were based on data collected at 17 sites in seven countries , where a team of four people observed and interviewed more than 150 people over a three month period . Figure 7 : Working with Postlts ~ A whiteboa ; d electronic printouts , and whiteboards during data analysis . During the knowledge management project , we used a simple , custom - built data structuring software application to catalogue the data and begin the analysis . However , the in - depth analysis was done without the benefit of computerized tools . Using well - known knowledge management frameworks to structure the analysis , we used an eleceonic whiteboard to sketch scenarios and PostIt . Gi placed on a whiteboard to create diagrams , matrices , and tables . The Post & s and electronic whiteboard printouts helped us display key issues and the problems to address . While this process worked , it was cumbersome , inefficient and time - consuming - In the end we had a scattered pile of PostIts and much of the project history was not preserved . DESIGN RATIONALE During the knowledge management project we documented all of our activities by recording our work as digital images and 35mm slides . Using these materials , we reviewed and reflected upon our experiences to identify the key factors that influenced the way we conducted our design sessions . The outcome was a set of goals for the Insight Lab : to support team - based analysis , facilitate informal interaction , utilize technology to improve the process , and enable teams to use common objects including pen and paper . A basic premise of the Insight Lab design is that the analysis and synthesis of observational data into requirements documents should be accomplished by teams , since teams bring in multiple perspectives to minimize the influence of individual biases . A typical team may consist of experts in a company or industry , social scientists experienced in describing and identifying social and cultural factors , designers , and perhaps the people who are expected to use the resultant technological system 171 , [ 9 ] . Moran and his colleagues demonstrate the importance of supporting informal collaborative work [ l 11 , [ 121 . Their research focuses on using technology to augment intensive discussion - based teamwork . They supported groups reviewing and rating many documents in short meetings . We are supporting a team working together over a period of weeks to “make sense” of multimedia data . In both cases the social interaction involved in building consensus is crucial . A team working on complex problems establishes a common context regarding the meaning of data by discussing , analyzing , and repeatedly reviewing it together . Researchers examining the use of technologies for group work point out the importance of natural interactions between team members , especially when using computers to assist or support the team’s activities [ 151 , [ 12 ] . Issues involve shared displays , turn - taking , recording activities and modes of interaction with objects . ANALYSIS FRAMEWORK At Andersen Consulting , we employ data collection methods such as video ethnography and contextual inquiry to observe everyday work practices , organizations’ activities , and consumer behaviors . The practical benefits of these methods are well - documented [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] , [ 17 ] . They ensure a rich understanding of an environment , situation , or activity , which is to be supported by a new or changing technology solution . Analysis is typically done by looking for patterns in the data . For example , Suchman and Trigg utilized utterance - based transcriptions to understand air - traffic controllers [ 18 ] ; Xerox and IRL pioneered the use of Interaction Analysis [ 7 ] ; and Conklin championed the use of IBIS to structure the issues and decision points identified durijlg data analysis [ 4 ] . Building on these approaches , we created a simple analysis framework , which structures the data and allows for the use of numerous clustering and brainstorming techniques throughout the analysis , synthesis and design phases of a project . This simple structuring provides for a bottom - up approach for reaching the highest levels of data abstraction , going from data to requirements . At the same time , hypotheses are used for a top - down approach to ensure fdll coverage of a problem domain . Elements of the Analysis Framework Figure 2 diagrams the elements of the Analysis Framework , which are described below , while Figure 3 presents an example for each element . Evidence is the basic unit of analysis . A piece of evidence is a significant action , quote , or description taken directly from the multimedia data gathered during observation . A project usually has hundreds to thousands of pieces of evidence , each of which is tagged to a piece of media . Keywords are important concepts that are used to assemble the evidence into meaningful subsets during the initial stages of analysis . A piece of evidence is usually tagged to PAPERS CHI 98 l 18 - 23 APRIL 1998 multiple keywords . In our experience , a project may have fifty keywords . Figure 2 : Analysis Framework ( p + feiJ q $ lizzJ Il ( eywordst - ) ~ + Multimedia Data + I I Observation I Patterns are meaningful groupings of evidence derived from a bottom - up clustering of evidence . Our projects typically result in fifty to one hundred patterns . Hypotheses are a special type of Pattern . They are key questions the team needs to address when gathering data . Evidence is gathered to confirm or disconfirm hypotheses . Themes are the important dimensions of a problem domain that emerge during the analysis process . A project typically results in less than a dozen themes . Figure 3 : Examples of the Analysis Elements : Knowledge Management Themes Conttiblnion to Knowtedge SVstM Findinas , Issues . Reauirementi Issue : Pqie win share knowleflge if they know who is using It . Requirement : Feedback me & an ! sms are needed to enhanceshIng . Patterns HYUOtfWU3S People spend large People have no time lo amounls of time sharing contribute 10 knm % ledge lmosdeclgevkt email and repasilorks . phone . Evidence JBS Smk Y don’t have any time to amtribule . ’ Joe Stiti ‘I spend about 8 hrskk helpbg others : Flexibility of the Analysis Framework Experience showed us that every project would have varying needs with regard to the data to be captured and analyzed . Our analysis framework is simple , yet flexible , providing rhe freedom to assign specific types of labels to data instead of creating an overly structured , and therefore inflexible analysis framework . For example , in a current project we have “suggested solutions” and ‘surprises” keywords to organize subsets of evidence that may not directly relate to the bottom - up approach of identifying themes and patterns from evidence . Following the approach of others who found that new tools need to work in concert with many other team activities [ 121 , [ 20 ] the Insight Lab allows a team to use any number of techniques or tools to transform evidence into patterns , and patterns into themes . For example , cluster analysis was useful in a project in which we were interested in the intersection of evidence across many keywords . Similarly , affinity diagramming is used to identify themes from patterns . MANAGING THE DATA The Insight Lab utilizes software tools to digitize , store , index , and access large amounts of multimedia data including the video , audio , and photographic data gathered during data collection . All of the elements of the analys ; ls framework just described are also captured and stored . Insight MAST ( Multimedia Analysis Software Tool ) We developed Insight MAST ( Multimedia Analysis Software Tool ) for use throughout the entire analysis alld synthesis process . Insight MAST supports data capture and storage , data entry , and searching and display capabilities . Digitized media clips can be played and views of organized subsets of the analysis data can be displayed . All of the interactions between the Insight Lab’s objects , devices , equipment , and displays are managed by Insight MAST . The best way to quickly and easily view data is to digitize it [ 3 ] , [ 13 ] . Providing easy , non - linear access to the original source data is essential . For example , during analysis a team views media clips to create consensus about the meaning of pieces of evidence and to clarify their interpretations of events that transpire in a particular media segment . Figure 4 : Design of the Insight Lab Interaction Obieets Linked Sticky Notes Linked Data Reports Electronic Whiteboard Images Interaction Devices Command Slate Insight MAST Wireless Mouse Wireless Keyboard Barcode Scanner Dkmlays - 3 Monitor Display Tackable Walls Electronic Whiteboard Layered Whiteboards Eauiument 9 Gig . Video Server Hi - 8 Player Barcode Printer Insight MAST , as shown in Figure 4 above , is the glue that holds all of the elements of the Insight Lab together . In the Lab , team members can work with Interaction Objects , use 552 CHI 98 . 18 - 23 APRIL 1998 PAPERS the Interaction Devices to input , save , and retrieve data , view materials on the Display surfaces , and write on the whiteboards . The use of these objects and devices are detailed in the sections that follow . Traceability : Preserving a Project’s History Insight MAST maintains the links between multimedia data and evidence , and links between the various analysis elements as well as storing electronic whiteboard drawings . Providing this automatic “traceability” of the analysis and design process is a key feature of MAST . Preserving the history of the team’s activities provides a rich design rationale . There have been numerous efforts to capture design histories such as [ 2 ] , [ 4 ] , and [ 20 ] often requiring the team to take extra steps to document their work . Our approach to this challenging problem is to make it an easy , almost invisible part of the analysis process . The value of the captured history is’apparent during the analysis process . It allows teams to easily review their work when there are questions about how they arrived at particular conclusions . In creating the final project documents accessing the captured history provides linkages between the underlying empirical data and the findings and issues which shape the final outcomes . DISPLAYING THE DATA The ability to manipulate and view large amounts of data at one time is critical throughout data analysis . The Insight Lab supports the use of a multi - monitor computer display , as well as using the Lab’s walls as displays . High - Resolution Computer Displays Three 800x600 resolution displays provide a large surface for groups to view the Insight MAST information and see several levels of data detail simultaneously . Our decision to utilize a large display was based on the experiences of Swaminathan and Sato 1191 , who take advantage of a large surface to display several domain contexts simultaneously . The Lab’s long and narrow , 9 feet by 27 feet space prevented us from using three contiguously displayed high - resolution projectors on the long wall because a projector’s focal length is more than nine feet . Therefore we place the displays on the nine - foot wall using a projector in the center and thirty - one - inch color monitors on the left and right , as shown in Figure 5 . The different sizes of the displays creates a discontinuity causing some problems when moving the mouse between screens [ 191 . The different sizes of the displays also presents a challenge regarding readability . We determined that the content of each display should be legible from twelve feet away , since teams sitting around a table are likely to be seated at that distance . To achieve the perception that text displayed on each screen is approximately the same size , the smaller monitors use a larger font size than the center projector . A 1 Opt . font is used on the center display and an 1 Spt font on the two side monitors . As can be seen from the picture in Figure 5 , the relative sizes of the fonts in the windows appear comparable . The use of varying font sizes constrains the movement of windows from one monitor to the other . Figure 5 : The Insight Lab’s three screen display . Interaction Windows in Insight MAST The Insight MAST application consists of a combination of interaction windows and windows that are used for display only . Windows that require user interaction are placed on the center screen , whereas video clips are played on the left monitor , and additional details of data is viewed on the right monitor . The interaction windows on the center screen are used to create and maintain links among different levels of data . Example windows are shown below in Figures 6 , 7 , and 8 . Figure 6 : The user is creating a pattern by dragging evidence from one window into another . These windows are displayed on the large projection screen in the middle . Figure 7 : The right monitor displays additional details about a particular item highlighted on the center screen . This example shows all the evidence associated with a pattern . 553 - ~ - . ~ - . - - . . ^ _ - - - . - . . z - - _ . j , \ - ? , . _ cL . Yk’ . rl - r . > - . ‘ . ‘ , - < ‘i , T , . _ . - . - - PAPERS CHI 98 . 18 - 23 APRIL 1998 [ Figure 8 : Video clips are I displayed on the left & f monitor . This frame is from ! a series of video clips i associated with the pattern i displayed in Figure 7 . Walls as Displays During our knowledge management project we covered all of the Lab’s walls with diagrams , notes , matrices , drawings , and affinity diagrams . We found it very useful to have easy access to the materials . This was important for comparing different ideas at one time , as well as quickly and easily moving items around to make new groupings of information . Even the use of three high - resolution displays does not provide sufficient display space so we continue to rely on walls to provide additional display surface . Thus , in designing the Insight Lab we wanted to preserve this capability , while also creating connections between the papers and sketches with the materials stored in the computer . When the walls are covered with paper linked to the computer via barcodes , the entire room , in essence , becomes a huge computer display . Figure 9 : Using walls CONNECTING PAPER TO THE COMPUTER The uses of paper and whiteboards by teams is well understood [ l2 ] , [ 15 ] . [ 17 ] . Paper is used for reading , sketching , and annotating . Similarly , whiteboards are used for sketching , capturing emerging thoughts and viewing materials . The use of whiteboards in the Insight Lab is discussed in the section on Linked Images on the following page . Sellen and O’Hara’s research shows how individuals annotate paper to gain an understanding of what they are reading . Paper is also used to spatially display a lot of material at one time , and to easily move between documents or sections of documents [ 141 . The key to the Insight Lab success is the creation of a seamless interaction between the computer and these other forms , namely paper and whiteboard . We utilize a barcode reader , a custom designed barcode command slate , and barcode enabled paper forms , which we call ‘Zinked Sticky Notes” and “Linked Data Reports , ” to facilitate this interaction between paper objects outside of the computer and the data stored in the computer . Just as Video Mosaic [ IO ] connects paper - based storyboard elements , digital elements and video clips through the use of scanners and barcodes , we connect the basic components of a design project using barcodes . DigitalDesk [ 21 ] supports activities that utilize pre - existing paper documents . For example , the calculator tool retrieves numbers from a printed page using image processing technology eliminating the need to punch the numbers into a calculator before they can be manipulated . These two systems provide important evidence of the ways in which paper usage is an integral part of many activities . In accounting for the use of the paper , sticky notes , and whiteboards , we made a concerted effort to understand where a team’s focus is at any given point in the analysis process and what activity they are doing . When team members are working individually we support the use of personalized printouts . When they are discussing items we support the use of the personal printouts , as well as the computer displays and whiteboards to create a shared workspace . The following sections provide examples of how the team uses paper during different points in the analysis process . Linked Data Reports Insight MAST can generate any number of customized data reports filtered or sorted using various criteria . The example below shows a report of evidence sorted by keywords . Associated with every item on a report is a barcode identifier that can be scanned to display details about the item . Scanning the barcode for a piece of evidence plays its digitized video or audio clip . Figure 10 : Reviewing a list of evidence to identify patterns in the data . The first step of data analysis is to create patterns from evidence . The team begins by reviewing all of the evidence using linked evidence reports . The team members spend time individually reviewing the evidence and making annotations on their own printed reports , which is followed by a discussion about the pieces of evidence . When hundreds to thousands of pieces of evidence are collected by multiple people , individuals may need additional information to understand evidence they have not se = n before . To gain context . they can view a corresponding video clip for any piece of evidence by scanning the barcode associated with a piece of evidence listed on a report . Scanning a barcode to review a media clip is 554 CHI 98 l 18 - 23 APRlL 1998 PAPERS j ’ simpler and faster & an using the computer to search for the particular clip to play . Similarly , when the team is already using the printed reports , it is far simpler to scan barcodes to link a piece of evidence to a pattern than it is to turn attention to the computer to open windows , search for an item in a window and drag - and - drop it to a pattern window . Linked Sticky Notes As a team conducts analysis and creates patterns and themes , Insight MAST is used to create associations of evidence into patterns and themes . New patterns or themes are printed on 2”xY magnetic cards , as shown below - A “Linked Sticky Note” can be placed on a magnetic whiteboard . Figure 11 : This person is scanning a Linked Sticky Note to view the information associated with a pattern . Scanning the barcode identifier on a pattern’s Linked Sticky Note displays its underlying information on the computer monitor . There is a natural fluidity in the way that one can point to an object and scan it to view its underlying information , rather than turning attention from the object to the computer to search for the item . This retains the person’s focus on the object they are already using . EnabIing a team member to easily trace the history of the pattern by viewing all of the underlying data ensures that the team is referencing the actual data , not working from memory - It is common for team members to review all of tie evidence linked to a pattern ; it heIps the team maintain a common understanding of the meaning of the pattern . Linked Images When the team is developing conclusions , extensive discussions are captured using the electronic whiteboard . Team members sketch ideas , diagram relationships between interesting elements of the domain , and articulate key points . As they are working at the whiteobard the team does not want to think about which drawings will be important . Thus , every image is automatically saved and stored . All of the electronic whiteboard images created by the team are digitally stored in the Insight MAST database . These images , tagged with barcode identifiers , are printed and displayed on a tackable fabric wall . We call these ‘linked Images” . Figure 12 shows numerous Linked Images created using the electronic whiteboard . As themes begin emerging , Linked Images of previous Figure 12 : The electronic whiteboard surrounded by Linked Images tacked to the wail . analysis sessions are moved around the room and placed with images of related discussions . These images are easily associated with themes . They can be displayed on the large projection screen for easy viewing by the entire team , and can be retrieved for editing using Adobe PhotoshopTM or other image editing programs . Barcode Command Slate The Barcode Command Slate provides shortcuts to initiate the actions most commonly used during analysis . It is a printed list of barcoded commands for invoking specific actions . The use of the Slate enables the team to maintain focus on their work by providing a better mapping between what they want to do and how they start it . To “Create a Pattern” they scan the “Create a Pattern” barcode rather than using a series of mouse moves and mouse clicks to find and open a series of windows that are needed to create patterns . The Barcode Command Slate has three different types of commands : 1 ) Direct Action Commands t - When this type of command barcode is . _ _ . - * . _ - scanned , an action occurs . “Start Electronic Whiteboard” is an example . 2 ) Commands on Objects Command barcodes perform an action on a specific object . Using the commanc “View Media For . . . ” and scanning a pattern plays the media associated with each of the pattern’s pieces of evidence . 555 : - . PAPERS CHI 98 . 18 - 23 APRIL 1998 3 ) MultiObject Commands + - - - - _ - _ - & I Input MultiObject Commands allow multiple objects to be associated with a command and combined with keyboard input . For example , to create a Pattern , 1 ) scan the command “Create a Pattern” , 2 ) scan appropriate evidence barcodes , and 3 ) type in the name of the pattern . These steps create a new pattern and link the pattern to the pieces of evidence from which it originated . The Barcode Command Slate works in conjunction with the MAST interface . When a command is invoked the appropriate windows are opened and displayed , providing feedback that the Barcode Command Slate actions are working properly . For example , when the “Create a Pattern” barcode is scanned , the “Action Pattern” window is opened and displayed . As pieces of evidence are scanned to add them to the pattern , the evidence is displayed in the Action Pattern Window . The use of the Command Slate and wireless keyboard extends the reach of the computer application , saves time , and makes complex actions simple . The Command Slate is particularly valuable when creating patterns from evidence reports and creating themes from pattern Linked Sticky Notes . BARCODE OBJECTSINUSE The interplay between paper , sticky notes , and computer occurs throughout the analysis process . Using the Linked Interaction Objects together - Linked Sticky Notes , Linked Data Reports , and Linked Images - dramatically enhances the analysis process . The team can focus on the content of their work because the use of these objects minimizes the amount of effort required to access , manipulate , view , and create data . Figure 14 : An analysis session in progress . Linked Sticky Notes and Linked Images are organized into a matrix . The underlying details of any Linked Sticky Note can be viewed by scanning the barcode . The challenging part of analysis is developing the higher - level frameworks that explain or give meaning to a particular problem . A team arrives at these frameworks by repeatedly organizing and reorganizing the available data . People attach meaning to spatial relationships they create between the objects and materials they display . This improves how they interpret and remember the data . The use of Linked Sticky Notes allow the team members to easily move the content around on the whiteboard . For example , they can group the Notes into an affinity diagram . They can create themes , which associate all of the Linked Sticky Notes included in the diagram . The group can then either retain the diagram or move the Sticky Notes knowing that they have recorded the theme , which is also represented by a Linked Sticky Note . REFLECTIONS While we continue to develop and enhance the Insight Lab , we learn about its strengths and limitations by using the Lab . We recently completed a project to descrioe information needs surrounding the use of a car ; this will he used to identify new services that could be delivered to people with in - car computing and GPS ( Global Positioning System . ) Three researchers used the Insight Lab for over a month to analyze behavioral data collected through numerous observational techniques , resulting in activtty logs , video , audio , and photographic data . Our experience reinforced the design decisions we made with regard to team attention and focus . The team spent numerous days reviewing the evidence reports to create patterns . Using the Lab has dramatically improved the speed and effectiveness of creating these patterns . We also found that all team members would only direct their attention to the computer displays as needed , such as during discussions about precise wording of a pattern . During later stages of analysis , the Linked Sticky Notes were effective in allowing the team to fluidly move back - and - forth between high - level issues and underlying data in a unified manner . There are some limitations to the Insight Lab in its current form . The Lab is the result of a research project and to date has only been used by its creators . Usability testing would be necessary before making the Lab widely available . The MAST application in its current form is not robust and the facilities for digitizing the multimedia data are incomplete . Some additional capabilities would enhance the use of the Lab . For example , we use the Linked Sticky Notes placed on the Whiteboard to manually carry out affinity diagramming . To create a theme and associate patterns and images with it , the team members must use the command slate , barcode scanner , and keyboard . Instead , we would like to pursue the ideas presented in SILK [ 8 ] for using screen ( Whiteboard ) gestures to make the association between patterns . By circling a group of clustered patterns and images , a theme would be created . We are also considering the use of audio interface components to enhance how data can be manipulated by teams in a way that increases their focus on the data , not interaction with the computer . We are currently extending the use of the Lab into other aspects of the design and development process . We are investigating the use of the Lab for design teams who are reviewing the Requirements documents . As such , we have developed hybrid paper documents that take advantage of the Insight Lab capabilities by utilizing the best of paper , the media server , three - screen display , and the barcode 556 scanner . The document enables team members to create electronic annotations , bookmarks , and keywords , which link back to a paper - based document [ I ] . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Our conceptual thinking about the goals and designs of the Insight Lab benefited from the advice of our colleague Kishore Swaminathan . We thank Kelly Dempski for his contributions to the technical design and implementation . REFERENCES l . Arai , T . , Aust , D . , and Hudson , S . E . PaperLink : A Technique for Hyperlinking from Real Paper to Electronic Content , in Proceedings CJJ CHI ‘97 ( Atlanta GA , March 1997 ) , ACM Press , 327 - 334 . 2 . Bellotti , V . , Integrating Theoreticians’ and Practioners’ Perspectives with Design Rationale , in Proceedings of ZnterCHI ‘93 ( Amsterdam , April 1993 ) , ACM Press , lOl - 106 . 3 . Carrol1 , J . , Alpert , S . , Karat , J . , Van Dusen , M . , and Rosson , h4 . Raison d’Etre : Capturing design history and rationale in multimedia narratives , in Proceedings of CHZ ‘94 ( Boston h & April 1994 ) , ACM Press , 192 - 197 . 4 . Conklin , J . and Begeman , M . L . gIBIS : A Hypertext Tool for Exploratory Policy Discussion , in Proceedings of CSClY ‘88 ( Portland OR , September 1988 ) , ACM Press , 140 - 152 . S . Holtzblatt , K . and Jones , S . , Conducting and Analyzing a Contextual Interview , in Namioka and Schuler ( Eds . ) Participatory Design . - Principles and Practice , . Lawrence ErIbaum Associates , HilIsdale , NJ , 1993 . 6 . Hughes , J . , King , V , Rodden , T . , and Andersen , H . The Role of Ethnography in Interactive Systems Design . Interactions , 2 , 2 ( April 1995 ) , 57 - 65 . 7 . Jordan , B . , and Henderson , A . Interaction Analysis : Foundations and Practice . The Journal of the Learning Sciences 4 , 1 ( 1995 ) , 39 - 103 . S . Landay , J . A . , and Myers , B . A . Interactive Sketching for the Early Stages of User Interface Design , in Proceedings of CHI ‘95 ( Denver CO , May 1995 ) , ACM Press , 43 - 50 . g . Lewis , S . , Mateas , M . , Palmiter , S . , and Lynch , G . Ethnographic Data for Product Developmenr A Collaborative Process . Interactions , 3 , 6 ( November / December 1996 ) , 53 - 69 . lO . Mackay , W - E . , and Pagani , D . S . Video Mosaic : Laying Out Time in a Physical Space , in Proceedings of Multimedia ‘94 ( San Francisco , CA , October 1994 ) , ACM Press , 165 - 172 . 1 l . Moran , T . P . and Anderson , R . J . , The Workaday World as a Paradigm for CSCW Design , in Proceedings of CSCW ‘90 ( Los Angeles CA , October 1990 ) , ACM Press , 381 - 393 . 12 . Moran , T . P . , Chiu , P . , Harrison , S . , Kurtenbach , G . , Minneman , S . , and van Melle , W . Evolutionary Engagement in an Ongoing Collaborative Work Process : A Case Study , in Proceedings of CSCW ‘96 ( Cambridge MA , Nbvember 1996 ) , ACM Press , I50 - 159 . 13 . Moran , T . P . , Palen , L . , Harrison , S . , Chiu , P . , Kimbzr , D . , Minneman , S . , van Melle , W . , and Zellweger , P . “I’ll Get That Off the Audio” : A Case Study of Salvaging Multimedia Meeting Records , in Proceedings of CHI ‘97 ( Atlanta GA , March 1997 ) , ACM Press , 202 - 209 . 14 . O’Hara , K . , and Sellen , A . A Comparison of Reading Paper and On - Line Documents , in Proceedings of CHI ‘97 ( Atlanta GA , March 1997 ) , ACM Press , 335 - 342 . 15Pedersen , E . , McCall , K . , Moran , T . , and Halasz , F . Tivoli : an Electronic Whiteboard for Informal Workgroup Meetings , in Proceedings of InterCHI ‘93 ( Amsterdam , May 1993 ) , ACM Press , 391 - 398 . 16 . Sellen , A . , and Harper , R . Paper as an Analytic Resource for the Design of New Technologies , in Proceedings of CHZ ‘97 ( Atlanta GA , March 1997 ) , ACM Press , 3 19 - 326 . 17Suchman , L . Representations of Work . Communications of the ACM 38 , 9 ( entire issue ) . 18 . Suchman , L . A . , and Trigg , R . H . Understanding Practice : Video as a Medium for Reflection and Design , in Greenbaum and Kyng ( Eds . ) Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hillsdale , NJ , 1993 . lg . Swaminathan , K . , and Sato , S . Interaction Design for Large Displays . Interactions 4 , 1 ( Jan - Feb . 1997 ) , 15 - 24 . 2O . Wal1 , P . , and Mosher , A . Representations of Work : Bringing Designers and Users Together , in Proceedings of PDC ‘94 ( Chapel Hill NC , October 1994 ) , ACM Press , 87 - 98 . 21 . Wellner , P . Interacting with Paper on the DigitalDesk . Communications of the ACM 36 , 7 ( 1993 ) , 97 - 96 . ; : 557