Gene Delivery Rigidity of polymer micelles affects interactions with tumor cells Tal Stern a , 1 , Inon Kaner a , 1 , Neta Laser Zer b , Hila Shoval a , Dvir Dror a , Zakhariya Manevitch c , Liraz Chai b , Yifat Brill - Karniely a , Ofra Benny a , ⁎ a Department of Pharmaceutical Science , School of Pharmacy , Faculty of Medicine , The Hebrew University of Jerusalem , Jerusalem , Israel b Institute of Chemistry , the Hebrew University of Jerusalem , Jerusalem , Israel c The Hebrew University of Jerusalem , Core Research , Israel a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 19 September 2016 Accepted 12 December 2016 Available online 23 December 2016 Controllingtheinteractionofdrugdeliverysystems ( DDS ) withtissuesiscriticalforthesuccessoftherapies . Spe - ci ﬁ callyincancer , duetothehighdensityofthetumors , tissuepenetrationofDDSiscriticalandmaybechalleng - ing . In previous work we have shown that Solidi ﬁ ed Polymer Micelles ( SPMs ) rapidly internalize into cells and tissues . Using AFM analysis , in the present work we measured differences in rigidity of SPM compared with WetPolymerMicelles ( WPM ) . Wefurtherexaminedwhetherthesemi - solidformofhydratedSPMshasaneffect on the interaction with tumor cells both in mono - layer systems and in multi - layer clusters of cells as spheroids . For that we have performed detailed characterization of SPM compared to WPM , including examinationsof par - ticlesize , stability , drugreleasekineticsandcelltranscytosis , inmelanomaA - 375cells . Celluptakemeasurements were done using ﬂ uorescent signal analysis , FACS and microscopy imaging , showing enhanced abilities of SPMs to penetrate cells and tissues . A simple physical model is presented that well agrees with the experiments and providesinsightabouttheroleofparticlerigidity intheengulfmentmechanism . Weconcludethatparticlerigid - ity enhances cellular uptakeand tissue penetration and that SPMshave a promising potential as aneffectiveand highly permeable DDS . Our ﬁ ndings can be important in future rational design of DDS for particle adjustment to speci ﬁ c tissues and pathologies . © 2016 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Advanced nanotechnology for drugdelivery has signi ﬁ cantpotential in improving formulations for controlled release of drugs while increas - ingconcentrationattarget organ . Inoncology , sincemostofthe ﬁ rstline therapies are based on poorly selective chemotherapies , drug delivery can make a substantial impact in ef ﬁ cacy and selectivity of treatment . Indeed there are global efforts to develop new formulations for cancer therapy with superior performance e . g . circulation time , stability , selec - tivity and duration of therapy [ 1 ] . One of the underlining mechanisms for tumor accumulation of nanoparticles is the “ Enhanced Permeability and Retention ” ( EPR ) effect , described 30 years ago by Maeda [ 1 , 2 ] . This processof nanoparticlepassiveaccumulationiscaused bytheleakage of newly formed vascular capillaries and the poor lymphatic drainage which increase retention time of nanoparticles in the tumor tissue [ 3 ] . Due to the vast preclinical studies in the ﬁ eld of EPR effect , much attention was given to identify parameters that affect the accumulation through the EPR [ 4 , 5 ] . However , to achieve higher drug exposure in tu - mors , itis also essentialthat thenanoparticles will showsigni ﬁ canttraf - ﬁ cking inside the tissue in diffusion or transcellular migration . Moreover , the kinetics and the extant of nanoparticle uptake by tissue depend on tissue characteristics such as vascularity and stroma density on one hand , and the characteristics of the drug vehicle that govern cell interaction , on the other hand . The interactions of nanoparticles with tumor cells and traf ﬁ cking at the cell level have major effects at the macro / tissue level by governing penetration into the deep tumor tissue . Drug penetration in tumors , in turn , affects ef ﬁ cacy , selectivity and resistance to therapy . Given the fact that there is a huge heterogeneity between tumor types and stages regarding their vascular state , some tumors show poor EPR effect or they lack this effect at all [ 6 , 7 ] . For example , pancreatic adenocarci - nomas were found to be characterized by ﬁ broin ﬂ ammatory , dense stroma and hypovascularity [ 8 ] , and not only are these generally poorly vascularized tumors , butalsotheblood vessels thatdoexistinthetissue are commonly compressed due to the high tissue pressure [ 9 ] . It is then possible that the low response of this tumor to drugs is partly due to the poor drug penetration . In such scenario , using high af ﬁ nity Journal of Controlled Release 257 ( 2017 ) 40 – 50 ⁎ Corresponding author . E - mail address : ofrab @ ekmd . huji . ac . il ( O . Benny ) . 1 These authors equally contributed to this work . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jconrel . 2016 . 12 . 013 0168 - 3659 / © 2016 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Controlled Release journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / jconrel nanoparticles with ability for tissue diffusion may be a better strategy than the attempt to relay on the EPR effect . Inthesearchforoptimalnanoparticledeliverysystemsincancer , the impact of polymer nano / micro particles characteristics on their interac - tion with tumor cells is widely investigated . Particle parameters such as size , shape , surface charge and hydrophobicity have been shown to in - ﬂ uence internalization , endocytosis and intracellular traf ﬁ cking [ 10 – 15 ] . DDS can be roughly differentiated by their solid / liquid state in which they are being introduced in the body . For example , biodegrad - able polymer nanoparticles , such as poly lactic glycolic - acid ( PLGA ) , or Polycaprolactone ( PCL ) particles represents solid vehicles in which drug is entrapped and released with the degradation of the matrix [ 16 – 18 ] . In contrast , liposomes and micelles composed of lipids or am - phiphilic phospholipids represent vehicles which are introduced in their ﬂ uidic “ wet ” state . While solid particles show superior physio - chemical stability and longer drug release kinetics , their clearance , biodistribution and ability to penetrate gaps in the endothelium wall may be less favorable [ 19 ] . Therefore , understanding the different ef - fects related to tunable ﬂ exibility of vehicles is important in order to ra - tionally design and select the optimal vehicles per speci ﬁ c condition . Some recent technologies in formulation development , including using micro ﬂ uidics , enabled the generation of particles with varying elasticity . For example , controlled elasticity was obtained on chip by synthesizing lipid - polymer nanoparticles of the same sizes , covered with either lipid - monolayer - shell or lipid - bilayer - shell [ 20 ] . Another approach for controlling elasticity of super - soft PEG hydrogel particles were prepared via a mesoporous silica templating method and removal of template to obtain [ 21 ] . Studies that were performed with cancer cells provided some contradicting results related to the uptake capacity of elastic particles compared with stiffer ones [ 22 , 23 ] . This can be attrib - uted to the heterogeneity of cancer tumors , however , it also should be noted that each of these studies used different size and composition of particles tested in different tumor cells . In this work we focused on studying two types of Polymer Mi - celles ( PMs ) made of mono Methoxypoly ( ethylene glycol ) - poly ( lactide ) copolymer ( PEG - PLA ) , one is in its wet form and the other in the semi - solid form , referred as Wet Polymer Micelles ( WPMs ) and Solidi ﬁ ed Polymer Micelles ( SPMs ) , respectively . The physiochemical parameters of the particles , including their elastici - ty , morphology , size and charge were measured , and their interac - tions with cancer cells in monolayer or in a 3 - dimention ( 3D ) tissue like model were studied . Our observations indicate that parti - cle rigidity enhances cellular uptake and penetration into multi - cell layer structures . In order to gain physical insight about our experimental results , we have constructed a minimal model examining the role of particle rigidity in the engulfment process . Particle wrapping by cell mem - brane and cell internalization are complex processes and composed of several ﬁ elds of physics . While the initial adhesion may be regarded as a thermodynamic process , it can be accompanied by a dynamic non - equilibrium stage that involves remodeling of the cy - toskeleton , and terminates in a narrow neck con ﬁ guration of the cell membrane that needs to close and detach from the membrane reservoir . While various steps are necessary for the full uptake to occur , it can be very challenging to physically model all of them using a single scheme . In the present work , we focus on the ﬁ rst stage , the “ adhesion phase ” which is a necessary condition for the full wrapping process and can thus be very informative in providing the minimal conditions required for particle uptake . Using the model , we were able to explain our experimental ﬁ ndings that the softer WPM particles internalize the cells less than the stiffer SPM ones , with a more prominent difference with the larger particles . Furthermore , our model provides a simple intuitive description of the physical aspects governing the adhesion process , focusing on the important role played by the energetic penalty of membrane bending at the rim of the contact surface with the particle . Taken together , our results shed light on the potential involvement of phys - ical and mechanical parameters which affects the eventual perfor - mance of drug delivery systems and may have a broader relevance to different types of drug vehicles . 2 . Materials and method 2 . 1 . Cell culture A375 cells from ATTC were cultured in DMED , with 10 % FCS ( fetal calf serum ) and 1 % Penicillin / Streptomycin ( P / S ) solution in a 10 cm petri dish ( corning , NY ) . The cells were passaged twice a week and when con ﬂ uency reached ~ 80 % , trypsin A was used in order to detach them from the plate ( biological industries , Israel ) , after washing with PBS / EDTA . For BxPC3 cells from ATTC , RPMI medium was used instead of DMEM in a similar fashion . Human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVEC ) were purchased from Lonza . The cells were maintained in EBM medium supplemented with PeproGrow - MicroV kit ( ENDO - BM & GS - MicroV ) with 1 % P / S . All cells were kept in humidi ﬁ ed incubated at 37 °C with 5 % CO 2 . 2 . 2 . Particle preparation Fluorescent - labeled micelles were prepared by the dialysis method similarly as was previously described [ 6 ] . Di - block co - polymer , mPEG - PLA ( Advanced Polymers Materials , Canada ) with different molecular weight ratios ( PEG : PLA ) of 2000 : 1100 , 4000 : 2200 and 8300 : 3700 re - ferredasNP1 , NP2andNP3respectively , wereusedforfabrication . Poly - mers were dissolved in di - methyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ) at a concentration of 12 . 5 mg / ml and stirred until fully dissolved in room temperature . Then 2 ml of 0 . 1 % wt / vol 6 - coumarin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in DMSO were added to the solution that was under stirring . Afterwards , the solution was dialyzed using regenerated cellulose dialysis bag ( MWCO 1000 , Spectra / Por Biotech Regenerated Cellulose , and VWR ) , against double distilled water ( DDW ) and WPMs were formed . To prepare SPMs , we added a lyophilization step which produced a ﬁ ne powder of particles that were stored in dark and dry environment at − 20 °C until use . Fig . 1 illustrates the particle preparation method . 2 . 3 . Particle characterization Particles shape was detected ﬁ rst by transmission electron micros - copy ( TEM ) . For TEM analysis , particles suspensions were sonicated in a bath . Then , samples were placed on a glow discharged carbon coated 300 mesh copper TEM grids ( Ted Pella , Inc . ) . After blotting , the samples were negatively stained with 2 % aqueous solution of uranyl acetate for 30 s and air dried . The samples were examined by a FEI Tecnai 12 G2 TWIN TEM operated at 120 kV . Images were recorded using 4 k × 4 k FEI Eagle CCD camera . Size and charge analysis was performed using Dynamic Light Scat - tering ( DLS ) / Zeta sizer nano series ( Malvern Instruments ) at 25 °C in DTS1070 disposable capillary cells . All experiments were carried out with 0 . 2 mg / ml micelle solutions diluted with DDW . The solutions were ﬁ ltered using 0 . 22 μ m ﬁ lters . 1 ml of each sample was injected to measure the size and the zeta potential . 2 . 4 . Imaging and elasticity measurements by AFM Measurements were performed with BioScope Resolve ™ BioAFM ( Bruker AXS Corporation , Santa Barbara , CA , USA ) in Peak Force QNM mode . We used a ScanAsyst - Fluid - HR probe ( Bruker , 60 kHz , 0 . 7 Nm ) and PEAKFORCE - HiRS - F - A ( Bruker , 165 kHz , 0 . 35 Nm ) probes to image WPM and SPM particles , respectively . Samples were immersed in an aqueous media and the measurements were performed at room 41 T . Stern et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 257 ( 2017 ) 40 – 50 temperature . Details of sample preparation and absorption to surface are in Supplemental section . To determine the Young ' s modulus of both specimens we used a DNP - 10 - Dprobe ( Bruker , 18kHz , 0 . 06 Nm ) . Young ' smoduluswascalculat - ed by ﬁ tting the retract curve using the Derjaguin , Muller , Toropov ( DMT ) model [ 24 ] . The low spring constant probe was chosen to allow the measurement of the soft micelles ' modulus , but this was at the expanse of losing lateral resolution . At least 30 particles were mea - sured to obtain an elasticity value and 50 curves that were taken in the core of the micelles were ﬁ tted for each . The results are reported from measurements with two different batches of both micelles . Measure - ments of the forces between a DNP - 10 - D probe and silicon surfaces ( rather than micelle – coated ones ) , yielded a lower bound to theSi sur - faces ' Young ' s modulus . Cantilevers ' spring constants were calibrated using Thermal Tune method for imaging and touch calibration for modulus measurements . Images were analyzed and processed using NanoScope software and NanoScope Analysis software . Estimation of micelles size was done using 30 different particles . Since the tip radius is much smaller than that of the micelles , we have not considered convolution effects here . 2 . 5 . Release kinetics studies The release pro ﬁ les of 6 - coumarin from WPMs and SPMs of NP3 were determined . 2 ml of WPMs and SPMs were taken from each prep - aration at a concentration of 4 mg / ml and were inserted into dialysis bags ( MWCO 1000 , Spectra / Por Biotech Regenerated Cellulose , VWR ) . They were then dialyzed against 70 ml DDW and 1 ml DMSO . Samples were kept at room temperature with constant stirring of 100 rpm . At predetermined timepoints , samples of 1 ml were collected from theex - ternal solution and same volumes were immediately supplemented to keep constant volumes . The samples ﬂ uorescence was then immediate - ly measured at Ex / Em 480 / 530 wavelength using a plate reader ( Syner - gy HT Multi - Mode Microplate Reader , Bio Tek ) . 2 . 6 . Cell uptake measurements and evaluation To detect particle internalization into cells we used imaging in a multi well format . Cells were seeded in 24 well plates ( 4 × 10 4 A375 cells / well ) and were allowed to grow overnight . Well suspended parti - cles ( 4 mg / ml ) were added to each well for ﬁ xed incubation times up to 180 min . Then , wells were washed twice with PBS and the ﬂ uorescence was measured by a plate reader ( Synergy HT Multi - Mode Microplate Reader , BioTek ) in Ex / Em 480 / 530 nm . The cells were ﬁ xated with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) and imaged by Cytacion 3 , BioTek Synergy HT . For quantitative analysis we used Fluorescence Activation Cell Sorting method ( FACS ) as follows : A375 cells and BxPC3 cells were seeded in 6 well plates a day prior the experiment . Suspended samples of WPM NP3 , and SPM NP3 were supplemented ( 4 mg / ml ) and after predetermined incubation times ( up to 30 min ) , cells were washed twice with PBS and detached by trypsin . The cells were suspended with FACS buffer ( 0 . 05 % sodium azide , 1 % BSA , 500 ml DDW ) and ana - lyzed with a FACS machine ( CytoFLEX , Beckman Coulter ) . 2 . 7 . Cell exocytosis A375 , BxPC - 3 and HUVECs cells were seeded in a 24 well plate and incubated for 24 h prior to the experiment . Sub con ﬂ uent cultures were supplemented with 4 mg / ml of WPMs and SPMs of NP3 for two hours to allow extensive uptake . Cells were then washed twice with PBS and ( 100 μ l ) samples from each well were collected at different times and ﬂ uorescence was measured to detect exocytosed particles inaplate readeratEx / Em480 / 530wavelength . Allsamples wereplaced back at the wells after measurement . 2 . 8 . Spheroid formation , particle penetration and imaging BxPC3 cellswerestained withLipophilicTracers membranedye , DID ( Invitrogen , Em / Ex 644 / 555 nm ) and seeded in 2 % Agarose hydrogel micro - wells templated with Master 3D Petri Dish® 35 well array ( Microtissues , Providence ) . The micro - wells were incubated with fresh medium , followed by cells seeding . Each spheroid was consisted of 10 , 000 cells . 10 min after seeding , 1 ml of fresh media was gently added and the spheroids were allowed to form over the next 24 h . SPMs and WPMs ( NP3 ) were added for either 3 h or for overnight , and after incubation , the wells were washed with PBS and ﬁ xed with 4 % PFA . Spheroids were imaged with 2 - photon microscope ( Nikon A1 MP Multi - Photon , ×25 ) . For central sectioning spheroids were frozen in mold using Optimal cutting temperature compound ( OCT ) on dry ice . Sections were prepared by cryostat , and stained with DAPI ( 1 : 1000 ) for imaging with ﬂ uorescent microscope ( Olympus IZ73 ) . 2 . 9 . Physical model For capturing basic intuition regarding the engulfment of ﬂ exible particles we examine here how the extent of particle ﬂ attening affects its adhesive interaction with cells . Our physical model is restricted to Fig . 1 . Illustration of polymeric micelles WPM andSPM fabrication . Di - blockcopolymersof PEG - PLAundergo self - assemblyinaqueousmediaand formWet Polymer Micelles ( WPMs ) . Solidnanoparticlesareformedbyanadditionalstepoflyophilization . Dryparticlesarehydratedoncere - introducedintoaqueoussolutionobtainingsuspendedSolidi ﬁ edPolymerMicelles ( SPMs ) . 42 T . Stern et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 257 ( 2017 ) 40 – 50 the initial interaction between the cell and the particle , the “ adhesion phase ” . Weassumeherethattheadhesionphaserepresentsbindingdy - namics that is slower than particle ﬂ attening . We further assume that in the adhesion phase , particles initially slowly adsorb on the cell mem - brane and only later on they may internalize the cell , similar to well characterized systems [ 25 – 28 ] . The adhesive phase is a necessary step towards full engulfment , thus from understanding this phase we can gain signi ﬁ cant insight about the minimal requirements for particle up - take . For the scope of the present paper , we characterize the free energy at the critical con ﬁ guration de ﬁ ned in Fig . 8 . In this con ﬁ guration , the particle is engulfed by thecell until its widest point ( in the caseof a hor - izontal symmetric particle this means that half of it is wrapped ) . Previ - ous studies suggest that such con ﬁ guration provides the bottleneck for full engulfment , as later on a sharp change in the membrane slope needs to occur for full uptake [ 27 ] . Our simple model assumes that the contact between the cell and the particle has the geometry of a cap with the opening angle ϑ ( between 0 and π / 2 ) , see Fig . 8 . This shape is suf ﬁ cient for studying the general be - havior in the adhesion phase and in the same time is very simple for analysis and intuition . Due to the small size of the particles we can model the cell membrane as an elastic 2D plane that is initially ﬂ at , with zero spontaneous curvature . In the present model membrane bending is the only relevant term of membrane deformability . Tension in the membrane is ignored since cells typically have a reservoir of ex - cess membrane , and since membrane ﬂ uidity allows for topological al - terations without causing tension [ 29 ] . Gaussian curvature and entropic terms are also neglected compared to membrane bending . In the scope of our elucidated thermodynamic scheme the dynamics of particle ﬂ attening is not treated . It is convenient to write thefree energy ofthesystemasafunctionof two independent variables that describe the state of the particle : the opening angle ϑ and the contact area , a . Note that ϑ re ﬂ ects the ﬂ atness of theparticle : thesmaller ϑ is themore ﬂ atis theparticle , with ϑ = π / 2 representing a spherical particle ( Fig . 8 ) . The free energy can then be written as F ¼ − ε ∙ a þ 2 κ c 1 − cos θ ð Þ þ κ r ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 a π 1 − cos θ ð Þ s ∙ sin ϑ : ð 1 Þ The ﬁ rst term is the adhesion energy with ε the binding energy per contact area . Therestof thetermsrepresentthemembranebendingen - ergy resulting from the cap shaped curvature ( second term ) , see red re - gimeinFig . 8A ; andthebendingpenaltyattherimofthecap ( markedin blue in Fig . 8A ) in thethird term . The bendingenergies are derived from the Helfrich expression for membrane elasticity , assuming that the rim term is proportional to the perimeter of the cap [ 30 ] . κ c and κ r are the bending elastic constants of the cap and rim , respectively . Typical pa - rameters were used : ε ¼ 0 : 1 k B T nm 2 and κ c = 20 k B T with k B the Boltzmann constant , and varying values of κ r in the range of several k B T nm ( in accor - dance with previous knowledge ) were tested [ 30 , 31 ] . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . Characterization of WPMs and SPMs TEM microscopy showed the spherical shape of the micelles that is common to both WPMs and SPMs ( Table 1S ) . The imaging combined with DLS measurements ( performed in duplicates ) demonstrated the correlation between the length of the copolymers and the diameter of the micelles formed , the longer the copolymer , the larger the micelles as measured by DLS : 17 . 6 nm , 33 . 8 nm , 67 . 8 nm for WPM and 18 . 7 nm , 51 . 0 nm , 86 . 0 nm for SPMs ( NP1 , NP2 and NP3 respectively ) . Z - potential measurements revealed similar charge of the WPM and the SPM of slightly negative charge of the particles : for WPMs with av - erage values of − 21 , − 24 , − 15 and for SPMs − 24 , − 20 , − 16 mV for NP1 , NP2 and NP3 respectively . Table 1S details measurements of two independent batch measurements . 3 . 2 . AFM measurements The topography of the NP3 type of the WPM and the SPM was mea - sured with an AFM . Fig . 2 shows the Height ( a , b ) and Peak Force ( c , d ) channels of the measurements that were performed in situ , i . e . , in an aqueous solution . The Height measurement results from a direct de ﬂ ec - tion of the tip and therefore it can be used to deduce the diameter and height of the micelles , as shown for example by a cross section of image ( b ) alongtworepresentativemicellesizes ( Fig . 2f ) . ThePeakForce channel complements the Height measurement for better clarity for non - AFM users . Altogether , the topography measurements as well as the 3D surface representation of the images ( Fig . 2e ) show that both type of micelles are spherical and that they are both composed of two typical sizes cor - respondingto small andlarge particles . A summary of themicelles ' size : diameter and height is summarized in Table 2S . A statistical analysis of the diameter , height and modulus measurements is shown in Fig . 2S . In order to estimate whether the different micelle types vary in their mechanical properties , we used theAFMtomeasure their Young ' s mod - ulus ( see Materials and methods ) . The Young ' s modulus of a material is de ﬁ ned as the ratio between the applied stress and the resulting strain [ 32 ] and it gives a measure of the elasticity of a material , the larger the modulus the stiffer the material . ‘ Using PeakForce capture mode , we could measure the modulus of the larger particles only and found that the moduli of the WPM and SPM were 165±50 and 260±80 kPa , re - spectively . For comparison , we have found that the modulus of a clean silicon surface ( see Materials and methods ) is larger than 78 GPa , in agreement with literature values [ 33 , 34 ] . It is important to note here that previous AFM measurements and respective moduli calculations of similar micellar systems were performed on dry samples in air . How - ever , here we show for the ﬁ rst time the results of moduli measure - ments of micelles in an aqueous solution , where the native mechanical properties of the micelles are preserved . 3 . 3 . Release kinetic studies We compared the pattern of release of drug - like molecule from the WPM and SPM and particles . Fig . 3 shows the release kinetic of WPM and SPM ( NP3 ) . In both cases , similar release kinetic pro ﬁ les of 6 - coumarine were obtained , characterized by an initial stage of burst release that was slightly higher in WPM after the 24 h . After 80 h both WPM and SPM reached a plateau until 140 h in which sec - ond release phase was detected and prolonged through the end of the measurement in 190 h . A separated experiment detected the re - lease pattern for the ﬁ rst 24 h only , also con ﬁ rmed that there were no signi ﬁ cant difference between the SPM and WPM in this time frame ( data not shown ) . 3 . 4 . Cell uptake studies A375 tumor cells were used to investigate interaction with SPM and WPM atdifferenttimepoints of incubation . The ﬂ uorescentsignal of the cells with the particles revealed an elevated interaction ( adherence and internalization ) of the SPMs compared with the WPMs ( Fig . 4A ) . The larger the particle , the higher is the difference . It should be noted that our previous studied established a rapid endocytosis kinetics of SPM particles into cells after 5 – 20 min [ 35 , 36 ] . To compare the adherence potentialof eachparticlewefocusedonthetime0 pointwhereparticles were added and immediately washed , showing 7 % , 44 % and 88 % en - hancement in adherence of SPMs compared with WPMs for NP1 , NP2 and NP3 respectively ( Fig . 4B ) . In support of the quantitative total ﬂ uo - rescentsignals , FACS revealed alsothatA375 cells had fast andmore ex - tensive interaction with SPM NPs compared with WPMs indicated by a 43 T . Stern et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 257 ( 2017 ) 40 – 50 shift in the FL1 channel in histogram presentation ( Fig . 5 ) . By visual ob - servation , images of A375 cells that were incubated with both SPM and WPM up to 30 min , showed higher levels of ﬂ uorescence in the case of SPM compared with WPMs at the same equivalent dose ( Fig . 5A ) . Fur - thermore , cell analysis of imaging ( ×200 magni ﬁ cation ) demonstrated higher level of particle accumulation of SPM in cells at the early time pointsof theexperimentsupto25min ( Fig . 3S ) whereas differencesde - creased afterwards . 3 . 5 . Exocytosis studies TheabilityofNP3toexitfromcellsafterbeinginternalizedwasmea - sured . Equivalent quantities of WMPs and SPMs NP3 with encapsulated ﬂ uorescent 6 - coumarin were incubated for 2 h , which was previously proved to reach uptake saturation [ 35 ] , with different cell lines : BxPC - 3 , A375 and HUVEC . After incubation we washed the cells twice with fresh medium in order to remove free particles that did not react with Fig . 2 . MicellecharacterizationusingAFM . ImagesoftheWPM ( A ) andSPM ( B ) inHeight ( a , b ) andPeakForcemodes ( c , d ) . A3Dsurfacerepresentationof ( b ) isshown . ( f ) showsacross section pro ﬁ le along the dotted line marked in ( b ) . 44 T . Stern et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 257 ( 2017 ) 40 – 50 the cells . Then , samples were collected from the media up to 24 h . As shown in Fig . 6 , particles exit the cells in rapid kinetics and reach a pla - teau at 5 to 24 h . 3 . 6 . Tissue penetration - spheroids In order to compare the ability of WPMs and SPMs to penetrate tis - sues , we fabricated 3D cellular multicellular spheroids from BxPC3 pan - creatic cancer cell line which were pre - stained with DID . After 24 h , cell aggregated to form condensed spheroids . First comparison was done by incubation with NP3 for overnight . The samples were ﬁ xated with 4 % PFA and images were taken by a two - photon microscope ( Nikon A1 MP Multi - Photon , ×25 ) , ( Fig . 7A ) . As shown in the images , optical mid - section of the spheroid could not detect ﬂ uorescence in the central layers of the multicellular aggregates due to limited diffusion of ﬂ uores - cent signal thus differences between the two particles ( WPMs and SPMs ) could not be observed . To solve this issue we used central frozen crosssectionsof spheroids . The images revealed that SPMs were detect - ed as concentrated signals in all layers of spheroid including the central site compared with WPM that showed lower signals of particles throughout the spheroids and at the central site ( Fig . 7B ) . 3 . 7 . Physical model The free energy F re ﬂ ects the thermodynamic probability of the par - ticles to be engulfed by the cell . The particle con ﬁ guration is re ﬂ ected in the variables ϑ and a . The ﬂ attening state is represented by ϑ , whereas the smaller ϑ is the ﬂ atter is the particle ( Fig . 8A ) . a , the contact area , is in general related to the size of the particle and the state of ﬂ attening . However , for the critical con ﬁ guration of a horizontal symmetric parti - cle , a equals half the surface area of the particle regardless of ϑ . Thus , by looking at constant values of a we can gain information about the critical con ﬁ guration free energy as a function of the ﬂ attening state Fig . 3 . Release kinetic pro ﬁ le of NP3 . WPMs and SPMs were placed in dialysis bag and incubated in a bath of 70 ml DDW for 8 days . Samples were collected in different time points and ﬂ uorescence was measured by plate reader with 480 nm / 530 nm Em / Ex measuring the 6 - coumarin signal . As control we used empty particles . Fig . 4 . CellinteractionwithWPMsandSPMs . CellsinteractionwithNPswastestedbyendocytosisintocancercells . A375cellswereseededina24wellplate ( 4×10 4 cells / well ) . Thenext day equivalent quantities of ﬂ uorescentWPMs and SPMs were added to eachwell and washed twice with PBS after ﬁ xed time points . Florescence was measured by a plate readerwith 480 nm / 530 nm ( Ex / Em ) . A . NP1 , NP2 and NP3 uptake by A375 cells . B . Comparison of uptake in time 0 . C . Illustration of cell interaction with WPMs and SPMs . 45 T . Stern et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 257 ( 2017 ) 40 – 50 only . This can re ﬂ ect the behavior of particles for which there is conser - vation of surface area upon ﬂ attening . Free energy plots are shown in Fig . 8B for increasing values of κ r . While the adhesion energy is essential for the binding to occur , the physical interplay controlling the role of particle ﬂ atness is between the cap and rim bending terms of the membrane . For small κ r ¼ 3 k B T nm the role of particle ﬂ atness is vanishing since the rim term can be neglected . Within a small increase in κ r , to the value of 6 . 5 k B T nm , the effect of ϑ is observed . This value agrees nicely with our ﬂ uorescence mea - surements in zero time ( See Fig . 5B ) , which indicate on the extent of particle adsorption . In both the theoretical and experimental results we ﬁ nd increased adhesion of large spherical particles ( SPM ) . This is compared to smaller SPM and to small and large ﬂ atter ( WPM ) parti - cles . The reason for the higher binding of the rigid spherical particles is that the gain in adhesion energy is more signi ﬁ cant for larger parti - cles . However , if we further increase κ r , to the value of 15 k B T nm , the rim bending penalty becomes high compared to the gain in binding energy , resulting in lower free energy for the smaller rigid particles , due to their smalldiameteroftherim ( rightplotinFig . 8B ) . However , largerimterm results in overall positive free energy predicting there will be no uptake in this case . 4 . Discussion In this work we aimed to study how mechanical cues of nanoparti - cles canaffectcellularinteractionsand uptake . Previouslywe developed oral available polymer micelles with conjugated anti - angiogenic drug [ 36 ] . The oral availability was possible because of the increased stability that followed the solidi ﬁ cation process . Such SPMs can rapidly endocytose into endothelium and intestinal epithelium and circulate intheblood , possiblyintact , asis suggestedbytheparticleaccumulation in tumors via the EPR effect [ 36 ] . We hypothesize that the solidi ﬁ cation may be responsible to the high stability and the extended internaliza - tion in vitro and in vivo . To test our hypothesis we now compared the wet non - solidi ﬁ ed form of PEG - PLA micelles , referred as WPM , to the stiffer form , SPMs , in regards to their mechanical , physiochemical , mol - ecule release capabilities and interaction with monolayer or multi - cell layers . The effects of micelle mechanical properties may have a broader relevance in understanding cellular interactions of additional drug de - livery systems , to understand clinical outcomes and understand how we can control these interactions to improve drugs selectivity . To com - pare different particles in their soft or their semi solid forms , we tested three types of PEG - PLA micelles with different molecular weights while keepingtheratio of PEG toPLAof ~ 2 : 1 . Asexpected , thesize of particles , both SPM and WPM enlarged with the increase of molecular weight . SPM exhibits slightly larger diameter , yet not statistically signi ﬁ cant , for all three molecular weight in comparison to WPM . This could be ex - plained either by swell during water freeze prior to lyophilization , or al - ternatively , by water penetration during hydration stage resulted in a slight swell and increase in diameter . The TEM and AFM measurements of NP3 also showed that SPM are somewhat larger than the WPN . Ac - cording to the AFM measurement , the micellar diameter is smaller than the one measured with DLS and this can be explained by the fact Fig . 5 . CellinteractionwithNP3testedbyFACS . A375cellswereincubatedwith ﬂ uorescentlabeledNP3 . A . Afterdifferenttimepoints , thecellswerewashedandpreparedforanalysisby FACS . Foreachexperiment10 , 000eventswererecordedatmedium ﬂ owrateof30 μ l / min . B . WPMandSPMcelluptakeimagedbyCytacion3 , BioTekSynergyHT . AMontageofWPMsand SPMs ( in green ) incubated with A375 cells for different times0 , 5 , 10 , 15and 25min . All imagesweretaken from the center of the well using Cytacion 3 instrument at ×2 . 5 magnitude 3×3mm . Threechannelswereused : BrightField , DAPI ( 358 / 461 ) andGreen ﬂ uorescence ( 475 / 520 ) . C . CentralviewofA375cellwithWPM ( NP3 ) after120minincubationweretakenat a Z stack mode in ×400 magnitude . 46 T . Stern et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 257 ( 2017 ) 40 – 50 that in light scattering measurements the polydispersity of the sample may shift in the calculated size towards the larger end . It should be noted that the Z - potential values of the polymer micelles ~ − 15 to − 25 mV suggests that the particle suspension may have a tendency for aggregations , which may also explain the larger particle size detect - ed in SPMs post lyophilization ( Table 1S ) , although typically after mixing we obtained a monodispersed particle solution as shown by TEM . In general , zeta potential is an important marker of the stability of various colloidal dispersions . The values of the zeta potential show the extent of electrostatic repulsion between all the nanoparticles . When the potential is less this repulsion and the dispersion may break and ﬂ occulate the suspension , generally values of below 40 mV would yield stable suspension . The modulus measurements show that the WPMs are 1 . 5 times softer than the SPMs ( Table 2S ) that is due to the solidi ﬁ cation step of the PEG - PLA in which maintain a solid core . The measurements were performed in water after hydration of PLA already occurred thus explaining the relatively low stiffness . In our AFM measurements we could not discriminate the modulus of the micellar periphery and inte - rior and therefore the value reported accounts for contributions of both Fig . 6 . DifferentcancercellsdemonstrateexocytosisofNP3 . A . A24wellplatewasseededwithBxPC - 3 , A375andHUVECcells . Thefollowingday , cellswereincubatedwith6 - coumarine labeled NP3 for 2 h and then washed twice with PBS . Samples from media were collected and their ﬂ uorescence were measured by a plate reader with 480 / 530 ( Ex / Em ) . Fig . 7 . NPspenetrationinto3Dtumorspheroids . BxPC3cellswerestainedwithDIDandthenseededina35wellmoldmadefromagarose ( 10 , 000cells / well ) . Thefollowingday , spheroids wereformedandincubatedwithWPMsandSPMs A . SpheroidsincubatedovernightwithNP3wereimagedby2 - photonmicroscope ( NikonA1MPMulti - Photon ) . B . Spheroidcellswere stained with DID and incubated for 3 h with NP3 . Spheroids were then frozen inOCT , sectioned and imaged by ﬂ uorescence microscopy . Blue : DAPI ( nuclei ) , green : NP3 , purple : DID . 47 T . Stern et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 257 ( 2017 ) 40 – 50 therigidcoreandthe ﬂ exibleperiphery . Thereforeitisprobablethatthe modulus of the core only of the SPM micelles is larger than the reported value . Release kinetics pro ﬁ le of the hydrophobic molecule 6 - coumarine has shown two major release phases in both WPM and SPM with a typ - ical initial burst of release after 1 h possibly due to leakage and diffusion process from the outer layer of the micelles , followed by ﬁ rst order re - lease up to 68 h and zero order release until 140 h and possibly an initi - ation of a second phase release which may result in homogenous degradation of the PLA [ 37 ] . This early burst release pro ﬁ le is consistent with other groups ' reports [ 38 , 39 ] . Even though we expected that the SPM will show slower release kinetics than WPM due to hydration step that is required prior to hydrolysis in the case of SPM , the results showed an overall similarity in the release kinetics . The main differ - ences between the WPMs and the SPMs are shown after 24 h . This may be explained by a relatively fast hydration and water uptake in the SPM form due to the small dimensions of the particles . To study the internalization of particles into the cells we measured cellular uptake by imaging and by FACS . The adherence of particles on cellmembranewasestimatedbytime0incubation , meaning , theextent of particles that remain on the cells after particle supplementation and immediate washing ( Fig . 4B ) . From our previous studies performed in confocal microscopy we con ﬁ rmed endocytosis and saturation in Caco - 2 and HUVEC cells after 20 min [ 35 , 36 ] . We assume relatively sim - ilar kinetics in cancer cells thus mostly attribute signals that measured by FACS as endocytosed particle signals . FACS results have shown ad - vantage in cellular uptake of SPM in early stages of 10 and 20 min timepoints but the differencewasdiminished after30min , this indicat - ing a saturation in endocytosis . Since the WPMs are more elastic than the SPMs , we assume that the contact surface with the cells will be larg - er accordingly which may lead to longer internalization time . We as - sume that saturation is achieved by the end of this timeline which eliminate the advantage in cellular uptake . The direct imaging seems similar to the FACS results , with higher difference between the WPMs and SPMs at the initial time points ( Fig . 5 ) . These results indicate an important role of nanoparticle ﬂ exibility in cell uptake . Speci ﬁ cally , we have shown herethat stiffer particles arein - ternalized more into cancer cells compared to softer ones , in accordance with a previous study [ 40 ] . Since the WPMs and SPMs have similar size and are made of the same building blocks , they have the same charge and are expected to have the same chemical interaction with the cells . These characteristics allow for isolated examination of the role played by particle rigidity . This principle may be valid to other drug delivery systems and may explain cellular internalization kinetics and the effect of solid nanoparticles such as poly lactic - co - glycolic acid ( PLGA ) or gold nanoparticlesincomparisontoperformanceof “ wet ” systemssuchasli - posomes [ 11 ] . However we could not ﬁ nd studies that compare the in - ternalization capacity of solid particles in comparison to micelles or liposomes with the same size . Moreover the different compositions can affect af ﬁ nity to cells and thus making such comparison more challenging . Exocytosis of particles may haveanimportant impactontheirability to spread inside tissues by transcytosis in addition to the paracellular transport . Thisis particularlyimportantfortumors thatdonot necessar - ily bene ﬁ t from the EPR effect thus rely more on intracellular transport via the endothelium to thetumor bed . Generally , exocytosis is less stud - ied than endocytosis and the mechanisms are not fully elucidated . Re - cent work showed the exocytosis of PEGylated gold in a 3 week time frame [ 41 ] . Polymer micelles composed of PEG3000 - PLA3000 were also tested for their ability to transcytose through an intact monolayer of Madin – Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cell line . In that study ~ 50 nm “ wet ” particles were found to penetrate constantly the cells , to the basolateral side of the chamber in a transwell format between the ex - amined 30 to 150 h whereas the exact mode of exocytose particles was not determined . Interestingly it has been proposed that the molec - ular mediators govern exocytosis are different than in endocytosis due to uneven effect of clathrin and caveolin antagonists [ 42 ] . As seen in Fig . 6 , exocytosis kinetics was tested in A375 and BxPC - 3 and HUVEC cells . It yet needs to be determined whether the mechanism of exocyto - sis involves exosome or macrovesicle secretion . We previously showed that SPMs internalize into Caco - 2 and HUVEC cells via clathrin depen - dent mechanism and that they are packed within membrane vesicles . Interestingly , we detected a small difference in exocytosis of WPM and SPM in HUVEC cells , unlikein tumor cells that mightsuggestthe in - volvementofcaveolinintheexocytosisasitishighlyexpressedinendo - thelial cells [ 43 ] . Since we see indication of differences in cellular uptake between SPM and WPM we hypothesize that such differences can be manifested also in multicellular structures . Therefore we measured cellular uptake in a 3D cell model of tumor spheroids which better mimics the physio - logical behavior . Even though quantitative data is not presented here we clearly see differences in micelles uptake of BxPC3 spheroids . Since exocytosis measurement shows no differences between SPM and WPM we assume that the main two mechanisms of micelles penetra - tion into the deep layers of the spheroids are either via intra cellular pathway ( endocytosis and exocytosis ) or via para cellular pathway ( particles movement in gaps between cells ) . The para cellular transport is govern by different parameters such as the gaps between cells , spher - oid formation technique , cell type , medium , concentration and time . Small gaps between cells would force the micelles to deform in order to penetrate into deeper region of the spheroids and so WPMs could gain an advantage . However , larger gaps could allow the micelles to cross , thus SPMs would gain advantage due to their superior uptake kinetics and levels . Further investigation is needed in order to compare biodistribution and tumor uptake of the two types of particles in vivo . Our ﬁ ndings that rigid particle internalize more into cancer cells werereplicatedalsoin3Dspheroidsinagreementwithpreviousstudies that examined the penetration of nanoparticles up to 200 nm in size Fig . 8 . Physicalmodel . A . Aschemeofthemodelgeometry , withde ﬁ nitionofthe ﬂ atteningstate , ϑ , andthecontactarea , a . B . Freeenergyplotsasafunctionof ϑ and a fordifferentvaluesof the rim constants , κ r , with ε ¼ 0 : 1 k B T nm 2 and κ c = 20 k B T . 48 T . Stern et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 257 ( 2017 ) 40 – 50 into cancer cells [ 22 , 40 , 44 ] . It is interesting to note that there is also opposing data showing that soft particles internalize more into can - cer cells [ 23 , 44 – 46 ] . However , in the latter , larger particle were used with micron scale diameter . The size of the particles controls the mechanism of engulfment and uptake , both from the physical and bi - ological point of view [ 47 , 48 ] . In the present work we were interest - ed in the endocytosis size regime . In this case , cells need to deform only their membrane in order to wrap the particles , while for larger particles a phagocytosis process occurs , where cytoskeleton defor - mation is required as well [ 47 ] . Accordingly , we have constructed a minimal physical model of engulfment in the endocytosis regime . Our aim was to capture basic understanding and intuition regarding the role of particle rigidity , by focusing on the main physical terms in a model of simpli ﬁ ed geometry . Recently , a more general model has been published [ 28 ] , accounting for detailed description of physical terms . Such a model can provide more accurate information by re - garding physical aspects of varying contribution weights , which is beyond the scope of the present study . However , we ﬁ nd that our basic cross grained theory is very ef ﬁ cient in isolating the main phys - ical players in the physical mechanism of ﬂ exible / rigid particle en - gulfment . Our simple analytic model allows us to gain clear intuition about this system and by that to contribute important in - sight to previous recent knowledge in this ﬁ eld [ 28 , 40 ] . Our model provides a simple expression for the free energy , contrib - uted from cell - particle adhesion and membrane bending terms of the cap shaped contact and the rim at the margin of the cap . The more neg - ative the free energy is , the higher is the tendency of cell engulfment which can lead to particle internalization . Since the adhesion energy in the critical con ﬁ guration does not depend on ϑ , for a given value of a that re ﬂ ect a certain size of the particle ( due to our restriction to the criticalcon ﬁ guration ) , thephysicalinterplay controllingtheengulfment process is between the cap and the rim bending terms . Large negative adhesion energy is essential for the binding to occur and is necessary for the wrapping process . However , the dependence on the state of ﬂ at - tening is not affected by the adhesion term and comes only from the bending energies . Note in Eq . ( 1 ) that the cap term increases with ϑ . This is most intuitive as the cap curvature is larger for high values of ϑ . Thus , in terms of the cap energy a ﬂ at particle con ﬁ guration is more favorableforcellengulfment . Ontheotherhand , therimenergyreduces with ϑ . The reasonforthatis theincreaseinrimperimeter uponparticle ﬂ attening . In simpli ﬁ ed words , the physics here is controlled by a battle between the membrane bending term of the cap , which favors ﬂ at con - ﬁ guration of particles , and the bending of the rim , whichfavors a spher - ical geometry . We ﬁ nd that , for the relevant conditions tested in our experiments , the best match between the model and the experimental ﬁ ndings is for intermediate value of the rim constant , around6 : 5 k B T nm . In this regime therimterm dominance , sothat rigid particles have enhanced probabil - itytoenterthecellsduetotheirsmallerdiameter . Interestingly , thegain in negative adhesion energy then is large enough so that larger rigid particles interact more with the cells , compared with small ones . This is consistent with our measurements in time 0 in Fig . 5B . We note that the model presented here does not account for the dynamical thinning ofparticles , butcalculatesthefreeenergygiventhestateof ﬂ attening , ϑ . This should be accurate for the case of very ﬂ exible particles which eas - ily spreadon thecell membrane [ 28 ] . We are aware that ourmodel can - not provide thus general insight about the dynamics , which can make an important effect . For the present purpose , we were interested in a simple thermodynamic picture for qualitative understanding of the dif - ferences between particle types . The main effect of particle ﬂ exibility examined here is their ability to spread and ﬂ atten . Importantly , differences in particle elasticities for particles that are fairly rigid are not expected to show similar behavior , simply astheir spreadingis negligible even in thesofterstate . For exam - ple , it has been shown that for viruses in the range of 10 2 – 10 3 MPa , the softer ones have enhanced abilities of cell entry [ 28 ] . 5 . Conclusions Since many anti - cancer drugs exhibit poor penetration abilities into tumor tissue [ 49 ] formulations that may improve drug penetration into tissues could have substantial implication in ef ﬁ cacy of treatments . Our ﬁ ndings indicate that mechanical cues have an important effect on the ability of nanoparticles to interact with cells . We found that stiffer poly - mermicelles nanoparticles have advantageous penetrationabilitiesinto tumor cells leadingto higher uptake , also in multicellular entities . Using distinction of uptake abilities based on mechanical properties of mi - cellesNPs could be animportant factor in designingef ﬁ cientdrug deliv - erysystemsforspeci ﬁ cphysiologicalconditions . Our ﬁ ndingmayhavea broader impact and relevance to other drug delivery systems , suchas li - posomes , emulsions and hydrogels and biodegradable particles . Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge support from the Israel Science Founda - tion ( 0394883 ) ; theFP7MarieCurieCIGgrant ( 0305116 ) ; andtheEdith C . Blum Foundation ( 0364801 ) . We thank Dr . Yael Kalisman from the Nano - center of the Hebrew University for her help in the TEM studies . YBK would like to thank Avinoam Ben - Shaul for inspiring discussions . Appendix A . Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jconrel . 2016 . 12 . 013 . References [ 1 ] A . Z . Wang , R . Langer , O . C . Farokhzad , Nanoparticle delivery of cancer drugs , Annu . Rev . Med . 63 ( 2012 ) 185 – 198 . [ 2 ] Y . Matsumura , H . Maeda , A new concept formacromoleculartherapeutics incancer chemotherapy : mechanism of tumoritropic accumulation of proteins and the anti - tumor agent smancs , Cancer Res . 46 ( 12 Pt 1 ) ( 1986 ) 6387 – 6392 . [ 3 ] H . Nakamura , J . Fang , H . Maeda , Development of next - generation macromolecular drugs based on the EPR effect : challenges and pitfalls , Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . 12 ( 1 ) ( 2015 ) 53 – 64 . [ 4 ] M . Bolkestein , etal . , Investigation of factorsdeterminingtheenhancedpermeability and retention effect in subcutaneous xenografts , J . Nucl . Med . 57 ( 4 ) ( 2016 ) 601 – 607 . [ 5 ] J . Fang , H . Nakamura , H . Maeda , TheEPReffect : uniquefeaturesoftumor blood ves - sels for drug delivery , factors involved , and limitations and augmentation of the ef - fect , Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 63 ( 3 ) ( 2011 ) 136 – 151 . [ 6 ] T . Lammers , et al . , Personalized nanomedicine , Clin . Cancer Res . 18 ( 18 ) ( 2012 ) 4889 – 4894 . [ 7 ] T . Lammers , et al . , Theranostic nanomedicine , Acc . Chem . Res . 44 ( 10 ) ( 2011 ) 1029 – 1038 . [ 8 ] T . Stylianopoulos , R . K . Jain , Combiningtwostrategiestoimproveperfusionanddrug deliveryinsolidtumors , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 110 ( 46 ) ( 2013 ) 18632 – 18637 . [ 9 ] P . P . Provenzano , S . R . Hingorani , Hyaluronan , ﬂ uid pressure , and stromal resistance in pancreas cancer , Br . J . Cancer 108 ( 1 ) ( 2013 ) 1 – 8 . [ 10 ] S . Zhang , H . Gao , G . Bao , Physicalprinciplesofnanoparticlecellularendocytosis , ACS Nano 9 ( 9 ) ( 2015 ) 8655 – 8671 . [ 11 ] N . Oh , J . H . Park , Endocytosisandexocytosisofnanoparticlesinmammaliancells , Int . J . Nanomedicine 9 ( Suppl . 1 ) ( 2014 ) 51 – 63 . [ 12 ] L . Shang , K . Nienhaus , G . U . Nienhaus , Engineered nanoparticles interacting with cells : size matters , J . Nanobiotechnol . 12 ( 2014 ) 5 . [ 13 ] A . Albanese , P . S . Tang , W . C . Chan , The effect of nanoparticle size , shape , and surface chemistry on biological systems , Annu . Rev . Biomed . Eng . 14 ( 2012 ) 1 – 16 . [ 14 ] L . Clodius , Restoration of lymph drainage after extremity replantation , J . Reconstr . Microsurg . 7 ( 1 ) ( 1991 ) 45 – 47 . [ 15 ] M . O . Durymanov , A . A . Rosenkranz , A . S . Sobolev , Current approaches for improving intratumoral accumulation and distribution of nanomedicines , Theranostics 5 ( 9 ) ( 2015 ) 1007 – 1020 . [ 16 ] H . K . Makadia , S . J . Siegel , Poly lactic - co - glycolic acid ( PLGA ) as biodegradable con - trolled drug delivery carrier , Polymers ( Basel ) 3 ( 3 ) ( 2011 ) 1377 – 1397 . [ 17 ] P . Gentile , etal . , Anoverviewofpoly ( lactic - co - glycolic ) acid ( PLGA ) - basedbiomate - rials for bone tissue engineering , Int . J . Mol . Sci . 15 ( 3 ) ( 2014 ) 3640 – 3659 . [ 18 ] P . F . McDonald , et al . , In vitro degradation and drug release from polymer blends basedonpoly ( DL - lactide ) , poly ( L - lactide - glycolide ) andpoly ( epsilon - caprolactone ) , J . Mater . Sci . 45 ( 5 ) ( 2010 ) 1284 – 1292 . [ 19 ] S . Barua , S . Mitragotri , Challenges associated with penetration of nanoparticles across cell and tissue barriers : a review of current status and future prospects , Nano Today 9 ( 2 ) ( 2014 ) 223 – 243 . 49 T . Stern et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 257 ( 2017 ) 40 – 50 [ 20 ] L . Zhang , et al . , Micro ﬂ uidic synthesis of hybrid nanoparticles with controlled lipid layers : understanding ﬂ exibility - regulated cell - nanoparticle interaction , ACS Nano 9 ( 10 ) ( 2015 ) 9912 – 9921 . [ 21 ] J . Cui , et al . , Super - soft hydrogel particles with tunable elasticity in a micro ﬂ uidic blood capillary model , Adv . Mater . 26 ( 43 ) ( 2014 ) 7295 – 7299 . [ 22 ] A . C . Anselmo , et al . , Elasticity of nanoparticles in ﬂ uences their blood circula - tion , phagocytosis , endocytosis , and targeting , ACS Nano 9 ( 3 ) ( 2015 ) 3169 – 3177 . [ 23 ] W . J . Liu , et al . , Uptake of hydrogel particles with different stiffness and its in ﬂ uence on HepG2 cell functions , Soft Matter 8 ( 35 ) ( 2012 ) 9235 – 9245 . [ 24 ] B . V . Derjaguin , V . M . Muller , Y . P . Toporov , Effectofcontactdeformationsonadhesion of particles , J . Colloid Interface Sci . 53 ( 2 ) ( 1975 ) 314 – 326 . [ 25 ] S . L . Zhang , H . J . Gao , G . Bao , Physical principles of nanoparticle cellular endocytosis , ACS Nano 9 ( 9 ) ( 2015 ) 8655 – 8671 . [ 26 ] D . M . Richards , R . G . Endres , The mechanism of phagocytosis : two stages of engulf - ment , Biophys . J . 107 ( 7 ) ( 2014 ) 1542 – 1553 . [ 27 ] J . S . vanZon , etal . , Amechanicalbottleneckexplainsthevariationincupgrowthdur - ing FcgammaR phagocytosis , Mol . Syst . Biol . 5 ( 2009 ) 298 . [ 28 ] X . Yi , X . Shi , H . Gao , Cellular uptake of elastic nanoparticles , Phys . Rev . Lett . 107 ( 9 ) ( 2011 ) 098101 . [ 29 ] D . Raucher , M . P . Sheetz , Characteristics of a membrane reservoir buffering mem - brane tension , Biophys . J . 77 ( 4 ) ( 1999 ) 1992 – 2002 . [ 30 ] S . Tzlil , et al . , A statistical - thermodynamic model of viral budding , Biophys . J . 86 ( 4 ) ( 2004 ) 2037 – 2048 . [ 31 ] R . Lipowsky , E . Sackmann , Structure and dynamics of membranes , Handbook of Bi - ological Physics , Elsevier Science , Amsterdam ; New York , 1995 ( v . b 1A - 1B , N ) . [ 32 ] A . D . M . a . A . W . Blackwell , IUPAC , Compendium of Chemical Terminology , Scienti ﬁ c Publications , Oxford , 1997 . [ 33 ] Y . Calahorra , et al . , Young ' s modulus , residual stress , and crystal orientation of dou - bly clamped silicon nanowire beams , Nano Lett . 15 ( 5 ) ( 2015 ) 2945 – 2950 . [ 34 ] M . Hopcroft , W . D . Nix , T . W . Kenny , What is the Young ' s modulus of silicon ? J . Microcomput . Appl . 19 ( 2010 ) 229 – 238 . [ 35 ] E . Abramov , et al . , Cellular mechanism of oral absorption of solidi ﬁ ed polymer mi - celles , Nanomedicine 11 ( 8 ) ( 2015 ) 1993 – 2002 . [ 36 ] O . Benny , etal . , Anorally deliveredsmall - molecule formulationwithantiangiogenic and anticancer activity , Nat . Biotechnol . 26 ( 7 ) ( 2008 ) 799 – 807 . [ 37 ] L . Yang , A . El Ghzaoui , S . Li , In vitro degradation behavior of poly ( lactide ) - poly ( eth - ylene glycol ) blockcopolymer micellesinaqueoussolution , Int . J . Pharm . 400 ( 1 – 2 ) ( 2010 ) 96 – 103 . [ 38 ] R . Gref , et al . , Biodegradable long - circulating polymeric nanospheres , Science 263 ( 5153 ) ( 1994 ) 1600 – 1603 . [ 39 ] J . Matsumoto , et al . , Preparation of nanoparticles consisted of poly ( L - lactide ) - poly ( - ethylene glycol ) - poly ( L - lactide ) and their evaluation in vitro , Int . J . Pharm . 185 ( 1 ) ( 1999 ) 93 – 101 . [ 40 ] J . Sun , et al . , Tunable rigidity of ( polymeric core ) - ( lipid shell ) nanoparticles for reg - ulated cellular uptake , Adv . Mater . 27 ( 8 ) ( 2015 ) 1402 – 1407 . [ 41 ] N . Tlotleng , et al . , Cytotoxicity , intracellular localization and exocytosis of citrate cappedandPEGfunctionalizedgoldnanoparticlesinhumanhepatocyte andkidney cells , Cell Biol . Toxicol . 32 ( 4 ) ( 2016 ) 305 – 321 . [ 42 ] S . Zhao , et al . , Monitoring the transport of polymeric micelles across MDCK cell monolayer and exploring related mechanisms , J . Control . Release 158 ( 3 ) ( 2012 ) 413 – 423 . [ 43 ] P . G . Frank , Endothelial caveolae and caveolin - 1 as key regulators of atherosclerosis , Am . J . Pathol . 177 ( 2 ) ( 2010 ) 544 – 546 . [ 44 ] A . C . Anselmo , S . Mitragotri , Impactofparticleelasticityonparticle - baseddrugdeliv - ery systems , Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . ( 2016 ) . [ 45 ] H . L . Sun , et al . , The role of capsule stiffness on cellular processing , Chem . Sci . 6 ( 6 ) ( 2015 ) 3505 – 3514 . [ 46 ] R . Hartmann , et al . , Stiffness - dependent in vitro uptake and lysosomal acidi ﬁ cation of colloidal particles , Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 54 ( 4 ) ( 2015 ) 1365 – 1368 . [ 47 ] V . P . Zhdanov , Physical aspectsoftheinitial phase ofendocytosis , Phys . Rev . E 88 ( 6 ) ( 2013 ) . [ 48 ] J . Rejman , et al . , Size - dependent internalization of particles via the pathways of clathrin - and caveolae - mediated endocytosis , Biochem . J . 377 ( Pt 1 ) ( 2004 ) 159 – 169 . [ 49 ] I . F . Tannock , et al . , Limited penetration of anticancer drugs through tumor tissue : a potentialcauseofresistanceofsolidtumorstochemotherapy , Clin . CancerRes . 8 ( 3 ) ( 2002 ) 878 – 884 . 50 T . Stern et al . / Journal of Controlled Release 257 ( 2017 ) 40 – 50