ELSEVIER Knowledge - Based Systems 10 ( 1997 ) 3 - 13 Knowledge - Ba . ~ Pxl 5VSTEM ~ - - - Computers and creativity support : knowledge , visualisation and collaboration Linda Candy * LUT ( ' HI Research Centre . Department of Computer Studie ~ . Loughborough University , Loughborough , Leicestershire LEI I 3TU . UK Abstract This paper is concerned with research into creativity and how it might inform our understanding of knowledge - based computer support . Aspects of creativity research are explored and two case studies by the author are described . The implications of knowledge - intensive work including visualisation and collaboration for computer support are discussed . Finally , future research directions that combine the aims , objectives and techniques of both the artificial intelligence and human - computer interaction communities are outlined . © 1997 Elsevier Science B . V . Keywords : Creativity ; Knowledge ; Computer support 1 . Introduction The strengths and weaknesses of current computer sys - tems may be judged according to whether they meet the user ' s skills , needs and expectations of them within a given context . Users also have different levels of compe - tence and task goals and these factors impose particular requirements upon the design of such systems . Most people do not require any detailed knowledge of the computers in their washing machines or cameras and experience tightly constrained forms of interaction with them . Interacting with a vehicle - monitoring computer , for example , is not usually considered to be a desirable function . You may ask it for information about temperature or petrol consumption but , in most cases , when the symbol for a routine check appears , whilst you may be aware that something is taking place , you cannot ask for a status report on your vehicle . The service engineer , on the other hand , needs to have greater access to the information gathered during a drive , which may be very important to how effectively he / she can carry out his / her work . In these instances , the degree of interaction with the computer is circumscribed by its perceived primary function of monitoring and fault detection and , in effect , its role is primarily a one - way transfer of information . In respect of route navigation systems , the degree of interactivity is dif - ferent again and the introduction of such systems raises an entirely new set of issues about task support . * Tel . : + 44 1509 222328 ; fax : + 44 1509 610815 ; e - mail : L . Candy @ lbor - o . ac . uk 0950 - 7051 / 97 / $ 17 . 00 © 1997 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved PII S0950 - 7051 ( 97 ) 00008 - 7 2 . Creativity support ? Whilst acknowledging that there have been vast improve - ments in computer systems for personal and business use in the last decade , there remain important aspects of the design that constrain the users to prescribed ways of carrying out their work rather than supporting them in the most appro - priate way . Access to the full computational power of a system may be obtained by learning the programming lan - guages that drive them ; but , for the ordinary non - computing specialist user , these languages are arcane and , thus , the extent of that power remains highly circumscribed . In spite of significant developments in the role of the computer for creative tasks , we have yet to marry ease - of - use with full access to the computer ' s potential . Certain applications are , nevertheless , more successful in satisfying user needs and providing appropriate task match than others . Spreadsheets and some computer - aided design ( CAD ) applications have been shown to combine appropriate task notations with usability 1 . These applications are being used by artists , graphic designers and educationalists who are experts in their own fields , although not in conventional computer programming . A question arises that if , indeed , computer systems are becoming more accessible and usable , is there any reason to doubt that they will eventually meet the requirements for creativity support through the normal evolutionary process of adding functionality and usability to existing appli - cations ? To some extent , the answer lies both in the nature of creativity itself and in the underlying attributes of L . Candy ~ Knowledge - Based Systems 10 ( 1997 ) 3 13 computer system design . In creative work , the generation of new concepts by ( say ) the designer , which might include , for example , new objects formed from old ones , cannot be easily handled in current computer systems . In creative work , knowledge about domain entities , whether they take the form of visual shapes , objects , parts , complex products or textual or analytical / numerical data , plays an essential role in the development of the task in hand . In current com - puter systems the objects , structures and procedures that are provided by the system are usually embedded ( even hard - wired ) in such a way as to make them inflexible and inaccessible to change . Thus , for example , if a new shape is drawn by the user , the information about its composition , dimensions , etc . that may be necessary to manipulate it , compare and evaluate it , is not available within the system . More problematic is the handling of shapes that have emerged in the mind of the designer as he / she observes those set down and then wishes to manipulate " new " shapes . This is an important and growing area of research . For further discussion about the nature of emergence and why computer support for creativity must take account of it , see 2 - 4 . The above example is only one such illustration of how we need to have greater understanding of creativity in order to inform the design of support systems . Whilst considerable research is taking place into issues such as improving data transfer , usability and efficiency in task execution , there is a need to look at more fundamental questions about the roles computers have the potential to play and what more can be achieved in the direction of empowering users . In particular , there are issues arising from empirical studies about the role of knowledge , visualisation and collaboration in the creative process that need to be addressed . 2 . 1 . Systematic approaches to creativity research The systematic study of creativity is largely a post World War II development within the discipline of psychology 5 . Academic interest prior to that time was the prerogative of the historians of art and science . Doing creative things was , of course , the business of the artists , writers and composers who were not expected to provide reliable evidence about the nature of creativity itself even though it was their primary occupation . The elusive nature of creativity stems largely from the assumption that creativity is not open to experimentation in the laboratory and the retrospective accounts and anecdotal evidence available was unreliable and certainly not refutable using scientific methods . Early characterisations of creativity provided points of departure for the more systematic approaches . Those approaches used different frames of reference , from the psycho - analytical and psycho - pathological ones to Gestalt , trait formation and associative kinds 6 . Much valuable pioneering research took place into areas such as the creative personality 7 - 9 and the relationship between creativity and intelligence 10 , 11 . Albert 12 documents the history of previous work in social psychology into gen - ius , creativity and giftedness . He notes that there has been less interest in identifying what creativity is and who are creative people than one might have supposed . Attention to the creative process itself drew upon reports of highly creative people ( e . g . Poincar6 ' s own account of his mathematical discoveries 13 . Work on defining the criteria for a creative product , a complementary stream of activity , also took place 14 . Sprecher proposed the notion that a truly creative product or idea has the characteristic of being itself creative in the sense that it generates additional creative activity 15 . 2 . 2 . Can creativity be learned ? The scientific research goal of trying to define the char - acteristics of creativity began to be accompanied , in certain groups , by a very different goal , that of trying to develop creativity as an educational process . Whether or not , those ways of thinking that were found in creative people could be nurtured in the population at large was an issue that was much debated . Methods for investigating the stages whereby a creative idea is generated and turned into a creative outcome were devised and applied . For example , Parnes ' brainstorm programme used a five step procedure : fact finding , problem finding , idea finding , solution finding and acceptance finding that was applied in the Creative Problem Solving Institute at Buffalo 16 . The issue of whether or not creativity can be understood or characterised in a reliable way remains a research issue despite the vast quantity of knowledge from the last fifty years of research . The development of a coherent picture of the multi - dimensional aspects of creativity , of which a small number are referred to above , is yet to be achieved . The issue as to whether creative thinking or behaviour can be learned , or encouraged , invites a set of questions that are different again from those posed by the quest to understand its characteristics . In seeking to promote creativity , does this mean that we must base the approaches used upon tried and tested results about how creativity takes place ? If we argue that it is important to adopt creativity supporting approaches that have a sound basis in research evidence , then we need to be very clear as to what kind of evidence is needed and what is reliable . A fundamental problem here is that much of the evidence could be considered to be inconclusive and , in certain cases , contradictory . It might also be the case that some of the evidence does not suit the prevailing wisdom of the time . For example , if we consider the evidence that individuals are better at problem solving than groups using brainstorm techniques 17 should we reconsider the drive for increased teamwork ? 2 . 3 . A climate for creativity ? One area of research that bears upon the question of L . Candy ~ Knowledge - Based Systems 10 ( 1997 ) 3 13 whether creativity be learned or influenced in some way has received less attention is that of the conditions in which creativity takes place . These conditions might be defined in terms of the environmental ( including organisational ) factors , and indeed the materials or tools used to achieve the creative outcome . Where experiments into creative thinking have been carried out , the impact of the materials used have proved to be influential in making differences to the outcome 118 . One might hypothesise that the characteristics of any resources , materials , tools or techniques that form a part of the creative work are in themselves critical factors that influence the way it takes place , i . e . the process . It follows that the characteristics of the support environments , whether computer - based or not , ought to be determined on the basis of what we know about creative process . A further question arises that , even if a support environment is designed to meet the creative process of the creative user , how far does it , in turn , change that process ? Creativity is not responsive to deliberate efforts to initiate it because its occurrence is highly unpredictable and is , therefore , resis - tant to planning and control . The same might be said for supporting it by computational means . Perhaps in the end , the issue might not be so much how to support creativity or encourage it , but how to avoid impeding it when using computer tools . 3 . Empirical approaches to creativity research Empirical research into the nature of human creativity takes many different forms , including ethnographic studies , case studies , protocol data studies , controlled experiments and simulation trials using artificial intelligence ( AI ) tech - niques . Where a computational perspective applies , there are two main streams of research . The first arises from traditional AI where the goal is to reproduce human creative process or creative products as computer programs 19 - 24 . The second is one where the goal is to support or enhance the human creative process and , by implication , enable it to be passed on or learned 25 - 27 . In both cases , the need to develop computational models , albeit of different kinds , is implied . Whilst there are many areas of overlap between the above areas of research , the ultimate goals are different . The devel - opment of computational models for exploring the nature of creativity by reproducing that behaviour in computer programs is most often dedicated to the derivation of funda - mental scientific knowledge 28 . By contrast , the develop - ment of creativity support has , on the whole , a more immediate and pragmatic aim : that of informing the design and implementation of computer support environments for creative work . In each case , the outcomes of the research differ in respect of understanding how that knowledge obtained is to be used . The existence of a computer program that emulates the human creative process has intrinsic value only insofar as how well it may be validated against the original hypothesis . On the other hand , the creativity sup - porting computer environment must be acceptable to the human beings who use it and also demonstrate to their satisfaction that it does , indeed , support them in the creative aspects of their work . There are also methodological differences between the two approaches , in particular , the extent or scope of the creative acts that are to be considered . It is possible to research the creative process in its " ' small acts " such as identifying how incubation takes place by way of laboratory experiments ( see Partridge and Rowe lot a review 28 ) . Alternatively , creativity may be seen in the larger scale , where all issues , including the creative outcome itself , are considered . This all - embracing approach is a broad - brush first stage from which specific issues may be identified and pursued in more detail . An example of such an issue would be the identification of the important role of perceptual changes in creative insight and the research area of emer - gent shapes that has arisen as a result . Weisburg 29 , posing a challenge to some fundamental concepts of creativity , has claimed that there are no gener - ally describable creative mechanisms that some people pos - sess and others do not . Evidence that certain people , such as scientists , are not particularly adept at so - called " divergent thinking " supports the view that creativity really depends upon the domain specific skills being used . However , it should be noted that this work and the critique by Partridge and Rowe arises from an analysis of creativity " in the small " . What is missing from this kind of evidence is how creativity takes place in the context of realistic situa - tions outside the confines of the laboratory . An alternative approach is to examine creative work ( as defined by the creative outcomes ) in terms of the totality of the person ' s activities . Creativity looked at this way can be considered to be characteristics ( e . g . mental operations such as memory , recognition and intelligence ) that are combined in an exceptional way so as to maximise their effectiveness 30 . The traits might be extended to include basic cognitive capabilities , values , motivations and strategies . Another approach , that of deriving theoretical models of the creative process , is a different starting point . However , such models do not tell us what we need to know about the general context in which creative work takes place , nor do they give us insight into specific scenarios that tell us how ground - breaking ideas arise . Hence , the need for the case study that encompasses a wide range of elements . The value of case studies of individual people in giving real - life proportions to the general theories of creativity has been advocated , although it must be said , not carried out extensively . Theories of innovation in technology have either tended to dwell upon the artefact itself , using an eco - nomic or social explanation 31 . The value of case studies of individual creative people in providing depth to our understanding of the total process is discussed below and illustrated by examples in the following section . 6 3 . 1 . Case studies of creativity Studies of the creative process " in the large " ( i . e . com - plex factors of the motivations , activities and outcomes as they happen in context ) have been carried out in a number of empirical case studies of successful individuals who have demonstrated by the outcomes of their work that they have made a special contribution to innovation . Maccoby 32 studied prominent designers and engineers whose contribution to their fields was unquestioned by their peers and the world at large . Although they represent a spectrum of different fields and cultures , they exhibit similar ways of thinking and working . Most are " systems thinkers " in the sense that they look for an overall broad scope before moving into specific detail . Masaru Ibuka , co - founder of Sony Corporation and originator of many electronic firsts , describes his experience as follows : " I think over the issue I am working on and wait until I get a vision that illuminates its overall nature . " This process is a necessary forerunner to that of discussing with his team how to put the ideas into effect . This ability to think " holistically " is related to another important feature of creative thinking and one that is vital to the breaking away from conventional ideas and solutions , especially when faced with a dead end or set of apparently unresolvable conflicts : this is an ability ( and preference for ) working from first principles . Gordon Murray , chief engi - neer for the Brabham and McLaren Formula One racing teams in the 1970s and 1980s , preferred to keep experience at the back of his mind ( he meant specific instances or solutions ) and to work from first principles . For example , in designing a wishbone suspension system , he observes : it ' s all too easy . . . to say , I know all about wishbones , this is how it ' s going to look because that ' s what wishbones look like . But if you want to make a step forward . . . . then you have to go right back to load path analysis . It is like designing things for the first time , rather than the n - th time . 33 From the results of empirical studies , certain character - istics of creative design that are relevant to this discussion have been identified . In particular , design is often solution - led , in that early on the designer proposes solutions in order to better understand the problem 34 . Thus previous , pro - totypical designs are needed and re - use is a significant activ - ity 35 . Secondly , however , it is seen that the iterations resulting from the solution - led approach are largely driven by the perceived constraints upon the design goal . These constraints ( be they requirements , legal issues , stylistic pre - ferences or whatever ) generate the criteria against which each candidate solution is evaluated and the next iteration initiated . In both product design and software design , characteris - tics in common have been identified : in particular , design as an hierarchically organised planned activity versus design as an opportunistically driven mix of top - down and bottom - up L . Candy / Knowledge - Based Systems 10 ( 1997 ) 3 - 13 strategies has been explored in a number of empirical stu - dies 36 - 38 . The results indicate that the factors that dif - ferentiate between design situations are complexity of the problem domain ( e . g . aircraft or vehicle design compared to simple products ) , whether the problem is ill defined or well understood , the experience and skill of the designers and the operational conditions of the total activity in a given orga - nisational context . From case studies of creative people at work with and without computers , examples from the author ' s research are described in the next section . 3 . 2 . Studies of creative process The studies reported provide examples of creative work based upon the acknowledged creative quality of the out - come of the process itself . Some characteristics of creative cognition that coincide with findings from other studies were identified , in particular , Maccoby ' s investigations into high profile engineers , Roy ' s studies of innovative pro - duct development and Cross and Cross ' s study of Gordon Murray 32 , 33 , 39 . Two studies are described , one in speech science 40 , 41 and the other in product design 42 - 44 . In the first instance , the work took place using a knowledge - based support sys - tem throughout the process . In the second example , a com - puter system was not involved at any point in the creative process . 3 . 2 . 1 . An example from science In science , if creativity is acknowledged , it is usually perceived as the results of investigations , in the H - creative sense 22 . If ideas or concepts are recognised as being original contributions to the field , they have , in effect , been accepted into the canon of scientific knowledge . On the other hand , the creative process , whereby the scientist achieves new insights , is framed , indeed , constrained , by the scientific methods and validation techniques used . Scientific investigation is an appropriate context of dis - covery and affords opportunities for studying the creative process . In order to understand creativity in the context of actual scientific research , there is a need for further studies of scientists carrying out their investigations in a real con - text . In this way , we can gain more insight into the ways ideas are generated , considered and pursued . In scientific work too , it is also necessary to include other aspects of human thinking processes that provide support to scientific exploration such as reflection and insight and the role of personal practice , as differentiated from the application of knowledge derived from reference points in the scientific canon . Scientific knowledge workers can be provided with powerful methods for studying and evaluating their source material using computer support . Graphical techniques for marking up visual phenomena and expressing knowledge about that data in rule form are available . The need for L . Candy / Knowledge - Based Systems l O ( 1997 ) 3 - 13 and use of visualisation of data in the scientific domain is now well established . The scientist may view and manipu - late high - quality domain - specific data such as aircraft mod - els , molecular structures , brain scans or architectural models . The facilities for changing the parameters , and hence the " view " , enable such knowledge workers to explore the visual data in order to understand and interpret it more effectively . In the study referred to 40 , 45 , the visualisation of such data is combined with explicit rules about the associated knowledge that has been compiled by the scientist . To enable the scientist to express knowledge to the system in a domain - specific language , a bridge between the represen - tation of visual data and the representation of scientific the - ory in the form of rules was made available . In effect , the visual data analysis and interpretation are combined with methods for capturing formal domain knowledge as rules . The scientist uses graphical interaction techniques to anno - tate visual data and to specify the knowledge gained from studying the data . Having assimilated the results from the exploration of the visual data and the knowledge base , the scientist can continue to advance existing knowledge further as the analysis and interpretation progresses . The aim is to reduce the constraints upon the scientist ' s explorations and unpredictable courses of action . The Speech Knowledge Interface ( SKI ) system 46 sup - ported rapid graphical interaction with the visual images . The annotations were recorded for later use at the testing stage when the scientist asked for an identification of the annotated speech utterance . The marking of the visual fea - tures using colour , blocks and lines appeared to heighten awareness of the finer details of the image . The overlaying of alternative quantitative information about the visual data supported more reliable judgements . The speed , quality and quantity of visual data access were vital as multiple images were required simultaneously and the interchange between them needed to be quick and fluent . Unpredictable features were identified that could not be marked up using the stan - dard techniques and the scientist used an improvised solu - tion . This often led to a need to refine existing rules . Having evaluated the results of the knowledge base iden - tification , the scientist could then change the rules or add new ones according to the fresh insights which arose during this process . For example , having identified the need to take account of the effects of contextual variants on the recogni - tion of particular visual features , new rules were created , tested and evaluated about those effects . In total , the process was an iterative one in which ideas were applied , abandoned or refined as the discovery of new insights took place . When a solution , in the form of a refined rule , proved impossible to achieve , the existing rule or rules were typically discarded . It was then that the whole problem was reformulated and an entirely new rule created . The SKI system contained within it a set of constraints within which the scientist set out to achieve certain goals . The extent to which the scientist moved beyond the boundaries of those constraints and created new concepts can be seen as an indication of the creativity involved 47 . The methods of interaction were designed to enable the knowledge worker to manipulate the visual source data and the knowledge base in a flexible manner . The fact that the feedback on the knowledge being applied was rapid and immediate was useful but that was not the main advantage . The rules were created and then evaluated against the source data under scrutiny by request - ing an identification . This implied that the speech knowl - edge captured was tested rigorously . Because it represented the current state of the scientist ' s thinking , the continual process of confirmation or refutation as the results of the identification process were produced was quite powerful . This was a form of support that challenged the scientist ' s hypotheses and forced a response at the knowledge level and not just the surface interaction level . The study illustrated how , in creative work , exploratory ideas and acts arise during the process and sometimes as side - effects rather than from the explicit objectives being pursued at the time . By its very nature , creativity cannot be described in advance and this makes the modelling task somewhat challenging . In particular , the application of knowledge that is highly expert , distinctive in character and constantly evolving is a feature of the way creative people work . From the study , a model of the creative process was derived . It represents the key interactions between user and computer system in respect of three areas : generation and invention ; exploration and evaluation ; and handling constraints . The creative process as observed in this study and in others 48 may be described in terms of three main stages which the user moves between : generation and invention , exploration and evaluation , and the consideration of con - straints ( Fig . 1 ) . Taking each of those stages in turn . we can decompose them and consider the roles of user and computer system more specifically . • Exploration and evaluation consists of examining the data , evaluating and refining the rules . In this case , the balance between human and computer shifts during the process . Whilst the human examines the data and refines the rules that the computer presents , the data is analysed by the computer according to the existing rules which are , as a consequence , evaluated by the human . • Generation and invention involves , in addition , moments of insight and the creation of new rules . Both of these are human activities . In particular , any insight obtained is an insight of the human understanding . The consideration of constraints , on the other hand , involves receiving and clarifying them , revising , and possibly negotiating , the revisions . Here , then , the computer presents the existing constraints ~ the human revises them L . Candy ~ Knowledge - Based Systems I 0 ( 1997 ) 3 - 13 GENERATION & INVENTION CONSTRAINTS \ / G , EXPLORATION & EVALUATION Roceluo Roulso Negotiate Fig . 1 . A Process model of creative work . and the resources of both are employed in the process of considering and negotiating plausible revisions . In the kind of knowledge work reported above , there are discernible stages in the process that reflect the progressive nature of the investigations that went on . Because knowl - edge work of this kind involves changes of mode within each stage , this needs to be reflected in the objects and structures of the computer support system . 3 . 2 . 2 . An example from design Individual case histories provide the source material for an analysis of the elements of creative work . The design of LotusSport Bike was chosen because it was a high - profile example of innovative design that made the headlines at the 1992 Olympic Games . By investigating what lay behind the innovation in terms of the designer ' s working process , an understanding of the creative processes as a whole was sought , From such a study , one outcome is a greater under - standing of how we might learn to be creative or encourage its development more widely . Conventional wisdom has it that truly novel ideas spring up suddenly , often without precedent . The LotusSport bicycle design illustrated that the pathway to innovation can be a long and difficult one . The designer ' s experimenta - tion and innovation spanned a period of 10 years , during which time the bicycle frame was transformed from the conventional diamond shape into a single unit ( monocoque ) made of carbon fibre material . The advent of the monocoque has given rise to a reorientation of the whole concept of what a bicycle frame might be . At the time it first appeared , the design contravened conventional expectations of what a bicycle should look like . A brief summary of the study follows . The main focus is upon creative cognition : this refers to the combined effect of a number of elements of the designer ' s process that were critical in the generation of new ideas and in the making of artefacts . In the case reported here , all stages of the design and building were carried out by the designer , Michael Burrows . From the initial generation of ideas , the rough sketching , tube brazing and component - making in steel and aluminium to the testing in competition , he was the initiator and executor throughout . Later , when the carbon fibre frame - making was carried out , he engaged the help of others for the mould construction and materials processing . The design process was very dependent upon personal ways of working and , in particular , " designing in the head " combined with " designing in the hands " was an essential element . The ability to formulate the problem at a high level , and devise both systematic and opportunistic strategies lor moving forward , were key features because these enabled the designer to break out of the existing con - ventions of bicycle design . Designing in parallel areas was also very significant in promoting the creative insights that occurred . The innovative design outcome was a result of years of deep involvement and immersion in the expert knowledge of the field . Burrows did not use any form of computer support for his design and engineering . He was able to progress his work within the boundaries of the resources he possessed and achieve a standard that satisfied his personal and business requirements . To go beyond that to high volume production or to turn - round his designs and customise them faster would have required significant changes in resources and , indeed , in his whole style of working . He was aware , never - theless , of the potential of computer support and did not have particular inhibitions about using new tools and meth - ods except in so far as they were not suitable tbr the task . The study suggested that existing CAD systems were unlikely to have been helpful in the particular context , not least because of the highly individualised strategies employed by the designer . In addition to his existing knowl - edge and expertise , he constantly kept abreast of new events in the field . This was characterised by keeping in close touch with other key players and developing a network of con - tacts . The key point is that the use of in - depth domain knowl - edge and access to state - of - the art expertise were critical to the designer ' s creative thinking . Such attributes would not have been supported by existing computer systems . In a representation of creativity " in the large " , the elements of the creative design process are interlocking and interde - pendent activities over time . The creative cognition repre - sented in Fig . 2 is comprised of recurring patterns that represent a typical approach to creative work 30 . L . Candy ~ Knowledge - Based Systems 10 ( 1997 ) 3 - 13 Fig . 2 . The elements of creative cognition . In the elements of creative cognitive style , problem formulation , ideas generation , strategies and methods and the application of expert knowledge are included . When combined in a particular way by a particular individual , the result is creative . • Ideas generation : the starting points were the existing traditions and models but it was making analogies with other product designs that enabled the extension and transformation of the design space . • Problem formulation : the designer chooses problems with minimal constraints and identifies previously unanswered questions . Taking a higher - level view of the problem space is critical to being able to step outside the existing constraints and dare to be radically different . • Strategies : a creative strategy may involve risk taking that can lead to significant gains . Taking opportunistic steps as a strategy for change requires the designer to be receptive to new ideas and be able to devise new methods quickly . • Methods : new methods were acquired only when the need arose . The methods were developed or acquired as a result of the change of strategy . • Expert knowledge : significant domain knowledge was continually being updated by using a network of con - tacts with the experts in the field . Breaking information from other innovators rather than documented material is key . 4 . Discussion : requirements for creativity support In this section , issues for computer support to creativity are considered in the light of the results of the case studies described in above . The case studies described above illus - trate different approaches to the gathering of evidence about creative work . In the first example , the interaction with domain knowledge is the focal point at a detailed task level . From the second example , a model of creative cogni - tion was derived that encompasses the recurring patterns of the designer ' s activities . In both cases , the individual ' s expert knowledge of the field played a significant role in the process . The results of these studies were represented as models of creativity : one of creative process , the other of creative cognition . These models inform the requirements for a creativity support system in which creative work invol - ving a combination of knowledge evaluation and extension , visualisation and collaboration are centrally important . From the investigations of creative work and the models of cognition and process that have been derived , it is possi - ble to envisage a future creativity support environment that addresses the needs of the creative user . In terms of the functions required , there are three main activities that are fundamental to the user ' s thinking and working needs : support for ( i ) knowledge evaluation and extension , ( ii ) visualisation , and ( iii ) collaboration . Knowledge evaluation and extension is the application of domain knowledge in the generation of innovative out - comes , whether they be scientific results , design artefacts or devices . The nature of knowledge - intensive tasks that underpin creative work is an important research issue . Recent understanding about this subject has arisen from studies of people carrying out their tasks in real situations rather than in laboratory conditions . It is a subject that has been investigated in a small number of empirical studies 35 , 38 . The concept of knowledge as a dynamic phenomenon is differentiated from knowledge that has been gathered and stored as information . Something that is characterised as a " body of knowledge " which is not necessarily useful or to a purpose is a very different notion from that of knowledge that is meaningful and directed towards a purpose , Perkins 49 advocates the notion of " knowledge as design " for teaching and learning to promote critical and creative think - ing . This approach emphasises knowledge as something constructed by human enquiry and , by implication , continu - ally evolving and , therefore , is particularly relevant to stu - dies of creativity . In the studies reported above , expert knowledge was drawn upon , evaluated and reassessed : but that process was " creative " in that it often resulted in new knowledge being generated . The evaluation and extension of domain knowledge is the process of acquiring and evaluating different types of knowledge and relating it to new concepts under considera - tion . The application of existing knowledge to new concepts involves extension of that knowledge . The knowledge might be both informal ( notes and images ) and formal ( rules and strategies for use ) . Direct access to all forms of knowledge in the system and a facility to change it in the light of evaluation and experience is an important requirement . 10 L . Candy ~ Knowledge - Based Systems 10 ( 1997 ) 3 - 13 The development of expressive knowledge interaction techniques is a key research area . Providing the user with a repertoire of techniques for interaction with domain knowledge in a way that accords with his / her cognitive style is a need that has yet to be addressed . In addition , the integration of knowledge sources as diverse as geome - try , ergonomics , safety , the law and marketing is a signifi - cant aspect of research and is especially applicable in concurrent engineering design . Interaction techniques that enable designers to modify existing knowledge and express new knowledge to the sys - tem are needed . Techniques based upon appropriate domain models enable direct interaction between designers and the knowledge represented in the system . This implies providing end user access to the formal structures and rules of the design knowledge in the system using end user programming techniques based upon domain - specific formalisms 1 . Being able to interact with the knowledge enables the user to use it for evaluation of alternatives under consideration . Visualisation involves working with visual data such as images , drawings , sketches , diagrams , charts , graphs , graphical objects , that are specific to the domain . It takes the form of expressing ideas and concepts through sketch - ing , annotation and examining multiple or alternative views of the same data , all of which varies according to the domain of interest . In different fields of work , the use of visual representa - tions , whether it take the form of tables , graphs , pictorial images or drawings , is commonplace . The appearance of the object being designed is only one of the many concerns of these representations . Indeed , perspective drawings , for example , are often only used for communication with the client and not as an aid to design itself . However , visual and analytical design activities are to be found in all design domains from product design to engineering design , although the degree of emphasis varies considerably 50 . Whilst visualisation takes many forms depending upon the domain , its role in design is critical . Current CAD sys - tems provide some forms of visual representation ( e . g . 3D - rendered models ) and alternative representations ( e . g . the numerical co - ordinates ) . However , there are limited methods available for interacting with the full range of required representations . Tools and techniques such as pen - base input devices , expressive sketching techniques , graphical programming and electronic white boards have been developed 51 - 53 . Collaboration : complex design tasks , whether of a new automobile or a software system , are carried out by teams both large and small , often working in parallel . Studies of individual creative people carrying out small - scale tasks can only yield limited information . The nature of collaborative work should be investigated because we need to understand more about the way collective knowledge is communicated if we are to provide appropriate support for teamwork . Such communication , combined with support for information access via the internet , will be an important resource for creative users . However , these developments raise a number of research issues for interactive system designers : for example , how to address the sharing of criteria , the resolu - tion of conflicts and the representation of collaborative knowledge between different designers and teams . For effective support to human - to - human communica - tion , there is a need for computer environments that incor - porate techniques for the mediation of user communication and input to design activity . Jones and Edmonds 541 describe an environment which supports collaboration between colleagues who are working at different locations . The environment enables designers to participate in a shared environment and work independently at the same time . This enables designers to have an awareness of the design process of the shared artefact and to explore a particular issue privately . 5 . Integrated creativity support environments The requirements for computer support referred to above have already been realised as discrete elements in a number of applications . It is , however , the potential for significant changes in the total design of a creativity support environ - ment that is the concern here . Some issues to be addressed are as follows : • All three functions need to exist in combination , as a seamless environment within which the user has com - plete freedom of movement and data is exchangeable in common formats . • The interaction methods should be appropriate for the cognitive style and working practices of creative users . • Existing forms of computer system support remain to be made accessible to those who most need them without the time constraints of office hours and the physical limitations of desktop workstations in respect of port - ability . 5 . 1 . A prototypical design knowledge support environment An example of a system that employs domain knowledge for concept design support has been developed in order to demonstrate the kind of support environment that might lead the way towards a creativity support environment . The LUTCHI Vehicle Packager Knowledge Support System ( VPKSS ) 55 has been designed to aid designers at the conceptual stage of the automotive design process . Graphi - cal interactive techniques enable the designer to interact with the domain knowledge in specific concept vehicle design terms . An important aim is to provide that knowledge support to the designer as the design activity proceeds . The knowledge is used to enable the exploration of possible design solutions . L . Candy ~ Knowledge - Based Systems I0 ( 1997 ) 3 - 13 11 During the course of the designing activity using the VPKSS , the designer may encounter an unintended impli - cation of the modifications to the existing design made . This issue has to be resolved and , in doing so , there is a need to re - formulate the design problem in hand . In order to support this process , the VPKSS enables the designer to analyse the design in progress against a given set of constraints . The knowledge in the system embodies sets of proto - typical designs as well as rules about legal requirements , costs , manufacturing processes and other constraints . Inter - action with such knowledge has two effects : first , it provides information about constraints and underlying assumptions ( of the system ) that are immediately accessible to the designer during the process of developing the design . They can either be observed or ignored by the designer as the design proceeds . Second , it allows the designer to make explicit changes to the formal knowledge in the system , i . e . to alter the basic status of the design constraints . This might take the form of changing the ranges of the parameter values or , indeed , adding new parameters or relating existing ones in different ways . The VPKSS provides access to knowledge as a set of constraints in the form of domain - specific rules that can be used to test and generate design ideas as they are being developed . It provides facilities for the consultation of rules in the knowledge base that allows the designer to consider all the elements of the design under consideration and whether these meet existing rules . Where they do not , the designer may alter the rules by adding new constraints or modifying existing rules . It provides facilities for capturing knowledge dynamically as the design proceeds . interaction and AI , the notion of the human complementary system , alongside that of the human emulation system , is now on the interactive systems research agenda . Thus , research into computer automation and computer support may be reassessed as two different , but not entirely irrecon - cilable , paths towards understanding the needs of users and ways of generating better designs . Terveen 56 identifies themes where convergence from existing divergent streams may be possible . The areas for research suggested are : • natural communication : natural language , and direct manipulation ; • collaborative adaptation : adaptive systems and adapta - ble systems ; • reification : visible and concrete entities for shared access by user and system ; • balance between representation and reasoning and inter - action . Some additional requirements for further research are also identified : • techniques for integration of different AI techniques with each other and conventional systems to support the user ' s tasks with various tools : • allocation between user and system of automated and mediated tasks ; • integration and control of co - existing but different views , representation forms , levels of abstraction and complexity ; • the dynamic character of design in terms of strategies , procedures and knowledge application 157 . 6 . Future research Future research directions concerning interaction with creativity supporting systems are now considered . The chal - lenge will be to create support environments that go well beyond current concerns for better interaction techniques and the emulation of human cognitive processes . User - centred systems design arose in the 1980s in response to the new demands of personal computing and the manifest failure of many systems to meet the needs of an expanding population of users without technical exper - tise . The primary focus for the approach was how to take the results of investigations into people , their tasks and work practices into the design practice of system developers . For a time , the user interface became the main item of attention , both as the solution to achieving user satisfaction and a single unified view of the entire system , as seen from the user ' s perspective . In the 1990s , the scope of human - computer interaction has embraced collaboration and remote communication across an ever expanding range of specialist domains from science and finance to product and engineering design . In the bridging world between the fields of human - computer 7 . Conclusions The paper has presented ways in which empirical research in the form of case studies provides us with evi - dence about creative processes that can inform computer support system design . A better understanding of creativity comes from investigating people carrying out their work in the situational context of that work rather than as discrete tasks in experimental conditions . Existing computer sys - tems , whilst having many attributes that may be used to support users , have significant limitations when it comes to creativity . Requirements for creativity support systems were discussed and a future research agenda was proposed . Acknowledgements The author wishes to thank the tollowing for their support and co - operation to the research described in this paper : Michael Burrows , Ernest Edmonds , Bryan Murray , Stella O ' Brien , David Patrick , Andr6 Schappo and K . J . Shears Lotus Engineering . 12 L . Candy ~ Knowledge - Based Systems 10 ( 1997 ) 3 - 13 References l B . A . Nardi , A Small Matter of Programming , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA 1993 . 2 E . A . Edmonds , B . Soufi , Computational modelling of emergent shapes in design , in : J . S . Gero , F . Sudweeks , Preprints 2nd Interna - tional Round Table Conference on Computational Models of Creative Design , University of Sydney , 1992 , pp . 173 - 190 . 3 W . J . Mitchell , A computational view of design creativity , in : J . S . Gero , M . - L . Maher ( Eds . ) , Modelling Creativity and Knowledge - based Creative Design , Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , 1993 , pp . 25 - 42 . 4 B . Soufi , E . A . Edmonds , Cognitive issues in emergence and inter - action : implications for computational models , Preprints of 3rd Inter - national Conference on Computational Models of Creative Design , Heron Island , December 1995 , pp . 131 - 146 . 5 R . J . Sternberg , The Nature of Creativity : Contemporary Psychological Perspectives , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK , 1988 . 6 I . A . Taylor , A retrospective view of creativity investigation , in : I . A . Taylor , J . W . Getzels ( Eds . ) , Perspectives in Creativity , Aldine , Chicago , 1975 , pp . 1 - 36 . 7 A . Roe , Artists and their work , Journal of Personality 16 ( 1946 ) 1 - 40 . 8 A . Roe , A psychological study of eminent psychologists and anthro - pologists and a comparison with biological and physical scientists , Psychological Monographs 67 ( 1953 ) . 9 F . Barron , Creative Person and Creative Process , Holt , Rinehart and Winston , New York , 1969 . 10 J . W . Getzels , P . W . Jackson , Creativity and intelligence : explorations with gifted students , Wiley , New York , 1962 . 11 J . P . Guilford , Creativity : retrospect and prospect , Journal of Creative Behaviour 4 ( 1970 ) 149 - 168 . 12 R . S . Albert , Genius and Eminence : The Social Psychology of Crea - tivity and Exceptional Achievement , Pergamon Press , Oxford , 1983 . 13 H . Poincar ~ , Mathematical creation , in : H . Poincar6 ( Ed . ) , The Foun - dations of Science , Science Press , New York , 1913 . 14 P . W . Jackson , S . Messick , The person , the product and the response : conceptual problems in the assessment of creativity , Journal of Per - sonality 36 ( 1965 ) 309 - 329 . 15 T . B . Sprecher , Committee report on criteria of creativity , in : C . W . Taylor ( Ed . ) , Third University of Utah Research Conference on the Identification of Creative Scientific Talent , University of Utah Press , Salt Lake City , UT , 1959 . 16 S . J . Parnes , Creative Bebaviour Workbook , Scribners , New York , 1967 . 17 D . W . Taylor , P . C . Berry , C . H . Block , Does group participation when using brainstorming facilitate or inhibit creative thinking ? Adminis - trative Science Quarterly 3 ( 1958 ) 23 - 47 . 18 E . P . Torrance , R . Gupta , Development and Evaluation of recorded programmed experience in creative thinking in the fourth grade , Min - neapolis Bureau of Educational Research , University of Minnesota , 1964 . 19 D . Michie , R . Johnston , The Creative Computer : Machine Intelligence and Human Knowledge , Viking , London , 1984 . 20 M . Sharpies , Cognition , Computers and Creative Writing , Ellis Horwood , Chichester , UK , 1985 . 21 P . N . Johnson - Laird , The Computer and the Mind , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA , 1988 . 22 M . A . Boden , The Creative Mind : Myths and Mechanisms , Weiden - feld and Nicolson , London , 1990 . 23 P . N . Johnson - Laird , Human and Machine Thinking , Erlbaum , Hills - dale , NJ , 1993 . 24 T . Dartnall ( Ed . ) , Artificial Intelligence and Creativity , Kluwer , Dor - drecht , 1994 . 25 G . Fischer , Creativity enhancing design environments , in : J . S . Gero , M . - L . Maher ( Eds . ) , Modelling Creativity and Knowledge - based Creative Design , Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , 1993 , pp . 269 - 282 . 26 T . Calvert , A . Bruderlin , T . Schiphorst , C . Welman , The evolution of an interface for choreographers , Proceedings of INTERCHF93 , Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM . Ncw York , 1993 , pp . 115 - 122 . 27 E . A . Edmonds , L . Candy , Knowledge support for conceptual design : the amplification of creativity , Procedings HCI International , Elsevier , Amsterdam , 1993 , pp . 350 - 355 . 28 D . Partridge , J . Rowe , Computers and Creativity , Intellect , Oxford . 1994 . 29 R . W . Weisburg , Creativity , Genius and Other Myths , Freeman , New York , 1986 . 30 D . N . Perkins , The Mind ' s Best Work , Harvard University Press , Cam - bridge , MA . 198 I . 31 G . Basalla , The Evolution of Technology , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK , 1988 . 32 M . Maccoby , The Innovative Mind at Work , IEEE Spectrum ( 1991 ) 23 - 35 . 33 N . Cross , A . C . Cross , Winning by design : the methods of Gordon Murray , racing car designer , Design Studies 17 ( 1 ) ( 1996 ) 91 - 107 . 34 B . Lawson , How Designer ' s Think , Architectural Press , Butterworths , London , 1980 . 35 W . Visser . Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving , Design Studies 16 ( 2 ) ( 1995 ) 171 - 187 . 36 R . Guindon , H . Krasner , B . Curtis , Cognitive processes in software design , Proceedings of the 2nd IFIP Conference on Human Computer Interaction - INTERACT ' 87 , North - Holland . Amsterdam , 1987 , pp . 383 - 388 . 37 D . G . UIlman , T . G . Dietterich , L . Stauffer , A model of the mechanical design process based on empirical data , AI EDAM 2 ( 1 ) ( 1988 ) 33 - 52 . 38 W . Visser , Organisation of design activities : opportunistic with hier - archical episodes , Interacting with Computers 6 ( 3 ) ( 1994 ) 235 - 274 . 39 R . Roy . Case studies of creativity in innovative product development . Design Studies 14 ( 4 ) I1993 ) 423 - 443 . 40 L . Candy , S . M . O ' Brien , E . A . Edmonds , End user manipulation of a knowledge based system : a study of an expert ' s practice , International Journal of Man - Machine Studies 38 ( 1 ) ( 1993 ) 129 - 145 . 41 S . M . O ~ Brien , L . Candy , E . A . Edmonds , T . J . Foster , E . McDaid , End - user Knowledge Manipulation Systems : The Speech Knowledge Interface , in Proceedings of the 20th Annual Computer Science Con - terence , ACM , Computer Science Conference ' 92 , Kansas City , KS , March 1992 . pp . 359 - 366 . 42 E . A . Edmonds . L . Candy , R . M . Jones , B . Soufi , Support for collabora - tive design : agents and emergence , Communications of the ACM 37 ( 7 ) ( 1994 ) 41 - 47 . 43 L . Candy , E . A . Edmonds , Artefacts and the designer ' s process : impli - cations li ) r computer support to design , Journal of Design Sciences and Technology 3 ( 1 ) ( 1994 ) 11 - 31 . 44 L . Candy , E . A . Edmonds , Creative design of the Lotus bicycle : impli - cations for knowledge support systems research , Design Studies 17 ( 1 ) ( 1996 ) 71 - 90 . 45 L . Candy , E . A . Edmonds , Creativity in Knowledge Work : A Process Model and Requirements for Support , in : H . Hassan , C . Nicastri ( Eds . ) , Proceedings OZCHI ' 95 , HCI : A Light into the Future , CH1SIG , 1995 , pp . 242 - 248 . 46 E . A . Edmonds , S . M . O ' Brien , T . Bayley , E . McDaid , Constructing end - user knowledge manipulation systems , International Journal of Man - Machine Studies 38 ( 1 ) ( 1993 ) 51 - 70 . 47 S . M . O ' Brien , Spectral features of plosives in connected - speech signals , International Journal of Man - Machine Studies 38 ( I ) ( 1993 ) 97 - 127 . 48 R . A . Finke , T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , Creative Cognition : Theory , Research and Application , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1992 . 49 D . N . Perkins , Knowledge as Design , Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , 1986 . 50 M . Tovey , Thinking styles and modelling systems , Design Studies 7 ( 1 ) ( 1986 ) 20 - 30 . 51 K . Carter , Computer support for designers : back to the drawing board , in : L . Candy , E . A . Edmonds ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the International L . Candy ~ Knowledge - Based Systems I0 ( 1997 ) 3 13 13 Symposium on Creativity and Cognition , Loughborough , April 1993 , pp . 221 - 228 . 52 B . S . Murray . E . A . Edmonds , L . Candy , T . J . Foster , Constructing semantic graphical objects , in : J . Santo ( Ed . ) , Compugrapbics ' 93 : Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Computational Graphics and Visualization Techniques , University of Lisbon , Portugal , 1993 , pp . 46 - 57 . 53 M . D . Gross , The electronic cocktail napkin : a computational environ - ment for wnrking with design diagrams , Design Studies 17 ( 1 ) ( 1996 ) 53 - 69 . 54 R . M . Jones . E . A . Edmonds , Supporting collaborative design in a seamless environment , Concurrent Engineering : Research and Appli - cations ( CERA ) 3 ( 3 ) ( 1995 ) 203 211 . 55 L . Candy , E . A . Edmonds , D . J . Patrick , Interactive support to concep - tual design , AI system support for conceptual design , in : J Sharpe ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the 1995 Lancaster International Workshop on Engineering Design , Springer - Verlag , Berlin , 1995 , pp . 260 - 278 . 56 L . Terveen , Overview of human - computer collaboration , Knowledge Based Systems ( Special Issue on Human - Computer Collaboration ) 8 ( 2 - 3 ) ( 1995 ) 67 - 81 . 57 L . T . M . Blessing , Engineering design and artificial intelligence : a pro - mising marriage ' ? , in : N . Cross , K . Roozenburg , N . Roozenburg ( Eds . ) , Research in Design Thinking , Delft University of Technology , May 1992 , pp . 177 - 212 .