Leading Edge Perspective Understanding the cell : Future views of structural biology Martin Beck , 1 , 3 , 4 , 5 , * Roberto Covino , 2 , 4 , 5 , * Inga Ha¨nelt , 3 , 4 , 5 , * and Michaela Mu¨ller - McNicoll 3 , 4 , 5 , * 1 Max Planck Institute of Biophysics , Max - von - Laue - Straße 3 , 60438 Frankfurt am Main , Germany 2 Frankfurt Institute for Advanced Studies , Ruth - Moufang - Straße 1 , 60438 Frankfurt am Main , Germany 3 Goethe University Frankfurt , Frankfurt , Germany 4 Senior author 5 These authors contributed equally * Correspondence : martin . beck @ biophys . mpg . de ( M . B . ) , covino @ ﬁas . uni - frankfurt . de ( R . C . ) , haenelt @ biochem . uni - frankfurt . de ( I . H . ) , mueller - mcnicoll @ bio . uni - frankfurt . de ( M . M . - M . ) https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 017 SUMMARY Determining the structure and mechanisms of all individual functional modules of cells at high molecular detail has often been seen as equal to understanding how cells work . Recent technical advances have led to a ﬂush of high - resolution structures of various macromolecular machines , but despite this wealth of detailed information , our understanding of cellular function remains incomplete . Here , we discuss present - day limitations of structural biology and highlight novel technologies that may enable us to analyze molecular functions directly inside cells . We predict that the progression toward structural cell biology will involve a shift toward conceptualizing a 4D virtual reality of cells using digital twins . These will capture cellular segments in a highly enriched molecular detail , include dynamic changes , and facilitate simulations of molecular pro - cesses , leading to novel and experimentally testable predictions . Transferring biological questions into algo - rithms that learn from the existing wealth of data and explore novel solutions may ultimately unveil how cells work . INTRODUCTION Structural biology is an attempt to answer the question ‘‘what are we made of ? ’’ This attempt follows the reductionist approach , which aims to identify the most fundamental constit - uents of matter and study their properties . It led us to discover a hierarchy of structures , from molecules through atoms all the way down to fundamental particles , such as quarks and elec - trons . Cells are the minimal units of life and are made of billions of distinct molecules . Although this answers part of the ques - tion of what we are made of , it does not answer a key question of cell biology—how do cellular functions spontaneously emerge from the interaction of these billions of molecules ? Cell biology usually lacks the structural resolution to under - stand the role of individual molecules and the choreography that organizes them in functional units , which ultimately distin - guishes a living cell from an inanimate object . To gain this un - derstanding , the integration of structural and cellular biology is an outstanding challenge . With the discovery of the DNA double - helix and the ﬁrst pro - tein structures , a structure - function paradigm emerged , under - pinning the implicit assumption of structural biology : by knowing the detailed structures of biomolecules , one will understand their function , and the sum of all individual structure - function relation - ships will enable us to explain how cells work . This approach has been immensely successful because it led to an atomistic picture of many molecular machines and for many molecules set the foundation of our present understanding of their function . How - ever , with increasing coverage and in - depth characterization of the cell’s constituents , challenges to this assumption are emerging . The ﬁrst challenge stems from the realization that all biomole - cules are inherently dynamic . Thermal ﬂuctuations can transmit energy to molecules from their environment . In response , these molecules will experience spontaneous conformational changes , ranging from the local ﬂipping of a side chain to global folding processes . Instead of considering a biomolecule as a sin - gle well - deﬁned static structure , we must think of it as a struc - tural ensemble , i . e . , a large collection of conformations , each populated with different probabilities . 1 The molecule will sto - chastically interconvert between different conformations . For some molecules , there will be few conformations overwhelm - ingly more probable than others , such as the globular protein serum albumin ; but for others , the ensemble will be very hetero - geneous , consisting of many conformations , all nearly equally probable , such as in the case of disordered proteins . Increasing evidence points to the fact that the entire conformational ensemble , including rare conformations , determines the function of a biomolecule . 2 , 3 Such an ensemble view implies that the probability of populating the different alternative conformations can be modulated by thermodynamic parameters , interactions with other biomolecules , post - translational modiﬁcations ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 ª 2023 The Authors . Published by Elsevier Inc . 545 This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) . ( PTMs ) , or the local physiochemical features of the environment , such as ion concentrations . This view is well established in biophysics ; rooted in the statistical mechanics describing mo - lecular systems ; and explored by molecular dynamics ( MD ) and biophysical approaches , such as nuclear magnetic reso - nance ( NMR ) , electron paramagnetic resonance ( EPR ) , Fo¨rster resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) , hydrogen - deuterium ex - change ( HDX ) mass spectrometry ( MS ) , and single - molecule force - spectroscopy . A conformational ensemble view provides a comprehensive instrument to understand how a dynamic envi - ronment can modulate a molecular conformational ensemble and its function ( Figure 1 ) . The second , more profound challenge is related to the limits of using the reductionist approach to understand complex sys - tems . In 1972 , physicist P . Anderson published the very inﬂuen - tial article ‘‘More is different . ’’ 4 Anderson claimed that the reduc - tionist hypothesis does not imply a constructionist one . In other words , knowing the elementary constituents of complex sys - tems is not enough to understand how these systems actually work . The reason for this is that new properties and effective laws emerge in complex systems that are very difﬁcult to predict from their fundamental description . For example , even if we knew the precise chemical structure of a lipid molecule , it would be very challenging to predict that many lipids together with wa - ter and in the presence of thermal ﬂuctuations will spontaneously self - assemble into complex structures , such as lipid bilayers . To describe an isolated lipid molecule , we use concepts such as conﬁgurations , dihedral angles , and chemical bonds . Yet , these are useless to describe a bilayer , where concepts coming from materials physics , such as phase behavior , mechanical moduli , and lateral organization , are instead more pertinent . Similarly , polymer physics offers important tools to conceptualize the properties of membrane - less organelles or chromatin , while characterization of the individual components relies on different concepts , such as chemical bonds and their rotation , charge dis - tribution , the scaling law or multivalent binding . However , pre - dicting their behavior as polymers in situ remains challenging . Molecules in a cell constantly interact with each other in a self - organizing manner , creating a dynamic subcellular organization with higher - order macromolecular assemblies in astonishing complexity in a tightly regulated choreography . This molecular sociology of cells 5 is not well understood . Hence , we need a new conceptual framework , language , and technical tools to bridge the gap from single molecules to the entirety of the cell . In this perspective on the future of structural cell biology , we review the limits of present - day approaches . We discuss the concept of cellular self - organization , which is crucial for cellular function and includes phenomena such as local conﬁnement , molecular rulers , and self - organization mechanisms of mem - branes . We identify high - yield targets for technological develop - ments and sketch our vision of the next generation of experi - ments , structural models , and scientiﬁc conceptualization and how this may enable us to extend structural biology from study - ing isolated macromolecular assemblies toward understanding how these assemblies self - organize into the complex structures and pathways that we observe inside cells . Overcoming this challenge will require the integration of structural and cell biology , biophysics , and computational sciences . STATE OF THE ART OF STRUCTURAL BIOLOGY : ADVANCES AND LIMITATIONS As of today , a considerable part of the molecular repertoire of cells has been elucidated at a high resolution . Structural analysis in combination with in vitro reconstitution and advanced biochemical techniques uncovered the mechanisms of an increasing number of molecular machines at a very high molec - ular detail . This wealth of data enabled training of a new genera - tion of AI - based prediction tools that in turn accelerated struc - ture determination efforts further . 6 AI - based analyses revealed a great number of previously unknown domain folds , alternative isoforms , and protein interfaces and even allowed the design of new proteins . 7 – 10 Integrated structural biology has made very large cellular assemblies amenable to structural analysis , which had seemed far out of reach only 10 years ago . Finally , in situ structural biology techniques have been used to provide the ﬁrst glimpse of how molecular machines operate inside cells . This in - cludes detailed insights into key processes of life , such as DNA replication , transcription , chromatin remodeling , RNA process - ing , cellular transport , translation , autophagy , membrane re - modeling , and many more , as exempliﬁed in work by Greenan et al . , 11 Deguchi et al . , 12 O’Reilly et al . , 13 Greber et al . , 14 Wagner et al . , 15 and Li et al . 16 The progress in charting the structured ter - ritories of the cellular interior has , however , also made it very apparent that some regions of our cellular maps continue to remain white spots , despite the new technologies and advances noted above . In the following section , we will cover several cur - rent examples , where present - day approaches have reached their technical limits . Molecules within cells are inherently dynamic , but present - day structural biology is mostly blind to conformational dynamics . Traditional in vitro structural biology techniques , such as sin - gle - particle cryo - electron microscopy ( cryo - EM ) or X - ray crys - tallography , have difﬁculties in capturing low - abundant or dynamic species and transition states . They usually select for high resolution based on the averaging of large numbers of ho - mogeneous particles . Poorly sampled states , short - lived inter - mediates , or disordered regions will thus be missed . To some extent , applying X - ray free - electron laser ( XFEL ) pulses to pro - tein nanocrystals 17 or performing single - particle cryo - EM under turnover conditions , where the biological process under scrutiny is snap frozen , 18 , 19 can enrich the conformational ensemble of protein complexes . NMR and EPR spectroscopy are capable of complementing these shortcomings 20 – 22 because they enable sampling of conformational dynamics of biomolecules , or at least distinct atoms , in biomolecules . Single - molecule FRET 23 , 24 and high - speed atomic force microscopy ( hsAFM ) 25 – 27 even provide temporal resolution of the dynamics of individual molecules . Finally , HDX - MS quantiﬁes solvent accessibility and thus reveals binding sites of other molecules and interaction partners or conformational changes . 28 However , all these techniques require rather large amounts of the respec - tive biomolecules or site - speciﬁc labeling ; they are in part limited in the size of the studied molecule and are mostly applied in vitro . As a consequence of these limitations , we often understand little about structural transitions and dynamics , which are key to un - derstanding how molecules carry out their biological functions . ll OPEN ACCESS 546 Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 Perspective Thus , characterizing structural dynamics experimentally , albeit being essential , remains challenging , and novel or further reﬁned methods are urgently required . Another emerging fact is that many unstructured molecules are important for cellular function . For example , proteins con - taining intrinsically disordered regions ( IDRs ) are very abun - dant in higher eukaryotes and play essential roles in various biological processes , 29 , 30 but we lack information on their structure or conformation . Such proteins contribute to the formation of membrane - less organelles , deﬁne the biophysical properties of subcellular microenvironments , bend mem - branes , extend the interaction repertoire of protein complexes beyond folded interfaces , and even conﬁne small mole - cules . 31 – 35 However , all these physiological functions remain ill - deﬁned at the molecular level due to the absence of struc - tural data . Figure 1 . Scheme illustrating the extent to which the structure of protein complexes may be modulated in eukaryotes AsinglestructureofagivenproteincomplexrepresentedbyitsPDBentryshouldbeconceivedasacollapsedconceptualizationofvariousspliceisoforms , post - translational modiﬁcations ( PTMs ) , alternative interactions , and conformations that modulate the respective structural ensemble inside of cells . ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 547 Perspective Structural biology also largely neglects post - transcriptional modiﬁcations and PTMs . For example , alternative splicing vari - ants that govern cell - type speciﬁcity in eukaryotes are not commonly considered in structural models , and consensus gene models are used instead , e . g . , for the production of recom - binant proteins . Many PTMs are highly dynamic and added to proteins in a stochastic manner . Thus , they often are lost during averaging techniques , while omics techniques also struggle to provide a comprehensive picture of all PTMs . Box 1 exempliﬁes how these shortcomings limit our understanding of messenger RNA - protein particles ( mRNPs ) and their processing . Functional importance of high - resolution conformational states Structural analyses in combination with in vitro reconstitution have elucidated the ﬁne details of many molecular processes . However , in vitro structural biology often operates under the assumption that the structural states that converge to high reso - lution , e . g . , by averaging - based techniques , are also the states that are functionally important . But is this a valid assumption ? First , production and assembly of the respective molecular in - gredients in a test tube limit which and how many structural states can be captured . More importantly , such in vitro ap - proaches are blind to the cellular context , such as local concentrations , exclusion effects , PTMs , or alternatively spliced transcript isoforms . Inarguably , one can infer constructive hy - potheses about how given structures look or work in situ ; yet , local folding and ﬁne details are likely different inside cells , and conformational equilibria will be shifted . Thus , favoring high - resolution structures imposes a bias . For example , during cryo - EM single - particle classiﬁcation and sort - ing , a considerable fraction of molecules that do not contribute to high resolution is often considered ‘‘junk’’ or damaged and is removed from the analysis . The pitfalls of this procedure were recently demonstrated for ribosomes : during in situ structural analysis of translation inside of intact cells , where molecular damage can be largely ruled out , many of the analyzed ribo - somes showed clear - cut features of native activity , i . e . , the presence of tRNAs during translation elongation , but still did not converge to high resolution . 44 – 46 These particles thus likely represent conformationally variable states or transitions be - tween structurally more deﬁned intermediates within the ensemble of all states ( Figure 1 ) . This does not mean that they are functionally less important . To value a given structure based solely on the resolution that has been achieved may therefore be misleading . We should embrace the realization that medium - to - high - resolution structures are often sufﬁcient to draw function - ally important conclusions and that coupled with AI - generated structural ensembles , they allow for an accurate understanding of processes in cells that could not be captured solely by in vitro high - resolution structural analysis . Consequently , the question of whether the resolution of a structure is high enough only makes sense in the context of a sci - entiﬁc question that the structure should answer . To assess a large conformational change or to understand the overall archi - tecture of a large macromolecular assembly , medium - range resolutions at around 10 – 20 A˚ , often achieved in integrative structural biology , are sufﬁcient . In such cases , it does not nega - tively affect the overall conclusions if some side - chain dihedrals are wrong . In contrast , understanding the mechanism of ion co - ordination requires a much higher resolution of < 3 A˚ , possibly also resolving water molecules around the site , which is typical for X - ray crystallography or single - particle EM . Advancing structural biology by combining in vitro and in situ data Much of our understanding of molecular activities at high resolu - tion is inferred from in vitro reconstitution techniques . These were traditionally used to analyze complex cellular phenomena experimentally because it is very difﬁcult to observe molecules at work inside of cells . But in almost every single case when in situ structural analysis has been successfully carried out , the re - sults challenged previous dogmas or shifted scientiﬁc concepts considerably . One example is the barrel - shaped 26S protea - some , composed of the 20S core and 19S caps , which is the ma - jor degradation chamber of cells . While the 19S cap unfolds pro - teins , the 20S core particle chops them into peptides . For decades , biochemists have tried to purify double - capped 26S proteasomes , which had been conceived as notoriously unsta - ble ex cellulo , falling apart into the 20S core and 19S cap parti - cles . This quest came to an end when in situ structural analysis revealed that the majority of proteasomes are actually singly capped in cells . 47 Other examples are ribosomes , which trans - late the genetic message encoded in mRNAs into proteins by cycling through various functional states that have been carefully characterized in isolation . Initially , quantitative assessment of the distribution of elongation cycle intermediates inside of cells was inferred from analyses of complexes that were rapidly isolated from active cells . 48 However , the exact distribution of elongation states turned out to be different once such analyses became possible inside of cells . 44 , 45 Similarly , the architecture of the bac - terial expressosome that consists of a leading RNA polymerase and the trailing ribosome differs inside of cells compared with previous in vitro analyses . 13 Another striking example is the nuclear pore complex ( NPC ) , a 120 - MDa assembly encoded by (cid:1) 30 different Box 1 . Structural understanding of mRNPs Although many of the key enzymes such as RNA polymerases , the spliceosome , RNA degraders , helicases , and the ribosome are understood in considerable detail , 36 – 40 we know little about the actual structure of messenger ribonucleoproteins ( mRNPs ) . This is largely because mRNPs show a large compositional complexity , have a high conformational ﬂexibility , and are constantly remodeled throughout their life cycle . Moreover , a large number of RNA - binding proteins feature extended IDRs and form biomolecular condensates . The different regions of an mRNA ( UTRs , cod - ing region , and poly ( A ) - tail ) are occupied by different RNA - binding proteins with different IDRs and different condensate properties . Within mRNPs alsoRNA structureandRNA : RNAinteractions haveto beconsidered . Thisdiversityallowsthespatialand temporal separation ofRNA processingor editingevents ; preventsRNAmodiﬁcation , tangling , anddegradation ; andpromotesproperpackaging , sorting , andtransport ofmRNAs . 41 – 43 Atthe same time , it makes in vitro structural approaches nearly impossible , which complicates the molecular conceptualization of mRNPs . ll OPEN ACCESS 548 Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 Perspective genes . In vitro structural analysis of nucleoporins by X - ray crystallography revealed the respective folds and their subcomplexes , which were essential to understand NPC architecture . However , the structural ensemble of individual components was insufﬁcient to understand how NPCs oligo - merize into fully assembled nuclear pores , which was re - vealed only in combination with in situ structural analysis 49 ( Figure 2 ) . However , the weakness of in vitro structural biology is also its strength . Although biological complexity inside test tubes re - mains limited , the ability to precisely control the ingredients of a given structural analysis provides a strong advantage , as according to Feynman ‘‘What I cannot create , I do not under - stand . ’’ In vitro structural biology will undoubtedly continue to be important because it is not limited by cellular abundances or the molecular weight of the target molecules . It is crucial when high - throughput is required , for instance , to elucidate how various small molecules bind to a drug target . 50 Recent developments in multi - dataset crystallographic analyses have even improved and accelerated the identiﬁcation of ligand binding and structural events . 51 In combination with functional assays , in vitro structural studies were and continue to be essential to understand the molecular details of a process . They , for example , provide high - resolution information on active sites of an enzyme and allow to directly study the conse - quences of mutations or modulatory ligands . Structures ob - tained in vitro are also often a prerequisite for in situ structural analysis . This is particularly relevant for template matching , a method to identify structural signatures of known assemblies inside of cells ( see below ) . UNDERSTANDING MOLECULAR ACTIVITIES INSIDE OF CELLS To ultimately understand how cells work , we need techniques that monitor molecular activities inside cells in a way that enables us to quantify structural dynamics and local concentrations . For any class of molecules , it will be important to quantify cellular content with a very high spatial and temporal resolution . Devel - oping such techniques remains challenging although recent im - aging and omics techniques have brought us closer to this goal . Quantitative and spatial measurements by cryo - ET : Moving away from averaging Cryo - electron tomography ( cryo - ET ) is a versatile method to visualize the molecular interior of cells . Here , the fraction of a cell contained in each tomogram is revealed in its entirety , pri - marily as a 3D distribution of electron optical density . The respective data can be analyzed in manifold ways , ﬁrst and fore - most , by segmentation of easily identiﬁable features such as ri - bosomes or membranes . Such analysis techniques are well suited to , e . g . , analyze the local curvature and thickness of mem - branes , to trace the trajectory of mRNA molecules decorated with ribosomes or to identify microtubules or actin ﬁlaments . In combination with AI - based image analysis techniques , segmen - tation becomes objective and quantitative . 52 – 56 Further minimi - zation of false negative detections and human interference with data analysis will be essential to continuously increase the accu - racy of capturing cellular processes . Subtomogram averaging in cryo - ET is based on correlation averaging and classiﬁcation of structural features observed Figure 2 . Integrated structural model of the nuclear pore Differenttypesofdatawereusedtomodelspeciﬁcpartsofthedisplayedstructuralmodel . Theresultinghigh - ﬁdelitymodelisheterogeneousintermsofaccuracy butaprerequisiteformoleculardynamicssimulations . Thesubtypesofcomponents , theiraccuracy , andemergentpropertiesofthemodelareindicatedinboxes . ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 549 Perspective repetitively in tomograms , thereby enabling the high - resolution structure determination of large macromolecular complexes and their functional states . Recently , averaging in close to atomic detail has become possible , enabling high - resolution structural biology inside of cells . This , for example , allowed the elucidation of the substrate - processing species distribution of 26S proteasomes 47 or of the functional states of the ribosome during the translation elongation cycle . 45 , 46 , 57 This approach , however , requires that enough particles populate a given func - tional state . Therefore , it will be crucial to analyze tomographic content beyond averaging techniques . One possible solution is template matching , which is a method that systematically scans tomo - graphic content for the signature of reference structures . The re - sulting cross - correlation volume can be statistically analyzed to assess whether the respective reference structure has been observed at a given position and orientation in a cellular tomo - gram , 58 thus providing information on conformational state and location at a single - molecule level in cells . Among the attempts to experimentally implement this so - called visual proteomics concept , which aims to generate molecular atlases that describe the cellular content in high detail , template matching has been considered a potent approach . However , thus far , template matching has been suffering from size and abundance limita - tions 59 , 60 and has rarely been applied to particles other than ribo - somes or proteasomes . Conceptually , there is no strict physical limit that would prevent the recognition of smaller and less abun - dant features , such as the molecular weight limit of single - parti - cle EM , which has been pushed to ever smaller entities . A recent preprint reports systematically optimized template - matching parameters for tomographic data generated with the latest gen - eration of hardware that was able to detect very subtle confor - mational changes and particles as small as individual tubulin segments . 61 In the future , the template - free identiﬁcation of recurrent structural features 62 may facilitate an entirely unbiased annotation of cryo - electron tomograms . Also , upcoming ma - chine learning ( ML ) methods may address this issue . 55 At a ﬁrst glance , the resulting molecular atlases may appear descriptive . They , however , can be mined to deduce concepts of functional organization in space , which otherwise would not be apparent , and may allow to formulate new types of hypotheses . Examples for this could include the orientation of the catalytic center of different macromolecular complexes toward each other , align - ment of molecules at membrane deformations or aggregates , local clustering of conformational states , and many more . Regardless of all these strengths , the cryo - ET technology also suffers a few limitations . Genetic labeling remains challenging . Although some solutions that rely , e . g . , on the fusion of recogniz - able shapes or clusters of dense material were proposed , they are not generically applicable to proteins of any size or expres - sion level . 63 The fact that the fraction of a cell that can be analyzed by cryo - ET at once is inherently small also limits the an - alyses . Finally , the inability to resolve biological processes directly in time , simply because samples have to be ﬂash frozen , is a severe drawback . Moving forward , visualizing the molecular sociology of cells comprehensively and in high detail will require a combination of cryo - ET with complementary techniques that will allow to , e . g . , indirectly stage biological processes in time to trigger rare events or to identify molecular content . Those will include , but not be limited to , ﬂuorescence - based super - res - olution imaging , subcellular omics , single - molecule approaches , AI - based targeting of rare subcellular features , optogenetic con - trol of transient biological events or local conﬁnement , and mi - croﬂuidic sorting of cellular populations . Fluorescence - based super - resolution imaging Recent methods pushed the resolution of ﬂuorescence - based super - resolution microscopy ( SRM ) techniques to subnanome - ter precision . 12 , 64 , 65 Thus , SRM techniques are well capable of resolving individual macromolecules and their domains , although not with the atomic precision that is achieved with many structural biology techniques . In combination with cryo - ET , these advances are paving the way for structural biology in - side cells . The complementary strengths of SRM with respect to cryo - ET are its capability of visualizing unstructured molecules at very high detail , providing quantitative data , such as molecule numbers , stoichiometries , or distances and allowing time - resolved analyses inside living cells . Minimal ﬂuorescence photon ﬂuxes ( MINFLUX ) nanoscopy , for example , achieves an unprecedented three - dimensional spatial resolution of 2 to 3 nm , allowing true molecular - scale ﬂuo - rescence imaging 66 of different subcellular structures , including the NPC 67 and the mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system ( MICOS ) complex . 68 Different adaptations allow multiplexing and quantitative imaging of multiple targets simultaneously , 67 , 69 , 70 as well as single - molecule spatiotem - poral tracking 71 in living cells . 12 , 64 Development of MINSTED nanoscopy based on MINFLUX combined with STED ( stimulated emission depletion ) further increases spatial precision and pro - vides structural information for target macromolecules on the scale of a single amino acid . 72 Using the NPC as a reference yielded an astonishing localization precision of 2 . 3 A˚ . This tech - nology also revealed that Mic60 proteins in the mitochondrial in - ner membrane of human cells form ring - like assemblies at junc - tions of cristae . Another approach to enhance resolution is resolution enhancement by sequential imaging ( RESI ) , 65 which can separate localizations in very close proximity . This method uses Exchange - PAINT to label neighboring molecules with different photo - switchable tags by orthogonal DNA barcoding . Despite these advances , major technical challenges of ﬂuo - rescence nanoscopy remain , e . g . , the very small ﬁeld of view , the long timescales required for image acquisition , and the lack of multiplexing in live cells . Initial attempts to overcome these issues have been made ; for example , short - distance self - quenching in ﬂuorophore dimers was used to reduce back - ground ﬂuorescence signal while increasing the photon budget in the bound state by almost 2 - fold . 73 Transient adapter - medi - ated switching for high - throughput 3D DNA - PAINT ( FLASH - PAINT ) allows imaging of a nearly unlimited number of target sites , revealing the organization of cilia and Golgi in unprece - dented detail . 74 To achieve the highest spatial precision , low background signal and endogenous ( multiplexed ) labeling , smaller ﬂuorophores , and new labeling strategies have to be developed . With those developments , novel approaches such as using RNA - FISH coupled with FLASH - PAINT and MINFLUX could make addressing challenges such as resolving the ll OPEN ACCESS 550 Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 Perspective ultrastructure of membrane - less organelles or the conformation of mRNPs feasible ( Box 1 ) . Moreover , ﬂuorescence lifetime im - aging of ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer ( FLIM - FRET ) can measure the conformation of IDRs , and when combined with genetic code expansion technologies , FRET pairs can be introduced at multiple sites to generate a conformational map of IDRs directly inside of cells . 75 These and additional ap - proaches , such as ﬂuorescence nanoscopy with expansion mi - croscopy ( ExM ) 76 , 77 or SRM with cryo - ET , will further advance the technological possibilities to observe the molecular details of subcellular organization changes in living cells with high quan - titative power , thereby bringing us closer to observing molecules at work . Subcellular and spatial omics The term omics refers to the investigation of the sum of speciﬁc classes of biomolecules , e . g . , proteins , lipids , mRNAs , or metab - olites within cells . Bulk omics approaches are ideally suited to identify and quantify biomolecules and their variants in speciﬁc cellular states and to quantitatively describe molecular pro - cesses . However , bulk omics methods cannot capture the dy - namic spatiotemporal organization of subcellular architecture because cellular context and spatial information are lost during cell lysis . More recently developed spatial omics techniques attempt to circumvent this limitation , 78 but a global and precise picture of cellular organization is not yet possible . Current spatial omics applications are either genome - wide or targeted . Genome - wide approaches proﬁle the entire molecular content of single cells within their native context , with spatial information from the location within the tissue , but rarely provide subcellular res - olution . Targeted omics approaches , on the other hand , proﬁle the molecular content of a speciﬁc cellular segment , a subcellu - lar structure , or organelle in situ in great detail but only provide a limited cellular snapshot . The cellular segments have to be bio - chemically puriﬁed or physically separated , e . g . , by laser capture microdissection ( LCM ) , followed by RNA sequencing ( RNA - seq ) or MS in order to identify and quantify their content . Alternatively , if puriﬁcation is not possible , the content of a speciﬁc cellular segment can be obtained by proximity labeling of RNAs or pro - teins , using , e . g . , APEX2 fused to marker proteins of the respec - tive subcellular structures , followed by puriﬁcation and sequencing or MS of the labeled components . 79 While targeted RNA - seq will capture all expressed RNAs in the respective segment , the detection of local proteomes by MS is very limited due to the lack of signal ampliﬁcation procedures . Lowly abun - dant proteins , splice isoforms , cleavage products , and PTMs remain challenging to detect . Hence , further developments of MS technologies to enhance sensitivity and resolution are required for this method to catch up with other omics tech - nologies . Alternative approaches such as translation imaging in turn allow tracking of global translation and enable the quantiﬁcation of nascent proteomes in speciﬁc subcellular compartments , e . g . , at the synapse . 80 – 82 Cross - linking MS ( XL - MS ) , on the other hand , had originally been limited to in vitro systems of limited complexity but was recently applied to more complex systems and in combination with subcellular fractionation and afﬁnity pu - riﬁcation of cross - linked peptides , is capable of charting local variations of protein interactions . 83 – 85 The technique , however , remains less comprehensive in terms of coverage compared with other proteomics techniques . In contrast , techniques to determine the cellular distribution of different lipid species at high resolution are still entirely lacking . Although imaging MS is capable of resolving local lipid compo - sition , the present resolution is hardly subcellular . 86 Much of our knowledge about local lipid composition is either based on invasive subcellular fractionation experiments or indirectly in - ferred by perturbation experiments of lipid regulators . A method to locally quantify lipid molecules inside of cells could , however , facilitate novel insights into subcellular organization . CELLULAR SELF - ORGANIZATION AND ITS IMPACT ON MACROMOLECULAR ASSEMBLY AND ACTIVITY Which factors modulate the function of macromolecular assem - blies in the cellular context ? This question has always been cen - tral for cell biologists , but due to the lack of appropriate tools , it has been somewhat neglected by structural biologists . In the following section , we will illustrate some of the principles that organize cells and contextually modulate molecular function and structure of macromolecules but that are themselves struc - turally not well understood . Thus , they comprise high - impact tar - gets toward understanding cellular self - organization . The dis - cussed organizing factors are selected in an exemplifying manner ; various others such as the cytoskeleton or PTMs , although equally important , are not covered due to space limi - tations . Local conﬁnement Local conﬁnement facilitates the contextual regulation of cellular function . 87 , 88 Molecules that form a functional module have to interact with each other at the right time and at the right place . The cell is densely packed with biomolecules , and for each spe - ciﬁc protein - protein interaction , many non - speciﬁc interactions with lower afﬁnity compete with the respective binding partners . This becomes a considerable challenge with increasing genomic complexity . 89 Thus , the generation of locally conﬁned and specialized molecular communities reduces complexity and es - tablishes a dedicated biophysical environment that is suitable for the proper assembly and function of macromolecules . It may locally expose interaction partners and promote their binding or prevent promiscuous interactions by local exclusion . We are only beginning to understand the self - organizing prin - ciples of local conﬁnement inside cells , and the respective con - ditions are challenging to recapitulate in vitro . Although local conﬁnement by membranes , i . e . , in organelles , has long been known , we understand little how these membranes self - orga - nize . In recent years , much attention has been dedicated to membrane - less organelles and whether concepts from polymer physics or multivalent binding based on biochemical entities are well suited to explain their biogenesis . 35 , 90 , 91 Despite the still pending ﬁnal verdict on this issue , they can add to explaining local conﬁnement of functionally dedicated , local molecular communities . To make things even more complex , cells may combine this mode of local conﬁnement with additional ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 551 Perspective self - organizing principles . For example , alternative splicing fac - tors are sequestered into nuclear bodies for release in response to environmental cues ; 92 , 93 local translation can ensure the biogenesis of selected proteins directly in a suitable environ - ment , e . g . , the neuronal synapse , 94 , 95 while co - translational chaperoning and assembly warrant that nascent chains of pro - teins already engage in speciﬁc interactions before being released from the ribosome . 96 Another self - organizing compo - nent that inﬂuences local conﬁnement in a complex manner is termed molecular rulers . Molecular rulers In their most simple manifestation , molecular rulers deﬁne the distance between two molecular entities . This can be realized by two short linear motifs ( SLiMs ) separated by a linker or , simi - larly , two protein - binding motifs on an RNA . Molecular rulers can also organize protein complexes . For example , SLiMs in so - called ‘‘linker nucleoporins’’ organize scaffold nucleoporins in space , ensure their stoichiometric assembly , and act as sensors for the correct assembly of subcomplexes that form early during the NPC biogenesis process . 97 , 98 Molecular rulers may further - more organize co - translational biogenesis , 99 where they deﬁne the exact sequence and timing of co - translational interaction events that occur , while the respective domains appear from the exit tunnel of the ribosome . 99 Promiscuously interacting do - mains , such as coiled coils , may be C - terminally encoded to ensure that the respective native interaction partners have already been recruited to the nascent chain by other more spe - ciﬁc assembly motifs . In addition , the codon usage of a molecu - lar ruler may be as equally important as its length because this deﬁnes the necessary timing . Another example is the long - non - coding RNA that often plays architectural role because these RNAs organize chromatin in 3D , recruit interaction part - ners , or scaffold nuclear bodies . 100 Architectural RNAs ( arcR - NAs ) may adopt a speciﬁc 3D conformation inside membrane - less organelles together with bound RNA - binding proteins ; for example , the lncRNA NEAT1 acts as a scaffold for paraspeckles . NEAT1 length and the speciﬁc protein - binding sites within it determine the dimensions and the inner organization of the respective condensates in a manner similar to a molecular ruler , in this context , referred to as micellization of block co - poly - mers . 101 We anticipate that focusing future structural investiga - tions on molecular rulers will be rewarding . This problem is very approachable—one essentially needs to solve structures of the interaction pairs and understand the biophysical behavior of the linker in between . Self - organization of membranes Cellular membranes are highly complex systems characterized by a heterogeneous and dynamic composition . One of the mys - teries of membrane biology is why thousands of different lipid species exist , and lipid composition is strictly regulated in space and time . 102 Lipids locally inﬂuence the biophysical properties of membranes , such as their ﬂuidity , and thus are critical for the function of membrane - bound organelles . 103 Local lipid composi - tion is regulated not only by lipid synthetases and degraders that control the availability of speciﬁc lipid species but also by dy - namic organelle contacts and lipid transporters that spatially affect lipid availability . Lipids and proteins can self - organize in cell membranes to form nanodomains to concentrate speciﬁc proteins and enhance biochemical reactions . 104 , 105 Recent evi - dence supports that such mobile nanodomains exist in cell membranes and can help form protein nanoclusters . 106 Technical limitations force us to study membrane proteins and lipid bilayers separately . Conceptionally this separation is prob - lematic because both entities are interdependent . Lipids and the bilayer can induce conformational changes in proteins or pro - mote the assembly of protein complexes . 107 Vice versa , proteins can lead to extensive membrane - remodeling processes , 108 – 110 for example , the endomembrane system , mitochondria and chloroplasts in eukaryotes , but also the cell envelope of gram - negative bacteria , can form a very complex membrane architec - ture that is constantly remodeled and maintained and , in some cases , even formed almost entirely from scratch . Basic design elements such as membrane tubes , budding of trafﬁcking vesi - cles , or membrane scission are repurposed in manifold ways . An intriguing example is a set of two or more highly parallel mem - branes termed stacked sheets that are found in mitochondria , the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) and the nuclear envelope , the Golgi apparatus , the rod outer segment , and annulate lamellae . Autophagosomes form membrane sheets from scratch that sub - sequently bend to engulf cellular debris . 111 In some cells , such membrane sheets even form a helically stacked superstruc - ture . 112 We still do not know the self - assembly mechanisms of these structures . Until recently , the architecture of such organelles was thought to be shaped mainly by membrane - interacting proteins . Yet , structural analyses of Bin / Amphiphysin / Rvs ( BAR ) domain , coat - omer , clathrin , endosomal sorting complex required for transport ( ESCRT ) , or nucleoporin proteins in vitro have not allowed us to predict or manipulate the subcellular outline of the endomem - brane system or mitochondria . It has become clear that addi - tional principles of self - organization play a crucial role in shaping organelle architecture . 113 – 115 Molecular rulers may deﬁne membrane distances , which is the case for nuclear membrane - localized LINC complexes . These complexes consist of SUN and KASH , two transmembrane pro - teins that shake hands in the lumen of the nuclear envelope , whereby the linker length between transmembrane and interac - tion domains deﬁnes the maximal distance between the inner and outer nuclear membranes . 116 However , the overall organelle shape , more speciﬁcally , the surface - to - volume ratio also must be tightly controlled . This could be done by regulating the osmo - larity , or similarly , by controlling the number of biomolecules in - side of a given organelle . Such concepts appear to be well suited to explain the transformation of a vesicle into a membrane sheet and vice versa , but the respective regulatory circuits remain ill - deﬁned . Together with lipid availability , changing osmolarity reg - ulates membrane tension , the force per unit length acting on the cross - section of a membrane , which deﬁnes how much it may be deformed . 117 , 118 Evidently , these three parameters are inter - twined and will be regulated by proteins that make organelle contacts , transport ions and biomolecules across membranes , regulate lipid availability , or deform membranes . Such a system is in turn capable of controlling protein struc - ture as illustrated by recent work on the NPC , which dilates ll OPEN ACCESS 552 Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 Perspective and constricts in response to osmotic shock and the consequent changes in membrane tension . 119 The resulting large conforma - tional changes have various functional implications that we are just beginning to understand . Other well - studied examples are mechanosensitive channels such as piezo . 120 Moreover , recent work , e . g . , on BAR domains coupled to IDRs , implies that molec - ular crowding proximal to membrane is a major driver of mem - brane curvature formation . 121 Similarly , molecular condensation may also be involved in the budding of trafﬁcking vesicles . 122 This appears intuitive when considering that coalescence is coupled to a membrane association activity . The formation of a structured protein coat may thus be a consequence , rather than the driver of membrane curvature . To understand such complex architectural traits , precise quantitative and spatial data are needed . Perturbation and syn - thetic biology experiments that abolish the respective architec - tures or generate them from scratch may enlighten the complex circuits of intertwined , self - organizing principles that govern subcellular organization . NEXT - GENERATION STRUCTURAL CELL BIOLOGY A common aim should be that next - generation structural cell biology targets complex biological processes in their cellular context . Technological developments alone , as the ones dis - cussed so far , will not be sufﬁcient to discover and conceptualize the principles of molecular self - organization . New theoretical concepts and frameworks that capture dynamics and complexity will also have to be developed and adopted . Struc - tural biology should systematically build on information and con - cepts not only from other disciplines , such as developmental , systems , and cell biology , but also from physics , information the - ory , computational sciences , and the science of complex sys - tems . As a notable example , soft - matter physics concepts such as phase transitions , criticality , or scaling exponent are proving necessary to conceptualize the rich phenomenology of biomolecular condensates and IDRs . 31 , 123 – 125 What limits our present - day conceptualization ? Without a doubt , cell biological models are context - aware and may cap - ture self - organizing principles of subcellular architecture . How - ever , cell biological processes are often depicted in 2D , e . g . , in ﬂowcharts of cellular pathways or interaction maps . While these are useful for identifying individual factors and their functional in - teractions in given pathways , they neglect the complex spatial context of a crowded cell and thus miss fundamental layers of regulation . They struggle to recapitulate the complex spatial and dynamical context in situ or how interactions emerge from the interplay of many multi - valent ( many - body ) molecular inter - actions . For example , conﬁnement within organelles , conden - sates , and lateral domains in membranes lead to varying local concentration of molecules with distinct functional conse - quences , from polymer packing that controls RNA and DNA accessibility to the formation of cellular barriers that can protect macromolecules by local exclusion . In structural biology , atomically resolved 3D models of macro - molecular complexes are routine . However , despite being 3D , these traditional models are also limited because they only de - pict distinct functional states of isolated macromolecular com - plexes and not the subcellular organization that relies on compo - sitional , structural , and dynamic complexity . They also lack information about transitions between states and the inﬂuence of neighboring molecules or PTMs and do not integrate func - tional metadata . Which new concepts should the next generation of structural cell biologists aim to uncover ? To be useful , a principle should serve as a guide to understanding observations , planning exper - iments , and condensing a rich phenomenology . It should also change the way we think . For example , the laws of General Rel - ativity , the most accurate theory of gravity , can inspire structural biology . It taught us that physical systems do not evolve in a static spatial and temporal background but that the background , the spacetime , is itself an integral part of the physical system and that matter and spacetime are locked in a constant dialog . J . A . Wheeler famously summarized the core principle of the theory by saying , ‘‘Spacetime tells matter how to move ; matter tells spacetime how to curve . ’’ 126 This can serve as an analogy for principles of cellular organizations . Proteins and other biomole - cules do not function in a static background . The molecules and their background—be it a membrane , a conﬁned compart - ment , or a complex solution—are part of the same dynamic sys - tem . They are engaged in a dialog . Thinking of membrane - pro - tein interactions , for example , we could be tempted to follow Wheeler in saying , ‘‘Membranes tell proteins where to go , and proteins tell membranes how to curve . ’’ This sentence provides the gist of many diverse phenomena , and it summarizes the fact that membranes and proteins control each other in an interde - pendent way . It furthermore gives a useful mental image to un - derstand observations and formulate hypotheses . Of course , not all membrane proteins reshape membranes , but they act on membranes , and all membranes respond in return . The concept of the ‘‘ﬁngerprint’’ of a speciﬁc membrane protein 127 is one attempt to quantify how structural features determine the strength of the protein’s actions on a membrane and there - fore what distinguishes a protein that reshapes a membrane from one that does not . With an increasingly more precise deﬁ - nition of these concepts , we will be able to integrate them into existing theories 128 , 129 that describe how membranes are orga - nized on an organellar scale as a function of their composition . In this way , we may obtain a quantitative theory—in the form of equations—that links atomistic details in proteins to large re - shaping of entire organelles . Digital twins of cellular segments How can we progress toward taming cellular complexity ? In initial attempts , 3D models of subcellular segments that incorpo - rate all available knowledge from structural , morphological , and omics measurements , as well as biochemical experiments , have been put forward . For example , these have revealed that a syn - aptic vesicle consists of a similar number of molecular compo - nents as a ribosome 130 although both objects are organized in a fundamentally different way . Ribosome architecture relies on folded protein and RNA interfaces ; the synaptic vesicles is a result of self - organization , membrane - protein interactions , and molecular sorting . Further steps toward fully representative models have now been made . For instance , recent models of an autophagic vesicles or a nuclear pore 131 , 132 include explicit ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 553 Perspective membranes and other dynamic components such as intrinsically disordered proteins ( Figure 2 ) . These ﬁrst comprehensive models contain the molecular content of the respective subcel - lular segment . They are best conceived as high - ﬁdelity structural models in which the structure of a given protein complex has been used as the basis but has been expanded to the best possible scientiﬁc knowledge with additional information of non - regularly structured content . This could be knowledge about biological membranes and lipids , solvents , intrinsically disordered stretches , and interacting surrounding molecules and spatial boundaries . Alternatively , cryo - electron tomograms , which capture the respective subcellular structure , could be fed into the molecular modeling framework , annotated by template matching and enriched with additional molecular detail much like a 3D jigsaw puzzle . Importantly , such high - ﬁdelity structural models can be used as input for MD simulation framework to explore their dynamics . Such dynamic virtual equivalents of cellular objects , which ideally mirror the respective cellular behavior , are best described by the digital twin concept , 133 which is used in other ﬁelds , such as urban planning or construction . 134 A ‘‘digital twin’’ is deﬁned as a virtual representation of a real - world object ( ‘‘physical twin’’ ) that allows the operator to run virtual experiments without real - world constraints , such as object size or gravity . Yet , it can also be more than a static virtual copy and can contain algo - rithms that allow simulation of its behavior in response to pertur - bations . A digital twin could be conceived in different layers of complexity . Atomic models of macromolecular complexes , routinely used in structural biology , are accurate representations of molecular objects that can be explored in a virtual reality ; therefore , they could be considered a basic digital twin of a macromolecule . As discussed above , structural models may be further enriched with complementary molecular information , thus resulting in a high - ﬁdelity version of the model that con - siders cellular context and represents a digital twin of a macro - molecular complex with its surrounding environment . This could be done , e . g . , by adding membranes to the structure of a mem - brane protein , by placing all molecular components of a vesicle into a virtual box , or by annotating the cryo - electron tomogram of a subcellular segment with additional molecular detail , e . g . , by template matching . Regardless of which speciﬁc approach is applied , the meaningful integration of different types of data will be the important common feature . Finally , digital twins should also become dynamic . Their virtual reality should prog - ress over time and respond to external perturbations . We thus envision that a digital twin of a subcellular segment would be an integrated pipeline of datasets , computer simulations , and ML methods to study the system in silico to better understand and discover in situ phenomena ( Figure 3 ) . Digital twins could be constrained by functional meta data to predict cellular behavior more accurately . Predictions made by digital twins can in turn guide experimental design and inspire synthetic biology approaches . High - ﬁdelity structural models An important ﬁrst step toward the digital twin of subcellular seg - ments is the integration of many different technologies . There are different approaches to data integration , whereby the combina - tion of some complementary techniques has become particu - larly popular . This is apparent for the combination of NMR with small - angle X - ray scattering ( SAXS ) , or X - ray crystallography with cryo - EM , where information about the structure of individual components is combined to obtain the overall assembly . 135 – 137 Some techniques have turned out to be important facilitators and accelerators of data integration because they elucidate how molecular components interact or bridge across scales . This is true for XL - MS that identiﬁes proximate residues in pro - teins that are frequently used as spatial restraints during modeling . 138 Cryo - ET , in combination with subtomogram aver - aging , provides moderately resolved maps of macromolecular assemblies inside cells , which have become popular as a modeling frameworks that deﬁne overall shapes and dimen - sions . 139 Software frameworks such as the integrative modeling platform 140 or Assembline 139 are routinely used . They consider various types of data , including high - resolution structures , shapes , interaction data , and other spatial constraints . They sample an exhaustive ensemble of possible solutions and iden - tify those that explain the given experimental datasets best , whereby very complex structural assemblies can be elucidated . Meanwhile , such frameworks have been successfully applied to various macromolecular assemblies . 141 Data integration for structural modeling beneﬁts enormously from AI - based structure prediction . New algorithms such as AlphaFold not only unravel protein folds but also predict their in - terfaces and thus can ﬁll in gaps of structural knowledge , such as by bridging across subcomplexes . 132 AlphaFold predicts 3D conﬁgurations of proteins from their amino acid sequences with a high accuracy , matching or surpassing some experi - mental results . 6 , 142 , 143 The algorithm capitalizes on the wealth of publicly available information in both sequence and structural space , in addition to considering fundamental biophysical and chemical principles of how amino acids engage with each other . AI - based structure prediction has achieved remarkable success , but it also has clear limitations . Some of the most important ones are not capturing alternative conformations , dynamics , or the ef - fect of mutations . 144 The generation of the NPC structure exempliﬁes the strength of integrative approaches to deal with very large biological systems en route toward generating digital twins of subcellular segments . NPCs consist of 1 , 000 individual protein building blocks . The elucidation of individual nucleoporin folds by traditional in vitro structural biology techniques and AI - based prediction provided the pieces of the puzzle , while tomographic analyses inside cells revealed the overall outline of the nuclear pore . This then served as framework for further computational structural modeling , while interaction studies and XL - MS techniques elucidated interfaces and spatial proximity of the individual components . Finally , when all of these data were jointly analyzed by integrative modeling , the overall molecular picture of the nuclear pore archi - tecture was revealed and could subsequently be reﬁned step by step , analogous to progressively solving a puzzle . 49 , 145 – 147 This model has been further complemented with membranes based on compositional knowledge about lipids and membrane shapes . 132 IDR - containing nucleoporins were added based on the knowledge about their anchoring sites to the scaffold , ll OPEN ACCESS 554 Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 Perspective resulting in a ‘‘high - ﬁdelity model . ’’ Fluorescence - based methods were used to explore their conformation inside of cells . 75 Today , the respective structural models approach completeness ( Figure 2 ) , thus enabling MD simulations of NPCs . 75 , 132 Such high - ﬁdelity models are heterogeneous in terms of resolution and accuracy . The individual interfaces stem either from high - res - olution structural analysis or AI - based prediction and are resolved with differing accuracy , but certainly to the subnanometer level . The exact orientations and positions of the individual proteins are the result of integrative modeling and not precise to the A˚ level but allow conceptualizing the overall architecture . Thereby , the position and conformation of dynamic components such as lipids or IDRs are not based on traditional structure determination tech - niques but are added based on the best of present knowledge , stemming , e . g . , from omics or FRET measurements . They are still informative , e . g . , about the spatial range such dynamic compo - nents may have ( Figure 2 ) . In principle , these models can also become multilayered and consider multiple conformations , splicing isoforms , PTMs , local lipid composition , or variable stoichiometries , although this is not yet routinely performed . One challenge thereby is posed by the structural data that constrain a given model and that may have been generated for one isoform of a macromolecule or complex , which , however , may not necessarily be transferable to other forms . Another issue is the meaningful integration of time as an additionalaxisforbiologicalprocesses . Overall , however , theinte - grationofdatafrommultipledifferenttechnologieswillbecriticalto further deﬁne the molecular details of cellular function . Initial op - tions dealing with this challenge have been reported and tested ; yet , these will need to be continuously reﬁned and further expanded to incorporate technological advances and novel ﬁndings . MD simulation Among the existing modeling frameworks , MD simulations may be the closest to the ideal of a digital twin of a cellular segment , because they attempt to comprehensively simulate the molecu - lar content of a given biological system at atomic resolution . This approach has matured from a prototype to a standard toolkit capable of generating hypotheses and making discoveries , as if it were a ‘‘computational microscope . ’’ 148 In MD simulations , the forces acting between all atoms are modeled , and high - per - formance supercomputers are used to numerically solve New - ton’s second law of motion and predict the dynamics of biomol - ecules . 149 They produce trajectories that sample the molecular structural dynamics and can also show how molecules reorga - nize between alternative structural organizations ( Figure 4A ) . MD simulations are ultimately based on the physics and chemis - try that accurately describe how atoms interact and how these interactions determine the dynamics of molecules . Yet , the approach has limitations that remain to be addressed . The forces acting between individual atoms are modeled in so - called ‘‘force ﬁelds . ’’ No general force ﬁeld exists , and the speciﬁc system ( proteins , lipids , inorganic molecules , etc . ) determines which force ﬁeld to use . The accuracy of MD simulations depends on the accuracy of the force ﬁeld used . Protein force ﬁelds were optimized to describe single - domain globular proteins . 156 Conse - quently , these force ﬁelds were not as accurate when used to Figure 3 . Scheme illustrating a workﬂow for generating digital twins of subcellular segments Integrative structuralmodels ofcomplexsubcellularsegmentswillbe complementedwithadditionalinformationabout cellularcontext , derived , e . g . , fromomics or ﬂuorescence - based techniques . The resulting high - ﬁdelity models will serve as input for MD simulation frameworks to explore their physical properties and dynamics . Thesimulationswill be augmentedwith machine learning methods trained on experimentaldata . Once stimuli are applied thedigital twin willpredict a cellular response considering a complex parametric space . These predictions can be experimentally tested . ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 555 Perspective sample the dynamics of disordered domains and required some recalibration . 157 Similarly , force ﬁelds used for simulating DNA and RNA do not yet match the quality of protein force ﬁelds . MD simulations are alsolimitedbythe spatialandtemporaltimescales that can be sampled . A virtual simulation box can contain a single protein surrounded by water or a large membrane patch contain - ing many proteins and other molecules . The larger the box , the shorter the covered timescales . Typically , timescales range be - tween micro - and milliseconds , sufﬁcient for observing events such as small protein folding , ligand binding , or short - timescale conformational changes . Yet , longer biological processes , such as large protein folding or protein - protein interactions , which may occur over milliseconds to seconds , are often beyond the reachoftraditionalMDsimulations . Methodstosamplelargersys - tems for more extended times are developed by building on phys - ical insight 158 or by trading a smaller spatial resolution for the abil - ity to sample longer timescales . 159 The latter approach is called coarse - graining and has , in recent years , enabled simulations of sub - organellar systems , such as the NPC . 132 Are these MD simulations precise enough to conceptualize complex biomolecular systems ? As discussed for structural models , it depends on the scientiﬁc question we are asking . 149 MD simulations can help in characterizing individual proteins at atomic level resolution with sufﬁcient accuracy to enable drug Figure 4 . Molecular dynamics simulations of complex cellular systems The given examples demonstrate the scope that MD simulations of enriched structural models can provide . ( A ) Snapshots of an MD simulation of FAM143B in membrane that predicts clustering of FAM143B over time and consequent budding of endoplasmic reticulum membranes during ER - phagy , which was experimentally conﬁrmed . 150 , 151 Arrowheads indicate progression in time . ( B ) MD simulations of an integrative structural model of tetrameric TRPV4 with the previously unresolved four 150 amino - acid - long N - terminal intrinsically disordered regions ( IDRs ) . Superimposed IDR extensions ( pink ) form a halo around the previously known structured part of TRPV4 ( gray and cyan ) . Coarse - grained MD simulations were carried out within a bilayer ( yellow ) . The simulations uncovered that the IDRs expand the intracellular channel surface from 14 to 34 nm and suggest that the IDRs exert a pulling force on the pore - forming domains through membrane interactions . 152 ( C ) SnapshotofanMDsimulationoffull - lengthspikeprotein ( red ) withexplicitglycosylationsites ( blue ) andbilayer ( gray ) . Thesesimulationspredictedﬂexibilityat three hinge regions ( hip , knee , and ankle ) that were conﬁrmed using cryoelectron tomography of viral particles ( top inset ) . The predicted ﬂexibility of the glycosylation sites was conﬁrmed using subtomogram averaging ( bottom inset ) and led to the prediction of the surface epitopes approachable by neutralizing antibodies . 153 – 155 ll OPEN ACCESS 556 Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 Perspective design . They can estimate the free energy cost to bend or compress a membrane of a given composition—important bio - physical parameters—from the lipids dynamics . 160 The results are often within the experimental uncertainties . MD simulations excel in providing mechanistic hypothesis , which can be valu - able even if other predictions are not accurate . For instance , a simulation of a conformational change could provide an inaccu - rate free energy estimate and , at the same time , an accurate sequence of structural intermediates along the conformational change . New ML and AI - based methods such as AlphaFold can synergize with MD simulations and enable us to assess pre - viously uncharacterized molecules . Integrating ML - and physics - based simulations is emerging as a paradigm , 158 thus increasing sampling speed for molecular structures . MD simulations can be supplemented with experimental data and used as a framework to integrate different types of informa - tion . An intriguing example , where IDRs play a crucial role , is the TRP vanilloid channel ( TRPV ) 4 , which is involved in thermo - and osmosensing ( Figure 4B ) . The 150 amino - acid - long N - terminal IDR remained unresolved in traditional structural models ; yet , the integrative structural biology approach using NMR , SAXS , tryptophan ﬂuorescence spectroscopy , XL - MS , and HDX - MS combined with atomistic MD simulations ﬁnally led to a structural model including the IDRs . 152 This model led to the now testable prediction that the IDR increases the channel dimension at the plasma membrane from a diameter of 14 nm to 34 nm and that the IDR interacts with PIP 2 in the plasma membrane , which pro - vides a pulling force leading to channel sensitization . Increasingly , MD simulations have become integral parts of interdisciplinary approaches , where experiments , theory , and simulations complement each other to provide more detailed mechanistic and structural insights . The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 ( SARS - CoV - 2 ) pandemic was an op - portunity to showcase the enabling features of this approach . Only a few months after its onset , the integration of in situ cryo - ET and MD simulations provided accurate atomistic models of the SARS - CoV - 2 spike protein’s structural dy - namics 153 ( Figure 4C ) . The integrative approach yielded more than the sum of its parts : the MD simulation could add atomistic details and dynamics to medium - resolution cryo - ET structures , while the structural experiment could validate the MD models and reveal the organization of multiple spikes on the viral capsid at the supramolecular level . Notably , the spike protein of SARS - CoV - 2 is highly glycosylated . While it had been known that the positioning of glycosylation sites on viral surface proteins may allow viruses to dodge neutralizing antibodies , 161 , 162 the MD simulations were instrumental in understanding the exact conformational movements of glycans that create surface patches where the spike is protected from antibodies , thus form - ing a glycan shield that hinders an immune response . With such striking examples , it has become evident that integrated and complementary experimental studies are required to advance the molecular understanding of how macromolecular complexes function in cells . MD simulations are moving toward the subcellular and cellular scale . The ﬁrst pioneering molecular simulations of viruses or entire cells were done , and more work will undoubtedly be under - taken during the next decade . 163 , 164 However , sampling inter - esting timescales and using an accurate biochemical description will be challenging . In addition , one outstanding problem remains : howcanweobtainahigh - ﬁdelity insilico representationofsubcel - lular compartments with incomplete knowledge of molecular and cellular biology ? We still ignore many details—and maybe more general aspects—of the cellular content , pathways , and mecha - nisms . An MD simulation that does not contain a crucial compo - nent of a cellular pathway will not produce an accurate descrip - tion . One promising strategy is to systematically augment MD simulations with ML methods trained on experimental data . 165 In other words , one would employ an MD simulation for the known part of the model and use neural network - based approaches to learn the unknown part from experimental data . Ever - increasing computational power , improvements to force ﬁelds , and more meaningful coarse - graining , together with an integration of phys - ics - based simulations with data - driven approaches , will make digital twins standard tools to conceptualize complex phenomena and hypothesis generators in cellular biology . Conclusions In the past decades , structural biology has evolved , with the focus shifting from high - resolution and atomistic details of single molecules toward the characterization of larger complexes and assemblies and more recently , their analysis in a native environ - ment— in situ . A deﬁnition of molecular function in situ requires taking into account all aspects of the cellular context and inte - grative approaches combining different technologies that cap - ture additional properties such as structural dynamics or phys - ical forces . As the ﬁeld progresses in this direction , novel types of models and concepts will be needed to incorporate and visu - alize the diverse data types . Once properly built and tuned , digital twins of cellular seg - ments should be able to capture synergistic effects of molecular functions and faithfully predict complex cellular responses . Example problems could be membrane deformation by protein clustering or crowding ( Figure 4A ) , the conformation of mRNPs , the beneﬁt of a local environment for protein folding , how forces act on subcellular architecture , or whether a small molecule will be enriched in membrane - less organelles or not . Importantly , the information gained will not be limited to the wild - type protein in an unperturbed cellular context , but such models could be over - laid with clinically manifested mutations or changing environ - mental conditions . Casting biological questions into algorithms will be an important skill for future cell and structural biologists , given the wealth of available data and the increasing complexity of cellular modeling frameworks . Thenextgenerationofstructuralbiologyinvestigationsarelikely to embrace cell biology by accurately quantifying cellular content in space , measuring molecular activities inside of cells , and simu - lating cellular behavior in a virtual reality to make predictions that are experimentally testable and that motivate synthetic biology approaches . The combined power of these approaches holds great potential to elucidate the grammar that underlies the com - plex choreography of cellular self - organization . When will we have understood how cells work ? Luckily , there will still be a tremendous amount of work waiting for many generations of future biologists , who will study cells with methods that remain to be invented . However , once digital twins of cells predict their ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 557 Perspective behavior that could not have been conceived without them , an important milestone will have been achieved . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the faculties of the SubCellular Architecture of LifE ( SCALE ) con - sortium for discussions and Stefanie Bo¨hm for critical reading of the manu - script . We apologize to those colleagues whose work could not be cited due tospaceconstraints . WethankAgnieszkaObarska - Kosinskaforhelpwithpre - paring the ﬁgures . The SubCellular Architecture of LifE ( SCALE ) consortium hasbeenfundedbytheGoetheUniversity , Frankfurt , Germany . M . B . acknowl - edges funding by the Max Planck Society , Germany ; R . C . acknowledges the support of the Frankfurt Institute of Advanced Studies , Frankfurt , Germany . I . H . and M . M . - M . acknowledge funding by the Goethe University , Frankfurt , Germany . I . H . acknowledges funding by theDFG , Germany ; Heisenberg grant ( HA6322 / 5 - 1 ) . DECLARATION OF INTERESTS M . B . is a member of the advisory board of Cell . REFERENCES 1 . Bonomi , M . , and Vendruscolo , M . ( 2019 ) . Determination of protein struc - turalensemblesusingcryo - electronmicroscopy . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 56 , 37 – 45 . 2 . Yabukarski , F . , Doukov , T . , Pinney , M . M . , Biel , J . T . , Fraser , J . S . , and Herschlag , D . ( 2022 ) . Ensemble - functionrelationshipstodissect mecha - nisms of enzyme catalysis . Sci . Adv . 8 , eabn7738 . 3 . Ken , M . L . , Roy , R . , Geng , A . , Ganser , L . R . , Manghrani , A . , Cullen , B . R . , Schulze - Gahmen , U . , Herschlag , D . , and Al - Hashimi , H . M . ( 2023 ) . RNA conformational propensities determine cellular activity . Nature 617 , 835 – 841 . 4 . Anderson , P . W . ( 1972 ) . More is different . Science 177 , 393 – 396 . 5 . Robinson , C . V . , Sali , A . , and Baumeister , W . ( 2007 ) . The molecular soci - ology of the cell . Nature 450 , 973 – 982 . 6 . Jumper , J . , Evans , R . , Pritzel , A . , Green , T . , Figurnov , M . , Ronneberger , O . , Tunyasuvunakool , K . , Bates , R . , (cid:1) Zı´dek , A . , Potapenko , A . , et al . ( 2021 ) . Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold . Na - ture 596 , 583 – 589 . 7 . Varadi , M . , Anyango , S . , Deshpande , M . , Nair , S . , Natassia , C . , Yorda - nova , G . , Yuan , D . , Stroe , O . , Wood , G . , Laydon , A . , et al . ( 2022 ) . Alpha - Fold Protein Structure Database : massively expanding the structural coverage of protein - sequence space with high - accuracy models . Nu - cleic Acids Res . 50 , D439 – D444 . 8 . Humphreys , I . R . , Pei , J . , Baek , M . , Krishnakumar , A . , Anishchenko , I . , Ovchinnikov , S . , Zhang , J . , Ness , T . J . , Banjade , S . , Bagde , S . R . , et al . ( 2021 ) . Computed structures of core eukaryotic protein complexes . Sci - ence 374 , eabm4805 . 9 . Dauparas , J . , Anishchenko , I . , Bennett , N . , Bai , H . , Ragotte , R . J . , Milles , L . F . , Wicky , B . I . M . , Courbet , A . , de Haas , R . J . , Bethel , N . , et al . ( 2022 ) . Robust deep learning - based protein sequence design using Pro - teinMPNN . Science 378 , 49 – 56 . 10 . Anishchenko , I . , Pellock , S . J . , Chidyausiku , T . M . , Ramelot , T . A . , Ovchin - nikov , S . , Hao , J . , Bafna , K . , Norn , C . , Kang , A . , Bera , A . K . , et al . ( 2021 ) . De novo protein design by deep network hallucination . Nature 600 , 547 – 552 . 11 . Greenan , G . A . , Vale , R . D . , and Agard , D . A . ( 2020 ) . Electron cryotomog - raphy of intact motile cilia deﬁnes the basal body to axoneme transition . J . Cell Biol . 219 , e201907060 . 12 . Deguchi , T . , Iwanski , M . K . , Schentarra , E . M . , Heidebrecht , C . , Schmidt , L . , Heck , J . , Weihs , T . , Schnorrenberg , S . , Hoess , P . , Liu , S . , etal . ( 2023 ) . Direct observation of motor protein stepping in living cells using MIN - FLUX . Science 379 , 1010 – 1015 . 13 . O’Reilly , F . J . , Xue , L . , Graziadei , A . , Sinn , L . , Lenz , S . , Tegunov , D . , Blo¨tz , C . , Singh , N . , Hagen , W . J . H . , Cramer , P . , etal . ( 2020 ) . In - cellarchitecture of an actively transcribing - translating expressome . Science 369 , 554 – 557 . 14 . Greber , B . J . , Toso , D . B . , Fang , J . , and Nogales , E . ( 2019 ) . The complete structure of the human TFIIH core complex . Elife 8 , e44771 . 15 . Wagner , F . R . , Dienemann , C . , Wang , H . , Stu¨tzer , A . , Tegunov , D . , Urlaub , H . , and Cramer , P . ( 2020 ) . Structure of SWI / SNF chromatin remodeller RSC bound to a nucleosome . Nature 579 , 448 – 451 . 16 . Li , M . , Tripathi - Giesgen , I . , Schulman , B . A . , Baumeister , W . , and Wilﬂing , F . ( 2023 ) . In situ snapshots along a mammalian selective autophagy pathway . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 120 , e2221712120 . 17 . Stagno , J . R . , Liu , Y . , Bhandari , Y . R . , Conrad , C . E . , Panja , S . , Swain , M . , Fan , L . , Nelson , G . , Li , C . , Wendel , D . R . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Structures of ribos - witch RNA reaction states by mix - and - inject XFEL serial crystallography . Nature 541 , 242 – 246 . 18 . Hofmann , S . , Januliene , D . , Mehdipour , A . R . , Thomas , C . , Stefan , E . , Bru¨chert , S . , Kuhn , B . T . , Geertsma , E . R . , Hummer , G . , Tampe´ , R . , and Moeller , A . ( 2019 ) . Conformation space of a heterodimeric ABC exporter under turnover conditions . Nature 571 , 580 – 583 . 19 . Arkhipova , V . , Guskov , A . , and Slotboom , D . J . ( 2020 ) . Structural ensemble of a glutamate transporter homologue in lipid nanodisc envi - ronment . Nat . Commun . 11 , 998 . 20 . Ha¨nsel , R . , Luh , L . M . , Corbeski , I . , Trantirek , L . , andDo¨tsch , V . ( 2014 ) . In - cell NMR and EPR spectroscopy of biomacromolecules . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 53 , 10300 – 10314 . 21 . Ha¨nelt , I . , Wunnicke , D . , Bordignon , E . , Steinhoff , H . J . , and Slotboom , D . J . ( 2013 ) . Conformational heterogeneity of the aspartate transporter Glt ( Ph ) . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 20 , 210 – 214 . 22 . Huang , Y . , Reddy , K . D . , Bracken , C . , Qiu , B . , Zhan , W . , Eliezer , D . , and Boudker , O . ( 2023 ) . Environmentally ultrasensitive ﬂuorine probe to resolve protein conformational ensembles by 19 F NMR and cryo - EM . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 145 , 8583 – 8592 . 23 . Wang , Z . , Campos , L . A . , and Mun˜oz , V . ( 2016 ) . Single - molecule ﬂuores - cence studies of fast protein folding . Methods Enzymol . 581 , 417 – 459 . 24 . Erkens , G . B . , Ha¨nelt , I . , Goudsmits , J . M . , Slotboom , D . J . , and van Oijen , A . M . ( 2013 ) . Unsynchronised subunit motion in single trimeric sodium - coupled aspartate transporters . Nature 502 , 119 – 123 . 25 . Ando , T . , Uchihashi , T . , and Kodera , N . ( 2013 ) . High - speed AFM and ap - plications to biomolecular systems . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 42 , 393 – 414 . 26 . Ruan , Y . , Miyagi , A . , Wang , X . , Chami , M . , Boudker , O . , and Scheuring , S . ( 2017 ) . Direct visualization of glutamate transporter elevator mecha - nism by high - speed AFM . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 114 , 1584 – 1588 . 27 . Matin , T . R . , Heath , G . R . , Huysmans , G . H . M . , Boudker , O . , and Scheur - ing , S . ( 2020 ) . Millisecond dynamics of an unlabeled amino acid trans - porter . Nat . Commun . 11 , 5016 . 28 . Konermann , L . , Pan , J . , and Liu , Y . H . ( 2011 ) . Hydrogen exchange mass spectrometry for studying protein structure and dynamics . Chem . Soc . Rev . 40 , 1224 – 1234 . 29 . Wright , P . E . , and Dyson , H . J . ( 2015 ) . Intrinsically disordered proteins in cellular signalling and regulation . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 , 18 – 29 . 30 . Tsang , B . , Priti (cid:1) sanac , I . , Scherer , S . W . , Moses , A . M . , and Forman - Kay , J . D . ( 2020 ) . Phase separation as a missing mechanism for interpretation of disease mutations . Cell 183 , 1742 – 1756 . 31 . Hyman , A . A . , Weber , C . A . , and Ju¨licher , F . ( 2014 ) . Liquid - liquid phase separation in biology . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 30 , 39 – 58 . 32 . Ryan , V . H . , and Fawzi , N . L . ( 2019 ) . Physiological , pathological , and targetable membraneless organelles in neurons . Trends Neurosci . 42 , 693 – 708 . 33 . Su , M . , Zhuang , Y . , Miao , X . , Zeng , Y . , Gao , W . , Zhao , W . , and Wu , M . ( 2020 ) . Comparative study of curvature sensing mediated by F - BAR and an intrinsically disordered region of FBP17 . iScience 23 , 101712 . ll OPEN ACCESS 558 Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 Perspective 34 . Stachowiak , J . C . , Schmid , E . M . , Ryan , C . J . , Ann , H . S . , Sasaki , D . Y . , Sherman , M . B . , Geissler , P . L . , Fletcher , D . A . , and Hayden , C . C . ( 2012 ) . Membrane bending by protein - protein crowding . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 944 – 949 . 35 . Alberti , S . , Gladfelter , A . , and Mittag , T . ( 2019 ) . Considerations and chal - lenges in studying liquid - liquid phase separation and biomolecular con - densates . Cell 176 , 419 – 434 . 36 . Girbig , M . , Misiaszek , A . D . , and Mu¨ller , C . W . ( 2022 ) . Structural insights into nuclear transcription by eukaryotic DNA - dependent RNA polymer - ases . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 23 , 603 – 622 . 37 . Vorla¨nder , M . K . , Pacheco - Fiallos , B . , and Plaschka , C . ( 2022 ) . Structural basisofmRNAmaturation : timetoputittogether . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 75 , 102431 . 38 . Will , C . L . , and Lu¨hrmann , R . ( 2011 ) . Spliceosome structure and function . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 , a003707 . 39 . Bohnsack , K . E . , Yi , S . , Venus , S . , Jankowsky , E . , and Bohnsack , M . T . ( 2023 ) . Cellular functions of eukaryotic RNA helicases and their links to human diseases . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 24 , 749 – 769 . 40 . Jobe , A . , Liu , Z . , Gutierrez - Vargas , C . , and Frank , J . ( 2019 ) . New insights into ribosome structure and function . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 11 , a032615 . 41 . Uzonyi , A . , Dierks , D . , Nir , R . , Kwon , O . S . , Toth , U . , Barbosa , I . , Burel , C . , Brandis , A . , Rossmanith , W . , Le Hir , H . , et al . ( 2023 ) . Exclusion of m6A from splice - site proximal regions by the exon junction complex dictates m6A topologies and mRNA stability . Mol . Cell 83 , 237 – 251 . e7 . 42 . Pacheco - Fiallos , B . , Vorla¨nder , M . K . , Riabov - Bassat , D . , Fin , L . , O’Reilly , F . J . , Ayala , F . I . , Schellhaas , U . , Rappsilber , J . , and Plaschka , C . ( 2023 ) . mRNA recognition and packaging by the human transcription - export complex . Nature 616 , 828 – 835 . 43 . Bonneau , F . , Basquin , J . , Steigenberger , B . , Scha¨fer , T . , Scha¨fer , I . B . , and Conti , E . ( 2023 ) . Nuclear mRNPs are compact particles packaged with a network of proteins promoting RNA - RNA interactions . Genes Dev . 37 , 505 – 517 . 44 . Hoffmann , P . C . , Kreysing , J . P . , Khusainov , I . , Tuijtel , M . W . , Welsch , S . , and Beck , M . ( 2022 ) . Structuresof the eukaryotic ribosome and its trans - lational states in situ . Nat . Commun . 13 , 7435 . 45 . Xing , H . , Taniguchi , R . , Khusainov , I . , Kreysing , J . P . , Welsch , S . , Turo - (cid:1) nova´ , B . , and Beck , M . ( 2023 ) . Translation dynamics in human cells visu - alized at high resolution reveal cancer drug action . Science 381 , 70 – 75 . 46 . Xue , L . , Lenz , S . , Zimmermann - Kogadeeva , M . , Tegunov , D . , Cramer , P . , Bork , P . , Rappsilber , J . , and Mahamid , J . ( 2022 ) . Visualizing translation dynamics at atomic detail inside a bacterial cell . Nature 610 , 205 – 211 . 47 . Asano , S . , Fukuda , Y . , Beck , F . , Aufderheide , A . , Fo¨rster , F . , Danev , R . , and Baumeister , W . ( 2015 ) . Proteasomes . A molecular census of 26S proteasomes in intact neurons . Science 347 , 439 – 442 . 48 . Behrmann , E . , Loerke , J . , Budkevich , T . V . , Yamamoto , K . , Schmidt , A . , Penczek , P . A . , Vos , M . R . , Bu¨rger , J . , Mielke , T . , Scheerer , P . , andSpahn , C . M . ( 2015 ) . Structural snapshots of actively translating human ribo - somes . Cell 161 , 845 – 857 . 49 . Lin , D . H . , andHoelz , A . ( 2019 ) . Thestructureofthenuclearporecomplex ( an update ) . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 88 , 725 – 783 . 50 . Blundell , T . L . , and Patel , S . ( 2004 ) . High - throughput X - ray crystallog - raphy for drug discovery . Curr . Opin . Pharmacol . 4 , 490 – 496 . 51 . Pearce , N . M . , Krojer , T . , Bradley , A . R . , Collins , P . , Nowak , R . P . , Talon , R . , Marsden , B . D . , Kelm , S . , Shi , J . , Deane , C . M . , and von Delft , F . ( 2017 ) . A multi - crystal method for extracting obscured crystallographic states from conventionally uninterpretable electron density . Nat . Com - mun . 8 , 15123 . 52 . Beck , M . , and Baumeister , W . ( 2016 ) . Cryo - electron tomography : can it reveal the molecular sociology of cells in atomic detail ? Trends Cell Biol . 26 , 825 – 837 . 53 . Baumeister , W . ( 2022 ) . Cryo - electron tomography : a long journey to the inner space of cells . Cell 185 , 2649 – 2652 . 54 . Zeng , X . , Kahng , A . , Xue , L . , Mahamid , J . , Chang , Y . W . , and Xu , M . ( 2023 ) . High - throughput cryo - ET structural pattern mining by unsuper - vised deep iterative subtomogram clustering . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 120 , e2213149120 . 55 . de Teresa - Trueba , I . , Goetz , S . K . , Mattausch , A . , Stojanovska , F . , Zim - merli , C . E . , Toro - Nahuelpan , M . , Cheng , D . W . C . , Tollervey , F . , Pape , C . , Beck , M . , et al . ( 2023 ) . Convolutional networks for supervised mining of molecular patterns within cellular context . Nat . Methods 20 , 284 – 294 . 56 . Lamm , L . , Righetto , R . D . , Wietrzynski , W . , Po¨ge , M . , Martinez - Sanchez , A . , Peng , T . , and Engel , B . D . ( 2022 ) . MemBrain : a deep learning - aided pipeline for detection of membrane proteins in Cryo - electron tomo - grams . Comput . Methods Programs Biomed . 224 , 106990 . 57 . Gemmer , M . , Chaillet , M . L . , van Loenhout , J . , Cuevas Arenas , R . , Vism - pas , D . , Gro¨llers - Mulderij , M . , Koh , F . A . , Albanese , P . , Scheltema , R . A . , Howes , S . C . , etal . ( 2023 ) . Visualizationoftranslation andproteinbiogen - esis at the ER membrane . Nature 614 , 160 – 167 . 58 . Bohm , J . , Frangakis , A . S . , Hegerl , R . , Nickell , S . , Typke , D . , and Bau - meister , W . ( 2000 ) . Toward detecting and identifying macromolecules in a cellular context : template matching applied to electron tomograms . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 14245 – 14250 . 59 . Beck , M . , Malmstro¨m , J . A . , Lange , V . , Schmidt , A . , Deutsch , E . W . , and Aebersold , R . ( 2009 ) . Visual proteomics of the human pathogen Lepto - spira interrogans . Nat . Methods 6 , 817 – 823 . 60 . Fo¨rster , F . , Han , B . G . , and Beck , M . ( 2010 ) . Visual proteomics . Methods Enzymol . 483 , 215 – 243 . 61 . Cruz - Leo´n , S . , Majtner , T . , Hoffmann , P . C . , Kreysing , J . P . , Tuijtel , M . W . , Schaefer , S . L . , Geißler , K . , Beck , M . , Turo (cid:1) nova´ , B . , and Hummer , G . ( 2023 ) . High - conﬁdence 3D template matching for cryo - electron tomog - raphy . Preprint at bioRxiv . 62 . Xu , M . , Beck , M . , andAlber , F . ( 2011 ) . Template - free detectionofmacro - molecular complexes in cryo electron tomograms . Bioinformatics 27 , i69 – i76 . 63 . Fung , H . K . H . , Hayashi , Y . , Salo , V . T . , Babenko , A . , Zagoriy , I . , Brunner , A . , Ellenberg , J . , Mu¨ller , C . W . , Cuylen - Haering , S . , and Mahamid , J . ( 2023 ) . Genetically encoded multimeric tags for subcellular protein local - ization in cryo - EM . Nat . Methods 20 , 1900 – 1908 . 64 . Wolff , J . O . , Scheiderer , L . , Engelhardt , T . , Engelhardt , J . , Matthias , J . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2023 ) . MINFLUX dissects theunimpeded walking ofkine - sin - 1 . Science 379 , 1004 – 1010 . 65 . Reinhardt , S . C . M . , Masullo , L . A . , Baudrexel , I . , Steen , P . R . , Kowalewski , R . , Eklund , A . S . , Strauss , S . , Unterauer , E . M . , Schlichthaerle , T . , Strauss , M . T . , etal . ( 2023 ) . A˚ngstro¨m - resolutionﬂuorescencemicroscopy . Nature 617 , 711 – 716 . 66 . Balzarotti , F . , Eilers , Y . , Gwosch , K . C . , Gynna˚ , A . H . , Westphal , V . , Ste - fani , F . D . , Elf , J . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2017 ) . Nanometer resolution imaging and tracking of ﬂuorescent molecules with minimal photon ﬂuxes . Sci - ence 355 , 606 – 612 . 67 . Gwosch , K . C . , Pape , J . K . , Balzarotti , F . , Hoess , P . , Ellenberg , J . , Ries , J . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2020 ) . MINFLUX nanoscopy delivers 3D multicolor nano - meter resolution in cells . Nat . Methods 17 , 217 – 224 . 68 . Stephan , T . , Bru¨ser , C . , Deckers , M . , Steyer , A . M . , Balzarotti , F . , Barbot , M . , Behr , T . S . , Heim , G . , Hu¨bner , W . , Ilgen , P . , et al . ( 2020 ) . MICOS as - sembly controls mitochondrial inner membrane remodeling and crista junction redistribution to mediate cristae formation . EMBO J . 39 , e104105 . 69 . Pape , J . K . , Stephan , T . , Balzarotti , F . , Bu¨chner , R . , Lange , F . , Riedel , D . , Jakobs , S . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2020 ) . Multicolor 3D MINFLUX nanoscopy of mitochondrial MICOS proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 117 , 20607 – 20614 . 70 . Ostersehlt , L . M . , Jans , D . C . , Wittek , A . , Keller - Findeisen , J . , Inamdar , K . , Sahl , S . J . , Hell , S . W . , andJakobs , S . ( 2022 ) . DNA - PAINTMINFLUXnano - scopy . Nat . Methods 19 , 1072 – 1075 . ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 559 Perspective 71 . Schmidt , R . , Weihs , T . , Wurm , C . A . , Jansen , I . , Rehman , J . , Sahl , S . J . , andHell , S . W . ( 2021 ) . MINFLUXnanometer - scale3Dimagingandmicro - second - range tracking on a common ﬂuorescence microscope . Nat . Commun . 12 , 1478 . 72 . Weber , M . , von der Emde , H . , Leutenegger , M . , Gunkel , P . , Sambandan , S . , Khan , T . A . , Keller - Findeisen , J . , Cordes , V . C . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2023 ) . MINSTED nanoscopy enters the Angstrom localization range . Nat . Bio - technol . 41 , 569 – 576 . 73 . Kessler , L . F . , Balakrishnan , A . , Deußner - Helfmann , N . S . , Li , Y . , Mantel , M . , Glogger , M . , Barth , H . D . , Dietz , M . S . , and Heilemann , M . ( 2023 ) . Self - quenched ﬂuorophore dimers for DNA - PAINT and STED micro - scopy . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 62 , e202307538 . 74 . Schueder , F . , Rivera - Molina , F . , Su , M . , Kidd , P . , Rothman , J . E . , Toomre , D . , and Bewersdorf , J . ( 2023 ) . Unraveling cellular complexity with unlim - ited multiplexed super - resolution imaging . Preprint at bioRxiv . 75 . Yu , M . , Heidari , M . , Mikhaleva , S . , Tan , P . S . , Mingu , S . , Ruan , H . , Rein - kemeier , C . D . , Obarska - Kosinska , A . , Siggel , M . , Beck , M . , et al . ( 2023 ) . Visualizingthedisorderednucleartransportmachineryinsitu . Na - ture 617 , 162 – 169 . 76 . Chen , F . , Tillberg , P . W . , and Boyden , E . S . ( 2015 ) . Optical imaging . Expansion microscopy . Science 347 , 543 – 548 . 77 . Jurriens , D . , van Batenburg , V . , Katrukha , E . A . , and Kapitein , L . C . ( 2021 ) . Mapping the neuronal cytoskeleton using expansion microscopy . Methods Cell Biol . 161 , 105 – 124 . 78 . Bressan , D . , Battistoni , G . , and Hannon , G . J . ( 2023 ) . The dawn of spatial omics . Science 381 , eabq4964 . 79 . Barutcu , A . R . , Wu , M . , Braunschweig , U . , Dyakov , B . J . A . , Luo , Z . , Turner , K . M . , Durbic , T . , Lin , Z . Y . , Weatheritt , R . J . , Maass , P . G . , et al . ( 2022 ) . Systematic mapping of nuclear domain - associated transcripts reveals speckles and lamina as hubs of functionally distinct retained introns . Mol . Cell 82 , 1035 – 1052 . e9 . 80 . Do¨rrbaum , A . R . , Alvarez - Castelao , B . , Nassim - Assir , B . , Langer , J . D . , and Schuman , E . M . ( 2020 ) . Proteome dynamics during homeostatic scaling in cultured neurons . Elife 9 , e52939 . 81 . Sun , C . , Nold , A . , Fusco , C . M . , Rangaraju , V . , Tchumatchenko , T . , Heile - mann , M . , and Schuman , E . M . ( 2021 ) . The prevalence and speciﬁcity of local protein synthesis during neuronal synaptic plasticity . Sci . Adv . 7 , eabj0790 . 82 . Glock , C . , Biever , A . , Tushev , G . , Nassim - Assir , B . , Kao , A . , Bartnik , I . , Tom Dieck , S . , and Schuman , E . M . ( 2021 ) . The translatome of neuronal cell bodies , dendrites , and axons . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 118 , e2113929118 . 83 . Ruwolt , M . , Piazza , I . , and Liu , F . ( 2023 ) . The potential of cross - linking mass spectrometry in the development of protein - protein interaction modulators . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 82 , 102648 . 84 . Stahl , K . , Graziadei , A . , Dau , T . , Brock , O . , andRappsilber , J . ( 2023 ) . Pro - tein structure prediction with in - cell photo - crosslinking mass spectrom - etry and deep learning . Nat . Biotechnol . 41 , 1810 – 1819 . 85 . Chen , Z . A . , and Rappsilber , J . ( 2023 ) . Protein structure dynamics by crosslinking mass spectrometry . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 80 , 102599 . 86 . Alexandrov , T . ( 2020 ) . Spatial metabolomics and imaging mass spec - trometry in the age of artiﬁcial intelligence . Annu . Rev . Biomed . Data Sci . 3 , 61 – 87 . 87 . Herna´ndez - Vega , A . , Braun , M . , Scharrel , L . , Jahnel , M . , Wegmann , S . , Hyman , B . T . , Alberti , S . , Diez , S . , and Hyman , A . A . ( 2017 ) . Local nucle - ation of microtubule bundles through tubulin concentration into a condensed tau phase . Cell Rep . 20 , 2304 – 2312 . 88 . Marzahn , M . R . , Marada , S . , Lee , J . , Nourse , A . , Kenrick , S . , Zhao , H . , Ben - Nissan , G . , Kolaitis , R . M . , Peters , J . L . , Pounds , S . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Higher - order oligomerization promotes localization of SPOP to liquid nu - clear speckles . EMBO J . 35 , 1254 – 1275 . 89 . Johnson , M . E . , and Hummer , G . ( 2011 ) . Nonspeciﬁc binding limits the number of proteins in a cell and shapes their interaction networks . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 603 – 608 . 90 . Musacchio , A . ( 2022 ) . Ontheroleofphaseseparationinthebiogenesisof membraneless compartments . EMBO J . 41 , e109952 . 91 . Mittag , T . , and Pappu , R . V . ( 2022 ) . A conceptual framework for under - standing phase separation and addressing open questions and chal - lenges . Mol . Cell 82 , 2201 – 2214 . 92 . de Oliveira Freitas Machado , C . , Schafranek , M . , Bru¨ggemann , M . , Her - na´ndez Can˜a´s , M . C . , Keller , M . , Di Liddo , A . , Brezski , A . , Blu¨mel , N . , Ar - nold , B . , Bremm , A . , etal . ( 2023 ) . PoisoncassetteexonsplicingofSRSF6 regulatesnuclearspeckledispersalandtheresponsetohypoxia . Nucleic Acids Res . 51 , 870 – 890 . 93 . Ko¨nigs , V . , de Oliveira Freitas Machado , C . , Arnold , B . , Blu¨mel , N . , Solo - vyeva , A . , Lo¨bbert , S . , Schafranek , M . , Ruiz De Los Mozos , I . , Wittig , I . , McNicoll , F . , et al . ( 2020 ) . SRSF7 maintains its homeostasis through the expression of Split - ORFs and nuclear body assembly . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 27 , 260 – 273 . 94 . Sun , C . , and Schuman , E . ( 2023 ) . A multi - omics view of neuronal subcel - lular protein synthesis . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 80 , 102705 . 95 . Hafner , A . S . , Donlin - Asp , P . G . , Leitch , B . , Herzog , E . , and Schuman , E . M . ( 2019 ) . Local protein synthesis is a ubiquitous feature of neuronal pre - and postsynaptic compartments . Science 364 , eaau3644 . 96 . Frydman , J . ( 2001 ) . Foldingofnewlytranslatedproteinsinvivo : theroleof molecular chaperones . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 , 603 – 647 . 97 . Petrovic , S . , Samanta , D . , Perriches , T . , Bley , C . J . , Thierbach , K . , Brown , B . , Nie , S . , Mobbs , G . W . , Stevens , T . A . , Liu , X . , et al . ( 2022 ) . Architecture of the linker - scaffold in the nuclear pore . Science 376 , eabm9798 . 98 . Fischer , J . , Teimer , R . , Amlacher , S . , Kunze , R . , and Hurt , E . ( 2015 ) . Linker Nups connect the nuclear pore complex inner ring with the outer ring and transport channel . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 22 , 774 – 781 . 99 . Schwarz , A . , and Beck , M . ( 2019 ) . The beneﬁts of cotranslational assem - bly : a structural perspective . Trends Cell Biol . 29 , 791 – 803 . 100 . Hirose , T . , Ninomiya , K . , Nakagawa , S . , and Yamazaki , T . ( 2023 ) . A guide to membraneless organelles and their various roles in gene regulation . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 24 , 288 – 304 . 101 . Yamazaki , T . , Yamamoto , T . , Yoshino , H . , Souquere , S . , Nakagawa , S . , Pierron , G . , andHirose , T . ( 2021 ) . Paraspeckles areconstructedasblock copolymer micelles . EMBO J . 40 , e107270 . 102 . Harayama , T . , and Riezman , H . ( 2018 ) . Understanding the diversity of membrane lipid composition . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 19 , 281 – 296 . 103 . Halbleib , K . , Pesek , K . , Covino , R . , Hofbauer , H . F . , Wunnicke , D . , Ha¨nelt , I . , Hummer , G . , and Ernst , R . ( 2017 ) . Activation of the unfolded protein response by lipid bilayer stress . Mol . Cell 67 , 673 – 684 . e8 . 104 . Singer , S . J . , and Nicolson , G . L . ( 1972 ) . The ﬂuid mosaic model of the structure of cell membranes . Science 175 , 720 – 731 . 105 . Simons , K . , andIkonen , E . ( 1997 ) . Functionalraftsincellmembranes . Na - ture 387 , 569 – 572 . 106 . Levental , I . , andLyman , E . ( 2023 ) . Regulationofmembraneproteinstruc - tureandfunctionbytheirlipidnano - environment . Nat . Rev . Mol . CellBiol . 24 , 107 – 122 . 107 . Jensen , M . Ø . , and Mouritsen , O . G . ( 2004 ) . Lipids do inﬂuence protein function - the hydrophobic matching hypothesis revisited . Biochim . Bio - phys . Acta 1666 , 205 – 226 . 108 . Rangamani , P . , Mandadap , K . K . , and Oster , G . ( 2014 ) . Protein - induced membrane curvature alters local membrane tension . Biophys . J . 107 , 751 – 762 . 109 . Bigay , J . , Gounon , P . , Robineau , S . , and Antonny , B . ( 2003 ) . Lipid pack - ing sensed by ArfGAP1 couples COPI coat disassembly to membrane bilayer curvature . Nature 426 , 563 – 566 . 110 . Boucrot , E . , Pick , A . , C¸amdere , G . , Liska , N . , Evergren , E . , McMahon , H . T . , and Kozlov , M . M . ( 2012 ) . Membrane ﬁssion is promoted by ll OPEN ACCESS 560 Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 Perspective insertion of amphipathic helices and is restricted by crescent BAR do - mains . Cell 149 , 124 – 136 . 111 . Boyle , E . , and Wilﬂing , F . ( 2023 ) . Autophagy as a caretaker of nuclear integrity . FEBS Lett . 597 , 2728 – 2738 . 112 . Terasaki , M . , Shemesh , T . , Kasthuri , N . , Klemm , R . W . , Schalek , R . , Hay - worth , K . J . , Hand , A . R . , Yankova , M . , Huber , G . , Lichtman , J . W . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Stacked endoplasmic reticulum sheets are connected by helicoi - dal membrane motifs . Cell 154 , 285 – 296 . 113 . von der Malsburg , A . , Sapp , G . M . , Zuccaro , K . E . , von Appen , A . , Moss , F . R . , 3rd , Kalia , R . , Bennett , J . A . , Abriata , L . A . , Dal Peraro , M . , van der Laan , M . , etal . ( 2023 ) . Structuralmechanismofmitochondrialmembrane remodelling by human OPA1 . Nature 620 , 1101 – 1108 . 114 . Romanauska , A . , and Ko¨hler , A . ( 2023 ) . Lipid saturation controls nuclear envelope function . Nat . Cell Biol . 25 , 1290 – 1302 . 115 . Bharathan , N . K . , Giang , W . , Hoffman , C . L . , Aaron , J . S . , Khuon , S . , Chew , T . L . , Preibisch , S . , Trautman , E . T . , Heinrich , L . , Bogovic , J . , et al . ( 2023 ) . Architecture and dynamics of a desmosome - endoplasmic reticulum complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 25 , 823 – 835 . 116 . Ungricht , R . , and Kutay , U . ( 2017 ) . Mechanisms and functions of nuclear envelope remodelling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 18 , 229 – 245 . 117 . Venkova , L . , Vishen , A . S . , Lembo , S . , Srivastava , N . , Duchamp , B . , Rup - pel , A . , Williart , A . , Vassilopoulos , S . , Deslys , A . , GarciaArcos , J . M . , etal . ( 2022 ) . A mechano - osmotic feedback couples cell volume to the rate of cell deformation . Elife 11 , e72381 . 118 . Roffay , C . , Molinard , G . , Kim , K . , Urbanska , M . , Andrade , V . , Barbarasa , V . , Nowak , P . , Mercier , V . , Garcı´a - Calvo , J . , Matile , S . , et al . ( 2021 ) . Pas - sive coupling of membrane tension and cell volume during active response of cells to osmosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 118 , e2103228118 . 119 . Zimmerli , C . E . , Allegretti , M . , Rantos , V . , Goetz , S . K . , Obarska - Kosinska , A . , Zagoriy , I . , Halavatyi , A . , Hummer , G . , Mahamid , J . , Kosinski , J . , and Beck , M . ( 2021 ) . Nuclear pores dilate and constrict in cellulo . Science 374 , eabd9776 . 120 . Jiang , Y . , Yang , X . , Jiang , J . , and Xiao , B . ( 2021 ) . Structural designs and mechanogating mechanisms of the mechanosensitive piezo channels . Trends Biochem . Sci . 46 , 472 – 488 . 121 . Yuan , F . , Lee , C . T . , Sangani , A . , Houser , J . R . , Wang , L . , Lafer , E . M . , Ran - gamani , P . , and Stachowiak , J . C . ( 2023 ) . The ins and outs of membrane bending by intrinsically disordered proteins . Sci . Adv . 9 , eadg3485 . 122 . Mund , M . , Tschanz , A . , Wu , Y . L . , Frey , F . , Mehl , J . L . , Kaksonen , M . , Avi - noam , O . , Schwarz , U . S . , and Ries , J . ( 2023 ) . Clathrin coats partially pre - assemble and subsequently bend during endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 222 , e202206038 . 123 . Hubatsch , L . , Jawerth , L . M . , Love , C . , Bauermann , J . , Tang , T . D . , Bo , S . , Hyman , A . A . , andWeber , C . A . ( 2021 ) . Quantitativetheoryforthediffusive dynamics of liquid condensates . Elife 10 , e68620 . 124 . Gouveia , B . , Kim , Y . , Shaevitz , J . W . , Petry , S . , Stone , H . A . , and Brang - wynne , C . P . ( 2022 ) . Capillary forces generated by biomolecular conden - sates . Nature 609 , 255 – 264 . 125 . Fare , C . M . , Villani , A . , Drake , L . E . , andShorter , J . ( 2021 ) . Higher - orderor - ganization of biomolecular condensates . Open Biol . 11 , 210137 . 126 . Misner , C . W . , Thorne , K . S . , Wheeler , J . A . , and Kaiser , D . ( 2017 ) . Gravita - tion ( Princeton University Press ) . 127 . Corradi , V . , Mendez - Villuendas , E . , Ingo´lfsson , H . I . , Gu , R . X . , Siuda , I . , Melo , M . N . , Moussatova , A . , DeGagne´ , L . J . , Sejdiu , B . I . , Singh , G . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Lipid - protein interactions are unique ﬁngerprints for mem - brane proteins . ACS Cent . Sci . 4 , 709 – 717 . 128 . Helfrich , W . ( 1973 ) . Elastic properties of lipid bilayers : theory and possible experiments . Z . Naturforsch . C 28 , 693 – 703 . 129 . Andersen , O . S . , and Koeppe , R . E . , 2nd . ( 2007 ) . Bilayer thickness and membrane protein function : an energetic perspective . Annu . Rev . Bio - phys . Biomol . Struct . 36 , 107 – 130 . 130 . Takamori , S . , Holt , M . , Stenius , K . , Lemke , E . A . , Grønborg , M . , Riedel , D . , Urlaub , H . , Schenck , S . , Bru¨gger , B . , Ringler , P . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Molecular anatomy of a trafﬁcking organelle . Cell 127 , 831 – 846 . 131 . Sawa - Makarska , J . , Baumann , V . , Coudevylle , N . , von Bu¨low , S . , Nogel - lova , V . , Abert , C . , Schuschnig , M . , Graef , M . , Hummer , G . , and Martens , S . ( 2020 ) . ReconstitutionofautophagosomenucleationdeﬁnesAtg9ves - icles as seeds for membrane formation . Science 369 , eaaz7714 . 132 . Mosalaganti , S . , Obarska - Kosinska , A . , Siggel , M . , Taniguchi , R . , Turo - (cid:1) nova´ , B . , Zimmerli , C . E . , Buczak , K . , Schmidt , F . H . , Margiotta , E . , Mack - mull , M . T . , etal . ( 2022 ) . AI - based structure prediction empowersintegra - tive structural analysis of human nuclear pores . Science 376 , eabm9506 . 133 . Alber , M . , Buganza Tepole , A . , Cannon , W . R . , De , S . , Dura - Bernal , S . , Garikipati , K . , Karniadakis , G . , Lytton , W . W . , Perdikaris , P . , Petzold , L . , and Kuhl , E . ( 2019 ) . Integrating machine learning and multiscale modeling - perspectives , challenges , and opportunities in the biological , biomedical , and behavioral sciences . NPJ Digit . Med . 2 , 115 . 134 . Grieves , M . ( 2019 ) . Virtually intelligent product systems : digitaland phys - ical twins . InComplex SystemsEngineering : Theory and Practice , S . Flu - merfelt , K . G . Schwartz , D . Mavris , and S . Briceno , eds . ( American Insti - tute of Aeronautics and Astronautics ) , pp . 175 – 200 . 135 . Delhommel , F . , Martı´nez - Lumbreras , S . , and Sattler , M . ( 2023 ) . Combining NMR , SAXS and SANS to characterize the structure and dy - namics of protein complexes . Methods Enzymol . 678 , 263 – 297 . 136 . Thompson , M . K . , Ehlinger , A . C . , and Chazin , W . J . ( 2017 ) . Analysis of functional dynamics of modular multidomain proteins by SAXS and NMR . Methods Enzymol . 592 , 49 – 76 . 137 . Trabuco , L . G . , Villa , E . , Mitra , K . , Frank , J . , and Schulten , K . ( 2008 ) . Flex - ible ﬁtting of atomic structures into electron microscopy maps using mo - lecular dynamics . Structure 16 , 673 – 683 . 138 . Rappsilber , J . ( 2011 ) . The beginning of a beautiful friendship : cross - link - ing / massspectrometryandmodellingofproteinsandmulti - protein com - plexes . J . Struct . Biol . 173 , 530 – 540 . 139 . Rantos , V . , Karius , K . , and Kosinski , J . ( 2022 ) . Integrative structural modeling of macromolecular complexes using assembline . Nat . Protoc . 17 , 152 – 176 . 140 . Russel , D . , Lasker , K . , Webb , B . , Vela´zquez - Muriel , J . , Tjioe , E . , Schneid - man - Duhovny , D . , Peterson , B . , and Sali , A . ( 2012 ) . Putting the pieces together : integrativemodelingplatform softwareforstructuredetermina - tion of macromolecular assemblies . PLoS Biol . 10 , e1001244 . 141 . Rout , M . P . , andSali , A . ( 2019 ) . Principlesforintegrativestructuralbiology studies . Cell 177 , 1384 – 1403 . 142 . Senior , A . W . , Evans , R . , Jumper , J . , Kirkpatrick , J . , Sifre , L . , Green , T . , Qin , C . , (cid:1) Zı´dek , A . , Nelson , A . W . R . , Bridgland , A . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Improved protein structure prediction using potentials from deep learning . Nature 577 , 706 – 710 . 143 . Tunyasuvunakool , K . , Adler , J . , Wu , Z . , Green , T . , Zielinski , M . , (cid:1) Zı´dek , A . , Bridgland , A . , Cowie , A . , Meyer , C . , Laydon , A . , et al . ( 2021 ) . Highly ac - curate protein structure prediction for the human proteome . Nature 596 , 590 – 596 . 144 . Ruff , K . M . , and Pappu , R . V . ( 2021 ) . AlphaFold and implications for intrin - sically disordered proteins . J . Mol . Biol . 433 , 167208 . 145 . Fernandez - Martinez , J . , and Rout , M . P . ( 2021 ) . One ring to rule them all ? Structural and functional diversity in the nuclear pore complex . Trends Biochem . Sci . 46 , 595 – 607 . 146 . Schwartz , T . U . ( 2022 ) . Solving the nuclear pore puzzle . Science 376 , 1158 – 1159 . 147 . Hampoelz , B . , Andres - Pons , A . , Kastritis , P . , and Beck , M . ( 2019 ) . Struc - ture and assembly of the nuclear pore complex . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 48 , 515 – 536 . 148 . Dror , R . O . , Dirks , R . M . , Grossman , J . P . , Xu , H . , and Shaw , D . E . ( 2012 ) . Biomolecular simulation : a computational microscope for molecular biology . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 41 , 429 – 452 . ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 561 Perspective 149 . Hollingsworth , S . A . , and Dror , R . O . ( 2018 ) . Molecular Dynamics simula - tion for all . Neuron 99 , 1129 – 1143 . 150 . Bhaskara , R . M . , Grumati , P . , Garcia - Pardo , J . , Kalayil , S . , Covarrubias - Pinto , A . , Chen , W . , Kudryashev , M . , Dikic , I . , and Hummer , G . ( 2019 ) . Curvature induction and membrane remodeling by FAM134B reticulon homology domain assist selective ER - phagy . Nat . Commun . 10 , 2370 . 151 . Gonza´lez , A . , Covarrubias - Pinto , A . , Bhaskara , R . M . , Glogger , M . , Kun - cha , S . K . , Xavier , A . , Seemann , E . , Misra , M . , Hoffmann , M . E . , Bra¨uning , B . , et al . ( 2023 ) . Ubiquitination regulates ER - phagy and remodelling of endoplasmic reticulum . Nature 618 , 394 – 401 . 152 . Goretzki , B . , Wiedemann , C . , McCray , B . A . , Scha¨fer , S . L . , Jansen , J . , Tebbe , F . , Mitrovic , S . A . , No¨th , J . , Cabezudo , A . C . , Donohue , J . K . , et al . ( 2023 ) . Crosstalk between regulatory elements in disordered TRPV4 N - terminus modulates lipid - dependent channel activity . Nat . Commun . 14 , 4165 . 153 . Turo (cid:1) nova´ , B . , Sikora , M . , Schu¨rmann , C . , Hagen , W . J . H . , Welsch , S . , Blanc , F . E . C . , von Bu¨low , S . , Gecht , M . , Bagola , K . , Ho¨rner , C . , et al . ( 2020 ) . In situ structural analysis of SARS - CoV - 2 spike reveals ﬂexibility mediated by three hinges . Science 370 , 203 – 208 . 154 . Sikora , M . , vonBu¨low , S . , Blanc , F . E . C . , Gecht , M . , Covino , R . , andHum - mer , G . ( 2021 ) . Computational epitope map of SARS - CoV - 2 spike pro - tein . PLoS Comput . Biol . 17 , e1008790 . 155 . von Bu¨low , S . , Sikora , M . , Blanc , F . E . C . , Covino , R . , and Hummer , G . ( 2023 ) . Antibody accessibility determines location of spike surface muta - tions in SARS - CoV - 2 variants . PLoS Comput . Biol . 19 , e1010822 . 156 . Lindorff - Larsen , K . , Maragakis , P . , Piana , S . , Eastwood , M . P . , Dror , R . O . , and Shaw , D . E . ( 2012 ) . Systematic validation of protein force ﬁelds against experimental data . PLoS One 7 , e32131 . 157 . Robustelli , P . , Piana , S . , and Shaw , D . E . ( 2018 ) . Developing a molecular dynamics force ﬁeld for both folded and disordered protein states . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 115 , E4758 – E4766 . 158 . Jung , H . , Covino , R . , Arjun , A . , Leitold , C . , Dellago , C . , Bolhuis , P . G . , and Hummer , G . ( 2023 ) . Machine - guided path sampling to discover mecha - nisms of molecular self - organization . Nat . Comput . Sci . 3 , 334 – 345 . 159 . Souza , P . C . T . , Alessandri , R . , Barnoud , J . , Thallmair , S . , Faustino , I . , Gru¨ - newald , F . , Patmanidis , I . , Abdizadeh , H . , Bruininks , B . M . H . , Wassenaar , T . A . , et al . ( 2021 ) . Martini 3 : a general purpose force ﬁeld for coarse - grained molecular dynamics . Nat . Methods 18 , 382 – 388 . 160 . Venable , R . M . , Brown , F . L . H . , andPastor , R . W . ( 2015 ) . Mechanicalprop - erties of lipid bilayers from molecular dynamics simulation . Chem . Phys . Lipids 192 , 60 – 74 . 161 . Dacheux , L . , Moreau , A . , Ataman - Onal , Y . , Biron , F . , Verrier , B . , and Barin , F . ( 2004 ) . Evolutionary dynamics of the glycan shield of the human immunodeﬁciency virus envelope during natural infection and implica - tions for exposure of the 2G12 epitope . J . Virol . 78 , 12625 – 12637 . 162 . Poon , A . F . , Lewis , F . I . , Pond , S . L . , andFrost , S . D . ( 2007 ) . Evolutionaryin - teractions between N - linked glycosylation sites in the HIV - 1 envelope . PLoS Comput . Biol . 3 , e11 . 163 . Thornburg , Z . R . , Bianchi , D . M . , Brier , T . A . , Gilbert , B . R . , Earnest , T . M . , Melo , M . C . R . , Safronova , N . , Sa´enz , J . P . , Cook , A . T . , Wise , K . S . , et al . ( 2022 ) . Fundamental behaviors emerge from simulations of a living min - imal cell . Cell 185 , 345 – 360 . e28 . 164 . Casalino , L . , Dommer , A . C . , Gaieb , Z . , Barros , E . P . , Sztain , T . , Ahn , S . - H . , Trifan , A . , Brace , A . , Bogetti , A . T . , Clyde , A . , et al . ( 2021 ) . AI - driven multi - scale simulations illuminate mechanisms of SARS - CoV - 2 spike dy - namics . Int . J . High Perform . Comput . Appl . 35 , 432 – 451 . 165 . Lavin , A . , Krakauer , D . , Zenil , H . , Gottschlich , J . , Mattson , T . , Brehmer , J . , Anandkumar , A . , Choudry , S . , Rocki , K . , Baydin , A . G . , etal . ( 2022 ) . Simu - lation intelligence : towards a new generation of scientiﬁc methods . Pre - print at arXiv . ll OPEN ACCESS 562 Cell 187 , February 1 , 2024 Perspective