Sorting It Out in Endosomes : An Emerging Concept in Renal Epithelial Cell Transport Regulation Ion and water transport by the kidney is continually adjusted in response to physiological cues . Selective endocytosis and endosomal trafﬁcking of ion transporters are increasingly appreciated as mechanisms to acutely modulate renal function . Here , we discuss emerging paradigms in this new area of investigation . Paul A . Welling 1 and Ora A . Weisz 2 1 Department of Physiology , University of Maryland School of Medicine , Baltimore , Maryland ; and 2 Department of Medicine and Department of Cell Biology and Physiology , Renal - Electrolyte Division , University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania weisz @ pitt . edu Endosomes have emerged as a key intracellular sorting site in kidney cells . Internalized transmem - brane proteins that enter these compartments can be targeted for recycling to the cell surface , for transport to the lysosome , for transcytosis , or for retrograde transport to the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) . The default trafﬁcking pathway that is fol - lowed for a given protein depends on its inherent targeting signals and the availability and localiza - tion of adaptors that recognize this information . In recent years , it has become evident that the pos - tendocytic fate of surface receptors and ion trans - porters is highly regulated within this pathway . A variety of posttranslational modiﬁcations can alter or create new endocytic signals to acutely enable proteins to engage different trafﬁcking routes . In this review , we describe endocytic pathways and the machinery that regulate these routes , with em - phasis on emerging paradigms that highlight the complexity of these pathways and their participa - tion in the modulation of renal ion transport . We have used examples from differentiated kidney cells where possible but note that many of the studies we discuss were performed in nonpolar - ized cells , where endocytic trafﬁc is less complex than in polarized cells . Endocytosis and Postendocytic Pathways Cell surface receptors , transporters , and channels can be internalized by several different mechanisms ( seeRef . 13forreview ) , ofwhichtheclathrin - dependent pathway is the best understood . In each case , en - docytosis involves the invagination and ﬁssion of the plasma membrane to generate cytoplasmic vesicles that ultimately fuse with early sorting en - dosomes ( EEs ; FIGURE 1A ) . The slightly acidic lu - menal pH of EEs favors dissociation of internalized ligands from membrane receptors . In EEs , proteins are sorted for recycling , degradation , retrograde transport to the TGN , or transcytosis to the op - posing cell surface domain . Lumenal contents of EEs , including dissociated ligands , are sorted from recycling lipid and membrane proteins at this stage : membrane receptors and other proteins en - ter tubular extensions that can return to the sur - face rapidly and directly ( fast recycling ) or after convergence in juxtanuclear recycling endo - somes . Motor proteins including myosins play a role in protein delivery from recycling endo - somes to the cell surface . Cargoes destined for degradation ( e . g . , lumenal contents or membrane proteins that are targeted for degradation by ubiq - uitination ) are retained in sorting endosomes . EEs mature to become late endosomes / multivesicular bodies ( LEs / MVBs ) by invagination of the limiting membrane to form lumenal vesicles . MVBs tran - siently fuse with lysosomes to deliver their intralu - menal contents and then re - form . Endocytic Pathways in Polarized Cells Endocytic pathways in polarized cells are by ne - cessity more complex than in nonpolarized cells . The trafﬁcking routes and compartments through which internalized proteins pass have been most extensively characterized in the Madin - Darby ca - nine kidney ( MDCK ) cell line , which readily forms polarized monolayers when cultured on permeable supports . In these cells , cargo internalized from the apical or basolateral surface is trafﬁcked to distinct apical and basolateral early endosomes , respec - tively ( FIGURE 1B ) ( 20 ) . Apically and basolaterally recycling proteins are trafﬁcked to the common endosome ( CRE ) before sorting and delivery to the appropriate membrane domain . This compart - ment is marked by the small GTP binding protein Rab8 , although disruption of Rab8 function does not affect recycling ( 26 ) . The epithelial - speciﬁc adaptor protein complex AP1 - B , which mediates basolateral recycling of a subset of membrane pro - teins , is also associated with this endosomal com - partment ( 20 ) . In fully differentiated cells , there is an additional recycling compartment , termed the apical recycling endosome ( ARE ) , that differs from the CRE by the presence of Rab11 and slightly higher pH ( 6 , 88 ) . This compartment , which com - prises a subapical cluster of membrane tubules REVIEWS PHYSIOLOGY 25 : 280 – 292 , 2010 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / physiol . 00022 . 2010 1548 - 9213 / 10 ©2010 Int . Union Physiol . Sci . / Am . Physiol . Soc . 280 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J u ne 16 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys i o l og y on li ne . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m FIGURE 1 . The endocytic pathway and entry portals in undifferentiated and polarized cells A : in nonpolarized cells , cargo internalized through clathrin coated pits ( 1 ) enters slightly acidic early sorting endosomes ( EE ) . Membrane proteins such as the transferrin receptor ( TfR ) are segregated from soluble content by concentration in ﬂuid - poor tubular extensions and can recycle directly to the membrane ( 2 ; fast recycling ) or transit rab11 - positive recycling endosomes ( RE ) before returning to the cell sur - face ( 3 ) . EEs mature into multivesicular bodies / late endosomes ( MVB ) by invagination of the limiting membrane that captures ubiquiti - nated membrane proteins destined for degradation in intralumenal vesicles ( 4 ) . MVBs release their contents to lysosomes ( LY ) via transient fusion ( 5 ) . B : in polarized renal cells , apical and basolateral proteins are internalized into apical and basolateral early endosomes ( AEE and BEE ; 1a and 1b , respectively ) . Fast recycling can occur from these compartments ( 2a and 2b ) , or membrane proteins , such as the basolat - erally recycling TfR , can move into Rab11 - negative common recycling endosomes ( 3a and 3b ) before recycling ( 4a , 4b ) . At least a subset of apically recycling cargo as well as proteins transcytosing from one membrane to the other also transit the rab11 - positive apical recy - cling endosome before reaching the apical membrane ( 3a’ ; 4a ) . Proteins destined for degradation are targeted deeper into the endocytic pathway from AEE and BEE via formation of MVBs ( 5 ) and transient fusion with lysosomes ( 6 ) . Retrograde transport pathways to the TGN are omitted from A and B for simplicity . C : in addition to clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( 1 ) , several clathrin independent entry mechanisms have been described ( 2 – 5 ) . Some of these pathways , including caveolin and ﬂotillin - dependent internalization ( 2 ) , as well as a clathrin - and caveolin - independent pathway regulated by RhoA ( 3 ) , require the GTPase dynamin for ﬁssion . A dynamin - inde - pendent pathway regulated by ARF6 has also been described ( 4 ) . GPI - anchored proteins may be internalized into clathrin - independent carriers termed CLICs that fuse with GPI - anchored protein enriched early endosomal compartments ( GEECs ) ; whether dynamin is required for CLIC formation remains controversial ( 5 ) . Interestingly , both clathrin - dependent and - independent pathways ultimately converge in early endosomes , and recycling from this compartment is differentially regulated depending on the mode of entry ( see text for more de - tails ) . In general , is not known whether all of these clathrin independent pathways operate at both apical or basolateral cell surface do - mains of polarized cells . REVIEWS PHYSIOLOGY (cid:127) Volume 25 (cid:127) October 2010 (cid:127) www . physiologyonline . org 281 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J u ne 16 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys i o l og y on li ne . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m around the microtubule organizing center , has traditionally been thought to receive apically but not basolaterally recycling proteins ( 2 ) . This view has been recently challenged by studies demon - strating a role of Rab11 and the ARE - associated motor protein Myosin Vb in basolateral recycling ( 84 ) . Additionally , polarized cells have apical - to - basolateral and basolateral - to - apical transcytotic routes that enable the salvaging of misdirected proteins as well as the bidirectional transit of im - munoglobulin receptors . Transcytosing proteins internalized from either cell surface domain transit both the CRE and the ARE before reaching their target membrane ( 2 , 84 ) . Sorting Decisions Along the Endocytic Pathway Proteins are sorted at every step along the endo - cytic pathway . The ﬁrst of these sorting decisions is whether to enter the pathway at all . Proteins enter - ing the cell via clathrin - dependent endocytosis bind to adaptor proteins that recruit them to clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) . Some cell surface receptors en - gage distinct adaptors for constitutive vs . regulated internalization , resulting ultimately in altered re - ceptor fate . In addition to clathrin - dependent endo - cytosis , several clathrin - independent mechanisms exist for cargo internalization , and some proteins can access multiple pathways . These pathways converge in early endosomes , where proteins are sorted for recycling , degradation , transcytosis , retrograde trans - port to the TGN , or sequestration . As discussed be - low , the fate of a speciﬁc protein along this pathway can be acutely modulated by global cues such as cell signaling or by individual post - translational modiﬁcations . Internalization vs . Cell Surface Retention Retention factors stabilize the expression of sur - face membrane proteins , often by preventing or limiting endocytosis . Several retention mecha - nisms have been described , including association with scaffolding proteins , assimilation into special - ized plasmalemma microdomains , and interaction with the cytoskeleton ( FIGURE 2A ) . In recent years , it has become evident that regulation of transport proteins is often achieved by changing the balance between endocytosis and retention . The regulated interplay of retention factors can display an in - triguing degree of complexity in these physiologi - cal processes . A salient example is provided by recent discov - eries into the mechanisms by which two key so - dium transport molecules , the Na (cid:1) / H (cid:1) exchange isoform 3 ( NHE3 ) and the sodium phosphate co - transporter 2 ( NaPi2 ) , are physiologically regulated in the renal proximal tubule ( FIGURE 2B ) . NHE3 and NaPi2 are usually localized within the apical microvilli . Retention in this structure segregates the transporters from the sites of avid endocytosis located within the intermicrovillar clefts , allowing robust membrane expression for copious salt re - absorption . Negative regulatory factors , such as PTH , dopamine , or an acute rise in blood pressure , stimulate the translocation of the transporters from the body of the microvilli . But this does not guaran - tee endocytosis . In fact , only NaPi2 is targeted for internalization ( 97 ) . NHE3 simply moves to special - ized apical membrane domains at the base of the microvilli where its activity is apparently shut off . Available data suggest the PDZ scaffolding pro - tein , NHERF1 ( Na (cid:1) / H (cid:1) exchange regulatory factor 1 ) ( 91 ) and raft - partitioning ( 67 ) play separate re - tention roles in the differential response of the api - cal sodium - hydrogen exchanger NHE3 , and the sodium - phosphate cotransporter NaPi2 to these reg - ulatory signals . NHERF1 effectively anchors NHE3 and NaPi2 within the microvilli by directly interact - ing with the transporters and simultaneously engag - ing the underlying microvillar cytoskeleton . NHE3 also directly binds to the actin - associated protein erzin , allowing additional modes of attachment . On signaling through the negative regulatory factors , in - teractions with NHERF1 become severed , and a my - osin VI - driven translocation process moves NHE3 and NaPi2 from the microvilli ( 4 , 98 ) . Because NHE3 selectively assimilates with lipid rafts , the translocated NHE3 molecules are effectively excluded from clathrin - coatedpitsandconsequentlyretainedatthebaseofthe microvilli . By contrast , NaPi2 transporters do not parti - tionintoraftsandarefreetobeinternalizedonceitsties with the microvillar anchor are broken . It should be pointed out that membrane proteins that interact with the same retention factor may also have different endocytic fates , depending on the in - ternalization / recycling signals embedded within them . A PDZ complex , comprised of Lineage protein 7 ( Lin - 7 ) and the calcium - / calmodulin - dependent serine protein kinase ( CASK ) retains many proteins at the basolateral membrane but disruption of Lin - 7 interactions produces a wide range of mislo - calization phenotypes ( FIGURE 2C ) . For instance , mutant Kir2 . 3 channels lacking the PDZ binding motif are largely directed to an endosomal com - partment rather than the basolateral membrane ( 61 ) , consistent with strong endosomal targeting signals . By contrast , mutant betaine - GABA trans - porters ( BGT1 ) lacking their PDZ binding motif are predominately localized on the basolateral membrane despite increased endocytosis , pre - sumably as a consequence of rapid recycling . In yet another twist on this theme , an apical - missorting phenotype is produced by removing the PDZ binding site from a chimeric LET - 23 / nerve growth factor receptor protein ( 78 ) . In this case , Lin - 7 interaction may stabilize the receptor REVIEWS PHYSIOLOGY (cid:127) Volume 25 (cid:127) October 2010 (cid:127) www . physiologyonline . org 282 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J u ne 16 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys i o l og y on li ne . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m on the basolateral membrane to limit transcyto - sis to the apical membrane . Cargo Entry Into Clathrin - Coated Pits Proteins that are efﬁciently internalized by clathrin - dependent mechanisms contain cytoplasmic signals that are recognized by intracellular adaptor pro - teins that link cargo to the forming clathrin lattice ( see Ref . 82 for an excellent recent review ) ( FIGURE 3 ) . The adaptor protein ( AP ) family is the best - studied class of endocytic adaptor . Individual subunits of the AP - 2 adaptor protein complex bind REVIEWS PHYSIOLOGY (cid:127) Volume 25 (cid:127) October 2010 (cid:127) www . physiologyonline . org 283 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J u ne 16 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys i o l og y on li ne . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m to linear peptide motifs ( including YXX (cid:2) and [ DE ] XXXL [ LI ] sequences ) on the cytoplasmic tail of constitutively internalized cargo proteins . Other adaptor proteins ( also termed CLASPs , for clathrin - and lipid - associated sorting proteins ) bind variously to different signals on membrane proteins . For instance , one group of CLASPs con - tain a PTB domain that serves as recognition site for “NPxY / F” endocytosis signals . In some cases , these recognize posttranslational modiﬁcations on membrane proteins that target them for regulated internalization ; for example , beta - arrestins bind to phosphorylated serine and threonine residues on some activated G - protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) to modulate their selective internaliza - tion and downregulation . Similarly , epidermal growth factor substrate 15 ( Eps15 ) , the Eps15 - related protein EPS15R , and epsin ( for Eps15 in - teractor ) bind to ubiquitin moieties attached to cytoplasmic lysine residues on membrane pro - teins . The plethora of different CLASPS , each having different signal recognition demands and regulatory requirements , provides a means to tightly control endocytic speciﬁcity . For exam - ple , clathrin - dependent endocytosis of the epi - thelial sodium channel ( ENaC ) and the renal medullary potassium channel ( ROMK , Kir1 . 1 ) from the principal cell apical membrane can be separately regulated because the channels inter - act with different CLASPs . ENaC is marked for endocytosis through its interaction with epsin , whereas ROMK is targeted for internalization by the PTB - containing CLASP ARH ( FIGURE 3 ) ( 18 , 89 ) . In addition to binding clathrin , many CLASPs also interact with AP - 2 as well as with other acces - sory proteins that function in endocytosis . More - over , nearly all of the CLASPs identiﬁed to date bind to the lipid phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphos - phate ( PIP 2 ) , which is enriched at the plasma membrane . Formation of this highly scaffolded network of adaptors and accessory proteins facili - tates membrane curvature leading to the produc - tive formation of a clathrin - coated vesicle . Fission of the vesicle from the membrane is accomplished by action of the GTPase dynamin . CLASPs and Cargo Sorting The availability of numerous CLASPs to engage cargo is one means to ensure access to the endocytic ma - chinery for proteins that are not abundant and / or have relatively weak endocytic sorting signals . In - deed , internalization of a given protein is saturable but does not preclude endocytosis of other proteins with different internalization signals ( 48 , 90 ) . The presence of multiple CLASPs also provides redun - dancy for speciﬁc proteins that has physiological im - plications : some receptors bind preferentially to one adaptor for constitutive endocytosis but to another on ligand - induced activation . For example the GPCR family member protease - activated receptor - 1 ( PAR - 1 ) is internalized constitutively by clathrin - mediated endocytosis that requires direct inter - action with AP - 2 . However , ligand binding triggers rapid internalization of PAR - 1 via an AP - 2 - independent pathway ( 96 ) . Numerous groups have demonstrated colocaliza - tion of multiple receptors or CLASPs in CCPs ( 8 , 10 , 35 , 49 , 80 ) , consistent with the idea that cargo mol - ecules are recruited essentially randomly into coated pits . This notion has been challenged recently by several studies demonstrating the selective enrich - ment of distinct cargo in subpopulations of clathrin - coated pits ( 3 , 40 , 41 , 63 , 81 ) . In some cases , cargo segregation may be induced on receptor activation . In the case of the epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor EGF - R , ligand binding has been suggested to lead to de novo assembly of EGF - R - speciﬁc CCPs ( 32 , 93 ) , although this idea has been disputed ( 66 ) . Activated GPCRs also appear to be internalized in a subset of CCPs with unique kinetics ( 63 ) , and differ - ent GPCRs appear to be targeted to distinct subpopu - lations of preexisting CCPs ( 54 ) . This segregation may reﬂect the binding of GPCRs to different adaptor proteins ( 96 ) . Somewhat surprisingly , however , these GPCRs converge in the same early endosomes after internalization ( 54 ) . In another study , Lakadamyali et al . found that LDL and EGF are enriched in a subset of CCPs that selectively fuse with a subpopulation of dynamic , rapidly maturing endosomes , whereas the recycling marker transferrin ( Tf ) is nonselectively de - livered to all early endosomes ( 40 ) . FIGURE 2 . Cargo retention mechanisms A : General scheme . Retention factors , including PDZ proteins , scaffolding molecules , and the cytoskeleton , can effectively anchor proteins at the plasmalemma and segregate them away from sites of endocytosis . Cargo interactions with retention factors are often tightly controlled by post - translational modiﬁcations . On release from these factors , cargo can be freed for internalization . B : retention of the Na (cid:1) / H (cid:1) exchange isoform 3 ( NHE3 ) and the sodium phosphate cotransporter 2 ( NaPi2 ) at the renal proximal tubule apical membrane . Both transporters associate with the PDZ protein , NHERF1 ( Na (cid:1) / H (cid:1) exchange regulatory factor 1 ) , in the apical microvilli , separating them from sites of endocytosis within the intermicrovil - lar clefts . On release from NHERF1 , a myosin VI driven translocation process moves NHE3 and NaPi2 out of the microvilli . Yet , only NaPi2 trans - porters are internalized . Because NHE3 selectively assimilates with lipid rafts , it is excluded from clathrin - coated pits . C : the Lineage protein 7 ( Lin - 7 ) and the calcium - / calmodulin - dependent serine protein kinase ( CASK ) PDZ protein complex at the basolateral membrane retains a number of PDZ binding targets , including the betaine - GABA transporter ( BGT - 1 ) , the inwardly rectifying potassium channel Kir 2 . 3 , and the LET - 24 / NGF re - ceptor tyrosine kinase . Lin - 7 directly interacts with cargo . CASK interacts with Lin - 7 while simultaneously engaging the actin cytoskeleton through a hook domain interaction with 4 . 1 proteins . Disruption of Lin - 7 interactions produces a wide range of mislocalization phenotypes , depending on the internalization / recycling signals embedded within the cargo proteins . REVIEWS PHYSIOLOGY (cid:127) Volume 25 (cid:127) October 2010 (cid:127) www . physiologyonline . org 284 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J u ne 16 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys i o l og y on li ne . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m It is not yet clear whether these disparate obser - vations regarding cargo and adaptor segregation in coated pits can be reconciled with the classical view of coated - pit assembly . Live cell imaging sug - gests heterogeneity in coated - pit dynamics that could reﬂect differences in their contents ( 22 ) , whereas other studies have argued against this idea ( 16 ) . It is possible that these differences are cell - type speciﬁc or that cargo - selective coated pits may form only under experimentally induced con - ditions . Regardless , it is interesting to speculate about the potential for cargo segregation in polar - ized cells and the consequent implications for the regulation of renal epithelial transport . There is some evidence for adaptor protein segregation in the most global sense in these cells , since differential recruitment of some CLASPs to one plasma mem - brane domain or another has been reported . For example , Dab - 2 is strikingly positioned at the apical membrane in renal epithelial cells ( 55 ) , whereas the cellular distribution of ARH in the collecting duct is more diffuse ( 18 ) . Interestingly , in hepatocytes , ARH is more basolateral , where it is responsible for con - trolling endocytosis of the LDL receptor . Apical and basolateral CCPs differ in their speed of invagination , with apical endocytosis being markedly slower than basolateral ( 56 ) . Could these differences explain the presence of CCP populations with distinct lifetimes observed in nonpolarized cells ( 22 ) ? Are there addi - tional subpopulations of CCPs that might form at each domain ? Clathrin - Independent Endocytosis In recent years , the contribution of clathrin - inde - pendent internalization pathways to cell ho - meostasis has become increasingly clear . Several distinct clathrin - independent endocytic mecha - nisms have been identiﬁed on the basis of their differential requirement for caveolin , ﬂotillin , dy - namin , and the small GTPases Arf 1 , Arf6 , Rac1 , RhoA , and Cdc42 . ( reviewed in Refs . 13 , 23 , 50 , 87 ; FIGURE 1C ) . For example , independent caveolar - dependent and RhoA - dependent pathways have been described that also require dynamin , whereas dynamin - independent pathways can be regulated by Cdc42 or Arf6 ( 50 ) . An important consideration in interpreting studies performed in nonpolarized cells relative to renal physiology is that apical and basolateral surfaces differ in the availability of clathrin - independent mechanisms as alternative FIGURE 3 . Mechanisms of adaptor protein interaction with cargo and clathrin AP - 2 and clathrin - and lipid - associated sorting proteins ( CLASPs ) have the capacity to simultaneously interact with clathrin ( clathrin box ) and internalization signals on cargo proteins . Shown are schematic views of the tetrameric AP - 2 adaptor protein complex UIM ( ubiquitin - interacting motifs ) - CLASPS and PTB ( phosphotyrosine - binding domain ) - containing - CLASPs and their cognate internalization signals . In ad - dition to interacting with clathrin and cargo , the CLASPs also are capable of interacting with AP - 2 . REVIEWS PHYSIOLOGY (cid:127) Volume 25 (cid:127) October 2010 (cid:127) www . physiologyonline . org 285 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J u ne 16 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys i o l og y on li ne . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m endocytic pathways . For example , the apical sur - face of polarized renal cells has been reported to lack caveolae ( 86 ) , although caveolin - 1 , a compo - nent of caveolae , is apparently present at the apical surface of MDCK cells and apical transporters such as UT - A1 physically interact with this protein in lipid rafts ( 19 , 71 ) . The relative robustness of these individual pathways in differentiated plasma mem - brane domains vs . undifferentiated cells may explain why urokinase plasminogen activator receptor uti - lizes distinct internalization pathways in polarized vs . nonpolarized MDCK cells ( 87 ) . Proteins internalized by clathrin - independent pathways are initially observed in PI3P - negative compartments , but many converge with clathrin - dependent cargo in Rab5 and PI3P - positive EEs ( 14 , 58 ) . An exception may be proteins that are attached to the membrane via glycosylphosphati - dylinositol ( GPI ) anchors . At least some of these proteins are internalized into specialized endocytic compartments termed GEECs ( for GPI - anchored - protein - enriched endosomal compartments ) or CLICs ( for clathrin - independent carriers ) that are also enriched in ﬂuid phase markers . GEECs / CLICs require Cdc42 and the GTPase activating protein GRAF1 for formation , and in some studies GPI - anchored proteins internalized in these compart - ments remain segregated from early endosomes containing internalized Tf ( 57 , 70 ) . Whether dy - namin plays a role in the GEEC / CLIC pathway is controversial ( 46 , 70 ) . Some proteins can utilize multiple endocytic mechanisms to enter cells , sometimes with distinct consequences to their fate . Cholera toxin internal - ization via its receptor ( the ganglioside GM1 ) oc - curs via both clathrin - dependent and GEEC / CLIC pathways ( 37 , 59 ) . In the case of the EGF - R , inter - nalization via the clathrin - dependent pathway is important for signaling but leads to less efﬁcient degradation compared with internalization by a clathrin - independent pathway ( 76 ) . In some cells , EGF - R internalization via a clathrin - independent pathway at high ligand concentrations may reﬂect saturation of the clathrin - mediated pathway ( 94 ) . Neither of these pathways appears to absolutely require ubiquitination of EGF - R , although this modiﬁcation is essential for targeting the receptor to lysosomes ( 29 ) . A more comprehensive discus - sion of EGF - R trafﬁcking can be found in Ref . 77 . In contrast , internalization of the potassium channel ROMK may be diverted from a clathrin - dependent pathway to a clathrin - and dynamin - independent pathway on ubiquitination by the ubiquitin ligase POSH ( 44 ) . A caveat to consider in interpreting such studies is that experimental perturbation of endo - cytic pathways may lead to compensatory endocyto - sis of cargo via alternative mechanisms ( 12 , 70 ) . Protein Recycling Internalized proteins destined for delivery to the cell surface can undergo slow or fast recycling . “Fast” recycling occurs from early sorting endo - somes or earlier compartments , and this process is regulated by Rab4 and Rab35 ( 39 , 85 ) . In contrast , “slow” recycling in nonpolarized cells involves cargo passage through Rab11 - positive recycling endosomes , which are formed from membrane - rich tubules that emanate from sorting endosomes . In these cells , disrupting the function of proteins important for transport to recycling endosomes , such as Rab11 effectors , actually enhances recy - cling of proteins internalized via clathrin - dependent mechanisms , probably via the fast recycling pathway ( 72 ) . Recent data suggest that proteins can segregate into distinct subdomains of recycling endosomes and point to the existence of multiple pathways for recycling . Oddly , it appears from several studies that recycling of clathrin - dependent and clathrin - independent cargo from recycling endosomes pro - ceeds via distinct carriers and is differentially regulated by Rabs ( reviewed in Ref . 23 ) . Whereas recycling of plasma membrane proteins internal - ized via clathrin - dependent mechanisms appears to represent the default pathway for cargo han - dling , recycling of clathrin - independent proteins is highly regulated . A recent review by Julie Donaldson points out that several proteins reg - ulate both clathrin - dependent endocytosis and clathrin - independent recycling , and suggests that this redundancy may enable coordination of both pathways ( 14 ) . A subset of proteins apparently have speciﬁc targeting information that regulates their exit from recycling endosomes . Expression of a dominant - negative form of Rme - 1 , a protein that regulates cargo exit from recycling endosomes , in HEK 293 cells results in accumulation of Tf receptor ( TfR ) and the cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conduc - tance regulator ( CFTR ) in recycling endosomes , whereas trafﬁcking of low - density lipoprotein is unaffected ( 62 ) . Recycling of a given protein can be affected in - dividually by cell signaling events . In some cases , ligand binding can inﬂuence the fate of a receptor : for example , internalized EGF - R bound to EGF is targeted to lysosomes for degradation , whereas the alternative ligand TGF - (cid:3) is released from the re - ceptor in acidic EEs , resulting in efﬁcient EGF - R recycling to the plasma membrane ( 21 ) . This pos - tendocytic routing may reﬂect the use of distinct internalization pathways for different EGF - R - ligand complexes . There are also cases where cell signaling causes global alterations in protein trafﬁc . For example , REVIEWS PHYSIOLOGY (cid:127) Volume 25 (cid:127) October 2010 (cid:127) www . physiologyonline . org 286 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J u ne 16 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys i o l og y on li ne . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m activation of the ephrin B receptor in rat hip - pocampal neurons causes phosphorylation of syn - aptojanin 1 , which decreases its activity and globally stimulates internalization of TfR and other receptors ( 31 ) . Similarly , ligand - induced endocyto - sis of the beta - 2 adrenergic receptor in HEK293 cells stimulates a Rab4 - dependent recycling path - way that also increases recycling of TfR ( 99 ) . Alter - natively , some signaling pathways can globally inhibit protein recycling , since sustained GPCR sig - naling by serotonin led to sequestration of the 5 - HT receptor as well as other proteins ( EGF - R and PAR - 1 ) in intracellular compartments of HEK293 cells ( 30 ) . Regulation of Cargo Trafﬁcking by Posttranslational Modiﬁcations In recent years , intense investigation into elucidating the mechanisms by which internalization and post - endocytic trafﬁc of cargo molecules may be physio - logically controlled has illuminated key roles of phosphorylation , ubiquitination , and palmitoylation . Modulation of Endocytosis by Phosphorylation Phosphorylation - dependent regulation of endo - cytic trafﬁcking has been implicated in a wide range of physiological processes from synaptic transmission to the regulation of salt and mineral balance . Elucidating how this occurs has been the focus of intense investigation . Following the discov - ery that rapid endocytosis of the polymeric immuno - globulin receptor from the MDCK cell basolateral membrane requires phosphorylation of a cytoplas - mic serine residue ( 60 ) , many epithelial transport molecules have been found to be internalized or routed in the post - endocyotic pathway by pro - cesses that are dependent on their own phospho - rylation status . For some , such as the apical Na (cid:1) / H (cid:1) exchanger NHE3 ( 28 ) and the vasopres - sin - regulated water channel aquaporin 2 ( AQP2 ) ( 53 ) , serine or threonine phosphorylation is re - quired . For others , including the ROMK potassium secretory channel , tyrosine phosphorylation can play a role ( 42 ) . Examples are not limited to proteins , like those above , that are internalized by clathrin - dependent endocytosis . Raft - mediated endocytosis of neph - rin , for instance , is triggered by tyrosine phospho - rylation , in a response that has been implicated in the assembly of the glomerular slit diaphragm ( 64 ) . Phosphorylation can also block entry of cargo into clathrin - in dependent internalization vehicles . For instance , in HEK 293 cells , phosphorylation of the apical TRPV5 channel suppresses endocytosis into caveolae . This response has been suggested to explain how Ca 2 (cid:1) reabsorption in the distal nephron may be stimulated by parathyroid - hor - mone ( 9 ) . Many different mechanisms have been impli - cated in translating a cargo phosphorylation event into an endocytic trafﬁcking command ( FIGURE 4 ) . As exempliﬁed by the interaction of GPCRs with arrestins , phosphorylation can create a recognition site for internalization machinery de novo . In other cases , phosphorylation can reﬁne an existing en - docytic trafﬁcking signal so as to optimize or in - hibit cargo interaction with speciﬁc components of the endocytic machinery . With aquaporin 4 water channels , for example , phosphorylation of a serine immediately preceding the YXX (cid:2) - adaptin interac - tion motif switches the speciﬁcity of the clathrin adaptor recognition site from AP - 2 to the lysosome targeting adaptor protein complex AP - 3 . This di - rects phosphorylated channels for trafﬁc into the degradative pathway ( 47 ) . By contrast , phosphory - lation of the key tyrosine in the GABA - “A” recep - tor’s “YXX (cid:2) ” internalization motif renders the signal unable to engage the AP - 2 adaptor protein complex ( 38 ) , suppressing endocytosis and up - regulating surface levels of the receptor for synap - tic inhibition . More commonly described mechanisms involve phosphorylation of sites that seem far removed from endocytic motifs . In many of these cases , it has been speculated that phosphorylation may change cargo protein conformation in such a way to affect presentation or accessibility of the inter - nalization signal . Sometimes , however , phospho - rylation can create or modify important docking sites for proteins that are indirectly involved in endocytosis . This is just how endocytosis of the Na (cid:1) - K (cid:1) - ATPase may be stimulated by dopamine ( 11 ) . On activation of the dopamine receptor , PKC - mediated phosphorylation of a serine residue in the pump’s catalytic alpha - 1 subunit produces a binding site for 14 - 3 - 3 proteins ( 15 ) . Recruitment of 14 - 3 - 3 to the Na (cid:1) - K (cid:1) - ATPase facilitates subsequent binding of PI - 3 kinase , and this , in turn , stimulates endocytosis , likely by changing the polyphosphoinositide chemis - try around the Na (cid:1) / K (cid:1) pump . An increase in the lo - cal pool of PIP 2 , for example , stimulates cargo endocytosis because PIP 2 increases the binding af - ﬁnity of the AP - 2 for tyrosine and di - leucine - based endocytic signals ( 27 ) . In other cases , phosphorylation abrogates cargo interaction with retention proteins , freeing cargo for endocytosis . An important example is provided by type I PDZ protein interactions . Phosphoryla - tion of the key serine or threonine residue in the cargo PDZ binding site is well appreciated to create an energetically unfavorable substrate for PDZ re - tention protein interaction . Phosphorylation can be modulated by the regu - lated targeting of kinases and other signaling mole - REVIEWS PHYSIOLOGY (cid:127) Volume 25 (cid:127) October 2010 (cid:127) www . physiologyonline . org 287 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J u ne 16 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys i o l og y on li ne . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m cules to sites of endocytosis or to endosomes , providing a means to adjust the internalization and post - endocytic trafﬁc of cargo molecules with phys - iological needs . Such a mechanism has been pro - posed to inﬂuence how the With No Lysine ( WNKs ) kinases WNK1 and WNK4 control renal salt trans - port . These kinases normally control the balance be - tween renal sodium and potassium excretion by regulating the thiazide - sensitive sodium chloride co - transporter , NCC , and the ROMK potassium channel in opposite directions . In cell expression models , both kinases stimulate clathrin - dependent endocytosis of ROMK ( 18 , 33 ) , but neither WNK kinase inﬂuences NCC internalization . Instead , WNK4 stimulates interac - tion of NCC with the clathrin adaptor AP - 3 and sor - tilin in the secretory pathway ( 79 , 101 ) , so as to target newly synthesized transporters to lyso - somes . Because lysosomal targeting of NCC is sup - pressed by WNK1 , physiological changes in the relative abundance of WNK1 and WNK4 kinase FIGURE 4 . Mechanisms by which endocytosis is controlled by phosphorylation A : phosphorylation of residues within or near internalization signals can enhance ( AQP4 ) or inhibit ( GABA - A receptor ) their interaction with endocytotic machinery . B : in transport proteins , like the Na - K - ATPase ( see text ) , phosphoryla - tion at sites other than the endocytotic signal can create interaction sites for proteins that are indirectly involved in endocytosis . C : endocytotic machinery is also regulated by phosphorylation . For example , the binding site for tyrosine - based internalization signals on the AP - 2 complex ( mu subunit ) is exposed on phosphorylation by AAK1 ( or by PIP 2 association ) . REVIEWS PHYSIOLOGY (cid:127) Volume 25 (cid:127) October 2010 (cid:127) www . physiologyonline . org 288 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J u ne 16 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys i o l og y on li ne . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m may help switch the signaling pathway to either block or permit NCC surface delivery . Targeting of the WNK kinases to different endo - somal locales may toggle the signaling pathway to preferentially stimulate ROMK endocytosis or acti - vate NCC lysosome routing . WNK1 and WNK4 are normally recruited to clathrin - coated pits through their interaction with the multimodular endocytic scaffold intersectin ( 25 ) . However , WNK1 can translocate to the TGN and / or recycling endo - somes on phosphorylation and exposure to hypo - tonic stress ( 100 ) . This targeting is apparently faulty in mutations of WNK1 and WNK4 that cause pseudohypoaldosteronism type II ( PHAII ) , a famil - ial disorder of renal potassium retention and hy - pertension in which increased NCC and decreased ROMK at the apical surface result in exaggerated sodium reabsorption and diminished potassium urinary excretion ( 95 ) . PHAII - causing mutations in WNK4 increase the afﬁnity of the kinase for inter - sectin and thereby augment ROMK endocytosis in the disease . Sequestering the kinase to the sites of internalization at the cell surface would also di - minish the amount of kinase available to stimulate lysosomal trafﬁcking of NCC , offering a potential explanation for the pathophysiological increase in NCC at the cell surface . In addition to the above examples where trafﬁck - ing of individual cargo can be modulated by phos - phorylation , it should also be pointed out that the endocytic machinery itself is tightly regulated by various kinases . Cycles of AP - 2 phosphorylation and dephosphorylation by the adaptor - associated kinase 1 ( AAK1 ) have been proposed to orchestrate cycles of cargo recruitment to clathrin - coated pits and AP - 2 uncoating from early endocytic vesicles ( 74 ) , and internalization of caveolae also requires phosphorylation of the endocytic machinery , likely involving Src - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of caveolin - 1 ( 52 ) . Ubiquitination - Dependent Protein Trafﬁcking The posttranslational attachment ubiquitin can serve as a signal to target certain transmembrane proteins for internalization . Accumulating evi - dence indicates the addition of multiple monou - biquitin moieties per cargo molecule ( multiple monoubiquitination ) or the addition of polyubiq - uitin chains are usually involved , rather that the addition of a single ubiquitin ( monoubiquitina - tion ) as once believed ( reviewed in Ref . 83 ) . In fact , for some proteins , like AQP2 ( 34 ) , the conjugation of more than one ubiquitin seems to be absolutely required for endosomal trafﬁcking . For others , like ENaC , the ubiquitin chain might behave as an endocytic rheostat , increasing the efﬁciency of in - ternalization with growing length ( 92 , 102 ) . Ubiquitination not only marks surface proteins for endocytosis , it also can target internalized proteins for trafﬁc to MVBs and lysosomes . Two components of the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport ( ESCRT ) machinery ( 65 ) , called HRS ( hepatocyte growth factor regulated ty - rosine kinase substrate ) and STAM ( signal trans - ducing adaptor molecule ) , are responsible for capturing internalized , ubiquitated cargo in the early endosome for inclusion in MVBs . Because HRS and STAM also initiate the recruitment of the ESCRT machineries that are responsible for form - ing the intraluminal vesicles of the MVB , they es - sentially couple cargo - selection to MVB genesis . In recent years , it has become evident that ubiq - uitination drives the endocytic trafﬁc of many ep - ithelial transport molecules , including ENaC ( 92 , 102 ) , CFTR ( 5 , 75 ) , ROMK ( 43 , 44 ) , AQP2 ( 34 ) , and the ClC - 5 H (cid:1) / Cl (cid:4) antiporter ( 73 ) . In fact , the reg - ulated addition and removal of ubiquitin affords an important means to tightly control the surface density of these epithelial transport molecules . Ex - empliﬁed by the modulation of ENaC by Nedd4 ( 69 ) , the association of E3 ubiquitin ligases with their substrates is usually highly speciﬁc and pre - cisely regulated , allowing endocytosis and / or lyso - somal routing of speciﬁc cargo proteins to be selectively stimulated in accord with physiological needs . An equally important , but less studied , mechanism for turning off endosomal routing in - volves the removal of ubiquitin from cargo pro - teins by deubquitinating enzymes ( DUBs ) . Like E3 ligases , DUB speciﬁcity is determined by substrate - speciﬁc binding and by speciﬁc subcellular com - partmentalization . For example , UCH - L3 ( 7 ) and USP10 ( 5 ) localize to populations of early endoso - mal to deubiquitinate internalized cargoes , includ - ing ENaC and CFTR . Also similar to the E3 ligases , the activity of DUBs can be tightly regulated . UCH - L3 , for example , is apparently stimulated by cAMP / PKA so as to enhance ENaC recycling . Another DUB that deubiquitinates ENaC , USP2 – 45 , is in - duced by aldosterone , providing a means to phys - iologically increase ENaC at the cell surface in hyperaldosterone states ( 17 ) . Importantly , alterations in ubiquitin - dependent sorting processes can give rise to serious human diseases of altered ﬂuid and electrolyte balance . For example , mutations in ENaC that corrupt the “PPXY” binding site for Nedd4 render the channel unable to be efﬁciently cleared from the apical membrane . This leads to Liddle’s syndrome , an inherited disease of excessive sodium reabsorption and hypertension . General misfolding appears to exacerbate ubiquitin - dependent routing of mutant CFTR molecules to the lysosome , contributing to defective Cl (cid:4) transport in cystic ﬁbrosis ( 75 ) . REVIEWS PHYSIOLOGY (cid:127) Volume 25 (cid:127) October 2010 (cid:127) www . physiologyonline . org 289 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J u ne 16 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys i o l og y on li ne . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Palmitoylation Once believed to operate singularly as a membrane anchor for cementing cytoplasmic proteins to membranes , accumulating evidence now indicates that thioester linkage of palmitate , a C16 saturated fatty acid , to internal ( S - palmitoylation ) or NH 2 - terminal cysteines ( N - palmitylation ) does much more . For a growing number of integral membrane proteins , palmitoylation can generate trafﬁcking cues . Awareness of palmitoylation as an endocytic signal recently became particularly heightened with the realization that it plays an important role in the internalization of the Anthrax toxin receptor ( 1 ) . As it turns out , palmitoylation can drive a variety of different trafﬁcking commands besides endocy - tosis . Depending on the target molecule , it can control biosynthetic delivery , surface membrane retention , or transport along the post - endocytic pathway . Palmitoylation of the apical membrane transmembrane mucin MUC1 drives recycling from endosomes back to the plasma membrane ( 36 ) . However , in the case of the lysosomal enzyme receptors sortilin and the mannose 6 - phosphate receptor , palmitoylation inﬂuences recycling back to the Golgi , likely by facilitating the translocation of receptors to a membrane compartment that con - tains retromer ( 51 ) . Palmitoylation of NMDA can ei - ther stimulate surface membrane retention or inhibit Golgi export , depending on where on the protein palmitate is added ( 24 ) . Because S - palmitoylation is reversible , cycles of palmitate addition and removal may affect trafﬁcking of the same target protein at several different steps in its travels to and from the cell surface . With recent discoveries of the protein acyltransferase enzyme families that catalyze the ad - dition of palmitate ( 45 ) and the development of new techniques to identify palmitoylated proteins on a proteomic scale ( 68 ) , the ﬁeld appears to be on the verge of solving the mystery of how one type of modiﬁcation can control so many diverse trafﬁcking processes . Summary • Endocytic pathways and their regulation in polarized cells is more complex than in non - polarized cells , and results obtained using nonpolarized cells do not necessarily translate to the situation in polarized cells . As examples , clathrin - dependent apical endocytosis is markedly slower than basolateral endocytosis , and caveolae have been reported to be absent from the apical surface . • Individual steps along the endocytic pathway are regulated independently to modulate the surface density of a given membrane protein . Sorting decisions include internalization vs . cell surface retention , the endocytic pathway engaged , and the subsequent fate of the inter - nalized protein ( e . g . , intracellular retention , recycling , or degradation ) . • Clathrin - dependent endocytosis of proteins can be differentially regulated via their inter - actions with distinct adaptors . There is in - creasing evidence for the existence of subsets of clathrin - coated pits that are enriched in se - lected cargo proteins . Some receptors engage different CLASPs during constitutive vs . li - gand - induced endocytosis . • There are multiple pathways for membrane recycling . Fast recycling bypasses recycling endosomes entirely . Export from recycling en - dosomes of proteins internalized by clathrin - dependent vs . - independent mechanisms appears to be differentially regulated . Cell signaling can alter the endocytosis and / or recycling of individual proteins or globally affect mem - brane trafﬁc . • Trafﬁcking of individual cargo can be modulated by many reversible posttranslational modiﬁca - tions , including phosphorylation , ubiquitination / deubiquitination , and palmitoylation . (cid:1) We thank John Johnson and Alexander Sorkin for thoughtful comments . Studies on protein trafﬁc in the authors’ laboratories are supported by National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases R01 Grants DK - 54407 and DK - 064613 ( to O . A . Weisz ) , and DK - 54281 and DK - 63049 ( to P . A . Welling ) . No conﬂicts of interest , ﬁnancial or otherwise , are de - clared by the author ( s ) . References 1 . Abrami L , Leppla SH , van der Goot FG . Receptor palmitoyl - ation and ubiquitination regulate anthrax toxin endocytosis . J Cell Biol 172 : 309 – 320 , 2006 . 2 . Apodaca G , Katz LA , Mostov KE . Receptor - mediated trans - cytosis of IgA in MDCK cells is via apical recycling endo - somes . J Cell Biol 125 : 67 – 86 , 1994 . 3 . Benmerah A , Lamaze C . Clathrin - coated pits : vive la differ - ence ? Trafﬁc 8 : 970 – 982 , 2007 . 4 . Blaine J , Okamura K , Giral H , Breusegem S , Caldas Y , Millard A , Barry N , Levi M . PTH - induced internalization of apical membrane NaPi2a : role of actin and myosin VI . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 297 : C1339 – C1346 , 2009 . 5 . Bomberger JM , Barnaby RL , Stanton BA . The deubiquitinat - ing enzyme USP10 regulates the post - endocytic sorting of cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator in air - way epithelial cells . J Biol Chem 284 : 18778 – 18789 , 2009 . 6 . Brown PS , Wang E , Aroeti B , Chapin SJ , Mostov KE , Dunn KW . Deﬁnition of distinct compartments in polarized Madin - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells for membrane - volume sorting , polarized sorting and apical recycling . Trafﬁc 1 : 124 – 140 , 2000 . 7 . Butterworth MB , Edinger RS , Ovaa H , Burg D , Johnson JP , Frizzell RA . The deubiquitinating enzyme UCH - L3 regulates the apical membrane recycling of the epithelial sodium chan - nel . J Biol Chem 282 : 37885 – 37893 , 2007 . 8 . Carpentier JL , Gorden P , Anderson RG , Goldstein JL , Brown MS , Cohen S , Orci L . Co - localization of 125I - epidermal growth factor and ferritin - low density lipoprotein in coated pits : a quantitative electron microscopic study in normal and mutant human ﬁbroblasts . J Cell Biol 95 : 73 – 77 , 1982 . REVIEWS PHYSIOLOGY (cid:127) Volume 25 (cid:127) October 2010 (cid:127) www . physiologyonline . org 290 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J u ne 16 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys i o l og y on li ne . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 9 . Cha SK , Wu T , Huang CL . Protein kinase C inhib - its caveolae - mediated endocytosis of TRPV5 . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 294 : F1212 – F1221 , 2008 . 10 . Chen H , FreS , SlepnevVI , CapuaMR , TakeiK , Butler MH , DiFiorePP , DeCamilliP . EpsinisanEH - domain - bindingproteinimplicatedinclathrin - mediatedendo - cytosis . Nature 394 : 793 – 797 , 1998 . 11 . Chibalin AV , Pedemonte CH , Katz AI , Feraille E , Berggren PO , Bertorello AM . Phosphorylation of the catalyic alpha - subunit constitutes a trigger - ing signal for Na (cid:1) , K (cid:1) - ATPase endocytosis . J Biol Chem 273 : 8814 – 8819 , 1998 . 12 . Damke H , Baba T , van der Bliek AM , Schmid SL . Clathrin - independent pinocytosis is induced in cells overexpressing a temperature - sensitive mu - tant of dynamin . J Cell Biol 131 : 69 – 80 , 1995 . 13 . Doherty GJ , McMahon HT . Mechanisms of endo - cytosis . Annu Rev Biochem 78 : 857 – 902 , 2009 . 14 . Donaldson JG , Porat - Shliom N , Cohen LA . Clathrin - independent endocytosis : a unique platform for cell signaling and PM remodeling . Cell Signal 21 : 1 – 6 , 2009 . 15 . Efendiev R , Chen Z , Krmar RT , Uhles S , Katz AI , Pedemonte CH , Bertorello AM . The 14 - 3 - 3 pro - tein translates the Na (cid:1) , K (cid:1) - ATPase (cid:3) 1 - subunit phosphorylation signal into binding and activa - tion of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase during endocy - tosis . J Biol Chem 280 : 16272 – 16277 , 2005 . 16 . Ehrlich M , Boll W , Van Oijen A , Hariharan R , Chandran K , Nibert ML , Kirchhausen T . Endocy - tosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 : 591 – 605 , 2004 . 17 . Fakitsas P , Adam G , Daidie D , van Bemmelen MX , Fouladkou F , Patrignani A , Wagner U , Warth R , Camargo SM , Staub O , Verrey F . Early aldo - sterone - induced gene product regulates the ep - ithelial sodium channel by deubiquitylation . J Am Soc Nephrol 18 : 1084 – 1092 , 2007 . 18 . Fang L , Garuti R , Kim BY , Wade JB , Welling PA . The ARH adaptor protein regulates endocytosis of the ROMK potassium secretory channel in mouse kidney . J Clin Invest 119 : 3278 – 3289 , 2009 . 19 . Feng X , Huang H , Yang Y , Frohlich O , Klein JD , Sands JM , Chen G . Caveolin - 1 directly interacts with UT - A1 urea transporter : the role of caveo - lae / lipid rafts in UT - A1 regulation at the cell membrane . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 296 : F1514 – F1520 , 2009 . 20 . Folsch H , Mattila PE , Weisz OA . Taking the sce - nic route : biosynthetic trafﬁc to the plasma mem - brane in polarized epithelial cells . Trafﬁc 10 : 972 – 981 , 2009 . 21 . French AR , Tadaki DK , Niyogi SK , Lauffenburger DA . Intracellular trafﬁcking of epidermal growth factor family ligands is directly inﬂuenced by the pH sensitivity of the receptor / ligand interaction . J Biol Chem 270 : 4334 – 4340 , 1995 . 22 . Gaidarov I , Santini F , Warren RA , Keen JH . Spa - tial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 1 – 7 , 1999 . 23 . Grant BD , Donaldson JG . Pathways and mecha - nisms of endocytic recycling . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 597 – 608 , 2009 . 24 . Hayashi T , Thomas GM , Huganir RL . Dual palmi - toylation of NR2 subunits regulates NMDA re - ceptor trafﬁcking . Neuron 64 : 213 – 226 , 2009 . 25 . He G , Wang HR , Huang SK , Huang CL . Intersec - tin links WNK kinases to endocytosis of ROMK1 . J Clin Invest 117 : 1078 – 1087 , 2007 . 26 . Henry L , Sheff DR . Rab8 regulates basolateral secretory , but not recycling , trafﬁc at the recy - cling endosome . Mol Biol Cell 19 : 2059 – 2068 , 2008 . 27 . Honing S , Ricotta D , Krauss M , Spate K , Spolaore B , MotleyA , RobinsonM , RobinsonC , HauckeV , Owen DJ . Phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphateregulates sorting signal recognition by the clathrin - associated adaptor complex AP2 . Mol Cell 18 : 519 – 531 , 2005 . 28 . Hu MC , Fan L , Crowder LA , Karim - Jimenez Z , Murer H , Moe OW . Dopamine acutely stimulates Na (cid:1) / H (cid:1) exchanger ( NHE3 ) endocytosis via clathrin - coatedvesicles : dependenceonproteinkinaseA - me - diated NHE3 phosphorylation . J Biol Chem 276 : 26906 – 26915 , 2001 . 29 . Huang F , Goh LK , Sorkin A . EGF receptor ubiq - uitination is not necessary for its internalization . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 : 16904 – 16909 , 2007 . 30 . Idkowiak - Baldys J , Baldys A , Raymond JR , Han - nun YA . Sustained receptor stimulation leads to sequestration of recycling endosomes in a classi - cal protein kinase C - and phospholipase D - dependent manner . J Biol Chem 284 : 22322 – 22331 , 2009 . 31 . IrieF , OkunoM , PasqualeEB , YamaguchiY . EphrinB - EphB signalling regulates clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis through tyrosine phosphorylation of synaptojanin 1 . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 501 – 509 , 2005 . 32 . Johannessen LE , Pedersen NM , Pedersen KW , Madshus IH , Stang E . Activation of the epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor induces formation of EGF receptor - and Grb2 - containing clathrin - coated pits . Mol Cell Biol 26 : 389 – 401 , 2006 . 33 . Kahle KT , Wilson FH , Leng Q , Lalioti MD , O’Connell AD , Dong K , Rapson AK , MacGregor GG , Giebisch G , Hebert SC , Lifton RP . WNK4 regulates the balance between renal NaCl reab - sorption and K (cid:1) secretion . Nat Genet 35 : 372 – 376 , 2003 . 34 . Kamsteeg EJ , Hendriks G , Boone M , Konings IB , Oorschot V , van der Sluijs P , Klumperman J , Deen PM . Short - chain ubiquitination mediates the regulated endocytosis of the aquaporin - 2 wa - ter channel . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 18344 – 18349 , 2006 . 35 . Keyel PA , Mishra SK , Roth R , Heuser JE , Watkins SC , Traub LM . A single common portal for clathrin - mediated endocytosis of distinct cargo governed by cargo - selective adaptors . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 4300 – 4317 , 2006 . 36 . Kinlough CL , McMahan RJ , Poland PA , Bruns JB , Harkleroad KL , Stremple RJ , Kashlan OB , Weixel KM , Weisz OA , Hughey RP . Recycling of MUC1 is dependent on its palmitoylation . J Biol Chem 281 : 12112 – 12122 , 2006 . 37 . Kirkham M , Fujita A , Chadda R , Nixon SJ , Kur - zchalia TV , Sharma DK , Pagano RE , Hancock JF , Mayor S , Parton RG . Ultrastructural identiﬁcation of uncoated caveolin - independent early endo - cytic vehicles . J Cell Biol 168 : 465 – 476 , 2005 . 38 . Kittler JT , Chen G , Kukhtina V , Vahedi - Faridi A , Gu Z , Tretter V , Smith KR , McAinsh K , Arancibia - Carcamo IL , Saenger W , Haucke V , Yan Z , Moss SJ . Regulation of synaptic inhibition by phospho - dependent binding of the AP2 complex to a YECL motif in the GABAA receptor gamma2 sub - unit . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 : 3616 – 3621 , 2008 . 39 . Kouranti I , Sachse M , Arouche N , Goud B , Echard A . Rab35 regulates an endocytic recycling path - way essential for the terminal steps of cytokine - sis . Curr Biol 16 : 1719 – 1725 , 2006 . 40 . Lakadamyali M , Rust MJ , Zhuang X . Ligands for clathrin - mediated endocytosis are differentially sorted into distinct populations of early endo - somes . Cell 124 : 997 – 1009 , 2006 . 41 . Leonard D , Hayakawa A , Lawe D , Lambright D , Bellve KD , Standley C , Lifshitz LM , Fogarty KE , Corvera S . Sorting of EGF and transferrin at the plasma membrane and by cargo - speciﬁc signal - ing to EEA1 - enriched endosomes . J Cell Sci 121 : 3445 – 3458 , 2008 . 42 . Lin DH , Sterling H , Lerea KM , Welling P , Jin L , Giebisch G , Wang WH . K depletion increases protein tyrosine kinase - mediated phosphoryla - tion of ROMK . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 283 : F671 – F677 , 2002 . 43 . Lin DH , Sterling H , Wang Z , Babilonia E , Yang B , Dong K , Hebert SC , Giebisch G , Wang WH . ROMK1 channel activity is regulated by monou - biquitination . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 : 4306 – 4311 , 2005 . 44 . Lin DH , Yue P , Pan CY , Sun P , Zhang X , Han Z , Roos M , Caplan M , Giebisch G , Wang WH . POSH stimulates the ubiquitination and the clathrin - in - dependent endocytosis of ROMK1 channels . J Biol Chem 284 : 29614 – 29624 , 2009 . 45 . Linder ME , Deschenes RJ . Palmitoylation : polic - ing protein stability and trafﬁc . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 : 74 – 84 , 2007 . 46 . Lundmark R , Doherty GJ , Howes MT , Cortese K , Vallis Y , Parton RG , McMahon HT . The GTPase - activating protein GRAF1 regulates the CLIC / GEEC endocytic pathway . Curr Biol 18 : 1802 – 1808 , 2008 . 47 . Madrid R , Le Maout S , Barrault MB , Janvier K , Benichou S , Merot J . Polarized trafﬁcking and surface expression of the AQP4 water channel are coordinated by serial and regulated interac - tions with different clathrin - adaptor complexes . EMBO J 20 : 7008 – 7721 , 2001 . 48 . Marks MS , Woodruff L , Ohno H , Bonifacino JS . Protein targeting by tyrosine - and di - leucine - based signals : evidence for distinct saturable components . J Cell Biol 135 : 341 – 354 , 1996 . 49 . Maxﬁeld FR , Schlessinger J , Shechter Y , Pastan I , Willingham MC . Collection of insulin , EGF and alpha2 - macroglobulin in the same patches on the surface of cultured ﬁbroblasts and common in - ternalization . Cell 14 : 805 – 810 , 1978 . 50 . Mayor S , Pagano RE . Pathways of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 : 603 – 612 , 2007 . 51 . McCormick PJ , Dumaresq - Doiron K , Pluviose AS , Pichette V , Tosato G , Lefrancois S . Palmitoylation controls recycling in lysosomal sorting and traf - ﬁcking . Trafﬁc 9 : 1984 – 1997 , 2008 . 52 . Minshall RD , Tiruppathi C , Vogel SM , Niles WD , Gilchrist A , Hamm HE , Malik AB . Endothelial cell - surface gp60 activates vesicle formation and traf - ﬁcking via G i - coupled Src kinase signaling pathway . J Cell Biol 150 : 1057 – 1070 , 2000 . 53 . Moeller HB , Praetorius J , Rutzler MR , Fenton RA . Phosphorylation of aquaporin - 2 regulates its en - docytosis and protein - protein interactions . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 : 424 – 429 , 2010 . 54 . Mundell SJ , Luo J , Benovic JL , Conley PB , Poole AW . Distinct clathrin - coated pits sort different G protein - coupled receptor cargo . Trafﬁc 7 : 1420 – 1431 , 2006 . 55 . Nagai J , Christensen EI , Morris SM , Willnow TE , Cooper JA , Nielsen R . Mutually dependent local - ization of megalin and Dab2 in the renal proximal tubule . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 289 : F569 – F576 , 2005 . 56 . Naim HY , Dodds DT , Brewer CB , Roth MG . Api - cal and basolateral coated pits of MDCK cells differ in their rates of maturation into coated vesicles , but not in the ability to distinguish be - tween mutant hemagglutinin proteins with differ - ent internalization signals . J Cell Biol 129 : 1241 – 1250 , 1995 . 57 . Naslavsky N , Weigert R , Donaldson JG . Charac - terization of a nonclathrin endocytic pathway : membrane cargo and lipid requirements . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 3542 – 3552 , 2004 . 58 . Naslavsky N , Weigert R , Donaldson JG . Conver - gence of non - clathrin - and clathrin - derived endo - somes involves Arf6 inactivation and changes in phosphoinositides . Mol Biol Cell 14 : 417 – 431 , 2003 . REVIEWS PHYSIOLOGY (cid:127) Volume 25 (cid:127) October 2010 (cid:127) www . physiologyonline . org 291 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J u ne 16 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys i o l og y on li ne . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 59 . NicholsBJ , KenworthyAK , PolishchukRS , LodgeR , Roberts TH , Hirschberg K , Phair RD , Lippincott - Schwartz J . Rapid cycling of lipid raft markers between the cell surface and Golgi complex . J Cell Biol 153 : 529 – 541 , 2001 . 60 . Okamoto CT , Song W , Bomsel M , Mostov KE . Rapid internalization of the polymeric immuno - globulin receptor requires phosphorylated serine 726 . J Biol Chem 269 : 15676 – 15682 , 1994 . 61 . Olsen O , Liu H , Wade JB , Merot J , Welling PA . Basolateral membrane expression of the Kir 2 . 3 channel is coordinated by PDZ interaction with Lin - 7 / CASK complex . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 282 : C183 – C195 , 2002 . 62 . Picciano JA , Ameen N , Grant BD , Bradbury NA . Rme - 1 regulates the recycling of the cystic ﬁbro - sis transmembrane conductance regulator . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 285 : C1009 – C1018 , 2003 . 63 . Puthenveedu MA , von Zastrow M . Cargo regu - lates clathrin - coated pit dynamics . Cell 127 : 113 – 124 , 2006 . 64 . Qin XS , Tsukaguchi H , Shono A , Yamamoto A , Kurihara H , Doi T . Phosphorylation of nephrin triggers its internalization by raft - mediated en - docytosis . J Am Soc Nephrol 20 : 2534 – 2545 , 2009 . 65 . Raiborg C , Stenmark H . The ESCRT machinery in endosomal sorting of ubiquitylated membrane proteins . Nature 458 : 445 – 452 , 2009 . 66 . Rappoport JZ , Simon SM . Endocytic trafﬁcking of activated EGFR is AP - 2 dependent and occurs through preformed clathrin spots . J Cell Sci 122 : 1301 – 1305 , 2009 . 67 . Riquier AD , Lee DH , McDonough AA . Renal NHE3 and NaPi2 partition into distinct mem - brane domains . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 296 : C900 – C910 , 2009 . 68 . Roth AF , Wan J , Bailey AO , Sun B , Kuchar JA , Green WN , Phinney BS , Yates JR 3rd , Davis NG . Global analysis of protein palmitoylation in yeast . Cell 125 : 1003 – 1013 , 2006 . 69 . Rotin D , Kanelis V , Schild L . Trafﬁcking and cell surface stability of ENaC . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 281 : F391 – F399 , 2001 . 70 . Sabharanjak S , Sharma P , Parton RG , Mayor S . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endo - somes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independentpinocyticpathway . DevCell 2 : 411 – 423 , 2002 . 71 . Scheiffele P , Verkade P , Fra AM , Virta H , Simons K , Ikonen E . Caveolin - 1 and - 2 in the exocytic pathway of MDCK cells . J Cell Biol 140 : 795 – 806 , 1998 . 72 . Schonteich E , Wilson GM , Burden J , Hopkins CR , Anderson K , Goldenring JR , Prekeris R . The Rip11 / Rab11 - FIP5 and kinesin II complex regu - lates endocytic protein recycling . J Cell Sci 121 : 3824 – 3833 , 2008 . 73 . Schwake M , Friedrich T , Jentsch TJ . An internal - ization signal in ClC - 5 , an endosomal Cl - channel mutated in dent’s disease . J Biol Chem 276 : 12049 – 12054 , 2001 . 74 . Semerdjieva S , Shortt B , Maxwell E , Singh S , Fonarev P , Hansen J , Schiavo G , Grant BD , Smythe E . Coordinated regulation of AP2 un - coating from clathrin - coated vesicles by rab5 and hRME - 6 . J Cell Biol 183 : 499 – 511 , 2008 . 75 . Sharma M , Pampinella F , Nemes C , Benharouga M , So J , Du K , Bache KG , Papsin B , Zerangue N , Stenmark H , Lukacs GL . Misfolding diverts CFTR from recycling to degradation : quality control at early endosomes . J Cell Biol 164 : 923 – 933 , 2004 . 76 . Sigismund S , Argenzio E , Tosoni D , Cavallaro E , Polo S , Di Fiore PP . Clathrin - mediated internal - ization is essential for sustained EGFR signaling but dispensable for degradation . Dev Cell 15 : 209 – 219 , 2008 . 77 . Sorkin A , Goh LK . Endocytosis and intracellular trafﬁcking of ErbBs . Exp Cell Res 315 : 683 – 696 , 2009 . 78 . Straight SW , Chen L , Karnak D , Margolis B . Inter - action with mLin - 7 alters the targeting of endo - cytosed transmembrane proteins in mammalian epithelial cells . Mol Biol Cell 12 : 1329 – 1140 , 2001 . 79 . Subramanya AR , Liu J , Ellison DH , Wade JB , Well - ing PA . WNK4 diverts the thiazide - sensitive NaCl cotransporter to the lysosome and stimulates AP - 3 interaction . J Biol Chem 284 : 18471 – 18480 , 2009 . 80 . Tebar F , Sorkina T , Sorkin A , Ericsson M , Kirch - hausen T . Eps15 is a component of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles and is located at the rim of coated pits . J Biol Chem 271 : 28727 – 28730 , 1996 . 81 . Tosoni D , Puri C , Confalonieri S , Salcini AE , De Camilli P , Tacchetti C , Di Fiore PP . TTP speciﬁ - cally regulates the internalization of the trans - ferrin receptor . Cell 123 : 875 – 888 , 2005 . 82 . Traub LM . Tickets to ride : selecting cargo for clathrin - regulated internalization . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 583 – 596 , 2009 . 83 . Traub LM , Lukacs GL . Decoding ubiquitin sorting signals for clathrin - dependent endocytosis by CLASPs . J Cell Sci 120 : 543 – 553 , 2007 . 84 . Tzaban S , Massol RH , Yen E , Hamman W , Frank SR , Lapierre LA , Hansen SH , Goldenring JR , Blumberg RS , Lencer WI . The recycling and tran - scytotic pathways for IgG transport by FcRn are distinct and display an inherent polarity . J Cell Biol 185 : 673 – 684 , 2009 . 85 . van der Sluijs P , Hull M , Webster P , Male P , Goud B , Mellman I . The small GTP - binding protein rab4 controls an early sorting event on the endocytic pathway . Cell 70 : 729 – 740 , 1992 . 86 . Verkade P , Harder T , Lafont F , Simons K . Induc - tion of caveolae in the apical plasma membrane of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J Cell Biol 148 : 727 – 739 , 2000 . 87 . Vilhardt F , Nielsen M , Sandvig K , van Deurs B . Urokinase - type plasminogen activator receptor is internalized by different mechanisms in polar - ized and nonpolarized Madin - Darby canine kid - ney epithelial cells . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 179 – 195 , 1999 . 88 . Wang E , Brown PS , Aroeti B , Chapin SJ , Mostov KE , Dunn KW . Apical and basolateral endocytic pathways of MDCK cells meet in acidic common endosomes distinct from a nearly - neutral apical recycling endosome . Trafﬁc 1 : 480 – 493 , 2000 . 89 . Wang H , Traub LM , Weixel KM , Hawryluk MJ , Shah N , Edinger RS , Perry CJ , Kester L , Butter - worth MB , Peters KW , Kleyman TR , Frizzell RA , Johnson JP . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis of the epithelial sodium channel . Role of epsin . J Biol Chem 281 : 14129 – 14135 , 2006 . 90 . Warren RA , Green FA , Stenberg PE , Enns CA . Distinct saturable pathways for the endocytosis of different tyrosine motifs . J Biol Chem 273 : 17056 – 17063 , 1998 . 91 . Weinman EJ , Cunningham R , Wade JB , Sheno - likar S . The role of NHERF - 1 in the regulation of renal proximal tubule sodium - hydrogen ex - changer 3 and sodium - dependent phosphate co - transporter 2a . J Physiol 567 : 27 – 32 , 2005 . 92 . Wiemuth D , Ke Y , Rohlfs M , McDonald FJ . Epithelial sodium channel ( ENaC ) is multi - ubiquitinated at the cell surface . Biochem J 405 : 147 – 155 , 2007 . 93 . Wilde A , Beattie EC , Lem L , Riethof DA , Liu SH , Mobley WC , Soriano P , Brodsky FM . EGF recep - tor signaling stimulates SRC kinase phosphoryla - tion of clathrin , inﬂuencing clathrin redistribution and EGF uptake . Cell 96 : 677 – 687 , 1999 . 94 . Wiley HS . Anomalous binding of epidermal growth factor to A431 cells is due to the effect of high receptor densities and a saturable endocytic system . J Cell Biol 107 : 801 – 810 , 1988 . 95 . Wilson FH , Disse - Nicodeme S , Choate KA , Ish - ikawa K , Nelson - Williams C , Desitter I , Gunel M , Milford DV , Lipkin GW , Achard JM , Feely MP , Dussol B , Berland Y , Unwin RJ , Mayan H , Simon DB , Farfel Z , Jeunemaitre X , Lifton RP . Human hypertension caused by mutations in WNK ki - nases . Science 293 : 1107 – 1112 , 2001 . 96 . Wolfe BL , Trejo J . Clathrin - dependent mecha - nisms of G protein - coupled receptor endocyto - sis . Trafﬁc 8 : 462 – 470 , 2007 . 97 . Yang LE , Maunsbach AB , Leong PK , McDonough AA . Differential trafﬁc of proximal tubule Na (cid:1) transporters during hypertension or PTH : NHE3 to base of microvilli vs . NaPi2 to endosomes . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 287 : F896 – F906 , 2004 . 98 . Yang LE , Maunsbach AB , Leong PK , McDonough AA . Redistribution of myosin VI from top to base of proximal tubule microvilli during acute hyper - tension . J Am Soc Nephrol 16 : 2890 – 2896 , 2005 . 99 . Yudowski GA , Puthenveedu MA , Henry AG , von Zastrow M . Cargo - mediated regulation of a rapid Rab4 - dependent recycling pathway . Mol Biol Cell 20 : 2774 – 2784 , 2009 . 100 . Zagorska A , Pozo - Guisado E , Boudeau J , Vitari AC , Raﬁqi FH , Thastrup J , Deak M , Campbell DG , Morrice NA , Prescott AR , Alessi DR . Regulation of activity and localization of the WNK1 protein kinase by hyperosmotic stress . J Cell Biol 176 : 89 – 100 , 2007 . 101 . Zhou B , Zhuang J , Gu D , Wang H , Cebotaru L , Guggino WB , Cai H . WNK4 enhances the degra - dation of NCC through a sortilin - mediated lyso - somal pathway . J Am Soc Nephrol 21 : 82 – 92 , 2010 . 102 . Zhou R , Patel SV , Snyder PM . Nedd4 – 2 catalyzes ubiquitination and degradation of cell surface ENaC . J Biol Chem 282 : 20207 – 20212 , 2007 . REVIEWS PHYSIOLOGY (cid:127) Volume 25 (cid:127) October 2010 (cid:127) www . physiologyonline . org 292 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J u ne 16 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys i o l og y on li ne . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m