ª The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 2000 / 09 / 1299 / 11 $ 5 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 150 , Number 6 , September 18 , 2000 1299 – 1309 http : / / www . jcb . org 1299 Mechanism of N - WASP Activation by CDC42 and Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate Rajat Rohatgi , Hsin - yi Henry Ho , and Marc W . Kirschner Department of Cell Biology , Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts 02115 Abstract . Neuronal Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) transmits signals from Cdc42 to the nucle - ation of actin ﬁlaments by Arp2 / 3 complex . Although full - length N - WASP is a weak activator of Arp2 / 3 com - plex , its activity can be enhanced by upstream regula - tors such as Cdc42 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . We dissected this acti - vation reaction and found that the previously described physical interaction between the NH 2 - terminal domain and the COOH - terminal effector domain of N - WASP is a regulatory interaction because it can inhibit the ac - tin nucleation activity of the effector domain by occlud - ing the Arp2 / 3 binding site . This interaction between the NH 2 - and COOH termini must be intramolecular because in solution N - WASP is a monomer . Phosphati - dylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) inﬂuences the activity of N - WASP through a conserved basic sequence element located near the Cdc42 binding site rather than through the WASp homology domain 1 . Like Cdc42 , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 reduces the afﬁnity between the NH 2 - and COOH termini of the molecule . The use of a mutant N - WASP molecule lacking this basic stretch allowed us to delineate a signaling pathway in Xenopus extracts leading from PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 to actin nucleation through Cdc42 , N - WASP , and Arp2 / 3 complex . In this pathway , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 serves two functions : ﬁrst , as an activator of N - WASP ; and second , as an indirect activator of Cdc42 . Key words : phosphoinositides • Cdc42 GTP - binding protein • actin • signal transduction • Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein Introduction The Rho family of small GTPases can direct distinct mor - phological changes in the actin cytoskeleton . The three founding members of the Rho family , Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 , induce the formation of stress fibers , lamellipodia , and filopodia when introduced into cells ( Hall , 1998 ) . Whereas Rho functions by reorganizing preexisting actin filaments , Rac and Cdc42 act by promoting new actin po - lymerization , either by stimulating de novo actin nucle - ation or by stimulating the uncapping or severing of fila - ments ( Machesky and Insall , 1999 ) . Over the last two years , proteins of the Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome protein ( WASp ) 1 family have emerged as important mediators of the de novo actin nucleation pathway downstream of Rac and Cdc42 ( Mullins , 2000 ) . The first member of this fam - ily , WASp , was identified as a gene expressed in the he - matopoietic lineage that is mutated in children with the disease Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome ( Derry et al . , 1994 ) . Other family members include neuronal WASp ( N - WASP ) , a ubiquitously expressed protein with z 50 % identity to WASp , Bee1 / Las17p from yeast , and the Scar / WAVE proteins ( Miki et al . , 1996 , 1998b ; Li , 1997 ; Bear et al . , 1998 ; Suetsugu et al . , 1999 ) . The WASp family proteins funnel signals from a variety of upstream signaling pathways to actin nucleation through a common effector , Arp2 / 3 complex . For instance , N - WASP has been implicated in filopodia formation downstream of Cdc42 , and the Scar / WAVE family has been shown to function in lamellipodia formation downstream of Rac in fibroblasts and in actin polymerization downstream of the cAMP receptor in Dictyostelium ( Bear et al . , 1998 ; Miki et al . , 1998a , b ) . In turn , Arp2 / 3 complex can accelerate the de novo nucleation of actin filaments and can also orga - R . Rohatgi and H . H . Ho contributed equally to this study . Address correspondence to Marc Kirschner , Department of Cell Biol - ogy , Harvard Medical School , 240 Longwood Avenue , Boston , MA 02115 . Tel . : ( 617 ) 432 - 2250 . Fax : ( 617 ) 432 - 0420 . E - mail : marc @ hms . harvard . edu 1 Abbreviations used in this paper : A , acidic region ; BR , basic region ; C , cofilin homology segment ; CRIB , Cdc42 / Rac interactive motif ; G - actin , actin monomers ; GBD , G - protein binding domain ; G - protein , GTP bind - ing protein ; GBR , G - protein binding region ; GST , glutathione S - trans - ferase ; HT , hexahistidine - tagged ; HSS , high speed supernatant ; MT , Myc - tagged ; NMR , nuclear magnetic resonance ; N - WASP , neuronal WASP ; PC , phosphatidylcholine ; PI , phosphatidylinositol ; PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , PI 4 , 5 - bis - phosphate ; PRD , proline - rich domain ; V , verprolin homology segment ; VCA , COOH - terminal domain of WASP family proteins containing the V , C , and A segments ; WASp , Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein ; WH1 , WASp homology domain 1 ; WIP , WASp interacting protein . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 150 , 2000 1300 nize these filaments into the stereotypical arrays seen at the leading edges of migrating cells ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ; Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ) . This property of different up - stream targets and a common downstream effector is re - flected in the domain structure of WASp family proteins . They contain a conserved COOH - terminal VCA domain , consisting of a verprolin homology segment ( V ) , a cofilin homology segment ( C ) and an acidic region ( A ) ( see Fig . 1 A ; Miki et al . , 1996 ) . The VCA domains of various family members have been the focus of extensive investigation because these domains of z 100 residues can bind actin monomers ( G - actin ) and Arp2 / 3 complex , interactions that lead to a dramatic enhancement of actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex ( Egile et al . , 1999 ; Machesky et al . , 1999 ; Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ; Winter et al . , 1999 ; Yarar et al . , 1999 ) . On the other hand , the NH 2 termini of WASp family proteins are quite diverse and , therefore , are thought to interact with distinct sets of upstream signaling molecules . In particular , the NH 2 termini of N - WASP and WASp contain several recognizable and biochemically defined domains ( see Fig . 1 A ) . The extreme NH 2 termini of WASp and N - WASP contain a WASp homology 1 ( WH1 ) do - main that mediates interactions with the WASp interact - ing protein ( WIP ) family , calmodulin , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , and actin filaments ( Miki et al . , 1996 ; Ramesh et al . , 1997 ; Egile et al . , 1999 ) . The WH1 domain is followed by a Cdc42 or G - protein binding domain ( GBD ) , which includes a Cdc42 / Rac interactive binding ( CRIB ) motif ( Aspenstrom et al . , 1996 ; Kolluri et al . , 1996 ; Symons et al . , 1996 ; Miki et al . , 1998a ) . In all WASp family members , the NH 2 - terminal domains are linked to the COOH - terminal VCA segment through a long proline - rich region , which is implicated in binding to profilin and to Src homology domain 3 – contain - ing proteins like Grb2 , Nck , and certain cytoplasmic ty - rosine kinases ( Rivero - Lezcano et al . , 1995 ; Banin et al . , 1996 ; Miki et al . , 1996 ; She et al . , 1997 ) . Given this remark - able list of interacting partners , the WASp family of pro - teins , endowed with multiple domains for interactions with a large number of other signaling molecules , appear to be ideally built for integrating diverse upstream signals and relaying them to Arp2 / 3 complex . Thus , a detailed bio - chemical understanding of how WASp family proteins are activated ( and subsequently inactivated ) is crucial for un - derstanding how signaling pathways attain precise spatial and temporal control over actin polymerization in the cell . N - WASP is the only WASp family member whose bio - chemical activity towards Arp2 / 3 complex has been shown to be directly enhanced by upstream signaling molecules , including Cdc42 , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , Grb2 , and the Shigella protein IcsA ( Egile et al . , 1999 ; Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ; Carlier et al . , 2000 ) . We have reconstituted one minimal scheme for the signal - regulated activation of N - WASP using purified components in vitro . Full - length N - WASP , which displays weak basal activity towards Arp2 / 3 complex , can be dramatically and synergistically activated by Cdc42 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . This behavior of full - length N - WASP can be ac - counted for by an allosteric model for N - WASP regula - tion . Miki et al . ( 1998a ) first demonstrated that activated Cdc42 and N - WASP can cooperate to induce filopodia when introduced into tissue culture cells . In exploring the regulation of N - WASP by Cdc42 , they found that a frag - ment of N - WASP containing the GBD could physically in - teract with the COOH - terminal VCA segment , and this interaction could be relieved by the binding of Cdc42 to the GBD domain ( Miki et al . , 1998a ) . These data suggested the following : that N - WASP exists in a closed , autoinhib - ited state ; and that binding of activated Cdc42 to the GBD would release intramolecular contacts in the molecule , un - masking the VCA region . A recently published nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) study of WASp provided a detailed structural model for the interaction between NH 2 - terminal GBD and the VCA segment ( Kim et al . , 2000 ) . Using an engineered WASp construct in which the GBD domain was fused via a short linker to a fragment from the COOH - terminal cofilin - acidic ( CA ) segment , the authors demonstrated that the GBD domain of WASp folds into markedly different and mutually incompatible structures depending upon whether it is bound to Cdc42 or to the CA fragment . From the standpoint of N - WASP activation , the critical question about this physical interaction between the NH 2 - and COOH - terminal domains of N - WASP remains to be answered . Does this interaction regulate the activity of N - WASP by inhibiting the activity of the VCA segment ? Since binding of the VCA segment to both G - actin and Arp2 / 3 is required for stimulation of nucleation , does this interaction inhibit nucleation by occluding the Arp2 / 3 binding site , the G - actin binding site , or both ? Whereas the interactions between Cdc42 and N - WASP have been examined , the biochemical mechanism by which PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 activates N - WASP as well as the sequence elements in N - WASP necessary to respond to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 remain ob - scure . In this study , we have taken advantage of the re - markably parsimonious and biochemically reconstituted Cdc42 - PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 signaling module to an - swer these questions and to test the current models for how N - WASP is activated by Cdc42 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . This activation reaction will hopefully shed light on the regula - tion of WASp family members in general . Materials and Methods Antibodies Arp2 / 3 complex was detected using a polyclonal antiserum against Arp2 or by using affinity - purified anti - Arp3 or anti - ARC34 antibodies provided by M . Welch ( University of California , Berkeley , Berkeley , CA ) . The af - finity - purified anti – N - WASP antibody has been described previously ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . The anti - pentaHis ( QIAGEN ) , anti - GST ( Amer - sham Pharmacia Biotech ) , anti - Cdc42 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) , and the antiactin ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) antibodies were pur - chased . Protein Expression and Purification All N - WASP fragments and mutants were made by PCR using bovine N - WASP cDNA as the template and were confirmed by sequencing . The wild - type , full - length N - WASP used in this study ( both GST - tagged and untagged ) was the rat version . To construct templates for in vitro translation , WGP ( amino acids 1 – 396 ) , WG ( amino acids 1 – 277 ) , WH1 ( amino acids 1 – 158 ) , and the G - protein binding region ( GBR ; amino acids 151 – 277 ) were subcloned into the pCS2 1 MT vector containing six copies of the Myc epitope located NH 2 - terminal to the cloning sites . The in vitro translation of 35 S - labeled pro - teins was performed using the TNT - coupled ( transcription / translation ) rabbit reticulocyte lysate system ( Promega ) and [ 35 S ] methionine ( NEN Life Science Products ) . Rohatgi et al . Mechanism of N - WASP Activation 1301 For production of recombinant proteins in Sf9 cells , baculoviruses were constructed and used for infections according to the Bac - to - Bac baculovi - rus expression system ( GIBCO BRL ) . WGP and WG ( without the Myc epitopes ) were transferred from pCS2 1 into the pFastBacHT vector ( GIBCO BRL ) , which contains a hexahistidine tag located NH 2 - terminal to the cloning sites . After expression , HT - WG and HT - WGP proteins were purified by Ni - NTA ( QIAGEN ) affinity chromatography . GST fu - sions of wild - type N - WASP , ( D WH1 ) N - WASP ( residues 151 – 505 ) and ( D B ) N - WASP ( D residues 186 – 195 ) were generated by subcloning the in - serts into a modified pFastBacHT vector carrying the sequence encoding GST inserted ( in - frame ) COOH - terminal to the hexahistidine tag and NH 2 - terminal to the cloning sites . These proteins ( tagged at their NH 2 ter - mini with a hexahistidine tag followed by a GST tag ) were purified on a Ni - NTA or glutathione Sepharose affinity column followed by a Mono Q column ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) . For production of purified recombinant proteins in Escherichia coli , VCA ( amino acids 392 – 505 ) , VCA ( D col ) ( D residues 477 – 480 ) , V ( amino acids 392 – 449 ) , VC ( amino acids 392 – 485 ) , CA ( amino acids 450 – 505 ) , GBR ( amino acids 151 – 277 ) , GBR2 ( amino acids 201 – 277 ) , GBR3 ( D resi - dues 186 – 200 ) , and GBR4 ( with K186D , K189D , K192D , and K195D ) were fused to GST at their NH 2 termini by cloning them into a pGEX vec - tor ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) and affinity - purified on glutathione Sepharose beads as described previously ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) . Purification of untagged full - length rat N - WASP ( which was produced in Sf9 cells ) , Cdc42 ( which was produced as a GST fusion and subse - quently cleaved with thrombin to remove the GST tag ) , and Arp2 / 3 com - plex from bovine brain extracts has been described previously ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . In the purified assay system , no difference was observed be - tween prenylated ( purified from Sf9 cell membranes ) and nonprenylated ( purified from E . coli ) Cdc42 . In some preparations of Arp2 / 3 complex , the Arp3 subunit appeared as a doublet ( presumably because of partial proteolysis ; see Fig . 2 c ) , an occurrence that did not affect the specific ac - tivity of the preparation either with respect to actin polymerization or VCA affinity . Protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford assay ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) or by scanning densitometry of Gelcode blue - stained gels ( Pierce Chemical Co . ) using BSA as a standard in both cases . Hydrodynamic Measurements of Rat N - WASP Analytical ultracentrifugation experiments were carried out at 4 8 C in 20 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 6 , 100 mM KCl , 1 mM DTT in a Beckman Optima XL - A analytical ultracentrifuge . Sedimentation equilibrium experiments were performed at 20 , 000 rpm ; sedimentation velocity experiments were per - formed at 40 , 000 rpm . Data collection and analysis were carried out using the Optima XL - A data analysis software and Microcal Origin . The partial specific volume of 0 . 713 cm 3 / g for rat N - WASP was estimated from the amino acid content . Gel filtration chromatography was performed on a Superdex 200 PC column ( Amersham Phamacia Biotech ) at 4 8 C using a Superdex200 col - umn equilibrated in 20 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 6 , 100 mM KCl , 1 mM DTT . To determine the diffusion coefficient ( D ) of rat N - WASP , standard curves were generated by plotting elution volume versus 1 / D , using the following protein standards ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) : ferritin , catalase , aldo - lase , BSA , and chymotrypsinogen A . Binding Assays Using 35 S - labeled Proteins Produced in Reticulocyte Lysate For GST pull - down assays , 5 m g of each GST fusion protein immobilized on 5 m l of glutathione - Sepharose beads was added to a 50 - m l reaction con - taining XB buffer ( 20 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 7 , 100 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 1 mM EDTA ) , 1 mM DTT , 0 . 5 mg / ml chicken egg albumin as a carrier , and 10 m l of the [ 35 S ] methionine - labeled target protein . After rotating at 4 8 C for 1 h , the beads were washed once with XB , 0 . 5 M KCl , 1 mM DTT , 0 . 1 % Tween 20 ( high salt wash ) , once with XB , 1 mM DTT , 0 . 5 % Tween 20 ( high detergent wash ) , and once with XB , 1 mM DTT , and 0 . 1 % Tween 20 ( low salt wash ) . Proteins bound to the beads were eluted with SDS sample buffer and analyzed by SDS - PAGE . The labeled proteins were vi - sualized using a PhosphorImager ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) and quantitated using Quantity One software ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) . Binding Assays Using Purified Proteins For Arp2 / 3 interaction assays , the GST - tagged protein ( VCA , CA , or N - WASP ) was incubated with the indicated concentrations of the other components ( see Fig . 2 ) in 30 m l of XB plus 1 mM DTT , 0 . 02 % Tween 20 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , and 0 . 5 mg / ml chicken egg albumin ( binding buffer ) . After a 1 - h incubation in solution at room temperature , 5 m l of glutathione - Sepharose beads was added to each reaction and the GST - fused protein was captured by gently rocking this slurry at 4 8 C for an additional hour . The beads were collected by centrifugation and washed three times with 500 m l of XB plus 0 . 2 mM ATP , 1 mM DTT , and 0 . 02 % Tween 20 ( wash buffer ) . The proteins that remained bound to the beads were eluted with SDS sample buffer , fractionated by SDS - PAGE , and identified by immu - noblotting . The G - actin binding assays were performed in the same man - ner , except that the binding and wash buffers contained 0 . 5 3 XB . To test the interaction of full - length , untagged N - WASP with Arp2 / 3 complex ( see Fig . 2 e ) , 5 m l of glutathione - Sepharose beads coated with 5 m g of GST - Cdc42 were added to 40 m l of binding buffer containing Arp2 / 3 com - plex ( 1 m M ) and the indicated concentrations of N - WASP and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 vesicles . Lipids The preparation of synthetic liposomes used for pyrene actin assays has been described previously ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . To make the [ 3 H ] phos - phatidylcholine - labeled vesicles used in lipid binding experiments , dried lipid mixtures ( containing either PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 [ 30 % ] and PC [ 70 % ] or PI [ 30 % ] and PC [ 70 % ] ) were resuspended in 30 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 0 , 100 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , and 0 . 02 % NP - 40 ( HNE - NP - 40 ) and sonicated to clarity . GST fusion proteins immobilized on glutathione - Sepharose beads ( 5 m g protein : 5 m l packed beads ) were mixed with [ 3 H ] phosphatidylcho - line - labeled lipid vesicles ( 0 . 32 mM total lipid ) in HNE - NP - 40 in a total reaction volume of 50 m l . After a 1 - h incubation with rotation at room temperature , the beads were collected by centrifugation , washed twice with HNE - NP - 40 buffer , and subjected to liquid scintillation counting . Xenopus Extracts and Immunodepletions The preparation of high speed supernatant ( HSS ) from Xenopus egg ex - tracts and the immunodepletion of N - WASP from these extracts have been described previously ( Ma et al . , 1998a ; Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . Actin Polymerization Assays In Xenopus HSS , pyrene - labeled actin ( 2 m M ) was added to follow actin polymerization as described previously ( Ma et al . , 1998a ) . After ensuring that the mixture achieved a stable baseline , polymerization was initiated by the addition of vesicles containing 10 : 45 : 45 PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 / phosphatidylino - sitol ( PI ) / phosphatidylcholine ( PC ; 100 m M total lipid ) . To follow actin polymerization using purified components , pyrene G - actin or unlabeled G - actin was isolated by incubating freshly thawed proteins in G buffer ( 5 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 2 mM DTT ) for z 10 h at 4 8 C , and then removing residual filamentous actin by centrifugation at 400 , 000 g for 1 h . Polymerization reactions con - tained 1 . 0 m M of unlabeled actin , 0 . 3 m M pyrene actin ( 50 % labeled ) , and 0 . 2 mM ATP and various proteins at the indicated concentrations in 80 m l of XB buffer . All reaction components except actin were first mixed to - gether in XB buffer . The reaction was started by adding a mixture of actin and pyrene actin , and the fluorescence changes were measured in a fluo - rometer . In all the curves shown in the figures , polymerization was initi - ated at time 5 0 ; the curves are shifted along the abscissa to account for the delay time between the addition of actin and the first fluorescence reading . Data Analysis Kinetic analyses were performed using either the software provided with the fluorescence spectrometer ( SLM - Aminco ) or using MicroCal Origin . Maximum polymerization rates were calculated from the raw polymeriza - tion curves by performing a linear regression on the elongation phase of the actin assembly curve or by calculating the slope of the line tangent to the inflection point . In all the curves shown in the figures , solid lines are drawn through all the data points collected ; a symbol is only placed on ev - ery few points for clarity . The data shown in the figures were taken from experiments performed at least two to three times . When normalized to controls , data varied by , 20 % between independent experiments . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 150 , 2000 1302 Results Association between the NH 2 - and COOH - terminal Regions of N - WASP The domain structure of the N - WASP molecule and its nomenclature is shown in Fig . 1 A . Unless otherwise noted , all residue numbers refer to the bovine N - WASP protein , which is z 95 % identical to the human and rat versions . Since the domain nomenclature of WASp family proteins is not standardized , we begin with a brief description of the N - WASP domain structure and its designation used in this study ( Fig . 1 A ) . The NH 2 terminus of the N - WASP molecule is composed of a WASP homology 1 ( WH1 ) do - main , followed by a GBR . The GBR contains a basic re - gion ( BR ) and a GBD that interacts with Cdc42 . The COOH terminus of N - WASP has been named a VCA seg - ment because it contains two verprolin homology regions ( V ) , a cofilin homology region ( C ) , and an acidic region ( A ) . The NH 2 - and COOH - terminal portions of N - WASP are linked by a central proline - rich domain ( PRD ) . The first evidence for the autoinhibited structure of N - WASP was the demonstration that the isolated VCA region could bind to an NH 2 - terminal fragment ( residues 127 – 277 ) that includes the GBR ( Miki et al . , 1998a ) . This interaction could be disrupted by the addition of Cdc42 , suggesting that upstream activators might regulate N - WASP by reducing the affinity between the NH 2 - and COOH ter - mini . Since the NH 2 - and COOH termini of N - WASP can interact even in the absence of the PRD that connects them in the full - length molecule , we wanted to determine whether the NH 2 terminus could inhibit , in trans , the abil - ity of VCA to bind and activate Arp2 / 3 complex . As a first step , we identified the portion of the NH 2 ter - minus of N - WASP that displayed the highest affinity for the VCA segment . Several N - WASP fragments were Myc - tagged ( MT ) at their NH 2 termini and were produced as [ 35 S ] methionine - labeled proteins by in vitro translation ( Fig . 1 A ) . The fragments have been named according to the domains of N - WASP that they encompass . For in - stance , MT - GBR is the Myc - tagged fragment that includes the GBR ; MT - WG is the Myc - tagged fragment that in - cludes the WH1 domain and the GBR ; and MT - WGP is the Myc - tagged fragment that includes the WH1 domain , the GBR , and the PRD . These fragments were tested for their abilities to bind to a GST fusion of VCA ( GST - VCA ) using a pull - down assay . As expected , MT - WG , MT - WGP , and MT - GBR all bound to GST - VCA ( Fig . 1 b ) . Surprisingly , a weak but detectable interaction was also observed between GST - VCA and the WH1 domain of N - WASP ( Fig . 1 , B and C ) . This additional VCA – WH1 in - teraction is one explanation for the observation that the MT - WG fragment bound to GST - VCA with an approxi - mately twofold higher affinity than the MT - GBR frag - ment ( Fig . 1 C ) . The full - length N - WASP molecule did not bind to GST - VCA , probably because its NH 2 terminus is locked in an intramolecular interaction with its COOH - terminal VCA segment and is , thus , unable to bind to GST - VCA added in trans ( Fig . 1 B ) . The 35 S - labeled pro - tein that bound to GST - VCA in the MT - N - WASP experi - ment is not full - length N - WASP , but rather a truncated translation product that does not include portions of the COOH - terminal VCA segment . In conclusion , the highest affinity for the VCA segment was seen with a fragment of N - WASP that included both the WH1 domain and GBR . We also mapped the regions within VCA that are im - portant for its interaction with the NH 2 - terminal MT - WG fragment . Fragments containing the V , VC , CA , and VCA segments ( Fig . 1 A ) were expressed as GST fusion proteins and tested for their abilities to interact with the [ 35 S ] me - thionine - labeled MT - WG fragment . The G - actin binding V segment appears to be dispensable for the interaction between VCA and MT - WG because GST - V does not bind to MT - WG and GST - CA and GST - VCA bind to MT - WG with roughly equal affinities ( Fig . 1 D ) . The C segment contributes to the interaction since the GST - VC protein shows a weak interaction with MT - WG . However , the highest affinity interaction with MT - WG is seen when both the C and A segments are present ( GST - CA and GST - VCA ) . This CA segment , which comprises the COOH - terminal 55 amino acids of N - WASP , is also the minimal region required for binding to Arp2 / 3 complex . WASp family members have been postulated to interact Figure 1 . Sequence determinants of the interaction between the NH 2 - and COOH - terminal regions of N - WASP . ( A ) A summary of the nomenclature and amino acid boundaries of the various domains and fragments of bovine N - WASP described in this study . ( B ) GST - VCA ( or GST alone as a control ) immobilized on glutathione - Sepharose beads was tested for its ability to pull down various fragments of N - WASP ( shown in A ) produced as Myc - tagged ( MT ) , 35 S - labeled proteins . ( C ) Dose - dependent binding of the indicated N - WASP fragments to GST - VCA beads . The slope of the line defined by each set of points is inversely proportional to the dissociation constant . ( D ) GST fusions of the indicated subfragments of the VCA segment of N - WASP ( de - fined in A ) were immobilized on glutathione - Sepharose beads and used to pull down the MT - WG fragment from the NH 2 termi - nus of N - WASP . In B and D , 5 % of the input and 33 % of the pulled down material was analyzed on a 5 – 15 % SDS – polyacryl - amide gel . Rohatgi et al . Mechanism of N - WASP Activation 1303 with Arp2 / 3 complex through a conserved 4 – amino acid basic motif in the C segment ( residues 477 – 480 [ KRSK ] in bovine N - WASP ; Bi and Zigmond , 1999 ) . In the recent NMR structure of the autoinhibited fold of human WASp , the first Arg in this motif makes a hydrogen bond to a glutamic acid residue in the GBD ( Kim et al . , 2000 ) . Based on these results , the NH 2 termini of WASp family proteins may inhibit interactions between VCA and Arp2 / 3 , at least in part , by occluding this motif . To test the hypothesis that this motif contributes to the affinity between VCA and the NH 2 terminus of N - WASP , we constructed a GST - VCA protein containing an in - frame deletion of these four resi - dues ( GST - VCA ( D cof ; Fig . 1 A ) . The GST - VCA ( D cof ) mutant bound to MT - WG as well as the wild - type VCA ( Fig . 1 D ) . In addition , this mutation had only a very mod - est effect on the ability of GST - VCA to bind or to activate Arp2 / 3 complex ( Rohatgi , R . , and M . W . Kirschner , un - published results ) . The analysis presented above demonstrates that the GBR and the WH1 domains within the NH 2 terminus of N - WASP interact with the C and A segments in the COOH terminus of the molecule . The NH 2 - terminal Domain of N - WASP Can Inhibit Binding of Arp2 / 3 Complex to the COOH - terminal VCA Segment The VCA segment of N - WASP possesses two activities that are critical to its ability to activate actin nucleation . It binds to Arp2 / 3 complex through its CA region and to G - actin through its V region ( Miki and Takenawa , 1998 ; Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . We tested if these interactions could be blocked by the NH 2 - terminal WG fragment . Whereas the VCA segment can bind to Arp2 / 3 complex with high affinity ( K d z 100 nM ) , the full - length , autoinhib - ited N - WASP molecule does not show detectable binding to Arp2 / 3 using pull - down assays ( Fig . 2 B ; Egile et al . , 1999 ) . To test the hypothesis that the low affinity of N - WASP for Arp2 / 3 complex is due to interactions between the NH 2 - terminal domain and the VCA segment , we determined whether the WG and WGP fragments ( Fig . 1 A ) would compete with Arp2 / 3 for binding to VCA . The WG and WGP fragments were expressed as hexahistidine - tagged ( HT ) proteins using the baculovirus system in insect cells ( Fig . 2 A ) . Both HT - WG and HT - WGP bound to GST - VCA in a dose - dependent manner and , more importantly , inhibited the interaction between Arp2 / 3 and GST - VCA ( Fig . 2 C ) . The HT - WG – GST - VCA complex was appropriately regulated by Cdc42 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . ( Unless otherwise noted , Cdc42 refers to activated , GTP g S - loaded Cdc42 , and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 refers to synthetic liposomes containing 10 : 45 : 45 PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 / PC / PI ) . The addition of Cdc42 or PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 to the HT - WG – GST - VCA complex stimulated the release of HT - WG from GST - VCA and the concomitant recovery of the GST - VCA – Arp2 / 3 interaction ( Fig . 2 D ) . The ability of full - length N - WASP to bind to Arp2 / 3 could also be stimulated by Cdc42 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( Fig . 2 E ) . Cdc42 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 produced the most potent increase in affinity when added together , explaining our previous observation that the ability of N - WASP to stimulate Arp2 / 3 complex is synergistically activated by these two regulators ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . Because pull - down assays are only semiquan - titative , we have not been able to determine whether the affinity of full - length , activated N - WASP for Arp2 / 3 is comparable to the high affinity ( z 100 nM ) displayed by its isolated VCA segment . The VCA segment of N - WASP has been shown to bind to G - actin ( actin below its critical concentration for poly - merization ) through the V region that includes two ver - prolin homology segments ( Miki and Takenawa , 1998 ) . This actin binding site is separable from Arp2 / 3 site be - cause the CA fragment , while sufficient to bind to Arp2 / 3 complex , does not bind to G - actin ( Fig . 1 A and Fig . 3 ) . The addition of saturating concentrations of the NH 2 - ter - minal HT - WG and HT - WGP fragments ( sufficient to completely block the interaction of GST - VCA with Arp2 / 3 complex ) did not affect the interaction between GST - VCA and G - actin ( Fig . 3 ) . This is consistent with the ob - Figure 2 . The NH 2 - terminal domain of N - WASP inhibits binding of Arp2 / 3 complex to the COOH - terminal VCA segment in a Cdc42 - and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - regulated manner . ( A ) Purified protein preparations of the hexahistidine - tagged ( HT ) WG and WGP fragments and GST - VCA used in this study are shown on a 5 – 15 % SDS – polyacrylamide gel . ( B ) Binding of GST - VCA or GST - fused full - length N - WASP ( 0 . 5 m M each ) to Arp2 / 3 com - plex ( 0 . 1 m M ) was assayed by incubating the components in solu - tion and capturing the GST fusion protein on glutathione - Sepharose beads . The amount of Arp2 / 3 bound was determined by analyzing 50 % of the input and 37 . 5 % of the pulled down ma - terial on an a - Arp2 immunoblot . ( C ) Binding of GST - VCA ( 0 . 2 m M ) to Arp2 / 3 ( 0 . 1 m M ) was tested ( as in B ) in the presence of the indicated concentrations of HT - WG or HT - WGP . Immuno - blotting was used to assay the amount of GST - VCA ( a - GST ) , Arp2 / 3 ( a - Arp3 and a - p34Arc ) , and HT - WG or HT - WGP ( a - pentaHis ) precipitated on the glutathione - Sepharose beads . ( D ) The ability of HT - WG ( 2 m M ) to inhibit the binding of Arp2 / 3 ( 0 . 1 m M ) to GST - VCA ( 0 . 2 m M ) was tested in the presence of GTP g S - loaded Cdc42 ( 5 m M ) or PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - containing vesicles ( 100 m M ; PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 / PI / PC 5 10 : 45 : 45 ) . ( E ) GST - Cdc42 beads , loaded with either GTP g S or GDP , were tested for their abilities to bind to Arp2 / 3 ( 1 m M ) in the presence of N - WASP ( 1 m M ) and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - containing vesicles ( 100 m M ) . Arp2 / 3 pulled down by GST - Cdc42 beads in the absence of any N - WASP represents nonspecific , background binding under the conditions of the as - say . For the a - Arp2 immunoblot , 7 . 5 % of the input , 10 % of the material pulled down on the GST - Cdc42 beads , and ( as a control for comparison ) 10 % of the material pulled down by GST - VCA ( 1 m M ) on glutathione - Sepharose beads was loaded on the gel . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 150 , 2000 1304 servation that the V region does not contribute to the binding interaction between GST - VCA and 35 S - labeled MT - WG ( Fig . 1 D ) . Furthermore , a GST fusion of the full - length , autoinhibited N - WASP could bind to G - actin de - spite the presence of a putative intramolecular VCA – WG interaction ( Fig . 3 ) . These results are unexpected because the ability of full - length N - WASP to sequester G - actin and raise the critical concentration for polymerization has been shown to be much weaker than that of the isolated VCA fragment ( Egile et al . , 1999 ) . Since our pull - down as - says are only semiquantitative compared with critical con - centration plots , one explanation for this difference is that we cannot detect modest ( but functionally important ) changes in the affinity for G - actin upon the binding of WG to VCA . The NH 2 - terminal Domain of N - WASP Can Inhibit the Actin Nucleation Activity of the COOH - terminal VCA Segment Having established that the NH 2 - terminal HT - WG frag - ment could inhibit the binding interaction between VCA and Arp2 / 3 in a Cdc42 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - regulated manner , we wanted to determine whether HT - WG could inhibit the ability of VCA to activate actin nucleation . We used an established fluorescence assay using pyrene - labeled ac - tin to monitor the kinetics of actin assembly in the pres - ence of GST - VCA , Arp2 / 3 , and increasing concentrations of HT - WG ( Cooper et al . , 1983 ) . HT - WG inhibited the ability of GST - VCA to accelerate actin polymerization in a dose - dependent manner ( Fig . 4 , A and B ) . Consistent with Arp2 / 3 binding data and the behavior of the full - length N - WASP molecule , the addition of GTP g S - Cdc42 or PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 relieved the inhibition of GST - VCA by HT - WG ( Fig . 4 , C and D ) . When added individually , Cdc42 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 had a much greater effect on the trans - inhibited WG – VCA complex than on full - length N - WASP . In the full - length molecule , the interaction between the WG and VCA segments likely occurs with a very high apparent af - finity because of the fact that they are tethered together by the proline - rich region ; thus , binding of both activators may be required to effectively disrupt this intramolecular interaction . N - WASP Is a Monomer Previously proposed models of N - WASP autoinhibition have been arbitrarily drawn to suggest the presence of an intramolecular interaction between the NH 2 - and COOH termini of the molecule ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . The ability of the WG – VCA complex , even when lacking the inter - vening proline - rich tether , to recapitulate the behavior of the full - length N - WASP molecule highlights the possibil - ity that N - WASP is actually a homodimer ( or homomulti - mer ) and that autoinhibitory interactions occur in trans between the NH 2 - and COOH termini of two different molecules . To characterize the physical state of N - WASP in solu - tion , we produced untagged rat N - WASP in insect cells and purified the protein to homogeneity by sequential chromatography over heparin , anion exchange , and gel fil - tration columns ( Fig . 5 A ) . Analysis of the protein by equi - librium ultracentrifugation at concentrations ( up to 0 . 55 mg / ml or 10 m M ) well above the estimated cellular con - centrations ( 50 nM ) revealed that it behaved as a single species with a molecular mass of 56 , 826 6 1 , 085 D , which is within 5 % of the molecular mass predicted from the Figure 3 . The NH 2 - terminal do - main of N - WASP does not inhibit binding of G - actin to the VCA seg - ment . GST pull - down assays were used to measure the binding of actin ( 0 . 05 m M ) to GST - CA , GST - N - WASP , GST - VCA ( 0 . 5 m M each ) , or to GST - VCA ( 0 . 5 m M ) in the presence of HT - WG or HT - WGP ( 2 . 5 m M each ) . The amount of actin bound was compared using an a - actin immunoblot , loading 100 % of the input and 40 % of the pulled down material . The amounts of GST - N - WASP , GST - CA , GST - VCA , HT - WG , and HT - WGP pulled down were compared by immuno - blotting with a - GST or a - pentaHis . Figure 4 . The NH 2 - terminal domain of N - WASP inhibits Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin nucleation activity of the VCA segment in a Cdc42 , and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - regulated manner . ( A ) The pyrene actin as - say was used to monitor the polymerization of 1 . 3 m M G - actin ( 1 m M unlabeled actin 1 0 . 3 m M pyrene labeled actin ) in the pres - ence of Arp2 / 3 ( 30 nM ) , GST - VCA ( 10 nM ) , and the indicated concentrations of HT - WG . ( B ) The ability of GST - VCA ( 10 nM or 50 nM ) to activate Arp2 / 3 complex ( 30 nM ) was measured in the presence of increasing concentrations of HT - WG . The maxi - mum polymerization rate , calculated from the linear phase of po - lymerization curves of the type shown in A , is taken as a measure of Arp2 / 3 activation . ( C ) Cdc42 - GTP g S can stimulate actin poly - merization ( 1 . 3 m M actin , 30 nM Arp2 / 3 ) in the presence of GST - VCA ( 5 nM ) and HT - WG ( 200 nM ) more effectively than Cdc42 - GDP . ( D ) The ability of either Cdc42 - GTP g S ( 200 nM ) , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - containing vesicles ( 10 m M ) , or both together to stimu - late actin polymerization ( 1 . 3 m M actin , 30 nM Arp2 / 3 complex ) in the presence of GST - VCA ( 5 nM ) and HT - WG ( 200 nM ) . Rohatgi et al . Mechanism of N - WASP Activation 1305 amino acid composition ( 54 , 324 D ) ( Fig . 5 B ; Suzuki et al . , 1998 ) . To obtain an independent measure of the molecular mass , we determined the diffusion coefficient ( D 20 , w ) of N - WASP by gel filtration chromatography and the sedi - mentation coefficient ( s 20 , w ) by boundary sedimenta - tion velocity ultracentrifugation ( Fig . 5 C ) . The diffusion ( D 20 , w 5 4 . 87 3 10 2 7 cm 2 / s ) and the sedimentation coeffi - cients ( s 20 , w 5 3 . 16S at 0 . 29 mg / ml or 5 . 4 m M ) yield a mo - lecular mass estimate of 55 , 147 D , which is within 2 % of the predicted value . The WH1 Domain Is Not Required for the Ability of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 to Activate N - WASP While Cdc42 interacts with N - WASP through the G - pro - tein binding domain , the sequence elements in N - WASP that confer sensitivity to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 have not been precisely mapped ( Miki et al . , 1998a ) . We have speculated that PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 activates N - WASP through its WH1 domain based on a report describing a binding interaction between PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and a partial NH 2 - terminal fragment of the WH1 domain ( residues 1 – 127 ; Miki et al . , 1996 ) . We produced an N - WASP molecule lacking the WH1 domain as a GST fusion protein ( GST - ( D WH1 ) N - WASP ; Fig . 6 A ) . The ac - tivation of this molecule by Cdc42 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 was com - pared with that of a GST fusion of wild - type N - WASP ( GST - N - WASP ) . The GST tag does not change the behav - ior of wild - type N - WASP . As previously reported for un - tagged N - WASP , GST - N - WASP is partially activated by Cdc42 and fully activated in a synergistic fashion by Cdc42 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( see Fig . 8 B ) . In the absence of Cdc42 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , the GST - ( D WH1 ) N - WASP had a modestly higher basal Arp2 / 3 stimulation activity compared with the wild - type protein ( Fig . 6 B ) . However , like the wild - type protein , the GST - ( D WH1 ) N - WASP protein could be further activated by Cdc42 and maximally activated by a combination of Cdc42 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( Fig . 6 B ) . While the WH1 domain may play an accessory role in stabilizing the autoinhibited conformation of N - WASP , a deletion of this domain clearly does not fully activate the molecule and , more importantly , does not abrogate its ability to respond to Cdc42 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . The Basic Region ( BR ) Located Near the Cdc42 Binding Site Is Required for the Ability of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 to Activate N - WASP To find the sequence elements in N - WASP that mediate the effects of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , we focused our attention on the GBR ( residues 151 – 277 ) in the NH 2 terminus of N - WASP . There is a conserved BR ( residues 186 – 196 ) in the GBR that is located just upstream of the consensus CRIB motif in N - WASP ( Fig . 7 A ) . This BR is a good candidate for the site that binds to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 because many motifs in pro - teins that interact with acidic phospholipids are basic in character , and the proximity of this BR to the Cdc42 - bind - ing CRIB motif may explain the synergistic effects of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and Cdc42 on N - WASP . We used an established vesicle pull - down assay to deter - mine whether the isolated GBR could bind to synthetic Figure 5 . Hydrodynamic characterization of N - WASP . ( A ) A purified preparation of untagged rat N - WASP used for analytical ultracentrifugation and gel filtration chromatography is shown on a 10 % SDS – polyacrylamide gel . ( B ) A radial absorbance plot showing the equilibrium distribution of N - WASP ( 0 . 55 mg / ml , 10 m M ) after sedimentation in an analytical ultracentrifuge . The solid line indicates the best fit to the data , assuming a single com - ponent model , and the top panel shows residuals of the fit . ( C ) Elution profile from gel filtration chromatography of N - WASP on an analytical grade Superdex 200 column . The volumes at which various standard proteins elute are indicated . Figure 6 . The WH1 domain is not required for the ability of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 to activate N - WASP . ( A ) A 10 % SDS – polyacrylamide gel showing purified protein preparations of GST - tagged wild - type N - WASP ( GST - N - WASP ) or a GST - tagged truncation mu - tant of N - WASP lacking the WH1 domain ( GST - ( D WH1 ) N - WASP ) . ( B ) Actin polymerization ( 1 . 3 m M actin , 30 nM Arp2 / 3 complex ) in the presence of the indicated combinations of GST - N - WASP ( 50 nM ) , GST - ( D WH1 ) N - WASP ( 50 nM ) , Cdc42 - GTP g S ( 100 nM ) , or PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - containing vesicles ( 1 m M ) . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 150 , 2000 1306 liposomes containing PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( Rameh et al . , 1997 ) . A GST - GBR fusion protein was immobilized on gluta - thione - Sepharose beads and used to pull down vesicles labeled with trace amounts of [ 3 H ] phosphatidylcholine . Compared with the GST control , GST - GBR bound to ves - icles containing 30 : 70 % PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 / PC but not to vesicles containing 30 : 70 % PI / PC ( Fig . 7 B ) . This binding of GST - GBR to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - containing vesicles could be disrupted by mutations in the basic region . An NH 2 - terminal trunca - tion of GBR ( residues 201 – 276 , GBR2 ) , which deletes this basic region , eliminated binding to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 – containing vesicles ( Fig . 7 B ) . Moreover , either an in - frame internal deletion of the basic stretch within GBR ( D residues 186 – 200 , GBR3 ) or a neutralization of positive charge ( by the substitution of four of the lysine residues within this region with glutamic acid residues , GBR4 ) also eliminated binding ( Fig . 7 B ) . Since the vesicle binding data suggested that the BR within the GBR of N - WASP could mediate its interaction with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , we proceeded to make a full - length GST - N - WASP fusion protein containing an in - frame deletion of this BR ( D residues 186 – 195 , GST - ( D B ) N - WASP ; Fig . 8 A ) . It is important to note that this deletion does not re - move the basic residues ( e . g . , K200 ) thought to be impor - tant for the interaction of N - WASP with Cdc42 ( Abdul - Manan et al . , 1999 ) . We have verified that GST - ( D B ) N - WASP and wild - type GST - N - WASP bind to Cdc42 with similar affinities ( data not shown ) . The GST - ( D B ) N - WASP protein was compared with the wild - type GST - N - WASP protein in its ability to activate Arp2 / 3 - stimulated actin polymerization in response to Cdc42 or Cdc42 plus PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 vesicles ( Fig . 8 B ) . GST - ( D B ) N - WASP modestly activated Arp2 / 3 on its own , and this basal activity could be stimulated by Cdc42 . However , unlike the wild - type molecule , the activity of GST - ( D B ) N - WASP was com - pletely insensitive to the further addition of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . The BR seems to contribute to the stability of the autoinhib - ited conformation . When activated by saturating levels of Cdc42 alone , GST - ( D B ) N - WASP displayed twofold higher activity compared with its wild - type counterpart . The Requirement for N - WASP in PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - stimulated Actin Polymerization in Xenopus Egg Extracts The isolation of a PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - insensitive N - WASP molecule allowed us to dissect the role of N - WASP and of the N - WASP – PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 interaction in PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - stimulated ac - tin polymerization in Xenopus egg extracts . Synthetic lipo - somes containing PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 stimulate actin polymerization in lipid - free HSS made from Xenopus egg extracts through a pathway that includes Cdc42 and Arp2 / 3 complex ( Ma et al . , 1998a ) . Since N - WASP is required for Cdc42 - stimu - lated actin polymerization in Xenopus HSS , we tested whether it was also required for PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - stimulated actin assembly ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . Using a polyclonal anti - body described previously ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) , we im - munodepleted . 95 % of the N - WASP from the HSS ( Fig . 9 A ) . The depletion of N - WASP eliminated the ability of the HSS to support Cdc42 - stimulated actin polymerization . The activity could be rescued by adding back purified , recombinant N - WASP protein ( Fig . 9 B ) . Both untagged N - WASP and GST - tagged N - WASP could rescue the ac - tivity when added back to extracts depleted of endogenous N - WASP ( Fig . 9 , B and C ) . To test the requirements for the WH1 domain and the BR of N - WASP in mediating PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - stimulated actin polymerization in the context of a more physiological extract system , we replaced endogenous N - WASP in Xe - nopus HSS with the GST - ( D WH1 ) N - WASP and GST - Figure 7 . The BR in the NH 2 terminus of N - WASP specifically binds to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . ( A ) Diagram showing various mutants of the GBR of bovine N - WASP , which includes the BR and the Cdc42 / Rac interactive binding ( CRIB ) motif . In GBR4 , the four Xs de - note the substitution of four lysine residues ( numbers 186 , 189 , 192 , and 195 ) with glutamic acid residues . ( B ) Binding of the GST - GBR mutants shown in A to [ 3 H ] phosphatidylcholine - labeled vesicles of the indicated compositions . A GST fusion of the b spectrin pleckstrin homology domain ( GST - SpecPH ) was used as a positive control in the assay . Figure 8 . The BR in the NH 2 terminus is required for the ability of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 to activate N - WASP . ( A ) A 10 % SDS – polyacryla - mide gel showing purified protein preparations of wild - type GST - N - WASP or a GST - tagged mutant of N - WASP containing an internal deletion of the BR ( GST - ( D B ) N - WASP ) . ( B ) The maximum rate of polymerization was used to quantitate Arp2 / 3 activity ( 1 . 3 m M actin , 30 nM Arp2 / 3 complex ) in the presence of two different concentrations of GST - N - WASP or GST - ( D B ) N - WASP and the indicated combinations of Cdc42 - GTP g S ( 450 nM ) and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - containing vesicles . While the data shown in B is at 1 m M lipid , GST - ( D B ) N - WASP was PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - insensitive at higher lipid concentrations as well ( up to 5 m M ) . Rohatgi et al . Mechanism of N - WASP Activation 1307 ( D B ) N - WASP mutants described above . The mutant pro - teins , when added back to extracts depleted of endoge - nous N - WASP , did not stimulate spontaneous , signal - independent actin polymerization , confirming that they are substantially autoinhibited ( Fig . 9 , C and D ) . Based on both the initial rate of polymerization and the maximum amount of actin polymerized , the GST - ( D WH1 ) N - WASP was just as effective as wild - type GST - N - WASP in re - storing PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - stimulated actin assembly ( Fig . 9 C ) . In - terestingly , the actin polymerized in the GST - ( D WH1 ) N - WASP – containing extract seemed to be less stable and partially depolymerized at later time points . The GST - ( D B ) N - WASP , which is PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - insensitive in the puri - fied system , was also capable of restoring PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - stimu - lated actin assembly to HSS depleted of endogenous N - WASP ( Fig . 9 D ) . However , compared with GST - N - WASP – containing extracts , the GST - ( D B ) N - WASP – containing extracts polymerized less total actin and did so with slower kinetics ( characterized by a longer lag phase and a reduced initial rate of polymerization ) . Discussion Mechanism of N - WASP Inhibition and Activation The physical interaction between the NH 2 - and COOH termini of WASp family proteins has been used as the ba - sis to propose a model in which this interaction locks the molecule in an autoinhibited state . We now show that an NH 2 - terminal fragment of N - WASP , including the WH1 domain and the G - protein binding region , functions as a regulatory domain and inhibits , even in trans , actin nucle - ation by the COOH - terminal VCA segment by occluding Arp2 / 3 binding site . Activation of N - WASP by Cdc42 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 leads to two changes : ( 1 ) the affinity between the WG and VCA domains is reduced ; and ( 2 ) the Arp2 / 3 binding site on VCA is exposed . The proline - rich segment of N - WASP appears to be dispensable both for the ability of the NH 2 terminus to inhibit the activity of the VCA seg - ment and for the ability of Cdc42 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 to relieve this inhibition . These results can be accommodated into either of two models for N - WASP activation that have been proposed in the literature ( Fig . 10 ) . In the first model ( Model 1 ) , the autoinhibitory interaction occurs in cis between the NH 2 - and COOH termini of the same molecule ( Miki et al . , 1998a ) . In the second model ( Model 2 ) , N - WASP is a homodimer ( or homomultimer ) and the autoinhibitory WG – VCA interaction occurs in trans between two differ - ent molecules ( Carlier et al . , 2000 ) . Recent structural stud - ies on the p21 activated kinase , which like N - WASP switches between autoinhibited and Cdc42 - bound confor - mations , demonstrated that the GBD region can serve as a dimer interface ( Lei et al . , 2000 ) . Based on our finding that full - length , autoinhibited N - WASP is a monomer by both equilibrium and velocity ultracentrifugation at concentra - tions ( . 5 m M ) well above cellular concentrations , we fa - vor Model 1 . In addition , GST - tagged N - WASP , which is forced into a dimeric form because of the GST moiety , be - haves in a manner indistinguishable from the untagged protein in actin polymerization assays performed in the purified system or in extracts . Model 2 was proposed , in part , on the finding that a hexahistidine - tagged human N - WASP protein has a tendency to self - associate at con - centrations above z 100 nM based on cross - linking data Figure 9 . N - WASP is required for PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - stimulated actin po - lymerization in Xenopus HSS . ( A ) Affinity - purified a - N - WASP antibody or antibody buffer ( mock ) was used to immunodeplete N - WASP from Xenopus HSS , and the material in the superna - tant was analyzed for the presence of N - WASP by immunoblot - ting using the same a - N - WASP antibody . ( B ) Comparison of ac - tin assembly stimulated by 100 m M PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - containing vesicles in mock - depleted HSS , a - N - WASP – depleted HSS , and in de - pleted HSS reconstituted with 50 nM recombinant N - WASP . The add back of recombinant N - WASP to a - N - WASP – depleted ex - tracts and the addition of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - containing vesicles was per - formed at the time points indicated by the arrows . ( C and D ) The abilities of GST - N - WASP , GST - ( D WH1 ) N - WASP , or GST - ( D B ) N - WASP ( 100 nM each ) to restore PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - stimulated ac - tin polymerization to HSS depleted of endogenous N - WASP . Figure 10 . Two models for N - WASP activation . A black circle has been placed between sequence elements or proteins that have been shown to physically interact . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 150 , 2000 1308 and on a reported s 20 , w of 5 . 45S ( at 4 m M ; Carlier et al . , 2000 ) . This is significantly higher than the s 20 , w value of 3 . 16S ( at 5 m M ) measured by us for untagged rat N - WASP . Since the human and rat proteins are z 95 % identical , it is unlikely that this discrepancy in the s 20 , w value represents a species - specific difference . More likely , the hexahistidine tag or associated leader sequences might contribute to the tendency for the human protein to self - associate . Sequence Elements that Mediate the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 Effect Contrary to our previous hypothesis , we have found that the WH1 domain does not mediate the effects of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 on N - WASP . Instead , a BR located just upstream of the CRIB domain is required for the effects of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 be - cause a deletion of this segment generates an N - WASP molecule that is PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - insensitive in the purified assay system . This mutant molecule is not simply misfolded into an inactive state because it can activate Arp2 / 3 complex in a Cdc42 - stimulated manner , and it can restore actin poly - merization activity to Xenopus extracts depleted of endog - enous N - WASP . The BR has been postulated to bind to the acidic region in the VCA domain through an electro - static interaction ( Miki et al . , 1998a ) . However , an internal deletion of the BR does not significantly reduce the affin - ity of the NH 2 - terminal WG region for GST - VCA ( data not shown ) . Thus , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 might work , not simply by in - terfering with an electrostatic BR – VCA interaction , but rather by destabilizing the fold adopted by the adjacent GBD region in the autoinhibited state . Alternatively , re - cruitment of N - WASP to the surface of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 vesicles ( via BR interactions ) might indirectly destabilize the auto - inhibited state by promoting multimerization . A BR is found in the NH 2 termini of all members of the WASp family , even in the Scar / WAVE proteins that lack a G - protein binding domain ( Mullins , 2000 ) . This sequence element may be an important regulatory site for the WASp family in general , mediating activation of these molecules by acidic phospholipids or other interacting proteins . It will be interesting to test whether IcsA and Grb2 can bind and activate the mutant N - WASP protein lacking the BR . Recently , an NMR structure of the G - protein binding domain of human WASp ( beginning at the CRIB motif but not including the basic region ) artificially fused via a short linker to a fragment from the CA region has been solved ( Kim et al . , 2000 ) . While this certainly represents the core of the autoinhibited fold of WASp ( and likely N - WASP ) , our results suggest that the BR , which is just NH 2 - terminal to the sequences included in WASp struc - ture , can also function to mediate activation and , thus , probably influence the fold adopted by the GBD . The ability of the Grb2 Src homology domain 3 to activate N - WASP represents another example of a regulatory in - teraction that likely occurs outside this core fold defined by the NMR structure ( Carlier et al . , 2000 ) . In this context , it will be important to define the sequence elements that mediate the activation of N - WASP by the Shigella protein IcsA . This property of sequence elements broadly distrib - uted throughout N - WASP molecule to influence the sta - bility of the autoinhibited fold is likely to be critical to its capacity to integrate and respond to a large set of signal in - puts . Dissecting a PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 Pathway in Xenopus Extracts Phosphoinositides have been implicated as important reg - ulators of actin assembly at a variety of different steps , including filament uncapping , severing , actin monomer binding as well as further upstream signaling roles . Be - cause of the diverse effects of phosphoinositides on signal - ing proteins and actin binding proteins , it is often difficult to clearly trace lipid signaling pathways leading to actin as - sembly . We have previously shown that vesicles containing PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 can induce actin polymerization in Xenopus ex - tracts in a Cdc42 - dependent manner ( Ma et al . , 1998a ) . In turn , Cdc42 - induced actin polymerization in extracts re - quires both N - WASP and Arp2 / 3 complex ( Ma et al . , 1998b ; Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . Our demonstration that N - WASP is required for PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - stimulated actin assem - bly highlights the existence of a coherent signaling path - way in Xenopus extracts leading from PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 to de novo actin nucleation through Cdc42 , N - WASP , and Arp2 / 3 complex . There is also evidence that this kind of pathway exists in somatic cells . Recently , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 has been shown to mediate , through the WASp - Arp2 / 3 pathway , actin polymerization induced by sphingolipid cholesterol – rich membrane microdomains ( Rozelle et al . , 2000 ) . PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 can play two potential roles in this signaling pathway . First , it might indirectly stimulate the exchange of GTP for GDP on Cdc42 through the activation of an unidentified guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( Ma et al . , 1998a ) . Work in the purified system suggests that PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 also plays a role in directly activating N - WASP . Our identification of an N - WASP mutant ( containing a deletion of the BR ) that is PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - insensitive but Cdc42 - sensitive in the purified system allowed us to dissect the relative contributions of these two potential functions of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 in the Xenopus system . Since the ( D B ) N - WASP mutant is able to rescue PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - stimulated actin poly - merization extracts depleted of endogenous N - WASP , we can conclude that the critical function of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is to activate Cdc42 . This is consistent with the previous obser - vation that Cdc42 alone can stimulate actin assembly in lipid - free Xenopus HSS ( Ma et al . , 1998a ) . Since Cdc42 is a relatively weak activator of N - WASP in the purified sys - tem , it is possible that another coactivator can substitute for PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 in extracts . In fact , biochemical fractionation of Xenopus and bovine brain extracts suggests that Cdc42 - induced actin assembly requires a third factor in addition to N - WASP and Arp2 / 3 complex ( Ma , L . , R . Ro - hatgi , and M . W . Kirschner . 1999 . American Society of Cell Biologist Annual Meeting . 2220 ( Abstr . ) ) . Identification of this unknown factor and elucidation of the pathway by which PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 activates Cdc42 are important future di - rections . For the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - Cdc42 - N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 path - way , the ability to complement experiments in complex extract or cellular systems with experiments in reconsti - tuted , completely purified systems is a tremendous advan - tage that should continue to yield important insights into signal regulated actin assembly . We thank Steve Harrison , Bruce Mayer , Maria - Carla Parrini , and Ming Lei for first raising the question of N - WASP dimerization and for helpful discussions ; Ming Lei and Brian Baker for help with analytical ultracen - trifugation ; Lucia Rameh , Brian Duckworth and Lew Cantley for help with lipid binding assays ; Nagi Ayad and Olaf Stemmann for carefully Rohatgi et al . Mechanism of N - WASP Activation 1309 reading the manuscript ; Teresita Bernal and Louise Evans for help with baculovirus construction ; Ethan Lee and Cathy Pfleger for expression vec - tors ; and Tadaomi Takenawa , Hiroaki Miki , and Matt Welch for provid - ing reagents . R . Rohatgi is a member of the Medical Scientist Training Program at Harvard Medical School . This work was supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health to M . W . Kirschner ( GM26875 ) . Submitted : 14 June 2000 Revised : 21 July 2000 Accepted : 24 July 2000 References Abdul - Manan , N . , B . Aghazadeh , G . A . Liu , A . Majumdar , O . Ouerfelli , K . A . Siminovitch , and M . K . Rosen . 1999 . Structure of Cdc42 in complex with the GTPase - binding domain of the ‘Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome’ protein . Nature . 399 : 379 – 383 . Aspenstrom , P . , U . Lindberg , and A . Hall . 1996 . Two GTPases , Cdc42 and Rac , bind directly to a protein implicated in the immunodeficiency disorder Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome . Curr . Biol . 6 : 70 – 75 . Banin , S . , O . Truong , D . R . Katz , M . D . Waterfield , P . M . Brickell , and I . Gout . 1996 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) is a binding partner for c - Src family protein - tyrosine kinases . Curr . Biol . 6 : 981 – 988 . Bear , J . E . , J . F . Rawls , and C . L . Saxe III . 1998 . SCAR , a WASP - related protein , isolated as a suppressor of receptor defects in late Dictyostelium develop - ment . J . Cell Biol . 142 : 1325 – 1335 . Bi , E . , and S . H . Zigmond . 1999 . Actin polymerization : where the WASP stings . Curr . Biol . 9 : R160 – R163 . Carlier , M . F . , P . Nioche , I . Broutin - L’Hermite , R . Boujemaa , C . Le Clainche , C . Egile , C . Garbay , A . Ducruix , P . J . Sansonetti , and D . Pantaloni . 2000 . GRB2 links signalling to actin assembly by enhancing interaction of neural Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( N - Wasp ) with actin - related - protein ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 21969 – 21974 . Cooper , J . A . , S . B . Walker , and T . D . Pollard . 1983 . Pyrene actin : documentation of the validity of a sensitive assay for actin polymerization . J . Musc . Res . Cell Motil . 4 : 253 – 262 . Derry , J . M . , H . D . Ochs , and U . Francke . 1994 . Isolation of a novel gene mu - tated in Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Cell . 79 : 922 . Egile , C . , T . P . Loisel , V . Laurent , R . Li , D . Pantaloni , P . J . Sansonetti , and M . F . Carlier . 1999 . Activation of the CDC42 effector N - WASP by the Shigella flexneri IcsA protein promotes actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex and bac - terial actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 146 : 1319 – 1332 . Hall , A . 1998 . Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science . 279 : 509 – 514 . Kim , A . S . , L . T . Kakalis , N . Abdul - Manan , G . A . Liu , and M . K . Rosen . 2000 . Autoinhibition and activation mechanisms of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Nature . 404 : 151 – 158 . Kolluri , R . , K . F . Tolias , C . L . Carpenter , F . S . Rosen , and T . Kirchhausen . 1996 . Direct interaction of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein with the GTP - ase Cdc42 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 93 : 5615 – 5618 . Lei , M . , W . Lu , W . Meng , M . C . Parrini , M . J . Eck , B . J . Mayer , and S . C . Harri - son . 2000 . Structure of PAK1 in an autoinhibited conformation reveals a multi - stage activation switch . Cell . 102 : 387 – 397 . Li , R . 1997 . Bee1 , a yeast protein with homology to Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein , is critical for the assembly of cortical actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 649 – 658 . Ma , L . , L . C . Cantley , P . A . Janmey , and M . W . Kirschner . 1998a . Corequirement of specific phosphoinositides and small GTP - binding protein Cdc42 in induc - ing actin assembly in Xenopus egg extracts . J . Cell Biol . 140 : 1125 – 1136 . Ma , L . , R . Rohatgi , and M . W . Kirschner . 1998b . The Arp2 / 3 complex mediates actin polymerization induced by the small GTP - binding protein Cdc42 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 95 : 15362 – 15367 . Machesky , L . M . , and R . H . Insall . 1999 . Signaling to actin dynamics . J . Cell Biol . 146 : 267 – 272 . Machesky , L . M . , R . D . Mullins , H . N . Higgs , D . A . Kaiser , L . Blanchoin , R . C . May , M . E . Hall , and T . D . Pollard . 1999 . Scar , a WASp - related protein , acti - vates nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 96 : 3739 – 3744 . Miki , H . , and T . Takenawa . 1998 . Direct binding of the verprolin - homology do - main in N - WASP to actin is essential for cytoskeletal reorganization . Bio - chem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 243 : 73 – 78 . Miki , H . , K . Miura , and T . Takenawa . 1996 . N - WASP , a novel actin - depolymer - izing protein , regulates the cortical cytoskeletal rearrangement in a PIP 2 - dependent manner downstream of tyrosine kinases . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 15 : 5326 – 5335 . Miki , H . , T . Sasaki , Y . Takai , and T . Takenawa . 1998a . Induction of filopodium formation by a WASP - related actin - depolymerizing protein N - WASP . Na - ture . 391 : 93 – 96 . Miki , H . , S . Suetsugu , and T . Takenawa . 1998b . WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein involved in actin reorganization induced by Rac . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 17 : 6932 – 6941 . Mullins , R . D . 2000 . How WASP - family proteins and the Arp2 / 3 complex con - vert intracellular signals into cytoskeletal structures . Curr . Opin . Cell . Biol . 12 : 91 – 96 . Mullins , R . D . , J . A . Heuser , and T . D . Pollard . 1998 . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high affinity pointed end capping , and for - mation of branching networks of filaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 95 : 6181 – 6186 . Rameh , L . E . , A . K . Arvidsson , K . Carraway , A . D . Couvillon , G . Rathbun , A . Crompton , B . VanRenterghem , M . P . Czech , K . S . Ravichandran , S . J . Bura - koff , et al . 1997 . A comparative analysis of the phosphoinositide binding specificity of pleckstrin homology domains . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 22059 – 22066 . Ramesh , N . , I . M . Anton , J . H . Hartwig , and R . S . Geha . 1997 . WIP , a protein as - sociated with Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein , induces actin polymeriza - tion and redistribution in lymphoid cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 : 14671 – 14676 . Rivero - Lezcano , O . M . , A . Marcilla , J . H . Sameshima , and K . C . Robbins . 1995 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein physically associates with Nck through Src homology 3 domains . Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 : 5725 – 5731 . Rohatgi , R . , L . Ma , H . Miki , M . Lopez , T . Kirchhausen , T . Takenawa , and M . W . Kirschner . 1999 . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell . 97 : 221 – 231 . Rozelle , A . L . , L . M . Machesky , M . Yamamoto , M . H . Driessens , R . H . Insall , M . G . Roth , K . Luby - Phelps , G . Marriott , A . Hall , and H . L . Yin . 2000 . Phos - phatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate induces actin - based movement of raft - enriched vesicles through WASP - Arp2 / 3 . Curr . Biol . 10 : 311 – 320 . She , H . Y . , S . Rockow , J . Tang , R . Nishimura , E . Y . Skolnik , M . Chen , B . Mar - golis , and W . Li . 1997 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is associated with the adapter protein Grb2 and the epidermal growth factor receptor in living cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . 8 : 1709 – 1721 . Suetsugu , S . , H . Miki , and T . Takenawa . 1999 . Identification of two human WAVE / SCAR homologues as general actin regulatory molecules which as - sociate with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 260 : 296 – 302 . Suzuki , T . , H . Miki , T . Takenawa , and C . Sasakawa . 1998 . Neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is implicated in the actin - based motility of Shigella flex - neri . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 17 : 2767 – 2776 . Svitkina , T . M . , and G . G . Borisy . 1999 . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymeriz - ing factor / cofilin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin filament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 : 1009 – 1026 . Symons , M . , J . M . Derry , B . Karlak , S . Jiang , V . Lemahieu , F . Mccormick , U . Francke , and A . Abo . 1996 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , a novel ef - fector for the GTPase CDC42Hs , is implicated in actin polymerization . Cell . 84 : 723 – 734 . Winter , D . , T . Lechler , and R . Li . 1999 . Activation of the yeast Arp2 / 3 complex by Bee1p , a WASP - family protein . Curr . Biol . 9 : 501 – 504 . Yarar , D . , W . To , A . Abo , and M . D . Welch . 1999 . The Wiskott - Aldrich syn - drome protein directs actin - based motility by stimulating actin nucleation with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 9 : 555 – 558 .