© 2002 Nature Publishing Group Almost all CONNECTIVE TISSUES seem to be under some sort of mechanical tension , even at rest . With the exception of individuals of advancing years and those who have inherited defects , our soft connective tissues do not sag , even around relaxed musculature or dur - ing sleep . Indeed , the resting tension that is built into the anatomy of these tissues is most obvious from the fact that important blood vessels and nerves , when dissected free from an arm or a leg , have a resting length that is 25 – 30 % less than their in situ length . Establishment of this situation during childhood growth could be explained if soft - tissue growth is acti - vated by a ‘threshold external tension’ . This apparently basic analysis clearly raises many key questions ; in par - ticular , what is the cell - molecular basis of such ten - sional homeostasis in tissues , how is it maintained during adult life and , crucially , how is it re - established in adults after tissue repair ? Another example of ten - sion development in connective tissue is represented by wound contraction , a process that occurs during the healing of an open wound . Finally , pathologies that involve the mechano - regulation of connective tis - sue include burn - scar contracture , breast - implant fail - ure , abdominal adhesion strictures and Dupuytren’s disease ( BOX 1 ) — a lesion of the palmar fascia that results in the immobilization of one or more fingers . Yet tissue tension is an essential regulator of tissue function , such as in lung alveoli , kidney capsule , GRANULATION TISSUE contraction and UTERINE INVOLUTION . Although most tissues exist under a mechanical tension , the same is not necessarily true of their resi - dent cells . They are protected from the relatively mas - sive external loads by the mechanical properties of the surrounding matrix . In engineering terms , such cells are ‘stress - shielded’by the matrix that they deposit and remodel 1 , 2 . Stress - shielding is well known in engineer - ing where one element ( A ) of a heterogeneous struc - ture is mechanically loaded in preference to others ( B and C ) ; for example , as a result of its shape , orienta - tion or compliance . Consequently , components B and C are shielded from applied stresses by element A . As examples , submariners are stress - shielded by the sub - marine hull ( compressive loading ) , or windows and walls function to shield against the forces of wind . Similarly , resident cells of a mature connective tissue are under minimal loading ( where only the matrix is under significant load ) in a way that is not necessarily true for growing or damaged tissues . The close inter - dependence of matrix remodelling and mechanical stress - shielding is well recognized in bone biology , but its importance for soft tissues is only recently becom - ing appreciated 3 , 4 . MYOFIBROBLASTS AND MECHANO - REGULATION OF CONNECTIVE TISSUE REMODELLING James J . Tomasek * , Giulio Gabbiani ‡ , Boris Hinz ‡ , Christine Chaponnier ‡ and Robert A . Brown § During the past 20 years , it has become generally accepted that the modulation of fibroblastic cells towards the myofibroblastic phenotype , with acquisition of specialized contractile features , is essential for connective - tissue remodelling during normal and pathological wound healing . Yet the myofibroblast still remains one of the most enigmatic of cells , not least owing to its transient appearance in association with connective - tissue injury and to the difficulties in establishing its role in the production of tissue contracture . It is clear that our understanding of the myofibroblast — its origins , functions and molecular regulation — will have a profound influence on the future effectiveness not only of tissue engineering but also of regenerative medicine generally . CONNECTIVE TISSUES Tissues that form the architectural framework ofthe vertebrate body . In these tissues , the extracellular matrix is plentiful , and cells are sparsely distributed within it . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 3 | MAY 2002 | 349 * Department ofCell Biology , University ofOklahoma Health Sciences Center , P . O . Box 26901 , Oklahoma City , OK 73190 , USA . ‡ Department ofPathology , Centre Médical Universitaire , University of Geneva , 1 rue Michel - Servet , 1211 Geneva 4 , Switzerland . § Tissue Repair & Engineering Centre , University College London , Institute ofOrthopaedics , Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital , Stanmore , Middlesex HA7 4LP UK . Correspondence to J . J . T . e - mail : James - Tomasek @ ouhsc . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm809 R E V I E W S © 2002 Nature Publishing Group GRANULATION TISSUE Tissue that is formed as part of the initial response to a wound during the healing and repair process , so - called because its surface has a granular appearance due to sprouting of neo - capillaries . It also contains abundant fibroblasts and variable numbers of inflammatory cells . UTERINE INVOLUTION The degenerative and regenerative process that the tissues that constitute the uterus and oviducts undergo on their return to a non - pregnant state . FIBROSIS The production offibrous connective tissue as a consequence ofchronic inflammation or healing . Its function is to replace lost parenchymal tissue . 350 | MAY 2002 | VOLUME 3 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S force generation 10 . Modified fibroblasts with smooth - muscle ( SM ) - like features ( myofibroblasts ) were first observed in granulation tissue of healing wounds , which led to the suggestion that these cells have a role in the production of the contractile force that is involved in this process 11 . The presence of myofibrob - lasts in most fibro - contractive diseases ( for example , Dupuytren’s disease ) and even in developing 12 and spe - cialized normal tissues ( for example , lung septa ) has extended this possibility to several situations ( TABLE 1 ) . It has subsequently been shown that most myofibrob - lasts express α - SM actin ( the actin isoform typically found in vascular SM cells ) 13 , 14 and that the expression of α - SM actin and collagen type I in these cells is coor - dinately regulated by transforming growth factor β 1 ( TGF - β 1 ) 15 . All these observations indicate that the myofibroblast has a role in the synthesis of ECM and in force generation , which results in ECM reorganiza - tion and wound contraction 5 . Morphologically , myofibroblasts are characterized by the presence of a contractile apparatus that contains bundles of actin microfilaments with associated con - tractile proteins such as non - muscle myosin , and which is analogous to STRESS FIBRES that have been described in cultured fibroblasts 5 , 16 , 17 ( FIG . 1 ) . These actin bundles terminate at the myofibroblast surface in the fibronexus — a specialized adhesion complex that uses transmembrane integrins to link intracellular actin with extracellular FIBRONECTIN FIBRILS 16 , 18 , 19 . Functionally , this provides a mechano - transduction system , so that the force that is generated by stress fibres can be transmitted to the surrounding ECM 16 . In addition , extracellular mechanical signals can be trans - duced into intracellular signals through this mechano - transduction system 16 , 20 , 21 . It should be emphasized that fibroblasts in connective tissues in vivo lack the contractile microfilamentous apparatus , or stress fibres , that are observed in myofibroblasts ; rather , actin microfilaments are organized predominantly into a cortical meshwork . Similarly , highly organized fibronexus adhesion complexes are lacking at the sur - faces of fibroblasts in connective tissues in vivo . So , in connective tissues in vivo , myofibroblasts are both morphologically and functionally different from fibroblasts . Another characteristic of myofibroblasts is that , similar to SM cells , they are connected directly to each other through GAP JUNCTIONS . Functional gap junctions have been identified morphologically between myofi - broblasts in dermal wounds 22 , as well as between myofibroblasts that are derived from CORNEAL fibrob - lasts 23 . This indicates that myofibroblasts might form multicellular contractile units during granulation tis - sue contraction . Gap junctions are composed of sev - eral hemichannels in the plasma membrane of one cell that are joined in mirror symmetry with the same number of hemichannels in the opposing cell mem - brane . Hemichannels contain distinct but functionally related proteins called CONNEXINS . Not much is known about myofibroblast gap junctions ; however , connexin 43 is expressed by myofibroblasts in breast - cancer During the past 20 years , it has become generally accepted that the myofibroblast — a specialized con - tractile fibroblast — has an important role in establish - ing tension during wound healing and pathological contracture 5 , 6 , although its formation and function remain to be explained . Part of this difficulty has been the limited account taken of the inescapable mechanical laws that are integral to the regulation of myofibroblasts by growth factors , matrix attachments and other cell signals . Recent studies using various model systems have begun to explain the interplay between EXTRACELLULAR - MATRIX ( ECM ) organization , cytomechanical stress and growth - factor signals that regulate the transition from fibroblast to differentiated myofibroblast 5 , 7 . The myofibroblast The notion that granulation tissue contraction depends on force that is generated in this tissue is very old 8 . The traditional view has been that the mecha - nism of contraction was mainly due to collagen short - ening 9 . However , several observations had indicated that granulation - tissue cells could be important for Box 1 | Normal and pathological wound healing Skin wound healing involves two main phenomena . First , re - epithelialization , which involves the replication and movement of epidermal cells to reconstitute tissue continuity ; and second , de novo formation and contraction of granulation tissue that is essentially composed of small vessels , fibroblasts , myofibroblasts and variable amounts of inflammatory cells ( for a review , see REF . 34 ) . When re - epithelialization is complete , an important decrease in the number of cellular elements , and in particular of myofibroblasts , takes place in granulation tissue , owing to apoptotic phenomena ; then granulation tissue evolves into a poorly cellularized scar 128 . In many instances — due to mechanisms not yet understood — scarring does not occur even despite epithelialization , and granulation tissue evolves into a hypertrophic scar . This contains many myofibroblasts and shows inappropriate production of extracellular matrix , a process called FIBROSIS , which results in the deformation of the surrounding PARENCHYMA or connective tissue 132 . It has been proposed that the onset of hypertrophic - scar formation coincides with a lack of apoptotic phenomena in the final phase of wound healing 132 . This general scheme of fibrosis formation applies to many organs after different types of injury ( for example , kidney , lung , liver and heart ) . Again , deformation and malfunction is the pathological issue . Table 1 | Fibroblastic cells of normal organs with myofibroblastic features Localization Reference Uterine submucosa 139 Reticular cells of lymph nodes and spleen 140 Intestinal pericryptal cells 141 Intestinal villous core 142 Testicular stroma 14 Theca externa of the ovary 143 Periodontal ligament 144 Adrenal - gland capsule 145 Hepatic perisinusoidal cells 146 Lung septa 147 Bone - marrow stroma 148 Capillary and venular pericytes 33 © 2002 Nature Publishing Group NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 3 | MAY 2002 | 351 R E V I E W S studies have questioned whether granulation tissue , and thereby myofibroblasts , are even necessary for wound closure in animals that have relatively immo - bile skin , such as pigs and humans 30 , 31 . The ability of some models of immobile skin to contract without granulation tissue might reflect traction and contrac - tion processes that can compensate for each other 30 . It now seems likely that both traction and contraction are important at different stages in wound healing 26 ( discussed below ) , and questions now should focus on the detailed mechanisms . Myofibroblasts , in addition to expressing the β - and γ - cytoplasmic actins that are found in fibroblasts , may express α - SM actin , which is similar to that expressed by SM cells 13 , 14 . This finding has led to the misconcep - tion that for a cell to be classified as a myofibroblast it must express α - SM actin . There are , however , several locations in vivo in which cells show the morphological characteristics of myofibroblasts , such as stress fibres , but do not express α - SM actin — for example , in the lung alveolar septa and the early phases of granulation - tissue formation 29 , 32 . Therefore , this shows that there are two types of myofibroblasts ( TABLE 2 ) : those that do not express α - SM actin , which we propose should be termed ‘proto - myofibroblasts’ ; and those that do express α - SM actin , for which we propose the term ‘dif - ferentiated myofibroblast’ ( FIG . 2 ) . The distinction between fibroblast and proto - myofibroblast is particu - larly clear in vivo , whereas , when cultured on a plastic substrate in the presence of foetal calf serum , practically all fibroblasts acquire proto - myofibroblastic features . The presence of proto - myofibroblasts in certain adult tissues shows that they can persist and function as an independent cell type ; however , proto - myofibroblasts can be induced to express α - SM actin and form differ - entiated myofibroblasts in response to specific factors , as occurs in certain adult tissues , granulation tissue and FIBROCONTRACTIVE DISEASES . The following two sections address what is known so far about the formation of proto - myofibroblasts and differentiated myofibroblasts . The formation of proto - myofibroblasts The signals that are responsible for the formation of proto - myofibroblasts in vivo are just beginning to be understood . One crucial signal for the formation of the contractile features of the proto - myofibroblast is stroma 24 and by myofibroblasts that are derived from corneal fibroblasts 23 . Although myofibroblasts are clearly present in granulation tissue during wound closure and in patho - logical contracture tissues , questions have arisen as to whether they are essential for collagen / granulation tis - sue contraction . It is clear that tractional forces that are generated by fibroblasts as they migrate on a compli - ant substratum can reorganize collagen matrices 25 , 26 . In fact , in free - floating collagen lattices the resulting reduction in lattice diameter is due entirely to fibrob - last tractional forces 27 , 28 . It has been proposed that trac - tional forces that are generated by fibroblasts migrat - ing into granulation tissue are sufficient to result in wound closure , which makes the involvement of a spe - cialized contractile cell unnecessary 28 . Although trac - tional forces that are generated by fibroblasts might be sufficient to initiate wound closure , the subsequent appearance of resistance in the surrounding tissue induces the DIFFERENTIATION of myofibroblasts 29 , and only then can contraction be considered to start . Other PARENCHYMA The essential or functional elements ofan organ as distinguished from its stroma or framework . EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX ( ECM ) . A complex , three - dimensional network ofvery large macromolecules that provides contextual information and an architectural scaffold for cellular adhesion and migration . STRESS FIBRES Intracellular axial bundles of filamentous - actin and actin - associated proteins . FIBRONECTIN FIBRILS Extracellular fibrils that are composed offibronectin , and are found primarily in tissues that undergo active morphogenesis , such as embryonic tissue and granulation tissue . GAP JUNCTION A junction between two cells that consists ofpores that allow passage ofmolecules ( up to 9 kDa ) . CORNEA The transparent , curved part of the front ofthe eyeball . It is made up ofmany layers ( in particular a thick stromal layer ) , and refracts incident light onto the lens . CONNEXIN The main protein component of a connexon , the structural subunit ofa gap junction . Six connexins make up one connexon . EPIRETINAL MEMBRANE A membrane that can sometimes form on the surface ofthe central portion ofthe retina when the vitreous gel that fills the central eye cavity shrinks away from the retina . DIFFERENTIATION The elaboration ofparticular characteristics that are expressed by an end - stage cell type or by a cell en route to becoming an end - stage cell . This term is not synonymous with commitment , but differentiation features are used to determine when a cell is committed . FIBROCONTRACTIVE DISEASES Connective tissue disorders , such as Dupuytren’s disease , that involve both tissue contracture and fibrosis . Figure 1 | Myofibroblasts in epiretinal membrane . Three - dimensional reconstruction by means of laser - scan confocal microscopy of a differentiated myofibroblast that is present in an EPIRETINAL MEMBRANE from a patient suffering from proliferative vitreous retinopathy . The membrane recovered at surgery has been stained in toto by means of immunofluorescence with an antibody against α - smooth muscle actin . The colours change as a function of the depth of the section . Differentiated myofibroblasts show typical stress fibres . Scale bar , 10 µ m . Reprinted with permission from REF . 5 © 1999 Academic Press . 0 µ m 9 . 9 µ m 19 . 8 µ m Table 2 | Fibroblast – myofibroblast features in different situations Cell In vivo Closest in vitro model Fibroblast Normal connective tissue Low stiffness substrates ± TGF - β Free - floating collagen gels ± TGF - β Proto - myofibroblast Specialized normal connective tissue Medium stiffness substrates ( stress fibres that express ( for example , alveolar septum ) cytoplasmic actins ) Early granulation tissue ( for example , open wound ) Differentiated myofibroblast Specialized normal connective tissue ( for example , Medium stiffness substrates + TGF - β ( stress fibres that express bone marrow stroma , liver capsule ) α - smooth muscle actin ) Late contracting granulation tissue ( for example , High stiffness substrates ± TGF - β open wound ) Fibrocontractive diseases Attached collagen gels ± TGF - β TGF - β , transforming growth factor β . © 2002 Nature Publishing Group 352 | MAY 2002 | VOLUME 3 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S rich ECM 11 , 29 . With the initial closure of the wound , pre - sumably owing to tractional forces that are developed by migrating cells , the collagen fibres and fibroblasts become oriented parallel to the wound bed and along expected lines of stress 11 , 29 . These fibroblasts acquire the proto - myofibroblast phenotype with stress fibres , FOCAL ADHESIONS and extracellular fibronectin fibrils 29 . In addi - tion to increased levels of fibronectin production , fibrob - lasts also change the repertoire of fibronectin transcripts to resemble that found during early embryogenesis . In normal DERMIS , fibroblasts produce fibronectin messenger RNA , but these transcripts lack the two splice segments ED - A and ED - B 39 . However , during wound healing , these segments are included in the fibronectin mRNA , and lead to de novo expression of ED - A fibronectin in the granulation tissue , which is important to promote fur - ther myofibroblast differentiation 40 . Most of our understanding of proto - myofibroblast formation comes from in vitro studies . Fibroblasts that are isolated from various connective tissues or organs and placed into culture on plastic tissue - culture dishes rapidly acquire stress fibres , focal adhesions and fibronectin fibrils — that is , they acquire a proto - myofibroblast phenotype ( TABLE 2 ) . As the cell attempts mechanical tension . Fibroblasts populating the granu - lation tissue of a wound that has been mechanically stressed by splinting with a plastic frame form stress fibres — and , therefore , proto - myofibroblasts — ear - lier than normally healing wounds . Conversely , release of tension in wound granulation tissue and in the GRANULOMA POUCH leads to a gradual loss of stress fibres 29 . Similarly , in normal tissues , proto - myofi - broblasts are always present where there is the need to generate mechanical tension 5 . In addition to mechan - ical tension , platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) seems to be important in the formation of the proto - myofibroblast during embryonic development ( for a review , see REF . 33 ) and wound healing in the adult ( for a review , see REF . 34 ) . In particular , capillary PERICYTES and alveolar proto - myofibroblasts are lost in PDGF - null mice 35 , 36 . Interestingly , although PDGF seems to be important in the formation of the proto - myofi - broblast , it does not induce the expression of α - SM actin or the formation of the differentiated myofibrob - last either in vitro or in vivo 37 , 38 . During normal wound healing in adult animals , fibroblasts initially migrate into the wound area and , as they do so , lay down a collagen - and cellular fibronectin - GRANULOMA POUCH A fluid - filled pouch that is created by subcutaneous injection ofair and a necrotizing agent , such as croton oil , which later fills with fluid and becomes surrounded by granulation tissue . PERICYTES Support cells ofcapillaries ( referred to as smooth muscle cells in larger vessels ) . FOCAL ADHESIONS Cellular structures that link the extracellular matrix on the outside ofthe cell , through integrin receptors , to the actin cytoskeleton inside the cell . DERMIS The innermost layer ofthe vertebrate skin that lies beneath the epidermis and is responsible for the tensile strength ofskin . It comprises loose connective tissue that contains blood capillaries , smooth - muscle fibres , sweat glands and sebaceous glands with their ducts , hair follicles and sensory nerve endings . Figure 2 | The two - stage model of myofibroblast differentiation . In vivo , fibroblasts might contain actin in their cortex but they neither show stress fibres nor do they form adhesion complexes with the extracellular matrix . Under mechanical stress , fibroblasts will differentiate into proto - myofibroblasts , which form cytoplasmic actin - containing stress fibres that terminate in fibronexus adhesion complexes . Proto - myofibroblasts also express and organize cellular fibronectin — including the ED - A splice variant — at the cell surface . Functionally , these cells can generate contractile force . Transforming growth factor β 1 ( TGF - β 1 ) increases the expression of ED - A fibronectin . Both factors , in the presence of mechanical stress , promote the modulation of proto - myofibroblasts into differentiated myofibroblasts that are characterized by the de novo expression of α - smooth muscle actin in more extensively developed stress fibres and by large fibronexus adhesion complexes ( in vivo ) or supermature focal adhesions ( in vitro ) . Functionally , differentiated myofibroblasts generate greater contractile force than proto - myofibroblasts , which is reflected by a higher organization of extracellular fibronectin into fibrils . Mechanicaltension ? Nucleus TGF - β 1 ED - A fibronectin Mechanical tension Fibroblast Proto - myofibroblast Differentiated myofibroblast Focal adhesion site Cortical cytoplasmic actins Cytoplasmic actins α - Smooth muscle actin Fibronectin ED - A fibronectin © 2002 Nature Publishing Group NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 3 | MAY 2002 | 353 R E V I E W S proto - myofibroblasts , but again this is also linked to an altered cytomechanical environment . What happens to a fibroblast when it is placed into a three - dimensional ECM that provides an environment with very different mechanical properties to a non - deformable , planar substratum ? At present , three - dimen - sional hydrated collagen lattices provide the most potent model for examining in vitro the reciprocal mechanical interactions that occur between cells and the ECM , and how these can influence the formation and function of the myofibroblast 3 , 26 , 43 . In the earliest , and still the most widely used , version of this model , the cells are embedded within the collagen matrix , which floats freely in tissue - culture media 26 , 27 , 44 ( FIG . 3 ) . The diameter of these lattices is reduced over time ( hours to days ) by the small tractional forces that are generated by fibroblasts during attachment , spreading and migration on collagen fibres . However , such unrestrained gels are poor models for mechanically regulated processes , because in a living organism almost all tissues are tethered in such a way that cell contraction will inevitably increase stress in the surrounding matrix . This feedback mechanical signal is missing in floating col - lagen lattices , and resident fibroblasts therefore fail to acquire a proto - myofibroblast phenotype 26 , 45 – 48 . Endogenous tension ( also called pre - stress ) can be generated in the collagen matrix by tethering the lat - tice 26 , 43 , 45 . Under these conditions , tractional forces begin to compact the collagen fibres ; however , as the collagen fibres are tethered , tension develops , which reflects the in vivo situation . Direct force measure - ments by various methods have shown that there is a linear rise in the force generated by fibroblasts in stabi - lized collagen lattices that closely correlates with cell attachment , extension and spreading of processes , and cell motility 49 – 52 ( FIG . 3 ; phase 1 ) . As tension develops , the collagen fibres and the cells begin to align parallel to the principal strain in the collagen lattice 4 . Once this pre - stress is established , it is maintained at a relatively constant level over long periods of time ( FIG . 3 ; phase 2 ) . As phase 2 is reached , the fibroblasts acquire the proto - myofibroblast phenotype and form stress fibres , adhe - sion complexes and fibronectin fibrils that are com - posed of both plasma fibronectin from the culture serum and secreted cellular fibronectin 26 , 43 , 45 . The maintenance of the proto - myofibroblast phe - notype requires a continuous interaction between cell - generated stress and the reaction of a substratum that is sufficiently stiff to resist this force . If the collagen lat - tice is released from its points of attachment — such that stress in the matrix is lost — the cells rapidly con - tract and subsequently lose their stress fibres and fibronexus adhesion complexes 43 , 45 . Similarly , stress fibre organization is lost when fibroblasts that are cul - tured on a stiff planar substratum and show the proto - myofibroblast phenotype are treated with inhibitors of actin - myosin force generation 53 . Formation of differentiated myofibroblasts Once proto - myofibroblasts have developed in response to mechanical stress , they can be stimulated to develop into differentiated myofibroblasts . to pull against points of tight adhesion to the rigid substrate , tension develops and this causes the align - ment of individual microfilaments and the recruit - ment of more filaments to the bundles , as well as for - mation of focal adhesions 16 , 18 , 26 , 41 . High extracellular tension is a key stimulus for fibroblasts that are grown on plastic to differentiate into proto - myofibroblasts , as fibroblasts cultured on compliant planar polymer sub - strates do not form stress fibres 42 . On rigid planar substrates , fibroblasts produce an ECM that contains cellular fibronectin that includes the ED - A splice variant 18 . It is noteworthy that during the early steps of wound healing ( 3 – 5 days after wounding ) , the fibroblasts that accumulate in granula - tion tissue also contain stress fibres that are composed of cytoplasmic actins , and produce ED - A fibronectin 29 . These observations indicate that the presence of ED - A fibronectin might contribute to the formation of Figure 3 | Three - dimensional collagen - lattice model . Free - floating , fibroblast - populated collagen lattices that are untethered from the plastic culture dish are placed in culture media . As fibroblasts attach to the collagen fibrils , spread and migrate , they exert tractional forces ( phase 1 ) , which results in the slow compaction of the lattice . Mechanical tension cannot develop in untethered lattices , and fibroblasts do not acquire the proto - myofibroblast phenotype ; free - floating lattices do not enter the contraction phase . Stabilized , fibroblast - populated collagen lattices are tethered to the underlying plastic tissue - culture dish . Fibroblasts reorganize the collagen fibrils through tractional forces that are parallel to the underlying plastic dish ( phase 1 ) . Mechanical stress begins to develop and cells align along lines of stress . The mechanical stress induces fibroblasts to become proto - myofibroblasts and acquire their characteristic features , including stress fibres , fibronexus adhesion complexes and fibronectin fibres ( phase 2 ) . If transforming growth factor β 1 ( TGF - β 1 ) is present , proto - myofibroblasts can form differentiated myofibroblasts . Proto - and differentiated - myofibroblasts can exert contractile force on the extracellular matrix , which defines the contraction phase . The culture force monitor allows force measurement of fibroblast populations in uniaxially tethered collagen lattices . The force – time plot indicates how force increases linearly in phase 1 as fibroblasts exert tractional forces on the collagen matrix . As mechanical stress develops at the beginning of phase 2 , fibroblasts become proto - myofibroblasts and differentiated myofibroblasts . These cells generate contractile force that is maintained relatively constant . The lower diagrams illustrate collagen lattices ( tan ) connected to floating plastic bars ( green ) . One bar is fixed and the other is connected to a strain gauge to measure force . As force develops , the collagen lattice acquires an hourglass shape . 250 200 150 100 50 0 0 5 10 15 Time ( h ) 20 25 30 Floating lattice Culture force monitor Phase 1 : Traction Fibroblasts Phase 2 : Contraction Proto - myofibroblasts and differentiated myofibroblasts Phase 3 : Contracture Differentiated myofibroblasts Stabilized lattice F o r ce ( d y n e s ) © 2002 Nature Publishing Group 354 | MAY 2002 | VOLUME 3 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S signalling pathway is responsible for increased expres - sion of PAI - 1 ( REF . 64 ) . Maximum expression of colla - gen type I in TGF - β 1 - activated mouse HEPATIC STELLATE CELLS ( differentiated myofibroblasts ) requires Smad3 ; however , Smad3 is not necessary for TGF - β 1 - induced increased expression of α - SM actin in activated mouse hepatic stellate cells either in vitro or in vivo 70 . Similarly , increased expression of α - SM actin in response to TGF - β 1 can occur in cultured mouse der - mal fibroblasts that lack Smad3 ( REF . 71 ) . A TGF - β 1 response element that has a sequence different to that known for Smad binding has been identified in the α - SM actin promoter and seems to be essential for expression of α - SM actin in both SM cells 72 and myofibroblasts 73 . How TGF - β 1 activates expression of α - SM actin through this TGF - β 1 control element is , as yet , unknown . Inhibiting the interaction between the ED - A seg - ment of fibronectin and the cell surface blocks TGF - β 1 - induced myofibroblast differentiation 40 . The mole - cular mechanism that underlies this action is not known , but the identification of the integrins α 4 β 1 and α 9 β 1 as specific receptors of the ED - A domain ( L . van de Water , personal communication ) might lead to fur - ther insights . ED - A fibronectin alone in the absence of TGF - β 1 does not induce α - SM actin expression 40 , so whether and how the downstream pathways that are activated by TGF - β 1 and ED - A - fibronectin signalling converge remains unknown at present . Even in the presence of both factors , the myofibroblast phenotype is lost when mechanical tension is removed , as shown by tension - release of granuloma pouches and splinted - wound - granulation tissue 29 . However , increased mechanical tension in splinted wounds increases ED - A fibronectin and α - SM actin expression ( FIG . 4 ) without changing the expression levels of TGF - β 1 . Although the effect of mechanical tension is apparently not trans - mitted by changes in the levels of TGF - β 1 , blocking Differentiated myofibroblasts can be distinguished from proto - myofibroblasts by the de novo expression of α - SM actin and the increased expression of ED - A fibronectin , as well as increased assembly of stress fibres and focal adhesions that become more and more complex . Many experiments and clinical observa - tions 54 , 55 have shown that TGF - β 1 has a key role in stimulating all of these characteristics of the differenti - ated myofibroblast both in vitro and in vivo ( see BOX 2 for a discussion of TGF - β 1 - stimulated myofibroblast differentiation in the cornea ) . TGF - β 1 in damaged tis - sue could be derived from PLATELETS , white blood cells ( particularly MACROPHAGES ) or parenchymal cells 54 – 59 . Autocrine production of TGF - β 1 by fibroblasts is of great importance in preserving the fibrogenic activity once the inflammatory stimulus has ceased 60 , 61 . Injured epithelial cells can also produce TGF - β 1 , and thereby contribute to paracrine fibroblast stimulation 62 . TGF - β 1 has long been known to induce collagen synthesis by fibroblastic cells 63 ; it has also been shown to enhance the production of plasminogen activator inhibitor - 1 ( PAI - 1 ) 64 , the expression of cellular fibronectin — particularly the ED - A splice variant 65 — and , more recently , the expression of α - SM actin 15 , 54 , 55 . Although several studies have been carried out to investigate the signalling events that are elicited by these single stimuli , it is not known which molecular mechanism integrates them to promote myofibroblast differentiation . TGF - β 1 is generally released in a bio - logically latent form ( L - TGF - β 1 ) , which is stored within the ECM through the L - TGF - β 1 - binding fac - tor ( LTF ) 66 . After cleavage from LTF , TGF - β 1 is con - verted to its biologically active form 67 . The binding of active TGF - β 1 to the transmembrane TGF - β - recep - tors type I and II leads to the assembly of a receptor complex with protein serine / threonine kinase activity ( for reviews , see REFS 68 , 69 ) . The type I subunit of this complex then binds and activates a series of transcrip - tion factor proteins called SMADS 68 . These subsequently form a transcriptional complex with co - Smads to translocate to the nucleus and activate the transcrip - tion of target genes . TGF - β 1 activation of the Smad MESENCHYMAL STEM CELL A cell from immature connective tissue — tissue that consists of cells embedded in extracellular matrix — that has the potential to divide and reproduce a replica cell as well as a differentiated progeny . PLATELETS The smallest blood cells , which are important in haemostasis and blood coagulation . MACROPHAGES Any cells ofthe mononuclear phagocyte system that are characterized by their ability to phagocytose foreign particulate and colloidal material . SMADS A family oftranscription factors that mediate transforming factor β ( TGF - β ) signals . The term SMAD is derived from the founding members ofthis family , the Drosophila protein MAD ( Mothers Against Decapentaplegic ) and the Caenorhabditis elegans protein SMA ( small body size ) . HEPATIC STELLATE CELLS Also known as perisinusoidal cells , these cells are normally quiescent , but when they are stimulated by several toxins , they differentiate into myofibroblasts , which results in liver fibrosis . Box 2 | Corneal wound healing Similar to excisional cutaneous wounds , α - smooth muscle ( SM ) - actin - containing differentiated myofibroblasts form in corneal wounds , where they generate contractile forces that result in wound closure 133 , 134 . As the cornea is an avascular tissue , these force - generating cells probably form from the surrounding differentiated corneal stromal fibroblasts , which clearly shows a non - SM origin for these cells in this tissue 135 . However , on the basis of new knowledge of adult MESENCHYMAL progenitor ( or stem ) cells , we cannot exclude other origins based on plasticity of such uncommitted cells in vivo . In addition , proto - myofibroblasts are present adjacent to the wound in the undamaged corneal stroma 134 . Like differentiated myofibroblasts from other tissues , these corneal myofibroblasts have large vinculin - containing focal adhesions and express high levels of the fibronectin receptor α 5 β 1 ( REF . 136 ) . The differentiation of myofibroblasts from corneal fibroblasts seems to require transforming growth factor β 1 ( TGF - β 1 ) and the assembly of cellular fibronectin and its interaction with the cell surface 137 , which is similar to what has been described for dermal fibroblasts 5 . Interestingly , cell density is also important for corneal fibroblast differentiation in response to TGF - β 1 ( REF . 138 ) . Figure 4 | Mechanical tension induces myofibroblast differentiation in wound granulation tissue . Protein expression in sections of 6 - day - old granulation tissue from unsplinted wounds ( a ) is compared to that in splinted wounds ( b ) . α - smooth muscle ( SM ) actin ( red ) is constitutively expressed by SM cells , and co - localizes ( yellow ) with desmin ( green ) in vessels . Enhanced mechanical tension by splinting wounds with a plastic frame results in the expression of α - SM actin by differentiated myofibroblasts in 6 - day - old granulation tissue , which are absent in unsplinted wound tissue . Scale bar , 50 µ m . Reprinted with permission from REF . 29 from the American Society for Investigative Pathology via the Copyright Clearance Center . a Unsplinted wound b Splinted wound © 2002 Nature Publishing Group NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 3 | MAY 2002 | 355 R E V I E W S α - SM - actin expression in SM cells , while enhancing expression in non - muscle cells 73 , 76 . Future studies should shed light on how these regulatory elements function differently in SM cells and myofibroblasts . The expression of α - SM actin is at present consid - ered to be the most reliable marker of the differentiated myofibroblast 5 , 6 ( TABLE 2 ) . In addition , differentiated myofibroblasts might express other markers of SM cells that correlate with more advanced differentiation , such as SM myosin heavy chains , caldesmon or desmin 5 . Expression of these markers varies depending on the context . For example , differentiated myofibroblasts in granulation tissue express only α - SM actin and no other SM - specific proteins , whereas a proportion of differenti - ated myofibroblasts in Dupuytren’s disease may also express desmin and / or SM myosin 77 . Differentiated myofibroblasts do not express smoothelin 78 , 79 , a recently described late differentiation marker of both vascular and parenchymal SM cells 80 . The expression of smoothe - lin is at present the most reliable criterion by which to distinguish between the differentiated myofibroblast , as defined here , and the mature SM cell 79 . During the evo - lution of vascular diseases , such as atheromathosis or restenotic phenomena , SM cells might lose differentia - tion markers , such as smoothelin , and become similar to myofibroblasts 79 . At present , it is unclear whether myofi - broblasts and SM cells are distinctly different cell types or whether the myofibroblast represents a step of a con - tinuous differentiation spectrum that exists between the fibroblast and the SM cell 7 , 78 – 80 . The existence of such a spectrum could explain vasculogenesis processes in which media SM cells can differentiate from local fibrob - lasts , as seen during pulmonary hypertension 81 . Force generation and transmission Granulation tissue can generate contractile force . This was first directly shown 82 by connecting a force TGF - β 1 in a stressed environment inhibits myofibrob - last formation 29 . So , it seems that TGF - β 1 is the central regulator of myofibroblast differentiation through its capacity to promote accumulation of intracellular contractile proteins , high collagen density and the ED - A fibronectin splice variant 40 , 54 , 63 , 65 . Interestingly , stud - ies of wound healing during development have shown that foetal wounds heal without scarring . One reason for this might be the small amount of TGF - β 1 in embryo and foetus compared with adult stages , with no apparent conversion of fibroblasts into myofibrob - lasts until after birth 74 . In addition to increasing the expression of α - SM actin , TGF - β 1 dramatically enhances the assembly of stress fibres and the formation of the fibronexus adhe - sion complexes . This has been observed on both pla - nar substrates 18 and in tethered three - dimensional collagen lattices 54 . A detailed study using fibroblasts that were plated on a planar substrate has shown that TGF - β 1 administration induces , in addition to α - SM actin - rich stress fibres , the formation of mature and ‘supermature’ focal adhesions 18 . Compared with immature focal adhesions that are predominant in proto - myofibroblasts , both mature and supermature focal adhesions in differentiated myofibroblasts show de novo appearance of tensin and focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) , and an important increase in vinculin and paxillin content 18 . Therefore , myofibroblast differentiation depends both on the mechanical stress that develops within a given tissue and on the local expression of growth factors such as TGF - β 1 . In combination , these agents induce the gradual accumulation of α - SM actin - con - taining stress fibres as well as the other characteristics of the differentiated myofibroblast . We postulate that their concurrent action results in a positive feedback loop , in which tension facilitates TGF - β 1 production and / or activation of α - SM actin expression , which , in turn , increases force production and tension develop - ment . These reciprocal interactions are probably important for the continued formation and sustained function of myofibroblasts . Myofibroblasts and smooth muscle cells The expression of α - SM actin is regulated differently in differentiated myofibroblasts and SM cells . As discussed previously , the α - SM actin promoter contains a TGF - β response element that seems to be essential for the expression of α - SM actin in both myofibroblasts and SM cells 72 , 73 . The α - SM actin promoter also contains CArG response elements that seem to regulate the expres - sion of α - SM actin differently in myofibroblasts and SM cells . Using transgenic mice , it has been shown that CArGs A and B are required for SM cells to express a transgene construct from – 2600 to the first intron of the α - SM actin gene 75 . By contrast , CArGs A and B did not seem to be necessary for the increased expression of α - SM actin in cultured myofibroblasts , as analysed using transient transfection of ‘decoy’oligonucleotides that were homologous to CArG A or B ( REF . 73 ) . In addition , the MCAT A and B response elements seem to repress CArG BOX MOTIF A CArG box motif— CC ( A + T - rich ) 6 GG — is a DNA element that is required for muscle - specific gene transcription . Figure 5 | α - smooth muscle ( SM ) actin expression correlates with wrinkling on silicone substrates . Rat lung myofibroblasts were cultured on a deformable silicone substrate of high stiffness and stained for α - SM actin ( red ) and filamentous - actin ( green ) . Overlay with the phase - contrast image shows that α - SM - actin - negative proto - myofibroblasts ( green ) do not form wrinkles , which are restricted to α - SM - actin expressing differentiated myofibroblasts ( yellow ) . Scale bar , 50 µ m . Reprinted with permission from REF . 86 from the American Society for Cell Biology via the Copyright Clearance Center . © 2002 Nature Publishing Group 356 | MAY 2002 | VOLUME 3 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S no , or only small ( 1 µ m length ) , focal adhesion sites that are generally described as focal complexes 92 and that are analogous to the recently termed ‘immature’ focal adhesions 18 . These small , or immature , focal adhesions do not transmit measurable forces to the substrate 93 and are , together with mature focal adhe - sions , characteristic of proto - myofibroblasts . The size of mature focal adhesions ( 2 – 6 µ m ) and their protein composition correspond to the features of focal adhe - sions of fibroblasts that are cultured on planar stiff substrates , and which were recently summarized by Geiger and co - workers 94 . They are mainly situated in the cell periphery and typically contain β - and γ - cytoplasmic actins , ( frequently also α - SM actin ) , α v integrin , vinculin , paxillin , α - actinin , talin , FAK and tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins 18 , 95 . Such ( mature ) focal adhesions were recently shown to transmit an average force of 5 . 5 nN µ m – 2 to a deformable sub - strate 93 . Treatment with TFG - β 1 increases the num - ber of mature focal adhesions and induces ‘superma - ture’ focal adhesions 18 . Supermature focal adhesions are typical of differentiated myofibroblasts ; they are considerably longer ( 6 – 30 µ m ) than mature focal adhesions and always contain α - SM actin and tensin . They extend as continuous structures from the cell periphery into the cell centre and thereby differ mor - phologically from fragmented fibrillar adhesions that are usually defined on the basis of tensin expression 94 . In fact , supermature focal adhesions of cultured dif - ferentiated myofibroblasts resemble in many ways the recently described three - dimensional matrix adhe - sions of fibroblasts that were grown in tissue - derived three - dimensional matrices 96 . So far , the amount of force that acts through a single supermature contact has not been measured . However , as force transmission seems to be almost linearly proportional to the adhesion area 93 , super - mature adhesions might transmit considerably high forces , simply because they are larger . Moreover , dif - ferent ratios between the constituents of mature and supermature focal adhesions 18 might lead to different structural and signalling properties . It has yet to be investigated whether supermature adhesions contain a specialized subset of integrins or other compo - nents . This is conceivable , as TGF - β 1 — the main promoter of myofibroblast differentiation and matu - ration of focal adhesions — influences the integrin expression pattern of human fibroblasts 97 – 99 . Regulation of myofibroblast contraction Myofibroblasts can sustain a contractile force over long periods of time . This force is generated by con - tractile stress fibres — which are composed of bundles of actin microfilaments with associated non - muscle myosin and other actin - binding proteins 5 , 16 , 43 — and is regulated by myosin light - chain ( MLC ) phosphory - lation , which is similar to that which occurs in SM cells 51 , 53 . Two kinase systems seem to regulate this phosphorylation : the calcium ( Ca 2 + ) - dependent myosin - light - chain ( MLC ) kinase ( MLCK ) and the Rho - kinase systems 16 . transducer to the granulation tissue that formed in an excisional wound on the dorsum of a rabbit and mea - suring generation of ISOMETRIC TENSION . Moreover , stud - ies have shown 29 , 82 – 85 that , contrary to connective tissue strips , granulation tissue strips placed into tissue baths contract on stimulation with SM cell agonists such as endothelin , angiotensin II and prostaglandin F1 . Not surprisingly , granulation - tissue strips isolated from early wounds that contain only proto - myofibroblasts generate less force than do strips from later wounds that contain differentiated myofibroblasts 29 . When cultured in tethered collagen lattices , fibroblasts can acquire the proto - myofibroblast phe - notype and undergo isometric contraction that is transmitted to the surrounding collagen matrix to maintain a relatively constant level of tension over long periods of time 50 – 52 ( FIG . 3 ) . If the collagen matrix is released from its points of attachment , the cells rapidly undergo ISOTONIC CONTRACTION and pull in the surrounding collagen fibres 43 , 45 . Treatment of proto - myofibroblasts in collagen lattices with TGF - β 1 induces differentiated myofibroblasts to form , and dramatically enhances force generation that is corre - lated with an increase in expression of α - SM actin 36 , 54 , 86 , 87 . More and more evidence is accumulat - ing in support of the hypothesis that increased expression of α - SM actin is sufficient to increase the capacity of myofibroblasts to generate force both in vitro and in vivo . Myofibroblasts that contain α - SM actin exert a stronger traction on stiff silicone sub - strates ( FIG . 5 ) or on collagen gels compared with myofibroblasts that express only cytoplasmic actins 54 , 86 , 88 . Recent experiments 86 have shown that 3T3 fibroblasts that are stably transfected with α - SM actin cDNA contract collagen lattices significantly more than wild - type fibroblasts or fibroblasts that are transfected with α - cardiac or cytoplasmic actins . This contractile activity takes place in the absence of SM myosin - heavy - chain expression and without increas - ing the content of non - muscle myosin heavy chain . The cellular mechanism by which increased levels of α - SM actin might elicit increased force generation is not known . However , it has been shown that intracel - lular application of α - SM actin antibody or treat - ment with antisense oligonucleotides that target α - SM actin mRNA increase the motility of SM cells or myofibroblasts 89 . Moreover , the α - SM actin - specific antibody stimulates the polymerization of this iso - form 90 , and the introduction of the amino - terminal peptide sequence Ac - EEED ( which comprises the epi - tope of this antibody ) reduces spontaneous and induced contraction of myofibroblasts in culture , as well as granulation - tissue contraction in vivo 91 . These observations provide new information on the mecha - nism of tension production by the myofibroblast and represent a new strategy in preventing inappropriate wound contraction . The presence of focal adhesions seems instrumen - tal for force transmission 18 , 19 , 54 . Tissue fibroblasts and fibroblasts that are cultured on compliant substrates 42 or in the presence of contraction inhibitors 53 develop ISOMETRIC TENSION A condition in which contraction ofmuscle , non - muscle cells or the actomyosin network is opposed by an equal load that prevents net shortening , even though tension increases . ISOTONIC CONTRACTION A condition in which contraction results in a shortening ofmuscle , nonmuscle , or the actomyosin network in order that tension remains constant . © 2002 Nature Publishing Group NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 3 | MAY 2002 | 357 R E V I E W S tion , myosin - phosphatase activity would be continu - ously removing the phosphate group from the MLC , so that high intracellular Ca 2 + concentrations would be required to maintain MLCK activity . By contrast , regu - lation of contraction by inhibition of myosin phos - phatase through the Rho – Rho - kinase pathway pro - vides an energetically more favourable mechanism for maintaining sustained isometric tension , as observed in myofibroblasts . Contraction and contracture Although it is clear that myofibroblasts can generate and maintain contractile force , the question arises as to how this translates into the tissue shortening that is observed during wound healing and pathological con - tractures . In this context , it is essential to distinguish between connective - tissue contracture and muscle - based contraction . The terms are often used synony - mously and their outward , gross anatomical appear - ances can seem identical ; however , they are very different processes . Muscle contraction is a rapid and reversible shortening of tissues , which is dominated by intracellular events and energy expenditure . By con - trast , connective - tissue contracture is a slow , ( semi ) permanent , low - energy , shortening process , which involves matrix - dispersed cells and is dominated by extracellular events such as matrix remodelling 112 , 113 . Viewing connective - tissue contracture simply as a result of muscle - like contraction of myofibroblasts is an oversimplification , and leads to the misconception that myofibroblast function is simple and muscle - like . From our present understanding , it is reasonable to conclude that myofibroblasts are predominantly responsible for contracture ( FIG . 6 ) , whereas smooth ( and skeletal ) muscle cells act by contraction . Although some mechanical contraction is an inevitable part of the process of contracture , the reverse is not necessarily true . As Glimcher and Peabody 113 point out , gut or vascular SM cells contract connective tissues for decades without causing con - tractures . If myofibroblasts in scars or Dupuytren’s Increased concentrations of intracellular Ca 2 + will activate the MLCK pathway , which results in increased levels of MLC phosphorylation and contraction 16 , 100 . This contraction tends to be rapid and short - lived , as the increase in Ca 2 + is transient and active myosin phos - phatase terminates the reaction by removing the phos - phate group from MLC . In the Rho kinase pathway , RhoA — a small RHO FAMILY GTPASE — becomes activated in response to an appropriate agonist and can activate one of its target proteins , Rho kinase / ROK α / ROCK II ( REFS 101 , 102 ) . Activated Rho kinase can increase MLC phosphorylation by one of two mechanisms : first , by direct phosphorylation of MLC — however , the cat - alytic activity of Rho kinase is significantly lower than that of MLCK with regard to phosphorylation of MLC 103 – 105 — or second , by inactivating myosin phos - phatase by phosphorylating the myosin - binding sub - unit of this enzyme complex 106 , 107 . The inhibition of myosin phosphatase by activated Rho kinase has been shown to promote the contraction of isolated stress fibres 108 . This pathway would result in sustained con - traction , as the state of phosphorylated MLC would be maintained by inhibiting myosin phosphatase . Therefore , the two regulatory systems of MLC phospho - rylation seem to be responsible for the two different modes of contraction : Ca 2 + - dependent MLCK would be used to generate rapid contraction , whereas Rho kinase is important in maintaining sustained contraction . The regulation of contraction of myofibroblasts is different to that described for SM cells . In SM cells , ele - vation of intracellular Ca 2 + is the main process through which an immediate and rapid increase in force is cre - ated . Inhibition of myosin phosphatase by Rho – Rho kinase sensitizes the cell to intracellular Ca 2 + levels 109 . In contrast to SM cells , the Rho – Rho - kinase pathway seems to be the predominant pathway that regulates myofibroblast contraction through regulated activity of myosin phosphatase , whereas elevation of intracel - lular Ca 2 + does not promote contraction of myofibrob - lasts within collagen lattices or granulation tissue 110 , 111 . Inhibition of Rho or of Rho kinase dramatically reduces the amount of force that is generated in response to LYSOPHOSPHATIDIC ACID by both proto - and differentiated myofibroblasts that are cultured within three - dimensional collagen lattices , whereas the phos - phatase inhibitor calyculin — used to inhibit myosin phosphatase — can promote force generation 111 . Similarly , differentiated myofibroblasts in wound granulation tissue or in granuloma pouch do not con - tract in response to an agonist when treated with the Rho kinase inhibitor Y27632 ( REF . 110 ) . The apparent fundamental difference between the regulation of SM - cell - and myofibroblast contraction might relate to their functional differences . SM cells need to contract and relax in response to environmen - tal cues , whereas myofibroblasts need to continuously generate force over long periods of time . Maintenance of sustained contraction in myofibroblasts would be difficult to regulate by a Ca 2 + - dependent system alone , as this would require Ca 2 + concentrations inside the cell to be finely tuned for long periods of time . In addi - RHO FAMILY GTPASES Ras - related GTPases that are involved in controlling the polymerization ofactin . LYSOPHOSPHATIDIC ACID Any phosphatidic acid that is deacylated at positions 1 or 2 . It binds to a G - protein - coupled receptor , which results in the activation ofthe small GTP - binding protein Rho and the induction ofstress fibres . Figure 6 | Scar contracture across the wrist following a burn injury . Dermal scar tissue has the remarkable ability to continue to shorten a long time after healing . In this individual , the wrist is held in permanent flexion by this tissue , despite the opposing power of skeletal musculature in the arm ( Courtesy of Dr . Jaysheela Mudera , University College , London ) . © 2002 Nature Publishing Group 358 | MAY 2002 | VOLUME 3 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S tissues had a similar mode of action to SM cells , their anatomical effects would mean that they would have to produce synchronous , prolonged contraction to oppose the tensile forces from massive skeletal - muscle blocks ( FIG . 6 ) . The implication that accumulations of myofibroblasts could achieve such an opposition is untenable on the simplest of energetic grounds . Instead , connective - tissue contracture involves incre - mental , anatomical shortening of the ECM material 114 . On an anatomical basis , it is clear that myofibroblasts do not need to generate enormous forces to temporar - ily deform their immediate collagen matrix , as skeletal muscles spend most time under low basal tension ( for example , during sleep ) . Indeed , contractures of only a few tens of µ m per day might occur . This argues against simultaneous or coordinated cell contraction , but rather supports an average effect of independent , local pericellular shortening events . These would be defined through cytomechanics rather than tissue mechanics . A similar misconception underlies the idea that cell cooperativity is needed to produce shortening in a particular plane . The force that is generated in tis - sues could be non - directional , as the pre - existing matrix shape and properties will largely dictate the resultant vectors . By analogy , the shape of a balloon is dictated by its envelope , but the inflating force is non - directional . Once achieved , such ‘contracture’shorten - ing does not require the continuing action of myofi - broblasts as the shortened ECM restrains the surrounding tissues . The visible appearance of contin - uous tension in pathological contractures is simply a consequence of this changed anatomical relationship . So , how is the contractile force that is generated by myofibroblasts translated into a shortened collagen matrix that no longer requires active cell contraction to maintain a tissue tension ? So far , the mechanism for this has been ascribed simply to collagen crosslinking , but the permanency of this covalent bonding is irrec - oncilable with the dynamic nature of the process . Matrix shortening and increased stiffness indicates that the resident cells have locked a tension into the colla - gen structure , but in an interstitial , incremental man - ner 115 . This represents a ‘slip and ratchet’ theory for contracture ( FIG . 7 ) , but it can only realistically occur as a localized , dynamic and incremental process that is not consistent with massive breakdown , re - assembly and crosslinking . Related concepts in which collagen fibrils slip past one another locally and are then re - linked whereas adjacent fibrils are , in their turn , unbonded and slipped have been proposed 116 – 119 . It is noteworthy that in granulation tissue of a normal heal - ing wound or in fibrocontractive diseases , collagen type I is replaced to a great extent by collagen type III , which is known to be present in remodelling tissues ( for example , during development ) or in normal tis - sues that are subject to mechanical stress 120 ( for exam - ple , arteries ) . Any remodelling process inevitably involves the removal of matrix molecules , and is largely mediated by matrix METALLOPROTEINASES ( MMPs ) . Which MMPs are used will depend on the matrix components that Figure 7 | Model of extracellular - matrix - remodelling phase of matrix contracture . Matrix contracture is mediated by myofibroblasts . How is the contraction of myofibroblasts translated into functional collagen - network shortening ? The following working hypothesis serves to define some basic mechanisms . a | Myofibroblasts are embedded in a collagen network . These cells bind to collagen fibrils through fibronexus adhesion complexes that are linked to intracellular stress fibres . b | Cytoskeletal or signalling events in one of these myofibroblasts leads to stress - fibre contraction , which results in a local matrix contraction , shortening and bundling of the surrounding pericellular collagen network . As this is a local effect , its consequences are incremental , and affect at most a few surrounding cells and matrix . c | New matrix components are added to stabilize the new collagen organization , relative to its neighbours . The addition of collagen would potentially increase collagen density and orientation . d | The myofibroblast that contracted originally , as well as other surrounding myofibroblasts , can repeat the process so that this small incremental collagen - matrix remodelling can result in tissue contracture . a Adjacent myofibroblasts attach to collagen network b Myofibroblast B contracts , deforming network B c New collagen secretion stabilizes contracted structure of network B , relative to network A d Cell re - spreads and process is repeated A B New collagen secretion © 2002 Nature Publishing Group NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 3 | MAY 2002 | 359 R E V I E W S remodel and lay down the shortened ECM . The lim - ited understanding of the relationship between myofi - broblast contraction and ECM remodelling makes it very difficult to define how this process occurs . Some recent insights into the process of connec - tive - tissue contracture might be emerging from the collagen lattice model as outlined in FIG . 8 . This model identifies an in vitro form of contracture . This sup - ports the importance of the changing material prop - erties of the collagen matrix on overall cell and tissue function 130 , 131 . Recently , it has been shown that , with time , there is a progressive increase in matrix stiffness that occurs while the matrix is under tension 131 . As this occurs , the shortening / compaction of the colla - gen network ceases to depend on cell - generated forces , as the increased stiffness and ability to carry load is built into the matrix material and is present , even after the loss of cell contraction 115 . In terms of cytomechanics , this increase in stress occurs a result of the process of matrix contracture ( FIG . 7 ) . This mechano - remodelling of collagen is a key component of the cycle that links cytomechanical control , altered load transmission by asymmetric matrix structures and production / revision of that structure by resident cells , of which myofibroblasts and associated cell types are the central components . Conclusions and perspectives Although the model that is summarized in FIG . 9 pro - vides a framework for understanding connective - tis - sue contraction and contracture , several important aspects of this complex process remain to be deter - mined . Some of those points are discussed here . Although it is well established that mechanical stress can promote the assembly of stress fibres 26 , 43 , 53 , little is known about how this signal is transduced to induce the early actin polymerization in fibroblasts after wounding and its association with myosin and other proteins to assemble these structures . The for - mation of specialized adhesion sites probably has an important role in this process . Recent work has indi - cated that Rho - kinase activity might be important for the generation of a relatively strong and long - lasting force by stress fibres 108 , but many details still remain to be discovered about the regulation of contractile activ - ity of these structures . Mechanical stress is necessary for the formation of the proto - myofibroblast ; however , whether TGF - β 1 also has a role in promoting proto - myofibroblast formation remains speculative . It is clear that both TGF - β 1 and ED - A - fibronectin interaction with the cell surface are necessary for the formation of the differentiated myofibroblast but the signal pathways that are acti - vated by these interactions remain elusive . Furthermore , although it has been shown that the amino - terminal sequence Ac - EEED of α - SM actin is important for α - SM actin polymerization 90 , nothing is known of how expression of this specific actin isoform results in increased force generation . Collagen shortening and remodelling is the key part of tissue contracture . At present , the mechanisms by need to be removed to allow slippage , and this is a key area of uncertainty . Several candidates have been con - sidered in analogous models , including PROTEOGLYCANS such as decorin 121 , 122 , collagen types V and XIV ( REFS 123 , 124 ) , and procollagen N - propeptide ( itself dictated by levels of procollagen N - protease ) 125 , and non - col - lagenous proteins such as lumican and fibromod - ulin 126 . The identity of the MMPs that might be involved in the breakdown of linkage that is impor - tant in contractures is presently unknown , although combinations of , for example , MMP3 , MMP2 and MMP9 would be expected to degrade proteoglycans and non - collagenous proteins . The simplest mecha - nism probably requires no inter - fibril linker , but relies on a collagenase , such as MMP1 , to ‘skim’ the outer - most layer of collagen , which mechanically separates two neo - fibrils . In this instance , re - fixing the fibrils after spatial rearrangement would need only an inter - posed layer of freshly synthesized collagen for re - crosslinking . Interestingly , this system would become dependent on the ubiquitous gelatinases ( MMP2 and MMP9 ) , as re - apposition of adjacent fibrils would require clearance of partly degraded collagen frag - ments from their surfaces 127 . The ability of the myofibroblast to generate and maintain contractile force is essential for tissue con - tracture . It is during the stage of ECM remodelling that the load that is normally carried by the ECM is now carried by the contracted myofibroblast . Once a new shortened matrix is laid down , the myofibroblast is stress - shielded by the load - carrying ECM ( FIG . 7 ) . The myofibroblast can either disappear by apopto - sis 128 , 129 or contract again to continue the process of ECM shortening . It should be emphasized that although force generation is mostly mediated by the myofibroblast , it is possible that a second cell could Figure 8 | Contracture in three - dimensional collagen lattices . The schematic force – time plot represents three phases of force generation in the culture force monitor . Uncertainty and overlap between the end of one phase and start of the next is indicated by the dotted sections of the bars . Addition of CYTOCHALASIN D shortly after the force plateau is reached in the contraction phase results in a total loss of force 51 , 52 . By contrast , addition of cytochalasin D much later in the putative contracture phase ( arrow ) results in residual tension remaining in the matrix ( REF . 131 ; R . A . Brown and M . Marenzana , unpublished observations ) . This residual tension is due to irreversible remodelling - shortening of the collagen network , as would be expected with contracture . F o r ce ( d y n e s ) ( 1 ) Traction 10 20 48 ( 3 ) Contracture ( 2 ) Contraction Time ( h ) CYTOCHALASIN D A fungal compound that specifically interferes with actin polymerization . METALLOPROTEINASE A proteinase that has a metal ion at its active site . PROTEOGLYCAN Any glycoprotein that contains glycosaminoglycans as the carbohydrate unit . © 2002 Nature Publishing Group 360 | MAY 2002 | VOLUME 3 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S small - vessel disappearance from granulation tissue is mediated through apoptotic phenomena 128 , again the fac - tors that regulate these phenomena are at present unclear . The analysis of the mechanisms that regulate the above - mentioned biological events will be important for the understanding of the biology of normal patho - logical wound healing , as well as for the development and the implementation of preventive and / or thera - peutic strategies . which a fibrillar - collagen matrix can be remodelled and shortened is unclear . Many reports have shown that proteolytic enzymes are expressed in granulation and fibrotic tissues ( for a review , see REF . 34 ) , but how their activity is coordinated with remodelling is not known . Similarly , it is unclear what effect the expression of dif - ferent types of collagen that are observed in granulation tissue and scars have on collagen remodelling 34 , 120 . Finally , although it is clear that myofibroblast - and 1 . Brown , R . A . , Prajapati , R . , McGrouther , D . A . , Yannas , I . V . & Eastwood , M . Tensional homeostasis in dermal fibroblasts : mechanical responses to mechanical loading in three - dimensional substrates . J . Cell Physiol . 175 , 323 – 332 ( 1998 ) . Describes the first evidence that fibroblasts respond cytomechanically to externally applied mechanical loads that maintain a set level of pre - stress in their matrix , which is termed tensional homeostasis . 2 . Muellner , T . et al . Light and electron microscopic study of stress - shielding effects on rat patellar tendon . Arch . Orthop . Trauma Surg . 121 , 561 – 565 ( 2001 ) . 3 . Brown , R . A . in Future Strategies for Tissue and Organ Replacement ( eds Polak , J . M . , Hench , L . L . & Kemp , P . ) 51 – 78 ( World Scientific Publishing , Singapore , 2002 ) . 4 . Eastwood , M . , Mudera , V . C . , McGrouther , D . A . & Brown , R . A . Effect of precise mechanical loading on fibroblast populated collagen lattices : morphological changes . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 40 , 13 – 21 ( 1998 ) . 5 . Serini , G . & Gabbiani , G . Mechanisms of myofibroblast activity and phenotypic modulation . Exp . Cell Res . 250 , 273 – 283 ( 1999 ) . 6 . Powell , D . W . et al . Myofibroblasts . I . Paracrine cells important in health and disease . Am . J . Physiol . 277 , C1 – C9 ( 1999 ) . 7 . Grinnell , F . Fibroblast - collagen - matrix contraction : growth - factor signalling and mechanical loading . Trends Cell Biol . 10 , 362 – 365 ( 2000 ) . Describes fibroblast collagen matrix - contraction models and recent evidence that indicates that the state of cellular mechanical loading determines the mechanism that cells use to regulate contraction . 8 . Carrel , A . & Hartmann , A . Cicatrization of wounds . I . The relation between the size and the rate of its cicatrization . J . Exp . Med . 24 , 429 – 450 ( 1916 ) . Figure 9 | Model of the role of myofibroblasts during the healing of an open wound . a | In normal tissues , fibroblasts experience a relatively low amount of tension owing to stress - shielding by the surrounding collagen matrix , such that the organization of a contractile cytoskeleton is not stimulated ( light pink area of dermis ) . When a full - thickness dermal wound is filled by a fibrin clot , local growth factors stimulate fibroblasts from the adjacent intact dermis to invade this provisional matrix . These migrating fibroblasts , along with vessels , fill the wound , which results in the formation of granulation tissue . At this point , fibroblasts are already stimulated to produce ED - A fibronectin ( ED - A FN ) . b | Migrating fibroblasts exert tractional forces on the collagen matrix , which results in its reorganization along lines of stress . The development of mechanical stress stimulates fibroblasts to develop stress fibres and to produce collagen , so they acquire the proto - myofibroblast phenotype . Tensional forces and growth factors stimulate proto - myofibroblasts to secrete transforming growth factor β 1 ( TGF - β 1 ) and increased levels of ED - A FN . c | In a feedback loop , proto - myofibroblasts become differentiated myofibroblasts by synthesizing α - smooth muscle actin and generating increased contractile force . At the same time , differentiated myofibroblasts lay down collagen and other extracellular - matrix ( ECM ) components , and produce proteases . This complex process of remodelling results in shortening of the collagen matrix with corresponding wound closure . d | When a normal healing wound closes , myofibroblasts disappear by apoptosis and a scar is formed . e | However , in many pathological situations , such as hypertrophic scar formation , myofibroblasts persist and continue to remodel the ECM , which results in connective - tissue contracture . In conclusion , myofibroblasts , far from being a ‘bad’ cell type , are functionally essential cells . It is their dysregulation that is the cause of tissue dysfunction . Clot Epidermis Hair TGF - β TGF - β TGF - β TGF - β ED - A FN a b c d Normal Pathological e Collagen fibril Proto - myofibroblast Fibroblast Blood vessel Differentiated myofibroblast Apoptotic fibroblast © 2002 Nature Publishing Group NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 3 | MAY 2002 | 361 R E V I E W S 9 . Payling Wright , G . An Introduction to Pathology 2nd Edition ( Longmans Green and Co . , London , 1954 ) . 10 . Abercrombie , M . , Flint , M . H . & James , D . W . Wound contraction in relation to collagen formation in scorbutic guinea pigs . J . Embryol . Exp . Morph . 4 , 167 ( 1956 ) . 11 . Gabbiani , G . , Ryan , G . B . & Majno , G . Presence of modified fibroblasts in granulation tissue and their possible role in wound contraction . Experientia 27 , 549 – 550 ( 1971 ) . 12 . Walker , G . A . , Guerrero , I . A . & Leinwand , L . A . Myofibroblasts : molecular crossdressers . Curr . Top . Dev . Biol . 51 , 91 – 107 ( 2001 ) . 13 . Darby , I . , Skalli , O . & Gabbiani , G . α - smooth muscle actin is transiently expressed by myofibroblasts during experimental wound healing . Lab . Invest . 63 , 21 – 29 ( 1990 ) . 14 . Skalli , O . et al . A monoclonal antibody against α - smooth muscle actin : a new probe for smooth muscle differentiation . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 2787 – 2796 ( 1986 ) . The specific antibody for α - SM actin shows that this protein is expressed temporarily in granulation - tissue fibroblasts . 15 . Desmouliere , A . , Geinoz , A . , Gabbiani , F . & Gabbiani , G . Transforming growth factor - β 1 induces α - smooth muscle actin expression in granulation tissue myofibroblasts and in quiescent and growing cultured fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 103 – 111 ( 1993 ) . The first demonstration that TGF - β 1 is involved in the induction of α - SM actin in normal fibroblasts and myofibroblasts . 16 . Burridge , K . & Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . Focal adhesions , contractility , and signaling . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 12 , 463 – 518 ( 1996 ) . 17 . Kreis , T . E . & Birchmeier , W . Stress fiber sarcomeres of fibroblasts are contractile . Cell 22 , 555 – 561 ( 1980 ) . 18 . Dugina , V . , Fontao , L . , Chaponnier , C . , Vasiliev , J . & Gabbiani , G . Focal adhesion features during myofibroblastic differentiation are controlled by intracellular and extracellular factors . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 3285 – 3296 ( 2001 ) . Demonstration that focal adhesion size and composition are modulated by intracellular and extracellular factors that regulate the myofibroblast phenotype . 19 . Singer , I . I . , Kawka , D . W . , Kazazis , D . M . & Clark , R . A . In vivo co - distribution of fibronectin and actin fibers in granulation tissue : immunofluorescence and electron microscope studies of the fibronexus at the myofibroblast surface . J . Cell Biol . 98 , 2091 – 2106 ( 1984 ) . 20 . Chicurel , M . E . , Chen , C . S . & Ingber , D . E . Cellular control lies in the balance of forces . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 232 – 239 ( 1998 ) . 21 . Geiger , B . & Bershadsky , A . Assembly and mechanosensory function of focal contacts . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 584 – 592 ( 2001 ) . 22 . Gabbiani , G . , Chaponnier , C . & Huttner , I . Cytoplasmic filaments and gap junctions in epithelial cells and myofibroblasts during wound healing . J . Cell Biol . 76 , 561 – 568 ( 1978 ) . 23 . Spanakis , S . G . , Petridou , S . & Masur , S . K . Functional gap junctions in corneal fibroblasts and myofibroblasts . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 39 , 1320 – 1328 ( 1998 ) . 24 . Jamieson , S . , Going , J . J . , D’Arcy , R . & George , W . D . Expression of gap junction proteins connexin 26 and connexin 43 in normal human breast and in breast tumours . J . Pathol . 184 , 37 – 43 ( 1998 ) . 25 . Harris , A . K . , Stopak , D . & Wild , P . Fibroblast traction as a mechanism for collagen morphogenesis . Nature 290 , 249 – 251 ( 1981 ) . 26 . Grinnell , F . Fibroblasts , myofibroblasts , and wound contraction . J . Cell Biol . 124 , 401 – 404 ( 1994 ) . 27 . Bell , E . , Ivarsson , B . & Merrill , C . Production of a tissue - like structure by contraction of collagen lattices by human fibroblasts of different proliferative potential in vitro . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 76 , 1274 – 1278 ( 1979 ) . 28 . Ehrlich , H . P . & Rajaratnam , J . B . Cell locomotion forces versus cell contraction forces for collagen lattice contraction : an in vitro model of wound contraction . Tissue Cell 22 , 407 – 417 ( 1990 ) . 29 . Hinz , B . , Mastrangelo , D . , Iselin , C . E . , Chaponnier , C . & Gabbiani , G . Mechanical tension controls granulation tissue contractile activity and myofibroblast differentiation . Am . J . Pathol . 159 , 1009 – 1020 ( 2001 ) . This paper showed that the myofibroblastic phenotype is regulated by mechanical tension in vivo . 30 . Gross , J . , Farinelli , W . , Sadow , P . , Anderson , R . & Bruns , R . On the mechanism of skin wound ‘contraction’ : a granulation tissue ‘knockout’ with a normal phenotype . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 5982 – 5986 ( 1995 ) . 31 . Berry , D . P . , Harding , K . G . , Stanton , M . R . , Jasani , B . & Ehrlich , H . P . Human wound contraction : collagen organization , fibroblasts , and myofibroblasts . Plast . Reconstr . Surg . 102 , 124 – 131 ( 1998 ) . 32 . Kapanci , Y . , Ribaux , C . , Chaponnier , C . & Gabbiani , G . Cytoskeletal features of alveolar myofibroblasts and pericytes in normal human and rat lung . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 40 , 1955 – 1963 ( 1992 ) . 33 . Lindahl , P . & Betsholtz , C . Not all myofibroblasts are alike : revisiting the role of PDGF - A and PDGF - B using PDGF - targeted mice . Curr . Opin . Nephrol . Hypertens . 7 , 21 – 26 ( 1998 ) . 34 . Martin , P . Wound healing — aiming for perfect skin regeneration . Science 276 , 75 – 81 ( 1997 ) . 35 . Lindahl , P . , Johansson , B . R . , Leveen , P . & Betsholtz , C . Pericyte loss and microaneurysm formation in PDGF - B - deficient mice . Science 277 , 242 – 245 ( 1997 ) . 36 . Bostrom , H . et al . PDGF - A signaling is a critical event in lung alveolar myofibroblast development and alveogenesis . Cell 85 , 863 – 873 ( 1996 ) . 37 . Desmouliere , A . , Rubbia - Brandt , L . , Grau , G . & Gabbiani , G . Heparin induces α - smooth muscle actin expression in cultured fibroblasts and in granulation tissue myofibroblasts . Lab . Invest . 67 , 716 – 726 ( 1992 ) . 38 . Rubbia - Brandt , L . , Sappino , A . P . & Gabbiani , G . Locally applied GM - CSF induces the accumulation of α - smooth muscle actin containing myofibroblasts . Virchows Arch . B Cell Pathol . Incl . Mol . Pathol . 60 , 73 – 82 ( 1991 ) . 39 . Ffrench - Constant , C . , Van de Water , L . , Dvorak , H . F . & Hynes , R . O . Reappearance of an embryonic pattern of fibronectin splicing during wound healing in the adult rat . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 903 – 914 ( 1989 ) . 40 . Serini , G . et al . The fibronectin domain ED - A is crucial for myofibroblastic phenotype induction by transforming growth factor - β 1 . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 873 – 881 ( 1998 ) . Shows that the ED - A domain of cellular fibronectin is required for α - SM actin stimulating activity of TGF - β 1 . 41 . Burridge , K . Are stress fibres contractile ? Nature 294 , 691 – 692 ( 1981 ) . 42 . Pelham , R . J . Jr & Wang , Y . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate flexibility . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 13661 – 13665 ( 1997 ) . This paper shows the ability of cells to survey the mechanical properties of their surrounding environment , and the effect this has on focal adhesion formation . This indicates the possible involvement of both protein tyrosine phosphorylation and myosin - generated cortical forces in this process . 43 . Tomasek , J . J . , Haaksma , C . J . , Eddy , R . J . & Vaughan , M . B . Fibroblast contraction occurs on release of tension in attached collagen lattices : dependency on an organized actin cytoskeleton and serum . Anat . Rec . 232 , 359 – 368 ( 1992 ) . Shows that fibroblasts in stressed collagen lattices acquire the myofibroblast phenotype and that these cells can generate contractile force , which results in rapid contraction of the collagen lattices . 44 . Elsdale , T . & Bard , J . Collagen substrata for studies on cell behavior . J . Cell Biol . 54 , 626 – 637 ( 1972 ) . 45 . Mochitate , K . , Pawelek , P . & Grinnell , F . Stress relaxation of contracted collagen gels : disruption of actin filament bundles , release of cell surface fibronectin , and down - regulation of DNA and protein synthesis . Exp . Cell Res . 193 , 198 – 207 ( 1991 ) . 46 . Halliday , N . L . & Tomasek , J . J . Mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix influence fibronectin fibril assembly in vitro . Exp . Cell Res . 217 , 109 – 117 ( 1995 ) . 47 . Porter , R . A . , Brown , R . A . , Eastwood , M . , Occleston , N . L . & Khaw , P . T . Ultrastructural changes during contraction of collagen lattices by ocular fibroblasts . Wound Repair Regen . 6 , 157 – 166 ( 1998 ) . 48 . Tomasek , J . J . et al . Gelatinase A activation is regulated by the organization of the polymerized actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 7482 – 7487 ( 1997 ) . 49 . Kasugai , S . et al . Measurements of the isometric contractile forces generated by dog periodontal ligament fibroblasts in vitro . Arch . Oral Biol . 35 , 597 – 601 ( 1990 ) . 50 . Delvoye , P . , Wiliquet , P . , Leveque , J . L . , Nusgens , B . V . & Lapiere , C . M . Measurement of mechanical forces generated by skin fibroblasts embedded in a three - dimensional collagen gel . J . Invest . Dermatol . 97 , 898 – 902 ( 1991 ) . 51 . Kolodney , M . S . & Wysolmerski , R . B . Isometric contraction by fibroblasts and endothelial cells in tissue culture : a quantitative study . J . Cell Biol . 117 , 73 – 82 ( 1992 ) . 52 . Eastwood , M . , McGrouther , D . A . & Brown , R . A . A culture force monitor for measurement of contraction forces generated in human dermal fibroblast cultures : evidence for cell - matrix mechanical signalling . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1201 , 186 – 192 ( 1994 ) . 53 . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . & Burridge , K . Rho - stimulated contractility drives the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 1403 – 1415 ( 1996 ) . Shows that activated Rho stimulates contractility , drives the formation of stress fibres and focal adhesions , and elevates tyrosine phosphorylation . 54 . Vaughan , M . B . , Howard , E . W . & Tomasek , J . J . Transforming growth factor - β 1 promotes the morphological and functional differentiation of the myofibroblast . Exp . Cell Res . 257 , 180 – 189 ( 2000 ) . Shows that TGF - β 1 will promote the formation of stress fibres , focal adhesions and fibronectin fibrils by fibroblasts that are cultured in stressed collagen lattices , and that this correlates with increased generation of contractile force . 55 . Ronnov - Jessen , L . & Petersen , O . W . Induction of α - smooth muscle actin by transforming growth factor - β 1 in quiescent human breast gland fibroblasts . Implications for myofibroblast generation in breast neoplasia . Lab . Invest . 68 , 696 – 707 ( 1993 ) . 56 . Roberts , A . B . & Sporn , M . B . in The Molecular and Cellular Biology of Wound Repair ( ed . Clark , R . A . F . ) 275 – 308 ( Plenum Press , New York , 1996 ) . 57 . O’Kane , S . & Ferguson , M . W . Transforming growth factor - β s and wound healing . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 29 , 63 – 78 ( 1997 ) . 58 . Massague , J . The transforming growth factor - β family . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 6 , 597 – 641 ( 1990 ) . 59 . Border , W . A . & Noble , N . A . Transforming growth factor β in tissue fibrosis . N . Engl . J . Med . 331 , 1286 – 1292 ( 1994 ) . 60 . Schmid , P . , Itin , P . , Cherry , G . , Bi , C . & Cox , D . A . Enhanced expression of transforming growth factor - β type I and type II receptors in wound granulation tissue and hypertrophic scar . Am . J . Pathol . 152 , 485 – 493 ( 1998 ) . 61 . Kim , S . J . et al . Autoinduction of transforming growth factor β 1 is mediated by the AP - 1 complex . Mol . Cell . Biol . 10 , 1492 – 1497 ( 1990 ) . 62 . Yang , L . et al . Healing of burn wounds in transgenic mice overexpressing transforming growth factor - β 1 in the epidermis . Am . J . Pathol . 159 , 2147 – 2157 ( 2001 ) . 63 . Roberts , A . B . et al . Transforming growth factor type β : rapid induction of fibrosis and angiogenesis in vivo and stimulation of collagen formation in vitro . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 83 , 4167 – 4171 ( 1986 ) . 64 . Lund , L . R . et al . Transforming growth factor - β is a strong and fast acting positive regulator of the level of type - 1 plasminogen activator inhibitor mRNA in WI - 38 human lung fibroblasts . EMBO J . 6 , 1281 – 1286 ( 1987 ) . 65 . Borsi , L . , Castellani , P . , Risso , A . M . , Leprini , A . & Zardi , L . Transforming growth factor - β regulates the splicing pattern of fibronectin messenger RNA precursor . FEBS Lett . 261 , 175 – 178 ( 1990 ) . 66 . Miyazono , K . , Ichijo , H . & Heldin , C . H . Transforming growth factor - β : latent forms , binding proteins and receptors . Growth Factors 8 , 11 – 22 ( 1993 ) . 67 . Khalil , N . TGF - β : from latent to active . Microbes Infect . 1 , 1255 – 1263 ( 1999 ) . 68 . Massague , J . & Wotton , D . Transcriptional control by the TGF - β / Smad signaling system . EMBO J . 19 , 1745 – 1754 ( 2000 ) . 69 . Heldin , C . H . , Miyazono , K . & ten Dijke , P . TGF - β signalling from cell membrane to nucleus through SMAD proteins . Nature 390 , 465 – 471 ( 1997 ) . 70 . Schnabl , B . et al . The role of Smad3 in mediating mouse hepatic stellate cell activation . Hepatology 34 , 89 – 100 ( 2001 ) . 71 . Tomasek , J . J . , Flanders , K . C . & Haaksma , C . J . Smad3 signaling is not required for TGF - β 1 promoted myofibroblast differentiation . Wound Repair Regen . ( in the press ) . 72 . Hautmann , M . B . , Madsen , C . S . & Owens , G . K . A transforming growth factor β ( TGF β ) control element drives TGF β - induced stimulation of smooth muscle α - actin gene expression in concert with two CArG elements . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 10948 – 10956 ( 1997 ) . 73 . Roy , S . G . , Nozaki , Y . & Phan , S . H . Regulation of α - smooth muscle actin gene expression in myofibroblast © 2002 Nature Publishing Group 362 | MAY 2002 | VOLUME 3 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S differentiation from rat lung fibroblasts . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 33 , 723 – 734 ( 2001 ) . 74 . Sullivan , K . M . , Lorenz , H . P . , Meuli , M . , Lin , R . Y . & Adzick , N . S . A model of scarless human fetal wound repair is deficient in transforming growth factor β . J . Pediatr . Surg . 30 , 198 – 202 ( 1995 ) . 75 . Mack , C . P . & Owens , G . K . Regulation of smooth muscle α - actin expression in vivo is dependent on CArG elements within the 5 ′ and first intron promoter regions . Circ . Res . 84 , 852 – 861 ( 1999 ) . 76 . Swartz , E . A . , Johnson , A . D . & Owens , G . K . Two MCAT elements of the SM α - actin promoter function differentially in SM versus non - SM cells . Am . J . Physiol . 275 , C608 – C618 ( 1998 ) . 77 . Schurch , W . , Skalli , O . & Gabbiani , G . in Dupuytren’s Disease ( eds McFarlane , R . , McGrouther , D . A . & Flint , M . H . ) 31 – 47 ( Churchill Livingston , Edinburgh , 1990 ) . 78 . Van der Loop , F . T . , Gabbiani , G . , Kohnen , G . , Ramaekers , F . C . & van Eys , G . J . Differentiation of smooth muscle cells in human blood vessels as defined by smoothelin , a novel marker for the contractile phenotype . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 17 , 665 – 671 ( 1997 ) . 79 . Christen , T . et al . Mechanisms of neointima formation and remodeling in the porcine coronary artery . Circulation 103 , 882 – 888 ( 2001 ) . 80 . Van der Loop , F . T . , Schaart , G . , Timmer , E . D . , Ramaekers , F . C . & van Eys , G . J . Smoothelin , a novel cytoskeletal protein specific for smooth muscle cells . J . Cell Biol . 134 , 401 – 411 ( 1996 ) . 81 . Jones , R . C . & Jacobson , M . Angiogenesis in the hypertensive lung : response to ambient oxygen tension . Cell Tissue Res . 300 , 263 – 284 ( 2000 ) . 82 . Higton , D . I . R . & James , D . W . The force of contraction of full - thickness wounds of rabbit skin . Br . J . Surg . 51 , 462 – 466 ( 1964 ) . 83 . Majno , G . , Gabbiani , G . , Hirschel , B . J . , Ryan , G . B . & Statkov , P . R . Contraction of granulation tissue in vitro : similarity to smooth muscle . Science 173 , 548 – 550 ( 1971 ) . 84 . Gabbiani , G . , Hirschel , B . J . , Ryan , G . B . , Statkov , P . R . & Majno , G . Granulation tissue as a contractile organ . A study of structure and function . J . Exp . Med . 135 , 719 – 734 ( 1972 ) . 85 . Appleton , I . , Tomlinson , A . , Chander , C . L . & Willoughby , D . A . Effect of endothelin - 1 on croton oil - induced granulation tissue in the rat . A pharmacologic and immunohistochemical study . Lab . Invest . 67 , 703 – 710 ( 1992 ) . 86 . Hinz , B . , Celetta , G . , Tomasek , J . J . , Gabbiani , G . & Chaponnier , C . α - smooth muscle actin expression upregulates fibroblast contractile activity . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2730 – 2741 ( 2001 ) . This shows that a correlation exists between α - SM actin expression and contractile activity of fibroblast in vitro . 87 . Arora , P . D . & McCulloch , C . A . Dependence of collagen remodelling on α - smooth muscle actin expression by fibroblasts . J . Cell Physiol . 159 , 161 – 175 ( 1994 ) . 88 . Arora , P . D . , Narani , N . & McCulloch , C . A . The compliance of collagen gels regulates transforming growth factor - β induction of α - smooth muscle actin in fibroblasts . Am . J . Pathol . 154 , 871 – 882 ( 1999 ) . Shows that TGF - β 1 - induced increases of α - SM actin content are dependent on the resistance of the substrate to deformation and that the generation of intracellular tension is a central determinant of contractile cytoskeletal gene expression . 89 . Ronnov - Jessen , L . & Petersen , O . W . A function for filamentous α - smooth muscle actin : retardation of motility in fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 134 , 67 – 80 ( 1996 ) . 90 . Chaponnier , C . et al . The specific NH 2 - terminal sequence Ac - EEED of α - smooth muscle actin plays a role in polymerization in vitro and in vivo . J . Cell Biol . 130 , 887 – 895 ( 1995 ) . 91 . Hinz , B . , Gabbiani , G . & Chaponnier , C . The N - terminal peptide of α - smooth muscle actin inhibits force generation by the myofibroblast in vitro and in vivo . J . Cell Biol . ( in the press ) . This shows that the amino - terminal sequence of α - SM actin inhibits myofibroblast contraction in vitro and in vivo , which indicates a new therapeutic strategy . 92 . Nobes , C . D . & Hall , A . Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress fibers , lamellipodia , and filopodia . Cell 81 , 53 – 62 ( 1995 ) . 93 . Balaban , N . Q . et al . Force and focal adhesion assembly : a close relationship studied using elastic micropatterned substrates . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 466 – 472 ( 2001 ) . 94 . Geiger , B . , Bershadsky , A . , Pankov , R . & Yamada , K . M . Transmembrane crosstalk between the extracellular matrix – cytoskeleton crosstalk . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 793 – 805 ( 2001 ) . 95 . Zamir , E . & Geiger , B . Molecular complexity and dynamics of cell - matrix adhesions . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 3583 – 3590 ( 2001 ) . 96 . Cukierman , E . , Pankov , R . , Stevens , D . R . & Yamada , K . M . Taking cell - matrix adhesions to the third dimension . Science 294 , 1708 – 1712 ( 2001 ) . 97 . Heino , J . , Ignotz , R . A . , Hemler , M . E . , Crouse , C . & Massague , J . Regulation of cell adhesion receptors by transforming growth factor - β . Concomitant regulation of integrins that share a common β 1 subunit . J . Biol . Chem . 264 , 380 – 388 ( 1989 ) . 98 . Ignotz , R . A . , Heino , J . & Massague , J . Regulation of cell adhesion receptors by transforming growth factor - β . Regulation of vitronectin receptor and LFA - 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 264 , 389 – 392 ( 1989 ) . 99 . Brown , R . A . et al . Enhanced fibroblast contraction of 3D collagen lattices and integrin expression by TGF - β 1 and β 3 : mechanoregulatory growth factors ? Exp . Cell Res . 274 , 310 – 322 ( 2002 ) . Study shows very rapid stimulation of traction force by TGF - β 1 and TGF - β 3 , which is consistent with activated cytoskeletal contraction . 100 . Katoh , K . , Kano , Y . , Masuda , M . , Onishi , H . & Fujiwara , K . Isolation and contraction of the stress fiber . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 1919 – 1938 ( 1998 ) . 101 . Leung , T . , Manser , E . , Tan , L . & Lim , L . A novel serine / threonine kinase binding the Ras - related RhoA GTPase which translocates the kinase to peripheral membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 29051 – 29054 ( 1995 ) . 102 . Ishizaki , T . et al . The small GTP - binding protein Rho binds to and activates a 160 kDa Ser / Thr protein kinase homologous to myotonic dystrophy kinase . EMBO J . 15 , 1885 – 1893 ( 1996 ) . 103 . Chihara , K . et al . Cytoskeletal rearrangements and transcriptional activation of c - fos serum response element by Rho - kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 25121 – 25127 ( 1997 ) . 104 . Amano , M . et al . Myosin II activation promotes neurite retraction during the action of Rho and Rho - kinase . Genes Cells 3 , 177 – 188 ( 1998 ) . 105 . Amano , M . et al . Phosphorylation and activation of myosin by Rho - associated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 20246 – 20249 ( 1996 ) . 106 . Kimura , K . et al . Regulation of myosin phosphatase by Rho and Rho - associated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) . Science 273 , 245 – 248 ( 1996 ) . 107 . Kawano , Y . et al . Phosphorylation of myosin - binding subunit ( MBS ) of myosin phosphatase by Rho - kinase in vivo . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1023 – 1038 ( 1999 ) . 108 . Katoh , K . et al . Rho - kinase - mediated contraction of isolated stress fibers . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 569 – 584 ( 2001 ) . Describes an isolated reactivatable stress fibre contraction model in which actomyosin - based nonmuscle contractility is regulated by two kinase systems : MLCK , which promotes rapid contraction , and Rho kinase , which maintains a sustained contraction . 109 . Gong , M . C . et al . Role of guanine nucleotide - binding proteins – ras - family or trimeric proteins or both in Ca 2 + sensitization of smooth muscle . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 1340 – 1345 ( 1996 ) . 110 . Tomasek , J . J . , Martin , M . D . , Vaughan , M . B . , Cowan , R . & Kropp , B . P . Myofibroblast contraction in granulation tissue is dependent on Rho kinase . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 88a ( 2000 ) . 111 . Parizi , M . , Howard , E . W . & Tomasek , J . J . Regulation of LPA - promoted myofibroblast contraction : role of Rho , myosin light chain kinase , and myosin light chain phosphatase . Exp . Cell Res . 254 , 210 – 220 ( 2000 ) . Shows that LPA - promoted contraction of myofibroblasts occurs through the Rho – Rho kinase pathway , probably by inhibiting myosin light chain phosphatase . 112 . Glimcher , M . J . in Pathobiology ( eds Kang , A . H . & Nimni , M . E . ) 137 – 165 ( CRC Press , Boca Ratton , 1992 ) . 113 . Glimcher , M . J . & Peabody , H . M . in Dupuytren’s Disease ( eds McFarlane , R . , McGrouther , D . A . & Flint , M . H . ) 72 – 85 ( Churchill Livingston , Edinburgh , 1990 ) . 114 . Ryan , G . B . et al . Myofibroblasts in human granulation tissue . Hum . Pathol . 5 , 55 – 67 ( 1974 ) . 115 . Grinnell , F . & Ho , C . H . Transforming growth factor β stimulates fibroblast – collagen matrix contraction by different mechanisms in mechanically loaded and unloaded matrices . Exp . Cell Res . 273 , 248 – 255 ( 2002 ) . 116 . Brown , R . A . & Byers , P . D . Swelling of cartilage and expansion of the collagen network . Calcif . Tissue Int . 45 , 260 – 261 ( 1989 ) . 117 . Nemetschek , T . et al . [ Functional properties of parallel fibred connective tissue with special regard to viscoelasticity ( author’s transl ) ] . Virchows Arch . A Pathol . Anat . Histol . 386 , 125 – 151 ( 1980 ) . 118 . Woessner , J . F . in Collagen in Health and Disease ( eds Jayson , M . I . V . & Weiss , J . B . ) 506 – 527 ( Churchill Livingston , Edinburgh , 1982 ) . 119 . Byers , P . D . & Brown , R . A . in Methods in Cartilage Research ( eds Maroudas , A . & Kuettner , K . E . ) 318 – 321 ( Academic , London , 1990 ) . 120 . Gabbiani , G . , Le Lous , M . , Bailey , A . J . , Bazin , S . & Delaunay , A . Collagen and myofibroblasts of granulation tissue . A chemical , ultrastructural and immunologic study . Virchows Archiv . B Cell Pathol . 21 , 133 – 145 ( 1976 ) . 121 . Graham , H . K . , Holmes , D . F . , Watson , R . B . & Kadler , K . E . Identification of collagen fibril fusion during vertebrate tendon morphogenesis . The process relies on unipolar fibrils and is regulated by collagen – proteoglycan interaction . J . Mol . Biol . 295 , 891 – 902 ( 2000 ) . 122 . Danielson , K . G . et al . Targeted disruption of decorin leads to abnormal collagen fibril morphology and skin fragility . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 729 – 743 ( 1997 ) . 123 . Kypreos , K . E . , Birk , D . , Trinkaus - Randall , V . , Hartmann , D . J . & Sonenshein , G . E . Type V collagen regulates the assembly of collagen fibrils in cultures of bovine vascular smooth muscle cells . J . Cell Biochem . 80 , 146 – 155 ( 2000 ) . 124 . Young , B . B . , Gordon , M . K . & Birk , D . E . Expression of type XIV collagen in developing chicken tendons : association with assembly and growth of collagen fibrils . Dev . Dyn . 217 , 430 – 439 ( 2000 ) . 125 . Watson , R . B . , Holmes , D . F . , Graham , H . K . , Nusgens , B . V . & Kadler , K . E . Surface located procollagen N - propeptides on dermatosparactic collagen fibrils are not cleaved by procollagen N - proteinase and do not inhibit binding of decorin to the fibril surface . J . Mol . Biol . 278 , 195 – 204 ( 1998 ) . 126 . Ezura , Y . , Chakravarti , S . , Oldberg , A . , Chervoneva , I . & Birk , D . E . Differential expression of lumican and fibromodulin regulate collagen fibrillogenesis in developing mouse tendons . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 779 – 788 ( 2000 ) . 127 . Prajapati , R . T . , Chavally - Mis , B . , Herbage , D . , Eastwood , M . & Brown , R . A . Mechanical loading regulates protease production by fibroblasts in three - dimensional collagen substrates . Wound Repair Regen . 8 , 226 – 237 ( 2000 ) . 128 . Desmouliere , A . , Redard , M . , Darby , I . & Gabbiani , G . Apoptosis mediates the decrease in cellularity during the transition between granulation tissue and scar . Am . J . Pathol . 146 , 56 – 66 ( 1995 ) . 129 . Grinnell , F . , Zhu , M . , Carlson , M . A . & Abrams , J . M . Release of mechanical tension triggers apoptosis of human fibroblasts in a model of regressing granulation tissue . Exp . Cell Res . 248 , 608 – 619 ( 1999 ) . 130 . Mudera , V . C . et al . Molecular responses of human dermal fibroblasts to dual cues : contact guidance and mechanical load . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 45 , 1 – 9 ( 2000 ) . 131 . Wakatsuki , T . , Kolodney , M . S . , Zahalak , G . I . & Elson , E . L . Cell mechanics studied by a reconstituted model tissue . Biophys . J . 79 , 2353 – 2368 ( 2000 ) . 132 . Schurch , W . , Seemayer , T . A . & Gabbiani , G . in Histology for Pathologists ( ed . Sternberg , S . S . ) 129 – 165 ( Raven Press , Ltd , New York , 1997 ) . 133 . Garana , R . M . et al . Radial keratotomy . II . Role of the myofibroblast in corneal wound contraction . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 33 , 3271 – 3282 ( 1992 ) . 134 . Jester , J . V . , Petroll , W . M . , Barry , P . A . & Cavanagh , H . D . Expression of α - smooth muscle ( α - SM ) actin during corneal stromal wound healing . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 36 , 809 – 819 ( 1995 ) . 135 . Jester , J . V . et al . Corneal keratocytes : in situ and in vitro organization of cytoskeletal contractile proteins . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 35 , 730 – 743 ( 1994 ) . 136 . Masur , S . K . , Conors , R . J . Jr , Cheung , J . K . & Antohi , S . Matrix adhesion characteristics of corneal myofibroblasts . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 40 , 904 – 910 ( 1999 ) . 137 . Jester , J . V . , Petroll , W . M . & Cavanagh , H . D . Corneal stromal wound healing in refractive surgery : the role of myofibroblasts . Prog . Retin . Eye Res . 18 , 311 – 356 ( 1999 ) . 138 . Masur , S . K . , Dewal , H . S . , Dinh , T . T . , Erenburg , I . & Petridou , S . Myofibroblasts differentiate from fibroblasts © 2002 Nature Publishing Group NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 3 | MAY 2002 | 363 R E V I E W S when plated at low density . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 4219 – 4223 ( 1996 ) . 139 . Glasser , S . R . & Julian , J . Intermediate filament protein as a marker of uterine stromal cell decidualization . Biol . Reprod . 35 , 463 – 474 ( 1986 ) . 140 . Toccanier - Pelte , M . - F . , Skalli , O . , Kapanci , Y . & Gabbiani , G . Characterization of stromal cells with myoid features in lymph nodes and spleen in normal and pathological conditions . Am . J . Pathol . 129 , 109 – 118 ( 1987 ) . 141 . Sappino , A . P . , Dietrich , P . Y . , Skalli , O . , Widgren , S . & Gabbiani , G . Colonic pericryptal fibroblasts . Differentiation pattern in embryogenesis and phenotypic modulation in epithelial proliferative lesions . Virchows Arch . A Pathol . Anat . Histopathol . 415 , 551 – 557 ( 1989 ) . 142 . Kaye , G . I . , Lane , N . & Pascal , P . R . Colonic pericryptal fibroblast sheath : replication , migration and cytodifferentiation of a mesenchymal cell - system in adult tissue . II . Fine structural aspects of normal rabbit and human colon . Gastroenterology 54 , 852 – 865 ( 1968 ) . 143 . Czernobilsky , B . et al . α smooth muscle actin ( α - SM actin ) in normal human ovaries , in ovarian stromal hyperplasia and in ovarian neoplasms . Virchows Arch . B Cell Pathol . Incl . Mol . Pathol . 57 , 55 – 61 ( 1989 ) . 144 . Beertsen , W . , Everts , V . & van den Hooff , A . Fine structure of fibroblasts in the periodontal ligament of the rat incisor and their possible role in tooth eruption . Arch . Oral Biol . 19 , 1087 – 1098 ( 1974 ) . 145 . Bressler , R . S . Myoid cells in the capsule of the adrenal gland and in monolayers derived from cultured adrenal capsules . Anat . Rec . 177 , 525 – 531 ( 1973 ) . 146 . Yokoi , Y . et al . Immunocytochemical detection of desmin in fat - storing cells ( Ito cells ) . Hepatology 4 , 709 – 714 ( 1984 ) . 147 . Kapanci , Y . , Ribaux , C . , Chaponnier , C . & Gabbiani , G . Cytoskeletal features of alveolar myofibroblasts and pericytes in normal human and rat lung . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 40 , 1955 – 1963 ( 1992 ) . 148 . Charbord , P . et al . The cytoskeleton of stromal cells from human bone marrow cultures resembles that of cultured smooth muscle cells . Exp . Hematol . 18 , 276 – 282 ( 1990 ) . Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge the support of the National Institutes of Health , the Wellcome Foundation , the Swiss National Science Foundation , UCB - Bioproducts and the European Union Framework V awards . We thank Professor D . A . McGrouther ( University of Manchester ) for his helpful early dis - cussions and E . Homberg for secretarial work . We apologize for the failure to cite many important contributions to this field owing to space limitations . Online links DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : LocusLink : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink TGF - β 1 OMIM : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / Omim Dupuytren’s disease Swiss - Prot : http : / / www . expasy . ch / angiotensin II | β - cytoplasmic actin | γ - cytoplasmic actin | decorin | ED - A | ED - B | fibromodulin | lumican | MLCK | MMP1 | MMP2 | MMP3 | MMP9 | paxillin | procollagen N - protease | Rho kinase | ROK α | talin | tensin | vinculin Access to this interactive links box is free online .