www . ijdesign . org 51 International Journal of Design Vol . 14 No . 2 2020 Introduction Food design is a new design discipline . Although it may not be possible to provide a very precise definition , food design has been defined provisionally as the discipline that connects food and design : design applied to food and eating , or food and eating investigated from a design perspective ( Zampollo , 2016 ) . In a more descriptive way , Fabio Parasecoli proposed that “Food Design includes ideas , values , methods , processes and activities aiming to modify , improve and optimize individual and communal interactions with and around food , including but not limited to edible materials , objects , experiences , natural and built environments , services , systems and networks” ( quoted in Zampollo , 2016 , p . 7 ) . The broadness of these definitions suggests that food designers can develop alternatives for how farmers and the food industry grow , harvest , process , and distribute foods , for how consumers purchase , transport , store , cook , and eat foods , for how restaurants create menus , develop new dishes and serve them , and for the multiple roles that foods can play in people’s lives , in social relationships , in local communities and society at large , to name a few . For most designers who want to work in the food domain , this creates the challenge to get to know agriculture , food industry , culinary processes and the hospitality industry , because many of the current educational design programs do not offer a specialization in food design . Likewise , most current designers are unfamiliar with using foods as materials , even though foodstuffs hold interesting properties and design challenges ( Ayala , 2015 ; Bruns Alonso , Klooster , Stoffelsen , & Potuzáková , 2013 ; Lemma , Allione , De Giorgi , Bruno , & Stabellini , 2012 ; Rognoli , Bianchini , Maffei , & Karana , 2015 ) . Some designers already work with food industry . In cases where food companies have hired designers as internal staff , the majority have joined the packaging department , where they can be involved in three - dimensional ( 3D ) packaging design , graphic design or communication design . In cases where food companies work with external design agencies , designers mostly work on products in which foods can be prepared or served , such as a beer tap or a beer glass , but not on the food itself ( Schifferstein , 2016 ) . For future designers to become more involved in innovating the food itself , they need to obtain more specific knowledge on food products , including the technology of food production and preparation , hygiene and safety issues , food consumption , the role of food in society and food waste disposal ( Bordewijk & Schifferstein , 2020 ; Schifferstein , 2017 ) . Only when they get acquainted with this domain - specific knowledge , they will be able to act as equally knowledgeable partners in design and innovation projects . When designers do become involved in food innovation , they tend to broaden the scope of projects . As a consequence , the food experts involved in these projects typically will encounter specialists with disciplinary backgrounds they are unfamiliar with . With their communication skills and their working knowledge of ORIGINAL ARTICLE Supporting Food Design Processes : Development of Food Design Cards Youngsil Lee , Carola Breuer , and Hendrik N . J . Schifferstein * Department of Human - Centered Design , Delft University of Technology , the Netherlands Food design is a relatively new discipline that requires designers to become familiar with several areas that are not currently covered in many design curricula , such as agriculture , the food industry , culinary processes and the hospitality industry . To inspire , enrich and facilitate food design processes , we developed and tested a card set reflecting the richness of the food design field . After literature review , we clustered findings into seven main categories : agriculture , industrial processing , distribution & marketing , kitchen management , eater , consumption situation , and policy & legislation . Each category is represented by five topic cards and one overview card . The card set is accompanied by instructions for six exercises . Testing the card set among individual designers and student groups showed that it was considered useful in multiple stages of the design process . In the beginning of the design process , it was used to gain overview and to inspire . Along the process , it enhanced brainstorming , facilitated discussions , and was used to create scenarios and refine ideas . In later stages , the variety of topics was helpful in evaluating whether all important design aspects had been considered . Keywords – Card Set , Creativity , Design Tools , Food Design , Multidisciplinary . Relevance to Design Practice – The card set can support the creative process in multiple areas of the food domain . It brings together design expertise with multiple disciplines relevant for the food context . Citation : Lee , Y . , Breuer , C . , & Schifferstein , H . N . J . ( 2020 ) . Supporting food design processes : Development of food design cards . International Journal of Design , 14 ( 2 ) , 51 - 64 . Received October 15 , 2018 ; Accepted May 6 , 2020 ; Published August 31 , 2020 . Copyright : © 2020 Lee , Breuer , & Schifferstein . Copyright for this article is retained by the authors , with first publication rights granted to the International Journal of Design . All journal content is open - accessed and allowed to be shared and adapted in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution - NonCommercial 4 . 0 Internationa l ( CC BY - NC 4 . 0 ) License . * Corresponding Author : h . n . j . schifferstein @ tudelft . nl www . ijdesign . org 52 International Journal of Design Vol . 14 No . 2 2020 Supporting Food Design Processes : Development of Food Design Cards each of these disciplinary areas , designers can play an important role in facilitating and structuring the cooperation between people with different backgrounds . In addition , they can facilitate the integration of the knowledge that is necessary to develop successful new food design concepts ( Schifferstein , 2016 ) . We want to support this expansion in scope by developing a card set that describes the most important areas and topics that are relevant for food design projects . By providing physical tokens that can be easily manipulated , the card set can help in creating overview and in facilitating discussion among experts from different disciplines and , thereby , contribute to the integration of knowledge from different departments into a coherent proposition . Although the focus of the current paper is the role of the designer and how the card set can support the designer who works in the food domain , the card set should support all professionals involved in the innovation project . Because so many disciplines are relevant for the food context , every expert can only be a specialist in a small part of the domain . Hence , all participants will benefit by becoming aware of the other relevant disciplines and can try to build bridges in order to evaluate projects from multiple perspectives . In addition , the card set may support a new , more creative process of generating new concepts and thus introduce another way of working in food innovation . Therefore , we see a role for the card set in the food industry , food policy development , food legislation , and several other professional areas . Card Sets as Design Tools In the field of engineering design , Lindahl ( 2005 ) found that designers have three main purposes when using a method or tool : to facilitate communication during the process , contribute with structure , and integrate knowledge and experience as a know - how backup . In terms of requirements , he found that the design method or tool should be easy to adopt and implement , facilitate designers to fulfil specified requirements , reduce the risk that important elements in product development are forgotten , and reduce the total time needed to complete the task . Similarly , in the field of eco - design Lofthouse ( 2006 ) found that designers tend to look for guidance , information and education . She indicated that a tool should preferably contain many examples , be as visual as possible , and contain the smallest amount of text in everyday language . Using the tool should not take too much time , and at the same time it should fit with the designers’ regular ways of working . Although these requirements were derived in a specific design context , they seem to apply for the field of food design equally well . In line with these requirements , many design researchers have developed card - based design tools to support their design process . Physical card sets are popular , because they provide new input to the design process in an inspiring way . Cards make the design process visible , more tangible , more intuitive , and less abstract . They provide an overview of the information , together with the flexibility to compare elements , evaluate them or combine them . They give designers the freedom to restructure information and determine priorities . This supports the clarification and the iterative development of ideas ( Casais , Mugge , & Desmet , 2016 ; Lafreniere , Dayton , & Muller , 1999 ; Lucero & Arrasvuori , 2010 ) . Furthermore , they can facilitate communication between the members of the design team and also with external parties , such as potential users or company management , because they offer a common language to facilitate shared understanding ( Beck , Obrist , Bernhaupt , & Tscheligi , 2008 ) . They help to keep the design team focused on the design process ( Lucero & Arrasvuori , 2010 ) . Card sets can help designers to grasp knowledge from additional domains and elaborate on a specific problem , in order to ensure that a design solution is in line with multiple perspectives on an issue . If a discussion becomes unproductive , cards can introduce new elements or a different view and thus enable a shift in focus that may help to invigorate the discussion . By presenting combinations of seemingly unrelated elements , cards can spark innovative ideas . And presenting information in a playful way can enhance creativity , because it takes pressure away from coming up with new ideas . Cards can also be used to evaluate , rate or bookmark ideas generated ( Hornecker , 2010 ) . Lucero , Dalsgaard , Halskov , and Buur ( 2016 ) summarized these benefits of using physical cards in three headings : cards are tangible idea containers , they trigger combinatorial creativity , and they enable collaboration . In their survey of card - based design tools , Wölfel and Merritt ( 2013 ) evaluated card sets on the basis of their intended purpose and scope , duration of use and placement in the design process , the type of usage instructions , the degree of customization , and the formal qualities of the set . On the basis of their analysis , these authors distinguished between three different types of card sets : ( 1 ) general purpose / repository cards that offer a method repository or aim to stimulate inspiration or lateral thinking and that can be used throughout the entire design process , ( 2 ) customizable cards that are typically used in participatory design and that encourage non - designers to contribute to the creative process , and ( 3 ) context - specific cards that are developed primarily to focus on a specific design agenda or context . The latter type of card sets Youngsil Lee received Bachelor degrees in Visual Design and Food Bio - engineering ( cum laude ) from Seoul National University . After working in the food and health industry for 4 years ( CJ CheilJedang , Korea ) , she returned to university to obtain her Master’s degree in Strategic Product Design from TU Delft . With her background in engineering , design , and marketing , her interests evolve around energy supply , food provision , and cultural differences . Currently , she works for a digital design agency as an interaction designer at Mirabeau in Amsterdam . She is passionate about applying human - centered approaches to bring design solutions to practice . Carola Breuer received her Master’s degree in Design for Interaction from TU Delft , after completing training as a chef and bartender . She has worked for research as well as commercial entities , such as TU Delft , Fraunhofer and BSH Home Appliances Group and thereby gathered theoretical as well as practical knowledge in the field of user experience and service design . Currently she works at a digital design agency called ui / deation in Munich . Working with food and designing for food - related topics is her personal passion . Rick ( H . N . J . ) Schifferstein is Associate Professor at the Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering of Delft University of Technology . His topics of interest include ( multi ) sensory perception , food design , and experience - driven innovation . He contributed to 75 + papers in international scientific journals , including Acta Psychologica , Food Quality and Preference , Chemical Senses , Materials & Design , and International Journal of Design . He is principal editor of the International Journal of Food Design , and co - editor of the books Food , People and Society ( 2001 ) , Product Experience ( 2008 ) , From Floating Wheelchairs to Mobile Car Parks ( 2011 ) , and Advanced Design Methods for Successful Innovation ( 2013 ) . www . ijdesign . org 53 International Journal of Design Vol . 14 No . 2 2020 Y . Lee , C . Breuer , and H . N . J . Schifferstein are mainly used at a specific point in the design process with an explicit set of usage instructions . In our case , we aim to develop such a context - specific card set that introduces the richness of the food design field to the participants of food innovation projects . Besides developing a physical design representing and describing the various relevant topics , we will also propose a set of instructions indicating how these cards can be used . Using Card Sets for Food Design Recently , Zampollo and Peacock ( 2016 ) described the development of the Thoughts for Food card set , which is specifically aimed at activating themes regarding the ideal eating situation for the preparation phase of the food design process . Examples of themes are sharing , immersion , changes , and curiosity . Their card set fits the category of general purpose / repository cards that are aimed primarily at stimulating creativity and obtaining inspiration in order to generate new ideas in the early stages of product development . In contrast , our card set will be particularly helpful in getting an overview of the many different aspects that are important for the project . It can stimulate product developers to elaborate on the aspects that are relevant and specific for food projects . Hence , we think that our card set will probably be particularly valuable in the later stages of product development , where existing ideas are screened and concepts are improved . Whereas a stimulating tool might be useful for generating new food ideas , the current card set should assist in taking the design process a step further by reminding designers to consider a multitude of aspects that either need deliberation , can enrich their proposition , can enhance design details that yield competitive advantage in a saturated market , and that inspire evaluation from the viewpoints of multiple stakeholders . Hence , due to the differences in aim , our card set is likely to deviate substantially from the Thoughts for Food set . In fact , both sets could be useful in different stages of the food design process and they could fulfil complementary roles . Whereas the Thoughts for Food set may spark innovation and generate creative ideas for product concepts , the Food Design Cards may help to enrich and evaluate these ideas and develop them into engaging and realistic new product propositions . Ideally , the new card set should be suitable for usage in multiple contexts ( at food companies , in design agencies , and in an educational context at multiple types of schools , including food science , gastronomy , food service , and design schools ) to support and teach food innovation processes . It should introduce a range of topics that will allow participants to broaden their horizon and invite them to explore unknown topics . The broadness of the range of topics makes it suitable for application in multiple contexts and education programs , because the familiar topics will create a sense of recognition , while the unfamiliar topics will make participants aware of additional stakeholders and will spark interest for relevant topics outside their focal areas . We strive to make the set self - explanatory for usage in any of these contexts . Anyone who takes the initiative to introduce the card set in a creative session can determine which knowledge gaps may require additional time for investigation and discussion . In professional settings , the overview of all relevant topics will stimulate the inclusion of stakeholders from all relevant departments and disciplines , and will help to clarify their respective contributions . In addition , we expect the set to stimulate an open discussion on the respective arguments and support a clear decision - making process . This is in line with Brown ( 2008 ) , who suggests that using design methods helps companies to enhance 1 ) systemic thinking , 2 ) a human - centered approach , 3 ) iterative validations , and 4 ) tangible communication with multidisciplinary experts to create sustainable business models . In this paper we explore the value of the new card - based design tool to help designers with challenges they encounter in the food realm . We will design the first version of a card set and test it with several groups of participants . On the basis of these tests , we will improve our design and we develop a number of usage instructions to go with the card set . This improved card set with instructions will then be tested further by designers both in individual and in group challenges . Development of the Food Design Cards Because we explicitly wanted to incorporate the richness of the food design field in the card set , we started out with a review of papers published in the International Journal of Food Design . This recently started academic journal provides a platform for a cross - disciplinary approach to food design , soliciting contributions combining any food discipline ( e . g . , agricultural production , food science , culinary arts , hospitality , food culture , food marketing ) with one or more design disciplines ( e . g . , design theory , design history , design education , industrial design , graphic design , packaging design ) . The early papers that appeared in this journal helped us to define the foundations of the food design area . In particular , we made use of the special issue on food design education ( Biderman , 2017 ; Campagnaro & Ceraolo , 2017 ; Massari , 2017 ; Parasecoli , 2017 ; Perrone & Fuster , 2017 ; Reissig , 2017 ; Reynolds , 2017 ; Schifferstein , 2017 ) , because these papers together provided a multifaceted view on the topics that teachers from multiple disciplinary backgrounds would like to convey to their food design students , and on the variety of ways in which they approached the subject matter . Hence , this literature review provided us with a broad coverage of topics that was supported by a number of current experts in this relatively new field . In addition , it provided insights in the scientific disciplines included , the stakeholders identified in the field , the activities they performed , and so on . We also analysed several existing card sets and other tools that were developed to support different types of design processes ( e . g . , Daae & Boks , 2014 ; Deng et al . , 2014 ; Golembewski & Selby , 2010 ; Halskov & Dalsgaard , 2007 ; Hornecker , 2010 ; IDEO , 2018 ; Lucero & Arrasvuori , 2010 ; Benenson , 2018 ; MethodKit , 2018 ; Taylor , 2018 ; van Boeijen , 2015 ; van Kuijk , 2010 ; Yilmaz , Daly , Seifert , & Gonzalez , 2016 ; Zampollo & Peacock , 2016 ) in order to see how information was presented in these tools and to get an impression on how card sets were used in other design processes . In addition , we used this information to establish the criteria that we would use to evaluate the card set . www . ijdesign . org 54 International Journal of Design Vol . 14 No . 2 2020 Supporting Food Design Processes : Development of Food Design Cards Gathering and Clustering Raw Data The Food Design Cards should cover the food system across the borders of different disciplines . We started out by distinguishing between four important areas in the food domain : food science , food service , food studies , and food business . With food science we refer to the physical , biological , and chemical processes that affect food during production and processing . Food service refers to all kinds of activities related to cooking , eating , and presenting food . Food studies focus on the relationships between food and social contexts within the arts , humanities , and social sciences . Food business refers to ways of making the food system profitable . After defining these areas , a large amount of raw data was collected within each area by an extensive search through the latest journal papers , books , and online resources . These raw data were then clustered in order to derive umbrella terms within each of the four food system areas . For example , under the term Food studies at the 1st level , we identified the terms Individual , Interpersonal , Community , and Society at the 2nd level . Each of these terms was then subdivided at the 3rd level , and these could be subdivided once more , so that the basic structure of the hierarchy of terms consisted of four levels in the classification ( Table 1 ) . Terms that were not supported by enough data could be supplemented in the next steps . Deciding on the Final Terms for the Highest Level Categories The various categories of the card set should be mutually exclusive and should ideally cover all the data . Furthermore , the categories should connect the various phases of a food system in a natural way . Therefore , the classification in the previous section was restructured and relocated under new categories . In the first attempt to revise the classification , we tried to divide the data by distinguishing between eating in and eating out , and then breaking down the data set based on the chronological stages of eating in or out ( Schifferstein , 2017 ) . However , these two top categories could not be represented as part of a single system , as they tended to reveal two separate systems . In the second attempt , we started with 5W , 1H ( What , Who , Why , Where , When , How ) as categories and then divided these topics into activities of the food system , such as produce , Table 1 . An example of the classification of terms within one of the four areas of the food domain . First category Second Third Fourth ( examples ) Food studies ( relationship between food and human ) Individual Feeling ( Psychological ) The food I ate before ( breakfast , lunch , dinner ) Stress ( want to eat spicy food ) Pleasure ( how to indulge myself ) Healthy ( relieve guilty mind ) Heredity Allergy Food neophobia Ritual ( Eating Habit ) Working schedule Environment ( family ) Experience ( taste ) Principle Health ( diet , ingredient ) Environment ( organic , vegetarian , vegan ) Efficiency ( time , material ) Religion ( Hinduism ) Age From infant to old age Status Worker , student , CEO Interpersonal Family Tradition ( traditional recipe ) Bonding ( ritual eating together ) Holiday ( Thanksgiving ) Friends Friendship Co - worker Business Community ( Region ) Local characteristic Local product ( pasta , cheese ) MythMovement ( Slow food ) Society ( Culture ) Discipline ( Law & Policy ) Nutrition facts ( for food business ) Process ( for food business ) Import & Export ( FTA ) WelfareIncentive ( farm bill ) Education ( elementary , middle , high , college ) Economy Food shortage ( hunger ) History Religion ( halal ) Development , trend ( integrate new : internationalization , tourism , franchise ) Tradition ( keeping good custom : Chinese medicine ) www . ijdesign . org 55 International Journal of Design Vol . 14 No . 2 2020 Y . Lee , C . Breuer , and H . N . J . Schifferstein process , distribute , marketing , consume , and control . However , this yielded too many terms that were closely connected between the categories . For instance , a person with dietary restriction under the Who category would be closely linked to health & safety under the Why category . Finally , we decided to take the various elements of the food system as the basis for our classification and this appeared to work out well . We improved and refined the names and definitions of the category labels by including a large amount of records from our data collection . Each category was supposed to be approximately equally large , covering a similar number of topics . Eventually , the 7 categories of the card set were defined as agriculture , industrial processing , distribution & marketing , kitchen management , eater , consumption situation , and policy & consideration . Description of Topics on the Card The card set was now divided in 7 broad categories that covered all basic areas relevant for food design . Each category was identified with a different colour . The number of topic cards in each category was limited to five in order to prevent information overload ( Figure 1 ) . The card titles aimed to cover all basic and important topics in a category , including some trends that might gain importance in the near future . In addition to the title a visual icon was depicted and a question was added that clarified the topic of the card . Selected topics were transformed into essential questions to help designers become more inspired ( Deng et al . , 2014 ) . For instance , the topic Geography was rephrased as the question what are the factors that affect agriculture ? On the back of each card , six to eight examples were given that illustrated different elements of the topic and that were possible answers to the question . For instance , in response to what are the factors that affect agriculture ? we included season , climate , transport , weather , soil , market , and technology as examples . As an example , Table 2 describes the category Agriculture , with the topics and examples that belong to this category . The information for all seven categories was arranged in this table format . Two professors and three students of TU Delft helped to rewrite the contents to make it more comprehensible . Table 2 . Description of contents in the Agriculture category . Category Topics + Inspiring questions Examples Agriculture Geography What are the factors that affect agriculture ? Season , Climate , Transport , Weather , Soil , Market , Technology Improvement How can you cultivate and breed effectively ? Irrigation , Pesticides , Greenhouse , Vaccine , Genetically engineered , Fertilizer , Natural enemies Urban farming How can you cultivate and breed in urban cities ? Rooftop garden , Micro - farming , Community garden , Hydro - culture , Indoor farming , Pot farming Sustainable farming How can you make agriculture sustainable ? Improving animal life , Preventing water loss , Nutrient management , Preventing soil erosion , Reduce chemical use , Preventing pollution Self - sufficient farming Why not do farming by yourself ? Independent life , Distrust food industry , Personal well - being , Hobby , Enjoy farming , Sustainability Figure 1 . The seven categories of the card set in the original design . www . ijdesign . org 56 International Journal of Design Vol . 14 No . 2 2020 Supporting Food Design Processes : Development of Food Design Cards Design of the Individual Cards The contents of the cards could function as a trigger that might raise awareness of certain issues . The aim of the card set was to expand participants’ knowledge about the food domain ; we wanted them to gain a wider perspective on the food area . In addition , it could help participants to communicate with people from multiple disciplines and to avoid stereotypes . It should be helpful in refining ideas with critical thinking . In addition , the usability of the cards was deemed important . For instance , the information should be easily accessible and understandable and should not restrict the creative design process in any way . Therefore , all the texts were kept simple , using only a few words . Similarly , the icon on each card was kept abstract and simple , in a clean graphical style , and thereby gave the users the liberty to associate freely on the topic . The fronts of the card only contained the topic title , the icon , and the clarifying question . The fronts were meant to be used during the initial stages of the creative process , where ideas were generated using the main areas that needed to be considered in food design processes . The card fronts were used to explore the food system across the board and to get inspired . The image used conceptual icons rather than an explicit picture , in order to create the freedom to embrace different perspectives without fixating on a certain image . By combining cards from different categories , different types of ideas could be joined in a single design . The main goal of the back of each card was to refine initial ideas . This part showed concrete examples regarding the topic of the card . These examples were short and randomly scattered . It enabled users to choose example words and integrate these with their ideas , without any predefined order or priority . The inspiring question on the front gave them an opportunity to come up with diverse ideas , while the explicit examples on the back helped to shape these ideas into concrete concepts . It helped them to tackle different topics in more detail , to elaborate and refine the ideas . In second instance , the examples could be used to challenge initial design ideas . Users might add examples if they thought important examples were missing . In summary , the main deck consisted of 35 cards , divided in 7 categories of 5 cards each , approximately 85 mm by 120 mm in size . Instructions We conducted two workshops with groups of 4 - 6 Master students using prototypes of the card set in order to create guidelines to support the use of the set . In all workshop sessions , students were asked to generate ideas for new food products or services in specific contexts . In the end , this should result in an idea , specifying the 5W , 1H aspects ( What , Who , Why , Where , When , How ) . Through these workshops , we found out that it was important to familiarise the participants with the deck of cards before the workshop . Otherwise , participants would try to make sense of all the different cards . For instance , the participants could be provided with an overview of the card topics . Alternatively , the session could start with a specified activity , such as a card game , in which the cards were introduced . We would like the cards to enhance the participants’ workflow and creativity during idea generation , discussing initial ideas , and refinement of ideas . Hence , the cards should function as conversation starters . For example , during idea generation participants could select 5 cards from different categories that they considered the most relevant topics for the task at hand . Subsequently , participants could brainstorm about each topic and write down ideas on sticky notes . Then they could explain these ideas to the group and cluster them . During idea generation participants should only see the fronts of the cards , otherwise they might get distracted by all the possible details . After clustering and selecting ideas , the backs of the cards could be used for developing ideas further and for critically evaluating ideas from various perspectives . This could be done , for instance , by randomly picking some cards and challenging the favourite idea . Based on these insights , we decided to develop a set of general instructions containing basic information about the background , aim and structure of the card set . In addition , we created instructions for six games that would facilitate using the Figure 2 . The front ( category , topic title , icon & question ) and the back ( category , topic title , example keywords ) of an individual card in the original design . www . ijdesign . org 57 International Journal of Design Vol . 14 No . 2 2020 Y . Lee , C . Breuer , and H . N . J . Schifferstein card set for the food design process . Many card sets provide game rules to provide structure to the innovation process ( e . g . , Lucero & Arrasvuori , 2010 ; Mora , Gianni , & Divitini , 2017 ) . Our game rules were obtained by considering the instructions given in other card sets and by consulting methods of creative facilitation ( e . g . , Tassoul , 2009 ) . Two of these games were intended to support ideation , whereas the other four were primarily helpful for idea refinement . Each game consisted of a verbal instruction with one or two visuals . The ideation methods consisted of : • Random 3 : Randomly pick one card each from 3 differently coloured topic piles . Think of an idea or concept that connects all three topics . • Clustering : Find the cards that represent the most important questions that need to be addressed . Brainstorm ideas and write them on sticky notes . Cluster the answers to form concepts . The refinement methods included : • Aligning the group : Discuss each card and determine its importance for the concept . Place the card either on the important or the unimportant side . If you do not agree , place it in the middle . The important pile can then function as a first to do list . • Prioritizing : Draw a grid with “importance of the topic for the project” ( y ) and “urgency of the topic to be addressed” ( x ) . Now sort the topic cards into the grid . This will help you see which topics need to be addressed first , which can wait , and which can be addressed if there is still time . • Timeline : Draw a timeline for your project and choose the cards that are relevant . Sort the cards into the phases of your time plan . Also think about who can take care of which topic . • Have you thought of … ? : Distribute the cards evenly among all team members . One member takes the position of the devil’s advocate . He or she chooses a card and asks a question beginning with “Have you thought of … . ” The others try to answer the question . User Testing Consecutive user tests were conducted in three contexts . First , we invited individual students and professional designers to use the card set with instructions in food design projects , either as a personal project , a course requirement , or as their final graduation project . After another revision , we used the updated card set in a group assignment with Master students . The final card set was also used in three different assignments with Master students during the progression of an elective course in food design . Test in Individual Projects The aim of the test was to evaluate how the participants would use the card set to work on their food design challenges , either when working on their own or when involving others in a creative session . Participants were recruited at the faculty of Industrial Design Engineering at TU Delft , through social media , bulletin boards , and personal connections . Participants were asked to prepare a question or brief they wanted to work on and to bring working materials such as sticky notes , pen and paper . They were asked to read the instructions and try out two of the games before freely engaging in their process . If the researcher could attend the designer’s creative session , she gave a brief introduction to the study and discussed formalities about audio and video recording . Next , she would let the participant use the card set in a natural way , and would only ask clarification questions if needed . Subsequently , she conducted a short oral interview about the experience of the participant . If she was unable to attend the session , either due to practical limitations or to confidentiality issues , the participant replied to the interview questions either orally in a separate interview , or in writing . The general questions about the card set in the interview concerned what the card set was used for , how it was used , whether it helped to produce relevant design ideas or not , whether it functioned well with designers and non - designers , and how it could be improved . The questions about the games addressed which games were used , and whether the instructions were clear , useful , and fun to do . Six participants were Master students of Industrial Design Engineering , who were in their final year or had recently completed the program . Four followed the Master Design for Interaction and two followed the Master Integrated Product Design . Although we recruited six student participants originally , two of them did not complete the task : After looking through the set they decided not to use it , because the card set did not seem to fit with their plans . Typically , this occurred in cases where projects were already quite focused on a particular topic , but not yet at the end stage where designers would need to take all sorts of topics into consideration for a market launch . In the end , observations were made in three student projects , of which two were also videotaped , and oral feedback was received in one additional student project . In general , the observations in the student projects showed that participants did not read the instructions attentively and did not want to read more . They stated that the instructions felt very open and they did not see this as a problem . However , they wondered whether non - designers might want more guidance from instructions and whether a facilitator might be needed when working with non - designers . Even though the set consisted of many cards , participants liked to read through all the cards in order to see what kind of ideas this would elicit regarding their design brief . As a consequence , participants tended to lose quite a lot of time at the start of the session by going through all the cards . Hence , they tended to spend more time than anticipated on their first use . All three observed participants seemed to get very much immersed in the card set and largely forgot time . The observations showed that the card set was useful in gaining overview when trying to define a project brief and addressing all different kinds of topics . Designers generally found the set very useful in the first stage of food design projects , where the scope was still quite wide . Furthermore , the card set continued to be of use at any time in projects that had a wide scope ( e . g . , speculative projects ) . Also , the card set proved useful when evaluating whether the design took the whole food system www . ijdesign . org 58 International Journal of Design Vol . 14 No . 2 2020 Supporting Food Design Processes : Development of Food Design Cards into consideration and reflected all the necessary topics ( e . g . , legislation ) . The value of the card set was limited for designers who had a narrowly defined brief or had already focused on a concrete topic . In these cases , broad considerations of implications for multiple contexts or stakeholders were not applicable . Designers with these projects were looking for more in - depth information and found the information on the cards too general . Overall , the student participants were positive about the card set and its instructions . They found the card set open enough to suit multiple contexts , while it also provided enough guidance to enable all design students to use it in their project . Criticisms were generally specific to a single participant and their topic , and we used these remarks to fine - tune the topics on the cards set further . The card set was also evaluated by a professional food designer and her business partner , who performed design projects regularly for industrial clients . This designer was also trained in Industrial Design Engineering and had over 20 years of experience in food design projects . She provided both oral and written feedback . The professional designer and her business partner saw the main value in the card set at the start of the design project , using it to set the scope of the design assignment . Because the card set covered many topics , it gave a broad overview of all the different topics that the innovation could focus on . It made sure that all possible strategic directions were considered , before a choice was made together with the client . Hence , the card set was valuable for the process , because it made sure that all different and possibly important aspects had been considered at the start . During the project , however , more specific information would be needed as sources of inspiration that could not be provided by the card set . During the process , the designers needed to find new insights and inspiration on specific product details . Therefore , this design team typically developed a new , customized inspirational tool during the course of each project . After the individual tests , we wanted to reduce the amount of time card users spent to create an overview of the topics represented in the set . Therefore , we added 7 summary cards that provided an overview of all five topics within a category ( Figure 3 ) . In addition , because some of the participants reported that they had trouble distinguishing the 7 categories on the cards , the sections displaying the categories were contrasted with the overall design in the redesign ( Figure 4 ) . Also , the category policy & consideration was renamed into policy & legislation . The final design is free to be used for non - commercial purposes and is available for download from https : / / delftdesignlabs . org / food - design / . Food Design Cards are also available for purchase through this website . Test in Group Project The updated card set was tested in a group exercise , forming an assignment in the Master elective course Food & Eating Design . All participants were in their final year of the Master education . In the assignment , the design students used the card set to develop a number of design briefs : opportunities , questions , or problems that they found interesting to investigate in the food domain and were formulated in a way that left enough room for multiple types of design solutions . Examples of such challenges included “how to make grocery shopping more efficient and less time consuming for people with dietary restrictions” , “how to enhance the food experience through environment - friendly packaging” , and “how to offer people healthy , balanced and customizable meals , that are convenient to prepare and consume” . A week later , they presented the top 3 of their design opportunities in class . The assignment was performed by 11 groups of 3 - 5 students , each composed of 1 - 3 design students and 1 - 2 non - designer friends . They started the session by choosing two games they wanted to play . They could also invent an additional game themselves . Figure 3 . Example of a category overview card , showing the five topics in the category kitchen management . Figure 4 . Revised design of a topic card , with the category name in contrast . www . ijdesign . org 59 International Journal of Design Vol . 14 No . 2 2020 Y . Lee , C . Breuer , and H . N . J . Schifferstein Subsequently , they could use the card set in any way they wanted to perform their assignment . After the session , each group filled out an evaluation form about their experience using the card set for the group assignment . The feedback form consisted mainly of open questions addressing the difficulty of the assignment , the way they used the card set , its usefulness , and suggestions for improvement of the card set and its instructions . After reading the feedback from the students , a discussion session was held to clarify unclear feedback and ask for more details if needed . In general , the students found the card set helpful in formulating their design briefs . They found the structure clear ( category – topic – example ) and appreciated the broadness of the set . Some students indicated that the number of cards and topics was overwhelming at first , but after taking some time to get to know the set and read instructions , they found it useful in supporting their process . They mostly used the set to generate ideas and to become inspired , but also to facilitate discussion , create scenarios and refine their ideas . The broadness of the topics was generally seen as an added value reminding them of issues to be considered . However , students who were unfamiliar with some of these indicated that they might not use them for defining their topic , if they lacked necessary background knowledge . Some students commented that the topics mentioned on the cards were not specific enough to specify the exact topic of the design brief—they were too general for that . The game that was chosen most often as an introduction to their assignment was Random 3 . For this assignment , students found it helpful to pick a number of cards of their liking , make combinations , and then tried to formulate a related problem , or in some cases also tried to come up with possible solutions . The design students observed that non - designers tended to approach the design challenge in a somewhat different way . If the designers focused on the product or the final solution , the non - designers would focus on the context or on the process , or vice versa . However , this disparity might also have been caused by the fact that the designers in some cases already started working on the assignment before they involved the non - designers . The designers also observed that the non - designers tended to take some extra time to understand how the card set worked , because they were not familiar with working with these types of tools to support their process . Some non - designers were really impressed by how the set could easily help them generate many out - of - the - box ideas and became very enthusiastic about having such tools to support their work . In many cases , the groups appointed a facilitator to instruct the group , explain the procedure , and keep track of time . Especially in groups with non - designers , the role of the facilitator could be important to manage the creative session and bridge the experience gaps between participants with different backgrounds , to make sure everyone could fully participate in the process . With respect to the design process , the students indicated that they thought the cards could be useful at multiple stages in the process : ( 1 ) as inspiration in the beginning of the design process , ( 2 ) to enhance brainstorming for ideas for solution directions , or ( 3 ) to check if they covered all important design aspects at the end of the process . Using the Cards Several Times during a Single Project The final card set was also tested during three stages of a design project performed during the Master elective course Food & Eating Design . This project was performed on an individual basis and was the main deliverable for the course . All participants were in their final year of the Master education and none of them had participated in the previous tests . The aim of each assignment varied according to the stage of the project . Ideation Exercise The first assignment was intended to familiarise the students with the card set and to discover its potential in supporting idea generation . Students were divided into six groups of four students and were instructed to follow the instruction of the Random 3 exercise . Each group performed at least three rounds of 20 min . each . In each round they picked three cards with different colours and tried to come up with as many ideas or concepts that would connect these three cards . For each round , they noted down the number of ideas they had generated , they described their best idea in a few lines of text and they made a sketch . Each group ( N = 6 ) also filled out a small questionnaire in which they indicated how difficult and how much fun it was to perform the exercise ( each on a 5 - point scale ) . In addition , an open question format was used to assess how they used the card set , what made the task challenging , what they saw as the main benefits of using the card set , whether they would use the card set again , and whether there was anything they wanted to improve . The results showed that some groups found the task easy ( N = 2 ) and some found it difficult ( N = 3 ) ; some found the task fun to do ( N = 2 ) , others found it just okay ( N = 4 ) . The groups differed substantially in the mean number of ideas they generated in the three rounds , which varied from 2 . 0 to 7 . 7 . The variation between the three repetitions per group was never more than 3 . Apparently , the number of ideas depended largely on group composition and their process , rather than on the three cards they selected . Groups indicated that it was often quite challenging to link all three cards . Some groups first started out by linking two cards and then later included the third one . In some cases , they used the back of the cards with detailed examples to get inspiration for ideas . Some groups decided to pick a new card in case they could not come up with ideas . Others restricted their card selection to the cards that were of most interest to them . The main benefits of the exercise were its helpfulness in sparking ideas and broadening up the thinking process by going through the many topics included in the card set . Students also appreciated the clear structure and logic in the set—they indicated that this approach might be useful for developing sets for other areas as well . One of the ideas that a group of students generated was based on the cards Consumption Situation : Prepared Meal , Eater : Beliefs and Values , and Policy & Legislation : International Trade . The idea consisted of a chocolate bar , wrapped in a package that looked like a boarding pass , showing the origin of the chocolate and the distance it had travelled . A percentage of every bar purchased would go directly to the cocoa bean farmer . Another www . ijdesign . org 60 International Journal of Design Vol . 14 No . 2 2020 Supporting Food Design Processes : Development of Food Design Cards idea tried to integrate the cards Agriculture : Sustainable Farming , Distribution & Marketing : Package , and Consumption Situation : Atmosphere . The product idea consisted of a package of vegetables for a dish for multiple persons that also contained seeds of each of the vegetables . After enjoying the meal together with friends , each of the friends would take home one of the sacks of seeds . After three months , they would come together again to prepare a meal with the vegetables they each grew . The third idea brought together the cards Policy & Legislation : Food Education , Distribution & Marketing : Access , and Kitchen Management : Type of Food Service . It consisted of a healthy food pie . The centre of this transparent food pie contained a sweet , high - calorie part that you could only reach by eating the outside part of the pie . However , by the time you reached it , you would already feel full , so you would not eat it anymore . Another idea integrated Consumption Situation : Place , Kitchen Management : Storage & Waste , with Agriculture : Urban Farming . It consisted of a system of growing , cooking and serving food for a retirement home . The elderly who lived in the home could help in the vegetable garden , help in the kitchen , and eat the meal together , which provided them with meaningful and connecting activities and healthy meals , enhancing both their physical and mental health . The ideas discussed show that some of the concepts the students generated were highly innovative , whereas others could be created now , or might already exist . Refining the Topic The second assignment intended to help students find and refine the topic of their individual design project . Students were instructed to individually browse through the entire set of food design cards in search for aspects that related to their theme of interest , and to define their topic as precisely as possible . Subsequently , each student ( N = 24 ) evaluated the usefulness of the card set in helping them to define their topic , by replying to a set of questions that were equivalent to the set used in the previous assignment . The results showed that on average students rated their assignment as not easy , not difficult ( mean 2 . 8 , SD 0 . 88 ) and as okay to do ( mean 3 . 3 , SD 0 . 68 ) . The students indicated that the card set provided a good overview of the food realm with its clear , logical structure . The broadness of the topics allowed a more holistic approach and made them think of topics they initially did not think about . It allowed them to evaluate the topic of their challenge from many different viewpoints , they could find new clues that widened their topic , work out concepts in more detail , and generate new possibilities . These aspects were considered the main benefits of using the card set for this task . Although a large part of the students indicated that they would use the cards again for a similar task , some of them indicated that they found the set more suitable for generating ideas than to define a topic . These students suggested that the cards were particularly useful if they had no idea where to start , when they were looking for inspiration for a completely new topic , or if they were stuck in the process and needed to think from different perspectives . The more students had concrete ideas in their minds , the harder they found it to use the card set to define their design challenge . In this case , many cards seemed irrelevant and contained only quite abstract , generic information , rather than rich , detailed material . Some students noticed that they did not know all the words on the cards , possibly because they were not yet familiar with all topics in the food domain . Some reported that the cards were restrictive and limited their free thinking . Given the large number of topics , the set also did not help in narrowing down the topic . Instead , students thought the set could be more useful when evaluating concepts in a later stage of the design process . Examples of the challenges that students generated in this task included : • I want to make people aware of the amount of water that is required to produce specific products . • I want to inform bar and pub visitors on sustainable food . • I want to help people eat healthy by reminding them to eat slowly . • I want to help parents who want to introduce vegetables to toddlers . • I want to stimulate the connection between two people who eat the same meal at the same place , but not at the same time . Evaluate the Concept The third assignment involved a group exercise , in which students used the card set to evaluate the concepts they had developed individually in their design projects . In groups of 4 or 5 they used the exercise Have you thought of … ? to critically evaluate whether they had considered all the aspects that might be relevant when designing for the food context . After the exercise , they handed in a description and sketch of their idea , and they summarized the 3 - 5 most important insights that they had derived from the exercise . In addition , each student ( N = 18 ) evaluated the usefulness of the card set in helping them to refine their concept by replying to a set of questions that were equivalent to those used in the previous assignments . The results showed that on average students rated their assignment as not easy , not difficult ( mean 2 . 7 , SD 0 . 83 ) and as fun to do ( mean 3 . 6 , SD 0 . 59 ) . The large majority of students ( 88 % ) would like to use the card set again for this type of challenge . Many students also reported that the card set was more suitable for this task than it was for the previous assignment . The main benefit of doing this exercise with the cards was that it helped designers to consider aspects they had not thought of yet . It allowed them to consider whether they missed something and to assess whether this aspect was really important or not . This allowed them to make adjustments and to enrich their concept . Although a card might not seem relevant at first , it could jumpstart a discussion and introduce a new perspective . Students observed that the exercise could either be done individually or in a group . The advantage of doing it alone would be that they had more time to go through all the cards and carefully pick the ones they found most interesting . On the other hand , doing the exercise with people with different backgrounds and working on different projects would provoke interesting discussions and give extra inspiration . The topics on the cards made it easy for people in the group to become inspired and formulate questions for the others , and the design of the card www . ijdesign . org 61 International Journal of Design Vol . 14 No . 2 2020 Y . Lee , C . Breuer , and H . N . J . Schifferstein set provided a basic structure for the discussion , and also kept the atmosphere of the process light and playful . The main negative aspect mentioned was that some of the topics on the cards were not relevant for the design topic at hand . On the other hand , some other topics might be too obvious . If this happened repeatedly , the exercise could evoke feelings of annoyance or boredom . Some students found it easiest to apply the topics to their own project ; when trying to apply it to the project of other students , they had trouble relating some of the topics to the project at hand , and found the card set too broad . An incidental student found the structure of the card set too rigid : although the questions provided different angles , the student found the topics quite abstract and found that they did not sufficiently stimulate deeper thinking . To give some idea of the outcomes of the exercise : • The student who wanted to inform of bars and pubs visitors on sustainable food created attractive presentations for different bites made of organ meat . A lot of organs from cows , sheep and pigs currently end up in cat and dog food , whereas they are well suited for human consumption . Consumers would be able to receive information on the background of their bites , for instance by scanning a QR code . Doing the exercise made the student more aware that the story behind these products was crucial for the success of the concept . Therefore , she now paid more attention to the way the story was told and the way this information was offered to consumers . Also , she added information on different aspects , such as nutritional facts ( Figure 5 ) . In addition , she thought about how she could create a brand experience and considered the kinds of restaurants that would be open to serving these products . • The student who wanted to help parents introduce vegetables to their toddlers created three monster plates to be used at dinner time . The idea was that the toddler could play with the food by using it to add new parts to the monster or to feed the monster ( Figure 6 ) . By doing the exercise , she became aware that she needed to clarify the role of the parent better , particularly because some parents did not want their children to play with their food . Also , it became clear that she needed to rethink the material and the possible shapes , because the products should be cleaned properly between usage occasions . Discussion Food is an essential element for everyone’s daily life , and the Food Design Card s help participants in food innovation processes to become more aware of the different possible perspectives on food . Hence , this type of design tool provides an essential piece of support for addressing all the different stakeholder needs and for guiding social innovations in the food industry of the future . The tests of our Food Design Cards demonstrated that card - based tools have the potential to inspire and support designers during their design process . It showed how designers could maximize their strengths by using design methods to tackle the challenges presented by a variety of current issues in the food area . In addition , we predict that our card set will be helpful to engage different food stakeholders in food innovation processes , including farmers , food manufacturers , scientists , chefs , consumers , and government officials . In the design of the set , we made use of the requirements that typically apply to design tools and methods ( Lindahl , 2005 ; Lofthouse , 2006 ) , and we tried to optimize the design in several ways . First of all , we wanted the set to be broad and cover all relevant topics in the area of food design , but we also wanted to keep the size of the set limited . With the total number of 35 topic cards , we think we have reached a good balance between these two demands . Even though some participants tended to be overwhelmed at first , we tried to overcome this by adding the 7 category cards that help to create overview . In addition , the six games provide engaging ways to start the creative process and to familiarize oneself with the different topics in the set . However , by providing many relevant topics , the descriptions of these topics and the examples remain quite abstract and general . Also , the pictograms we used are schematic and open for multiple Figure 5 . Information card on calf tongue , showing preparation method and nutrition facts by Trudie Bosse . Figure 6 . Graphic designs for two monster plates by Hannah Goss . www . ijdesign . org 62 International Journal of Design Vol . 14 No . 2 2020 Supporting Food Design Processes : Development of Food Design Cards interpretations , in order to permit room for creativity . Hence , the designers who use the set will need their own creativity to define their challenge and to develop their solutions in more detail . They may find additional inspiration in more concrete examples of products or contexts that magazines , websites , or other creative tools provide . Although we added instructions on the use of the set and added a few games to start off the creative process , we kept these to a minimum in order to reduce the reading load before starting the process . We mainly wanted to stimulate designers and non - designers to engage in the creative process , without blocking them or restraining them in any way . The observations we did during our test sessions and the feedback we got from our participants indeed suggested that we largely succeeded in reaching this goal . The design students who tested the card set found the set relevant for multiple stages in the design process , including ( 1 ) inspiration at the start of the design process to formulate the brief , ( 2 ) brainstorming to come up with ideas for solution directions , or ( 3 ) evaluating the final propositions to check whether they covered all important design aspects . In addition , the cards can facilitate communication between the members of design teams , because they make the discussion tangible . Hence , the cards seem to be most useful when designers do not have a clear picture in mind of where they want to go ( at the start of the project or when they get stuck during the project ) or when they have already developed a detailed concept and want to check whether they forgot something important . In the intermediate stages , however , when designers have chosen a direction and look for more detailed insights on their topic , the information on the cards may be too abstract and not provide enough concrete clues for forming their concept . Nonetheless , the possibilities to apply the card set were more elaborate than we had envisioned originally , and we were happy to see that participants viewed multiple possible uses . In the Introduction , we suggested that the Food Design Cards and the Thoughts for Food card set ( Zampollo & Peacock , 2016 ) might be useful in different stages of the food design process . Whereas the Thoughts for Food set stimulates creativity and evokes inspiration in order to generate new ideas in the early stages of product development , we expected the Food Design Cards mainly to be useful to screen and evaluate concepts that were already quite detailed . However , the user tests showed that the Food Design Cards can also be used at the initial stages of the design process , because the cards provide an overview of the many aspects that need to be considered when designing for the food domain . Hence , both card sets can fulfil a role in the first stages of product development , although these roles may differ . Whereas the Thoughts for Food set activates different ways of creative thinking that can spark imagination , the Food Design Cards connect the designer both with a structural overview of the food context and with the diversity of relevant topics in this context . It might be interesting to compare the usage of the two card sets in a subsequent study , in order to determine their possible roles and to ascertain their complementarity . We would like the Food Design Cards to be easy to use , and we will continue to improve the user’s experience . We want to provide participants with interesting challenges and we want to stimulate participants to come out of their comfort zone . Therefore , we plan to develop more games and suggestions for using the Food Design Cards in the future . Furthermore , it might be necessary to update the cards from time to time if new technologies or trends occur . In the future it might be possible for users to add examples themselves on the website and to order personalized card sets . This would make it possible to have customizable sets for specific user groups . In addition , we might use this information to select new standard examples for the updated card set . The benefits of physical creativity tools deviate from the advantages that may be offered by digital tools , which can be updated more easily . For computer - based creativity support tools , Shneiderman ( 2007 ) mentions the following desirable attributes : ( 1 ) support exploratory research , ( 2 ) enable collaboration , ( 3 ) provide history - keeping , and ( 4 ) have low thresholds , high ceilings , and wide walls , indicating that tools should be easy to use for novices , yet also provide the functionality that experts aspire . Because physical tools are constrained to a limited set of words and images , they cannot support wide explorations and they do not automatically keep track of the outcomes of all iterations and the corresponding insights . On the other hand , they help to create an overview and allow designers to focus their attention on the most important aspects of the design . Hence , they can help designers in avoiding the pitfalls of endless search without convergence , which can be an important strength compared to digital tools . Nonetheless , it might be interesting to explore whether the Food Design Cards can also form the starting point for a digital tool , thereby combining the advantages of physical with those of digital tools . Although the Food Design Cards were developed specifically for design projects in the food realm , the way in which this card set was developed and structured may possible serve as a template for card sets to be developed in other areas . Several students referred to the clear structure of the set and the use of colour coding that helped them obtain a comparatively quick overview of the focal area for their design challenge . Possibly , this approach may work for other design fields as well . Acknowledgements The authors are indebted to all students and colleagues who helped us improve the Food Design Cards with their feedback in multiple iterations . References 1 . Ayala , C . ( 2015 ) . The basis of processes - Experimenting with food to re - shape the industry language . In L . Collina , L . Galluzzo , & A . Meroni ( Eds . ) , Cumulus : The virtuous circle ; Design culture and experimentation ( pp . 443 - 453 ) . Milan , Italy : McGraw - Hill . 2 . Beck , E . , Obrist , M . , Bernhaupt , R . , & Tscheligi , M . ( 2008 ) . Instant card technique : How and why to apply in user - centered design . In Proceedings of the 10th Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design ( pp . 162 - 165 ) . Bloomington , Indiana : Indiana University . www . ijdesign . org 63 International Journal of Design Vol . 14 No . 2 2020 Y . Lee , C . Breuer , and H . N . J . Schifferstein 3 . Biderman , J . L . ( 2017 ) . Embracing complexity in food , design and food design . International Journal of Food Design , 2 ( 1 ) , 27 - 44 . 4 . Bordewijk , M . , & Schifferstein , H . N . J . ( 2020 ) . The specifics of food design : Insights from professional design practice . International Journal of Food Design , 4 ( 2 ) , 101 - 138 . 5 . Brown , T . ( 2008 ) . Design thinking . Harvard Business Review , 86 ( 6 ) , 84 - 92 . 6 . Bruns Alonso , M . , Klooster , S . , Stoffelsen , M . , & Potuzáková , D . ( 2013 ) . Nourishing the design ability through food . In Proceedings of the 5th International IASDR Congress on Consilience and Innovation in Design ( pp . 1 - 12 ) . Eindhoven , the Netherlands : Eindhoven University of Technology . 7 . Campagnaro , C . , & Ceraolo , S . ( 2017 ) . Fighting food waste towards a new social food chain : The egg of Columbus workshop . International Journal of Food Design , 2 ( 1 ) , 103 - 116 . 8 . Casais , M . , Mugge , R . , & Desmet , P . M . A . ( 2016 ) . Using symbolic meaning as a means to design for happiness : The development of a card set for designers . In Proceedings of the DRS Conference on Future - Focused Thinking ( pp . 1553 - 1570 ) . London , UK : Design Research Society . 9 . Daae , J . Z . , & Boks , C . ( 2014 ) . Dimensions of behaviour change . Journal of Design Research , 12 ( 3 ) , 145 - 172 . 10 . Deng , Y . , Antle , A . N . , & Neustaedter , C . ( 2014 ) . Tango cards : A card - based design tool for informing the design of tangible learning games . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( pp . 695 - 704 ) . New York , NY : ACM . 11 . Golembewski , M . , & Selby , M . ( 2010 ) . Ideation decks : A card - based design ideation tool . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( pp . 89 - 92 ) . New York , NY : ACM . 12 . Halskov , K . , & Dalsgaard , P . ( 2007 ) . The emergence of ideas : The interplay between sources of inspiration and emerging design concepts . CoDesign , 3 ( 4 ) , 185 - 211 . 13 . Hornecker , E . ( 2010 ) . Creative idea exploration within the structure of a guiding framework : The card brainstorming game . In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( pp . 101 - 108 ) . New York , NY : ACM . 14 . IDEO . ( 2018 ) . IDEO method cards . Retrieved from https : / / www . ideo . com / post / method - cards 15 . Lafreniere , D . , Dayton , T . , & Muller , M . ( 1999 ) . Variations of a theme : Card - based techniques for participatory analysis and design . In CHI ’99 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( pp . 151 - 152 ) . New York , NY : ACM . 16 . Lemma , B . , Allione , C . , De Giorgi , C . , Bruno , S . , & Stabellini , B . ( 2012 ) . Food , design , users : How to design food interaction modes . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Designing Food and Designing for Food ( pp . 297 - 314 ) . London , UK : London Metropolitan University . 17 . Lindahl , M . ( 2005 ) . Engineering designers’ requirements on design for environment methods and tools ( Doctoral dissertation ) . KTH Royal Institute of Technology , Stockholm , Sweden . 18 . Lofthouse , V . ( 2006 ) . Ecodesign tools for designers : Defining the requirements . Journal of Cleaner Production , 14 ( 15 ) , 1386 - 1395 . 19 . Lucero , A . , & Arrasvuori , J . ( 2010 ) . PLEX Cards : A source of inspiration when designing for playfulness . In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Fun and Games ( pp . 28 - 37 ) . New York , NY : ACM . 20 . Lucero , A . , Dalsgaard , P . , Halskov , K . , & Buur , J . ( 2016 ) . Designing with cards . In P . Markopoulos , J . - B . Martens , J . Malins , K . Coninx , & A . Liapis ( Eds . ) , Collaboration in creative design : Methods and tools ( pp . 75 - 95 ) . Berlin , Germany : Springer . 21 . Massari , S . ( 2017 ) . Food design and food studies : Discussing creative and critical thinking in food system education and research . International Journal of Food Design , 2 ( 1 ) , 117 - 133 . 22 . MethodKit . ( 2018 ) . Slice of knowledge . Retrieved from https : / / methodkit . com 23 . Mora , S . , Gianni , F . , & Divitini , M . ( 2017 ) . Tiles : A card - based ideation toolkit for the Internet of Things . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( pp . 587 - 598 ) . New York , NY : ACM . 24 . Parasecoli , F . ( 2017 ) . Food , research , design : What can food studies bring to food design education ? International Journal of Food Design , 2 ( 1 ) , 15 - 25 . 25 . Perrone , R . , & Fuster , A . ( 2017 ) . Food as a system and a material for the creative process in design education . International Journal of Food Design , 2 ( 1 ) , 65 - 81 . 26 . Benenson , F . ( 2018 ) . Pitch deck . Retrieved from https : / / www . kickstarter . com / projects / fred / pitch - deck 27 . Reissig , P . ( 2017 ) . Food design education . International Journal of Food Design , 2 ( 1 ) , 3 - 13 . 28 . Reynolds , K . ( 2017 ) . Designing urban agriculture education for social justice : Radical innovation through Farm School NYC . International Journal of Food Design , 2 ( 1 ) , 45 - 63 . 29 . Rognoli , V . , Bianchini , M . , Maffei , S . , & Karana , E . ( 2015 ) . DIY materials . Materials & Design , 86 , 692 - 702 . 30 . Schifferstein , H . N . J . ( 2016 ) . What design can bring to the food industry . International Journal of Food Design , 1 ( 2 ) , 103 - 134 . 31 . Schifferstein , H . N . J . ( 2017 ) . Differentiating consumption contexts as a basis for diversity in food design education : Eating in or eating out ? International Journal of Food Design , 2 ( 1 ) , 83 - 101 . 32 . Shneiderman , B . ( 2007 ) . Creativity support tools : Accelerating discovery and innovation . Communications of the ACM , 50 ( 12 ) , 20 - 32 . 33 . Tassoul , M . ( 2009 ) . Creative facilitation ( 3rd ed ) . Delft , the Netherlands : VSSD . 34 . Taylor , G . ( 2018 ) . The oblique strategies . Retrieved from http : / / www . rtqe . net / ObliqueStrategies / 35 . van Boeijen , A . G . C . ( 2015 ) . Crossing cultural chasms : Towards a culture - conscious approach to design ( Doctoral dissertation ) . Delft University of Technology , Delft , the Netherlands . www . ijdesign . org 64 International Journal of Design Vol . 14 No . 2 2020 Supporting Food Design Processes : Development of Food Design Cards 36 . van Kuijk , J . I . ( 2010 ) . Managing product usability . How companies deal with usability in the development of electronic consumer products ( Doctoral dissertation ) . Delft University of Technology , Delft , the Netherlands . 37 . Wölfel , C . , & Merritt , T . ( 2013 ) . Method Card design dimensions : A survey of card - based design tools . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction ( pp . 479 - 486 ) . Berlin , Germany : Springer . 38 . Yilmaz , S . , Daly , S . R . , Seifert , C . M . , & Gonzalez , R . ( 2016 ) . Evidence - based design heuristics for idea generation . Design Studies , 46 , 95 - 124 . 39 . Zampollo , F . ( 2016 ) . Welcome to food design . International Journal of Food Design , 1 ( 1 ) , 3 - 9 . 40 . Zampollo , F . , & Peacock , M . ( 2016 ) . Food design thinking : A branch of design thinking specific to food design . Journal of Creative Behavior , 50 ( 3 ) , 203 - 210 .