Review Actin polymerization machinery : the finish line of signaling networks , the starting point of cellular movement A . Disanza a , b , † , A . Steffen c , † , M . Hertzog a , b , E . Frittoli a , b , K . Rottner d and G . Scita a , b , * a IFOM , Istituto FIRC di Oncologia Molecolare , Via Adamello 16 , 20134 Milan ( Italy ) , Fax : + 39 02 574303231 , e - mail : gscita @ ifom - ieo - campus . it b Department of Experimental Oncology , Istituto Europeo di Oncologia ( IEO ) , Via Ripamonti 435 , 20141 Milan ( Italy ) c Department of Cell Biology and d Cytoskeleton dynamics Group German Research Centre for Biotechnology ( GBF ) , Mascheroder Weg 1 , 38124 Braunschweig ( Germany ) Received 26 October 2004 ; received after revision 27 December 2004 ; accepted 6 January 2005 Available online 09 March 2005 Abstract . Dynamic assembly of actin filaments gener - ates the forces supporting cell motility . Several recent biochemical and genetic studies have revealed a plethora of different actin binding proteins whose coordinated ac - tivity regulates the turnover of actin filaments , thus con - trolling a variety of actin - based processes , including cell migration . Additionally , emerging evidence is highlight - ing a scenario whereby the same basic set of actin regula - CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 62 ( 2005 ) 955 – 970 1420 - 682X / 05 / 090955 - 16 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 004 - 4472 - 6 © Birkhäuser Verlag , Basel , 2005 CMLS Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences tory proteins is also the convergent node of different sig - naling pathways emanating from extracellular stimuli , like those from receptor tyrosine kinases . Here , we will focus on the molecular mechanisms of how the machin - ery of actin polymerization functions and is regulated , in a signaling - dependent mode , to generate site - directed actin assembly leading to cell motility . Key words . Actin dynamics ; signaling complex ; lamellipodia ; RhoGTPases ; actin - binding proteins . Introduction The dynamic assembly of actin filaments in response to extracellular signals is at the base of a wide range of fun - damental cellular processes through which living cells change shape , extend protrusions like lamellipodia and filopodia , or wrap around a particle , as in a phagocytic cup [ 1 – 3 ] . The bulk turnover of actin subunits is 100 – 200 times faster in cells than with pure actin , point - ing to a complex regulation in vivo . A large repertoire of actin - binding proteins consistently regulates the dynamic assembly and spatial organization of actin filaments , thus orchestrating the motile behavior of cells . Among these are proteins that ( i ) promote the nucleation of actin , such * Corresponding author . † These authors contributed equally to this work . as the Arp2 / 3 complex or formins , that ( ii ) affect the de - polymerization of filaments , such as the actin - depoly - merizing factor ( ADF / cofilin ) family and that ( iii ) asso - ciate to monomeric actin , such as profilin and beta - thymosin , and that ( iv ) cap the ends of filaments . Coordination and integration of the activities of this basic set of proteins is essential to control site - directed actin polymerization in vivo [ 1 – 3 ] . Additionally , complexity is emerging with the discovery that these proteins are , in turn , targets of various signaling pathways emanating from diverse extracellular stimuli , such as those from the receptor tyrosine kinase ( RTK ) family . Within these path - ways , Rho GTPase family members play a key role , act - ing as molecular switches on which signaling inputs con - verge and are transduced into a coordinated array of out - put events regulating site - directed actin dynamics required for cell motility [ 4 – 6 ] . Here , we will examine the most recent evidence high - lighting the molecular mechanisms controlling the basic machinery of actin polymerization . Additionally , with the aim of providing examples of how the machinery of actin polymerization is linked and controlled by signaling cas - cades emanating from Rho GTPases , we will further fo - cus on those pathways and macromolecular complexes permitting a proper temporal and spatial regulation of Rac - mediated actin dynamics leading to membrane pro - trusion , the first step in the establishment of cell loco - motion . Actin treadmilling Actin , a 43 - kDa globular protein , is the most abundant protein in eukaryotes . In physiological medium , actin can undergo polymerization into helical filaments . Actin fila - ments are polarized , characterized by a fast - growing ( plus or barbed ) end and a slow - growing or minus end . Actin as - sembly is coupled with continuous ATP hydrolysis . Actin is an ATPase . Under physiological conditions , MgATP - bound G - actin is incorporated into growing filaments at the barbed end . ATP - actin is then converted in ADP - actin by slow hydrolysis as actin monomers are shifted along the filament toward the pointed ends . Thus , actin assembly at steady state can be described by an ATPase cycle featuring the energetic imbalance between the fast and slow ends of filaments linked to the irreversible hydrolysis of ATP . This cycle comprises three elementary steps : ( i ) net depolymer - ization from the pointed end , releasing ADP - G - actin ; ( ii ) exchange of ATP for bound ADP , restoring ATP - G - actin , which ( iii ) undergoes net assembly at the barbed end . The kinetic constants of all these steps determine both the con - centrations of each species at steady state and the turnover rate of actin filaments [ 7 , 8 ] . It is noteworthy that the con - centration of ATP - G - actin , which is kept stationary during this cycle , is intermediate between the critical concentra - tions ( Cc = the minimal G - actin concentration required for assembly at the ends of filaments , resulting from the ratio of rate constants of dissociation and association at actin filament ends ) at the barbed and pointed ends . Irreversible hydrolysis of the bound ATP associated with polymeriza - tion is at the origin of treadmilling and destabilizes the fil - aments [ 3 ] . Treadmilling is crucial in actin motility . The polymerized array of actin filaments displays a very rapid turnover . Filaments are oriented so that the growing barbed ends face the plasma membrane , while the pointed ends , where depolymerization occurs , are at the rear [ 9 – 11 ] ( fig . 1 ) . Notably , a similar architectural and dynamic organiza - tion of actin polymers is also used by a number of intra - cellular pathogens , such as Listeria monocytogenes , which hijack components of the actin - treadmilling machinery to generate comet tails for their propulsion . Indeed , charac - terization of the mechanisms driving Listeria or Shigella propulsion has been instrumental in uncovering key mole - 956 A . Disanza et al . Actin polymerization machinery : the finish line of signaling networks cules regulating actin dynamics [ 12 – 14 ] . This arrange - ment suggests also that an insertional polymerization mechanism is at the base of force production needed for locomotion . Finally , the observation that the rate of barbed end growth equals the speed at which lamellipodia extend and L . monocytogenes moves provided the first direct sup - port for actin polymerization as the driving force in motil - ity [ 15 , 16 ] . The rate of actin treadmilling is controlled by a diversified array of actin - binding proteins In vitro studies using purified actin showed that depoly - merization from the pointed end is slow and represents the limiting step in the treadmilling rate . As a result , the steady - state concentration of ATP - G - actin is very close to the critical concentration of barbed ends , so that barbed end growth balances pointed end depolymerization [ 17 , 18 ] . Notably , the growth of barbed ends in in vivo processes , such as during formation of lamellipodia , which are extending plasma membrane protrusions in the direction of migration , is two orders of magnitude faster . This implies that the concentration of monomeric actin is maintained at higher values by factors controlling the dy - namics of assembly at the two ends of the actin filament [ 3 ] . These factors are proteins that generally bind either to monomeric G - actin or to the filament , thereby regulating the rate of turnover and imposing spatial restrictions re - quired for site - directed actin dynamics . These actin ‘reg - ulatory proteins’ affect the kinetic / thermodynamic para - meters of actin assembly at one or the other end of the fil - ament in various fashions ( figs 1 , 2 ) . Instrumental in understanding the biochemical contribu - tions of various actin regulatory proteins has been the in vitro reconstitution of actin - based motility of either bac - teria or functionalized beads [ 19 , 20 ] . These approaches led to the identification of the essential proteins for actin - based motility : actin , the actin nucleator complex Arp2 / 3 , an Arp2 / 3 activator , an actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / cofilin ) and a capping protein [ 21 ] . The movement is more effective when profilin is also included [ 21 ] . In - terestingly , the same proteins are required for lamellipo - dia formation in Drosophila S2 cells [ 22 ] . The fact that five essential proteins are sufficient to reconstitute actin - based propulsion of a particle strongly supports the no - tion that the regulated treadmilling of actin filaments , coupled to site - directed catalytic generation of new fila - ments , is at the origin of actin - based movements [ 23 ] ( see also table 1 ) . Severing and depolymerization ADF / cofilin are ubiquitous , conserved actin - binding pro - teins [ 24 ] . Their role is to enhance the treadmilling rate of actin filaments through their ability to bind preferentially to ADP - bound forms of G - and F - actin and thus changing the rate of actin assembly . ADF specifically increases the rate of depolymerization of ADP - F - actin from the pointed ends , triggering a greater flux of ADP - G - actin , which increases the steady - state concentration of ATP - G - actin . This , finally , results in an enhancement of the rate of barbed end elongation balancing the high rate of pointed - end disassembly . Additionally , ADF / cofilin may generate new barbed ends by severing preexisting fila - ments [ 25 ] . Thus , by these mechanisms , ADF increases the overall rate of barbed - end growth at steady state , pro - moting actin - based motility [ 17 , 26 ] . The activity of ADF is regulated by reversible phosphorylation of a serine residue in the N - terminal region ( dephosphorylation = activation ) [ 27 ] . A Rac - regulated LIM kinase inactivates ADF [ 28 ] ( see also below ) . Conversely , the human hSSHs , like their homologue in Drosophila , Slingshot , have been recently shown to act as the activating phos - phatases . In vitro experiments showed that SSH and hSSHs are able to dephosphorylate purified P - cofilin , and the loss of ssh function in Drosophila was found to increase the level of phospho - cofilin ( P - cofilin ) . Addi - tionally , SSH and hSSH expression has been shown to suppress actin reorganization induced by the expression of LIM kinase 1 and to reduce the level of P - cofilin in cultured cells [ 29 ] . Interactors of monomeric G - actin Profilin and its Drosophila functional homologue Ciboulot are members of the actobindin family of proteins [ 30 , 31 ] , which are involved in actin polymerization . Profilin specif - ically binds ATP - G - actin in a complex that associates ex - clusively with barbed ends [ 32 , 33 ] , shifting in this way the distribution of G - actin at steady state . The pool of ADF - ADP - G - actin derived from pointed ends is converted into an ATP - bound profilin - actin complex , which associates at barbed ends , enhancing the treadmilling ( figs 1 , 2 ) . In vitro , treadmilling is accelerated 125 - fold by the synergis - tic effects of ADF and profilin [ 3 , 34 ] . CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 62 , 2005 Review Article 957 Figure 1 . The actin polymerization machinery triggers dendritic nucleation for protrusion at the leading edge . The activated Arp2 / 3 com - plex nucleates and branches actin filaments at the leading edge , pushing the membrane forward . Capping proteins control the half - life of filaments , and by blocking a large fraction of barbed ends , promote site - directed elongation of uncapped filaments . ADF / cofilin promotes dissociation of ADP - actin from filament pointed ends and severs preexisting filaments , generating new barbed ends . Profilin catalyzes the exchange of ADP for ATP on monomeric actin molecules , which become available for new polymerization at barbed ends . Barbed - end cappers Capping proteins are required for efficient motility of many cells [ 35 , 36 ] . Cells contain a variety of barbed - end capping proteins . Gelsolin and its relatives ( severin , ad - severin / scinderin , villin and fragmin ) bind very tightly to barbed ends ( Kd = 10 – 11 – 10 – 12 M ) and sever filaments . Other weaker , non - severing capping proteins ( Kd = 10 – 8 – 10 – 9 M ) are proteins such as b 2 ( CP ) , the homolog of CapZ in non muscle cells , and CapG [ 3 , 37 – 39 ] . Capping proteins contribute to the regulation of actin treadmilling in multiple ways . First , by capping a large fraction of barbed ends , they establish a high steady - state concentration of monomeric actin , deriving from depo - lymerization at pointed ends . This may , in turn , feed growth , in a spatially restricted and signaling - dependent fashion , of a few uncapped filaments that individually grow faster . Second , by arresting the growth of filaments , they regulate their lifetime and average length in lamel - lipodia [ 3 , 38 ] ( figs 1 , 2 ) . Thus , in vivo , their regulated dissociation is proposed to provide a source of free fila - ment ends to funnel actin polymerization . This is consis - tent with a model where signal - regulated and spatially - re - stricted capping / uncapping of existing filaments provides sites of actin filament elongation , thus highlighting a role for actin filament barbed - end capping proteins as critical targets of signaling cascades leading to actin - based motil - ity [ 40 , 41 ] ( see also below ) . Uncapping , for instance , was found to occur in cells at sites of active actin assem - bly , including protruding lamellae and rocketing vesicles [ 41 , 42 ] . Moreover , recently , the balance between capping and anti - capping activities has been proposed to be criti - cal in determining how cells ‘choose’ between two dis - tinct modes of organizing the architecture of actin - based protrusions leading to the formation of either lamellipo - dia or filopodia . Mejillano and colleagues showed that depletion by RNA interference ( RNAi ) of capping pro - tein ( CP ) , a ubiquitous , highly conserved barbed - end cap - per [ 37 , 43 ] , suppressed lamellipodia , and induced the ex - plosive formation of filopodia in several cell lines . 958 A . Disanza et al . Actin polymerization machinery : the finish line of signaling networks Figure 2 . Regulation of treadmilling in motility . ADF / cofilin and capping proteins act in a coordinated manner to enhance barbed - end growth and accelerate membrane protrusions . ( A ) Treadmilling in the absence of ADF / cofilin , profilin and capping protein . The pool of ATP - G - actin is limited , and the rate of polymerization at the barbed ends is slow . ( B ) ADF / cofilin alone , by enhancing depolymerization from pointed ends , increases the pool of G - actin available for polymerization at the barbed ends , thereby increasing the steady state of barbed - end growth . Profilin synergizes with ADF / cofilin by promoting the exchange of nucleotides on G - actin . ( C ) Capping proteins , by blocking a large number of barbed ends , funnel G - actin , deriving from the depolymerization from the pointed ends , to the few uncapped filaments . ( D ) Cumulative effects of ADF / cofilin - profilin and capping proteins . A B C D Notably , concomitant removal of CP and ENA / VASP , barbed - end interactors promoting rapid - debranching [ 44 ] , functionally antagonizing capping activity [ 45 ] , re - sulted in ruffling rather than filopodia formation [ 40 ] . This led to a model for selection between lamellipodia and filopodia in which CP may negatively regulate , in an Ena / VASP - dependent fashion , the latter type of mem - brane protrusions . Additionally , the activities of the gel - solin / villin family members , as well as the activity of CapG and CapZ , are tightly regulated by signaling - de - pendent molecules , such as phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bis - phosphate ( PIP2 ) [ 46 , 47 ] , which controls a variety of key regulators of the machinery of actin polymerization [ 48 – 50 ] . Finally , gelsolin and gelsolin - like proteins are strictly controlled by Ca 2 + levels and pH [ 46 , 51 ] . Recently , a new class of actin barbed - end capping protein was described and characterized revealing potential novel modality through which signals may regulate actin cap - ping [ 52 , 53 ] : the eps8 - family [ 54 , 55 ] . Eps8 , the proto - type of this family , is a typical modular protein that par - ticipates in signal transduction from the small GTPase Ras to Rac , leading to actin remodeling [ 56 ] . Eps8 inter - acts with both the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Sos - 1 and the adaptor Abi - 1 in a multi - protein complex including also p85 , the regulatory subunit of phos - phatidylinositol 3 - kinase [ 57 ] . This complex is crucial for activation of the Rho GTPase , Rac , as witnessed by the observation that genetic removal of Eps8 impairs growth factor - induced , Ras - dependent GTP loading of Rac and the ensuing actin remodeling . The Eps8 ‘output’ function resides in the C - terminal ‘effector’region , which binds to Sos - 1 , unmasking its Rac - GEF activity , and associates with F - actin in vitro [ 58 ] . In vivo , Eps8 co - localizes with a variety of F - actin - rich structures , including lamellipo - dia . Most notably , the isolated effector domain of Eps8 and of its family members was shown to be able to cap barbed ends with an affinity in the nM – 1 range [ 53 ] , com - parable to canonical cappers [ 3 ] . Despite this , Eps8 - fam - CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 62 , 2005 Review Article 959 Table 1 . Regulators of Rac - dependent actin remodeling . The proteins involved in these processes were categorized , from top to bottom , as actin binding proteins , Rac - GEFs ( Rac - guanine nucleotide exchange factors ) , downstream effectors of Rac involved in lamellipodia for - mation and nucleation promoting factors downstream of Rac . Protein Biochemical properties Predicted cellular function ( s ) Selected refs ADF / cofilin increases the rate of pointed end depoly - regulates lamellipodium protrusion [ 25 , 26 , 34 ] merization , severs filaments , enhances treadmilling Profilin promotes nucleotide exchange on actin promotes polymerization [ 32 – 34 ] Gelsolin severs filaments and caps the barbed end , enhances lamellipodium protrusion and [ 39 , 155 , 156 ] regulated by Ca 2 + and low pH membrane ruffling Capping protein caps the barbed end promotes actin - based motility [ 22 , 37 , 40 ] Eps8 caps barbed ends upon interaction with Abi enhances actin - based motility [ 53 ] Arp2 / 3 amplifies actin filament barbed ends upon essential for actin filament assembly [ 1 , 61 , 62 , interaction with the VCA domain of WAS in lamellipodia 72 , 73 , 75 ] familiy proteins Eps8 part of a Rac - GEF complex activates Rac [ 56 – 58 , 159 ] ( Sos - 1 , Abi , PI3 - K ) Sos - 1 Ras - GEF , Rac - GEF activates Ras , activates Rac [ 56 – 58 , 159 , 160 ] Swap - 70 Rac - GEF activates Rac [ 119 ] Tiam - 1 Rac - GEF activates Rac [ 120 ] Dock180 / ELMO Rac - GEF complex activates Rac [ 122 – 124 ] Abi part of a Rac - GEF complex activates Rac [ 56 – 58 , 159 ] ( Sos - 1 , Eps8 , PI3 - K ) IRSp53 bundles actin filaments , interacts implicated in linking RhoGTPases to [ 131 – 134 , 161 ] with WAVEs downstream effectors Abi binds to Nap1 and WAVE essential component of a WAVE - containing [ 59 ] complex Sra - 1 / PIR121 binds specifically to RacGTP essential component of a WAVE - containing [ 60 , 138 , 140 ] complex Nap1 binds to Sra - 1 / Pir121 and Abi1 essential component of a WAVE - containing [ 59 , 140 ] complex WAVEs nucleation promoting factors , essential for Arp2 / 3 complex activation at [ 59 , 60 , 69 , activate the Arp2 / 3 complex the lamellipodium tip 131 , 161 ] ily proteins do not share any similarity with other capping proteins . This indicates that the Eps8 family members de - fine a new class of barbed - end cappers , which may exert their biochemical activity through peculiar and unique mechanisms . The association to Abi1 , a physiological in - teractor of Eps8 , leads to its activation , revealing novel modalities of regulation of capping through protein : pro - tein interactions [ 53 ] . This indicates that the full length protein is , at least in vitro , autoinhibited . Thus , Eps8 and Abi1 may contribute to the activation of Rac by entering a Sos - 1 - based activating complex , and acting as a cap - ping assembly , they may participate in Rac downstream pathways , dictating the site and the spatial organization of the dendritic actin meshwork . It is of note that the Eps8 / Abi - 1 complex appears to be functional also in actin polymerization - based events , which are not regulated by Rho GTPases , indicating that this complex may partici - pate in a wider variety of actin - based processes , indepen - dent of its ability to activate Rac [ 53 ] . Interestingly , Abi1 has been assigned a role in actin assembly downstream of Rac affecting the site - restricted activation of WAVE2 in a complex together with Nap1 and PIR121 / Sra - 1 [ 59 , 60 ] . Thus , Eps8 and Abi - 1 seem to sit at the heart of a multi - layered system of regulation of the actin cytoskeleton , raising the interesting possibility that the two molecules are engaged in multi - protein complexes which are re - modeled during signal propagation through the con - trolled replacement of subunits , while keeping core com - ponents , an issue that needs to be further investigated . De novo actin nucleation : branching versus linear To balance the effect of capping , site - directed nucleation mechanisms must operate to keep a constant number of uncapped , growing barbed ends . Two cellular factors have been shown to generate new filaments in a site - directed , signaling - controlled fashion . The Arp2 / 3 complex [ 1 , 3 , 61 ] branches actin filaments in the lamellae of migrating cells [ 62 ] . Formins , instead , directly bind filament barbed ends , and , independent of the Arp2 / 3 complex , catalyze processive growth of un - branched actin filaments [ 63 – 65 ] . The Arp2 / 3 complex branches filaments The Arp2 / 3 complex consists of seven conserved polypeptides comprising the two actin - related proteins Arp2 and Arp3 , and the subunits p40 , p34 , p21 , p20 and p16 [ 66 ] . The Arp2 / 3 complex is located in motile regions of the cell and in the actin tails of propelling vesicles and pathogens [ 23 , 61 ] . Electron microscopy analysis of the branched filament array in lamellipodia and actin comet tails has shown that the Arp2 / 3 sits at the branch junctions of filaments [ 62 ] . Accordingly , biochemical and micro - scopic experiments established that the Arp2 / 3 complex branches new actin filaments ( daughter filaments ) at 70° angles from pre - existing filaments ( mother filaments ) [ 61 , 67 , 68 ] . Notably , Arp2 / 3 alone displays no activity on actin polymerization in vitro and only association to an ‘nucleation promoting factor’ ( NPF ) leads to initiation of filament branching [ 1 , 23 ] . Proteins of the WASP ( Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome pro - tein ) and WAVE ( WASP family verprolin - homologous ) families are the major activators of the Arp2 / 3 complex . They also serve as coincident detectors of signaling from the Rho GTPases , Cdc42 and Rac , or from other signal - ing molecules ( PIP2 ) or adaptors ( Grb2 , Nck ) to the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 23 , 69 , 70 ] ( see also below ) . All WASP and WAVE proteins display a similar modular organiza - tion . They contain a conserved C - terminal ‘effector’ do - main ( VCA ) and a more diverse N - terminal region re - sponsible for targeting and regulation of the C - terminal domain . The VCA domain initiates polymerization of new actin filaments by bringing together actin monomers and the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 1 , 23 , 69 , 70 ] . Within the VCA domain , a verprolin homology domain ( V ) binds G - actin monomers [ 71 ] , an intermediate conserved cofilin ho - mology domain ( C ) has been implicated in driving the conformational changes of the Arp2 / 3 complex , neces - sary for its activation [ 72 – 74 ] , and the C - terminal acidic region ( A ) binds directly the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 75 ] . The ternary complex formed by G - actin - VCA - Arp2 / 3 repre - sents the minimal activating unit capable of nucleating new actin filaments . Additionally , it interacts with mother filaments to initiate the formation of daughter filaments [ 1 , 23 ] . How exactly the activated Arp2 / 3 complex inter - acts with a filament to initiate branching has been the subject of intense debate and investigation in recent years . Two possible models have been proposed : the first one favors the possibility that the Arp2 / 3 complex branches by binding to the side of pre - existing filaments [ 66 , 67 , 76 ] ; the second , instead , proposes that branching can occur only at the barbed ends of growing filaments , [ 3 , 61 , 77 ] . Whatever the case , a consensus has been reached that the Arp2 / 3 complex generates a branched ar - ray of actin filaments in vitro . The dendritic character of lamellipodial network was revealed by the use of metal - replica electron microscopy techniques . Actin appeared to be organized into networks with the highest density at the leading edge , where actin filaments are extremely branched and characterized by an abundance of free barbed ends in a characteristic brush - like appearance . [ 40 , 62 , 78 ] . Nevertheless , by employing different elec - tron microscopy techniques , several additional studies have indicated that lamellipodia are composed of a net - work of relatively long and unbranched actin filaments , at least in more proximal lamellipodial regions [ 79 , 80 ] . Such a structure may arise from rapid daughter filament de - branching catalysed by ATP hydrolysis on Arp2 [ 81 ] . 960 A . Disanza et al . Actin polymerization machinery : the finish line of signaling networks Thus , the Arp2 / 3 complex mediates an amplification of barbed ends close to the membrane , allowing efficient protrusion and creating a structure which can rapidly re - organize into a more complex array of actin filaments by debranching , capping and bundling activities . Formins nucleate unbranched actin filaments Formins have been characterized as nucleators of un - branched actin filaments and implicated in several motile events , such as actin cable formation in yeast [ 65 , 82 , 83 ] , assembly of actin filaments in the cytokinetic ring [ 84 ] , focal adhesions and adherens junctions [ 85 ] , in cell mi - gration and ruffling [ 86 , 87 ] , and filopodia formation [ 88 ] . Formins are a family of proteins comprising several members , sharing a common domain organization that includes the functional formin homology domains FH1 and FH2 , which are conserved in all eukaryotes [ 65 , 89 ] . The FH2 domain is sufficient to nucleate actin in vitro , while the FH1 domain is required for actin nucleation in vivo and for binding to profilin [ 90 – 92 ] . This latter in - teraction has been recently shown to play a prominent role in the mechanism of nucleation induced by mam - malian formins . In the absence of profilin , formins bind actin filament barbed ends and , by weakly blocking them , act in a manner that resembles canonical actin capping proteins . Conversely , when bound to profilin , the FH1 - FH2 module of mDia1 accelerated the hydrolysis of ATP on F - actin filaments , increasing by 15 - fold the rate of polymerization at barbed ends [ 93 ] . Formins induce processive polymerization , using free en - ergy derived from the acceleration of the hydrolysis of ATP coupled with actin polymerization . This , taken to - gether with the fact that formins are involved in and con - trolled by a variety of signaling pathways [ 65 ] , points to - wards a role in the generation of actin - driven membrane protrusions . Signalling pathways leading to actin - based motility A prototypical example : growth factor - induced lamellipodia formation Integration and coordination of the activities of all the proteins interacting with and affecting the different steps of actin polymerization is needed to promote cell motil - ity . The same set of actin regulatory proteins is also the target of a number of signaling pathways , which trans - duce , in a temporally and spatially controlled fashion , ex - tracellular cues enabling a cell to respond to its environ - ment . Among these responses , the acquisition of a motile phenotype has been the subject of intense investigation . The ability of cells to move is essential for a number of fundamental physiological processes , including tissue morphogenesis , embryonic development and immuno - logical response . Additionally , regulated cell motility is often linked to pathology , first and foremost cancer . Cell migration is a multistep process requiring tightly regulated and coordinated dynamic changes of the actin cytoskeleton . These include de novo and site - directed polymerization of actin filaments at the periphery of cells , precise control of filament lengths and dynamics , and the turnover of cell - cell and cell - substrate adhesions . These changes of the cytoskeleton are usually initiated in response to ligand binding , which can be growth factors or proteins of the extracellular matrix , to cell surface re - ceptors . Among these changes , the extension of mem - brane protrusions , which often assume the shape of actin - rich , polarized lamellae driving the movement of an en - tire cell , is considered the initial event in the acquisition of a migratory phenotype . The nature of RTK - mediated signaling leading to membrane protrusion has indeed been explored in great detail in recent years and has be - come a paradigmatic model for unraveling the molecular complexity of the signaling network governing actin - based motility . Among the signaling proteins controlling this event , Rho - GTPases have emerged as central players . Although Rho GTPases have been implicated in a number of different fundamental cellular processes , such as cell - cycle pro - gression , gene transcription and vesicular trafficking , they have been shown to be essential for the regulation of actin remodeling [ 94 – 96 ] . Historically , Rac , Cdc42 and RhoA are the three GTPases , whose activities and func - tional roles in driving distinct actin dynamics - based pro - cesses have been most extensively investigated . Notably , for instance , while the overall rate of actin assembly in a forming lamellipodium induced by extracellular cues is mostly dependent on Rac , the initiation of the assembly processes and its site - restricted localization are mainly regulated by Cdc42 , while RhoA is required for generat - ing contractile forces for productive cell translocation . Thus , proper coordination of the activities of all these key transducers of signaling is required for efficient cell mi - gration . Due to space limitations and the availability of a number of excellent , recent papers covering the func - tional diversity of various Rho GTPases , the upcoming section of this review will specifically focus on the mech - anisms through which a Rac - dependent signaling net - work functions in vivo , highlighting the importance of a relatively small set of key proteins in generating a highly integrated and coordinated molecular circuitry ( see also table 1 ) . RhoGTPases : masterminds of actin - based cell motility The family of Rho - GTPases consists of 22 members [ 97 ] . Like all GTPases , they cycle between an active ( GTP - CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 62 , 2005 Review Article 961 bound ) and an inactive ( GDP - bound ) conformation ( fig . 3a ) . GTP loading and its subsequent hydrolysis are regu - lated by guanine - nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) , and GTPase activating proteins ( GAPs ) , respectively . An - other class of proteins , guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitors ( GDIs ) , modulate the distribution of Rho GT - Pases between membrane ( s ) , which is the site where these proteins are biologically active , and the cytosol [ 6 , 98 ] . In principle , activation of Rho GTPases could pro - ceed through modulation of any of these regulatory pro - teins ; in vivo , however , regulation of GEF activity ap - pears to be of paramount importance . Notably , the num - bers of GEFs far exceed that of Rho GTPases and are thought to act promiscuously towards several of the mem - bers of this family of proteins . Alternatively , different GEFs may exert specific roles depending on the signaling pathways and the specific cellular context . From RTKs to Rac Seminal studies by Ridley , Hall and co - workers showed that signals induced by growth factors [ i . e . epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) , platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) and insulin ] resulting in membrane ruffling 962 A . Disanza et al . Actin polymerization machinery : the finish line of signaling networks Figure 3 . ( A ) Rac activity is controlled by GEFs , GAPs and GDIs . Rac , like all GTPases , cycles between an inactive GDP - bound form and an active GTP - bound form . The cycle is tightly regulated by guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) , GTPase activating proteins ( GAPs ) and guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitors ( GDIs ) . Activated ( GTP - loaded ) Rac relays signals to its downstream effectors . ( B ) Schematic illustration of the molecular signaling pathways leading to Rac activation and subsequent lamellipodia formation . Rac be - comes activated ( GTP loaded ) by a variety of GEFs , which , in turn , are regulated by diverse upstream signaling events , like those emanat - ing from RTKs . Except for Tiam1 , the dependency on PI3 - K was demonstrated . Once Rac is activated , it elicits actin polymerization , lead - ing to lamellipodia formation by controlling several downstream pathways . The spatially controlled actin polymerization , at the plasma membrane is achieved by relaying the activation signal via the Sra - 1 / Nap1 / Abi / WAVE complex to Arp2 / 3 complex - catalyzed nucleation . Furthermore , Rac modulates ADF / cofilin - mediated actin depolymerization from the pointed end . Finally , the generation of free barbed ends , e . g . resulting from uncapping , is a prerequisite for Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucleation . This process most likely can also becontrolled by Rac , although the mechanism of regulation remains poorly defined ( for details , see text ) . strictly depend on Rac1 [ 99 ] . The initial step of growth factor binding to RTKs leads to receptor dimerization and subsequent activation of its cytoplasmic kinase domain . The ensuing auto - phosphorylation of tyrosine residues on the receptor C - terminal tail enables binding of a vari - ety of SH2 - domain - containing adaptor proteins , thus leading to the generation of signaling platforms com - posed of multiprotein complexes [ 100 – 102 ] . This makes it possible to greatly diversify and amplify the initial sig - naling input , leading to regulation of biological outputs as different as cell - cycle progression , differentiation and actin remodeling . In this latter case , the recruitment of the SH2 - domain - containing heterodimeric enzyme phos - phatidylinositol 3 - kinase ( PI3 - K ) is crucial for linking growth factor stimulation to Rac activation . Class IA PI3 - Ks are composed of a p110 catalytic sub - unit , which uses phosphatidylinositol 4 , and 5 phosphate ( PIP2 ) to generate phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 phosphate ( PIP3 ) , and a regulatory ( p85 / p55 ) subunit [ 103 ] . Spe - cific tyrosine - phosphorylated residues of the receptor mediate high affinity binding of the SH2 - domain of the regulatory ( p85 / p55 ) subunit , whereupon the catalytic ( p110 ) moiety is recruited and activated [ 104 , 105 ] . Ad - ditional complexity to this mode of activation came with the demonstration that the catalytic p110 subunit can di - rectly associate to another critical small GTPase , Ras . Ras is recruited and activated by a complex consisting of Grb2 , an adaptor molecule containing SH3 and SH2 do - mains , the latter of which bind to the activated and phos - phorylated tails of RTKs [ 106 – 108 ] , and Sos - 1 , a dual guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Ras and Rac ( fig . 3b , see also below ) . Thus , concomitant binding of PI3 - K to GTP - loaded Ras , via its catalytic subunit , and to RTK , via p85 , is thought to cooperate for its optimal ac - tivation . The enzymatic product of this lipid kinase , PIP3 , has in turn been implicated in actin - based cell mi - gration in at least two ways : recently , PI3 - K has been proposed to generate a gradient of PIP3 at the leading edge of protruding membranes [ 109 ] , critical for recruit - ment of downstream targets , such as WAVE2 [ 110 ] . This , however , was not sufficient to elicit actin polymer - ization in the presence of dominant negative Rac [ 110 ] . Furthermore , it has to be pointed out that the precise mechanisms of how the spatial orchestration of this highly polar membrane lipid is achieved , and the extent of its contribution in generating membrane protrusions remains to be defined . One interesting possibility to ac - count for this comes from the observation of the in - volvement in directional migration of the tumor suppres - sor PTEN , a phosphoinositide 3 ¢ - specific phosphatase that dephosphorylates PIP3 and P ( 3 , 4 ) P2 to P ( 4 , 5 ) P2 and P ( 4 ) P , respectively [ 111 – 113 ] . In chemotacting Dic - tyostelium cells , for instance , PTEN and PI3 - K exhibit reciprocal patterns of spatial localization [ 114 ] . PI3 - K is enriched at the leading edge of extending protrusions where PTEN is excluded but persists at the sides and the back of the cell [ 114 ] . Thus , it is reasonable to assume that the spatially restricted activation of PI3 - K and PTEN generates and maintains a PIP3 gradient at the leading edge of motile cells , critically contributing to the regulation of site - directed actin dynamics . Moreover , PIP3 has been shown to regulate the activation of Rac . The first indication that PI3 - K can act upstream of Rac came from the observations that interference with PI3 - K activity , using either pharmacological inhibitors , such as wortmannin , or dominant negative PI3 - K con - structs , led to the complete abrogation of PDGF - induced , Rac - dependent membrane ruffling . Ectopic expression of a constitutively active form of Rac1 could overcome this inhibition [ 104 , 115 – 117 ] , thus supporting an epistatic relationship between PI3 - K and Rac . The biochemical mechanisms underlining this cross - talk turned out to be a much more difficult nut to crack . With the availability of in vivo assays capable of measuring the levels of GTP - loaded Rac , it became apparent that activation of PI3 - K was functionally linked to Rac activation , providing the first biochemical evidence of a PI3 - K - Rac pathway . The missing molecular links in this cascade were GEFs . The structural features of GEFs , which are frequently charac - terized by a modular organization with a variety of pro - tein : protein interaction motifs , strengthen the possibility that these molecules may be capable of intercepting a va - riety of incoming signals from RTK , leading to Rac acti - vation . A number of Rac - specific guanine nucleotide ex - change factors were shown to be regulated by binding to PIP3 [ 118 ] ( fig . 3b ) . For instance , genetic removal of Swap - 70 , a GEF for Rac , was shown to reduce ruffling in response to pharmacological doses of PDGF [ 119 ] . Sim - ilarly , PIP3 - independent and - dependent GEFs , such as Tiam1 and Vav2 / 3 , have been shown to play a role in Ras and RTK - mediated Rac activation , respectively [ 120 , 121 ] . A peculiar mode of action for Rac - specific guanine nucleotide exchange factors was demonstrated in the case of Dock180 , an unconventional Rac - GEF devoid of the Dbl homology domain present in all other known mam - malian Rac - GEFs . Dock180 can mediate GTP loading of Rac in vitro [ 122 , 123 ] . In vivo , however , the formation of a bipartite DOCK180 / ELMO complex is required for its function [ 124 ] . The assembly into multimolecular complexes as a modality of regulation of GEFs involved in RTK - to - Rac signaling is also exemplified in the case of Sos - 1 . Sos - 1 , a dual GEF for Ras and Rac , was pro - posed to act as a Rac - GEF when engaged in a complex with Eps8 and Abi1 ( also called E3b1 ) , two adaptor mol - ecules and phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - triphosphate [ 57 ] . Accordingly , interference with any of the components of the complex reduces or abrogates membrane ruffling in - duced by RTK activation . CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 62 , 2005 Review Article 963 The final step : how Rac mediates lamellipodia formation Several downstream targets of Rac have been extensively investigated for their ability to contribute to actin dynam - ics . Emerging evidence supports a model whereby Rac , through binding to a variety of distinct effectors , not only coordinates the activities directly affecting the rate of ac - tin treadmilling and the architectural organization of the actin meshwork within the lamellipodium , but also im - poses a strict spatial control on actin polymerization , generating the physical force pushing the membrane for - ward . Three major modes through which Rac regulates actin dynamics can be categorized , all contributing to en - hanced protrusion of the membrane : de novo nucleation of actin filaments from monomers and filament elonga - tion , resulting in the formation of a branched array of fil - aments by proteins such as the Arp2 / 3 complex ; acceler - ation of actin turnover by proteins such as cofilin ; regu - lated exposure of existing barbed ends after dissociation of high affinity filament capping proteins , such as gel - solin ( fig . 1 , see also above ) . Whatever the case , all the emerging evidence points to a scenario whereby Rac - me - diated control of site - directed actin dynamics is achieved through the transmission of signal via macromolecular complexes that , to different extents , are required to phys - ically link Rac to the basic machinery of actin polymer - ization , permitting a precise spatio - temporal coordina - tion of the turnover of actin filaments . Site - directed filament elongation : a matter of Arp2 / 3 and WAVE In vitro , the rate - limiting step of actin polymerization is the assembly of free actin monomers into a trimer [ 1 ] . This , in vivo , is enhanced by several factors that stimulate nucleation [ 70 ] . A family of regulatory proteins , includ - ing WASP , N - WASP and WAVEs ( 1 , 2 and 3 ) , participate in these processes by relaying signaling from Cdc42 and Rac to the actin nucleation machinery – the Arp2 / 3 com - plex [ 2 , 70 ] . These proteins possess a common modular organization that includes the highly conserved C - termi - nus capable of binding to and activating the Arp2 / 3 com - plex [ 69 ] . A variety of biochemical and structural biolog - ical evidence defined the modality through which signal - ing is conveyed to regulate WASP and N - WASP , particularly in the case of Cdc42 [ 70 , 125 ] . Conversely , only recently the mechanisms that control WAVE pro - teins have begun to be clarified . WAVE - mediated actin nucleation at the lamellipodium tip was assumed early on to function downstream of Rac [ 126 ] , although the molecular linkage remained elusive , since WAVE proteins are incapable of direct binding to GTP - bound Rac . Furthermore , in contrast to WASPs , whose autoinhibitory conformation is released synergis - tically by binding of GTP - Cdc42 and PIP 2 in in vitro actin polymerization assays [ 127 – 129 ] , full - length WAVE is fully active in this assay [ 130 ] . This suggested the possi - bility that regulation of WAVE proteins by GTP - loaded Rac could be exerted by controlling its localization , rather than its activity , thus allowing spatially restricted , Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin nucleation at the leading edge of cells . Consistent with this , WAVE proteins were shown to assemble into multiprotein complexes at the lamel - lipodium tip , which exert a tight regulation either on their activity and / or on their stability and localization . The first link between WAVE2 and Rac was found to be mediated by the insulin receptor substrate IRSp53 . However , while a complex including Rac - IRSp53 - WAVE2 could be re - constituted in vitro , it did not significantly affect the nu - cleation promoting function of WAVE2 [ 131 ] . Addition - ally , no genetic evidence has been so far provided of a re - quirement of IRSp53 in Rac - mediated , WAVE - dependent ruffling . Finally , IRSp53 has also been shown to be a downstream target of the small GTPase Cdc42 , leading to filopodia formation , pointing to a much more complex scenario [ 132 – 134 ] . Thus , the functional and physiolog - ical role exerted by IRSp53 on WAVE activity is far from being established , and more investigation in this direction will be needed . An alternative mechanism to control the activity of WAVEs via Rac was recently proposed [ 135 ] . WAVE1 was found to be kept inactive through its association with three other proteins : Nap1 , an NCK - associated protein [ 136 ] , PIR121 / Sra - 1 , identified as a Rac effector [ 137 , 138 ] and HSPC300 [ 135 ] . This complex was unable to stimulate actin polymerization in in vitro assays . Addi - tion of active Rac relieved this inhibition by inducing the disassembly of the inhibitory Nap1 - PIR121 sub - com - plex from the WAVE1 - HSPC300 unit , which was then capable of actin nucleation [ 135 ] . More recently , in vivo and in vitro experiments challenged this attractive in - hibitory model arguing , instead , for a positive mode of regulation exerted by the assembly of WAVE into a Abi1 - Nap1 - PIR121 complex . According to these latter stud - ies , Abi1 was shown to interact directly with the WHD domain of WAVE2 , to increase WAVE2 - mediated actin polymerization activity , and to mediate the assembly of a WAVE - Abi1 - Nap1 - PIR121 complex [ 59 ] . Unexpect - edly , in vitro reconstituted WAVE1 - and WAVE2 - Abi1 - Nap1 - PIR121 complexes were as active as the WAVE1 - or 2 - Abi1 sub complexes in stimulating Arp2 / 3 , and ad - dition of activated Rac either in vitro or in vivo did not disrupt the complex [ 59 , 60 ] . Furthermore , the integrity of the macromolecular complex was shown to be also re - quired for proper targeting to the leading edge of mem - brane protrusions , as witnessed by the observation that all the components of the WAVE - based complex are dy - namically re - localized to the leading edge of membrane protrusions , where de novo actin polymerization occurs [ 60 ] . This latter evidence is in agreement with previous and independent studies on the localization of Abi1 and 964 A . Disanza et al . Actin polymerization machinery : the finish line of signaling networks WAVE during membrane protrusion [ 69 , 139 ] . The sum of these data suggest a model whereby the WAVE - Abi1 - Nap1 - PIR121 / Sra - 1 signaling complex needs to be re - cruited to lamellipodia upon Rac activation , thus leading to site - directed nucleation of actin filaments . Further support to this came from a number of RNAi studies per - formed in different model systems . Systematic , individ - ual ablation of WAVE , Nap1 , PIR121 / Sra - 1 and Abi1 gene products in Drosophila S2 Schneider cells [ 22 , 140 ] and in mammalian cells [ 59 , 60 ] led to a complete loss of lamellipodia formation . Moreover , mutations of the homologues of Sra - 1 / PIR121 or Nap1 / Kette in plants resulted in a phenotype similar to the one caused by mu - tations in the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 141 – 144 ] . Thus , all to - gether , these data support the notion that PIR121 / Sra - 1 , Nap1 / Kette and Abi play positive , rather than inhibitory roles in WAVE / Scar regulation . An additional role ex - erted by this multimolecular complex was demonstrated by the observation that an intact Sra - 1 / Nap1 / Abi / Wave complex is a prerequisite for the stability of WAVE [ 22 , 59 , 60 , 140 , 145 ] . Interestingly , reintroduction of GFP - tagged WAVE2 , which was not degraded , could not re - store lamellipodia formation in Nap1 knockdown cells in response to Rac , highlighting the requirement of an inte - gral complex for proper signal transduction from Rac to WAVE [ 60 ] . Regulation of actin filament turnover In addition to the control on site - directed , de novo actin nucleation , Rac has been shown to mediate a signaling cascade leading to the regulation of the actin depolymer - izing factor ADF / cofilin . This pathway has been exten - sively characterized and shown to occur through a ‘canonical’ kinase cascade . One of the first Rac effectors identified is PAK ( p21 activated kinase ) , a serine / threo - nine kinase , whose activity is induced following associa - tion to GTP - loaded Rac . PAK in turn can phosphorylate a number of different substrates , including LIM kinase [ 146 ] , leading to its upregulation . LIM kinase is then ca - pable of directly regulating the activity of ADF / cofilin by controlling its phosphorylation status [ 147 ] . ADF / cofilin displays constitutive actin severing and depolymerizing activity once it is in a non - phosphorylated form , promot - ing actin filament turnover . Consistent with this view , ADF / cofilin has been shown to be required for cell motil - ity [ 148 , 149 ] . Further support for this came from studies in single cells . RNAi - mediated reduction of cofilin in Drosophila S2 cells led to accumulation of filamentous actin at the cell cortex [ 22 ] , strengthening its role in pro - moting actin dynamics during plasma membrane protru - sion . Rac may , therefore , modulate filament turnover by directly controlling ADF / cofilin activity . An additional level of ADF / cofilin regulation might be exerted through its association with the lipid second messenger PIP2 . In vitro and in vivo experiments indicated that binding of PIP2 to ADF / cofilin prevents its interaction to actin [ 150 ] . Notably , Rac has been proposed to positively reg - ulate both the PI4 , P5 kinase [ 151 ] , a lipid kinase , whose catalytic activity is responsible for the production of PIP2 , and a lipid phosphatase , like synaptojanin II [ 152 ] . This suggests that coordinated regulation of these pro - teins by Rac may control the local levels of PIP2 , possi - bly generating PIP2 gradients along the breath of the lamellipodium . This may , in turn , be instrumental in mod - ulating the activities , in a spatially - restricted fashion , of proteins such as ADF / cofilin and / or capping proteins . Control of barbed end elongation by capping and de - capping The availability of free barbed ends for the Arp2 / 3 - based actin nucleation machinery is fundamental to promote motility . Hence , dissociation of barbed - end cappers ac - companies filament elongation [ 153 ] . Additionally , by blocking a large fraction of barbed ends , cappers estab - lish a high steady - state concentration of monomeric ac - tin , thus actively feeding the growth of free barbed ends . Finally , by arresting the growth of filaments , they regu - late their life - time and average length in various motile actin structures such as lamellipodia . Signaling leading to actin - based motility is thought to regulate the interaction of cappers with barbed ends , thus providing sites where actin polymerization generates propulsive force [ 41 , 50 , 154 ] . Consistently , gelsolin , a filament capping protein , has been implicated in the reg - ulation of the actin cytoskeleton downstream of Rac . Gel - solin null fibroblasts displayed reduced ruffling in re - sponse to epithelial growth factor ( EGF ) stimulation [ 155 ] . Furthermore , the uncapping event of gelsolin from actin was found to occur at sites of active actin assembly [ 41 , 156 ] . Conversely , in Drosophila S2 cells , RNAi - me - diated reduction of gelsolin had no effect on lamellipodia formation [ 22 ] . This may be due to the fact that a variety of different capping proteins may contribute to this phe - notype . These proteins may play specific roles depending on the cellular context and the signaling pathways in which they are implicated . In support of this view , genetic removal of either murine gelsolin or CapG only results in mild physiological alterations that are restricted to the tis - sues where the expression of these capping proteins is high [ 157 , 158 ] . Finally , the discovery of the existence of a new family of actin capping proteins , like the Eps8 fam - ily [ 52 , 53 ] , involved in different steps of the cascade reg - ulating actin remodeling , indicates that multiple mecha - nisms may have evolved to precisely regulate this activity in a tissue - specific and signaling - dependent manner . Clearly , more investigations will be needed to unravel the molecular basis of the connection between key signaling molecules , such as Rac , and capping proteins : an exciting challenge for the years to come . CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 62 , 2005 Review Article 965 Acknowledgments . This work was supported by grants from AIRC ( Associazione Italiana Ricerca sul Cancro ) to G . S . , from the Hu - man Science Frontier Program to G . S . , ( grant # RGP0072 / 2003 - C ) , from the Italian Ministry of Health ( grant R . F . 02 / 184 ) to G . S . , from the European Community ( VI Framework ) to G . S . A . S . was sup - ported in part by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( DFG ) ( FOR 471 ) and by an EMBO short - term fellowship . K . R . was sup - ported in part by the DFG ( SPP 1150 ) . A . S . thanks Jürgen Wehland for allowing time to contribute to this article . We would like to thank Theresia E . B . Stradal for critical reading of the manuscript . 1 Pollard T . D . and Borisy G . G . ( 2003 ) Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 ( 4 ) : 453 – 465 2 Small J . V . , Stradal T . , Vignal E . and Rottner K . ( 2002 ) The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol . 12 ( 3 ) : 112 – 120 3 Pantaloni D . , Le Clainche C . and Carlier M . F . ( 2001 ) Mecha - nism of actin - based motility . Science 292 ( 5521 ) : 1502 – 1506 4 Mullins R . D . and Machesky L . M . ( 2000 ) Actin assembly me - diated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP family proteins . Meth - ods Enzymol . 325 : 214 – 237 5 Bi E . and Zigmond S . H . ( 1999 ) Actin polymerization : where the WASP stings . Curr . Biol . 9 ( 5 ) : R160 – 163 6 Hall A . ( 1998 ) Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Sci - ence 279 ( 5350 ) : 509 – 514 7 Carlier M . F . ( 1991 ) Actin : protein structure and filament dy - namics . J . Biol . Chem . 266 ( 1 ) : 1 – 4 8 Carlier M . F . ( 1991 ) Nucleotide hydrolysis in cytoskeletal as - sembly . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 3 ( 1 ) : 12 – 17 9 Bailly M . , Macaluso F . , Cammer M . , Chan A . , Segall J . E . and Condeelis J . S . ( 1999 ) Relationship between Arp2 / 3 complex and the barbed ends of actin filaments at the leading edge of carcinoma cells after epidermal growth factor stimulation . J . Cell Biol . 145 ( 2 ) : 331 – 345 10 Wang Y . L . ( 1985 ) Exchange of actin subunits at the leading edge of living fibroblasts : possible role of treadmilling . J . Cell Biol . 101 ( 2 ) : 597 – 602 11 Small J . V . , Isenberg G . and Celis J . E . ( 1978 ) Polarity of actin at the leading edge of cultured cells . Nature 272 ( 5654 ) : 638 – 639 12 Welch M . D . , Rosenblatt J . , Skoble J . , Portnoy D . A . and Mitchison T . J . ( 1998 ) Interaction of human Arp2 / 3 complex and the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein in actin filament nucleation . Science 281 ( 5373 ) : 105 – 108 13 Welch M . D . , Iwamatsu A . and Mitchison T . J . ( 1997 ) Actin polymerization is induced by Arp2 / 3 protein complex at the surface of Listeria monocytogenes . Nature 385 ( 6613 ) : 265 – 269 14 Egile C . , Loisel T . P . , Laurent V . , Li R . , Pantaloni D . , San - sonetti P . J . et al . ( 1999 ) Activation of the CDC42 effector N - WASP by the Shigella flexneri IcsA protein promotes actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex and bacterial actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 146 ( 6 ) : 1319 – 1332 15 Theriot J . A . , Mitchison T . J . , Tilney L . G . and Portnoy D . A . ( 1992 ) The rate of actin - based motility of intracellular Liste - ria monocytogenes equals the rate of actin polymerization . Nature 357 ( 6375 ) : 257 – 260 16 Dabiri G . A . , Sanger J . M . , Portnoy D . A . and Southwick F . S . ( 1990 ) Listeria monocytogenes moves rapidly through the host - cell cytoplasm by inducing directional actin assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 87 ( 16 ) : 6068 – 6072 17 Carlier M . F . ( 1998 ) Control of actin dynamics . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 ( 1 ) : 45 – 51 18 Pollard T . D . and Cooper J . A . ( 1986 ) Actin and actin - binding proteins . A critical evaluation of mechanisms and functions . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 55 : 987 – 1035 19 Wiesner S . , Helfer E . , Didry D . , Ducouret G . , Lafuma F . , Car - lier M . F . et al . ( 2003 ) A biomimetic motility assay provides insight into the mechanism of actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 160 ( 3 ) : 387 – 398 20 Yarar D . , To W . , Abo A . and Welch M . D . ( 1999 ) The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein directs actin - based motility by stimulating actin nucleation with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 9 ( 10 ) : 555 – 558 21 Loisel T . P . , Boujemaa R . , Pantaloni D . and Carlier M . F . ( 1999 ) Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 ( 6753 ) : 613 – 616 22 Rogers S . L . , Wiedemann U . , Stuurman N . and Vale R . D . ( 2003 ) Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella forma - tion in Drosophila S2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 ( 6 ) : 1079 – 1088 23 Carlier M . F . , Le Clainche C . , Wiesner S . and Pantaloni D . ( 2003 ) Actin - based motility : from molecules to movement . Bioessays 25 ( 4 ) : 336 – 345 24 Moon A . and Drubin D . G . ( 1995 ) The ADF / cofilin proteins : stimulus - responsive modulators of actin dynamics . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 ( 11 ) : 1423 – 1431 25 Condeelis J . ( 2001 ) How is actin polymerization nucleated in vivo ? Trends Cell Biol . 11 ( 7 ) : 288 – 293 26 Carlier M . F . , Laurent V . , Santolini J . , Melki R . , Didry D . , Xia G . X . et al . ( 1997 ) Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / cofilin ) enhances the rate of filament turnover : implication in actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 136 ( 6 ) : 1307 - 1322 27 Nebl G . , Meuer S . C . and Samstag Y . ( 1996 ) Dephosphoryla - tion of serine 3 regulates nuclear translocation of cofilin . J . Biol . Chem . 271 ( 42 ) : 26276 – 26280 28 Bamburg J . R . ( 1999 ) Proteins of the ADF / cofilin family : es - sential regulators of actin dynamics . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 : 185 – 230 29 Niwa R . , Nagata - Ohashi K . , Takeichi M . , Mizuno K . and Ue - mura T . ( 2002 ) Control of actin reorganization by Slingshot , a family of phosphatases that dephosphorylate ADF / cofilin . Cell 108 ( 2 ) : 233 – 246 30 Hertzog M . , van Heijenoort C . , Didry D . , Gaudier M . , Coutant J . , Gigant B . et al . ( 2004 ) The beta - thymosin / WH2 domain ; structural basis for the switch from inhibition to promotion of actin assembly . Cell 117 ( 5 ) : 611 – 623 31 Boquet I . , Boujemaa R . , Carlier M . F . and Preat T . ( 2000 ) Ci - boulot regulates actin assembly during Drosophila brain metamorphosis . Cell 102 ( 6 ) : 797 – 808 32 Pantaloni D . and Carlier M . F . ( 1993 ) How profilin promotes actin filament assembly in the presence of thymosin beta 4 . Cell 75 ( 5 ) : 1007 – 1014 33 Pollard T . D . and Cooper J . A . ( 1984 ) Quantitative analysis of the effect of Acanthamoeba profilin on actin filament nucle - ation and elongation . Biochemistry 23 ( 26 ) : 6631 – 6641 34 Didry D . , Carlier M . F . and Pantaloni D . ( 1998 ) Synergy be - tween actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin and profilin in in - creasing actin filament turnover . J . Biol . Chem . 273 ( 40 ) : 25602 – 25611 35 Hug C . , Jay P . Y . , Reddy I . , McNally J . G . , Bridgman P . C . , El - son E . L . et al . ( 1995 ) Capping protein levels influence actin assembly and cell motility in dictyostelium . Cell 81 ( 4 ) : 591 – 600 36 Sun H . Q . , Kwiatkowska K . , Wooten D . C . and Yin H . L . ( 1995 ) Effects of CapG overexpression on agonist - induced motility and second messenger generation . J . Cell Biol . 129 ( 1 ) : 147 – 156 37 Wear M . A . and Cooper J . A . ( 2004 ) Capping protein : new in - sights into mechanism and regulation . Trends Biochem . Sci . 29 ( 8 ) : 418 – 428 38 Bear J . E . , Krause M . and Gertler F . B . ( 2001 ) Regulating cel - lular actin assembly . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 ( 2 ) : 158 – 166 39 Yin H . L . and Stull J . T . ( 1999 ) Proteins that regulate dynamic actin remodeling in response to membrane signaling minire - view series . J . Biol . Chem . 274 ( 46 ) : 32529 – 32530 966 A . Disanza et al . Actin polymerization machinery : the finish line of signaling networks 40 Mejillano M . R . , Kojima S . , Applewhite D . A . , Gertler F . B . , Svitkina T . M . and Borisy G . G . ( 2003 ) Lamellipodial versus filopodial mode of the actin nanomachinery : pivotal role of the filament barbed end . Cell 118 ( 3 ) : 363 – 373 41 Allen P . G . ( 2003 ) Actin filament uncapping localizes to ruff - ling lamellae and rocketing vesicles . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 ( 11 ) : 972 – 979 42 Chou J . , Stolz D . B . , Burke N . A . , Watkins S . C . and Wells A . ( 2002 ) Distribution of gelsolin and phosphoinositol 4 , 5 - bis - phosphate in lamellipodia during EGF - induced motility . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 34 ( 7 ) : 776 – 790 43 Schafer D . A . , Korshunova Y . O . , Schroer T . A . and Cooper J . A . ( 1994 ) Differential localization and sequence analysis of capping protein beta - subunit isoforms of vertebrates . J . Cell Biol . 127 ( 2 ) : 453 – 465 44 Samarin S . , Romero S . , Kocks C . , Didry D . , Pantaloni D . and Carlier M . F . ( 2003 ) How VASP enhances actin - based motil - ity . J . Cell Biol . 163 ( 1 ) : 131 – 142 45 Krause M . , Dent E . W . , Bear J . E . , Loureiro J . J . and Gertler F . B . ( 2003 ) Ena / VASP proteins : regulators of the actin cy - toskeleton and cell migration . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 : 541 – 564 46 Lin K . M . , Wenegieme E . , Lu P . J . , Chen C . S . and Yin H . L . ( 1997 ) Gelsolin binding to phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphos - phate is modulated by calcium and pH . J . Biol . Chem . 272 ( 33 ) : 20443 - 20450 47 Yu F . X . , Johnston P . A . , Sudhof T . C . and Yin H . L . ( 1990 ) gCap39 , a calcium ion - and polyphosphoinositide - regulated actin capping protein . Science 250 ( 4986 ) : 1413 – 1415 48 Hilpela P . , Vartiainen M . K . and Lappalainen P . ( 2004 ) Regu - lation of the actin cytoskeleton by PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 and PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 . Curr . Top . Microbiol . Immunol . 282 : 117 – 163 49 Doughman R . L . , Firestone A . J . and Anderson R . A . ( 2003 ) Phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinases put PI4 , 5P ( 2 ) in its place . J . Membr . Biol . 194 ( 2 ) : 77 – 89 50 Yin H . L . and Janmey P . A . ( 2003 ) Phosphoinositide regula - tion of the actin cytoskeleton . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 65 : 761 – 789 51 Robinson R . C . , Mejillano M . , Le V . P . , Burtnick L . D . , Yin H . L . and Choe S . ( 1999 ) Domain movement in gelsolin : a cal - cium - activated switch . Science 286 ( 5446 ) : 1939 – 1942 52 Croce A . , Cassata G . , Disanza A . , Gagliani M . C . , Tacchetti C . , Malabarba M . G . et al . ( 2004 ) A novel actin barbed - end - capping activity in EPS - 8 regulates apical morphogenesis in intestinal cells of Caenorhabditis elegans . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 ( 12 ) : 1173 – 1179 53 Disanza A . , Carlier M . F . , Stradal T . E . , Didry D . , Frittoli E . , Confalonieri S . et al . ( 2004 ) Eps8 controls actin - based motil - ity by capping the barbed ends of actin filaments . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 ( 12 ) : 1180 – 1188 54 Offenhauser N . , Borgonovo A . , Disanza A . , Romano P . , Pon - zanelli I . , Iannolo G . et al . ( 2004 ) The eps8 family of proteins links growth factor stimulation to actin reorganization gener - ating functional redundancy in the Ras / Rac pathway . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 ( 1 ) : 91 – 98 55 Tocchetti A . , Confalonieri S . , Scita G . , Di Fiore P . P . and Bet - sholtz C . ( 2003 ) In silico analysis of the EPS8 gene family : genomic organization , expression profile and protein struc - ture . Genomics 81 ( 2 ) : 234 – 244 56 Scita G . , Nordstrom J . , Carbone R . , Tenca P . , Giardina G . , Gutkind S . et al . ( 1999 ) EPS8 and E3B1 transduce signals from Ras to Rac . Nature 401 ( 6750 ) : 290 – 293 57 Innocenti M . , Frittoli E . , Ponzanelli I . , Falck J . R . , Brachmann S . M . , Di Fiore P . P . et al . ( 2003 ) Phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ac - tivates Rac by entering in a complex with Eps8 , Abi1 and Sos - 1 . J . Cell Biol . 160 ( 1 ) : 17 – 23 58 Scita G . , Tenca P . , Areces L . B . , Tocchetti A . , Frittoli E . , Giar - dina G . et al . ( 2001 ) An effector region in Eps8 is responsible for the activation of the Rac - specific GEF activity of Sos - 1 and for the proper localization of the Rac - based actin - poly - merizing machine . J . Cell Biol . 154 ( 5 ) : 1031 – 144 59 Innocenti M . , Zucconi A . , Disanza A . , Frittoli E . , Areces L . B . , Steffen A . et al . ( 2004 ) Abi1 is essential for the formation and activation of a WAVE2 signalling complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 ( 4 ) : 319 – 327 60 Steffen A . , Rottner K . , Ehinger J . , Innocenti M . , Scita G . , Wehland J . et al . ( 2004 ) Sra - 1 and Nap1 link Rac to actin as - sembly driving lamellipodia formation . EMBO J . 23 ( 4 ) : 749 – 759 61 Pantaloni D . , Boujemaa R . , Didry D . , Gounon P . and Carlier M . F . ( 2000 ) The Arp2 / 3 complex branches filament barbed ends : functional antagonism with capping proteins . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 ( 7 ) : 385 – 391 62 Svitkina T . M . and Borisy G . G . ( 1999 ) Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin filament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 ( 5 ) : 1009 – 1026 63 Zigmond S . H . ( 2004 ) Formin - induced nucleation of actin fil - aments . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 ( 1 ) : 99 – 105 64 Higashida C . , Miyoshi T . , Fujita A . , Oceguera - Yanez F . , Monypenny J . , Andou Y . et al . ( 2004 ) Actin polymerization - driven molecular movement of mDia1 in living cells . Science 303 ( 5666 ) : 2007 – 2010 65 Evangelista M . , Zigmond S . and Boone C . ( 2003 ) Formins : signaling effectors for assembly and polarization of actin fila - ments . J . Cell Sci . 116 ( Pt 13 ) : 2603 – 2611 66 Higgs H . N . and Pollard T . D . ( 1999 ) Regulation of actin poly - merization by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASp / Scar proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 274 ( 46 ) : 32531 – 32534 67 Blanchoin L . , Amann K . J . , Higgs H . N . , Marchand J . B . , Kaiser D . B . and Pollard T . D . ( 2000 ) Direct observation of dendritic actin filament networks nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP / Scar proteins . Nature 404 ( 6781 ) : 1007 – 1011 68 Mullins R . D . , Heuser J . A . and Pollard T . D . ( 1998 ) The inter - action of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high affinity pointed end capping and formation of branching networks of filaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 ( 11 ) : 6181 – 6186 69 Stradal T . E . , Rottner K . , Disanza A . , Confalonieri S . , Inno - centi M . and Scita G . ( 2004 ) Regulation of actin dynamics by WASP and WAVE family proteins . Trends Cell Biol . 14 ( 6 ) : 303 – 311 70 Takenawa T . and Miki H . ( 2001 ) WASP and WAVE family proteins : key molecules for rapid rearrangement of cortical actin filaments and cell movement . J . Cell Sci . 114 ( Pt 10 ) : 1801 – 1809 71 Miki H . and Takenawa T . ( 1998 ) Direct binding of the verpro - lin - homology domain in N - WASP to actin is essential for cy - toskeletal reorganization . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 243 ( 1 ) : 73 – 78 72 Panchal S . C . , Kaiser D . A . , Torres E . , Pollard T . D . and Rosen M . K . ( 2003 ) A conserved amphipathic helix in WASP / Scar proteins is essential for activation of Arp2 / 3 complex . Nat . Struct . Biol . 10 ( 8 ) : 591 – 598 73 Marchand J . B . , Kaiser D . A . , Pollard T . D . and Higgs H . N . ( 2001 ) Interaction of WASP / Scar proteins with actin and ver - tebrate Arp2 / 3 complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 ( 1 ) : 76 – 82 74 Kim A . S . , Kakalis L . T . , Abdul - Manan N . , Liu G . A . and Rosen M . K . ( 2000 ) Autoinhibition and activation mecha - nisms of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Nature 404 ( 6774 ) : 151 – 158 75 Machesky L . M . and Insall R . H . ( 1998 ) Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 8 ( 25 ) : 1347 – 1356 76 Amann K . J . and Pollard T . D . ( 2001 ) The Arp2 / 3 complex nu - cleates actin filament branches from the sides of pre - existing filaments . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 ( 3 ) : 306 – 310 CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 62 , 2005 Review Article 967 77 Boujemaa - Paterski R . , Gouin E . , Hansen G . , Samarin S . , Le Clainche C . , Didry D . et al . ( 2001 ) Listeria protein ActA mim - ics WASp family proteins : it activates filament barbed end branching by Arp2 / 3 complex . Biochemistry 40 ( 38 ) : 11390 – 11404 78 Svitkina T . M . , Verkhovsky A . B . , McQuade K . M . and Borisy G . G . ( 1997 ) Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in fish epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J . Cell Biol . 139 ( 2 ) : 397 – 415 79 Resch G . P . , Goldie K . N . , Krebs A . , Hoenger A . and Small J . V . ( 2002 ) Visualisation of the actin cytoskeleton by cryo - elec - tron microscopy . J . Cell Sci . 115 ( Pt 9 ) : 1877 – 1882 80 Small J . , Rottner K . , Hahne P . and Anderson K . I . ( 1999 ) Vi - sualising the actin cytoskeleton . Microsc . Res . Tech . 47 ( 1 ) : 3 – 17 81 Le Clainche C . , Pantaloni D . and Carlier M . F . ( 2003 ) ATP hy - drolysis on actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex causes de - branching of dendritic actin arrays . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 ( 11 ) : 6337 – 6342 82 Evangelista M . , Pruyne D . , Amberg D . C . , Boone C . and Bretscher A . ( 2002 ) Formins direct Arp2 / 3 - independent actin filament assembly to polarize cell growth in yeast . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 ( 3 ) : 260 – 269 83 Evangelista M . , Blundell K . , Longtine M . S . , Chow C . J . , Adames N . , Pringle J . R . et al . ( 1997 ) Bni1p , a yeast formin linking cdc42p and the actin cytoskeleton during polarized morphogenesis . Science 276 ( 5309 ) : 118 – 122 84 Pelham R . J . and Chang F . ( 2002 ) Actin dynamics in the con - tractile ring during cytokinesis in fission yeast . Nature 419 ( 6902 ) : 82 – 86 85 Kobielak A . , Pasolli H . A . and Fuchs E . ( 2004 ) Mammalian formin - 1 participates in adherens junctions and polymeriza - tion of linear actin cables . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 ( 1 ) : 21 – 30 86 Koka S . , Neudauer C . L . , Li X . , Lewis R . E . , McCarthy J . B . and Westendorf J . J . ( 2003 ) The formin - homology - domain - containing protein FHOD1 enhances cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 116 ( Pt 9 ) : 1745 – 1755 87 Watanabe N . , Madaule P . , Reid T . , Ishizaki T . , Watanabe G . , Kakizuka A . et al . ( 1997 ) p140mDia , a mammalian homolog of Drosophila diaphanous , is a target protein for Rho small GTPase and is a ligand for profilin . EMBO J . 16 ( 11 ) : 3044 – 3056 88 Peng J . , Wallar B . J . , Flanders A . , Swiatek P . J . and Alberts A . S . ( 2003 ) Disruption of the diaphanous - related formin Drf1 gene encoding mDia1 reveals a role for Drf3 as an effector for Cdc42 . Curr , Biol , 13 ( 7 ) : 534 – 545 89 Wallar B . J . and Alberts A . S . ( 2003 ) The formins : active scaf - folds that remodel the cytoskeleton . Trends Cell Biol . 13 ( 8 ) : 435 – 446 90 Pring M . , Evangelista M . , Boone C . , Yang C . and Zigmond S . H . ( 2003 ) Mechanism of formin - induced nucleation of actin filaments . Biochemistry 42 ( 2 ) : 486 – 496 91 Sagot I . , Rodal A . A . , Moseley J . , Goode B . L . and Pellman D . ( 2002 ) An actin nucleation mechanism mediated by Bni1 and profilin . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 ( 8 ) : 626 – 631 92 Pruyne D . , Evangelista M . , Yang C . , Bi E . , Zigmond S . , Bretscher A . et al . ( 2002 ) Role of formins in actin assembly : nucleation and barbed - end association . Science 297 ( 5581 ) : 612 – 615 93 Romero S . , Le Clainche C . , Didry D . , Egile C . , Pantaloni D . and Carlier M . F . ( 2004 ) Formin is a processive motor that re - quires profilin to accelerate actin assembly and associated ATP hydrolysis . Cell , in press 94 Burridge K . and Wennerberg K . ( 2004 ) Rho and Rac take cen - ter stage . Cell 116 ( 2 ) : 167 – 179 95 Raftopoulou M . and Hall A . ( 2004 ) Cell migration : Rho GT - Pases lead the way . Dev . Biol . 265 ( 1 ) : 23 – 32 96 Ridley A . J . ( 2001 ) Rho GTPases and cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 114 ( Pt 15 ) : 2713 – 2722 97 Aspenstrom P . , Fransson A . and Saras J . ( 2004 ) Rho GTPases have diverse effects on the organization of the actin filament system . Biochem . J . 377 ( Pt 2 ) : 327 – 337 98 Schmidt A . and Hall A . ( 2002 ) Guanine nucleotide exchange factors for Rho GTPases : turning on the switch . Genes Dev . 16 ( 13 ) : 1587 – 1609 99 Ridley A . J . , Paterson H . F . , Johnston C . L . , Diekmann D . and Hall A . ( 1992 ) The small GTP - binding protein rac regulates growth factor - induced membrane ruffling . Cell 70 ( 3 ) : 401 – 410 100 Ronnstrand L . and Heldin C . H . ( 2001 ) Mechanisms of platelet - derived growth factor - induced chemotaxis . Int . J . Cancer 91 ( 6 ) : 757 – 762 101 Schlessinger J . ( 2000 ) Cell signaling by receptor tyrosine ki - nases . Cell 103 ( 2 ) : 211 – 225 102 Lemmon M . A . and Schlessinger J . ( 1994 ) Regulation of sig - nal transduction and signal diversity by receptor oligomeriza - tion . Trends Biochem . Sci . 19 ( 11 ) : 459 – 463 103 Fruman D . A . , Meyers R . E . and Cantley L . C . ( 1998 ) Phos - phoinositide kinases . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 67 : 481 – 507 104 Wennstrom S . , Hawkins P . , Cooke F . Hara K . , Yonezawa K . , Kasuga M . et al . ( 1994 ) Activation of phosphoinositide 3 - ki - nase is required for PDGF - stimulated membrane ruffling . Curr . Biol . 4 ( 5 ) : 385 – 393 105 Kazlauskas A . and Cooper J . A . ( 1990 ) Phosphorylation of the PDGF receptor beta subunit creates a tight binding site for phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase . EMBO J . 9 ( 10 ) : 3279 – 3286 106 Matuoka K . , Shibasaki F . , Shibata M . and Takenawa T . ( 1993 ) Ash / Grb - 2 , a SH2 / SH3 - containing protein , couples to signal - ing for mitogenesis and cytoskeletal reorganization by EGF and PDGF . EMBO J . 12 ( 9 ) : 3467 – 3473 107 Buday L . and Downward J . ( 1993 ) Epidermal growth factor regulates p21ras through the formation of a complex of recep - tor , Grb2 adapter protein , and Sos nucleotide exchange factor . Cell 73 ( 3 ) : 611 – 620 108 Lowenstein E . J . , Daly R . J . , Batzer A . G . , Li W . , Margolis B . , Lammers R . et al . ( 1992 ) The SH2 and SH3 domain - contain - ing protein GRB2 links receptor tyrosine kinases to ras sig - naling . Cell 70 ( 3 ) : 431 – 442 109 Wang F . , Herzmark P . , Weiner O . D . , Srinivasan S . , Servant G . and Bourne H . R . ( 2002 ) Lipid products of PI ( 3 ) Ks maintain persistent cell polarity and directed motility in neutrophils . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 ( 7 ) : 513 – 518 110 Oikawa T . , Yamaguchi H . , Itoh T . , Kato M . , Ijuin T . , Yamazaki D . et al . ( 2004 ) PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 binding is necessary for WAVE2 - induced formation of lamellipodia . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 ( 5 ) : 420 – 426 111 Yamada K . M . and Araki M . ( 2001 ) Tumor suppressor PTEN : modulator of cell signaling , growth , migration and apoptosis . J . Cell Sci . 114 ( Pt 13 ) : 2375 – 2382 112 Lee J . O . , Yang H . , Georgescu M . M . , Di Cristofano A . , Mae - hama T . , Shi Y . et al . ( 1999 ) Crystal structure of the PTEN tu - mor suppressor : implications for its phosphoinositide phos - phatase activity and membrane association . Cell 99 ( 3 ) : 323 – 334 113 Maehama T . and Dixon J . E . ( 1998 ) The tumor suppressor , PTEN / MMAC1 , dephosphorylates the lipid second messen - ger , phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate . J . Biol . Chem . 273 ( 22 ) : 13375 – 13378 114 Merlot S . and Firtel R . A . ( 2003 ) Leading the way : directional sensing through phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase and other sig - naling pathways . J . Cell Sci . 116 ( Pt 17 ) : 3471 – 3478 115 Nobes C . D . , Hawkins P . , Stephens L . and Hall A . ( 1995 ) Ac - tivation of the small GTP - binding proteins rho and rac by growth factor receptors . J . Cell Sci . 108 ( Pt 1 ) : 225 – 233 116 Kotani K . , Hara K . , Yonezawa K . and Kasuga M . ( 1995 ) Phos - phoinositide 3 - kinase as an upstream regulator of the small GTP - binding protein Rac in the insulin signaling of mem - 968 A . Disanza et al . Actin polymerization machinery : the finish line of signaling networks brane ruffling . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 208 ( 3 ) : 985 – 990 117 Hawkins P . T . , Eguinoa A . , Qiu R . G . , Stokoe D . , Cooke F . T . , Walters R . et al . ( 1995 ) PDGF stimulates an increase in GTP - Rac via activation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase . Curr . Biol . 5 ( 4 ) : 393 – 403 118 Welch H . C . , Coadwell W . J . , Stephens L . R . and Hawkins P . T . ( 2003 ) Phosphoinositide 3 - kinase - dependent activation of Rac . FEBS Lett . 546 ( 1 ) : 93 – 97 119 Shinohara M . , Terada Y . , Iwamatsu A . , Shinohara A . , Mochizuki N . , Higuchi M . et al . ( 2002 ) SWAP - 70 is a gua - nine - nucleotide - exchange factor that mediates signalling of membrane ruffling . Nature 416 ( 6882 ) : 759 – 763 120 Lambert J . M . , Lambert Q . T . , Reuther G . W . , Malliri A . , Siderovski D . P . , Sondek J . et al . ( 2002 ) Tiam1 mediates Ras activation of Rac by a PI ( 3 ) K - independent mechanism . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 ( 8 ) : 621 – 625 121 Bustelo X . R . ( 2000 ) Regulatory and signaling properties of the Vav family . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 ( 5 ) : 1461 – 1477 122 Cote J . F . and Vuori K . ( 2002 ) Identification of an evolution - arily conserved superfamily of DOCK180 - related proteins with guanine nucleotide exchange activity . J . Cell Sci . 115 ( Pt 24 ) : 4901 – 4913 123 Kiyokawa E . , Hashimoto Y . , Kobayashi S . , Sugimura H . , Ku - rata T . and Matsuda M . ( 1998 ) Activation of Rac1 by a Crk SH3 - binding protein , DOCK180 . Genes Dev . 12 ( 21 ) : 3331 – 3336 124 Brugnera E . , Haney L . , Grimsley C . , Lu M . , Walk S . F . , Tosello - Trampont A . S . et al . ( 2002 ) Unconventional Rac - GEF activity is mediated through the Dock180 - ELMO com - plex . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 ( 8 ) : 574 – 582 125 Prehoda K . E . and Lim W . A . ( 2002 ) How signaling proteins integrate multiple inputs : a comparison of N - WASP and Cdk2 . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 ( 2 ) : 149 – 154 126 Miki H . , Suetsugu S . and Takenawa T . ( 1998 ) WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein involved in actin reorganization in - duced by Rac . EMBO J . 17 ( 23 ) : 6932 – 6941 127 Prehoda K . E . , Scott J . A . , Mullins R . D . and Lim W . A . ( 2000 ) Integration of multiple signals through cooperative regulation of the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 290 ( 5492 ) : 801 – 806 128 Rohatgi R . , Ho H . Y . and Kirschner M . W . ( 2000 ) Mechanism of N - WASP activation by CDC42 and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J . Cell Biol . 150 ( 6 ) : 1299 – 1310 129 Rohatgi R . , Ma L . , Miki H . , Lopez M . , Kirchhausen T . , Take - nawa T . et al . ( 1999 ) The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin as - sembly . Cell 97 ( 2 ) : 221 – 231 130 Machesky L . M . , Mullins R . D . , Higgs H . N . , Kaiser D . A . , Blanchoin L . , May R . C . et al . ( 1999 ) Scar , a WASp - related protein , activates nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 ( 7 ) : 3739 – 3744 131 Miki H . , Yamaguchi H . , Suetsugu S . and Takenawa T . ( 2000 ) IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of membrane ruffling . Nature 408 ( 6813 ) : 732 – 735 132 Yamagishi A . , Masuda M . , Ohki T . , Onishi H . and Mochizuki N . ( 2004 ) A novel actin bundling / filopodium - forming domain conserved in insulin receptor tyrosine kinase substrate p53 and missing in metastasis protein . J . Biol . Chem . 279 ( 15 ) : 14929 – 14936 133 Govind S . , Kozma R . , Monfries C . , Lim L . and Ahmed S . ( 2001 ) Cdc42Hs facilitates cytoskeletal reorganization and neurite outgrowth by localizing the 58 - kD insulin receptor substrate to filamentous actin . J . Cell Biol . 152 ( 3 ) : 579 – 594 134 Krugmann S . , Jordens I . , Gevaert K . , Driessens M . , Vandek - erckhove J . and Hall A . ( 2001 ) Cdc42 induces filopodia by promoting the formation of an IRSp53 : Mena complex . Curr . Biol . 11 ( 21 ) : 1645 – 1655 135 Eden S . , Rohatgi R . , Podtelejnikov A . V . , Mann M . and Kirschner M . W . ( 2002 ) Mechanism of regulation of WAVE1 - induced actin nucleation by Rac1 and Nck . Nature 418 ( 6899 ) : 790 – 793 136 Kitamura T . , Kitamura Y . , Yonezawa K . , Totty N . F . , Gout I . , Hara K . et al . ( 1996 ) Molecular cloning of p125Nap1 , a pro - tein that associates with an SH3 domain of Nck . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 219 ( 2 ) : 509 – 514 137 Saller E . , Tom E . , Brunori M . , Otter M . , Estreicher A . , Mack D . H . et al . ( 1999 ) Increased apoptosis induction by 121F mu - tant p53 . EMBO J . 18 ( 16 ) : 4424 – 4437 138 Kobayashi K . , Kuroda S . , Fukata M . , Nakamura T . , Nagase T . , Nomura N . et al . ( 1998 ) p140Sra - 1 ( specifically Rac1 - associ - ated protein ) is a novel specific target for Rac1 small GTPase . J . Biol . Chem . 273 ( 1 ) : 291 – 295 139 Hahne P . , Sechi A . , Benesch S . and Small J . V . ( 2001 ) Scar / WAVE is localised at the tips of protruding lamellipodia in living cells . FEBS Lett . 492 ( 3 ) : 215 – 220 140 Kunda P . , Craig G . , Dominguez V . and Baum B . ( 2003 ) Abi , Sra1 and Kette control the stability and localization of SCAR / WAVE to regulate the formation of actin - based protru - sions . Curr . Biol . 13 ( 21 ) : 1867 – 1875 141 Basu D . , El - Assal Sel D . , Le J . , Mallery E . L . and Szymanski D . B . ( 2004 ) Interchangeable functions of Arabidopsis PIROGI and the human WAVE complex subunit SRA1 during leaf epi - dermal development . Development 131 ( 17 ) : 4345 – 4355 142 Brembu T . , Winge P . , Seem M . and Bones A . M . ( 2004 ) NAPP and PIRP encode subunits of a putative wave regulatory pro - tein complex involved in plant cell morphogenesis . Plant Cell 16 ( 9 ) : 2335 – 2349 143 El - Assal Sel D . , Le J . , Basu D . , Mallery E . L . and Szymanski D . B . ( 2004 ) Arabidopsis GNARLED encodes a NAP125 ho - molog that positively regulates ARP2 / 3 . Curr . Biol . 14 ( 15 ) : 1405 – 1409 144 Zimmermann I . , Saedler R . , Mutondo M . and Hulskamp M . ( 2004 ) The Arabidopsis GNARLED gene encodes the NAP125 homolog and controls several actin - based cell shape changes . Mol . Genet . Genomics 145 Blagg S . L . , Stewart M . , Sambles C . and Insall R . H . ( 2003 ) PIR121 regulates pseudopod dynamics and SCAR activity in Dictyostelium . Curr . Biol . 13 ( 17 ) : 1480 – 1487 146 Edwards D . C . , Sanders L . C . , Bokoch G . M . and Gill G . N . ( 1999 ) Activation of LIM - kinase by Pak1 couples Rac / Cdc42 GTPase signalling to actin cytoskeletal dynamics . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 ( 5 ) : 253 – 259 147 Yang N . , Higuchi O . , Ohashi K . , Nagata K . , Wada A . , Kan - gawa K . et al . ( 1998 ) Cofilin phosphorylation by LIM - kinase 1 and its role in Rac - mediated actin reorganization . Nature 393 ( 6687 ) : 809 – 812 148 Chen J . , Godt D . , Gunsalus K . , Kiss I . , Goldberg M . and Laski F . A . ( 2001 ) Cofilin / ADF is required for cell motility during Drosophila ovary development and oogenesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 ( 2 ) : 204 – 209 149 Zebda N . , Bernard O . , Bailly M . , Welti S . , Lawrence D . S . and Condeelis J . S . ( 2000 ) Phosphorylation of ADF / cofilin abol - ishes EGF - induced actin nucleation at the leading edge and subsequent lamellipod extension . J . Cell Biol . 151 ( 5 ) : 1119 – 1128 150 Bamburg J . R . , McGough A . and Ono S . ( 1999 ) Putting a new twist on actin : ADF / cofilins modulate actin dynamics . Trends Cell Biol . 9 ( 9 ) : 364 – 370 151 Tolias K . F . , Hartwig J . H . , Ishihara H . , Shibasaki Y . , Cantley L . C . and Carpenter C . L . ( 2000 ) Type Ialpha phosphatidyli - nositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase mediates Rac - dependent actin assembly . Curr . Biol . 10 ( 3 ) : 153 – 156 152 Malecz N . , McCabe P . C . , Spaargaren C . , Qiu R . , Chuang Y . and Symons M . ( 2000 ) Synaptojanin 2 , a novel Rac1 effector that regulates clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 10 ( 21 ) : 1383 – 1386 CMLS , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 62 , 2005 Review Article 969 153 Falet H . , Hoffmeister K . M . , Neujahr R . , Italiano J . E . Jr , Stos - sel T . P . , Southwick F . S . et al . ( 2002 ) Importance of free actin filament barbed ends for Arp2 / 3 complex function in platelets and fibroblasts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 ( 26 ) : 16782 – 16787 154 Sun H . Q . , Yamamoto M . , Mejillano M . and Yin H . L . ( 1999 ) Gelsolin , a multifunctional actin regulatory protein . J . Biol . Chem . 274 ( 47 ) : 33179 – 33182 155 Azuma T . , Witke W . , Stossel T . P . , Hartwig J . H . and Kwiat - kowski D . J . ( 1998 ) Gelsolin is a downstream effector of rac for fibroblast motility . EMBO J . 17 ( 5 ) : 1362 – 1370 156 Arcaro A . ( 1998 ) The small GTP - binding protein Rac pro - motes the dissociation of gelsolin from actin filaments in neu - trophils . J . Biol . Chem . 273 ( 2 ) : 805 – 813 157 Witke W . , Li W . , Kwiatkowski D . J . and Southwick F . S . ( 2001 ) Comparisons of CapG and gelsolin - null macrophages : demonstration of a unique role for CapG in receptor - mediated ruffling , phagocytosis , and vesicle rocketing . J . Cell Biol . 154 ( 4 ) : 775 – 784 158 Witke W . , Sharpe A . H . , Hartwig J . H . , Azuma T . , Stossel T . P . and Kwiatkowski D . J . ( 1995 ) Hemostatic , inflammatory , and fibroblast responses are blunted in mice lacking gelsolin . Cell 81 ( 1 ) : 41 – 51 159 Innocenti M . , Tenca P . , Frittoli E . , Faretta M . , Tocchetti A . , Di Fiore P . P . et al . ( 2002 ) Mechanisms through which Sos - 1 co - ordinates the activation of Ras and Rac . J . Cell Biol . 156 ( 1 ) : 125 – 136 160 Nimnual A . S . , Yatsula B . A . and Bar - Sagi D . ( 1998 ) Coupling of Ras and Rac guanosine triphosphatases through the Ras ex - changer Sos . Science 279 ( 5350 ) : 560 – 563 161 Miki H . and Takenawa T . ( 2002 ) WAVE2 serves a functional partner of IRSp53 by regulating its interaction with Rac . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 293 ( 1 ) : 93 – 99 970 A . Disanza et al . Actin polymerization machinery : the finish line of signaling networks