dr . helena Britt , JiMMy stePhen - Cran & elaine BreMner the glasgow sChool of art awaken : contemPorary fashion & t extile interPretation of archival material ARCHIvE UTILISATIoN | FASHIoN AND TExTILES | CREATIvE PRoCESS INSPIRATIoN | REINTERPRETATIoN abstract THE ARCHIvES AND CoLLECTIoNS CENTRE ( ACC ) AT THE GLASGoW SCHooL oF ART ( GSA ) ExISTS AS A RESoURCE FoR THE STUD y o F ART , DESIGN , ARCHITECTURE AND EDUCATIoN . IT CoMPRISES A WIDE RANGE oF MATERIAL FRoM SCHooL RECoRDS , TExTILE PIECES , GARMENTS , PATTERN BooKS , PoSTERS , ARTWoRKS , ARCHITECTURAL DRAWINGS , PLASTER CASTS , PHoToGRAPHy AND A CoLLECTIoN oF WoRKS By CHARLES RENNIE MACKINToSH . This paper describes Awaken , a research project undertaken involving staff from the ACC , the Department of Fashion and Textiles , and the Centre for Advanced Textiles ( CAT ) at GSA . The project examined the conceptual possibilities of re - interpreting archive material for contemporary fashion and textile related design work . This was underpinned by an explication of the creative process characteristic of this specific approach to design . The following questions directed the project : ● To what extent will the ideas produced be derivative or unoriginal ? ● Will we be re - interpreting , reproducing , initiating , appropriating , parodying or deliberately abstracting ? or will archive material simply act as a prompt , a trigger , or ‘fodder’ ? ● How will working from archive material differ from our normal working practice ? ● Will we be collaborating with the originator of the archive piece ? ● To what extent will we make sense of the original artefact by working from it ? 126 dr . helena Britt , JiMMy stePhen - Cran & elaine BreMner Awaken involved case studies with fashion and textile practitioners working individually and collaboratively . Data collection methods involved the practitioners observing , recording and reflecting on responses and processes using creative process journals ( CPJs ) and focus groups to stimulate critical reflection , share , question and articulate issues associated with the research . Content analysis provided the framework to relate the data collected to the key questions and emergent themes . The resulting fashion and textile artefacts were exhibited alongside extracts from CPJs and original archive material in the Mackintosh Gallery at the GSA . Aspects of the project were assimilated with visual material in a publication , which accompanied the exhibition . This paper will provide insight into the Awaken project , detailing the archival items practitioners selected , the approaches taken , insights into the creative process , the contemporary artefacts produced and discussions surrounding the research questions and key themes . The findings from the project will be described , adding to the minimal existent literature surrounding fashion and textile design creative process involving the utilisation of archival material . The paper will also briefly describe a research project currently in progress by the authors involving the Stoddard Templeton Design Archive at the GSA . awaken : contemPorary fashion & textile interPretation of archival material Existing literature regarding the design process and therefore design thinking tends to come from outside the textile and fashion disciplines . For example , Schön’s ( 1985 ) account of the reflective practitioner in the design studio , reflecting - in and - on action is from architecture , Lawson’s ( 2006 ) focus is also on architectural practice , whereas Cross ( 2011 ) analyses examples from automotive and industrial design . The nature of design process literature tends to dissect the developmental process into key stages . Labat and Sokolowski ( 1999 ) reviewed design process models from architecture , environmental , engineering , industrial product and clothing design to develop a three - stage design process for textiles , consisting of problem definition and research , creative exploration and implementation . The authors suggest the need for further ‘…exploration and understanding of design process…to advance the use of such processes in the field of textiles and clothing . ’ ( Labat and Sokolowski 1999 : 11 ) Fashion and textiles research undertaken by Parsons and Campbell ( 2004 ) describes a four - stage process consisting of problem identification , conceptual design , prototyping and solution . Research has been undertaken which focuses on the initial stages of the design process , for use in the development of digital design tools . For example , Mougenot et al ( 2008 : 331 ) undertook research with vehicle designers as ‘…the early stages of design remain incompletely understood , while the informative phase is identified as a crucial step of the design process . ’ Keller et al ( 2006 ) studied designers working in different disciplines and identified the collecting and collating of visual material as an ‘ongoing process’ , assisting design problem understanding and solution development . Designers’ sensitivity to aspects such as form , material , colour , texture and the social , cultural and technological environment is enhanced due to the collecting process ( Keller et al 2006 ) . In the textiles industry , a variety of images are collected for inspiration and idea development ( Studd 2002 ) . Collecting can be ‘… personal and intuitive…’ or ‘…from trend forecasting , from visits to trade fairs…to identify colour , fibre and fabric trends , from trade press and from suppliers , consultants , customers and agents . ’ ( Studd 2002 : 45 ) Eckert and Stacey ( 2003a , 2003b ) investigated the use of sources of inspiration in knitwear design . Described as a ‘neglected’ area of study , utilisation of inspirational sources and ‘…drawing ideas from previous designs . . . ’ is recognised as ‘…a universal part of human designing…’ ( Eckert and Stacey 2003a : 1 ) Sources of inspiration for knitwear design are categorised as examPles of new artefacts Produced by art and design Practitioners working from archives exist , but minimal insight is Provided into the rationale behind item selection or utilisation of this tyPe of source material in the creative Process . 127 dr . helena Britt , JiMMy stePhen - Cran & elaine BreMner garments , fashion photographs , other textiles , artefacts and other designed products , works of art , natural objects and phenomena and yarn ( Eckert and Stacey 2003a , 2003b ) . The transformative adaptations made to these references are categorised as ‘literal adaptation’ , ‘conscious simplification’ , ‘abstraction’ , ‘modifications to the source’ , ‘association’ and ‘deviation’ ( Eckert and Stacey 2003b ) . A study into student textile teachers’ design process inspirations , discovered variation , some had ‘…difficulties adapting and transforming inspiration sources into new kinds of design ideas…’ ( Laamanen and Sitamaa - Hakkarainen 2008 : 111 ) . Museum , library and archive visits are different for each individual as they bring with them their own experiences and expectations that impact upon how these resources are approached ( Holden et al 2006 ) . Archives ‘…are constituted from records created as an integral part of the business…’ or organisation ; they are ‘…closely related to locational value…and they can normally be associated with their origins , in time and place . ’ ( Schoeser and Boydell 2002 : 5 ) The creation of ‘new’ replica artefacts derived from archival sources is common practice in textiles and fashion conservation . Replicas of historical garments provide a new form of research material , which , used as part of a handling resource , can extend a collection’s potential ( Davidson and Hodson 2007 ) . Digital reproductions are also produced for commercial purposes , as with the fabric collections of Classic Textiles ( www . classictextiles . com ) and After Bloomsbury : Rugs from the Omega Workshop , 1913 - 1916 , produced using original designs from The Courtauld Gallery collections ( Geladell 2012 ) . In a paper focusing on current and best practice regarding clothing and textiles museum collections in the United States , a competition is briefly mentioned for professional and student fashion designers to redesign a collection object such as a paisley shawl ( Marcketti et al 2011 ) . In the United Kingdom ( UK ) insight into undergraduate and postgraduate ( graphics , illustration , interior , architecture , fashion and textiles ) student learning , using museum collections and other sources of inspiration , has enabled consideration of student needs in future provision ( Reading 2009 ) . Some students use collections purely for initial inspiration whereas ‘…others were informed by deeper understanding of the design process , and used the collections for a greater variety of purposes . ’ ( Reading 2009 : 119 ) Student projects using museum - based and archive resources are described in existing literature . For example , Marr ( 2011 ) reports on a textile design student project , from a UK higher education institution ( HEI ) using the Jenisch House Museum , Hamburg . In this instance ‘…little details triggered the creative process…’ , narratives and insights into the lives of people living and working in the house ‘…captured the students’ curiosity and imagination…’ ( Marr 2011 : 42 ) . In a paper , which provides an overview of a project where Masters students selected a sketch from a Swedish University to reinterpret through their own art and design work , archives are described as a ‘…great treasure for artists and designers…’ ( Turpeinen 2012 : 7 ) . Examples of new artefacts produced by art and design practitioners working from archives exist , but minimal insight is provided into the rationale behind item selection or utilisation of this type of source material in the creative process . The exhibition Carpets of Distinction ( Panel and Dovecot Studios 2012 ) included rugs produced by seven artists inspired by items from the Stoddard - Templeton archive . A selection of archive items were shown alongside the rugs and a short statement provided brief insight into the artist’s thinking behind each creation . The Nottingham Lace archive is used for visual inspiration and reinterpretation for student and staff research projects at Nottingham Trent University ( NTU ) ( Briggs - Goode and Buttress 2011 ) . The exhibition Journeys in Lace , featured work produced by staff from NTU , each selected a piece from the archive for reinterpretation resulting in the creation of a contemporary textile artefact ( Briggs - Goode 2012 ) . A brief statement reveals the archive item and key intention of the resulting exhibit . Inventors of Tradition brought together archive material from personal collections and Scottish textile companies , Scottish Screen Archive films and interviews with key individuals , to provide insight into the Scottish textile and fashion industry since the 1930s ( Lipscombe and McKenzie 2011 ) . Research using the archive material and into current manufacturing processes resulted in the creation of a new fashion collection , developed through working with Scottish manufacturers ; the collection was presented through a series of travelling showroom exhibits ( Lipscombe and McKenzie 2011 ) . Currently in progress , Experimental Archaeology meets Textile Design : The rediscovery of shadow tissues involves research using the archives of the textile company Turnball and Stockdale ( Belford 2011 ) . Historical findings inform practical investigations which attempt to replicate and reinterpret the ‘shadow tissue’ process through the production of textile samples and through recording the processes involved ( Belford 2011 ) . The potential commercial application of utilising the uncovered and newly created textile production process will also be considered ( Belford 2011 ) . 128 dr . helena Britt , JiMMy stePhen - Cran & elaine BreMner Davies ( 2010 ) questioned a group of fashion designers about the sources of inspiration revisited and the importance of research to their working processes . Museums and archives were used to access vintage fashion collections ( Six and Seven Eighths ) , view vintage issues of Vogue magazines ( Basso & Brooke ) and for natural phenomenon inspiration ( Graeme Black ) ( Davies 2010 ) . Personal archives were used for reference , described as ‘…my treasured archive of thousands of swatches and fabrics’ by Alice Temperley ( Davies 2010 : 24 ) and ‘…memories of all these different things as my main design repository’ by Tim Soar ( Davies 2010 : 184 ) . The designer , Dries van Noten ( in Davies 2012 : 64 ) provides further insight : ‘I remain fascinated by the past , by history and the history of fashion . All of my work is rooted in this appreciation of what has been and gone . It is not to mimic something that’s already happened , but more to revisit certain elements with a contemporary vision . A modern approach to design is , for me , the space between an object from another time and its reinterpretation . ’ research Process The aim of the research project , Awaken , described in this paper was to add to the minimal existent literature regarding the textile and fashion design creative process , specifically related to utilisation of archive resources . The Archives and Collections Centre ( ACC ) at The Glasgow School of Art ( GSA ) ‘…houses a wide variety of items relating to the history of the School , its buildings , activities and personnel . ’ ( Walters 2009 : 36 ) The intention of the project was to examine the conceptual possibilities of re - interpreting archive material , using the ACC , for contemporary fashion and textile related design work . Fourteen textile and fashion practitioners participated in the project ; all were members of staff at GSA . Each of these individuals attended an induction session with the ACC archivist . Creative process journals ( CPJs ) were used by each of the participants as the primary method for data collection . Using this method enables creative practitioners to record , analyse , evidence and explicate their own creative process ( McGilp & Stephen - Cran 2007 ) . A research log is kept by the individual which faithfully records practice as it happens , the log contains ‘…detailed written descriptions based on direct observation’ and ‘…includes a range of approaches to documentation such as photographs , rough sketches , drawings , diagrams and videos… artefacts such as swatches and sewing notions may also be included . ’ ( McGilp & Stephen - Cran 2007 : 126 ) . This ‘raw data’ constituting the research log is interrogated , reflected upon , sifted through and edited to produce the CPJ that integrates ‘…text and visuals or other media to detail the ‘creative journey’ . ’ ( McGilp & Stephen - Cran 2007 : 126 ) The intention of the CPJ is to represent to external viewers the key components involved in the creative process ( Gillham & McGilp 2007 ) . Explication of the design process using this method can enhance creative practitioner awareness and understanding of their own knowing in practice . As instigated by Pedgley ( 2007 : 466 ) it is only through ‘… eliciting an account of designing from the originator… [ that ] the nature of design activity from the originator’s perspective [ can ] be revealed . ’ Focus groups were used to stimulate critical reflection , share , question , and articulate issues associated with the project . Content analysis provided the means to interrogate the CPJs against the key research questions and emergent themes . This analysis 1 2 3 129 dr . helena Britt , JiMMy stePhen - Cran & elaine BreMner technique was applied to the data contained within the CPJs and involved ‘…two essential strands…identifying… substantive points ; putting them into categories . ’ ( Gillham 2000 : 59 ) Initial categories were formed from the research questions , with others devised and amended in relation to the CPJ content . In this way data was ‘…’interrogated’ through an inductive process where categories emerge as a result . ’ ( Gray & Malins 2004 : 133 ) The fashion and textile artefacts resulting from the project were exhibited , alongside CPJ extracts and original archive material in the exhibition Awaken , Mackintosh Gallery , GSA , 24 January – 28 February 2009 ( Stephen - Cran 2009a ) . An accompanying seminar for archivists took place to increase awareness of approaches to working with archival resources . Aspects of the project were assimilated with visual material in a post - exhibition publication ( Stephen - Cran 2009b ) . The project informed undergraduate and postgraduate learning and teaching at GSA through student projects and further integration of the use of design process logs and journals in the curriculum . archive artefact selection The ACC items selected to work from by the practitioners ranged from single artefacts , such as a textile sample ( figure 1 ) or book , to numerous seemingly disparate items such as posters ( figure 2 ) , past GSA fashion show and exhibition opening photographs . Certain participants selected items surrounding a particular individual or location . For example , a class photograph , sketchbook and folder of information relating to the GSA student Daisy Anderson , the northern Italian and European tours sketchbooks of Charles Rennie Mackintosh , photographs of the Mackintosh Building ( figure 3 ) and ‘Glasgow : Fifty Drawings’ by Muirhead Bone . The Gillespie Kidd and Coia architectural practice archive contains photographs , plans and drawings ( figure 4 ) . Items from this archive were selected by one of the participants and by two practitioners electing to work collaboratively . Two participants selected different bulletins from the Needlework Development Scheme ( NDS ) and a further two opted to work from the Travel Journal of John Walter Lindsay ( figure 5 ) . Both of the participants who selected the journal also selected other items , which included an ephemera book and items related to the archiving process ( figure 6 ) , described as ‘ephemera – labels , wrappings , backings’ ( Kinnersly - Taylor 2009 ) . selection rationale Analysis of the CPJs highlighted varying reasons for selecting archive items to work from . For certain participants this related to personal connections with the visual aesthetic and graphic content of imagery . The Gillespie Kidd and Coia items provided geometric imagery , graphical shapes , shadows and multi - layered qualities ( Shaw 2009 ) . Those using these items reflected on the aesthetic characteristics evident in their previous work as reasons for selecting this source of inspiration . Bremner ( 2009 ) described this as a preference for working from an architectural and geometric source . Photographs ( for example figure 3 ) were selected due to the shadows and negative space ( Begg 2009 ) . A particular fondness for a ‘retro’ aesthetic directed the rationale behind Bagley’s ( 2009 ) choice of items . With other participants , the reasons for selecting certain archive artefacts related to the aesthetic quality , technique and potential materiality . Telford ( 2009 ) described the criteria for selecting the textile sample , figure 1 , as ‘… quirky , 3D technique , simplicity and great colour – overall pretty kitsch . ’ The ornate , handmade collars worn in figure 7 were the reason for selecting this photograph , directed by the participant’s desire to translate these embroidered items into knitted accessories ( Alexander 2009 ) . Highmore ( 2009 ) found the ‘stylised and wonky’ qualities evident in the toys shown in figure 8 appealing , expressing the enjoyment that would be had when drawing the embroidered elements . The ethos behind particular items provided the reason for selection by certain participants . Kinnersly - Taylor ( 2009 ) felt a connection with John Walter Lindsay through his travel journal ; engagement with this item was described as a ‘catalyst’ to take new ideas forward . Similarly , Dearden ( 2009 ) found the innovative teaching methods initiated by Macbeth and Swanson in their book fascinating and inspirational . ‘Fell in love with’ and ‘…blew me away…’ expressed Lipscombe’s ( 2009 ) response to certain items in the archive ( for 130 dr . helena Britt , JiMMy stePhen - Cran & elaine BreMner example figure 3 ) . For Lipscombe ( 2009 ) , archive item selection and personal interests inspired the idea of paying homage to the ‘Glasgow Girls’ , prompting the collection of further material and research directed by this theme . visiting the ACC in the basement of the Mackintosh building triggered memories of Gallagher’s ( 2009 ) own student experiences of studying in ‘… the dark and gloomy underground studios…’ at GSA . Explaining initial ideas , he states , the ‘…idea of light , or lack of it , could be an area to look at…and could be an identifiable link between past and present . ’ ( Gallacher 2009 ) This participant selected the NDS Bulletin ‘Edgings and Trimmings’ ( figure 9 ) , which contains references to lampshades , highlighting the connection to his theme of light and lighting . aPProaches to archive utilisation Analysis of data contained within the CPJs revealed a variety of approaches to working from archive material . It was evident that some of the project participants adopted a number of different approaches , whereas others utilised a specific approach . PromPting ‘own’ archive use For certain participants collecting the initial archive material triggered the selection and use of owned and previously collected material . For Telford ( 2009 ) this included a three - dimensional embroidery book , a Murano glass lampshade and vernon Panton panels . These ‘own’ personal items had certain qualities that were seen to connect with the selected archive item ( figure 1 ) . A range of previously gathered items including passages of text , drawings of ships , 4 7 5 6 8 9 131 dr . helena Britt , JiMMy stePhen - Cran & elaine BreMner extracts from pottery books , posters and photographs were combined with archive material by Kinnersly - Taylor ( 2009 ) ( figure 10 ) . The logbook was described as ‘liberating’ due to its ‘magpie’ nature and the fact that it permitted the ‘… bringing together of disparate items’ ( Kinnersly - Taylor 2009 ) . A map previously collected by this participant was found to feature on the first page of the Travel Journal from the archive , providing a connection with the archive to a previously unconnected source ( Kinnersly - Taylor 2009 ) . Shaw ( 2009 ) also combined archive images with previously collected visual content , ‘clipping’ this material together in a sketchbook . Figure 11 shows a photograph owned by Gallacher ( 2009 ) , the analysis of which enhanced insight into the structure of lampshades . collecting additional material In addition to using previously collected photographs , Gallacher ( 2009 ) undertook further investigation into lampshades from historical and contemporary perspectives . Manufacturers , wire frames and other materials were sourced , lampshades purchased and deconstructed so that patterns could be made ( Gallagher 2009 ) . The decision to make lampshades rather than outsource manufacture resembled the ‘make do and mend’ approach evident in the NDS Bulletins ( Gallacher 2009 ) . other participants collected both further historical and contemporary material . Alexander ( 2009 ) sourced knitting patterns from 70’s and 80’s magazines and examples of knitted designs relating to lace , collars and textured placement . The discovery of an example of fine lace work attached to a plain knit base provided an idea to be developed ( Alexander 2009 ) . Telford ( 2009 ) selected contemporary fashion examples found to be inspiring . Bagley ( 2009 ) collected secondary visual information regarding product , colour , pattern placement , layout and image quality . Lipscombe ( 2009 ) was inspired by written texts in addition to other visual images and continued to collect items as her project evolved ( figure 12 ) . brief within a brief From the outset the creative practitioners participating in Awaken understood the aims and intentions of the overall project . Although this provided the brief for individuals to follow , analysis of CPJs revealed the need for certain participants to set a further brief within the Awaken brief . In describing this , comparisons were made between working from the archive and ‘normal’ working practice . Telford ( 2009 ) found the lack of limitations ‘unnatural’ compared with her commercial design practice and was used to restrictions being imposed , such as season , colour , scale and budget . This ‘…yearning for a brief with restrictions…’ resulted in Telford ( 2009 ) focusing on textile and material developments for a specific end product . Similarly , Shaw ( 2009 ) 10 11 12 132 dr . helena Britt , JiMMy stePhen - Cran & elaine BreMner required a brief within the brief , as he did not enjoy working from a theme as open as archive utilisation . For Highmore ( 2009 ) the Awaken project reversed the design process , when working in a commercial context information is known about the intended end product at the outset , therefore , the target market impacts upon the visual content of the research collected . Highmore ( 2009 ) further explained ‘…not having an idea of the end product makes this unconstrained way of working quite odd . ’ Change in dissemination context from normal working practice to designing for a gallery - based exhibition caused anxieties for Bagley ( 2009 ) and Britt ( 2009 ) . Product driven Participants were driven by aspirations to produce certain end products . For some this derived directly from archive material , for others product ideas were informed by thoughts from archive and other collected material . Contrastingly , certain participants’ product ideas developed due to the nature of their current or previous practice or by a desire to create a new product . Gallacher ( 2009 ) , Alexander ( 2009 ) and Dearden ( 2009 ) all developed product ideas from their selected archive items . For Telford ( 2009 ) , the idea to create a series of panels ( figure 13 ) occurred ‘quite early on’ and was informed by items from this participant’s ‘own’ archive . During Lipscombe’s project , thoughts regarding concept evolved from assimilation of archive material , collected images , written texts , previous and current creative practice . To create her ‘Glasgow Girls’ Lipscombe ( 2009 ) dressed specific women in her Autumn / Winter collection , photographed them to mimic poses shown in archive photographs ( for example , figure 9 ) and then created and printed a series of posters using the photographic image ( figure 14 ) . The poster idea evolved from archive items ( i . e . figure 2 ) and previous posters printed for fashion collections . Shaw ( 2009 ) decided to produce interior textiles and focused on designing for upholstery . Similarly , Bremner ( 2009 ) and Britt ( 2009 ) intended to produce interior textiles , directed by a commission to produce an upholstery fabric and aspirations to design coordinating large - scale fabrics ( figure 15 ) . Highmore ( 2009 ) also elected to produce fabric lengths due to the personal enjoyment gained from working on a large scale and as a reaction against the small motifs present in the archive inspiration ( figure 8 ) . Previous work by Bagley ( 2009 ) prompted the early decision to produce knitted fabric wall tiles ( figure 16 ) for the project . archive images inform develoPment Begg ( 2009 ) elected to produce a collection of drawings , working from interior photographs ( for example , figure 3 ) . This participant reinterpreted qualities evident in the photographs through using traditional ( pencil , pen , paint ) and digital processes ( drawing tools in Adobe Photoshop ) ( Begg 2009 ) . Sweeney ( 2009 ) worked onto fabric and used textile processes ; the intention was to examine ‘…the concept that an artist as reproducer is capable of discerning , protecting and even enhancing the aura of an original piece of work through the reduplicative processes . ’ This resulted in the production of a series of canvases , which consisted of screen - printed images of the archive prints , with surface treatments and added embellishment ( figure 17 ) . 13 15 14 16 133 dr . helena Britt , JiMMy stePhen - Cran & elaine BreMner The majority of participants used images from the archive to inform design development . Participants translated imagery through varying processes such as drawing , CAD , screen - printing , stitching , knitting , casting and vacuum forming . Components within archive images were selected and digitally redrawn to create line - based motifs from which different pattern layouts were produced ( Bagley 2009 ) . Shaw ( 2009 ) also worked digitally , to extract and develop shape , colour and pattern . Working from architectural drawings and photographs , Britt ( 2009 ) used different tools in varying software packages to recreate visual components containing interesting combinations of shape and tone and to explore repeat , scale and colour options ( figure 18 ) . For Bremner ( 2009 ) , initial drawing by hand was scanned , digitally redrawn , manipulated and composed to develop designs ( figure 19 ) . Components of archive drawings were photographed and CAD used to overlay other visual content in Campbell’s ( 2009 ) work , described as ‘using the imagery in a literal fashion’ . Telford ( 2009 ) also believed the initial design stage to be ‘literal’ , with textile sampling undertaken to recreate the embroidery process evident in the archive sample ( figure 1 ) . Referencing and developing ideas from own artefacts assisted in the development of the work and led to material explorations ( Telford 2009 ) . Highmore ( 2009 ) produced drawings to translate the embroidered imagery shown in figure 8 into print . Graphic components in archive items were drawn from by Gallacher ( 2009 ) to form textile content ( figure 20 ) and printed textile technical exploration ( figure 21 ) . Working from collated archive and own material , Kinnersly - Taylor drew and reworked visual content using a combination of generative , analogue and digital processes to create graphic images . Alexander ( 2009 ) produced drawings and cut paperwork to translate embroidery into knit and develop knitted collar and garment shape ideas ( figure 22 ) . other participants used archive material to directly inform garment design . The shapes of the clothes typically worn by the authors of the book , which inspired Dearden’s ( 2009 ) project , influenced the simple dress shape produced . A variety of archive images inspired Lipscombe’s conceptual and visual development , the paisley patterned waistcoat , shown in figure 23 , led Lipscombe ( 2009 ) to produce a similar waistcoat . 18 17 19 134 dr . helena Britt , JiMMy stePhen - Cran & elaine BreMner triggering collaboration For Dearden ( 2009 ) the educational book by Swanson and Macbeth discovered in the archive triggered an aspiration to ‘collaborate’ with school pupils . A school was contacted and a lesson selected ( figure 24 ) from the book and carried out with a group of pupils . This resulted in the production of embroidered tray cloths , which were used by Dearden ( 2009 ) to create a digitally printed garment . Lipscombe ( 2009 ) pursued the idea of creating a series of posters , showing garments that she had created , ‘…I wanted to create my version of the Glasgow Girls relevant to the past 35 years of my life , spanning the late 1970’s , 80’s , 90’s to the present day . ’ ( Lipscombe 2009 ) A list was compiled comprising names of artists , designers and musicians , each were ‘tracked down’ , contacted and asked to participate . Personal insight into each individual was gained through this process , further connecting the underlying concept to the resulting posters ( figures 14 ) . Selection of the same archive material , similarities in aesthetic taste , interests in digital technology and working closely together in the teaching environment prompted Bremner ( 2009 ) and Britt ( 2009 ) to work collaboratively for Awaken . conclusion The archive material utilised varied between participants , ranging from the selection of one item to gathering collections of related or previously unconnected material . The archivist selected items from the archive for the participants to view , provided background insight into items and made suggestions regarding viewing other related material . Information searching was undertaken using records of the archives held in the library and available online . After the initial induction , participants found it necessary to revisit certain items and or look at other items related to their particular interests , or containing certain visual qualities . Participants expressed concerns that using archive items may cause the resulting work to be unoriginal or a ‘pastiche’ . Conversely , individuals also questioned the extent to which the resulting work had to link to the archive material . It was evident that individual aesthetic ‘taste’ directed the selection of archive material . Participants also made connections with items beyond the purely visual content , for example , accessing the archive resource prompted reflection on memories and previous experiences . Also , practitioners were motivated to carry out further primary generative research activity . In certain examples , the line of enquiry required the involvement of other participants to realise the practitioner’s ideas and concepts . There is potential to use the varying 20 22 21 23 135 dr . helena Britt , JiMMy stePhen - Cran & elaine BreMner Archive images directly informed the visual development stage of projects . various digital and analogue mediums were used to replicate and reinterpret aspects of archive images . Replica textile techniques were sampled and garment shapes influenced by archive items . Creative practitioners’ previous experiences appeared to direct decision - making regarding aspects such as material selection , design and technical processes and end product direction . Individuals also selected archive items due to their individual aesthetic tastes . These factors should be considered when formulating student projects involving archive utilisation , as it is possible that participants will still be discovering and developing their individual understanding , knowledge , skills and aesthetic sensibilities . Projects that compare student and practitioner use of the same archive would provide further insight . A finding of the project was the necessity for certain participants to develop a brief within the brief . The necessity to have restrictions imposed that represented working in a commercial design context and anxieties felt , due to exhibiting work in a gallery space is interesting , although for some , not an issue . As the Awaken project was undertaken in a higher education institution , as a staff research project , the artefacts resulting from the project were not required to be commercially viable . This presents an interesting point for further discussion regarding the nature of creative practice undertaken by staff employed in higher education institutions . Projects could examine archive utilisation to create products for distribution through commercial dissemination modes ( i . e . trade shows , retail ) compared with utilisation when the end focus is the gallery exhibition . Research could also be undertaken which examines archive utilisation in the textile and fashion industries . CPJs were the primary method of data collection used . This method provided a tool to gain insight into creative practitioner design process and thinking . The format of the CPJs varied between participants meaning that the level of detail and therefore insight provided differed . The written content contained within the journals tended to be personal in nature ; to enable subjective analysis the ‘personality’ within the text , to a certain extent , had to be removed . To capture insight at specific stages throughout the design process CPJs could be used alongside other methods such as interviews . Recording the focus groups , which took place throughout the project , would also provide further data for analysis . Research surrounding archive utilisation continues at GSA with a project funded by the Royal Society of Edinburgh . This examines the utilisation of archival resources in the design process , focusing specifically on the Stoddard Templeton Design Studio and Design Library , held at GSA . approaches evident to direct projects with creative practitioners and students to extend insight into archive utilisation . To form further connections with archive resources and for idea development , participants introduced items from their personal archives . These items included artefacts , images , colours , materials and texts previously collected and deemed interesting or appealing by the practitioner , used to inform the creative process . Archive material triggered the sourcing of further items relating to participants’ projects including historical and contemporary visual references , product and market information , materials , technical process and written texts . This emphasises the need for practitioners to collect and source varying types of items and related information to assist with idea development . 24 136 dr . helena Britt , JiMMy stePhen - Cran & elaine BreMner references Alexander , C . ( 2009 ) Creative Process Journal ( unpublished ) . Glasgow : The Glasgow School of Art . Bagley , L . ( 2009 ) Creative Process Journal ( unpublished ) . Glasgow : The Glasgow School of Art . Belford , P . ( 2012 ) Experimental archaeology meets textile design : the rediscovery of shadow tissues . TRIP : An international symposium exploring the role and relevance of traditional ‘hand skills’ in contemporary textiles , and the value and status of craft process . 16th - 17th Novembe r2011 , Loughborough University . www . lboro . ac . uk / departments / sota / trip / trip _ homepage . html Bremner , E . ( 2009 ) Creative Process Journal ( unpublished ) . Glasgow : The Glasgow School of Art . Briggs - Goode , A . ( 2012 ) Journeys in Lace . Exhibition . 22nd September - 4th November 2012 . Wallner Gallery , Lakeside Arts Centre , Nottingham . Briggs - Goode , A . & Buttress , J . ( 2011 ) A Taxonomy of Pattern through the analysis of Nottingham Lace . In Wade & Walton : Futurescan : Mapping the Territory . Association of Degree Courses in Fashion & Textiles : Loughborough University . Britt , H . ( 2009 ) Creative Process Journal ( unpublished ) . Glasgow : The Glasgow School of Art . Campbell , J . R . ( 2009 ) Creative Process Journal ( unpublished ) . Glasgow : The Glasgow School of Art . Cross , N . ( 2011 ) Design Thinking : Understanding How Designers Think and Work . oxford : Berg Publishers . Davidson , H . & Hodson , A . ( 2007 ) Joining forces : the intersection of two replica garments . In Hayward , M . & Kramer , E . edt ( 2007 ) Textiles and Text . Re - establishing the Links between Archival and object - based Research . AHRC Research Centre for Textile Conservation and Textile Studies , Third Annual Conference 11th - 13th July 2006 . London : Archetype Publications Ltd . Davies , H . ( 2010 ) Fashion Designers Sketchbooks . London : Laurence King . Dearden , J . ( 2009 ) Creative Process Journal ( unpublished ) . Glasgow : The Glasgow School of Art . Eckert , C . & Stacey , M . ( 2003a ) Sources of inspiration in industrial practice : The case of knitwear design . Journal of Design Research , 3 ( 1 ) . Eckert , C . & Stacey , M . ( 2003b ) Adaptation of Sources of Inspiration in Knitwear Design . Creativity Research Journal , 15 ( 4 ) : 355 - 384 . Gallacher , A . ( 2009 ) Creative Process Journal ( unpublished ) . Glasgow : The Glasgow School of Art . Geladell , C . ( 2012 ) A Bloomsbury Set of Five Carpets . [ Internet ] www . telegraph . co . uk / culture / art / artsales / 9221990 / A - Bloomsbury - set - of - five - carpets . html [ Accessed 01 / 12 / 12 ] . Gillham , B . ( 2000 ) Case Study Research Methods . London : Continuum . Gillham , B . & McGilp , H . ( 2007 ) Recording the Creative Process : An Empirical Basis for Practice - Integrated Research in the Arts . Journal of Art & Design Education 26 ( 2 ) : 177 - 184 . Gray , C . & Malins , J . ( 2004 ) visualizing Research : A Guide to the Research Process in Art and Design . Aldershot : Ashgate . Highmore , C . ( 2009 ) Creative Process Journal ( unpublished ) . Glasgow : The Glasgow School of Art . Holden , J . & Jones , S . ( 2006 ) Knowledge and Inspiration : the democratic face of culture . London : Museums , Libraries and Archives Council . Keller , A . I , Pasman , G . J , and Stappers , P . J . ( 2006 ) Collections designers keep : collecting visual material for inspiration and reference . CoDesign , 2 ( 1 ) : 17 - 33 . Kinnersly - Taylor , J . ( 2009 ) Creative Process Journal ( unpublished ) . Glasgow : The Glasgow School of Art . Laamanen , T . K . & Seitamaa - Hakkarainen , P . ( 2008 ) Sources of inspiration and mental image in textile design process . Art , Design & Communication in Higher Education , 7 ( 2 ) : 105 - 119 . Labat , K . & Sokolowski , S . ( 1999 ) A Three - Stage Design Process Applied to an Industry - University Textile Product Design Project . Clothing and Textiles Research Journal , 17 ( 1 ) : 11 - 20 . Lawson , B . ( 2006 ) ( 4th Edition ) How Designers Think . oxford : Architectural Press . Lipscombe , B . ( 2009 ) Creative Process Journal ( unpublished ) . Glasgow : The Glasgow School of Art . Lipscombe , B . & McKenzie , L . ( 2011 ) The Inventors of Tradition . Cologne : Buchhandlung Walther König Marcketti , S . B . , Fitxpatrik , J . E . , Keist , C . N . & Kadolph , S . J . ( 2011 ) University Historic Clothing Museums and Collections : Practices and Strategies . Clothing and Textiles Research Journal , 29 ( 3 ) : 248 - 262 . Marr , A . ( 2011 ) Past Future . In Wade & Walton : Futurescan : Mapping the Territory . Association of Degree Courses in Fashion & Textiles : Loughborough University . McGilp , H . & Stephen - Cran , J . ( 2007 ) Explicating the Creative Process within a Postgraduate Fashion Context . In Boddington , A . & Clews , D . edt . Teachers Academy Papers . European League of Institutes of the Arts Teachers Academy . Brighton : University of Brighton . there is Potential to use the varying aPProaches evident to direct Projects with creative Practitioners and students to extend insight into archive utilisation . 137 dr . helena Britt , JiMMy stePhen - Cran & elaine BreMner Mougenot , C . , Bouchard , C . and Aoussat , A . ( 2008 ) Inspiration , images and design : an investigation of designers’ information gathering strategies . Journal of Design Research , 7 ( 4 ) : 331 - 351 . Panel & Dovecot Studios ( 2012 ) Carpets of Distinction . Exhibition . 10th November 2012 – 12th January 2013 . Dovecot Studios , Edinburgh . Parsons , J . & Campbell , J . R . ( 2004 ) Digital Apparel Design Process : Placing a New Technology Into a Framework for the Creative Design Process . Clothing and Textiles Research Journal , 22 ( 1 - 2 ) : 88 - 98 . Pedgley , o . ( 2007 ) Capturing and analysing own design activity . Design Studies , 28 ( 5 ) : 463 - 483 . Reading , C . ( 2009 ) Sources of inspiration : How design students learn from museum collections and other sources of inspiration . Art , Design & Communication in Higher Education , 8 ( 2 ) : 109 - 121 . Schoeser , M . & Boydell , C . edts ( 2002 ) Disentangling Textiles : Techniques for the study of designed objects . London : Middlesex University Press . Schon , D . ( 1985 ) The Design Studio . London : RIBA Publications Limited . Shaw , A . ( 2009 ) Creative Process Journal ( unpublished ) . Glasgow : The Glasgow School of Art . Stephen - Cran , J . ( 2009a ) Awaken . Exhibition . 24th January – 28th February 2009 . Mackintosh Gallery , The Glasgow School of Art , Glasgow . Stephen - Cran , J . ( 2009b ) Awaken : New Textiles Inspired by the Archives & Collections at The Glasgow School of Art . Glasgow : The Glasgow School of Art . Studd , R . ( 2002 ) The Textile Design Process . The Design Journal , 5 ( 1 ) : 35 - 49 Sweeny , C . ( 2009 ) Creative Process Journal ( unpublished ) . Glasgow : The Glasgow School of Art . Telford , S . ( 2009 ) Creative Process Journal ( unpublished ) . Glasgow : The Glasgow School of Art . Turpeinen , o . ( 2012 ) Combining art and design education with cultural heritage . [ Internet ] http : / / cumulushelsinki2012 . org / cumulushelsinki2012 . org / wp - content / uploads / 2012 / 05 / 02 _ Combining - art - and - design - education - with - cultural - heritage . pdf [ Accessed 23 / 11 / 12 ] . Walters , S . ( 2009 ) Passing Interest of Likely Debate . In Stephen - Cran , J . Awaken . Glasgow : The Glasgow School of Art . figure caPtions and credits Figure 1 : Selected by Susan Telford . Apples , by Mary Gribble , satin , leather and felt with couched metallic thread , mid 1970s . Archives & Collections Centre , GSA . Photograph , Sean Black . Figure 2 : Selected by Beca Lipscombe . Fabric poster , 1981 . Archives & Collections Centre , GSA . Photograph , Sean Black . Figure 3 : Selected by vicky Begg . Painting studios , The Glasgow School of Art , black and white photograph , c1960s . Archives & Collections Centre , GSA . Photograph , vicky Begg . Figure 4 : Selected by Alan Shaw , Elaine Bremner and Helena Britt . Detail of architectural drawing , , c . 1958 . Archives & Collections Centre , Gillespie , Kidd and Coia Archive , GSA . Figure 5 : Selected by Leigh Bagley and Joanna Kinnersly - Taylor . Travel Journal ( detail ) by John Walter Lindsay , 1950 . Archives & Collections Centre , GSA . Photograph , Sean Black . Figure 6 : ‘Typed Label’ , photograph from a series of details of archive ‘ephemera’ , 2009 . Photographed , Joanna Kinnersly - Taylor . Figure 7 : Selected by Christie Alexander . Class photograph from Daisy Anderson papers , 1892 . Archives & Collections Centre , GSA . Photograph , Sean Black . Figure 8 : Selected by Chloe Highmore . Excerpt from Needlework Development Scheme Bulletin 18B , Designing Toys , c1950s . Archives & Collections Centre , GSA . Photograph , Sean Black . Figure 9 : Selected by Alan Gallacher . Needlework Development Scheme Bulletin 27B , Edgings and Trimmings , c1950s . Archives & Collections Centre , GSA . Photograph , Sean Black . Figure 10 : Detail of Awaken exhibition case showing inspiration , ‘external artefacts’ and development work , Joanna Kinnersly - Taylor , 2009 . Photograph , Leigh Bagley . Figure 11 : Photograph from personal ( external ) archive , Alan Gallacher , 2009 . Photograph Alan Gallacher . Figure 12 : ‘vitrine of Research’ for My Glasgow Girls , Awaken exhibition detail , Beca Lipscombe , 2009 . Photograph , Leigh Bagley . Figure 13 : Installation of vacuum formed clear acrylic panels with resin cast flowers , Awaken exhibition detail , Susan Telford , 2009 . Photograph , Leigh Bagley . Figure 14 : ‘My Glasgow Girls’ , screen - printed fabric posters , Awaken exhibition detail , Beca Lipscombe , 2009 . Photograph , Joanna Kinnersly - Taylor . Figure 15 : GC & K Digital Textiles Collection , Elaine Bremner and Helena Britt , 2009 . Photograph , Helena Britt . Figure 16 : ‘Blister’ , knitted wall tiles , Leigh Bagley , 2009 . Photograph , Joanna Kinnersly - Taylor . Figure 17 : ‘The Barrow Market on Saturday after Sir Muirhead Bone’ , pigment screen print on cotton , hand painted with watercolour and dye , Awaken exhibition detail , Clair Sweeney , 2009 . Photograph , Joanna Kinnersly - Taylor . Figure 18 : GC & K design , scale exploration , digital prints onto cotton , Helena Britt , 2009 . Photograph , Helena Britt and Elaine Bremner . Figure 19 : GC & K designs , digital prints onto cotton , Elaine Bremner , 2009 . Photograph , Helena Britt and Elaine Bremner . Figure 20 : Lampshade design development , Alan Gallacher , 2009 . Photograph , Helen McGilp . Figure 21 : Lampshade , Expandex on felt wool with discharge printed fringe , Alan Gallacher , 2009 . Photograph , Joanna Kinnersly - Taylor . Figure 22 : Machine knitted dress with hand - worked detailing , Awaken exhibition detail , Christie Alexander , 2009 . Photograph Christie Alexander . Figure 23 : Selected by Beca Lipscombe . Exhibition opening , black and white photograph , c . 1980 . Archives & Collections Centre , GSA . Artefact photograph , Sean Black . Figure 24 : Selected by Juliet Dearden . Excerpt from Educational Needlecraft by Margaret Sawnson and Ann MacBeth , 1922 . Photograph , Sean Black . Reproduced by kind permission of Pearson Education Ltd , Essex .