When is a Tool a Tool ? User Perceptions of System Agency in Human – AI Co - Creative Drawing Tomas Lawton Kazjon Grace Francisco Ibarrola School of Architecture , Design and School of Architecture , Design and School of Architecture , Design and Planning , The University of Sydney Planning , The University of Sydney Planning , The University of Sydney Australia Australia Australia tlaw8603 @ uni . sydney . edu . au kazjon . grace @ sydney . edu . au francisco . ibarrola @ sydney . edu . au “cat stuck in a chimney” “an antique avocado chair” “cat working in an ofce as a CEO” “cat on a stool making a painting on a canvas” “fying chair with robot arms” ‘fying car with futuristic design , fre jets , fying over the sea” Figure 1 : Collaborative human - AI sketches made by our study participants using Reframer , our co - creative drawing system . ABSTRACT This paper presents an analysis of the user experience of Reframer , a novel human - AI drawing interface designed with the iterative and refective nature of creativity in mind . Collaboration with Re - framer occurs in real time , with the user and the system drawing together concurrently . This approach is inspired by theories of cre - ativity as being more problem - framing than problem - solving , and Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pittsburgh , PA , USA © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9893 - 0 / 23 / 07 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3563657 . 3595977 contrasts with the automated one - shot end - to - end workfows of most generative AI models . A 12 - participant qualitative exploratory study of the capabilities of our prototype is detailed , as well as a thematic analysis of user attitudes towards drawing with it . The paper then describes two modifed prototypes and a second 32 - participant comparative study revealing how interface variations evoke diferences in user attitudes and experiences . It concludes by proposing a model that characterises the conditions under which users experience co - creative AI as a collaborator , rather than a non - agentive tool . CCS CONCEPTS • Computer systems organization → Embedded systems ; Re - dundancy ; Robotics ; • Networks → Network reliability . 1978 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Lawton , Grace & Ibarrola KEYWORDS datasets , neural networks , gaze detection , text tagging ACM Reference Format : Tomas Lawton , Kazjon Grace , and Francisco Ibarrola . 2023 . When is a Tool a Tool ? User Perceptions of System Agency in Human – AI Co - Creative Drawing . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’23 ) , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pittsburgh , PA , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 19 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3563657 . 3595977 1 INTRODUCTION It has been proposed that AI will disrupt design and the creative arts , but many of the methods by which it might do so fundamentally depend on the end - to - end generation of high - quality media . These technologies are often pitched as possessing the capacity to “magic away” all the hard searching work of creativity : just state your wish and it will be done . These technologies are certainly revolutionary , but the end - to - end approach is completely at odds with what we know about creative cognition . Psychology tells us that , in creative processes , it is only through searching that we can discover what we were looking for all along [ 14 , 20 ] . Creative processes are a co - evolution of problem - framing ( fguring out what to do ) and problem - solving ( actually doing it ) , a kind of refective dialogue between the designer and their medium [ 38 , 50 ] . New interaction paradigms will be required before generative AI can realise its potential to augment human creativity , ones that are grounded in the way human creativity operates in practice . We present Reframer 1 ( Figure 2 ) , a novel human - AI drawing interface designed with the iterative and refective nature of de - signing in mind . Collaborating with Reframer is through real - time , vector - based drawing with a physical stylus on a display – as soon as you lift it , the system fuidly resumes modifying the strokes of your drawing . Collaboration has been called essential for solving real - world creative problems at almost any scale [ 44 ] . Free and open collaboration has been shown to increase creativity in felds as diverse as software development [ 59 ] , musical improvisation [ 49 ] , and engineering design [ 59 ] . Given this efcacy of human - human collaboration , it is thus perhaps unsurprising that when a co - creative AI system is perceived as being an agentive collabora - tor ( rather than a tool ) , it is seen as possessing a level of creative responsibility [ 7 ] . A signifcant goal of Reframer was to support this kind of bidirectional exchange . We describe our prototype , a 12 - participant qualitative exploratory study of its capabilities , and a resulting thematic analysis of user attitudes towards this new kind of human - AI creative partnership . We then describe a modifed prototype and a second study in which 32 participants used two diferent versions of Reframer . Using the themes from our frst study we compare these experiences , par - ticularly how they infuence users’ perception of Reframer as a collaborator . Based on this analysis we propose a model of agen - tive fow , a highly engaging state of interacting with a co - creative system as a collaborator . 1 Source code available at https : / / github . com / Tomas - Lawton / Reframer 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Text - to - Image Generative Machine Learning Models The term “computational creativity” as a description of AI systems capable of being creative can be traced back to at least the 1970s [ 26 ] , although precise defnitions came much later [ 7 ] . The notion of creative thinking in AI research goes back further still , with creativity long being recognised as one of the components of what it would take to call something “intelligent” [ 40 , 55 ] . However , the more recent explosion of interest in “creative AI” has resulted from two fundamentally new technologies : large language models capable of generating text at a close - to - human syntactic level , and text - to - image models capable of generating high - quality images from provided prompts . This research focuses on the latter , which has given rise to popular systems ( at least at the time of writing ) like Imagen 2 , MidJourney 3 , DallE2 [ 46 ] , and Stable Difusion [ 47 ] . Without going into mathematical detail on the architecture or operations of these models , it’s useful to note that the underlying approach is contrastive training between images and text . Most well - known through the model CLIP ( Contrastive Language - Image Pretraining ) [ 45 ] , contrastive training involves a machine learning model ( consisting of a text encoder and an image encoder ) that can map both forms of media to a shared high - dimensional space . It is this abstract space – which captures the “semantics” of a particular image or text prompt – which can then be leveraged to search for matches between a provided text and a desired image . Many ( but not all – difusion - based models being an excep - tion ) of these approaches utilise a process known as synthesis - by - optimisation . This involves a pre - trained network like CLIP being used as a “guide” for the search – evaluating how close an image generated by some other process is to the semantics of the prompt . This might be familiar to those who have experimented with “neural style transfer” techniques , which use a similar ap - proach to modify ( rather than generate ) a provided image based on the output of another neural network [ 19 ] . The diference is that while style transfer directly searches the space of per - pixel colour values to change an image at a textural level , text - to - image models search an abstract space , typically one that has been learned by a generative model trained on real images , such as VQGAN [ 8 ] . There are also increasing critical voices raising awareness of the ethical issues surrounding creative AI [ 17 ] . By their nature , models trained on publicly available creative artefacts ( like CLIP ) have at least two major ethical failings : they fail to properly acknowledge the creators of their training data , and they are fundamentally so - cially conservative , in that they over - represent the styles , norms , and content that are dominant in that training data . The frst failing leads to harm through intellectual property infringements in the specifc case and wage theft in the general case . The second fail - ing leads to additional marginalisation of minority groups at best , and outright cultural colonialism at worst . We have taken every available efort to minimise the efects of these ethical issues in this work . Reframer’s atypical “scribbly” aesthetic difers greatly from the vast majority of its training set , which should minimise 2 https : / / imagen . research . google / 3 https : / / www . midjourney . com / 1979 When is a Tool a Tool ? User Perceptions of System Agency in Human – AI Co - Creative Drawing DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Figure 2 : The revised version of Reframer used in the second user study , with convergence sparkline and “Focus regions” feature . The sketch shown is of " A cat on top of a church building with a cross on it . " the chance of recreating prior art or appropriating existing styles ( although we acknowledge that our use of CLIP means Reframer’s drawings are inspired by stolen labour ) . Our focus on real - time collaboration is also motivated by augmenting human creativity , rather than directly replacing creative workers , many of whom already have precarious work arrangements . 2 . 2 Co - Creative and Mixed - Initiative Systems Creativity support systems are interactive digital tools for aug - menting human creativity [ 51 ] . They may or may not feature AI components – Adobe Photoshop is a creativity support system that features AI , for example . Within that broad category are a number of terms relating to creative AI that should be unpacked . Co - creative AI systems are a specifc kind of creativity support system where human ( s ) and AI collaboratively create , contributing to the creative process in a blended manner [ 6 , 12 ] . In co - creative systems , the “locus of creativity” – a term used in Csikszentmiha - lyi’s systems view of creativity [ 9 ] to describe the shared origin of creativity between individuals , societies , and culture – exists somewhere between the user and the system over the course of the interaction . A precise and broadly agreed - upon operationalisation of what makes a creative AI system co - creative has eluded the feld to date , playing into a broader dialogue about the complexity of evaluating of co - creative systems [ 30 , 34 ] . The Drawing Apprentice [ 11 ] is a co - creative system with a similar goal to Reframer : to provide a manual , embodied draw - ing experience . The Drawing Apparentice engages in turn - taking , rather than the concurrent approach to mixed - initiative interaction in our system . Mixed - initiative creative interfaces are a subset of co - creative systems where the system is imbued with some degree of interjective capability [ 13 , 60 ] . These systems have the capacity to take the initiative in certain circumstances : to act on their own without being directly instructed . It is hypothesised that through mixed - initiative , these systems may have a greater capacity to “nudge” their users away from their pre - determined paths , poten - tially enhancing creativity [ 29 ] . While clearly intended to augment creativity , this puts mixed - initiative interfaces at odds with the traditional design patterns of creativity support systems , which in - clude being maximally unobtrusive in order to promote and sustain user engagement [ 51 ] . The confict between direct manipulation and agent - based interaction models is at least three decades old in the HCI community [ 23 , 37 ] , but it posed questions that remain unresolved for co - creative systems : how can a system be both unob - trusive and interjective ? And how – if one were to be constructed – would users perceive it ? Would they view such a mixed - initiative generative AI as a collaborator , imbued with agentive capacity and brought onto their “team” , or would they view it as a powerful tool : a magical wish - granting lamp , no genie required ? 2 . 3 Interactive Generative AI Techniques A number of recent capabilities in generative machine learning could be applied to the development of co - creative systems similar to Reframer , although many of them have not been specifcally developed in that direction . We mention them here to provide coverage of the state - of - the - art in generative image models and situate Reframer’s contributions within that technical context . One of the frst widespread generative machine learning ap - proaches to incorporate drawing - based interaction was GauGAN [ 43 ] , a model that generated realistic images from a segmented and labelled image “mask” ( i . e . another image with regions of fat 1980 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Lawton , Grace & Ibarrola colour corresponding to object categories , like “house” or “grass” ) . A web - based drawing interface for authoring these conditioning images was available , but the requirement for the mask to be almost pixel - perfect made generating high - quality images time - consuming . More recent drawing - based approaches have focused on a genera - tive variant of the earlier “sketch - based image retrieval” problem , where a quick sketch could be matched to an existing image from a database [ 15 ] . Some sketch - based generative AI approaches produce a single image from sketch [ 1 , 25 ] , while others take the approach of customising a generator to produce a diverse array of images given one or more similar sketches as “customisation” [ 25 , 58 ] . An opposite approach is to generate simple sketches from provided images in a manner that preserves both semantic and geometric information , as CLIPasso [ 57 ] . 3 DESIGNING REFRAMER In Reframer we were motivated by a desire for users to be able to interact directly through manual drawing . For that reason , we built on top of the CICADA system [ 24 ] for vector - based synthesis . CICADA is itself based on CLIPDraw [ 18 ] , which uses the same CLIP text - to - image mapping as other generative AIs , but optimises a set of Bézier curves that form the “strokes” of a drawing . This is made possible by an algorithm called difvg [ 36 ] , a “diferentiable rasteriser” , or vector - drawing - to - pixel - image converter which is compatible with gradient descent . CICADA combines this CLIP - based semantic loss that comes from pixel - image based generative methods with several additions designed for co - creative use . CI - CADA draws while preserving a provided “partial” sketch ( i . e . user input ) , incurring a penalty if it moves user - drawn strokes too much , draws over them , or otherwise visually occludes the user’s contri - butions . The features and interface of Reframer were developed through an iterative research - through - design process , starting with prece - dents , capabilities , sketching , and progressing through prototypes , refnement and usability studies . Design concepts explored during this time included history keeping : whether to keep user and sys - tem changes separate , and whether to have a linear or branching history . In the end user testing indicated the additional capabil - ity of branching and separate histories did not ofset the loss in familiarity of a simple shared history . Another concept explored was the progressive reveal of drawing strokes . Reframer originally added strokes to the canvas over time , while maintaining a larger set of hidden strokes ( as the CLIP - based loss function works poorly with very few strokes ) . This was found to be a “slow” experience , with the “reveal” taking a longer time than users were willing to wait . It could take 30 - 60 seconds to reveal all strokes , and strokes continued moving after they were “revealed” . Whether the reveal was fast or slow , it seemed to distract users from drawing , particu - larly when they were focused on a diferent section of the drawing . We also explored the opposite : initially adding a larger number of strokes ( several hundred ) and then pruning away the ones that were not contributing to the prompt as the system optimised , using CICADA’s pruning function , which deletes strokes that improve the loss the least . This pruning was applied stochastically to a por - tion of the strokes every 50 iterations until half had been pruned . Drawing quality was better , but users were unable to understand why some strokes were disappearing , and the feature was removed . In both the progressive reveal and pruning cases we realised we were fghting against the “random initialisation and then emergent meaning” nature of our generative process . We found that starting the human – AI collaboration from its most dense and abstract place was actually not a deterrent to our users , who enthusiastically took on the task of creating order from the chaos through exploratory sketching [ 20 , 56 ] . The version of Reframer used in our frst study , shown in Fig - ure 3 , runs in a web browser on any platform ( although at time of writing , it is not a deployed web - app ) . It is optimised for pen - based drawing , and works best on a device like the Wacom Cintiq ( used in our experiments ) or a tablet with a stylus . This manual interac - tion model is compounded by Reframer’s real - time , fully duplex , and fuid movement – as soon as the user fnishes a stroke , the agent instantly begins incorporating it into the shared and evolving drawing . This makes interacting with Reframer , like the Drawing Apprentice before it , feel embodied and enactive [ 11 ] , with the drawing as part of a dialogue between creator and medium . We wanted to enable this sense of dialogue between agent and user through a combination of low - level “manual” interactions ( draw - ing / moving strokes ) and higher - level “conceptual” ones ( iterating on the prompt ) . We also wanted to present the experience as an ex - ploration , not the production of a fnished product . Accordingly , the interface is minimal when compared to more full - featured drawing software , being inspired by tablet drawing / sketching apps rather than desktop vector illustration suites . While the interface under - went a number of visual and functional iterations from this starting point , these criteria remained central to our thinking . To facilitate the fuid co - drawing experience , a client - server ar - chitecture with FastAPI and Websockets was implemented so the model and sketch could update one another automatically . The Web - Socket protocol was chosen to send and receive updates through a bi - directional channel with minimal HTTP latency . This works by having a frontend and backend controller to trigger event logic ( as in model - view - controller interface framework [ 33 ] ) . Metadata such as the prompt and sketch size were encapsulated in the same message as the sketch . The front end uses the Javascript library Paper . js to render the provided drawings ( both strokes from the user and from the server ) as Scalable Vector Graphics ( SVG ) directly in the browser . The small size of the vector - based sketches being sent back and forth between client and server makes the interface responsive and fuid even with a few hundred strokes on screen ( on high - end 2022 hardware ) . As is common in research - through - design [ 61 ] , we adapted our prototype between studies to improve its user experience . For ex - ample , we found it valuable to show users the degree to which the Reframer agent had “converged” on a drawing , or more specifcally showing when it had plateaued in its ability to make the drawing more accurately resemble the prompt . A sparkline - like chart [ 54 ] was added to the interface , showing a ( normalised for simplicity ) assessment of the drawing’s ft to the user’s prompt and how it had recently changed . We also found that users felt there was a huge gap between the “low” and “high” level interactions available to them ( the strokes and the prompt ) . Users regularly wanted to work on a specifc component of their sketch – somewhere between an individual stroke and the whole canvas – so we investigated several 1981 When is a Tool a Tool ? User Perceptions of System Agency in Human – AI Co - Creative Drawing DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Figure 3 : The Reframer prototype used in our frst user study , with an earlier version of the interface featuring a “sketchbook” of saved sketches and the “clean up” function . The sketch shown is of “an avocado beanbag , ” with system - generated 3D shading . options for a “mid - f” interaction mode . After some experimentation with grouping and labelling strokes , we settled on a feature called “Focus Regions” : the ability to defne a rectangular region and give it its own prompt . This local prompt would then be optimised in concert with the overall sketch’s global prompt . The interface used in the second study is shown in Figure 4 . 4 METHOD We followed an iterative research - through - design methodology that combined both technology - driven feature development and human - centred exploration to produce Reframer . At two stages in that process , we conducted formal user studies to more rig - orously explore the system’s user experience . The frst was an exploratory semi - structured interview study with 12 participants using Reframer to complete three tasks ( after a brief tutorial ) and then answering open - ended questions about their experience . Par - ticipants were asked to think aloud while completing their tasks , and a thematic analysis of both the think - aloud and interview data was used to construct a broad picture of how our participants per - ceived Reframer and the drawings they produced with it . While the analysis was inductive and broad , we placed a particular emphasis on when and why participants perceived our system to be agentive ( i . e . acting as a collaborator rather than a tool ) . The second study was a 32 - participant within - subjects compara - tive analysis of two variants of the Reframer tool across two tasks . One variant ofered more precise control ( through the Focus Re - gions feature described in Section 3 ) , and one did not ( that feature was disabled ) . The same think - aloud plus followup interview ap - proach was used , and the thematic analysis from the frst study was used as an interpretive lens through which to compare the experience of participants across the two tasks and two interface variants . Participants were given non - sequential IDs in order to blind analysts ( some of whom were also experimenters ) and quotes are denoted as either being in the exploratory frst study ( ES ) or the comparative second study ( CS ) followed by their IDs . 4 . 1 Study 1 : An Exploratory Interview Study of Using Reframer 12 design students were recruited , through social networks and di - rect approaches on campus , at an internationally - recognised school of design and architecture . No participants had prior knowledge of the research project . Participants were selected on the basis of having sketching experience and being enrolled in a design - related tertiary degree ( from undergraduate to PhD level ) . All participants self - identifed as designers , with a few identifying as artists . Efort was made to select participants from diverse cultural and ethnic backgrounds , as well as diversity in the programs they were en - rolled in ( architecture , interaction design , etc ) . 7 / 12 ( 58 % ) partici - pants were non - male and all participants were within the typical student age demographic ( approximately 18 - 25 – exact ages were not recorded ) . 1982 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Lawton , Grace & Ibarrola Figure 4 : The revised Reframer interface with “Focus regions” toggled - of and toggled - on . This drawing of " A watercolour painting of an underwater submarine " also includes multiple region - specifc “local” prompts . Participants were provided with a Wacom Cintiq 16 and a sty - Participants were given an introduction to the study and told lus , connected to a workstation with a high - end 2022 consumer briefy about our design goal of leveraging the strengths of both hu - GPU . Several participants had experience using creative AI , and man designers and generative AI . They then completed a hands - on the majority had some experience with tablet - based digital draw - tutorial as an introduction to the basic features of Reframer , during ing . Participants agreed to the collection and use of audio , screen - which they were encouraged to ( and most did ) ask questions of recordings and survey responses that were taken during the study , the experimenter . Afterwards , participants were asked to complete which lasted about an hour . three tasks , designed to be increasingly open - ended . As part of each task introduction , participants were reminded that they could use 1983 When is a Tool a Tool ? User Perceptions of System Agency in Human – AI Co - Creative Drawing DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA the prompt to guide the AI in what to draw ( as we found in our earlier prototyping many participants would start drawing without cueing Reframer as to their intent ) . The tasks were : ( 1 ) “Draw a pizza with no toppings . ” , followed by “now turn it into a pepperoni pizza” , followed by “now make it a pepper - oni pizza with extra cheese” . This frst task was designed to be highly prescriptive and relatively simple . ( 2 ) “Draw an avocado chair . ” followed by “Now , make it an an - tique avocado chair . ” . This featured a juxtaposition and re - quired the participant to interpret the task in order to begin , then re - interpret their design again after the second instruc - tion . ( 3 ) “Draw a cat in a place where a cat shouldn’t be” . This task was the most unconstrained and open - ended , specifcally designed so that the task instructions could not be used as the prompt . Following the third task , participants were interviewed in a semi - structured manner , with seven questions , interspersed with follow - ups as needed : ( 1 ) When would you be most likely to use a system like this ? ( 2 ) Was there anything that was particularly difcult to learn , or use ? ( 3 ) Did using the system become easier over time or did it remain consistent ? ( 4 ) Did you feel like this system let you express your intentions ? ( 5 ) Who do feel was in control . Why ? ( 6 ) How did you feel using this system and why ? ( 7 ) Overall , what rating do you give to this system for producing sketches ? You may answer this question however you like . Audio was transcribed algorithmically , with errors corrected during coding . Coding was conducted in Dovetail 4 . The thematic analysis process following a six - phase structure of familiarisation , coding , theming , review , defnition , and documentation [ 5 , 52 ] . Two additional independent researchers were brought in for workshops during the theming , review and defnition phases to provide investi - gator triangulation [ 2 ] and increase comprehensibility and cohesion . In practice , the six phases were iteratively moved between until thematic saturation was reached [ 48 ] . 4 . 2 Study 2 : Comparative Analysis of Reframer Interaction Models After the thematic analysis was complete , our fndings informed the design of a revised prototype , with particular attention given to better understanding when and why users would view the system as being agentive , and why that agency was good and / or bad . Based on the analysis , this quality – the trade - of between user control and system agency – was viewed by the design team as critically related to the capacity for emergence and creativity . To explore this trade - of we developed the Focus Regions feature ( the capacity for the user to defne a bounding box within the drawing canvas and assign it a sub - prompt that describes its intended content ) and conducted a comparative study of the Reframer experience both with and without this feature . 4 https : / / dovetailapp . com / This study was structured as a qualitative within - subjects com - parison , with 32 participants engaging with two tasks : one with Focus Regions , and one without . Four additional participants com - pleted a pilot study . Recruitment screening was the same as in the previous study . Participants had to be enrolled as students , and have some sketching experience . Participants from the frst study were not allowed to participate in the second study . Participants were culturally and ethnically diverse ( although skewing towards educated – recruitment happened on a large Australian public uni - versity campus ) , with 16 / 32 ( 50 % ) participants being non - male . Most participants were students , with a mix of undergraduate and post - graduate . Only some of the participants had used graphics displays or creative AI applications previously . All participants consented to the collection and use of their data . The same experimental setup was used , with the Wacom attached to a high - end workstation . A longer tutorial was used ( as there would be no simple , constrained “pizza” task at the beginning ) , with participants being asked to draw with the prompt “a volcanic eruption next to a small village with smoke and lava” and shown system features throughout . If the participant was using Focus Regions in their frst task , an introduction to this was included in the tutorial , and these participants were told after completing their frst task that that feature would not be available for their second . If the participant was not using Focus Regions in their frst task this portion of the tutorial was omitted , and a short Focus Regions - specifc tutorial was provided between tasks . Two diferent tasks were used ( as participants would experience the same creative task diferently the second time they were asked to complete it ) , and were as follows : Task A “Draw a cat in a place where a cat should not be . ” Task B “The year is 2065 , you’re a retiree , what does your vehicle look like ? ” These tasks were chosen to be open - ended and not directly tran - scribable as prompts . Order , tool , and task were counterbalanced through a Latin Squares design , with half of the participants re - ceiving focus regions frst , half of the participants receiving focus regions with Task A , and half of the participants receiving Task A frst . This was a mixed - methods study , with the quantitative per - task survey component detailed in [ 35 ] . After completing both tasks , participants were given a similar open - ended interview as in the frst study , this time with fve questions focusing on their goals , how well they were able to execute those goals , and the system’s agency , all compared across the two tasks they performed . The questions were : ( 1 ) Can you tell me what you made in the frst drawing task ? ( 2 ) Did you go into the task with a clear idea in mind ? Did that idea change overtime ? Why ? ( 3 ) Did you have a similar experience for the second drawing task ? Why ? ( 4 ) At times , did it feel like the system had a mind of its own ? Did the system behave more like a tool or a collaborator ? ( 5 ) Given your experience , would you use this system again ? And , what would you like to see from the system in the future ? The transcription process was the same as in the frst study , but this time the existing codes and themes were applied to the results , 1984 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Lawton , Grace & Ibarrola with care taken to separate utterances out by task , tool , and order so that a comparison ( both interpretive as well as in terms of code prevalence ) could be performed . 5 RESULTS We present the results of our two studies with Reframer : frst , the thematic analysis collected from Study 1 , and second the compara - tive analysis between task and tool variants in Study 2 . 5 . 1 Thematic Analysis Our thematic analysis of the 12 participants from our frst study ex - tracted 656 quotes from 746 minutes of transcribed audio recordings . These were analysed to construct a bottom - up hierarchy constitut - ing 8 high - level themes , constructed from 19 sub - themes , across 54 codes . This analysis aimed to capture a broad understanding of how our users co - created with a drawing AI , and are presented in Table 1 and described in the remainder of this section . 5 . 1 . 1 Theme 1 : Confident Learning Engagement . Many participants experienced initial confusion with Reframer due to unfamiliarity , but its manageable learning curve bolstered their confdence with practice , although there was some prolonged uncertainty from persistent issues . Figure 5 shows the thematic network [ 3 ] for this theme . First - glance exploration helps users form a base understanding of a new system’s layout and functions [ 42 ] . However , half of our participants ( 6 ) needed to reach a certain level of understanding before they could use Reframer efectively , which we refer to as requiring a “comprehensibility threshold” . Participants made as - sumptions based on preconceived notions about AI . For example , one expressed that they “expected the AI to just give you like a re - ally nicely drawn pizza” ( ES28 ) . The participant expected Reframer to produce high - quality outputs , without requiring signifcant user efort . Others reported it took “a while to understand how it works” ( ES67 ) . Many participants had “never used any sort of technology like this” ( ES28 ) . Our participants found Reframer highly unfamiliar , and didn’t know how it should be used at frst . However , almost all participants ( 11 ) conveyed that they were able to manage the system’s learning curve , allowing them to be - come confdent after some practice . One reported ( after the initial learning period ) that “the interface perspective , I think that’s re - ally simple . It takes you three seconds and then you understand” ( ES28 ) . Another said that the system was “Pretty easy to learn . Easy . Clean . ” ( ES67 ) . Most participants developed this confdence through practice , stating that Reframer “made sense when I started doing it” ( ES96 ) and that “once you get used to what it is . . . It’s a lot more easier for you to control” ( ES62 ) . After the initial shock of unfa - miliarity wore of , participants felt that they were becoming “very competent using the system . ” ( ES28 ) . However , not all features of Reframer were so quickly or so uniformly learnable . There were aspects of Reframer which caused continued uncertainty among the majority of participants ( 10 ) . A key challenge was the core notion of synchronous drawing , which was a “foreign concept” ( ES48 ) . Participants had never experienced " AI where you , in real time , work on something together” ( ES48 ) , and many assumed that they would take turns . Participants also found the pruning feature ( designed to remove errant strokes and implemented through a “Clean Up” button , see Section 3 ) confusing , with some assuming the button would clear the entire sketch . Those who used this feature did not like it , one reporting that “I don’t know what it’s taking away " ( ES96 ) . This may indicate a form of loss aversion [ 31 ] for subtractive AI actions : accidentally removing “good” strokes is perceived as worse than leaving “bad” ones . 5 . 1 . 2 Theme 2 : Traditional Visual Principles . Perhaps unsurpris - ingly , our student designer participants applied the “traditional” visual principles they had learned in other domains to drawing with Reframer . This led to stimulating and collaborative idea generation even in the unfamiliar context of synchronous drawing with an AI . A thematic network is shown in Figure 6 . In drawing literature , researchers have articulated the embodied perceptual and cognitive means through which designers think while they sketch [ 20 ] . Almost all participants ( 11 ) were observed applying traditional visual principles ( such as Gestalt principles like closure , continuation , and symmetry ) to elements in the drawing canvas as part of a meaning - making process . This often led to surprise or even serendipitous discoveries , such as “oh , so that’s a chair happening there , and probably like an avocado ! ” ( ES53 ) . This enabled them to interpret Reframer’s abstract compositions , seeing colour palettes , line arrangements and even written letters . For example , even after acknowledging that the sketch was “pretty abstract right now” , one participant could see “what the AI is trying to do . It actually knows what I want . ” ( ES67 ) . Explicit sketch planning was observed in most participants ( 10 ) . Most participants vocalised both what to draw , and then how to draw it . Examples of this planning behaviour include “I guess I’m trying to work out what antique means . I guess , going to brown , like lots of brown . ” ( ES96 ) , and “Cats don’t like water so cats shouldn’t be in a swimming pool . If they are , it’s probably not a cat . It’s probably a dog in a cat costume” ( ES48 ) . This was often interspersed with the other visual sub - themes of meaning making and experimentation as participants engaged in the formulate - act - reformulate refective cycle that is known to characterise design [ 50 ] . Refection and imagination were evident through quotes like “ [ I’m ] like . . . somehow visualising what the thing is looking at , or looking for” ( ES74 ) . Almost all participants ( 10 ) translated their meaning - making and planning into experimentation , “playing around” with elements on the canvas to come up with new ideas . Discussion of this was common in the interviews , with comments like “you could move it around and just make kind of an idea , and then go from that . ” ( ES25 ) and that this process was familiar because “in graphic design , there’s an element of playing around with abstract forms or con - cepts” ( ES78 ) . The abstraction and chaotic emergence of Reframer’s designs were discussed regularly , with participants fnding that it pushed them to the pushing participants to the “boundary of their knowledge” ( ES99 ) creatively , or as one put it Reframer “challenges your brain to try and play around with it even more . . . drawing the abstractness a bit down , while retaining some of the features that you deem striking . ” ( ES78 ) . However , this was positive for many , being described as “a playful experience” ( ES48 ) . 5 . 1 . 3 Theme 3 : Capacity for Collaboration . Participants reported that the system had its own perspective , and was to an extent steering the collaboration . The way they reported the changes Reframer made revealed a perception of it as an agent , attributing 1985 When is a Tool a Tool ? User Perceptions of System Agency in Human – AI Co - Creative Drawing DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Figure 5 : Thematic network for Confdent Learning Engagement , with Codes ( Left ) and Sub - Themes ( Middle ) . Figure 6 : Bottom - Up Diagram Showing : Codes ( Left ) and Sub - Themes ( Middle ) for Traditional Visual Principles . 1986 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Lawton , Grace & Ibarrola S Theme Description 5 . 1 . 1 Confdent Learning En - gagement While the system was initially confusing , participants learned quickly and bolstered their confdence with practice . 5 . 1 . 2 Traditional Visual Princi - ples Traditional visual principles and processes were used to make meaning with the sketch . These principles were applied to ongoing AI changes , leading to inspiration and collaborative idea generation . 5 . 1 . 3 Capacity for Collaboration The agent was , some of the time , able to communicate its “intent” and infuence the sketch . Participants felt the system had its own perspective and was steering parts of the collaboration . 5 . 1 . 4 Negotiated Developments Ongoing guidance and critique from the agent increased recurring system – user feedback . This instigated considerable conceptual development by building on ideas and encouraging concept reformulation . 5 . 1 . 5 Technology Limitations Limitations with the underlying technology caused disruptions to the col - laborative drawing experience . 5 . 1 . 6 Creative Diferences Diferences between system and user drawing behaviour disrupted their capacity to work together . These diferences were distinct from technology limitations : the system was behaving as we intended , the participant just disagreed . 5 . 1 . 7 Cooperative Strategies Ways of working were devised to work productively with the system , through both its strengths and its weaknesses . This included attempting to control the system behaviour using interface settings . 5 . 1 . 8 Refections Participants reported the overall experience largely positively , citing many potential applications , although there were some negative outlooks . Table 1 : The eight high - level themes developed through our analysis . viewpoints and / or intent to its actions . These perspectives were often valuable contributions . A thematic network is shown in Figure 7 . Working with the curated outputs of mixed - initiative systems , humans and machines often become entangled in tight feedback loops in which initiative is shared [ 13 ] . Most users ( 9 ) were moti - vated to use the system to search for inspiration and to see what the AI “thought” about their design . For example , one participant “realised nobody actually kinda knows what an avocado chair would be , so I’m just going to ask him to do one avocado” ( ES53 ) . This participant had apparently anthropomorphised and even gendered Reframer , suggesting the attribution of agency . Multiple users used the system to help them explore for a design concept , as one said “you don’t know what it would look like” so you “put it into the machine and see how the machine interprets” ( ES48 ) . Another was “very curious as to what it thinks an avocado chair looks like” ( ES28 ) , indicating a desire to understand the AI’s perspective and possibly even follow its lead . Most participants ( 11 ) reported that Reframer made changes that improved the drawing . These included colour palettes , new shapes and structures , and the emergence of recognisable textures . Some of these changes were obvious , like the system “changing the form of what I draw into a chair” ( ES99 ) . Others were surprises : “the shapes are all a little random , if I’m being honest . Like I – Oh I see the shapes ! I see the chair forming now . ” ( ES48 ) . Colour changes were fast , with one user commenting that they “can clearly see the palette . . . I can like immediately know what I can do with it . ” ( ES67 ) . Texture and form changes were slower , eliciting comments like “I’m watching an avocado tree grow ! ” ( ES48 ) . Since the system was able to meaningfully change and infuence the sketch , participants ( 10 ) reported that Reframer had its own design perspective , one that that aligned with their design goals , enhanced feedback , and ofered options to explore . One participant found the system enabled them to produce a sketch ( shown in Figure 8 ) they “would not be able to do” ( ES99 ) on their own , due to a genetic vision condition . Users engaged with Reframer dialogically [ 4 ] , with one saying they would activate AI drawing and ask “Do you agree to this ? Do you like this ? Or , what would you add ? Give me your feedback . ” ( ES78 ) . This was useful when the participant was uncertain , as the system’s perspective could provide direction , as in “Oh , this is the shape that you can go towards . ” ( ES53 ) . The Explorer function ( which generated multiple possible futures for the sketch as thumbnails , allowing the user to choose between them ) was perceived as particularly useful for this AI - led way of working , with multiple participants lauding “the diferent options the AI gives you” ( ES28 ) . 5 . 1 . 4 Theme 4 : Negotiated Developments . Ongoing guidance and critique from the agent resulted in iterative system - user feedback and idea exchange . When these negotiations were resolvable , they instigated considerable conceptual development by building on ideas and encouraging concept reformulation . When they weren’t resolvable , technology limitations ( see Section 5 . 1 . 5 ) tended to be the cause . A thematic network is shown in Figure 9 . During conceptual design , unexpected discoveries often prompt the invention new requirements , which may in turn lead further unexpected discoveries and ( potentially ) creativity [ 53 ] . In team design these unexpected discoveries can come from productive am - biguities between team members [ 39 ] . Almost all participants ( 11 ) 1987 When is a Tool a Tool ? User Perceptions of System Agency in Human – AI Co - Creative Drawing DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Figure 7 : Thematic network for Capacity for Collaboration , with Codes ( Left ) and Sub - Themes ( Middle ) . Figure 8 : Screen capture of drawings from ES99 . Left : User sketch of an avocado beanbag made while the AI was switched of . Right : The sketch after AI changes were made after co - drawing with the prompt “avocado beanbag” . 1988 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Lawton , Grace & Ibarrola reported that Reframer provided agentive guidance – inspiration in the form of surprising suggestions that broadened the design scope . This helped participants “think outside the box” ( ES28 ) , providing “options that you wouldn’t think about” ( ES96 ) . As one participant refected , “as a human being , I do have my limitations on looking at things . . . But , I think AI [ doesn’t ] have this limitation” ( ES99 ) . Some of Reframer’s changes clearly pushed participants away of their intended concepts , forcing refection and adaptation . One said “I feel it defnitely changed to a chair with a leg , it looks better , so I just changed it . . . It changed my idea . ” ( ES99 ) . Similarly , another participant wanted to draw a cat “the normal way , you know you make the double A , and some whiskers , but the AI prompted the leg and the body so I was like , Hey ! I can do that” ( ES53 ) . This shows that the system did not only extend participants existing concepts , but also challenged them to reframe their ideas – and this was often valuable . 5 . 1 . 5 Theme 5 : Technology Limitations . Despite its successes at triggering mixed - initiative co - creative drawing , every participant described at least one limitation of the Reframer system . These mainly related to defciencies in the AI’s ability to understand in - tent and / or its expected precision drawing abilities . Most of these stemmed from misunderstandings of the underlying algorithm’s abilities , and led to “technology friction” [ 16 ] and participant frus - tration . A thematic network is shown in Figure 10 . Most participants described at least one incident where they were frustrated about a “disconnect between how we interpreted things” ( ES48 ) , and / or felt that “the system wasn’t understanding what I was trying to put across” ( ES78 ) . Many of these were related to mismatches between interpretations of the prompt : the participant meant it one way , but the system interpreted it another . In some cases the user and AI weren’t directly opposed in their actions , but participants felt the AI wasn’t contributing : “I was just a little like . . . alright , that’s just not what I’m drawing . ” ( ES28 ) . The reliance of the Reframer system on gradual development and emergence sometimes exacerbated this issue , as sometimes the chaos would resolve into valuable contributions , and other times it would not . This could lead to ambiguity not just about content , but about process , with one participant reporting they were “not sure how the AI works in terms of like . . . its status of where it’s at in its process” ( ES48 ) . In some cases the system’s ability to optimise towards a com - pelling and high - quality sketch that matched the provided prompt was hampered by the local nature of the CICADA vector - based optimiser . Due to the way it receives feedback on the quality of drawings , Reframer can only “improve” its drawing if there is a clear pathway to doing so that does not pass through any interme - diate drawings that are worse than the current one . In other words , it is constrained by local minima – drawings that are better than all of their “neighbours” in the space of possible drawings , even though better drawings exist “further away” . In many cases this was resolvable by the user taking the initiative and making larger structural changes , but in some instances the system seemed uncer - tain about how to proceed . Participants remarked that it sometimes “gets the idea , but it doesn’t know what to do afterwards . ” ( ES62 ) . This would often arise when users changed a prompt mid - drawing : the system would stay “anchored” to signifcant portions of its pre - vious drawings , unable to fnd a path towards a better one without frst making things worse . One participant remarked that early explorations were “fun” and ”playful” , but that “afterwards , when I have inspiration , like . . ‘oh , I have an idea , let’s do this ! ’ then I had a clearer vision , and it can’t see that clearer vision , and it starts to annoy me” ( ES48 ) . 5 . 1 . 6 Theme 6 : Creative Diferences . All participants expressed opinions about Reframer’s drawing style and how they worked with it to achieve their goals . We distinguish this from technological limitations in the previous theme as Reframer was working as we had intended : it was designed to favour line drawings in an abstract and “messy” style . Not all of the statements coded into this category were criticisms , but they all required some kind of adaptation on the participant’s behalf . A thematic network is shown in Figure 11 . Many of these opinions fell into the category of feeling Re - framer’s drawings were childish . For example , one said it felt “like you’re drawing something and then a little kid kind of like rushes in and tries to do something” ( ES25 ) . It’s clear that Reframer’s order - out - of - chaos approach was confrontational to some users , who were sometimes overwhelmed by lines as the system began drawing : “there were so many elements going on with that , so I couldn’t focus what I really wanted to do” ( ES53 ) . Another pointed out they couldn’t “deal with my creative process while these things are like moving around . . . ” ( ES74 ) . These stylistic limitations were more impactful later in the drawing process as the drawing solidi - fed , with one participant saying “the AI just kind of mucks it up . ” ( ES62 ) . Participants found Reframer more useful in the early concep - tual phases of drawing , with comments like “in a stage of fnding inspiration , I would say it is helpful . . . if it’s about helping me to fnish or like polish my drawing , I would say it doesn’t meet my expectations” ( ES27 ) . This was connected to its abstractness , with comments like “it’s just a little bit too abstract for me . ” ( ES67 ) . Some - times this led to serendipity , but sometimes Reframer went too far , like it was “tricking your eye . Like you’re trying to fnd something that’s not really there , because you want it to be an antique chair . ” ( ES62 ) . There was a desire for this kind of abstraction , but also a clear awareness of a threshold beyond which collaboration sufered , as in “you want to make it abstract . . . but if it’s too abstract you just have no idea what to do . ” ( ES67 ) . 5 . 1 . 7 Theme 7 : Cooperative Strategies . Participants developed new ways of working with Reframer , with almost all ( 11 ) adapting their design approach to work with it . Many of these strategies involved imposing additional control when the AI’s contributions became unhelpful , and involved a transition from agentive interaction to tool - like use . A thematic network is shown in Figure 12 . Participants sought ways to infuence and control the system directly . The simplest of these was stopping the AI from drawing , to “take back the control and redo it or fx it up” ( ES25 ) . This provided the capacity to “pull back” ( ES33 ) changes if desired . Other strategies involved the use of the behaviour sliders ( visible on the bottom left of Fig . 3 ) , but these were opaque to a number of users . This may have been exacerbated by the fact that the sliders did nothing when the AI wasn’t already drawing , because they mediated agent behaviour rather than afect the drawing directly . One slider controlled the 1989 When is a Tool a Tool ? User Perceptions of System Agency in Human – AI Co - Creative Drawing DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Figure 9 : Thematic network for Negotiated Developments , with Codes ( Left ) and Sub - Themes ( Middle ) . Figure 10 : Thematic network for Technology Limitations , with Codes ( Left ) and Sub - Themes ( Middle ) . amount of respect the system had for user modifying user compared to its own , an indirect and intangible concept . One participant thought “it just was just another technical term for how much stuf you want there to be . ” ( ES62 ) . We revised this slider and stroke ownership in the second prototype . Users also adopted behavioural strategies for working with Re - framer . One was to divide and conquer the task by reducing the scope of individual activities ( and thus also Reframer’s propensity for abstraction ) . An example of this was “when I frst tried ‘cat on a sofa’ , it doesn’t work . So I wanna try do it like separately , like frst cat and then sofa . ”’ ( ES27 ) . Another participant described this as an “attempt to break it down into like smaller and smaller bits . ” ( ES48 ) . Participants found the system better at working on smaller , more basic prompts , the results of which could then be scaled and com - posed . Another strategy was local pruning – removing portions of the drawing where the system was being unproductive . Of this one said Reframer was often “trying more stuf” and “sometimes I had to delete that . ” ( ES33 ) . The fnal common strategy we observed was to simply stop Reframer once a solid concept had been established and complete the drawing manually , with one participant saying they “decided to leave the AI out of it , because it was getting hard for me to control” ( ES53 ) . 5 . 1 . 8 Theme 8 : Reflections . With the vast majority of participants providing both positive and negative examples of their experience drawing with Reframer , it was interesting to draw out their broader evaluations of the system . All our participants ( 12 ) gave some kind of mostly positive review , but few unambiguously so . A thematic network is shown in Figure 13 . Positive refections tended to focus on the “uniqueness” ( ES53 ) and utility of Reframer , with comments like “I’d use it as a way to like , spur new ideas . ” ( ES48 ) . A number of participants mentioned 1990 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Lawton , Grace & Ibarrola Figure 11 : Thematic network for Creative Diferences , with Codes ( Left ) and Sub - Themes ( Middle ) . Figure 12 : Thematic network for Cooperative Strategies , with Codes ( Left ) and Sub - Themes ( Middle ) . excitement for a Reframer - like tool in their workfows , typically designers might struggle with the system’s abstraction , saying it as a component of another software tool rather than a standalone depends on how well you can “associate AI ideas with your ideas” experience . A variety of uses were suggested , including overcoming ( ES99 ) A few participants concluded that Reframer’s drawings were creative block , interior design , modifying existing products , story too unserious for design applications , with one saying “it just kinda boarding , guiding new designers , creating an artwork , and coming feels like not really something a designer would use , but something up with physical form - factors . It is always dangerous to extrapolate like a kid would use” ( ES62 ) . A fnal common complaint was system from user estimates of a new technology’s utility , but it was clear speed , with some feeling the movement of strokes was too fast ( “it’s that most participants at least were keen for similar experiences in faster than me ! ” ( ES74 ) ) , and others feeling the gradual coalescence future . of forms felt like it was “going slowly” ( ES67 ) . Negative feedback tended to focus on confusion , lack of pro - fessional applications , and speed . Some felt that less experienced 1991 When is a Tool a Tool ? User Perceptions of System Agency in Human – AI Co - Creative Drawing DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Figure 13 : Thematic network for Refections , with Codes ( Left ) and Sub - Themes ( Middle ) . 5 . 2 Comparative Analysis of Reframer Variants In our second study , after additional refnements to the Reframer interface ( see Section 3 ) , we compared two diferent variations of the interface on two diferent drawing tasks , counterbalancing for tool ( i . e . interface ) , task , and order ( see Section 4 ) . The quantitative parts of this second study are published in [ 35 ] . As a supplemen - tary qualitative comparison to triangulate those results , we used the codebook from our frst study’s thematic analysis to compare the diferent conditions in our second study . We found that the existing themes captured participant quotes from the second study as well as they had in the frst , allowing us to use them as a lens to analyse the experiences of our participants across the two tasks and interface variants . Having coded the second study interviews , we analysed quotes , code prevalence , and sentiment to build a qual - itative analysis of how experiences difered . We present the results of that comparative analysis here . 5 . 2 . 1 Between - Task Diferences . There were substantial diferences in the experience of using Reframer to complete the two tasks in this study , independent of both the order in which they were done and the interface version used . Task A , the “cat” task , elicited more positivity , more discussion of Reframer as a collaborator , and more mention of serendipity . For example , one participant reported Reframer “started drawing like some musical notes and , and then I was actually surprised . I was like , wow , that’s actually like a really good way of like showing that it’s a rave ! ” ( CS80 ) . By contrast Task B , the “vehicle” task , led to more negativity , discussion of limitations , and creative diferences . One participant reported that for Task B they were “trying to do a detailed one , like with all the lights , the wheels and all of it . But the system was making it more abstract” ( CS32 ) . We hypothesise that these diferences may have arisen from greater emphasis on the early conceptual exploration component of Task A , and / or a greater openness to pivoting towards the AI’s suggestions . It is also possible that the nature of the focus regions feature impacted more negatively on those who used it with Task B . Focus regions worked great when users were using them to create separate objects within a scene – which was much more common in Task A . In Task B , however , users often used the regions to defne connected components of a larger object such as a car , and in this case the resulting images tended not to cohere . In one case a “window” region within a drawing of a car produced a house - like window , complete with windowsill . Task B had less openness to the kind of sketchy spatial ambiguity that Reframer lends itself to , making users less tolerant of it taking action . This suggests the nuance required to understand how and when – even within a single study of a single system – users perceive it as a tool or an agent . 5 . 2 . 2 Between - Tool Diferences . A majority of participants viewed the Focus Regions as a way to tame the abstraction of Reframer and induce more control , particularly those who had access to that feature for Task A . For example , one participant reported “ [ Without Focus Regions ] was more abstract and it gave me a lot more difer - ent perspective of the sketch I imagined . . . Whereas [ With Focus Regions ] it . . . it allowed me more control over the subjects” ( BP15 ) . We observed a kind of tradeof between an increase in control with Focus Regions and an increase in serendipitous discovery without them . This ft with our design intent : providing “mid - level” infu - ence ( i . e . between individual strokes and the overall prompt ) over the sketch would increase quality at the expense of system agency . Participants in all conditions tended towards viewing the Re - framer experience as at least partly collaborative . As one put it “as much as I would like to be like ‘it’s my own work’ , I don’t think without the tool I would’ve drawn that at all . So it’s defnitely a collaborator” ( CS67 ) . Others were more unequivocal : “it’s more 1992 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Lawton , Grace & Ibarrola like collaboration because we’re actually inspiring each other , it’s almost like working with a partner . It’s not only to like to only follow your instruction , but collaboration means like mutual inspi - ration . ” ( CS40 ) . This experience of mutual inspiration was likened to human - human partnership by some , or at least going beyond tool - use by others . The interjection of ideas was identifed as a signifcant driver of this belief : “I would say tools are something that you use to make something that you have in mind . In any case , the second it starts changing what you’re putting down , I think that would make it more of a collaborator” ( CS66 ) . When taken in the context of the comments about greater exposure to new per - spectives ( without Focus Regions ) and greater control ( with Focus regions ) , this discussion of mutual inspiration supports the idea that – at least when it did not lead to disruption – Reframer was perceived as more tool - like with Focus Regions , and more agentive without them . 6 DISCUSSION The participants in our study clearly found mixed - initiative co - creativity unfamiliar and even confronting . That’s unsurprising , since mixed - initiative drawing is novel . Regardless , most partici - pants were able to quickly learn and adapt to the system . Along the way , there were many incorrect assumptions that needed to be corrected – some users thought the system would “autocom - plete” their drawings , and many thought they and Reframer would take turns drawing . Among those with some experience of other generative AI tools it was a common belief that Reframer would produce realistic , high - quality output based on their sketches , even after we explained it as a collaborative sketching tool . Managing these assumptions and unfamiliarities will be a key requirement of any co - creative design tool being developed during this period of AI - driven disruption . Despite these initial expectation mismatches , most of our par - ticipants were able to reach a state where their relationship with Reframer could be described as collaborative and creative . Our studies showed that this “agentive” view of the interaction was experienced by almost all users , but that it was also true that all users were forced to “clamp down” on the system’s agency and treat it as a tool at least some of the time . One of our key design goals was to explore how mixed - initiative interfaces could be designed to support creativity . Almost by def - nition , mixed - initiative systems violate the principle of maximal unobtrusiveness that has long been a hallmark design principle for creativity support systems [ 51 ] . Our studies found that Reframer’s fuidity , physicality , and capacity for serendipitous and unexpected discoveries resulted in moments where users engaged with it in an agentive fashion . These periods were not disruptive despite the system’s interjections , instead they were ( as a whole ) perceived as fowy [ 10 ] and highly engaging . From this we posit a new – or at least new to co - creative AI – modality for interaction that is simultaneously mixed - initiative and creativity - supportive : agentive fow . In agentive fow , a user is both highly engaged in creativity and open to being infuenced by the system . As mentioned this is not an entirely new idea , as shared creative fow states have been discussed before in human - human co - creation , such as collabora - tive fow in rap music [ 32 ] and joint performance or “togetherness” in improvisational dance [ 41 ] . These experiences are creatively rich , mutually inspiring , and often embodied and enactive [ 11 ] . Under - standing how analogous human - AI states of “agentive fow” can be evoked and sustained is a key challenge for future co - creative systems research . To take a brief detour into philosophy , Heidegger views tools as embodied functions that we encounter and can take advantage of . Tools enact themselves through use , so a hammer becomes a tool through the function of hitting nails , and a fallen log in a forest be - comes a tool through being sat upon mid - hike . Heidegger describes tools as “ready - to - hand” , becoming less visible the better they fulfl their function . The best tools become extensions of their wielder’s own body , reaching what Harman calls “tool - being” – not perceived as separate entities unless they malfunction [ 21 ] . Once broken , a tool becomes “present - at - hand” , entering awareness due to its in - ability to perform its desired function – which certainly did occur with Reframer at times . We contend that mixed - initiative tools can be placed within this Heideggerian viewpoint if one accepts that their function is diferent : they are ideation engines , not production ones . When agentive fow occurs , Reframer is not encountered as a tool for drawing , but as a tool for creating . Within that broader scope , as the locus of creativity moves from the individual human to the human – AI nexus , being “ready - to - hand” requires being at - tentive , responsive and even interjective in order to support the refnement of ideas . This begs the question : how , when , and why does agentive fow arise ? Analysing our participants’ experiences with Reframer across both user studies , we have developed a model that begins to char - acterise the causes and efects of agentive fow . We call this model M - CAF , the Model of Co - creative Agentive Flow . 6 . 1 M - CAF : A Model of Co - Creative Agentive Flow Having identifed from our analysis that this state of agentive fow might be a desirable one for future research in co - creative systems to evoke , a few questions immediately follow . What drives agentive fow ? What is it like to experience agentive fow ? What are the benefts of doing so ? What interrupts agentive fow ? And what strategies might be possible to restore it ? M - CAF is intended as a starting point for that discussion : not a conclusive model of user behaviour validated over many systems , but a suggested one that might help shape the design of more . Existing models of co - creative interaction are descriptive , focusing on articulating what infuences co - creativity [ 27 ] and / or what comprises it [ 13 ] . M - CAF is diferent , focusing on one phenomenological notion – agentive fow – that we believe to be critical to co - creative interactions and how it is created , sustained , disrupted , and repaired . From our user studies we have identifed four stages of the co - creative experience , seen in Figure 14 . The interactions and transi - tions between these four stages are critical concerns for co - creative systems researchers , as they defne the kind of experience users will have with a tool . The four stages are as follows : ( 1 ) Expectations about the coming human - agent interaction , which derive from assumptions and prior experiences with 1993 When is a Tool a Tool ? User Perceptions of System Agency in Human – AI Co - Creative Drawing DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA both creative software and AI tools . This state precedes co - creative interaction , and needs to be given particular atten - tion by system designers due to the unfamiliarity of mixed - initiative co - creative systems and the resultant lack of trans - ferable prior experience . ( 2 ) Co - Creative Agentive - Flow , a state of highly engaged and open - ended mutual attention and adaptation between the co - creative system ( the “agent” ) and the human user ( s ) . This state is mixed - initiative , creativity supporting and fow - like despite agent interjections . ( 3 ) Tool - Supported Creative Flow , the state of being in “tra - ditional” creative fow , where despite its AI capabilities the system is an unobtrusive tool – a better paint palette – rather than an agentive interjector . It’s important to note that this state can also be creativity - supporting and highly engaging , but it is not mixed - initiative . ( 4 ) Refections , the state which follows successful agentive in - teraction , involving refection and the internalisation of new assumptions and expectations that drive future experiences with other systems . M - CAF is a state model of interaction with creative AI : users start in the frst state , then cycle between states 2 and 3 , before ending up at state 4 . Technically , it is a partial model because we deliberately exclude the “broken tool” states in which the experience is not fow - like or creativity - supportive , regardless of its level of agency . M - CAF is therefore an idealistic model , with which we can describe systems that fuctuate between being tools and being collaborators , all the while remaining engaging and supportive of creativity . Its purpose is not to describe exactly when and why a given system might transition between one of these states , but instead to identify what those transitions are , to give nuance to the discussion around designing mixed - initiative co - creative systems . Often systems are described as being mixed - initiative based on features or capabilities that permit interjection . From our thematic analysis of how users have experienced three diferent variants of Reframer , we think a much more interesting question is when is a system perceived as being mixed - initiative , and when does that perception lead to co - creative agentive fow . This reframes the question into a human - centric one , asking what might cause someone to perceive a system as agentive , what might cause them to stop doing so , and when do such perceptions lead to fow - like and / or creatively productive states . In this way M - CAF builds on theories that have previously been applied in HCI , such as activity theory [ 28 ] and distributed cognition [ 22 ] . Activity theory emphasises the dynamic , constructive and socio - culturally grounded nature of both our tasks and the tools with which we enact them – an infuence seen in M - CAF’s central cycle between agentive and non - agentive interactions . The theory of distributed cognition holds that perception , reasoning and action are properties of networks of actors , both organic and otherwise . In M - CAF , potential disruptors of agency are distributed , in that they emerge out of interactions between system and user . With M - CAF as a lens , we can ask six questions that we think would be of use to the designers of future mixed - initiative co - creative systems , presented here with our thoughts based on our studies with Reframer : Q1 : What enabling assumptions existed in users prior to interac - tion , that made agentive fow more likely ? In our case , those able to “suspend their disbelief” and accept Reframer as a collaborator and peer were more likely to end up in agentive fow , as were those more open to changing their ideas . Q2 : What disabling assumptions existed in users prior to interac - tion , that made agentive fow less likely ? We found a number of users came in expecting high - fdelity , realistic and com - plete drawings , and those initially clashed with the design of Reframer . While most participants realised those assump - tions were wrong and corrected , a small fraction never got past the abstract , “childish” nature of Reframer’s chaotic drawing process , and subsequently were much more likely to prevent it from acting on their drawing . Q3 : What disruptors of agency existed in your system ? In Reframer , this included both low - level issues ( such as some strokes getting stuck in local minima and being left on the canvas as “scribbles” with no clear purpose ) and some more conceptual ones ( such as overwhelming the user with too much noise , or refusing to acknowledge a user’s pivot in creative concept and constantly trying to revert the drawing ) . These tended to cause the user to stop the AI drawing , ending real - time fuid collaboration . Q4 : What control strategies were adopted by users to mediate those disruptions ? In our case , when users did not just leave the AI of ( thereby staying in tool - supported fow ) , most strategies for mediating disruption were based on trying to “re - set” the AI’s behaviour , deleting or adding strokes , modifying the prompt , and marking strokes as user - owned , then re - starting the AI . Other users decomposed the task into smaller pieces ( e . g . drawing a cat , and then a sofa , rather than “a cat on a sofa” ) to simplify it for Reframer’s sake . Most users adopted strategies of letting the AI have more agency early in the process as forms and concepts were emerging , but then tapering its agency through adjusting parameters ( or just turning it of ) as the task progressed . Q5 : What caused users to look back on the experience with an agent - empowered mindset ? Reframer users , particularly those who had experienced agentive fow , were most positive about the “spontaneous” emergence of serendipitous forms or ideas that it triggered , and that capability drove them adopting an “agentive” perspective . Q6 : What caused users to look back on the experience with a tool - based mindset ? Among those who had highly disrupted ex - periences with Reframer , particularly those who used the Focus Regions feature in the second study to attempt to draw detailed designs of a vehicle with many components , it was common to see Reframer as a tool for generating abstract ideas , not a collaborator ( or even much of a drawing aid ) . 7 CONCLUSIONS In this paper , we presented an in - depth analysis of the user expe - rience of Reframer , our mixed - initiative and co - creative drawing system . Reframer facilitates fuid , real - time shared drawing expe - riences with a generative AI , and our studies indicated this novel interaction paradigm enables a bi - directional exchange of ideas 1994 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Lawton , Grace & Ibarrola Figure 14 : Model of Co - Creative Agentive Flow : The model starts with expectations , then cycles between experiencing agentive fow and tool - use , then concludes with users having adopted mindsets and refected on their experiences . between its users and the AI system . This mutual infuence can cre - ate moments of serendipitous discovery and design reformulation , which both delighted our users and contributed to their overall positive experiences . We contrasted these engaging and positive “agentive fow” experiences with traditional notions of creativity support that focus on maximally unobtrusive tools . Through our thematic analysis , we established users move between agentive and non - agentive creative fow states as they adapt to and are disrupted by a tool’s functions , with diferent features helping at some points in the process and hindering at others . We should therefore think of systems not as being mixed - initiative or not , but rather as facili - tating mixed - initiative interactions in some moments , and tool - like ( i . e . user - initiated ) interactions in others . We presented M - CAF , a state model of co - creative agentive fow , as a way of beginning to capture this phenomenological , moment - to - moment perspective of co - creative interaction . This is intended to focus future work in de - signing co - creative experiences as the drivers , disruptors , enablers and disablers of agentive fow . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to acknowledge the fnancial support of the Aus - tralian Research Council ( # DP200101059 ) , as well as the University of Sydney . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Zirui An , Jingbo Yu , Runtao Liu , Chuang Wang , and Qian Yu . 2023 . SketchInverter : Multi - Class Sketch - Based Image Generation via GAN Inversion . In Proceedings of the IEEE / CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision . 4319 – 4329 . [ 2 ] Mandy M Archibald . 2016 . Investigator triangulation : A collaborative strategy with potential for mixed methods research . Journal of mixed methods research 10 , 3 ( 2016 ) , 228 – 250 . [ 3 ] Jennifer Attride - Stirling . 2001 . Thematic networks : an analytic tool for qualitative research . Qualitative research 1 , 3 ( 2001 ) , 385 – 405 . [ 4 ] Oliver Bown , Kazjon Grace , Liam Bray , and Dan Ventura . 2020 . A Speculative Exploration of the Role of Dialogue in Human - ComputerCo - creation . . In ICCC . 25 – 32 . [ 5 ] Virginia Braun , Victoria Clarke , and Nikki Hayfeld . 2022 . ‘A starting point for your journey , not a map’ : Nikki Hayfeld in conversation with Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke about thematic analysis . Qualitative Research in Psychology 19 , 2 ( 2022 ) , 424 – 445 . [ 6 ] Linda Candy and Ernest Edmonds . 2002 . Modeling co - creativity in art and technology . In Proceedings of the 4th conference on Creativity & cognition . 134 – 141 . [ 7 ] Simon Colton , Geraint A Wiggins , et al . 2012 . Computational creativity : The fnal frontier ? . In Ecai , Vol . 12 . Montpelier , 21 – 26 . [ 8 ] Katherine Crowson , Stella Biderman , Daniel Kornis , Dashiell Stander , Eric Halla - han , Louis Castricato , and Edward Raf . 2022 . Vqgan - clip : Open domain image generation and editing with natural language guidance . In Computer Vision – ECCV 2022 : 17th European Conference , Tel Aviv , Israel , October 23 – 27 , 2022 , Proceedings , Part XXXVII . Springer , 88 – 105 . [ 9 ] Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi . 1988 . Society , culture and person : A system view of creativity . The Nature of Creativity ( New York : Cambridge University Press , 1988 ) ( 1988 ) , 325 – 339 . [ 10 ] Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi . 1997 . Flow and creativity . Namta Journal 22 , 2 ( 1997 ) , 60 – 97 . 1995 When is a Tool a Tool ? User Perceptions of System Agency in Human – AI Co - Creative Drawing DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA [ 11 ] Nicholas Davis , Chih - PIn Hsiao , Kunwar Yashraj Singh , Lisa Li , Sanat Moningi , and Brian Magerko . 2015 . Drawing apprentice : An enactive co - creative agent for artistic collaboration . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition . 185 – 186 . [ 12 ] Nicholas Mark Davis . 2013 . Human - computer co - creativity : Blending human and computational creativity . In Ninth Artifcial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment Conference . [ 13 ] Sebastian Deterding , Jonathan Hook , Rebecca Fiebrink , Marco Gillies , Jeremy Gow , Memo Akten , Gillian Smith , Antonios Liapis , and Kate Compton . 2017 . Mixed - initiative creative interfaces . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 628 – 635 . [ 14 ] Kees Dorst . 2006 . Design problems and design paradoxes . Design issues 22 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 4 – 17 . [ 15 ] Mathias Eitz , Kristian Hildebrand , Tamy Boubekeur , and Marc Alexa . 2010 . Sketch - based image retrieval : Benchmark and bag - of - features descriptors . IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 17 , 11 ( 2010 ) , 1624 – 1636 . [ 16 ] Jonathan Ericson . 2022 . Reimagining the Role of Friction in Experience Design . Journal of User Experience Vol 17 , 4 ( 2022 ) . [ 17 ] Catherine Flick and Kyle Worrall . 2022 . The Ethics of Creative AI . In The Language of Creative AI : Practices , Aesthetics and Structures . Springer , 73 – 91 . [ 18 ] Kevin Frans , LB Soros , and Olaf Witkowski . 2021 . Clipdraw : Exploring text - to - drawing synthesis through language - image encoders . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2106 . 14843 ( 2021 ) . [ 19 ] Leon A Gatys , Alexander S Ecker , and Matthias Bethge . 2016 . Image style transfer using convolutional neural networks . In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 2414 – 2423 . [ 20 ] Gabriela Goldschmidt . 1991 . The dialectics of sketching . Creativity research journal 4 , 2 ( 1991 ) , 123 – 143 . [ 21 ] Graham Harman . 2011 . Tool - being : Heidegger and the metaphysics of objects . Open Court . [ 22 ] James Hollan , Edwin Hutchins , and David Kirsh . 2000 . Distributed cognition : toward a new foundation for human - computer interaction research . ACM Trans - actions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 7 , 2 ( 2000 ) , 174 – 196 . [ 23 ] Edwin L Hutchins , James D Hollan , and Donald A Norman . 1985 . Direct manipu - lation interfaces . Human – computer interaction 1 , 4 ( 1985 ) , 311 – 338 . [ 24 ] Francisco Ibarrola , Tomas Lawton , and Kazjon Grace . 2022 . A collaborative , interactive and context - aware drawing agent for co - creative design . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2209 . 12588 ( 2022 ) . [ 25 ] Syed Muhammad Israr and Feng Zhao . 2022 . Customizing GAN Using Few - shot Sketches . In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Multimedia . 2229 – 2238 . [ 26 ] Kenneth M Kahn . 1978 . Ani : am example of computational creativity . In Proceed - ings of the 1978 AISB / GI Conference on Artifcial Intelligence . 164 – 168 . [ 27 ] Anna Kantosalo , Prashanth Thattai Ravikumar , Kazjon Grace , and Tapio Takala . 2020 . Modalities , styles and strategies : An interaction framework for human - computer co - creativity . . In ICCC . 57 – 64 . [ 28 ] Victor Kaptelinin and Bonnie Nardi . 2012 . Activity theory in HCI : Fundamentals and refections . Synthesis Lectures Human - Centered Informatics 5 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 1 – 105 . [ 29 ] Pegah Karimi , Kazjon Grace , Nicholas Davis , and Mary Lou Maher . 2018 . Cre - ative sketching apprentice : Supporting conceptual shifts in sketch ideation . In International Conference on - Design Computing and Cognition . Springer , 721 – 738 . [ 30 ] Pegah Karimi , Kazjon Grace , Mary Lou Maher , and Nicholas Davis . 2018 . Evaluating creativity in computational co - creative systems . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1807 . 09886 ( 2018 ) . [ 31 ] Veronika Köbberling and Peter P Wakker . 2005 . An index of loss aversion . Journal of Economic Theory 122 , 1 ( 2005 ) , 119 – 131 . [ 32 ] Robert Komaniecki . 2017 . Analyzing collaborative fow in rap music . Music Theory Online 23 , 4 ( 2017 ) . [ 33 ] Glenn E Krasner , Stephen T Pope , et al . 1988 . A description of the model - view - controller user interface paradigm in the smalltalk - 80 system . Journal of object oriented programming 1 , 3 ( 1988 ) , 26 – 49 . [ 34 ] Max Kreminski , Isaac Karth , Michael Mateas , and Noah Wardrip - Fruin . 2022 . Evaluating mixed - initiative creative interfaces via expressive range coverage analysis . . In IUI Workshops . 34 – 45 . [ 35 ] Tomas Lawton , Francisco J Ibarrola , Dan Ventura , and Kazjon Grace . 2023 . Draw - ing with Reframer : Emergence and Control in Co - Creative AI . In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . 264 – 277 . [ 36 ] Tzu - Mao Li , Michal Lukáč , Michaël Gharbi , and Jonathan Ragan - Kelley . 2020 . Diferentiable vector graphics rasterization for editing and learning . ACM Trans - actions on Graphics 39 , 6 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 15 . [ 37 ] Pattie Maes and Robyn Kozierok . 1993 . Learning interface agents . In AAAI , Vol . 93 . 459 – 465 . [ 38 ] Mary Lou Maher and Josiah Poon . 1996 . Modeling design exploration as co - evolution . Computer - Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 11 , 3 ( 1996 ) , 195 – 209 . [ 39 ] Susan Mohammed , Gül Okudan , and Madara Ogot . 2006 . Tolerance for ambiguity : An investigation on its efect on student design performance . In 2006 Annual Conference & Exposition . 11 – 1343 . [ 40 ] Allen Newell , J Cliford Shaw , and Herbert A Simon . 1962 . The processes of creative thinking . In Contemporary Approaches to Creative Thinking , . Atherton Press . [ 41 ] Lior Noy , Nava Levit - Binun , and Yulia Golland . 2015 . Being in the zone : phys - iological markers of togetherness in joint improvisation . Frontiers in human neuroscience 9 ( 2015 ) , 187 . [ 42 ] Rich Page , Tim Ash , and Maura Ginty . 2012 . Landing page optimization : The defnitive guide to testing and tuning for conversions . John Wiley & Sons . [ 43 ] Taesung Park , Ming - Yu Liu , Ting - Chun Wang , and Jun - Yan Zhu . 2019 . Gau - GAN : semantic image synthesis with spatially adaptive normalization . In ACM SIGGRAPH 2019 Real - Time Live ! 1 – 1 . [ 44 ] Paul B Paulus and Bernard A Nijstad . 2003 . Group creativity : Innovation through collaboration . Oxford University Press . [ 45 ] Alec Radford , Jong Wook Kim , Chris Hallacy , Aditya Ramesh , Gabriel Goh , Sandhini Agarwal , Girish Sastry , Amanda Askell , Pamela Mishkin , Jack Clark , et al . 2021 . Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision . In International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR , 8748 – 8763 . [ 46 ] Aditya Ramesh , Prafulla Dhariwal , Alex Nichol , Casey Chu , and Mark Chen . 2022 . Hierarchical text - conditional image generation with CLIP latents . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2204 . 06125 ( 2022 ) . [ 47 ] Robin Rombach , Andreas Blattmann , Dominik Lorenz , Patrick Esser , and Björn Ommer . 2022 . High - resolution image synthesis with latent difusion models . In Proceedings of the IEEE / CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ( CVPR ) . 10684 – 10695 . [ 48 ] Benjamin Saunders , Julius Sim , Tom Kingstone , Shula Baker , Jackie Waterfeld , Bernadette Bartlam , Heather Burroughs , and Clare Jinks . 2018 . Saturation in qual - itative research : exploring its conceptualization and operationalization . Quality & quantity 52 ( 2018 ) , 1893 – 1907 . [ 49 ] R Keith Sawyer . 2006 . Group creativity : Musical performance and collaboration . Psychology of music 34 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 148 – 165 . [ 50 ] Donald A Schon and Glenn Wiggins . 1992 . Kinds of seeing and their functions in designing . Design studies 13 , 2 ( 1992 ) , 135 – 156 . [ 51 ] Ben Shneiderman . 2000 . Creating creativity : User interfaces for supporting innovation . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 7 , 1 ( 2000 ) , 114 – 138 . [ 52 ] Jonathan A Smith . 2015 . Qualitative psychology : A practical guide to research methods . Qualitative psychology ( 2015 ) , 1 – 312 . [ 53 ] Masaki Suwa , John Gero , and Terry Purcell . 2000 . Unexpected discoveries and S - invention of design requirements : Important vehicles for a design process . Design Studies 21 , 6 ( 2000 ) , 539 – 567 . [ 54 ] Edward R Tufte . 2006 . Beautiful evidence . Graphis Pr . [ 55 ] AM Turing . 1950 . Computing Machinery and Intelligence . ( 1950 ) . [ 56 ] Barbara Tversky . 2002 . What do sketches say about thinking . In 2002 AAAI Spring Symposium , Sketch Understanding Workshop , Stanford University , AAAI Technical Report SS - 02 - 08 , Vol . 148 . 151 . [ 57 ] Yael Vinker , Ehsan Pajouheshgar , Jessica Y Bo , Roman Christian Bachmann , Amit Haim Bermano , Daniel Cohen - Or , Amir Zamir , and Ariel Shamir . 2022 . CLIPasso : Semantically - aware object sketching . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2202 . 05822 ( 2022 ) . [ 58 ] Sheng - Yu Wang , David Bau , and Jun - Yan Zhu . 2021 . Sketch your own GAN . In Proceedings of the IEEE / CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 14050 – 14060 . [ 59 ] Qiong Wu and Kathryn Cormican . 2016 . Shared leadership and team creativity : A social network analysis in engineering design teams . Journal of technology management & innovation 11 , 2 ( 2016 ) , 2 – 12 . [ 60 ] Georgios N Yannakakis , Antonios Liapis , and Constantine Alexopoulos . 2014 . Mixed - initiative co - creativity . ( 2014 ) . [ 61 ] John Zimmerman , Jodi Forlizzi , and Shelley Evenson . 2007 . Research through design as a method for interaction design research in HCI . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . 493 – 502 . 1996