An Empirical Field Study of the Yield Shift Theory of Satisfaction Robert O . Briggs San Diego State University rbriggs @ mail . sdsu . edu Bruce A . Reinig San Diego State University breinig @ mail . sdsu . edu G . J . de Vreede University of Nebraska at Omaha gdevreede @ unomaha . edu Abstract Stakeholders who experience dissatisfaction with a system , even for reasons unrelated to its technology , may decline to adopt it or may abandon it even if there is clear evidence of substantial benefit from its continued use . Yield Shift Theory ( YST ) proposes a causal explanation for the onset , magnitude , and direction of satisfaction responses . . This study of 282 professional knowledge workers in the field doing technology - supported work on real problems finds that the satisfaction responses of the knowledge workers are consistent with the relationships proposed by YST . The relationships held for both causal constructs of YST : shifts - in - utility and shifts - in - likelihood of goal attainment . The relationships held for two objects - of - satisfaction : work processes and work outcomes . 1 . Introduction Stakeholders who feel dissatisfied with an information system , even for reasons unrelated to its technology , may decline to adopt the system [ 1 , 2 ] , or may abandon it it [ 3 , 4 ] , even in the face of credible evidence of substantial benefit from its continued use . Satisfaction responses have therefore become a key indicator of system success [ 5 ] . A satisfaction response is an emotion , defined as a valanced affective arousal with respect to an object , having reference an individual’s goal ( s ) [ 6 ] . The term , satisfaction , is also applied to other constructs , for example , a judgment that needs have been satisfied and constraints have been met [ e . g . 7 ] . This paper focuses on satisfaction - as - emotion . Reports of satisfaction effects the IS literature are complex . Satisfaction responses to systems have been associated , for example , with individual differences [ 8 ] and perceptions [ 9 ] , attitudes [ 10 ] , and needs [ 11 ] to name but a few . People who feel satisfied with their early uses of a system do not necessarily remain satisfied [ 12 ] ; and sometimes the most productive users are the least satisfied [ 13 ] , but other times the most productive users are also the most satisfied [ See e . g . 14 , 15 ] . Table 1 . Effects for Which a Theory of Satisfaction Should Account . From [ 6 ] Phenomenon Definition 1 . Goal attainment effect Individuals feel satisfied on attainment of a desired state or outcome . They feel dissatisfied when the desired state or outcome is thwarted . 2 . Confirmation effect Individuals feel satisfied when outcomes match expectations or desires , and feel dissatisfied when outcomes are less than expectations or desires . 3 . Disconfirmation effect Individuals feel neutral when outcomes match expectations or desires . They feel satisfied when outcomes exceed expectations or desires ; they feel dissatisfied when outcomes are lower than expectations or desires . 4 . Anticipation effect Individuals feel satisfied or dissatisfied when thinking of future goal attainment , even though goals have not yet been attained or thwarted . 5 . Nostalgia effect Individuals feel satisfied or dissatisfied when thinking about past goal attainment or past failure to attain goals . 6 . Differential effect Multiple individuals manifest differing levels of satisfaction upon the attainment of goals to which they ascribe similar utility . 7 . Hygiene effect Individuals feel only neutral or negative about an IT / IS artifact , but never positive . 8 . Mentor effect Individuals feel more satisfied or dissatisfied after discussions with a trusted advisor , even though current conditions have not changed . 9 . Mixed Feelings Individuals experience both satisfaction and dissatisfaction with the same IS / IT artifact . 10 . Attenuation effect Individuals’ satisfacti on responses diminish over time 2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Science 978 - 1 - 4799 - 2504 - 9 / 14 $ 31 . 00 © 2014 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 2014 . 69 492 Briggs , Reinig and Vreede [ 6 ] identified in the IS literature and in the field ten satisfaction effects for which a theory of satisfaction should account ( Error ! Reference source not found . ) Authors have proposed several useful theoretical models to explain the complex variety of satisfaction responses in the IS literature , but none accounted for all ten effects . Goal attainment theories [ 16 , 17 ] , for example , predict that users will feel satisfied with a system to the extent that it advances them toward their salient goals , and will feel dissatisfied to the extent that a system thwarts goal attainment . Such theories have garnered empirical support [ 17 ] , but could not account for confirmation effects . Confirmation theories [ 3 ] predict that users will feel satisfied when systems match or exceed expectations or desires , and predict dissatisfaction when outcomes do not meet expectations . These also have gained some empirical support [ 3 ] but could not account for disconfirmation and other effects in Table 1 . Disconfirmation theories [ 18 ] propose that satisfaction will be positive when outcomes exceed expectations and desires , will be neutral when outcomes match expectations and desires , and will be negative when outcomes do not meet expectations and desires [ 19 , 20 ] . Disconfirmation theories can account for goal attainment , confirmation , and disconfirmation effects , and can also explain hygiene and differential effects . However , disconfirmation theories can only account for satisfaction responses at the time outcomes are realilzed . They cannot account for effects that manifest well before and well after outcomes are known . Further , when expectations differ significantly from desires , disconfirmation theories yield paradoxically conflicting predictions . Each theoretical approach contributed useful insights about satisfaction responses , but none accounted for the full variety of reported effects . Yield Shift Theory ( YST ) [ 6 ] proposes a causal explanation for not only the effects described by prior models , but also for effects the earlier models did not describe or explain . To date , however , YST has not been subjected to rigorous empirical testing . If the logic of YST stands up to empirical scrutiny , it may become a useful tool for increasing the value stakeholders derive from information systems . This paper reports a field study to explore the degree to the satisfaction responses of working professionals using technology - supported work practices are consistent with the causal relationships proposed by YST . 2 . Yield Shift Theory Yield Shift Theory is deductive nomological model to explain the onset , magnitude , and direction of satisfaction responses . Two kinds of statements comprise the theory : assumptions abducting mechanisms that could cause observed variations observed in satisfaction responses ; and propositions , which are functional statements of cause - and - effect between causal and consequent constructs , that must be derivable from the assumptions by internally consistent deductive logic . We summarize YST’s key assumptions and propositions below . The complete logic is derived in [ 6 ] . YST posits that individuals hold multiple goals ( desired states or outcomes ) , ranging from basic survival goals like drawing breath to esoteric self - actualization goals like achieving mastery of a musical instrument . The human mind , however , has limited cognitive resources , and so at a given moment can only process some subset of an individual’s goals . Goals currently the subject of cognitive processing are said to be active goals . YST assumes that a cognitive mechanism automatically ascribes some level of utility to an active goal – a sense of how “good” it might be if the goal were to be attained . YST also assumes that a cognitive mechanism automatically assesses the likelihood that an active goal may be attained . YST further assumes that a cognitive mechanism synthesizes the yield for an active goal that is proportional to its utility , but reduced in inverse proportion to the likelihood of its attainment . Thus , an active goal with high utility but low likelihood could have a yield equivalent to a different active goal with low utility , but high likelihood . YST’s first proposition is therefore : P1 : Perceived Yield . The yield of an active goal is a function of its perceived utility , moderated by the perceived likelihood of its attainment . Figure 1 illustrates YST’s Proposition 1 . Figure 1 . YST Proposition 1 . Perceived yield for an active goal is a function of the perceived utility of goal attainment , moderated by the perceived likelihood of goal attainment . YST further assumes that a cognitive mechanism detects the magnitude and direction of changes ( shifts ) in the overall yield for the set of active goals as a whole , 493 and that it triggers an affective arousal proportional to the magnitude of the shift - in - yield , with a valence in the direction of the shift . An individual might simultaneously perceived a small negative shift - in - yield for one active goal , and larger positive shift - in - yield for another . The net yield shift for the set of active goals would be positive , and so , by the logic of YST , an affective arousal with a positive valence would manifest . YST therefore proposes : P2 . Yield Shift . The magnitude of a satisfaction response is a function of the absolute value of yield shift for the set of active goals . The valence of a satisfaction response is equivalent to the direction of the yield shift . Figure 2 illustrates YST’s Proposition 2 . Figure 2 . YST Proposition 1 . Satisfaction responses are a function of perceived shifts in yield for the set of active goals . The valence of the satisfaction response is in the direction of the perceived shift . If the logic of YST holds , then there are several ways a user might experience a yield shift , and so a satisfaction response with respect to any aspect of a system , its use , or its outputs . For example : 1 . Change the perceived utility of attaining an active goal . For example , a user might learn that a new financial analysis system also includes several faster and more reliable printers that will be available for general use . This might be perceived a positive utility shift , and so trigger a positive satisfaction response . 2 . Change the perceived likelihood of attaining an active goal . For example , a stakeholder who would benefit from a proposed financial analysis system might hear a lukewarm comment about the system from an influential opinion leader , and so experience a negative likelihood shift , giving rise to a negative satisfaction response . 3 . Change the goals in the active set . For example , a user might prefer not to implement a new esource tracking system that would create great value for the organization , but require a moderate increase in work load for users . A mentor might suggest that the event creates an opportunity to demonstrate leadership , and so build credibility toward a desired promotion . Removing the lower - yield work - load goal from the active set and replacing it with the higher - yield promotion goal would raise the yield for the set of salient goals , and so invoke a positive satisfaction response . If the logic of YST holds , then users who perceive yield shifts during the conduct of technology - supported work should experience corresponding satisfaction responses . Such responses should emerge whether the yield shift was caused by a shift - in - utility or a shift - in - likelihood . Two key objects - of - satisfaction for technology - supported work would be the work process - the procedures and tools by which the work is conducted ; and work outcomes , the products of the work . We therefore hypothesize : H1 : People who report more - positive yield shifts with respect to work processes will score higher on a measure of satisfaction - with - process than do people who report less - positive yield shifts . H2 : People who report more - positive yield shifts with respect to work outcomes will score higher on a measure of satisfaction - with - outcome than do people who report less - positive yield shifts 2 . Methods To test YST in the field , we compiled and validated an instrument to measure the causal and consequent constructs of Yield Shift Theory in the context of technology - supported collaborative knowledge work . 2 . 1 Dependent Variables We focused on two objects - of - satisfaction pertaining to technology - supported collaborative work : satisfaction - with - process ( SP ) and satisfaction with outcome ( SO ) . To measure SP and SO , we used two 5 - item , five - point Likert scales that had been validated elsewhere [ 16 , 21 ] . For both scales , a rating of 1 was anchored with “strongly disagree” and a rating of 5 was anchored with “strongly agree . The items in the SP scale were : 1 . I feel satisfied with the way in which today’s meeting was conducted . 2 . I feel good about today’s meeting process . 3 . I liked the way the meeting progressed today . 4 . I feel satisfied with the procedures used in today’s meeting . 5 . I feel satisfied about the way we carried out the activities in today’s meeting . 494 The items in the SO scale were : 1 . I liked the outcome of today’s meeting . 2 . I feel satisfied with the things we achieved in today’s meeting . 3 . When the meeting was over , I felt satisfied with the results . 4 . Our accomplishments today give me a feeling of satisfaction . 5 . I am happy with the results of today’s meeting . These items inquire about satisfaction - as - emotion , and so are consistent with YST’ s definition of satisfaction as a valanced affective response . We did not use questions that asked about the effectiveness or efficiency of the work process or of the quality of the system or the work products , because such questions would elicit judgments rather than emotions , and so would not be useful measures of YST’s consequent construct . We also avoided ambiguous questions like , “ I am satisfied with the outcomes , ” because respondents it would not be clear whether the questions asked about an emotion or a judgment , so results would be uninterpretable . 2 . 2 Independent Variables We developed two 4 - item , seven - point semantic anchor scales to measure the two components of a yield shift : shifts - in - utility ( US ) and shifts - in - likelihood ( LS ) . For both scales , a rating of 1 was anchored with the phrase “much less , ” and a rating of 7 was anchored with the phrase “much more . ” The items in the Shift - in - Utility scale were : 1 . I got ( less / more ) from the meeting than I had anticipated . 2 . I benefited ( less / more ) from this meeting than I expected . 3 . The meeting did ( less / more ) good for me than I thought it would . 4 . I gained ( less / more ) from the meeting than I believed I would . The items for the Shift - In - Likelihood scale were : 1 . The meeting made it ( less / more ) likely that I would attain something I want . 1 All teams used GroupSystems software . 2 . Because of the meeting , I am ( less / more ) likely to succeed on something I care about . 3 . I am ( less / more ) likely to attain my goals because of this meeting . 4 . Due to this meeting I am ( less / more ) likely to get what I want . Consistent with the propositions of YST , these items do not inquire about the magnitude of utility and likelihood perceptions ( e . g . I benefited ( much / little ) from this meeting ” ; “ I am ( likely / unlikely ) to attain something I want ” ) , but rather about changes - in - magnitude of utility and likelihood perceptions ( e . g . “ I am less / more likely to get something I want” ) . If the logic of YST holds , then measures of the magnitude of utility and likelihood perceptions would not be useful predictors of satisfaction responses . 2 . 3 Participants Because YST posits that satisfaction responses relate to the private goals of individuals , we opted to explore the theory in the field among people who had an ongoing personal stake in their work processes and outcomes . The participants included 282 professional knowledge workers distributed among 24 naturally occurring groups . The average age of the participants was 40 . 8 years ( s = 12 . 9 ) and their average work experience was 19 . 2 years ( s = 12 . 6 ) . The groups worked for business , government , and non - profit organizations . All groups participated in workshops to address real problems assigned to them in the normal course of their professional duties . The tasks of the group varied but all included organizational problem solving , such as strategic planning , policy development , organizational restructuring , curriculum development , systems analysis and event planning . The 24 groups ranged in size from 4 to 28 with a mean group size 11 . 7 and a standard deviation of 6 . 9 members . The median group size was 9 members . All groups used the same group support system 1 , and all engaged a professional facilitator to design and conduct a technology - supported collaborative workshop on their behalf . 2 . 4 Procedures We gained the cooperation of several professional facilitators who regularly use group support systems to conduct collaborative workshops on behalf of knowledge workers in the field . The facilitators agreed 495 to administer the satisfaction instrument to participants at the end of their workshops . The professional facilitators designed and conducted the workshops according to their usual practices . At the end of each workshop they asked participants if they would voluntarily take two minutes to respond to the one - page instrument on behalf of university researchers . They told participants that the instruments were completely anonymous , and that participation was completely optional . All instruments were administered on paper . Facilitators collected response forms from the participants and forwarded them to the researchers . Of the 282 knowledge workers in the 24 groups , 265 responded to all 18 items comprising the independent variables . Participants who submitted incomplete responses were eliminated from the analysis . 3 . Validating the Instrument The items in this instrument had been previously validated in earlier studies . The SP and SO items were validated and used in [ 22 - 24 ] . The US items had been validated in [ 23 ] and the LS items had been validated in [ 22 ] . The entire set of items , however , had not been validated together in a published manuscript , and so are done here for the first time . Table 2 shows the results of a principle components analysis with varimax rotation for the set of 18 items . The results suggest a four factor model in which items intended to measure the same construct load heavily together on a single factor indicating convergent validity . Further , items tend not to load heavily on other factors , which indicates divergent validity . The Cronbach’s alpha measure for each set of items ranged from 0 . 925 to 0 . 972 indicating strong interitem reliability . Given strong indicators for convergent and divergent validity , and strong interitem reliability , the validity of the instrument is show to be sufficient to support hypothesis testing . For the purposes of hypothesis testing , the value representing each construct was the mean score of the items comprising the scale used to measure it . 4 . Results We tested H1 an H2 using multiple regression to model SO and SP each as functions of likelihood shifts ( LS ) and utility shifts ( US ) . The results for SP are presented in Table 3 . The overall model was statistically significant at p < . 001 and statistically significant main effects ( p < . 001 ) were observed for both LS and US . The two factors ccounted for approximately 47 . 6 percent of variance in SO . Table 2 . Principle Components Analysis and Cronbach’s α Item Factor 1 Factor 2 Factor 3 Factor 4 Cronbach’s α US1 0 . 274 0 . 338 0 . 268 0 . 774 0 . 954 US2 0 . 279 0 . 334 0 . 324 0 . 776 US3 0 . 276 0 . 327 0 . 282 0 . 788 US4 0 . 307 0 . 295 0 . 326 0 . 767 LS1 0 . 291 0 . 193 0 . 709 0 . 391 0 . 925 LS2 0 . 210 0 . 180 0 . 845 0 . 239 LS3 0 . 194 0 . 257 0 . 834 0 . 227 LS4 0 . 145 0 . 252 0 . 846 0 . 190 SP1 0 . 826 0 . 320 0 . 168 0 . 215 0 . 951 SP2 0 . 706 0 . 303 0 . 280 0 . 335 SP3 0 . 794 0 . 285 0 . 252 0 . 270 SP4 0 . 850 0 . 240 0 . 169 0 . 217 SP5 0 . 833 0 . 348 0 . 179 0 . 19 SO1 0 . 417 0 . 760 0 . 246 0 . 266 . 972 SO2 0 . 394 0 . 778 0 . 239 0 . 305 SO3 0 . 303 0 . 804 0 . 258 0 . 314 SO4 0 . 335 0 . 773 0 . 310 0 . 319 SO5 0 . 333 0 . 793 0 . 245 0 . 328 Notes : N = 265 . Principle components analysis used varimax rotation . Rotated Eigenvalues : 4 . 38 , 4 . 13 , 3 . 56 , 3 . 50 . Utility Shift ( US ) items are US1 to US4 , Liklihood Shift ( LS ) items are LS1 to LS4 , satisfaction with meeting process ( SP ) items are SP1 to SP5 , and satisfaction with meeting outcome ( SO ) items are SO1 to SO5 . Boldface indicates the heaviest factor loading for an item . Table 3 . Multiple Regression Results for Satisfaction with Process Parameter Estimates : Β s . e . Model fit Intercept 1 . 97 (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) 0 . 24 F ( 2 , 262 ) = 119 . 03 (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) R 2 = 0 . 476 adjusted R 2 = 0 . 472 Utility - Shift 0 . 53 (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) 0 . 06 Likelihood - Shift 0 . 21 (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) 0 . 06 Notes : N = 265 , (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) p < . 001 We tested for the possibility of an interaction effect between LS and US , a relationship that would not be consistent with the logic of YST . Results were not 496 statistically significant and the interaction variable was subsequently dropped from the model . The results for SO are presented in Table 4 . The overall model was statistically significant at p < . 001 and statistically significant main effects ( p < . 001 ) were observed for both LS and US . The two factors accounted for approximately 59 . 1 percent of variance in SO . We tested for the possibility of an interaction effect between LS and US , which would not be consistent with the logic of YST . Results were not statistically significant and the interaction variable was subsequently dropped from the model . Thus , both H1 and H2 were supported for both objects of satisfaction . The effect size was greater for SO than for SP . In both models the utility - shift variable appears to play a greater role in determining satisfaction responses than does the likelihood - shift variable . That is , a one - point average increase in a participant’s response to the US items will generate a 0 . 53 increase in SP , and . 64 increase in the estimated SO whereas a similar one point increase in a participant’s response to the LS items will generate a more modest increase of 0 . 21 in SP and 0 . 24 in LU . Thus , while the regression results supported the hypotheses , they also reveal potential differences in the strength of the relationships between the independent variables and dependent variables . 5 . Discussion Under the conditions of this study , the observed relationships between yield shifts and satisfaction responses were consistent with the theoretical relationships proposed by the Yield Shift Theory of Satisfaction ; the magnitude and direction of satisfaction responses were consistent with the predictions of theory . The more positive were the reported yield shifts , the more positive the satisfaction responses tended to be . Likewise , the more negative were the yield shift they reported , the more negative the satisfaction responses tended to be . The predicted relationships held for both independent variables – likelihood shifts and utility shifts . They also held for two different objects - of - satisfaction : work process and work outcomes . Thus , the study provides empirical support for the theory . If subsequent studies add support the theory , then YST may become a useful tool for the designers and managers of information systems . YST suggests that designers could probe the dissatisfaction responses of Table 4 . Multiple Regression Results for Satisfaction with Outcome Parameter Estimates : Β s . e . Model fit Intercept 0 . 86 (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) 0 . 22 F ( 2 , 262 ) = 189 . 28 (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) R 2 = 0 . 591 adjusted R 2 = 0 . 588 Utility - Shift 0 . 64 (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) 0 . 06 Likelihood - Shift 0 . 24 (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) 0 . 06 Notes : N = 265 , (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) p < . 001 stakeholders toward existing systems and proposed system requirements . If the goals underlying those responses can be routinely surfaced , then designers can make design choices to support those goals , and so increase the value the system creates for stakeholders . Mangers of information systems may also find YST useful , for example , in planning the roll - out IS innovations in ways that produce positive satisfaction responses , and so increase the likelihood of adoption and diffusion . Roll - out planning could begin early in the project with stakeholder analysis to learn the stakeholders current goals , and , if necessary , to get them focused on other , higher - yield goals that the system might serve . It is intriguing to note that , under the conditions of this study , for both objects - of - satisfaction , the measures of Utility Shift were stronger predictors of reported satisfaction than were measures Likelihood Shifts . It is also interesting to note that the strengths of associations between independent and dependent variables varied from object - to object - of - satisfaction . It would be useful to conduct further studies under other conditions , with other dependent and independent variables , among different populations and with other objects - of - satisfaction to discover how consistent these patterns may be , and perhaps to fuel further development of the theory . This study has several limitations that could also be addressed with further research . The study gathered data from people in a single culture – the United States . If the logic of YST is sound , then the relationships it posits should hold across cultures . Additional research is warranted , therefore , to gather similar data to test the theory in other cultures . This study also measured , rather than manipulating the causal construct . It verifies predicted associations among constructs , but its design is not sufficient to assert causal direction . It 497 would therefore be useful to follow up with experimental studies to test the theory’s proposit ions . Finally , the term , “satisfaction , ” labels an affective arousal toward some object . The physiological indicators of affective arousal , however , are indistinguishable regardless of label – fear , joy , anger , or relief all manifest with , for example , increased heart rate , respiration , pupil dilation , and galvanic skin responses . Additional research may be warranted to explore whether the causal mechanisms proposed here to explain satisfaction responses could be generalized to a theory of affective responses . 6 . Conclusions This study provides empirical support for the Yield Shift Theory of Satisfaction , but more empirical research will be required under a variety of condition to validate its scientific utility . 7 . References 1 . Bailey , J . E . and S . W . Pearson , Development of a Tool for Measuring and Analysing Computer User Satisfaction . Management Science , 1983 . 29 ( 5 ) : p . 530 - 545 . 2 . Ives , B . , M . H . Olson , and J . J . Baroudi , The Measurment of User Information Satisfaction . Communications of the ACM , 1983 . 26 ( 10 ) : p . 785 - 793 . 3 . Bhattacherjee , A . , Understanding information systems continuance : An expectation - confirmation model . Management Information Systems Quarterly , 2001 . 25 ( 3 ) : p . 351 - 370 . 4 . Te ' eni , D . and R . Feldman , Performance and satisfaction in adaptive websites : An experiment on searches within a task - adapted website . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 2001 . 2 ( 1 ) : p . 1 - 30 . 5 . Petter , S . , W . DeLone , and E . McLean , Measuring information systems success : models , dimensions , measures , and interrelationships . European Journal of Information Systems , 2008 . 17 ( 3 ) : p . 236 - 263 . 6 . Briggs , R . O . , B . A . Reinig , and G . J . de Vreede , The Yield Shift Theory of Satisfaction and its application to the IS / IT domain . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 2008 . 9 ( 5 ) : p . 267 - 293 . 7 . Powers , R . F . and G . W . Dixon , MIS Project Management : Myths , Opinions , and Reality . California Management Review , 1973 . 15 ( 3 ) : p . 147 - 156 . 8 . Lu , H . P . and M . J . Chiou , The impact of individual differences on e - learning system satisfaction : A contingency approach . British Journal of Educational Technology , 2010 . 41 ( 2 ) : p . 307 - 323 . 9 . Lukaszewski , K . M . , D . L . Stone , and E . F . Stone - Romero , The effects of the ability to choose the type of human resources system on perceptions of invasion of privacy and system satisfaction . Journal of Business and Psychology , 2008 . 23 ( 3 - 4 ) : p . 73 - 86 . 10 . Liaw , S . - S . , G . - D . Chen , and H . - M . Huang , Users’ attitudes toward Web - based collaborative learning systems for knowledge management . Computers & Education , 2008 . 50 ( 3 ) : p . 950 - 961 . 11 . Jiang , Y . , J . Shang , and Y . Liu , Maximizing customer satisfaction through an online recommendation system : A novel associative classification model . Decision Support Systems , 2010 . 48 ( 3 ) : p . 470 - 479 . 12 . Liu , V . and M . Khalifa , Determinants of satisfaction at different adoption stages of Internet - based services . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 2003 . 4 ( 1 ) : p . 12 . 13 . Connolly , T . , L . M . Jessup , and J . S . Valacich , Effects of Anonymity and Evaluative Tone on Idea Generation in Computer - Mediated Groups . Management Science , 1990 . 36 ( 6 ) : p . 689 - 703 . 14 . Fjermestad , J . and S . R . Hiltz , An Assessment of Group Support Systems Experimental Research : Methodology and Results . Journal Of Management Information Systems , 1999 . 15 ( 3 ) : p . 7 - 149 . 15 . Fjermestad , J . and S . R . Hiltz , A Descriptive Evaluation of Group Support Systems Case and Field Studies . Journal Of Management Information Systems , 2001 . 17 ( 3 ) : p . 115 - 159 . 16 . Briggs , R . O . , B . A . Reinig , and G . J . de Vreede , Meeting Satisfaction for Technology Supported Groups : An Empirical Validation of a Goal - Attainment Model . Small Group Research , 2006 . 37 ( 6 ) : p . 1 - 26 . 17 . Reinig , B . A . , Toward an understanding of satisfaction with the process and outcomes of teamwork . Journal of Management Information Systems , 2003 . 19 ( 4 ) : p . 65 - 83 . 18 . Oliver , R . L . , Satisfaction : A behavioral perspective on the consumer . 2009 : ME Sharpe Inc . 19 . McKinney , V . , K . Yoon , and F . W . Zahedi , The Measurement of Web - Customer Satisfaction : An Expectation and Disconfirmation 498 Approach . Information Systems Research , 2002 . 13 ( 3 ) : p . 296 - 315 . 20 . Oliver , R . , A cognitive model of the antecedents and consequences of satisfaction decisions . Journal of marketing research , 1980 . 17 ( 4 ) : p . 460 - 469 . 21 . Reinig , B . A . , R . O . Briggs , and G . J . de Vreede , A cross - cultural investigation of the goal - attainment - likelihood construct and its effect on satisfaction with technology - supported collaboration , in Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 2008 , IEEE . p . 1 - 10 on CD . 22 . Reinig , B . A . , R . O . Briggs , and G . - J . De Vreede , Satisfaction as a function of perceived change in likelihood of goal attainment : A cross - cultural study . International Journal of e - Collaboration ( IJeC ) , 2009 . 5 ( 2 ) : p . 61 - 74 . 23 . Vreede , G . - J . d . , B . A . Reinig , and R . O . Briggs , e - Collaboration Satisfaction : Empirical Field Studies of Disconfirmation Theory Across Two Cultures . 2008 . 24 . Briggs , R . O . , B . A . Reinig , and G . - J . de Vreede , Meeting Satisfaction for Technology - Supported Groups An Empirical Validation of a Goal - Attainment Model . Small Group Research , 2006 . 37 ( 6 ) : p . 585 - 611 . 499