THE JOURNAL OF THE LEARNING SCIENCES , 10 ( 4 ) , 417446 Copyright O 2001 , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Learning by Analogical Bootstrapping Kenneth J . Kurtz , Chun - Hui Miao , and Dedre Gentner Department of Psychology Northwestern University Analogies are typically drawn from a well - understood situation to a situation that is poorly understood . In this research , we investigate a different route to analogical in - sight . We suggest that mutual alignment - that is , comparison between 2 partially un - derstood situations - - can act to promote comprehension and abstraction . We pre - sented participants with 2 analogous scenarios depicting heat flow . They were given processing tasks that varied in the degree to which comparison was required . We then measured insight into the common structure in 3 ways . Participants were asked to ( a ) specify differences between the 2 pictured scenarios , ( b ) write scenario descriptions , and ( c ) rate the similarity of the 2 scenarios . The results show that carrying out com - parison promotes greater insight into the common causal structure , but only when the comparison is intensive . The best results were obtained when participants were asked to jointly interpret the scenarios and to list specific correspondences . In a second ex - periment designed to further pinpoint the source of the comparison advantage , partici - pants were asked to make correspondences between the elements of the 2 scenarios . These results suggest that mutual alignment is an effective means of promoting in - sight . The ability to think analogically is central to human cognition . Progress in scien - tific and technological domains often arises from the discovery of a profound analogy such as the planetary model of atomic structure , the water flow analogy of heat transfer , and the computer metaphor of the human mind ( Gentner et al . , 1997 ; Hesse , 1966 ; Nersessian , 1992 ; Thagard , 1992a ) . Dunbar ( 1 993 , 1995 ) suggested , on the basis of his studies of the behavior of scientists in real - world microbiology laboratories , that analogy use is positively correlated with success - ful scientific investigation . Correspondence and requests for reprints should be sent to Kenneth J . Kurtz , Department of Psychol - ogy , NorthwestemUniversity , 2029 Sheridan Road , Evanston , K . 60208 - 2710 . E - mail : kjk @ nwu . edu 4 1 8 KURTZ , MIAO , GENTNER Research on analogical processing and case - based reasoning shows the impor - tance of analogy in learning and understanding ( Holyoak & Thagard , 1995 ; Kolodner , 1993 , 1997 ; Nersessian , 1992 ; Reed , 1987 ; Reeves & Weisberg , 1994 ; Ross , 1984 , 1986 ; Thagard , 1992b ) . Students can often understand a novel situa - tion by transferring knowledge from a well - understood situation ( Pirolli & Ander - son , 1985 ; Polya , 1945 ; Riesbeck & Schank , 1989 ) . Ross ( 1987 ) found that giving learners analogical examples to illustrate a probability principle facilitated their later use of the probability formula to solve other problems . In sum , there is good evidence that analogy can serve as a powerful learning tool . The standard approach to analogical learning involves mapping information from a base - a well - understood domain that serves as the information source - to a less familiar target . The base analog is assumed to be rich in information and to have well - understood relational structure ; in contrast , the target is not well under - stood . In this article , we explore another kind of analogical learning , which we call mutual alignment or analogical encoding ( see Ferguson , 1994 ; Ferguson & Forbus , 1996 ) . In mutual alignment , the learner is simultaneously presented with two analogous situations that act symmetrically in the mapping process : Both serve as potential sources and recipients of information . We suggest that this kind of comparison between two partially understood situations can lead to noticing parallel structure and developing a deeper understanding of both situations . There are several reasons for exploring mutual alignment as an alternative to the standard base - to - target mapping paradigm . In the traditional framework , re - trieval is typically required ; examples are presented in isolation and it is assumed that learners will draw on appropriate prior examples when they are given a new target problem . On this account , analogical learning involves being reminded of prior problems . However , it has been shown that learners frequently fail to transfer relevant stored knowledge ( e . g . , Perfetto , Bransford , & Franks , 1983 ; Ross , 1989 ; Weisberg , DiCamillo , & Phillips , 1978 ) . Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 ) showed that participants given an insight problem typically failed to solve it , even when they had just read a story with an analogous solution . Eighty percent of participants failed to spontaneously retrieve the analogy despite being able to recognize the analogy when reminded of the prior story . Even under conditions of recent , salient exposure to an applicable base problem , spontaneous relational retrieval is un - likely . The difficulty of transfer has been interpreted in terms of a dissociation be - tween the kind of similarity that governs access to long - term memory and the simi - larity that is used in evaluating and reasoning from a present analogical match ( Gentner , Rattermann , & Forbus , 1993 ; Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ; Ross , 1989 ) . Whereas accuracy of transfer depends critically on the degree of structural match , memory retrieval is highly sensitive to surface similarity such as common object attributes and problem context . As a result , people often fail to access structurally appropriate materials key to analogical understanding , even when such materials are present in long - term memory ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ) . Apart from the difficulty of retrieval , there are further reasons why learning based on analogical processing can be hard . Whereas the main purpose of analogy is to transfer relational structure from the base to the target , the base typically also includes surface details and irrelevant content in addition to the usefil relational information . Accordingly , even when a useful base is readily available , a novice learner may not be able to clearly pick out the common structure and apply it in the target domain ( Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Novick & Holyoak , 1991 ) . In some cir - cumstances , a bridging analogy that shares similarity with both the base and the target can help the learners to understand the analogical structure ( Clement , 1993 ) , but finding an appropriate such analogy can itself be a formidable task . We propose mutual alignment as a means of escaping such difficulties while preserving many of the benefits of analogical processing . This view emphasizes comparison as an encoding process . In mutual alignment the learner is simulta - neously presented with two analogous situations that act symmetrically in the mapping process : Both can serve as sources and recipients of information . Under these conditions , comparison between two partially understood situations can lead to noticing parallel structure and developing a deeper understanding of both situa - tions . There is some existing evidence that comparison can facilitate learning . Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 ) found that instructing participants to describe the similarities between two analogs led to formation of abstract schemas and facilitated transfer to a further problem . Catrambone and Holyoak ( 1989 ) showed that inducing par - ticipants to compare multiple examples improved performance on long - term transfer across contexts . Cumrnins ( 1992 ) found that when learners were given questions that required comparison of analogous problems , they developed deeper understanding of the solution principles than did learners who received an equal number of noncomparison questions . Schwartz and Bransford ( 1998 ) conducted classroom studies to show that inducing learners to generate distinctions between contrasting cases led to the development of more differentiated knowledge struc - tures . Loewenstein , Thompson , and Gentner ( 1 999 ) found that graduate manage - ment students who compared two analogical cases were nearly three times more likely to incorporate the common strategy into a subsequent negotiation task than were students given the same cases separately . These and related findings suggest that analogical encoding can invite abstraction and promote transfer ( see also Gentner & Namy , 1999 ; Thompson , Gentner , & Loewenstein , 2000 ; Vanderstoep & Seifert , 1993 ) . One important factor in analogical encoding may be the depth of the compari - son process . Merely reading or receiving multiple cases during the same session is often not sufficient to produce comparison - based effects ( Loewenstein et al . , 1999 ) . For example , Catrambone and Holyoak ( 1989 ) found transfer benefits only when participants were given an extensive set of directed comparison instructions ; merely giving them multiple source analogs without explicit instructions to com - pare was insufficient to support transfer . For this reason , researchers have sought ways to promote active comparison , especially early in learning . Kolodner ( 1997 ) suggested that using software tools to line up cases or examples next to each other to reveal their correspondences may facilitate the use of analogous cases . In this research , we investigate mutual alignment - whereby partially under - stood examples are compared to engender deeper comprehension - as well as the type of comparison context needed to foster learning in this manner . Novice learn - ers often have mental representations that are weakly structured ( lacking causal re - lations and abstractions , such as understanding the concept of rain only in terms of " getting wet " ) and predominantly focused on surface features , in contrast to the well - structured representations of domain experts ( Chi , Feltovich , & Glaser , 1981 ) . Mutual alignment is proposed as an online means of increasing sophisti - cated understanding and representation through a comparison process according to which key components of meaning are made salient , roles are made explicit , and relations are made evident . Mutual alignment has some advantages over standard approaches to analogical instruction . In one standard technique , the learner is given an analogy from a well - structured base to the desired target case . This technique requires the exis - tence of at least one appropriately structured case that is highly familiar to the learner . Often , such a case is not available . An alternative , more bottom - up ap - proach is case - based training , in which learners work through a series of cases de - sign to reveal the domain principles . Such training may be ineffective if the learner fails to retrieve the appropriate prior case when encountering a new situation . ( This problem may also exist for the directional mapping technique , in that learners must retrieve the base domain on subsequent encounters with the target . ) In mutual alignment , the emphasis is on juxtaposing two alignable situations and inviting learners to actively identify common structure . This juxtaposition is especially helpful for novice learners who are most likely to show surface - driven retrieval ( Gentner , Rattermann , & Forbus , 1993 ) . A further advantage of mutual alignment , which we return to in the discussion , is that it ' s an active and engaging process for learners . The Structural Alignment View The theoretical foundation for mutual alignment is structure - mapping theory . It is widely agreed that analogical reasoning involves setting up correspondences be - tween structured representational elements of two domains and transferring infor - mation guided by the common relational structure ( Gentner , 1983 , 1989 ; Holyoak , 1985 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1989 , 1997 ) . According to Gentner ' s struc - COMPARISON AND LEARNING 421 ture - mapping theory , the defining characteristic of analogy is that it involves the alignment of relational structure . This process is governed by the search for corre - spondences between connected systems of relational predicates . The computa - tional model of structure - mapping theory , the structure - mapping engine , begins blindly with a set of local , mutually inconsistent matches and gradually coalesces these into one or a few deep , structurally consistent alignments ( Falkenhainer , Forbus , & Gentner , 1989 ; Forbus , Gentner , & Law , 1995 ) . In structure - mapping theory , cases are represented in terms of sets of predicates capturing objects , attributes , and the relations that hold among them . The com - monalities and differences between two situations are found by determining the maximal structurally consistent alignment between their representations . A struc - tural alignment is characterized by one - to - one mapping ( i . e . , an element in one representation can correspond to at most one element in the other representation ) and parallel connectivity ( i . e . , if elements correspond across the two representa - tions , then the elements they govern must correspond as well ) . The goodness of the match is not just a matter of the number of matching elements , but also of their structure . People prefer alignments with high systematicity - that is , matches that have deeply interconnected relational systems . Structural Alignment and Learning Structural alignment can serve as a basis for knowledge change ( see Gentner & Me - dina , 1998 ; Gentner & Wolff , 2000 ; Kurtz , Gentner , & Gunn , 1999 ) . The most straightfonvard mechanisms follow directly from mapping : ( a ) highlighting is the process by which relational information comes into greater focus through compari - son , and ( b ) inferencing is the process by which content is added to the representa - tion of a compared case as a result of structured pattern completion . Once the map - ping process is complete , the common structure of the alignment provides a basis for abstraction . Furthermore , cases can be re - represented as part of the comparison process ( Clement , Mawby , & Giles , 1994 ; Falkenhainer , 1990 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ) . Lacking a comparison context , learners may form domain - specific repre - sentations that are highly distinctive and idiosyncratic ( Gentner & Medina , 1998 ) . During comparison , a " drive for similarity " can lead to altering the representa - tional elements of one or both cases toward a common internal vocabulary ( Gentner & Rattermann , 199 1 ) . Re - representation consists of a change during the comparison process of the relational elements used to represent a case . For exam - ple , to presage our current research , a learner might initially represent one situation as " cooking " and another as " melting . " In the course of comparison , learners may arrive at a more uniform representation of the two situations - for example , that in both cases a state change is occurring as a result of exposure to heat . In ongoing re - search , we are evaluating the role of re - representation as a mechanism for flexible mapping based on allowing correspondences between semantically similar , but nonidentical predicates ( Gentner & Kurtz , 2001 ) . These mechanisms underlie mutual alignment as a basis for learning . Con - sider a case in which a learner ' s initial representations emphasize surface details and are partly deficient in causal structure . During comparison , the process of establishing correspondences reveals the maximal structural match between the representations and highlights connected commonalities and differences . Re - representation during mapping can promote uniform encoding of analogs and allow semantically related but nonidentical predicates to be aligned . When a shared connected structure is more extensive in one case than the other , a candi - date inference is generated . Importantly , mutual alignment reinforces and en - hances encodings in both directions . Such enriched representations can then act , either individually or jointly , as a more effective cue for retrieving relevant world knowledge or additional analogs from memory ( Forbus , Gentner , & Law , 1995 ) . Similarity and Difference in the Structural Alignment View Structure - mapping theory has been successfully extended to the study of similar - ity and difference ( Gentner & Markman , 1995 , 1997 ; Goldstone , 1994a , 1994b ; Goldstone & Medin , 1994 ; Gentner & Gum , in press ; Markman & Gentner , 1993a , 1993b , 1996 ; Medin , Goldstone , & Gentner , 1993 ) . On this view , simi - larities and differences are highly interrelated . The output of the comparison process consists of commonalities between items and two kinds of differences : those related to the commonalities ( called alignable differences ) and those unre - lated to the commonalities ( called nonalignable differences ) . For example , " a cat has four legs , but a human has two " is an alignable difference ; the shared dimen - sion of number of legs is connected to the common structure shared by cats and humans . In contrast , " A cat has four legs , but people can talk " is a nonalignable difference ; there is no common predicate nor a common connection to shared structure . Highly similar pairs tend to generate more alignable differences ( ADS ) , whereas less similar pairs tend to generate nonalignable differences ( NADs ) . This suggests that the process of generating differences evokes a structural alignment in which common structure and differences connected to that struc - ture become salient . Thus , paradoxically , there is a close link between com - monalities and differences . People find it easier to list differences for highly similar items than for very dissimilar items ( Gentner & Markman , 1994 ) . Dif - ferences depend on commonalities . This relation takes on importance in the experimental design presented next . Invoking the Comparison Process As we have noted , whether learners derive the potential advantages of mutual align - ment may depend in part on the depth and quality of the comparison process . Many techniques have been used to elicit comparison including physical juxtaposition of examples ( Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ) , using software to generate felicitous align - ments ( Kolodner , 1997 ) , asking for similarityratings ( Markman & Gentner , 1993b ) , asking a set of directed questions ( Catrambone & Holyoak , 1989 ) , asking people to describe commonalities ( Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ; Loewenstein et al . , 1999 ) , and us - ing the same name or language ( symbolic juxtaposition ) to refer to multiple exam - ples ( Gentner & Medina , 1998 ) . There has been relatively little attention to calibrat - ing effects acrossvarious techniques . Therefore , one ofthegoals ofthis research is to further the exploration of different kinds of comparison experience . EXPERIMENT 1 Our chief purpose in this work is to test mutual alignment as a means of facilitating learning and understanding . In addition , we seek to specify the kinds ofcomparison experiences that best promote insight . To test the influence of different types and degrees of comparison experience , our approach is as follows : 1 . Present participants with a pair of analogous situations to invite mutual alignment . 2 . Have participants perform an orienting task designed to encourage align - ment during the process of interpreting and encoding the scenarios . 3 . Gauge the alignment and measure resulting insight into the common causal structure . The stimulus materials in this study are two pictures of analogous scenarios shown in Figure 1 : ( a ) pancakes in a frying pan and ( b ) a coffee cup with an ice cube . Though superficially dissimilar , the two scenarios share the common theme of heat flow . In selecting the scenarios , we made two assumptions : first , that heat flow is the most systematic common structure underlying the two scenarios ; and second , that participants have some degree of prior understanding of the two sce - narios and of the notion of heat flow . Because the two scenarios are quite distinct in terms of the objects involved , the implied goal context ( cooking pancakes vs . something either to do with drinking coffee or a laboratory demonstration ) , and the degree of familiarity , we expected the two cases to be at least somewhat difficult to reconcile in alignment . More specifically , we did not expect the common structure to be noticed effortlessly by the observer - rather , we predicted that to effectively 424 KURTZ , MIAO , GENTNER I Pancakes bang cooked on a gnddle Hot cotlee with a metal bar ~ n on a gas stove . it that has an ~ c e cube at the end . For each of the components of situation B write a comsponding component for situation A . ( but mite as many as you ' d like ) FIGURE 1 Two pictures of analogousscenarios . realize and demonstrateunderstanding of the heat flow theme , participants must actively align the elements and their causal links . The invitationto alignthe situations was varied across four conditions with dif - ferent orientingtasks - that is , processing contexts within which the stimuliwould be interpreted . The control condition served as a baseline and included no orient - ing task prior to the dependent measure of conceptual alignment . Thus , any com - parison taking place would have to occur at testing . In the separate interpretation condition , participantswere shown the two scenariosseparatelyandaskedto inter - pret them individually . In this condition , comparison is availableto the participant by way of temporal juxtaposition , but it is not explicitlyinvited . In thejoint inter - pretation condition , participants were shown the two scenariosside by side on the samepage and explicitlyinstructed to comparethe scenariosand describethem to - gether . By askingparticipants to interpretthe scenariosjointly , we expected that a learning context was provided for them to elicit the common relational structure . Everything is in place for mutual alignmentin thejoint condition , but it remains a somewhat weak manipulation because the task does not specifically require a unifying interpretation - a description could be written that addresses both scenar - ios , but shows minimal integration or mentions only surface features . In the joint interpretation plus correspondences condition ( abbreviated Joint + Corr ) , partici - pants were shown both scenarios together and asked to perform the joint interpre - tation task along with an additional mapping task in which specific correspondences must be assigned between the elements of the two scenarios . The joint interpretation plus correspondence task explicitly requires a comprehensive , global alignment . Accordingly , the Joint + Corr condition was expected to have the strongest effect . The order of the four conditions in terms of predicted likeli - hood of promoting mutual alignment was ( from low to high ) : control , separate in - terpretation , joint interpretation , joint interpretation plus correspondence . After the orienting task , we evaluated the alignment and encoding of the scenar - ios . An obvious measure of alignment is asking participants to list commonalities between the scenarios . We chose not to use a commonality - listing task as a de - pendent measure because formulating commonalities essentially involves an alignment process in its own right - - consequently , effects of the orienting task ma - nipulation might be washed out . Instead , we used a less intrusive difference listing task more likely to follow from previous processing than to initiate a new align - ment . As just discussed , alignable differences tend to be produced more easily for highly similar pairs and serve as an effective measure of alignment . Differences vary in their relevance to the common structure and also in their alignability . By evaluating the kinds of differences produced we can effectively assess the degree of alignment and understanding of the common causal structure . If the participants did not find a natural way to align the stimulus , they would tend to list nonalignable or superficial differences . In contrast , successful structural align - ment would enable participants to notice more alignable differences and more deep and interesting differences that are causally related to the common structure . Raters were asked to judge the quality of each difference produced by partici - pants in terms of depth of causal relevance to the common theme of heat flow . If the orienting task was successful in promoting mutual alignment , then participants should notice more meaningful and causally relevant differences - most of them alignable . To illustrate with an example from the experiment results , the response , " The pancakes are being heated directly from a source of heat . However , the heat in picture B is being transmitted from one substance through a medium to another substance " was rated high because of the clear account to the common structure of heat flow ; whereas another response , " One is heated to be eaten , the other is a drink , " received a lower rating because it is not relevant . As an additional measure of alignment , the differences were also coded based on whether the same dimen - sion was used in both cases to delineate a different between them . To further test the claim that mutual alignment promotes better understanding of the scenarios we collected participants ' written descriptions of one of the sce - narios ( coffee cup with ice cube ) near the end of the session . Such descriptions can 426 KURTZ , MIAO , GENTNER be informative about the learning taking place - - Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 ) found that quality of descriptions predict subsequent performance in tests of spontaneous transfer . This description measure also allows us to investigate re - representation effects . We predict that the conditions that encourage alignment are more likely to show evidence of comparison - driven re - representation in the content of the de - scriptions . After completing the description task , participants were shown the pair of scenarios again and asked to rate their similarity . The judgments of similarity ought to reflect comprehension and shifts in underlying representation . We expect higher similarity ratings to result from deeper alignment , highlighting of common - alities , and increased representational uniformity . Because alignable differences , commonalities , and similarity are positively cor - related convergent measures , the results on these tasks are expected to reveal a com - mon , consistent pattern across conditions . Compared to the difference - listing task , similarity ratings might be less informative about the specifics of alignment , but more straightforward because the results follow directly from the raw data without need for a coding process . We hope to obtain a consistent and comprehensive evalu - ation ofmutual alignment through the use ofthis set ofcomplementarymeasures . METHOD Participants Eighty undergraduate students ( half were students fulfilling a course requirement , half were recruited to participate for pay ) at Northwestern University participated in the study . Twenty participants were randomly assigned to each of the four condi - tions . Materials Each participant received a packet containing the orienting task ( which varied with condition ) plus the set of common tasks including a difference - listing sheet , a drawing and description sheet , a similarity rating sheet , and a science background survey sheet . Two analogous scenarios depicting the common theme of heat flow ( shown in Figure l ) , coffee cup with ice cube and pancakes in pan , were used as the two situations to be compared . The scenarios were presented during the orienting task ( except in the control condition ) and appeared again on the difference - listing sheet and similarity rating sheet . Design and Procedure There were four different orienting tasks run in a between - subject design . Four dif - ferent dependent measures were used , as shown in Table 1 , that illustrate the overall COMPARISON AND LEARNING 427 TABLE 1 Experiment 1 : Design and Procedure Conditions Control Separated Joint Joint + Correspondence Orienting tasks None Separated Joint interpretation Joint interpretation then interpretation ( with pictures correspondence ( with ( with pictures shown together ) pictures shown shown , one at a together ) time ) Common tasks ( measures Difference Listing ( with pictures shown ) of alignment and Coffee cup drawing and description ( no pictures shown ) learning ) Similarity rating ( with pictures shown ) Background assessment Science background survey design and ordering of the tasks . Participants were given the task sheets by the exper - imenter and instructed to fill them out in order . The control group began immediately with the difference - listing task that was their first exposure to the scenarios . The other groups all performed an orienting task before proceeding to the difference list - ing . The separate interpretation group began with an interpretation task - the sce - narios were presented individually on separate pages with instructions to write a de - scription of the scenario . The joint interpretation group started with a joint interpretation task in which both scenarios were presented on the same page . Partici - pants were instructed to write a description as follows : " Please compare these two scenarios and think about what they have in common . Describe what is happening in these two scenarios and explain why . " The Joint + Corr group started with the same joint interpretation task followed by a correspondence task in which they were shown the set of component elements of one scenario and asked to fill in the blanks with the corresponding set of elements from the other scenario . After completing the difference - listing task , participants in all conditions were asked to draw the coffee cup scenario * from memory and to describe the coffee cup scenario ( on the same task sheet ) . Participants were then asked to rate the similarity betweenthe two scenarios on a scale from 1 ( low ) to 7 ( high ) . After all ofthe depend - ent measures were collected , participants rated their own science backgrounds from 1 ( low ) to 5 ( high ) . In keeping with our assumption that participants had some basic understanding of heat transfer , participants who responded in the science back - ground self - rating were removed from the analysis and replaced . In all conditions , the phases of the task were completed without interruption in a single experimental session lasting approximately 10 min . ' This requirement was used to check whether they carefully studied the scenarios . 428 KURTZ , MIAO , GENTNER Results and Discussion A total of 165 differenceswere generated by 80 participants across all four condi - tions : 35 in the separate interpretationcondition , 37 in the joint interpretationcon - dition , 32 in the Joint + Corr condition , and 61 in the control condition . Table 2 shows examples of the differences generated . Rating the Differences ScoringProcedure : A randomized list of the differenceresponses was rated by two laboratory assistants . They had no prior knowledge of this study and were blind to the conditions of the participants . Two differentkinds of ratings were collected : ( a ) the causal relevance of the differences and ( b ) whether the differences were alignable . For the causalrelevanceratings , eachraterjudged the qualityof each dif - ference in terms of its depth of causalrelevanceto heat transfer . Therating scaleal - lowedrespondentsto assign a rating of 0 for ( not relevant ) or a rating from l ( shal - low ) to 7 ( deep ) . To help the raters formulatetheirjudgments of causal relevance , we provided a set of key concepts ( heat source , heat conductor , phase change ) to be used in evaluating the responses . For the alignabilityratings , the criteriaused to code each differenceas alignable or nonalignablewere adapted from the conservativetechniqueused in Gentnerand Markman ( 1994 ) . A listed differencewas counted as an alignable difference if ( a ) the participant mentioned contrastingproperties of the two items ( e . g . , " A hotel is expensive ; a motel is cheap " ) or ( b ) the participant used an explicit comparative construction ( e . g . , " Dogs are bigger than cats " ) . All other differenceswere consid - ered nonalignable differences , includingsimplenegation of one item ' s property as TABLE 2 Experiment 1 : Sample Responses Generated in the Difference Listing Task Differences rated as " deep , interesting " In A pancakes are being solidified , but in B ice cube is liquifying , even though heat is applied and transferred in both situations . ( Joint + Corr condition ) The end product for the transfer of heat for A is cooked pancakes , while in B it is melted ice or water . ( Joint + Corr condition ) Heat is being transferred directly in A and indirectly in B . ( Joint interpretation condition ) . Ice is liquifying , pancakes are solidifying . ( acrossconditions ) Differencesrated as " shallow " or " extraneous " You can eat the pancakes and drink the coffee . ( Separated interpretation condition ) One is being heated , the other is previously heated . ( Separatedinterpretation condition ) B is vertical and A is horizontal . ( Controlcondition ) Situation A is probably occurring in the southern states , situation B in the north . ( Control condition ) applied to the other ( e . g . , " A police car has weapons in it , an ambulance does not " ) . As such , each difference was coded as either alignable or nonalignable . Each rater independently scored each item and then the two raters discussed their judgment to resolve discrepancies . The initial independent causal relevance ratings showed 74 % identical scores on the ( 0 - 7 ) scale ( and 96 % within a range of + or - 1 ) . For a given participant ' s listed differences , the causal relevance ratings were combined to yield the mean score . The initial alignability coding showed 95 % agreement and yielded the number of alignable and nonalignable differences for that participant . The causal relevance rating results of differences . The results of the causal relevance rating are shown in Figure 2 . All analyses were conducted using the conservative technique of an omnibus test supported by post hoc comparisons . As predicted , there was a difference across conditions . A one - way , be - tween - subject analysis of variance ( ANOVA ; 4 levels ) using the mean causal rat - ing of each participants differences as the dependent measure showed an overall significant difference , F ( 3 , 76 ) = 2 . 7 5 , ~ < . 05 . A Dunnett test showed a significant difference between the Joint + Corr and control conditions 07 < . 05 ) . NO other painvise comparisons reached significance levels . The rating results support the claim that mutual alignment can be effectively in - duced by the combined tasks of joint interpretation and correspondence . Although the presented scenarios differed obviously in terms of the objects involved and the thematic context , comparison guided participants toward listing differences caus - ally related to the common theme of heat transfer . This result suggests the efficacy Mean rating of 4 - 2 . 47 2 . 52 - differences 3 - - 2 - - 1 - - 0 Control Separated Joint Joint + Corr Conditions FIGURE 2 Experiment 1 : Mean rating of differences in terms of the causal relevance to heat transfer . of mutual alignment as a bootstrapping process that can facilitate better under - standing of the presented examples by emphasizing the encoding of the common relational structure . The findings also suggest that mutual alignment is sensitive to the nature of the comparison context in the orienting task . In the separate condi - tion , providing participants with the opportunity to compare through sequential presentation and description of scenarios appears to be nearly the same as the con - trol condition of no orienting task at all . The differences listed by participants were rated as more causally relevant to heat flow when they performed a comparison task of joint interpretation , but the effect is reliable only in the Joint + Corr condi - tion . The alignability coding results of differences . The results of our second - ary scoring approach based on the conservative technique for coding differences for alignability are shown in Table 3A . Successful alignment is reflected in the pro - portion of ADS to the total differences ( AD / DAD + AD ] ) . Results are consistent with the claim that an effective comparison led to a higher proportion of ADS , how - ever the finding failed to reach levels of significance , F ( 3 , 76 ) = l . 33 , p > . lo . This conservative scoring procedure is likely to underestimate the phenomenon , so the lack of a reliable difference across conditions may speak to the stringency of this methodological approach rather than the manipulation itself . Rating the Descriptions Scoring procedure . A randomized list of all participants ' descriptions of the coffee cup scenario was rated by the same two laboratory assistants to assess un - derstanding of the scenarios and test for re - representation effects ( see Table 4 for TABLE 3 Experiment 1 : Overview of Mean Scores Results On All Dependent Measures Joint + Corr Joint Separated Control Conditions ( n = 20 ) ( n = 20 ) ( n = 20 ) ( n = 20 ) A . Differences Causal relevance rating of differences ( 0 - 7 ) 3 . 97 * ( 1 . 85 ) 3 . 36 ( 2 . 00 ) 2 . 52 ( 2 . 3 1 ) 2 . 47 ( 1 . 51 ) Proportion of ADS 0 . 72 ( 0 . 40 ) 0 . 59 ( 0 . 44 ) 0 . 53 ( 0 . 43 ) 0 . 48 ( 0 . 27 ) B . Descriptions Causal relevance rating of descriptions ( 0 - 7 ) 6 . 3 ( 0 . 57 ) 6 . 0 ( 1 . 34 ) 5 . 70 ( 1 . 56 ) 5 . 25 ( 1 . 77 ) C . Similarity Rating of similarity ( 1 - 7 ) 4 . 95 * ( 1 . 15 ) 4 . 05 ( 1 . 43 ) 3 . 85 ( 1 . 50 ) 3 . 50 ( 1 . 15 ) Note . ADS = alignable differences . * Significantly different from control . COMPARISON AND LEARNING 431 TABLE 4 Experiment 1 : Sample Responses in the Scenario Description Task " Deep , clear " description Heat is transferred from the ice cube through the metal bar , causing the ice to melt . ( across conditions ) The hot coffee heats the metal bar , which in turn transfers heat to the ice cube causing it to melt . ( Joint + Con condition ) " Shallow " description A metal rod with an ice cube at the end is in coffee . I do not know why . ( Control condition ) A man ordered a cup of coffee . It was too hot . We assume it was a man in his late 30s , and he took out the 12 " metal bar he kept in his pocket and speared an ice cube , so that the ice would not melt into his coffee . ( Separated interpretation condition ) examples ofthe descriptionsgenerated ) . Each rater was askedto evaluatethe qual - ity of each description in terms of depth of causal relevance to heat transfer on a scale from 0 ( low ) to 7 ( high ) . Each rater independentlyscoreda given description , and then the raters discussedthe results . The initial scoringshowed92 % agreement and all discrepancies were resolved by discussion . The causal relevance rating results of descriptions . The mean ratings of the descriptions in terms of depth of causal relevance to heat flow are shown in Table 3B . Althoughparticipantsreceivedno instruction ( explicitor implicit ) to de - scribethe coffee cup scenarioin terms of the heat transfer schema , many included it in their description under comparison conditions . The Joint + Corr group showed the best performance ( M = 6 . 3 ) of all the conditions . Althoughwe did not find sig - nificant differencesacross conditions , F ( 3 , 76 ) = 2 . 0 9 , ~ = . lo , there is a clear trend in the predicted direction . These results are consistentwith our specificpredictions for ordering among the orienting tasks and provide another source of convergent evidence for the role of mutual alignment in fostering understanding of the com - mon structure of the two scenarios . The failureto reach significancelevels in this measuremay reflect a lack of sen - sitivity of the description measure or the scoring procedure . In examining the de - scription results , we discovered that participants who performed a comparison ( joint interpretation and Joint + Corr conditions ) were more likely to use terms re - femng to the causal schema of heat transfer ( heat , transfer , and cause ) than those who did not ( separate interpretation and control conditions ) . After counting the number of participants who used these terms , we found significant differencesbe - tween groups ( see Table 5 ) . For heat , ~ ( 3 ) = 9 . 4 3 , ~ < . 05 . For cause , ~ ( 3 ) = 10 . 41 , p < . 05 . However , for perceptual and descriptive words specific to the coffee cup or ice cube objects ( melt , hot , or cold ) no such difference was found . This differ - ence in use of the schema - relevantterms suggestsa richer and more uniform repre - 432 KURTZ , MIAO , GENTNER TABLE 5 Experiment 1 : Number of Participants Using Key Terms in Scenario Descriptions Joint + Corr Joint Separated Control Conditions ( n = 20 ) ( n = 20 ) ( n = 20 ) ( n = 20 ) Terms referring Heat 19 18 16 12 to the Cause ( because of , due to ) 16 18 10 11 common Transfer ( conduct , transmit ) 12 14 13 9 schema of heat transfer Perceptual and Melt descriptive Hot ( cold ) words sentation of the scenarios . To further evaluate the induction or instantiation of a heat - transfer schema we checked for use of multiple schema - relevant terms in sce - nario descriptions . We found that 48 % of participants in the joint interpretation conditions used all three key terms ( heat , transfer , and cause ) in their descriptions as opposed to 23 % of participants in the noncomparing conditions . The tendency for the comparison groups to invoke elements of a causal schema supports our view of comparison promoting highlighting and abstraction of common structure along with increased representational uniformity . The similarity judgment results . The mean ratings of similarity given by the participants are shown in Figure 3 . The pattern is the same as those found in the difference task and the description task . ANOVA shows overall significant differ - ences , F ( 3 , 76 ) = 4 . 4 2 , ~ < . 05 . Furthermore , Dunnett tests show significant differ - ence between Joint + Con and control condition @ < . 05 ) , and Joint + Corr and sep - arate interpretation condition @ < . 05 ) . No other differences were significant . Participants in the Joint + Con condition judged the scenarios to be more similar than did noncomparing participants with or without an orienting task . The ratings of descriptions and the similarity judgments are consistent with the results from the difference - listing task . The Joint + Corr orienting task appears to promote better alignment and comprehension as measured in the difference listing task , word use in the description task , and the similarity rating task . In contrast , joint interpretation alone nor separate interpretation reliably lead to improved per - formance relative to baseline . To further look into the relation among the dependent measures , we obtained Pearson correlations and probabilities as shown in Table 6 . We took the proportion of AD as a measure of alignment across any kind of commonalities and the causal relevance rating of differences as an indirect measure of alignment along the com - mon causal structure of primary interest . As predicted , these measures were strongly COMPARISON AND LEAR , h ? NG 433 5 - 3 . 85 4 - 05 - 3 . 50 4 - - Mean rating of similarity 3 - - 2 - - 1 . Control Separated Joint JoinWCon Conditions FIGURE 3 Experiment 1 : Mean rating of similarity . TABLE 6 Experiment 1 : Results of Pearson Correlation and Probabilities Matrix Proportion Causal Rating Causal Rating Rating of of AD of Dzflerences of Descriptions Szmilarity Causal rating of differences 0 . 68 * * Causal Rating of descriptions 0 . 33 * * 0 . 30 * * Rating of similarity 0 . 28 * * 0 . 28 * * 0 . 12 Science background - 0 . 05 * * 0 . 03 * * 0 . 07 0 . 20 Note . Number of paired observations was 80 per cell . AD = alignable difference . * p < . 05 . * * p < . 01 . correlated . We also found positive correlations between the causal relevance ratings of the scenario descriptions and the two difference scores with the proportion ofAD and the ratings of causal relevance of the differences . These convergent results lend additional support to the claim that mutual alignment promoted insight into deeper common structure . Additionally , the positive correlation between the similarity rat - ings and the two difference measures is consistent with Gentner and Markman ' s ( 1 994 ) finding that the number of alignable differences listed by participants tends to increase with the degree of similarity of the items . Finally , as shown in Table 6 , participants ' responses in the measurement tasks were not correlated to their self - rated science backgrounds . Therefore , different interpretations by the participants are not simply a reflection of their previous knowledge , but instead are attributable to the experimental manipulation . 434 KURTZ , MIAO , GENTNER EXPERIMENT 2 In Experiment 1 , we found that participants in the Joint + Corr condition performed better than the other groups across a series of dependent measures . However , be - cause two types of orienting tasks were involved in Joint + Corr condition , it is not clear whether it is one of the tasks or the combination that accounts for the finding of effective mutual alignment . In particular , because the joint interpretation ( alone ) group did not perform as well , it might be argued that the correspondence task itself was the driving force behind our pattern of data . We conducted the following experi - ment to test whether the correspondence task would promote alignment without a prior joint interpretation task . In the experiment , we divided participants into two groups . One group only performed a correspondence task , whereas the other group performed joint interpretation plus correspondence task as in Experiment 1 . The ac - curacy ofthe responses generated in the correspondence task serves as ameasure of alignment . For scenarios that are structurally similar , the correspondence task can be chal - lenging . Lacking agoodalignment , participantsmay attend to the superficially simi - lar elements and miss the relational matches . Only good alignment enables the participants to assign correct correspondences between elements of the two scenar - ios . Because joint interpretation provides a context that invites participants to focus on the common structure and relations , we expect it to promote alignment and facili - tate the correspondence task . Therefore , thejoint interpretation plus correspondence group is expected to give more correct responses than the correspondence - only group . METHOD Participants Twenty undergraduate students at Northwestern University fulfilling a course re - quirement participated in the study . Ten participants were randomly assigned to each condition . Materials The scenarios and task sheets from Experiment 1 were used . Design and Procedure There were two conditions run in a between - subject design . The experimenter gave each participant the task sheets and asked them to fill out the task sheets in order . COMPARISON AND LEARNING 435 The joint interpretation plus correspondence group started with the joint interpreta - tion task followed by the correspondence task . The correspondence - only group were given only the correspondence task . Results and Discussion Scoring procedure . Participants ' responses in the correspondence task were scored by the experimenter . The correct answers are listed in Table 7 . We adopted these answers according to the following alignment : Heat is transferred from the gas stove ( coffee cup ) through the griddle ( metal bar ) , causing the batter ( ice cube ) to become pancakes ( drops of water ) . The difference between the mean number of correct answers ( see Figure 4 ) given by the participants in the joint interpretation plus correspondence condition and the correspondence - only condition was reliable , t ( 9 ) = 2 . 684 , p < . 05 . In Ex - periment 1 , there were also 20 participants in the joint interpretation plus corre - spondence condition . To verify the observed pattern , we scored their correspondence responses and obtained comparable results . The mean number of correct responses was 2 . 95 , which is nearly identical to the mean result in the joint interpretation plus correspondence condition in this study . This result provides evidence that the correspondence task itselfmay not be suffi - cient to produce a quality conceptual alignment . Experiment 1 suggests that the cor - respondence task and joint interpretation task can be used in conjunction to help learners focus on the common structure and relational matches . We conclude that both the joint interpretation and the correspondence tasks play a causal role and that the two in combination form an effective basis for learning by mutual alignment . GENERAL DISCUSSION Our principle goal has been to demonstrate mutual alignment as a basis for learning . When participants were led to carry out joint interpretation and corre - spondence , they showed better causal understanding . Compared to the control TABLE 7 Experiment 2 : Correct Correspondences Between Situation A and Provided Elements of Situation B Situation A Situation B 1 . Batter ( or pancake ) 1 . Ice cube 2 . Griddle ( pan ) 2 . Metal bar 3 . Gas stove ( or flame ) 3 . Coffee 4 . Pancake 4 . Drops of water 3 - - Mean number of correct 2 - 1 . 3 - responses 1 - - 0 Joint + Corr Single Corr Conditions FIGURE 4 Experiment 2 : Mean number of correct responses in the correspondence task . condition , this group generated differences more relevant to the causal structure of heat transfer and judged the scenarios to be more similar . The deeper under - standing of the stimulus materials by participants in the joint interpretation and correspondence condition is evidenced by reliably better performance in 1 . Noticing insightful differences between the scenarios . 2 . Using key terms relevant to the heat - transfer schema to describe the scenarios . 3 . Appreciating the similarity between the two scenarios . The evidence provides support for the claim that intensive comparison of two anal - ogous situations leads to mutual alignment and improved encoding of the examples in terms of the common higher order relation of heat flow . In Experiment 1 we found evidence for two components of successful mutual alignment : joint interpretation and correspondence . Inviting participants to con - sider two scenarios together promoted a focus on the common structure and rela - tions . The second component of successful mutual alignment was the correspondence task . In the process of assigning one - to - one correspondences be - tween scenarios , participants had to consider the entire system and make explicit the parallels between elements . We did not see evidence in Experiment 2 that cor - respondence by itself could lead to enhanced understanding . Rather , as expected , engaging learners in more active comparison processes - involving both corre - spondence and joint interpretation - proved more efficacious . Re - representation during comparison has been posited as a mechanism that can lead to common higher order abstractions . We speculate that re - representation COMPARISON AND LEARNING 437 processes may be responsible in part for the higher similarity ratings by the com - parison groups . This result is consistent with the findings of Kurtz ( 1996 ) and Livingston , Andrews , and Harnard ( 1998 ) that category leamers judged items from the same category as more similar than did control groups who did not ac - quire the category structure . Linking examples together by learning their category structure , by successful alignment , or by a combination of these factors may alter the way in which the individual examples are understood . Another line of support for re - representation is the tendency toward convergent word use in descriptions under the joint interpretation conditions . This suggests the possibility that the jux - taposition of scenarios increased the uniformity of the representations . Limitations of This Research One concern in interpreting these results is whether differences in amount of pro - cessing time during the orienting task could be responsible for the pattern of perfor - mance observed across conditions . The entire procedure was self - paced , and we did not time the task . Thus , we cannot rule out the possibility that the tasks that best promoted learning were those on which learners spent the most time . For example , because there was no orienting task in the control condition , poor performance here could be attributable to spending less overall time processing the stimulus materi - als . We note , however , that while the intensity ofthe comparison context increased progressively across the orienting tasks , this might not be the case for time - on - task . The separate interpretation group had to write two descriptions , whereas the joint interpretation group only had to write one . Yet , the data in these conditions follow the pattern predicted by the nature of the task , not the amount of time required . Along these lines , the correspondence listing task ( which in combination with joint interpretation resulted in successful mutual alignment ) is particularly demanding in terms of the depth or specificity of comparison required , but it is typically per - formed fairly quickly . Again , the contribution of the correspondence listing is more easily attributable to the type of processing than to the time spent on task . Overall , we believe that understanding in this task derives from the right lund of processing , rather than merely amassing processing time . However , it would be useful in future research to address this issue by equating time - on - task across conditions . Although the present results provide promising initial evidence , many ques - tions remain . The generality of our findings is limited , because only one set of stimulus materials was tested . In addition , the scenarios we used were self - contained and depicted relatively straightforward conceptual content . In real - world experience , cases tend to be more complex . In the classroom , cases are often presented in rich contexts - as part of a lecture , discussion , or exercise . The effects of mutual alignment within our simple experimental context were encour - aging , but not dramatic . However , we note that , although scaling up is typically a 438 KURTZ , MIAO , GENTNER challenge , it is possible in this case that more intricate materials would reveal larger effects , because mutual alignment should be most effective in learning do - mains rich in relational structure . For example , Loewenstein et al . ( 1999 ) found ro - bust effects of analogical encoding using complex , verbal scenarios . Another basis for cautious optimism about the potential generality of our findings is that struc - tural alignment theory has proven applicable to a broad set of domains : verbal and pictorial , simple and complex . Further research will be necessary to see whether and how this learning technique will extend to a broader range of materials and contexts . Implications for Education The patterns revealed in this study have implications for education and training . In the practice of explaining concepts by analogy , teachers typically give vivid examples as the information base and encourage the students to transfer these examples to solve the problems . However , even when these examples are poten - tially useful , students may not be able to make use of the analogy between a new problem and the example if they are hindered by a superficial distinction ( Lan - caster & Kolodner , 1987 ; Novick , 1988 ; Ross , 1989 ) . According to Catrambone , Jones , Jonides , and Seifert ( 1995 ) , when solving a problem that reminds them of a familiar example , people often reason by analogy to the instance . However , as noted earlier , instances are often retrieved on the basis of superficial similarity ( Gentner , Rattermann , & Forbus , 1993 ; Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ; Ross , 1989 ) . Thus , even though learners may be capable of sophisticated analogical reason - ing , they may be limited to finding superficial commonalities because the re - trieved example contains nothing better . Our results suggest that learning can be promoted by inviting comparison . In - ducing learners to evaluate analogous situations jointly can allow for the discovery of common structure and help people generate a retrieval cue for later use . This is consistent with the suggestion by case - based reasoning researchers ( Kolodner , Narayanan , & Hmelo , 1996 ; Narayanan & Kolodner , 1995 ; Schank , Fano , Bell , & Jona , 1993 ) that libraries of relevant cases be made available to students as they are solving problems , because such cases can suggest issues to focus on and solutions to problems ( Kolodner , 1997 ) . In addition , mutual alignment emphasizes bidirectional processing of partially understood examples , rather than the more traditional approach of analogical transfer from a well - understood base to a poorly understood target . Finally , our findings underscore the importance of going be - yond mere availability or shallow processing of multiple examples . It is important to encourage learners to articulate mappings ; for example , to lay out the full set of correspondences . Clearly articulating the correspondences requires learners iden - tify the objects roles in the global system and label the objects at an abstract level . COMPARISON AND LEARNING 439 Mutual alignment as formulated in this research can be translated into the classroom context . In the context of lecture or reading , case - based learning can be extended to the presentation of multiple examples along with an active com - parison context . Mutual alignment lends itself naturally to active and participa - tory learning approaches as the comparison process requires an active stance rather than passively receiving information . Beyond carrying out comparison ex - ercises during instruction or at home , another approach is to divide students into two groups , each working on different , but conceptually related , problems or do - mains during the activity . The groups can be brought together to interpret the problems jointly and work out the correspondences . Such implementations of mutual alignment may lead to immediate or secondary consequences in class - room learning . Schwartz and Bransford ( 1 998 ) found that the benefits of analyz - ing contrasting cases were revealed in subsequent instruction - the technique was most effective in enabling learning from traditional modes such as reading texts or hearing lectures . Thus , mutual alignment may hold promise as a scaf - folding technique within a broader pedagogical approach . Additional implications of these findings bear consideration . Mutual align - ment may be helpfbl in addressing the inert knowledge problem : Learners often have appropriate knowledge , but fail to use it when it is relevant ( Bransford , Franks , Vye , & Shenvood , 1989 ) . Although the knowledge is applicable in many situations , learners tend to be reminded only in a restricted context and in a narrow domain . Mutual alignment can bypass the difficulty of activating prior analogs by encouraging learners to induce schemas that may help during subse - quent problem solving and improve the quality of instruction and learning ( Faries & Reiser , 1988 ; Ferguson , Bareiss , Birnbaum , & Osgood , 1992 ; Seifert , 1989 ) . Along related lines , learners often make a distinction between everyday life , viewed as a " real - world " situation , and scientific knowledge , viewed as abstract laboratory knowledge ( Clement , 1993 ; diSessa , 1983 ) . For example , in our study , the unusual situation of a coffee cup with an ice cube in it was described by participants as a scientific experiment , whereas the familiar situation of cook - ing pancakes was understood as a real - world example . From this viewpoint , people may be unaware that seemingly distant situations have matching underly - ing structures ( Catrambone et al . , 1995 ; Kaiser , Jonides , & Alexander , 1986 ) . It can be hard to help students comprehend the general principles underlying both a science experiment and everyday life experiences given the variation in con - text and surface details . For example , in the Kaiser et al . study , participants pre - dicted a straight path for water leaving a tube but a curved path for a ball , although both cases are equivalent in physics principles . By encouraging learn - ers to compare everyday situations and scientific situations , mutual alignment may promote deeper understanding and appreciation of the operation of abstract principles in the real world . 440 KURTZ , MIAO , GENTNER Mutual alignment may be helpful in early stages of domain learning . Al - though novice learners may be limited to highly similar cases with large amounts of overlapping information , there is evidence that even a relatively easy alignment may make possible more abstract analogies based on the same rela - tional structure . Using a perceptual similarity task , Kotovsky and Gentner ( 1996 ) showed that 4 - year - old children given concentrated experience compar - ing highly similar , same - dimension figures ( that could easily be aligned ) were then able to process otherwise non - obvious cross - dimensional matches . Thus ex - periencing close alignments allowed children to subsequently recognize abstract relational similarity ( e . g . , a common pattern across the size dimension and the color dimension ) , whereas children without this comparison experience did not show such recognition . This progressive alignment process may help early learners move from concrete representations to more abstract representations ( see Figure 5 ) . A related technique is Clement ' s ( 1993 ) use of bridging analo - gies to move the learner from relative close similarities to a more abstract and less transparent analogy . Despite these various possibilities , there are limitations on the application of the mutual alignment approach . Mutual alignment can enhance understanding , but there must be at least rudimentary prior knowledge to make two - way infor - mation transfer possible . Learning by mutual alignment can succeed without an - alogical retrieval , but it is not bootstrapping from ground zero . Mutual alignment also depends on enticing the leamer into an active process by provid - ing a learning context that fosters deep comparison . Further , if the goal is for a leamer to be able to interpret single target examples using analogical reasoning , mutual alignment serves only as a learning tool toward this ability , not a basis for it in its own right . Further Research This discussion of implications and limitations of our findings raises the question of directions for further research . A top priority is to test the effects of mutual align - ment beyond improving the understanding and encoding of training materials . To test participants ' ability to apply what they have learned after mutual alignment , they should be tested on their ability to transfer their understanding to novel cases . Another approach would involve giving participants a series of questions designed to test the quality and limits of their understanding after mutual alignment . Are dif - ficult or unusual examples more effectively understood after mutual alignment of standard examples ? Another direction for future work is to look more closely at the detailed opera - tion of the comparison process . These data do not hlly pinpoint the role of specific mechanisms acting as component processes within alignment : highlighting , infer - COMPARISON AND LEARNING 441 Same Dimension Different Dimension FIGURE 5 Example of materials used in Kotovsky and Gentner ( 1996 ) . From " Comparison and Categorization in the Development of Relational Similarity , " by L . Kotovsky and D . Gentner , 1996 , ChildDevelopment , 67 , pp . 2797 - 2822 . Copyright 1996 by Society for Research in Child Development , University of Michigan . Re - used with permission . ence , re - representation , and abstraction . To evaluate re - representation , it would have been useful to compare initial representations with later ones . However , in this design , obtaining initial representations of the coffee cup scenario would have interfered with the orienting tasks . Further research is underway to address the role of re - representation in the comparison process . A host of additional questions deserve consideration . How does mutual align - ment compare to other techniques for promoting learning ? Can tasks other than joint interpretation plus correspondence listing be used to implement mutual align - ment ? How effective is mutual alignment with different types of cases including verbal materials or more complex materials ? How does the effectiveness of mutual alignment vary with the similarity of the two analogs ( e . g . , literally similar or highly remote analogs ) ? What level of prior knowledge is optimal for mutual alignment ? Is the technique suitable for novices or for advanced learners ? Is it pos - sible to speed up the path to expertise via mutual alignment ? SUMMARY Analogy is a powerful tool for learning and reasoning . However , a good analogy is often difficult for learners to construct or retrieve . We demonstrate the effi - 442 KURTZ , MIAO , GENTNER cacy of mutual alignment as a technique for fostering learning by intensive com - parison of two partially understood examples . Our results provide evidence about the conditions under which comparison fosters analogical insight by re - vealing or highlighting the common structure between examples . We consider this to be a kind of bootstrapping process as improved understanding of the ex - amples is fostered without the need to find or draw on well - understood cases or sophisticated knowledge structures from memory . Mutual alignment by joint in - terpretation plus correspondence listing promotes richer encoding and under - standing in the laboratory setting - the technique may prove beneficial in facing broad , real - world challenges in teaching and learning . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research was supported by Office of Naval Research Grant N00014 - 92 - 5 - 1098 . The first author was supported by NIH postdoctoral train - ing Grant F32 MH11723 - 02 . This article was partially prepared while the third author was a Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sci - ences . We thank Jonathon Berkowitz for his contributions to pilot efforts , Albert Erlebacher and Jeffrey Loewenstein for suggestions on data analysis , and the Similarity and Analogy group for discussion of this research . We thank Kathleen Braun and Marie Gabrielle Basso for their help throughout the project . In addi - tion , we thank Chris Baxter , Steve Chan , Jason Waugh , and Tasneem Sheikh for their assistance with data collection and scoring . Janet Kolodner , David Uttal , Allyana Ziolko , and two anonymous reviewers provided helpful comments on an earlier draft . REFERENCES Bransford , J . , Franks , J . , Vye , N . , & Sherwood , R . ( 1989 ) . New approaches to instruction : Because wis - dom can ' t be told . In S . Vosniadou and A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 47W97 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Catrambone , R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Overcoming contextual limitations on problem - solving transfer . Journal of Experimental Psychologv : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 15 , 1147 - 1 156 . Catrambone , R . , Jones , C . M . , Jonides , J . , & Seifert , C . ( 1995 ) . Reasoning about curvilinear motion : Using principles or analogy . Memory & Cognition , 23 , 368 - 373 . Chi , M . T . H . , Feltovich , P . J . , & Glaser , R . ( 1981 ) . Categorization and representation ofphysics prob - lems by experts and novices . Cognitive Science , 5 , 121 - 152 . Clement , C . A , , & Gentner , D . ( 1991 ) . Systematicity as a selection constraint in analogical mapping . Cognitive Science , IS , 89 - 1 32 . Clement , C . A . , Mawby , B . , & Giles , D . E . ( 1994 ) . The effects ofmanifest relational similarity on analog retrieval . Journal ofMemory and Language , 33 , 396 - 420 . COMPARISON AND LEARNING 443 Clement , J . ( 1993 ) . Using analogies to deal with students ' preconceptions in physics . Journal of Re - search in Science Teaching , 30 , 124 1 - 1 257 . Cummins , D . D . ( 1992 ) . Role of analogical reasoning in the induction of problem categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memoly , & Cognition , 18 , 1103 - 1 124 . disessa , A . A . ( 1983 ) . Phenomenology and the evolution of intuition . In D . Gentner & A . L . Stevens ( Eds . ) , Mental models ( pp . 15 - 33 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Dunbar , K . ( 1993 ) . Concept discovery in a scientific domain . Cognitive Science , 17 , 391 - 434 . Dunbar , K . ( 1995 ) . How scientists really reasoning : Scientific reasoning in real - world laboratories . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 365 - 395 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Falkenhainer , B . ( 1990 ) . Analogical interpretation in context . In Proceedings ofthe Twelfth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 69 - 76 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associ - ates , Inc . Falkenhainer , B . , Forbus , K . D . , & Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . The structure - mapping engine : Algorithm and examples . Artificial intelligence , 41 , 1 - 63 . Faries , J . M . , & Reiser , B . J . ( 1988 ) . Access and use of previous solutions in a problem solving situation . In Proceedings of the 10th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 433439 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Ferguson , R . W . ( 1994 ) . MAGI : A model of analogy - based encoding using symmetry and regularity . In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual Conference on the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 283 - 288 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Ferguson , R . W . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 1998 ) . Telling juxtapositions : Using repetition and alignable differ - ence in diagram understanding . In K . Holyoak , D . Gentner , & B . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , Advances in anal - ogy research ( pp . 109 - 1 17 ) . Sofia , Bulgaria : New Burlingame University . Ferguson , W . , Bareiss , R . , Birnbaum , L . , & Osgood , R . ( 1992 ) . ASK systems : An approach to the real - ization of story - based teachers . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 2 , 95 - 134 . Forbus , K . D . , Gentner , D . , & Law , K . ( 1995 ) . MACRAC : Amodel of similarity - basedretrieval . Cogni - tive Science , 19 , 14 1 - 205 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 - 170 . Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . The mechanisms of analogical learning . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Simi - larity and analogical learning ( pp . 199 - 24 1 ) . London : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . , Brem , S . , Ferguson , R . W . , Markman , A . B . , Levidow , B . B . , Wolff , P . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 1997 ) . Analogical reasoning and conceptual change : A case study of Johames Kepler . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 6 , 3 - 40 . Gentner , D . , & Gunn , V . ( in press ) . Structural alignment facilitates the noticing of differences . Memoly and Cognition . Gentner , D . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1997 ) . Reasoning and learning by analogy : Introduction . American Psy - chologist , 52 , 32 - 34 . Gentner , D . , & Kurtz , K . J . ( 2001 ) . Mechanisms of mapping : Evidencefrom online analogyevaluation . Manuscript in preparation . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1994 ) . Structural alignment in comparison : No difference without sim - ilarity . Psychological Science , 5 , 152 - 158 . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1995 ) . Similarity is like analogy . In C . Cacciari ( Ed . ) , Similarity ( pp . 111 - 147 ) . Brussels , Belgium : BREPOLS . Gentner , D . , & Markrnan , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psy - chologist , 52 , 45 - 56 . Gentner , D . , & Medina , J . ( 1998 ) . Similarity and the development of rules . Cognition , 65 , 263 - 297 . Gentner , D . , & Namy , L . L . ( 1999 ) . Comparison in the development of categories . Cognitive Develop - ment , 14 , 487 - 513 . 444 KURTZ , MIAO , GENTNER Gentner , D . , & Rattermann , M . J . ( 1991 ) . Language and the career of similarity . In S . A . Gelman & J . P . Byrnes ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on language and thought : Interrelations in development ( pp . 225 - 277 ) . London : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 1993 ) . The roles of similarity in transfer : Separating re - trieval from inferential soundness . Cognitive Psychology . 25 , 524575 . Genmer , D . , & Toupin , C . ( 1986 ) . Systematicity and surface similarity in the development of analogy . Cognitive Science , 10 , 277 - 300 . Gentner , D . , & Wolff , P . ( 2000 ) . Metaphor and knowledge change . In E . Dietrich & A . Markman ( Eds . ) , Cognitive dynamics : Conceptual change in humans and machines ( pp . 295 - 342 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306355 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 - 38 . Goldstone , R . L . ( 1994a ) . The role of similarity in categorization : Providing a groundwork . Cognition , 52 ( 2 ) , 125 - 157 . Goldstone , R . L . ( 1994b ) . Similarity , interactive activation , and mapping . JournaIofExperimental Psy - chologv : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 20 ( 1 ) , 3 - 28 . Goldstone , R . L . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1994 ) . The time course of comparison . Journal of experimentalpsy - chology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 20 , 29 - 50 . Goldstone , R . L . , & Medin , D . L . , & Genmer , D . ( 1991 ) . Relations attributes and the non - independence of features in similarity judgment . Cognitive Psychology , 23 , 222 - 264 . Hesse , M . B . ( 1966 ) . Models and analogies in science . Notre Dame , IN : University of Notre Dame Press . Holyoak , K . J . ( 1985 ) . The pragmatics of analogical transfer . In G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , Thepsychology of learning and motivation : Advances in research and theory ( Vol . 19 ) . New York : Academic . Holyoak , K . J . , & Koh , K . ( 1987 ) . Surface and structural similarity in analogical transfer . Memory and Cognition , 15 , 332 - 340 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1989 ) . Analogical mapping by constraint satisfaction . Cognitive Science , 13 , 295 - 355 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1995 ) . Mental leap : Analogy in creative thought . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1997 ) . The analogical mind . American Psychologist , 52 , 3 5 4 . Kaiser , M . K . , Jonides , J . , & Alexander , J . ( 1986 ) . Intuitive reasoning about abstract and familiar physics problems . Memory & Cognition , 14 , 308 - 312 . Keane , M . T . ( 1988 ) . Analogical mechanisms . Art ~ $ cial Intelligence Review , 2 , 229 - 250 . Kolodner , J . ( 1993 ) . Case - based reasoning . San Mateo , CA : Morgan Kauhann . Kolodner , J . L . ( 1997 ) . Educational implications of analogy : A view from case - based reasoning . Ameri - can Psychologist , 52 , 5746 . Kolodner , J . L . , Narayanan , H . , & Hmelo , C . ( 1996 ) . Problem - based learning meets case - based reason - ing . In E . Domeshek & D . Edelman ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the I996 International Conference of the Learning Sciences ( pp . 188 - 195 ) . VA : American Association for Computers in Education . Kotovsky , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1996 ) . Comparison and categorization in the development of relational similarity . Child Development , 67 , 2797 - 2822 . Kurtz , K . J . ( 1996 ) . Category - based similarity . In Proceedings of the 18th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( p . 790 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Kurtz , K . J . , Gentner , D . , & Gum , V . ( 1999 ) . Reasoning . In B . Martin Bly & D . E . Rumelhart ( Eds . ) , Handbook ofperception and cognition : Cognitive science ( pp . 144200 ) . San Diego , CA : Aca - demic . COMPARISON AND LEARNING 445 Lancaster , J . S . , & Kolodner , J . L . ( 1987 ) . Problem solving in a natural task as a function of experience . In Proceedings of the Ninth Annual Conference ofthe Cognitive Science society ( pp . 715 - 726 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Livingston , K . R . , Andrews , J . K . , & Harnard , S . ( 1998 ) . Categorical perception effects induced by cate - gory learning . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 24 , 732 - 753 . Loewenstein , J . , Gentner , D . , & Thompson , L . ( in press ) . Analogical encoding and relational language in long - term hamfer of negotiation strategies . Loewenstein , J . , Thompson , L . , Gentner , D . ( 1999 ) . Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge transfer in negotiation . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 6 , 58G597 . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993a ) . Splitting the differences : A structural alignment view of simi - larity . Journal ofMemory and Language , 32 , 5 17 - 535 . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993b ) . Structural alignment during similarity comparisons . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 43 1467 . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1996 ) . Commonalities and differences in similarity comparisons . Memory & Cognition , 24 , 235 - 249 . Markrnan , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1997 ) . The effects of alignability on memory . Psychological Science , 8 , 363 - 367 . Markrnan , A . B . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1995 ) . Similarity and alignment in choice . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 63 , 1 17 - 130 . Mayer , R . E . ( 1992 ) . Thinking , problem solving , cognition . San Francisco : Freeman . Medin , D . L . , Goldstone , R . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Respects for similarity . PsychologicalReview , 100 , 25 + 278 . Narayanan , H . , & Kolodner , J . L . ( 1995 ) . Case libraries in support of design education : The DESIGNMuse experience . In Proceedings FIE 5 : Frontiers in education ( pp . 2b2 . 1 . 2 ) . Atlanta , GA : IEEE Press . Nersessian , N . J . ( 1992 ) . How do scientists think ? Capturing the dynamics of conceptual change in sci - ence . In R . N . Giere & H . Feigl ( Eds . ) , Cognitive models ofscience : Minnesota studies in thephilos - ophy ofscience ( pp . 344 ) . Minneapolis , MN : University of Minnesota Press . Novick , L . R . ( 1988 ) . Analogical transfer , problem similarity and expertise . Journal of Experimental Psychologv . . Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 14 , 51C520 . Novick , L . R . ( 1990 ) . Representational transfer in problem solving . Psychologv Science , 1 , 128 - 132 . Novick , L . R . , & Hmelo , C . E . ( 1994 ) . Transfening symbolic representations across nonisomorphic problems . JournaIofExperimentalPsychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 20 , 12961321 . Novick , L . R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1991 ) . Mathematical problem solving by analogy . Journal ofExperi - mental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 17 , 398415 . Perfetto , G . A . , Bransford , J . D . , & Franks , J . J . ( 1983 ) . Constraints on access in a problem solving con - text . Memory & Cognition , 11 , 24 - 3 1 . Pirolli , P . L . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 1985 ) , The role of learning from examples in the acquisition of recur - sive programming skills . Canadian Journal ofPsychology , 39 , 240 - 272 . Polya , G . ( 1945 ) . How to solve it . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Reed , S . K . ( 1987 ) . A structure - mapping model for word problems . Journal ofExperimenta1 Psychol - ogy : Learning , Memo y , and Cognition , 13 , 12k139 . Reeves , L . M . , & Weisberg , R . W . ( 1994 ) . The role of content and abstract information in analogical transfer . Psychological Bulletin , 3 , 381 - 400 . Riesbeck , C . K . , & Schank , R . C . ( 1989 ) . Inside case - based reasoning . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Ross , B . H . ( 1984 ) . Remindings and their effects in leaming a cognitive skill . Cognitive Psychology , 16 , 371416 . 446 KURTZ , MIAO , GENTNER Ross , B . H . ( 1986 ) . Remindings in learning . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity , analogy and thought ( pp . 438469 ) New York : Cambridge University Press . Ross , B . H . ( 1987 ) . This is like that : The use of earlier problems and the separation of similarity effects . Journal ofExperimenta1 Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 13 , 629 - 639 . Ross , B . H . ( 1989 ) . Distinguishing types of superficial similarities : Different effects on the access and use of earlier examples . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memoiy , and Cognition , 15 , 456468 . Rumelhart , D . E . ( 1989 ) . Toward a micro - structural account of human reasoning . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical learning ( pp . 298 - 3 12 ) . London : Cambridge University Press . Schank , R . C . , Fano , A . , Bell , B . , & Jona , M . ( 1993 ) . The design of goal - based scenarios . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 3 , 305 - 346 . Schwartz , D . L . , & Bransford , J . D . ( 1998 ) . A time for telling . Cognition & Instruction . 16 , 475 - 522 . Seifert , C . M . ( 1 989 ) . Analogy and case - based reasoning . InK . I . Hammond ( Ed . ) , Proceedings : Second workshop on case - basedreasoning ( DARPA ; pp . 125 - 129 ) . San Mateo , CA : MorganKaufmann . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1977 ) . Intelligence , information processing and analogical reasoning : The componential analysis of human abilities . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Thagard , P . ( 1992a ) . Conceptual revolutions . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Thagard , P . ( 1992b ) . Analogy , explanation , and education . Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching , 29 , 537 - 544 . Thompson , L . , Gentner , D . , & Loewenstein , J . ( 2000 ) . Avoiding missed opportunities in managerial life : Analogical training more powerful than individual case training . Organizational Behavior & Human Decision Process , 82 , 6 & 75 . Tversky , A . ( 1977 ) . Features of similarity . Psychological Review , 84 , 327 - 352 . VanderStoep , S . W . , & Seifert , C . M . ( 1993 ) . Learning " how " versus learning " when : " Improving trans - fer of problem - solving principles . Journal ofthe Learning Sciences . 3 , 93 - 1 11 . Weisberg , R . , DiCamillo , M . , & Phillips , D . ( 1978 ) . Transferring old associations to new situations : A nonautomatic process . Journal of Verbal Learning Behavior , 17 , 219 - 228 . You have printed the following article : Learning by Analogical Bootstrapping Kenneth J . Kurtz ; Chun - Hui Miao ; Dedre Gentner The Journal of the Learning Sciences , Vol . 10 , No . 4 . ( 2001 ) , pp . 417 - 446 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 1050 - 8406 % 282001 % 2910 % 3A4 % 3C417 % 3ALBAB % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - E This article references the following linked citations . If you are trying to access articles from an off - campus location , you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR . Please visit your library ' s website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR . References ASK Systems : An Approach to the Realization of Story - Based Teachers William Ferguson ; Ray Bareiss ; Lawrence Birnbaum ; Richard Osgood The Journal of the Learning Sciences , Vol . 2 , No . 1 . ( 1992 ) , pp . 95 - 134 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 1050 - 8406 % 281992 % 292 % 3A1 % 3C95 % 3AASAATT % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - L Analogical Reasoning and Conceptual Change : A Case Study of Johannes Kepler Dedre Gentner ; Sarah Brem ; Ronald W . Ferguson ; Arthur B . Markman ; Bjrn B . Levidow ; Phillip Wolff ; Kenneth D . Forbus The Journal of the Learning Sciences , Vol . 6 , No . 1 , Conceptual Change . ( 1997 ) , pp . 3 - 40 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 1050 - 8406 % 281997 % 296 % 3A1 % 3C3 % 3AARACCA % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - % 23 Comparison and Categorization in the Development of Relational Similarity Laura Kotovsky ; Dedre Gentner Child Development , Vol . 67 , No . 6 . ( Dec . , 1996 ) , pp . 2797 - 2822 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0009 - 3920 % 28199612 % 2967 % 3A6 % 3C2797 % 3ACACITD % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 1 http : / / www . jstor . org LINKED CITATIONS - Page 1 of 2 - The Design of Goal - Based Scenarios Roger C . Schank ; Andrew Fano ; Benjamin Bell ; Menachem Jona The Journal of the Learning Sciences , Vol . 3 , No . 4 , Goal - Based Scenarios . ( 1993 - 1994 ) , pp . 305 - 345 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 1050 - 8406 % 281993 % 2F1994 % 293 % 3A4 % 3C305 % 3ATDOGS % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 6 A Time for Telling Daniel L . Schwartz ; John D . Bransford Cognition and Instruction , Vol . 16 , No . 4 . ( 1998 ) , pp . 475 - 522 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0737 - 0008 % 281998 % 2916 % 3A4 % 3C475 % 3AATFT % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 6 Learning " How " versus Learning " When " : Improving Transfer of Problem - Solving Principles Scott W . VanderStoep ; Colleen M . Seifert The Journal of the Learning Sciences , Vol . 3 , No . 1 . ( 1993 - 1994 ) , pp . 93 - 111 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 1050 - 8406 % 281993 % 2F1994 % 293 % 3A1 % 3C93 % 3AL % 22VL % 22I % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - 7 http : / / www . jstor . org LINKED CITATIONS - Page 2 of 2 -