Dimensions of Creative Evaluation : Distinct Design and Reasoning Strategies for Aesthetic , Functional and Originality Judgments B . T . Christensen & L . J . Ball Paper presented at DTRS10 Purdue , 13 - 15 October 2014 Starting point : the definition of creativity Mayer ( 1999 , p . 451 ) “In summary , there is some consensus in the crea ; vity research community concerning what to study : Crea ; vity occurs when someone creates an original and useful product . ” Conceptually vague : implications for the design process ? Framing -­‐ We argue that the dimensions of crea ; ve evalua ; on have underpinning logics linked to assump ; ons of crea ; vity . These logics in turn have consequences for reasoning and sugges ; on making during the crea ; ve process . Focus -­‐ Industrial Design data sets -­‐ We focus on the evalua ; ons and reasoning of the experienced designers -­‐ Evalua ; on in this paper related speciﬁcally to the evalua ; on of pre-­‐ inven , ve structures ( ideas , sketches , prototypes , objects ) , but not to the evalua ; on of persons ( i . e . , students ) or processes . Minimal assumption of dimensions of creative evaluation in Industrial Design . At least 3 high level dimensions : Aestetics Functionality Originality Aestetics Functionality Originality Minimal assumption of dimensions of creative evaluation in Industrial Design . . At least 3 high level dimensions : Aestetics Functionality Originality The logics of creative dimensions ( 1 ) what is the basis of evaluation ? Subjec ; ve assessment Objec ; ve measurement The logics of creative dimensions ( 2 ) what constitutes an idea ? ( unit vs proccess ) Aestetics Functionality Original - ity The logics of creative dimensions ( 3 ) how important is object perception and interaction ? Aestetics Functionality Originality Chair Hypotheses • Comparing aesthetic evaluation to functionality evaluation we predict in the former more suggestions for development through trial and error ( H1a ) , less mental simulation ( H1b ) and fewer suggestions for testing the concept ( H1c ) . • Comparing originality evaluation to aesthetic evaluation we predict in the former less mental simulation ( H2a ) , more ‘go / kill’ decisions for whole concepts ( H2b ) and fewer suggestions for development through trial and error ( H2c ) . • Comparing functionality evaluation to originality evaluation we predict in the former more suggestions for changing elements or forms ( H3a ) , more mental simulation ( H3b ) , fewer ‘go / kill’ decisions ( H3c ) and more concept testing suggestions ( H3d ) . Methods Employed ‘In Vivo’ research methodology ( e . g . , Dunbar , 1995 ; Ball & Christensen , 2009 ; Christensen & Ball , in press ) . Industrial Design data sets ( both Graduate and Undergraduate ) - 13 Student / supervisor pairings ; 39 transcripts Segmentation according to turn - taking during spoken dialogue ( 4316 segments ) Three independent coders , by applying 6 codes in 5 iterations Aestetics Functionality Originality Coding evaluative statements & episodes Evaluative statements : any statement that comments on or evaluates ( either positively or negatively ) the designed product or design idea . Evaluation episodes : a block of segments relating to this evaluation , which contains descriptions and / or explanations of the design idea as well as segments involving further development or reasoning concerning the evaluation . Evaluation episodes are then divided into aestehtic , originality , and functionality episodes . This was – save this for another – this one ' s kinda neat . I really loved how this curved around . ( Undergraduate ; Alice ; 2nd review ; line 121 ) Ya ' know , I love the idea of having accessories that , that can hang from the branches that allow you to customize it and , ya ' know , it supports different functionality . ( Graduate ; Mylie ; Client review ; line 92 ) This one seems a little far - fetched . I mean , like I – like I said , I appreciate the , uh , I appreciate the out , ya’ know , the thinking outside the box , but it’s , I mean , maybe we’re too – in too much reality . ( Graduate ; Eva ; Client review ; line 77 ) Coding of Design Idea Progression Suggestion Go / kill I think you have other stronger concepts . ( Graduate ; Julian ; Client review ; line 29 ) Change form or element And , ya ' know , maybe you add the fragrance thing in and kinda ' take it from there . ( Graduate ; Mylie ; Client review ; line 60 ) Test concept Talking about get a dowel and drill through the – drill through the boTom all the way up , and , and then , ah , with a drill press and then , ah , goTa dowel and see if it actually func ; ons . ( Undergraduate ; Tommy ; Look like ; line 65 ) Search for informa9on Okay . So you goTa do a liTle research . ( Graduate ; Julian ; Concept reduc , on ; line 157 ) Trial and error So play with your forms and dimensions , and then these others which are really , really exci ; ng as independent pieces , that ' s really refreshing . Both these are really fun . Both of ' em have great merit . [ Clears throat ] . ( Undergraduate ; Alice ; 2nd review ; line 177 ) Evalua ; on episodes are coded in 5 subcategories every ; me an experienced designer makes a Design Idea Progression Sugges ; on Coding for mental simulation The running of a mentally constructed model , containing a sequence from an ini ; al representa ; on ; the running of some mental modiﬁca ; on , resul ; ng in a changed representa ; on ( TrickeT & Tra \ on , 2007 ; Ball & Christensen , 2009 ; Christensen & Schunn , 2009 ) Yeah , and then you ' ve got this sort of element . Now one of things when it goes on the ﬂoor , um , you may consider maybe that ' s a have some semi-­‐so \ machinable plas ; c pieces of material . Um , or maybe it could be , um , a – maybe a metal piece or something . I don’t know . But , anyway , we need to have some kind of structure . You won’t , you won’t have narrow enough fabric to the ﬂoor – even if slightly , maybe like wood . Um , so then this , this could be uh wood piece that could be , could be fabric in here maybe it comes down , or something just , keep just , just keeps the [ clears throat ] fabric from touching the ﬂoor and it ' s already kind of moisture or whatever ( Undergraduate ; Adam ; 2nd review ; line 35-­‐37 ) Reliability Code Kappa coefficient Mental Simulation . 71 Evaluation Episodes . 75 Design Idea Progression Suggestion . 68 Evaluation Valence . 86 Evaluation Type . 85 Uncertainty . 90 Kappa coefficients for inter - coder reliability Results Frequencies of dimensions by ; meline Aestetics Functionality Results . Logistic regression predicting evaluation type ( aesthetic vs . functional ) from DIPS and mental simulation B SE Wald df Sig Exp ( B ) DIPS – Test concept 3 . 16 1 . 20 6 . 93 1 . 01 23 . 55 DIPS – Trial and error - 1 . 47 0 . 67 4 . 82 1 . 03 0 . 23 Constant 0 . 11 0 . 19 0 . 35 1 . 56 1 . 12 H1B : ( Mental sim ) , not supported H1A H1C Results . Logistic regression predicting evaluation type ( aesthetic vs . originality ) from DIPS and mental simulation B SE Wald df Sig Exp ( B ) DIPS – Go / kill 1 . 19 0 . 56 4 . 59 1 . 03 3 . 28 Mental simulation - 1 . 31 0 . 69 3 . 60 1 . 06 0 . 27 Constant - 1 . 37 0 . 42 10 . 83 1 . 00 0 . 25 Aestetics Originality H2B H2C : ( Trial and Error ) , not supported H2A Functionality Originality Results . Logistic regression predicting evaluation type ( functionality vs . originality ) from DIPS and mental simulation B SE Wald df Sig Exp ( B ) DIPS – Go / kill 1 . 68 0 . 60 7 . 96 1 . 01 5 . 39 DIPS – Search for information 2 . 72 1 . 28 4 . 52 1 . 03 15 . 18 DIPS – Change form or element - 2 . 17 0 . 82 7 . 05 1 . 01 0 . 11 Constant - 1 . 51 0 . 43 12 . 40 1 . 00 0 . 22 H3A H3D : ( Tes ; ng concepts ) , not supported H3B : ( Mental simula ; on ) , supported a \ er collinearity checks H3C Conclusion We argued that dimensions of creative evaluations differ on the basis of their underpinning logics related to assumptions of creativity ( what is an idea ; what is the basis of evaluation ; how important is perception & interaction ) . Our results show some initial support for the claim that these logics lead to predictable differences in design idea progresssion suggestions , and mental simulation patterns made by experienced designers at design critique sessions in Industrial Design . . Theoretical contribution We argue that the results hold promise for informing theories of creative evaluation , which at the moment mainly contain theories of consensual asssessment ( e . g . , Amabile ; Csikszentmihalyi ) or universal claims of which dimensions are involved in creativity ( e . g . , O’Quinn & Besemer ) . Contrary to these theories , our results and arguments indicate that 1 ) Creative evaluation is domain specific 2 ) Creative evaluation involves several distinct dimensions ( varying by domain ) 3 ) The underpinning logics regarding creativity of these dimensions may be in opposition 4 ) The underpinning logics of these dimensions lead to predictable differences in design reasoning and progression suggestions during the design process . Future perspectives A direct hypothesis derived from the present argumentation is that domains ( including design domains ) should differ in somewhat predictable ways in their distribution of creative dimension episodes . This hypothesis is testable even within the DTRS10 datasets , by e . g . , repeating the analysis for the Choreography data . Thank you ! Linden J . Ball Bo T . Christensen Practical implications The idea that different dimensions of creative evaluation lead to certain types of progression suggestions may alert design evaluators to the nature and consequences of their critical appraisals . For example , it may be important to strike the right balanc e between critiques of the different dimension s when giving feedback .