1 Computing and the Common . An empirical case of Participatory Design today . Maurizio Teli Madeira Interactive Technologies Institute Caminho da Penteada 9020 - 105 Funchal , Portugal maurizio . teli @ m - iti . org Angela Di Fiore University of Trento via Sommarie , 9 38123 , Trento , Italy angela . difiore @ unitn . it Vincenzo D’Andrea University of Trento via Sommarie , 9 38123 , Trento , Italy vincenzo . dandrea @ unitn . it ABSTRACT With this paper we contribute to the ongoing discussion on the transformations of Participatory Design to address current societal transformations . We focus on how the implications of the emergence of financialized capitalism , characterized by “accumulation by dispossession” , could be reduced by the nourishment of the “common” . In taking this approach , we claim that nourishing the “common” , which refers to the ensemble of the material and symbolic elements that tie together human beings , would allow a renewal of Participatory Design , reinvigorating its political agenda . We base our reasoning on a project called ThinkDigiTank , the goal of which is the construction of a digital platform supporting a network of Italian “think tanks” , which refers to or ganizations aimed at producing political and cultural thinking . In this paper , we theoretically articulate the needs of a PD process nourishing the common and we discuss the empirical case , highlighting the possibilities of a renewal in PD and practical strategies to support commoning practices . CCS Concepts ● Participatory design ● Collaborative and social computing theories , concepts , and paradigms Keywords Autonomous Marxism ; participatory design process ; think tanks ; politics ; austerity 1 . INTRODUCTION Twenty years ago , Greenbaum [ 15 ] discussed how Participatory Design ( henceforth PD ) needed to consider the mutated social context . She was pointing to the substitution of the “modern times” of the industrial organization of work by the “postmodern times” o f post - industrialism . The argument of this paper is that contemporary PD is in need of addressing another transformation , from post - industrialism / post - Fordism to financialized capitalism , in which the relation between social production and capital accumulation is characterized by “accumulation by dispossession” [ 21 ] . This expression refers to the way through which capital extracts value from social cooperation , which is mostly autonomous from capital , and even from life itself [ 27 ] . In this context , digital technologies play a prominent role in making global finance tout - court possible [ 31 ] or allowing the most disruptive financial instruments [ 36 ] . At the same time , alternative models of social production are foreseeable in the domain of digital technologies , as one of the arenas in which the construction of general social alternatives to the dominant models is pursued [ 16 ] . Indeed , activists and intellectuals have started giving attention to concepts like “the common” , an expression used to refer to the ensemble of the symbolic and material elements that tie together human beings [ 19 ] . The common can be nourished [ ibidem ] or dispossessed [ 21 ] . Indeed , recent arguments point to the social group of the highly skilled , often precarious / freelance workers , as a potential social ally for a PD perspective that nourishes the common , instead of dispossessing it [ 34 ] . Such an argument is in line with the ongoing search for different social allies that has been traversing PD for at least the last ten years , as a way of advancing the progressive politics that has characterized PD since its origins [ e . g . 7 ] . For example , the extension of PD beyond the workplace , toward community based participatory design [ 9 ] or public design [ 10 , 35 ] , can be read as another of the attempts to renew PD reflecting the changing arenas of interventions . In this paper , we will describe and discuss an initial example of practical strategies PDers can rely upon in the changed societal landscape , drawing upon a PD process oriented toward nourishing the common , in alliance with highly skilled precarious workers . Specifically , we will discuss the ThinkDigiTank project that entails the design and construction of a digital platform supporting the work of a network of Italian “think tanks” in a social context in which the traditional models of financial viability of such organizations are in transformation . The collaborators of the think tanks are often highly skilled and precarious , and the structural conditions leave space mainly for collaborations based upon a convergence of interests beyond financial compensation . The project has been participatory in two different ways : on the one hand we , the designers , have been involved in an initiative of our “participants” , acting both as fa cilitators and part of the working group ; on the other hand , the participants themselves have been involved in a process that provided them with the methodological skills to actually carry out the majority of the design work we agreed upon . Moreover , the project has been conducted with limited financial resources in a relationship that involved two different cities in Italy , constituting an empirical case of renewed strategies for PDers . As we will show , although the digital platform isn’t yet in existence , the richness of the enacted process has nevertheless brought significant gains to the participants , and has strengthened their ability to nourish the common . 2 . PD NOURISHING THE COMMON Thinking about PD in the current social context , we want to reinvigorate the political orientation of PD through the accent on nourishing the common . Political orientation is indeed an act of participating in what Light and Akama defined as Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honoured . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . PDC ' 16 , August 15 - 19 , 2016 , Aarhus , Denmark © 2016 ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4046 - 5 / 16 / 08 . . . $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2940299 . 2940312 2 “structuring future social relations” [ 24 ] . The two authors , contributing to the long - standing debate on the political aspects of PD , give a relevant contribution based on the feminist influence of Haraway and de la Bellacasa . More specifically , they argue for a PD that is interested in “bringing people into the design of the invisible media ting structures around them” [ ibidem : 153 ] . Our attention to the common goes in the same direction . Indeed , it aims to extend the focus from the “mediating structures” to broader concepts able to locate these mediating structures into the frame of ongoing societal transformations . From this point of view , we are arguing for , paraphrasing Light and Akama , a PD interested in bringing people into the design of the political relations around them . Indeed , we agree with the attention that Light and Akama give to the concept of care , as a situated , relational , aspect of human and social life . The common perspective we propose extends their perspective to more general narratives , able to be fruitfully located in the landscape of the societal changes connected to financialized capitalism . Our reference to the common is grounded in Autonomous Marxism ( henceforth , AM ) , a strand of Marxism that developed in Italy in the 1970s ' and that , since then , has been able to intercept global attention , in particular thanks to the work of Michel Hardt and Toni Negri [ 17 , 19 ] . The basic tenet of AM is its understanding of social relations , characterized by ( a ) the anthropological priority of freedom over institutionalized power , ( b ) the social priority of the multitude of the poor , and ( c ) the affective priority of love over hate [ 16 , 34 ] . That implies that conflicts in social life are characterized by the trials of the following : institutionalized power , the rich and hate ; to contain and discipline freedom ; the multitude ; and finally , love ( itself ) . Considering the PD tradition of empowering people with weak resources [ 12 ] , thanks to the attention of the situated political aspects that are intrinsic factors of a design process [ 24 ] , it becomes clear how PD can provide a common perspective with tangible outcomes [ 37 ] . Contemporaneously , PD could be renewed in its attention to politics [ 22 ] by focusing on a framework able to reveal power and dominance [ 3 ] . These aspects are particularly significant in a period in which the promotion of participation can be used to support the elites , transforming participation into a conservative practice while depicting it as a progressive one [ 29 ] . It is indeed our conviction that a convergence between PD and the critical analysis of current societies could benefit both groups , creating new paths where the design processes and products are conceived as open to scrutiny . In taking this approach , the design processes and the technologies should be considered as “future things” , embracing modifications in itinere and social appropriations [ 11 , 32 ] . In particular , we frame our contribution as an addendum to the debate on “democratic design experiments” in participatory design [ 4 ] . In this perspective , participation is itself a situated matter concern not defined as a priori [ 2 ] . Design projects could be read as collectives with a high composition and it is in the forms of collaboration that design and its representations emerge [ 4 ] . That implies dealing with different arenas of participation , as follows : a ) the single project , b ) the specific organization , or c ) the wider societal level [ 13 ] . Following Binder et al . , democratic design experiments are the “tentative formation of an issue and a public in mutual emergence” [ 4 : 162 ] . In this perspective , the design process aims to conceptualize the object of design as multiple and unfinished ( an “actor - network” ) , while the designer accompanies the participants in articulating their own perspective and capacity to grow [ 33 ] . The designer and the participants are therefore engaging with each other in transforming the world around them . They tend to build future social relations with a “ becoming with ” approach , reconsidering the pre - existing conditions through a mutual and reflective process [ 1 ] . From the point of view of democratic design experiments , our proposal of a common perspective , articulating the relation between societal phenomena and local projects , avoids the risk of PD becoming excessively focused on the local dimension [ 30 ] . Indeed , contemporary PD has foc used on the “commons” - with a final “s” – [ 28 ] , forms of collaborative management of shared resources . In this reading , the accent has been posed on the practices of commoning [ 25 ] and on the commons as a way of opening production [ 26 ] . We agree with the idea of the commons as a relevant organizational and institutional arrangement to be included in the design of digital technologies [ 35 ] . However its potentially localistic accent calls for a more general concept , like nested commons [ 20 ] or the common [ 34 ] . Indeed , the relations among the common as an ensemble , specific commons as institutional arrangements , and the practices of commoning could be discussed in different design projects . In particular , the proposed AM approach has been historically careful in framing general readings that were then converted into specific forms of research at the local level [ 38 ] . The relevance of an AM approach could be based not only in the potential convergence between political nuances between AM and PD , nourishing the common and focusing on collaboration . The AM approach could also enrich the understanding of the potential of digital technologies . Dahlberg [ 6 ] has summarized the AM position on digital technologies and democracy , pointing out how the technological affordances that nourish the common are : collaboration , cooperation , distribution , exchange , networking , participation , and sharing . In all these cases , the development of singularities ( individuals in AM’s language ) becoming subjects in common is the way through which AM is focused on freedom and love [ 19 ] . In this context , designers willing to nourish the common need to identify practical strategies to support the emergence of commoning practices . Indeed , the construction of “the multitude” , that is the alliance of people in different but similar conditions engaging in collaborative activities is the mean through which freedom and love could be politically achieved [ ibidem ] . Now , we can summarize the possible strategies we foresee for a reading of PD projects as nourishing the common . First , PDers should identify an arena of action that is consistent with the possibility to promote societal transformations [ 13 ] , oriented toward nourishing the common . Second , they should clarify what the social groups are and how they are connected to nourishing the common [ 34 ] . Third , to avoid social engineering [ 24 ] , they should promote an open ended design process in which participation is ready to be overtaken by other actors [ 2 ] , addressing commoning practices . Finally , PDers should find a way to discuss and evaluate how the condition of the participants gets improved , what Bossen at al . defined as “user gains” [ 5 ] , being aware of the complexity of evaluating participation [ 14 ] . 3 . THINK DIGI TANK : AN OVERVIEW The empirical case we present and discuss is the project named “ThinkDigiTank” ( henceforth , TDT ) , an Italian project that has some peculiar characteristics that are consistent with the outlined perspective on PD as nourishing the common . TDT project is still ongoing , and it is aiming to create a collective platform , using a PD approach , in order to provide a collaborative tool for a network of Italian leftist think tanks . This paper presents the initial phases of the process that pertain to the creation of the social and relational bases for the adoption of the platform , identifying the needs of the participants and defining the preliminary requirements of the technology to be . For this reason , the project is in progress , and the platform is still in the dimension of the future things [ 11 ] . 3 The project launched at the end of 2014 not by us , briefly “the designers” , but by “the participants” , members of a combination of Italian political think tanks . The term think tanks in relation to the political context refers to organizations devoted to political and cultural production . Currently Italy has 105 think tanks , 44 % of which are leftist [ 8 ] . The network of think tanks that we worked with was composed by eight organizations , which represented the most influential leftist think tanks in Italy . More specifically , the TDT project involved six researchers ( with an average age of 30 ) that worked for one or more of the think tanks of the network . Our involvement took place in a period of transformations where the think tanks decided to consolidate their relationships by creating a network , due to the reduction of financial resources and to the changing political landscape . Indeed , starting from 2013 the Italian leftist think tanks saw the emergence of a new political scenario , due to two concurrent facts . On one side , the rise of the current Prime Minister Renzi that compromised the role of the think tanks in the leftist agenda , putting them at the margins of the political arena . On the other side , in 2013 there was the Five Star Movement , a new political formation , which drastically changed the Italian parliamentary composition , achieving 25 % of votes . These changes have pushed the think tanks toward rethinking their role in Italian politics and TDT could be considered as part of this effort . In this context , we were contacted by a person ( known to two of us already ) requesting we engage in the participatory design of a digital platform to support the work of the think tanks , their networking , and their capability to attract a new audience . The person who contacted us was not only an acquaintance but somebody whom , in different moments , we have worked with . He was indeed aware of our interest in PD and that was the reason he thought we could be interested in collaboration . Indeed , the existing social relations among us have been the basis of the project existence and they have been used to structure new social relations . The common ( existing social relations ) allowed the emergence of the project . The project aimed to increase the possibility of aggregation around a theme ( leftist politics ) , in line with the concept of public formation [ 23 ] . Another relevant point that characterizes the background of this project is that the offered collaboration has been peculiar in its institutional conditions . The project has been based on sharing an interest for the conducted activities and nothing more , as financial compensation was out of scope for both the designers and the participants . Indeed , the unique budget available was a small amount of money that could be devoted to the second stage of the project , the construction of a technical partnership . While we were not financially compensated , the involved researchers were available to work at the PD process with our training and guidance . Indeed , they conducted interviews , analysed them , wrote personas and scenarios , and therefore they become “participatory designers” themselves . Our role , as detailed later , was one of training and collaboration . What we’ve re quested since the beginning was to be available to write the paper you are reading now , as we foresee that a new participatory design process could be potentially conceptualized . To go back to our language , we were sharing competences , increasing the skill s of “the participants” , and we did that to achieve two competing results in terms of nourishing the common : increase academic knowledge on PD and favour networking among think tanks . Finally , the specific arena of intervention , think tanks , is particularly interesting . On one side , as such organizations deal with political and cultural elaboration , our project was connecting the local , organizational level , with the societal level . As think tanks in Italy have a short life - span and limited resources [ 8 ] , we were acting on conditions potentially nourishing the common by promoting the possibility for the researchers to go on pursuing their goals and intellectual development . Indeed , the enacted open process and the construction of the technical partnerships , described later , were both foreseen as creating the conditions for the project to be taken over by other entities . 4 . THINK DIGI TANK : THE PROCESS The empirical sections of this paper describe the PD process that we enacted , with the goal of nourishing the common . The process of the TDT project started with the intent of defining , through a PD approach , a new technological platform to support the partnership between the network of leftist think tanks . However , as we will show , the most relevant role of the PD process has been the consolidation of novel forms of collaboration and the establishment of a mutual understanding between the think tanks . It should be noted how , initially , the process was expected to last approximately nine months , five of research and four of technical implementation . In particular , the envisioned process entailed an understanding of the practices to be digitally supported and the construction of documents to be shared with potential “technical partners” in an open call . The actual technical partners would have been chosen near the conclusion of the project according to their technical proposal and their willingness to engage in building a long - term relationship with the think tanks and our research group . Indeed , as we detail later and show in Figure 1 , the actual process unfolded slower than expected , the choice of the technical partner has just been completed at the moment of writing and the technical implementation has just started . The process has been slow because we have accommodated the needs of the participants and of the institutional conditions , engaging our allies in a process that laid the foundation for renewed dialogue and collaboration among the network of think tanks . This process prioritized the need to allow the think tanks to consolidate their network by setting their common goals and creating the relational bases to build and adopt a collective platform based on collaboration and sharing . In this way , the nourishment of the common have been conceived as a condition inscribed in the technology to be . In this section we present the ongoing PD process , illustrating the 10 phases [ Figure 1 ] that characterized the evolution of the TDT project , oriented toward nourishing the common . The project started within a public presentation ( 1 ) held in December , 2014 in which many members of Italian think tanks participated . The agenda of the meeting was focused on the need to face the emergence of a fragmented participation among the think tanks due to current changes in the Italian political landscape . Starting from this position the need emerged of a collective platform , to foster communication and information sharing among the members of the think tanks . We participated at this meeting delivering a talk , introducing PD and proposing it as an interesting approach to promote social relations among the Italian leftist organisations . PD was widely accepted , recalling an affinity with their cultural heritage based on an Italian leftist research approach called conricerca ( literally research - with ) [ 38 ] . At the end of the meeting a working group was created formed by 6 researchers that worked for the 8 think tanks in order to collaborate with us on the PD of the platform . The process has been planned ( 2 ) taking into account the physical distance of 600km between the headquarters of the think tanks in Rome , and our workplace at the University of 4 [ city ] . For this reason , we established a participatory path based , on the one hand , on intensive and intermittent face to face meetings at the headquarters of think tanks , and on the other hand , a longitudinal remote support . The project officially started in January 2015 with a first intensive face to face meeting ( 3 ) that lasted two days , in which we provided the basics of PD . In particular , we focused on the rationale of PD , stressing the relevance of the participants and introducing the role of interviews , scenario and personas in a PD process . We chose to focus on interview technique because some members of the TDT group have had previous experience in doing interviews in journalistic contexts . A similar argument could be made about personas and scenarios , the former the description of a character , the latter of practices and actions . The choice was therefore based on leveraging the already existing knowledge of the participants , in order to avoid intensive sessions on completely unfamiliar techniques . Indeed , the aim of this first meeting was to provide rudiments of PD , in order to allow the TDT group to facilitate the process of designing their own platform with their peers . This knowledge sharing wished to activate an instance of delegation among them , leaving them to conduct their own PD process where they were both participants and facilitators among peers . During this session we also identified collectively the sample of people to interview and we negotiated an interview outline to support the interviews . Finally , the members of the group conducted a 3 trial interviews , and we helped them to create an appropriate special and interactional setting , sharing our own research experiences . Between the first and second face to face meetings the TDT group worked on data gathering ( 4 ) activities , conducting interviews and transcribing the recording . During this period , we provided remote support via email and Skype , discussing the modification of some questions of the interview outline and backing their research activities . In addition , we engaged a Skype meeting where we shared techniques on data analysis , introducing the most important phases of the thematic analysis . In taking this approach , we requested they read the transcription of the 14 interviews that they conducted , to code the text in an inductive way , and to start thinking about the categories that were emerging from the text . In March 2015 , we had a second meeting ( 5 ) , in which we engaged the TDT group in a data analysis session at the headquarters of the think tanks involved in the project . In this meeting we introduced the most important phases of the thematic analysis . We asked them to read the transcriptions of the 14 interviews that they had conducted , underline the most important sentences and begin to think about the categories that were emerging from the text . Then , we asked them to physically cut the printed codes associat ed to all the interviews’ transcriptions and recombine them collectively using a billboard , creating second level concept and third level categories . This activity later revealed itself as fundamental in creating a sense of attachment within the group towards the project . Because of the cutting task of the transcriptions’ hard copies , this activity was lately renamed confetti by our participants . The confetti activity allowed the members of the group to have a different perspective on their network of think tanks , discovering new dynamics , rationales and roles involved in the daily life of their organisations . This activity has been substantial for the TDT group , and for this reason , the term confetti has been associated with the deep meaning of the project throughout its duration . From March to April 2015 , the TDT group have been busy , carrying out data analysis that led to the development of the personas and scenarios ( 6 ) . During this period of time we provided remote support , by emails and Skype . The process of collective data analysis led to the identification of 18 categories , which conceptualized the high level themes that were emerging from the collected data . This activity outlined the heuristics of the PD process , highlighting technological issues ; strategies and future trajectories ; hierarchical settings ; and communication , information sharing and organisational issues . These heuristics have been crystallized creating 18 mind maps that illustrated the ramification of each category with the connected second - level concepts . We then wrote an example of personas and scenario while the group created their own examples . These were achieved by working on the horizontal connections between the mind maps . This was a demanding task for the TDT group because it was their very first experience in doing design activities . In particular , the challenge of the personas and scenario writing was that we asked the participants to write by themselves the personas that brought both their own needs and the needs of their peers . “We were at an impasse after the confetti turning point , because , you know , we had the interviews but … . Then , at a certain point we handled a sort of our… our… our experience that we wrote in some way , and that we directed in the personas” During the data analysis phase , the group participated in the most important Italian conference related to the public sector and citizenship , called ForumPA , where they presented the project as a form of public restitution ( 7 ) . This conference had an important role within the TDT project by giving an opportunity to disseminate the contribution of PD , illustrating to a wide audience the ongoing outcomes of the project . We , as “designers” , supported intervention of the TDT group by sending a video speech , where we illustrated the rationale of PD in relation to the project . The public restitution at ForumPA led to the enlargement of the network of think tanks . There , the adoption of a PD approach generated interest , and several organisations and NGOs joined the project . “The fact that we were doing this thing… there were rumors about that , and it generated interest from organizations that , at first , were not involved in t he project . ” “ForumPA has been an important experience of public dissemination , there some ( organizations ) talked to us , expressing interest in joining processes and to be part of it” ( Focus group ) . At the end of September 2015 , the TDT group published a call ( 8 ) in order to recruit the technical partner for the development of the digital platform . Twelve partners expressed their interest , sending a proposal . The number of proposals was particularly gratifying for the members of the TDT group . Figure 1 : The actual process of TDT . 5 “When we started , we didn’t even know how to explain what we were going to do… and then suddenly our process became something that other people were interested in and wanted to do . ” “I am not sure that all the applicants had perfectly understood what this project deals with , but I think that the scent that you can feel around this process has attracted them . ” ( Focus Group ) In November 2015 we had a third meeting ( 9 ) with the TDT group , where we conducted a focus group with them in order to assess the process . After that meeting we started supporting them in the selection of the candidates for the technical partner ( 10 ) which took place in January 2016 . 5 . THE EMPIRICAL RESULTS Here we present the empirical results of our research on the enacted participatory process . Since the project is ongoing , this section illustrates the results of the data that have been gathered between January 2015 and December 2015 . Following from this the sub - sections present the data at the base of this paper and the outcomes of our analysis in terms of future social relations , subjects of change , and organizational transformations . 5 . 1 Data The outcomes presented in this section are based on several qualitative data , including : interviews , personas and scenarios , mind maps , and a focus group [ Table 1 ] . Table 1 . The data at the base of this paper . TYPE of DATA N NOTES Interviews 14 Interviews conducted with some members of the network of think tanks Personas / scenarios 11 / 13 Used as core content of the call for a technical partner Mind Maps 18 Summarize the heuristics of the PD process Focus Group 1 Provide reflection on the PD process The interviews have been conducted by the TDT group with 14 members of the think tanks . These interviews were focused on collecting data on the organizations , in particular in relation to hierarchy , internal relations , perception of the network , external relations and use of the technology . The outline , built during the first meeting , included questions about the personal story of political activism , the story of connection with the specific think tank , the activities done in relation to the think tank ( with an attention on information retrieval and sharing ) , the think tank’s foreseeable future , its ongoing transformations , and the role of TDT in this context . The transcriptions of the interviews have been collectively analysed . This led to the creation of 18 mind maps , one for each macro - category identified during the analysis . The mind maps have been used to summarize the results of the analysis and illustrate the connections between the macro categories . In particular , the mind maps were : technological ( in ) adequacy ; archives ; publishing activities ; skills ; communication ; communication and social networks ; thematic positioning ; events ; nature and future of the think tanks ; training ; contacts ; being informed ; newsletter ; organization : future strategies ; organization : structure , roles , resources and change ; participation ; international network ; research . The personas and scenarios have been developed on the basis of the interviews to address the design of the collaborative platform . The work group created 11 personas starting from the main roles that emerged within the interviews , such as : the researcher ; the research coordinator ; the event organizer ; the web editor ; the training manager ; the archivist ; the social media manager ; the director ; the activist ; the computer scientist ; the secretary . The 13 scenarios have been built beginning with the mind maps summarizing organizational practices . The focus group was conducted by us among the TDT group at the end of 2015 . The moderator’s guide has been developed to push the participants to reflect on their condition , on their organizations , and on the PD process within the TDT project . The interviews and the focus group have been analysed adopting thematic analysis . We analysed the focus group , while the interviews have been analysed by the members of the TDT group supervised by us . 5 . 2 Towards future social relations The two changes in the Italian political landscape described before , the rise of Renzi and the Five Star Movement , have impacted the way the participating think tanks could project themselves into the future . Indeed , the 2013 elections have been a turning point in the relation between the think tanks and established political parties , as shown by the following excerpts . “After the 2013 , some sort of depression kicked in , b ecause until then we were the insight behind the political agenda of the Democratic Party . We influenced the coalitions and the political and cultural conception of the party . ” “Before ( 2013 ) , our relationship with the party was strongly consolidated and c ontinuous , and now it is falling apart . ” “There is no more systematic relationship between us and them . ” ( Focus Group ) The process has helped them in reflecting on the impact of this change of paradigm of the Italian political scenario , researching strategies to deal with intermittent relations with the Democratic Party . Indeed , due to the current changes of the scenario , they chose not to be overtly influenced by political parties , working to outline a new role for them in the Italian political and cultural milieu . They developed new perspectives and started working on new projects to redefine their position in the political framework . In doing so , the adoption of a PD process and the development of a collective platform has been perceived by them as a bridge between the past and the future trajectories of the leftist think tanks . “There is a political dissolution , which is also an opportunity . An opportunity to do political research . This precariousness and this lack of reso urces also offers opportunities . ” ( Focus Group ) One of the main issues , in this historical phase of Italian leftist think tanks , is related to funding , granting themselves autonomy and independence while still being a relevant actor in the Italian scenario . This new political configuration is leading the think tanks to focus on new forms of funding in order to preserve their latitude . 6 “The only organizations that are good at surviving are the ones that we call personal organizations . These organizations are not connected to a collective project , but are linked to the rising star of the Italian politics . ” ( Focus Group ) The European Commission funding for research is seen as an interesting resource to face this ongoing changes , carrying out the cultural and political projects and forming new partnerships . 5 . 3 The subjects of change In this scenario , the think tanks are dealing with the changes of the Italian political milieu . Two subjectivities are taking on these new challenges : an individual subject that is represented by the personal experience of the precarious workers ; and an organizational subject that deals with organizational and contextual settings that have been changing in recent years . The figure of the precarious researcher is central for the think tanks . Indeed , these organisations are usually understaffed and the workers are often precarious and engaged in overworking and multitasking activities . This state is also confirmed by the contents of the Personas that have been developed by the TDT group , reflecting on their experience . “Leonardo is a young researcher that holds a Ph . D . deg ree . He , as well as his colleagues , face daily difficulties as temporary researchers . He has published several articles and monographs , but he doesn’t find research grants because he is not bonded to a full professor that is involved in his sustenance . ” ( P ersonas : the researcher ) The lack of time and possibility to work is perceived as a strong constraint that is hindering the effectiveness of the think tanks . However , the development of a collective platform within the TDT project is perceived as a tool that could foster collaborative practices and mutual support among the precarious workers . The organizational subject of this change is engaged on negotiating a new political identity for the think tanks in the Italian context . Due to the specific historical phase , the organisations have been passed from one generation to the next . The previous organisational ladder , defined by the TDT group “in line with the president” , was pretty structured and hierarchical . Today , the older generation is passing the baton , leaving open new possible paths for the future . In doing so , the think tanks are now focused on widening their social base and the collaboration with similar organisations , rethinking their role as laboratories of culture and politics . They see themselves as laboratories that try new concepts and trajectories to improve the political debate and the policies . “The laboratory for us is a place where you bring out new tools that should be used by politics and by academia as well , to understand the r eality . ” ( Focus group ) The definition of a new identity is accompanied by the negotiation of new areas of concern in order to guide the long term plan of these organisations . The thematic positioning has a central role in this historical phase of the think tanks . In particular , there is a focus on finding a balance between being ecumenical , in order to apply for several types of research funding , and establishing specific topics , in order to delineate their own identity , being conscious . 5 . 4 The need of organisational change The PD process among the TDT group has been characterized by several phases . This PD process produced two different types of outcomes , both technological and organizational . As we mentioned before , the confetti session has been a crucial moment of organizational awareness for the participants . It provided inputs for the creation of the personas in order to develop the collective platform . The confetti sessions cleared the daze around the project , making the organisational and the technological outcomes of the PD process evident . The materiality of the confetti gave tangibility to the data , allowing for the creation of highly evocative mind maps . “We gleaned from our personal experiences , from the subjectivity of the person that was writing the personas . We put a vital breath in the confetti . Writing the personas , we turn the confetti into simulacrum of human being . ” “Writing the personas and during the confetti session , we reflected individually and collectively on our condition , or we tell situations that we are used to living or we reinterpreted something in relation to something else . ” “After the confetti session , we attached the maps to the walls , and these maps are already there ! The confetti maps have been a way to communicate to the others that we were not doing only the new website of the think tank . In doing so… the initial scepticism among the PD process became expectation ! ” ( Focus group ) The mind maps had a restitutive role within the project , by communicating in an intelligible way the results of the work of the TDT group and the current challenges for the think tanks . These activities opened a new phase for the project , characterized by a strong openness . “We presented the data and the activities that we did , and then , they under stood that it was a serious project . ” ( Focus group ) During the process , the need for planning and transforming the organisation emerged among the members of the TDT group . In particular , they wished that the new platform could bring a new organisational culture , supporting the long term planning and the bookkeeping . The optimisation of work is perceived by them as an important step to take but one which has never been one of their strong points . “Planning and organization mean choosing what to do . It means to measure your resources taking into account your objectives , and this is complicated ! It is so complicated especially in a cultural and political context , where theoretical categories and ideal categories , which are not linked to praxis , are put in the center . ” “Planning ! In ten years I tried to do it many times ! We never managed it… but… we can call it penny pinch , call it however you want… just make an excel table with input and output . ” ( Focus group ) Figure 2 : Mind map on the problem of resources . 7 The categories that emerged within the interviews have been translated by the TDT group into strategies to reach a desired future , answering both to collective and individual needs . These strategies have been a Janus in this PD process , on the one hand the strategies outlined the rationale of the platform , giving materiality to the future technology ; on the other hand , they provided an overview of the organizational issues among the think tanks . This operationalization led to six keywords : strategies , change , activities , communication , collaboration , and coordination . Strategies establishes the core trajectories for the future of the think tanks , including : change the organisational culture ; lead the organisational change ; forge new relations and widen the social base of the leftists’ organisations ; change the communication strategies . Change highlights the need to face the ongoing political , contextual and organizational change , conceiving it as : an opportunity , a constraint and a factual datum . Activities emphasizes the need to find an organizational solution to manage and plan the amount of heterogeneous activities that characterize the think tanks . Communication is perceived as a fundamental need for the survival of the think tanks outside of the political party sphere . It requires mutual sharing and relations , and it conceives the technology as an enabling factor . Collaboration is understood as an organisational solution by the member of the think tanks . In particular , this category stresses the importance of finding a balance between the extreme autonomy and variability of the precarious workers employed in the think tanks and the need of a stable and cohesive network of collaborators . Coordination stresses the relevance of a culture of sharing and integration to support the think tanks . The PD process activated changes in the organizational praxes of the think tanks , anticipating the advent of the platform . In particular , new forms of collaboration have been triggered by the process . Indeed , the TDT group started working collectively , facing their problems together and not in isolation . During the process , they used Dropbox and experimented with forms of collective writing on Google Drive , consolidating collaboration in their daily work practices . “My digital illiteracy has been reduced by this project . ” “It was the first time that has been used here ( at the think tank ) a Dropbox folder ! ( laughs ) These are little improvements , and I hope that these praxes will last . ” ( Focus Group ) The PD process enhanced collaborative practices . It gives the members of the TDT group the opportunity to work together , testing a new research method . The participants recognized that the process consolidated the relationships between the precarious workers , reducing the social isolations caused by their overworking . “It has been significant also for the human level . ” “Working together was not contemplated as a practice . ” ( Focus Group ) The process gave a relevant contribution in terms of organisational know how . The participants acquired a wide awareness of the inner workings of the organizations , and this gave new resources in managing the generational change of the think tanks . “We put down in black and white how our organizations are structured . Before the TDT project we had this sort of presidential monarchy , where some people took decisions and the others just conform . ” “It has been useful because we have had the opportunity to study our organizations . ” ( Focus Group ) The process accompanied the think tanks in this phase of radical change , reinforcing their relationships and providing hints to foster their collective agenda . “This project enriched my experience . It has been useful because when we decided what to do after the generation of the last president , we just came back to interviews to have a clear frame . ” ( Focus Group ) 6 . DISCUSSION In the initial part of this paper , we articulated a reading of PD as nourishing the common based on four main strategies : the identification of a relevant social arena ; the clarification of the social groups designers are willing to align to ; the enactment of an open ended design process ; and the capability to evaluate the improvement of the participants ' conditions . Indeed , we claimed that this kind of process could renew PD , reinvigorating the attention to politics and elaborating novel strategies to build projects in contemporary financialized capitalism . It is our conviction that the case study of TDT enriches our comprehension of a project built around the goal of nourishing the common , being a first example of the strategies that could be leveraged when aiming towards such a goal . Indeed , the project emerged from the transformations affecting the social arena of think tanks , with a shortage of financial resources coming in one way or another through state funding . Without discussing the opportunity or otherwise of these cuts , the shortage of state funding is clearly in line with the contemporary austerity policies , one of the elements characterising contemporary forms of accumulation by dispossession [ 21 ] . Moreover , the domain is strictly connected to parliamentary politics , with the former president and a director of one of the think tanks as members of the Senate . The hierarchical and discontinuous relation with policy makers has been seen by our participants as a problem to be addressed through the search for autonomy from parliamentary politics . The enacted process contributed to such a search for autonomy in two different ways . On one side , the construction of novel alliances between think tanks , universities , and technical partners is enlarging the networks all these actors could rely upon . On the other side , being exposed to new techniques and approaches has improved the organizational awareness and skills of our participants . Indeed , the construction of an area of autonomy from institutionalized power could be read as aligned to the basic tenets of Autonomous Marxism , mainly focusing on the autonomy of the working class [ 19 ] , knowledge workers in this case . Figure 3 : Mind map on future organizational strategies . 8 The project was endorsed by the think tanks’ management but it was conducted by precarious workers , who have been referred to as “The Fifth Estate” [ 34 ] . As detailed above , the condition of the participants in this project was characterized by limited access to continuous income and by diverse working activities conducted almost individually . The participation in TDT was recognized as promoting new collaborative practices , exemplified by the reference to technologies like Dropbox or by the idea of collective writing , consistently with previous studies on user gains [ e . g . 5 ] . Moreover , the work done has empowered them in the process of choosing the new president and director of one of the think tanks , as the interviews have been reviewed by them to plan future interventions within the organization . Therefore , the design process acted as a practice of commoning [ 25 ] and the produced material became an element for the development of the organization . The process supported the participants in ways that were unexpected at the beginning and it was not only participation in the research material itself that was “overtaken” [ 2 ] by other organizational practices . In particular , the commoning practices helped the members of the think tanks to reflect on their condition , to think about the different available resources and the need for organisational transformation . There is another aspect in the relationship between our participants and the think tanks that should be noted : that is how the enacted process and the presence of the specific group we worked with both acted on democratizing the outcome in terms of internal relations . In particular , three elements of the method contributed to that . First , the way through which the sample for the interviews was built gave voice not only to the management of the diverse organizations but to people in different areas of the structure’s hierarchy . Second , the data analysis , in particular the coding and the face - to - face session in which the confetti were aggregated to build second level concepts , were done by the participants and not by the management . This delegation process made the knowledge of our precarious participants more relevant than the one of management in making decisions . Third , the privilege to the participants ' knowledge was strengthened in the process of writing personas and scenarios . As we have shown , the personal contribution of the people involved was a key point in that and , therefore , the final list of early requirements in terms of personas and scenarios has been deeply connected to our participants ' subjectivity . This is indeed not new in PD , it connects to the concept of empowerment [ 12 , 32 ] reaffirming the need to choose PD ' s social allies carefully [ 7 , 34 ] . The discussed process has not only highlighted the relevance of the precarious workers’ subjective conditions we described but also how their subjective conditions have been strengthened in re - thinking their organization . That was visible also during the analysis of the interviews , in which the issues where the cultural and political elaboration of think tanks played a crucial role in the depicted process , as the journal they are producing came out as the most significant product of the activities of Italian think tanks . Indeed , the issues that are dealt with by the think tanks are the ones that allow for the capability of reaching a new audience and potential supporters . This suggests that , at least in the case of think tanks , the formation of publics and the issues at stake go together , as discussed by the proposal of democratic design experiments [ 4 ] . The problem of public formation [ 23 ] was visible also in the way through which the inter - organizational relations developed among the different actors in relation to the project . If at the beginning the focus was on associating different think tanks in the design process , the development of the process made central some of them . That didn ' t mean that there were no other organizations involved but that the kind of organizations involved changed over time . As our focus group data shows , that has been interpreted by the participants as connected to the changing character of the future thing , obscure at the beginning and then becoming more and more visible , although still not existing . This visibility should be discussed , as what became publicly known in the dissemination activities was more the characteristics of the process and , later , the personas and scenarios . Not the digital artefact that , indeed , doesn ' t exist yet , but the established process that is open and unfinished , one of the need of contemporary PD [ 11 , 33 ] . Therefore , the process comes out not only as favouring public formation through participation but also as one of the ways through which new alliances can be made . This updates the role of the design process in public formation as discussed by public design [ 10 , 35 ] . Indeed , the process itself has become central more than the technological artefact . The artefact played a role as a future thing in the open design process [ 11 ] but , as shown by our focus group , until now has not been the main gain for the participants . Indeed , acquiring a better comprehension of the functioning of their organization , more digital skills , and an understanding of the shared working conditions , have been among the more relevant gains for our participants . That involved , as already discussed , including the wider societal conditions in which the participant activities are taking place , the elaboration of an agenda for increased autonomy , the privileged grant to their point of view in shaping the outcomes of the project , and the focus on the new relations and alliances that , through the project , they could build . To summarize , if we look back at the four characteristics that we outlined for a PD process nourishing the common ( identifying a relevant social arena and allies , an open ended process , and the improvement of the life conditions of people ) , the process described and discussed here suggests some significant practical strategies for contemporary PD promoting commoning practices . First , the need to adapt a process to the actual conditions of the political economy ( e . g . austerity ) , levering a convergence of interests , the resources and the skills available . Second , the importance of supporting the growth of the participants ' autonomy , both as new forms of collaboration and as intervention in the situated social domain . Third , to empower the participants in the process , in making decisions , and as subjects . Fourth , to be aware of the issue of public formation in terms of reaching new audiences , new alliances , and changing inter - organizational relations . Fifth , to conceptualize the digital artefact as a changing and blurred “future thing” , whose boundaries and details evolve as long as the political structuring of social relations evolves . In conclusion , as all these activities are characterized by the growth of ties among human beings , both materially through the unexpected use of the material produced by the project , or symbolically through the construction of a new agenda for the future development of the think tank and of collaboration , all these elements could be seen as part of the wider goal of nourishing the common . 7 . CONCLUDING REMARKS In this paper , we have articulated a perspective on Participatory Design as nourishing the common , the ensemble of symbolic and material elements that tie together human beings . In this perspective , PD appears as structuring social relations that are highly political through democratic design experiments . We have theoretically articulated the necessities that a PD process in this context should satisfy and we discussed them through an empirical case . TDT was characterized by a context deeply influenced by austerity policies that pushed our participants toward the search for a renewed autonomy . The open design process in itself improved the conditions of our participants , 9 especially through renewed knowledge on their domain of action and an improvement on their collaboration . Nevertheless , a few questions remain open . First , our project took place in a specific and situated institutional context , that of think tanks and limited economic resources . In this case , the built alliance with highly skilled collaborators of the think tank involved has proven fruitful but future research will be needed to clarify how this kind of process could benefit other social groups . Second , the wider societal conditions have been part of the project as a context for it and as a goal for political action but only time will allow us to evaluate if and how changes will take place . Third , the inclusion of a third partner , the technical one , will question the proposed project through a re - composition of the participants , introducing new perspectives and points of view , whose effects are all to be observed . In conclusion , we see our contribution and these final questions as participating in the ongoing discussion on the transformations of Participatory Design to catch up and influence societal transformations . 8 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank all the people at ThinkTank who have looked for us , worked with us , and made us feel special anytime we met . In particular , without Giulio this project would have never come into existence . Formally , Maurizio ' s commitment was possible thanks to the " Città Educante " project , funded by the Italian Ministry of Education and Research . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Akama , Y . 2015 . Being awake to Ma : designing in between - ness as a way of becoming with . CoDesign 11 , 3 - 4 : 262 – 274 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2015 . 1081243 [ 2 ] Andersen L . B . , Danholt , P . , Halskov K . , Brodersen Hansen N . , and Lauritsen , P . 2015 . Participation as a matter of concern in participatory design . CoDesign 11 , 3 - 4 : 250 – 261 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2015 . 1081246 [ 3 ] Beck , E . E . 2002 . P for political : Participation is not enough . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems 14 , 1 : 77 – 92 . [ 4 ] Binder , T . , Brandt , E . , Ehn , P . , and Halse , J . 2015 . Democratic design experiments : between parliament and laboratory . CoDesign 11 , 3 - 4 : 152 – 165 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2015 . 1081248 [ 5 ] Bossen , C . , Dindler , C . , and Iversen , O . S . 2010 . User Gains and PD Aims : Assessment from a Participatory Design Project . Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , ACM , 141 – 150 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1900441 . 1900461 [ 6 ] Dahlberg , L . 2011 . Re - constructing digital democracy : An outline of four “positions . ” New Media & Society 13 , 6 : 855 – 872 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1461444810389569 [ 7 ] Dearden , A . , Walker , S . , and Watts , L . 2005 . Choosing Friends Carefully : Allies for Critical Computing . Proceedings of the 4th Decennial Conference on Critical Computing : Between Sense and Sensibility , ACM , 133 – 136 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1094562 . 1094582 [ 8 ] Diletti , M . 2010 . I think Tank : le fabbriche delle idee in America e in Europa Bologna . Il Mulino . [ 9 ] DiSalvo , C . , Clement , A . , and Pipek , V . 2012 . Participatory design for , with , and by communities . In International Handbook of Participatory Design , Simonsen J . and Robertson T . ( eds . ) . Routledge , Oxford , 182 – 209 . [ 10 ] DiSalvo , C . , Lukens , J . , Lodato , T . , Jenkins , T . , and Kim , T . 2014 . Making Public Things : How HCI Design Can Express Matters of Concern . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 2397 – 2406 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557359 [ 11 ] Ehn , P . 2008 . Participation in Design Things . Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 , Indiana University , 92 – 101 . Retrieved August 10 , 2014 from http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1795234 . 1795248 [ 12 ] Ertner , M . , Kragelund , A . M . , and Malmborg , L . 2010 . Five Enunciations of Empowerment in Participatory Design . Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , ACM , 191 – 194 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1900441 . 1900475 [ 13 ] Gartner J . and Wagner , I . 1996 . Mapping Actors and Agendas : Political Frameworks of Systems Design and Participation . Human – Computer Interaction 11 , 3 : 187 – 214 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327051hci1103 _ 1 [ 14 ] Gerrard V . and Sosa , R . 2014 . Examining Participation . Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers - Volume 1 , ACM , 111 – 120 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2661435 . 2661451 [ 15 ] Greenbaum , J . 1996 . Post Modern Times : Participation Beyound the Workplace . PDC , 65 – 72 . [ 16 ] Hakken , D . , Teli , M . , and Andrews , B . 2015 . Beyond Capital : Values , Commons , Computing , and the Search for a Viable Future . Routledge . [ 17 ] Hardt , M . and Negri , A . 2001 . Empire . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , Mass . [ 18 ] Hardt M . and Negri , A . 2005 . Multitude : War and democracy in the age of empire . Penguin . [ 19 ] Hardt , M . and Negri , A . 2009 . Commonwealth . Belknap Press , Cambridge , Mass . [ 20 ] Harvey , D . 2012 . Rebel Cities : From the Right to the City to the Urban Revolution . Verso Books . [ 21 ] Harvey , D . 2014 . Seventeen Contradictions and the End of Capitalism . Oxford University Press , Oxford ; New York . [ 22 ] Karasti , H . 2010 . Taking PD to Multiple Contexts : A reply to Kyng . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems 22 , 1 : 85 – 92 . [ 23 ] Le Dantec C . A . and DiSalvo , C . 2013 . Infrastructuring and the formation of publics in participatory design . Social Studies of Science 43 , 2 : 241 – 264 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0306312712471581 [ 24 ] Light , A . and Akama , Y . 2014 . Structuring Future Social Relations : The Politics of Care in Participatory Practice . Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers - Volume 1 , ACM , 151 – 160 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2661435 . 2661438 [ 25 ] Marttila , S . , Botero , A . , and Saad - Sulonen , J . 2014 . Towards commons design in participatory design . Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference , ACM , 9 – 12 . [ 26 ] Marttila , S . , Nilsson M . E . , and Seravalli , A . 2014 . Opening Production : Design and Commons . In Making Futures : Marginal Notes on Innovation , Design , and Democracy , Ehn , P . , Nilsson M . E . and Topgaard R . ( eds . ) . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 87 – 98 . 10 [ 27 ] Morini C . and Fumagalli , A . 2010 . Life put to work : Towards a life theory of value . Ephemera : theory & politics in organization 10 , 3 / 4 : 234 – 252 . [ 28 ] Ostrom , E . 1990 . Governing the Commons : The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . [ 29 ] Palmås K . and von Busch , O . 2015 . Quasi - Quisling : co - design and the assembly of collaborateurs . CoDesign 11 , 3 - 4 : 236 – 249 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2015 . 1081247 [ 30 ] Sabiescu , A . G . , Salomão D . , van Zyl , I . , and Cantoni , L . 2014 . Emerging Spaces in Community - based Participatory Design : Reflections from Two Case Studies . Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers - Volume 1 , ACM , 1 – 10 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2661435 . 2661446 [ 31 ] Sassen , S . . 2001 . The Global City : New York , London , Tokyo . Princeton University Press , Princeton , N . J . [ 32 ] Storni , C . 2014 . The Problem of De - sign As Conjuring : Empowerment - in - use and the Politics of Seams . Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers - Volume 1 , ACM , 161 – 170 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2661435 . 2661436 [ 33 ] Storni , C . 2015 . Notes on ANT for designers : ontological , methodological and epistemological turn in collaborative design . CoDesign 11 , 3 - 4 : 166 – 178 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2015 . 1081242 [ 34 ] Teli , M . 2015 . Computing and the Common . Hints of a new utopia in Participatory Design . Aarhus Series on Human Centered Computing 1 , 1 : 4 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21318 [ 35 ] Teli , M . , Bordin , S . , Menéndez Blanco , M . , Orabona , G . , and De Angeli , A . . 2015 . Public design of digital commons in urban places : A case study . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 81 : 17 – 30 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2015 . 02 . 003 [ 36 ] Tett , G . 2009 . Fool’s gold : how the bold dream of a small tribe at J . P . Morgan was corrupted by Wall Street greed and unleashed a catastrophe . Simon and Schuster . [ 37 ] Whittle , J . 2014 . How Much Participation is Enough ? A Comparison of Six Participatory Design Projects in Terms of Outcomes . Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers - Volume 1 , ACM , 121 – 130 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2661435 . 2661445 [ 38 ] Woodcock , J . . 2014 . The workers’ inquiry from Trotskyism to Operaismo : A political methodology for investigating the workplace . ephemera : theory & politics in organization 14 , 3 .