O R I G I N A L A R T I C L E Escherichia coli K1 utilizes host macropinocytic pathways for invasion of brain microvascular endothelial cells Lip Nam Loh 1 | Elizabeth M . C . McCarthy 1 | Priyanka Narang 1 | Naveed A . Khan 2 | Theresa H . Ward 1 1 Department of Immunology and Infection , Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases , London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine , London , UK 2 Department of Biological Sciences , Faculty of Science and Technology , Sunway University , Selangor , Malaysia Present address Lip Nam Loh , Departments of Pediatrics , and Microbiology and Immunology , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , NY . Present address Priyanka Narang , Envision Pharma Group , Horsham , UK . Correspondence Theresa H . Ward , Department of Immunology and Infection , Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases , London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine , London , UK . Email : theresa . ward @ lshtm . ac . uk Funding information Bloomsbury Colleges PhD Studentship ; Central Research Fund , University of London Eukaryotic cells utilize multiple endocytic pathways for specific uptake of ligands or molecules , and these pathways are commonly hijacked by pathogens to enable host cell invasion . Escheri - chia coli K1 , a pathogenic bacterium that causes neonatal meningitis , invades the endothelium of the blood - brain barrier , but the entry route remains unclear . Here , we demonstrate that the bacteria trigger an actin - mediated uptake route , stimulating fluid phase uptake , membrane ruf - fling and macropinocytosis . The route of uptake requires intact lipid rafts as shown by choles - terol depletion . Using a variety of perturbants we demonstrate that small Rho GTPases and their downstream effectors have a significant effect on bacterial invasion . Furthermore , clathrin - mediated endocytosis appears to play an indirect role in E . coli K1 uptake . The data suggest that the bacteria effect a complex interplay between the Rho GTPases to increase their chances of uptake by macropinocytosis into human brain microvascular endothelial cells . KEYWORDS clathrin - independent endocytosis , dynamin , Escherichia coli , macropinocytosis , neonatal meningitis , Rho GTPase family 1 | INTRODUCTION Neonatal bacterial meningitis ( NBM ) is a life - threatening disease that progresses rapidly , and , despite advances in chemotherapy and sup - portive care that have reduced overall case numbers , at least in industrialized countries , up to 50 % of survivors are left with long - term disability and serious neurological dysfunction . 1 – 4 The Escheri - chia coli strain carrying the K1 capsule is globally the most common cause of NBM in early neonates ( only surpassed by Group B strepto - coccus in the developed world ) , and mortality rates remain high at 10 % - 58 % . 1 , 3 – 8 Several bacterial virulence factors are thought to contribute to bacterial traversal of the blood - brain barrier ( BBB ) , a critical step to penetrate the brain and cause the disease pathophysiology . 9 Bacterial adherence to receptors on the surface of human brain microvascular endothelial cells ( HBMEC ) stimulates the activation of host molecules involved in a number of signalling pathways , including signal transdu - cer and activator of transcription 3 ( stat3 ) , focal adhesion kinase , phosphatidylinositol - 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) , protein kinase C α ( PKC α ) , p21 - activated kinase 1 ( PAK1 ) and the small GTPases Rac1 and RhoA . 10 – 17 These signalling events result in actin polymerization at the bacterial adhesion site , which is necessary for bacterial internali - zation into HBMEC . 18 However , the specific endocytic pathway hijacked by the bacterial invasion of HBMEC is not well characterized , 19 , 20 and could contribute to identification of targets for prevention and therapy of E . coli meningitis . Here , using perturbation of endocytosis by overexpression of functional mutant proteins and by inhibition with small compound inhibitors and siRNA , 20 in conjunction with fluorescence microscopy and quantitative flow cytometry - based assays , we demonstrate that the bacteria exploit fluid phase uptake , or macropinocytic , pathways to gain entry into HBMEC . We show that this invasion process is Received : 13 July 2016 Revised and accepted : 7 August 2017 Uncorrected manuscript published : 11 August 2017 Published on : 20 September 2017 DOI : 10 . 1111 / tra . 12508 © 2017 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd Traffic . 2017 ; 18 : 733 – 746 . wileyonlinelibrary . com / journal / tra 733 actin - mediated , that it coordinates the collective activity of the small GTPases of the Rho family ( RhoA , Rac1 and Cdc42 ) and downstream effectors ( including PAK1 , PKC and PI3K ) , and requires cholesterol to enable phagocytic - like uptake of E . coli K1 into the host cells . 2 | RESULTS 2 . 1 | E . coli K1 invasion of HBMEC is dependent upon actin recruitment The current literature has identified host - specific signalling molecules that contribute to E . coli K1 interaction with HBMEC but remains unclear on the uptake pathway that leads to cell invasion . 12 , 15 , 17 , 21 , 22 Therefore , we have taken a first principles approach to investigate the route of endocytic invasion of HBMEC by E . coli K1 . Actin polymerization plays a role in multiple endocytic path - ways . 19 , 20 To study the relation of actin to invading bacteria , HBMEC were infected with E . coli K1 bacteria for 30 minutes , then fixed and stained for extracellular and intracellular bacteria sequentially in con - junction with phalloidin staining to label actin . Bacteria at the cell sur - face showed association with ruffling membrane denoted by actin filaments ( Figure 1A , B ) . Invading bacteria were surrounded by an actin cup ( Figure 1B ) . Internalized bacteria were found with and with - out actin coats ( Figure 1C , D , respectively ) . Quantitation of bacteria with and without actin at different time points following infection ( Figure S1C ) suggests a role for actin in coating the bacterial vacuole during its formation and the actin then depolymerises once the bac - terium is completely internalized . The role of the cytoskeleton in bac - terial uptake was therefore further investigated using cytoskeleton perturbation agents . Cells were pretreated with several inhibitors ( Figure 1E ) and then infected with E . coli K1 for 1 hour . The F - actin depolymerizing agent cytochalasin D , the F - actin stabilizing agent jas - plakinolide , or blebbistatin , an inhibitor of myosin II which has been shown to drive closure of actin cups , all significantly inhibited bacter - ial invasion while nocodazole , a microtubule - destabilizing agent , had FIGURE 1 Escherichia coli K1 recruits actin to invade HBMEC . A - D , HBMEC were infected with E . coli K1 for 30 minutes , fixed and stained with differential permeabilization for bacteria and actin . External bacteria are shown in purple , bacteria that stained only after permeabilization ( ie , internalized bacteria ) are blue , actin in green . Scale bar 5 μ m . A , Projected z - stack of group of cells , shown in B at higher magnification from a single confocal slice in xy and xz dimensions . Note actin cup ( yellow arrowhead ) around central bacterium . C , Internalized bacterium ( white arrowhead ) surrounded by actin ( yellow arrowhead ) , D , Internalized bacteria ( white arrowhead ) no longer colocalizing with actin . E , Cells were pretreated with cytoskeleton - disrupting agents for 30 minutes , then infected with E . coli K1 for 1 hour . Internalized bacteria were assayed by colony counting and normalized to the appropriate mock treatment , either RPMI alone or with DMSO . Cyt D , cytochalasin D ; Jasp , jasplakinolide ; Bleb , blebbistatin ; NZ , nocodazole ; concentrations as shown . Data shown are mean (cid:1) SEM from 2 independent experiments with 3 replicates each . * * * P < . 001 compared to related mock treatment . n . s . no significance 734 LOH ET AL . no effect ( Figure 1E ) . These results demonstrated that , while microtu - bules were not required , actin played an important role in bacterial entry and infection . Through timelapse imaging of HBMEC expressing an actin repor - ter , the host cells were found to respond directly to E . coli K1 . Actin - based membrane ruffling throughout the cell surface was induced from 5 to 10 minutes following exposure to the bacteria , with the cells becoming quiescent from 25 to 30 minutes ( Movie S1 ; Figure S1A , B ) . Following this time series , a z - stack through a cell shows an internalized bacterium ( Figure S1B ) . Quantitation of actin showed that ruffling was induced by E . coli K1 but not by non - pathogenic E . coli K - 12 ( Figure S1D ) . This suggests that the bacteria induce actin mobilization to upregulate the cell ' s uptake pathways to enable cell entry . 2 . 2 | Involvement of actin - modulating small GTPases in E . coli K1 invasion Previous publications have implicated the actin recruitment proteins RhoA and Rac1 with putative roles in E . coli K1 invasion . 12 , 15 , 17 The Rho GTPases cycle between a GTP - bound , active , state and a GDP - bound , inactive , state . Activity can be modulated by expression of dominant mutants which alter nucleotide binding . To study invol - vement of the Rho family of GTPases during bacterial invasion quan - titatively , HBMEC were transiently transfected with GFP chimaeric constructs of the GTPases and their related mutants . A plasmid encoding GFP alone was transfected into HBMEC as a transfection control . Transfected cells were infected with E . coli K1 bacteria expressing mCherry ( K1 - Cherry ) for 2 hours , incubated for 1 hour in media containing gentamicin to kill extracellular bacteria , processed for imaging , and then tiled z - stack confocal images were acquired to obtain a large unbiased field . Quantification of GFP - positive cells with intracellular K1 - Cherry showed that cells transfected with activated RhoA ( RhoA V14 ) and Rac1 ( Rac1 L61 ) both had significantly higher number of cells with internalized bacteria , while cdc42 activated mutant ( cdc42 V12 ) had no significant effect on bacterial uptake when compared to wild type ( WT ) but did significantly increase num - ber of cells with bacterial uptake when compared to the inactive mutant , cdc42 N17 and the GFP control ( Figure 2A ) . Furthermore , the inactive mutants of RhoA and Rac1 showed significant reduction in number of infected cells relative to the GFP control . In the case of all GTPase constructs some internalized bacteria could be seen to colocalize with a concentrated ring of GFP stain while others were found without any specific colocalization ( Figure 2B , C shows cdc42 as an example of this ) . As bacterial uptake was not tightly synchro - nized , this would suggest that during invasion , the bacteria transiently associate with membranes to which the small GTPases are recruited and these are then released from the membrane as the bacterial vacuole matures . The effect of inhibition of downstream effectors of the Rho GTPases including PAK1 , PKC and PI3K with IPA - 3 , GF109203X and wortmannin , respectively , was next tested . These inhibitors were found to significantly block entry of bacteria into cells ( Figure 2D ) . In comparison , transferrin uptake , used as a marker for clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) , was not inhibited by any of the kinase inhibitors tested , indeed PKC inhibition led to increased transferrin uptake . Furthermore , uptake of labelled dextran , a marker for fluid phase uptake , was found to be markedly inhibited only by wortman - nin treatment ( Figure 2D ) . To further investigate activation of signal - ling pathways , total cell lysates were analyzed by Western blot with antibodies to phosphorylated Akt , a downstream effector of PI3K ( Figure 7C , D ) . As found in previous studies , Akt was transiently phos - phorylated following infection of HBMEC . 16 Together these results support a role for Rho GTPases , and their downstream effectors , in E . coli K1 invasion of HBMEC . 2 . 3 | E . coli K1 invasion of HBMEC is cholesterol - dependent The involvement of actin , the membrane ruffling and the importance of non - specific Rho GTPase activity and the regulatory kinases all point to macropinocytosis or another clathrin - independent pathway as a potential entry mechanism for E . coli K1 into the endothelial cells . 23 As cholesterol is required for membrane ruffling , lipid raft - dependent endocytosis ( such as caveolar uptake ) and macropinocytosis , 24 – 26 the effect of HBMEC treatment with methyl - β - cyclodextrin ( M β CD ) , a reagent used to deplete membrane cholesterol , was tested on the uptake of E . coli K1 . Bacterial invasion was significantly inhibited by > 95 % upon cholesterol depletion ( Figure 3A ) . Conversely , cholesterol loading of HBMEC through the addition of water - soluble cholesterol ( M β CD - cholesterol complexes ) increased bacterial invasion by 79 % (cid:1) 16 % ( Figure 3A ) . These data indicated the importance of cho - lesterol and associated lipid rafts in E . coli K1 invasion of HBMEC . As a comparison , the effect of cholesterol depletion with M β CD and cholesterol loading on the endocytic markers transferrin ( for clathrin - mediated uptake ) and dextran ( for fluid phase uptake ) was also explored ( Figure 3B ) . Cholesterol depletion had an inhibi - tory effect on dextran uptake while transferrin uptake was enhanced by cholesterol depletion , both with dose - dependent effect . Therefore , E . coli K1 uptake again more closely resembled the dynamics of the fluid phase pathway in response to cholesterol depletion treatment . 2 . 4 | E . coli K1 invasion of HBMEC is caveolin - 1 - independent Caveolae - mediated endocytosis is highly sensitive to cholesterol - depleting agents , 27 and has previously been implicated in E . coli K1 invasion of HBMEC . 21 , 22 To investigate this possible uptake route , HBMEC were infected with E . coli K1 - Cherry , fixed at indicated time points post - infection , and immunolabelled for caveolin - 1 . After 30 minutes of infection , some bacteria could be found localized in compartments weakly labelled for caveolin - 1 ( Figure 4A , white arrows ) . However , quantification showed that only about 4 % of the bacteria were closely associated with caveolin - 1 after 30 - minute infection ( Figure 4B ) , which was further reduced to about 1 % at 2 hours post - infection ( p . i . ) and continued to diminish at later time points . Therefore , association of E . coli K1 with caveolin - 1 seemed to be a rare event , occurring at early time points of infection , presum - ably during internalization . LOH ET AL . 735 While these data suggested that caveolae - mediated uptake was not a major route of invasion for E . coli K1 into HBMEC , it was possi - ble that the interaction with caveolin may be too fleeting to record . However , expression of a dominant caveolin - 1 mutant that inacti - vates caveolae - dependent uptake ( caveolin - 1 - Tyr14 28 , 29 ) had no effect on E . coli K1 invasion into HBMEC ( Figure 4C ) . Furthermore , bacterial invasion of either caveolin - 1 knockout ( Cav1 KO ) endothe - lial cells compared to WT cells , or caveolin - 1 knockdown in HBMEC with siRNA , in both cases revealed that loss of caveolin - 1 resulted in a significant increase in E . coli K1 invasion ( Figure 4D , E , respectively ) , indicating that the presence of caveolin - 1 was not essential for bac - terial entry . As caveolin - 2 expression is suppressed by knockdown of caveolin - 1 , it is not possible that this is acting in a compensatory manner . 30 – 33 Overall , our data therefore indicated that E . coli K1 invasion of HBMEC is not dependent on caveolae - mediated endocytosis . 2 . 5 | E . coli K1 invasion of HBMEC is dynamin - dependent Many endocytic routes , including clathrin - mediated , caveolae and some lipid - raft - dependent uptake routes , require recruitment of dynamin ( Dyn ) , a large GTPase necessary for pinching off transport intermedi - ates from the plasma membrane . Overexpression of the GDP - locked dynamin mutant inhibits these uptake routes . 34 – 36 We therefore hypothesized that , if the bacteria invaded HBMEC in a dynamin - dependent manner , overexpression of Dyn2 ( aa ) K44A , 37 would inhibit E . coli K1 invasion of HBMEC . HBMEC were transiently transfected FIGURE 2 Rho family GTPases alter E . coli K1 invasion dynamics and are recruited onto bacterial vacuoles . A , Graphs showing quantitation of GFP - GTPase - expressing HBMEC containing intracellular bacteria following 2 - hour infection at m . o . i . approximately 100 . In each graph , the data is normalized to the transfection control cells expressing GFP only in the left column , then the columns in order indicate data from cells expressing the GFP - tagged WT GTPase , those expressing the dominant positive mutant and the right column the dominant negative GTPase . Cells expressing dominant positive Rho GTPases show a significant increase in number of infected mutant - expressing cells , while cells expressing the inactive mutant of Rac1 and RhoA show an inhibition in bacterial invasion as compared to the GFP control . Data shown are mean (cid:1) SEM of 3 independent experiments normalized to soluble GFP transfection control . No significant difference was found in number of intracellular bacteria per cell . B shows xy view of cell containing intracellular bacteria either enclosed in a cdc42 - labelled vacuole ( white arrow ) or without cdc42 label ( yellow arrowhead ) . C shows the corresponding orthogonal view . D , The effect of kinase inhibitors ( IPA - 3 , GF109203X , wortmannin ) on E . coli K1 infection ( 1 hour ) and on uptake of transferrin and dextran markers ( 30 minutes ) was assayed by colony counting and by flow cytometry , respectively , and normalized to the control . Data shown are mean (cid:1) SEM of 2 independent experiments each with triplicate samples . # Data not shown owing to overlapping emission spectra of kinase inhibitor and fluorescent marker . * * * P < . 001 736 LOH ET AL . with GFP - tagged Dyn2 chimaeric constructs , with a plasmid encoding GFP alone used as a transfection control . Following infection with K1 - Cherry for 30 minutes , bacteria at the cell surface showed no specific colocalization with dynamin , nor were any intracellular bacteria encircled by dynamin stain ( Figure S2C ) as has been seen previously with invading bacteria such as Listeria monocytogenes . 38 Quantification of GFP - positive cells with intracellular K1 - Cherry showed no inhibition of bacterial invasion in cells overexpressing Dyn2 ( aa ) K44A GFP ( Figure 5A ) , contrary to what would be expected for a dynamin - dependent uptake route . Repetition of the experiments with Dyn1 constructs confirmed these results , and no reduction in E . coli K1 inva - sion of HBMEC overexpressing dominant negative Dyn1 ( Dyn1K44A - GFP ) was seen ( Figure 5A ) . In fact , there was a modest enhancement in E . coli K1 internalization into these cells compared to cells expressing WT Dyn1 , although it was not statistically significant . To demonstrate that the dynamin mutant had a significant effect on the dynamin - dependent uptake pathways in these cells , a control transferrin uptake experiment was performed with either Dyn2 ( aa ) WT - GFP or Dyn2 ( aa ) K44A - GFP expressing cells . Figure S2A , B demonstrates that transferrin uptake is abrogated in cells expressing GFP - tagged mutant Dyn2 . Furthermore , when the chimaeric Dyn2 constructs were expressed in HBMEC and the cells were infected with L . monocytogenes , uptake was inhibited by both the dominant mutant and by overexpression of the WT Dyn2 construct itself ( Figure 5B ) . We further tested the role of dynamin by using the inhibitory agent dynasore to inhibit dynamin in the E . coli K1 invasion assay . Only at high concentration was dynasore found to inhibit E . coli K1 uptake ( Figure 5C ) . In contrast , dynasore had a significant impact on Listeria invasion at the lowest concentration tested ( Figure 5C ) . At high concentrations dynasore inhibits fluid - phase endocytosis in a dynamin - independent manner ( Figure S3A ) , 39 which may explain why E . coli K1 invasion is only affected at high concentration . The effect of Dyn2 depletion through siRNA transfection on E . coli K1 uptake was also investigated . Relatively inefficient knockdown was achieved in the HBMEC , however , with a 45 % reduction in Dyn2 levels , a 40 % reduction in bacterial invasion was seen ( Figure 5D ) . This suggests that , while dynamin had some effect on E . coli K1 invasion , it was not as clear a role as seen with L . monocytogenes infection . 2 . 6 | E . coli K1 upregulates macropinocytosis and utilizes the pathway to invade HBMEC To further explore the role of macropinocytosis in E . coli K1 inva - sion , the effect of bacteria on fluid phase uptake was investigated . Internalization of fluid by macropinocytosis can be stimulated with high levels of serum . 40 , 41 Fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) - dextran , employed as a marker for fluid phase uptake during macropinocyto - sis , was added to serum - starved HBMEC in low - or high - serum medium , or in conjunction with bacterial infection , and cells were then analyzed by flow cytometry for FITC content ( Figure 6A ) . The experimental medium used for bacterial invasion had a low - serum content , and the high - serum experimental medium was employed as a positive control for macropinocytic uptake in HBMEC . 40 , 41 Analy - sis of FITC levels revealed that high serum induced a small but reproducible and significant shift in median FITC measurements , indicative of increased fluid phase uptake in cells stimulated with serum ( Figure 6A ) . FITC - dextran internalization was also increased relative to low - serum media alone upon exposure to E . coli K1 ( Figure 6A ) , indicating that bacteria increase fluid phase uptake in HBMEC . Activity of the Na + / H + exchanger at the plasma membrane mod - ulates Rho GTPases and this can be inhibited by the amiloride - derivative 5 - ( N - Ethyl - N - isopropyl ) amiloride ( EIPA ) thereby inhibiting macropinosome formation . 42 Another reagent often used as a macro - pinocytosis inhibitor is rottlerin , potentially acting through PKC although its mechanism of action is unclear . 23 , 43 Treatment of HBMEC with either EIPA or rottlerin had a strong inhibitory effect on fluid phase uptake as measured by labelled 10 kDa dextran internali - zation ( Figure 6B ) . Clathrin - mediated uptake of transferrin was not FIGURE 3 Escherichia coli K1 invasion of HBMEC is inhibited upon cholesterol depletion . A , HBMEC were pretreated with methyl - β - cyclodextrin ( MbCD ) or loaded with cholesterol at indicated concentrations 30 minutes before infection with E . coli K1 for 1 hour . Internalized bacteria were assayed by colony counting and normalized to control treatment ( SFM ) . B , HBMEC were pretreated as in A , then labelled with FITC - dextran and transferrin - Alexa - Fluor 647 for 30 minutes at 37 (cid:3) C . For each treatment , 10 000 cells were analyzed by flow cytometry and normalized to untreated cells . Data shown are mean (cid:1) SEM from 2 independent experiments with 3 replicates each . * P < . 05 , * * P < . 01 , * * * P < . 001 , n . s . no significance LOH ET AL . 737 inhibited by these treatments , and rottlerin induced a strong increase in transferrin uptake compared to the control . EIPA and rottlerin reduced E . coli K1 invasion by 95 % and 99 % , respectively ( Figure 6B ) , indicating that E . coli K1 requires macropinocytosis in order to infect HBMEC . When cells were infected with E . coli K1 in the presence of Alexa - Fluor 647 - dextran for 30 minutes , fixed and stained for extra - and intracellular bacteria and then imaged , labelled dextran coloca - lized with internalized bacteria ( Figure 6C ) . Quantification of interna - lized bacteria associated with dextran following 30 minutes uptake showed that 59 . 7 % (cid:1) 4 . 9 % bacteria were in dextran - positive FIGURE 4 Manipulation of caveolae function does not alter E . coli K1 invasion . A , Confocal image of intracellular bacterium associated with caveolin - 1 following infection with E . coli K1 for 30 minutes and cell fixation . DAPI labels DNA in the host cell and the bacteria . Arrow indicates association of caveolin - 1 around invading bacterium while arrowheads indicate bacteria without specific caveolin - 1 association . Scale bar 5 μ m . B , Quantification from micrographs of intracellular bacteria associated with caveolin - 1 following infection for the time indicated . A decrease in the percentage of bacteria associated with caveolin - 1 was observed , although very few bacteria are associated with caveolin - 1 even at the earliest timepoint . C , GFP - tagged caveolin - 1 mutant constructs inhibit caveolae - dependent uptake of cargo or bacteria . HBMEC were transiently transfected with caveolin - 1 - GFP chimaeras : WT or phosphorylation mutant ( Tyr14 ) as indicated . LDLR A18 GFP was a transfection control . GFP - expressing cells were scored for the presence of intracellular E . coli K1 following infection for 2 hours . There was no statistically significant difference seen in bacterial invasion between cells expressing caveolin - 1 WT and caveolin - 1 Tyr14 ( or other caveolin - 1 mutants , not shown ) . D , Mouse lung endothelial cells ( MLEC ) isolated from wild type and caveolin - 1 knockout mice were infected with either E . coli K1 or non - pathogenic E . coli K - 12 for 2 hours , then bacterial invasion analyzed by cfu assay . E , Uptake of E . coli K1 for 2 hours following siRNA depletion of caveolin - 1 . Protein expression was quantitated by western blotting of samples and relative expression determined against control siRNA ( data not shown ) . Average knockdown was 73 % (cid:1) 2 % . Actin was used as a loading control . Data shown are mean (cid:1) SD of 2 or 3 independent experiments each with triplicate samples . * P < . 05 , n . s . no significance 738 LOH ET AL . compartments ( Figure 6D ) . These data indicated that the bacteria entered through the macropinocytic pathway . 2 . 7 | Clathrin - mediated endocytosis is indirectly involved in E . coli K1 invasion Although clathrin has not been found associated with bacterial vacuoles as visualized by microscopy , 18 the involvement of clathrin - mediated uptake in E . coli K1 invasion has not been quantitatively measured . Chlorpromazine ( CPZ ) is a pharmacologic inhibitor of CME but has off - target effects that can vary between cell types . 44 – 46 When the effect of CPZ on bacterial invasion of HBMEC was assessed , no significant inhibition of E . coli K1 invasion was found across a range of concentrations ( Figure 7A ) . Although there appeared to be decreased efficiency in invasion with lower concen - trations of CPZ , this was not statistically significant . In contrast , inva - sion of L . monocytogenes , which enters cells utilizing the CME pathway components , 38 , 47 was inhibited by CPZ in dose - dependent manner ( Figure 7A ) . When the effect of CPZ on endocytic markers was tested , transferrin uptake showed a small but significant inhibi - tory effect , while dextran was unaffected ( Figure S3A ) . In support of the earlier study by Prasadarao et al , 18 we also found no association of clathrin with bacterial vacuoles containing E . coli K1 , while Listeria bacteria were found to colocalize with clathrin ( Figure S3B ) . This sup - ports E . coli K1 invasion through a non - clathrin - mediated pathway . Specific targeting of clathrin - mediated uptake through siRNA depletion of adaptor protein complex 2 ( AP2 ) resulted in a decrease of 80 % in E . coli K1 invasion ( Figure 7B ) . This somewhat contradicted the CPZ result and suggested that clathrin might be the major uptake pathway for E . coli K1 . However , when cells were also treated with EIPA , to additionally block macropinocytosis , bacterial invasion was 95 % inhibited ( Figure 7B ) . When the effect of AP2 depletion on E . coli - stimulated Akt phos - phorylation was examined through immunoblotting of cell lysates ( Figure 7C , D ) , this revealed that Akt phosphorylation was greatly reduced compared to control ( approximately 50 % level of phospho - Akt ) at 30 - minute post - infection . This would suggest that a long - term block in clathrin - mediated uptake , as in a siRNA transfection time - course , reduced an important plasma membrane component for E . coli K1 invasion , diminishing both invasion and signalling . As trafficking through clathrin - independent endocytic routes has been found to exhibit some dependency on FIGURE 5 Manipulation of dynamin activity inhibits bacterial invasion of HBMEC . A , HBMEC transiently transfected with GFP - tagged dynamin constructs were infected with K1 - Cherry for 2 hours . GFP - expressing cells were scored for the presence of intracellular E . coli K1 . Soluble GFP was an experimental control . No statistically significant difference was seen between control , wild type and mutant dynamin , indicating that overexpression of dominant negative dynamin 1 and 2 did not inhibit E . coli K1 invasion of HBMEC . , n . s . no significance B , As for A , following infection with L . monocytogenes . C , HBMEC were pretreated for 30 minutes with dynasore at concentrations shown , then infected with either E . coli K1 or L . monocytogenes for 1 hour . Internalized bacteria were assayed by colony counting and normalized to the appropriate control ( RPMI with DMSO ) . D , Uptake of E . coli K1 for 2 hours following siRNA depletion of dynamin 2 . Average knockdown was 45 % (cid:1) 3 % . Protein expression was quantitated by western blotting of samples and relative expression determined against negative siRNA ( data not shown ) . Actin was used as a loading control . Data shown are mean (cid:1) SEM of 2 or 3 independent experiments each with triplicate samples . * P < . 05 , * * P < . 01 , * * * P < . 001 LOH ET AL . 739 CME , 48 this may explain the apparent effect of CME blocks on E . coli K1 invasion . 3 | DISCUSSION In order to establish meningitis , E . coli K1 must induce its uptake by the endothelial cells that form the BBB , and then traverse these cells . These microvascular endothelial cells are known to have very few endocytic vesicles , 49 which may derive from any of the clathrin - dependent or - independent endocytic pathways . 19 Therefore , in order to gain entry to the cells , the bacteria must induce huge changes in uptake dynamics . The actin - mediated membrane ruffling seen here at the cell surface points to bacteria - induced upregulation of macropinocytic activity . This enables a phagocytic - like uptake of the bacteria . The requirement for actin in E . coli K1 uptake into HBMEC has been demonstrated by both accumulation of host actin to the mem - brane underlying invading bacteria , by the increased actin mobiliza - tion seen in the live imaging , and by the inhibitory effects on bacterial invasion by actin inhibitors ( here and Ref . 18 ) . The small GTPases of the Rho family ( Rho , Rac1 and cdc42 ) are frequently involved in the signalling cascade which regulates actin filament dynamics leading to membrane ruffling . 23 The bacterial toxin cyto - toxic necrotizing factor 1 ( CNF1 ) , produced by pathogenic E . coli bac - teria including E . coli K1 , coordinately activates Rho , Rac and Cdc42 , 12 , 50 , 51 which in turn upregulate generalized ruffling activity and actin recruitment , the processes which underlie induction of macropinocytosis . Previous investigations have suggested that both RhoA ( through CNF1 ) and Rac1 ( through outer membrane protein A , OmpA ) play a role in E . coli K1 uptake . 12 , 15 , 17 Here , we have demon - strated that activated RhoA , Rac1 and cdc42 can promote E . coli K1 invasion , and that this may be linked to PAK1 and PI3K activation . Signalling through the PI3K pathway culminates in phosphorylation of Akt , which has been found to also require PAK1 and PKC α for effi - cient activation . 52 , 53 CNF1 from E . coli K1 may therefore act in con - cert with OmpA to switch on the collective activity of the GTPases and their downstream effectors to bring about cytoskeletal rearran - gement to form macropinosomes ( Figure 8 ) . 12 , 17 , 18 Cdc42 and Rac1 both constitute major regulators of macropinocytosis , 20 , 23 , 54 but while RhoA has not been considered a factor in macropinocytosis , it has been implicated in lipid raft - mediated endocytic pathways . 19 , 20 Furthermore , the precedent for additional Rho GTPase family mem - bers to be required for macropinocytosis in concert with Rac1 and Cdc42 has been shown with Salmonella invasion of non - phagocytic cells , 55 where RhoG was required , together with Rac1 and Cdc42 , to FIGURE 6 Macropinocytic uptake of E . coli K1 . A , HBMEC were labelled with FITC - dextran in either experimental medium ( low serum ) or experimental medium supplemented with 20 % serum ( high serum ) or infected with E . coli K1 in low - serum experimental medium for 2 hours at 37 (cid:3) C . Cells were then analyzed by flow cytometry for uptake of FITC - dextran . Data shown are mean of triplicates (cid:1) SEM of 1 representative experiment . P values are from pairwise statistical analysis of 3 independent experiments . n . s . no significance . B , The effect of macropinocytosis inhibitors ( EIPA and rottlerin ) on 1 - hour infection of HBMEC by E . coli K1 and on 30 minutes uptake of transferrin and dextran markers was assayed by colony counting and by flow cytometry , respectively , and normalized to the DMSO control . Data shown are mean (cid:1) SEM of 2 or 3 independent experiments each with triplicate samples . * P < . 05 , * * * P < . 001 C , Confocal micrograph shows that intracellular bacteria colocalize with Alexa - Fluor 647 - dextran ( white arrow ) following 30 - minute infection of E . coli K1 while extracellular bacteria ( yellow arrowhead ) do not . Inset shows the corresponding orthoganol view of the internalized bacterium . D , Quantification of internalized bacteria colocalizing with dextran as in C . Data shown are mean (cid:1) SEM from 2 independent experiments 740 LOH ET AL . orchestrate actin modulation required for bacterial entry . The ability to manipulate bacterial invasion by all the Rho GTPases suggests that the bacterial invasion requires a dynamic activation of actin recruit - ment to upregulate macropinocytosis in order for the bacteria to force cell engulfment . Virus induction of macropinocytosis is often associated with acti - vation of signalling pathways that lead to changes in actin dynamics , causing membrane ruffling and increased fluid phase uptake , which results in internalization of particles including viruses as well as fluid . 54 , 56 Plasma membrane deformation during macropinocytosis differs from phagocytosis in that the latter specifically forms a mem - brane cup around an object targeted by the cell for uptake , while the former involves indiscriminate cell - wide membrane ruffling . Different macropinocytic mechanisms show distinct membrane formations and , while some macropinocytic events rely on induction of circular ruf - fling , others are characterized by plasma membrane deformation as either flat lamellipodial sheets or as blebs . 57 , 58 In our data , bacterial addition resulted in non - specific membrane ruffling with no evident circular formations . We also saw increased fluid uptake upon expo - sure of the endothelial cells to E . coli K1 which concurs with the elec - tron micrographs of internalized bacteria in the previous study by Prasadarao et al that showed internalized bacteria surrounded by notable amounts of fluid in their vacuoles . 18 Together , the transient membrane ruffling response of the cells to the bacteria , involvement of multiple Rho GTPases , stimulated dextran uptake and inhibition by macropinocytic inhibitory reagents all point to indiscriminate stimula - tion of particle uptake mechanisms to enable bacterial invasion by macropinocytic - like processes . This is also termed triggered phagocytosis . 56 Methyl - β - cyclodextrin has been shown before to inhibit E . coli K1 entry into HBMEC . 22 The mechanism of this inhibition is unknown and could be due to effects on cell surface receptor expres - sion such as by receptor sequestration or by inhibition of receptor - mediated invasion . However , new data shown here demonstrates that cholesterol loading of the cells has the opposite effect , where the bacteria can much more readily gain entry to the cells . This can - not be easily explained by a large increase in receptors on the surface and suggests that the levels of cholesterol in the cell membrane may alter the environment in another way to facilitate bacterial invasion . Depletion of cholesterol from membranes might remove some impor - tant receptor from the cell membranes , hence preventing uptake , however , cholesterol loading would not be expected to cause upregu - lation of an equivalent receptor during the short treatment time to explain the increased uptake and therefore this points to a more direct effect of cholesterol itself . While previous studies of E . coli K1 invasion have implicated a role for caveolae for bacterial entry into HBMEC , 21 , 22 we could find no evidence for a role for caveolae through both direct visualized association of a caveolin coat , through inhibitory effects of dominant mutants , siRNA knockdown , and through use of a KO cell line . We FIGURE 7 Effect of inhibition of clathrin - mediated endocytosis on E . coli K1 invasion . A , Uptake of L . monocytogenes and E . coli K1 for 1 hour , following pretreatment of HBMEC with the indicated concentrations of chlorpromazine ( CPZ ) for 30 minutes , was assayed by colony counting and normalized to the RPMI control . * * P < . 01 , * * * P < . 001 B , HBMEC transfected with siRNA as indicated were infected with E . coli K1 for 2 hours following pretreatment for 30 minutes with EIPA or with DMSO as a control and assayed by colony counting . Average AP2 knockdown was 76 % (cid:1) 1 % . Data shown are mean (cid:1) SEM of 2 independent experiments each with triplicate samples . C , Cells transfected with siRNA were infected with E . coli K1 for 30 or 120 minutes ( control was uninfected ) . Western blot of cell extracts shows total and phosphorylated Akt , AP2 and actin loading control for 1 experiment . Average AP2 knockdown was 83 % (cid:1) 2 . 8 % . D , Phosphorylated Akt relative to total Akt was quantified for 3 independent experiments . Data shown are mean (cid:1) SEM . n . s . no significance LOH ET AL . 741 instead found increased bacterial invasion in cells with reduced caveolin - 1 . As cholesterol is found concentrated in caveolae , they may have a role in regulating levels of cholesterol and other lipids in the plasma membrane . 59 , 60 In caveolin null cells , there is no differ - ence in total plasma membrane cholesterol compared to WT cells , 61 , 62 suggesting that the cholesterol usually sequestered within caveolae is distributed instead throughout the plasma membrane . This might lead to a membrane environment equivalent to our choles - terol loading experiment , that also led to increased invasion of HBMEC by E . coli K1 . In agreement with this , in cells depleted of caveolin - 1 fluid phase uptake is upregulated . 63 Similarly , increased membrane microdomain mobility in caveolin null cells is attributed to enhanced invasion of Staphylococcus aureus . 64 Previously , clathrin has not been implicated in E . coli K1 uptake . Here , we found an apparent effect with inhibition of CME through both pharmacological inhibitors ( of clathrin and dynamin ) and through siRNA knockdown of AP2 , the clathrin adaptor complex , although an earlier study , and our own data , could find no colocalization with cla - thrin . 18 Although the chemical inhibitors used in this study are known to have off - target effects , 44 – 46 the effects seen on Listeria uptake much more closely followed transferrin uptake as would be expected given its association with clathrin on entry , as shown here and Refs . 38 , 47 . However , in each case , E . coli K1 invasion dynamics showed very different behaviour . Dynasore inhibited E . coli K1 entry only at high concentrations . This reagent has been previously found to affect macropinocytosis , attributed to its inhibition of membrane ruffling and fluid phase uptake , which is dynamin - independent . 39 , 65 There - fore , this would explain its impact on uptake by E . coli K1 via a macropinocytic invasion route . Dynamin itself does not have a direct effect on macropinocytosis . 39 , 40 That AP2 and dynamin knockdown have such a strong effect on E . coli K1 invasion may be due to an indirect effect such as preventing cell surface recycling of important plasma membrane protein components through CME . 48 Alternatively , long - term depletion of CME components could have an effect on cholesterol homeostasis by preventing internalization of low - density lipoprotein ( LDL ) at the plasma membrane ( Figure 8 ) . 65 Blood bacteraemia must reach a threshold before the bacteria gain access to the central nervous system . 66 As the blood - brain endothelium has a high resistance to transport , it therefore appears that the E . coli K1 bacteria target a network of signalling molecules in order to stimulate macropinocytosis which the cell ordinarily uses as a broad and general mechanism for sampling fluid and solutes . By making use of the pleiotropic regulation of the host ' s macropinocytic machinery , the bacteria can thereby increase their own chances of uptake into the cells of the BBB and thus invasion into the brain . 4 | MATERIALS AND METHODS 4 . 1 | Cell culture and bacteria Mammalian cells were maintained in a humidified 37 (cid:3) C , 5 % CO 2 tissue culture incubator . HBMEC 67 were grown in RPMI - 1640 supplemented with 20 % ( vol / vol ) heat - inactivated foetal bovine serum ( FBS ) ( Biosera ) , 2 mM L - glutamine , 1 mM sodium pyruvate , 100 μ g / mL streptomycin , 100 units / mL penicillin , non - essential amino acids ( Gibco , Invitrogen ) and vitamins ( Gibco ) . Primary mouse lung endothe - lial cells ( MLEC ) ( a kind gift from B . J . Nichols , MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology , Cambridge , UK ) were grown in 50 : 50 low glucose Dulbecco ' s Modified Eagles Medium ( DMEM ) and Ham ' s F12 supple - mented with 20 % ( vol / vol ) FBS , 0 . 00125 % ( wt / vol ) heparin , 2 mM L - glutamine , 100 μ g / mL streptomycin , and 100 units / mL penicillin , 0 . 1 mg / mL endothelial cell growth supplement ( AbD Serotec ) . Reagents were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich unless otherwise stated . Bacterial strains used were E . coli K1 ( E44 ) , which is a sponta - neous rifampicin - resistant mutant of RS218 strain isolated from a neonatal meningitis patient , 68 and E . coli HB101 ( K - 12 ) , grown in Luria - Bertani ( LB ) broth at 37 (cid:3) C with shaking . E . coli K1 constitutively expressing mCherry ( K1 - Cherry ) were described previously and are not compromised for invasion in HBMEC . 69 Listeria monocytogenes ( a kind gift from G . J . Bancroft , LSHTM ) was grown in brain - heart infusion ( BHI ) broth . 4 . 2 | Antibodies Antibodies used were : monoclonal mouse anti - β - actin ( clone AC - 15 ) , monoclonal mouse anti - adaptin α ( clone 8 ; BD Biosciences ) , monoclo - nal rabbit anti - pan Akt ( Cell Signaling Technology ) , polyclonal rabbit anti - phospho - Akt ( Ser473 ) ( Cell Signaling Technology ) , polyclonal rab - bit antibody to caveolin - 1 ( BD Biosciences ) , monoclonal mouse anti - clathrin ( clone X22 was a kind gift from FM Brodsky , UCL ) , polyclonal rabbit anti - dynamin 2 ( Genetex Inc . ) , polyclonal rabbit antibody to FIGURE 8 Model for E . coli K1 internalization in HBMEC . E . coli K1 enters the cell through an actin - dependent , cholesterol - dependent process , involving activation of Rho GTPase signalling pathways . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis may contribute indirectly through the uptake of LDL - derived cholesterol , or through control of receptor cycling 742 LOH ET AL . E . coli O18 ( Mast Group ) , FluoProbes - secondary antibodies ( Interchim , Cheshire Science Ltd . ) , horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) - conjugated goat anti - mouse and HRP - conjugated goat anti - rabbit ( Bio - Rad ) . 4 . 3 | Gentamicin survival assay HBMEC were grown to confluency in 24 - well tissue culture plates , 3 wells for each condition . Experiments were conducted in low - serum media ( RPMI - 1640 supplemented with 5 % FBS , and 2 mM L - gluta - mine ) , except where indicated . Cells were pretreated for 30 minutes with reagents and infected at multiplicity of infection ( m . o . i . ) of approximately 100 with mid - log phase E . coli K1 , K1 - Cherry or K - 12 , or with m . o . i . 10 with mid - log L . monocytogenes , as indicated . To facili - tate bacterial association with cells , bacteria were centrifuged onto cells at 500 g for 5 minutes . Cells were infected for 1 hour at 37 (cid:3) C , unless indicated otherwise in the text , after which infected cells were overlaid with experimental media containing 100 μ g / mL gentamicin for 1 hour at 37 (cid:3) C to kill extracellular bacteria . Cells were lysed with 0 . 3 % ( wt / vol ) SDS in PBS to release E . coli or with 0 . 5 % ( wt / vol ) sapo - nin in PBS to release L . monocytogenes , and the number of viable bac - teria released from the cells was assessed by bacterial colony - forming units ( cfu ) ascertained by titration on LB agar plates ( or BHI agar plates for L . monocytogenes ) and overnight incubation at 37 (cid:3) C . Results were expressed as the number of intracellular bacteria per cell relative to control . At least 3 independent experiments were undertaken . 4 . 4 | Fluid phase and clathrin - mediated uptake assays Alexa - Fluor 647 transferrin ( Molecular Probes , Invitrogen ) or Alexa - Fluor 647 10 kD fixable dextran ( Molecular Probes , Invitro - gen ) at final concentration of 25 μ g / mL or 0 . 5 mg / mL , respec - tively , were incubated with HBMEC for 30 minutes at 37 (cid:3) C , before washing at 4 (cid:3) C to arrest endocytosis . Transferrin - labelled cells were treated with an acid wash ( 0 . 5 % acetic acid , 0 . 05 M NaCl , pH 3 . 0 ) for 2 minutes at 4 (cid:3) C to remove surface label and washed in RPMI to neutralize the acid . Cells were trypsinised , washed and resuspended in FACS ( fluorescence - activated cell sor - ter buffer ( 1 % FBS in PBS ) . Acquisition of flow cytometry data was performed on a BD LSRII ( BD Biosciences ) using appropriate laser lines , and analyzed using FlowJo software ( version 9 , Tree Star , Ashland ) . 4 . 5 | Pharmacological inhibitors For cholesterol depletion or loading , cells were washed twice with RPMI ( serum - free media , SFM ) and pretreated at 37 (cid:3) C for 30 minutes with M β CD ( methyl - β - cyclodextrin ) or cholesterol - M β CD , respectively , in RPMI at a concentration range of 1 to 10 μ M before addition of bacteria or labelled endocytic marker and assayed as described . For other chemical treatments , cells were pretreated with the reagent or control vehicle in experimental media for 30 minutes , prior to infection with E . coli K1 or labelled endocytic marker in the continuing presence of the reagent . Blebbistatin was used at 25 to 100 μ M ; chlorpromazine at 3 to 30 μ M ; cytochalasin D at 1 to 10 μ M ; dynasore at 80 μ M or at concentration shown ; EIPA at 80 μ M ; GF109203X at 25 μ M ; IPA - 3 at 50 μ M ; jasplakinolide at 0 . 5 - 5 μ M ; nocodazole at 1 μ g / mL ; rottlerin at 50 μ M ; wortmannin at 10 μ M . Reagents were tested for potential toxicity on HBMEC by trypan blue exclusion , and their effects on bacterial viability were tested by cfu analysis . Treatments with cholesterol - manipulating and macropinocytic inhibitory reagents were repeated with L . monocyto - genes bacteria but the reagents were found to be bacteriostatic for this species and the results could not be interpreted . 4 . 6 | Immunofluorescence and imaging HBMEC were grown on 13 mm no . 1 glass coverslips ( VWR ) and infected as above with either E . coli K1 or K1 - Cherry at m . o . i . approximately 100 . Cells were fixed in 3 % formaldehyde / PBS for 15 minutes at room temperature ( RT ) , washed with PBS and then incubated for 10 minutes in 50 mM NH 4 Cl in PBS . Cells were washed in 5 % FCS / PBS ( wash solution ) and then were labelled sequentially with primary and secondary antibodies diluted in wash solution con - taining 0 . 2 % saponin , each with 1 hour RT incubations . For actin staining , cells were labelled with phalloidin - tetramethylrhodamine iso - thiocyanate at 10 μ g / mL for 1 hour RT . For differential staining of intra - and extracellular bacteria , cells were initially stained with anti - E . coli O18 and then FluoProbes - 642 donkey anti - rabbit IgG without a permeabilization agent , before proceeding to a second sequential staining step in the presence of saponin with anti - E . coli O18 and the related secondary antibody tagged with another fluorophore ( usually FluoProbes - 546 ) in combination with other antibodies as appropriate . Nuclei were stained with 1 μ g / mL DAPI and cells were mounted onto a microscope slide with Confocal Matrix ( Micro - Tech - Lab ) or Fluoromount - G ( eBioscience ) . To visualize dextran uptake with bacteria , cells were infected with mid - log E . coli K1 at m . o . i . approximately 100 in the presence of 500 μ g / mL Alexa - Fluor 647 10 kD fixable dextran for 30 minutes , then fixed and stained for intra - and extracellular bacteria . For transferrin uptake , Alexa - Fluor 555 transferrin ( Gibco , Invi - trogen ) at 25 μ g / mL was incubated for 30 minutes at 37 (cid:3) C with HBMEC transfected with dynamin 2 - GFP plasmids , cells were fixed in 2 % formaldehyde / PBS and visualized . Samples were observed with an inverted Zeiss LSM 510 confocal laser - scanning microscope ( Carl Zeiss Ltd ) with appropriate lasers . To avoid potential experimental bias , tile z - stack images were acquired under software control . Images were processed with ImageJ ( W . Rasband , National Institutes of Health ) and Adobe Photoshop . 4 . 7 | Transient transfection of HBMEC Plasmids encoding Dyn2 ( aa ) WT - GFP and Dyn2 ( aa ) K44A - GFP 37 were kind gifts from M . A . McNiven ( Mayo Clinic ) , Dyn1WT - GFP and Dyn1K44A - GFP were generously provided by H . T . McMahon ( MRC LMB ) , Cav1 - GFP 70 was from B . J . Nichols ( MRC LMB ) , and the GFP - tagged caveolin - 1 mutant constructs were kindly provided by M . - O . Parat ( University of Queensland , Australia ) . 71 RhoA - GFP plasmid constructs and pGFP wt Rac1 and pGFP L61 Rac1 were kind gifts from A . J . Ridley ( King ' s College , London , UK ) 72 ; pGFP - Rac1N17 from LOH ET AL . 743 P . Fort ( CNRS Montpellier ) 73 ; cdc42 - GFP constructs were from B . J . Nichols 74 ; Lifeact - GFP was from M . Parsons . 75 , 76 pEGFP - N1 ( Clontech , BD Biosciences ) was used as the soluble GFP control and pLDLR A18 GFP , a kind gift from G . E . Kreitzer ( University of Cornell , NY , USA ) , 77 as the membrane - bound GFP control . For plasmid DNA transfection , HBMEC were seeded onto glass cover slips , grown to approximately 80 % confluency , and were trans - fected using jetPRIME transfection reagent ( Polyplus - transfection SA ) according to the manufacturer ' s instructions . Approximately 20 hours post - transfection , cells were infected with K1 - Cherry bacteria and imaged as described . 69 Briefly , following infection as above , cells were incubated in experimental medium containing 100 μ g / mL gen - tamicin at 37 (cid:3) C for 1 hour . Coverslips were washed and mounted onto a low - tech rubber gasket imaging chamber with approximately 35 μ L imaging medium ( RPMI - 1640 without phenol red supplemen - ted with 5 % [ vol / vol ] FBS , 2 mM L - glutamine , 25 mM HEPES [ pH 7 . 4 ] ) . 69 , 78 Live cells were held at 37 (cid:3) C on the microscope stage and tile z - stack images were acquired . Infection was quantified manu - ally by counting the number of GFP - positive cells with intracellular bacteria ( n ≥ 30 GFP - positive cells ) . For live cell time series of E . coli K1 infection , K1 - Cherry bacteria were centrifuged onto transfected HBMEC and cells were immedi - ately transferred to the microscope stage and imaged continuously at 37 (cid:3) C for 1 hour . Images and movies were generated and analyzed using the Zeiss LSM software and ImageJ software . 4 . 8 | siRNA transfection Non - targeting siRNA or AP2A1 , caveolin - 1 and dynamin 2 siRNA ( all SMARTpool siGENOME siRNA from Dharmacon , GE Healthcare ) were delivered to cells at a final concentration of 50 μ M , using Lipo - fectamine RNAiMAX . Assays were carried out after 48 hours . Knock - down efficiency was ascertained by lysis of control cell wells in RIPA buffer ( 140 mM NaCl , 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid , 0 . 5 mM EGTA , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 1 % sodium deoxycholate , 0 . 1 % SDS , 10 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 ) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail ( ThermoFisher Scientific ) , followed by protein gel electrophoresis , western blotting and detection of HRP - conjugated secondary antibo - dies with Pierce ECL Western Blotting Substrate ( ThermoFisher Scientific ) . 4 . 9 | Macropinocytosis assay HBMEC were grown to confluency in 12 - well plates , then incubated in experimental media for 1 hour prior to refreshment with experimental media supplemented with 200 μ g / mL FITC - dextran ( 10 kD dextran conjugated to FITC ) (cid:1) mid - log E . coli K1 at m . o . i . approximately 100 for 2 hours at 37 (cid:3) C . As a positive control HBMEC were incubated with experimental media containing 20 % FCS and 200 μ g / mL FITC - dextran . 41 Following the infection period , cells were washed and incu - bated for 1 hour with fresh experimental media supplemented with 100 μ g / mL gentamicin , after which they were washed , trypsinised , labelled with LIVE / DEAD Fixable Near - IR stain ( Molecular Probes , Invi - trogen ) and suspended in FACS buffer . Acquisition of flow cytometry data was performed as described above . 4 . 10 | Actin quantitation Images of serial sections of HBMEC stained with phalloidin were thresholded ( Intermodes setting ) and fluorescence area quantified in ImageJ . Quantitation of actin was applied to apical sections for the ruffling data . 4 . 11 | Statistical analysis All experiments were repeated 3 times and performed in duplicate or triplicate . GraphPad Prism Version 6 software was used for statistical analysis . For comparison of data from 2 experimental conditions , the 2 - tailed Student ' s t test was used to test statistical significance . For multiple comparisons , statistical significance was tested using 1 - way analysis of variance followed by the Newman - Keuls post hoc test . A P value less than . 05 was considered significant . In the figure legends , * P < . 05 , * * P < . 01 , * * * P < . 001 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We gratefully thank all those that provided reagents used in this work — Dr B . J . Nichols for plasmids and primary MLEC , and Dr G . Otto for MLEC isolation . P . Fort , H . T . McMahon , M . A . McNiven , M . - O . Parat , G . E . Kreitzer , M . Parsons and A . J . Ridley kindly provided plasmids , F . M . Brodsky provided clathrin antibody , G . J . Bancroft provided the Listeria strain and N . Altan - Bonnet provided labelled transferrin . We also thank Andrea Zelmer and Nihal Altan - Bonnet for critical reading of this manuscript and Xufeng Wu ( Light Micro - scopy Core , NHLBI ) for assistance with image analysis . LNL was supported by a Bloomsbury Colleges PhD Studentship and the Central Research Fund , University of London . EDITORIAL PROCESS FILE The Editorial Process File is available in the online version of this article ORCID Theresa H . Ward http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 9881 - 8649 REFERENCES 1 . Bonacorsi S , Bingen E . Molecular epidemiology of Escherichia coli causing neonatal meningitis . Int J Med Microbiol . 2005 ; 295 : 373 - 381 . 2 . de Louvois J , Halket S , Harvey D . Neonatal meningitis in England and Wales : sequelae at 5 years of age . Eur J Pediatr . 2005 ; 164 : 730 - 734 . 3 . Heath PT , Okike IO . Neonatal bacterial meningitis : an update . Paediatr Child Health . 2010 ; 20 : 526 - 530 . 4 . Okike IO , Johnson AP , Henderson KL , et al . Incidence , etiology , and outcome of bacterial meningitis in infants aged < 90 days in the Uni - ted Kingdom and Republic of Ireland : prospective , enhanced , national population - based surveillance . Clin Infect Dis . 2014 ; 59 : e150 - e157 . 5 . May M , Daley AJ , Donath S , Isaacs D . Early onset neonatal meningitis in Australia and New Zealand , 1992 – 2002 . Arch Dis Child Fetal Neo - natal Ed . 2005 ; 90 : F324 - F327 . 6 . Wu J - H , Chen C - Y , Tsao P - N , Hsieh W - S , Chou H - C . Neonatal sepsis : a 6 - year analysis in a neonatal care unit in Taiwan . Pediatr Neonatol . 2009 ; 50 : 88 - 95 . 744 LOH ET AL . 7 . Furyk JS , Swann O , Molyneux E . Systematic review : neonatal menin - gitis in the developing world . Trop Med Int Health . 2011 ; 16 : 672 - 679 . 8 . Stoll BJ , Hansen NI , Sánchez PJ , et al . Early onset neonatal sepsis : the burden of group B Streptococcal and E . coli disease continues . Pedia - trics . 2011 ; 127 : 817 - 826 . 9 . Kim KS . Current concepts on the pathogenesis of Escherichia coli meningitis : implications for therapy and prevention . Curr Opin Infect Dis . 2012 ; 25 : 273 - 278 . 10 . Reddy MA , Prasadarao NV , Wass CA , Kim KS . Phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase activation and interaction with focal adhesion kinase in Escher - ichia coli K1 invasion of human brain microvascular endothelial cells . J Biol Chem . 2000 ; 275 : 36769 - 36774 . 11 . Reddy MA , Wass CA , Kim KS , Schlaepfer DD , Prasadarao NV . Invol - vement of focal adhesion kinase in Escherichia coli invasion of human brain microvascular endothelial cells . Infect Immun . 2000 ; 68 : 6423 - 6430 . 12 . Khan NA , Wang Y , Kim KJ , Chung JW , Wass CA , Kim KS . Cytotoxic necrotizing factor - 1 contributes to Escherichia coli K1 invasion of the central nervous system . J Biol Chem . 2002 ; 277 : 15607 - 15612 . 13 . Prasadarao NV . Identification of Escherichia coli outer membrane pro - tein A receptor on human brain microvascular endothelial cells . Infect Immun . 2002 ; 70 : 4556 - 4563 . 14 . Khan NA , Shin S , Chung JW , et al . Outer membrane protein A and cytotoxic necrotizing factor - 1 use diverse signaling mechanisms for Escherichia coli K1 invasion of human brain microvascular endothelial cells . Microb Pathog . 2003 ; 35 : 35 - 42 . 15 . Rudrabhatla RS , Selvaraj SK , Prasadarao NV . Role of Rac1 in Escheri - chia coli K1 invasion of human brain microvascular endothelial cells . Microbes Infect . 2006 ; 8 : 460 - 469 . 16 . Maruvada R , Argon Y , Prasadarao NV . Escherichia coli interaction with human brain microvascular endothelial cells induces signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 association with the C - terminal domain of Ec - gp96 , the outer membrane protein A receptor for inva - sion . Cell Microbiol . 2008 ; 10 : 2326 - 2338 . 17 . Maruvada R , Kim KS . IbeA and OmpA of Escherichia coli K1 exploit Rac1 activation for invasion of human brain microvascular endothelial cells . Infect Immun . 2012 ; 80 : 2035 - 2041 . 18 . Prasadarao NV , Wass CA , Stins MF , Shimada H , Kim KS . Outer mem - brane protein A - promoted actin condensation of brain microvascular endothelial cells is required for Escherichia coli invasion . Infect Immun . 1999 ; 67 : 5775 - 5783 . 19 . Kumari S , Swetha MG , Mayor S . Endocytosis unplugged : multiple ways to enter the cell . Cell Res . 2010 ; 20 : 256 - 275 . 20 . Kühling L , Schelhaas M . Systematic analysis of endocytosis by cellular perturbations . Methods Mol Biol . 2014 ; 1174 : 19 - 46 . 21 . Sukumaran SK , Quon MJ , Prasadarao NV . Escherichia coli K1 internali - zation via caveolae requires caveolin - 1 and protein kinase C α interac - tion in human brain microvascular endothelial cells . J Biol Chem . 2002 ; 277 : 50716 - 50724 . 22 . Chi F , Jong TD , Wang L , et al . Vimentin - mediated signalling is required for IbeA + E . coli K1 invasion of human brain microvascular endothelial cells . Biochem J . 2010 ; 427 : 79 - 90 . 23 . Mercer J , Helenius A . Virus entry by macropinocytosis . Nat Cell Biol . 2009 ; 11 : 510 - 520 . 24 . Schnitzer JE , Oh P , Pinney E , Allard J . Filipin - sensitive caveolae - mediated transport in endothelium : reduced transcytosis , scavenger endocytosis , and capillary permeability of select macromolecules . J Cell Biol . 1994 ; 127 : 1217 - 1232 . 25 . Orlandi PA , Fishman PH . Filipin - dependent inhibition of cholera toxin : evidence for toxin internalization and activation through caveolae - like domains . J Cell Biol . 1998 ; 141 : 905 - 915 . 26 . Grimmer S , van Deurs B , Sandvig K . Membrane ruffling and macropi - nocytosis in A431 cells require cholesterol . J Cell Sci . 2002 ; 115 : 2953 - 2962 . 27 . Anderson HA , Chen Y , Norkin LC . Bound simian virus 40 translocates to caveolin - enriched membrane domains , and its entry is inhibited by drugs that selectively disrupt caveolae . Mol Biol Cell . 1996 ; 7 : 1825 - 1834 . 28 . Hu G , Schwartz DE , Shajahan AN , et al . Isoflurane , but not sevoflur - ane , increases transendothelial albumin permeability in the isolated rat lung . Role for enhanced phosphorylation of caveolin - 1 . Anesthe - siology . 2006 ; 104 : 777 - 785 . 29 . Watson RO , Galán JE . Campylobacter jejuni survives within epithelial cells by avoiding delivery to lysosomes . PLoS Pathog . 2008 ; 4 : e14 . 30 . Mora R , Bonilha VL , Marmorstein A , et al . Caveolin - 2 localizes to the Golgi complex but redistributes to plasma membrane , caveolae , and rafts when co - expressed with caveolin - 1 . J Biol Chem . 1999 ; 274 : 25708 - 25717 . 31 . Parolini I , Sargiacomo M , Galbiati F , et al . Expression of caveolin - 1 is required for the transport of caveolin - 2 to the plasma membrane . Retention of caveolin - 2 at the level of the Golgi complex . J Biol Chem . 1999 ; 274 : 25718 - 25725 . 32 . Drab M , Verkade P , Elger M , et al . Loss of caveolae , vascular dysfunc - tion , and pulmonary defects in caveolin - 1 gene - disrupted mice . Science . 2001 ; 293 : 2449 - 2452 . 33 . Razani B , Engelman JA , Wang XB , et al . Caveolin - 1 null mice are viable but show evidence of hyperproliferative and vascular abnorm - alities . J Biol Chem . 2001 ; 276 : 38121 - 38138 . 34 . Oh P , McIntosh DP , Schnitzer JE . Dynamin at the neck of caveolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP - driven fis - sion from the plasma membrane of endothelium . J Cell Biol . 1998 ; 141 : 101 - 114 . 35 . Shajahan AN , Timblin BK , Sandoval R , Tiruppathi C , Malik AB , Minshall RD . Role of Src - induced dynamin - 2 phosphorylation in caveolae - mediated endocytosis in endothelial cells . J Biol Chem . 2004 ; 279 : 20392 - 20400 . 36 . Yao Q , Chen J , Cao H , et al . Caveolin - 1 interacts directly with dynamin - 2 . J Mol Biol . 2005 ; 348 : 491 - 501 . 37 . Cao H , Garcia F , McNiven MA . Differential distribution of dynamin isoforms in mammalian cells . Mol Biol Cell . 1998 ; 9 : 2595 - 2609 . 38 . Veiga E , Cossart P . Listeria hijacks the clathrin - dependent endocytic machinery to invade mammalian cells . Nat Cell Biol . 2005 ; 7 : 894 - 900 . 39 . Park RJ , Shen H , Liu L , Liu X , Ferguson SM , De Camilli P . Dynamin tri - ple knockout cells reveal off target effects of commonly used dyna - min inhibitors . J Cell Sci . 2013 ; 126 : 5305 - 5312 . 40 . Cao H , Chen J , Awoniyi M , Henley JR , McNiven MA . Dynamin 2 med - iates fluid - phase micropinocytosis in epithelial cells . J Cell Sci . 2007 ; 120 : 4167 - 4177 . 41 . Krzyzaniak MA , Zumstein MT , Gerez JA , Picotti P , Helenius A . Host cell entry of respiratory syncytial virus involves macropinocytosis fol - lowed by proteolytic activation of the F protein . PLoS Pathog . 2013 ; 9 : e1003309 . 42 . Koivusalo M , Welch C , Hayashi H , et al . Amiloride inhibits macropino - cytosis by lowering submembranous pH and preventing Rac1 and Cdc42 signaling . J Cell Biol . 2010 ; 188 : 547 - 563 . 43 . Sandgren KJ , Wilkinson J , Miranda - Saksena M , et al . A differential role for macropinocytosis in mediating entry of the two forms of vac - cinia virus into dendritic cells . PLoS Pathog . 2010 ; 6 : e1000866 . 44 . Ivanov AI . Pharmacological inhibition of endocytic pathways : is it spe - cific enough to be useful ? Methods Mol Biol . 2008 ; 440 : 15 - 33 . 45 . Vercauteren D , Vandenbroucke RE , Jones AT , et al . The use of inhibi - tors to study endocytic pathways of gene carriers : optimization and pitfalls . Mol Ther . 2010 ; 18 : 561 - 569 . 46 . Daniel JA , Chau N , Abdel - Hamid MK , et al . Phenothiazine - derived antipsychotic drugs inhibit dynamin and clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis . Traffic . 2015 ; 16 : 635 - 654 . 47 . Bonazzi M , Vasudevan L , Mallet A , et al . Clathrin phosphorylation is required for actin recruitment at sites of bacterial adhesion and inter - nalization . J Cell Biol . 2011 ; 195 : 525 - 536 . 48 . Dutta D , Donaldson JG . Sorting of clathrin - independent cargo pro - teins depends on Rab35 delivered by clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Traffic . 2015 ; 16 : 994 - 1009 . 49 . Rubin LL , Staddon JM . The cell biology of the blood – brain barrier . Annu Rev Neurosci . 1999 ; 22 : 11 - 28 . 50 . Fiorentini C , Falzano L , Fabbri A , et al . Activation of Rho GTPases by cytotoxic necrotizing factor 1 induces macropinocytosis and scaven - ging activity in epithelial cells . Mol Biol Cell . 2001 ; 12 : 2061 - 2073 . 51 . Fabbri A , Falzano L , Travaglione S , et al . Rho - activating Escherichia coli cytotoxic necrotizing factor 1 : macropinocytosis of apoptotic bodies in human epithelial cells . Int J Med Microbiol . 2002 ; 291 : 551 - 554 . LOH ET AL . 745 52 . Higuchi M , Onishi K , Kikuchi C , Gotoh Y . Scaffolding function of PAK in the PDK1 – Akt pathway . Nat Cell Biol . 2008 ; 10 : 1356 - 1364 . 53 . Ju R , Simons M . Syndecan 4 regulation of PDK1 - dependent Akt acti - vation . Cell Signal . 2013 ; 25 : 101 - 105 . 54 . Mercer J , Helenius A . Gulping rather than sipping : macropinocytosis as a way of virus entry . Curr Opin Microbiol . 2012 ; 15 : 490 - 499 . 55 . Patel JC , Galán JE . Differential activation and function of Rho GTPases during Salmonella - host cell interactions . J Cell Biol . 2006 ; 175 : 453 - 463 . 56 . Swanson JA . Shaping cups into phagosomes and macropinosomes . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2008 ; 9 : 639 - 649 . 57 . Mercer J , Helenius A . Apoptotic mimicry : phosphatidylserine - mediated macropinocytosis of vaccinia virus . Ann NY Acad Sci . 2010 ; 1209 : 49 - 55 . 58 . Mercer J , Knébel S , Schmidt FI , Crouse J , Burkard C , Helenius A . Vac - cinia virus strains use distinct forms of macropinocytosis for host - cell entry . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2010 ; 107 : 9346 - 9351 . 59 . Parton RG , Simons K . The multiple faces of caveolae . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2007 ; 8 : 185 - 194 . 60 . Cheng JPX , Nichols BJ . Caveolae : one function or many ? Trends Cell Biol . 2016 ; 26 : 177 - 189 . 61 . Le Lay S , Li Q , Proschogo N , et al . Caveolin - 1 - dependent and - independent membrane domains . J Lipid Res . 2009 ; 50 : 1609 - 1620 . 62 . Ariotti N , Fernández - Rojo MA , Zhou Y , et al . Caveolae regulate the nanoscale organization of the plasma membrane to remotely control Ras signaling . J Cell Biol . 2014 ; 204 : 777 - 792 . 63 . Chaudhary N , Gomez GA , Howes MT , et al . Endocytic crosstalk : cavins , caveolins , and caveolae regulate clathrin - independent endocy - tosis . PLoS Biol . 2014 ; 12 : e1001832 . 64 . Hoffmann C , Berking A , Agerer F , et al . Caveolin limits membrane microdomain mobility and integrin - mediated uptake of fibronectin - binding pathogens . J Cell Sci . 2010 ; 123 : 4280 - 4291 . 65 . Preta G , Cronin JG , Sheldon IM . Dynasore – not just a dynamin inhi - bitor . Cell Commun Signal . 2015 ; 13 : 24 . 66 . Zelmer A , Bowen M , Jokilammi A , Finne J , Luzio JP , Taylor PW . Dif - ferential expression of the polysialyl capsule during blood - to - brain transit of neuropathogenic Escherichia coli K1 . Microbiology . 2008 ; 154 : 2522 - 2532 . 67 . Stins MF , Badger J , Kim KS . Bacterial invasion and transcytosis in transfected human brain microvascular endothelial cells . Microb Pathog . 2001 ; 30 : 19 - 28 . 68 . Achtman M , Mercer A , Kusecek B , et al . Six widespread bacterial clones among Escherichia coli K1 isolates . Infect Immun . 1983 ; 39 : 315 - 335 . 69 . Loh LN , Ward TH . Escherichia coli K1 invasion of human brain micro - vascular endothelial cells . Methods Enzymol . 2012 ; 506 : 93 - 113 . 70 . Pelkmans L , Kartenbeck J , Helenius A . Caveolar endocytosis of simian virus 40 reveals a new two - step vesicular - transport pathway to the ER . Nat Cell Biol . 2001 ; 3 : 473 - 483 . 71 . Parat M - O , Anand - Apte B , Fox PL . Differential caveolin - 1 polarization in endothelial cells during migration in two and three dimensions . Mol Biol Cell . 2003 ; 14 : 3156 - 3168 . 72 . Hall A . Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science . 1998 ; 279 : 509 - 514 . 73 . Blangy A , Vignal E , Schmidt S , Debant A , Gauthier - Rouvière C , Fort P . TrioGEF1 controls Rac - and Cdc42 - dependent cell structures through the direct activation of rhoG . J Cell Sci . 2000 ; 113 : 729 - 739 . 74 . Sabharanjak S , Sharma P , Parton RG , Mayor S . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev Cell . 2002 ; 2 : 411 - 423 . 75 . Riedl J , Crevenna AH , Kessenbrock K , et al . Lifeact : a versatile marker to visualize F - actin . Nat Methods . 2008 ; 5 : 605 - 607 . 76 . Costa P , Scales TME , Ivaska J , Parsons M . Integrin - specific control of focal adhesion kinase and RhoA regulates membrane protrusion and invasion . PLoS ONE . 2013 ; 8 : e74659 . 77 . Kreitzer G , Schmoranzer J , Low SH , et al . Three - dimensional analysis of post - Golgi carrier exocytosis in epithelial cells . Nat Cell Biol . 2003 ; 5 : 126 - 136 . 78 . Ward TH . Trafficking through the early secretory pathway of mam - malian cells . Methods Mol Biol . 2007 ; 390 : 281 - 296 . SUPPORTING INFORMATION Additional Supporting Information may be found online in the sup - porting information tab for this article . How to cite this article : Loh LN , McCarthy Elizabeth M . C . , Narang P , Khan NA , Ward TH . Escherichia coli K1 utilizes host macropinocytic pathways for invasion of brain microvascular endothelial cells . Traffic . 2017 ; 18 : 733 – 746 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / tra . 12508 746 LOH ET AL .