Cell motility modes are selected by the interplay of mechanosensitive adhesion and membrane tension Yuzhu Chen , David Saintillan , Padmini Rangamani June 2 , 2023 Abstract The initiation of directional cell motion requires symmetry breaking that can happen both with or without external stimuli . During cell crawling , forces generated by the cytoskeleton and their transmission through mechanosensitive adhesions to the extracellular substrate play a crucial role . In a recently proposed 1D model ( Sens , PNAS 2020 ) , a mechanical feedback loop between force - sensitive adhesions and cell tension was shown to be sufficient to explain spontaneous symmetry breaking and multiple motility patterns through stick - slip dynam - ics , without the need to account for signaling networks or active polar gels . We extended this model to 2D to study the interplay between cell shape and mechanics during crawling . Through a local force balance along a deformable boundary , we show that the membrane ten - sion coupled with shape change can regulate the spatiotemporal evolution of the stochastic binding of mechanosensitive adhesions . Linear stability analysis identified the unstable pa - rameter regimes where spontaneous symmetry breaking can take place . Using simulations to solve the fully coupled nonlinear system of equations , we show that starting from a randomly perturbed circular shape , this instability can lead to keratocyte - like shapes . Simulations pre - dict that different adhesion kinetics and membrane tension can result in different cell motility modes including gliding , zigzag , rotating , and sometimes chaotic movements . Thus , using a minimal model of cell motility , we identify that the interplay between adhesions and tension can select emergent motility modes . The mechanism of cell crawling on substrates is important for understanding numerous biologi - cal processes such as morphogenesis and wound healing [ 1 ] . Experiments have revealed that several main subcellular processes , including actin polymerization [ 2 ] , adhesion [ 3 ] , and myosin contrac - tion [ 4 ] , are spatially and temporally orchestrated to generate coherent cellular motion . These experiments have also lent themselves to systematic theoretical and computational modeling [ 5 ] . Among these different subprocesses , the initiation of motion is of particular interest because it can happen both due to external cues and spontaneously due to intrinsic biochemical or mechanical instabilities , in a process known as cell self - polarization [ 6 , 7 ] . A polarized cell undergoes distinct molecular processes at the front and rear , such as the distribution of Rho family GTPases which regulate the actin protrusion and adhesion formation [ 8 ] ; this distribution specifies a direction for motility . Interestingly , despite the vast number of molecular players involved [ 8 , 9 ] , cell migration is essentially a mechanical process [ 10 , 11 ] . The integration of cell signaling into mechanical processes has led to different scales of biophysical models [ 11 – 13 ] . Depending on the cell type , migrating cells can assume different shapes . For example , fibrob - lasts have multiple protrusions [ 14 – 16 ] , while fast - moving keratocytes are characterized by their 1 a r X i v : 2306 . 00236v1 [ q - b i o . CB ] 31 M a y 2023 A B C D Figure 1 : ( A ) Schematic describing self - polarization in cells . Fluctuations of certain wavelengths are amplified by the intrinsic instability of the feedback loop between adhesions and membrane tension , leading to self - polarization . ( B ) Schematic describing the various motility modes . Di - rectional motion is the uniaxial motion of the cell in one preferred direction . Bipedal motion involves antiphase retraction of the left - right trailing edge and lateral oscillation of the cell . In turning motion , the cell rotates in a certain direction with left - right asymmetry . ( C ) Sketch of the two - dimensional model ( top view ) . The cell shape is determined by the difference between the polymerization velocity v p and the retrograde velocity v r , where v r is related to the off - rate of adhesive bonds distributed within the lamellipodium with width l 1 along the cell boundary . The force balance between friction , membrane tension , and contraction is maintained at the cell edge . ( D ) Sketch of the two - dimensional model ( side view ) . The adhesive bonds bind to the substrate with a constant rate k on and unbind with a force - dependent rate k off as the actin filaments move . flat , smooth , fan - shaped leading edges [ 17 ] . Despite these differences , a common mechanism for cells to undergo directional motion can be summarized as follows : the leading edge of the cell protrudes as a result of the speed difference between actin polymerization and retrograde flow , the rear retracts to keep up with the front [ 4 , 18 ] , and membrane tension plays a crucial role in this process because it can coordinate the protrusion and retraction as a global regulator for cell shape change and motility [ 19 – 21 ] . With this picture , many phenomenological models have been proposed to explain the underlying mechanisms for motility and shape determination . These in - clude models constructed based on the graded radial extension hypothesis [ 22 ] , viscoelastic actin network and myosin transport [ 23 ] , force balance between treadmilling actin filaments and mem - brane tension [ 17 , 24 ] , two - phase fluids with actin polymerization [ 25 ] , and many other redundant mechanisms [ 26 ] . Later , more comprehensive free - boundary models incorporated other features such as the discrete stick - slip adhesions [ 27 , 28 ] , the orientational order of the actin filament net - work [ 29 – 32 ] , and the feedback loop between actin flow , myosin , and adhesion [ 33 ] and are reviewed in [ 34 ] . Most of these simulations either start with a crescent shape to match experimental ob - servations [ 22 , 23 ] , with perturbations or polarity fields along a specified direction [ 27 – 33 ] , or with a prescribed front [ 25 ] . Therefore , how the cell shape transitions from random fluctuations to persistent motile shapes remains unclear from these models . Apart from steady - moving states , keratocytes can also undergo more complex motility modes such as bipedal motion and spontaneous turning , or a combination of both [ 35 – 38 ] . Experimental 2 and modeling studies reveal that the stick - slip adhesive sites at the rear and their coupling with the cytoskeleton dynamics are crucial for such unsteady motions [ 37 – 40 ] . However , the models used to investigate this coupling need prior knowledge of the positions of adhesion sites and the broken symmetries . As a result , they cannot predict how the distributions of adhesions are formed in the first place . Other simulations that obtain bipedal motion without prescribed adhesion sites take the substrate deformations into account [ 41 , 42 ] , but treat adhesion dynamics phenomenologically . Mogilner et al . suggested that cell polarization and turning may share similar mechanisms that involve the feedback between actomyosin flows and stick - slip dynamics of adhesions [ 5 ] . Recently , Sens proposed a 1D mechanical feedback loop between the binding and unbinding of cell - substrate adhesions and linear cell tension that can lead to the spontaneous symmetry breaking [ 10 ] . Based on a mean - field approximation of the molecular clutch model for adhesions , this theoretical model also predicted various one - dimensional cell locomotion behaviors such as steady crawling , bistabil - ity , and bipedal motion as observed in experiments [ 37 , 38 ] , bridging the gap between microscopic factors and whole cell locomotion . Combining the mechanosensitive unbinding of adhesions [ 10 ] that are based on first principles , with cell shape change can provide a natural description for the formation and the stick - slip dynamics of adhesions and how they can lead to unsteady motions . However , this model does not explore the link between the mechanical feedback loop and cell shape and motility modes . Such an exploration requires a 2D formulation with a deformable boundary . Here , we asked whether the mechanical feedback loop between adhesion and cell shape change is sufficient to explain the dynamics of cell shape change and motility modes . Specifically , we extend the 1D model in [ 10 ] to two dimensions with deformable boundaries to investigate how the coupling between membrane tension and the stick - slip dynamics of adhesions determines cell shape change and the spatial distribution of traction forces during the initiation of motility and resulting sus - tained motion . Linear stability analysis of the model shows that uniform steady states are unstable in certain parameter regimes due to the stick - slip nature of the adhesions . Numerical simulations in 2D predict that the interplay between membrane tension and mechanosensitive adhesions is sufficient for a circular - shaped cell to spontaneously initiate and sustain motion ( Fig . 1 A ) , and the various motility modes mentioned above can be captured ( Fig . 1 B ) even without the consideration of the complex reorganization of the cytoskeleton . Thus , our 2D model is able to capture the ini - tiation of cell polarization and the different motility modes ( directional , bipedal , and turning ) by tuning the physical parameters , and demonstrates the crucial role for interplay between adhesions and membrane tension in cell motility . Model Development Governing equations At cellular length scales , inertia is negligible [ 12 ] , so that forces are balanced everywhere at any instant of time . When the actin filaments treadmill at the edge of the cell , the membrane imposes an opposing force while actomyosin contraction generates a contractile force ( Fig . 1 C ) . These two forces lead to the retrograde flow of actin filaments away from the cell edge and are locally balanced by a friction force pointing outwards and created by transmembrane adhesions that can stochastically bind or unbind to the flat substrate [ 43 ] : F contraction + F membrane + F friction = 0 . ( 1 ) 3 Here , we apply a coarse - grained approach and assume the focal adhesions are concentrated in a narrow region near the cell periphery with width l 1 , as proposed by [ 10 ] . The cell boundary is thus treated as a one - dimensional curve Γ ( t ) evolving in a two - dimensional plane ( see Fig . S1 of the SI Appendix ) , where the adhesion clusters are material points containing a collection of ρl 1 adhesive linkers on average per unit length along the curve . The position vector of a material point on the boundary at time t is represented by x ( α , t ) , where α ∈ [ 0 , 2 π ] is a Lagrangian parameter ( a detailed description of the geometry and parameterization can be found in the SI ) . At each material point , the total number of adhesive linkers for each adhesion cluster is assumed to be conserved [ 43 ] . Each of the adhesive linkers can unbind and rebind between the substrate and the sliding actin filaments with an off - rate k off and an on - rate k on ( Fig . 1 D ) , and the effect of thermal fluctuations is modeled with an effective diffusivity D . Denoting the current arclength as s ( α , t ) ∈ [ 0 , L ( t ) ] , the fraction of bound linkers n ( α , t ) at each material point evolves by the kinetic equation ∂n ∂t ( α , t ) = k on ( 1 − n ) − k off n + D ∂ 2 n ∂s 2 . ( 2 ) According to the Bell - Evans formula [ 44 , 45 ] , the mechanical force f b felt by a given linker will lower the energy barrier for it to unbind from the substrate , such that the off - rate increases exponentially with the force as k off = k 0off exp ( f b / f 0 ) , where k 0off is the off - rate under zero force and f 0 is a molecular force scale for the linker to rupture with a typical order of several pN . For simplicity , the on - rate k on is assumed to be a force - independent constant . The mechanosensitivity of the adhesions allows us to capture the biphasic relation between the friction force and the retrograde velocity v r [ 46 – 49 ] . Here , we adopt a minimal mean - field approximation [ 10 ] where the average extension of a linker is approximated by the retrograde velocity v r times its average lifetime 1 / k off . Each linker is viewed as an elastic spring with spring constant k b . By Hooke’s law , the force experienced by a single linker is given by f b = k b v r / k off . Hence , the retrograde velocity and the dimensionless off - rate r = k off / k 0off can be related by v r = v β r log r , where v β = k 0off f 0 / k b is a characteristic velocity scale related to the mechanosensitive unbinding process . In addition to the friction generated by the mechanosensitive adhesions , viscous dissipation between the actin flow and the substrate contributes to a linear friction ζ 0 v r . Assuming that protrusions as well as the retrograde flow are locally normal to the cell boundary [ 50 , 51 ] , the total friction force is given by F friction = (cid:16) ζ 0 v r + ζ 1 nv r r (cid:17) n , ( 3 ) where n is a unit outward normal vector on the cell edge Γ ( t ) . To highlight the interplay between the mechanosensitive adhesions and the membrane tension , we simply treat the contractile force per unit length as a constant force pointing inwards along the normal direction , F contraction = − σ c n . The time scale for the rebinding and unbinding of adhesions ( seconds ) [ 52 ] is much longer than the time scale for the membrane force to equilibrate ( milliseconds ) [ 17 ] , so the membrane tension , σ m , is assumed to be spatially uniform along the cell boundary . The force per unit length integrated over the lamellipodium height is then given by F membrane = − 2 hσ m H n , where H = 1 / h + κ is the total curvature given by the in - plane curvature κ and the lamellipodium radius h along the vertical direction to the substrate . We further assume that the membrane tension depends linearly on the total area A ( t ) of the 4 cell as it evolves in time , d σ m d t ( t ) = k σ d A d t , ( 4 ) where k σ is an effective stiffness that accounts for the extensibility of the membrane . Finally , the shape of the cell evolves according to the kinematic boundary condition ∂ x ∂t ( α , t ) = ( v p − v r ) n , ( 5 ) where the normal velocity is determined by the difference between the actin polymerization velocity v p and the retrograde velocity v r . Here , we treat the polymerization velocity as a constant along the cell edge following [ 53 , 54 ] , although it can be a function of the myosin density as hypothesized in some more detailed modeling approaches [ 51 ] . Non - dimensionalization We nondimensionalize the governing equations with the following scales . The characteristic time scale is given by the off - rate under zero force load 1 / k 0off . The mechanosensitive unbinding process provides a characteristic velocity scale v β as mentioned in the previous subsection . The cell size is characterized by its average radius R 0 . The dimensionless variables are listed as follows : t ∗ = tk 0off , v ∗ r = v r v β , x ∗ = x R 0 , σ ∗ m = 2 σ m ζ 0 v β . ( 6 ) The dimensionless parameters governing the system can be classified into two groups , namely parameters that characterize the stick - slip dynamics of the adhesions and parameters that char - acterize the general cell properties . We estimate their orders of magnitude from experiments and previous modeling approaches ( see SI ) , as summarized in Table 1 . The first group contains the dimensionless relative adhesion strength ζ ∗ 1 = ζ 1 / ζ 0 that compares the contribution of the adhesive friction ( sticking ) and the viscous friction ( slipping ) , the dimensionless on - rate r on = k on / k 0off , and the dimensionless diffusion coefficient D ∗ = D / k 0off R 20 . The second group contains the dimension - less lamellipodium height h ∗ = h / R 0 , the dimensionless length ϵ = v β / k 0off R 0 that compares the length scale provided by the off - rate and the retrograde velocity with the cell size , the dimension - less effective stiffness k ∗ σ = 2 k σ R 0 / ζ 0 k 0off that compares the cell stiffness to the adhesive friction , the dimensionless actomyosin contraction σ ∗ c = σ c / ζ 0 v β , and the dimensionless polymerization velocity v ∗ p = v p / v β . The dimensionless governing equations can be summarized as follows , where the stars have been dropped for simplicity : ∂ x ∂t ( α , t ) = ϵ ( v p − r log r ) n , ( 7 ) ∂n ∂t ( α , t ) = r on ( 1 − n ) − rn + D ∂ 2 n ∂s 2 , ( 8 ) d σ m d t ( t ) = k σ d A d t ( t ) , ( 9 ) σ c + σ m ( 1 + κh ) = r log r + ζ 1 n log r . ( 10 ) 5 Table 1 : Range of dimensionless model parameters . See SI Appendix for dimensional parameter values . Dimensionless parameter Approximate value ζ ∗ 1 = ζ 1 / ζ 0 400 − 600 r on = k on / k 0off 10 − 60 D ∗ = D / k 0off R 20 0 . 01 − 0 . 1 ϵ = v β / k 0off R 0 0 . 001 h ∗ = h / R 0 0 . 01 σ ∗ c = σ c / ζ 0 v β 100 k ∗ σ = 2 k σ R 0 / ζ 0 k 0off 1000 v ∗ p = v p / v β 200 Numerical implementation To describe the geometry , the tangent angle , θ , and the arclength derivative , s α , are introduced as independent variables instead of x . By specifying the arclength derivative as s α = L / 2 π , the mesh points are kept equally spaced in arclength at every time step . The derivatives with respect to s and α can be exchanged through ∂ α = s α ∂ s : this enables us to apply a finite difference scheme in the fixed α - parametric domain , to which the curve is mapped as a circle and uniformly discretized in α as α i = 2 π ( i − 1 ) / N , i = 1 , · · · , N + 1 . The method was validated by comparison to the linear stability results at short times ( see Fig . S2 of the SI Appendix ) , and by comparison with a different scheme based on spline interpolation ; excellent agreement was found between the two schemes , with the θ – L method providing enhanced computational speed . All simulations start from a circular configuration with a uniform fraction of bound linkers , which is perturbed initially , along with other corresponding physical quantities , using the first 100 Fourier modes with amplitudes varying randomly from − 10 − 4 to 10 − 4 . Given the geometric and physical variables at time step t n , we update their values at t n + 1 by the following steps : ( 1 ) Update the shape of the curve x with the θ – L formulation using an explicit Euler scheme . Compute other geometric quantities such as the normal vector and the curvature . ( 2 ) Update the membrane tension σ m with the explicit Euler scheme . ( 3 ) Update the fraction of bound linkers n with a Crank - Nicholson scheme . ( 4 ) Update the off - rate by solving the force balance ( 10 ) iteratively using Newton’s method and obtain the normal velocity . The spatial derivatives are discretized by central finite difference and the integrals are computed by the trapezoidal rule with end - correction . The number of grid points is taken as N = 2000 and the time step is set to ∆ t = 10 − 3 . Results Initiation of cell motion through a stick - slip instability We first analyze the linear stability of the model to uncover a mechanism for cell spontaneous symmetry breaking and motility initiation through an instability arising from the stick - slip dy - namics of the mechanosensitive adhesions . A similar instability was discussed in [ 10 ] for the 1D case as a “stick - slip instability” , which gave rise to persistent oscillations between protrusion and retraction phases by switching between sticking and slipping states . Here , we show that , when cell shape change is considered , this instability still exists but distinct modes of deformation are subject to distinct instability criteria due to the spatial effects . 6 We take the base state for the analysis to be a stationary circle with radius ¯ R = 1 where the retrograde velocity balances with the protrusion velocity v p = ¯ r log ¯ r everywhere , and the fraction of bound linkers is uniformly distributed along the edge with the steady - state value ¯ n = r on / ( r on + ¯ r ) . Henceforth , overbars are used to denote base - state variables . From the force balance ( 10 ) , the base state surface tension then satisfies ¯ σ m = 1 1 + h / ¯ R ( ¯ r log ¯ r + ζ 1 ¯ n log ¯ r − σ c ) . ( 11 ) We consider small perturbations around the base state with the ansatz ϕ = ¯ ϕ + δϕ = ¯ ϕ + (cid:80) k ϕ k exp ( i kθ + λ k t ) . Here ¯ ϕ represents the base - state value of variable ϕ , and ϕ k and λ k de - note the initial magnitude of perturbation and corresponding dimensionless growth rate of the k th normal mode , respectively . Note that in our model , the surface tension is assumed to be uniform along the cell edge , so perturbations of the surface tension with modes k ̸ = 0 are set to zero . In - serting the ansatz into the governing equations and linearizing the system for small perturbations yields eigenvalue problems for the growth rates λ k . For k = 0 , (cid:16) 1 + log ¯ r + ζ 1 ¯ n ¯ r (cid:17) λ 20 + (cid:110)(cid:16) 1 + log ¯ r + ζ 1 ¯ n ¯ r (cid:17) ( r on + ¯ r ) + (cid:104)(cid:16) 1 + h ¯ R (cid:17) 2 π ¯ Rk σ − ϵh ¯ σ m ¯ R 2 (cid:105) ( 1 + log ¯ r ) − ζ 1 ¯ n log ¯ r (cid:111) λ 0 + (cid:104)(cid:16) 1 + h ¯ R (cid:17) 2 π ¯ Rk σ − ϵh ¯ σ m ¯ R 2 (cid:105) ( 1 + log ¯ r ) ( r on + ¯ r ) = 0 , ( 12 ) and for k ̸ = 0 , (cid:16) 1 + log ¯ r + ζ 1 ¯ n ¯ r (cid:17) λ 2 k + (cid:104)(cid:16) 1 + log ¯ r + ζ 1 ¯ n ¯ r (cid:17)(cid:16) r on + ¯ r + Dk 2 ¯ R 2 (cid:17) + ϵh ¯ σ m ¯ R 2 ( k 2 − 1 ) ( 1 + log ¯ r ) − ζ 1 ¯ n log ¯ r (cid:105) λ k + ϵh ¯ σ m ¯ R 2 ( k 2 − 1 ) ( 1 + log ¯ r ) (cid:16) r on + ¯ r + Dk 2 ¯ R 2 (cid:17) = 0 . ( 13 ) The governing equations are nonlinearly coupled and , consequently , they provide constraints on the initial perturbations ( see the SI for details ) . These constraints satisfy a quadratic equation for the perturbation amplitudes with two possible conjugate imaginary solutions , corresponding to two independent modes of perturbation , analogous to the one - dimensional case [ 10 ] where the two independent modes are the symmetric and the anti - symmetric modes . The various Fourier modes represent different modes of deformation . Typical dispersion rela - tions for parameter choices relevant to physiological conditions values are plotted in Fig . 2 . We find that the precise choice of parameters does not affect the qualitative behavior of the dispersion relation , which can be summarized as follows . The mode k = 0 describes a spatially homogeneous perturbation and corresponds to the global dilation or contraction of the cell . This is the only mode to be affected by the effective membrane stiffness k σ , and we find it to be always linearly stable at physiological values of the stiffness ( k σ ∼ 10 3 ) . Thus , membrane elasticity always acts to maintain the cell area at its base value in the linear regime . The mode k = 1 is the only mode that is not center - symmetric and captures translational motion of the center of mass ; its growth rate is found to be purely real regardless of the choice of model parameters . Therefore , when this mode becomes unstable , the corresponding perturbation is amplified and leads to a symmetry break - 7 A B C D Figure 2 : Dispersion relations showing the real and imaginary parts of the growth rate λ k as functions of wavenumber k for various choices of the parameters related to adhesion kinetics : ( A ) growth rates under different relative adhesion strengths ζ 1 with r on = 20 , D = 0 . 01 , σ c = 100 ; ( B ) growth rates under different on - rates r on with ζ 1 = 600 , D = 0 . 01 , σ c = 100 ; ( C ) growth rates under different diffusion coefficients D with ζ 1 = 600 , r on = 20 , σ c = 100 ; ( D ) growth rates under different contraction strengths σ c with ζ 1 = 600 , r on = 20 , D = 0 . 01 . In all cases , the parameters related to the general cell properties are fixed as ϵ = 0 . 001 , h = 0 . 01 , k σ = 1000 , r p = 50 . ing in space that singles out a certain direction to initiate locomotion . Subsequent modes with k > 1 describe various shape deformations with increasingly shorter wavelengths . At relatively low wavenumbers , the dispersion relation typically displays two real positive growth rates . As k increases , these give way to two complex conjugate growth rates , suggesting that there can exist oscillations and traveling waves propagating along the edge , known as “stick - slip” waves , which are similar to the lateral waves predicted along a flat edge [ 10 ] . Finally , all modes beyond a certain wavenumber become stable , indicating that high - frequency perturbations will decay . The dependence of the growth rates on the relevant system parameters can also be gleaned from Fig . 2 . We first note that a Hopf bifurcation can occur for modes with high wavenumbers as the parameters vary , where the real growth rates become growth rates with conjugate imaginary parts , similar to the 1D case [ 10 ] . We focus on the role of the three parameters that characterize adhesion kinetics . The relative adhesion strength ζ 1 and the on - rate r on are found to affect both the magnitude of the unstable growth rates as well as the number of unstable modes , while the effect of the diffusion coefficient D is to damp high order modes . As ζ 1 increases , both the magnitude of the positive real growth rates and the number of unstable modes increase . The effect of the on - rate r on , on the other hand , is nonmonotonic and exhibits a biphasic behavior . When the on - rate increases , the magnitudes of unstable growth rates first increase and then decrease . This suggests 8 the possibility of a stick - slip instability similar to the 1D case [ 10 ] , and provides a mechanism for the cell to oscillate between protruding ( sticking ) and retracting ( slipping ) states at the two distinct ends . Here , in two dimensions , certain modes of perturbation are amplified by the mechanosensitive nature of the adhesion clusters and their coupling with the retrograde flow , leading to the local adhesion sites switching between sticking and slipping motions in distinct regions . To make the biphasic relationship between friction and retrograde flow possible , the relative adhesion strength needs to be strong enough for the adhesive friction to play a role compared to the linear friction . Moreover , the rebinding rate cannot be either too small or too large , since in both cases the adhesive linkers either dissociate or rebind to the substrate too quickly . As a result , there is no possible stick - slip transition and the system remains linearly stable . That optimal locomotion efficiency occurs for intermediate adhesions was demonstrated in experiments by varying the concentration of integrins and blocking integrins [ 55 ] . Our model assumed a uniform contractile force along the cell edge as a way to single out the role of mechanosensitive adhesions in driving symmetry breaking . The effect of actomyosin contraction on stability is shown in Fig . 2 D , where it is found to have a weak but destabilizing effect on the system . This finding is qualitatively consistent with previous contraction - driven cell motility models and with various experimental observations [ 33 , 56 , 57 ] . Instability of mode k = 1 is responsible for the formation of the front and rear in the early stage of locomotion As already mentioned above , the instability of the k = 1 mode provides a mechanism for the self - polarization of the cells and initiation of motility . This is further demonstrated in our numerical simulations . A typical temporal evolution of a cell shape at short times is illustrated in Fig . 3 A , where the cell edge is colored by the fraction of bound linkers . Starting from a circular shape and a randomly perturbed initial distribution of bound linkers at t = 0 , high - frequency fluctuations are found to decay very rapidly ( t = 0 . 5 ) as predicted by the stability analysis . The k = 1 mode , which has the largest growth rate , grows simultaneously , resulting in the formation of a potential cell front where more linkers are bound to the substrate and of a potential rear where fewer linkers are bound ( t = 1 ) . The polymerization velocity then exceeds the retrograde velocity in the front while the opposite occurs at the rear , leading to expansion in the front , shrinkage at the rear , and translocation of the center of mass ( t = 1 . 5 ) . The front further keeps protruding while the rear keeps retracting , and the cell ultimately evolves to a fan - like shape with a smooth leading edge ( t = 2 ) very similar to the characteristic shape of coherent keratocytes [ 37 ] . The spatiotemporal evolution of the fraction of bound linkers , off - rate , friction force and cur - vature during these early stages are plotted as kymographs in Fig . 3 B – E . As a result of the growth of the k = 1 mode , the retrograde velocity is low in the front of the cell and high at the rear . Consequently , strong adhesion develops in the front where the off - rate is low and hence most linkers are bound to the substrate . Meanwhile the off - rate is high with most linkers unbound along regions at the back and sides , in agreement with the traction stress distribution revealed by experiments in migrating cells [ 58 ] . Comparing the spatiotemporal distribution of the friction and the curvature ( Fig . 3 D and E ) shows that regions with high friction coincide with regions with high curvature as required by the force balance equation . This is also consistent with ex - periments [ 58 ] where traction stress concentrates at the sides . Note that unlike many previous modeling approaches [ 37 , 40 ] where the breaking of front - rear symmetry and adhesion distribution were treated as inputs to trigger the initiation of motion and turning , our model provides a route for this distribution of adhesions to emerge spontaneously through the instability of the k = 1 9 A B C D E Figure 3 : Spatiotemporal evolution of a fan - shaped cell during the initiation of motion ( t = 0 to t = 2 ) from a nonlinear numerical simulation . ( A ) Time evolution of the cell shape , where the edge is colored by the fraction of bound linkers . The two black dots show the initial and current center - of - mass positions . ( B ) - ( E ) Kymographs of the fraction of bound linkers n , off - rate r , total friction r log r + ζ 1 n log r , and local curvature κ , as functions of normalized arclength s / L and time t . Parameters values : ϵ = 0 . 001 , h = 0 . 01 , k σ = 1000 , σ c = 100 , r p = 50 , r on = 25 , ζ = 600 , D = 0 . 05 . mode and to become further amplified by the feedback loop between mechanosensitive adhesions , membrane tension , and geometry . The stability diagram predicts various motility modes Next , we turn our focus to long - time dynamics and the effect of adhesion kinetic parameters . While the initiation of locomotion through the instability of the k = 1 mode is generic , various cell motility modes are observed at long times depending on the relative adhesion strength ζ 1 and on - rate r on . We categorize them in a phase diagram in Fig . 4 A , in which the blue shaded regions highlight the linearly unstable regimes for the Fourier modes with wavenumbers k = 1 , 2 , 5 , 10 , 15 , while the dots denote the long - time motility modes . Each dot represents five simulations with different random initial perturbations . A systematic exploration of the parameter space allowed us to classify the motility modes by the following criteria : ( i ) if the cell moves in a straight line with no turns over the entire simulation time range ( t = 100 ) , we call it a “gliding” mode ( Fig . 4 B and C ) ; ( ii ) if the cell turns only towards one direction , we call it a “rotational” mode ( Fig . 4 D ) ; ( iii ) if the cell turns alternatively between left and right resulting in a lateral oscillation , we call it a “zigzag” mode ( Fig . 4 E and F ) ; ( iv ) for some combinations of parameters and for different initial conditions , we observed “mixed” modes where the cell can exhibit different types of motions including the three cases mentioned above ; ( v ) finally , there exist more complicated types of motion that do not fit into any of the cases above and that we label as “others” ( Fig . 4 G – J ) . Most of the motility modes described here have been observed in experiments as well as in previous models : the gliding motion is well known in fast - moving fish keratocytes [ 59 ] ; the zigzag motion is analogous to the “bipedal” motion of oscillating keratocytes [ 37 , 38 ] ; and spontaneous turning has also been observed in keratocytes even in the absence of external cues [ 35 , 39 ] . 10 Although the dynamics at long times are essentially nonlinear , Fig . 4 A shows a clear correlation between the stability diagram and the motility modes . In regions of the parameter space with fewer unstable modes , where the on - rate is either relatively low or high , the motion tends to be uniaxial with the cell remaining polarized with left - right symmetry . More complex dynamics arise for intermediate on - rates , which we attribute to the stick - slip instability . Rotational and zigzag modes arise in this regime , and are characterized by broken left - right symmetry in addition to front - rear asymmetry , resulting in quasi - periodic turns in the cell trajectory . We take a closer look at these turns in Fig . 5 A and B , where we plot the temporal evolution of the membrane tension together with the corresponding shapes and center of mass velocities within one oscillation period for the rotational and zigzag modes , respectively . At the initiation of a turn , the distribution of bound linkers is first observed to become asymmetric , with an increase in the fraction of bound linkers on one side of the cell . This results in enhanced sticking on that side along with slipping on the opposite side , allowing the cell to turn in that direction , and this mechanism is reminiscent of the “sticking wave” predicted in the 1D flat case [ 10 ] . As the cell shape becomes asymmetric and the cell rotates , the membrane tension is found to increase and reaches a peak value before relaxing again in the later stage of the turn . In the zigzag case , the high adhesion region alternatively switches between the left and right sides of the cell , while for the rotational cases the direction in which the high adhesion regions form remains fixed , with equal probabilities for a cell to turn clockwise or counterclockwise . The Hopf bifurcation of higher - order modes may be responsible for this transition from uniaxial translation to oscillatory motion . Moreover , we find that there is a strong correlation between cell shapes and motility modes . For the gliding cases , the cell adopts either a triangular - like shape ( for small on - rates , Fig . 4 B ) or a nearly circular shape ( for large on - rates , Fig . 4 C ) , while for the zigzag and rotational motions , the cells are more fan - shaped with curved fronts ( Fig . 4 D – F ) . Another key observation is that , regardless of the randomness in the initial perturbations , the emerging shapes corresponding to a give set of parameters are robust ; we further elaborate on this point below . Robustness of motility modes The observations above suggest that the feedback loop between mechanosensitive adhesions and membrane tension uniquely determines the emergent motility mode for a given set of system parameters , irrespective of the initial condition or history of the system . To further demonstrate the robustness of these modes , we vary the parameters during a simulation to analyze transitions between modes . A typical transition is shown in Fig . 6 A : starting from a cell performing a gliding motion , we abruptly vary the value of r on from 16 to 30 at t 0 = 25 , causing it to switch to a zigzag mode . As shown in the snapshots , the cell glides smoothly at first , and , after the change in r on , its shape quickly adjust and start undergoing zigzags . The oscillation frequency and cell morphology after the transition are similar to the corresponding zigzag motions with r on = 30 starting from a randomly perturbed initial condition . The time instant t 0 at which we start altering the parameters , the period of time ∆ t within which we gradually alter the parameters , and the intermediate states do not significantly affect the zigzag dynamics ( Fig . 6 B ) . To quantitatively compare the resulting zigzag modes emerging through different routes , we plot the temporal evolution of the membrane tension in Fig . 6 B for different choices of t 0 and ∆ t . After increasing the on - rate and the adhesion strength , the cell expands , leading to an increase in the membrane tension towards the tension value of the new state , regardless of the history of states . This is in agreement with the one - dimensional case [ 10 ] as well as experiments [ 19 ] where the membrane tension in motile cells is determined by the adhesion strength and cytoskeletal forces , and increases as cell - substrate adhesion strengthens—in 11 our model , as either the on - rate and relative adhesion strength increases . Similar transitions are also observed when we change parameters between other modes ( see SI Appendix , Movies S10 – S12 ) . In all cases , after changing the parameters , the cell first goes through a transient state and then soon evolves into the motility mode selected by the new set of parameters in the phase diagram of Fig . 4 . This further suggests that these motility modes are attractors of the dynamical system , with the model solutions either approaching fixed points or stable limit cycles in phase space . Effect of adhesion parameters Finally , we investigate the effect of varying adhesion kinetic parameters on cell geometry , me - chanics and locomotion . For various combinations of r on and ζ 1 , we calculate the time - average circularity 4 πA / L 2 ( with a maximum value of 1 corresponding to a perfect circle ) , the aver - age membrane tension , and the average distance of the center of mass from the origin x c = (cid:80) Mi = 1 | x ( i ) c − x ( 0 ) c | / M , and plot them as phase diagrams in Fig . 7 where the motility modes are also labeled . Note that the precise boundary between each mode changes slightly as we vary the diffusion coefficient D , but the qualitative behavior remains unchanged . For the gliding modes with low on - rates , the cell adopts a nearly triangular shape with low circularity , with only a weak dependence on ζ 1 . As the on - rate increases , the shapes all become more circular regardless of motility mode as seen in Fig . 7 A . A possible explanation for this behavior is that , as the on - rate increases , the difference in the fraction of bound linkers between the front and the rear decreases , and therefore the difference in the sticking and slipping velocity also decreases , resulting in less deformed shapes . The average membrane tension shows little correlation with the various motility modes in Fig . 7 B , and is mainly determined by the on - rate and the relative adhesion strength , consistent with the discussion above [ 10 , 19 ] . The ability of a cell to explore space depends strongly on its motility mode as illustrated in Fig . 7 C , where we show the phase diagram for the average distance traveled by the cell . The gliding and the zigzag modes are more unidirectional and thus allow the cell to travel for a longer distance than in the rotational mode . In the case of zigzag trajectories , the left - right oscillations can be accompanied by a circular motion when the relative adhesion strength and the on - rate increase , leading to a decrease in the distance traveled . Ultimately , the zigzag mode gives way to trajectories labeled as “others” in Fig . 7 C , which are characterized by irregular turns and may result from the superposition of multiple oscillatory periods . Discussion In this work , we have extended the one - dimensional model coupling actin polymerization , adhesion , membrane tension , and shape change described in [ 10 ] to two dimensions to elucidate the role of the coupling between tension and adhesion in the determination of cell shape , the initiation of migration , and the selection of motility modes . With this minimal model , we showed that motile cells can display rich dynamical behaviors by relying on a relatively simple set of physical mechanisms and couplings . We first performed a linear stability analysis and demonstrated that the k = 1 mode , describing translocation of the center of mass , is always the most unstable and is responsible for the cell to obtain its polarity and identify a direction in space for migration by spontaneous symmetry breaking . We then conducted nonlinear numerical simulations , and showed that , driven by a constant actin polymerization rate , the model was able to capture various motility 12 modes commonly seen in experiments , such as unidirectional gliding , bipedal motion and turning . We identified the nonlinear coupling between stochastic adhesion and membrane tension as the key mechanism involved in the selection of motility modes . Specifically , the relative adhesion strength and on - rate were shown to govern membrane tension , which in turns connects spatially distributed adhesions and thus couples the retrograde flow with shape change and adhesion kinetics . Certain fluctuation modes are amplified by this feedback loop , resulting in directional motion and oscillatory behaviors . The basic physical mechanisms involved in this process are summarized in Fig . 8 . A local increase in the off - rate r can have two distinct effects : a decrease in the fraction of bound linkers n and a local retraction of the cell edge . The latter will lead to a global decrease in cell area and , consequently , in a decrease in membrane tension due to the membrane elasticity . The force balance ( 10 ) dictates that the decrease in n will cause an increase the off - rate r , whereas the decrease in membrane tension will cause r to decrease . Therefore , there is a competition between the membrane tension and the fraction of bound linkers in the regulation of the off - rate , tuned by the relative adhesion strength ζ 1 . When ζ 1 is large , the effect of n dominates resulting in a positive feedback on r , rendering the system unstable and driving the onset of motility . On the other hand , when ζ 1 is small , the situation is the opposite and the system is stable . These predictions are borne out by the results of our stability analysis and numerical simulations . Our model predictions are consistent with experimental observations of symmetry breaking and cell motility modes . Using experimental measurements and mechanical models , Barnhart et al . showed that two feedback loops—one between actin flow and adhesions and the other between actin flow and myosins—are required to initiate motility in fish keratocytes [ 33 ] . Similarly , using a phase - field approach , Shao et al . [ 28 ] showed that coupling between adhesions , actin flow , and myosin contraction is required to recapitulate different experimental observations of keratocyte shape change . In the present work , we showed that the feedback between adhesion and membrane tension , for constant actin flow , is sufficient to capture both the spontaneous initiation of motility by symmetry breaking and the emergence of complex motility modes . An interesting and as yet unexplained experimental observation that our model may help shed light on is that , at low temperatures , the trajectories of fast - moving keratocytes tend to be more unidirectional , while their motion is more circular and less persistent at high temperatures [ 5 ] . Previous studies have proposed a “steering wheel” mechanism [ 39 , 40 ] whereby the turning of a cell is caused by asymmetrically distributed adhesion sites at the rear , but the relationship between the turning and temperature is unclear . This effect can be explained by the molecular clutch approach for adhesions in our model . According to Bell’s theory [ 44 ] , the reaction rate increases with temperature , so binding and unbinding processes should be more active at high temperatures . By this effect , an increase in temperature drives an increase in the on - rate and relative adhesion strength , and thus drives the transition from gliding to zigzag , rotational , and other modes . While our model captures many experimental observations and makes testable predictions on the interaction between membrane tension and adhesion , it has certain limitations . In particular , it does not account for the complex molecular machinery underlying actomyosin contraction or associated signaling pathways and only contains a single mechanical feedback loop . We also note that even though we obtain fan - shaped cells in the early stages of motion , the shapes ultimately become triangular for gliding cells , which could be a result of the constant actin polymerization velocity assumed in our model and of ignoring actin remodeling events [ 5 , 11 , 13 , 51 ] . The contrac - tion generated by the distinct distribution of myosin motors in crawling cells is also neglected in our model . In some studies , contraction alone can be shown to generate spontaneous symmetry breaking and motions [ 56 ] . Finally , like other cell motility models [ 27 , 29 , 33 ] , we have assumed 13 that membrane tension is spatially uniform , yet spatial variations in tension has been observed in cells in experiments [ 60 ] . An extension of our approach to incorporate some of these additional details as well internal active stresses has the potential to further enrich the model . References [ 1 ] Jesse R Holt , Wei - Zheng Zeng , Elizabeth L Evans , Seung - Hyun Woo , Shang Ma , Hamid Abuwarda , Meaghan Loud , Ardem Patapoutian , and Medha M Pathak . Spatiotemporal dynamics of piezo1 localization controls keratinocyte migration during wound healing . eLife , 10 : e65415 , 2021 . [ 2 ] Thomas D Pollard and Gary G Borisy . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell , 112 ( 4 ) : 453 – 465 , 2003 . [ 3 ] Revathi Ananthakrishnan and Allen Ehrlicher . The forces behind cell movement . Int . J . Biol . Sci . , 3 ( 5 ) : 303 , 2007 . [ 4 ] Patricia T Yam , Cyrus A Wilson , Lin Ji , Benedict Hebert , Erin L Barnhart , Natalie A Dye , Paul W Wiseman , Gaudenz Danuser , and Julie A Theriot . Actin – myosin network reorgani - zation breaks symmetry at the cell rear to spontaneously initiate polarized cell motility . J . Cell Biol . , 178 ( 7 ) : 1207 – 1221 , 2007 . [ 5 ] Alex Mogilner , Erin L Barnhart , and Kinneret Keren . Experiment , theory , and the keratocyte : An ode to a simple model for cell motility . In Seminars in cell & developmental biology , volume 100 , pages 143 – 151 . Elsevier , 2020 . [ 6 ] Louise P Cramer . Forming the cell rear first : breaking cell symmetry to trigger directed cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . , 12 ( 7 ) : 628 – 632 , 2010 . [ 7 ] Wouter - Jan Rappel and Leah Edelstein - Keshet . Mechanisms of cell polarization . Curr . Opin . Syst . , 3 : 43 – 53 , 2017 . [ 8 ] Anne J Ridley , Martin A Schwartz , Keith Burridge , Richard A Firtel , Mark H Ginsberg , Gary Borisy , J Thomas Parsons , and Alan Rick Horwitz . Cell migration : integrating signals from front to back . Science , 302 ( 5651 ) : 1704 – 1709 , 2003 . [ 9 ] J Thomas Parsons , Alan Rick Horwitz , and Martin A Schwartz . Cell adhesion : integrating cytoskeletal dynamics and cellular tension . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 11 ( 9 ) : 633 – 643 , 2010 . [ 10 ] Pierre Sens . Stick – slip model for actin - driven cell protrusions , cell polarization , and crawling . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 117 ( 40 ) : 24670 – 24678 , 2020 . [ 11 ] Padmini Rangamani , Marc - Antoine Fardin , Yuguang Xiong , Azi Lipshtat , Olivier Rossier , Michael P Sheetz , and Ravi Iyengar . Signaling network triggers and membrane physical properties control the actin cytoskeleton - driven isotropic phase of cell spreading . Biophys . J . , 100 ( 4 ) : 845 – 857 , 2011 . [ 12 ] Gaudenz Danuser , Jun Allard , and Alex Mogilner . Mathematical modeling of eukaryotic cell migration : insights beyond experiments . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . , 29 : 501 – 528 , 2013 . 14 [ 13 ] Yuguang Xiong , Padmini Rangamani , Marc - Antoine Fardin , Azi Lipshtat , Benjamin Dubin - Thaler , Olivier Rossier , Michael P Sheetz , and Ravi Iyengar . Mechanisms controlling cell size and shape during isotropic cell spreading . Biophys . J . , 98 ( 10 ) : 2136 – 2146 , May 2010 . [ 14 ] Chun - Min Lo , Hong - Bei Wang , Micah Dembo , and Yu - li Wang . Cell movement is guided by the rigidity of the substrate . Biophys . J . , 79 ( 1 ) : 144 – 152 , 2000 . [ 15 ] B J Dubin - Thaler , G Giannone , H G D¨obereiner , and M P Sheetz . Nanometer analysis of cell spreading on matrix - coated surfaces reveals two distinct cell states and STEPs . Biophys . J . , 86 ( 3 ) : 1794 – 1806 , March 2004 . [ 16 ] Benjamin J Dubin - Thaler , Jake M Hofman , Yunfei Cai , Harry Xenias , Ingrid Spielman , Anna V Shneidman , Lawrence A David , Hans - Gunther Dobereiner , Chris H Wiggins , and Michael P Sheetz . Quantification of cell edge velocities and traction forces reveals distinct motility modules during cell spreading . PLoS One , 3 ( 11 ) : e3735 , January 2008 . [ 17 ] Kinneret Keren , Zachary Pincus , Greg M Allen , Erin L Barnhart , Gerard Marriott , Alex Mogilner , and Julie A Theriot . Mechanism of shape determination in motile cells . Nature , 453 ( 7194 ) : 475 – 480 , 2008 . [ 18 ] Cyrus A Wilson , Mark A Tsuchida , Greg M Allen , Erin L Barnhart , Kathryn T Applegate , Patricia T Yam , Lin Ji , Kinneret Keren , Gaudenz Danuser , and Julie A Theriot . Myosin ii contributes to cell - scale actin network treadmilling through network disassembly . Nature , 465 ( 7296 ) : 373 – 377 , 2010 . [ 19 ] Arnon D Lieber , Shlomit Yehudai - Resheff , Erin L Barnhart , Julie A Theriot , and Kinneret Keren . Membrane tension in rapidly moving cells is determined by cytoskeletal forces . Curr . Biol . , 23 ( 15 ) : 1409 – 1417 , 2013 . [ 20 ] Alba Diz - Mu˜noz , Daniel A Fletcher , and Orion D Weiner . Use the force : membrane tension as an organizer of cell shape and motility . Trends Cell Biol . , 23 ( 2 ) : 47 – 53 , 2013 . [ 21 ] Pierre Sens and Julie Plastino . Membrane tension and cytoskeleton organization in cell motil - ity . J . Condens . Matter Phys . , 27 ( 27 ) : 273103 , 2015 . [ 22 ] Boris Rubinstein , Ken Jacobson , and Alex Mogilner . Multiscale two - dimensional modeling of a motile simple - shaped cell . Multiscale Model Simul . , 3 ( 2 ) : 413 – 439 , 2005 . [ 23 ] Boris Rubinstein , Maxime F Fournier , Ken Jacobson , Alexander B Verkhovsky , and Alex Mogilner . Actin - myosin viscoelastic flow in the keratocyte lamellipod . Biophys . J . , 97 ( 7 ) : 1853 – 1863 , 2009 . [ 24 ] Thomas E Schaus , Edwin W Taylor , and Gary G Borisy . Self - organization of actin filament orientation in the dendritic - nucleation / array - treadmilling model . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 104 ( 17 ) : 7086 – 7091 , 2007 . [ 25 ] Marc Herant and Micah Dembo . Form and function in cell motility : from fibroblasts to keratocytes . Biophys . J . , 98 ( 8 ) : 1408 – 1417 , 2010 . [ 26 ] Charles W Wolgemuth , Jelena Stajic , and Alex Mogilner . Redundant mechanisms for stable cell locomotion revealed by minimal models . Biophys . J . , 101 ( 3 ) : 545 – 553 , 2011 . 15 [ 27 ] Danying Shao , Wouter - Jan Rappel , and Herbert Levine . Computational model for cell mor - phodynamics . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 105 ( 10 ) : 108104 , 2010 . [ 28 ] Danying Shao , Herbert Levine , and Wouter - Jan Rappel . Coupling actin flow , adhesion , and morphology in a computational cell motility model . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 109 ( 18 ) : 6851 – 6856 , 2012 . [ 29 ] Falko Ziebert , Sumanth Swaminathan , and Igor S Aranson . Model for self - polarization and motility of keratocyte fragments . J . R . Soc . Interface . , 9 ( 70 ) : 1084 – 1092 , 2012 . [ 30 ] Elsen Tjhung , Davide Marenduzzo , and Michael E Cates . Spontaneous symmetry breaking in active droplets provides a generic route to motility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 109 ( 31 ) : 12381 – 12386 , 2012 . [ 31 ] Elsen Tjhung , Adriano Tiribocchi , Davide Marenduzzo , and Michael E Cates . A minimal physical model captures the shapes of crawling cells . Nat . Commun . , 6 ( 1 ) : 5420 , 2015 . [ 32 ] Wieland Marth , Simon Praetorius , and Axel Voigt . A mechanism for cell motility by active polar gels . J . R . Soc . Interface . , 12 ( 107 ) : 20150161 , 2015 . [ 33 ] Erin Barnhart , Kun - Chun Lee , Greg M Allen , Julie A Theriot , and Alex Mogilner . Balance between cell - substrate adhesion and myosin contraction determines the frequency of motility initiation in fish keratocytes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 112 ( 16 ) : 5045 – 5050 , 2015 . [ 34 ] William R Holmes and Leah Edelstein - Keshet . A comparison of computational models for eukaryotic cell shape and motility . PLoS Comput . Biol . , 8 ( 12 ) : e1002793 , 2012 . [ 35 ] Tim Oliver , Micah Dembo , and Ken Jacobson . Separation of propulsive and adhesive traction stresses in locomoting keratocytes . J . Cell Biol . , 145 ( 3 ) : 589 – 604 , 1999 . [ 36 ] Rachael A Ream , Julie A Theriot , and George N Somero . Influences of thermal acclimation and acute temperature change on the motility of epithelial wound - healing cells ( keratocytes ) of tropical , temperate and antarctic fish . J . Exp . Biol . , 206 ( 24 ) : 4539 – 4551 , 2003 . [ 37 ] Erin L Barnhart , Greg M Allen , Frank J¨ulicher , and Julie A Theriot . Bipedal locomotion in crawling cells . Biophys . J . , 98 ( 6 ) : 933 – 942 , 2010 . [ 38 ] Alex J Loosley and Jay X Tang . Stick - slip motion and elastic coupling in crawling cells . Phys . Rev . E , 86 ( 3 ) : 031908 , 2012 . [ 39 ] Greg M Allen , Kun Chun Lee , Erin L Barnhart , Mark A Tsuchida , Cyrus A Wilson , Edgar Gutierrez , Alexander Groisman , Julie A Theriot , and Alex Mogilner . Cell mechanics at the rear act to steer the direction of cell migration . Cell Syst . , 11 ( 3 ) : 286 – 299 , 2020 . [ 40 ] Kun Chun Lee , Greg M Allen , Erin L Barnhart , Mark A Tsuchida , Cyrus A Wilson , Edgar Gutierrez , Alexander Groisman , Julie A Theriot , and Alex Mogilner . Modeling cell turning by mechanics at the cell rear . bioRxiv , 2020 . [ 41 ] Falko Ziebert and Igor S Aranson . Effects of adhesion dynamics and substrate compliance on the shape and motility of crawling cells . PloS One , 8 ( 5 ) : e64511 , 2013 . 16 [ 42 ] Jakob L¨ober , Falko Ziebert , and Igor S Aranson . Modeling crawling cell movement on soft engineered substrates . Soft Matter , 10 ( 9 ) : 1365 – 1373 , 2014 . [ 43 ] Ulrich S Schwarz and Samuel A Safran . Physics of adherent cells . Rev . Mod . Phys . , 85 ( 3 ) : 1327 , 2013 . [ 44 ] George I Bell . Models for the specific adhesion of cells to cells : a theoretical framework for adhesion mediated by reversible bonds between cell surface molecules . Science , 200 ( 4342 ) : 618 – 627 , 1978 . [ 45 ] Evan A Evans and David A Calderwood . Forces and bond dynamics in cell adhesion . Science , 316 ( 5828 ) : 1148 – 1153 , 2007 . [ 46 ] AE Filippov , J Klafter , and M Urbakh . Friction through dynamical formation and rupture of molecular bonds . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 92 ( 13 ) : 135503 , 2004 . [ 47 ] Benedikt Sabass and Ulrich S Schwarz . Modeling cytoskeletal flow over adhesion sites : com - petition between stochastic bond dynamics and intracellular relaxation . J . Condens . Matter Phys . , 22 ( 19 ) : 194112 , 2010 . [ 48 ] Ying Li , Prabhakar Bhimalapuram , and Aaron R Dinner . Model for how retrograde actin flow regulates adhesion traction stresses . J . Condens . Matter Phys . , 22 ( 19 ) : 194113 , 2010 . [ 49 ] Erin M Craig , Jonathan Stricker , Margaret Gardel , and Alex Mogilner . Model for adhesion clutch explains biphasic relationship between actin flow and traction at the cell leading edge . Phys . Biol . , 12 ( 3 ) : 035002 , 2015 . [ 50 ] Juliet Lee , Akira Ishihara , Julie A Theriot , and Ken Jacobson . Principles of locomotion for simple - shaped cells . Nature , 362 ( 6416 ) : 167 – 171 , 1993 . [ 51 ] Masoud Nickaeen , Igor L Novak , Stephanie Pulford , Aaron Rumack , Jamie Brandon , Boris M Slepchenko , and Alex Mogilner . A free - boundary model of a motile cell explains turning behavior . PLoS Comput . Biol . , 13 ( 11 ) : e1005862 , 2017 . [ 52 ] Clarence E Chan and David J Odde . Traction dynamics of filopodia on compliant substrates . Science , 322 ( 5908 ) : 1687 – 1691 , 2008 . [ 53 ] AC Callan - Jones , J - F Joanny , and J Prost . Viscous - fingering - like instability of cell fragments . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 100 ( 25 ) : 258106 , 2008 . [ 54 ] Carles Blanch - Mercader and J Casademunt . Spontaneous motility of actin lamellar fragments . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 110 ( 7 ) : 078102 , 2013 . [ 55 ] Sean P Palecek , Joseph C Loftus , Mark H Ginsberg , Douglas A Lauffenburger , and Alan F Horwitz . Integrin - ligand binding properties govern cell migration speed through cell - substratum adhesiveness . Nature , 385 ( 6616 ) : 537 – 540 , 1997 . [ 56 ] P Recho , T Putelat , and L Truskinovsky . Contraction - driven cell motility . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 111 ( 10 ) : 108102 , 2013 . [ 57 ] C Alex Safsten , Volodmyr Rybalko , and Leonid Berlyand . Asymptotic stability of contraction - driven cell motion . Phys . Rev . E , 105 ( 2 ) : 024403 , 2022 . 17 [ 58 ] Maxime F Fournier , Roger Sauser , Davide Ambrosi , Jean - Jacques Meister , and Alexander B Verkhovsky . Force transmission in migrating cells . Journal of Cell Biology , 188 ( 2 ) : 287 – 297 , 2010 . [ 59 ] Alexander B Verkhovsky , Tatyana M Svitkina , and Gary G Borisy . Self - polarization and directional motility of cytoplasm . Curr . Biol . , 9 ( 1 ) : 11 – S1 , 1999 . [ 60 ] Zheng Shi , Zachary T Graber , Tobias Baumgart , Howard A Stone , and Adam E Cohen . Cell membranes resist flow . Cell , 175 ( 7 ) : 1769 – 1779 . e13 , December 2018 . 18 A B C E F G H I J D Figure 4 : ( A ) Stability diagram and motility modes in the ( r on , ζ 1 ) parameter space : blue shadings show regions of instability for modes k = 1 , 2 , 5 , 10 , 15 ( from light to dark blue ) , and symbols indicate the motility modes observed in nonlinear simulations , whose dynamics are illustrated in the remaining panels . Five simulations were performed for each data point . Points labeled as ‘mixed’ display multiple types of dynamics depending on the initial condition . Points labeled as ‘others’ display irregular dynamics that are not easily categorized . ( B ) Gliding mode , ( r on , α 1 ) = ( 16 , 600 ) , ∆ t = 10 . ( C ) Gliding mode , ( r on , α 1 ) = ( 56 , 560 ) , ∆ t = 10 . ( D ) Rotational mode , ( r on , α 1 ) = ( 24 , 540 ) , ∆ t = 10 . ( E ) Zigzag mode , ( r on , α 1 ) = ( 26 , 600 ) , ∆ t = 10 . ( F ) Zigzag mode , ( r on , α 1 ) = ( 36 , 560 ) , ∆ t = 15 . ( G ) Others , ( r on , α 1 ) = ( 38 , 580 ) , ∆ t = 20 . ( H ) Others , ( r on , α 1 ) = ( 40 , 540 ) , ∆ t = 20 . ( I ) Others , ( r on , α 1 ) = ( 40 , 600 ) , ∆ t = 20 . ( J ) Others , ( r on , α 1 ) = ( 44 , 560 ) , ∆ t = 20 . In all cases , the other parameters were set to ϵ = 0 . 001 , h = 0 . 01 , k σ = 1000 , σ c = 100 , r p = 50 , D = 0 . 05 . The cells contours are colored by the fraction of bound linkers n , and the purples curves show the center - of - mass trajectories in each case . See Movies S1 – S9 in the SI Appendix for videos of the dynamics . 19 A B Figure 5 : Temporal evolution of the membrane tension and corresponding cell shapes and center - of - mass velocities as functions of time during one period of oscillation for the ( A ) rotational mode with ( r on , α 1 ) = ( 24 , 540 ) , and ( B ) zigzag mode with ( r on , α 1 ) = ( 26 , 600 ) . The cell shapes are colored by the local fraction of bound linkers n , and the orange arrows show the instantaneous center - of - mass velocity . In both cases , other parameters are fixed as ϵ = 0 . 001 , h = 0 . 01 , k σ = 1000 , σ c = 100 , r p = 50 , D = 0 . 05 . A B Figure 6 : Transition between different motility modes . ( A ) Snapshots of a gliding cell switching into a zigzag mode as the adhesion parameters ( r on , α 1 ) abruptly change from ( 16 , 580 ) to ( 30 , 580 ) at t = 25 . Other parameters are fixed as ϵ = 0 . 001 , h = 0 . 01 , k σ = 1000 , r p = 50 , D = 0 . 05 . ( B ) Temporal evolution of the membrane tension as the parameters ( r on , α 1 ) are varied to cause changes in motility modes . Here , ∆ t denotes the duration of the time interval over which the parameters are gradually varied . 20 A B C Figure 7 : Phase diagrams in the ( r on , ζ 1 ) parameter space showing color maps of the time - averaged ( A ) cell circularity 4 πA / L 2 , ( B ) membrane tension σ m , and ( C ) average distance of the center of mass from the origin x c . The diagrams show averages over five simulations of duration T = 95 . Symbols indicate the corresponding motility modes previous identified in Fig . 4 . Other parameters are fixed as ϵ = 0 . 001 , h = 0 . 01 , k σ = 1000 , σ c = 100 , r p = 50 , D = 0 . 05 . Figure 8 : A simple mechanical feedback loop between membrane tension and adhesions determines cell shape and direction of motility . 21