Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 Appendix A – Summary of Nine Equity - Focused Health Informatics Projects According to Application of PRAXIS Framework Elements Participation and Representation Appropriate methods and interventions ConteXtualization and structural competence Investigating Systematic differences I n i t i a t i ng R esea r c h  Patient partners 1 or clinicians 1 , 8 , 9 as part of the research team  Multi - sectoral partnerships : healthcare organizations , non - profit organizations , advocates and subcontractors 1 , 3  Community - based participatory research with federally qualified health centers ( FQHCs ) and / or nonprofit partners 7 , 8  Committees involving patients , nonprofits , and / or healthcare organizations 1 , 3 , 4  Study was informed by initial exploratory research with marginalized groups 1 , 2 , 6 , 8  Intervention developed on the foundation of previous interventional studies within the target population and in consultation with a community advisory board 5  Initial qualitative stage was used to inform the selection of measures for a survey 2  Focused on a chronic health condition that was highly prevalent in the target community , using an interventional approach that was endorsed by the community in prior studies 5  Participatory design sessions to gather intervention ideas 1 , 8  Targeted interventions for marginalized groups 1 , 5 , 8  Stigmatization as a structural context 2  Motivated by calls to action for policy shifts 3  Made appropriate connections to primary care 5  Goal was to identify community - based solutions that could address systematic barriers , while building on current community assets 8  Study with general research aims and equity - focused subgroup analyses 1 , 6  Observational study with research aims of detecting or understanding disparities 2 , 3 , 9  Intervention ( s ) targeted to marginalized groups 5 , 7 , 8 S a m p l i ng a nd R ec r u i t m e n t  Social media data based on census tract and linked census data 6  Recruited with advice from nonprofits , healthcare settings , and support groups 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 8  Used telephone - based recruitment 7  Included all EHR data in a given time period 9  Participants recruited in - person from the Veteran’s Health administration and emergency department 4 , 5  Retention measures included incentivizing each data collection assessment and removing participation barriers 1 , 4 , 5  Recruited survey participants via text per articulated preferences of some patients 7  Clustered sampling by family , starting with index patient 4  Eligibility criteria sensitive to the technology context of the target population 5  Oversampled tweets from neighborhoods with high disadvantage 6 Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 Participation and Representation Appropriate methods and interventions ConteXtualization and structural competence Investigating Systematic differences D a t a C o ll ec t i on  Multiple data collection methods to gather diverse patient voices and perspectices 1 , 2 , 7  Participatory design activities 1  User generated content treated as study data 6  Conducted initial focus groups with intended intervention end users 6  Collection of all EHR - based visit data in a given time period , with no exclusions 7 , 9  Assets - based approach seeks to building upon community strengths 8  Validated patient - reported measures to represent patients’ values and preferences 2  Working group meetings focused on developing inclusive practices 3  Targeted interventions 1 , 5  Developed visual , step - by - step educational materials for marginalized audience 7  Provided technology to patients to facilitate participation 7  Provided materials to facilitate remote PD session participation 8  Verbal discussion to counteract any potential literacy issues 8  Plain language review of study materials and instruments 2 , 8  Use of survey instruments and other measures per ONLINE APPENDIX C 1 , 7 , 8  Cluster randomized controlled trial 1  Evaluation of technology in “real world” contexts to reveal valid use contstraints 1 , 7  Extended individually - focused methods to be conducted with groups 4  Protocol driven plans to collect all data verbally in the event participants have low literacy levels 5  Observation in everyday settings to understand context 4  Interviewed both patients and the people who assist them in using technology ( “intermediaries” ) 7  Home blood pressures and step count data collected from mobile devices 5  Conducted an environmental scan and literature reviews to understand inequities for sexual and gender minorities 3  Collected secondary data sets to characterize census tracts , and linked to other data 6 , 9  Parallel projects in urban and rural areas used to investigate differences in design requirements based on place of residence 8 D a t a A n a l ys i s  Presented preliminary results to partners for discussion and feedback 1 , 4 , 7 , 8  Patients’ drawings analyzed as study data 1  Evaluated success of recruitment methods 7  Community partners as co - authors on papers 1 , 6 , 7 , 8  Integrated mixed methods analysis guided by participants’ values and preferences 2  Developed a patient - facing intervention grounded in patient experiences 1  Informatics intervention designed to integrate with workflow 1  Developed new keyword lists to better represent colloquial language 6  Based on the transformative lens , held participants’ values as a guide in analyses 2  Considered patient portal use at baseline of COVID - 19 period to evaluate patient access to / use of technology 9  Developed low - fidelity prototypes for feedback from marginalized participants based on earlier PD sessions 8  Georeferenced social media data used to characterize local health behavior , attitudes , and resources 6  Activity space analysis of GPS data gathered via mobile technology 6  Intersectional analysis of the demographic data revealed that the majority of people who lived alone were women ( 33 / 34 ; 97 % ) , resulting in further analysis of transcripts of women who lived alone 2  Visual analyses of home tour photographs 4  Family network analyses 4  Preliminary impact will be assessed in part according to a health system - level outcome 8  Linked patient census tracts to investigate mediators  Planned heterogeneity of treatment effect analyses by sex , race , health literacy , education , and clinical characteristics 1  Analysis of keywords driving differences between census tracts of different SES levels 6  Evaluated machine learning classifier performance in census tracts by racial demographics and SES 6  Analyzed availability of grocery store information in Yelp based on census tract SES 6  Analysis of GPS data quality by participant demographics 6  Comparison of differences between family experiences by disease 4  Analyses of intervention reach based on demographics , Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 Participation and Representation Appropriate methods and interventions ConteXtualization and structural competence Investigating Systematic differences or moderators of observed disparities in outcome 7 , 8 , 9  Stigma examined as a factor affecting design of intervention 8 technology experience , and access 7  Evaluation of which forms of process , task , interface or resource complexity are important for marginalized groups , with subgroup analysis based on reported stress levels 7  Direct investigation of differences in intervention uptake and usage among marginalized patient groups 7 , 9  Rural and urban studies also compare requirements for primary care versus specialist care 8 1 Dialysafe - Enhancing the cardiovascular safety of hemodialysis care : A cluster - randomized , comparative effectiveness trial of multimodal provider education and patient activation interventions [ 1 - 7 ] 2 DTs for COPD - Exploring the role of digital technologies ( DTs ) for social connectedness , outcomes and experiences for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) : A transformative mixed methods study [ 8 , 9 ] 3 GSSO project - Modernizing gender , sex and sexual orientation ( GSSO ) information practices in digital health systems ( DHS ) : An action research project [ 10 - 13 ] 4 Families study - Families , illness , and information : A longitudinal , ethnographic Study [ 14 - 19 ] 5 MI - BP - mHealth to Improve ( MI ) Blood Pressure ( BP ) control in hypertensive African Americans : One - year randomized controlled trial [ 20 - 22 ] 6 Neighborhood Effects project - Neighborhood Effects : A “Big Data” approach to understanding neighborhood effects in chronic illness disparities [ 23 - 28 ] 7 Project Simplify - Sociotechnical Systems and Complexity Reduction : Enhancing Access to Digital Essential Services for Low - Income Communities during a Public Health Crisis [ 29 , 30 ] 8 Shared Mobility project - Shared Mobility Systems to Address Transportation Barriers of Underserved Urban and Rural Communities : A community - participatory based research study [ 31 - 33 ] 9 Telehealth Uptake project - Health equity and the rapid virtualization of primary health care in the COVID - 19 pandemic : Evaluating access , uptake and engagement barriers to inform artificial intelligence interventions [ 34 , 35 ] References 1 . Perry EE , Zheng K , Grogan - Kaylor A , Newman MW , Veinot TC . Assessing the effect of a technology - based peer - mentoring intervention on renal teams ' perceived knowledge and comfort level working with young adults on dialysis . J Nephrol Soc Work . 2010 ; 33 ( 8 ) : 8 - 12 . 2 . Veinot TC , Meadowbrooke CC , Newman MW , Zheng K , Perry EE , editors . Routines that ease the pain : The information world of a dialysis clinic . Proc Assoc Inf Sci Technol ; Pittsburgh , PA : ASIS & T ; 2010 . 3 . Kuo P - Y , Saran R , Argentina M , Heung M , Bragg - Gresham JL , Chatoth D , et al . , editors . Development of a checklist for the prevention of intradialytic hypotension in hemodialysis care : Design considerations based on activity theory . Proc SIGCHI Conf Hum Factor Comput Syst ; Glasgow , Scotland : ACM ; 2019 . 4 . Willis MA , Hein LB , Hu Z , Saran R , Argentina M , Bragg - Gresham J , et al . Feeling better on hemodialysis : User - centered design requirements for promoting patient involvement in the prevention of treatment complications . J Am Med Inform Assoc . 2021 ; 28 ( 8 ) : 1612 - 31 . 5 . Willis M , Brand Hein L , Hu Z , Saran R , Argentina M , Bragg - Gresham J , et al . Usability evaluation of a tablet - based intervention to prevent intradialytic hypotension in dialysis patients during in - clinic dialysis : mixed methods study . JMIR Hum Factors . 2021 ; 8 ( 2 ) : e26012 . 6 . Veinot TC , Pierce CS . Materiality in information environments : Objects , spaces , and bodies in three outpatient hemodialysis facilities . J Am Soc Inf Sci Technol . 2019 ; 70 ( 12 ) : 1324 - 39 . 7 . Kuo P - Y , Saran R , Argentina M , Heung M , Bragg - Gresham J , Krein S , et al . Cramping , crashing , cannulating , and clotting : A qualitative study of patients ' definitions of a " bad run " on hemodialysis . BMC Nephrol . 2020 ; 21 ( 1 ) : 67 - . 8 . Molzahn AE , Sheilds L , Antonio M , Bruce A , Schick - Makaroff K , Wiebe R . Ten minutes to midnight : a narrative inquiry of people living with dying with advanced copd and their family members . Int J Qual Stud Health Well - being . 2021 ; 16 ( 1 ) : 1893146 . Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 9 . Antonio M . Exploring the role of digital technologies for social connectedness , outcomes and experiences with the chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) community : A transformative mixed methods research study [ Doctoral Thesis ] . Victoria , BC : University of Victoria ; 2021 . 10 . Davison K , Queen R , Lau F , Antonio M . Culturally competent gender , sex , and sexual orientation information practices and electronic health records : Rapid review . . JMIR Med Inform . 2021 ; 9 ( 2 ) : e25467 . 11 . Lau F , Antonio M , Davison K , Queen R , Devor A . A rapid review of gender , sex , and sexual orientation documentation in electronic health records . J Am Med Inform Assoc . 2020 ; 27 ( 11 ) : 1774 - 83 . 12 . Lau F , Antonio M , Davison K , Queen R , Bryski K . An environmental scan of sex and gender in electronic health records : Analysis of public information sources . J Med Internet Res . 2020 ; 22 ( 11 ) : e20050 . 13 . Antonio M , Lau F , Davison K , Devor A , Queen R , Courtney K . Toward an inclusive digital health system for sexual and gender minorities in Canada . J Am Med Inform Assoc . 2022 ; 29 ( 2 ) : 379 - 84 . 14 . Brown LK , Veinot TC . All in the family : A descriptive analysis of family network change in families managing chronic illness . Proc Assoc Inf Sci Technol . Pittsburgh , PA : ASIS & T , 2020 . 15 . Barbarin A , Veinot TC , Klasnja P , editors . Taking our time : Chronic illness and time - based objects in families . CSCW Conf Comput Support Coop Work ; 2015 , Vancouver , BC : ACM . 16 . Brown LK , Veinot TC . Information behavior and social control : Toward an understanding of conflictual information behavior in families managing chronic illness . J Am Soc Inf Sci Technol . 2021 ; 72 ( 1 ) : 66 - 82 . 17 . Veinot TC , Kim YM , Meadowbrooke CC , editors . Health information behavior in families : Supportive or irritating ? Proc Assoc Inf Sci Technol . New Orleans , LA : ASIS & T ; 2011 . 18 . Brown LK , Veinot TC . Resilience to health shocks : How do family information and support networks respond to unexpected negative health events ? iConference 2020 Proceedings ; Boras , Sweden ; 2020 . 19 . Wolf CT , Veinot TC . Struggling for space and finding my place : An interactionist perspective on everyday use of biomedical information . J Am Soc Inf Sci Technol . 2015 ; 66 ( 2 ) : 282 - 96 . 20 . Buis LR , Artinian NT , Schwiebert L , Yarandi H , Levy PD . Text messaging to improve hypertension medication adherence in African Americans : BPMED intervention development and study protocol . JMIR Res Protoc . 2015 ; 4 ( 1 ) : e1 . 21 . Buis LR , Dawood K , Kadri R , Dawood R , Richardson CR , Djuric Z , et al . Improving blood pressure among African Americans with hypertension using a mobile health approach ( the MI - BP App ) : Protocol for a randomized controlled trial . JMIR Res Protoc . 2019 ; 8 ( 1 ) : e12601 - e . 22 . Buis L , Hirzel L , Dawood RM , Dawood KL , Nichols LP , Artinian NT , et al . Text messaging to improve hypertension medication adherence in African Americans : BPMED intervention development and study protocol . JMIR mhealth uhealth . 2017 ; 5 ( 2 ) : e9 . 23 . Vydiswaran VGV , Romero DM , Zhao X , Yu D , Gomez - Lopez I , Lu JX , et al . Uncovering the relationship between food - related discussion on Twitter and neighborhood characteristics . J Am Med Inform Assoc . 2019 ; 27 ( 2 ) : 254 - 64 . 24 . Goodspeed R , Yan X , Hardy J , Vydiswaran VV , Berrocal VJ , Clarke P , et al . Comparing the data quality of global positioning system devices and mobile phones for assessing relationships between place , mobility , and health : Field study . JMIR mHealth uHealth . 2018 ; 6 ( 8 ) : e9771 . 25 . Shen Y , Clarke P , Gomez - Lopez IN , Hill AB , Romero DM , Goodspeed R , et al . Using social media to assess the consumer nutrition environment : comparing Yelp reviews with a direct observation audit instrument for grocery stores . Public Health Nutr . 2019 ; 22 ( 2 ) : 257 - 64 . 26 . Hardy J , Veinot TC , Yan X , Berrocal VJ , Clarke P , Goodspeed R , et al . User acceptance of location - tracking technologies in health research : Implications for study design and data quality . J Biomed Inform . 2018 ; 79 : 7 - 19 . 27 . Vydiswaran V , Romero D , Zhao X , Yu D , Gomez - Lopez I , Lu J , et al . , editors . " Bacon bacon bacon " : Food - related tweets and sentiment in metro Detroit . Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media ; 2018 . 28 . Gomez - Lopez IN , Clarke P , Hill AB , Romero DM , Goodspeed R , Berrocal VJ , et al . Using social media to identify sources of healthy food in urban neighborhoods . J Urban Health . 2017 ; 94 ( 3 ) : 429 - 36 . 29 . Shaw J , Brewer LC , Veinot T . Recommendations for health equity and virtual care arising from the COVID - 19 pandemic : Narrative review . JMIR Form Res . 2021 ; 5 ( 4 ) : e23233 - e . 30 . Antonio , MG , Williamson , AK , Kameswaran , V , Ankrah , E . , Goulet , S . , Wang , I , et al . Reducing patients ' cognitive load for telehealth video visits through student - delivered helping sessions at a United States Federally Qualified Health Center : A pilot intervention study . JMIR [ submitted 12Sep2022 ] . 31 . Maestre JF , Dillahunt T , Theisz AA , Furness M , Kameswaran V , Veinot T , et al . Examining mobility among people living with HIV in rural areas . Proc SIGCHI Conf Hum Factor Comput Syst ; Yokohama , Japan : ACM ; 2021 . 32 . Dillahunt TR , Maestre JF , Kameswaran V , Poon E , Osorio Torres J , Gallardo M , et al . , editors . Trust , reciprocity , and the role of timebanks as intermediaries : Design implications for addressing healthcare transportation barriers . Proc SIGCHI Conf Hum Factor Comput Syst ; New Orleans , LA : ACM ; 2022 . 33 . Dillahunt TR , Veinot TC . Getting there : Barriers and facilitators to transportation access in underserved communities . ACM Trans Comput Hum Interact . 2018 ; 25 ( 5 ) : 1 - 39 . 34 . Benda NC , Veinot TC , Sieck CJ , Ancker JS . Broadband internet access is a social determinant of health ! Am J Public Health . 2020 ; 110 ( 8 ) : 1123 - 5 . 35 . Sharko M , Benda NC , Veinot TC , Sieck C , Ancker JS . Broadband Internet Access as a Social Determinant of Health With Impacts on Health Disparities During COVID - 19 . 2021 AMIA Annu Symp Proc . San Diego , CA : AMIA ; 2021 . Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 Appendix B – Participatory Research Methods Community - based participatory research 1 , 2 Transformative mixed methods research 3 - 5 Action research 6 - 8 Overview Definition Focused on addressing inequities by involving community members in all aspects of the research . Seeks to transform injustices by building capacity and prioritizing the values of marginalized populations . A deliberative process of researchers working with a community or organization to understand and resolve a problem . Key principles A cyclical process that builds on community strengths and resources . Facilitates collaborative partnerships in all stages of the research . Integrates knowledge and actions that are mutually beneficial to all partners . Promotes a co - learning and empowering process to address social inequities . Axiology , or values , are the foundation of all aspects of the research in considering the project’s : 1 . Epistemology ( i . e . , whose knowledge is prioritized that can introduce inequities , and how the voices of underserved populations can be prioritized ) ; 2 . Ontology – ( i . e . , recognizing that our existing digital health systems may be creating a world that reinforces privilege to already dominant groups , and thus the need for equitable strategies ) ; and 3 . Methodology ( i . e . , selecting an approach that can address the complexity of inequities and represent the values of underserved groups ) . Works through the iterative “look , think and act” process by : 1 . Systematically evaluating the problem ; 2 . Formulating advanced accounts of the issue ; and 3 . Developing plans to address the problem . Theoretical foundations Community is the core unit of identity . Values ( or axiology ) is at the foundation of all research decisions . Process of look , think , act . Takes a pragmatic approach of observation , reflection and action . Equity lens Focused on health equity , and benefiting marginalized communities through the process of study conduct . Focused on addressing social injustices and inequities . Strives to enable participation from all people involved in the inquiry process , and establishes space where all voices have equal worth . Ethical position of the researcher Community members are “co - researchers” throughout all stages of the research . The researcher takes an ethical position in addressing social injustices and inequities . The role of researcher is not as an expert , but as a resource person who facilitates the research process . Equitable Research PRAXIS Considerations P articipation and R epresentation Community members are viewed as “co - researchers” throughout all stages of the research from defining the study question , through to building and maintenance of study activities . Places values at the foundation of the study design in prioritizing marginalized populations’ worlds and knowledge . Principles for working with a group include building harmonious relationships ; effective , attentive , genuine communication ; participation that allows people to be actively involved and genuinely represented ; and inclusion of all participants in the activities and outputs . A ppropriateness of methods and interventions Involves working with the community in selecting methods and tools . This includes selecting methods that use language and processes that are culturally sensitive . Emphasizes the importance of selecting methods that can address the complexity of inequities . Recommends starting with an exploratory qualitative stage in order to select tools The research cycle involves the “look , think , act” cycle : 1 . Look in gathering relevant information to that can help to describe the problem ; 2 . Think in hypothesizing and theorizing on what and why things are happening in a Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 Community - based participatory research 1 , 2 Transformative mixed methods research 3 - 5 Action research 6 - 8 Fairly compensating for the time commitment of both community partners and participants . and questions that match the priorities and language of participants . particular way ; and 3 . Act through a planning report that can then be evaluated and implemented . Conte X tualization and structural competence Involvement of community partners involved at the outset of the research allows for identifying a research question that resonates and fits the community needs , and thus has the potential to make a wider impact . Focus is on capacity building ; this includes disseminating the knowledge shared by participants to community members and organizations that can be part of social change . Disciplined inquiry that seeks to improve the quality of people’s organizational , community and family lives . I nvestigation of S ystemic differences Engagement of partners across communities and organizations supports the development of intersectoral strategies that address the complexity of structural health inequities . Emphasizes the importance of heterogeneity of a population to elicit a range of experiences . A sociodemographic survey during the quantitative stage can be used to identify participants to interview who represent a diverse intersection of social identities . The cycle should take into account the social , cultural , interactional and emotional factors that impact human actions , and in negotiating and reaching consensus on the problem . Recognizes the need to include all partners’ perspectives and not just an administrative / political agenda . References 1 . Israel BA , Schulz AJ , Parker EA , Becker AB . Review of community - based research : assessing partnership approaches to improve public health . Annual review of public health . 1998 ; 19 ( 1 ) : 173 - 202 . 2 . Unertl KM , Schaefbauer CL , Campbell TR , Senteio C , Siek KA , Bakken S , et al . Integrating community - based participatory research and informatics approaches to improve the engagement and health of underserved populations . J Am Med Inform Assoc . 2016 ; 23 ( 1 ) : 60 - 73 . 3 . Mertens DM . Transformative paradigm : Mixed methods and social justice . J Mixed Methods Res 2007 ; 1 ( 3 ) : 212 - 25 . 4 . Mertens D . What does a transformative lens bring to credible evidence in mixed methods evaluations ? New Directions for Evaluation . 2013 ; 2013 ( 138 ) : 27 - 35 . 5 . Mertens DM . Transformative mixed methods : Addressing inequities . Am Behav Sci 2012 ; 56 ( 6 ) : 802 - 13 . 6 . Stringer ET . Action Research : A Handbook for Practitioners . Thousand Oaks , CA : SAGE Publications ; 1996 . 7 . Stringer ET , Aragón AO . Action Research . Thousand Oaks , CA : SAGE publications ; 2020 . 8 . Avison DE , Lau F , Myers MD , Nielsen PA . Action research . Communications of the ACM . 1999 ; 42 ( 1 ) : 94 - 7 . Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 Appendix C – Definitions and Measurement Related to Marginalized Groups Basis of marginalization Definitions Examples of Marginalized Groups Related Constructs or Dimensions Issues in measurement Citations for further reading Age Chronological age : “aging is a lifelong process that starts at birth” [ 1 ] . Cohort age : Aging is a dynamic process linking biographical time as it intersects with changing social and historical contexts by year ( period ) , which create unique cohort experiences for groups of individuals ( e . g . , Baby Boomers , Children of the Great Depression ) [ 2 ] . Age as a social structure : “age is a structure , a social organization of age statuses through which either cohorts or individuals flow . . : ” [ 3 ] . Age is a major criterion for entry into or exit from roles in our society ( e . g . , Social Security eligibility ) . As people age , they move through the stages of family life , school , career trajectories , retirement , and ultimately death . As elaborated by Riley [ 4 ] , “this movement with aging occurs partly by individual choice , but it is also channeled by the rules , linkages , and mechanisms governing role sequences within the social structure” .  Children  Youth  Older Adults Ageism : “Ageism arises when age is used to categorize and divide people in ways that lead to harm , disadvantage and injustice and erode solidarity across Generations” [ 5 ] . Structural Lag : “Structural lag” refers to the misfit between social institutions that regulate aging ( e . g . , retirement , social security ) and the productivity needs of older adults [ 6 ] . Burgess [ 7 ] drew attention to the negative health consequences of the “role - less role of the aged” in Western culture . Transition to Adulthood : A critical / vulnerable period of the life course ( around age 20 - 35 ) constituting educational attainment , work status , independent living , potential romantic partnership , and potential parenthood ; with multiple transitions related to social roles , residence , work , and education , all within a relatively short time [ 8 ] . Health disadvantages during this critical period can have lifelong consequences for subsequent educational attainment , career path ,  Distinguish age from period ( year ) or cohort  Measure age at distinct periods of vulnerability ( childhood , transition to adulthood , later life )  Capture the timing of life events ( e . g . , parenthood , highest educational credential ) with respect to age .  Gather retrospective life histories to examine the impact of earlier life events and to create measures of cumulative disadvantage [ 11 ] .  Rather than standardized age categories , age should be reported in years or stratified when age - related inequities are known to exist . Overview articles : [ 4 , 12 ] Examples of survey instruments :  Age Discrimination ( Everyday Discrimination Scale ) [ 13 ]  Adverse Childhood Experiences Questionnaire [ 14 ]  Subjective Age [ 15 ] Examples of measurement methods used in secondary data analyses :  Longitudinal growth curve models [ 16 , 17 ] .  Latent trajectory class models with distal outcomes [ 9 , 18 ] . Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 Basis of marginalization Definitions Examples of Marginalized Groups Related Constructs or Dimensions Issues in measurement Citations for further reading asset acquisition , and long - term health [ 9 ] . The Life Course Perspective and Cumulative Inequality [ 2 ] : From a life course perspective , health or social disadvantage early in life ( especially during the key period of transition to adulthood ) has consequences that can multiply over time in the form of cumulative disadvantage . “Disadvantage increases exposure to risk , but advantage increases exposure to opportunity” , which ultimately serves to reinforce inequality with aging [ 10 ] . Disability “Disability is the expression of a physical or mental limitation in a social context . ” [ 19 ] The International Classification of Functioning , Disability and Health ( ICF ) [ 20 ] : generally accepted as the global standard language and framework for describing human functioning : “We prefer to use the term functioning in recognition that the ICF is applicable to all . An emphasis on disability may give the impression that the ICF is for separate , minority groups rather than People with disabilities , including those with :  Physical disability ( e . g . , due to spinal cord injury ) ;  Sensory disability ( e . g . , blind or D / deaf and hard of hearing ) ;  Intellectual or Developmental disability ( e . g . , due to autism spectrum disorders ) Ableism : systemic oppressive processes of entitlement and exclusion that cast disability as a “diminished state of being human” [ 22 ] . Social model of disability : In contrast to the medical model of disability , which considers disability to be a problem of the individual , a social model of disability “views the phenomenon of disability as a socially created problem and not as an attribute of the person . In the social model of disability , the underlying problem is created by an  “The importance of involving persons with disability in the development of data collections and for truly representative research cannot be emphasized enough” [ 24 ] .  Measurement should consider the interaction between a person’s capacities and limitations in the environment . Overview articles : [ 25 - 27 ] Examples of survey instruments :  Functional Difficulty in activities of daily living ( ADL ) and instrumental activities of daily living ( IADL ) [ 28 ] .  Disability measurement protocol in the National Health and Aging Trends Study that incorporates environmental aspects of disability [ 29 ] .  Discrimination ( Everyday Discrimination Scale ) [ 13 ] Examples of measurement methods used in secondary Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 Basis of marginalization Definitions Examples of Marginalized Groups Related Constructs or Dimensions Issues in measurement Citations for further reading inclusive of people with different functioning and an equal right to participate in all facets of life” [ 21 ] . Functioning / disability in the ICF is an umbrella term capturing the dynamic elements of the disability process at the level of the body ( impairments ) , person ( activity limitations ) , and society ( participation restrictions ) . Importantly , the ICF draws attention to the interaction between contextual factors ( both environmental and personal ) and the underlying health condition to shape disability and functioning . For example , a person with a non - visible health condition , such as HIV or mental illness , may have no impairments , and no activity limitations , but can have participation restrictions due to the negative attitudes of individuals or groups , which act as barriers to participation in society [ 21 ] . unaccommodating or inflexible environment brought about by the attitudes or features of the social and physical environment itself , which calls for a political response or solution” [ 23 ] . data analyses :  Statistical interactions between individual capacity and environmental demand [ 31 , 32 ]  Use of wearable motion sensors to capture the interaction between function and the environment in real time [ 32 , 33 ] .  Multilevel models to examine health inequities at the intersection of multiple social identities ( e . g . , disability , race , gender / sex , age ) [ 34 ] . Gender / Sex Gender : “Gender refers to the attitudes , feelings , and behaviors that a given culture associates with a person’s biological sex . Behavior that is compatible with cultural expectations is referred to as gender - normative ; behaviors that are viewed as incompatible with  Gender non - conforming people  Gender independent people  Intersex people  Nonbinary people  Transgender people  Women  Two - Spirit people Gender identity : “A person’s deeply ‐ felt , inherent sense of being a boy , a man , or male ; a girl , a woman , or female ; or … genderqueer , gender nonconforming , gender neutral . . . that may or may not correspond to a person’s sex assigned at birth or to a person’s primary  Sex is prioritized in discussions of health and healthcare due to differences in biochemistry and subsequent differences in disease etiology , prognosis , and treatment pathways .  However , gender also influences health outcomes Overview articles : [ 36 , 41 ] Examples of survey instruments : [ 42 ] Examples of measurement methods used in secondary data analyses : Some work has used clinical notes in an attempt to identify Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 Basis of marginalization Definitions Examples of Marginalized Groups Related Constructs or Dimensions Issues in measurement Citations for further reading these expectations constitute gender non - conformity” [ 35 ] . Sex : “the traits that distinguish between males and females . Sex refers especially to physical and biological traits , whereas gender refers especially to social or cultural traits , although the distinction between the two terms is not regularly observed . ” Sex is “typically assigned at birth based on the appearance of external genitalia” [ 35 ] . or secondary sex characteristics . Since gender identity is internal , a person’s gender identity is not necessarily visible to others” [ 36 ] . Gender expression : “The presentation of an individual , including physical appearance , clothing choice and accessories , and behaviors that express aspects of gender identity or role . Gender expression may or may not conform to a person’s gender identity” [ 35 ] . Gender modality : A proposed overview term for distinguishing “how a person’s gender identity stands in relation to their gender assigned at birth . ” Categories include cisgender , transgender , and agender [ 37 ] . Transphobia : “a fear of those who do not conform to one ' s expected gender role ( the expected performative aspects of gender ) and gender identity ( one ' s internal sense of belonging to a gender group , whether male , female , or something more fluid ) ” [ 38 ] . Cisnormativity : an through a variety of mechanisms including environmental exposures , differences in risk perception , and health services use [ 36 ] . More research is needed which bridges gender ( typically explored in social science research ) with health research .  Sex and gender are highly interrelated concepts , and both play a role in health . So it is critical that relevant health research measures both concepts ( without conflating the two ) and that these measures are clear as to how the different terms are defined .  Those who identify outside of binary , cisnormative gender identities are also subject to experiences of bias and discrimination in healthcare settings ; thus it is important to incorporate these concepts into measures of health for gender minority patients . Further , it is critical to reflect upon measures to avoid making cisnormative assumptions within the research interactions .  Allow for more than binary options for both gender and sex . These concepts exist on a spectrum and use of dichotomous classification can alienate transgender patients [ 43 ] . Although intended to highlight the health outcomes of a population that is frequently invisible in health data , there are ethical questions about assigning identities that may not actually represent the patients’ understandings of their own identities [ 44 ] . There have been efforts in recent years to incorporate collection of sexual orientation and gender identity ( SOGI ) information from patients , but implementation is not consistent at a health system level [ 45 ] . Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 Basis of marginalization Definitions Examples of Marginalized Groups Related Constructs or Dimensions Issues in measurement Citations for further reading assumption that all individuals are cisgender , which subsequently marginalizes those who are not [ 39 ] . those who exist outside of these options .  Many individuals also identify with specific sets of pronouns to describe themselves . These are important to collect in research , especially interviews or focus groups in which a researcher may use pronouns to refer to research participants .  Some transgender and gender minority individuals may be reticent to identify themselves in research and health contexts due to fear of stigma .  The Gender , Sex , and Sexual Orientation Ontology ( GSSO ) provides a comprehensive vocabulary for describing and discussing LGBTQIA + concepts in research and health care [ 40 ] . Race / Ethnicity Race : “…a cultural category of difference that is contextually constructed as essential and natural – as residing within the very body of the individual” [ 46 ] . Ethnicity : “a group possessing some degree of coherence and solidarity composed of people who are aware…of having common origins and interests” [ 47 ] .  Asian people  Black / African American People  Hispanic / Latinx People  Indigenous People  Middle Eastern and North African People  Pacific Islanders / Native Hawaiians Racism : “…an organized social system in which the dominant racial group , based on an ideology of inferiority , categorizes and ranks people into social groups called ‘races’ and uses its power to devalue , disempower , and differentially allocate valued societal resources and opportunities to groups defined as inferior” [ 48 ] . Racism functions at individual ( beliefs ,  “Race” is a social category and is a poor method of identifying biological and genetic differences between people [ 51 , 52 ] .  Health disparities affecting people marginalized based on race / ethnicity are rooted in experiences of discrimination , segregation , inequitable allocation of valued social resources , and other forms of interpersonal and structural racism . “Race” should thus be treated as a Overview articles : [ 53 , 57 - 59 ] Examples of survey instruments : Everyday Discrimination Scale [ 13 , 61 ] Measure of Indigenous Racism Experiences [ 62 ] Asian - American Racism - Related Stress Inventory [ 63 ] Perceived Online Racism Scale [ 64 ] Examples of measurement methods used in secondary data analyses : Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 Basis of marginalization Definitions Examples of Marginalized Groups Related Constructs or Dimensions Issues in measurement Citations for further reading unconscious bias ) , cultural ( language , values , symbols ) , and institutional ( laws , policies , practices ) levels [ 48 - 50 ] . proxy for exposure to these health - harming effects [ 53 ] ,  Healthcare disparities on the basis of race / ethnicity are rooted in “…differences between population groups in the way they access , experience , and receive healthcare” [ 54 ] , and factors correlated with race , such as access to healthcare , including health insurance status and broadband Internet access . Therefore , measurement should include assessment of experiences of racism .  Data completeness is often a concern in EHR data [ 55 ] , and secondary data sources commonly used in health informatics research [ 56 ] .  Researchers should avoid collapsing racial and ethnic categories whenever possible to avoid erasure of smaller groups [ 53 ] .  Self - reported race and healthcare provider - assigned race may differ , and they capture different aspects of systemic racism : how a person sees themselves , which may correlate with internalized racism , and how others see that person [ 53 ] .  Self - reporting of race / ethnicity may result in greater data completeness Natural language processing of clinical notes in EHR data [ 55 ] Index of concentration at the extremes [ 65 ] ( geographic ) Getis - Ord Local Gi * statistic [ 66 ] ( geographic ) Latent variable models of structural racism as a set of multifacted exposures [ 67 - 69 ] ( geographic ) Structural intersectionality [ 70 ] Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 Basis of marginalization Definitions Examples of Marginalized Groups Related Constructs or Dimensions Issues in measurement Citations for further reading than other methods of gathering race / ethnicity data [ 56 ] . Rural Residence Rural : Characteristics of a geographic area that typically encompass smaller population sizes and lower population densities than urban areas , as well as distance from urban areas . Remote : areas characterized by geographic , professional , and often social isolation .  Rural residents  Rurality : can be defined in multiple ways , including by demographic indicators , such as population size and population density [ 73 ] .  Local economies can also be used to define rurality as these areas are often oriented towards agriculture , and resource extraction industries [ 71 , 73 ] . Tourism is a major industry in some rural areas [ 72 ] .  Rural areas can also be defined according to distance from urban areas , or from specific resources [ 73 ] . Distance to healthcare resources is often used as a definition of rurality in health services research .  Relationships between rural and urban areas may be obscured by definitions that draw sharp distinctions between them [ 73 ] .  Rurality is an “identity category” and a symbol with material consequences [ 74 , 75 ] .  In the United States , different agencies of the federal government use different definitions of rurality [ 76 ] .  Definitions of rurality differ by country [ 77 ] .  Rural areas often lack infrastructures such as broadband Internet access [ 78 ] and public transportation [ 79 ] .  The term “rural” is often used to describe very different areas [ 73 ] . Overview articles : [ 73 , 80 ] Examples of measurement methods used in secondary data analyses : Rural - Urban Continuum ( RUCA ) Codes [ 81 ] Sexual Orientation Sexual orientation : “refers to the sex of those to whom one is sexually and romantically attracted . Categories of sexual orientation typically have included attraction to members of one’s own sex ( gay men or lesbians ) , attraction to members of the other sex ( heterosexuals ) , and attraction to members of both sexes ( bisexuals ) ” [ 35 ] .  Asexual  Bisexual  Demisexual [ 82 ]  Gay  Graysexual [ 82 ]  Lesbian  Pansexual Three dimensions of sexual orientation [ 83 , 84 ] : 1 . Identity – label used to describe oneself ( e . g . lesbian , gay , bisexual , pansexual , asexual , queer ) 2 . Behavior – the sex ( es ) or gender ( s ) of the individuals with whom the respondent has participated in sexual activity ( generally within a specified , recent timeframe ) 3 . Attraction – the sex ( es ) or  It is important to understand which dimension ( s ) of sexual orientation is most relevant to the research question at hand .  Include survey options which do not assume the presence of sexual attraction , excluding asexual individuals [ 88 ] .  Consider sexual orientation that is not dependent on the Overview articles : [ 91 , 92 ] Examples of survey instruments :  Asexuality Identification Scale [ 93 ]  Gender - Inclusive Scale [ 94 ]  Biphobia Scale [ 86 ] Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 Basis of marginalization Definitions Examples of Marginalized Groups Related Constructs or Dimensions Issues in measurement Citations for further reading Sexual orientation does not always fit into these categories ; however , it can occur on a continuum and may be considered fluid [ 35 ] . gender ( s ) of the individuals to whom an individual is attracted sexually Romantic orientation [ 85 ] : Patterns of romantic ( as opposed to sexual ) attraction based on another person’s gender . Romantic identities include homoromantic , heteroromantic , biromantic , and aromantic . Homophobia : “the fear , hatred or intolerance of sharing space with individuals who are homosexual…i . e . , those individuals outside the heteronormative schema for sexual orientation” [ 38 ] . Biphobia : “negative attitudes about bisexuality and bisexual individuals” [ 86 ] . Heteronormativity : an assumption that all individuals are heterosexual , which subsequently marginalizes those who do not identify as such [ 87 ] . participant having a binary gender identity [ 89 ] .  Not all individuals may be willing to disclose their sexual orientation in health care and / or research settings due to concerns around stigma and / or privacy [ 90 ] . Socioeconomic Status ( SES ) Socioeconomic Status : “the socially derived economic factors that influence what positions individuals or groups hold within the multiple - stratified structure of a society” [ 95 ] . Subjective social status : “the individual ' s perception of  Low - income people  People with low levels of formal education  Uninsured or underinsured people Individual - level SES may be assessed according to : individual income , educational attainment [ 97 ] , wealth [ 98 ] , occupational status [ 99 ] , unemployment [ 100 ] , home ownership , and health insurance ( e . g . , public insurance such as Medicaid , lack of health insurance ) .  There may be value to including subjective SES measures in studies since the concept incorporates an emotional and cognitive response by individuals who assign themselves to a low SES [ 106 ] .  Indicators of SES differ Overview articles : [ 106 - 108 ] Examples of survey instruments :  Family Affluence Scale [ 109 ]  Hollingshead Four Factor Scale [ 110 ]  Subjective social status Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 Basis of marginalization Definitions Examples of Marginalized Groups Related Constructs or Dimensions Issues in measurement Citations for further reading [ their ] own position in the social hierarchy” [ 96 ] . Social risk screening in healthcare settings often reveals gaps in access to specific resources that can be addressed with community resources or health system programs , such as housing , food , child care , utilities , or transportation [ 101 ] . Family - level SES may be assessed according to : family income , family wealth , homeownership , and home overcrowding [ 102 ] . Community - level SES may be assessed according to : Income inequality [ 103 ] , Neighborhood wealth [ 104 ] , Poverty rates , population proportion using public income support programs , unemployment rates , and home ownership rates [ 105 ] . across sociodemographic categories such as race and sex [ 106 ] .  Income and wealth are distinct [ 98 ] , and wealth can provide a financial buffer during periods of low income or unemployment . scale [ 111 ] Examples of measurement methods used in secondary data analyses :  Area Deprivation Index [ 112 ]  HOUSES Index [ 113 ]  Neighborhood Affluence Scale [ 114 ]  Neighborhood Disadvantage Scale [ 114 ] References 1 . Riley MW . Introduction : Life - course perspectives . In : Riley MW , editor . Aging from birth to death : Interdisciplinary perspectives . Boulder , CO : Westview ; 1979 . p . 3 - 13 . 2 . Elder GH , Johnson MK . The life course and aging : Challenges , lessons , and new directions . In : Settersten J , R . A . , editor . Invitation to the life course : Toward new understandings of later life . Amityville , NY : Baywood ; 2003 . p . 49 - 81 . 3 . Marshall VW , Clarke PJ . Theories of aging : Social . In : Birren J , editor . Encyclopedia of gerontology . 2nd ed . London : Elsevier ; 2007 . p . 621 - 30 . 4 . Riley MW . On the significance of age in sociology . Am Sociol Rev . 1987 ; 52 ( 1 ) : 1 - 14 . 5 . World Health Organization . Global report on ageism . Geneva : The World Health Organization . Geneva : WHO ; 2021 . 6 . Riley MW , Riley Jr JW . Structural lag : Past and future . In : Riley MW , Kahn RL , Foner A , Mack KA , editors . Age and structural lag : Society ' s failure to provide meaningful opportunities in work , family , and leisure . New York , NY : John Wiley & Sons ; 1994 . p . 15 – 36 . 7 . Burgess EW . Aging in western culture . In : Burgess EW , editor . Aging in western societies . Chicago : University of Chicago Press ; 1960 . p . 3 - 28 . 8 . Shanahan MJ . Pathways to adulthood in changing societies : Variability and mechanisms in life course perspective . Annu Rev Sociol . 2000 ; 26 ( 1 ) : 667 - 92 . Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 9 . Clarke PJ , O ' Malley PM , Schulenberg JE , Johnston LD . Midlife health and socioeconomic consequences of persistent overweight across early adulthood : Findings from a national survey of American adults ( 1986 – 2008 ) . Am J Epidemiol . 2010 ; 172 ( 5 ) : 540 - 8 . 10 . Ferraro KF , Shippee TP . Aging and cumulative inequality : How does inequality get under the skin ? Gerontologist . 2009 ; 49 ( 3 ) : 333 - 43 . 11 . Smith J , Hu M , Lee H . Chapter 3 - Measuring life course events and life histories . In : Ferraro KF , Carr D , editors . Handbook of aging and the social sciences ( Ninth Edition ) : Academic Press ; 2021 . p . 33 - 47 . 12 . House JS , Lepkowski JM , Kinney AM , Mero RP , Kessler RC , Herzog AR . The social stratification of aging and health . J Health Soc Behav . 1994 ; 35 ( 3 ) : 213 - 34 . 13 . Williams DR , Yu Y , Jackson JS , Anderson NB . Racial differences in physical and mental health : Socio - economic status , stress and discrimination . J Health Psychol 1997 ; 2 ( 3 ) : 335 - 51 . 14 . Zarse EM , Neff MR , Yoder R , Hulvershorn L , Chambers JE , Chambers RA . The adverse childhood experiences questionnaire : Two decades of research on childhood trauma as a primary cause of adult mental illness , addiction , and medical diseases . Cogent Med 2019 ; 6 ( 1 ) : 1581447 . 15 . Stephan Y , Sutin AR , Terracciano A . How old do you feel ? The role of age discrimination and biological aging in subjective age . PLOS ONE . 2015 ; 10 ( 3 ) : e0119293 . 16 . Clarke P , Marshall V , House J , Lantz P . The social structuring of mental health over the adult life course : Advancing theory in the sociology of aging . Soc Forces 2011 ; 89 ( 4 ) : 1287 - 313 . 17 . Duchowny KA , Hicken MT , Cawthon PM , Glymour MM , Clarke P . Life course trauma and muscle weakness in older adults by gender and race / ethnicity : Results from the US health and Retirement Study . SSM Popul Health . 2020 ; 11 : 100587 . 18 . Clarke P , Marshall VW , Weir D . Unexpected retirement from full time work after age 62 : Consequences for life satisfaction in older Americans . Eur J Ageing 2012 ; 9 ( 3 ) : 207 - 19 . 19 . Nagi SZ . Some conceptual issues in disability and rehabilitation . Sociology and Rehabilitation . 1965 . 20 . World Health Organization . International classification of functioning , disability , and health : Children & youth version : ICF - CY . Geneva : WHO ; 2007 . 21 . Sykes CR , Maribo T , Stallinga HA , Heerkens Y . Remodeling of the ICF : A commentary . Disabil Healt J 2021 ; 14 ( 1 ) : 100978 . 22 . Campbell FK . Precision ableism : A studies in ableism approach to developing histories of disability and abledment . Rethink Hist 2019 ; 23 ( 2 ) : 138 - 56 . 23 . Jette AM . Toward a common language for function , disability , and health . Physical Therapy . 2006 ; 86 ( 5 ) : 726 - 34 . 24 . Sykes CR , Maribo T , Stallinga HA , Heerkens Y . Remodeling of the ICF : A commentary . Disabil Health J . 2021 ; 14 ( 1 ) : 100978 . 25 . Altman BM . Definitions , concepts , and measures of disability . Ann Epidemiol . 2014 ; 24 ( 1 ) : 2 - 7 . 26 . Iezzoni LI , Rao SR , Ressalam J , Bolcic - Jankovic D , Agaronnik ND , Donelan K , et al . Physicians’ perceptions of people with disability and their health care . Health Aff 2021 ; 40 ( 2 ) : 297 - 306 . 27 . Lollar DJ . Public health and disability : Emerging opportunities . Public Health Rep . 2002 ; 117 ( 2 ) : 131 - 6 . 28 . Verbrugge LM , Latham K , Clarke PJ . Aging with disability for midlife and older adults . Res Aging . 2017 ; 39 ( 6 ) : 741 - 77 . 29 . Freedman VA , Kasper JD , Cornman JC , Agree EM , Bandeen - Roche K , Mor V , et al . Validation of new measures of disability and functioning in the national health and aging trends study . . J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2011 ; 66A ( 9 ) : 1013 - 21 . 31 . Clarke P , Ailshire JA , Bader M , Morenoff JD , House JS . Mobility disability and the urban built environment . Am J Epidemiol . 2008 ; 168 ( 5 ) : 506 - 13 . 32 . Twardzik E , Duchowny K , Gallagher A , Alexander N , Strasburg D , Colabianchi N , et al . What features of the built environment matter most for mobility ? Using wearable sensors to capture real - time outdoor environment demand on gait performance . Gait Posture . 2019 ; 68 : 437 - 42 . 33 . Duchowny K , Clarke P , Gallagher NA , Adams R , Rosso AL , Alexander NB . Using mobile , wearable , technology to understand the role of built environment demand for outdoor mobility . Environ Behav . 2018 ; 51 ( 6 ) : 671 - 88 . 34 . Evans CR , Williams DR , Onnela J - P , Subramanian SV . A multilevel approach to modeling health inequalities at the intersection of multiple social identities . Soc Sci Med . 2018 ; 203 : 64 - 73 . 35 . Association AP . Guidelines for psychological practice with lesbian , gay , and bisexual clients . Am Psychol . 2012 ; 67 ( 1 ) : 10 - 42 . 36 . Nieuwenhoven L , Klinge I . Scientific excellence in applying sex - and gender - sensitive methods in biomedical and health research . J Womens Health . 2010 ; 19 ( 2 ) : 313 - 21 . 37 . Ashley F . ‘Trans’ is my gender modality : A modest terminological proposal . Trans bodies , trans selves . 2021 . 38 . Warriner K , Nagoshi CT , Nagoshi JL . Correlates of homophobia , transphobia , and internalized homophobia in gay or lesbian and heterosexual samples . J Homosex . 2013 ; 60 ( 9 ) : 1297 - 314 . 39 . Hobaica S , Schofield K , Kwon P . “Here’s your anatomy… good luck” : transgender individuals in cisnormative sex education . Am J Sex Educ . 2019 ; 14 ( 3 ) : 358 - 87 . 40 . Kronk CA , Dexheimer JW . Development of the gender , sex , and sexual orientation ontology : Evaluation and workflow . J Am Med Inform Assoc . 2020 ; 27 ( 7 ) : 1110 - 5 . 41 . Johnson JL , Greaves L , Repta R . Better science with sex and gender : facilitating the use of a sex and gender - based analysis in health research . Int J Equity Health . 2009 ; 8 ( 1 ) : 1 - 11 . Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 42 . Spiel K , Haimson OL , Lottridge D . How to do better with gender on surveys : a guide for HCI researchers . Interactions . 2019 ; 26 ( 4 ) : 62 - 5 . 43 . Ehrenfeld JM , Gottlieb KG , Beach LB , Monahan SE , Fabbri D . Development of a natural language processing algorithm to identify and evaluate transgender patients in electronic health record systems . Ethn Dis . 2019 ; 29 ( Suppl 2 ) : 441 . 44 . Davison K , Queen R , Lau F , Antonio M . Culturally competent gender , sex , and sexual orientation information practices and electronic health records : rapid review . JMIR medical informatics . 2021 ; 9 ( 2 ) : e25467 . 45 . Haider AH , Schneider EB , Kodadek LM , Adler RR , Ranjit A , Torain M , et al . Emergency department query for patient - centered approaches to sexual orientation and gender identity : the EQUALITY study . JAMA Intern Med . 2017 ; 177 ( 6 ) : 819 - 28 . 46 . Silverstein PA . Immigrant racialization and the new savage slot : Race , migration , and immigration in the new Europe . Annu Rev Anthropol . 2005 ; 34 ( 1 ) : 363 - 84 . 47 . Cashmore Ea . Dictionary of race and ethnic relations . 4th ed . ed : Routledge ; 1996 1996 . 48 . Williams DR , Lawrence JA , Davis BA . Racism and health : Evidence and needed research . Annu Rev Public Health . 2019 ; 40 ( 1 ) : 105 - 25 . 49 . Hicken MT , Kravitz - Wirtz N , Durkee M , Jackson JS . Racial inequalities in health : Framing future research . Soc Sci Med . 2018 ; 199 : 11 - 8 . 50 . Bonilla - Silva E . The structure of racism in color - blind , “post - racial” America . Am Behav Sci . 2015 ; 59 ( 11 ) : 1358 - 76 . 51 . Omi M , Winant H . Racial formation in the United States : Routledge ; 2014 . 52 . Smedley A , Smedley BD . Race as biology is fiction , racism as a social problem is real : Anthropological and historical perspectives on the social construction of race . Am Psychol . 2005 ; 60 ( 1 ) : 16 - 26 . 53 . Lett E , Asabor E , Beltrán S , Michelle Cannon A , Arah OA . Conceptualizing , contextualizing , and operationalizing race in quantitative health sciences research . Ann Fam Med . 2022 : 2792 . 54 . Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality . 2019 National Healthcare Quality and Disparities Report . Rockville , MD : Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality ; 2021 . 55 . Sholle ET , Pinheiro LC , Adekkanattu P , Davila MA , Johnson SB , Pathak J , et al . Underserved populations with missing race ethnicity data differ significantly from those with structured race / ethnicity documentation . J Am Med Inform Assoc . 2019 ; 26 ( 8 - 9 ) : 722 - 9 . 56 . Polubriaginof FCG , Ryan P , Salmasian H , Shapiro AW , Perotte A , Safford MM , et al . Challenges with quality of race and ethnicity data in observational databases . J Am Med Inform Assoc . 2019 ; 26 ( 8 - 9 ) : 730 - 6 . 57 . Hardeman RR , Homan PA , Chantarat T , Davis BA , Brown TH . Improving the measurement Of structural racism to achieve antiracist health policy . Health Aff . 2022 ; 41 ( 2 ) : 179 - 86 . 58 . Cogburn CD . Culture , race , and health : Implications for racial inequities and population health . Milbank Q . 2019 ; 97 ( 3 ) : 736 - 61 . 59 . Braveman PA , Arkin E , Proctor D , Kauh T , Holm N . Systemic and structural racism : Definitions , examples , health damages , and approaches to dismantling . Health Aff . 2022 ; 41 ( 2 ) : 171 - 8 . 61 . Van Dyke ME , Kramer MR , Kershaw KN , Vaccarino V , Crawford ND , Lewis TT . Inconsistent reporting of discrimination over time using the experiences of discrimination scale : Potential underestimation of lifetime burden . Am J Epidemiol . 2021 ; 191 ( 3 ) : 370 - 8 . 62 . Paradies YC , Cunningham J . Development and validation of the Measure of Indigenous Racism Experiences ( MIRE ) . Int J Equity Health . 2008 ; 7 ( 1 ) : 9 . 63 . Liang CTH , Li LC , Kim BSK . The Asian American racism - related stress inventory : Development , factor analysis , reliability , and validity . J Couns Psychol . 2004 ; 51 ( 1 ) : 103 - 14 . 64 . Keum BT , Miller MJ . Racism in digital era : Development and initial validation of the Perceived Online Racism Scale ( PORS v1 . 0 ) . J Couns Psychol . 2017 ; 64 ( 3 ) : 310 . 65 . Krieger N , Kim R , Feldman J , Waterman PD . Using the index of concentration at the extremes at multiple geographical levels to monitor health inequities in an era of growing spatial social polarization : Massachusetts , USA ( 2010 – 14 ) . Int J Epidemiol . 2018 ; 47 ( 3 ) : 788 - 819 . 66 . Getis A , Ord JK . The analysis of spatial association by use of distance statistics . Perspectives on spatial data analysis : Springer ; 2010 . p . 127 - 45 . 67 . Dougherty GB , Golden SH , Gross AL , Colantuoni E , Dean LT . Measuring structural racism and its association with BMI . Am J Prev Med . 2020 ; 59 ( 4 ) : 530 - 7 . 68 . Brown T , Homan P . Structural racism and health stratification in the US : connecting theory to measurement . 2022 . 69 . Chantarat T , Van Riper DC , Hardeman RR . The intricacy of structural racism measurement : A pilot development of a latent - class multidimensional measure . EClinicalMedicine . 2021 ; 40 : 101092 . 70 . Homan P , Brown TH , King B . Structural intersectionality as a new direction for health disparities research . J Health Soc Behav . 2021 ; 62 ( 3 ) : 350 - 70 . 71 . Marini MB , Mooney PH . Rural economies . In : Cloke TM , Mooney PH , editors . Handbook of rural studies . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage ; 2006 . p . 91 – 103 . 72 . Halfacree K . Heterolocal identities ? Counter ‐ urbanisation , second homes , and rural consumption in the era of mobilities . Popul Space Place . 2012 ; 18 ( 2 ) : 209 - 24 . 73 . Hardy J , Wyche S , Veinot TC . Rural HCI research : Definitions , distinctions , methods , and opportunities . CSCW Conf Comput Support Coop Work . 2019 ; 3 : 1 - 33 . 74 . Bell MM . The fruit of difference : The rural ‐ urban continuum as a system of identity . Rural Sociol . 1992 ; 57 ( 1 ) : 65 - 82 . 75 . Halfacree KH . Talking about rurality : Social representations of the rural as expressed by residents of six English parishes . J Rural Stud . 1995 ; 11 ( 1 ) : 1 - 20 . Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 76 . Waldorf B , Kim A , editors . Defining and measuring rurality in the US : From typologies to continuous indices . Commissioned paper presented at the Workshop on Rationalizing Rural Area Classifications , Washington , DC ; 2015 . 77 . United Nations Statistics Division . Population and urban density New York : United Nations ; 2017 [ Available from : https : / / unstats . un . org / unsd / demographic / sconcerns / densurb / densurbmethods . htm . 78 . Zahnd WE , Bell N , Larson AE . Geographic , racial / ethnic , and socioeconomic inequities in broadband access . J Rural Health . 2021 . 79 . Stommes ES , Brown DM . Transportation in rural America : Issues for the 21st century . 2002 . 80 . Makoto Su N , Hardy J , Vigil - Hayes M , Veinot T , Comber R . Introduction : Performing rurality with computing . ACM Trans Comput Hum Interact . 2021 ; 28 ( 3 ) : 1 - 13 . 81 . Surbhi S , Tolley EA , Cossman RE , Dashputre AA , Bailey JE . Refining a traditional urban - rural classification approach to better assess heterogeneity of treatment effects in patient - centered outcomes research . MethodsX . 2021 ; 8 : 101299 . 82 . Hille JJ , Simmons MK , Sanders SA . “Sex” and the ace spectrum : Definitions of sex , behavioral histories , and future interest for individuals who identify as asexual , graysexual , or demisexual . J Sex Res . 2020 ; 57 ( 7 ) : 813 - 23 . 83 . Priebe G , Svedin CG . Operationalization of three dimensions of sexual orientation in a national survey of late adolescents . J Sex Res . 2013 ; 50 ( 8 ) : 727 - 38 . 84 . McCabe SE , Hughes TL , Bostwick W , Boyd CJ . Assessment of difference in dimensions of sexual orientation : Implications for substance use research in a college - age population . J Stud Alcohol . 2005 ; 66 ( 5 ) : 620 - 9 . 85 . Carvalho AC , Rodrigues DL . Sexuality , sexual behavior , and relationships of asexual individuals : Differences between aromantic and romantic orientation . Arch Sex Behav . 2022 : 1 - 10 . 86 . Mulick PS , Wright Jr LW . The biphobia scale a decade later : Reflections and additions . J Bisexuality . 2011 ; 11 ( 4 ) : 453 - 7 . 87 . Utamsingh PD , Richman LS , Martin JL , Lattanner MR , Chaikind JR . Heteronormativity and practitioner – patient interaction . Health Commun . 2016 ; 31 ( 5 ) : 566 - 74 . 88 . Flore J . Mismeasures of asexual desires . Asexualities . 2014 : 17 - 34 . 89 . Galupo MP , Mitchell RC , Davis KS . Face validity ratings of sexual orientation scales by sexual minority adults : Effects of sexual orientation and gender identity . Arch Sex Behav . 2018 ; 47 ( 4 ) : 1241 - 50 . 90 . Kodadek LM , Peterson S , Shields RY , German D , Ranjit A , Snyder C , et al . Collecting sexual orientation and gender identity information in the emergency department : The divide between patient and provider perspectives . Emerg Med J . 2019 ; 36 ( 3 ) : 136 - 41 . 91 . Wolff M , Wells B , Ventura - DiPersia C , Renson A , Grov C . Measuring sexual orientation : A review and critique of US data collection efforts and implications for health policy . J Sex Res . 2017 ; 54 ( 4 - 5 ) : 507 - 31 . 92 . Galupo MP , Mitchell RC , Davis KS . Face validity ratings of sexual orientation scales by sexual minority adults : Effects of sexual orientation and gender identity . Arch Sex Behav . 2018 ; 47 ( 4 ) : 1241 - 50 . 93 . Yule MA , Brotto LA , Gorzalka BB . A validated measure of no sexual attraction : The Asexuality Identification Scale . Psychol Assess . 2015 ; 27 ( 1 ) : 148 . 94 . Galupo MP , Lomash E , Mitchell RC . “All of my lovers fit into this scale” : Sexual minority individuals’ responses to two novel measures of sexual orientation . J Homosex . 2017 ; 64 ( 2 ) : 145 - 65 . 95 . Galobardes B , Lynch J , Smith GD . Measuring socioeconomic position in health research . Br Med Bull . 2007 ; 81 - 82 : 21 - 37 . 96 . Jackman MR , Jackman RW . An interpretation of the relation between objective and subjective social status . Am Sociol Rev . 1973 : 569 - 82 . 97 . Winkleby MA , Jatulis DE , Frank E , Fortmann SP . Socioeconomic status and health : How education , income , and occupation contribute to risk factors for cardiovascular disease . Am J Public Health . 1992 ; 82 ( 6 ) : 816 - 20 . 98 . Ostrove JM , Feldman P , Adler NE . Relations Relations among socioeconomic status indicators and health for African - Americans and Whites . J Health Psychol . 1999 ; 4 ( 4 ) : 451 - 63 . 99 . Gregorio DI , Walsh SJ , Paturzo D . The effects of occupation - based social position on mortality in a large American cohort . Am J Public Health . 1997 ; 87 ( 9 ) : 1472 - 5 . 100 . Wilson SH , Walker GM . Unemployment and health : a review . Public Health . 1993 ; 107 ( 3 ) : 153 - 62 . 101 . Alderwick H , Gottlieb LM . Meanings and misunderstandings : A social determinants of health lexicon for health care systems . Milbank Q . 2019 ; 97 ( 2 ) : 407 - 19 . 102 . Cable N , Sacker A . Validating overcrowding measures using the UK Household Longitudinal Study . SSM Popul Health . 2019 ; 8 : 100439 . 103 . Pickett KE , Wilkinson RG . Income inequality and health : A causal review . Soc Sci Med . 2015 ; 128 : 316 - 26 . 104 . Moudon AV , Cook AJ , Ulmer J , Hurvitz PM , Drewnowski A . A neighborhood wealth metric for use in health studies . Am J Prev Med . 2011 ; 41 ( 1 ) : 88 - 97 . 105 . Ross CE , Mirowsky J . Neighborhood socioeconomic status and health : context or composition ? City & Community . 2008 ; 7 ( 2 ) : 163 - 79 . 106 . Nobles J , Weintraub MR , Adler NE . Subjective socioeconomic status and health : Relationships reconsidered . Soc Sci Med . 2013 ; 82 : 58 - 66 . 107 . Jackman MR , Jackman RW . An interpretation of the relation between objective and subjective social status . Am Sociol Rev . 1973 ; 38 ( 5 ) : 569 - 82 . 108 . Shavers VL . Measurement of socioeconomic status in health disparities research . J Natl Med Assoc . 2007 ; 99 ( 9 ) : 1013 . Equitable Research PRAXIS : a Framework for Health Informatics Methods Veinot et al IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2022 109 . Boyce W , Torsheim T , Currie C , Zambon A . The family affluence scale as a measure of national wealth : Validation of an adolescent self - report measure . Soc Indic Res . 2006 ; 78 ( 3 ) : 473 - 87 . 110 . Hollingshead A . Four Factor Index of Social Status . New Haven , CT : Yale University Department of Psychology ; 1975 . 111 . Operario D , Adler NE , Williams DR . Subjective social status : Reliability and predictive utility for global health . Psychol Health . 2004 ; 19 ( 2 ) : 237 - 46 . 112 . Singh GK . Area deprivation and widening inequalities in US mortality , 1969 - 1998 . Am J Public Health . 2003 ; 93 ( 7 ) : 1137 - 43 . 113 . Juhn YJ , Ryu E , Wi CI , King KS , Malik M , Romero - Brufau S , et al . Assessing socioeconomic bias in machine learning algorithms in health care : A case study of the HOUSES index . J Am Med Inform Assoc . 2022 . 114 . Clarke P , Morenoff J , Debbink M , Golberstein E , Elliott MR , Lantz PM . Cumulative exposure to neighborhood context : consequences for health transitions over the adult life course . Res Aging . 2014 ; 36 ( 1 ) : 115 - 42 .