Cytosol - and Clathrin - dependent Stimulation of Endocytosis In Vitro by Purified Adaptors Elizabeth Smythe , Laura L . Carter , and Sandra L . Schmid Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , California 92037 Abstract . Using stage - specific assays for receptor - mediated endocytosis of transferrin ( - Tfn ) into perfo - rated A431 cells we show that purified adaptors stim - ulate coated pit assembly and ligand sequestration into deeply invaginated coated pits . Late events in endocy - tosis involving membrane fission and coated vesicle budding which lead to the internalization of Tfn are unaffected . AP2 , plasma membrane adaptors , are ac - tive at physiological concentrations , whereas AP1 , Golgi adaptors , are inactive . Adaptor - dependent stim - ulation of Tfn sequestration requires cytosolic clathrin , but is unaffected by clathrin purified from coated vesi - cles suggesting that soluble and assembled clathrin pools are functionally distinct . In addition to adaptors and cytosolic clathrin other , as yet unidentified , cyto - solic factors are also required for efficient coated pit invagination . These results provide new insight into the mechanisms and regulation of coated pit assembly and invagination . T HE cellular uptake of many essential nutrients , growth factors , and hormones is mediated by clathrin - coated pits and coated vesicles ( recently reviewed by Smythe and Warren , 1991 ) . Ligands bind with high affinity to spe - cific transmembrane receptors which become concentrated , as a consequence of signals contained within the receptor cy - toplasmic tail ( reviewed by Trowbridge , 1991 ) , in specialized regions of the plasma membrane termed coated pits . The coated pits invaginate and a membrane fission event results in coated vesicle formation . After an uncoating reaction in the cytosoI , the released coat constituents recycle for addi - tional rounds of assembly , invagination and budding . The uncoated transport vesicles deliver their contents to the endosomal compartment . Coated pits and vesicles have been well characterized both morphologically and biochemically . The structure and bio - chemistry of the major coat components , clathrin and adap - tors ( originally referred to as assembly proteins ) , has been extensively studied ( reviewed by Brodsky , 1988 ; Morris et al . , 1989 ) . Clathrin triskelions , composed of three 180 - kD heavy chains and three tightly associated , ' o30 - kD light chains , form the polygonal lattice of the coat . Adaptors ( APs ) 1 are heterotetmmeric molecules consisting of two distinct , , ~ 100 - kD subunits , referred to as " adaptins " and two smaller subunits of unknown function . APs were first de - scribed in the functional context of mediating clathrin as - sembly into coat structures in the absence of membranes Elizabeth Smythe ' s present address is Department of Biochemistry , Uni - versity of Dundee , Dundee , DD1 4HN , Scotland . I . Abbreviations used in this paper : AP , adaptor ; Till , transferrin . ( Zaremba and Keen , 1983 ) . There are two classes of APs in all cells which differ in their subunit composition and in their subceUular localization ( reviewed by Morris et al . , 1989 ; Pearse and Robinson , 1990 ; Keen , 1990 ) . API is specifically associated with coated pits in the Golgi region of the cell and consists of ' y and 13 ' adaptins and smaller subunits of , , o47 and , , o19 kD . AP2 is specifically associated with coated pits at the plasma membrane and consists of ~ and / 3 adaptins and smaller subunits of , ' , , 50 and ' ~ , 17 kD . APs underlie the clathrin lattice and appear to interact directly with the mem - brane ( reviewed by Pearse and Crowther , 1987 ) . The nature of clathrin - AP interactions and their reassembly into coat structures in vitro has been extensively studied . In addition , recent studies suggest that APs might interact directly with the cytoplasmic tails of receptors concentrated in coated pits ( Pearse , 1988 ; Glickman et al . , 1989 ; Beltzer and Spiess , 1991 ) . These results have lead to the model that APs mediate clathrin assembly onto the membrane and perhaps function in concentrating receptors into coated pits ( reviewed by Pearse and Robinson , 1990 ; Keen , 1990 ) . Despite considerable biochemical understanding of the structural components of coated pits , very little information is available concerning the regulation of coat protein assem - bly from the soluble pool onto the membrane to form coated pits . Similarly the mechanisms of coated pit invagination and coated vesicle budding remain obscure ( for review see Schmid , 1992 ) . A clearer understanding of these mecha - nisms would benefit from the use of cell - free assays for coat proteins in the functional context of receptor - mediated en - docytosis . Towards this goal , we have developed stage - specific assays using perforated A431 cells which measure distinct events leading to the internalization of transferrin (cid:14)9 The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525f92 / 12 / I 163 / 9 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 119 , Number 5 , December 1992 1163 - 1171 1163 into sealed coated vesicles and / or to its sequestration into deeply invaginated coated pits ( Smythe et al . , 1989 ; Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ) . Within this system a variety of partial reactions have been shown to occur , including de novo coated pit assembly , coated pit growth and invagination , and a membrane fission event leading to coated vesicle budding . Each of these partial reactions contributing to the productive sequestration or internalization of ligand requires elevated temperatures . In addition , using both morphological and biochemical approaches ( Smythe et al . , 1989 ; Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ) , we have demonstrated that both coated pit as - sembly and coated vesicle budding require ATP hydrolysis and cytosol . Here , we demonstrate that clathrin and adaptors are among the cytosolic factors required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in perforated A431 ceils . Using these stage - specific assays , we have examined the role of purified coat proteins in the functional context of coated vesicle forma - tion . We demonstrate that adaptors purified from coated vesicles stimulate coated pit assembly and enhance both the rate and extent of ligand sequestration into deeply invagi - hated coated pits . Results from preincubation protocols sug - gest that adaPtors bind to membranes in an ATE cytosol , and temperature independent manner to initiate coated pit assembly . These results are in agreement with earlier studies on adaptor binding to isolated plasma membranes ( Mahaffey et al . , 1989 , 1990 ) . However , subsequent events leading to productive coated pit formation as assessed by ligand seques - tration require elevated temperatures and are ATP and cytosol dependent . Cytosol pretreated with anticlathrin anti - bodies is inactive and a cytosolic fraction enriched in clath - tin is ~ 40 - fold more active than unfractionated cytosol in mediating AP - stimulated ligand sequestration . Surprisingly , clathrin purified from coated vesicles is inactive . These results indicate a previously undetected functional distinc - tion between assembled and unassembled pools of clathrin . In addition to adaptors and cytosolic clathrin other , as yet unidentified , cytosolic factors are required for productive coated pit invagination and for coated vesicle budding . Materials and Methods Cell Lines and Antibodies The human adenocarcinoma cell line , A431 , was obtained from Graham Warren ( Imperial Cancer Research Fund , London ) and was grown in DME ( Gibco Laboratories , Grand Island , New York ) supplemented with 10 % FCS and 100 U / ml each of penicillin and streptomycin . Cells were passaged every 2 - 3 d by trypsinization . Cells required for an in vitro experiment were seeded overnight as previously described ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ; Smythe et al . , 1992 ) . Sheep antitransferrin antibody was a gift of the Scottish Antibody Production Unit . Anticlathrin monoclonal X22 was a generous gift from Frances Brodsk - y ( University of California , San Francisco , CA ) . Antiadap - tin mAbs 100 / 1 and 100 / 2 were generously provided by Ernst Ungewickell ( Max - Planck Institute for Biochemistry , Martinsried , Germany ) . Preparation of Coat Proteins from Bovine Brain Coat proteins were isolated from bovine brains which had been frozen on dry ice immediately after slaughter and stored at - 70 ~ Coated vesicles were prepared by differential centrifugation , essentially as described by Campbell et al . ( 1984 ) . Briefly , 1 kg of tissue was homogenized in an equal volume of 100 mM Mes ( 2 - N - morpholino - ethansulfonic acid ) , pH 6 . 5 , 0 . 5 mM MgCI2 , 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM PMSE 0 . 1 mM DTT ( Buffer A ) . The homogenate was centrifuged in a Beckman JA - 10 rotor ( Beckman Instru - ments , Inc . , Fullerton , CA ) at 10 , 000 rpm for 30 min . The superuatant was removed and saved . The pellet was rehomogenized and centrifuged as above . The combined supernatants were centrifuged at 30 , 000 rpm in a Beckman Ti 45 rotor ( Beckman Instruments , Inc . ) for 1 h . The resulting microsomal pellet was resuspended in , ~ 100 ml of buffer A and an equal volume of a Ficoll ( Sigma Type 400 - DL ; Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO ) / sucrose solution ( both 12 . 5 % wt / vol in buffer A ) was added . After centrifugation in a Beckman JA20 rotor ( Beckman Instruments , Inc . ) at 18 , 500 rpm for 40 rain , the supernatant was diluted fivefoid with buffer A and centrifuged for 1 h in a Ti45 rotor at 33 , 000 rpm . The pellet containing the crude coated vesicles was resuspended in 100 ml of extraction buffer ( 3 vols 1 M Tris , pH 8 : 1 vol buffer A ) and extraction allowed to proceed for 10 rain at room temperature ( Keen , 1987 ) . After centrifugation for 60 rain at 45 , 000 rpm in a Ti45 rotor , the supernatant was subjected to a 50 % ( NH2 ) 4SO4 precipitation and the pellet , collected by centrifugation at 10 , 000 rprn for 15 rain in a JA - 14 rotor . This fraction was resuspended in ' ~ 20 ml of colunm buffer ( 1 vol 1 M Tris , pH 7 . 0 : 1 vol buffer A containing 0 . 1 mM DTT ) and loaded on a Sephacryl S - 400 ( Pharmacia Fine Chemi - cals , Piseataway , NJ ) colunm ( 3 . 5 x 135 cm ) equilibrated in column buffer . The column was eluted overnight at a flow rate of 60 ml / h . Clathrin - and adaptor - containing fractions , detected by SDS - PAGE , were pooled and precipitated with 50 % ( NI - L02SO4 . The clathrin pellet was resuspended and dialyzed against assay buffer ( 100 mM K - Acetate , 85 mM sucrose , 20 mM Hepes , 1 mM MgAcetate , pH 7 . 4 , referred to as KSHM ) and the adap - tor pellet against I0 mM Tris , pH 8 . 5 , containing 0 . 1 mM DTT . Both frac - tions were stored in small aliquots at - 70 ~ without loss of activity . After thawing for use in the assay the aliquots were kept at 4 ~ where they re - mained active for 3 - - 4 d . Clathrin isolated by this procedure efficiently ( > 70 % ) assembled into empty cages after dialysis against 20 mM Mes , 1 mM EDTA , 2 mM CaC12 , pH 6 . 3 . Routinely , ' ~ 35 nag of purified clathrin and ' ~ 10 nag of purified adaptors were obtained from 1 kg of brain . No in - creases in either yield or specific activity were observed in adaptors purified from the brains of freshly slaughtered cattle . Purification of AP1 and AP2 Adaptor Complexes Separation of AP1 and AP2 adaptors was carried out on clathrin - Sepharose exactly as described by Keen ( 1987 ) . Briefly , APs obtained after chromatog - raphy on 5400 were mixed with clathrin - Sepharose in column buffer and then dialyzed overnight against Buffer D ( 0 . 1 M Mes , 1 mM EDTA , 0 . 1 mM DTT , 10 % glycerol , 0 . 02 % sodium azide , pH 6 . 5 ) with vigorous stirring . The suspension was transferred to a column and washed at room tempera - ture with Buffer D . Fractions containing AP1 , AP3 , and contaminating pro - teins were eluted in Buffer D . AP2 complexes were retained and could be eluted with 0 . 4 M Tris in Buffer D . After elution from clathfin - Sepharose the pooled fractions were concentrated using an Amicon Centriprep - 10 con - centrator ( Amicon , Beverly , MA ) . They were then stored at 4 ~ Before addition to the assay they were dialyzed against I0 mM Tris , pH 8 . 5 . The purity of the adaptor complexes was assessed by SDS - PAGE using a gra - dient of 5 - 15 % acrylamide ( Keen , 1987 ) and by immunoblotting with mAb , 100 / 2 , specific to the c ~ subunit ofAP2 ( Schrtder and Ungewickell , 1991 ) . Purification of Cytosolic Clathrin For the isolation of cytosolic clathrin , 400 ml of the cytosol fraction from the coated vesicle preparation was precipitated with 30 % ( NH4 ) 2SO4 . The pellet was resuspended in 40 ml buffer B ( 10 mM sodium phosphate , pH 7 . 2 , 25 mM NaCI , 0 . 1 mM DTT and 0 . 1 mM PMSF ) and dialyzed exten - sively against buffer B . The preparation was then applied to a DEAE cellu - lose column ( 2 . 5 (cid:141) 10 cm ) equilibrated in buffer B . After extensive washing with buffer B , bound proteins were eluted with a linear gradient of 0 - 1 M KCI in buffer B . Clathrin - containing fractions were detected by Western blotting using a polyclonal antiserum raised against purified clathrin which recognizes both heavy and light chains . These fractions were pooled and precipitated with 50 % ( NI - L02SO4 . The pellet was resuspended in 30 ml 0 . 2 M Tris - HC1 , 1 mM EDTA , 0 . 1 mM DTT , 10 % glycerol , pH 6 . 5 , com - bined with 17 ml of clathrin - Sepharose and dialyzed overnight against two changes of Buffer D . The clathrin - Sepharose was transferred to a column , washed extensively with Buffer D and then eluted with 0 . 4 M Tris in Buffer D . The final fraction , enriched in cytosolic clathrin , was concentrated in an Amicon Centriprep - 10 ( Amicon , Beverly , MA ) and stored at 4 ~ after dialysis against KSHM . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 119 , 1992 1164 Preparation of Cytosol Cytosol for assays was prepared from bovine brain homogenized in KSHM as previously described ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ) . Assay for uJI - BSST Internalization in Perforated A431 Cells Human diferric transferrin ( Boehringer Mannheim Corp . , Indianapolis , IN ) biotinylated and iodinated ( 125I - BSST ) as described previously ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ) , was used as a ligand for internalization . Standard incu - bations contained an ATP regenerating system , 4 # g / ml 125I - BSST , bovine brain cytosol and coat proteins as indicated for each experiment . All com - ponents were mixed in 1 . 5 ml eppendorf tubes on ice in 30 # 1 KSHM before addition of , - ol - 2 x 105 perforated A431 cells in 10 # 1 KSHM . Incubations were initiated by transfer to 37 ~ waterbaths and terminated by return to ice . The antibody inaccessibility and MesNa resistance assays were carded out exactly as previously described ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ; Smythe et al . , 1992 ) . For each experiment the signal obtained in the absence of ATP ( generally ' o7 - 12 % of total cell associated 125I - BSST ) has been subtracted as background so that the data shown represent ATP - dependent events . Since neither ATP3 , S nor AMPPNP will substitute for ATP in either of these reactions ( Smythe et al . , 1989 ; C . LaMaze , Carter and Schmid , unpub - lished results ) the ATP - dependent events presented in the data shown repre - sent energy - requiring events . Other Procedures Protein determination was carried out using the Pierce BCA assay ( Pierce Chemical Co . , Rockford , IL ) or by measurement of the absorbance at 280 nm using an extinction coefficient of 11 . 0 for clathrin ( Winkler and Stanley , 1983 ) and 8 . 7 for AP2 ( Keen , 1987 ) . SDS - PAGE was performed according to the method of Laemmli et al . ( 1970 ) . For Western blotting , gels were electrotransferred to sheets of reinforced nitrocellulose ( Schleicher and Schuell , Keene , NH ) using a Bio - Rad ( Richmond , CA ) mini - gel apparatus . Transfer was for 1 . 5 h at 100 V in 49 . 6 mM Tris , 384 mM glycine , 20 % ( vol / vol ) methanol , 0 . 01 % SDS . Blots were blocked in TBS containing 3 % milk protein . Blots were incubated overnight with anticlathrin serum at 1 : 1 , 000 dilution and with antiadaptin mAbs at 10 # g / ml . Clathrin or APs were visualized using alkaline phosphatase conjugated to secondary anti - bodies ( Pierce Chemical Co . ) . amining the role of coat proteins in the functional context of ligand sequestration and internalization . We therefore tested the effect of purified clathrin and adaptors , the major coat proteins , on 125I - BSST internalization . Perforated A431 cells were prepared and incubated under standard assay con - ditions , as described in Materials and Methods . Purified adaptors and / or clathrin were added to reaction mixtures in the absence of cytosol or in the presence of either low or high levels of cytosol , as indicated in Fig . 1 . After incubation for 30 min at 37 ~ the sequestration of ~ 25I - BSST in vitro was assessed using the antibody - inaccessibility assay . The data in Fig . 1 shows that in the absence of cytosol , the presence of purified clathrin and / or adaptors had no effect on the extent of Tfn sequestration in vitro . In contrast , in the presence of limiting concentrations of cytosol ( 0 . 5 - 1 mg / ml ) , the addi - tion of adaptors purified from coated vesicles stimulated t25I - BSST sequestration more than twofold , to a level greater than or equal to that seen in the presence of maximal ( 5 - 7 mg / ml ) cytosol . Clathrin purified from coated vesicles had no effect on ~ 25I - BSST sequestration either in the absence or presence of cytosol ( Fig . 1 ) . In addition , the presence of clathrin had no effect on adaptor - dependent stimulation of Tfn sequestra - tion . As this result was unexpected , the effect of clathrin alone or in the presence of adaptors was extensively exam - ined under a variety of conditions including a full range of cytosol concentrations , and a full range of ratios of clathrin to adaptors . Other sources of cytosol containing lower levels of clathrin , such as human K562 cell cytosol , were also Results Purified Adaptors Stimulate Sequestration ofuSI - BSST in Perforated , 4431 Cells We have previously described stage - specific assays for re - ceptor - mediated endocytosis into perforated A431 cells ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ; Smythe et al . , 1992 ) . ~ 25I - Transferrin ( Tfn ) which is biotinylated via a cleavable disul - phide bond ( referred to as ~ 25I - BSST ) is used as a ligand for internalization via the Tfn - receptor . The internalization of ~ 25I - BSST into sealed coated vesicles is measured by its ac - quisition of resistance to the low molecular weight mem - brane impermeant reducing agent , MesNa ( sodium , ~ mer - captoethane sulfonate ) . The inaccessibility of 125I - BSST to exogenously added antitransferrin antibodies , termed " se - questration " occurs as a result of both its inclusion into deeply invaginated coated pits and its internalization into sealed coated vesicles ( Schmid and Carter , 1990 ; Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ) . By measuring separate but overlapping events in receptor - mediated endocytosis , these assays pro - vide a means of dissecting three biochemically distinct events in coated vesicle formation : coated pit assembly , in - vagination , and vesicle budding . Since receptor - mediated endocytosis in vitro is inhibited by the addition of anticlathrin antibodies ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ) , this system should provide a means for ex - Figure 1 . Purified adaptors stimulate ATP - dependent Tfn sequestra - tion in vitro . Perforated A431 cells were prepared and incubated at 37 ~ as described in Materials and Methods . All incubations were in 40 # 1 of KSHM containing an ATP regenerating system and 4 / ~ g / ml ~ 25I - BSST and in addition , as indicated , bovine brain cyto - sol at low ( 0 . 75 mg / ml ) or high ( 6 . 5 mg / ml ) concentrations , 10 / zg adaptors and / or 10 # g clathrin . The ATP - dependent sequestration of t25I - BSST from exogenously added anti - Tfn antibodies is indi - cated and expressed as a percentage of the total cell associated t25I - BSST after subtracting ATP - independent backgrounds , as de - scribed in Materials and Methods . The data shown are the average ( + SD ) of six independent experiments using at least three different preparations of APs and clathrin . Smythe et al . Adaptors Stimulate Endocytosis In Vitro 1165 tested . In addition , we confirmed that the isolated clathrin was capable of self - assembly into cages ( see Materials and Methods ) . However , we were unable to detect any effect of addition of coated vesicle - derived clathrin on Tfn sequestra - tion in vitro ( data not shown ) . Purified Adaptors Stimulate Early but not Late Events in Tfn Internalization Our earlier studies suggested that although newly formed coated pits could efficiently invaginate to sequester receptor - bound 1zSI - BSST in vitro , they were unable to form sealed coated vesicles ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ) . Thus we sug - gested that coated vesicles which were formed in vitro were A " o - 6 = o . . , - ~ ? v - C t - O o 0 80 60 40 20 20 A o , . ors I (cid:12)9 + adaptors I i = i 10 20 30 Time ( rain ) B ~ " (cid:12)9 o 0 " 6 15 (cid:12)9 r i m C i = r - / / ; I o - adaptors I (cid:12)9 * adaptors 0 i (cid:12)9 i 0 10 20 30 Time ( rain ) Figure 2 . Purified adaptors stimulate sequestration into deeply in - vaginated pits but not coated vesicle budding . Perforated cells were incubated in a complete assay mixture containing 0 . 6 mg / ml bovine brain cytosol with ( 0 ) or without ( o ) 10 # g of adaptors for the in - dicated times at 37 ~ before returning to ice and analysis for either Ab inaccessibility ( A ) or MesNa - resistance ( B ) as described in Ma - terials and Methods . The backgrounds obtained after a 30 - min in - cubation on ice ( 4 % for Ab inaccessibility , 11 % for MesNa - resis - tance ) have been subtracted from the results shown . derived from a subpopulation of ' ~ activated " coated pits which had already been assembled in vivo before preparing perforated A431 cells . This hypothesis would predict that late events measured by acquisition of MesNa resistance would be unaffected by factors which enhance early events such as coated pit assembly . The latter would result only in enhanced sequestration of ligands into deeply invaginated coated pits . To test this hypothesis and to further explore the mechanism of adaptor stimulated ~ 25I - BSST internalization , we compared the effect of purified adaptors on the rate of 125I - BSST internalization into perforated A431 cells in a standard incubation as assessed by either MesNa - resistance , which measures coated vesicle budding or Ab - inaccessibil - ity , which measures coated pit invagination and coated vesi - cle budding . While purified adaptors caused a more than twofold increase in both the rate ( i . e . , the percent of Tfn se - questered / rain ) and extent of 12SI - BSST sequestration as as - sessed by Ab - inaccessibility ( Fig . 2 A ) , they had no effect on either the rate or extent of ~ SI - B $ ST internalization as as - sessed by the acquisition of MesNa - resistance ( Fig . 2 B ) . This result is consistent with our previous model for receptor - mediated endocytosis in vitro ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ) and indicates , as expected , a role for adaptors in early events leading to the formation of deeply invaginated coated pits . Adaptor - Dependent Stimulation of I ~ I - BSST Sequestration Requires Cytosolic Factors Efficient receptor - mediated endocytosis into perforated A431 cells requires high concentrations of cytosol which could reflect the need for stoichiometric amounts of soluble coat constituents . To test whether adaptors were indeed a limiting 6 0 ~ r 25 o / ! 3 _ is - . / - 20 / , o 5 , i (cid:12)9 i - i . J (cid:12)9 1 2 3 4 1 0 CytosoI ( mg ! ml ) 1 ' 2 3 4 5 6 CytosoI ( mg / ml ) Figure 3 . AP - stimulated Tfn sequestration is cytosol dependent . Perforated A431 cells were incubated for 30 min at 37 ~ with in - creasing concentrations of bovine brain cytosol in the presence ( o ) or absence ( o ) of 10 # g AP and then returned to ice for determina - tion of the extent of Tfn sequestration by Ab inaccessibility . The calculated difference between each set of points , which reflects the cytosol dependence of AP - stimulated sequestration , is shown in the inset . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 119 , 1992 1166 cytosolic factor and to determine whether other cytosolic factors were required for adaptor - stimulated sequestration we titrated the cytosolic requirement for ~ 25I - BSST seques - tration in the presence and absence of adaptors . The data in Fig . 3 compares the effect of increasing concentrations of cytosol on the extent of 125I - BSST sequestration into perfo - rated A431 cells in the presence or absence of adaptors . The cytosol dependence in the absence of adaptors was sub - tracted from that in the presence of adaptors to generate the data shown in the inset which reflects the cytosol dependence of adaptor - stimulated ~ zSI - BSST sequestration . In the ab - sence of adaptors , half - maximal activity requires > 2 mg / ml cytosol . This cytosol requirement is reduced by almost 10 - fold in the presence of purified adaptors ( half - maximal adaptor - dependent stimulation required " 00 . 2 mg / ml cyto - sol , see inset Fig . 3 ) . This result suggests that adaptors are a limiting component in the cytosolic fraction in vitro and that other cytosolic factors are required for coated pit growth and invagination . AP2 Specifically Stimulates Tfn Sequestration Two classes of adaptors exist in all cell types : AP1 which localizes to the Golgi complex and AP2 which is found at the plasma membrane ( Robinson and Pearse , 1986 ; Robin - son , 1987 ) . Both AP1 and AP2 are present in the adaptor fraction isolated chromatographically after extraction of bo - vine brain coated vesicles ( Fig . 4 , lane 3 ) . Also present in this fraction is AP3 , an ' o155 kD neuron - specific adaptin - Figure 4 . SDS - PAGE of coat protein preparations . ( A ) SDS - PAGE ( 5 - 15 % acrylamide ) of purified AP complexes stained with Coo - massie blue . ( Lane 1 ) Molecular weight markers ( Novex ) ; ( lane 2 ) clathrin - Sepharose flow - through containing AP1 polypeptides ( 108 , I00 and 47 kD , as indicated ) , AP3 ( 155 kD ) and contaminat - ing bands ; ( lane 3 ) Sephacryl S400 - purified APs ; and ( lane 4 ) frac - tion eluted from clathrin - Sepharose with 0 . 4 M Tris containing AP2 polypeptides ( 115 , 112 , 100 , and 50 kD , as indicated ) . ( Note the absence of the 47 - kD subtmit most diagnostic of API ) . ( B ) SDS - PAGE ( 8 % acrylamide ) stained with Coomassie blue ( 20 # g of each fraction was loaded per lane ) . ( Lane 5 ) Bovine brain cytosol ; ( lane 6 ) 30 % ammonium sulfate fraction ; ( lane 7 ) clathrin - containing pool from DEAE - cellulose ; ( lane 8 ) bound and eluted fraction from clathrin - Sepharose ; and ( lane 9 ) 5 # g of clathrin purified from coated vesicles . Mol . wt . markers indicated at left were 200 , 116 , 97 . 4 , 66 , and 43 kD . related molecule of unknown function ( Murphy et al . , 1991 ) . If the observed stimulation of Tfn sequestration by adaptors represents their physiological role either in de novo - coated pit formation or growth at the cell surface , then only AP2 should be active . To test this expectation , the adaptor com - plexes were separated from each other by affinity chroma - tography on clathrin - Sepharose ( Keen , 1987 ) . In this proce - dure , AP1 , AP3 , and contaminating proteins fail to bind clathrin - Sepharose and are eluted in the column washes ( Fig . 4 , lane 2 ) whereas AP2 is selectively retained and eluted with 0 . 4 M Tris ( Fig . 4 , lane 4 ) . The absence of con - taminating amounts of AP2 in the flow through fractions was verified by immunoblotting with mAbs specific for AP2 ( Schrtder and Ungewickell , 1991 , data not shown ) and by gradient gel analysis which allows AP1 and AP2 to be distin - guished based on subunit composition ( note the absence of the APl - specific 47 - kD subunlt in AP2 fractions , Fig . 4 , lane 4 ) . Purified AP1 or AP2 complexes were added to perforated A431 cells in the presence of a limiting amount of cytosol and the extent of Tfn sequestration was measured by Ab - inaccessibility after 30 min ( Fig . 5 A ) . Addition of equal amounts of purified AP1 and AP2 complexes showed that only AP2 adaptors were capable of stimulating Tfn seques - tration . AP1 ( and AP3 ) complexes were inactive , or slightly inhibitory . This demonstrates the specificity of the adaptor - dependent stimulation since only those adaptors which are found in coated pits at the cell surface increased the extent of Tfn sequestration . The concentration dependence for AP stimulation of Tfn sequestration is shown in Fig . 5 B . Half - maximal stimulation of Tfn - sequestration was obtained in the presence of , 00 . 2 # M of $ 400 purified APs . Further purification of this mixed AP fraction by affinity chromatography on clathrin - Sepha - rose resulted in an " 01 . 5 - 2 - fold increase in specific activity ( data not shown ) . These values are consistent with previous Kd values obtained for AP - membrane associations ( Virshup and Bennett , 1988 ; Mahaffey et al . , 1990 ) and AP - clathrin interactions in vitro ( Schr ' oder and Ungewickell , 1991 ) . A Role for Clathrin in Adaptor - stimulated Tfn Sequestration As indicated , adaptor - stimulated sequestration was indepen - dent of the addition of exogenous purified clathrin ( Fig . 1 ) . However , since it was likely that the added adaptors were in - volved in either de novo - coated pit assembly or coated pit growth , it would be expected that clathrin would also be in - volved in this process . To further investigate a role for clath - rin we examined the effect of the anticlathrin antibody , X22 , on AP - stimulated I ~ SI - BSST sequestration . X22 is a well - characterized antibody which inhibits clathrin assembly in vitro ( Blank and Brodsky , 1986 ) and receptor - mediated en - docytosis both in vivo ( Doxsey et al . , 1987 ; Chin et al . , 1989 ) and in vitro ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ) . Cytosol ( 3 . 5 mg / ml ) was preincubated for 30 rain on ice with X22 in the presence or absence of excess clathrin or with a nonspecific IgG of the same subclass . The cytosol was then diluted four - fold into a standard reaction mixture and assayed for its abil - ity to support adaptor stimulated sequestration ( Fig . 6 ) . Pretreatment of cytosol with X22 reduced AP stimulated Tfn sequestration seen in the presence of low cytosol from 16 to 3 % , corresponding to an , , 080 % inhibition . Purified clathrin Smythe et al . Adaptors Stimulate Endocytosis In Vitro 1167 30 , ~ i 25 , . 8 15 , No APs $ 400 APs AP1 AP2 Oo ~ g ) ( lO ~ g ) Oo ~ g ) 40 B 30 o 10 u 5 10 15 20 Adaptors ( pg ) Figure 5 . AP2 but not AP1 complexes specifically stimulate ATP - dependent Tfn sequestration . ( A ) Perforated A431 cells in a com - plete assay mixture containing 1 mg / ml cytosol were incubated for 30 min at 370C in the presence of 10 # g of $ 400 APs , AP1 , or AP2 fractions as shown and then returned to ice for determination of the extent of Tfn sequestration by Ab inaccessibility . ( B ) Concentration dependence of AP stimulation . Incubations were performed as in A in the presence of increasing amounts of S400 - purified APs . could protect against this inhibition and nonspecific IgG was only slightly inhibitory . The sequestration of ' 25I - BSST seen at limiting cytosol concentrations in the absence of adaptors ( Fig . 6 , ~ ) was unaffected , indicating that inter - nalization of Tfn from preformed coated pits was not in - hibited by the diluted antibody under these conditions . This result was consistent with our previous findings that inhibi - tion of events involving membrane - associated clathrin by X22 requires preincubation of perforated A431 cells with the antibody ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ) . These data indicate that the cytosolic fraction provides a soluble pool ofclathrin which is required for adaptor - stimulated ~ 25I - BSST seques - tration . A Cytosolic Fraction Enriched in Clathrin Supports Adaptor - Stimulated Sequestration To further explore the role of cytosolic clathrin in adaptor - stimulated sequestration , fractions enriched in soluble clath - rin were prepared from bovine brain cytosol by ( NtL ) 2SO , precipitation followed by DEAE cellulose and clathrin - Figure 6 . Inhibitory antibodies reveal a requirement for cytosolic clathrin in AP - stimulated Tfn sequestration . Cytosol ( 10 # 1 at 3 . 5 mg / ml ) was pretreated at 4 ~ for 30 min with 4 # g of either mAb X22 in the presence or absence of 10 # g of purified clathrin or with a nonspecific IgG of the same subclass . After preincubation the cytosol was diluted 1 in 4 into an assay mixture containing per - forated A431 ceils , t25I - BSST and an ATP - regenerating system with or without 10 # g of purified APs . Incubations were for 30 min at 37 ~ before return to ice for determination of the extent of Tfn - sequestration by Ab inaccessibility . - AP ( ~ ) ; + AP ( , , ) . Sepharose chromatography ( Fig . 4 B ) . These fractions were tested alone or in combination with purified APs and cytosol for their ability to stimulate 125I - BSST sequestration in per - forated A431 cells . The data in Fig . 7 shows that in the ab - sence of eytosol neither purified APs nor the cytosolic frac - tion enriched in clathrin were active alone . However , when present together , the enriched cytosolic fraction and puri - fied adaptors enhance t25I - BSST sequestration by threefold . This result contrasts with that obtained using clathrin iso - lated from coated vesicles which was inactive when assayed under identical conditions ( see Fig . 1 , incubations without added cytosol ) . The clathrin - enriched fraction partially stimulated sequestration in the presence of limiting concen - trations of cytosol , suggesting that clathrin may also be limit - ing under these conditions . Again , further stimulation was obtained upon addition of adaptors . In the absence of crude cytosol , maximal AP stimulation was obtained at < 25 # g / ml of the enriched clathrin fraction , corresponding to an " o40 - fold greater specific activity over crude cytosol in mediating AP - stimulated Tfn sequestration ( i . e . , maximum AP - depen - dent stimulation requires , o0 . 5 mg / ml of crude cytosol ) . Thus the further stimulation obtained in the presence of lim - iting cytosol suggests that although the enriched clathrin fraction satisfies much of the cytosolic requirement for AP stimulation , other factor ( s ) may also be required for maxi - mum activity . Perforated Cells May Be " Primed ' for Adaptor Stimulation of Tfn Sequestration Our results suggest that APs act at an early step to stimulate Tfn sequestration into deeply invaginated pits . This was ex - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 119 , 1992 1168 Figure 7 . Cytosolic fraction enriched in clathrin supports ATP - dependent AP stimulation of Tfn sequestration . Perforated A431 cells were incubated in the presence or absence of crude cytosol ( 0 . 9 mg / ml ) , a cytosolic fraction enriched in clathrin ( 25 # g / mi ) , and / or purified APs ( 250 # g / ml ) for 30 min at 370C and Tfn seques - tration was determined using the Ab inaccessibility assay . The data shown for ATP - dependent Tfn sequestration are the average results from two assays using independent preparations of the enriched cy - tosolic fraction . amined directly by testing whether preincubation of perfo - rated cell preparations with APs could " prime " these mem - branes for AP - stimulated Tfn sequestration in a subsequent incubation . Perforated cells were preincubated at 30 ~ for 3 min in the absence of ~ zSI - BSST under various conditions and then briefly ( 5 s ) centrifuged . The supernatants were re - moved and the cell pellets were then resuspended with cytosol and / or ATP and / or adaptors and reincubated in the presence of ~ zsI - BSST at 37 ~ for 30 min . The extent of Tf - n sequestration as assessed by Ab inaccessibility was then de - termined . The presence of adaptors in the preincubation step obviated the requirement for adaptors in the subsequent in - cubation ( compare set B with set C in Fig . 8 A ) . This sug - gests that the addition of adaptors during preincubation " primes " the membranes so that adaptors are no longer limit - ing for Tfn sequestration in the second incubation . This two - step incubation protocol enabled further examination of the requirements for the AP - dependent " priming " reaction . As seen in Fig . 8 A , the adaptor - dependent " priming " effect was independent of added ATP and cytosol ( set D ) and occurred on ice ( set E ) . It is important to note , however , that ATE cytosol and incubation at elevated temperatures were all es - sential in the second stage incubation leading to ~ zSI - BSST sequestration . Analysis of the adaptor titration for the preincubation effect showed that it was identical to that observed in a direct assay of adaptor stimulated sequestration ( compare Fig . 8 B with Fig . 5 B ) . This argues that the preincubation effect is truly a " priming " reaction for events which normally occur during the adaptor - dependent stimulation at elevated tem - peratures . That the membranes may be " primed " in this way indicates that the adaptors act very early , probably by assem - 40 - 30 10 ' A A Prelncubatlon conditions Temp none 30oc 30oc 30oc 4oc ATP . + + cytosol . + + APs . . + + + II e II c II D II E 18 (cid:12)9 B = ~ " - - 12 ; : 1o 6 i i i 0 5 10 15 p . g AP Present During Prelncubatlon Figure & l ~ ' eincubation with APs allows cell membranes to be " primed " for AP - independent sequestration in a two - step incuba - tion . ( A ) Perforated A431 ceUs were preincubated in 40 # 1 final vol - ume of KSHM containing 1 rag / rid BSA with or without adaptors ( 10 # g / assay ) , ATP and cytosol ( 0 . 6 mg / mi ) as indicated for 3 min at 30oc or for 5 rain at 4 ~ These times of preincubation were opti - mized to give the best signal in the subsequent assay without signifi - cant increase in ATP or temperature - independent backgrounds . The cells were then centrifuged at full speed for 5 s in an Eppendorf refrigerated centrifuge , model 5402 . The supernatant was aspirated and the membrane pellet resuspended in the assay mix containing 4 / zg / ml 125I - BSST , with or without 0 . 8 mg / ml cytosol and with or without l0 # g of APs . After 30 minat 37 ~ the amount of 125I - BSST inaccessible to antibody was determined . ( ~ ) + cytosol / + AP ; ( m ) + cytosol / - AP ; ( - ) - cytosol / - AP . ( B ) Preincubation was performed at 4 ~ as described in A in the presence of increas - ing concentrations of APs . After pelleting to remove unbound APs , assays were performed as described for A in the presence of 0 . 6 mg / ml cytosol and in the absence of APs . The data plotted are the extent of cytosol - depeodent Tfn sequestration obtained in the sec - ond incubation . Smythe et al . Adaptors Stimulate Endocytosis In Vitro 1169 bly onto the membranes , and that cytosol and ATP are re - quired after this initial step leading to productive sequestra - tion of Tfn into deeply invaginated pits . Discussion We have examined the role of purified coat proteins in receptor - mediated endocytosis in vitro using stage - specific assays which differentiate between coated pit assembly , in - vagination and coated - vesicle budding ( Smythe et al . , 1989 ; Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ) . Purified adaptors were found to markedly stimulate both the rate and extent of early events leading to the sequestration of ligand into deeply invaginated coated pits . In contrast , they had no effect on the late events involved in membrane fission and coated vesicle budding . Consistent with current models for adaptor function , these results suggest that APs participate in the initiation of a new pit and / or during the growth of existing pits . Further evidence that the adaptors are acting at an early stage was provided by the observation that it was possible to " prime " the perforated cell membranes with adaptors during a preincubation . Our observation that " priming " was inde - pendent of ATP and cytosol and occurs at 4 ~ is consistent with previous findings on AP - membrane interactions ( Ma - haffey et al . , 1990 ) . In addition , we demonstrated that after attachment to the membranes , the APs were functionally ac - tive and stimulated productive ligand sequestration . After " priming " of membranes with adaptors , productive ligand sequestration in the subsequent warm - up reaction demon - strated an absolute requirement for cytosol , ATP , and elevated temperature . This result suggests that other cyto - solic factors act after AP binding , perhaps to mediate lattice growth and invagination . Based on the ATP dependence of coated pit invagination , in addition to clathrin , these cyto - solic factors presumably include at least one as yet unidentified ATPase . The addition of APs increased both the rate and extent of ligand sequestration which occurred in the presence of limit - ing amounts of cytosol . No further increase in rate occurred as a result of priming the membranes with APs ( data not shown ) . This result suggests that events subsequent to AP binding but nonetheless dependent on APs may be rate limit - ing . This AP - dependent increase in the rate of ligand seques - tration could be due to an increased number of coated pits and / or an increase in the efficiency of " fin - receptor seques - tration into deeply invaginated coated pits . There are two populations of adaptors in all cell types , AP1 associated with coated pits in the Golgi region and AP2 associated with plasma membrane coated pits ( Robinson and Pearse , 1986 ) . The adaptor - dependent stimulation of endo - cytic uptake observed in vitro demonstrated the expected specificity since only AP2 complexes were active . Inhibition by AP1 complexes may reflect competition with limiting con - centrations of cytosolic clathrin . The titration curve for APs revealed that half - maximal stimulation of internalization oc - curred at < 0 . 2 # M . This value is consistent with the previ - ously reported Ks values for clathrin - adaptor interactions ( Schr & ler and Ungewickell , 1991 ) and for adaptor binding to stripped membranes ( Virshup and Bennett , 1988 ; Mahaf - fey et ai . , 1990 ) . However , under conditions of maximal AP stimulation , adaptors are present at , 010 - fold molar excess to clathrin . This observation most likely reflects the affinity of adaptors for membrane binding or for clathrin interac - tions as opposed to the absolute amount of adaptors present . An alternative explanation could be that only a minor popu - lation of the purified adaptors used in these assays is active in ligand sequestration . However , this is less likely since " priming " membranes with adaptors during preincubation at 4oC did not reduce the specific activity of the remaining adaptors when used in a subsequent incubation with fresh perforated cells ( data not shown ) . The cellular concentration of adaptors in bovine brain has not been directly measured , however data is available on the concentration of clathrin ( Goud et al . , 1985 ) . From these values , estimates of adaptor concentrations ( , o80 - 160 nM ) can be made based on the as - surnption that the ratio of clathrin to adaptors is the same as that found in isolated coated vesicles ( Beck and Keen , 1991 ) . These estimated values for AP2 concentrations in vivo are consistent with the concentration dependence for adaptor ac - tivity we have observed in vitro . Clathrin extracted and purified from coated vesicles was inactive in ligand sequestration , even though clathrin pre - pared in this way is fully competent in assembly both into cages and onto membranes . However , we could demonstrate a role for a soluble pool of clathrin in this process . Preincu - bation of cytosol with the anticlathrin mAb X22 resulted in almost complete inhibition of the adaptor - dependent seques - tration . Sequestration seen in the presence of cytosol alone and due presumably to preformed coated pits was unaffected . This inhibition was specific in that clathrin could protect against it and , in addition , nonspecific IgG of the same sub - class had no effect . This novel finding suggests that the solu - ble pool of clathrin may be functionally distinct from the assembled pool . Further support for this suggestion was ob - tained by demonstrating that a partially purified cytosolic fraction , enriched for clathrin , could substantially substitute for cytosol in mediating adaptor - stimulated sequestration . This observed functional distinction between soluble and assembled clathrin pools may explain results obtained in other studies on the rebinding of clathrin to membranes which had been stripped under conditions of either high pH , to remove the bulk of endogenous clathrin , or high Tris , to remove both APs and clathrin . In these experiments , while clathrin ( isolated from coated vesicles ) was able to bind to pH - stripped membranes , clathrin did not bind to Tris - stripped membranes even after rebinding adaptors ( Mahaf - fey et al . , 1990 ) . One interpretation suggested by the authors was that this result reflected the need for activation of adap - tors for clathrin binding . Given the results presented here , an alternative explanation is that clathrin isolated from the assembled pool requires some form of activation itself before assembly into functional coated pits . It is possible that al - though pre - existing or residual lattices may act as nucleation sites for the assembly of coated vesicle - derived clathrin these growing lattices may not be able to invaginate leading to productive sequestration of ligand . This possibility is con - sistent with the observation that lattice formation and invagi - nation are two discrete events ( Miller et al . , 1991 ) . In intact cells , clathrin may be enzymaticaily released from coated vesicles by the action of hsc70 which was identified as an uncoating ATPase in in vitro reactions ( Schlossman et al . , 1984 ; Rothman and Schmid , 1986 ) . In these reactions clathrin is released as a complex with the uncoating ATPase and is unable to self - assemble into cage structures ( Schloss - man et al . , 1984 ) . It is possible that the clathrin present in the partially purified cytosolic fraction which is active in coated pit assembly and invagination may be associated with accessory proteins , like the uncoating ATPase , which modu - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 119 , 1992 1170 lates its assembly activity . Although , ~ 40 - fold enriched over crude cytosol by activity and substantially enriched in clathrin content , there are several other components present in this enriched fraction , some of which appear to be en - riched after chromatography on clathrin - Sepharose column . Therefore it remains a strong possibility that other , unlden - tiffed factors which have alternative / additional roles in the sequestration of ligand contribute to the ability of this frac - tion to mediate AP - stimulated Tfn sequestration . Further purification and analysis of the soluble clathrin pool and iso - lation of the factor ( s ) responsible for stimulation of ligand sequestration will be required to address these issues . The Tfn - receptor is constitutively internalized and there - fore occupies all intermediates in coated pit and coated vesi - cle formation at steady state . As a consequence , a number of partial reactions which occur during receptor - mediated endocytosis can contribute to the sequestration of ligand measured by the antibody inaccessibility assay . These in - clude de novo - coated pit assembly and growth , invagination , and membrane fission leading to coated vesicle formation . Thus an increase in any one or in all of these partial reactions would result in an increase in the extent of ligand sequestra - tion as measured by Ab inaccessibility . The extent of adaptor stimulated t2 ~ I - BSST sequestration is usually greater than or equal to that observed in the presence of maximai cytosol , even though the extent of late membrane fission events is un - changed . In addition to demonstrating that adaptors are a limiting component in cytosol , this result suggests that the presence of excess adaptors acts to increase the relative con - tribution of de novo - coated pit assembly and / or coated pit growth to the overall extent of ligand sequestration . These partial reactions may only occur to a limited extent even in the presence of maximal cytosol since adaptor concentration may still be limiting . Consistent with this notion is our in - ability to prime membranes for adaptor - stimulated ligand sequestration even with high concentrations of cytosol ( data not shown ) . Similarly the extent of ligand sequestration ob - served in the presence of adaptors and cytosolic clathrin but in the absence of crude cytosol may reflect an increased contribution of de novo - coated pit formation to the Ab - inaccessible signal . Confirmation of these hypotheses will await detailed and quantitative morphological analysis of the events being detected biochemically . In conclusion , analysis of coated pit assembly in vitro in the functional context of receptor - mediated endocytosis has provided new insight into the requirements for and mecha - nism of coat protein assembly at the cell surface . Continua - tion of these studies using highly purified or enriched coat proteins should enable identification of other required fac - tor ( s ) and further understanding of the mechanisms which might regulate coated pit assembly and invagination . We thank Frances Brodsky ( University of California , San Francisco , CA ) and Ernst Ungewickell ( Max - Planck Institute , Martinsreid , Germany ) for the gifts of antibodies . We are grateful to Tom Redelmeier and Christophe Lamaze for helpful discussions and critical reading of the manuscript . This work was supported by the Lucille P . Markey Charitable Trust and by National Institutes of Health grants GM42445 and CA27489 to S . L . Schmid . E . Smythe was supported by a NATO / SERC postdoctoral fellow - ship . S . L . Schmid is a Lucille P . Markey Scholar . This is Scripps Manu - script 7387 - CB . Received for publication 1 June 1992 and in revised form 27 July 1992 . References Beck , K . A . , and J . H . Keen . 1991 . Self - association of the plasma membrane - associated clathrin assembly protein AP - 2 . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 4437 - - 4441 . Beltzer , J . P . , and M . Spiess . 1991 . In vitro binding of the asialoglycoprotein receptor to the / 3 adaptin of plasma membrane coated vesicles . EMBO ( Eur . MoL Biol . Organ . ) J . 10 : 3735 - 3742 . Blank , G . S . , and F . M . Brodsky . 1986 . Site - specific disruption of clathrin as - sembly produces novel structures . EMBO ( Eur . MoL Biol . Organ . ) J . 5 : 2087 - 2095 . Brodsky , F . M . 1988 . Living with clathrin : its role in intracellular membrane traffic . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 242 : 1396 - - 1402 . Campbell , C . , J . Squicciarini , M . Shia , P . F . Pilch , and R . E . Fine . 1984 . Identification of a protein kinase as an intrinsic component of rat liver coated vesicles . Biochemistry . 23 : 4420 - - 4426 . Chin , D . J . , R . M . Straubinger , S . Acton , I . Nathke , andF . M . Brodsky . 1989 . 100 - kDa polypeptides in peripheral clathrin - eoated vesicles are required for receptor - mediated endocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 86 : 9289 - 9293 . Doxsey , S . J . , F . M . Brodsky , G . S . Blank , and A . Helenius . 1987 . Inhibition of endocytosis by anti - clathrin antibodies . Cell . 50 : 453 - - 463 . Glickman , J . N . , E . Conibear , and B . M . F . Pearse . 1989 . Specificity of bind - ing of clathrin adaptors to signals on the marmose - 6 - phosphate / insulin - like growth factor II receptor . EMBO ( Eur . MoL Biol . Organ . ) J . 8 : 1041 - 1047 . Goud , B . , C . Huet , and D . Louvard . 1985 . Assembled and tmassembled pools of clathrin : a quantitative study using an enzyme immnnoassay . J . Cell Biol . 100 : 521 - 527 . Keen , J . H . 1987 . Clathrin assembly proteins : affinity purification and a model for coat assembly . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 1989 - 1998 . Keen , J . H . 1990 . Clathrin and associated assembly and disassembly proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 59 : 415 - - 438 . Laemmli , U . K . 1970 . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature ( Lond . ) . 227 : 680 - 685 . Mahaffey , D . T . , M . S . Moore , F . M . Brodsky , andR . G . W . Anderson . 1989 . Coat proteins isolated from clathrin coated vesicles can assemble into coated pits . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 1615 - 1624 . Mahaffey , D . T . , J . S . Peeler , F . M . Brodsky , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1990 . Clathrin - coated pits contain an integral membrane protein that binds the AP2 subunit with high affinity . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 16514 - 16520 . Miller , K . , M . Shipman , I . S . Trowbridge , and C . R . Hopkins . 1991 . Transfer - tin receptors promote the formation of elathrin lattices . Cell . 65 : 621 - 632 . Morris , S . A . , S . Aide , and E . Ungewickell . 1989 . Clathrin - coated vesicles . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 1 : 684 - 690 . Murphy , J . - E . , I . T . Pleasure , E . Puszkin , K . Prasad , and J . H . Keen . 1991 . Clathrin assembly protein AP - 3 : the identity of the 155K protein , AP180 , and NPI85 and demonstration ofa clathrin binding domain . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 4401 - - 4408 . Pearse , B . M . F . 1988 . Receptors compete for adaptors found in plasma mem - brane coated pits . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 7 : 3331 - 3336 . Pearse , B . M . F . , and R . A . Crowther . 1987 . Structure and assembly of coated vesicles . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biochem . 16 : 49 - 68 . Pearse , B . M . F . , and M . S . Robinson . 1990 . Clathrin , adaptors and sorting . Anna . Rev . Cell Biol . 6 : 151 - 171 . Robinson , M . S . 1987 . 100 - kD coated vesicle proteins : molecular heterogene - ity and intracelhlar distribution studied with monoclonal antibodies . J . Cell Biol . 104 : 887 - 895 . Robinson , M . S . , and B . M . F . Pearse . 1986 . Immnnofluorescent localization of 100K coated vesicle proteins . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 48 - 54 . Rothman , J . E . , and S . L . Schmid . 1986 . Enzymatic recycling of clathrin from coated vesicles . Cell . 46 : 5 - 9 . Schlossman , D . M . , S . L . Schmid , W . A . Braell , and J . E . Rothman . 1984 . An enzyme that removes clathrin coats : purification of an uncoating ATPase . J . Cell Biol . 99 : 723 - 733 . Schmid , S . L . 1992 . The mechanism of receptor - mediated endocytosis : more questions than answers . BioEssays . 14 : 589 - 596 . Schrnid , S . L . , and L . L . Carter . 1990 . ATP is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in intact ceils . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 2307 - 2318 . Schmid , S . L . , and E . Smythe . 1991 . Stage - specific assays for coated pit forma - tion and coaled vesicle budding in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 114 : 860 - 880 . Smythe , E . , and G . Warren . 1991 . The mechanism of receptor - mediated en - doeytosis . Eur . J . Biochem . 202 : 689 - 699 . Smythe , E . , M . Pypaert , J . Lucoeq , and G . Warren . 1989 . Formation of coated pits from coated vesicles in broken A431 cells . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 843 - 853 . Smytbe , E . , T . E . Redelmeier , and S . L . Schmid . 1993 . Receptor - mediated en - decytosis in semi - intact cells . Methods Enzymol . 219 : 223 - 234 . Trowbridge , I . S . 1991 . Endocytosis and signals for internalization . Curt . Opin . Cell Biol . 3 : 634 - 641 . Virshup , D . M . , and V . Bennett . 1988 . Clathrin - coated vesicle assembly poly - peptides : physical properties and reconstitution studies with brain mem - branes . J . Cell Biol . 106 : 39 - 50 . Winkler , F . K . , and K . K . Stanley . 1983 . Clathrin heavy chain , light chain in - teractions . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 2 : 1393 - 1400 . Zaremba , S . , and J . H . Keen . 1983 . Assembly polypeptides from coated vesi - cles mediate reassembly of unique clathrin coats . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 1339 - 1347 . Smythe et al . Adaptors Stimulate Endocytosis In Vitro 1171