Critical Race Theory for HCI Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya - Ogburu * 1 , Angela D . R . Smith * 2 , Alexandra To * 3 , Kentaro Toyama 1 1 University of Michigan 2 Northwestern University 3 Carnegie Mellon University Ann Arbor , MI USA Evanston , IL USA Pittsburgh , PA USA { iogburu , toyama } @ umich . edu angelasmith @ u . northwestern . edu aato @ cs . cmu . edu ABSTRACT The human - computer interaction community has made some efforts toward racial diversity , but the outcomes remain mea - ger . We introduce critical race theory and adapt it for HCI to lay a theoretical basis for race - conscious efforts , both in research and within our community . Building on the theory’s original tenets , we argue that racism is pervasive in everyday socio - technical systems ; that the HCI community is prone to “interest convergence , ” where concessions to inclusion re - quire beneﬁts to those in power ; and that the neoliberal under - pinnings of the technology industry itself propagate racism . Critical race theory uses storytelling as a means to upend deep - seated assumptions , and we relate several personal stories to highlight ongoing problems of race in HCI . The implications : all HCI research must be attuned to issues of race ; participa - tion of underrepresented minorities must be sought in all of our activities ; and as a community , we cannot become comfortable while racial disparities exist . Author Keywords critical race theory ; race ; racism ; storytelling ; theory CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing → HCI theory , concepts and models ; INTRODUCTION Recent events in the United States have prominently surfaced issues of race and ethnicity : a rise in hate crimes targeting people of African , Arab , Asian , Jewish , and other origins [ 36 ] ; a growing list of Black citizens killed by police ofﬁ - cers [ 62 ] ; the response through the establishment of the Black Lives Matter movement ; the 2017 White supremacist rally in Charlottesville , VA . Meanwhile , public sentiment toward technology has turned more critical with concerns about data privacy [ 123 ] , dissemination of ‘fake news’ [ 31 ] , election med - dling [ 131 ] , exacerbation of inequality [ 49 ] , and other issues instigating employee protests [ 81 ] , Congressional hearings [ 79 ] , and ﬁnes for technology companies [ 126 ] . These trends intersect in a way relevant to human - computer interaction , and HCI scholars have responded with several * These three authors contributed equally to this work . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’20 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA . © 2020 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6708 - 0 / 20 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376392 papers highlighting race . For example , in a 2016 paper , “ Does Technology Have Race ? ” Hankerson and colleagues enu - merate a number of digital technologies that have different consequences for people of different races [ 63 ] . In 2018 , Schlesinger , O’Hara , and Taylor consider the complexities of avoiding racism in chatbots , with conclusions that have broader scope [ 110 ] . Even more recently , O’Leary et al . explore how “conventional design practices may perpetuate forms of institutional racism , ” and suggest an alternative that emphasizes pre - existing forms of creativity [ 92 ] . It is not that racism has reappeared , as much as that ongoing racism – that never went away – is currently receiving more visibility . While this bump in interest is welcome , public attention is ﬁckle . Any community hoping to eliminate racism must sustain attention , resources , and effort toward meaningful change . And here , too , the HCI community has not been idle . Its special interest group , SIGCHI , has buttressed efforts toward greater inclusivity through an appointed chair [ 42 ] , a series of Diversity & Inclusion lunches [ 20 ] , and so on . Yet in spite of such efforts , the inequitable consequences of racism are severe even in a community like ours that often considers itself to be socially progressive . For example , of the 133 current members of the CHI Academy – those recognized by our community as having made substantial contributions to HCI – 124 ( 93 % ) appear to be White 1 . Only 9 appear non - White : 5 of East Asian descent ( 3 . 8 % ) , 2 South Asian ( 1 . 5 % ) , 2 Latinx ( 1 . 5 % ) , and 0 Black / African descent . These numbers are far from reﬂective of the global or U . S . proportions of these groups , and they are less diverse than , for example , leadership at companies that have been criticized for poor diversity [ 69 ] . As one step toward greater inclusivity , we propose that HCI scholars and practitioners engage more substantially and con - sistently with critical race theory , both as a way to advance inclusive research , but also to reduce our community’s own racial disparities . Critical race theory is a theoretical frame - work introduced in the 1970s by legal scholars to challenge the dominant discourse on race and racism [ 34 ] . Particularly for an intellectual community such as ours , maintaining a focus on race requires not only the formation of institutions and processes , but engagement with relevant theory . Critical race theory offers a starting point for such theoretical engagement , and in this paper , we introduce and adapt several of its key tenets for the HCI community : the ordinariness of racism ; the social construction of race ; interest convergence – the idea 1 We arrived at these numbers by inspection of websites and CVs ( a methodology we do not advocate for determining race in gen - eral ) . Self - identiﬁed racial tallies may differ , but are very unlikely to invalidate the larger point being made . CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 265 Page 1 that those in power support progressive goals only when it serves their selﬁsh interests , as well ; the intersectionality of identity ; a critique of liberalism ; the uniqueness of voices of color ; and methodologically , storytelling as a means to explore oppression . Some of these ideas will be familiar to readers , but critical race theory imbues them with an urgency and signiﬁcance that go beyond common understanding . We contribute the following HCI - focused adaptations : racism is pervasive and ordinary in our society’s digital platforms and the larger socio - technical systems in which they are embedded ; interest convergence is at work even in the HCI community ; storytelling is an effective means of elevating stiﬂed racial voices in HCI ; and , the technology sector’s color - blind ten - dencies – based on both liberalism and market capitalism – reinforce racist disparities . To demonstrate critical race the - ory’s key method of storytelling , we include our own personal stories from HCI and academic contexts , and use them as a basis for adapting critical race theory to HCI . Our contribu - tions have implications for both HCI research and for the HCI community itself . While a number of previous HCI papers mention “critical race theory” or interact substantially with race , this paper offers the ﬁrst in - depth engagement with the theory in an HCI context . For the authors , these issues are inextricably personal , and we incorporate reﬂexivity on our own positions as HCI re - searchers . We come from different positions of privilege and marginalization . Collectively , we are U . S . - based researchers at R1 universities and all people of color ( including authors from African - American , Asian , mixed - race , and multicultural backgrounds ) . As our personal stories will reﬂect , we have had a range of experiences navigating issues related to race . For example , many of us have done research that directly im - pacts or focuses on racially marginalized populations , both in the U . S . and internationally . We also recognize that there are many intersections of race and marginalization that we do not experience . For example , we are all cisgender individuals . Our experiences cannot and do not represent everyone who shares a particular identity . We hope to speak to communities we do belong to , namely HCI researchers and practitioners . We acknowledge one limitation of this paper up front : we consider race primarily in the context of the United States , neglecting the vast issues of race and ethnicity in the rest of the world , as well as the role of race in U . S . foreign policy . In part , this is for lack of space – we can hardly do justice to the complex matters of race and HCI just in the United States in a single paper . Additionally , critical race theory has its roots in U . S . legal theory . However , we hope that this paper will nevertheless spark necessary conversations about race and ethnicity in HCI beyond U . S . contexts . The main contribution of this paper is theoretical , but as with critical race theory itself , it is also a call to action . We begin with deﬁnitions of race and racism and offer a brief overview of critical race theory . After reviewing relevant research , we offer personal stories that highlight problems and challenges with respect to race and HCI . We then adapt some of critical race theory’s main tenets for HCI . Finally , we offer actionable implications for HCI research and the HCI community itself . CRITICAL RACE THEORY : BACKGROUND Race and Racism in the United States Race - based disparities in the United States are ﬁrmly estab - lished ( ﬁgures from 2016 - 2018 data ) : Median incomes for Blacks , Hispanics , and Native Americans are about 65 % of White income [ 74 , 135 ] . The median Black and Latinx fam - ilies own 2 % and 4 % the median wealth of White families , respectively [ 27 ] . Rates of college degrees among adults 25 years and older are 54 % for Asians , 36 % for Whites , 22 . 5 % for Blacks , and 15 . 5 % for Hispanics [ 108 ] . Blacks are six times more likely to be in prison than Whites , Hispanics are three times more likely [ 21 , 57 ] . There is no end to such statistics . These inequities have historical roots embedded deeply in our legal and economic institutions . Slavery in America goes back to 1619 [ 122 ] , a century and a half before the country’s founding . The country’s constitution , ratiﬁed in 1788 , counted slaves as three - ﬁfths of a person and denied them a vote [ 28 ] , a situation that continued until the 14th Amendment , passed in 1868 . After slavery was abolished , legally enforced racism continued with oppressive Jim Crow laws [ 73 ] , voting laws [ 50 ] , and redlining [ 12 ] . By 1970 , equality was legally as - sured , but not protected or enforced in practice ( e . g . [ 29 ] ) . More recently , executive orders shifting immigration policies speciﬁcally target persons of color : travel bans for citizens of some majority - Muslim countries , non - renewal of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program , and attempts to end Temporary Protected Status for certain nationals [ 100 ] . Race is difﬁcult to deﬁne , and its deﬁnition remains contested [ 25 , 107 , 112 , 133 ] . Race is multi - dimensional and , at differ - ent times , may refer to : phenotype / physical features , observed classiﬁcations into distinct groups , individual notions of self - deﬁned identity , and racial ancestry [ 107 ] . For the purpose of this paper , we refer to race as a categorization that is socially constructed , but that involves material and concrete conse - quences [ 82 ] . In the contemporary U . S . context , common racial categories are Asian , Black or African American , His - panic or Latinx , Native American , Paciﬁc Islander , and White , but these categories are neither ﬁxed nor exhaustive . In any case , the theoretical contributions of this paper apply for a range of deﬁnitions of race , and to the extent that our aim is to reduce prejudice and inequality , progress depends less on a precise deﬁnition of race as on actions to end discrimination . Racism comprises attitudes , actions , and institutions which contribute to relative disadvantages for members of racial groups with comparatively less power . It ranges from overt acts such as hate speech and violence to systemic exclusions , prejudices , and biases to subtle , even unconscious acts , such as aversive racism and microaggressions [ 34 , 39 , 40 , 88 ] . Color - blind racism , for example , enables racism through claims of ignoring race : “I don’t see color , just people” [ 14 ] . Racism can be perpetrated by individuals , groups , and institutions , either intentionally or unintentionally [ 34 ] . Key Tenets of Critical Race Theory Responding to race - based material disparities that persisted in the United States even after 1960s Civil Rights legislation , legal scholars and activists in the 1970s developed critical race CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 265 Page 2 theory as a framework to challenge the deep - rooted philosoph - ical , legal , systemic , and practical causes of racism [ 34 , 41 ] . As the name implies , critical race theory has intellectual roots in critical theory , which examines the role of power , history , culture , and ideology on social phenomena , often with an eye to critiquing or correcting abuses of power [ 72 ] . But , criti - cal race theory’s laser - focus on matters of race has led it to develop its own language and concepts . While critical race theorists do not subscribe to a uniﬁed set of principles , several key tenets are prominent in their writings : • Racism is ordinary , not aberrational [ 34 , 117 ] . Those who rarely encounter racism themselves often think of racism as an occasional happening – that a minority of individuals are racist , and racist events are one - off occur - rences . But , racism is pervasive , ever - present , structural , and systemic . Those who experience it do so on a regular basis in a variety of forms with a range of severity . Racism is often embedded in institutions and practices . Those who propagate it often do so unknowingly and without conscious negative intent . To productively discuss racism , its hidden ubiquity must be exposed and acknowledged . • Race and racism are socially constructed [ 34 ] . Race does not represent biological or genetic truths . Instead , racial categories and societal behavior with respect to them are entirely human - made . ( This is not to say that physical characteristics have no genetic basis , but that the categories used to differentiate and divide groups of people are artiﬁ - cial . History shows that racial categories are ﬂuid [ 16 ] ) . • Identity is intersectional [ 30 ] . Each person represents a unique and even potentially conﬂicting set of overlapping identities . In order to discuss and dismantle racism , we must be anti - essentialist and incorporate an understanding that these intersecting identities create unique contexts . • Those with power rarely concede it without interest con - vergence [ 9 , 8 ] . Racism beneﬁts some groups , and those groups are reluctant to move against it . They will take or allow anti - racist actions most often when it also confers them beneﬁts . In the U . S . context , forward movement for civil rights has typically only occurred when it is materially in the interest of the White majority . • Liberalism itself can hinder anti - racist progress [ 34 ] . Liberalism’s very aspirations to color - blindness and equal - ity – while admirable – can impede its goals , as they pro - hibit race - conscious attempts to right historical wrongs . In addition , liberalism’s tendency to focus on high - minded ab - stractions can lead to neglect of discrimination in practice . • There is a uniqueness to the voice of color [ 33 ] , and sto - rytelling is a means for it to be heard [ 112 ] . Belonging to a racial minority or an oppressed racial group endows one with a unique perspective , especially with regard to race and racism . Counterstories can challenge and displace dominant narratives , which are broadly held , consciously or unconsciously . Since the 1970s , critical race theory has expanded into sub - ﬁelds such as LatCrit , queerCrit , AsianCrit , and Critical Race Feminism , as well as into other disciplines such as education , women’s studies , and public health . As a lens , critical race theory illuminates hidden forms of racism and their origins , offers supportive evidence , rhetoric , and community for vic - tims of racism [ 38 ] , and provides an intellectual foundation for anti - racist activism . RELATED WORK : RACE AND HCI There has been a recent surge of publications about race and digital technology . They highlight negative representations of racial minorities [ 3 , 89 ] , reveal racist applications of tech - nology [ 10 , 22 ] , celebrate the unique use of technology by speciﬁc racial groups [ 10 , 19 , 87 ] , and showcase ways to ﬁght racism [ 11 , 83 ] . Much of this work notes how ofﬂine racism is reﬂected and reinforced online [ 10 , 89 ] . But , much of this work remains high - level without engaging with HCI - speciﬁc issues ; little of it is by HCI authors or in HCI publications , despite our community’s 30 + - year history [ 111 ] and 14 , 000 + research articles just at CHI [ 109 ] . A Google Scholar search with search terms “racial * AND ( discrimination OR bias OR prejudice ) ” ﬁnds 120 articles in CHI Proceedings , less than 1 % of the total . In a more rigorous 2016 search , Schlesinger et al . [ 109 ] found 17 articles speciﬁcally addressing race ( as opposed to , say , merely breaking down research participants by race ) . No more than 9 CHI papers include the phrase “crit - ical race , ” and all such mentions are one - off , without much engagement with the associated theory . Most race - focused HCI papers were published after 2000 , with many of them appearing in the past few years . Given the paucity of race - focused papers in HCI , we focus our literature review on ( 1 ) research that directly engages with or focuses on speciﬁc com - munities of color , ( 2 ) research that engages with racial bias in technology , and ( 3 ) theoretical work that aligns in some way with critical race theory . Work With and About Communities of Color HCI researchers have investigated or designed for small com - munities of various kinds . Some of this work has engaged with communities of racial minorities , focusing on issues such as health or community engagement [ 29 , 48 , 58 , 66 , 84 , 85 , 116 ] . More often than not , this work engages only brieﬂy with race , but sometimes it focuses on what is unique or different about a race - based group . Grimes and colleagues , for example , have consistently articulated the importance of cultural relevance and within - community role models in information sources for low - income African American communities [ 58 , 59 ] . A frequent outcome of this category of research are reﬂective lessons on how to conduct research with such communities . For example , Stowell et al . [ 116 ] mention the importance of noting racial demographics and intersectional issues in work with participants . Le Dantec & Fox [ 78 ] discuss the steps necessary to conduct research with non - majority communities , from gaining access and building rapport , demonstrating com - mitments , and overcoming institutional and personal barriers to design research to allow participants to fundamentally guide the research and approach . They also note the importance of acknowledging the authority and power that extends to being a researcher , which may reduce the voice of the disempowered . Baumann et al . [ 7 ] and Harrington et al . [ 64 ] employ similar CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 265 Page 3 practices to illuminate underserved populations by using phys - ical space and settings to serve as a collaborative dialogue . Relying on Participatory Action Research and Community - Based Participatory Research focus the participant as political collaborator and catalyst for change [ 129 ] . Both contextualize their work by highlighting their results and subsequent tech - nologies that are tied to their participants’ cultural practices . Indeed , there are occasions when insufﬁciently thought - through work that seeks to illuminate communities of color can have unintended negative effects on broader conceptions of race [ 139 , 140 ] . For example , one study offers a com - parison of technology use between two communities , one of low - income African Americans and another of wealthy White Americans [ 140 ] . The paper highlights discrepancies in use and attributes them primarily to socioeconomic class , but the word “race” is prominent in the title , and some ﬁndings are attributed to race and other intersectional identities . Putting aside the question of whether such attributions are valid ( given the groups differed on multiple dimensions ) , the choice of the groups itself is questionable : The choice makes it difﬁcult to draw inferences other than those based on stereotyped correla - tions of race and income . Erete and others [ 48 , 47 ] incorporate race more sensitively , by using race as an element in selecting communities to work with , but with more nuanced attributions of community differences . Most of the work above , however , sees race as a characteristic of the researcher or the participant group that must be con - sidered in design . Rarely does it go further into the broader context of race and technology . Critical race theory builds on the reﬂective content of these papers , while also provid - ing a larger frame and historical context . It also argues that researchers have a responsibility to be aware and sensitive to issues of race when engaging with communities of color . Bias in Technology and Design Much of the critique of biased technology focuses on algorith - mic bias – systemic errors in computer systems that lead to unfair outcomes or judgements . Some algorithmic bias is ex - plicitly about the physical dimensions of race . Some systems do not recognize darker skin tones [ 23 , 54 , 93 ] . Autonomous cars have been found to mis - identify darker - skinned pedestri - ans 10 percent more often than lighter - skinned subjects [ 67 , 134 ] . Commercial facial recognition technology has been found to be more accurate for White faces than for Black faces [ 102 ] . These algorithmic errors have real - world consequences as the technology is increasingly used by law enforcement [ 75 , 77 ] . Other forms of algorithmic bias creep in through ﬂawed train - ing data that is itself biased , whether for historical reasons , ﬂawed human labeling , or otherwise [ 5 , 89 , 106 ] . Modern online ads are individually targeted , but often based on race - based correlations ; corporations often excuse such biases on the basis that the bias was in the data [ 118 ] . Relatedly , re - searchers have also examined the ways in which the design of technologies may amplify racial stereotypes ( e . g . , [ 47 ] ) . HCI researchers have begun to respond to these problems . Hankerson et al . offer a list of discriminatory technol - ogy and discuss the normality of technological racism [ 63 ] . Schlesinger et al . consider the challenges of eliminating hate speech in chat bots [ 110 ] . A few papers have examined how racial bias might be mitigated with technological interven - tions . For example , virtual reality has been used to explore how embodying avatars of a different gender or race impacts implicit bias [ 80 ] , and transfer of negative racial stereotypes has been studied in virtual game environments [ 94 ] . At a meta - level , Woodruff et al . examined how people from marginalized groups perceive algorithmic fairness and found that teaching about notions of bias in algorithms incited negative emotions and connections to contemporary concerns about racial justice [ 137 ] . Others argue that conventional design practice has not adequately accounted for race or for the effects of racism [ 18 , 51 ] . Treating race as a discrete variable in the design process often overlooks structural effects of race on design outcomes . Critiquing and examining racial bias in technology is an impor - tant ﬁrst step , but we have much further to go . Technological racism is not limited to face recognition and biased algorithms . Race should not be relegated to a niche topic in HCI . Allied Research A number of movements , frameworks , and theories in HCI have goals allied with critical race theory , in that they seek to address injustices faced by minority , vulnerable , or marginal - ized communities of various kinds . Among the most salient such efforts are those that have a common intellectual ancestor in critical theory – for example , feminist HCI and queer HCI . Feminist HCI examines the “de - sign and evaluation of interactive systems that are imbued with sensitivity to the central commitments of feminism – agency , fulﬁllment , identity and the self , equity , empowerment , diver - sity , and social justice” [ 6 ] . Queer HCI articulates the need to focus on the “structures and norms that underlay sexism” and acknowledges the diversity within the LGBTQIA community [ 113 ] . The theorizing behind these and related movements extends to larger issues of oppression and injustice , and their conclusions often apply to issues of race , as well . A related set of theories incorporates race as one of many dimensions of discrimination or inequality . Ekbia & Nardi , for example , discuss the systemic causes of inequality , and call for the HCI community to ask such questions as “Which social class beneﬁts from this technology , and might be there a way to work toward balancing beneﬁts for different social classes more equitably ? ” [ 45 ] . Kimberlé Crenshaw , one of the pioneers of critical race theory , coined the concept of inter - sectionality to refer to contexts in which those with multiple discriminated identities – e . g . , female and African - American – fall through the cracks of attempts to address injustices suf - fered by individual identity groups . The concept has since been broadened to consider the complexities of overlapping identities , and it has also been imported into HCI [ 103 , 109 ] . That work shows that research on race and ethnicity lags be - hind research on gender and socio - economic class within the HCI community . HCI also has a longer engagement with universalist frame - works , in which the goal is to design technological artifacts CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 265 Page 4 that work for everyone . Explicitly or implicitly , these frame - works suggest that any designs that disadvantage any particu - lar group are poorly conceived . Examples include Universal Design [ 114 ] and Value - Sensitive Design [ 53 ] . Like Enlight - enment liberalism , these theories tend toward color - blindness and share both its strengths and weaknesses : On the one hand , they argue for design to accommodate all groups ; on the other hand , they are largely mute on questions of how to counter - act accumulated biases that affect speciﬁc groups . Overall , theories that recommend strategies to address large popula - tions often fail to incorporate or interpret inequalities , history , privilege , and power and their impacts on people [ 35 ] . We are aligned with these theories in that we share a com - mitment to ending discrimination of all kinds . We are also wary of the potential for race concerns to be diluted under the increasingly overburdened umbrella of “diversity . ” Critical race theory offers a theoretical basis on which to anchor issues of race . As a group , we should be arguing to increase the pie of inclusion efforts , not simply creating ever - shrinking slices . PERSONAL STORIES In this section , we relate personal stories related to race and HCI , both as data that we synthesize in our later adaptation of race to HCI , and also as an illustration of storytelling as a potent methodological tool in critical race theory . Critical race theory sometimes ventures into ﬁction [ 9 ] , but all of the stories here are real . Effort has been made to provide concrete details wherever possible , but names and some circumstances have been obscured or omitted to provide the narrators or their subjects anonymity . We also switch to ﬁrst - person singular pronouns here , as they are individual stories told by one of the co - authors ; the ﬁrst - person also serves to emphasize the stories’ speciﬁcity and personal impact . Story 1 : Different Views on Filter Bubbles I attend a predominately White , private R1 university . In my second year as a Ph . D . student , I took a theory - based course about Human Computer Interaction , a chance to dive deeper into the discipline and community in which I was striving to become part . Despite the ﬂood of information on landmark papers , the conversation around ﬁlter bubbles surprised me most . Filter bubbles create states of intellectual isolation [ 46 ] that can occur from personalized searches resulting in the website algorithms predicting what users want to see based upon their location , click behavior , and search history [ 4 , 32 ] . The realities I face as an African - American woman went un - known to my White counterparts , simply because their Internet history ﬁltered it away . All the Black lives lost and criminal - ized – White readers are likely familiar with the stories of Trayvon Martin , Eric Garner , and Sandra Bland , but what about Sean Bell , John Crawford , and Tamir Rice ? What is an occasional news item for the majority is a continual stream of tragedy for others . Unless mass media highlighted these deaths , their presence and subsequent effects were minimized and felt by few . We discussed in class the need for ﬁlter bub - bles and how it made navigating the Internet convenient , a stance I could not get behind . It served as another example in which I felt silenced and that my presence did not matter . Story 2 : Editing Away Voices of Color I wrote a paper that focused on interviews with people of color and received comments from my reviewers to severely edit the direct quotations I included from my participants . I rely on large block quotations from participants so that in addition to reading my analysis , readers can hear stories directly from the voice of my participants . I was uncomfortable being asked to edit my quotations for “grammar” and “readability . ” Many of my participants used colloquial language . As a researcher developing rapport with my participants , the use of vernacular English signals a certain level of trust or at least comfort . To me , making the quotations “proper grammatically” is an ivory - tower , elitist , racist erasure of voices of color . As one reviewer urged , “I usually edit quotations and remove words to make them more easily readable . ” My reviewers asked me to force my participants to conform to elitist , White notions of proper language without their consent . In addition to the affront to my participants , this feedback encodes a subtle and concrete threat to my own career . Re - views occur behind closed doors through anonymous systems . The implication is loud and clear – conform to our standards . Clean and polish the language or face roadblocks in your ca - reer . Many of my friends and I are people of color who use informal , vernacular language and many of my colleagues speak English as a second language . Now I have to question and evaluate others in HCI to judge whether they will limit my opportunities or unfairly judge my ability if I do not consis - tently use the language of elite Whites . The feedback in these reviews signals backstage racism ( i . e . , racist opinions only expressed in seemingly safe or anonymous environments [ 99 ] ) in the academy , adding cumulative stress , anger , and paranoia to my daily experiences as an HCI researcher . Story 3 : Interpreting Voices of Color My ﬁrst research study in my doctoral program involved my current work with homeless youth . It was not until after the ﬁrst focus group my colleague and I co - facilitated that I had to reﬂect on the various roles I played . The two of us were , in some ways the same – highly - educated , cisgendered women . We had never experienced homelessness , or having to come to terms with being truly out on your own without any type of support . Where we did differ , however , was race – my co - facilitator is White whereas I am a Black woman . We experienced many and differing forms of privilege . For instance , when trying to simply build rapport with the youth , we discussed things to which they look forward . One of the participants mentioned how he simply looks forward to going to a full time university because he has exhausted by all the computer science credits at his local community college . But right now , he just does not have the money . I stood confused on how to respond . Having never had to worry about my edu - cation highlighted my own potential unawareness in engaging in research with someone from a vulnerable population . When my co - facilitator and I collected data separately in follow - up interviews , we found that our primarily Black par - ticipants tended to provide longer and more detailed answers when I led the interview . It’s hard to deﬁnitively pinpoint it CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 265 Page 5 to race ; however , it is worth noting that is the component that most obviously differentiated us . Finally , in data analysis the difference between my co - facilitaor and I became even more pronounced . In open coding and thematic discussion , my co - facilitator noted that some of the participants comments went completely over her head . It became clear that because of my cultural background and familiarity with the vernacular , I was able to recognize and interpret the participants’ more racially coded remarks into our ﬁndings . While I am satisﬁed with our work , I realized if I had not been present , many of their comments may have gone unnoticed . A marginalized population would have still remained voiceless through naive interpretation . Story 4 : Acknowledging Race in Research This story presents two perspectives : PhD advisee and advisor . The Student’s Story . My recent research focused on returning citizens ( individuals who were formerly incarcerated ) which requires an acknowledgment of race [ 91 ] . The majority of my participants were African American and not mentioning that leaves out important context both for these individuals and for the larger history of the judicial system that put them in prison . Racial minorities have been imprisoned at disproportionate rates in the United States since its inception [ 1 , 55 ] , whether it was to uphold slavery , or Jim Crow laws that placed many African Americans in prison , or laws inhibiting African Amer - icans’ ability to vote [ 97 , 127 ] . Additionally , my research took place in a majority African American city that has its own racialized history . At the same time , I was concerned that acknowledging race in an HCI research paper could just as easily amplify a racist stereotype amongst the HCI community that people of color are criminals . Colleagues told me that my readers – members of the HCI community – would be aware of this historical context . Nev - ertheless , I was disturbed that there was no space to unpack the implications of race in my work on returning citizens . I , myself , was also absorbing a lot of new information while conducting the research . I was disappointed that page limi - tations were hugely part of the reason I could not go deeply into race . Knowing how biases such as conﬁrmation bias and implicit bias operate , the lack of racial minority representation within HCI spaces heightened my concern that my work would unintentionally conﬁrm racist prejudices . The HCI community is a global community ﬁlled with indi - viduals who identify as researchers , practitioners , and more . In addition to this , our research should be approachable to the general population . I was forced to trust reader’s good will , as well as their general understanding of the racial dimension of the justice system in America , without much justiﬁcation . Why is it safe to assume that we are all highly attuned to the news and politics of all the countries where we perform HCI research ? Does the assumption of being educated mean indi - viduals cannot be ignorant , racist , or hold other prejudices ? The Advisor’s Story . When my advisee asked whether we should mention race as we engaged on the paper , I clearly recall recommending a “race - blind” approach . My reasoning at the time was ( 1 ) that it was much easier to write the paper that way for constraints of space , time , and literature review ; ( 2 ) that race was only tangentially relevant to the core theme of the paper ; and ( 3 ) that I expected the well - educated HCI audi - ence to be aware of the historical biases of Black incarceration in America . Thinking back on it , though , the real source of my reluctance was that I knew introducing race in the paper would require considerable time to frame well – and we did not have the time . Even without that effort , we were cutting it close to the deadline . My bigger priority was to ensure that my advisee – herself a person of color , for whom the best thing I could do was to support her growth as an academic – could submit a research paper . But , that is not an excuse . The trade - off was required only because we had not thought through the issues much earlier . Black people are overrepresented in American prisons , and that is the result of years of accumulated racism in the country [ 55 ] . Yet , none of that was ultimately indicated in our paper , even in a footnote . It was a missed opportunity to offer context and corrective narrative about race in a research paper whose topic was inextricably intertwined with it . Story 5 : Everyday Privilege A Black colleague and I used to collaborate closely on a project that required us to drive about an hour from our ofﬁces . My col - laborator and I took turns driving , and sometimes , she would remark on how fast I drove . I regularly went over the speed limit , but I generally stayed within 10 % of the posted speed – a margin I assumed everyone took advantage of . She repeated the remark over the course of the project , and it dawned on me that maybe , driving over the limit was a privilege that I – an Asian person – took for granted . The news in the United States is full of Black men being killed after routine trafﬁc stops [ 62 ] . One study ﬁnds that African - Americans are about twice as likely as Whites to die of police violence , while Asians are 50 % less likely [ 44 ] . Could it be that to be safe , some African Americans drive strictly within the speed limit to reduce the chances of a police pull - over ? If that was what my colleague was doing , she could be losing an extra 15 minutes per trip when she travels solo to the ﬁeld . That could add up to hours , days , even weeks of lost research productivity over time , which would cause a systematic race - based disparity among researchers . These thoughts caused me to realize in a newer , deeper way , just how insidious and hidden racism can be : How it cascades through tortuous chains of causality . How it pervades every little mundane aspect of life . And how even if there were no direct racism in HCI , per se , there would still be the negative impact of racism . Story 6 : Who Beneﬁts from Diversity & Inclusion ? In 2014 , Google published demographic data about its employ - ees for the ﬁrst time [ 69 ] . At the time , only 2 % of Google’s U . S . workforce was Black , and 3 % Hispanic , and the num - bers in leadership and in technical positions were even lower . Google’s then Senior VP of People Operations , admitted , “We’re not where we want to be when it comes to diversity” [ 69 ] . But , as poor as the numbers were , commentators still praised Google for their transparency [ 69 , 132 ] . But , other forces might have been at play . The increased visibility for data - intensive approaches to HR likely helped CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 265 Page 6 that executive to raise $ 40 million to start his own company [ 130 ] . He left Google in time to avoid several diversity - related scandals , among which were revelations in 2018 that racial diversity had seen very little change in four years : represen - tation of Blacks and Hispanics at Google U . S . had only risen by 0 . 5 % - 0 . 6 % since 2014 [ 90 ] . All of this to say that leaders who contribute to diversity efforts are often rewarded , even as they miss the inclusive targets they claim to seek . I have noticed similar phenomena in academia and even in my own career . My university recently made dramatic investments to improve diversity . Yet , its own analysis of faculty diversity ﬁnds that rates of minority representation have barely budged over the last decade . Several years ago in my department , faculty performance reviews added a section on individual contributions to diversity . Each year , I dutifully indicate a range of activities along these lines , though without measures of actual impact . I will likely continue along the expected pro - fessorial trajectory , even as racial injustices around me remain inadequately addressed . Even at CHI , recent leadership posi - tions of the various diversity and inclusion efforts have been majority White [ 20 , 42 ] , and racial minority representation at the conferences remains low . I believe most of the inclusion efforts above to be in earnest . But , the outcomes continue to be disappointing . As knowledge workers , we take pride in being an impact - focused meritocracy , but with respect to racial equity and inclusion , we regularly overlook our failures . The struggle continues . Story 7 : University Public Relations I volunteered as an organizer for a racial justice conference in my city . This was done on my personal time outside of the university structure . Before the conference , I was interviewed by a university press representative , and afterwards the inter - view was posted to the front page of the university website for two weeks . The article applauded the students involved for being active in the community . However , the university had provided no support for the time , money , or effort involved . While I’m pleased and ﬂattered that the university cared enough to interview my colleagues and me and to shed a light on this wonderful event , this is still a case where the positive PR this may have generated for the university at least in part contributed to the front page display . While the inter - viewer , photographer , and others involved on the ground ﬂoor may deeply care about racial justice , they are operating in a larger system that refuses to take accountability for its negative impact on people of color in the city where the conference is based . While supporters exist in my institution , there is a bottom line that is always going to be impacted by racial justice work and any progress made has to coordinate with or subvert that economic system . This is deeply frustrating . I do not engage in racial justice work in my personal time for recognition , but in this situation , the university structurally is reaping material beneﬁts from my participation , while it will do nothing obviously positive for my standing in the university . In fact , in my interview , I pointed a ﬁnger at my institution for claiming to bring jobs to the city but ignoring that those jobs created massive displacement of people of color through gentriﬁcation . That quotation was , of course , not included in the ﬁnal write - up . At best , this interaction takes advantage of my labor for positive PR . At worst , my visible labor and association with the university will actually help the university offset legitimate complaints from the community that they have done harm to our city and its historic citizens of color . Story 8 : Deﬁning “Interesting” Research As a new researcher , I often relied on the judgement of my advisor on the direction of my work . We brainstormed ideas together , with some ideas being seen as interesting and some not so much . One day , I was watching a YouTube video [ 76 ] on writing , and the speaker stressed the importance of learning your readers . He mentioned that research is a conversation moving through time among researchers . He remarked that the idea was horrifying because historically researchers predomi - nantly looked like him ( a White American man ) , and they get to say what knowledge is and is not . I paused for a moment and was devastated . In America , the lack of diversity in spaces of power has historically disadvantaged minorities . Kang et al . found that minority job applicants who had indicators of their race on the resume received fewer responses to their re - sumes as opposed to individuals who intentionally removed any indicator of their race [ 56 , 70 ] . I was reminded of the conversations I had with my advisor . How he would pick and choose which ideas were interesting . I wondered , who determined what good taste was in research if historically research was performed by White individuals ? I wondered if my research ideas would appeal to CHI reviewers , industry professionals , etc . Would I even get a job because I chose to pursue a research question that I personally was interested in pursuing , but was not mainstream ? I started to fear for my career trajectory . I was told research provides you the opportunity to research whatever you want , but I guess only if it appeases the reviewers who mostly do not share the same race and ethnicity as me , an African American woman . Story 9 : Routine Microaggressions Microaggressions , by their very nature , are something that we all have experienced frequently [ 117 ] . As an undergraduate in my ﬁrst group meeting with the HCI researchers at my in - stitution , before the faculty arrived a male postdoc in the lab interrogated me about my racial background . Asking , “where are you from ? No , where are you really from ? ” is a routine microaggression that Asian Americans encounter [ 117 ] . The postdoc began guessing , " Are you Vietnamese ? Huh , well with that name , you must be Vietnamese , but you look Fil - ipino . Oh , you’re Chinese ? And Japanese and German ? Well that’s weird . That doesn’t make sense . ” The pointed assess - ment of my physical features added a gendered component to the interaction , and I very much felt my status as a woman of color in that space . Without any understanding of the power hierarchy of academia , I did not feel comfortable calling out how inappropriate the conversation was . This ﬁrst microag - gression I experienced in an HCI context sticks out clearly in my mind over seven years later , because it set the expectation that this would be routine in my professional life in HCI . CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 265 Page 7 Critical Race Theory Tenets # Personal Stories Racism is Ordinary Race is Socially Constructed Identity is Intersectional Interest Convergence Limits of Liberalism Uniqueness to Voice S1 Different Views on Filter Bubbles x x x x S2 Editing Away Voices of Color x x x S3 Interpreting Voices of Color x x S4 Acknowledging Race in Research x S5 Everyday Privileges x S6 Who Beneﬁts from Diversity ? x x S7 University Public Relations x S8 Deﬁning Interest Research x x x x S9 Routine Microagressions x x Table 1 . Overview of personal stories as they relate to critical race theory tenets . ADAPTING CRITICAL RACE THEORY FOR HCI Next , we adapt core ideas from critical race theory , incorpo - rating points raised by our personal stories from the previous section . Throughout the following section , we reference the stories ( Table 1 ) and note how they informed our adaptations . Racism is Ordinary in Our Socio - Technical World The stories above are just a very small fraction of the events we have experienced that were tinged or suffused with racism , all in contexts of HCI and / or research : in courses ( S1 ) , in paper reviews ( S2 ) , in research methodology ( S3 , S4 ) , in advising relationships ( S4 , S6 , S8 ) , among our research participants ( S4 ) , with our colleagues ( S5 , S8 , S9 ) , in corporations ( S6 ) , in academia ( S6 , S7 , S8 , S9 ) , and in our lives as a whole . Just as critical race theory asserts , racism is an ordinary , everyday fact of life , and the contexts of neither HCI nor research are an exception . That this needs to be said at all , is itself one of racism’s most insidious tricks – that those who do not experi - ence racism can pretend that it is an aberration , an occasional brokenness in what is otherwise a functioning world . Once we start looking , however , racism is truly everywhere and ever - present in our digital society . Every online search , ev - ery social media post , every Amazon purchase , and every item of mass - market technology is affected by racism in some way because the groups with the most power over these goods and services are insufﬁciently inclusive : the leadership at big tech ﬁrms , tech ﬁrm employees , designers , researchers , policymak - ers , content creators , and tech users themselves . Occasionally , news of this racism breaks through into the mass media : In 2010 , some Nikon cameras would prompt photographers to check whether someone had blinked , if an Asian face appeared in the photo [ 105 ] . In 2016 , much was made of the Google image results for “three Black teens” ( arrest mugshots ) versus “three White teens” ( smiling kids ) [ 60 ] . More recently , the Plain View Project found thousands of violent , racist , public Facebook posts by Philadelphia police ofﬁcers [ 128 ] . Though such reports are not uncommon , the nature of the news cy - cle might suggest these events are rare happenings in what is otherwise a pluralistic , race - friendly digital world . But , that would be the exact interpretation that we – and critical race theory – reject . Google apologized , but excused their results , claiming its algorithms were only reﬂecting what was in the data or online [ 60 ] , and Facebook continues to wrestle with its hate - speech policies [ 61 ] . Most troubling , even these highly publicized problems have yet to be resolved : online search for “four Black teenagers” still returns mugshots as of this writing , and Facebook’s automated attempts to ban hate speech now censor discussions about racism by people of color [ 61 ] . Again , for those who do not bear the brunt of racism , these seem like minor , occasional problems . But , they are not . Peo - ple of color are grossly underrepresented in digital games , though they comprise a large proportion of the over - 210 - million - person U . S . player base [ 96 , 124 ] . This happens every day . The well - documented phenomenon of online trolling is something that racial minorities are intimately familiar with every time they dare to speak truth to power online [ 24 , 98 ] . This happens every day . In grade schools everywhere , stu - dents are regularly assigned homework to put together slides about , say , an upcoming holiday . While White students ﬁnd themselves readily reﬂected in online searches , children of color must make do with White images or think to insert their own identities in the keywords , further reinforcing any self - consciousness with respect to race . This happens every day . Thus , critical race theory’s claim of racism’s ordinariness in society , translates directly to HCI , both within our community , but also with respect to the broader socio - technical universe that is the subject of all HCI . Extrapolating Winner’s propo - sition that artifacts carry politics [ 136 ] , it seems abundantly clear that in a world where racism is ordinary , racism in its technologies is also ordinary . Storytelling and Voices of Color in HCI Methodologically speaking , HCI already understands the value of storytelling . It is respected in qualitative research , crit - ical design ( e . g . , [ 13 ] ) , and a range of participatory methods ( e . g . , [ 26 ] ) . Some work with vulnerable populations – children , adults with mental health problems , indigenous populations , and survivors of domestic violence – explicitly highlights sto - rytelling methodology [ 86 , 119 ] . Even ﬁctional stories are accepted in speculative design and design ﬁction [ 120 ] . But , echoing some criticisms of speculative design [ 43 ] HCI could go much further to ensure that these methodologies are applied in race - conscious ways and to better understand race . The HCI community could also acknowledge the challenges in sharing and amplifying voices of color : in how words are edited and polished ( S2 ) , in how research agendas are selected ( S8 ) , and in how race and racism are given space for acknowl - CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 265 Page 8 edgement and historical context ( S4 ) . Furthermore , there is an emotional , mental , and even physical toll in performing sensi - tive work with marginalized groups ( e . g . , [ 115 ] ) . Both cogni - tive and emotional effort is required when researchers navigate racial identity with respect to relationships with participants ( S3 ) as well as explicit or ambient threats to professional ad - vancement ( S1 , S2 , S4 , S5 , S8 , S9 ) . Even in presenting our personal stories in this paper , we felt we were stretching the bounds of mainstream HCI research methodology , yet could think of no other way to convey our collective experience . Bringing out voices of color has a range of beneﬁts to HCI . For a community that values “understanding people” and user - centeredness , underrepresented voices of color offer unique insight into the world that others may not see . Diversity of per - spective can also lead to more creative designs [ 68 ] . Through stories , people experiencing similar isolation can see that they are not alone ( S1 , S9 ) , while others can reﬂect on the impact of how they engage , or fail to engage , with race ( S5 ) . At the same time , any stories of race must be carefully thought through and conscious of its potential impact . As described in S4 and in Related Work , framing of stories disclosed by participants is very much in the hands of researchers , and careless efforts risk exacerbating racist stereotypes . Work with communities of color – while desirable – is particularly fraught , as there is a tendency to assume deﬁcit narratives , in which communities of color are cast as lacking something that can be supplied with technology - based interventions [ 112 ] . Interest Convergence & Material Reality in HCI Pal [ 95 ] suggests that HCI efforts on behalf of others beneﬁt the practitioner more than the intended beneﬁciaries , and a similar dynamic is at play with diversity and inclusion ( D & I ) in the HCI community ( S6 ) , academia ( S6 , S7 ) , and the tech sector ( S6 ) . We saw that realities of research success via publi - cation tend to take priority over the time , resources , and space desired to engage meaningfully with race ( S2 , S4 , S8 ) . And , tangible beneﬁts of status , visibility , professional advance - ment , and even investment ( S6 , S7 ) accrue to those seen to support D & I . On the one hand , this is a sign of our commu - nity’s anti - racist aspiration ; on the other hand , it rarely goes beyond aspiration . The actual outcomes – gains in the propor - tion of minority groups represented among HCI leadership , researchers , students , paper authors , research participants , or paper topics – are negligible , and this despite the fact that as a scholarly community , we are in control of much of the “pipeline” that is often blamed for racial homogeneity in the tech sector : we select and mentor our students , hire and pro - mote our researchers , and recruit and choose our participants . Individual career advancement for majority D & I proponents in the absence of progress on material metrics of racial disparity suggests that interest convergence is very much in play . The Limits of Tech Liberalism Critical race theorists have softened their criticism of liber - alism in recent years , as their arguments for race - conscious policies have been appropriated by White supremacists fearing a future in which they are the minority [ 34 ] . Our analysis of HCI and technology contexts , however , suggests that critical race theory’s original instincts about liberalism were on the mark , and that academic , technocratic , and capitalist aversion to race - conscious work inhibits the ﬁght against racism . S1 showed how an argument for the efﬁciency of ﬁlter bubbles prevailed as commonsense over other social or political values . S2 suggests that some paper reviewers prefer to edit away minority voices in favor of dominant linguistic norms , perhaps as a way to accede to majoritarian standards . S4 highlights resistance to addressing race in research , in favor of color - blind analysis . These cases have in their background , an ideal of a color - blind future or a technocratic marketplace , in which race truly plays no role and racial disparities no longer exist . Here in the real world , however , racial disparities remain severe . Critical race theorists such as Cedric Robinson have proposed that modern capitalism , far from being the race - neutral tech - nocracy it claims to be , is itself founded on racism , citing widespread racial associations with socio - economic class dur - ing European industrialization [ 104 ] . More recent arguments suggest that capitalism’s inherent tendencies toward exploita - tion prey on racial minorities , and further that capitalism’s exacerbation of inequality [ 101 ] fuels racial antagonism [ 52 ] . Today’s technology industry seems to supercharge such cri - tiques . It actualizes the economic concentration of wealth through technological infrastructures that exploit private data [ 123 ] , harvest human attention [ 138 ] , and squeeze workers and consumers , all while supposedly color - blind algorithms propagate , reinforce , automate , and amplify past and present racial inequalities [ 49 , 125 ] . Here , we align with others in HCI who question the value of incremental improvements to technology , however “human - centered” they may be , as long as we remain in thrall of a larger exploitative system [ 45 , 71 ] . CALL TO ACTION Critical race theory adapted to HCI as above suggests a range of explicit anti - racist actions for our community . Below , we propose actions that are relatively unremarked upon by other HCI work drawing on critical theory . We offer these as high - level ideas ; most require additional thinking through and col - lective deliberation before implementation . For HCI Research and Practice True recognition of the pervasiveness of racism in our digi - tal systems would open our eyes to whole new universes of unexplored research questions : What alternatives are there to race - neutral search responses , and which ones successfully navigate the nuanced complexities of race ? How can visu - alizations of race - based data incorporate context that would mitigate stereotyped conclusions ? What are creative ways to confound or enlighten racist trolls ? Which of HCI’s estab - lished truths are actually only true of rich , White , developed - world undergraduates ? Then , thinking beyond the research topic , outcomes should be interpreted with theoretical lenses sensitive to race . When is it helpful to call out race - based differences ? Did stereotype threat affect results ? How did the strengths of communities of colors enrich design implications ? Anytime a research team is studying or working with a marginalized group , they must acknowledge an additional CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 265 Page 9 burden of representation . This is true not only for research in - volving racial minority group members , but for other forms of identity such as neurodiversity , sexuality , ability , etc . Among strategies for thoughtful representation is ensuring that at least some members of the research team represent those research subjects . Several of the papers we reviewed in this paper cite racism and social justice as key motivating elements of their work , but were surprisingly written by all - White authors ( per - haps in a case of interest convergence ? ) . We do not question their sincerity , their intellectual contributions , or the desir - ability of their engagement , but these papers still missed an opportunity to highlight voices of color in a relevant context . Next , when designing research or writing it up , researchers should strive to be other - conscious . Reﬂexivity – being self - aware and conscious of one’s own station and biases as they might affect research and writing – is something that most HCI researchers acknowledge as important [ 15 , 109 ] . Its important converse is being other - conscious , especially as it has to do with race : to think through one’s own research and writing as it might be received by groups that are not one’s own . For example , when writing papers , authors often imagine what se - nior members of the community might critique in a review and revise accordingly . We do this ourselves , and we notice those imaginary reviewers tend to be from the racial majority for historical reasons . But , what if we also imagined how racial minorities would review our research ? It would undoubtedly change the care with which we choose projects , recruit par - ticipants , describe communities , offer context , and discuss implications . Being other - conscious causes majority readers to be exposed to race - sensitive work and expression , while also being inclusive of non - majority consumers of research . One desired outcome of other - consciousness is improved racial representation in our research participants . U . S . univer - sities continue to have student bodies that are skewed racially [ 2 ] , but researchers have long acknowledged this [ 65 ] . There are few excuses for poorly proportioned participant pools that result in conclusions that leave out minority data . In qualitative work , convenience sampling should be looked upon critically to ensure studies incorporate minority voices . Where data sets are lacking in appropriate diversity , authors should explicitly acknowledge the deﬁciency [ 37 , 45 ] . Paper review processes also deserve consideration . One ad - ditional rubric for paper reviews ought to be the degree to which papers considered the potential racial impact of their work . Should a paper’s innovations be taken up , would it serve to alleviate racial disparities , or merely contribute to some corporate bottom line ? And if a paper is explicitly about race , does it sufﬁciently bring in a relevant voice of color ? Such things could be caught during paper review , were reviews not strictly color - blind . One possibility is to incorporate into the review process a means for reviewers to be informed of author background when relevant ( while maintaining anonymity ) . For the HCI Community at Large The foremost question of race for HCI is , are we serious about making our own community more inclusive ? If so , more researchers , particularly senior researchers , must commit to identifying , recruiting , and taking on underrepresented minor - ity students , interns , and junior researchers . Lack of diversity is often blamed on dry “pipelines” [ 121 ] , but ours is a pipeline whose valve the community itself controls . To hold ourselves accountable , SIGCHI should conduct periodic studies to track leadership make - up , community membership , paper author - ship , conference attendance , and such by race and other group categories . Progress , or its absence , must be made visible . Next , issues of race and racism must be raised more frequently in the community in a way that is heard by all participants . The Diversity & Inclusion Lunch is good start , but its cost should be subsidized to reduce attendance barriers and to demonstrate larger community commitment . We recognize that barriers are not solely tied to attendance , and we challenge the D & I effort to reﬂect on the makeup of their committee members , award recipients , and intended community . Relevant panels , workshops , and town hall discussions are also in order . Efforts to improve accessibility for underrepresented students , such as CHIMe – Mentoring in Human Computer Interactions – should be subsidized and turned into annual events [ 17 ] . As we become concerned with new dimensions of diversity and inclusion , we cannot dilute efforts to address race . All too often , panels and committees pass as “diverse” because they contain non - males . Race is overlooked as a category of diver - sity . For example , the SIGCHI Inclusion Innovators Open Call for 2018 called out gender , sexual orientation , professional discipline , economic advantage , and disability , but made no explicit mention of race or ethnicity , adding an ironic insult to injury . We welcome attempts to address other dimensions of discrimination , but such efforts need to add to the pie of resources , not carve away resources from race . Overall , as a community we can make it clear through public statements and actions that race and racism impact all areas of HCI and talking about this will beneﬁt everyone . SIGCHI is a sufﬁciently large , well - respected organization that should be more vocal about problems externally , much as the Ameri - can Medical Association is vocal about bad medical practice . We should establish committees that think through issues of race and technology and engage policymakers and technology companies through position papers , meetings , and so on . Finally , we hope allies will respond to all of the calls of action above in a spirit of genuine anti - racist progress . Tokenism only conﬁrms claims of interest convergence . CONCLUSION We are aware of and grateful for the overall socially progres - sive tendency of academic researchers and of the HCI com - munity speciﬁcally , and we thank allies from all backgrounds who seek to make CHI an inclusive community . Nevertheless , those of us who are not intentionally racist are still complicit in a larger racist system . Those who do not suffer from racism still beneﬁt from its absence . Our paper is not meant to accuse , as much to encourage every one of us ( ourselves included ) to re - engage , ever more vigorously , in the struggle against racism within ourselves , our communities , and in the socio - technical world . CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 265 Page 10 REFERENCES [ 1 ] Michelle Alexander . 2017 . The New Jim Crow . New Press . [ 2 ] Jeremy Ashkenas , Haeyoun Park , and Adam Pearce . 2017 . Even With Afﬁrmative Action , Blacks and Hispanics Are More Underrepresented at Top Colleges Than 35 Years Ago . ( 2017 ) . https : / / www . nytimes . com / interactive / 2017 / 08 / 24 / us / affirmative - action . html [ 3 ] Neda Atanasoski and Kalindi Vora . 2019 . Surrogate humanity : Race , robots , and the politics of technological futures . Duke University Press . [ 4 ] Drake Baer . 2016 . How Facebook and the ‘Filter Bubble’ Pushed Trump to Victory . The Cut by New York Media ( 11 2016 ) . https : / / www . thecut . com / 2016 / 11 / how - facebook - and - the - filter - bubble - pushed - trump - to - victory . html [ 5 ] Natã M . Barbosa and Monchu Chen . 2019 . Rehumanized Crowdsourcing : A Labeling Framework Addressing Bias and Ethics in Machine Learning . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 543 . [ 6 ] Shaowen Bardzell . 2010 . Feminist HCI . In Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’10 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 1301 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753521 [ 7 ] Karl Baumann , Ben Caldwell , Fracois Bar , and Benjamin Stokes . 2018 . Participatory Design Fiction : Community Storytelling for Speculative Urban Technologies . CHI 18 extended abstracts ( 2018 ) , 2018 . [ 8 ] Derrick Bell . 1980 . Brown v . Board of Education and the interest - convergence dilemma . Harvard Law Review ( 1980 ) , 518 – 533 . [ 9 ] Derrick Bell . 1992 . The Space Traders . https : / / web . archive . org / web / 20100404123611 / http : / / edweb . tusd . k12 . az . us / uhs / APUSH / 1stSem / ArticlesSemester1 / ArtilesSemester1 / Bell . htm [ 10 ] Ruha Benjamin ( Ed . ) . 2019 . Captivating Technology : Race , Carceral Technoscience , and Liberatory Imagination in Everyday Life . Duke University Press . [ 11 ] Ruha Benjamin . 2019 . Race after technology : Abolitionist tools for the new Jim code . John Wiley Sons . [ 12 ] Nicolas Boccard . 1999 . Racial Discrimination and Redlining in Cities Yves Zenou CERAS , Ecole Nationale des Ponts et Chaussees GAINS , Universite du Maine . Technical Report . [ 13 ] Kirsten Boehner , Janet Vertesi , Phoebe Sengers , and Paul Dourish . 2007 . How HCI Interprets the Probes . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’07 ) . ACM . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240789 [ 14 ] Eduardo Bonilla - Silva . 2006 . Racism without racists : Color - blind racism and the persistence of racial inequality in the United States . Rowman & Littleﬁeld Publishers . [ 15 ] Alan Borning and Michael Muller . 2012 . Next steps for value sensitive design . In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’12 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 1125 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208560 [ 16 ] Geoffrey C Bowker and Susan Leigh Star . 2000 . Sorting Things Out : Classiﬁcation and Its Consequences . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 17 ] Robin Brewer , Ronald Metoyer , Marvin Andujar , Manuel Pérez - Quiñones , Sheena Erete , and Yolanda Rankin . 2018 . CHIMe . ( 2018 ) . https : / / chime2018 . wordpress . com / [ 18 ] André Brock . 2012 . From the blackhand side : Twitter as a cultural conversation . Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 56 , 4 ( 2012 ) , 529 – 549 . [ 19 ] André Brock . 2020 . Distributed Blackness : African American Cybercultures . NYU Press . [ 20 ] Anke Brock , Daniela Busse , Dalila Szostak , and Gopinaath Kannabiran . 2016 . The Diversity and Inclusion Lunch . ( 2016 ) . https : / / sigchi . tumblr . com / post / 138016200160 / diversitylunch [ 21 ] Jennifer Bronson and E . Ann Carson . 2019 . Prisoners in 2017 . BJS Bulletin ( 2019 ) . https : / / www . bjs . gov / content / pub / pdf / p17 . pdf [ 22 ] Simone Browne ( Ed . ) . 2015 . Dark Matters : On the Surveillance of Blackness . Duke University Press . [ 23 ] Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru . 2018 . Gender Shades : Intersectional Accuracy Disparities in Commercial Gender Classiﬁcation . In Proceedings of the 1st Conference on Fairness , Accountability and Transparency ( Proceedings of Machine Learning Research ) , Sorelle A Friedler and Christo Wilson ( Eds . ) , Vol . 81 . PMLR , New York , NY , USA , 77 – 91 . http : / / proceedings . mlr . press / v81 / buolamwini18a . html [ 24 ] Danielle Keats Citron . 2014 . Hate crimes in cyberspace . Harvard University Press . [ 25 ] Matthew Clair and Jeffrey S . Denis . 2015 . Sociology of Racism . In International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences : Second Edition . Elsevier Inc . , 857 – 863 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 08 - 097086 - 8 . 32122 - 5 [ 26 ] Rachel Clarke , Peter Wright , and John McCarthy . 2012 . Sharing narrative and experience : digital stories and portraits at a women’s centre . In CHI’12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1505 – 1510 . [ 27 ] Chuck Collins , Dedrick Asante - Muhammad , Josh Hoxie , and Sabrina Terry . 2019 . Dreams Deferred : How Enriching the 1 % Widens the Racial Wealth Divide . ( 2019 ) . https : / / ips - dc . org / wp - content / uploads / 2019 / 01 / IPS _ RWD - Report _ FINAL - 1 . 15 . 19 . pdf CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 265 Page 11 [ 28 ] Constitutional Rights Foundation . 2019 . The Constitution and Slavery . ( 2019 ) . https : / / www . crf - usa . org / black - history - month / the - constitution - and - slavery [ 29 ] Eric Corbett and Yanni Loukissas . 2019 . Engaging Gentriﬁcation as a Social Justice Issue in HCI . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . ACM . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300510 [ 30 ] Kimberle Crenshaw . 1990 . Mapping the margins : Intersectionality , identity politics , and violence against women of color . Stan . L . Rev . 43 ( 1990 ) , 1241 . [ 31 ] Dave Davies and Craig Silverman . 2016 . Fake news expert on how false stories spread and why people believe them . ( 2016 ) . https : / / www . npr . org / 2016 / 12 / 14 / 505547295 / fake - news - expert - on - how - false - stories - spread - and - why - people - believe - them [ 32 ] Kevin J . Delaney . 2017 . Bill Gates says ﬁlter bubbles are a serious problem with news . Quartz ( 2 2017 ) . https : / / qz . com / 913114 / bill - gates - says - filter - bubbles - are - a - serious - problem - with - news / [ 33 ] Richard Delgado . 1989 . Storytelling for oppositionists and others : A plea for narrative . Michigan Law Review 87 , 8 ( 1989 ) , 2411 – 2441 . [ 34 ] Richard Delgado and Jean Stefancic . 2017 . Critical Race Theory : An Introduction . NYU Press , New York . [ 35 ] Nicola Dell , Vidya Vaidyanathan , Indrani Medhi , Edward Cutrell , and William Thies . 2012 . " Yours is better ! " : participant response bias in HCI . In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’12 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 1321 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208589 [ 36 ] Department of Justice . 2019 . Hate crimes case examples . ( 2019 ) . https : / / www . justice . gov / hatecrimes / hate - crimes - case - examples [ 37 ] Tawanna R . Dillahunt . 2014 . Fostering social capital in economically distressed communities . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 531 – 540 . [ 38 ] Adrienne D . Dixson and Celia K . Rousseau . 2005 . And we are still not saved : Critical race theory in education ten years later . Race Ethnicity and Education 8 , 1 ( 3 2005 ) , 7 – 27 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1361332052000340971 [ 39 ] John F . Dovidio , Samuel E . Gaertner , Kerry Kawakami , and Gordon Hodson . 2002a . Why can’t we just get along ? Interpersonal biases and interracial distrust . Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology 8 , 2 ( 2002 ) , 88 . [ 40 ] John F . Dovidio and Samuel L . Gaertner . 2004 . Aversive racism . Advances in experimental social psychology 36 ( 2004 ) , 4 – 56 . [ 41 ] John F . Dovidio , Kerry Kawakami , and Samuel L . Gaertner . 2002b . Implicit and explicit prejudice and interracial interaction . Journal of personality and social psychology 82 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 62 . [ 42 ] Allison Druin . 2018 . The possibilities of inclusion for SIGCHI . ( 2018 ) . https : / / sigchi . org / 2018 / 10 / the - possibilities - of - inclusion - for - sigchi / [ 43 ] Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby . 2013 . Speculative everything : design , ﬁction , and social dreaming . MIT press . [ 44 ] Frank Edwards , Hedwig Lee , and Michael Esposito . 2019 . Risk of being killed by police use of force in the United States by age , race { \ textendash } ethnicity , and sex . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116 , 34 ( 2019 ) , 16793 – 16798 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1821204116 [ 45 ] Hamid Ekbia and Bonnie Nardi . 2016 . Social Inequality and HCI : The View from Political Economy . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858343 [ 46 ] Mostafa M . El - Bermawy . 2016 . Your Echo Chamber is Destroying Democracy . Wired ( 11 2016 ) . https : / / www . wired . com / 2016 / 11 / filter - bubble - destroying - democracy / [ 47 ] Sheena L . Erete . 2015 . Engaging around neighborhood issues : How online communication affects ofﬂine behavior . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . ACM , 1590 – 1601 . [ 48 ] Sheena L . Erete and Jennifer O . Burrell . 2017 . Empowered participation : How citizens use technology in local governance . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2307 – 2319 . [ 49 ] Virginia Eubanks . 2018 . Automating Inequality : How High - Tech Tools Proﬁle , Police , and Punish the Poor . St . Martin’s Press . [ 50 ] John E . Filer , Lawrence W . Kenny , and Rebecca B . Morton . 1991 . Voting Laws , Educational Policies , and Minority Turnout . Technical Report 2 . 371 – 393 pages . [ 51 ] Sarah Fox , Jill Dimond , Lilly Irani , Tad Hirsch , Michael Muller , and Shaowen Bardzell . 2017 . Social justice and design : Power and oppression in collaborative systems . In CSCW 2017 - Companion of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . Association for Computing Machinery , Inc , 117 – 122 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3022198 . 3022201 [ 52 ] Nancy Fraser . 1990 . Rethinking the Public Sphere : A Contribution to the Critique of Actually Existing Democracy . Social Text 35 , 25 / 26 ( 1990 ) , 56 – 80 . https : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 466240 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 265 Page 12 [ 53 ] Batya Friedman and David G . Hendry . 2019 . Value Sensitive Design : Shaping Technology with Moral Imagination . MIT Press . [ 54 ] Feliks Garcia . 2015 . 8 times technology proved to be racist . Complex ( 11 2015 ) . https : / / www . complex . com / life / 2015 / 11 / racist - technology / [ 55 ] Arthur H . Garrison . 2011 . Disproportionate incarceration of African Americans : What history and the ﬁrst decade of twenty - ﬁrst century have brought . J . Institute of Justice & International Studies 11 ( 2011 ) , 87 – 116 . https : / / heinonline . org / HOL / Page ? handle = hein . journals / jijis11 & id = 99 [ 56 ] Dina Gerdeman . 2017 . Minorities Who ’Whiten’ Job Resumes Get More Interviews . Harvard Business Review Working Knowledge ( 5 2017 ) . https : / / hbswk . hbs . edu / item / minorities - who - whiten - job - resumes - get - more - interviews [ 57 ] John Gramlich . 2019 . The gap between the number of blacks and whites in prison is shrinking . ( 2019 ) . https : / / www . pewresearch . org / fact - tank / 2019 / 04 / 30 / shrinking - gap - between - number - of - blacks - and - whites - in - prison / [ 58 ] Andrea Grimes , Martin Bednar , Jay David Bolter , and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2008 . EatWell . ( 2008 ) , 87 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1460563 . 1460579 [ 59 ] Andrea Grimes and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2007 . Designing persuasion : health technology for low - income African American communities , Cees Midden Berry Eggen Yvonne De Kort , Wijnand Ijsselsteijn and B . J . Fogg ( Eds . ) . Springer - Verlag , 24 – 35 . [ 60 ] Ben Guarino . 2016 . Google faulted for racial bias in image search results for black teenagers . Washington Post ( 6 2016 ) . https : / / www . washingtonpost . com / news / morning - mix / wp / 2016 / 06 / 10 / google - faulted - for - racial - bias - in - image - search - results - for - black - teenagers / [ 61 ] Jessica Guynn . 2019 . Facebook while black : Users call it getting ‘Zucked , ’ say talking about racism is censored as hate speech . USA Today ( 2019 ) . https : / / www . usatoday . com / story / news / 2019 / 04 / 24 / facebook - while - black - zucked - users - say - they - get - blocked - racism - discussion / 2859593002 / [ 62 ] Josh Hafner . 2018 . Police killings of black men in the U . S . and what happened to the ofﬁcers . USA Today ( 2018 ) . https : / / www . usatoday . com / story / news / nation - now / 2018 / 03 / 29 / police - killings - black - men - us - and - what - happened - officers / 469467002 / [ 63 ] David Hankerson , Andrea R . Marshall , Jennifer Booker , Houda El Mimouni , Imani Walker , and Jennifer A . Rode . 2016 . Does technology have race ? . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 473 – 486 . [ 64 ] Christina N . Harrington , Katya Borgos - Rodriguez , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Engaging Low - Income African American Older Adults in Health Discussions through Community - based Design Workshops . ( 2019 ) , 1 – 15 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300823 [ 65 ] Joseph Henrich , Steven J . Heine , and Ara Norenzayan . 2010 . The weirdest people in the world ? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33 , 2 - 3 ( 2010 ) , 61 – 83 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0140525X0999152X [ 66 ] Donovan Hill , Jasmine Blunt , Terrence Pugh , Monika Monk , Ji - Sun Kim , Woodrow W Winchester , D . Scott McCrickard , Paul Estabrooks , and Felicia Doswell . 2011 . Mobile technologies for promoting health and wellness among African American youth . In International Conference on Universal Access in Human - Computer Interaction . Springer , 36 – 45 . [ 67 ] Kartik Hosanagar . A human’s guide to machine intelligence : how algorithms are shaping our lives and how we can stay in control . 262 pages . [ 68 ] Woodrow W . Winchester III . 2018 . Afrofuturism , inclusion , and the design imagination . Interactions 25 , 2 ( 2018 ) . [ 69 ] Murray Jacobson . 2014 . Google ﬁnally discloses its diversity record , and it’s not good . PBS News Hour ( 2014 ) . https : / / www . pbs . org / newshour / nation / google - discloses - workforce - diversity - data - good [ 70 ] Sonia K . Kang , Katherine A . DeCelles , Andras Tilcsik , and Sora Jun . 2016 . Whitened Resumes : Race and Self - Presentation in the Labor Market . Administrative Science Quarterly 61 , 3 ( 2016 ) , 469 – 502 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0001839216639577 [ 71 ] Os Keyes , Josephine Hoy , and Margaret Drouhard . 2019 . Human - Computer Insurrection . Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’19 ( 2019 ) , 1 – 13 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300569 [ 72 ] Joe L . Kincheloe and Peter McLaren . 2011 . Rethinking Critical Theory and Qualitative Research . Key Works in Critical Pedagogy 32 ( 2011 ) , 285 – 326 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 9789460913976 _ 024 [ 73 ] Ryan Scott King . 2006 . Jim crow is alive and well in the 21st century : Felony disenfranchisement and the continuing struggle to silence the african - american voice . Souls 8 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 7 – 21 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10999940600680507 [ 74 ] Rakesh Kochhar and Anthony Cilluffo . 2018 . Income Inequality in the U . S . Is Rising Most Rapidly Among Asians . ( 7 2018 ) . https : / / www . pewsocialtrends . org / wp - content / uploads / sites / 3 / 2018 / 07 / Pew _ Research _ Center _ Inequality - Report _ FINAL . pdf [ 75 ] David Kravets . 2017 . Driver’s license facial recognition tech leads to 4 , 000 New York arrests . Ars Technica ( 8 2017 ) . https : / / arstechnica . com / tech - policy / 2017 / 08 / biometrics - leads - to - thousands - of - a - ny - arrests - for - fraud - identity - theft / CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 265 Page 13 [ 76 ] Leadership Lab . 2014 . LEADERSHIP LAB : The Craft of Writing Effectively - YouTube . ( 2014 ) . https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = vtIzMaLkCaM & list = WL & index = 6 & t = 1755s [ 77 ] Cyndy Lane . 2018 . Facial Recognition Is Now A Part Of The Driver’s License Renewal Process . Here’s What That Means . CapeCodToday . com ( 5 2018 ) . http : / / www . capecodtoday . com / article / 2018 / 05 / 03 / 239221 - Facial - Recognition - Now - Part - DriverâĂŹs - License - Renewal - Process - Heres - What [ 78 ] Christopher A . Le Dantec and Sarah Fox . 2015 . Strangers at the Gate . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing - CSCW ’15 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 1348 – 1358 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675147 [ 79 ] Steve Lohr , Mike Isaac , and Nathaniel Popper . 2019 . Tech hearings : Congress unites to take aim at Amazon , Apple , Facebook and Google . New York Times ( 7 2019 ) . https : / / www . nytimes . com / 2019 / 07 / 16 / technology / big - tech - antitrust - hearing . html [ 80 ] Sarah Lopez , Yi Yang , Kevin Beltran , Soo Jung Kim , Jennifer Cruz Hernandez , Chelsy Simran , Bingkun Yang , and Beste F . Yuksel . 2019 . Investigating Implicit Gender Bias and Embodiment of White Males in Virtual Reality with Full Body Visuomotor Synchrony . ( 2019 ) , 1 – 12 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300787 [ 81 ] Samantha Maldonado and The Associated Press . 2019 . At Amazon , Google , and more , Big Tech employees are speaking out about bad company behavior . Fortune ( 2019 ) . https : / / fortune . com / 2019 / 08 / 26 / at - amazon - google - and - more - big - tech - employees - are - speaking - out - about - bad - company - behavior / [ 82 ] Amade M’Charek . 2013 . Beyond fact or ﬁction : On the materiality of race in practice . Cultural Anthropology 28 , 3 ( 2013 ) , 420 – 442 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cuan . 12012 [ 83 ] Charlton D . McIlwain . 2019 . Black Software : The Internet Racial Justice , from the AfroNet to Black Lives Matter . Duke University Press . [ 84 ] Katherine McKittrick . 2016 . Demonic Grounds : Black Women And The Cartographies Of Struggle . University of Minnesota Press . [ 85 ] Fred Moten . 2017 . Black and Blur . Duke University Press . [ 86 ] Gillian Mulvale , Sandra Moll , Ashleigh Miatello , Glenn Robert , Michael Larkin , Victoria J . Palmer , Alicia Powell , Chelsea Gable , and Melissa Girling . 2019 . Codesigning health and other public services with vulnerable and disadvantaged populations : Insights from an international collaboration . ( 6 2019 ) . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / hex . 12864 [ 87 ] Alondra Nelson , Thuy Linh N . Tu , and Alicia Headlam Hines ( Eds . ) . 2001 . Technicolor : Race , Technology , and Everyday Life . New York University Press . [ 88 ] Jack L . Nelson and Valerie Ooka Pang . 2006 . Racism , prejudice , and the social studies curriculum . The social studies curriculum : Purposes , problems , and possibilities 3 ( 2006 ) , 115 – 135 . [ 89 ] Saﬁya Umoja Noble . 2019 . Algorithms of Oppression . NYU Press . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / j . ctt1pwt9w5 [ 90 ] Sara Ashley O’Brien . 2018 . Google has a hard time keeping its black employees . CNN ( 6 2018 ) . https : / / money . cnn . com / 2018 / 06 / 15 / technology / google - diversity - report / [ 91 ] Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya - Ogburu , Kentaro Toyama , and Tawanna R . Dillahunt . 2019 . Towards an effective digital literacy intervention to assist returning citizens with job search . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 2019 ) , 1 – 12 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300315 [ 92 ] Jasper Tran O’Leary , Sara Zewde , Jennifer Mankoff , and Daniela K . Rosner . 2019 . Who Gets to Future ? Race , Representation , and Design Methods in Africatown . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . ACM . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300791 [ 93 ] Kara O’Neill . 2015 . ‘Racist’ tap will only give out soap to people with white skin thanks to ’discriminative’ sensor . Mirror Online ( 9 2015 ) . https : / / www . mirror . co . uk / news / weird - news / racist - tap - only - give - out - 6375873 [ 94 ] Tyler Pace . 2008 . Can an Orc Catch a Cab in a Stormwind ? Cybertype Preference in the World of Warcraft Character Creation Interface . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts 2011 ( 2008 ) , 2493 – 2502 . [ 95 ] Joyojeet Pal . 2017 . CHI4Good or Good4CHI . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’17 ) . ACM . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 3027063 . 3052766 [ 96 ] Cale J . Passmore , Max V . Birk , and Regan L . Mandryk . 2018 . The Privilege of Immersion . ( 2018 ) , 1 – 19 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173957 [ 97 ] Joan Petersilia . 2001 . Prisoner Reentry : Public Safety and Reintegration Challenges . The Prison Journal 81 , 3 ( 2001 ) , 360 – 375 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0032885501081003004 [ 98 ] Whitney Phillips . 2015 . This Is Why We Can’t Have Nice Things : Mapping the Relationship Between Online Trolling and Mainstream Culture . MIT Press . [ 99 ] Leslie H . Picca and Joe R . Feagin . 2007 . Two - faced racism : Whites in the backstage and frontstage . ( 2007 ) . CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 265 Page 14 [ 100 ] Sarah Pierce and Andrew Selee . 2017 . Immigration under Trump : A Review of Policy Shifts in the Year Since the Election . Migration Policy Institute ( 2017 ) . [ 101 ] Thomas Piketty . 2015 . About capital in the twenty - ﬁrst century . American Economic Review 205 , 5 ( 2015 ) , 48 – 53 . 10 . 1257 / aer . p20151060 [ 102 ] Inioluwa Deborah Raji and Joy Buolamwini . Actionable Auditing : Investigating the Impact of Publicly Naming Biased Performance Results of Commercial AI Products . Technical Report . www . aaai . org [ 103 ] Yolanda A . Rankin and Jakita O . Thomas . 2019 . Straighten up and ﬂy right : rethinking intersectionality in HCI research . Interactions 26 , 6 ( 2019 ) , 64 – 68 . [ 104 ] Cedric J . Robinson . 1983 . Black Marxism : The Making of the Black Radical Tradition . University of North Carolina Press . [ 105 ] Adam Rose . 2010 . Are face - detection cameras racist ? Time ( 2010 ) . http : / / content . time . com / time / business / article / 0 , 8599 , 1954643 , 00 . html [ 106 ] Lorna Roth . 2013 . The fade - out of shirley , a once - ultimate norm : Colour balance , image technologies , and cognitive equity . In The Melanin Millennium : Skin Color as 21st Century International Discourse . Springer Netherlands , 273 – 286 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 94 - 007 - 4608 - 4 { _ } 18 [ 107 ] Wendy D . Roth . 2016 . The multiple dimensions of race . Ethnic and Racial Studies 39 , 8 ( 2016 ) , 1310 – 1338 . [ 108 ] Camille L Ryan and Kurt Bauman . 2016 . Educational Attainment in the United States : 2015 . Current Population Reports ( 3 2016 ) . https : / / www . census . gov / content / dam / Census / library / publications / 2016 / demo / p20 - 578 . pdf [ 109 ] Ari Schlesinger , W . Keith Edwards , and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2017 . Intersectional HCI : Engaging identity through gender , race , and class . In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings , Vol . 2017 - May . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 5412 – 5427 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025766 [ 110 ] Ari Schlesinger , Kenton P . O’Hara , and Alex S . Taylor . 2018 . Let’s Talk About Race . ( 2018 ) , 1 – 14 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173889 [ 111 ] SIGCHI . 2019 . SIGCHI Conference History . ( 2019 ) . https : / / sigchi . org / conferences / conference - history / CHI / [ 112 ] Daniel G . Solórzano and Tara J . Yosso . 2002 . Critical Race Methodology : Counter - Storytelling as an Analytical Framework for Education Research . Qualitative Inquiry 8 , 1 ( 2 2002 ) , 23 – 44 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 107780040200800103 [ 113 ] Katta Spiel , Alex Ahmed , Jennifer A . Rode , Jed R . Brubaker , Gopinaath Kannabiran , Os Keyes , Ashley Marie Walker , Michael A . DeVito , Jeremy Birnholtz , Emeline Brulé , Ann Light , PÄ´snar Barlas , and Jean Hardy . 2019 . Queer ( ing ) HCI . In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI EA ’19 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 1 – 4 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3311750 [ 114 ] Edward Steinfeld and Jordana Maisel . 2012 . Universal Design : Creating Inclusive Environments . Wiley Publishing . [ 115 ] Stevie Chancellor , Nazanin Andalibi , Lindsay Blackwell , David Nemer , and Wendy Moncur . 2019 . Sensitive Research , Practice and Design in HCI . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts 2011 ( 2019 ) . [ 116 ] Elizabeth Stowell , Mercedes C . Lyson , Herman Saksono , Reneé C . Wurth , Holly Jimison , Misha Pavel , and Andrea G . Parker . 2018 . Designing and evaluating mHealth interventions for vulnerable populations : A systematic review . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 15 . [ 117 ] Derald Wing Sue . 2010 . Microaggressions in everyday life : Race , gender , and sexual orientation . John Wiley & Sons . [ 118 ] Latanya Sweeney . 2013 . Discrimination in online Ad delivery . Commun . ACM 56 , 5 ( 5 2013 ) , 44 – 54 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2447976 . 2447990 [ 119 ] Cristina Sylla , Pedro Branco , Clara Coutinho , and Maria Eduarda Coquet . 2009 . Storytelling through drawings : evaluating tangible interfaces for children . In CHI’09 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 3461 – 3466 . [ 120 ] Theresa Jean Tanenbaum . 2014 . Design ﬁctional interactions : why HCI should care about stories . Interactions 21 , 5 ( 2014 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2648414 [ 121 ] R . Roosevelt Thomas Jr . 1990 . From afﬁrmative action to afﬁrming diversity . Harvard Business Review ( Mar / Apr . 1990 ) , 107 – 117 . [ 122 ] New York Times . 2019a . The 1619 Project . ( 2019 ) . https : / / www . nytimes . com / interactive / 2019 / 08 / 14 / magazine / 1619 - america - slavery . html [ 123 ] New York Times . 2019b . The Privacy Project . New York Times ( 2019 ) . https : / / www . nytimes . com / series / new - york - times - privacy - project [ 124 ] Alexandra To , Joselyn McDonald , Jarrek Holmes , Geoff Kaufman , and Jessica Hammer . 2018 . Character Diversity in Digital and Non - Digital Games . Transactions of the Digital Games Research Association 4 , 1 ( 2018 ) . [ 125 ] Kentaro Toyama . 2015 . Geek Heresy : Rescuing Social Change from the Cult of Technology . PublicAffairs . CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 265 Page 15 [ 126 ] Ryan Tracy and John D . McKinnon . 2019 . Facebook penalty sends message to Big Tech . Wall Street Journal ( 7 2019 ) . https : / / www . wsj . com / articles / facebook - agrees - to - pay - 5 - billion - in - ftc - settlement - 11563971400 [ 127 ] Jeremy C . Travis . 2005 . But they all come back : facing the challenges of prisoner reentry . Urban Institute Press ( 2005 ) , 391 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11524 - 006 - 9046 - 5 [ 128 ] Lornet Turnbull . 2019 . Exposing the racist Facebook posts of city cops . ( 7 2019 ) . https : / / www . citylab . com / equity / 2019 / 07 / police - social - media - facebook - racism - islamophobia - bias / 593131 / [ 129 ] Kim M . Unertl , Chris L . Schaefbauer , Terrance R . Campbell , Charles Senteio , Katie A . Siek , Suzanne Bakken , and Tiffany C . Veinot . 2016 . Integrating community - based participatory research and informatics approaches to improve the engagement and health of underserved populations . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 23 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 60 – 73 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / jamia / ocv094 [ 130 ] Vicky Valet . 2018 . After a year of secrecy , Laszlo Bock and Wayne Crosby break their silence on Humu . Forbes ( 5 2018 ) . https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / vickyvalet / 2018 / 05 / 01 / after - a - year - of - secrecy - laszlo - bock - and - wayne - crosby - break - their - silence - on - humu / [ 131 ] Dustin Volz . 2018 . U . S . girds for possible Russian meddling on election day . ( 2018 ) . https : / / www . wsj . com / articles / u - s - girds - for - possible - russian - meddling - on - election - day - 1541421000 [ 132 ] Elizabeth Weise . 2014 . Google discloses its ( lack of ) diversity . USA Today ( 2014 ) . https : / / www . usatoday . com / story / tech / 2014 / 05 / 28 / google - releases - employee - diversity - figures / 9697049 / [ 133 ] David T . Wellman . 1993 . Portraits of White Racism , Second Edition . Cambridge University Press . [ 134 ] Benjamin Wilson , Judy Hoffman , and Jamie Morgenstern . 2019 . Predictive Inequity in Object Detection . ( 2 2019 ) . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1902 . 11097 [ 135 ] Valerie Wilson and Zane Mokhiber . 2017 . 2016 ACS shows stubbornly high Native American poverty and different degrees of economic well - being for Asian ethnic groups . ( 2017 ) . https : / / www . epi . org / blog / 2016 - acs - shows - stubbornly - high - native - american - poverty - and - different - degrees - of - economic - well - being - for - asian - ethnic - groups / [ 136 ] Langdon Winner . 1999 . Do artifacts have politics ? In The Social Shaping of Technology ( 2nd ed . ) , Donld MacKenzie and Judy Wajcman ( Eds . ) . Open University Press , UK , 28 – 40 . [ 137 ] Allison Woodruff , Sarah E . Fox , Steven Rousso - Schindler , and Jeffrey Warshaw . 2018 . A Qualitative Exploration of Perceptions of Algorithmic Fairness . ( 2018 ) , 1 – 14 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174230 [ 138 ] Tim Wu . 2017 . The attention merchants : The epic scramble to get inside our heads . Vintage . [ 139 ] S . P . Wyche , P . M . Aoki , and R . E . Grinter . 2008 . Re - placing faith : Reconsidering the secular - religious use divide in the United States and Kenya . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 2008 ) , 11 – 20 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357057 [ 140 ] Sarita Yardi and Amy Bruckman . 2012 . Income , race , and class . ( 2012 ) , 3041 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208716 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 265 Page 16