A Microscopic Interaction Model of Maximum Solubility of Cholesterol in Lipid Bilayers Juyang Huang and Gerald W . Feigenson Section of Biochemistry , Molecular and Cell Biology , Cornell University , Ithaca , New York 14853 USA ABSTRACT We recently reported the equilibrium maximum solubility of cholesterol in a lipid bilayer , x * chol , to be 0 . 66 in four different phosphatidylcholines , and 0 . 51 in a phosphatidylethanolamine ( Huang , J . , J . T . Buboltz , and G . W . Feigenson . 1999 . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . in press ) . Here we present a model of cholesterol - phospholipid mixing that explains these observed values of x * chol . Monte Carlo simulations show that pairwise - additivity of nearest - neighbor interactions is inadequate to describe all the x * chol values . Instead , if cholesterol multibody interactions are assigned highly unfavorable energy , then jumps occur in cholesterol chemical potential that lead to its precipitation from the bilayer . Cholesterol precipitation is most likely to occur near three discrete values of cholesterol mole fraction , 0 . 50 , 0 . 57 , and 0 . 67 , which correspond to cholesterol / phospholipid mole ratios of 1 / 1 , 4 / 3 , and 2 / 1 , respectively . At these solubility limits , where cholesterol chemical potential jumps , the cholesterol - phospholipid bilayer mixture forms highly regular lipid distributions in order to minimize cholesterol - cholesterol contacts . This treatment shows that dramatic structural and thermodynamic changes can occur at particular cholesterol mole fractions without any stoichiometric complex formation . The physical origin of the unfavorable cholesterol multibody interaction is explained by an “umbrella model” : in a bilayer , nonpolar cholesterol relies on polar phospholipid headgroup coverage to avoid the unfavorable free energy of cholesterol contact with water . Thus , at high cholesterol mole fraction , this unfavorable free energy , not any favorable cholesterol - phospholipid interaction , dominates the mixing behavior . This physical origin also explains the “cholesterol condensing effect” and the increase in acyl chain order parameter in cholesterol - phospholipid mixtures . INTRODUCTION We seek to understand general properties of biomembranes by exploring the molecular - level interactions among the components . Since there are many chemically different components in a biomembrane , there are very many possi - bilities for molecular interactions just between nearest - neighbor molecules . A reasonable starting point toward a description of the molecular - level interactions is to consider a chemically well - defined bilayer mixture of lipids . Cholesterol is the single most abundant molecule in the mammalian plasma membrane , so there have been numerous studies of choles - terol / phospholipid bilayer mixtures ( see , for example , Fine - gold , 1993 ) . In a plasma membrane , cholesterol comprises up to half of all the lipids ( Bloch , 1991 ) , and the mole fraction is likely to be even higher in one of the bilayer leaflets . When the cholesterol content is high enough to exceed the maximum solubility of cholesterol in the lipid bilayer , a mole fraction we refer to as x * chol , excess cholesterol mol - ecules leave the bilayer as a precipitate of cholesterol mo - nohydrate crystals . This maximum solubility represents the boundary of a first - order phase transition . Values of x * chol that describe this phase boundary in the high - cholesterol regime have been reported in numerous publications , but there is a wide range of disagreement on the actual values ( Horowitz et al . , 1971 ; Gershfeld , 1978 ; Finean , 1990 ; Bach et al . , 1998 ) . Yet , we require a reliable value of x * chol , because theoretical studies of cholesterol / phospholipid mix - tures offer the best possibility of developing our understand - ing of the intermolecular interactions only if we can pre - cisely compare the theoretical with the experimental results . Recently , we discovered that the major source of the disagreement lies in the sample preparation method . Con - ventional sample preparation methods that pass the mixture through a dry state can induce cholesterol / phospholipid demixing in this dry state ( Buboltz and Feigenson , 1999 ) . The cholesterol crystals are carried over to the hydrated lipid dispersions , making the apparent x * chol value lower than the true equilibrium value . By using two new indepen - dent sample preparation methods that avoid lipid demixing , we were able to find the true equilibrium values of x * chol ( Huang et al . , 1999 ) . These values show a very interesting pattern : for all of the phosphatidylcholines ( PCs ) studied , regardless of acyl chain type ( 12 : 0 , 12 : 0 or 16 : 0 , 16 : 0 or 16 : 0 , 18 : 1 or 22 : 1 , 22 : 1 ) the value of x * chol is 0 . 66 6 0 . 01 at 24°C . In contrast , we found the distinctly different result that x * chol for ( 16 : 0 , 18 : 1 ) phosphatidylethanolamine ( PE ) is 0 . 51 6 0 . 01 . These new findings lead us to ask the follow - ing questions : why are the values of x * chol insensitive to the type of phospholipid acyl chains ? Are some unique prop - erties of cholesterol - phospholipid organization revealed by the observed x * chol values , which are very close to choles - terol / phospholipid mole ratios of 1 / 1 and 2 / 1 ? What kind of Received for publication 2 September 1998 and in final form 19 January 1999 . Address reprint requests to Dr . Gerald W . Feigenson , Section of Biochem - istry , Molecular and Cell Biology , Cornell University , 201 Biotechnology Building , Ithaca , NY 14853 - 2703 . Tel . : 607 - 255 - 4744 ; Fax : 607 - 255 - 2428 ; E - mail : GWF3 @ cornell . edu . © 1999 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 99 / 04 / 2142 / 16 $ 2 . 00 2142 Biophysical Journal Volume 76 April 1999 2142 – 2157 microscopic interactions in cholesterol / phospholipid mix - tures could give rise to the observed x * chol values of 0 . 66 and 0 . 51 ? In this study we present a microscopic interaction model that answers these questions . We used Monte Carlo simu - lation as a tool to translate our model into the corresponding chemical potentials and lipid lateral organizations . We find that pairwise - additive interactions can explain a value of x * chol 5 0 . 51 , if mixing of phospholipid with cholesterol is sufficiently strongly favorable . However , this simple model cannot predict x * chol 5 0 . 66 . We find that if a simple form of multibody interaction is used , in which cholesterol - cho - lesterol interaction energy becomes unfavorable more steeply than additively for more cholesterols in contact , then x * chol of either 0 . 51 or 0 . 66 can occur , depending upon the details of the nonlinear energy increase . Moreover , a value of x * chol 5 0 . 57 is also shown to be possible . Our simula - tions show that at the solubility limits , highly regular lipid distributions form in the bilayer , and the chemical potential of cholesterol jumps steeply . The physical origin of this multibody interaction can be explained by the hydrophobic - ity of cholesterol . BASIC ASSUMPTIONS AND STRATEGY Chemical potential of cholesterol Cholesterol in a monohydrate crystal , as a pure substance , has a constant chemical potential , m cholcrystal . In contrast , the chemical potential of cholesterol in a lipid bilayer , m cholbilayer ( x chol ) , is a function of the bilayer composition . When x chol , x * chol , m cholbilayer ( x chol ) must be less than m cholcrystal for the bilayer to be the only stable phase . When x chol $ x * chol , the lipid bilayer phase and the cholesterol monohydrate crystal phase coexist . In this two - phase region , the chemical poten - tial of cholesterol in the bilayer must be equal to the chem - ical potential of cholesterol in the monohydrate crystal , m cholbilayer ( x * chol ) 5 m cholcrystal . A key experimental finding is the essentially identical values of x * chol in four PCs having different sets of acyl chains . This finding leads us to deduce a general picture of the way in which cholesterol chemical potential changes as its mole fraction increases in a bilayer . The theoretical treatment will be designed to search for the microscopic energies that reproduce this form of the chemical potential change . We start with the chemical potential of cholesterol , at any given mole fraction , being different in phospholipids A , B , and C . A very simple form of this difference would be a constant offset of the cholesterol chemical potential at every mole fraction in the three phospholipid environments . Fig . 1 illustrates a general relationship between the shape of the m cholbilayer profile and the range of possible x * chol values . This figure also shows the chemical potential of cholesterol in the pure monohydrate crystal , m cholcrystal , as a horizontal dashed line . In Fig . 1 a , a hypothetical m cholbilayer curve in phospho - lipid A is drawn as a smoothly increasing function of x chol ( solid line ) . The cholesterol mole fraction at which m cholbilayer intersects the chemical potential of crystalline cholesterol monohydrate is the x * chol value in lipid A . Consider two other phospholipids , B and C , with different sets of acyl chains , and having cholesterol - phospholipid interactions that are slightly different from those in lipid A . The m cholbilayer profiles in phospholipids B and C would be slightly differ - ent from that in phospholipid A . We represent these profiles as the two dotted lines in Fig . 1 a , obtained by adding or subtracting a small constant offset to or from the m cholbilayer of lipid A . These two dotted lines intersect m cholcrystal at different values of x chol , thus resulting in different values of x * chol . The range of x * chol values for lipids A , B , and C is indicated by the width of the shaded box . In Fig . 1 b , a hypothetical m cholbilayer curve is drawn having a steep increase at some cholesterol mole fraction . With the same offset of chemical potential at each cholesterol mole fraction , the resulting range of x * chol is much narrower . Since the x * chol for four PCs with very different acyl chains are almost identical , what - ever is the nature of the microscopic interaction that in - duces the cholesterol precipitation , it must cause the chem - ical potential of cholesterol in the bilayer to increase so sharply at x * chol that other contributions can be neglected . FIGURE 1 Relationship between the shape of m cholbilayer profiles and the range of possible x * chol values . ( a ) A set of hypothetical m cholbilayer profiles as smoothly increasing functions of x chol . The range of the x * chol values is indicated by the width of the shaded box . ( b ) A set of hypothetical m cholbilayer profiles as steeply increasing functions of x chol . The range of the x * chol values is much narrower . Huang and Feigenson Model of Cholesterol Solubility in Bilayers 2143 Single - state lattice model The above analysis implies that we can safely ignore the variation of m cholbilayer in each different acyl chain environ - ment , since it does not show up in the measured value of x * chol , as long as it is not of comparable energy . That is , the acyl chain contribution to the chemical potential does not need to be assumed as zero , yet we can completely ignore acyl chain details in our model , and instead need only note whether or not there is an acyl chain or a cholesterol at a given lattice position . The general mixing behavior of cholesterols near x * chol Since m cholbilayer ( x chol ) is a steeply increasing function of x chol near x * chol , the excess chemical potential of cholesterol should be a steeply increasing function as well , because the ideal part of the chemical potential ( RTln x chol ) is a slowly increasing function around x chol 5 0 . 5 or 0 . 67 . Thus , the microscopic interaction that induces cholesterol precipita - tion strongly favors the mixing of cholesterol with phos - pholipid . Otherwise , if cholesterol molecules tended to clus - ter , the excess chemical potential of cholesterol would decrease as a function of x chol , instead of increase . In terms of microscopic interaction energy , cholesterol - cholesterol contacts are unfavorable or cholesterol - phospholipid con - tacts are favorable . Type of lattice The cross - sectional area of cholesterol is ; 37 Å 2 ( Lund - berg , 1982 ) , that of a fluid phase phospholipid is on the order of 65 Å 2 ( Nagle et al . , 1996 ) . Other researchers have modeled the packing of cholesterol molecules and phospho - lipid acyl chains as a hexagonal lattice ( Cruzeiro - Hansson et al . , 1989 ; Scott , 1991 ) . The justification for using a lattice of acyl chains and cholesterol , rather than entire phospholipids and cholesterol , has been discussed by Virtanen et al . ( 1995 ) . We , too , will use the hexagonal packing model of acyl chains and cholesterol in this study . Since the sizes and packing details are surely not identical for cholesterol and phospholipid acyl chains , a distorted hexagonal lattice seems likely . Such a distorted hexagonal lattice will serve our purpose well , as long as each site has six nearest - neighbors . As we discussed above with reference to Fig . 1 , we assume that all possible variations of the acyl chains ( length , conformation , unsaturation ) yield only one energy state , and all the interactions with neighbors as well as any conformation changes on any parts of either the phospho - lipid or the cholesterol are included in the phenomenolog - ical interaction energy terms . In addition , although phos - pholipid headgroups and water molecules are not shown explicitly in the lattice , their effects are implicit in the phenomenological acyl chain - cholesterol interaction . Our goal is to formulate a simple and general form of the microscopic cholesterol / phospholipid interaction Hamilto - nian that could cause an abrupt increase of cholesterol chemical potential at x chol 5 0 . 66 or 0 . 51 . We use Monte Carlo simulations as the tool to find the microscopic inter - actions : a hypothetical interaction Hamiltonian is fed into the simulations ; the simulations faithfully produce the cor - responding free energy , chemical potentials , and molecular distributions of the simulated mixtures ; the simulation re - sults are then compared to the experimental data , and the Hamiltonian modified for a better fit . THE MICROSCOPIC INTERACTION MODEL The cholesterol / phospholipid bilayer is modeled as a two - dimensional hexagonal lattice . Each lattice site can be oc - cupied by either a phospholipid acyl chain or a cholesterol molecule . We model the interactions between phospholipids and cholesterols in the simplest possible way by limiting all the interactions to nearest - neighbor only . The Hamiltonian has two major components : one describing pairwise - addi - tive interactions , H pair , and another for cholesterol multi - body interactions with its nearest - neighbors , H multi . H total 5 H pair 1 H multi ( 1 ) The pairwise - additive part of the Hamiltonian includes the interactions of acyl chain - acyl chain , cholesterol - cho - lesterol , and acyl chain - cholesterol contact pairs : H pair 5 1 2 O i , j E aa L ai L aj 1 1 2 O i , j E cc L ci L cj 1 1 2 O i , j E ac ~ L ai L cj 1 L ci L aj ) ( 2 ) where E aa , E cc , and E ac are the interaction energies between acyl chains , between cholesterols , and between acyl chain - cholesterol , respectively ; L ai and L ci are the occupation variables ( 5 0 or 1 ) of acyl chains and cholesterols , respec - tively . The summation i is over all lattice sites , and j is over the nearest - neighbor sites of i only . The factor 1 / 2 is nec - essary to avoid counting each contact pair twice . For this lattice system , the three interaction energies in Eq . 2 can be further reduced to just one independent vari - able ( Guggenheim , 1952 ) . Eq . 2 is rewritten as : H pair 5 Z 2 O i E aa L ai 1 Z 2 O i E cc L ci 1 1 2 O i , j D E m ~ L ai L cj 1 L ci L aj ) , ( 3 ) where Z is the number of nearest - neighbors to a lattice site , which is six for a hexagonal lattice . D E m is the pairwise - additive excess mixing energy of acyl chains and cholester - ols , defined as D E m 5 E ac 2 ~ E aa 1 E cc ! / 2 . ( 4 ) 2144 Biophysical Journal Volume 76 April 1999 In a canonical Monte Carlo simulation , the total number of lattice sites ( N ) , the number of acyl chains ( N a 5 ( i L ai ) , the number of cholesterols ( N c 5 ( i L ci ) , and the tempera - ture ( T ) are all fixed for each simulation . Therefore , the first two terms in Eq . 3 are independent of lipid lateral distribu - tion , and the entire contribution of pairwise - additive inter - actions to the lipid mixing behavior is determined by the value of D E m in the third term . The cholesterol multibody interaction with its six nearest - neighbors is given by : H multi 5 O i O s 5 0 6 D E c C s L si L ci , ( 5 ) where D E c is the strength of the cholesterol multibody interaction , C s are the energy scaling factors , and L si is the environment variable of a lattice site , which is defined as L si 5 H 1 , if site i has s cholesterol as it nearest neighbor 0 , otherwise . In Eq . 5 , the summation s is over seven possible environ - ments for lattice site i : a site can have zero to six choles - terols as nearest - neighbors . Thus , if a cholesterol is sur - rounded by s other cholesterols , then the multibody interaction energy for this cholesterol would be D E c C s . No energy difference is assumed for the different arrangements of these s cholesterols among the nearest - neighbor sites . Seven energy scaling factors ( C 0 , C 1 , . . . , C 6 ) define the relative magnitude of the multibody interaction in the seven possible situations , and D E c determines the overall strength of the cholesterol multibody interaction . The physical origin of this multibody interaction term is described in the Discussion . SIMULATION METHOD All the simulations were performed on a 120 3 120 hex - agonal lattice with a standard periodical boundary condi - tion . Neighboring cholesterols and acyl chains can ex - change their position with a probability given by the Metropolis method ( Metropolis et al . , 1953 ) . All simula - tions started from an ideal mixture of given composition . Equilibrium conditions were established after an initial 25 , 000 – 70 , 000 Monte Carlo steps . The ensemble average of the data was obtained in 10 , 000 Monte Carlo steps after equilibrium . Data were averaged from three independent runs . As demonstrated in an earlier paper ( Huang and Fei - genson , 1993 ) , such a large - scale simulation makes the simulation size effect negligible . FREE ENERGY AND CHEMICAL POTENTIALS In order to relate our microscopic interaction model to experimental x * chol data , it is crucial to be able to calculate the chemical potential of cholesterol from computer simu - lations . We applied the Kirkwood coupling parameter method ( Haile , 1986 ; Chialvo , 1990 ; Kirkwood , 1935 , 1936 ) to calculate the excess Gibbs free energy of the cholesterol / phospholipid mixtures . Although this approach is computationally intensive , it provides complete informa - tion : mixing free energy , enthalpy , entropy , and chemical potentials of cholesterol and acyl chains . Following similar steps described in our earlier paper ( see Appendix in Huang et al . , 1993 ) , the excess Gibbs free energy of a cholesterol / phospholipid mixture is given by D G E ~ D E m , D E c ! 5 N 0 E 0 D E m K 1 2 O i , j ~ L ai L cj 1 L ci L aj ! L l c 5 0 N d l E 1 N 0 E 0 D E c K O i O s 5 0 6 C s L si L ci L l E 5D E m N d l C 2 N 0 D E c C 6 N c N ( 6 ) where N 0 is Avogadro’s number , l E and l C are coupling parameters , and the angle brackets denote an ensemble average from Monte Carlo simulations . By performing nu - merical integration , D G E can be calculated . The excess enthalpy D H E and entropy D S E are given by : D H E 5 N 0 K 1 2 O i , j ~ L ai L cj 1 L ci L aj ! L D E m / N 1 N 0 K O i O s 5 0 6 C s L si L ci L D E c / N 2 N 0 D E c C 6 N c / N ( 7 ) and D S E 5 ~ D H E 2 D G E ! / T ( 8 ) The excess chemical potentials of cholesterol and phos - pholipid ( m cholE and m lipidE ) can be obtained by differentiating D G E , D G E 5 m cholE N c / N 1 m lipidE N a / N ( 9 ) For convenience , we choose the standard state of m cholE as that in which cholesterols are infinitely dilute in a phospho - lipid bilayer , and the standard state of m lipidE as that in a pure phospholipid bilayer . Since each phospholipid has two acyl chains ( see Note 1 at end of text ) the mole fraction of cholesterol in a bilayer is given by x chol 5 2 N c / ~ 2 N c 1 N a ! . ( 10 ) Huang and Feigenson Model of Cholesterol Solubility in Bilayers 2145 COMPUTER SIMULATION RESULTS Pairwise - additive interaction energies First , we investigate the effects of a pairwise - additive in - teraction energy on the chemical potential and the molecular distributions . As shown above , three interaction energies ( E aa , E cc , and E ac ) can be specified for a mixture , but these can be reduced to a single parameter D E m ( Eq . 4 ) , which dictates the mixing behavior : 1 ) D E m 5 0 , ideal mixing . Excess Gibbs free energy 5 0 ; 2 ) D E m . 0 , mixtures tend to form clusters of like molecules , and even lateral phase separation is possible ( Huang and Feigenson , 1993 ) ; 3 ) D E m , 0 , cholesterol and acyl chains are mixed better than randomly . Like molecules tend to separate from each other . The excess chemical potential of cholesterol increases with increase of x chol , which is consistent with the general mix - ing behavior of cholesterol deduced from the x * chol data . This is the case we shall study . Fig . 2 a shows excess Gibbs free energies versus x chol for some negative values of D E m . These negative values of D G E indicate that the Gibbs free energies are lowered by mixing phospholipids with cholesterols . Fig . 2 a has a distinct fea - ture that D G E has a sudden change in slope at about x chol 5 0 . 5 when D E m # 2 2 kT , indicating a new regime of lateral organization of the molecules . Fig . 3 shows some snapshots of acyl chain / cholesterol lateral distributions simulated using pairwise - additive inter - actions . Each filled circle represents one cholesterol mole - cule , each open circle a phospholipid acyl chain . As shown in Fig . 3 a , at x chol 5 0 . 5 , with a low magnitude of D E m ( 2 1 kT ) , the distribution has no particular pattern : some choles - terol molecules have no cholesterol - cholesterol contact , oth - ers have up to four contacts . However , at the same compo - sition , with D E m 5 2 3 kT , cholesterol molecules form a crystal - like regular pattern ( Fig . 3 b ) : each cholesterol is surrounded by six acyl chains , and cholesterol - cholesterol contacts are minimized . Although some minor defects are common , the order is very long - range , only limited by the simulation size . Fig . 3 , c and d are snapshots of the lateral distributions simulated with D E m 5 2 3 kT at x chol 5 0 . 44 and 0 . 56 , respectively , slightly below or above x chol 5 0 . 5 . As x chol increases , the crystal - like regular pattern gradually grows in size at lower concentration , encompasses the whole lattice at the critical composition , then is gradually destroyed when x chol becomes higher . The effect of this crystal - like regular distribution on chemical potential of cholesterol is shown in Fig . 4 a . When the value of D E m is small , m cholbilayer increases smoothly as a function of x chol . With a large negative value of D E m , m cholbilayer shows a jump at x chol 5 0 . 5 . The magnitude of the jump increases with the magnitude of D E m . The formation of the crystal - like regular distribution pat - tern and the sharp increase of m cholbilayer at x chol 5 0 . 5 can be easily understood . A large negative value of D E m makes like - molecule contact very unfavorable ( or equivalently , unlike - molecule contact very favorable ) . Energy is lowered FIGURE 2 Excess Gibbs free energy , D G E , as a function of cholesterol mole fraction in a bilayer . Simulations use : ( a ) pairwise - additive interac - tions , which is equivalent to MIEP I ; ( b ) MIEP II ; ( c ) MIEP III ; ( d ) MIEP IV . 2146 Biophysical Journal Volume 76 April 1999 by minimizing cholesterol - cholesterol contacts or maximiz - ing acyl chain - cholesterol contacts . At x chol 5 0 . 5 , the ratio of acyl chain to cholesterol is exactly 2 / 1 . The crystal - like regular pattern shown in Fig . 3 b is the only distribution that avoids any cholesterol - cholesterol contact at this composi - tion . The chemical potential of cholesterol in such a perfect pattern is still low . Now imagine that a tiny amount of cholesterol is added to the mixture , replacing phospholipid , to raise x chol by an infinitesimal amount just above 0 . 5 : each added cholesterol now occupies a site previously occupied by an acyl chain , and would have three cholesterol - choles - terol contacts in such a pattern ( see Fig . 3 b ) . The energy cost for such an operation ( losing three acyl chain - choles - terol contacts ) is very high , with a large negative value of D E m . Therefore , the chemical potential of cholesterol just above x chol 5 0 . 5 rises sharply . In order to induce a sharp jump in chemical potential of cholesterol , D E m must be # 2 2 kT ( Fig . 4 a ; see Note 2 ) . This D E m could arise from a 2 2 kT favorable interaction energy between an acyl chain - cholesterol pair or from a 1 4 kT unfavorable interaction energy between a cholesterol - cholesterol pair , or from some combination ( Eq . 4 ) . Need for the multibody interaction Fig . 4 a shows that besides x chol 5 0 . 5 , the chemical po - tential of cholesterol has no sharp increase at any other composition ( see Note 3 ) . Therefore , no matter how the three interaction energies ( E aa , E cc , and E ac ) are chosen to formulate D E m ( using Eq . 4 ) , it is impossible to produce a sharp increase of m cholbilayer at x chol 5 0 . 67 by a pairwise - additive interaction Hamiltonian . This suggests that a new form of the interaction is needed . As we show in the next section , a relatively simple form of the cholesterol multi - body interaction can produce a sharp increase of m cholbilayer either at x chol 5 0 . 5 , or 0 . 57 , or 0 . 67 . The pairwise - additive term we studied in this section can be seen as a special case of the multibody interaction . The cholesterol multibody interaction energy In the previous section we saw the limitation of the pair - wise - additive interaction Hamiltonian . The main question still remains : how to formulate a simple and general micro - scopic cholesterol / phospholipid interaction Hamiltonian FIGURE 3 Snapshots of phospholipid and cholesterol lateral distributions simulated using pairwise - additive interactions . ( a ) x chol 5 0 . 50 and D E m 5 2 1 kT ; ( b ) x chol 5 0 . 50 and D E m 5 2 3 kT . Cholesterols form a crystal - like regular distribution pattern : each cholesterol has no other cholesterol as its nearest neighbor ; ( c ) x chol 5 0 . 44 and D E m 5 2 3 kT ; ( d ) x chol 5 0 . 56 and D E m 5 2 3 kT . ( F ) Cholesterol ; ( E ) acyl chain . Huang and Feigenson Model of Cholesterol Solubility in Bilayers 2147 that could cause an abrupt increase of cholesterol chemical potential at x chol 5 0 . 67 or 0 . 50 . Since no pairwise - additive term will work , using a multibody interaction is a natural solution . However , unlike the pairwise - additive interaction shown in Eq . 2 , there is no general form for the multibody interaction . Although there are many possibilities for the type of multibody interactions ( e . g . 3 body , 4 body , . . . ) , in a hexagonal lattice , a reasonable choice would be one in - volving all six nearest - neighbors . After a period of exten - sive simulation work , we discovered that a simple and reasonable form for the multibody interaction given in Eq . 5 can solve the problem . We start by noting that for a pairwise - additive interaction the number of such pairs is counted , and the total interaction energy increases linearly with the number of interaction pairs . For example , in Eq . 2 E cc is the interaction energy for a cholesterol - cholesterol pair . If there are n cholesterol - cholesterol contacts , then the total energy is simply nE cc . Thus , the total pairwise - additive energy is the sum of the energies of each individual pair . In contrast , the multibody interaction energy is a descrip - tion of the interactions of all nearest neighbors considered as a group . The multibody interaction Hamiltonian in Eq . 5 allows the total interaction energy to increase nonlinearly with the number of cholesterol - cholesterol contacts . For example , if a cholesterol has two cholesterol - cholesterol contacts , the interaction energy would be c 2 D E c instead of 2 D E c . Here c 2 is a chosen constant . Thus , six parameters , FIGURE 4 Excess chemical potential of cholesterol , m cholE , or of phospholipid , m lipidE , as a function of cholesterol mole fraction . ( a ) m cholE simulated using pairwise - additive interactions , which is equivalent to MIEP I ; ( b ) m cholE , simulated using MIEP II ; ( c ) m cholE and ( d ) m lipidE , simulated using MIEP III ; ( e ) m cholE , simulated using MIEP IV . 2148 Biophysical Journal Volume 76 April 1999 c 1 . . . c 6 ( c 0 is always 0 ) need to be specified for the multibody interaction in a hexagonal lattice . Table 1 lists four sets of multibody interaction energy parameters ( MIEP ) used in this study . For example , in MIEP II , the energy cost of the first cholesterol - cholesterol contact is 1 unit , for the second one 8 units , the third 3 units , and so on . Thus , c 1 5 1 , c 2 5 1 1 8 5 9 , c 3 5 1 1 8 1 3 5 12 , and so on . These sets describe , although not uniquely , how the energy increases as cholesterols make contact with each other , for positive values of D E c . The first set , MIEP I , is constructed to create a significant but equal energy cost for each cholesterol - cholesterol con - tact . Therefore , the total energy increases linearly with the number of cholesterol - cholesterol contacts ( indicated by the linear increase of c 1 , . . . , c 6 ) . With MIEP I , the multibody interaction Hamiltonian is reduced to a pairwise - additive Hamiltonian with E aa 5 E ac 5 0 , E cc 5 2 D E c , and D E m 5 2D E c ( using Eq . 4 ) . Therefore , we can consider that the results from the previous section were obtained using MIEP I . The second set , MIEP II , is constructed to create a rela - tively small energy cost for each pair of cholesterols that are in contact but completely surrounded by phospholipids , with a much larger energy cost for three cholesterols in contact . The first cholesterol - cholesterol contact costs 1 unit of energy , whereas the next one costs 8 energy units , thus much higher than the first . Contacts that are even higher - order are not so critical , so all are assigned to 3 units . Fig . 2 b shows the excess Gibbs free energy versus x chol simu - lated using MIEP II . The values of D G E are negative , indicating that the Gibbs free energies are lowered by mix - ing phospholipids with cholesterols . D G E has a global min - imum as well as a sudden change of slope at x chol 5 0 . 57 ( cholesterol / phospholipid mole ratio of 4 / 3 ) . Fig . 4 b shows the excess chemical potential of cholesterol versus x chol ; m cholE has a sharp jump at 0 . 57 for D E c $ 0 . 5 kT . Fig . 5 shows snapshots of cholesterol and acyl chain lateral distributions simulated with MIEP II . With a low magnitude of D E c ( 0 . 2 kT ) , as shown in Fig . 5 a , at x chol 5 0 . 57 the distribution shows no particular pattern . However , at the same composition , with D E c 5 0 . 5 kT , cholesterol molecules form an aligned dimer pattern ( Fig . 5 b ) : each cholesterol has exactly one cholesterol - cholesterol contact . Figs . 5 c and 7 d are snapshots of the lateral distributions simulated with D E c 5 0 . 5 kT at x chol 5 0 . 51 and 0 . 62 , respectively . At x chol 5 0 . 51 , many cholesterol dimers have formed , but no one preferred orientation is adopted ( Fig . 5 c ) ; at the critical mole fraction of 0 . 57 , all dimers are perfectly aligned to one orientation ( Fig . 5 b ) ; at x chol 5 0 . 62 , the dimer pattern no longer exists ( Fig . 5 d ) . By understanding this dimer pattern , one can understand how other multibody interaction sets work . The formation of the dimer pattern and abrupt increase of m cholbilayer at x chol 5 0 . 57 are direct results of this particular choice of the multi - body interaction parameters . In Table 1 , MIEP II is delib - erately formulated to make the second contact cost much more energy than the first . The energy cost for other , higher - order contacts are not critical to produce the dimer pattern , as long as they are positive , so we chose 3 for them . The mixture responds to MIEP II with a distribution that minimizes the second cholesterol - cholesterol contact , as shown in Fig . 5 b . At x chol 5 0 . 57 , the cholesterol / acyl chain ratio is 2 / 3 . The dimer pattern is the only pattern at this composition such that no cholesterol has the second cholesterol - cholesterol contact , i . e . , the lowest energy distribution . Consider a tiny amount of cholesterol added to the mix - ture , replacing acyl chains and raising x chol by an infinites - imal amount above 0 . 57 . The added cholesterol would be forced into sites previously occupied by acyl chains with either three or four cholesterol contacts ( Fig . 5 b ) . This newly added cholesterol now touches the three or four nearest - neighbor cholesterols that already have a second cholesterol - cholesterol contact . The energy cost for such an operation would be very high . Therefore , the chemical potential of cholesterol sharply jumps at x chol 5 0 . 57 . In MIEP II , the second cholesterol - cholesterol contact is assigned to cost 8 energy units . In order to induce a sharp jump in chemical potential of cholesterol , D E c should be $ 0 . 5 kT ( Fig . 4 b ) . Thus , the actual energy cost for the second cholesterol - cholesterol contact should be 0 . 5 3 8 5 4 kT or higher . Fig . 5 e shows a metastable distribution at x chol 5 0 . 57 simulated with D E c 5 0 . 6 kT . There are multiple domains of aligned dimer patterns in this distribution , and each domain has its own orientation . In a hexagonal lattice , three such orientations are possible . At the domain boundaries , many cholesterol trimers are visible , which indicates that the energy of this multidomain distribution is higher than that of the single - domain distribution shown in Fig . 5 b . We found that this metastable distribution at high D E c is very persistent in simulations : it could not be relaxed to a single - domain distribution even with very long simulation times ( up to 1 , 000 , 000 steps ) . However , it is possible to avoid the TABLE 1 A list of multibody interaction energy parameter sets used in this study Multibody Interaction Energy Parameter Set Energy Cost for Each Additional Chol - Chol Contact Eq . 5 Coefficients c 0 c 1 c 2 c 3 c 4 c 5 c 6 MIEP I 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 MIEP II 0 1 8 3 3 3 3 0 1 9 12 15 18 21 MIEP III 0 1 1 10 3 3 3 0 1 2 12 15 18 21 MIEP IV 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 0 1 3 6 10 15 21 Huang and Feigenson Model of Cholesterol Solubility in Bilayers 2149 multidomain distribution by slowly cooling down the mix - ture from a high temperature . In MIEP III , we continue the assignment of large , unfa - vorable interaction energy to yet higher - order cholesterol - cholesterol contacts . In MIEP III , the 4 - cholesterol multi - body interaction is assigned the largest interaction energy . Fig . 2 c shows excess Gibbs free energy versus x chol simu - lated with MIEP III , and with D E c ranging from 0 to 1 kT . D G E has a sharp change in slope at x chol 5 0 . 67 . The value of 0 . 67 is also a global minimum of D G E . The excess chemical potential of the mixture components is shown in Fig . 4 , c and d . With D E c $ 0 . 3 kT , m cholbilayer has FIGURE 5 Snapshots of phospholipid and cholesterol lateral distributions simulated using MIEP II . ( a ) x chol 5 0 . 57 and D E c 5 0 . 2 kT ; ( b ) x chol 5 0 . 57 and D E c 5 0 . 5 kT . Cholesterols form an aligned dimer pattern : each cholesterol has one other cholesterol as its nearest neighbor ; ( c ) x chol 5 0 . 51 and D E c 5 0 . 5 kT ; ( d ) x chol 5 0 . 62 and D E c 5 0 . 5 kT ; ( e ) a metastable multidomain regular distribution at x chol 5 0 . 57 and D E c 5 0 . 6 kT . ( F ) Cholesterol ; ( E ) acyl chain . 2150 Biophysical Journal Volume 76 April 1999 an abrupt increase at x chol 5 0 . 67 . The excess chemical potential of the acyl chains is plotted in Fig . 4 d . It shows the decrease at x chol 5 0 . 67 expected from the Gibbs - Duhem equation . Fig . 6 shows snapshots of acyl chain - cholesterol lateral distributions simulated with MIEP III . In Fig . 6 a , at x chol 5 0 . 67 , with a low magnitude of D E c ( 0 . 1 kT ) , the distribution looks almost random : a cholesterol molecule could have from zero to six cholesterol - cholesterol contacts . However , at the higher D E c of 0 . 6 kT shown in Fig . 6 b , cholesterol molecules form a “maze” pattern : the majority of choles - terols are surrounded by four acyl chains and two choles - terols . The majority of acyl chains are surrounded by four cholesterols and two acyl chains . Figs . 6 c and 10 d are snapshots of lateral distributions simulated with D E c 5 0 . 6 kT at x chol 5 0 . 60 and 0 . 72 , respectively . As x chol increases , the maze pattern that gradually forms at lower x chol , and encompasses the whole lattice at x chol 5 0 . 67 , is gradually destroyed when x chol becomes higher . This indicates that both the formation and the disappearance of a regular dis - tribution pattern are continuous phase changes . MIEP III is formulated so that the first two cholesterol - cholesterol contacts only cost 1 energy unit each , but the third one costs 10 units , much higher than the first two . The energy costs for the fourth , fifth , and sixth contacts are not critical to produce the maze pattern , so we chose 3 for them . The mixture responds to MIEP III with a distribution that minimizes the third cholesterol - cholesterol contact , as shown in Fig . 6 b . This regular distribution pattern is a little more complicated than the other two . At x chol 5 0 . 67 , the cholesterol / acyl chain ratio is 1 / 1 . As shown in Fig . 7 a , by forming alternating lines of cholesterols and acyl chains , all the cholesterols can have exactly two cholesterols as nearest neighbors , and no additional cholesterol - cholesterol con - tacts occur . However , there are three possible orientations of the pattern in Fig . 7 a in a hexagonal lattice . In addition , the pattern shown in Fig . 7 b has an energy identical to that of the pattern in Fig . 7 a , and it can also be arranged in three possible ways . Unlike the multidomain aligned dimer pattern shown in Fig . 5 e , the patterns in Fig . 7 can switch from one orientation to another with relatively low energy penalty . The maze pattern is the result of this sixfold degeneracy . FIGURE 6 Snapshots of phospholipid and cholesterol lateral distributions simulated using MIEP III . ( a ) x chol 5 0 . 67 and D E c 5 0 . 1 kT ; ( b ) x chol 5 0 . 67 and D E c 5 0 . 6 kT . Cholesterols form a maze pattern : each cholesterol has two other cholesterols as its nearest neighbors ; ( c ) x chol 5 0 . 60 and D E c 5 0 . 6 kT ; ( d ) x chol 5 0 . 72 and D E c 5 0 . 6 kT . ( F ) Cholesterol ; ( E ) acyl chain . Huang and Feigenson Model of Cholesterol Solubility in Bilayers 2151 Consider a tiny amount of cholesterol added to the mix - ture to replace acyl chains and raising x chol by an infinites - imal amount above 0 . 67 . The added cholesterol is forced into sites previously occupied by acyl chains having four cholesterol contacts . The newly added cholesterol now touches the four nearest - neighbor cholesterols already hav - ing three cholesterol - cholesterol contacts . The energy cost for such an operation would be very high . Therefore , the chemical potential of cholesterol sharply jumps at x chol 5 0 . 67 . In MIEP III , the third cholesterol - cholesterol contact is assigned to cost 10 energy units . In order to induce a sharp jump in chemical potential of cholesterol , D E c needs to be $ 0 . 5 kT ( Fig . 4 c ) . Thus , the actual energy cost for the third cholesterol - cholesterol contact should be 0 . 5 3 10 5 5 kT or higher . MIEP IV in Table 1 is an interesting parameter set . The energy cost for each additional cholesterol - cholesterol con - tact was chosen to be 1 unit higher than the preceding one . Thus , c i increases nonlinearly from 0 to 21 . Fig . 2 d shows the excess Gibbs free energy versus x chol simulated using MIEP IV . Compared with MIEP I , II , and III , the slope change in D G E at critical mole fractions is more subtle . Fig . 4 e shows the excess chemical potential of cholesterol ver - sus x chol . This curve has three step increases for D E c $ 3 kT : a steep jump at x chol 5 0 . 5 , and more gradual rises at 0 . 57 and 0 . 67 . Fig . 8 shows a plot of D G E and D H E , together with 2 T D S E for D E c 5 0 . 6 kT , simulated with MIEP II . D G E and D H E are both at global minima at x chol 5 0 . 57 . However , 2 T D S E has a peak at x chol 5 0 . 57 . This indicates that by forming the aligned dimer pattern at x chol 5 0 . 57 , as in Fig . 5 b , the excess entropy D S E is drastically reduced . The entropy part of the Gibbs free energy 2 T D S E actually increases to a peak at x chol 5 0 . 57 . Whenever a regular distribution is formed , regardless of the interaction type , the excess entropy , D S E , reaches a minimum . Fig . 9 shows D S E as a function of cholesterol mole fraction for a series of D E m values , simulated using pairwise - additive interactions , or equivalently , using MIEP I . As D E m becomes more nega - tive , the crystal - like regular pattern at x chol 5 0 . 50 gradually forms ( Fig . 3 b ) ; by adopting fewer and fewer configura - tions in phase space , the entropy reaches a minimum at x chol 5 0 . 50 . Once the pattern is completely formed at D E m # 2 2 kT , D S E stops changing at x chol 5 0 . 50 . 2 T D S E is always at a peak whenever a regular distribu - tion occurs . In contrast , D H E is always at a local ( sometimes global ) minimum ; however , D G E is not always at a mini - mum , but usually has a sudden change of slope at a regular distribution composition . DISCUSSION We have developed a model for cholesterol - phospholipid interactions in a bilayer having high cholesterol content . Our model focuses on the key finding that cholesterol precipitates from bilayer mixtures with PC at a cholesterol FIGURE 7 Two possible regular distribution patterns at x chol 5 0 . 67 . FIGURE 8 D G E and D H E , and 2 T D S E as functions of cholesterol mole fraction , for D E c 5 0 . 6 kT , simulated with MIEP II . FIGURE 9 Excess entropy , D S E , as a function of cholesterol mole fraction , at various values of D E m , simulated using pairwise - additive interactions . 2152 Biophysical Journal Volume 76 April 1999 mole fraction of 0 . 66 , and from bilayer mixtures of PE at 0 . 51 . Our confidence in the precise numerical value of these mole fractions is based upon exhaustive experimentation described in recent papers ( Buboltz and Feigenson , 1999 ; Huang et al . , 1999 ) . We find that the most simple model for the microscopic interaction energies , in which cholesterol - cholesterol , cho - lesterol - phospholipid , and phospholipid - phospholipid ener - gies are all pairwise additive , can explain the observed x * chol value of 0 . 51 for 16 : 0 , 18 : 1 - PE . This value of 0 . 51 appears naturally when the energy of unlike molecular contacts is sufficiently more favorable than the energies of like con - tacts ( see Eq . 4 ) . This is a common situation in mixtures , a form of nonideal mixing in which the mixing is better than random . However , if this pairwise additive description were adequate , then we would actually learn little about the physical origin of the interactions , since so many types of interactions fall into this category . A key result from the thermodynamic analysis of our simulations is that the pairwise additive treatment cannot explain the observed x * chol value of 0 . 66 for the four differ - ent PCs for which we have data . No choice of parameters in a pairwise additive model can yield a steep increase in m cholbilayer ( x chol ) at x chol 5 0 . 66 , as is shown in Fig . 4 a . We could treat PE and the PCs separately , modeling the PC / cholesterol mixtures , but not the PE / cholesterol mix - tures , with a multibody interaction energy treatment . How - ever , we find that we gain insight by considering PE and PC to be described by the same general type of interaction parameter sets . In this general multibody interaction energy parameter ( MIEP ) model , we notice the number of choles - terol nearest - neighbors for each cholesterol in the lattice . We then assign the same energy to each cholesterol - choles - terol contact as in MIEP I , or we assign a gradual increase in energy as the number of multibody contacts increases as in MIEP IV , or else we assign a large jump in energy to particular contacts , e . g . , to three - body contacts using MIEP II , or to four - body contacts using MIEP III . Depending upon the choice of MIEP coefficients , that is , whether and how we assign energy jumps to particular cholesterol - cholesterol multibody contacts , computer simu - lations reveal different patterns for cholesterol - phospholipid lateral distributions : 1 . There are three possible critical cholesterol mole frac - tions at which highly regular distributions of cholesterol can occur ( see Note 3 ) . They are x chol 5 0 . 50 , 0 . 57 , and 0 . 67 , corresponding to cholesterol / phospholipid mole ra - tios of 1 / 1 , 4 / 3 , and 2 / 1 , respectively . In these regular distributions , a cholesterol has exactly 0 , or 1 , or 2 other cholesterols as nearest - neighbors , if there are no defects in the distribution patterns . 2 . When a regular distribution occurs , m cholbilayer always jumps steeply at this critical mole fraction . If m cholbilayer jumps high enough , it intersects m cholcrystal . Thus , the MIEP model predicts that the measured x * chol values are most likely to be in the vicinities of three possible critical cholesterol mole fractions . The enthalpy is always at a local ( or global ) minimum , indicating that a regular distribution is a minimum energy state . The entropy is also at a mini - mum , because the mixture adopts only a few particular configurations in phase space . 3 . For the regular distribution to occur at x chol 5 0 . 5 , the energy cost for every cholesterol - cholesterol contact must be higher than ; 4 kT ; for a regular distribution to occur at x chol 5 0 . 57 , the energy cost for the additional , second cholesterol - cholesterol contact must be ; 4 kT higher than that of the first one ; and for the regular distribution to occur at x chol 5 0 . 67 , the energy cost for the third cholesterol - cholesterol contact must be ; 5 kT higher than that of the first two . The umbrella model In our cholesterol multibody interaction model , in order to have a steep jump in chemical potential at critical mole fractions , the energy cost for some higher - order cholesterol - cholesterol contacts must become much higher than that for lower - order contacts . Here , we propose a simple physical origin , which we term the “umbrella model , ” for the sudden increase in energy cost as cholesterols come into contact with each other in a bilayer . Cholesterol is largely nonpolar . The lone hydroxyl rep - resents , 5 % of the mass , and perhaps 1 / 4 of the surface that is exposed at the bilayer interface . Exposure to water of the nonpolar part of cholesterol would yield a very unfavorable contribution to the free energy ( Privalov and Gill , 1988 ; Levy and Gallicchio , 1998 ) . When cholesterols are incor - porated into a phospholipid bilayer , phospholipid head - groups provide “cover” to shield the nonpolar part of cho - lesterol from exposure to water . This is illustrated schematically in Fig . 10 a . Phospholipid headgroups act like umbrellas . The space under the headgroups is shared by acyl chains and cholesterols . As the cholesterol content in a bilayer increases , polar phospholipid headgroups reorient in order to provide more coverage per headgroup for the increasing fraction of cho - lesterol molecules , as drawn in Fig . 10 b . The headgroup umbrellas are “stretched” to provide more coverage area . Under the umbrella acyl chains and cholesterol molecules become tightly packed . No cholesterol is exposed to water at this point . Cholesterol hydroxyl groups also interact at the aqueous interface to provide partial coverage , but these hydroxyls cannot completely cover the nonpolar part of cholesterol without help from phospholipid headgroups . For a given cholesterol molecule , an additional choles - terol nearest - neighbor comes at the cost of losing an acyl chain contact . If neighboring phospholipid headgroups are required to shield a given cholesterol from water , then we expect the energetic cost of each additional cholesterol - cholesterol contact to increase ( see Note 4 ) . In particular , if losing one more phospholipid contact would expose the cholesterol molecule to the aqueous phase , then the energy cost would jump sharply . As illustrated in Fig . 10 c , if the Huang and Feigenson Model of Cholesterol Solubility in Bilayers 2153 phospholipid headgroups are stretched to their limits , they can no longer provide shielding for additional cholesterols . Exposure of cholesterol to water is very unfavorable . This may well be the big increase in energy cost for acquiring an additional cholesterol - cholesterol contact ( or equivalently , for losing an acyl chain contact ) needed to produce the regular distribution of cholesterol and the steep jump of m cholbilayer at critical mole fractions . To lower the overall free energy , instead of allowing the hydrophobic regions of bilayers to be exposed to water , excess cholesterol mole - cules precipitate , forming cholesterol monohydrate crystals , as shown in Fig . 10 d . Therefore , in our umbrella model , x * chol has a physical meaning : x * chol is a cholesterol mole fraction at which the capability of phospholipid headgroups to cover cholesterol molecules from water has reached its maximum . Any additional cholesterol in the bilayer would be exposed to water . The difference in x * chol values of PE and PC may originate from the size of their headgroups ( Wilkinson and Nagle , 1981 ) . Here , we mean the “effective area” of the headgroup , including bound water . The smaller headgroup of PE would be less effective than that of PC in providing shielding , so PE / cholesterol mixtures would have a high energy cost even for the first cholesterol - cholesterol contact . According to our simulations , relatively high energy cost for the first cholesterol - cholesterol contact results in m cholbilayer rising sharply at 0 . 50 , and thus x * chol 5 0 . 50 . In contrast , the larger headgroup of PC might well accommodate the first two cholesterol - cholesterol contacts , but be overwhelmed by the third one . The energy cost profile could then be modeled by MIEP III , i . e . , very high energy cost for the third choles - terol - cholesterol contact . This would result in x * chol 5 0 . 67 . So if the size of the phospholipid headgroup is the domi - nating factor , then the lack of acyl chain dependence of x * chol for PCs is explained . Would the energy cost associated with aqueous exposure of cholesterol , together with any phospholipid deforma - tions , be in the range of 4 – 5 kT , as estimated from our computer simulations ? There are no data available for cho - lesterol - containing mixtures , but studies of the hydrophobic interaction and lipid deformation in other cases suggest that 4 – 5 kT is within the expected range . For example , King and Marsh measured the critical micelle concentration of spin - labeled PCs by ESR spectroscopy . They estimated the free energy of transferring a PC monomer from an aqueous phase to a micelle to be 2 1 . 1 kT per CH 2 group ( King and Marsh , 1987 ) . Fattal and Ben - Shaul calculated the lipid deformation free energy caused by lipid - protein hydropho - bic mismatch in a bilayer , using a molecular model . At a mismatch length of 3 . 5 Å , the deformation free energy can be as high as 2 kT per lipid ( Fattal and Ben - Shaul , 1993 ) . We have found only one other case in the literature where multibody interactions were used for membrane simula - tions . Drouffe and co - workers attempted to simulate a self - assembled two - dimensional membrane from individual am - phiphilic “particles” using molecular dynamics simulations ( Drouffe et al . , 1991 ) . They found that a membrane would not be stable unless a multibody interaction , which assigns a large free energy cost for exposing the hydrocarbon chains to water , is included in the simulation . This finding supports the importance of a hydrophobic effect as an essential membrane interaction . The umbrella model and the “condensing effect” The umbrella model implies the physical origin for the long - known “cholesterol condensing effect” ( the average molecular area in a cholesterol - phospholipid monolayer is less than the sum ; or , the range of motion of phospholipid acyl chains in a bilayer is reduced by cholesterol ( Leathes , 1925 ; Demel et al . , 1967 ; Stockton and Smith , 1976 ; Vist and Davis , 1990 ) . These effects are also related to the decrease of bilayer permeability with increasing cholesterol FIGURE 10 The physical origin of the maximum solubility of choles - terol in a bilayer , illustrated by the “umbrella model . ” Cholesterol mole - cules are represented as ovals . ( a ) In a lipid bilayer , the polar phospholipid headgroups act like umbrellas , shielding the nonpolar part of cholesterol molecules from water ; ( b ) as the concentration of cholesterol increases , phospholipid headgroups are stretched to provide coverage for the increas - ing number of cholesterols ; ( c ) the phospholipid headgroups are stretched to their limit and can no longer provide shielding for all cholesterol molecules . Some cholesterol molecules ( shaded ovals ) are exposed to water , causing a steep jump in chemical potential of cholesterol . ( d ) To lower the free energy , excess cholesterol molecules precipitate and form a second phase : cholesterol monohydrate crystals . The bilayer phase now contains the maximum number of cholesterols that the phospholipid head - groups can cover . 2154 Biophysical Journal Volume 76 April 1999 content ( Kinsky et al . , 1967 ) . In the umbrella model , acyl chains and cholesterols become more tightly packed as cholesterol content increases , because they share the limited space under phospholipid headgroups . The hydrophobic nature of cholesterol thus forces cholesterol and acyl chains together . The model also implies that while acyl chains are compressed , phospholipid headgroups expanded . Thus we propose that the hydrophobic interaction could be the common driving force for cholesterol precipitation from the bilayer , as well as for the condensing effect / acyl chain ordering . Regular distribution and multibody interaction The regular distribution pattern shown in Fig . 3 b is iden - tical to one of the so - called “superlattice” distribution pat - terns of pyrene - PC or cholesterol in phospholipid bilayers . The proposed superlattice patterns were initially based on observation of a series of “kinks” or “dips” in the ratio of excimer - to - monomer fluorescence at particular mole frac - tions of pyrene - PC in bilayers ( Somerharju et al . , 1985 ; Tang and Chong , 1992 ; Chong et al . , 1994 ) . The bulky pyrene moieties were thought to form hexagonal superlat - tices in order to maximize separation from each other . Later , fluorescence data on cholesterol / phospholipid mixtures in - dicated that cholesterol molecules might also form super - lattices in lipid bilayers ( Chong , 1994 ; Virtanen et al . , 1995 ; Liu et al . , 1997 ) . Superlattice patterns at x chol 5 0 . 118 , 0 . 154 , 0 . 20 , 0 . 25 , 0 . 33 , 0 . 40 , and 0 . 5 were suggested based on geometrical symmetry arguments . A regular distribution at x chol 5 0 . 67 ( Fig . 7 a ) has been proposed , but does not fit the general form of the superlattice ( Lundberg , 1982 ; Vir - tanen et al . , 1995 ) . Sugar et al . explored the origin of superlattice patterns by using Monte Carlo simulations , introducing a long - range pairwise - additive repulsive inter - action ( Sugar et al . , 1994 ) . They found that long - range pairwise - additive repulsion can generate a superlattice pat - tern at x chol 5 0 . 5 , like the pattern in Fig . 3 b , but cannot produce any other large - scale superlattice patterns . How - ever , the general form of microscopic interaction that could produce the superlattices has remained unclear . In contrast , we have shown that the superlattice pattern in Fig . 3 b can also be generated with a nearest - neighbor pairwise - additive interaction , without a long - range force . Pairwise - additive interactions are commonly used to model microscopic interactions between phospholipid mol - ecules ( Jorgensen and Mouritsen , 1995 ; Sugar et al . , 1994 ; Huang et al . , 1993 ) , phospholipid and sterols ( Cruzeiro - Hansson et al . , 1989 ) , as well as phospholipid and proteins ( Zhang et al . , 1993 ) . In contrast , multibody interactions are rarely used for modeling lipid bilayers . This study clearly demonstrates that pairwise - additive interactions are inade - quate to model the observed maximum solubility of choles - terol in bilayers ; a multibody interaction is indispensable . The multibody interaction introduced in Eq . 5 can generate a series of regular distributions at x chol $ 0 . 5 . This new class of regular distributions is based on molecular contact , not on maximum molecular separation , as proposed for the bilayer superlattices . It is interesting to note that the focus of the studies of Sugar et al . was to obtain a regular distribution of bulky molecules , whereas ours was to obtain a steep jump in cholesterol chemical potential . By calculating the free energy , we show that these two seemingly unrelated phe - nomena are actually the two inseparable consequences of a class of multibody interactions . The usefulness of the multibody interaction treatment is not limited to description of the cholesterol interaction in bilayers of very high cholesterol content . It is readily ex - tended to the low cholesterol content regime by introducing a different multibody interaction , associated with the local environment of each acyl chain . We have successfully sim - ulated many cholesterol superlattice patterns at x chol , 0 . 5 ( Huang and Feigenson , manuscript in preparation ) . We can now conclude that regular distributions are generally cre - ated by multibody interactions . Acyl chain effects The chemical potential of cholesterol in bilayers must have some contribution from the microscopic interaction of cho - lesterol with its acyl chain neighbors . Cruzeiro - Hansson et al . ( 1989 ) calculated a cholesterol / phospholipid phase dia - gram for the low x chol regime , in which different interaction energies were assigned between cholesterol and acyl chains for different acyl chain conformations . We looked for such effects by measuring x * chol in long - and short - chain PCs . The ( pure PC ) di22 : 1 - PC bilayer is nearly 40 % thicker than the di12 : 0 - PC bilayer ( Caffrey and Feigenson , 1981 ) , so we might expect some difference in the interactions with cho - lesterol . Instead , we find that x * chol are essentially identical in these two PCs , as well as in 16 : 0 , 18 : 1 - PC and di16 : 0 - PC , so the cholesterol - acyl chain contribution to m cholbilayer ( x chol ) must be considerably smaller than that from cholesterol - cholesterol near x * chol . Our Hamiltonian is built to explore the cholesterol - cho - lesterol interactions that dominate in causing cholesterol precipitation near x * chol . There are many other types of interactions that are included in our Hamiltonian , which could become dominant under different conditions . For example , at lower x chol , where cholesterol - cholesterol con - tacts are almost absent , cholesterol - acyl chain interactions could have an important role . However , the low x chol regime is not the focus of this study . Absence of cholesterol - phospholipid complexes As seen above , there are indeed “special mole ratios” of cholesterol / phospholipid , e . g . , at 1 / 1 or 4 / 3 or 2 / 1 . Distinct structural and thermodynamic events take place , such as the appearance of a regular distribution and a chemical potential jump . However , these special mole ratios that we identify Huang and Feigenson Model of Cholesterol Solubility in Bilayers 2155 have no connection whatsoever to any chemical equilibrium binding reaction , such as 2Chol 1 PL º PL ( Chol ) 2 or 4Chol 1 3PL º PL 3 ( Chol ) 4 . To clarify this point , consider the aligned dimer pattern at x chol 5 0 . 57 shown in Fig . 5 b . Superficially , it might appear to be a cholesterol - to - acyl chain stoichiometric 2 / 3 complex . However , at the lower cholesterol composition shown in Fig . 5 c , many cholesterol dimers are already formed , but no particular cholesterol / phospholipid ratio is associated with each dimer ! The dimer pattern at x chol 5 0 . 57 is simply a minimum energy pattern , in which all cholesterols avoid the costly second cholester - ol - cholesterol contact : there is no chemical association be - tween phospholipid and cholesterol . In fact , there is no chemical association energy term in our Hamiltonian , and yet dramatic events can happen at “special mole fractions . ” Therefore , it is incorrect to generalize all distinct distribu - tions that occur at special mole fractions to be complex formation . Testable predictions Our MIEP model predicts that x * chol is most likely to occur at certain discrete values , in the vicinities of either x chol 5 0 . 500 , or 0 . 571 , or 0 . 667 . So far , we found that four PCs have x * chol at 0 . 66 , and one PE at 0 . 51 . Of course , more equilibrium x * chol data for other phospholipids would pro - vide a valuable test of this model . x * chol 5 0 . 57 is a new critical mole fraction that naturally arises from our model . There is no known report of x * chol at 0 . 57 so far , nor have its regular distribution patterns ( Fig . 5 b ) been described previously . Yet , the cholesterol - choles - terol multibody interactions that would give rise to these patterns and to x * chol 5 0 . 57 would seem to be accessible , given the great variety of phospholipid headgroups . In terms of the microscopic energy , the requirement is that the three - body interaction of cholesterols should have a jump in energy , compared with the two - body cholesterol - cholesterol interaction , i . e . , MIEP II should apply . It would be interest - ing to find some phospholipids having x * chol 5 0 . 57 . Rea - sonable candidates would be phospholipids with headgroup size intermediate between that of PE and PC , such as mono or dimethyl - PE . Mixtures of PE and PC might show x * chol 5 0 . 57 , for example if PE and PC in a bilayer mixture distrib - ute randomly around cholesterol - cholesterol dimers . If cholesterols do distribute regularly in bilayers at x * chol , as pictured in Figs . 3 b and 6 b , such organization of cho - lesterol and acyl chains might be detectable , for example by neutron diffraction . In this study we have partially characterized a particular interaction that dominates all others in the special case of binary phospholipid - cholesterol mixtures at high x chol . Al - though the study is restricted in this way , the finding of highly unfavorable cholesterol - cholesterol interaction seems applicable to real plasma membranes . NOTES 1 . In this simulation , two acyl chains belonging to the same phospho - lipid are not physically linked . A new simulation procedure to implement such a link has been recently reported ( Sugar et al . , 1998 ) . We will try to incorporate it in our future simulations . We anticipate that this new procedure might have some effect on the entropy contribution to the Gibbs free energy . 2 . In Fig . 4 and all other figures , x chol represents the cholesterol mole fraction in the bilayer . It can be different from the overall cholesterol content . For example , if the chemical potential jumps high enough at x chol 5 0 . 5 and reaches the value of m cholcrystal , any additional cholesterol would precipitate to form cholesterol monohydrate crystals ; m cholbilayer would stop at the value of m cholcrystal , and the cholesterol mole fraction in the bilayer would remain constant , even as the overall cholesterol content exceeds 0 . 5 . 3 . There are other theoretical critical mole fractions , higher than 0 . 67 , at which regular distributions can occur ( each cholesterol having three or more cholesterol contacts ) . Since we have not yet found an experimental x * chol value higher than 0 . 67 , we do not discuss these here . 4 . The hydrophobic interaction has an overall unfavorable contribution to the free energy ( Privalov and Gill , 1988 ; Levy and Gallicchio , 1998 ) . At room temperature it is energetically favorable , but entropically very unfa - vorable . Since our lattice model does not explicitly contain water mole - cules , this unfavorable free energy contribution is phenomenologically expressed as an unfavorable interaction energy . The authors thank Jeffrey Buboltz for many helpful discussions . This work was supported by National Science Foundation Grant MCB - 9722818 . REFERENCES Bach , D . , N . Borochov , and E . Wachtel . 1998 . Phase separation of cho - lesterol in dimyristoyl phosphatidylserine cholesterol mixtures . Chem . Phys . Lipids . 92 : 71 – 77 . Bloch , K . 1991 . Cholesterol : evolution of structure and function . In Bio - chemistry of Lipids , Lipoproteins and Membranes . D . E . Vance and J . E . Vance , editors . Elsevier , Amsterdam . 363 – 381 . Buboltz , J . T . , and G . W . Feigenson . 1999 . A novel strategy for the preparation of liposomes : rapid solvent exchange . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . ( in press ) . Caffrey , M . , and G . W . Feigenson . 1981 . Fluorescence quenching in model membranes . 3 . Relationship between calcium adenosinetriphosphatase enzyme activity and the affinity of the protein for phosphatidylcholines with different acyl chain characteristics . Biochemistry . 20 : 1949 – 1961 . Chialvo , A . A . 1990 . Determination of excess Gibbs free energy from computer simulation by the single charging - integral approach I . Theory . J . Chem . Phys . 92 : 673 – 679 . Chong , P . L . - G . 1994 . Evidence for regular distribution of sterols in liquid crystalline phosphatidylcholine bilayers . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 91 : 10069 – 10073 . Chong , P . L . - G . , D . Tang , and I . P . Sugar . 1994 . Exploration of physical principles underlying lipid regular distribution : effects of pressure , tem - perature , and radius of curvature on E / M dips in pyrene - labeled PC / DMPC binary mixtures . Biophys . J . 66 : 2029 – 2038 . Cruzeiro - Hansson , L . , J . H . Ipsen , and O . G . Mouritsen . 1989 . Intrinsic molecules in lipid membranes change the lipid - domain interfacial area : cholesterol at domain interfaces . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 979 : 166 – 167 . Demel , R . A . , L . L . M . van Deenen , and B . A . Pethica . 1967 . Monolayer interactions of phospholipids and cholesterol . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 135 : 11 – 19 . Drouffe , J . M . , A . C . Maggs , and S . Leibler . 1991 . Computer simulations of self - assembled membranes . Science . 254 : 1353 – 1356 . Fattal , D . R . , and A . Ben - Shaul . 1993 . A molecular model for lipid - protein interaction in membranes : the role of hydrophobic mismatch . Biophys . J . 65 : 1795 – 1809 . 2156 Biophysical Journal Volume 76 April 1999 Finean , J . B . 1990 . Interaction between cholesterol and phospholipid in hydrated bilayers . Chem . Phys . Lipids . 54 : 147 – 156 . Finegold , L . ( editor ) . 1993 . Cholesterol in Membrane Models . CRC Press , Boca Raton , FL . Gershfeld , N . L . 1978 . Equilibrium studies of lecithin - cholesterol interac - tions . I . stoichiometry of lecithin - cholesterol complexes in bulk systems . Biophys . J . 22 : 469 – 488 . Guggenheim , E . A . 1952 . Mixtures . Clarendon Press , Oxford . 23 . Haile , J . M . 1986 . On the use of computer simulation to determine the excess free energy in fluid mixtures . Fluid Phase Equilibria . 26 : 103 – 127 . Horowitz , C . , L . Krut , and L . Kaminsky . 1971 . Cholesterol uptake by egg - yolk phosphatidylcholine . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 239 : 329 – 336 . Huang , J . , J . T . Buboltz , and G . W . Feigenson . 1999 . Maximum solubility of cholesterol in phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine bi - layers . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . ( in press ) . Huang , J . , and G . W . Feigenson . 1993 . Monte Carlo simulation of lipid mixtures : finding phase separation . Biophys . J . 65 : 1788 – 1794 . Huang , J . , J . E . Swanson , A . R . G . Dibble , A . K . Hinderliter , and G . W . Feigenson . 1993 . Nonideal mixing of phosphatidylserine and phosphati - dylcholine in the fluid lamellar phase . Biophys . J . 64 : 413 – 425 . Jorgensen , K . , and O . Mouritsen . 1995 . Phase separation dynamics and lateral organization of two - component lipid membranes . Biophys . J . 69 : 942 – 954 . King , M . D . , and D . Marsh . 1987 . Head group and chain length dependence of phospholipid self - assembly studied by spin - label electron spin reso - nance . Biochemistry . 26 : 1224 – 1231 . Kinsky , S . C . , S . A . Luse , D . Zopf , L . L . M . van Deenen , and J . Haxby . 1967 . Interaction of filipin and derivatives with erythrocyte membranes and lipid dispersions : electron microscopic observations . Biochim . Bio - phys . Acta . 135 : 844 – 861 . Kirkwood , J . G . 1935 . Statistical mechanics of fluid mixtures . J . Chem . Phys . 3 : 300 – 313 . Kirkwood , J . G . 1936 . Statistical mechanics of liquid solutions . Chem . Rev . 19 : 275 – 307 . Leathes , J . B . 1925 . Role of fats in vital phenomena . Lancet . 208 : 853 – 856 . Levy , R . M . , and E . Gallicchio . 1998 . Computer simulations with explicit solvent : recent progress in the thermodynamic decomposition of free energies and in modeling electrostatic effects . Annu . Rev . Phys . Chem . 49 : 531 – 567 . Liu , F . , I . P . Sugar , and P . L . - G . Chong . 1997 . Cholesterol and ergosterol superlattices in three - component liquid crystalline lipid bilayers as re - vealed by dehydroergosterol fluorescence . Biophys . J . 72 : 2243 – 2254 . Lundberg , B . 1982 . A surface film study of the lateral packing of phos - phatidylcholine and cholesterol . Chem . Phys . Lipids . 31 : 23 – 32 . Metropolis , N . , A . W . Rosenbluth , M . N . Rosenbluth , and A . Teller . 1953 . Equation of state calculations by fast computing machines . J . Chem . Phys . 21 : 1087 – 1092 . Nagle , J . F . , R . Zhang , S . Tristram - Nagle , W . Sun , H . Petrache , and R . M . Suter . 1996 . X - ray structure determination of fully hydrated L a phase dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine bilayers . Biophys . J . 70 : 1419 – 1431 . Privalov , P . L . , and S . J . Gill . 1988 . Stability of protein structure and hydrophobic interaction . Adv . Protein Chem . 39 : 191 – 234 . Scott , H . L . 1991 . Lipid - cholesterol interactions . Biophys . J . 59 : 445 – 455 . Somerharju , P . , J . A . Virtanen , K . K . Eklund , P . Vainio , and P . K . Kinnunen . 1985 . 1 - palmitoyl - 2 - pyrenedecanoyl glycerophospholipids as membrane probes : evidence for regular distribution in liquid - crystalline phosphatidylcholine bilayers . Biochemistry . 24 : 2773 – 2781 . Stockton , B . W . , and I . C . P . Smith . 1976 . A deuterium NMR study of the condensing effect of cholesterol on egg phosphatidylcholine bilayer membranes . Chem . Phys . Lipids . 17 : 251 – 261 . Sugar , I . P . , D . Tang , and P . L . - G . Chong . 1994 . Monte Carlo simulation of lateral distribution of molecules in a two - component lipid membrane . Effect of long - range repulsive interactions . J . Phys . Chem . 98 : 7201 – 7210 . Sugar , I . P . , T . E . Thompson , K . K . Thompson , and R . L . Biltonen . 1998 . Monte Carlo simulation of two - component bilayers : DMPC / DSPC mix - tures . Biophys . J . 74 : 373 a . ( Abstr . ) . Tang , D . , and P . L . - G . Chong . 1992 . E / M dips : evidence for lipids regu - larly distributed into hexagonal super - lattices in pyrene - PC / DMPC bi - nary mixtures at specific concentrations . Biophys . J . 63 : 903 – 910 . Virtanen , J . A . , M . Ruonala , M . Vauhkonen , and P . Somerharju . 1995 . Lateral organization of liquid - crystalline cholesterol - dimyristoylphos - phatidylcholine bilayers . Evidence for domains with hexagonal and centered rectangular cholesterol superlattices . Biochemistry . 34 : 11568 – 11581 . Vist , M . , and J . H . Davis . 1990 . Phase equilibria of cholesterol / dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine mixtures : 2 H nuclear magnetic reso - nance and differential scanning calorimetry . Biochemistry . 29 : 451 – 464 . Wilkinson , D . A . , and J . F . Nagle . 1981 . Dilatometry and calorimetry of saturated PE dispersions . Biochemistry . 20 : 187 – 192 . Zhang , Z . , M . M . Sperotto , M . J . Zuckermann , and O . G . Mouritsen . 1993 . A microscopic model for lipid / protein bilayers with critical mixing . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1147 : 154 – 160 . Huang and Feigenson Model of Cholesterol Solubility in Bilayers 2157