Intelligence , creativity , and innovation Jay Squalli a , ⁎ , Kenneth Wilson b a Department of Economics , American University of Sharjah , P . O . Box 26666 , Sharjah , United ArabEmirates b Of ﬁ ce of the Provost , Zayed University , P . O . Box 19282 , Dubai , United ArabEmirates a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t Article history : Received 18 March 2014 Received inrevised form 22 June 2014 Accepted 14 July2014 Available online 14 August 2014 Thisstudyprovidesthefirsttestoftheintelligence – innovationhypothesis , whichcontributestothe intelligence – creativity debate in the psychology literature and to the innovation – growth debate in theeconomicsliterature . UsingU . S . state - leveldatathestudyfindsthat , netofotherfactors , high - IQ states are more innovative as measured by the important innovation outcome measure , utility patents registered . This study highlights the need for a better understanding of the relationship between intelligence , creative achievement , and innovation , a nascent and under - researched field of inquiry . Our research also begs the question of whether efforts to nurture intelligence are a necessary first step to increasing the capacity to realize innovation improvements . © 2014 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Keywords : Intelligence IQ Creativity Innovation Utility patents 1 . Introduction The relationship between intelligence , creativity , and inno - vationislittleunderstoodbyeconomistsandpsychologistsalike and is a fertile area for research , particularly interdisciplinary research , where questions abound in terms of the influence of intelligenceonbothcreativityandinnovation . Indeed , themajor focus of this paper is the question : do more intelligent societies or communities innovate more ? Although psychologists have not addressed the intelligence – innovation relationship explic - itly , they have made attempts at understanding how intelli - gence contributes to creativity , a related trait , but mainly at theindividuallevel . However , theabsenceofaunifieddefinition of creativity has made this task not only challenging but controversial . In addition , related inquiries face further compli - cations arising from the fact that intelligence and creativity are constructed differently and are subjected to varying theoretical and psychometric development ( see e . g . Kaufman & Plucker , 2011 ) . Empirical studies have generally reported little to no correlation between intelligence and creativity . Two notable examples include Wallach and Kogan ( 1965 ) and Kim ( 2005 ) who report average correlation between intelligence and creativity of 0 . 09 and 0 . 17 , respectively . 1 The low correlation between intelligence and creativity , to some extent , arises from the confusing array of definitions and measures that are used to represent creativity in empirical studies . Indeed , Nusbaum and Silvia ( 2011 ) emphasize that modern creativity research emphasizes the difference between intelligence and creativity and draw particular attention to the work of Kaufman ( 2009 ) and Sawyer ( 2006 ) . However , Nusbaum and Silvia take a different view and assert that intelligence is more central to creative cognition than is more popularly believed . Just like psychologists , economists have expressed keen interest in the role that innovation plays in stimulating economic growth . There are strong theoretical foundations in four different branches of economic thought : evolutionary ( Nelson & Winter , 1982 ; Schumpeter , 1934 ) ; neo - classical ( Solow , 1956 , 1957 ) ; post - Keynesian ( Kaldor , 1957 ) ; and Intelligence 46 ( 2014 ) 250 – 257 ⁎ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 971 65152318 . E - mail addresses : jsqualli @ aus . edu ( J . Squalli ) , Kenneth . Wilson @ mcycd . gov . ae , kenneth . wilson @ zu . ac . ae ( K . Wilson ) . 1 Wallach and Kogan ( 1965 ) correlate ﬁ ve different measures of creativity with ten measures of intelligence , whereas Kim ( 2005 ) undertakes a meta - analysis of 21 studies . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intell . 2014 . 07 . 005 0160 - 2896 / © 2014 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Intelligence endogenous growth ( Romer , 1986 , 1990 ) . Although the transmission mechanism from innovation to economic growth varies depending upon the framework , the evidence consistently predict that more innovation leads to greater economic growth ( Guellec & van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie , 2001 ; Lederman & Maloney , 2003 ) . Innovation boosts produc - tivity , improves an economy ' s competitiveness and contributes to building knowledge - based economies and societies . Intelli - genceisakeyaspectofhumancapitalinanysocietyandhuman capital plays an important role in the theory of economic growth . For instance , Mankiw , Romer , and Weil ( 1992 ) include a human capital variable in their empirical test of the Solow ( 1957 ) model where human capital is measured by secondary school enrollments . Other human capital measures include primary school enrollments ( Sala - i - Martin , 1997 ) and average years of schooling ( Barro & Lee , 1993 ) . More recently , Jones and Schneider ( 2006 ) use IQ as the human capital measure in their empirical test of the human capital - economic growth hypoth - esis . Similar to Weede and Kämpf ( 2002 ) they find that intelligence , measured by IQ , has a direct , positive effect on economic growth . Given that intelligence is an important element of human capital , we propose that there is more innovation in societies that have high - IQ populations for three reasons . First , more intelligent people have longer time horizons , a consistent findinginpsychologyandeconomics ( Potrafke , 2012 ; Shamosh & Gray , 2008 ) which enables them to better appreciate the increasing returns from innovation , entrepreneurship and risk - taking behavior . Second , in high - IQ population groups , knowl - edge spillovers from ‘ social technologies ’ ( Nelson & Sampat , 2001 ) are likely to be greater . 2 Third , since a key part of innovation involves scientific and engineering discovery and applications that are embodied in intellectual property via patents , we propose that more intelligent people are more able to undertake the considerable intellectual challenges asso - ciated with knowledge creation and innovation . Indeed , there is compelling evidence that intelligence has a direct effect on job performance when a job is inherently less trainable ; such as jobs that require creative problem solving , independent decision making and innovative adaptation ( Gottfredson , 2004 ) . These are the very skills needed for productive work in an innovation system . The transmission mechanism from intelligence to economic growth , illustrat - ing support for the proposition that innovation has a direct , positive effect on economic growth , is represented in Fig . 1 . Buildingonscholarlyworkinthepsychologyandeconomics literature , the original contribution of this paper is to provide the first test of the intelligence – innovation hypothesis . This assessment would contribute to the current intelligence – creativity debate in the psychology literature and to the innovation – growth debate in the economics literature . To this end , the paper is organized as follows : Section 2 discusses creativity and innovation . Section 3 describes our empirical strategy . Section 4 summarizes the results . Section 5 summa - rizes robustness estimations . Section 6 discusses the results and concludes . 2 . Creativity and innovation Intelligence , creativity and innovation may be well under - stood in general terms but attract considerable controversy when attempts are made to define , measure and assess their inter - relationships . Consider the following basic definitions of intelligence and creativity . According to the Merriam - Webster dictionary , intelligence is “ the ability to learn or understand thingsortodealwithnewordifficultsituations . ” Bycomparison , Mayer ( 1999 ) provides the following definition of creativity : “ creation of new and useful products including ideas as well as concrete objects . ” Such definitions place the area of overlap between the constructs as quite small . This is consistent with the early findings of Wallach and Kogan ( 1965 ) noted above . By contrast , Silvia et al . ( 2008 ) undertake a latent variable reanalysis of Wallach and Kogan ' s findings and find a correlation of r = 0 . 20 . Silvia ( 2008 ) continues this theme and argues that past work has tended to underestimate the relationship between intelligence and creativity . Silvia favors latent variable models which allow researchers “ to estimate higher - order latent factors , such as a latent g composed of lower - order latent factors ” ( p . 1013 ) . According to Silvia , testing the relationship between intelligence and creativity requires modeling intelligence as a higher - order , general factor composed of lower order cognitive skills . More recently , Nusbaum and Silvia ( 2011 ) use the latent variable approach to test therelationship between fluid intelligence andcreativity and conclude that intelligence and creativity are more closely related than more popular research contends . 2 Social technologies or social capital include the norms and social relations embeddedinsocial networks andinclude the sumofthe resourcesthat accrue to an individual or group when individuals work and interact together . Fig . 1 . The transmission of intelligence to growth via innovation . 251 J . Squalli , K . Wilson / Intelligence 46 ( 2014 ) 250 – 257