THREE - DIMENSIONAL VISUALIZATION OF COATED VESICLE FORMATION IN FIBROBLASTS JOHN HEUSER , with the technical assistance ofLOUISE EVANS From the Department of Physiology , School of Medicine , University of California , San Francisco , California 94143 ABSTRACT Fibroblasts apparently ingest low density lipoproteins ( LDL ) by a selective mech - anism of receptor - mediated endocytosis involving the formation of coated vesicles from the plasma membrane . However , it is not known exactly how coated vesicles collect LDL receptors and pinch off from the plasma membrane . In this report , the quick - freeze , deep - etch , rotary - replication method has been applied to fibro - blasts ; it displays with unusual clarity the coats that appear under the plasma membrane at the start of receptor - mediated endocytosis . These coats appear to be polygonal networks of 7 - nm strands or struts arranged into 30 - nm polygons , most of which are hexagons but some ofwhich are 5 - and 7 - sided rings . The proportion ofpentagons in each network increases as the coated area of the plasma membrane puckers up from its planar configuration ( where the network is mostly hexagons ) to its most sharply curved condition as a pinched - off coated vesicle . Coats around the smallest vesicles ( which are icosahedrons of hexagons and pentagons ) appear only slightly different from " empty coats " purified from homogenized brain , which are less symmetrical baskets containing more pentagons than hexagons . A search for structural intermediates in this coat transformation allows a test of T . Kanaseki and K . Kadota ' s ( 1969 . J . Cell Biol . 42 : 202 - 220 . ) original idea that an internal rearrangement in this basketwork from hexagons to pentagons could " power " coated vesicle formation . The most noteworthy variations in the typical hexagonal honeycomb are focaljuxtapositions of 5 - and 7 - sided polygons at points of partial contraction and curvature in the basketwork . These appear to precede complete contraction into individual pentagons completely surrounded by hexa - gons , which is the pattern that characterizes the final spherical baskets around coated vesicles . KEY WORDS (cid:9) coated vesicles (cid:9) " (cid:9) adsorptive endocytosis (cid:9) - (cid:9) surface replicas (cid:9) freeze - dried fibroblasts Adsorptive endocytosis of proteins and hormones appears in most cells to operate by the formation of coated vesicles from the plasma membrane . During this process , membrane - bound receptors for these proteins become associated with coated pits in the plasma membrane , after which these coated pits pinch off from the membrane to be - come coated vesicles , which in turn transport the protein to the lysosomal system or elsewhere inside the cell ( for a recent review , see reference 16 ; for specifics , see references 1 - 4 , 7 , 10 , 13 - 16 , 31 - 34 , 39 , 47 - 49 , 52 , and 55 ) . J . CELL BIOLOGY © The Rockefeller University Press " 0021 - 9525 / 80 / 03 / 0560 / 24 $ 1 . 00 Volume 84 (cid:9) March 1980 (cid:9) 560 - 583 However , it is not known how coated pits form or how their coats change as they pinch off from the plasma membrane to become coated vesicles . The views of coated pits shown in this report display the organization of the coat more clearly than heretofore possible and illustrate the variety of geometrical forms that it can assume . These data set constraints on the models that can be proposed for coated vesicle formation . In addition , the technique of specimen prepa - ration used here produces images that look like a cross between thin - section images and freeze - frac - ture images , so it becomes possible to look for structures that might link the coat to membrane receptors and to cytoplasmic filaments . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell Culture Fibroblasts originally isolated by trypsinization from Balb C mouse embryos were used within four passages and plated into 60 - min tissue culture dishes ( Falcon Labware , Div . of Becton , Dickinson & Co . , Oxnard , Calit ) containing anumber of4 - mm ' fragments of No . I coverglass . They were maintained in Dul - becco ' s modified Eagle ' s essential medium with 10 % fetal calf serum andallowed to settle down and spread on the glass cover slips for 18 h before each experiment . Freezing and Replication Cultures werequick - frozen bymounting individual coverslips on aluminum disks that are attached to the end of a plunger device originally designed to catch exocytosis in isolated frog muscles . This plunger rapidly drops causing the samples to strike a pure copper block that is cooled to the temperature of liquid helium ( see reference 27 for details of the construction and operation of this device ) . In ourexperiments , this method pro - duced frozen tissue - culture cells embedded in microcrystalline ice in which the crystals were < 20nm as a result ofthe extremely rapid freezing . To avoid crushing the cells and shattering the coverglasses when the plunger made contact with the copper block , we mounted the coverglasses on a soft , spongy matrix composed of slices of aldehyde - fixed rat lung . ( The lung was fixed in 2 % glutaraldehyde in water , sliced to a thickness of 0 . 8 mm with aSmith - Farquhar tissue chopper , andstored in distilled water , often for weeks , before use . ) The slices of lung became bonded to the surface of the aluminum disks as they froze and thus served as supports and carriers for the frozen coverglasses . Thedisks could then be mounted on thestandard rotary specimen stage in a freeze - fracture device ( Balzers Corp . , Nashua , N . H . ) . Once a vacuum of 10 - s torr or greater was achieved in this device , the specimens were warmed to - I00°C andfractured in the standard way . Then the tissue wasetched for 2 . 5 min , which removed 0 . 1 - 0 . 25 pm of water from the fractured surface . After etching , the samples were rotary replicated by evaporating car - bon - platinum onto them from a standard electron - beam gun mounted at 24° to the specimen plane while the specimen was rotating at 60 rpm . The resulting platinum replica was stabilized by 5 s of rotary deposition of pure carbon from agun mounted at 75° to the specimen plane . Thecoverglass was then removed from the vacuum andfloated offthe lung onto 30 % hydrofluoric acid in water , which promptly released the replica from the glass surface . The replica was then floated sequentially through dis - tilled water , full - strength household bleach , andtwomore water washes before being picked up on 75 - mesh Formvar carbon - coated grids . Microscopy Thereplicas were examined in aJEOL IOOB or I OOCelectron microscope operating at 100 kV . The high accelerating voltage wasused to reduce heating ofthe replica , to minimize recrystal - lization , and to reduce contrast in the final photographic nega - tives . Stereo pairs wereobtained with ahigh - resolution , top - entry goniometer stage tilted through ± 7° for all magnifications . Micrographswere examined in negative contrast , i . e . , by project - ing the original electron microscope negatives or by photograph - ically reversing them before printing to make the platinum deposits appear white and the background dark . This reverse contrast enhanced the three - dimensional appearance of the im - ages , as if the cells were illuminated by a gentle , diffuse " moon - light . " The samples appeared much as they do in the standard secondary mode of scanning electron microscopy . RESULTS While attempting to visualize attachment points of actin filaments to the inside of the plasma membrane in fibroblasts prepared as described above , we quite fortuitously obtained a number of glimpses of polygonal networks that appeared to lie under the filaments immediately against the inside of the plasma membrane ( Fig . 1 ) . These seemed likely to be unusual views of the " basket - work " that Kanaseki and Kadota ( 29 ) first saw around coated vesicles , though now on the inside ofthe plasma membrane . Roth and Porter ( 49 ) , in their original description of protein endocytosis by coated vesicles , showed that coated areas of the plasma membrane exist and predicted that these would be precursors of coated vesicles . Kanaseki and Kadota ( 29 ) predicted further that the coat under the plasma membrane would be formed of pure hexagons when it was flat , and that it would " power " the membrane invagination by rearrang - ing some of its hexagons into pentagons , thus forming the geodesic basket they observed around pinched - off coated vesicles . The views of basket - works shown in Fig . I were obtained from cells that had been distended in their last minute before freezing by a rinse in distilled water . This was done to dilute soluble cytoplasmic components and open up the view obtained by deep etching . Cells that were quick frozen and etched without this preliminary hypotonic shock displayed such a high concentration of unetchable granular ma - terial in their cytoplasm that views such as Fig . 1 were quite impossible to obtain ( cf . reference 40 ) . A second way to clear the cytoplasm for deep JOHN HEUSER (cid:9) Coated Vesicle Formation (cid:9) 561 etching was to fix the cells with 1 % glutaraldehyde in phosphate - buffered saline and then wash them in distilled water . This totally eliminated salts that may have formed part of the unetchable granular material , but the aldehyde fixation had certain pitfalls that will be illustrated more fully in a later report ( J . Heuser and M . W . Kirschner , manu - script submitted ) . Soluble components of the cy - toplasm appeared to become cross - linked to insol - uble components because something obscured , or at least decorated , the cytoplasmic filaments and membrane surfaces . In spite ofthis , aldehyde - fixed cells yielded the most complete views of basket - 562 FIGURE 1 (cid:9) Freeze - etch view ofthe inner surface ofthe fibroblast plasma membrane from a cell that had been quick - frozen without fixation and then freeze - fractured before etching . Actin filaments can be seen amid unidentified granular material in the cytoplasm above . The E - fracture face of the plasma membrane can be seen below , badly pitted by the long etching . Near the " shoreline " where the inner membrane surface begins ( large arrows ) are two polygonal " honeycombs " visible under the filaments . The honey - combs are composed largely ofhexagons , with afewjuxtapositions offive - and seven - member rings ( small arrows ) . Bar , 0 . 1 lm . x 126 , 000 . THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 84 , 1980 works against the inside of the plasma membrane , possibly because fixed cells fractured more favor - ably with the technique we used . Often , it ap - peared that almost everything in the culture had been removed , leaving only the parts of the fibro - blast plasma membranes that had been in direct contact with the coverglass . This afforded views , such as seen in Fig . 2 , of the true cytoplasmic surface of the plasma membrane . On that surface could be found many basketworks in a variety of curvatures . Immunocytochemistry has shown that coated pits are as abundant on the bottom of the cell as on the top , which is exposed to the most FIGURE 2 (cid:9) View of the inside of the plasma membrane from a fibroblast fixed with aldehydes before preparation as in Fig . 1 . Submembranous filaments are coarsened and obscured by a coagulum , but , for unknown reasons , the honeycombs stand out even more clearly . Again , a few five - and seven - sided polygons are found side by side among the hexagonal majority . Bar , 0 . 1 / m . x 140 , 000 . tissue culture fluid ( 4 ) . The rotary replicas of this membrane surface showed the overall organization of the basket - works quite clearly ( Fig . 3 ) . They appeared to be composed of honeycombs with - 8 . 5 - nm walls or struts linked predominantly into hexagons , with a few pentagons and heptagons interspersed , as will be illustrated later . These polygons were so small JOHN HEUSER (cid:9) Coated Vesicle Formation (cid:9) 563 ( - 30 nm ) and the shadowing angle so flat , that it was difficult , in these replicas , to see through the baskets to the plasma membrane underneath . The surface detail of the basket itself , however , was quite clear , and there were no overlapping images of front and back sides such as those that compli - cate three - dimensional electron microscopy of stained tissues , which often need optical diffrac - tion to be deciphered . The submembranous basketworks ranged from < 10 nm to > 300 nm in diameter . Consequently , they were composed of a variable number of po - lygons or facets ( from as few as 8 to more than 200in the largest basketworks ) as is shown in Fig . 4 . The arrow in this figure points to the mean number of facets , which was 61 , with a broad standard deviation of ± 40 . This mean is equiva - lent to an average diameter of 220 nm , which is comparable to the size ofcoated pits visualized in fibroblasts by other techniques ( 1 , 2 , 4 ) . The ob - servation of a continuous range of sizes suggested that the submembranous basketworks start as just 564 FIGURE 3 (cid:9) High magnification of the honeycomb network shows that it is composed of raised material , uniformly 7 nm wide , and linked into tight polygons , each 30 - nm in diameter . The granular background ofthe platinum replica is here about 2nm . Bar , 0 . 1 Am . x 420 , 000 . THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 84 , 1980 FIGURE 4 (cid:9) Histogram illustrating howoften coated pits of various sizes were found . Size is expressed as the number of polygons per coated pit . 256 examples from several dozen fibroblasts are displayed . The mean num - ber of polygons is 61 ( arrow ) , which is equivalent to a basketwork 220 nun in diameter . However , the distribu - tion was slightly skewed , as a result of a few very large basketworks that may have been confluent pairs , There - fore , the median of52 polygons may be abetter index of the average size ofthese coated pits , which would be 190 nm . ( Note that a basketwork 200 nm in diameter would ball up into a coated vesicle 100 nm in diameter , which would be typical of those found in fibroblasts . ) FIGURE 5 (cid:9) Selected examples from the various sizes ofbasketwork found , arranged to suggest continuous , progressive growth ( from a to e ) . The peripheral margins of the basketworks are invariably composed of incomplete polygons , regardless of how large the overall basketwork is . Bar , 0 . 1 [ m . x 200 , 000 . a few polygons and grow by the progressive ad - dition of more . Closer examination gave no indi - cation that growth was by coalescence of several small patches of polygons ; that is , small patches were never found near one another , nor was there any indication that basketworks grew in " quantal jumps " of dozens of polygons at a time , as might be expected if whole coated vesicles ( or whole " empty baskets , " which will be described later ) could join the basketworks one at atime . Instead , the histogram of sizes ( Fig . 4 ) was smooth enough to suggest that growth was progressive and contin - uous . Fig . 5 displays five basketworks that were typi - cal of the various sizes observed . Searching the margins of these basketworks for an indication of JOHN HEUSER (cid:9) Coated Vesicle Formation (cid:9) 565 how they mightgrow revealed that their periphery was usually ragged and composed of incomplete polygons bordered by amorphous material , which suggested that growth is most probably by the piecemeal assembly of polygons around the pe - riphery . The basketworks displayed in Fig . 5 were among the flattest that could be found . It was more common to find them in various degrees of curvature . The examples displayed in Fig . 6 in - clude the whole range of images that would be expected for a sequence ofendocytosis . ( Ofcourse , there was no way to assign a time arrow to this sequence ; it could represent the reverse process , i . e . , coated vesicle exocytosis , if such a process occurs in fibroblasts . ) The various degrees ofcur - vature could be evaluated much more accurately by tilting the replica ± 7° in the electron micro - scope and making stereo pairs of individual bas - ketworks such as are displayed in Fig . 7 . These dramatically illustrate that even the flattest baskets had a small degree ofinward curvature , and many were complete hemispheres . These rotary - replicated images were so clear that they allowed a direct test of Kanaseki and Kadota ' s ( 29 ) idea that an internal rearrangement of the coat from hexagons to pentagons is associ - ated with membrane curvature . To evaluate this possibility , 256 particularly clear examples of coated pits were arranged into three categories according to their degree ofcurvature : flat , slightly curved , and very curved . The categories included examples such as those in Figs . 5 , 6a , and 7 a ( flat ) ; Figs . 6 b and 7 b ( slightly curved ) ; and Figs . 6c and 7c ( very curved ) . Then , the numbers of hexagons and pentagons were counted in each of these examples . Finally , the mean proportion of pentagons ( ± 1 SE ) was plotted for each of the categories ( Fig . 8 ) . This illustrates that flat coats had a preponderance of hexagons , whereas more curved coats had a significantly higher proportion of pentagons . We may presume , from basic crystallographic considerations , that a completely enclosed , spher - ical network of polygons will include at least 12 pentagons . Because there were 61 ± 40 polygons in the basketworks studied , the proportion of pen - 566 tagons should be hypothetically have approached 12 / 60 , or 20 % , as they curved more and more . Thus , it was odd to fmdthat the very curved ones , which often appeared as near hemispheres in stereo , had only - 3 % pentagons . This value may have been low because of counting errors inas - much as it was difficult to recognize pentagons along the steep slopes of the more curved net - works . But this value may have been this low because there is actually more flexibility in the coat than in a rigid , spherical crystal , and fewer pentagons would be necessary to form a closed surface . Other evidence for such flexibility was indeed present . Some basketworks that were com - posed entirely of hexagonal facets appeared un - mistakably curved when viewed in stereo . Nevertheless , in the most extremely curved bas - kets , a very high proportion of pentagons was observed ( > 50 % ) . Fig . 9 illustrates such baskets obtained from homogenates of bovine brain by standard methods ( 30 , 44 ) that were less than 1 / 10 the diameter of coated vesicles in fibroblasts and , thus , much more acutely curved . Correspond - ingly , they were composed of a much smaller number of facets . Stereo electron microscopy of these empty baskets ( Fig . 10 ) provided three - di - mensional views that fully substantiated the pre - dictions about their structure made by Crowther et al . ( 9 ) from negatively stained images , but unlike the negatively stained images , the freeze - etched replicas introduced none of the ambiguity that results from superimposition of the image of the back side of the basket . Intermediates in Basket Curvature Because the shape of each individual polygon was easily discernible in these various views of coated pits , it could be expected that this technique would reveal exactly what happens when a facet in the basketwork rearranges from ahexagon to a pentagon . Unfortunately , thus far , no definitive coat transformation intermediate has been identi - fied . The only possible clue was that many of the larger , flatter sheets , such as the one in Fig . 11 , displayed pentagons near heptagons , which , as a result of their increased number of sides , were obviously larger than the surrounding hexagons FIGURE 6 (cid:9) Selected examples from the various degrees of curvature found , arranged as a progressive increase in curvature from a to e , to suggest the sequence of invagination that would be expected for coat - mediated endocytosis . Almost fully formed coated vesicles are shown infto h . Bar , 0 . 1 jim . x 200 , 000 . THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 84 , 1980 and thus compensated for the reduced size of the neighboring pentagons . Closer inspection of the lattices in which these " five - seven dislocations " could be found ( Fig . 12 ) revealed that they invariably occurred where one row of hexagons stopped and the two rows that had flanked it came together . The pentagon was the last facet of the terminating row , and the adjacent heptagon was a member of one or the other flanking row . Such a transition from three to two rows meant that the basketwork became narrower on one side than the other . A search through an old biology library showed that iden - tical five - seven dislocations occur in beehives and in diatoms that grow asymmetrically . Invariably , where a new row of hexagonal cells is added in the midst of two others , it begins with a pentagon flanked by a heptagon . As yet , it is not clear what relation these five - seven lattice dislocations have to coat curvature , if any . When they occur in beehives , the honey - combs do not curve . However , when models were built from hexagonal chicken wire , removing a row of hexagons produced a five - seven pair that z0 J a J 3 ~ 2 . F o 0 i z 1 1 0Kwa FLAT SLIGHTLY VERY CURVED CURVED FIGURE 8 (cid:9) Relative abundance ofpentagons and " five - seven dislocations " in coated pits of various degrees of curvature . Pentagons become significantly more abun - dant as the basketworks curve , confirming Kanaseki and Kadota ' s ( 29 ) original idea ( error bars indicate ± 1 SE ) . Five - seven dislocations , however , are relatively abun - dant at all degrees of curvature . Not apparent in the statistics is the evidence that these forms are intermedi - ates in coat rearrangement , which is described in Results in relation to Figs . 10 - 13 . was strained , and the strain led to a slight degree of curvature as is illustrated stereoscopically in Fig . 13 . These models also showed that the spatial discontinuity introduced by terminating a row of facets with a pentagon could not be alleviated merely by forming one adjacent heptagon ; all the hexagons around it also were severely strained . For this reason , we included the example of an in situ five - seven lattice discontinuity shown in Fig . 12 ( top ) , in which the hexagon next in line to the heptagon appears stretched and distorted . This could be a natural manifestation of a strain that wouldlead to acurvature such as that seen in Fig . 13 . The in situ examples in Fig . 12 also include an instance of two five - seven discontinuities occur - ring adjacent to each other , not an uncommon finding . It represents a point at which two rows stopped , and the lattice was consequently even more contracted and curved . Further experiment - ing with chicken wire also illustrated that termi - nating one more row , so that a total of three rows were stopped in a staggered sequence ( which was equivalent to removing the pie - shaped piece illus - trated in Fig . 13 ) , resulted in even greater curva - ture of the chicken wire and the formation of a totally new lattice in which heptagons were gone and nonadjacent rows ran completely together at 60° to each other such that only one pentagon was left in their midst . Fig . 12 ( bottom ) is an example of such an interruption of three rows at a lone pentagon found in situ in a moderately curved basketwork . Model building raised the possibility that coat curvature in vivo might involve just such a pro - gressive elimination of rows , and that five - seven dislocations might be significant intermediates in this process . In the search for evidence in support of this possibility , the relative abundance of five - seven dislocations in coats of different curvature was determined in the same three groups of coats used to make Fig . 8 . The results illustrate that coincident with the increase in abundance of pen - tagons that accompanied increased curvature was a slight decrease in the abundance of five - seven dislocations . They represented 3 % of all the facets in flat and moderately curved baskets , but were FIGURE 7 (cid:9) Three stereo pairs of basketworks with different degrees of curvature , from a , the flattest ( which are not completely flat when seen in stereo ) , to c , the stage approaching a hemisphere , aptly called acampanulate invagination of the plasma membrane . Bars , 0 . 1 pm . x 130 , 000 . JOHN HEUSER (cid:9) Coated Vesicle Formation 569 FIGURE 10 (cid:9) Stereo pair of the empty baskets isolated from brain and etched just enough to expose half of the basket and to obtain a clear , unequivocal view of their polygonal composition . Bars , 0 . 1 Am . x 139 , 000 . entirely absent from a large fraction of the very curved group . Furthermore , it was obvious from simple inspection of preparations such as those in Figs . 9 and 10 that seven - sided rings were rela - tively rare in small spherical baskets . Such hints ofa decline in the relative abundance of five - seven dislocations during curvature raised the possibility that in life such distortions might " mend " into more curved , pure , five - sided inser - tions ; but we have no explanation of how such mending could occur in the midst of an otherwise hexagonal lattice . It is perhaps worth adding , in this regard , that pentagons were particularly common around the FIGURE 9 (cid:9) The appearance of " empty baskets " isolated from brain and prepared by the freeze - etch and replication method used for fibroblasts . The baskets are seen to be composed of polygons with facets and struts of the same size found on the inside of fibroblast coated pits . As a result of their extremely sharp curvature , however , these small , isolated baskets display a much higher proportion of pentagons than the large coated pits . At the bottom , at the same magnification , are three examples ofthe smallest baskets that were found in situ , amid the unidentified granular material that abounds inside quick - frozen fibroblasts . These in situ baskets appear to be too small to accommodate amembranous vesicle , and thus may also be empty baskets . Bar , 0 . 1 Am . x 230 , 000 . JOHN HEUSER (cid:9) Coated Vesicle Formation 571 edges ofthe basketworks , where adjacent polygons were still incomplete . In these cases , it was impos - sible to tell whether they were destined to be pure pentagons or whether a seven - sided ring might have been in the process of forming adjacent to them . Thus , we could not assign them to either group nor include them in the calculations of the relative abundance of the pure pentagon ' s and the five - seven dislocations in Fig . 8 . It may , however , be significant that such edge pentagons constituted a considerable portion of the dislocations that occurred : 46 % in flat , 48 % in moderately curved , and 36 % in very curved dislocations . Subjectively , many of these pentagons appeared as though they were going to become five - seven pairs , so that it seemed that lattice dislocations and mending oc - curred more frequently around the growing edges ofthe baskets . On the other hand , if even a few of these edge pentagons were destined to become completely surrounded by hexagons , it would be necessary to conclude that some degree of curva - ture can be built into the coats as soon as they form . Such a " prefabrication " of the curvature might not always be the case , however . Often , very 572 FIGURE I I (cid:9) Higher magnification of the edge of one large coated pit showing two examples of the juxtapositions of five - and seven - member rings that invariably occur at lattice discontinuities in the otherwise hexagonal basketworks . Also shown is one five - sided ring near the periphery , where adjacent polygons are incomplete anddistorted but in many instances appear to be portions ofheptagons . Bar , 0 . 1 Im . x 360 , 000 . THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 84 , 1980 flat basketworks occurred that were quite large and almost entirely hexagonal . Unless these prove to be some sort of dead end , they would have to rearrange themselves into pentagons if they were ever to curve into coated vesicles . Outside Views of Coated Pits What must have been the outside of coated pits in the plasma membrane could be seen by simply freeze - drying the fibroblasts without fracturing them open . This revealed broad expanses of the upper surfaces of these cells ( Fig . 14 ) . Rotary platinum replicas viewed in transmission electron microscopy provided images ofthese surfaces that were considerably higher in resolution than com - parable scanning electron microscopic images of gold - coated cells , revealing that the surfaces ofthe fibroblasts were covered with a variety of small bumps that were about the size of intramembrane particles , apparently scattered at random . Previ - ously , we have shown that this procedure can display membrane receptors for neurotransmitters of similar size on the surface of certain postsyn - aptic membranes and can show when such recep - tors assume a nonrandom distribution ( 28 ) . The surfaces of fibroblasts also displayed other , much larger globules ( ~ 250 A in diameter ) , which were extremely smooth and spherical ( Fig . 15 ) , which looked exactly like recently published im - ages of freeze - dried , low density lipoprotein ( LDL ) molecules ( 22 ) . The ones seen in fibroblasts ap - peared to be linked to receptors , because they typically occurred in distinct clusters of various sizes and degrees ofcompaction . Stereomicroscopy revealed that the tightest clusters were deeply in - vaginated ( Fig . 15 ) . ( Similar 250 - A droplets were found here and there on the bare surface of the coverglass , but their concentration at indentations on the fibroblast surface did not seem to be an artifact of aldehyde fixation because fibroblasts quick - frozen without fixation also displayed simi - lar clusters of globules in shallow depressions of the plasma membrane ( Fig . 14 e ) , albeit less clearly because of a residue of tissue culture medium left after freeze - drying . ) The indentation of the LDL clusters suggests that their receptors were already linked to coated pits because all indentations of this size were coated when seen from the inside . This would fully agree with the results of earlier immunocytochemistry of ferritin - labeled LDL viewed in thin sections ( 1 ) and with subsequent visualization of deep - etched fibroblasts prepared by a freezing method slower and more deleterious than that used by us ( 41 ) . One advantage of our method was that the LDL molecules per coated pit could be counted directly ; the number ranged from 20 to 40 in the cells we viewed . It was also possible to obtain outer views of the basketworks by treating fibroblasts with Triton X - 100 before freeze - drying them . 1 - 3 h in 1 % Triton X - 100 at 37°C was necessary to rid the fibroblasts of all traces of their membrane after they were fixed , but this did not appear to alter their cytoar - chitecture . Left were stress fibers , cortical micro - filaments , and , ofparticular interest in this context , 0 . 1 - 0 . 3 - 1tm cuplike depressions composed of a FIGURE 12 (cid:9) Cropped portions of five basketworks , cho - sen to illustrate how a five - seven juxtaposition marks a spot of lattice contraction . At this spot , one row of polygons narrows and terminates with a pentagon , and one ofthe two rows adjacent to it contains aheptagon to fill in the space where the two rows come together . Two rows are eliminated by two successive five - seven juxta - positions . When three rows are eliminated , one pentagon is seen at the end of the central row , with the two adjacent rows coming together at a distorted hexagon . The rows may be seen more easily by raising the edge of the page . Bar , 0 . 1 ttm . x 310 , 000 . JOHN HEUSER (cid:9) Coated Vesicle Formation (cid:9) 573 574 FIGURE 13 (cid:9) Stereo views of chicken wire models made to illustrate how lattice discontinuities may be associated with curvature . Elimination of one row of hexagons creates a pentagon andaheptagon with an extra strut , which is also occasionally seen in vivo ( cf . Fig . 12 , top ) , and creates a slight degree of lattice curvature . Elimination of three rows in a sequential , pie - shaped piece creates one lone pentagon at the apex of a more sharply curved lattice . A pure hexagonal lattice can be rolled into a cylinder , butcannot assume the three - dimensional curves associated with lattice discontinuities . tightly knit meshwork ( Fig . 14f ) . Though this meshwork did not appear as neatly polygonal as it did when viewed from the inside , there was little doubt that it represented an outer view of the coated pits in the plasma membrane . ( Indeed , the immunocytochemistry of coated pits with anti - clathrin has been performed on fibroblasts fixed with aldehydes and extracted with Triton X - 100 in just this way [ 4 ] ) . Freeze - Fracturing Coated Pits Oblique fractures through coated pits were also found . Representative examples are shown in Fig . 16 that illustrate the overall thickness of the coat , FIGURE 14 (cid:9) Views ofthe outside of coated pits in the upper plasma membrane of freeze - dried fibroblasts , which display spherical 25 - nm droplets thought to be LDL molecules , among other smaller and more irregular surface protrusions . Micrographsa - cdisplay the probable sequence ofclustering and indentation of LDL - rich patches of membrane , until at d the invagination is so deep that the molecules have mostly disappeared . In e is shown the etched surface of a quick - frozen fibroblast that was not fixed and freeze - dried from distilled water as were those in a - d . LDL molecules are still visible , but are more difficult to see amid the debris that dries onto the membrane surface . Infthe plasma membrane of a fixed cell was dissolved away with Triton X - 100 to expose an external view of the basketworks that underlie the LDL - rich indentations . Bar , 0 . 1 [ m . X 180 , 000 . THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 84 , 1980 FIGURE 15 (cid:9) Stereo view of one of the droplet - laden indentations that are common on freeze - dried fibroblasts , to show more graphically what are thought to be external views of LDL molecules in coated pits . Bars , 0 . 1 gm . x 110 , 000 . or , actually , the separation of the basketwork from the plasma membrane interior exposed during freeze - fracture . Coat thickness measured 190 A . Coat thickness has been more easily assessed by cutting thin sections through the center of coated pits and measuringthe distance from the cytoplas - mic interface of the coat to the cytoplasmic dense line ofthe plasma membrane ' s " unit " appearance ; but , as aresult of image superimposition , little has been learned from thin sections about attachments of the coat to the plasma membrane . Unfortu - nately , the edge views of deep - etched coated pits such as those in Fig . 16 did not reveal much detail either . There was no distinct separation between the inner surface of the plasma membrane and the basketwork itself . It is here that one would expect the plasma membrane receptors for the coat to be found . Deep - etching of fractured pits such as those in Fig . 16 might also have been expected to have 576 exposed the interfaces of the baskets with the rest of the cytoplasm . Unfortunately , the fbroblasts ' cytoplasm proved to be so loaded with unetchable material ( cf . reference 40 ) that very little meaning - ful detail could actually be seen . The coats seemed to fade off into the surrounding material . This was true also of the isolated baskets seen in situ ( Fig . 9 , bottom ) . In a later paper , we shall show that cells had to be swollen in distilled water or fixed with aldehydes to clear away this unetchable ma - terial . Unfortunately , neither of these procedures could be used without damage to the cell . Swelling severely disrupted the normal geometry of the cell and depolymerized the microtubules and some actin filaments . Thus , the absence of discrete at - tachments to the coated pits ( cf . Fig . 1 ) had to be interpreted with caution . Aldehyde fixation made the unetchable material stick indiscriminately to the formed elements of the cytoplasm and , thus , tended to obscure everything but the coated pits , FIGURE 16 Edge views of freeze - etched coated pits from unfixed cells , which display the interface between coat and membrane ( bracketed in the uppermost micrograph only ) and the interface between coat and cytoplasm at the various stages of coated vesicle abscission . Unfortunately , the membranes of these pits have been fractured , so true internal membrane receptors for the coats cannot be seen . It is also unfortunate that the interior of deep - etched cells is so loaded with granular material that apparent attachments to the coat ( at arrows ) are of dubious significance . Bar , 0 . 1 pm . x 230 , 000 . THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 84 , 1980 which were somehow spared from contamination so that all the images seen in Figs . 2 - 12 could be obtained . Nevertheless , no particular attachments of cytoplasmic filaments to the basketworks could be found in aldehyde - fixed cells either . Light microscope immunocytochemistry has shown that coated pits tend to be aligned in rows on the surface of fully spread fibroblasts ( 4 ) , which raises the possibility that coated vesicle formation is associated with the actin - rich stress fibers that typify these cells . This did not appear to be the case in the fibroblasts studied here . Coated pits seemed to be just as common between the stress fibers as in their immediate vicinity . Fig . 17 shows the only three instances we could find in which coated pits occurred near a submembranous bun - dle of filaments . This figure also serves as a sum - mary of the various ways of viewing coated pits introduced in this report . Fig . 17 ( top ) is a view of a fixed cell surface , with the membrane intact and the LDL particles clearly visible in a cuplike depression . Embossed on the plasma membrane of the top of this figure is a granular horizontal band that proved to be a characteristic reflection of an underlying filament bundle . Fig . 17 ( center ) is a view of a fixed cell surface after Triton X - 100 extraction in which the plasma membrane and the LDL particles were removed , but the dense meshwork underlying the cuplike depression was retained . Also exposed was a horizontal bundle of cortical microfilaments , seen in the upper portion of the figure . There was no obvious attachment of these submembranous filaments to the adjacent cuplike depression , but something must have held it in place when the membrane was removed . In Fig . 17 ( bottom ) , the characteristic inside view of the basketwork from a fixed , fractured , deep - etched cell is shown . Again , a filament bundle was included in the upper portion of this figure to illustrate the only example we could find in which " wisps " appeared to link the basketwork with the submembranous filaments . However , because this cell had been fixed in glutaraldehyde , nothing specific can be said concerning these wisps . 578 Our interest in coated vesicles grew out of obser - vations of membrane recycling at the neuromus - cular junction by horseradish peroxidase tracer techniques , which provided evidence that coated vesicles retrieve synaptic vesicle membrane from the plasmalemma after this membrane is added by exocytosis ( 21 ) . The role of coated vesicles in various sorts of synapses haslong been recognized ( 5 , 6 , 8 , 18 - 21 , 23 , 36 , 43 , 53 ) . Our more recent quick - freezing and freeze - fracture studies have substantiated the idea that coated vesicles are in - volved in membrane retrieval , and have further indicated that this retrieval is selective by revealing that intramembrane particles that originate in syn - aptic vesicles and move to the plasma membrane during exocytosis are collected into coated pits before they bud off from the plasma membrane ( 25 , 26 ) . Thus , the formation of coated vesicles at the synapse would appear to be another instance of selective endocytosis , analogous to the process in other cells , where coated vesicles selectively internalize membrane - bound receptors for pro - teins or hormones as they bud off from the plasma membrane ( 16 ) . Furthermore , coated vesicles seem to be in - volved in a variety of other membrane shuttling pathways inside the cell , all of which involve selection of a particular bit of membrane and transfer to another membrane compartment ( 13 , 42 ) . The coat itself is apparently a ubiquitous apparatus , but what it selects and where it takes the selected membrane inside the cell is highly variable . What is common in every instance is that the coat forms around a specific part of the mem - brane that is to be budded off . Thus , a role for the coat in budding has been presumed . Mechanism of Coated Vesicle Formation The most compelling model showing how this might occur has been provided by Kanaseki and Kadota ( 29 ) and is based on their discovery that the coat is a basket of rods or septa linked into hexagons and pentagons . They proposed that this FIGURE 17 (cid:9) Summary of the three ways of viewing coated pits introduced in this report : ( top ) surface views of freeze - dried whole cells ; ( center ) outside views ofTriton X - 100 - extracted cells , and ( bottom ) inside views o£ freeze - fractured and deep - etched cells . These examples were chosen to illustrate the close association between coated pits and submembranous stress fibers ( SF ) which is occasionally seen ( arrow , bottom ) . Bar , 0 . 1 Am . x 185 , 000 . THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 84 , 1980 DISCUSSION basket undergoes internal rearrangements beneath coated pits , that is , transformations of hexagons into pentagons that force the basket and the mem - brane to curve into a closed vesicle . Indeed , images presented in our report do show a greater propor - tion of pentagons around closed vesicles than un - der flat coated pits . Thus , they support Kanaseki and Kadota ' s idea , but how the transformation occurs is still unknown . They were not necessarily correct in assuming that such a transformation would " power " the vesicle formation ; it may be driven by unknown intramembrane forces , and the coat may simply passively comply as the mem - brane curves . The images presented here also illustrate that coated pits display a number of five - seven dislo - cations at contractions and curvatures in the bas - ketwork ; these were seen slightly less often in more sharply curved pits and rarely in isolated coated vesicles . Thus , they may be intermediates in the process of coat curvature . Chicken wire models of lattice discontinuities showed considerable strain in the five - and seven - member rings and in the adjacent hexagons . Basketworks with such five - seven pairs may thus tend to rearrange into pure pentagons totally surrounded by hexagons , which , as chicken wire models illustrated , would be less strained internally but much more curved . Crys - tallography dictates that at least 12 such penta - gonal facets must be present in an otherwise hex - agonal basketwork for it to curve into a closed sphere . Mechanism of Coated Vesicle Selectivity Though it is relatively easy to see how such a structural transformation could be common to a variety of coated vesicle formation , it is more difficult to imagine how this common process achieves the high degree of selectivity that is seen in various situations . Depending on the cell type and the membrane pathways involved , coated ves - icles sequester and transport widely differing membrane molecules ( see references 2 , 11 , 12 , 17 , 26 , 52 , 54 , and 56 for details of various pathways in which coated vesicles are known to be involved ) . Presumably , these membrane molecules are se - lected for inclusion in the coated vesicle because they bind directly or indirectly to the coat itself . Indeed , evidence is accumulating that the cell surface receptors that are included by coated ves - icles extend through the plasmalemma and possess internal coat - binding sites ( 1 , 3 , 4 , 16 , 34 , 35 , 51 , W (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 84 , 1980 52 , 54 ) . We are now engaged in an effort to visualize these internal binding sites with the new technique described here by experimentally disas - sembling the basketworks just before quick freez - ing . Recycling and Reassembly of the Coats There is a little doubt that the basketworks described here can mediate several rounds of coated vesicle formation without new protein syn - thesis ( 16 ) , but how they do this is not clear . The simplest possibility would be that they remain permanently associated with a patch of receptor - rich membrane and simply shuttle back and forth between the cell surface and internal compart - ments . This clearly is not the case in synapses , where very few coated pits and coated vesicles are visible until vesicle membrane is added to the cell surface , after which they appear within seconds ( 24 , 26 ) ; nor does it seem to be the case in fibro - blasts . Even though the total number of coated pits and coated vesicles does not seem to vary in these cells , receptors can be free from these struc - tures for a significant part of their total lifetime ( 1 , 2 , 16 ) . Furthermore , thin sections seem to in - dicate that , instead of shuttling back and forth intact , the coats fall from the vesicles soon after they have separated from the plasma membrane ( 2 ) . Also , the method of viewing used in our report illustrates that coats are formed beneath the plasma membrane by progressive expansion by what appears to be piecemeal growth from foci that are initially very small . Thus , recycling of the coats seems to take place by repeated disassembly and reassembly accompanied by a reversible as - sociation with the membranes involved , rather than by a permanent shuttling of intact vesicles . This would agree with biochemical findings that isolated coats are held together by noncovalent bonds and can be made to assemble and disassem - ble by varying their ionic environment ( 30 , 44 - 46 , 50 , 55 ) . It is not known what controls the assembly of coats against certain membranes in vivo , but an interesting lead has been provided by Palade and Fletcher ' s ( 42 ) demonstration that anoxia inter - rupts coated vesicle formation and makes coat material aggregate into small , empty baskets in pancreatic acinar cells . ( After learning of this , we observed that applying metabolic inhibitors to frog nerves produces the same plethora of empty bas - kets that these authors observed . ) In healthy , quick - frozen cells , these empty bas - kets are rarely observed but they can quite often be seen in chemically fixed tissues ( 19 , 21 ) and can be isolated in considerably abundance from ho - mogenized tissues ( 30 , 44 - 46 ) . Thus , they may be in equilibrium with more soluble coat components in the cytoplasm . If such a soluble pool exists , however , its size remains to be determined . Im - munocytochemistry with antibodies against clath - rin , the major protein component of the coat , has so far revealed only fully formed coated pits , with very little background staining that might indicate clathrin in the cytoplasm ( 4 ) . However , the fibro - blasts observed so far have been fixed in a manner that may have washed away most of their soluble pool . The new views on coated pits presented here suggest that a soluble pool of clathrin must exist , and that empty baskets do not contribute directly to the assembly of new coated pits because the coated pit sizes varied ( Fig . 4 ) from just a few facets to hundreds . There was no sign of " quantal jumps " in size , which would be expected if whole baskets were added one at a time , nor was there any sign of empty baskets in the vicinity of newly forming coated pits . Instead , the edges of coated pits were ragged and composed of incomplete polygons , suggesting piecemeal assembly . Thus , the empty basket may be a red herring . Size vs . Organization of Baskets In spite of their dubious biological significance , empty baskets have been useful for illustrating how the overall basketwork can be woven of pen - tagons and hexagons ( 20 ) in that empty baskets are just the right size for good negative staining . The only problem has been that such staining invariably reveals both their front and back sides and creates patterns of superimposition that are difficult to interpret ( 9 , 29 , 30 , 44 - 46 ) . The surface replication technique used here shows only the front side of the baskets , and , thus , quite simply confirms the structural analyses previously done by laborious comparisons of negatively stained images with computer generated models ( 9 ) . The smallest empty baskets are about 48 nm in diam - eter and appear to be composed of 16 facets , 12 pentagons and 4 hexagons in a tetrahedral ar - rangement . The largest empty baskets are about 55 nm in diameter and appear to be composed of 20 facets , 12 pentagons and 8 hexagons , arranged as barrels and other slightly asymmetric forms . In contrast , the smallest intact coated vesicles are about 75 nm ( because the smallest possible mem - brane vesicle is about 40 nm , and the coat extends from the membrane - 20 nm on all sides . ) Such coated vesicles appear to be composed of32 facets , 12 pentagons and 20 hexagons , arranged in a symmetrical icosahedral pattern . ( These were the sort originally recognized in brain homogenates by Kanaseki and Kadota [ 29 ] . They can be quite clearly seen in our deep - etched replicas but could not be very clearly seen in previous negative - stain studies [ 9 ] because of problems with collapse of the internal vesicle . ) The largest coated vesicles , typical of those found in fibroblasts , are greater than 100 nm in diameter and have more than 100 facets , of which only about 10 % are pentagons ( though the total number of pentagons must pre - sumably still be 12 to form a closed , spherical surface ) . These are much too large to image by negative staining because they collapse ( cf . Fig . 2 in reference 46 ) but can clearly be seen by the method we used . Protein Composition ofBaskets Though clathrin is the major component of isolated baskets ( 44 , 45 ) , and though baskets can be formed in vitro from pure clathrin ( 30 ) , the baskets around coated vesicles in vivo appear to contain at least two other proteins ( 30 , 46 , 55 ) . Theseproteins exert strong influences on the tend - ency of clathrin to polymerize in vitro . The stoi - chiometric ratios of these accessory proteins vs . clathrin suggests that they may help to form the vertices of the baskets , where three clathrin mole - cules presumably come together ( 30 , 46 ) . Our current efforts are directed toward identi - fying the location of these accessory proteins by direct visualization of antibodies bound to them . We will show that the new viewing technique used here allows sufficient resolution to visualize IgG molecules directly , without the need for accessory electron - dense tags ( J . Heuser and M . W . Kir - schner , manuscript submitted ) . Thus , the tech - nique should be useful for identifying the protein composition of the basketworks it reveals so clearly . Heartiest thanks to Marc Kirschner and Margaret Lo - pata , Department of Biochemistry , University of Cali - fornia , San Francisco , for supplying the fibroblasts and to Lou Reichardt and Carol Lopez , Division of Neuro - biology , University of California , San Francisco , for JOHN HEUSER (cid:9) Coated Vesicle formation (cid:9) 581 supplying the coated vesicles purified from brain . Thanks also to Richard Anderson and Jim Rothman for helpful discussion . Frank McKeon performed the quantitation and statistics in this study . This work wassupported by grants from the Muscular Dystrophy Association of America and the U . S . Public Health Service ( NS - 11979 ) . Received forpublication 13 August 1979 , and in revised form 7November 1979 . REFERENCES 1 . ANDERSON , R . G . W J . L . GOLDSTEIN , and M . S . BROWN . 1976 . Localizationof lowdensity lipoprotein receptors on plasma membrane ofnormal humanfibroblasts andtheirabsence in cells from afamilial hypercholesterolemia homozygote . Proc . Nall . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 73 : 2434 - 2438 . 2 . ANDERSON , R . G . W . . M . S . BROWN , andJ . L . GOLDSTEIN , 1977 . Role of the coated endocytic vesicle in the uptake of receptor bound low density lipoproteinin humanfibroblasts . Cell . 10 - 351 - 364 . 3 . ANDERSON , R . G . W . , J . L . GOLDSTEIN , and M . S . BROWN . 1977 . A mutation that impairs theability oflipoprotein receptors to localise in coated pits on thecell surface of human fibroblasts . Nature ( Loud . ) . 270 : 695 - 699 . 4 . ANDERSON , R . G . W . , E . VASILE , R . J . MELLO , M . S . BROWN , and1 . L . GOLDSTEIN . 1978 . Immunocytochemical visualization of coated pits and vesicles in humanfibroblasts : relation to low density lipoprotein receptor distribution . Cell . 15 : 919 - 933 . 5 . ANDRES , K . H . 1964 . Mikropinozytose im Zentralnervensystem . Z . Zellforsch . Mikrosk . Anal . 64 : 63 - 73 . 6 . BENEDECZKY , I . , andA . D . SMITH . 1972 . Ultrastructural studieson the adrenal medullaof golden hamster : origin and fate ofsecretory gran - ules , Z . Zellforsch . Mikrosk . Anal . 124 : 367 - 386 . 7 . BOWERS , B . 1964 . Coated vesicles in thepericardialcells of the aphid . Protoplasma . 59 : 351 - 367 . 8 . BUNT , A . H . 1969 . Formation ofcoated and " synaptic " vesicles within neurosecretory axon terminals ofthecrustacean sinus gland . J . Ultra - struct . Res . 28 : 411 - 421 . 9 . CROWTHER , R . A . , J . T . FINCH , AND B . M . F . PEARSE . 1976 . On the structureof coated vesicles . J . Mot . Biol . 103 : 785 - 798 . 10 . DROLLER , M . J . , and T . F . ROTH . 1966 . Anelectron microscope study ofyolk formation during oogenesisin Clebisles reticularus guppyi . J . Cell Biol . 28 : 209 - 232 . 11 . FARQUHAR , M . G . 1978 . Recovery of surface membrane in anterior pituitarycells . Variations in traffic detected with anionic and cationic ferritin . J . Cell Biol . 77 : R35 - R42 . 12 . FARQUHAR , M . G . 1978 . Trafficof products and membranes through the Golgi complex . In Transport of Macromolecules in Cellular Sys - tems . S . C . Silverstein , editor . Dahlem Konferenzen , Berlin . 341 - 362 . 13 . FRIEND . D . S . , andM , G . FARQUHAR . 1967 . Functionsofcoated vesicles during protein absorption in the rat vasdeferens . J . Cell Biol . 35 : 357 - 376 . 14 . FAWCETT , D . W . 1964 . Local specializations of the plasmalemma in micropinocytosis vesicles oferythroblasts . Anal . Rec . 148 : 370 - 389 . 15 . FAWCETT , D . W . 1964 . Surface specialization of absorbing cells . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 13 : 75 - 98 . 16 . GOLDSTEIN , J . L . , R . G . W . ANDERSON , and M . S . BROWN . 1979 . Coatedpits , coatedvesicles , andreceptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature ( Load . ) . 279 : 679 - 685 . 17 . GORDEN , P . , J . - L . CAPRENTIER , S . COHEN , andL . ORCI . 1978 . Epider - malgrowth factor : morphological demonstration of binding , internali - zation , and lysosomal association in human fibroblasts . Proc . NatL Acad . Sri . U . S . A . 75 : 5025 - 5029 . 18 . GRAY , E . G . 1961 . The granule cells , mossy synapses and Purkinje spine synapses ofthecerebellum : light and electron microscope obser - vations . J . Anal . 95 : 345 - 356 . 19 . GRAY , E . G . 1972 . Arethecoats of coated vesicles artefacts ? 1 . Neuro - cytol . 1 : 363 - 382 . 20 . GRAY , E . G . , and H . PEASE . 1971 . On understanding theorganization oftheretinal receptor synapses . Brain Res . 35 : 1 - 15 . 21 . GRAY , E . G . , and R . A . WILLIS . 1970 . On synaptic vesicles , complex vesicles anddense projections . Brain Res . 24 : 149 - 168 . 22 . GULIK - KRZYWICKI , T . , M . YATES . andL . AGGERBECK . 1979 . Theuse of freeze - etching electron microscopy to study biological molecules in solution . Applicationto thestudy ofhumanserumlipoproteins . J . Mol . Biol . In press . 582 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY - VOLUME 84 , 1980 23 . HAMA , K . , and K . SAI ' TO . 1977 . Fine structure of the afferent synapse of the hair cells in the saccular macula of the goldfish , with special reference to anastomosing tubules . J . Neurocytol . 6 . 361 - 373 . 24 . HEUSER , J . E . , andT . S . REESE . 1973 . Evidenceforrecycling of synaptic vesicle membrane during transmitter releaseat the frog neuromuscular junction . J . Cell Biol . 57 : 315 - 344 . 25 . HEUSER , J . E . , and T . S . REESE . 1975 . Redistributionof intramembra - nous particles from synaptic vesicles : direct evidence forvesicle recy - cling . Anal . Rec . 181 : 374 . 26 . HEUSER , 1 . E . , and T . S . REESE . 1979 . Synaptic vesicle exocytosis captured by quick freezing . In TheNeurosciences , Fourth Study Pro - gram . F . O . Schmitt andF . G . Wordin , editor . MITPress , Cambridge . Mass . 573 - 600 . 27 . HEUSER , J . E . , T . S . REESE , M . 1 . DENNIS , Y . JAN . , L . JAN , and L . EVANS . 1979 . Synaptic vesicleexocytosis captured by quick freezing and correlated with quantal transmitter release . J . Cell Biol . 81 : 275 - 300 . 28 . HEUSER , J . E . , andS . R . SALPETER . 1979 . Organizationofacetylcholine receptors in quick - frozen , deep - etched , androtary - replicated " torpedo " postsynaptic membrane . J . Cell Biol . 82 : 150 - 173 . 29 . KANASEKL T . , and K . KADOTA . 1969 , The " vesicle in a basket . " A morphological study of the coated vesicle isolated from the nerve endings oftheguinea pigbrain , withspecialreferencetothemechanism ofmembrane movements . J . Cell Biol . 42 : 202 - 220 . 30 . KEEN , J . H . . M . C . WILLINGHAM , and 1 . H . PASTAN . 1979 . Clathrin - coated vesicles : isolation , dissociation andfactor - dependent reassocia - tion of Cahrin baskets . Cell . 16 : 303 - 312 . 31 . KESSFL , R . G . 1968 . An electron microscope study of differentiation and growth in oocyles of Ophioderma panamensis . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 22 : 63 - 78 . 32 . KRAEHENBUHL , J . P . , Y . SUARD , andL . KUHN . 1977 . Specific uptake of secretory immunoglobulins by mammary epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 75 ( 2 , Pt . 2 ) : 362a ( Abstr . ) . 33 . MAUNSBACH , A . B . 1966 . Absorption of ferritin by ratkidney proximal tubule cells : electron microscopic observations of the initial uptake phase in cells ofmicroperfused single proximal tubules . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 16 : 1 - 37 . 34 . MAXFIELD , F . R . , J . SCHLESSINGER , Y . SHECHTER , 1 . PASTAN , andM . C . WILLINGHAM . 1978 . Collectionof insulin . EGFandat - macroglobulin in thesame patches on thesurface ofcultured fibroblasts andcommon internalization . Cell . 14 : 805 - 810 . 35 . MAXFIELD , F . R . , M . C . WILLINGHAM , P . J . A . DAVIES , and1 . PASTAN . 1979 . Amines inhibit the clustering of a - , macroglobulin andEGFon the fibroblast cell surface . Nature ( Load . ) . 277 : 661 - 662 . 36 . NAGASAWA , J . , W . W . DOUGLAS , and R . A . SCHULTZ . 1971 . Mlcropl - nocytotic origin of coated and smooth microvesicles ( " synaptic vesi - cles " ) in neurosecretory terminals of posterior pituitaryglands dem - onstrated by incorporation of horseradish peroxidase . Nature ( Lond . ) . 232 : 341 - 343 . 37 . OrKLEFORD , C . D . 1976 . A three - dimensional reconstruction of the polygonal pattern on placental coated - vesicle membranes . J . Cell Sci . 21 : 83 - 91 . 38 . OCKLEFORD , C . D . , and G . MENON . 1977 . Differentiated regions of human placental cell surface associated with exchange of materials between maternal andfoetal blood : aneworganelle andthebinding of iron . J . Cell Sci . 25 : 279 - 291 . 39 . OCKLEFORD , C . D . , and A . WHYTE . 1977 . Differentiated regions of human placental cell surface associated with exchange of materials betweenmaternal andfoetal blood : coated vesicles . J . Cell Sci . 25 : 293 - 312 . 40 . OHTSUKI , L , R . M . MANZI , G . E . PALADE , andJ . D . JAMIESON . 1978 . Entryofmacromoleeulartracersinto cells fixedwithlowconcentrations ofaldehydes . Biol . Cell . 31 : 119 - 126 . 41 . ORCI , L . , J , L . CARPENTER , A . PERRELET , R . G . W . ANDERSON , J . L . GOLDSTEIN , and M . S . BROWN . 1978 . Occurrence of low density lipoprotein receptors within largepits on the surface ofhumanfibro - blasts as demonstrated by freeze - etching . Exp . Cell Res . 113 : 1 - 13 . 42 . PALADE , G . E . , and M . FLETCHER . 1977 . Reversible alterations in the morphology of the Golgi complexinduced by the arrest of secretory transport . J . Cell Biol . 75 ( 2 , Pt . 2 ) : 371 a ( Abstr . ) . 43 . PALAY , S . L . 1963 . Alevolate vesicles in Purkinje cells of the rat ' s cerebellum . J . Cell Biol . 19 : 89A ( Abstr . ) . 44 . PEARSE , B . M . F . 1975 . Coated vesicles from pigbrain : purification and biochemicalcharacterization . J . Mot Biol . 97 : 93 - 98 . 45 . PEARSE , B . M . F . 1976 . Clathrin : a unique protein associated with intracellular transfer ofmembrane by coated vesicles . Proc . Nail . Acad . Sri . U . S . A . 73 : 1255 - 1259 . 46 . PEARSE , B . M . F . 1978 . On thestructural andfunctional components of coated vesicles . J . Mol . Blot . 126 : 803 - 812 . 47 . RODEWALD , R . B . 1973 . Intestinal transport of antibodies in the new - born rat . J , Cell Biol . 58 : 189 - 211 . 48 . ROSENBLUTH , J . , ANDS . L . WIssiG . 1964 . Theuptake of ferritin by toad spinal ganglion cells . J . Cell Biol . 23 : 307 - 325 . 49 . ROTH , T . F . , and K . R . PORTER . 1964 . Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte ofthemosquito Aedes aegyptiL . J . Cell Biol . 20 : 313 - 332 . 50 . ROTH , T . F . , J . A . CUTTING , andS . B . ATLAS . 1976 . Proteintransport : a selective membrane mechanism . J . Supramol . Struct . 4 : 527 ( 487 ) - 548 ( 508 ) . 51 . SCHECHTER , Y . , L . HERNAEZ , J . SCHLESSINGER , and P . CUATRECASAS . 1979 . Local aggregation of hormone - receptorcomplexes is required for activation by epidermalgrowth factor . Nature ( Land . ) . 278 : 835 - 838 . 52 . SCHLESSINGER , J . , Y . SCHECHTER , M . C . WILLINGHAM , and 1 . PASTAN . 1978 . Direct visualizationofthebinding , aggregation , andinternaliza - tion ofinsulinandepidermalgrowth factor on fibroblastic cells . Proc . Nail . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 75 . 2659 - 2663 . 53 . WESTRum , L . E . 1965 . On theorigin of synaptic vesicles in thecerebral cortex . J . Physiol . ( Land . ) . 179AP - 6P . 54 . WILLINGHAM , M . C . , F . R . MAXFIELD , and 1 . H . PASTAN . 1979 . a2Macroglobulin binding to theplasma membrane of cultured fibro - blasts . J . Cell Biol . 82 : 614 - 625 . 55 . WOODS , 1 . W . , M . P . WOODWARD , and T . F . ROTH . 1978 . Common features of coated vesicles from dissimilar tissues : composition and structure . J . CellSci . 30 : 87 - 97 . 56 . YOUNGDAHL - Turner , P . , L . E . Rosenberg , and R . H . ALLEN . 1978 . Bindinganduptake oftranscobalamin 11 by humanfibroblasts . J . Clin . Invest . 61 : 133 - 141 . JOHN HEUSER (cid:9) Coated Vesicle Formation (cid:9) 583