T Ritchey ( 2006 ) : Journal of the Operational Research Society – Pre - copyedit version . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Problem structuring using computer - aided morphological analysis Tom Ritchey * Swedish Morphological Society SE - 118 69 Stockholm , Sweden . General morphological analysis ( GMA ) is a method for structuring and investigating the total set of relationships contained in multi - dimensional , usually non - quantifiable , problem complexes . Pioneered by Fritz Zwicky at the California Institute of Technology in the 1930s and 40s , it relies on a constructed parameter space , linked by way of logical relationships , rather than on causal relationships and a hierarchal structure . During the past 10 years , GMA has been computerized and extended for structuring and analyzing complex policy spaces , developing futures scenarios and modelling strategy alternatives . This article gives a historical and theoretical background to GMA as a problem structuring method , compares it with a number of other “soft - OR” methods , and presents a recent application in structuring a complex policy issue . The issue involves the development of an Extended Producer Responsibility ( EPR ) system in Sweden . Keywords : morphological analysis , general morphology , problem structuring methods , typology analysis , OR - methods . NOTE : This is the complete article as published in the Journal of the Operational Research Society ( JORS ) . However , it is the post - peer - review , pre - copyedit version and has a slightly different format . The definitive publisher - authenticated version , Ritchey , T . Problem Structuring using computer - aided morphological analysis , Journal of the Operational Research Society ( 2006 ) 57 , 792 – 801 , is available online at : http : / / www . palgrave - journals . com / jors / journal / v57 / n7 / abs / 2602177a . html . Introduction Structuring and analyzing complex socio - technical systems presents us with a number of difficult methodological problems . Firstly , many of the factors involved are not meaningfully quantifiable , since they contain strong social , political and cognitive dimensions . Secondly , the uncertainties inherent in such problem complexes are in principle non - reducible , and often cannot be fully described or delineated . This includes both so - called agonistic uncertainty ( conscious , reflective actions among competing actors ) and non - specified uncertainty ( for instance , uncertainties concerning what types of scientific and technological discoveries will be made in the future ) . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ * Contact : ritchey @ swemorph . com Added to this , the extreme non - linearity of social systems means that literally everything is connected to everything else . What might seem to be the most marginal of factors can , under the right historical circumstances , become a dominating force of change . All of this means that traditional quantitative methods , mathematical ( functional ) modelling and simulation will simply not suffice . As an alternative to mathematical modelling and other “hard” OR methods , a number of non - quantified problem structuring methods ( PSMs ) have been developed during the past 30 years – mainly within the British OR community ( Rosenhead , 1989 ) . Many of these methods were developed expressly for the purpose of structuring and analysing what have variously been termed wicked problems ( Rittel & Webber , 1973 ) and social messes ( Ackoff , 1974 ) . T Ritchey ( 2006 ) : Journal of the Operational Research Society – Pre - copyedit version . 2 Although there are many different specific procedures and techniques employed in different PSMs , it is interesting to compare two general approaches to problem structuring . One of these builds upon networks and hierarchies of causal or quasi - causal relationships , which can be represented in different forms of influence diagrams . In general , an influence diagram is a qualitative model of a system which depicts influence relationships between different elements or aspects of the system , shows the direction of such influences and ( usually , but not always ) allows for feedback loops or circular causality . In some cases , influences can be given relative strengths , and flows between nodes can be mapped . In other cases , the diagrams are only pictorial representations of complex nets of interaction . Models of this type have broad applications and are widely utilised within the OR - community . Moreover , there is a flora of software packages available for their facilitation . Soft Systems Methodology ( SSM ) ( Checkland , 1989 ) and Strategic Options Development and Analysis ( SODA ) ( Eden , 1989 ) are examples of this general approach . A complementary approach , which goes under the broad designation of morphological and typological methods , is based not on networks of causal relationships and hierarchal structures , but on constructed parameter spaces , linked by way of logical relationships . At least rudimentary examples of this approach are found , for example , in the Strategic Choice Approach ( SCA ) ( Friend , 1989 ) and Quality Function Deployment ( QFD ) ( Akao , 1990 ; Cohen , 1995 ) . Curiously , both morphological and typological methods were originally developed in German speaking environments in the 19 th century , at which time the dichotomy between Naturwissenschaft and Geisteswissenschaft essentially mirrored the present - day methodological distinction between “hard vs . soft” scientific methods . Since its beginning , morpho - logical analysis has been employed as a modelling method specific to a number of scientific disciplines . However , during the past 30 years , and especially with the advent of small , fast computers and advanced graphical interfaces , general morphology – or general morphological analysis ( GMA ) – has developed into a discipline of its own . This article will continue with a short history of the development of general morphological analysis , a presentation of its methodological foundations , and a case study in problem structuring involving the development of an Extended Producer Responsibility ( EPR ) system in Sweden . I hope to demonstrate that GMA is not at odds or in competition with other PSMs based on other principles . Indeed , straddling the fence between hard and soft OR methods , GMA should be seen as an important complement to both of these “cultures” , offering features that should help to strengthen PSMs in general . Morphologies and typologies The term morphology comes from classical Greek ( morphê ) and means the study of shape or form . Morphology is concerned with the structure and arrangement of parts of an object , and how these conform to create a whole or Gestalt . The " object " in question can be a physical system ( e . g . an organism , an anatomy or an ecology ) or a mental object ( e . g . linguistic forms , concepts or systems of ideas ) . Today , morphology is associated with a number of scientific disciplines in which formal structure , and not necessarily quantity or function , is a central issue . In biology it is the study of the shape or form of organisms . In linguistics , it is the study of word formation . In geology it is associated with the characteristics , configuration and evolution of rocks and landforms . The first to use the term morphology as an explicitly defined scientific method was J . W . von Goethe ( 1749 - 1832 ) . Goethe introduced the term to denote the principles of formation and transformation of organic bodies . Concentrating on form and quality , rather than function and quantity , this approach produced generalizations about the combinatorial logic of biological structures . Of central importance was the idea of the morphotype ; that is , a structural or organisational principle which can be identified and studied through comparative anatomy . This early theoretical morphology was eventually eclipsed by Darwinian evolutionary theory in the late 19 th century . With the exception of the works of William Bateson ( 1896 ) and D’Arcy Thompson ( 1917 ) , it remained obscure until the Modern Synthesis in evolutionary biology began to treat Darwinian evolu - tion from at the level of genes , phenotypes and populations . The present literature in theoretical T Ritchey ( 2006 ) : Journal of the Operational Research Society – Pre - copyedit version . 3 morphology is now quite extensive , as presented in McGhee ( 1999 ) . It is important to note , that Goethe developed morphology with the expressed purpose of methodologically distancing the life sciences from the then reigning paradigm in Naturwissenschaft , i . e . classical ( Newtonian ) mechanics . However , this methodological shift was exactly what was needed in another area , which was even less disposed to such a paradigm : the emerging disciplines of sociology and psychology . Theoretical morphology was thus carried over into the Geisteswissenschaft of Classical German Sociology – represented by Wilhelm Dilthey ( 1833 - 1891 ) ( Dilthy , 1989 ) and Max Weber ( 1864 - 1920 ) ( Weber , 1949 ) . More specifically , morphology and morphotypes became typology and ideal types . A typology ( the Greek word typos originally meant a hollow mould or matrix ) is a very simple morphological model based on the possible combinations obtained between a few ( often two ) variables , each containing a range of discrete values or states . Each of the possible combinations of variable - values in the typological field is called a constructed type . Typologies abound , especially in the sociological literature , and typology analysis is virtually a discipline in itself ( Bailey , 1994 ; Doty & Glick , 1994 ) . The simplest and most common form of a typology is the ubiquitous four - fold table , which pits two variables against each other , each variable containing two values or states . The type - concept was not created by Dilthey and Weber . It was already well established methodo - logically by Goethe in his conception of morphotypes . However , by employing typologies as a method for formulating sociological and social philosophical categories , Weber simplified , generalised and popularised typology analysis as a simple concept - structuring method applicable to virtually any area of investigation . In this context , typologies are one of the most fundamental forms of problem structuring . Although typological fields are certainly not restricted to two dimensions or simple binary rela - tions , there are severe limits to the complexity of the classical typological format . Visually , a typology utilizes the dimensions of physical space to represent its variables , as in a Cartesian coordinate system . Each of the constructed types lies at the intersection of two or more coordinates . However , the number of coordinates that can be represented in physical space ends at three . Typologies of greater dimensions – representing hyperspaces – usually get around this problem by embedding variables within each other . However , such formats quickly become difficult to interpret , if not hopelessly unintelligible . There are , however , other ways to represent – and visualize – hyperspaces . General morphology In the late 1940’s , Fritz Zwicky , the Swiss astro - physicist and aerospace scientist based at the California Institute of Technology ( Caltech ) , proposed a generalized form of morphological analysis : " Attention has been called to the fact that the term morphology has long been used in many fields of science to designate research on structural interrelations - for instance in anatomy , geology , botany and biology . . . . I have proposed to generalize and systematize the concept of morphological research and include not only the study of the shapes of geometrical , geological , biological , and generally material structures , but also to study the more abstract structural interrelations among phenomena , concepts , and ideas , whatever their character might be . " ( Zwicky , 1969 , p 34 ) In general morphology , the problem of represent - ting – and visualising – a hyperspace is overcome by placing the variables in columns beside each other , their value ranges listed below them . This is called a morphological field . A particular constructed morpho - type ( called a field configuration ) is designated by selecting a single value from each variable ( Figure 1 ) . Zwicky published a number of articles applying morphology to the classification of astrophysical objects ( Zwicky , 1948 a ) and the development of jet and rocket propulsion systems ( Zwicky , 1947 ) . He also published a more general article on the “morphological method of analysis and construction” ( Zwicky , 1948 b ) and later – in the 1960s – wrote a book on the subject ( Zwicky , 1969 ) . T Ritchey ( 2006 ) : Journal of the Operational Research Society – Pre - copyedit version . 4 Figure 1 Zwicky’s “propulsive system morphology” from 1947 , containing 6 parameters and 576 formal configurations – one shown . His morphological astronomy lead to a number of hypotheses and later discoveries , but remained more or less specific to astrophysics . His work on jet propulsion systems , however , had a wider impact in the area of engineering design . In 1962 , in a paper presented at a conference on engineering design methods in London , Norris ( 1963 ) proposed that the morphological approach should be turned into a full fledged engineering design method utilising computers , in order to systematically separate and collate different design solutions . Some authors saw even wider applications . Ayres ( 1969 ) pointed out how morphological analysis could be employed to systematically generate scenarios . He cited the work on future , non - national nuclear threats by Theodore Taylor ( 1967 ) at the Stanford Research Institute ( a civilian and commercial counterpoint to RAND ) . Then , in 1975 , Müller - Mebach ( 1975 ) of the University of Darmstadt published an article in Operational Research titled “The Use of Morphological Techniques for OR - Approaches to Problems” . There he pointed out that general morphology is especially suitable for operational research , not the least because of the growing need for operational analysts to be part of the problem formulation process , and not simply a “receiver” of pre - defined problems . In a more specific context , Rhyne ( 1971 , 1981 ) – also from the Stanford Research Institute – picked up on Taylor’s earlier work and began to apply a somewhat restricted form of morphological analysis as a scenario development technique . ( In order to generate new interest in the method , Rhyne packaged it under the somewhat esoteric name of “field anomaly relaxation” – FAR , a term borrowed from mechanical engineering [ personal communication ] . ) He continues to write about its potential as a systematic approach to “whole pattern futures projection” ( Rhyne , 1995 a , 1995 b ) . Finally , in the early 1990’s , Geoff Coyle , then working at the Royal Military College of Science in Shrivenham , UK , discovered Rhyne’s work and promoted morphological analysis as one of a number of structured techniques for scenario development and strategy planning ( Coyle et . al . , 1994 ; Coyle , 2004 ) . None of this seems to have had much of an impact on OR - techniques or PSMs generally . Indeed , GMA has been written about and discussed far more than it has actually been used in “real” client - based projects . One of the principle reasons for this , I believe , is that it has been carried out by hand , or with only rudimentary computer support . Employing GMA in this way is not only extremely difficult , time consuming and prone to errors ; it severely limits the number and range of parameters that can be employed . Since the number of configurations ( i . e . T Ritchey ( 2006 ) : Journal of the Operational Research Society – Pre - copyedit version . 5 formal solutions ) in a morphological field increases exponentially with the number of parameters applied to it , working with as few as six or seven variables becomes a considerable task . Thus , until recently , GMA has usually been carried out as a relatively simple form of attribute listing with internal consistency checks . In 1995 , my colleagues and I at the Department for Technology Foresight and Assessment at Totalförsvarets Forskningsinstitut ( FOI – the Swedish Defence Research Agency in Stockholm ) realized that general morphological analysis would never reach its full potential without dedicated , flexible computer support . The system we began developing then – and which is presently in its forth generation – fully supports the analysis - synthesis cycles inherent in GMA , and makes it possible to create morphological inference models ( Ritchey , 2003 ) . During the past 10 years we have utilised computer aided morphological analysis in more than 50 client - based projects , for structuring complex policy and planning issues , developing scenario and strategy laboratories , and analysing organisational and stakeholder structures . Problem structuring with GMA As with most other PSMs , GMA goes through a number of iterative steps or phases which represent cycles of analysis and synthesis – the basic method for developing ( scientific ) models ( Ritchey , 1991 ) . Also , as with many other PSMs , facilitated group interaction is a central feature of the process , since we are not only structuring a complex problem , but creating among the participants shared concepts and a common modelling framework . What is essentially a process of collective creativity is best facilitated in dialog between participants , rather than each participant addressing an “assembly” . For this reason , we have found it best to work with subject specialist groups of no more than 6 - 7 persons . If a wider knowledge base is required , one can either bring specialised competence into specific group sessions , or work in parallel groups . Depending on the level of ambition ( e . g . how many different models a client wishes to develop ; the complexity of the models ; and the number of groups involved ) a modelling job can take between 2 and 15 workshops days . We utilise two facilitators per workshop group . These alternate between , on the one hand , facilitating the group process as such and , on the other hand , tending the computer , recording and reflecting . Virtually all of the work is done in the workshop setting , with little back - office or software preparation time required . Also , the software is designed to facilitate project documentation during the workshop sessions themselves . The models which are generated during these sessions belong to the client , who is provided with software and documentation to run and maintain them . The analysis phase begins by identifying and defining the most important dimensions of the problem complex to be investigated . Each of these dimensions is then given a range of relevant values or conditions . Together , these make up the variables or parameters of the problem to be structured . A morphological field is constructed by setting the parameters against each other , in parallel columns , representing an n - dimensional configuration space . A particular constructed “field configuration” ( morphotype ) is designated by selecting a single value from each of the variables . This marks out a particular state or ( formal ) solution within the problem complex ( see Figure 1 , above ) Ideally , one would examine all of the configurations in the field , in order to establish which of them are possible , viable , practical , interesting , etc . , and which are not . In doing so , we mark out in the field a relevant “solution space " . The solution space of a Zwickian morphological field consists of the subset of configurations , which satisfy some criteria – one of which is internal consistency . However , a typical morphological field of 6 - 10 variables can contain between 50 , 000 and 5 , 000 , 000 formal configurations , far too many to inspect by hand . Thus , the next step in the analysis - synthesis process is to examine the internal relationships between the field parameters and reduce the field by identifying , and weeding out , all mutually contra - dictory conditions . This is achieved by a process of cross - consistency assessment . All of the parameter values in the morphological field are compared with one another , pair - wise , in the manner of a cross - impact matrix ( Figure 2 ) . As each pair of conditions is examined , a judgment is made as to whether – or to what extent – the pair can coexist , i . e . represent a consistent relationship . Note that there is no reference here to T Ritchey ( 2006 ) : Journal of the Operational Research Society – Pre - copyedit version . 6 Figure 2 Cross - consistency matrix for the propulsive system morphology in Figure 1 . direction or causality , but only to mutual consistency . Using this technique , a typical morphological field can be reduced by up to 90 or even 99 % , depending on the problem structure . ( Scenario fields are an exception , as will be discussed below . ) There are two principal types of inconsistencies involved here : purely logical contradictions ( i . e . those based on the nature of the concepts involved ) ; and empirical constraints ( i . e . relationships judged be highly improbable or implausible on empirical grounds ) . Normative constraints can also be applied , although these must be used with great care , and clearly designated as such . This technique of using pair - wise consistency relationships between conditions , in order to weed out internally inconsistent configurations , is made possible by a principle of dimensionality inherent in the morphological approach . While the number of configurations in a morphological field grows exponentially with each new parameter , the number of pair - wise relationships between conditions grows only as a quadratic polynomial – more specifically , in proportion to the triangular number series . Naturally , there are practical limits reached even with quadratic growth . However , a morphological field involving 100 , 000 formal configurations can require no more than few hundred pair - wise evaluations in order to create a solution space . When this solution ( or outcome ) space is synthesized , the resultant morphological field becomes an inference model , in which any parameter ( or multiple parameters ) can be selected as " input " , and any others as " output " . Thus , with computer support , the field can be turned into a laboratory with which one can designate initial conditions and examine alternative solutions . GMA seeks to be integrative and to help discover new relationships or configurations . Importantly , it encourages the identification and investigation of boundary conditions , i . e . the limits and extremes of different parameters within the problem space . The method also has definite advantages for scientific communication and – notably – for group work . As a process , the method demands that parameters , conditions and the issues underlying these be clearly defined . Poorly defined concepts become immedi - T Ritchey ( 2006 ) : Journal of the Operational Research Society – Pre - copyedit version . 7 ately ( and embarrassingly ) evident when they are cross - referenced and assessed for internal consistency . Like most PSMs dealing with wicked problems and social messes , GMA requires strong , experienced facilitation , an engaged group of subject specialists and a good deal of patience . Structuring complex social planning problems with GMA GMA is especially suitable for pitting strategies against scenarios . ( Note : In the text below , we use the term scenario in the sense of a future “situation” or “projection” , and not as a series of developments . ) In such cases , two complementary morphological fields are developed : one for generating different possible futures projections based on factors that cannot be directly controlled ( an " external world " field or contextual environment ) ; and one for modelling strategy or system variables , which can – more or less – be controlled ( an " internal world " field or strategy space ) . These two fields can then be linked by cross - consistency assessments in order to establish which strategies would be most effective and / or flexible for different ranges of futures projections . Two such fields are presented below . They derive from a study done for the Swedish Ministry of the Environment concerning the development of an Extended Producer Responsibility ( EPR ) system in Sweden ( Ritchey & Stenström , 2004 ) . Extended producer responsibility ( EPR ) imposes accountability over the entire life cycle of products and packaging introduced on the market . This means that firms , which manufacture , import and / or sell products and packaging , are required to be financially or physically responsible for such products after their useful life . They must either take back spent products and manage them through reuse , recycling or in energy production , or delegate this responsibility to a third party , a so - called producer responsibility organization ( PRO ) , which is paid by the producer for spent - product management . In this way , EPR shifts responsibility for waste from government to private industry , obliging producers , importers and / or sellers to internalise waste management costs in their product prices ( Hanisch , 2000 ) . The long - term purpose of EPR is to encourage more environmentally friendly product development – products that require fewer resources , are easier to reuse / recycle , and which contain fewer environment - ally dangerous substances . The problem , then , is to develop flexible EPR - strategies for a future in which there is a good deal of uncertainty concerning , for instance , national and international directives , technological developments , shifting political ideologies , market forces and ethical concerns . The purpose of the EPR study was to systematically formulate a range of future contextual environments by which to test alternative EPR strategies . Two working groups of seven persons each – a “strategic environment group” and a “strategy development group” – performed the modelling together with two morphologists from FOI . The groups were composed of researchers from the Swedish EPA and other relevant government authorities , from two NGOs and from two private companies involved in waste management and recycling . Each group worked two days on their respective fields , with a final one day joint session where the strategic environment model was merged with the strategy model . Figure 3 is an EPR scenario field consisting of eight parameters which represent “external” factors that can influence or constrain a Swedish EPR system . The eight parameters generate 20 , 736 formal configurations . In contrast to strategy fields , or fields representing system solutions , scenario fields are often difficult to assess internally and reduce . This is because it is risky to exclude relationships which may seem improbable today , but which might very well be the case in five , ten or fifty years . In such cases , it is better to work backwards , so to speak : Select one or more parameters as drivers , choose a number of configurations based on varying these drivers , and then assess the chosen configurations for internal consistency . Repeat this process until the desired number of scenario projections is achieved . For the study in question , eight specific configurations were chosen . Together , these covered all of the parameter states in the scenario field ( “full field coverage” ) , and represented a broad range of futures projections . The configurations were then named and linked to the column at the far left , a scenario - name “placeholder” . T Ritchey ( 2006 ) : Journal of the Operational Research Society – Pre - copyedit version . 8 Figure 3 An 8 - parameter scenario field with a scenario “placeholder” parameter ( at far left ) showing list of scenario configurations defined in the study . One configuration – Current policies ( Negative trend ) – is selected ( grey ) . Figure 4 An 8 - parameter strategy field – one possible strategy highlighted . T Ritchey ( 2006 ) : Journal of the Operational Research Society – Pre - copyedit version . 9 This is done for practical reasons , in order to keep track of specific configurations of interest . ( When such a placeholder is employed to define specific configurations , we call the field specified . When no such placeholder is present , then the field is open . ) Note : On the computer , morphological field configurations are colour - coded . For instance , selected input conditions are rendered in red , and output conditions in blue . In the figures below , red is represented by grey , and blue is represented by black . Figure 4 is a strategy field which also ( purely coincidently ) contains 8 parameters . It represents important “internal factors” of a ( future ) Swedish EPR system . The field generates 34 , 560 formal ( strategy ) configurations . A cross - consistency assessment reduced this to 480 strategies which were deemed realistic . An explicate strategy placeholder parameter was not employed with this field , since we wished it to be left “open” . The reason for this will be made clear below . The scenario and strategy fields can be linked in order to test the viability of different strategies against chosen futures projections . However , fully linking these two 8 - parameter fields into a 16 parameter field would result in a combined field consisting of over 700 million formal configurations . Although there are no purely technical constraints to working with such a large field , it produces an intimidatingly large cross - consistency matrix . Fortunately , we can get around this problem by using a condensed form of the scenarios : we simply merge the scenario “placeholder” parameter with the strategy field , as shown in Figure 5 ( below ) . There are two ways to make the cross - consistency assessment between the scenario placeholder parameter and the strategy parameters – a quick method and a thorough method . The quick method involves relating each scenario , as a gestalt , to each of the strategy parameters . The group making these assessments should , of course , refer to the complete scenario field , but only in order to form a total picture of what each scenario configuration would imply for each state of each strategy parameter . There is no direct assessment between the internal states of a scenario and the strategy parameters . This quick method is usually employed when there is limited time for group work . The thorough method assesses the relationships between the internal states of each ( defined ) scenario configuration , and the internal states of each of the strategy parameters . This requires eight times as many evaluations ( since , in this case , there are eight internal elements for each scenario configuration ) , but is it much more rigorous and provides an interesting base for discussions ( a crucial aspect of all the phases of a morphological analysis ) . In working with linked morphological fields , there are no automatically designated independent variables or drivers . Any parameter – or set of parameters – can be designated as such . Thus anything can be designated input and anything output . For instance , instead of simply letting a scenario placeholder define a relevant strategy , one can reverse the process and allow chosen states within a proposed strategy to designate relevant scenarios . Figure 6 ( below ) is an example . In this case , we have essentially posited the following question to the model : “If we want to develop an EPR system based on general legislation and international markets , with emphasis on detailed material - group sorting , what are the other consistent ( internal ) conditions for such a system , and with which ( external ) scenario configurations is this system most compatible ? ” This feature , of being able to define any combination of conditions as inputs – even mixing external and internal conditions – gives morphological models great flexibility . As is the case with most other problem structuring methods , it is not the morphological model as an end - product which is the sole important result of a morphological analysis . Much of the utility of the morphological structuring process is the process itself . One of the implicit outcomes is a shared terminology and problem concept among participants , and a better understanding of wider contexts . T Ritchey ( 2006 ) : Journal of the Operational Research Society – Pre - copyedit version . 10 Figure 5 Linked fields . The scenario placeholder parameter is imposed on the strategy field . One scenario is selected ( grey ) , with one of its possible strategy configurations shown ( black ) . Figure 6 Three strategy conditions selected ( grey ) in order to examine which other strategy conditions are compatible ( black ) , and which scenarios these best match ( black in far - left “scenario” parameter ) . T Ritchey ( 2006 ) : Journal of the Operational Research Society – Pre - copyedit version . 11 Conclusions Different forms of PSMs have been developed in order to tackle the difficult methodological issues inherent in complex socio - technical planning problems . Following Rosenhead ( 1996 ) , these methods should : (cid:1) accommodate multiple alternative perspectives rather than prescribe single solutions (cid:1) function through group interaction and iteration rather than back office calculations (cid:1) generate ownership of the problem formulation through transparency (cid:1) facilitate a graphical ( visual ) representation for the systematic , group exploration of a solution space (cid:1) focus on relationships between discrete alternatives rather than continuous variables (cid:1) concentrate on possibility rather than probability . Computer - aided morphological analysis is fully attuned to these criteria and can be seen as an important complement to other PSMs employing hierarchic structures and causally directed relationships . The advantage of GMA as a problem structuring method is that it defines an actual ( internally specified ) parameter space in which different inputs can be given , alternative outputs obtained , and inferences ( “what - if” assertions ) made . Thus , in addition to being an elementary PSM , GMA is also compatible with more advanced modelling methods , and can be employed as a test - bed or first step in the development of other types of models – for instance , Bayesian Belief Networks and multi - criteria decision support models . As is the case with all problem structuring methods and models , the output of a morphological analysis is no better than the quality of its input . However , even here the morphological approach has some advantages . It expressly provides for a good deal of in - built “garbage detection” , since poorly defined parameters and incomplete ranges of conditions are immediately revealed when one begins the task of cross - consistency assessment . These assessments simply cannot be made until the morphological field is well defined and the working group is in agreement about what these definitions mean . This type of garbage detection is extremely important when working with wicked problems and social messes . References Ackoff , R . ( 1974 ) . Redesigning the Future . Wiley : New York . Akao , Y . ( ed . ) ( 1990 ) . Quality Function Deployment : Integrating Customer Requirements into Product Design . Cambridge , MA : Productivity Press . Ayres , R . U . ( 1969 ) . Morphological Analysis . Technological Forecasting and Long - range Planning . McGraw - Hill : New York , pp . 72 - 93 . Bailey , K . ( 1994 ) . Typologies and Taxonomies - An Introduction to Classification Techniques , Sage University Papers : Sage Publications : Thousand Oaks , Baltimore . Bateson , W . ( 1896 ) . Materials for the study of variation . Johns Hopkins University Press . Checkland , P . B . ( 1989 ) . Soft Systems Methodology , In : J . Rosenhead , ( ed . ) . Rational Analysis for a Problematic World : Problem Structuring Methods for Complexity , Uncertainty and Conflict . John Wiley & Sons : Chichester . 71 - 100 . Cohen , L . ( 1995 ) . Quality function deployment : how to make QFD work for you . Addison - Wesley Publishing Company , Massachusetts , USA . Coyle , R . ( 2004 ) . Practical Strategy : Structured Tools and Techniques . Pearson Education : London . Coyle , R . , Crawshay , R and Sutton , L . ( 1994 ) . Futures Assessments by Field Anomaly Relaxation . Futures 26 ( 1 ) : 25 - 43 . Dilthey , W . ( 1989 ) [ 1883 ] . Introduction to the Human Sciences . Princeton University Press : Princeton . Doty , D & Glick , W . ( 1994 ) . Typologies as a Unique Form of Theory Building . Acad Manage Rev , 19 ( 2 ) . Eden , C . ( 1989 ) . Using Cognitive mapping for strategic options development and analysis ( SODA ) . In : J . Rosenhead , ( ed . ) . Rational Analysis for a Problematic World : Problem Structuring Methods for Complexity , Uncertainty and Conflict . John Wiley & Sons : Chichester . 21 - 42 . Friend , J . ( 1989 ) . The strategic choice approach . In : J . Rosenhead , ( ed . ) . Rational Analysis for a Problematic World : Problem Structuring Methods for Complexity , Uncertainty and Conflict . John Wiley & Sons : Chichester . 71 - 100 . Hanisch , C . ( 2000 ) . Is Extended Producer Responsibility Effective ? . Environ Sci Technol , 34 ( 7 ) , pp . 170A - 175 A McGhee , G . R . ( 1999 ) . Theoretical Morphology : the concept and its applications . Columbia University Press : New York . Müller - Merbach , H . ( 1975 ) . The Use of Morphological Techniques for OR - Approaches to Problems , in Haley K B ( ed . ) ( 1976 ) . Operational Research ’75 , North Holland Publishing Company . T Ritchey ( 2006 ) : Journal of the Operational Research Society – Pre - copyedit version . 12 Norris , K . W . ( 1963 ) . The Morphological Approach to Engineering Design . In : Jones , J . C . and Thornley , D . G . ( eds . ) Conference on Design Methods , Pergamon Press , Inc : Elmsford , pp . 115 - 140 . Rhyne , R . ( 1971 ) . Projecting Whole - Body Future Patterns - The Field Anomaly Relaxation ( FAR ) Method . Educational Policy Research Center of Stanford Research Institute : Menlo Park , California . Rhyne , R . ( 1981 ) . Whole - Pattern Futures Projection , Using Field Anomaly Relaxation . Technol Forecast Soc 19 : 331 - 360 . Rhyne R . ( 1995 a ) . Evaluating Alternative Indonesian Sea - Sovereignty Systems . Informs : Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences . Rhyne , R . ( 1995 b ) . Field Anomaly Relaxation - The Arts of Usage , Futures 27 ( 6 ) : 657 - 674 . Ritchey , T . ( 1991 ) . Analysis and Synthesis - On Scientific Method based on a Study by Bernhard Riemann . Syst Res 8 ( 4 ) : 21 - 41 . ( Revised 1996 ) [ Online ] . Available from the World Wide Web : www . swemorph . com / pdf / anaeng - r . pdf . Ritchey , T . ( 2003 ) . MA / Casper . Computer Support for Morphological Analysis : A Short Description . [ Online ] Available from the World Wide Web : www . swemorph . com / pdf / macasper1 . pdf . Ritchey , T . & Stenström , M . ( 2004 ) . Scenarios and Strategies for Extended Producer Responsibility : Using Morphological Analysis to Evaluate EPR System Strategies in Sweden . ( English Summary of a Swedish Government Report . ) [ Online ] . Available from the World Wide Web : www . swemorph . com / downloads . html . Rittel , H . & Webber , M . ( 1973 ) . Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning . Policy Sci 4 : 155 - 169 . Rosenhead , J . ( ed . ) ( 1989 ) . Rational Analysis for a Problematic World : Problem Structuring Methods for Complexity , Uncertainty and Conflict . John Wiley & Sons : Chichester . Rosenhead , . J . ( 1996 ) . What ' s the problem ? An introduction to problem structuring methods . In : Interfaces 26 ( 6 ) : 117 - 131 . Taylor , T . ( 1967 ) . Preliminary Survey on Non - national Nuclear Threats . Stanford Research Institute Technical Note SSC - TN - 5205 - 83 , Sept . 17 , 1967 . Thompson , D’Arcy ( 1917 ) . On growth and form . Cambridge University Press : Cambridge . Weber , M . ( 1949 ) . The Methodology of the Social Sciences . Translated and edited by Shils , E . A . & Finch , H . A . The Free Press : New York . Zwicky , F . ( 1947 ) . Morphology and Nomenclature of Jet Engines . Aeronaut Eng Rev 6 ( 6 ) : 49 - 50 . Zwicky , F . ( 1948 a ) . Morphological Astronomy . Observatory 68 ( 845 ) : 121 - 143 . Zwicky , F . ( 1948 b ) . The Morphological Method of Analysis and Construction . In : Courant . Anniversary Volume . Intersciences Publishers : New York , pp 461 - 470 . Zwicky , F . ( 1969 ) . Discovery , Invention , Research - Through the Morphological Approach . The Macmillan Company : Toronto .