Molecular Systems Biology Peer Review Process File © European Molecular Biology Organization 1 Quantification of cytosolic interactions identifies Ede1 oligomers as key organizers of endocytosis Dominik Boeke , Susanne Trautmann , Matthias Meurer , Malte Wachsmuth , Camilla Godlee , Michael Knop and Marko Kaksonen Corresponding author : Marko Kaksonen , EMBL Review timeline : Submission date : 12 May 2014 Editorial Decision : 11 June 2014 Revision received : 19 July 2014 Editorial Decision : 11 August 2014 Revision received : 11 September 2014 Accepted : 01 October 2014 Editor : Maria Polychronidou Transaction Report : ( Note : With the exception of the correction of typographical or spelling errors that could be a source of ambiguity , letters and reports are not edited . The original formatting of letters and referee reports may not be reflected in this compilation . ) 1st Editorial Decision 11 June 2014 Thank you again for submitting your work to Molecular Systems Biology . We have now heard back from the three referees who agreed to evaluate your manuscript . As you will see from the reports below , the referees acknowledge that the presented findings are potentially interesting . However , they raise a series of concerns , which should be carefully addressed in a revision of the manuscript . The recommendations provided by the reviewers are very clear in this regard . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Reviewer # 1 : In the submitted manuscript the authors aim to address several points . They use fluorescence correlation spectroscopy to test many published interactions between the endocytic proteins in the cytoplasm in yeast . This was done by chromosomally tagging proteins with either GFP or mCherry and measuring diffusion rates in the yeast cytosolic compartment . The authors also quantified the relative concentrations of the endocytic proteins , which ranged from low nanomolar ( Ark1 ) to low micromolar ( Abp1 ) . Of the 41 interactions tested , 16 were also present in the cytoplasm ; however , more interactions could be present that were not in the testable range for this assay . The authors then turned to self - interacting proteins . Of those tested , only Sla2 , Ede1 and Bbc1 exhibited self interactions in the cytoplasm . Ede1 has previously been shown to interact with itself as well as with other components of the endocytic machinery , and is thought to be a scaffold for assembly of the early coat . Ede1 had one of the slowest diffusion coefficients in the FCS experiments , which suggests it is part of a larger complex ; therefore , the authors chose to explore Molecular Systems Biology Peer Review Process File © European Molecular Biology Organization 2 this interaction further . To test this they made several truncations of ede1 fused to a C - terminal GFP tag . Using live cell imaging the authors found that deletion of the coiled coil domain of Ede1 resulted in a loss of cortical localization and instead exhibited a much higher cytoplasmic fluorescence . Interestingly , a mutant that contained only the coiled coil domain could still localize to cortical patches . FCS measurements of constructs without a coiled coil domain showed faster diffusion and higher cytoplasmic concentration , which suggests these proteins can no longer oligomerize . Lastly , the authors wanted to see if they could force homodimerization of ede1 lacking a coiled coil domain using the FRB FKBP rapamycin inducible system . After ten minutes of treatment the artificial ede1 dimers localized to the cortical patches . Specific Comments Page 5 Paragraph 2 It is also necessary to look for cleavage products in the western that would indicate the possible presence of free GFP . The diffusion time would be affected if there were degradation products factored into the averages . Page 7 / 8 If possible , it would be very useful to the reader if a supplemental table were provided that lists the predicted mass of the monomers vs . the size range measured for a given cytosolic protein complex . This would help collate the information in a way that could facilitate the reader ' s interpretation of the data and exploration of possible compositions of the complexes . Figure 2B - The dotted lines that are connecting the proteins could be prone to misinterpretation . The dashes should be made lighter ( e . g . , spaced further apart , with each dash rather short ) , such that they do not accidentally appear as solid lines at first glance . - Does the number of molecules per cell calculated agree with the number of molecules per cell published on the SGD database ? It would be useful to know how much agreement / correlation there is in the two approaches . This may be too complicated ( or devoid of meaning ? ) to calculate , since SGD factors in the total protein levels , while in this study , the focus is on the cytosolic pool , but it might still be an interesting comparison . Figure 3C - The cells are difficult to see relative to the fluorescent signal in this part of the figure . Can the contrast or brightness be adjusted on these images ? Figure 4B - There appeared to be some interesting morphology defects in Figures 4A and 6B . Is this something that was consistently observed , and if so , might this be something that is worth mentioning ? Figure 6 - Missing control - what happens if rapamycin is omitted ? - It would be best to show internalization of a patch with a kymograph , and / or colocalization with a later marker such as Sac6 . Minor Comments Figure 4B and 5B - Should label the Y axis as " cytoplasmic concentration " Page 13 Paragraph 2 Sentence 6 - Whitworth et al . ( Traffic , 2014 ) found that End3 binds to a region of Pan1 that is not phosphorylated . This reference should be included in this section as further support that phosphorylation is unlikely to regulate the association of End3 and Pan1 . Page 3 Paragraph 3 Sentence 2 Molecular Systems Biology Peer Review Process File © European Molecular Biology Organization 3 - The Boettner and D ' Agostino citation should be corrected ; there are more than two authors on this paper ( e . g . , Boettner et al . ) Page 3 Paragraph 3 Sentence 3 - Delete " to " Reviewer # 2 : This manuscript reports a systematic study of endocytic factors in yeast . Such factors are recruited sequentially to the plasma membrane , where they orchestrate endocytosis at actin patches . A main question addressed by the authors is which of the interactions among these proteins already occur in the cytosol . To do so , they carry out fluorescence cross - correlation spectroscopy in yeast strains where pairs of each endocytic factor have been tagged by a fluorescent protein . These tagged proteins were generated by homologous recombination and their functionality was thoroughly tested . 16 interactions within the cytosol are observed . A special focus is placed on Ede1 ( Eps15 ) , which is shown to oligomerize in the cytosol and to function as a key hub for the nucleation of coats at endocytic sites . This study pioneer a new direction in the field of endocytosis : the analysis of ensemble of proteins , rather than of one protein at a time . The senior author of this manuscript has been an innovator in the systematic analysis of endocytic factors and this study represents yet another example of his leading the field . Beyond information about protein - protein interactions , this study , which is highly quantitative , reports data on the abundance of all the major endocytic factors . This information will be very useful in the field . The specific new biological insight emerging form this study ( new information about Ede1 ) is limited , but this does not detract form the overall importance of this study in terms of quantitative data and of methodology . I have only a specific comment . I do not find the puzzling information about the coiled - coil - only Ede1 construct compelling . I suggest to remove it . Reviewer # 3 : This manuscript by Boeke et al . applies fluorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) and fluorescence cross - correlation spectroscopy ( FCCS ) to investigate the cytoplasmic assembly status of 36 components of the yeast endocytic machinery . The results reveal that only a subset of previously characterized interactions occur in the cytosol and also provide evidence that cytoplasmic oligomerization of the early coat component Ede1 is important for an initiation step in endocytosis . The work offers important insights into the process of endocytic coat formation by defining for the first time ( to this reviewer ' s knowledge ) the set of interactions that are stable in the cytoplasm in vivo . It represents a substantial step towards a full system - wide characterization of the cytoplasmic interaction network of the endocytic machinery and provides a critical foundation for understanding regulation of endocytosis . Overall the data are clear and the interpretations well - founded . 1 . As with any imaging technique that relies on fluorescent tags , there is a concern that large tags like triple copies of GFP and mCherry can interfere with protein function . The authors addressed this issue by assaying growth under normal and stress conditions . However , these are general assays that may not be sufficiently sensitive to reveal significant functional defects . For this reason it would be worthwhile to test , at least in a few key cases ( Ede1 - 3myeGFP , Rvs167 - 3mCherry , Rvs161 - 3mCherry , Sla1 - 3mCherry ) whether the triple - tagged proteins display the same lifetimes at endocytic sites as single - tagged versions , or the same dynamics in comparison with a standard endocytic component such as Abp1 . 2 . Figure 6 provides evidence that artificial Ede1 dimerization using FRB / FKBP domains can rescue the Ede1 localization defect caused by deletion of the coiled - coil oligomerization domain . It would be informative for the authors to test whether the FRB / FKBP Ede1 dimers can also rescue the Syp1 localization defect of ede1 cc mutants . In particular this experiment could help address the authors ' model ( Fig . 6S , Discussion pg . 16 - 17 ) that higher order oligomerization plays an important role in Molecular Systems Biology Peer Review Process File © European Molecular Biology Organization 4 adaptor clustering . 3 . In Figs 1B , C and S1 , out of the four subunits of AP - 2 , Aps2 has a significantly higher concentration and faster diffusion coefficient than the other three subunits . AP - 2 is a heterotetramer , and therefore all subunits are expected to display similar properties . The authors should comment on this discrepancy in the text on pg . 6 where slow diffusion of the other AP - 2 subunits is addressed . Related to point # 1 , could the properties observed for Aps2 result from effects of the triple tag that were not apparent in growth assays ? Perhaps Aps2 is not efficiently incorporated into the complex . 4 . Statistical analysis for significance of differences ( or lack thereof ) should be provided for bar graphs in Fig . 3B , 4B - D , 6C and S2 . 5 . In the Results section , page 7 , the authors state that " Self - interaction could not be tested for Rvs167 due to problems with the strain " and further refer to the problem at the end of the legend in Figure 2 . However , in the Discussion section , page 15 , the authors state " . . . both amphiphysins form a high - affinity heterodimer but not homodimers in the cytoplasm . " The authors should modify this conclusion to indicate that their data is consistent with no homodimerization of Rvs161 in the cytosol , but does not allow conclusions about Rvs167 homodimerization . 6 . In the methods section , in the data mining segment ( page 18 ) , the authors describe how they chose the reported interactions , " taking into account only physical interactions from both high - throughput and manually curated studies " . For self - interactions , data from the Saccharomyces cerevisiae database ( SGD ) was used . In the case of Apl3 , the self - interaction designation is derived from an SGD interpretation of a single high - throughput study [ Babu et al . Nature ( 2012 ) 489 : 585 - 589 ] , from the raw data in which the Apl3 - Apl3 interaction is observed in two of the three detergent extractions performed ( see wodaklab . org / membrane / links and download Purification data ) . Babu et al . state in their supplemental methods section ( Supplemental page 5 , " Calculation of the confidence scores of pairwise protein - protein associations . " ) that interactions observed in three detergents were given higher confidence scores than the ones found in one or two detergents . The SGD curators based their analysis on the initial cut - off used by Babu et al . However , further statistical analysis was used to define a high confidence interaction network that did not include Apl3 self - interaction ( Babu et al . Supplemental table S4 " List of 13343 protein - protein interactions comprising the integrated network , and 1726 interactions comprising the membrane network . " ) . In this context , the absence of Apl3 self - interaction in the cytosol determined by FCCS may reflect the absence of any self - interaction rather than a difference between membrane and cytoplasmic Apl3 self - interaction . For this reason the authors may want to consider removing reference to Apl3 self - interaction or add some discussion of the issues raised here ( page 7 , 7th line from the bottom ; self interacting circle from Figure 2 and Table S5 from Self column ) . 7 . page 3 , 5th line from the bottom , " . . . closely followed by to the appearance . . . " , should read " . . . closely followed by the appearance . . . " 8 . page 8 , 3rd line from the top , " . . . machinery is in large parts . . . " , should read " . . . machinery is in large part . . . " 9 . page 9 , 8th line from bottom , " µ HD " should be " µ HD - interacting " 10 . pg . 11 , 3rd line from bottom of first full paragraph , " . . . Syp1 was increased in ede1 cc cells as determined by FCS ( Fig . 5B ) . " Fig . 5B displays ede1 but not ede1 cc . This discrepancy should be corrected . 11 . Pg . 12 , 2nd and 4th lines from the top refer to ede1 cc patches and cite Fig . 6D and 6E but these panels are labeled in the figure and / or legend as ede1 591 - 1381 . This discrepancy should be corrected . 1st Revision - authors ' response 19 July 2014 Molecular Systems Biology Peer Review Process File © European Molecular Biology Organization 5 Reviewer # 1 : Specific Comments Page 5 Paragraph 2 It is also necessary to look for cleavage products in the western that would indicate the possible presence of free GFP . The diffusion time would be affected if there were degradation products factored into the averages . Indeed this is a major worry whenever we do FCS ! For this reason we carefully check all tagged proteins for the presence of lower molecular weight bands that would reflect free GFP or mCherry pools . From all our cumulative knowledge we now can say with high confidence that there is no protease in yeast existing in the cytoplasm that would simply cleave off from a fusion protein the particular GFP and mCherry proteins that we use for our work ( except for cases where the protein itself is subject to proteolytic processing , of course ) . Nevertheless , we sometimes observe smaller bands that are however always present in much lower quantities compared to the full - length protein . As it turned out these bands appear to result from partial vacuolar proteolysis , probably due to some autophagic uptake of the tagged protein , especially when the cell culture used for Western blotting was partially saturated ( which causes the induction of autophagocytosis ) . For mCherry we always see smaller bands , but they result from autohydrolysis of the polypeptide via the mCherry chromophore under the acidic and alkaline conditions used for cell lysis and hence represent an in vitro artifact ( this is also described in the paper by Gross and Tsien ( PNAS , 2000 ) where the dsRed chromophore is characterized : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 97 . 22 . 11990 ; Figure 6 ) . Page 7 / 8 If possible , it would be very useful to the reader if a supplemental table were provided that lists the predicted mass of the monomers vs . the size range measured for a given cytosolic protein complex . This would help collate the information in a way that could facilitate the reader ' s interpretation of the data and exploration of possible compositions of the complexes . We now provide a plot : Extended view Figure E1 ( see also below ) . To account for this plot , we introduced the following statement on page 6 : “In general , the diffusion coefficients correlated weakly with the molecular weights of the tagged proteins ( Fig E1 ) , consistent with the idea that most tagged proteins are not part of large protein assemblies . ” Molecular Systems Biology Peer Review Process File © European Molecular Biology Organization 6 Figure 2B • The dotted lines that are connecting the proteins could be prone to misinterpretation . The dashes should be made lighter ( e . g . , spaced further apart , with each dash rather short ) , such that they do not accidentally appear as solid lines at first glance . We changed the style of the lines . • Does the number of molecules per cell calculated agree with the number of molecules per cell published on the SGD database ? It would be useful to know how much agreement / correlation there is in the two approaches . This may be too complicated ( or devoid of meaning ? ) to calculate , since SGD factors in the total protein levels , while in this study , the focus is on the cytosolic pool , but it might still be an interesting comparison . The SGD database does list the dataset by Ghaemmaghami et al ( 2003 ) . In fact there are at present about 9 datasets available from 6 different publications . This data is compiled in the Pax database ( pax - DB . org ) . The log / log plot below shows all values for the proteins in our study . As can be seen , the values in the database easily scatter over 2 orders of magnitude . We think we do not learn anything from this correlation , even more because the pax - DB data sets correspond to total protein / cell values ( converted into concentration value ) , whereas our measurements correspond to the cytoplasmic fraction only . Therefore we do not want to include this plot into the publication , but we provide it here as part of this point - by - point response . Figure 3C • The cells are difficult to see relative to the fluorescent signal in this part of the figure . Can the contrast or brightness be adjusted on these images ? All three images were acquired using the same imaging conditions ( exposure time etc . ) and for visualization the same contrast settings were used . This allows a direct visual comparison of the intensities between the different cells . The low level of soluble Ede1 in the middle panel however Molecular Systems Biology Peer Review Process File © European Molecular Biology Organization 7 causes that the cell outline is not visible , since most of the protein is present in the bright clusters . To show the cell outlines , we now outline them using dashed red lines . To account for this we correspondingly modified the legend : “Where needed , dashed red lines were used to outline the cell boundaries . ” Figure 4B • There appeared to be some interesting morphology defects in Figures 4A and 6B . Is this something that was consistently observed , and if so , might this be something that is worth mentioning ? Indeed , ede1 - mutants , exhibit morphological defects ( e . g . slightly altered cell shapes ) . This has been described before ( Gagny et al . 2000 ) . At one point we considered to use this as readout , but the quantification of this morphological phenotype was not straightforward and initial attempts did not lead to robust results and we therefore did not use it to assess Ede1 functions . We , however , now mention this observation and cite Gagny et al . on page 10 . Figure 6 • Missing control - what happens if rapamycin is omitted ? We now included this information in the manuscript : Page 12 : “This was not seen when only DMSO was added ( Fig . E6 ) “ . • It would be best to show internalization of a patch with a kymograph , and / or colocalization with a later marker such as Sac6 . In addition to showing a time series of Sla1 and Ede1 localization we now also provided a kymograph of a patch in Figure 6D . Minor Comments Figure 4B and 5B • Should label the Y axis as " cytoplasmic concentration " We labeled in both Figure panels the Y axes as suggested . Page 13 Paragraph 2 Sentence 6 • Whitworth et al . ( Traffic , 2014 ) found that End3 binds to a region of Pan1 that is not phosphorylated . This reference should be included in this section as further support that phosphorylation is unlikely to regulate the association of End3 and Pan1 . We thank the reviewer for pointing this out , and we added the following sentence to the manuscript ( pages 13 - 14 ) : “A recent study showing that End3 binds to a region in Pan1 that is not phosphorylated provides further support for the conclusion that the interaction between these two proteins is unlikely to be regulated by phosphorylation ( Whitworth et al . , 2014 ) . ” Page 3 Paragraph 3 Sentence 2 • The Boettner and D ' Agostino citation should be corrected ; there are more than two authors on this paper ( e . g . , Boettner et al . ) This was corrected . Page 3 Paragraph 3 Sentence 3 • Delete " to " The error was corrected in the manuscript . Reviewer # 2 : Molecular Systems Biology Peer Review Process File © European Molecular Biology Organization 8 I have only a specific comment . I do not find the puzzling information about the coiled - coil - only Ede1 construct compelling . I suggest to remove it . The reviewer seems to refer with this suggestion to data shown in Fig 4A and Fig E4 , where we show that also the Ede1 coiled - coil domain does localize to foci at the PM . As we show in Figure E4 , this localization corresponds to late stages of endocytic vesicles only , and hence suggests that the coiled - coil domain does interact with a component of the late endocytic machinery . Leaving out the coiled - coil - only experiment in Fig 4A , would mislead the reader to think that the coiled - coil does not localize on its own . On the other hand we then need to show ( Fig E4 ) that , although the coiled - coil can localize , it does so only during the late phase . Thus , we need these experiments to explain the behavior of the coiled - coil domain , and the observation of a potential new interaction ( with a yet to be identified component ) could lead to future insights into the coordination of early and late endocytic events . We therefore do not want to remove this information . Reviewer # 3 : 1 . As with any imaging technique that relies on fluorescent tags , there is a concern that large tags like triple copies of GFP and mCherry can interfere with protein function . The authors addressed this issue by assaying growth under normal and stress conditions . However , these are general assays that may not be sufficiently sensitive to reveal significant functional defects . For this reason it would be worthwhile to test , at least in a few key cases ( Ede1 - 3myeGFP , Rvs167 - 3mCherry , Rvs161 - 3mCherry , Sla1 - 3mCherry ) whether the triple - tagged proteins display the same lifetimes at endocytic sites as single - tagged versions , or the same dynamics in comparison with a standard endocytic component such as Abp1 . According to our experience , most proteins that can withstand a single FP tag can also withstand a triple tag . Nevertheless , we now measured patch lifetimes for Ede1 - 3myeGFP , Rvs167 - 3mCherry , Rvs161 - 3mCherry , Sla1 - 3myEGFP , Sla2 - 3myEGFP and compared the values for the corresponding single tagged variants . For the triple tagged Sla1 and Sla2 proteins we could measure statistically significantly increased lifetimes , while the lifetimes of the other proteins did not differ significantly . However , the observed patch lifetimes will depend on our ability to detect the early endocytic sites where Sla1 and Sla2 may be present at low levels . These early stages might be below the detection threshold for the single tags but are visible with triple tags leading to longer apparent lifetimes . Therefore , we think it is difficult to make conclusions about the functionality of the tagged proteins from the lifetime comparison . However , because neither triple tagged Sla1 or Sla2 exhibited a growth phenotype in our assays , while their deletions did , we would like to argue that the conclusions drawn by using these strains are generally valid . 2 . Figure 6 provides evidence that artificial Ede1 dimerization using FRB / FKBP domains can rescue the Ede1 localization defect caused by deletion of the coiled - coil oligomerization domain . It would be informative for the authors to test whether the FRB / FKBP Ede1 dimers can also rescue the Syp1 localization defect of ede1 ∆ cc mutants . In particular this experiment could help address the authors ' model ( Fig . 6S , Discussion pg . 16 - 17 ) that higher order oligomerization plays an important role in adaptor clustering . This is indeed a very interesting experiment , and we now tested the effect of artificial dimerization of ede1 ∆ cc - FRB - mCherry / ede1 ∆ cc - FKBP - mCherry on Syp1 - 3myEGFP localization . However , we could not detect stable Syp1 patch formation in this strain after addition of rapamycin . This suggests that oligomerization in the wild type ( versus dimerization in the artificial construct ) of Ede1 molecules may be needed for proper Syp1 localization . 3 . In Figs 1B , C and S1 , out of the four subunits of AP - 2 , Aps2 has a significantly higher concentration and faster diffusion coefficient than the other three subunits . AP - 2 is a heterotetramer , and therefore all subunits are expected to display similar properties . The authors should comment on this discrepancy in the text on pg . 6 where slow diffusion of the other AP - 2 Molecular Systems Biology Peer Review Process File © European Molecular Biology Organization 9 subunits is addressed . Related to point # 1 , could the properties observed for Aps2 result from effects of the triple tag that were not apparent in growth assays ? Perhaps Aps2 is not efficiently incorporated into the complex . As stated by the reviewer , the cytoplasmic concentration of Aps2 is significantly higher and its diffusion is faster than observed for the other AP - 2 complex subunits . The brightness of Aps2 - GFP patches is comparable to the brightness of patches of other subunits . We think that the fast diffusion we observe is explained by an excess of free Aps2 . We now comment on this point in the manuscript on page 6 4 . Statistical analysis for significance of differences ( or lack thereof ) should be provided for bar graphs in Fig . 3B , 4B - D , 6C and S2 . We added the statistical significances in Fig . 3B , 4B - D and 6C . In Figure S2 ( Figure E3 in the revised version ) , we are aiming to show that the expression levels are similar , although not identical , and thus unlikely to explain the much higher differences seen in the cytosolic concentrations shown in Fig 4B . 5 . In the Results section , page 7 , the authors state that " Self - interaction could not be tested for Rvs167 due to problems with the strain " and further refer to the problem at the end of the legend in Figure 2 . However , in the Discussion section , page 15 , the authors state " . . . both amphiphysins form a high - affinity heterodimer but not homodimers in the cytoplasm . " The authors should modify this conclusion to indicate that their data is consistent with no homodimerization of Rvs161 in the cytosol , but does not allow conclusions about Rvs167 homodimerization . We now include a sentence to explain things further : “Moreover , our data are consistent with no homodimerization of Rvs161 in the cytosol , while homodimerization of Rvs167 could not be tested , due to non - functionality of the Rvs167 - 3mCherry tag . ” 6 . In the methods section , in the data mining segment ( page 18 ) , the authors describe how they chose the reported interactions , " taking into account only physical interactions from both high - throughput and manually curated studies " . For self - interactions , data from the Saccharomyces cerevisiae database ( SGD ) was used . In the case of Apl3 , the self - interaction designation is derived from an SGD interpretation of a single high - throughput study [ Babu et al . Nature ( 2012 ) 489 : 585 - 589 ] , from the raw data in which the Apl3 - Apl3 interaction is observed in two of the three detergent extractions performed ( see wodaklab . org / membrane / links and download Purification data ) . Babu et al . state in their supplemental methods section ( Supplemental page 5 , " Calculation of the confidence scores of pairwise protein - protein associations . " ) that interactions observed in three detergents were given higher confidence scores than the ones found in one or two detergents . The SGD curators based their analysis on the initial cut - off used by Babu et al . However , further statistical analysis was used to define a high confidence interaction network that did not include Apl3 self - interaction ( Babu et al . Supplemental table S4 " List of 13343 protein - protein interactions comprising the integrated network , and 1726 interactions comprising the membrane network . " ) . In this context , the absence of Apl3 self - interaction in the cytosol determined by FCCS may reflect the absence of any self - interaction rather than a difference between membrane and cytoplasmic Apl3 self - interaction . For this reason the authors may want to consider removing reference to Apl3 self - interaction or add some discussion of the issues raised here ( page 7 , 7th line from the bottom ; self interacting circle from Figure 2 and Table S5 from Self column ) . We added information to the supplementary table indicating that this interaction has a lower confidence score than the other reported interaction . 7 . page 3 , 5th line from the bottom , " . . . closely followed by to the appearance . . . " , should read " . . . closely followed by the appearance . . . " Changed 8 . page 8 , 3rd line from the top , " . . . machinery is in large parts . . . " , should read " . . . machinery is in large part . . . " Molecular Systems Biology Peer Review Process File © European Molecular Biology Organization 10 Changed 9 . page 9 , 8th line from bottom , " µ HD " should be " µ HD - interacting " Changed 10 . pg . 11 , 3rd line from bottom of first full paragraph , " . . . Syp1 was increased in ede1 ∆ cc cells as determined by FCS ( Fig . 5B ) . " Fig . 5B displays ede1 ∆ but not ede1 ∆ cc . This discrepancy should be corrected . It should read “Syp1 was increased in ede1D…” . This was changed . 11 . Pg . 12 , 2nd and 4th lines from the top refer to ede1 ∆ cc patches and cite Fig . 6D and 6E but these panels are labeled in the figure and / or legend as ede1 ∆ 591 - 1381 . This discrepancy should be corrected . It should all read ede1 ∆ 591 - 1381 . This was changed . 2nd Editorial Decision 11 August 2014 Thank you again for submitting your work to Molecular Systems Biology . We have now heard back from the referee who agreed to evaluate your manuscript . As you will see below , the main concerns raised by the referees have been satisfactorily addressed . However , reviewer # 3 refers to a few relatively minor issues , which we would ask you to address in a revision of the manuscript . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Reviewer # 3 : Overall the authors have effectively addressed my comments and strengthened the manuscript . This is an excellent manuscript , but I do have remaining questions / comments about the responses to two comments from reviewer # 1 . 1 . The authors respond in their rebuttal to reviewer # 1 ' s question about the possible presence of free GFP / Cherry but I did not see anything added to the manuscript to address this important question . If this is the case , I would suggest adding a sentence to the Methods section , pg . 19 , at the end of the Western blotting section that lets the reader know that little or no free GFP was detected by western blotting . 2 . Reviewer # 1 also requested information on the predicted mass of protein monomers and comparison to the measured size . To address this question the authors add a figure showing a plot of predicted mass to diffusion coefficient ( Fig . E1 ) . In general the plot supports the authors ' conclusion that slow diffusion rates suggest association in a complex . However , Chc1 , which is noted as an oligomeric protein with slow diffusion on pg . 5 , second paragraph , falls above the fitted line in Fig . E1 , meaning that it has a faster diffusion rate relative to the size of the monomer . I understand that this can be explained , but I am concerned about confusing the reader . It might be worthwhile to either address this discrepancy or remove Chc1 as an example . Also , I find the new sentence added at the end of paragraph 2 on pg 6 to potentially conflict with the fist sentence of the paragraph . The last sentence suggests that the graph in Fig . E1 is consistent with an absence of " large protein assemblies " while the first sentence states that slow diffusion indicates that the protein is part of a " large complex " . The authors could more clearly distinguish between these two terms . Molecular Systems Biology Peer Review Process File © European Molecular Biology Organization 11 2nd Revision - authors ' response 11 September 2014 1 . The authors respond in their rebuttal to reviewer # 1 ' s question about the possible presence of free GFP / Cherry but I did not see anything added to the manuscript to address this important question . If this is the case , I would suggest adding a sentence to the Methods section , pg . 19 , at the end of the Western blotting section that lets the reader know that little or no free GFP was detected by western blotting . This is an important point and we have given this quite some consideration throughout the work . We therefore agree with the reviewer and have added the following short paragraph at the proposed location in the Methods section : A major consideration in FCS experiments is the possibility of a proteolytic cleavage of the fluorescent protein tag . This would lead to a second fluorescent species with different diffusion behavior and would influence the averaged diffusion and co - diffusion measurements . For this reason , we checked by Western blotting all tagged proteins for the presence of lower molecular weight bands that would reflect free GFP or mCherry pools . These experiments showed lower molecular weight bands for some proteins . These were however much less abundant than the respective full - length protein and probably resulting from partial vacuolar proteolysis due to autophagic uptake of the tagged protein . For mCherry - tagged proteins we always saw lower molecular weight bands , which are likely an in vitro artifact resulting from autohydrolysis of the polypeptide via the mCherry chromophore under the conditions used for cell lysis ( Gross et al . , 2000 ) . 2 . Reviewer # 1 also requested information on the predicted mass of protein monomers and comparison to the measured size . To address this question the authors add a figure showing a plot of predicted mass to diffusion coefficient ( Fig . E1 ) . In general the plot supports the authors ' conclusion that slow diffusion rates suggest association in a complex . However , Chc1 , which is noted as an oligomeric protein with slow diffusion on pg . 5 , second paragraph , falls above the fitted line in Fig . E1 , meaning that it has a faster diffusion rate relative to the size of the monomer . I understand that this can be explained , but I am concerned about confusing the reader . It might be worthwhile to either address this discrepancy or remove Chc1 as an example . Also , I find the new sentence added at the end of paragraph 2 on pg 6 to potentially conflict with the fist sentence of the paragraph . The last sentence suggests that the graph in Fig . E1 is consistent with an absence of " large protein assemblies " while the first sentence states that slow diffusion indicates that the protein is part of a " large complex " . The authors could more clearly distinguish between these two terms . The line plotted in Fig E1 is a simple linear fit , illustrating the correlation in our data set . It does not predict the diffusion rates of proteins of different molecular weights nor is it meant to distinguish between monomeric proteins and proteins in larger molecular weight complexes . There are currently no models that could reliably predict the relationship between diffusion rate and molecular mass for proteins in the intracellular environment . In order to not confuse the reader , we now explain the nature of the line in the legend of Figure E1 . In order to emphasize the difference between the new sentence added at the end of paragraph 2 on pg 6 and the first sentence of the paragraph we made it more clear in the first sentence that We agree that the first sentence could be understood to describe a conclusion : “proteins are in large complexes” . However , the first sentence is meant simply to describe a starting assumption , rather than a conclusion . The last sentence summarizes the result “that most tagged proteins are not part of large protein assemblies” . To avoid potential confusion between the first and last sentences we modified the first sentence .