© 2006 Nature Publishing Group * Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research , Lausanne Branch , University of Lausanne , Chemin des Boveresses 155 , 1066 Epalinges , Switzerland . ‡ Genetics and Stem Cell Laboratory , Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research ( ISREC ) and School of Life Sciences , Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne ( EPFL ) , Chemin des Boveresses 155 , 1066 Epalinges , Switzerland . Correspondence to A . T . e - mail : Andreas . Trumpp @ isrec . ch doi : 10 . 1038 / nri1779 Self - renewal The capacity of a stem cell to divide in such a way that one or both daughter cells retain the stem - cell fate . Steel - Dickie mice ( Sl / Sl d ) . A spontaneous mouse mutant with a defect in the production of membrane - bound stem - cell factor ( SCF ) , although secreted SCF is produced normally Adult stem cells are present in most self - renewing tis - sues , including the skin , the intestinal epithelium and the haematopoietic system . On a single - cell basis , they have the capacity both to produce more stem cells of the same type ( that is , to self - renew ) and to give rise to a defined set of mature differentiated progeny to maintain or repair their host tissue 1 – 3 . The best - characterized adult stem cell is the haematopoietic stem cell ( HSC ) 4 , 5 . Since HSCs were first identified 6 , advances in technology have made it possible to purify adult mouse HSCs close to homogeneity . Several groups have achieved long - term reconstitution of the haematopoietic system of a lethally irradiated mouse by transplantation of a single purified bone - marrow HSC , providing functional proof of the existence of adult HSCs 2 , 7 – 9 . Maintenance of HSCs and regulation of their self - renewal and differentiation in vivo is thought to depend on their specific microenvironment , which has been historically called the haematopoietic - inductive microenvironment 10 or ‘stem - cell niche’ 11 . The crucial role of the microenvironment for HSC function has long been recognized because a mutation in the gene encoding membrane - bound stem - cell factor ( SCF ; also known as KIT ligand ) that is present in Sl / Sl d mice ( steel - Dickie mice ) causes changes in the HSC niche and leads to the failure of bone - marrow HSC maintenance in vivo 12 – 14 . Nevertheless , the structure and localization , as well as the molecular and cellular basis for niche activity , have long remained a ‘black box’ . It is only recently that the concept of a stem - cell niche has been supported by data on the molecules and cell types that are involved in its formation , first in invertebrates and more recently in mammals 1 , 15 – 17 . Many of the different types of signals that are exchanged between stem cells and niche cells , as well as some of the signalling pathways that control stem - cell maintenance , self - renewal and differentiation , have recently been identified . In this Review , we discuss models for the different types of bone - marrow HSC niches that might exist , particularly focusing on the molecules that are known to coordinate HSC function in vivo . The adult HSC Murine HSCs were initially identified on the basis of their ability to form colonies in the spleens of lethally irradiated mice following bone - marrow transfer 6 , 18 . Subsequently , a number of assays have been developed to monitor HSC activity in vivo and in vitro ( BOX 1 ) . The most widely accepted assay is the capacity of HSCs to provide lifelong reconstitution of all blood - cell lineages after transplantation into lethally irradiated recipients . The strictest version of this long - term repopulating ( LTR ) assay , known as serial transplantation , requires that HSC - containing donor bone marrow can be re - transplanted into secondary , and even tertiary , recipients while retaining both self - renewal and multi - lineage differentiation capacity 19 . These functional assays have been used to establish the cell - surface phenotype of mouse HSCs , allowing their prospective isolation by fluorescence - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) ( BOX 1 ) . All functional HSCs are found in the population of bone - marrow cells that does not express the cell - surface Bone - marrow haematopoietic - stem - cell niches Anne Wilson * and Andreas Trumpp ‡ Abstract | Adult stem cells hold many promises for future clinical applications and regenerative medicine . The haematopoietic stem cell ( HSC ) is the best - characterized somatic stem cell so far , but in vitro expansion has been unsuccessful , limiting the future therapeutic potential of these cells . Here we review recent progress in characterizing the composition of the HSC bone - marrow microenvironment , known as the HSC niche . During homeostasis , HSCs , and therefore putative bone - marrow HSC niches , are located near bone surfaces or are associated with the sinusoidal endothelium . The molecular crosstalk between HSCs and the cellular constituents of these niches is thought to control the balance between HSC self - renewal and differentiation , indicating that future successful expansion of HSCs for therapeutic use will require three - dimensional reconstruction of a stem - cell – niche unit . NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 6 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 93 REVIEWS F O C U S O N E A R LY LY M P H O C Y T E D E V E LO P M E N T © 2006 Nature Publishing Group Lin – SCA1 + KIT + Thy1 . 1 low FLT3 – Long - term self - renewal potential LT - HSC SP + N - cad + TIE2 + CD38 + CD150 + Endoglin + MYC low Rho low Lin – SCA1 + KIT + Thy1 . 1 low FLT3 – ST - HSC CD34 + CD11b low Lin – SCA1 + KIT + Thy1 . 1 – FLT3 + MPP CD34 + CD11b low CD48 + MYC hi Rho hi CD4 low markers normally present on lineage ( Lin ) - committed haematopoietic cells but does express high levels of stem - cell antigen 1 ( SCA1 ) and KIT . Therefore , this HSC - containing subset of bone - marrow cells is known as the LSK ( Lin – SCA1 + KIT + ) subset . Because only some phenotypic LSK HSCs have LTR activity , they can be further subdivided into long - term ( LT ) - HSCs , which are CD34 – fms - related tyrosine kinase 3 ( FLT3 ) – CD150 + and have LTR activity , and short - term ( ST ) - HSCs , which are CD34 + FLT3 – and have only limited self - renewal activity 9 , 20 – 22 ( BOX 1 ) . Although it has been shown that 100 LSK HSCs can provide protection from lethal irradiation 23 , several groups have succeeded in reconstituting all haematopoietic lineages from a single , purified HSC ( BOX 1 ) . These data clearly show that at the clonal - level HSCs fulfill the characteristics of true adult stem cells — multi - lineage reconstitution and long - term self - renewal . Recent gene - profiling studies have begun to establish a transcriptional signature of purified HSCs , which is the first step to elucidating the molecu - lar mechanisms of HSC function 9 , 24 – 27 . Furthermore , the number of functional HSCs in vivo is altered in a large number of mutant mice ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) , implicating several of these gene products in the regulation of self - renewal and differentiation of stem cells . Asymmetric self - renewing division in stem cells The vast majority of cell divisions are symmetrical , producing identical daughter cells and leading ( in the absence of apoptosis ) to increased numbers of cells . This process is readily observed for cells in culture and also occurs during organogenesis , where substantial cellular expansion ( including stem cells ) occurs during embryo - genesis . By contrast , under homeostatic conditions in the adult , the number of tissue stem cells in a particular organ remains relatively constant , despite the fact that they proliferate , because they not only self - renew but also produce differentiated progeny . This balance could be achieved if the number of stem cells dividing symmetrically to generate two identical daughter cells with stem - cell function was equivalent to the number of stem cells giving rise to two differentiated daughter cells . However , because this mechanism does not function at the single - cell level , and would require close coordination of two separate stem - cell populations , it is commonly assumed that an individual stem cell can give rise to two non - identical daughter cells , one maintaining stem - cell identity and the other becoming a differenti - ated cell . There are two mechanisms by which this asym - metry can be achieved , depending on whether it occurs pre - ( divisional asymmetry ) , or post - ( environmental asymmetry ) cell division ( FIG . 1 ) . Divisional asymmetry . In divisional asymmetry , specific cell - fate determinants in the cytoplasm ( mRNA and / or proteins ) redistribute unequally before the onset of cell division . During mitosis , the cleavage plane is oriented such that only one daughter cell receives the determinants . Therefore , two non - identical daughter cells are produced , one retaining the stem - cell fate while the other initiates differentiation ( FIG . 1a ) . In invertebrate model systems , the establishment of asymmetry by this mechanism is crucial for vari - ous developmental processes and the molecular basis for it has been well documented 28 . Asymmetrically localized proteins in Drosophila melanogaster include members of the partitioning defective ( PAR ) family of proteins , such as Inscuteable ( INSC ) and Partner of Inscuteable ( PINS , the homologue of which is LGN in mammals ) , as well as NUMB , a negative modulator of Notch signalling 29 . However , only a few examples of divisional asymmetry have been documented in higher vertebrates 28 , 30 . For example , in the mamma - lian fetal epidermis , basal cells not only divide sym - metrically to allow a two - dimensional expansion of the Box 1 | Characteristics of haematopoietic stem cells Haematopoietic stem cells ( HSCs ) are defined functionally by their ability to mediate long - term repopulation of all blood - cell lineages ( known as long - term repopulating ( LTR ) activity ) and to form colony forming units in the spleen after transfer to lethally irradiated recipients . Assays to assess HSC activity in vitro include LTC - IC ( long - term culture - initiating cell ) and CAFC ( cobblestone area - forming cell ) assays 131 . All LTR HSCs are contained in the lineage - negative ( Lin ) – stem - cell antigen 1 ( SCA1 ) + KIT + ( LSK ) subset that comprises ~ 0 . 5 % of bone marrow 132 . 100 LSK cells are sufficient for multi - lineage LTR activity 23 . Additional markers to further subdivide the LSK population into long - term HSCs ( LT - HSCs ) and short - term HSCs ( ST - HSCs ) , which have limited self - renewal activity , have been identified and are summarized in the figure . LTR activity is also enriched in the population of bone - marrow cells with low - level staining of rhodamine 123 ( Rho ) 133 . In addition , functional adult LTR HSCs can also be isolated by their ability to actively efflux the DNA - binding dye Hoechst 33342 . This characteristic is designated as side - population ( SP ) ability 134 , 135 . Single - cell reconstitution studies have indicated the following frequencies for multi - lineage reconstitution and long - term engraftment : • LSKThy1 . 1 low cells ( 18 % ) 2 , 7 • SP + Rho low Lin – cells ( 40 % ) 136 • LSKCD150 + CD48 – CD41 – cells ( 47 % ) 9 • LSKSP + CD34 – cells ( 35 % ) 137 and ( 96 % ) 8 LT - HSCs divide infrequently because ( by DNA content ) only ~ 5 % are in the S or G 2 / M phases of the cell cycle 51 , 138 , and 60 - 70 % of LSK cells are shown to be in G 0 by Ki67 staining 52 . Studies using bromodeoxyuridine ( BrdU ) uptake have calculated that LSK HSCs divide every 30 – 60 days 51 , 138 . 3 . 8 % of LSK CD150 + HSCs are in the S or G 2 / M phases of the cell cycle 9 . The low cycling status of HSCs might explain their significant resistance to cytotoxic drugs in vivo 40 . Label - retaining cells ( LRCs ) are defined by their capacity to retain the DNA label BrdU long - term ( for 70 days ) . Lin – KIT + LRCs are enriched for phenotypic HSCs , but due to the nature of the assay , functional LTR activity cannot be assessed . LT - HSCs , ST - HSCs and haematopoietic progenitor cells show substantially different gene expression patterns 9 , 24 – 27 . FLT3 , fms - related tyrosine kinase 3 ; MPP , multipotential progenitor ; N - cad , N - cadherin ; TIE2 , tyrosine kinase receptor 2 . R E V I E W S 94 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol R E V I E W S © 2006 Nature Publishing Group a Stem cell Terminallydifferentiatedcell Terminallydifferentiatedcell b Stem cell Niche Externalenvironment BrdU labelling Incorporation of bromodeoxyuridine ( BrdU ) into newly synthesized DNA permits indirect detection of proliferating cells using fluorescently labelled BrdU - specific antibodies by either flow cytometry or fluorescence microscopy . Trabecular bone Also known as cancellous bone , this is found in areas of rapid turnover such as the ends of the long bones . epidermis , but also divide asymmetrically to promote stratification and differentiation of the skin . In this case , a protein complex that includes PAR3 , LGN and a distant mouse homologue of D . melanogaster INSC ( mINSC ) , forms an apical crescent that dictates the polarity of the ensuing cell division 30 . Although such a mechanism has not been shown in any vertebrate stem - cell type in vivo , a number of in vitro studies indicate that HSCs might undergo some type of asymmetric division . In an analysis of the ability of either of the two daughter cells derived from a single cultured HSC to long - term reconstitute lethally irradiated recipients , it was shown that ~ 20 % of HSCs produced non - identical daughter cells 31 – 33 . However , these studies neither provide a mechanism for the observed asymmetry , nor show if it occurs pre - or post - cell - division . Moreover , whether these in vitro studies reflect the situation of bone - marrow HSCs remains unclear . Future studies will need to take advantage of recently developed tools to monitor asymmetric determinants such as mINSC and LGN 30 to determine whether , and to what extent , divisional asym - metry occurs in HSCs in vitro , and more importantly if it occurs in self - renewing HSCs in their niche . Environmental asymmetry and the stem - cell niche con - cept . An alternative way to achieve asymmetry is by expo - sure of the two daughter stem cells to different extrinsic signals provided by distinct local micro environments ( FIG . 1b ) . Therefore , a stem cell would first undergo a sym - metric self - renewing division , producing two identical daughter cells . While one daughter cell would remain in the niche microenvironment , conserving its stem - cell fate , the other would contact ( passively or actively ) a different microenvironment that would no longer preserve its stem - cell phenotype but would instead produce signals initiating differentiation 16 , 17 . Therefore , as with divisional asymmetry , the final product would be two non - identical daughter cells but achieved post - cell - division and not pre - cell - division ( FIG . 1b ) . Although the influence of the niche for stem - cell maintenance has been well documented , it has not been possible to monitor the division of vertebrate stem cells in vivo . However , recent studies of the mammalian epi - dermis indicate that the molecular mechanism for divi - sional asymmetry is conserved between invertebrates and vertebrates , raising the possibility that this mechanism might also mediate divisional asymmetry in mammalian stem cells ( including HSCs ) . Therefore , it is possible that HSCs could undergo both divisional and environmen - tal asymmetric divisions ; therefore both mechanisms could be used in parallel by independent HSCs to direct non - stem - cell daughters to distinct cell fates . Stem - cell - niche function A stem - cell niche can be defined as a spatial structure in which stem cells are housed and maintained by allowing self - renewal in the absence of differentiation . Although the concept of the stem - cell niche was initially proposed in vertebrates 10 , 11 , the D . melanogaster ovarian and testic - ular niches controlling germline stem - cell maintenance and differentiation were the first to be characterized 34 , 35 . In higher organisms , the analysis of stem - cell – niche interactions has been hampered by their unknown loca - tion . However , during the past few years , substantial progress has been made in localizing adult stem cells in situ . Many studies have indicated that most adult tissue stem cells ( such as HSCs , or epidermal stem cells ( ESCs ) in the skin ) divide infrequently and can be quiescent for weeks or even months 36 – 39 . In support of this notion , the adult - stem - cell pool is largely resistant to classical chemo - therapeutic agents that target cycling cells 40 . In addition , HSCs that efficiently engraft after transplantation are mainly quiescent 41 , 42 and considered to be metabolically inactive 43 . Moreover , when the DNA of adult stem cells is labelled during cellular proliferation by nucleotide analogues ( such as 3 H - thymidine or bromodeoxy uridine ( BrdU labelling ) ) , or by the histone H2B – enhanced - green - fluorescent - protein fusion protein ( H2B – EGFP ) , the DNA label can be retained for months and has consequently been used to locate quiescent stem cells in situ 37 – 39 , 44 , 45 . For example , such label - retaining cells ( LRCs ) were initially identified using BrdU in the hair - follicle bulge in the skin , leading to the suggestion that ESCs were present in this structure 37 , 46 . However , the nature of this assay precludes a functional assessment of stem - cell activity post - identification , because to iden - tify BrdU + cells , the cells must be fixed . Subsequently , H2B – EGFP was used to show that LRCs in the bulge are indeed functional ESCs 38 . In the bone marrow , only BrdU + LRCs have been identified in trabecular bone 39 , 45 . Nevertheless , in analogy to ESCs , BrdU + LRCs in the bone marrow are probably highly enriched for functional HSCs , particularly if they also fail to express differentiation markers , although this Figure 1 | A model of asymmetric cell division . a | During divisional asymmetry , cell - fate determinants are asymmetrically localized to only one of the two daughter cells , which retains stem - cell fate , while the second daughter cell differentiates . b | During environmental asymmetry , after division , one of two identical daughter cells remains in the self - renewing niche microenvironment while the other relocates outside the niche to a different , differentiation - promoting microenvironment . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 6 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 95 F O C U S O N E A R LY LY M P H O C Y T E D E V E LO P M E N T © 2006 Nature Publishing Group Non - niche microenvironment a Specialized niche cell b Cell - fate B Cell - fate A Specialized niche cell Stem cell in G 0 Self - renewal Non - niche microenvironment provides signals that induce stem - cell differentiation and division Non - specialized stromal cell Non - specialized stromal cell Niche Stemcellin G 0 Non - niche microenvironment Niche Interface between niche and non - niche microenvironment Niche microenvioronment provides signals that repress stem - cell differentiation and division Myeloablative agents Used to completely or partially eliminate the haematopoietic system . These agents include the use of whole - body irradiation or cytotoxic drugs such as 5 - fluorouracil . remains to be shown definitively . If so , these long - term quiescent HSCs are unlikely to contribute substantially to the normal homeostasis of the haematopoietic system with its high turnover rate . Instead , they might serve as a reserve pool that can be reactivated in response to stress or injury and might even be stored in a sepa - rate ‘quiescent - storage’ niche 16 ( FIG . 2a ) . In response to myeloablative agents , HSCs are released into the circu - lation ( a process known as mobilization , as discussed later ) , enter the cell cycle to re - establish haematopoiesis and migrate to putative HSC niches in the spleen and liver . After repair , they return to their bone - marrow niches and become quiescent again 27 , 47 , 48 . Although most adult stem cells are considered to be quiescent , this is not a requirement for all stem cells . For example , embryonic stem cells have enormous proliferative potential but retain their stem - cell fate , and fetal - liver HSCs , although highly proliferative , very efficiently reconstitute irradiated adult hosts 49 , 50 . Therefore , cell - cycle status might only reflect differ - ences between fetal ( that is , clonally expanding ) HSCs and adult ( that is , steady - state ) HSCs rather than be a measure of stem - cell fate . Moreover , even during homeo - stasis , a proportion of stem cells are expected to divide at least occasionally ( particularly in highly regenerative tissues such as the haematopoietic system ) , to maintain a constant flow of short - lived progenitors that can generate enough cells to replace those that are con - stantly lost during normal turnover . Indeed , continuous BrdU labelling has revealed a considerable number of cycling HSCs 51 , 52 . It is currently unclear whether all postulated stem - cell - niche functions ( storage of quiescent stem cells , self - renewal and inhibition of differentiation ) can be provided by a single niche , or whether different types of niches coexist . The main function of a self - renewing niche ( FIG . 2b ) would be to guarantee that ( by environ - mental and / or divisional asymmetry ) one of the two daughters of a dividing stem cell maintains the stem - cell fate while the other produces differentiating pro - genitors 53 . Such a self - renewing stem - cell niche would be more complex than a quiescent - storage niche but would be the essential unit that maintains normal tissue homeostasis . In this type of niche , one can propose that quiescent stem cells would be anchored in the centre of the niche , whereas self - renewing stem cells would be located close to the border separating the niche from the non - niche microenvironment , which could provide signals that would induce differentiation and / or cell division ( FIG . 2b ) . Figure 2 | Different types of niche . a | Quiescent - storage niche . Resting ( G 0 ) stem cells are stored in ‘quiescent’ niches . Specialized niche cells generate a differentiation - and / or division - repressive environment . Under conditions of stress these might be mobilized to generate mature cells as required , and might then return to empty niches for storage or self - renewal . b | Self - renewing niche . Quiescent stem cells would be anchored in the centre of the niche , whereas self - renewing stem cells would be located close to the border separating the niche from the non - niche microenvironment ( NNM ) . At this interface , niche signals ( differentiation and / or division repression ) and NNM signals ( differentiation and / or division induction ) intermingle to form a signalling centre . The appearance of a stem cell at the niche edge would expose it to proliferative and anti - adhesive signals emanating from the NNM . At the onset of cell division , one daughter cell would transit the interface towards the NNM to initiate differentiation , while the other would remain in the niche as a self - renewing stem cell , thereby achieving asymmetric division by environmental asymmetry 53 . Alternatively , signals from the periphery might induce asymmetric division of a formerly quiescent stem cell by polarization of determinants ( right ) 30 . Attachment of stem cells to niche cells ( and possibly signals exchanged between them ) would maintain stem - cell fate , while the budding daughter cell would initiate differentiation . Both mechanisms of asymmetrical division might occur in parallel , therefore allowing initiation of differentiation of stem cells to distinct cell fates ( A and B ) . R E V I E W S 96 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol R E V I E W S © 2006 Nature Publishing Group Osteoblasts Mesenchymal cells that produce bone matrix that forms bone after mineralization . Osteoclasts Large , multi - nucleated cells derived from macrophages that resorb bone . The activity of osteoblasts and osteoclasts form an equilibrium that maintains bone during homeostasis and remodelling . Endosteum The cellular lining separating bone from bone marrow . It comprises different cell types including osteoblasts , osteoclasts and stromal fibroblasts . Bone - marrow sinusoids Low - pressure vascular channels surrounded by a single layer of fenestrated endothelium . The bone - marrow HSC niche The link between bone - marrow formation ( haema - topoiesis ) and bone development ( osteogenesis ) was first recognized in the 1970s in studies showing that first bone and then vascularized bone marrow developed after subcutaneous transfer of total , unma - nipulated bone marrow 54 , 55 . The term ‘niche’ for the specific HSC bone - marrow microenvironment was first coined by Schofield , who proposed that HSCs are in intimate contact with bone , and that cell – cell contact was responsible for the apparently unlimited proliferative capacity and inhibition of maturation of HSCs 11 . More recently , several mutant mice in which haema - topoiesis is defective as a consequence of primary defects in bone development or remodelling , have implicated osteoblasts and / or osteoclasts in the formation and function of the bone - marrow HSC environment or niche ( TABLE 1 ) . For example , mice lacking core binding factor α 1 ( CBF α 1 ; also known as RUNX2 ) , which is one of the earliest osteoblast - specific transcription factors , have defective bone - marrow haematopoiesis and exten - sive extramedullary haematopoiesis , owing to defects in osteoblast differentiation and the consequent failure to form bone 56 , 57 ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . However , whether the haematopoietic deficiency is a secondary effect caused by the absence of a suitable bone - marrow cavity or whether the deficiency in CBF α 1 directly affects haematopoiesis remains unclear . In this respect , several other mouse mutants with defects in bone development and / or remodelling have been described 58 but potential effects on haematopoiesis have not been documented . The physical location of HSCs close to the bone surface was first shown in 1975 ( REF . 59 ) . Morphological evidence for the presence of HSC niches in close association with the endosteum was provided more recently when HSC or haematopoietic progenitor activity and / or phenotype ( TABLE 2 ) were shown to localize close to the endosteal lin - ing of bone - marrow cavities in trabecular regions of long bones , whereas more differentiated haematopoietic pro - genitors were found mainly in the central bone - marrow region 9 , 39 , 52 , 59 – 63 . For example , 89 % of CD45 + Lin – LRCs were shown to be attached to the endosteal surface , and only 11 % of these cells were in the centre of the bone marrow 39 . However , in another study , although 57 % of a bone - marrow population highly enriched in LTR activ - ity and defined as CD150 + CD48 – CD41 – Lin – ( denoted CD150 + HSCs ) were located in trabecular bone , only 14 % were found at the endosteum and the rest were found at bone - marrow sinusoids ( as discussed later ) 9 . The discrepancy between these two studies 9 , 39 might be a reflection of the different criteria used to identify HSC subsets in situ , which could mean that the popula - tions contain different proportions of functional , or qui - escent versus self - renewing , HSCs ( TABLE 2 ) . Nevertheless , HSCs are likely to be located in close proximity to bone surfaces , supporting the concept of an endosteal niche . The endosteal bone - marrow HSC niche . The first direct evidence for cells involved in bone formation having stem - cell - supporting activity was provided by studies in which both mouse and human osteoblast cell lines were shown to secrete a large number of cytokines that pro - mote the proliferation of haematopoietic cells in culture 64 . Furthermore , long - term bone - marrow cultures contain osteoblasts , and many , but not all , stromal cell lines that have been shown to maintain HSCs in vitro also show bone - formation activity 64 – 66 . A direct role for the involvement of osteoblasts in HSC regulation and / or maintenance in vivo has recently been obtained from two studies in which osteoblast numbers were experimentally increased or decreased . In the first study 67 , osteoblast - specific expression of a constitutively active form of parathyroid hormone ( PTH ) or the PTH / PTH - related protein receptor ( PPR ) , which is an important regulator of calcium homeostasis , and therefore bone formation and resorption , was achieved using the type 1 collagen α 1 ( Col1a1 ) promoter . This Table 1 | Mouse models affecting bone development and haematopoiesis Model Further details of model In vivo effects Refs Decreased number of HSCs Sl / Sl d ( steel - Dickie ) mice Spontaneous mutant mouse strain lacking membrane - bound SCF but not soluble SCF Decreased osteoblast development , compromised haematopoiesis and HSC self - renewal 13 , 14 , 117 CBF α 1 - deficient mice Knockout mice No osteoblasts , no bone or bone - marrow development and no adult haematopoiesis 56 , 139 , 140 Col1 α 1 – thymidine - kinase transgenic mice Osteoblast - specific expression of thymidine kinase allows conditional ablation of osteoblasts following administration of ganciclovir ( Cytovene , Roche ) Reversible depletion of osteoblasts and haematopoietic progenitors or HSCs 69 , 70 Increased number of HSCs Intravenous administration of PTH N / A Increased number of osteoblasts and HSCs but not other haematopoietic - cell lineages 67 Conditional BMPR1A - deficient mice Inducible deletion of Bmpr1a in bone - marrow stroma Increased number of osteoblasts and HSCs 39 Col1 α 1 – constitutively - active - PPR transgenic mice Osteoblast - specific expression of constitutively active PPR Increased number of osteoblasts and HSCs 67 BMPR1A , bone morphogenetic protein receptor 1A ; CBF α 1 , core binding factor α 1 ; Col1 α 1 , type 1 collagen α 1 ; HSC , haematopoietic stem cell ; N / A , not applicapble ; PRR , PTH / PTH - related protein receptor ; PTH , parathyroid hormone ; SCF , stem - cell factor . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 6 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 97 F O C U S O N E A R LY LY M P H O C Y T E D E V E LO P M E N T © 2006 Nature Publishing Group Bone morphogenetic protein Induces the formation of bone and cartilage , and is a member of the transforming growth factor - β ( TGF β ) superfamily . Stromal fibroblasts Part of the endosteal lining separating bone and bone marrow . resulted in a simultaneous increase in the number of both osteoblasts and HSCs in the bone marrow . Moreover , the maintenance of HSCs in vitro was more efficient when supported by stromal cells that were isolated from these transgenic mice , presumably because of an increase in the proportion of osteoblasts in the stromal - cell population compared to stromal cells from wild - type mice 67 . In a second study 39 , mice lacking bone morphogenetic protein ( BMP ) 68 receptor 1A ( BMPR1A , which is nor - mally expressed on osteoblasts lining the endosteum ) in the bone - marrow stroma showed a simultaneous increase in the number of both osteoblasts and repopu - lating HSCs , although the number of more differentiated cells remained unchanged 39 . Moreover , Lin – LRCs and osteoblasts were shown to be in direct contact through homotypic N - cadherin interactions ( TABLE 2 ) . Therefore , specialized spindle - shaped N - cadherin - expressing osteo - blasts ( SNOs ) located in the endosteum were postulated to be essential components of the HSC bone - marrow niche ( FIG . 3 ) . Both studies 39 , 67 show that an increase in the number of osteoblasts directly correlates with the number of functional LTR HSCs , indicating that osteoblasts ( or a subset of these cells ) are an essential part of the niche and are limiting for niche size and / or activity . This concept is supported by experiments in which osteoblasts were con - ditionally ablated by targeting the expression of thymidine kinase ( which induces cell death in response to gancic - lovir ( Cytovene , Roche ) , to the osteoblast lineage 69 , 70 . In these mice , progressive bone loss is accompanied by a decrease in bone - marrow cellularity , including a decrease in the number of LSK HSCs . Importantly , in response to the loss of osteoblasts , progenitor cells ( and presumably HSCs ) are now found in the liver , spleen and peripheral blood . This type of extramedullary haematopoiesis is a typical response to bone - marrow stress . Interestingly , osteoblast depletion due to thymidine - kinase activity is reversible following the removal of ganciclovir and is accompanied by a corresponding re - emergence of bone - marrow haematopoiesis . By contrast , genetic ablation of osteoblasts using the osteocalcin promoter ( which is active at a later stage of osteoblastogenesis than the Col1a1 promoter ) to drive thymidine - kinase expression has no effect on haematopoiesis 71 , indicating that niches comprise immature osteoblasts . Although N - cadherin - expressing PPR + BMPR1A + osteoblasts seem to be neces - sary and rate - limiting for niche function , it is probable that other cell types , such as osteoclasts , stromal fibroblasts and endothelial cells , also contribute to niche formation , activity or architecture . The vascular bone - marrow HSC niche . The presence of a second specialized HSC microenvironment in the bone marrow has recently been postulated , as a large proportion of CD150 + HSCs were observed to be attached to the fenestrated endothelium of bone - marrow sinusoids 9 ( TABLE 2 ) . A close interaction between HSCs and endothelial cells is not unexpected because both lineages arise from a common embryonic precursor , the haemangioblast 72 . Moreover , cell lines or purified primary endothelial cells that are derived from the yolk sac or the aorta – gonad – mesonephros promote the maintenance , or even clonal expansion , Table 2 | Localization of HSCs or haematopoietic progenitor cells in the bone marrow Cell population Source * Assay Result Refs Femoral bone marrow Endogenous CFUs • 3 - fold increase in CFU activity in endosteal bone marrow compared with central bone marrow 59 Endosteal bone - marrow cells identified as Lin – Sudan - Black - staining , and with lymphoid morphology Endogenous Scanning electron microscopy and histology of opened rat bone . CFUs of endosteal bone marrow • Lin – Sudan - Black - staining cells morphologically resembling lymphocytes located close to endosteum • High frequency of CFUs from endosteal bone marrow 60 Lin – bone marrow Transplanted In situ localization of CFSE - labelled cells transferred into sub - lethally irradiated hosts • 15h post - transplantation CFSE - labelled cells attached to BMPR1A + OPN + N - cad + osteoblasts at endosteum 52 Lin – Rho low WGA low / int bone marrow Transplanted In situ localization of CFSE - labelled cells 10 – 15h post transfer into non - ablated recipients • > 60 % CFSE - labelled cells at endosteum post - transplantation 63 LSK HSCs mixed with Lin – SCA1 + and Lin – KIT + ( HSPCs ) Transplanted Intravital bone - marrow imaging ( calvarial bone ) of transferred DiR - labelled cells • Attachment of HSPCs to CXCL12 + vascular microdomains in the perivascular space 2h after transfer• No quantitation 62 Lin – CD45 + LRCs ( BrdU + ) . At least 50 % are also SCA1 + KIT + Endogenous In situ localization by immuno - histochemistry • 6 - fold increase of BrdU + Lin – CD45 + LRCs at endosteum compared with bone marrow centre • LRCs attached to N - cad + osteoblasts 39 Lin – SCA1 + CD41 – CD45 + CD48 – CD150 + bone marrow or mobilized spleen Endogenous In situ localization by immuno - histochemistry • 57 % in trabecular bone , 14 % at endosteum • 60 % associated with MECA - 32 + sinusoidal epithelium in bone marrow • 100 % in contact with or close to MECA - 32 + sinusoidal epithelium in mobilized spleen 9 * In situ detection of endogenous or transplanted HSCs or haematopoietic progenitor cells . BMPR1A , bone morphogenetic protein receptor 1A ; BrdU , bromodeoxyuridine ; CFSE , 5 ( 6 ) - carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester ; CFUs , colony - forming units in the spleen ; CXCL12 , CXC - chemokine ligand 12 ; DiR , dialkylcarbocyanine ; HSPCs , haematopoietic stem and progenitor populations ; Lin – , lineage negative ; LRCs , label - retaining cells ; LSK , Lin – SCA1 + KIT + cells ; MECA - 32 , a pan - endothelial marker ; N - cad , N - cadherin ; OPN , osteopontin ; Rho , rhodamine 123 ; SCA1 , stem - cell antigen 1 ; WGA , wheat germ agglutinin . R E V I E W S 98 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol R E V I E W S © 2006 Nature Publishing Group Bone Bone marrow Endostealquiescent - storage niche Endosteal self - renewing niche Vascular niche HSC in G 0 Injury SNO Divisionalasymmetry Non - specialized stromal cell Environmentalasymmetry Long - term self - renewal ? Long - termself - renewal Sinusoidalendothelial cell Migration to the thymus and differentiationinto thymocytes Differentiation into B cells that migrate to stromal cells in the bone marrow expressing CXCL12 Sinusoid MPP HSC HSC Differentiation into megakaryocytes , erythrocytes and myeloid cells Mobilization The efflux of haematopoietic stem cells from the bone marrow into the vasculature in response to bone - marrow stress or injury , or after treatment with cytokines such as granulocyte colony - stimulating factor ( G - CSF ) . of adult LSK HSCs in vitro 73 , 74 . By contrast , vascular endothelial cells that are isolated from various adult non - haematopoietic organs have little or no ability to maintain HSCs in vitro 75 . Therefore , bone - marrow sinusoidal endothelial cells ( BMECs ) are functionally and phenotypically distinct from microvasculature - endothelial cells of other organs 76 . Indeed BMECs con - stitutively express cyto kines such as CXC - chemokine ligand 12 ( CXCL12 ) and adhesion molecules such as endothelial - cell ( E ) - selectin and vascular cell - adhesion molecule 1 ( VCAM1 ) that are important for HSC mobilization , homing and engraftment 62 , 77 , 78 ( FIG . 4 ) . A vascular bone - marrow HSC niche has previ - ously been predicted to form during HSC mobiliza - tion after myeloablation . Quiescent HSCs detach from the endosteal niche and migrate towards the centre of the bone marrow to the vascular zone from where they re - establish haematopoiesis 76 , 77 , 79 . The recent finding that CD150 + HSCs are attached to the sinu - soidal endothelium now raises the possibility that a vascular bone - marrow HSC niche might also exist during homeostasis 9 . Why have two apparently dis - tinct HSC niches in the bone marrow ? Putative HSCs that have been identified by LRC assays are almost exclusively located in the endosteal niche 39 , indicating that this niche might contain the most dormant HSCs and therefore serve as a quiescent - storage niche , or a self - renewing niche comprising both quiescent and self - renewing HSCs . In contrast to label - retaining HSCs that have not divided for many weeks , the CD150 + HSC population comprises both long - term quiescent and self - renewing HSCs , because 3 . 8 % of the cells are proliferating at any given time 9 . Because many of the proliferating cells are in contact with BMECs , it is probable that the vascular bone - marrow HSC niche contains self - renewing , rather than long - term dormant , HSCs . The location of CD150 + HSCs — in close proximity to sinusoids — would enable them to constantly monitor the concentration of blood - borne factors that reflect the status of the haematopoietic sys - tem . Under haematological stress , a rapid and robust response could be mounted , and if necessary more HSCs could be recruited from endosteal niches ( FIG . 3 ) . BMECs are known to support the survival , prolifera - tion and differentiation of myeloid and megakaryocyte progenitors 76 , 77 , 80 , whereas primary bone - marrow stromal cells release factors that inhibit megakaryocyte matura - tion 81 . These data indicate that megakaryocyte lineage development ( and possibly the development of other myeloid - cell types ) might be predominantly initiated at the vascular niche 76 ( FIG . 3 ) . It is probable that the pool of HSCs located in the vascular and self - renewing endosteal niches are freely exchanged to maintain homeostasis in a constantly changing haematopoietic environment . In addition , HSCs that are located in the self - renewing endosteal niche produce multipotential progenitors ( MPPs ) by divisional and / or environmental asymmetry ( FIG . 3 ) . These cells give rise to myeloid - cell lineages as well as lymphocyte precursors . B - cell progenitors are uniformly distributed throughout the bone marrow attached to CXCL12 - expressing fibroblasts ( in the B - cell niche ) 82 , 83 . Because deletion of osteoblasts results in extramedullary haematopoiesis 70 , the vascular bone - marrow HSC niche alone might not be sufficient to maintain long - term haematopoiesis . This indicates that in the bone marrow the vascular niche might be a secondary niche , requiring an influx of HSCs from the primary endosteal niches ( FIG . 3 ) . Collectively , the vascular and endosteal niches strongly cooperate to control HSC quiescence and self - renewing activity ( and therefore HSC number ) , as well as the produc - tion of early progenitors to maintain homeostasis or re - establish it after injury . Figure 3 | Model of bone - marrow HSC niches . Endosteal bone surfaces are lined with stromal cells . Spindle - shaped N - cadherin - expressing osteoblasts ( SNOs ) serve as niche cells to maintain quiescence and prevent differentiation of attached haematopoietic stem cells ( HSCs ) . The quiescent endosteal niche would maintain dormant HSCs long - term . In response to injury , quiescent HSCs might be activated and recruited to the vascular niche . The self - renewing niche would contain quiescent HSCs intermingled with dividing HSCs . Self - renewing HSCs produce multipotential progenitors ( MPPs ) either by divisional or environmental asymmetry . More HSCs can be generated by symmetrical divisions which might provide the vascular niche with new HSCs . Whether HSCs long - term self - renew in the vascular niche remains to be determined , and it is probable that influx of HSCs from endosteal niches is necessary to ensure prolonged haematopoietic - cell production at the vascular niche . HSCs in the vascular niche promote differentiation and expansion along megakaryocytic and other myeloid - cell lineages , particularly in response to injury . MPPs can give rise to all haematopoietic lineages , including B - cell precursors attached to randomly distributed CXC - chemokine ligand 12 ( CXCL12 ) - expressing stromal cells that constitute a B - cell niche 82 . Unidentified T - cell precursors migrate to the thymus where they enter a microenvironment , promoting T - cell maturation . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 6 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 99 F O C U S O N E A R LY LY M P H O C Y T E D E V E LO P M E N T © 2006 Nature Publishing Group Trabecularbone Bone - marrow cords Microvasculature Non - specialized stromal cell Endothelial cell Specializednicheosteoblast Mobilization : 5 - FU , G - CSF or cylcophosphamide : neutrophil proteases Lodging : CXCL12 – CXCR4 , membrane - bound SCF , CD26 , CD44 , OPN , RAC1 and RAC2 Liver HSC Circulation Homing : E - and P - selectin , PSGL1 , VLA4 , VLA5 , LFA1 and CD26 Spleen White pulp Red pulp Sinusoidalendothelialcell HSC Homing The specific movement or migration of haematopoietic stem cells through the vasculature to the bone marrow . Engraftment The production of more haematopoietic stem cells by symmetrical divisions and production of a large number of progenitors and differentiated cell types . LRC assay ( Label retaining cell assay ) . Identifies long - lived quiescent cells such as adult stem cells . They can be visualized in situ by pulse labelling of their DNA with BrdU ( or 3 H - thymidine or a histone H2B – EGFP transgene ) followed by a chase period of a month or more . Detection of BrdU + cells requires fixation , precluding subsequent functional analysis . Entering and exiting the HSC niche Although the vast majority of HSCs in the adult mouse are located in the bone marrow , HSCs show remarkable motility . In response to specific signals they can exit and re - enter the endosteal bone - marrow HSC niche , proc - esses known as mobilization and homing , respectively ( FIG . 4 ) . These opposing biological processes are controlled by overlapping but distinct molecular mechanisms 84 – 86 . Massive mobilization of HSCs occurs in response to treatment with cyclophosphamide and granulocyte colony - stimulating factor ( G - CSF ) , or bone - marrow injury . This is mediated by the release of neutrophil pro - teases , which lead to the degradation of niche - retention signals and adhesive connections ( such as those provided by membrane - bound SCF , VCAM1 and CXCL12 ) 87 ( FIG . 4 ) . During extramedullary haematopoiesis ( which can occur in the liver and spleen ) , extramedullary long - term self - renewal of HSCs might occur , so HSC niches should also be present in the spleen . Support for this idea comes from immunohistochemical analysis showing that two out of three mobilized CD150 + HSCs in the spleen are in contact with sinusoidal endothelial cells 9 . Whether mobilized HSCs are retained in these locations in situa - tions of sustained extramedullary haematopoiesis , and whether these niches are functionally equivalent to those present in the bone marrow , remains to be shown . The release of HSCs not only occurs during mobili - zation but is also observed during homeostasis , when a small number of HSCs are constantly released into the circulation 88 . Although their precise physiological role remains unclear , they might provide a rapidly accessible source of HSCs to repopulate areas of injured bone mar - row 87 . Alternatively , circulating HSCs might be a second - ary consequence of permanent bone remodelling that causes constant destruction and formation of HSC niches , therefore requiring frequent re - localization of HSCs . Transplanted HSCs have the capacity to home back to and lodge in bone - marrow niches . Homing can be defined as recruitment of circulating HSCs to the bone - marrow microvasculature and subsequent transendothe - lial migration into the extravascular haematopoietic cords of the bone marrow 15 ( FIG . 4 ) . Several cell - surface adhesion molecules , including selectins and integrins , are crucial for homing of HSCs to the bone - marrow HSC niche 84 , 85 . For example , β 1 - integrin - deficient HSCs fail to migrate to the bone marrow after transfer 89 . Although homing is thought to be an unselective process that occurs at a similar frequency for most haematopoietic cell types , trans endothelial migration into the extravascular haema - topoietic cords of the bone marrow and subsequent lodging in endosteal bone - marrow HSC niches is a specific property of HSCs 15 , 90 , 91 . Subsequent engraftment is accompanied by the generation of a large number of haematopoietic progenitors and differentiated cells . One crucial factor involved in migration , retention and mobilization of HSCs during homeostasis and after injury is CXCL12 ( FIG . 4 ) , which is expressed by several types of bone - marrow stromal cell , including osteoblasts Figure 4 | Mobilization , homing and lodging . Schematic diagram showing some of the factors implicated in each process . Haematopoietic stem cells ( HSCs ) bound to the bone - marrow niche are mobilized in response to granulocyte colony - stimulating factor ( G - CSF ) or cyclophosphamide , or after peripheral myeloablation following treatment with 5 - fluorouracil ( 5 - FU ) . After extravasation from the bone - marrow cords into the microvasculature , HSCs enter the circulation and are distributed to peripheral tissues such as the spleen or liver . HSCs locate close to endothelial cells in the splenic red pulp . They home to the bone - marrow cords through the circulation , a process that is controlled by a number of adhesion molecules such as very late antigen 4 ( VLA4 ) , VLA5 , lymphocyte function - associated antigen 1 ( LFA1 ) or selectins . After entering the bone marrow , HSCs specifically lodge in the niche , a process requiring membrane - bound stem - cell factor ( SCF ) , CXC - chemokine ligand 12 ( CXCL12 ) , osteopontin ( OPN ) , hyaluronic acid , and their corresponding receptors . CXCR4 , CXC - chemokine receptor 4 ; E - selectin , endothelial - cell selectin ; P - selectin , platelet selectin ; PSGL1 , P - selectin glycoprotein ligand 1 . R E V I E W S 100 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol R E V I E W S © 2006 Nature Publishing Group Angiogenic factors These factors ( which include angiopoietin - 1 ) promote the development of blood vessels , and are particularly important in embryonic and fetal development . and vascular endothelial cells 92 , 93 . Similar to SCF , CXCL12 expression and secretion is induced in response to haema - topoietic - cell loss due to irradiation , chemotherapy or hypoxia , and purified HSCs migrate specifically towards CXCL12 but not towards any other single chemokine 94 . The biological effects of CXCL12 are mediated by its capacity to induce motility , chemotaxis and adhesion , as well as to induce secretion of matrix metalloproteinases ( MMPs ) and angiogenic factors ( such as vascular endothe - lial growth factor ( VEGF ) ) by cells expressing its recep - tor , CXC - chemokine receptor 4 ( CXCR4 ) . Mice lacking either CXCL12 or CXCR4 show similar embryonic lethal defects , including impaired myeloid - and B - cell haema - topoiesis 87 , 95 , 96 ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . Importantly , CXCL12 is not essential for HSC generation or expansion in the fetal liver but is crucial for the colonization of bone marrow during late fetal devel - opment . Collectively , the genetic and functional data indicate that the CXCL12 – CXCR4 pathway is crucial for retention and maintenance of adult HSCs . The cytoskeleton also cooperates with cell - surface adhesion molecules to regulate migration and adhe - sion , and is essential for homing and mobilization . For example , Lin – KIT + cells lacking the RHO family GTPase RAC1 not only fail to engraft 97 , but also have reduced homing efficiency to the bone marrow and endosteum . Moreover , the deletion of both RAC1 and RAC2 causes massive defects in HSC or haematopoietic - progenitor - cell proliferation , survival , adhesion to very late antigen 4 ( VLA4 ) and / or VLA5 , and migration towards CXCL12 in vitro . Deletion of both RAC1 and RAC2 in engrafted HSCs in vivo leads to a massive mobilization of HSC or haematopoietic progenitor cells to the peripheral blood . Together , these data indicate that RAC1 and RAC2 have essential roles in homing , lodging and retention of HSCs in the endosteal bone - marrow HSC niche 86 , 97 ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . In summary , a complex combination of migration , adhesion , proteolysis and signalling occurs at the interface between HSCs and the endosteal bone - marrow niche ( FIGS 4 , 5 ) , and signals originating from the periphery can influence HSC hom - ing , retention and mobilization , therefore determining whether a niche is silent or whether HSCs exit the niche in response to stress . Molecular crosstalk in the endosteal niche Although little is known about the signals that are exchanged between HSCs and osteoblasts in situ , several receptors , membrane - anchored proteins and secreted factors are expressed by both cell types 65 . Comparative gene - expression profiling has recently been performed on HSC - supporting and non - supporting stromal cell lines , identifying a number of new molecules that might regulate endosteal bone - marrow HSC - niche activ - ity . These include various interleukins , oncostatin - M , ciliary neurotrophic factor and the membrane protein mKirre 98 . Here , however , we will focus on the role of molecules for which genetic or functional evidence has been shown in vivo for the regulation of HSC func - tion and / or niche activity ( FIG . 5 ) ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . Notch signalling . Signalling through Notch receptors is involved in many cell - fate decisions and is thought to have a role in the maintenance of stem cells in a variety of tissues 99 , 100 . Moreover , several Notch receptors and Notch - receptor ligands are expressed in the bone mar - row 101 , leading to the suggestion that Notch signalling has a role in HSC self - renewal and / or clonal expan - sion . Support for this hypothesis has been provided by in vitro culture of purified HSCs on various stromal cell lines 102 , 103 . In addition , overexpression of Notch1 in recombination - activating gene 1 ( RAG1 ) - deficient Lin – SCA1 + progenitors resulted in an increase in the number of HSCs or haematopoietic progenitor cells in vitro and in vivo 104 . Moreover , as expression of the Notch ligand Jagged - 1 is upregulated on osteoblasts that are exposed to PTH , the concomitant increase in HSCs has been postulated to be caused by increased Notch signalling 67 . However , in contrast to studies leading to over - activation of Notch signalling , loss - of - function studies have failed to show any requirement for Notch signalling in HSCs . Conditional knockout mice for Jagged - 1 , Notch - 1 and Notch - 2 , or CSL ( the common mediator of all signal - ling through Notch receptors ) have all been shown to be dispensable for HSC and niche function in vivo 105 – 108 . Together , these data indicate that signalling events occur - ring between HSCs and osteoblasts are more complex than has been previously assumed and involve factors other than Notch signals . Osteopontin . One mechanism by which osteoblasts might regulate the number of HSCs in the bone marrow is through secretion of osteopontin ( OPN ) , an acidic glycoprotein , into the bone matrix 109 . OPN - deficient mice have a two - fold increase in HSCs and , because the same effect was observed by transplanting wild - type HSCs into lethally irradiated OPN mutant recipients , OPN production by osteoblasts has a negative effect on HSC number 91 , 110 . Because cultured Lin – SCA1 + bone - marrow cells are induced to undergo apoptosis when exposed to soluble OPN , the increase in the number of HSCs in OPN - deficient mice has been postulated to be a result of decreased apoptosis 110 . In addition , OPN has been postulated to act as a negative regulator of HSCs by actively maintaining their quiescence 91 . Membrane - bound SCF . The steel ( Sl ) locus encodes both membrane - bound SCF and secreted SCF . The lat - ter is produced by alternative splicing followed by pro - teolytic cleavage of membrane - bound SCF 111 . SCF binds and activates KIT , which is expressed at high levels by all LTR HSCs as well as other stem cells . Mutations at either of these loci affect migration and differentiation of primordial germ cells , neural - crest - derived melano - blasts , and haematopoietic cells 112 ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . Analysis of the different SCF and KIT mutant mice showed that although not essential for the generation and initial clonal expansion of HSCs in the embryo and fetal liver , they are crucial for long - term maintenance and self - renewal of adult HSCs , raising the possibility that the SCF – KIT pathway mediates endosteal bone - marrow HSC niche activity ( FIG . 5 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 6 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 101 F O C U S O N E A R LY LY M P H O C Y T E D E V E LO P M E N T © 2006 Nature Publishing Group Fibronectin HSC Motility , self - renewal , survival Specializedniche osteoblast Nucleus LFA1 V L A 4 V L A 5 CD44 Hyaluronicacid CD44 Frizzled Integrin ? Nucleus OPN WNT RAC Notch TIE2 SCA1 CXCR4 CXCL12 KIT Membrane - bound SCF ANG1 PTH LRP5or LRP6 BMP ? PLC , PKC SMADS Jagged BMPR1A RAC PI3K ? FAK , MAPK FAK , MAPK PPR N – c a d h e r i n N – c a d h e r i n β - catenin Non - canonical WNT signalling pathway MYB p18p27 CSL Self - renewal Adhesion , motility Adhesion , motility Adhesion MYC ? ? ? p21 β - catenin BMI1HOXB4 ICAM1 VCAM1 Quiescence Importantly , membrane - bound SCF is expressed by osteoblasts and has a higher and more sustained capacity to activate KIT on the cell surface of HSCs than secreted SCF 112 , 113 . In addition , membrane - bound SCF is a potent stimulator of adhesion of HSCs or haematopoietic pro - genitor cells to stromal cells 114 because it can activate VLA4 and VLA5 , indicating that membrane - bound SCF can affect the adhesive properties of the endosteal niche by modifying the functional state of specific integrins 115 . Transplantation of normal bone marrow into Sl / Sl d mice results in impaired lodging and engraftment of the trans - planted HSCs 12 , 116 . In addition , the bone marrow of young Sl / Sl d mice has normal LTR activity when transplanted into lethally irradiated recipients , whereas bone marrow from old Sl / Sl d mice has greatly reduced LTR activity , indicating a progressive loss of HSC activity over time , potentially due to ceasing niche activity 13 , 14 . Collectively , these data indicate that membrane - bound SCF is an essential component of the endosteal bone - marrow HSC niche that maintains long - term HSC activity in adult bone marrow . However , membrane - bound SCF is also required for osteoblast proliferation and activity in vivo , as shown by the development of osteopaenia in Sl / Sl d mice 117 ( TABLE 1 ) . Therefore , further research is required to clarify whether the effect of membrane - bound SCF is direct ( due to its capacity to provide sustained activa - tion of KIT expressed by HSCs ) , or whether it is indirect ( owing to its essential role in the maintenance of niche osteoblasts ) . N - cadherin : a central HSC anchor ? N - cadherin is expressed by both SNOs and a subset of LSK HSCs 39 , 52 . In addition , N - cadherin expression by HSCs localizes asymmetrically to the side of their attachment to SNOs 39 . Figure 5 | A model of the endosteal niche – stem - cell synapse . Schematic diagram of the endosteal niche – stem - cell synapse showing putative ligand – receptor interactions and adhesion molecules , as well as some of the intracellular pathways that are activated following signalling . ANG1 , angiopoietin - 1 ; BMI1 , polycomb repressor ; BMP , bone morphogenetic protein ; BMPR1A , BMP receptor 1A ; CSL , CBF1 suppressor of Hairless and LAG1 ; CXCL12 , CXC - chemokine ligand 12 ; CXCR4 , CXC - chemokine receptor 4 ; FAK , focal adhesion kinase ; HOXB4 , homeobox B4 ; HSC , haematopoietic stem cell ; ICAM1 , intercellular adhesion molecule 1 ; LFA1 , lymphocyte function - associated antigen 1 ; LRP , low - density - lipoprotein - receptor - related protein ; MAPK , mitogen - activated protein kinase ; OPN , osteopontin ; PI3K , phosphatidylinositol - 3 kinase ; PLC , phospholipase C ; PKC , protein kinase C ; PPR , PTH / PTH - related protein receptor ; PTH , parathyroid hormone ; SCF , stem - cell factor ; SMADS , mothers against decapentaplegic - related homologue ; SNO , spindle - shaped N - cadherin - expressing osteoblast ; TIE2 , tyrosine kinase receptor 2 ; VCAM1 , vascular cell - adhesion molecule 1 ; VLA4 , very late antigen 4 ; ‘ ? ’ denotes molecules and / or interactions for which only indirect or contradictory evidence is available . R E V I E W S 102 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol R E V I E W S © 2006 Nature Publishing Group OP9 stromal cells A bone - marrow - derived cell line that can support the expansion of haematopoietic - cell lineages in culture . Therefore , homotypic N - cadherin interactions have been postulated to be an important component of the anchor that links HSCs to SNOs in the endosteal niche . In support of this hypothesis , ectopic expression of N - cadherin by OP9 stromal cells substantially increases their ability to maintain mouse HSCs in vitro 45 . However , genetic evidence of an essential role for N - cadherin in HSC – osteoblast adhesion and / or signalling is still lack - ing , as N - cadherin - mutant embryos fail to develop past mid - gestation 118 . Moreover , whether functional HSCs are enriched in N - cadherin - expressing LSK HSCs , com - pared to those not expressing this adhesion receptor , has not been shown . Nevertheless , indirect support for the importance of N - cadherin has been obtained from studies showing that MYC and tyrosine kinase recep - tor 2 ( TIE2 ) control N - cadherin expression by HSCs in an antagonistic manner . The effects of MYC and TIE2 on HSCs and on N - cadherin expression correlate with a key function for N - cadherin in the retention of HSCs in the endosteal niche 43 , 45 , 52 , 53 . The cell - adhesion signalling network . Genetic evidence for the requirement of TIE2 in HSC – niche interactions has been obtained from chimeric mice comprised of wild - type and TIE1 – / – TIE2 – / – morulae 119 . Although TIE1 and TIE2 are not required for the development and dif - ferentiation of fetal HSCs , HSCs lacking both TIE1 and TIE2 fail to be maintained in the adult microenviron - ment . In adult bone marrow , TIE2 ( which is expressed specifically by LT - HSCs ) is activated by angiopoietin - 1 ( ANG1 ) , which is secreted by osteoblasts , leading to upregulation of N - cadherin expression by HSCs , pro - viding the first example of a secreted factor promoting HSC – osteoblast adhesion . Interestingly , the ANG1 – TIE2 signalling pathway prevents HSC division and main - tains HSC quiescence , both in vitro and in vivo 36 , 41 , 45 , 120 . Collectively , these data strongly support the hypothesis that N - cadherin - expressing ANG1 + osteoblasts form a niche that maintains quiescence and prevents self - renewal or differentiation through TIE2 signalling ( FIG . 5 ) . TIE2 - mediated quiescence is potentially caused by positively regulating the cyclin - dependent - kinase inhibitor p21 ( also known as CIP1 and WAF1 ) . HSCs express high levels of p21 , and mice lacking p21 show increased HSC proliferation at the expense of long - term self - renewal , indicating that p21 is essen - tial for maintenance of quiescence in HSCs 120 , 121 ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . In contrast to TIE2 , transcription of the gene encoding p21 is negatively regulated by MYC , which is expressed at low levels by HSCs but increases during initiation of HSC differentiation in a converse expression pattern to that of p21 ( REFS 52 , 121 , 122 ) . Interestingly , MYC - deficient LSKFLT3 – HSCs overexpress N - cadherin and integrins such as lymphocyte function - associated antigen - 1 ( LFA1 ) and VLA5 , and contact SNOs 52 . Although mutant LSKFLT3 – HSCs self - renew normally , they have a severe niche - dependent differentiation defect and accumulate in situ . Conversely , enforced MYC activity in HSCs represses the expression of N - cadherin , as well as the expression of several integrins , by LSK HSCs . Most importantly , MYC overexpressing HSCs are lost over time because of differentiation , presumably owing to their failure to be retained in the niche 52 . These data indicate that the balance between self - renewal and dif - ferentiation might be controlled by MYC - dependent retention or exit of HSCs from the niche 52 , 53 . N - cadherin and WNT signalling . Intriguingly , it has recently been shown that the transmembrane metallo - proteinase ADAM10 ( a disintegrin and metalloprotein - ase - 10 ) is able to cleave N - cadherin that is expressed at the cell surface of fibroblasts and neuronal cells . This leads to the redistribution of β - catenin ( which is associated with the intracellular portion of N - cadherin ) from the cell surface to the cytoplasmic β - catenin pool , thereby decreasing the signalling threshold required for the expression of target genes of the canonical WNT sig - nalling pathway ( which is mediated through β - catenin signal transduction cascades ) , such as the genes encod - ing cyclin D1 and MYC 123 . A similar re - distribution of β - catenin has also been reported after E - cadherin cleavage 124 , indicating that high levels of expression of cadherins , as observed for HSCs , might decrease cyto - plasmic β - catenin levels and therefore negatively regulate expression of β - catenin target genes . This contrasts with studies in which activation of the WNT signalling pathway in cultured HSCs promotes symmetrical self - renewal in the absence of differentia - tion 125 , 126 . However , the importance of canonical WNT signalling during haematopoiesis has recently been questioned because β - catenin is dispensable for HSC function 127 . Although it is probable that the WNT sig - nalling pathway has an important role in HSC or haema - topoietic progenitor cell function 100 , the question remains whether WNT promotes self - renewal of LT - HSCs in vivo , or whether it is only important for the expansion and differentiation of non - HSC haematopoietic progenitor cells . The latter is in agreement with the expression pat - tern of the β - catenin target gene Myc , which is induced in LSKFLT3 + progenitor cells leading to downregulation of N - cadherin and integrin expression 52 . In this context , it is intriguing that the N - cadherin , TIE2 , MYC , p21 and β - catenin pathways are apparently interconnected , leading to the suggestion that they might cooperatively control quiescence , self - renewal and initiation of HSC differentiation through interaction with the niche 53 ( FIG . 5 and Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . The stem - cell – niche synapse The picture emerging from accumulating genetic and functional data indicates that molecular crosstalk between HSCs and niche cells ( particularly osteo blasts ) involves a large number of molecules ( cadherins , integrins , chemokines , cytokines , signalling molecules and receptors ) that mediate at least two types of inter - action ( FIG . 5 ) . First , adhesive cell – extracellular - matrix ( ECM ) interactions such as CD44 binding to OPN or hyaluronic acid , and cell – cell interactions , such as those mediated by heterotypic VLA4 – VCAM1 interactions and homotypic N - cadherin interactions . The main function of these interactions would be to maintain HSCs in close R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 6 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 103 F O C U S O N E A R LY LY M P H O C Y T E D E V E LO P M E N T © 2006 Nature Publishing Group proximity to cells in the endosteal bone - marrow niche . In addition , most adhesion receptors are also linked to intracellular signalling cascades and actively participate in the signalling network controlling HSC maintenance ( FIG . 5 ) . Second , ligand – receptor interactions , through which intracellular signalling pathways are activated after ligand binding to receptors that are expressed by HSCs or SNOs ( FIG . 5 ) . Most secreted signalling molecules are bound to the cell surface or ECM , and consequently do not diffuse far . Therefore , the tight adhesion and juxta position of HSCs to niche osteoblasts is essential for the for - mation of an intercellular space in which efficient ligand – receptor interaction can occur . Some osteo - blast - derived signals might be crucial to maintain HSCs in an undifferentiated state and these include the ligand – receptor pairs membrane - bound SCF – KIT , and ANG1 – TIE2 – MYC ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . Conversely , other ligand – receptor pairs , such as BMP – BMPR1A are important for the number and / or activity of niche osteoblasts . Therefore , in analogy to the neuronal and immunological synapses 128 , we propose the term ‘stem - cell – niche synapse’ for this adhesion and signalling unit ( FIG . 5 ) . Concluding remarks During the past few years , the theoretical concept of a specific stem - cell microenvironment ( that is , a stem - cell niche ) that was proposed in the 1960s and 1970s , has finally received greater attention 129 . Substantial progress in localizing the bone - marrow HSC niche ( s ) , as well as its characterization at the molecular and cel - lular levels , has been made . Nevertheless , important questions remain . These include , how many different types of haematopoietic niches exist in the bone mar - row and the periphery , how many HSCs each niche contains , and the exact role each niche unit has during homeostasis and in response to bone - marrow stress . It also remains unclear whether HSC – niche interac - tions are stable or dynamic . Furthermore , although osteoblasts have been shown to be rate - limiting for HSC number , very little is known about the specific differentiation stage of these cells . Are they the same mesenchymal - stem - cell - derived osteoblasts that continue to differentiate into osteocytes , or have they branched off to generate a distinct ‘niche - osteoblast’ ? If the latter is the case , do they differentiate in response to signals that are derived from an attaching HSC ? The recently identified vascular niche 9 opens another chap - ter on HSC – bone - marrow - niche interactions , and the molecular events governing adhesion and signalling of BMECs with HSCs will be an area of intense future research and will move the endothelial - cell field to one of the centre stages of adult - stem - cell research . Finally , whether long - term self - renewal occurs in sites of extramedullary haematopoiesis , such as the spleen and liver , and therefore maintains blood forma - tion during acute and chronic bone - marrow injury , remains unclear . First attempts to address this question indicate that mobilized splenic HSCs are found close to the vasculature ( peripheral vascular niche ) 9 . Are these areas active niches or do they only transiently maintain HSCs ? Are they always present or do they form only after injury , and what are the equivalent niche structures in the liver ? At the moment there are more questions than answers , but a better understanding of the differ - ent niches will also unearth similarities between them , which should facilitate the eventual reconstruction of active niches in vitro . Collectively , the impressive progress in the HSC - niche field clearly indicates that substantial clonal expansion of HSCs in vitro unquestionably requires more than just a cytokine cocktail , and instead requires a three - dimensional reconstruction of the niche , includ - ing the appropriate cells and ECM to allow the genera - tion of a stable ‘stem - cell – niche synapse’ . This requires not only further progress from the cell – and - molecular - biology end , but is in urgent need of input from matrix - and tissue - engineering fields . Future perspectives have never been more promising , and a breakthrough in the in vitro expansion field will eliminate one of the main obstacles for future regenerative medicine using adult stem cells 130 . Note added in proof A recent report shows that HSCs that are deficient for the calcium - sensing receptor show decreased homing to the endosteal niche accompanied by diminished adhesion to collagen type I . These data indicate that local calcium gradients , as are observed around areas of bone remodel - ling , might be involved in engraftment and / or retention of HSCs to the endosteal niche 141 . 1 . Fuchs , E . , Tumbar , T . & Guasch , G . Socializing with the neighbors : stem cells and their niche . Cell 116 , 769 – 778 ( 2004 ) . 2 . Osawa , M . , Hanada , K . , Hamada , H . & Nakauchi , H . Long - term lymphohematopoietic reconstitution by a single CD34 – low / negative hematopoietic stem cell . Science 273 , 242 – 245 ( 1996 ) . 3 . Watt , F . M . & Hogan , B . L . Out of Eden : stem cells and their niches . Science 287 , 1427 – 1430 ( 2000 ) . 4 . Weissman , I . L . Stem cells : units of development , units of regeneration , and units in evolution . Cell 100 , 157 – 168 ( 2000 ) . 5 . Kondo , M . et al . Biology of hematopoietic stem cells and progenitors : implications for clinical application . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 21 , 759 – 806 ( 2003 ) . 6 . Till , J . E . & McCulloch , C . E . A direct measurement of the radiation sensitivity of normal mouse bone marrow cells . Radiat . Res . 14 , 213 – 222 ( 1961 ) . 7 . Wagers , A . J . , Sherwood , R . I . , Christensen , J . L . & Weissman , I . L . Little evidence for developmental plasticity of adult hematopoietic stem cells . Science 297 , 2256 – 2259 ( 2002 ) . 8 . Matsuzaki , Y . , Kinjo , K . , Mulligan , R . C . & Okano , H . Unexpectedly efficient homing capacity of purified murine hematopoietic stem cells . Immunity 20 , 87 – 93 ( 2004 ) . 9 . Kiel , M . J . , Yilmaz , O . H . , Iwashita , T . , Terhorst , C . & Morrison , S . J . SLAM family receptors distinguish hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells and reveal endothelial niches for stem cells . Cell 121 , 1109 – 1121 ( 2005 ) . This study shows that CD150 , one of the signalling lymphocytic activation molecules ( SLAMs ) is expressed by LTR HSCs . CD150 + HSCs were localized near sinusoids in normal bone marrow , indicating that in addition to the endosteal niche a second vascular niche might exist . 10 . Curry , J . L . , Trentin , J . J . & Wolf , N . Hemopoietic spleen colony studies . II . Erythropoiesis . J . Exp . Med . 125 , 703 – 720 ( 1967 ) . 11 . Schofield , R . The relationship between the spleen colony - forming cell and the haemopoietic stem cell . Blood Cells 4 , 7 – 25 ( 1978 ) . This paper proposes that HSCs are associated with other cell types , and that these allow self - renewal but prevent cell maturation . Schofield termed this microenvironment the ‘stem - cell niche’ . 12 . McCulloch , E . A . , Siminovitch , L . , Till , J . E . , Russell , E . S . & Bernstein , S . E . The cellular basis of the genetically determined hemopoietic defect in anemic mice of genotype Sl - Sl d . Blood 26 , 399 – 410 ( 1965 ) . R E V I E W S 104 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol R E V I E W S © 2006 Nature Publishing Group This paper ( together with references 13 and 14 ) shows that normal bone marrow fails to engraft in Sl / Sl d mice . This is probably the first study demonstrating that the microenvironment is essential for bone - marrow HSC function and / or maintenance . 13 . Barker , J . E . Sl / Sld hematopoietic progenitors are deficient in situ . Exp . Hematol . 22 , 174 – 177 ( 1994 ) . 14 . Barker , J . E . Early transplantation to a normal microenvironment prevents the development of Steel hematopoietic stem cell defects . Exp . Hematol . 25 , 542 – 547 ( 1997 ) . 15 . Nilsson , S . K . & Simmons , P . J . Transplantable stem cells : home to specific niches . Curr . Opin . Hematol . 11 , 102 – 106 ( 2004 ) . 16 . Ohlstein , B . , Kai , T . , Decotto , E . & Spradling , A . The stem cell niche : theme and variations . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 693 – 699 ( 2004 ) . 17 . Spradling , A . , Drummond - Barbosa , D . & Kai , T . Stem cells find their niche . Nature 414 , 98 – 104 ( 2001 ) . 18 . Wu , A . M . , Siminovitch , L . , Till , J . E . & McCulloch , E . A . Evidence for a relationship between mouse hemopoietic stem cells and cells forming colonies in culture . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 59 , 1209 – 1215 ( 1968 ) . 19 . Domen , J . & Weissman , I . L . Self - renewal , differentiation or death : regulation and manipulation of hematopoietic stem cell fate . Mol . Med . Today 5 , 201 – 208 ( 1999 ) . 20 . Yang , L . et al . Identification of Lin – Sca1 + kit + CD34 + Flt3 – short - term hematopoietic stem cells capable of rapidly reconstituting and rescuing myeloablated transplant recipients . Blood 105 , 2717 – 2723 ( 2005 ) . 21 . Adolfsson , J . et al . Identification of Flt3 + lympho - myeloid stem cells lacking erythro - megakaryocytic potential a revised road map for adult blood lineage commitment . Cell 121 , 295 – 306 ( 2005 ) . 22 . Christensen , J . L . & Weissman , I . L . Flk - 2 is a marker in hematopoietic stem cell differentiation : a simple method to isolate long - term stem cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 14541 – 14546 ( 2001 ) . 23 . Jordan , C . T . & Lemischka , I . R . Clonal and systemic analysis of long - term hematopoiesis in the mouse . Genes Dev . 4 , 220 – 232 ( 1990 ) . 24 . Ramalho - Santos , M . , Yoon , S . , Matsuzaki , Y . , Mulligan , R . C . & Melton , D . A . ‘Stemness’ : transcriptional profiling of embryonic and adult stem cells . Science 298 , 597 – 600 ( 2002 ) . 25 . Ivanova , N . B . et al . A stem cell molecular signature . Science 298 , 601 – 604 ( 2002 ) . 26 . Akashi , K . et al . Transcriptional accessibility for genes of multiple tissues and hematopoietic lineages is hierarchically controlled during early hematopoiesis . Blood 101 , 383 – 389 ( 2003 ) . 27 . Venezia , T . A . et al . Molecular signatures of proliferation and quiescence in hematopoietic stem cells . PLoS Biol . 2 , e301 ( 2004 ) . 28 . Roegiers , F . & Jan , Y . N . Asymmetric cell division . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 195 – 205 ( 2004 ) . 29 . Betschinger , J . & Knoblich , J . A . Dare to be different : asymmetric cell division in Drosophila , C . elegans and vertebrates . Curr . Biol . 14 , R674 – R685 ( 2004 ) . 30 . Lechler , T . & Fuchs , E . Asymmetric cell divisions promote stratification and differentiation of mammalian skin . Nature 437 , 275 – 280 ( 2005 ) . This paper shows that some basal cells of the skin epidermis divide in an asymmetric manner ( divisional asymmetry ) , and that this correlates with the unequal distribution of determinants including PAR3 , LGN and mINSC in the two daughter cells . 31 . Suda , J . , Suda , T . & Ogawa , M . Analysis of differentiation of mouse hemopoietic stem cells in culture by sequential replating of paired progenitors . Blood 64 , 393 – 399 ( 1984 ) . 32 . Takano , H . , Ema , H . , Sudo , K . & Nakauchi , H . Asymmetric division and lineage commitment at the level of hematopoietic stem cells : inference from differentiation in daughter cell and granddaughter cell pairs . J . Exp . Med . 199 , 295 – 302 ( 2004 ) . 33 . Ho , A . D . Kinetics and symmetry of divisions of hematopoietic stem cells . Exp . Hematol . 33 , 1 – 8 ( 2005 ) . 34 . Xie , T . & Spradling , A . C . A niche maintaining germ line stem cells in the Drosophila ovary . Science 290 , 328 – 330 ( 2000 ) . 35 . Kiger , A . A . , White - Cooper , H . & Fuller , M . T . Somatic support cells restrict germline stem cell self - renewal and promote differentiation . Nature 407 , 750 – 754 ( 2000 ) . 36 . Fleming , W . H . et al . Functional heterogeneity is associated with the cell cycle status of murine hematopoietic stem cells . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 897 – 902 ( 1993 ) . 37 . Cotsarelis , G . , Sun , T . T . & Lavker , R . M . Label - retaining cells reside in the bulge area of pilosebaceous unit : implications for follicular stem cells , hair cycle , and skin carcinogenesis . Cell 61 , 1329 – 1337 ( 1990 ) . 38 . Tumbar , T . et al . Defining the epithelial stem cell niche in skin . Science 303 , 359 – 363 ( 2004 ) . In this paper , transgenic expression of H2B – EGFP is used to show that slow - cycling skin epidermal stem cells are primarily located in the hair follicle bulge . This technique , which identifies and allows purification of viable LRCs , should be adaptable for analysis of other adult stem cells and their associated niches . 39 . Zhang , J . et al . Identification of the haematopoietic stem cell niche and control of the niche size . Nature 425 , 836 – 841 ( 2003 ) . N - cadherin was proposed as a critical molecule that anchors HSCs to osteoblasts through homotypic interactions . This study ( together with reference 67 ) , also shows that osteoblastic cells are a critical component of the endosteal bone - marrow niche . 40 . Lerner , C . & Harrison , D . E . 5 - Fluorouracil spares hemopoietic stem cells responsible for long - term repopulation . Exp . Hematol . 18 , 114 – 118 ( 1990 ) . 41 . Spangrude , G . J . & Johnson , G . R . Resting and activated subsets of mouse multipotent hematopoietic stem cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 87 , 7433 – 7437 ( 1990 ) . 42 . Uchida , N . et al . The unexpected G 0 / G 1 cell cycle status of mobilized hematopoietic stem cells from peripheral blood . Blood 89 , 465 – 472 ( 1997 ) . 43 . Suda , T . , Arai , F . & Hirao , A . Hematopoietic stem cells and their niche . Trends Immunol . 26 , 426 – 433 ( 2005 ) . 44 . Potten , C . S . & Loeffler , M . Stem cells : attributes , cycles , spirals , pitfalls and uncertainties . Lessons for and from the crypt . Development 110 , 1001 – 1020 ( 1990 ) . 45 . Arai , F . et al . Tie2 / angiopoietin - 1 signalling regulates hematopoietic stem cell quiescence in the bone marrow niche . Cell 118 , 149 – 161 ( 2004 ) . This paper shows that the ANG1 produced by niche osteoblasts activates TIE2 , which maintains HSC quiescence and increases N - cadherin expression , and therefore increases adhesion to the endosteal niche . 46 . Oshima , H . , Rochat , A . , Kedzia , C . , Kobayashi , K . & Barrandon , Y . Morphogenesis and renewal of hair follicles from adult multipotent stem cells . Cell 104 , 233 – 245 ( 2001 ) . 47 . Van Zant , G . Studies of hematopoietic stem cells spared by 5 - fluorouracil . J . Exp . Med . 159 , 679 – 690 ( 1984 ) . 48 . Randall , T . D . & Weissman , I . L . Phenotypic and functional changes induced at the clonal level in hematopoietic stem cells after 5 - fluorouracil treatment . Blood 89 , 3596 – 3606 ( 1997 ) . 49 . Uchida , N . et al . ABC transporter activities of murine hematopoietic stem cells vary according to their developmental and activation status . Blood 103 , 4487 – 4495 ( 2004 ) . 50 . Chambers , I . & Smith , A . Self - renewal of teratocarcinoma and embryonic stem cells . Oncogene 23 , 7150 – 7160 ( 2004 ) . 51 . Cheshier , S . H . , Morrison , S . J . , Liao , X . & Weissman , I . L . In vivo proliferation and cell cycle kinetics of long - term self - renewing hematopoietic stem cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 3120 – 3125 ( 1999 ) . 52 . Wilson , A . et al . c - Myc controls the balance between hematopoietic stem cell self - renewal and differentiation . Genes Dev . 18 , 2747 – 2763 ( 2004 ) . This paper provides genetic evidence that differential expression of MYC controls the balance between stem - cell self - renewal and differentiation by regulating entry and exit of HSCs from the endosteal niche . 53 . Murphy , M . J . , Wilson , A . & Trumpp , A . More than just proliferation : Myc function in stem cells . Trends Cell Biol . 15 , 128 – 137 ( 2005 ) . 54 . Patt , H . M . & Maloney , M . A . Bone formation and resorption as a requirement for marrow development . Proc . Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 140 , 205 – 207 ( 1972 ) . 55 . Maloney , M . A . & Patt , H . M . On the origin of hematopoietic stem cells after local marrow extirpation . Proc . Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 149 , 94 – 97 ( 1975 ) . 56 . Deguchi , K . et al . Excessive extramedullary hematopoiesis in Cbfa1 - deficient mice with a congenital lack of bone marrow . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 255 , 352 – 359 ( 1999 ) . 57 . Ducy , P . , Schinke , T . & Karsenty , G . The osteoblast : a sophisticated fibroblast under central surveillance . Science 289 , 1501 – 1504 ( 2000 ) . 58 . Karsenty , G . & Wagner , E . F . Reaching a genetic and molecular understanding of skeletal development . Dev . Cell 2 , 389 – 406 ( 2002 ) . 59 . Lord , B . I . , Testa , N . G . & Hendry , J . H . The relative spatial distributions of CFUs and CFUc in the normal mouse femur . Blood 46 , 65 – 72 ( 1975 ) . 60 . Gong , J . K . Endosteal marrow : a rich source of hematopoietic stem cells . Science 199 , 1443 – 1445 ( 1978 ) . This study provides the first functional evidence for the location of HSCs and progenitor cells close to endosteal surfaces of rat bone . 61 . Askenasy , N . & Farkas , D . L . In vivo imaging studies of the effect of recipient conditioning , donor cell phenotype and antigen disparity on homing of haematopoietic cells to the bone marrow . Br . J . Haematol . 120 , 505 – 515 ( 2003 ) . 62 . Sipkins , D . A . et al . In vivo imaging of specialized bone marrow endothelial microdomains for tumour engraftment . Nature 435 , 969 – 973 ( 2005 ) . 63 . Nilsson , S . K . , Johnston , H . M . & Coverdale , J . A . Spatial localization of transplanted hemopoietic stem cells : inferences for the localization of stem cell niches . Blood 97 , 2293 – 2299 ( 2001 ) . 64 . Taichman , R . S . & Emerson , S . G . The role of osteoblasts in the hematopoietic microenvironment . Stem Cells 16 , 7 – 15 ( 1998 ) . 65 . Taichman , R . S . Blood and bone : two tissues whose fates are intertwined to create the hematopoietic stem - cell niche . Blood 105 , 2631 – 2639 ( 2005 ) . 66 . Oostendorp , R . A . et al . Stromal cell lines from mouse aorta - gonads - mesonephros subregions are potent supporters of hematopoietic stem cell activity . Blood 99 , 1183 – 1189 ( 2002 ) . 67 . Calvi , L . M . et al . Osteoblastic cells regulate the haematopoietic stem cell niche . Nature 425 , 841 – 846 ( 2003 ) . 68 . Chen , D . , Zhao , M . & Mundy , G . R . Bone morphogenetic proteins . Growth Factors 22 , 233 – 241 ( 2004 ) . 69 . Visnjic , D . et al . Conditional ablation of the osteoblast lineage in Col2 . 3 δ k transgenic mice . J . Bone Miner . Res . 16 , 2222 – 2231 ( 2001 ) . 70 . Visnjic , D . et al . Hematopoiesis is severely altered in mice with an induced osteoblast deficiency . Blood 103 , 3258 – 3264 ( 2004 ) . This paper shows that conditional ablation of osteoblasts results in a reversible decrease of bone - marrow HSCs and extramedullary haematopoiesis , indicating that osteoblasts are not only required for maintenance of bone - marrow haematopoiesis , but are also an essential component of the niche . 71 . Corral , D . A . et al . Dissociation between bone resorption and bone formation in osteopenic transgenic mice . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 13835 – 13840 ( 1998 ) . 72 . Huber , T . L . , Kouskoff , V . , Fehling , H . J . , Palis , J . & Keller , G . Haemangioblast commitment is initiated in the primitive streak of the mouse embryo . Nature 432 , 625 – 630 ( 2004 ) . 73 . Ohneda , O . et al . Hematopoietic stem cell maintenance and differentiation are supported by embryonic aorta - gonad - mesonephros region - derived endothelium . Blood 92 , 908 – 919 ( 1998 ) . 74 . Li , W . et al . Primary endothelial cells isolated from the yolk sac and para - aortic splanchnopleura support the expansion of adult marrow stem cells in vitro . Blood 102 , 4345 – 4353 ( 2003 ) . 75 . Li , W . , Johnson , S . A . , Shelley , W . C . & Yoder , M . C . Hematopoietic stem cell repopulating ability can be maintained in vitro by some primary endothelial cells . Exp . Hematol . 32 , 1226 – 1237 ( 2004 ) . 76 . Kopp , H . G . , Avecilla , S . T . , Hooper , A . T . & Rafii , S . The bone marrow vascular niche : home of HSC differentiation and mobilization . Physiology ( Bethesda Md . ) 20 , 349 – 356 ( 2005 ) . 77 . Avecilla , S . T . et al . Chemokine - mediated interaction of hematopoietic progenitors with the bone marrow vascular niche is required for thrombopoiesis . Nature Med . 10 , 64 – 71 ( 2004 ) . 78 . Rafii , S . , Mohle , R . , Shapiro , F . , Frey , B . M . & Moore , M . A . Regulation of hematopoiesis by microvascular endothelium . Leuk . Lymphoma 27 , 375 – 386 ( 1997 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 6 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 105 F O C U S O N E A R LY LY M P H O C Y T E D E V E LO P M E N T © 2006 Nature Publishing Group 79 . Heissig , B . et al . Recruitment of stem and progenitor cells from the bone marrow niche requires MMP - 9 mediated release of kit - ligand . Cell 109 , 625 – 637 ( 2002 ) . 80 . Rafii , S . et al . Human bone marrow microvascular endothelial cells support long - term proliferation and differentiation of myeloid and megakaryocytic progenitors . Blood 86 , 3353 – 3363 ( 1995 ) . 81 . Delehanty , L . L . et al . Stromal inhibition of megakaryocytic differentiation is associated with blockade of sustained Rap1 activation . Blood 101 , 1744 – 1751 ( 2003 ) . 82 . Tokoyoda , K . , Egawa , T . , Sugiyama , T . , Choi , B . I . & Nagasawa , T . Cellular niches controlling B lymphocyte behaviour within bone marrow during development . Immunity 20 , 707 – 718 ( 2004 ) . 83 . Hirose , J . et al . A developing picture of lymphopoiesis in bone marrow . Immunol . Rev . 189 , 28 – 40 ( 2002 ) . 84 . Papayannopoulou , T . Bone marrow homing : the players , the playfield , and their evolving roles . Curr . Opin . Hematol . 10 , 214 – 219 ( 2003 ) . 85 . Lapidot , T . , Dar , A . & Kollet , O . How do stem cells find their way home ? Blood 106 , 1901 – 1910 ( 2005 ) . 86 . Cancelas , J . A . et al . Rac GTPases differentially integrate signals regulating hematopoietic stem cell localization . Nature Med . 11 , 886 – 891 ( 2005 ) . 87 . Lapidot , T . & Petit , I . Current understanding of stem cell mobilization : the roles of chemokines , proteolytic enzymes , adhesion molecules , cytokines , and stromal cells . Exp . Hematol . 30 , 973 – 981 ( 2002 ) . 88 . Wright , D . E . , Wagers , A . J . , Gulati , A . P . , Johnson , F . L . & Weissman , I . L . Physiological migration of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells . Science 294 , 1933 – 1936 ( 2001 ) . 89 . Potocnik , A . J . , Brakebusch , C . & Fassler , R . Fetal and adult hematopoietic stem cells require β 1 integrin function for colonizing fetal liver , spleen , and bone marrow . Immunity 12 , 653 – 663 ( 2000 ) . 90 . Nilsson , S . K . et al . Hyaluronan is synthesized by primitive hemopoietic cells , participates in their lodgment at the endosteum following transplantation , and is involved in the regulation of their proliferation and differentiation in vitro . Blood 101 , 856 – 862 ( 2003 ) . 91 . Nilsson , S . K . et al . Osteopontin , a key component of the hematopoietic stem cell niche and regulator of primitive hematopoietic progenitor cells . Blood 106 , 1232 – 1239 ( 2005 ) . 92 . Ara , T . et al . Long - term hematopoietic stem cells require stromal cell - derived factor - 1 for colonizing bone marrow during ontogeny . Immunity 19 , 257 – 267 ( 2003 ) . The authors show that CXCL12 has an important role in colonization of the bone marrow by HSCs . 93 . Ponomaryov , T . et al . Induction of the chemokine stromal - derived factor - 1 following DNA damage improves human stem cell function . J . Clin . Invest . 106 , 1331 – 1339 ( 2000 ) . 94 . Wright , D . E . , Bowman , E . P . , Wagers , A . J . , Butcher , E . C . & Weissman , I . L . Hematopoietic stem cells are uniquely selective in their migratory response to chemokines . J . Exp . Med . 195 , 1145 – 1154 ( 2002 ) . 95 . Nagasawa , T . et al . Defects of B - cell lymphopoiesis and bone - marrow myelopoiesis in mice lacking the CXC chemokine PBSF / SDF - 1 . Nature 382 , 635 – 638 ( 1996 ) . 96 . Zou , Y . R . , Kottmann , A . H . , Kuroda , M . , Taniuchi , I . & Littman , D . R . Function of the chemokine receptor CXCR4 in haematopoiesis and in cerebellar development . Nature 393 , 595 – 599 ( 1998 ) . 97 . Gu , Y . et al . Hematopoietic cell regulation by Rac1 and Rac2 guanosine triphosphatases . Science 302 , 445 – 449 ( 2003 ) . 98 . Moore , K . A . Recent advances in defining the hematopoietic stem cell niche . Curr . Opin . Hematol . 11 , 107 – 111 ( 2004 ) . 99 . Artavanis - Tsakonas , S . , Rand , M . D . & Lake , R . J . Notch signalling : cell fate control and signal integration in development . Science 284 , 770 – 776 ( 1999 ) . 100 . Reya , T . & Clevers , H . Wnt signalling in stem cells and cancer . Nature 434 , 843 – 850 ( 2005 ) . 101 . Radtke , F . , Wilson , A . , Mancini , S . J . & MacDonald , H . R . Notch regulation of lymphocyte development and function . Nature Immunol . 5 , 247 – 253 ( 2004 ) . 102 . Duncan , A . W . et al . Integration of Notch and Wnt signalling in hematopoietic stem cell maintenance . Nature Immunol . 6 , 314 – 322 ( 2005 ) . 103 . Varnum - Finney , B . et al . Pluripotent , cytokine - dependent , hematopoietic stem cells are immortalized by constitutive Notch1 signalling . Nature Med . 6 , 1278 – 1281 ( 2000 ) . 104 . Stier , S . , Cheng , T . , Dombkowski , D . , Carlesso , N . & Scadden , D . T . Notch1 activation increases hematopoietic stem cell self - renewal in vivo and favours lymphoid over myeloid lineage outcome . Blood 99 , 2369 – 2378 ( 2002 ) . 105 . Han , H . et al . Inducible gene knockout of transcription factor recombination signal binding protein - J reveals its essential role in T versus B lineage decision . Int . Immunol . 14 , 637 – 645 ( 2002 ) . 106 . Mancini , S . J . et al . Jagged1 - dependent Notch signalling is dispensable for hematopoietic stem cell self - renewal and differentiation . Blood 105 , 2340 – 2342 ( 2005 ) . 107 . Radtke , F . et al . Deficient T cell fate specification in mice with an induced inactivation of Notch1 . Immunity 10 , 547 – 558 ( 1999 ) . 108 . Saito , T . et al . Notch2 is preferentially expressed in mature B cells and indispensable for marginal zone B lineage development . Immunity 18 , 675 – 685 ( 2003 ) . 109 . Denhardt , D . T . & Guo , X . Osteopontin : a protein with diverse functions . FASEB J . 7 , 1475 – 1482 ( 1993 ) . 110 . Stier , S . et al . Osteopontin is a hematopoietic stem cell niche component that negatively regulates stem cell pool size . J . Exp . Med . 201 , 1781 – 1791 ( 2005 ) . 111 . Flanagan , J . G . , Chan , D . C . & Leder , P . Transmembrane form of the kit ligand growth factor is determined by alternative splicing and is missing in the Sld mutant . Cell 64 , 1025 – 1035 ( 1991 ) . 112 . Lyman , S . D . & Jacobsen , S . E . c - kit ligand and Flt3 ligand : stem / progenitor cell factors with overlapping yet distinct activities . Blood 91 , 1101 – 1134 ( 1998 ) . 113 . Miyazawa , K . et al . Membrane - bound Steel factor induces more persistent tyrosine kinase activation and longer life span of c - kit gene - encoded protein than its soluble form . Blood 85 , 641 – 649 ( 1995 ) . 114 . Kinashi , T . & Springer , T . A . Steel factor and c - kit regulate cell - matrix adhesion . Blood 83 , 1033 – 1038 ( 1994 ) . 115 . Kovach , N . L . , Lin , N . , Yednock , T . , Harlan , J . M . & Broudy , V . C . Stem cell factor modulates avidity of α 4 β 1 and α 5 β 1 integrins expressed on hematopoietic cell lines . Blood 85 , 159 – 167 ( 1995 ) . 116 . Driessen , R . L . , Johnston , H . M . & Nilsson , S . K . Membrane - bound stem cell factor is a key regulator in the initial lodgment of stem cells within the endosteal marrow region . Exp . Hematol . 31 , 1284 – 1291 ( 2003 ) . 117 . Lotinun , S . , Evans , G . L . , Turner , R . T . & Oursler , M . J . Deletion of membrane - bound steel factor results in osteopenia in mice . J . Bone Miner . Res . 20 , 644 – 652 ( 2005 ) . 118 . Radice , G . L . et al . Developmental defects in mouse embryos lacking N - cadherin . Dev . Biol . 181 , 64 – 78 ( 1997 ) . 119 . Puri , M . C . & Bernstein , A . Requirement for the TIE family of receptor tyrosine kinases in adult but not fetal hematopoiesis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 12753 – 12758 ( 2003 ) . 120 . Cheng , T . et al . Hematopoietic stem cell quiescence maintained by p21cip1 / waf1 . Science 287 , 1804 – 1808 ( 2000 ) . 121 . Cheng , T . , Shen , H . , Rodrigues , N . , Stier , S . & Scadden , D . T . Transforming growth factor β 1 mediates cell - cycle arrest of primitive hematopoietic cells independent of p21 ( Cip1 / Waf1 ) or p27 ( Kip1 ) . Blood 98 , 3643 – 3649 ( 2001 ) . 122 . Wu , S . et al . Myc represses differentiation - induced p21CIP1 expression via Miz - 1 - dependent interaction with the p21 core promoter . Oncogene 22 , 351 – 360 ( 2003 ) . 123 . Reiss , K . et al . ADAM10 cleavage of N - cadherin and regulation of cell – cell adhesion and β - catenin nuclear signalling . EMBO J . 24 , 742 – 752 ( 2005 ) . 124 . Ito , K . et al . Calcium influx triggers the sequential proteolysis of extracellular and cytoplasmic domains of E - cadherin , leading to loss of β - catenin from cell – cell contacts . Oncogene 18 , 7080 – 7090 ( 1999 ) . 125 . Willert , K . et al . Wnt proteins are lipid - modified and can act as stem cell growth factors . Nature 423 , 448 – 452 ( 2003 ) . This paper , together with reference 126 , provides evidence of a positive role for WNT signalling in HSC self - renewal , whereas differentiation ( at least in vitro ) is inhibited . 126 . Reya , T . et al . A role for Wnt signalling in self - renewal of haematopoietic stem cells . Nature 423 , 409 – 414 ( 2003 ) . 127 . Cobas , M . et al . β - catenin is dispensable for hematopoiesis and lymphopoiesis . J . Exp . Med . 199 , 221 – 229 ( 2004 ) . 128 . Friedl , P . & Storim , J . Diversity in immune - cell interactions : states and functions of the immunological synapse . Trends Cell Biol . 14 , 557 – 567 ( 2004 ) . 129 . Powell , K . It’s the ecology , stupid . Nature 435 , 268 – 270 ( 2005 ) . 130 . Sorrentino , B . P . Clinical strategies for expansion of haematopoietic stem cells . Nature Rev . Immunol . 4 , 878 – 888 ( 2004 ) . 131 . Ploemacher , R . E . Stem cells : characterization and measurement . Baillieres Clin . Haematol . 10 , 429 – 444 ( 1997 ) . 132 . Morrison , S . J . , Uchida , N . & Weissman , I . L . The biology of hematopoietic stem cells . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 11 , 35 – 71 ( 1995 ) . 133 . Visser , J . W . , Bauman , J . G . , Mulder , A . H . , Eliason , J . F . & de Leeuw , A . M . Isolation of murine pluripotent hemopoietic stem cells . J . Exp . Med . 159 , 1576 – 1590 ( 1984 ) . 134 . Bunting , K . D . ABC Transporters as phenotypic markers and functional regulators of stem cells . Stem Cells 20 , 11 – 20 ( 2002 ) . 135 . Goodell , M . A . , McKinney - Freeman , S . & Camargo , F . D . Isolation and characterization of side population cells . Methods Mol . Biol . 290 , 343 – 352 ( 2005 ) . 136 . Uchida , N . , Dykstra , B . , Lyons , K . J . , Leung , F . Y . & Eaves , C . J . Different in vivo repopulating activities of purified hematopoietic stem cells before and after being stimulated to divide in vitro with the same kinetics . Exp . Hematol . 31 , 1338 – 1347 ( 2003 ) . 137 . Camargo , F . D . , Chambers , S . M . , Drew , E . , McNagny , K . M . & Goodell , M . A . Hematopoietic stem cells do not engraft with absolute efficiencies . Blood 107 , 501 – 507 ( 2006 ) . 138 . Bradford , G . B . , Williams , B . , Rossi , R . & Bertoncello , I . Quiescence , cycling , and turnover in the primitive hematopoietic stem cell compartment . Exp . Hematol . 25 , 445 – 453 ( 1997 ) . 139 . Komori , T . et al . Targeted disruption of Cbfa1 results in a complete lack of bone formation owing to maturational arrest of osteoblasts . Cell 89 , 755 – 764 ( 1997 ) . 140 . Otto , F . et al . Cbfa1 , a candidate gene for cleidocranial dysplasia syndrome , is essential for osteoblast differentiation and bone development . Cell 89 , 765 – 771 ( 1997 ) . 141 . Adams , G . D . et al . Stem cell engraftment at the endosteal niche is specified by the calcium - sensing receptor . Nature . Dec 28 , 2005 ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nature04247 16382241 ) . Acknowledgements We would like to thank F . Radtke , R . MacDonald , M . Murphy and G . Oser for their critical reading of the manuscript , and members of the Trumpp Laboratory for helpful discussions . We apologize to colleagues whose work could not be cited due to space limitations . This work was in part supported by grants to A . T . from the Swiss National Science Foundation , the Swiss Cancer League and the UBS Optimus Foundation . A . T . is member of the EMBO Young Investigator Program . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : Entrez Gene : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = gene CD34 | CD150 | CXCL12 | FLT3 | KIT | N - cadherin | SCA1 | SCF FURTHER INFORMATION Andreas Trumpp’s homepage : http : / / www . isrec . ch / research / groups / research _ groups _ detail _ eid _ 1668 _ lid _ 2 . htm SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article : S1 ( table ) Access to this links box is available online . R E V I E W S 106 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol R E V I E W S