Journal of Enterprise Information Management Practice - oriented toolkits for virtual communities of practice Demosthenes Akoumianakis Article information : To cite this document : Demosthenes Akoumianakis , ( 2009 ) , " Practice - oriented toolkits for virtual communities of practice " , Journal of Enterprise Information Management , Vol . 22 Iss 3 pp . 317 - 345 Permanent link to this document : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1108 / 17410390910949742 Downloaded on : 02 February 2015 , At : 02 : 56 ( PT ) References : this document contains references to 67 other documents . To copy this document : permissions @ emeraldinsight . com The fulltext of this document has been downloaded 1051 times since 2009 * Users who downloaded this article also downloaded : Alexander Ardichvili , Vaughn Page , Tim Wentling , ( 2003 ) , " Motivation and barriers to participation in virtual knowledge - sharing communities of practice " , Journal of Knowledge Management , Vol . 7 Iss 1 pp . 64 - 77 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1108 / 13673270310463626 Alexandre Ardichvili , Martin Maurer , Wei Li , Tim Wentling , Reed Stuedemann , ( 2006 ) , " Cultural influences on knowledge sharing through online communities of practice " , Journal of Knowledge Management , Vol . 10 Iss 1 pp . 94 - 107 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1108 / 13673270610650139 Stefano Borzillo , ( 2009 ) , " Top management sponsorship to guide communities of practice " , Journal of Knowledge Management , Vol . 13 Iss 3 pp . 60 - 72 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1108 / 13673270910962879 Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by 549148 [ ] For Authors If you would like to write for this , or any other Emerald publication , then please use our Emerald for Authors service information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission guidelines are available for all . Please visit www . emeraldinsight . com / authors for more information . About Emerald www . emeraldinsight . com Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society . The company manages a portfolio of more than 290 journals and over 2 , 350 books and book series volumes , as well as providing an extensive range of online products and additional customer resources and services . Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant . The organization is a partner of the Committee on Publication Ethics ( COPE ) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for digital archive preservation . * Related content and download information correct at time of download . D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) Practice - oriented toolkits for virtual communities of practice Demosthenes Akoumianakis Department of Applied Information Technology and Multimedia , Technological Education Institution of Crete , Crete , Greece Abstract Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to discuss the collaborative practices of virtual teams carrying out knowledge - based work and the tools required / used to assemble “collective” artefacts . Design / methodology / approach – The vast majority of recent work on communities of practice is devoted to community management ( i . e . discovering , building , and maintaining communities ) , dismissing or undermining community practices and how they are technologically mediated ( i . e . the practice - speciﬁc tools and artefacts involved ) . This paper investigates existing practices and makes use of scenarios to envision new distributed collective practices in a designated application domain . The instruments used include both empirical tools ( i . e . survey of current practice and expert interviews ) and analytical tools ( i . e . scenarios of use , walkthroughs , and virtual prototyping ) to provide insight towards the design of practice - oriented toolkits . Findings – The proposed approach is validated in the context of an electronic village of local interest with a thematic focus on regional tourism , highlighting the key role of “collective” knowledge management in information - based industries whose products are non - material ( intangible ) and knowledge is central to gaining competitive advantage . The results include a general model for practice - oriented toolkits conceived of as separate software components from ( but interoperable to ) the community support system and devised to establish a place for engaging in the practice the community is about . This model is then used to build an operational toolkit for assembling vacation packages by cross - organization virtual communities of practice . Practical implications – Virtual communities of practice ( or partnerships ) necessitate smooth integration of community management and practice - speciﬁc tasks and tools . Community management tasks can be supported by augmenting capabilities of existing community portals to allow for community registration , role undertaking , declaration of virtual assets , etc . Practice - oriented tasks should be designed in such a way so as to capture and accommodate domain - speciﬁc vocabulary . Originality / value – Model - based techniques and domain - speciﬁc design languages are used as the unifying mechanism ( i . e . software factory ) for integrating community management and practice - oriented artefacts . These techniques are designed and implemented into a software platform so as to facilitate the systematic accumulation and reuse of knowledge towards the construction of collective artefacts . Keywords Virtual organizations , Knowledge management , Software tools , Computer software , Partnership Paper type Research paper The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at www . emeraldinsight . com / 1741 - 0398 . htm The present work is carried out in the context of the eKoNES project which co - funded by the General Secretariat for Research and Technology , Greek Ministry of Development , in the context of the Regional Operational Program of Crete ( PEP - Crete ) , Action line 1 . 2 “Research and Development consortia in strategic priority application domains” . eKoNES project partners include the Department of Applied Information Technologies and Multimedia – Technological Education Institution of Crete ( Project Coordinator ) , the Department of Electronics and Computer Engineering – Technical University of Crete , the Department of Music and Acoustic Technology – Technological Education Institution of Crete , Forthnet S . A and Anixe , S . A . Practice - orientedtoolkits 317 Journal of Enterprise InformationManagement Vol . 22 No . 3 , 2009 pp . 317 - 345 q EmeraldGroupPublishingLimited1741 - 0398 DOI 10 . 1108 / 17410390910949742 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) 1 . Introduction Virtual partnerships formed on the basis of complementary competencies constitute a powerful mechanism for appropriating the beneﬁts of virtual networking . Recent studies indicate both the promises and the challenges confronting enterprises seeking to attain virtual networking in a variety of industries such as business travel management ( Sigala , 2007 ; Cardoso and Lange , 2007 ) , ship construction industry ( Kern and Kersten , 2007 ) , global inter - ﬁrm product development ( Jin and Hong , 2007 ) , etc . through a variety of virtual partnerships and network organizations ( Santoro et al . , 2006 ) . The common theme in all these efforts is the intention to integrate collaborative technologies so as to fabricate the required degree and intensity of collaborative practices . Despite this , the available evidence , as documented in the above ( but also in many other ) studies , indicate a number of shortcomings , both at the organizational and technological frontiers . In this paper , our intention is to contribute to the available literature by reviewing , describing and presenting components of a technological frame of reference and supporting tools which allow virtual partnerships to engage in the practice the partnership is about . In this context , practice is not framed so much in social interaction as in the processes , artefacts and the tools used by a community of practice . Consequently , the normative perspective of this work is that community management – the primary focus in recent writings – is distinctively different and ( sometimes ) separate from practice management . As a result , there is a compelling need to design and build technologies for practice to allow virtual teams ( or communities of practice ) to attain true cooperation and collaboration . This argument is grounded on recent theoretical thinking on distributed collective practices ( Turner et al . , 2006 ) and on - line communities of practice ( Wenger and Snyder , 2000 ; de Souza and Preece , 2004 ) and motivates the design of practice - speciﬁc toolkits as software platforms instituting new practices for virtual partnerships . Speciﬁcally , it is claimed that managing virtual assets requires a process and supporting practices related to the acquisition , capture , construction , sharing , and use of knowledge , wherever it resides , to enhance learning and performance . Addressing this challenge requires not only the capability to form and maintain sense of community ( i . e . through expressing opinion , exchanging information , and depositing resources ) , but rather a software platform for practice . Such a platform serves as the “place” for engaging in the practice the community is about by bringing together suitable social policies ( for registering , authorizing access , obtaining roles , etc . ) , agreed workﬂows ( for initiating and negotiating plans and schedules ) and domain - speciﬁc tools for assembling artefacts , mining social interactions to extract - added value and consolidating such value into new knowledge / codiﬁed experience . Our analysis is informed by recent work in the context of collaborative research and development project , namely eKoNES ( Acknowledgement ) , aiming to facilitate novel encounters between members of a community of practice ( Wenger and Snyder , 2000 ) in an electronic village of local interest . The term electronic village of local interest is used to denote a virtual social space in which villagers engage in a variety of endeavours to promote local activities and assemble information - based products through distributed collective practice . It is distinctively different from on - line communities of interest as it involves workﬂow - based practicing upon shared resources rather than mere social interaction . Shared resources represent tangible ( i . e . primitive services ) and intangible JEIM22 , 3 318 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) ( i . e . situational ) knowledge assets used by members of a community of practice to negotiate and construct new information - based products . The type of communities of practice relevant to this work are established as moderated cross - organization coalitions , formed dynamically on the grounds of pre - registered ( complementary ) competencies and seeking to assemble innovative and personalized products and services as a result of distributed collective practice ( Turner et al . , 2006 ) . Typically , this is manifested as an institution of on - line coordinative practices with impact on the members’ daily work . In terms of members’ incentives for participating , these vary and include the business beneﬁt resulting from the added value embodied in the “collective” products , as no individual community member can by his own resources produce such a product effectively and efﬁciently . The rest of the paper is structured as follows . Section 2 reviews related work and sets the focus of the present research . Then , we present the methodology and research methods aimed to facilitate empirical and analytical insight to the designated domain of practice , namely vacation package assembly . To this end , a reference scenario is used to reﬂect and envision distributed collective practices . In light of this , the following two sections are devoted to outlining a general model for practice - oriented toolkits and describing an operational instance of this model which allows virtual teams to package primitive tourism services and assemble collective information - based artefacts ( i . e . vacation packages ) . Section 6 consolidates the key contributions of the present work and assesses their implications on tools for communities of practice . Finally , the paper is wrapped up with conclusions and an account of on - going and future research . 2 . Theoretical links and research focus This paper draws on three strands of theoretical resources , namely , communities of practice , software factories and collaborative computing to establish an engineering ground for practice - oriented toolkits . It is the synergistic combination of key concepts advanced in these separate ﬁelds of study which characterizes the present work . At ﬁrst , an attempt is made to review relevant works from the communities of practice literature to establish a common vocabulary for understanding the constituents of “community” and “practice” and to claim that elements of “practice” and their role in virtual communities of practice are frequently ignored and / or underserved . This is probably due to the ambiguity of the terms “community” and “practice” which has allowed the concept of community of practice to be used in markedly different contexts and purposes , academic and practical ( Cox , 2005 ) . Although , it is not within the scope of this paper to resolve such ambiguities , we will attempt to advance an understanding of practice , not in terms of theoretical insight ( Schatzki et al . , 2001 ) , but rather in terms of its interactive manifestation , enactment , articulation and transmission in the context of communities of practice . Furthermore , the present work is primarily interested in practices framed in processes , tools and artefacts in addition to social interactions between members ; a distinction clearly articulated by Turner et al . ( 2006 ) in their account of information infrastructures for distributed collective practices . This orientation motivates the link with the software factories literature , in particular design languages and software assembly lines , as an approach towards supporting the enactment and articulation of practice - speciﬁc elements . Finally , collaborative computing and computer - supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) offers useful insights Practice - orientedtoolkits 319 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) to understanding how practice is codiﬁed , manifested , articulated and enacted in collaborative settings . Particularly relevant and informative is the notion of coordinative practice which in turn relates to groupware and mutual awareness . 2 . 1 Related research 2 . 1 . 1 Communities of practice . For more than a decade , now and despite the rise of interest and plethora of published works , terms such as on - line community , virtual community , communities of practice and network of practice are being employed more or less inter - changeably ( Cox , 2008 ) . Frequently , it is the reference context that offers more informative insight and qualiﬁes the use of the term in relation to knowledge management ( Enkel et al . , 2000 ; Wenger et al . , 2002 ; Gongla and Rizzuto , 2001 ; Dignum and van Eeden , 2005 ) , new marketing / business / new product development models ( Malhotra , 2000 , 2002 ; Schultz and Pucher , 2003 ; Stockdale and Borovicka , 2006 ; Fuller et al . , 2006 ; Mason and Leek , 2008 ) , etc . In all cases , the community of practice is typically conceived as being virtual , formed and maintained using a variety of tools , including electronic mailing lists , listservs , bulletin boards , Blogs , Wikis , multi - user dungeons ( MUDs ) and other collaborative technologies ( Gillam and Oppenheim , 2006 ) . Very often the sole purpose of the community of practice is seen as to link together people with common interests or in a similar profession or in a similar occupational role spread across a large or distributed organization . Despite its wide adoption by academics and practitioners , the community of practice concept is not without critique . In their book , Cultivating Communities of Practice , Wenger et al . ( 2002 , p . 141 ) devote a chapter to what they refer to as the “downside” of communities of practice arguing that the : [ . . . ] very qualities that make a community an ideal structure for learning – a shared perspectives on a domain , trust , a communal identity , longstanding relationships , an established practice – are the same qualities that can hold it hostage to its history and its achievements . Further critiquing has been advanced by management scholars . Roberts ( 2006 ) provides and informative account of the issues driving this debate . On the positive side , such debates have given rise to a variety of new concepts . One such concept which is relevant to the present work is the notion of interactive user toolkits as catalysts for user innovation in new product development ( von Hippel and Katz , 2002 ; Franke and Shah , 2001 ; Franke and Piller , 2004 ) . These studies offer useful insight for understanding the scope and role of such toolkits as well as their use as practice vocabularies . A common orientation is to allow creative end - users to engage in the practice of the community by taking part in design contests and / or product simulations , thereby expressing opinion , contributing original knowledge and frequently generating new design ideas . In the context of the present work , which is focused on information - based industries , the notion of a user toolkit is relevant as it resurfaces the challenge of enacting , encoding , processing and transmitting practice elements . This motivates our intention to consider software factories as a prominent concept for supporting novel on - line practice vocabularies ( as domain - speciﬁc design languages ) and assembly of information - based products ( through articulation of such primitive practice vocabularies and software components ) . 2 . 1 . 2 Software factories . Software factories constitute a new virtuality known in the software engineering literature for several years new ( Cusumano , 1989 ; JEIM22 , 3 320 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) Fernstrom et al . , 1992 ; Aaen et al . , 1997 ) . In the context of this work , it is the factory support environment ( i . e . the computerized components of a software factory ) and the means through which software engineering practices are enacted and communicated , which are relevant , rather than the factory’s institutional character . To this end , the literature provides a variety of connotations with the most prominent focusing on software assembly lines ( Greenﬁeld and Short , 2004 ) and software process improvement ( Basili , 1993 ) . Software assembly lines concentrate of establishing patterns , frameworks and models and integrating them into software schemas and domain - speciﬁc design languages so as to build software form components . In contrast , Basili ( 1993 ) introduced the notion of the experience factory as a pathway towards software process improvement relying heavily upon reuse and deployment of previous codiﬁed experiences . Initially , the experience factory was introduced purely as an institutional concept comprising three distinct components , namely the software development organization , the experience organization and a support organization separate from the other two components ( Basili , 1993 ) . However , in subsequent publications , Basili et al . ( 2001 ) and Seaman et al . ( 2003 ) offer useful updates regarding the ingredients of the underlying technological set - up and several examples of codiﬁed and packaged experiences . Our interest on software factories is slightly different from the orientations presented above . Speciﬁcally , in the context of the present work , the software factory is conceived of as a software platform unifying two aspects , namely the codiﬁcation of practice elements and the workﬂows for their enactment by collaborators in the context of communities of practice . In other words , the software factory is the “virtual place” for engaging in the practice the community is about . This makes the software factory a separable but interoperable component from the communityware medium ( i . e . community support system , Blog , Wiki , and portal ) undertaking the community management functions . Exemplifying further , this concept leads to alternative connotations of the factory and its role . One is to consider it as existing and established practice encapsulated into suitable software tools . An alternative is to view the software factory as new practice enabling attainment of novel goals , new forms of expression and collaborative endeavours . Both cases raise a variety of challenges regarding the collaborative features of the factory which are broadly classiﬁed under the province of CSCW . 2 . 1 . 3 Collaborative computing and groupware . Enactment of on - line practices by members of a community of practice is about making sense of what others are doing either in asynchronous or synchronous mode . Furthermore , it entails that a practitioner invokes his or her knowledge to interpret and reﬂect upon the common practice , that is , the setting , the process and the tools used as well as the explicit or implicit norms governing acceptable conduct in the designated domain of practice . Although there are various perspectives on sense - making , e . g . Kim’s ( 2005 ) work is informed by Dervin’s sense - making theory , Wenger ( 1998 , p . 55 ) addresses meaning negotiation in communities of practice in relation to participation and reiﬁcation ( see next section ) , our account is biased to sense - making during practice enactment in collaborative ( asynchronous and synchronous ) sessions . In this context , mutual awareness as considered by CSCW scholars ( Gutwin et al . , 1996 ; Hudson and Smith , 1996 ; Schmidt , 2000 , 2002 ; Carroll et al . , 2006 ) surfaces as a key design requirement of a practice - speciﬁc toolkit . Practice - orientedtoolkits 321 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) The typical connotation of mutual awareness in computer supported cooperative work refers to the situation , where : . community members engaged in the practice the community is about become ( somehow ) aware of what co - practitioners are doing or not doing and accordingly adjust their own line of action accordingly ; and . conversely , practitioners make their actions “publicly visible , ” that is , available and accessible to colleagues , so that they in turn can adjust their activities as appropriate ( Schmidt , 2000 ) . Early accounts of the issue by Gutwin et al . ( 1996 ) consider this challenge to result from a trade - off between being well - informed about other’s activities , while being distracted by the information . In a similar vein , Hudson and Smith ( 1996 ) recognize the dual trade - off between privacy and awareness , and between awareness and disturbance . Subsequent studies provide a more detailed and informative review of the concept of awareness in the context of computer - supportive cooperative work and qualify the concept in terms of social awareness , action awareness , workspace awareness and situation awareness ( Schmidt , 2002 ) . In terms of translating awareness to relevant design issues , Carroll et al . ( 2006 ) provided recently a non - exhaustive list . As discussed later on such issues are key design drivers for usability and sociability of practice - oriented toolkits . Speciﬁcally , they raise implications on the visual affordances of the elements of the practice vocabulary , the conduct of collaborative activities ( i . e . task - speciﬁc operations on practice vocabulary ) as well as the workﬂows through which collective artefacts are compiled . 2 . 2 Research focus Having brieﬂy reviewed selected related efforts , an attempt is made to exemplify both the current research focus and the intended contributions of the present work . The key research objective is to advance a proposition for practice - speciﬁc toolkits allowing collaborators to engage in the practice the community is about . According to Wenger ( 1998 , p . 55 ) , within communities of practice , meaning is negotiated through a process of participation and reiﬁcation . The author deﬁnes the concept of reiﬁcation as the process of giving form to experience by producing objects ( Wenger , 1998 , p . 58 ) . In other words , “ [ . . . ] any community of practice produces abstractions , tools , symbols , stories , terms , and concepts that reify something of that practice in a congealed form” ( Wenger , 1998 , p . 59 ) . In light of this , a practice - speciﬁc toolkit is conceived of as a collection of software components which represent elements of a practice vocabulary and support their enactment and articulation in community settings . Two types of such toolkits may be deﬁned , namely practice toolkits designed to encapsulate existing and well - deﬁned practices and practice toolkits designed to establish new practices . In recent work , we have focused on the former , detailing both the design of a novel practice toolkit for encapsulating existing music performance practices ( Akoumianakis et al . , 2008a ) as well as its application in the course of collaborative music learning communities ( Alexandraki et al . , 2008a , b ) . This paper concentrates on the later target , namely designing toolkits to establish new practices . Our application domain is also different . Speciﬁcally , we set out to consider cross - organization communities of practice – a virtuality seldom studied in the literature – engaging in new practices to facilitate vacation package assembly . To this end , we have designed and implemented JEIM22 , 3 322 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) the toolkit with the intention to support vacation package assembly as distributed collective practice ( Turner et al . , 2006 ) . The rest of the paper details our approach to investigating distributed collective practices in the selected application domain , as well as the design ingredients and current operational version of the toolkit . 3 . Distributed collective practices : requirements for practice toolkits To gain insight to the problems relevant to this work , we will refer to a case study from the eKoNES collaborative research and development project in the area of tourism . The case study’s aim is two - fold , namely to explore existing practices in a designated domain of practice and to envision new ones as a result of deploying novel practice - speciﬁc toolkits . The speciﬁc objective was to design the practice - oriented toolkit which would enable a cross - organization community of practice to engage in the assembly of vacation packages of local / regional interest . We have chosen to investigate a particular type of vacation packages which are not widely supported at present . These are packages tightly linked to a geographic region and independent of the pre - packaged solutions available to customers through modern destination management systems . Typically , these packages have short durations ( i . e . a few days ) and high - added value resulting from their locality . They are made up from primitive components such as transportation to and from a designated site , food and beverage , entrance fees , local accommodation ( if needed ) , etc . all blended into one transaction . Such primitive services should be tailorable so as to reﬂect special requirements and optional offerings . Packages of this sort may be considered either as peripheral supplements of a pre - packaged vacation or as factors stimulating the ultimate choice of destination and / or pre - packaged solution . They are created by responding to informal customer requests , circumstantial incidents or foreseen events taking place within a designated geographic region . The above characteristics necessitate that such vacation packages must be innovative “collective” offerings , quickly compiled ( if possible by reusing assets ) and adaptable so as to suit different needs and requirements of the customer base . The qualiﬁcation “collective” is used to convey that no single business actor can provide the vacation package effectively and efﬁciently by account of own resources . It can then be argued that creating such packages is a knowledge management task of a dedicated cross - organization community of practice . 3 . 1 Methodology The approach deﬁned and followed aimed to address two separate issues , namely gaining insight to current practices and envisioning novel practices through which a cross - organization community of practice would compile vacation packages by assembling virtual assets . Thus , the key research questions are broadly grouped into three constituents : ( 1 ) Practice - related questions such as what are the elements of current practices involved in the compilation of vacation packages ; what activities are involved and how they are socially instituted into practices . ( 2 ) Technological questions such as how are practices manifested ( i . e . on - versus off - line practices ) and what type of technologies are used for on - line practices . Practice - orientedtoolkits 323 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) ( 3 ) Collaboration context - related questions aiming to unfold sense of community albeit the medium used or the community support system , drives for participation and behaviours emerging from the community setting . To address the above questions , a variety of research methods were used to collect data and envision new capabilities for improved practices . Speciﬁcally , a non - experimental descriptive survey was conducted utilizing interviews , on - site visits and scenarios to provide the insights required . As our intention was to unfold hidden or implicit elements of community practice , interviews and on - site visits were tailored so as to feed scenarios of envisioning new ( improved ) practices . In turn , these were contextualized using rapid prototyping techniques . The scenarios of use included detailed description of the actions taken for a task to be performed by all actors involved in building vacation packages . Virtual prototypes , cognitive walkthroughs and interviewing of tour operators and travel agencies provided further additional insight . The empirical work provided useful insight to current work practices and constraints and revealed a variety of scenarios of use ( Akoumianakis et al . , 2008b ) . Speciﬁcally , it turned out that key elements of practice include articulating package templates , populating their constituent activities ( i . e . accommodation , transportation , site seeing , etc . ) , allocating activities to partners and negotiating details ( i . e . selecting partners , reaching agreement on activity attributes , etc . ) , packaging and disseminating information and package promotion and retailing . Moreover , these practices are enacted using a variety of traditional tools ( i . e . note books , drawing boards , etc . ) , as well as legacy software such as reservation and customer relationship management systems . As for community support , a variety of conventional media such as the telephone , fax and news papers , as well as more advanced tools ( i . e . agency web sites and on - line business - sponsored community models ) are employed . In terms of workﬂows , it is evidently common practice that vacation packages undergo distinct stages from conception to population and marketing , with a fair amount of iteration . In each stage , there are speciﬁc issues to be addressed with clear milestones and outcomes . Ownership is solely with the creator of the package , not the contributing partners . Thus , the contributor’s liability amounts to executing part of the plan as delegated to him / her by the owner . Communities exist in the form of allies , but their formation is largely opportunistic , while their maintenance is by personal contacts and traditional means . Community membership does raise implications on local practices , but only marginal . Interaction between community members , if existent , is on a need - driven basis and purely informative ( i . e . one member informs another about an event ) . Entering or opting out from a community is dissertational and seldom follows speciﬁc rules . Consequently , sense of community is weak and it can , by no means , be considered a catalyst for new or differentiated vacation packages . The analytical work involving scenarios ( Bodker , 2000 ) was intended to unfold and envision distributed collective practices in vacation package assembly by cross - organisation communities of practice . The following quote outlines in a narrative form such a reference scenario . Although , it is certainly common to tour operators acting locally in a designated geographic region , one can easily envisage similar scenarios being valid in cross - regional settings . Whatever the scale of application , the challenges are similar and amounting to the conditions for establishing effective virtual networking practices : JEIM22 , 3 324 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) Fred has just purchased a package for a two - week vacation in a popular resort in Greece , through a local travel agent . However , as he is interested in history and culture he would like to investigate the possibility of visiting archaeological sites , museums and the well known Palace of Knossos during his vacation . By surﬁng on the Web he comes across eKoNES - Tourism and reviews the eKoNES offerings during the period of his vacation . He is also informed that by registering as an eKoNES villager , he can pose a request to eKoNES - Tourism for a new package , which ﬁts his speciﬁc requirements . Indeed , he proceeds and creates an account and subsequently registers his request . In a few seconds , the system returns back with a message conﬁrming the registration of the request , the initiation of a process to fulﬁl the request and a tentative schedule for feedback . A few days later , eKoNES - Tourism notiﬁes Fred that a suitable vacation package has been compiled and that he can explore it through the eKoNES - Tourism portal . When Fred visits the portal he ﬁnds out that there is a tentative schedule with full - trip details ( i . e . pick - up and return dates , intermediate locations , options for transportation , food and beverage , local accommodation , costing schemes , etc . ) and that there are 25 more people who have expressed interest in such a package . The system also invites Fred to request further tailoring by indicating own preferences . To understand exactly the scope and type of virtual networking practices involved , it is perhaps appropriate to extract from the narrative of the above - mentioned quote , the key implied activities and revise the scenario as a partitioned narrative of activities across three distinct constituents . This is shown in Table I , which summarizes activities of the constituents of the customer , the community and the practitioners . We have intentionally oversimpliﬁed some of these activities to depict a logical sequence of steps without necessarily striving for the maximum of analytical insight . The scenario was developed in cooperation with the domain experts involved in the empirical phase of the work . It was explicitly focused to address vacation package assembly as distributed collective practice in which members of a cross - organization community of practice engage in the assembly of an information - based product . Information - based products are conceived of as intangible assets for which market value and purchasing behaviour are catalyzed by the information surrounding the product rather than the customers’ actual experience or test of the product in advance . Vacation packages are a typical example of an information product as in the majority of cases customers are not able to experience the vacation package in advance . Instead , they rely on information The customers’ context The community context The practitioners’ context 1 . Customer request for service 2 . Create package 3 . Announce new package 4 . Invite participation 5 . Conﬁrm / reject invitation 6 . Contribute to package 7 . Update model 8 . Raise issue 9 . Respond to issues raised 10 . Request offer / bit 11 . Update parameters 12 . Request clariﬁcation 13 . Clariﬁcation of issues 14 . Consolidate issues 15 . Publish package 16 . Tailor package / request changes Table I . Partitioned narrative Practice - orientedtoolkits 325 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) services , which determine purchasing patterns . The scenario brieﬂy elaborated above is indicative of this kind of virtual asset , while one can easily imagine other engineering domains and practice communities where information - based products and services are the object of construction . 3 . 2 Analysis of distributed collective practices Having outlined the reference scenario , an attempt is now made to extract the elements of distributed collective practices implied or encapsulated in this scenario . The term distributed collective practice is borrowed from Turner et al . ( 2006 , p . 97 ) , where it is used to signify “collective activity mediated through geographical and conceptual distances , time , collective resources , and heterogeneous perspectives or experiences . ” A contextual account of the term in the context of our scenario can provide useful insight to what is “collective , ” what is “practice” and what is “distributed activity” in the designated virtual community of practice . 3 . 2 . 1 Collective objects . A ﬁrst attempt at qualifying the notion of a collective object is to consider the stakeholders involved . In our reference example , the stakeholders include members of a cross - organization community of practice , namely representatives of cross - sector tourism service providers who register their offerings in a shared pool of virtual assets and devote resources so as to contribute to a collective objective ( i . e . new products ) , and consumers whose participation is motivated by individual goals and requirements . The latter group , is considered part of the community of practice , as it does inﬂuence the shape of the collective outcome ( i . e . what product is to be developed ) as well as the underlying decision - making processes . Consequently , in such a setting , collective objects represent contributions by both these groups which in some way generate interest for , shape characteristics of , articulate demand for and deﬁne the scope and limits of a new artefact ( i . e . a vacation package ) . This new artefact may have commonalities with other artefacts ( i . e . it need not necessarily be an innovation ) . Nevertheless , it results from a conscious effort to appropriate the beneﬁts of earlier innovations . In practice , this requires a certain amount of reuse and manipulation of codiﬁed experience . 3 . 2 . 2 Distributed activity . As for distributed activity , the common connotation found in the literature refers to the technologically mediated interactions which contrast distributed activities to co - located activities or face - to - face interactions ( Hinds and Keisler , 2002 ) . Although this is a valid and important view it is not the only one . Several researchers have used the term “distributed” to underline the distribution of cognition as an alternative paradigm to traditional cognitive science ( Hutchins , 1991 ; Norman , 1991 ) . A contextual interpretation of our scenario framed in this perspective denotes that distributed activities are also those contributing to the attainment of collective objects ( see earlier analysis ) , while having a local and autonomous scope , organizational bindings and situational character . This notion is closer to the distributed cognition paradigm ( Hutchins , 1995 ; Hollan et al . , 2000 ) , which holds that our environment can be structured in ways that greatly simplify the problem of knowing what to do in a particular situation . Considering the community of practice implied in our reference example , this is clearly a more appropriate interpretation of distributed activity . Speciﬁcally , distinct service providers from different sectors of the tourism industry ( i . e . accommodation , transport , food and beverage , entertainment , culture , etc . ) establish and implement their own processes and technologies addressing JEIM22 , 3 326 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) speciﬁc and well - deﬁned business objectives . Unifying them under an acceptable shared practice , without limiting or constraining autonomous action , is of paramount importance to attaining a collective goal ( i . e . assembly of a vacation package ) . 3 . 2 . 3 Practice elements . Having qualiﬁed the terms “collective” objects and “distributed” activities , we now turn to the notion of “practices . ” In general , practices emerge from accumulated wisdom or rules of thumb . Shared practices represent the collective wisdom or repertoire of resources accepted and used widely by practitioners of a domain of discourse towards a goal ( Wenger , 1998 ) . Furthermore , Turner et al . ( 2006 ) distinguish between practices framed in the social interactions between community members and practices framed into new processes , tools , and artefacts . The latter type , namely practices framed into processes , tools , and artefacts , are more relevant to our current research focus as they motivate an analysis of practice in terms of type or scope ( i . e . local versus shared practice ) , means for enacting practices ( i . e . off - versus on - line practice ) and intertwining practices ( i . e . on - line practice determining off - line practice and vice versa ) . In our reference scenario there are two types of practices . The ﬁrst type consolidates practices of a local character used by an organization to plan and execute own business activities . These practices are grounded on the organization’s context of work and may be embedded in dedicated technological tools ( i . e . enterprise databases and intranet ) and local procedures . For instance , making a reservation for a hotel room is totally different – in terms of process followed , the tools used and the codiﬁed outcomes – from making a reservation for a table in a restaurant . The second type of relevant practices , are shared and constitute a “social” protocol for participating in the virtual alliance set by the community of practice . Here , we refer to practices relevant to sociability ( de Souza and Preece , 2004 ) which designate how members participate and contribute . In terms of means for enacting practices , our interest is on media which allow articulation and enactment of on - line practices . This raises a design problem as it entails deﬁning the interactive practice vocabulary ( i . e . primitive elements constituting vacation packages ) and the computer - mediated context for executing statements of this vocabulary ( i . e . the vacation package assembly line ) . It stands to argue therefore that for domains where practice is framed more into processes and tools rather than social interactions between members , dedicated interactive software and interoperable components are needed to bridge across individual perspectives into a collaborative repository or community collective . Collectively , such software components are referred to as practice - speciﬁc toolkits . 3 . 3 Consolidation From the above , it follows that developing practice - speciﬁc toolkits of the type relevant to this work should be seen as establishing a new institution of practice . This can be made obvious by contrasting the current practices revealed by our empirical work against an envisioned practice suggested by our reference scenario . Speciﬁcally , our scenario assumes that new vacation packages are motivated either by appropriating codiﬁed experience or through end - user demand . In both cases , a moderator undertakes to deﬁne an abstract package as an aggregation of neighbourhood - speciﬁc activities or services . Community formation is dynamic , initially containing all registered members offering services in the neighbourhoods assumed by the package . Once an abstract package is deﬁned , an initial community of practice is formed dynamically . Practice - orientedtoolkits 327 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) Commitment to the package requires explicit indication on behalf of the members and follows assessment of own capacity , capability , availability of resources , etc . as well as any clariﬁcation that may be needed from the moderator . Only committed members are invited to contribute to the package’s reﬁnement by responding to the moderators requests for input , by expressing opinion , raising and clarifying issues , informing the community of seasonal or situational trends and tactics ( i . e . last minute offers , season discounts , and foreseen events ) , as well as arranging for local commitments at their sites . Conﬂicts may arise and are addressed in virtual meetings in which all involved parties are invited to take part . The effect of such exchanges , which are persistent , documented and visible , is to progressively map an abstract package to a concrete offering containing all alternatives designated by the differentiated services of the members . Thus , for instance , a concrete package including accommodation will present to the customer all accommodation options ( hotel , bed and breakfast , and bungalows ) with full details for him / her to decide the maximally preferred option . Thus , a package family may create a variety of concrete packages , assembled as distributed collective practice by members of a moderated community of practice and targeting different customer proﬁles . Clearly , this is a totally different practice than the current state of affairs or the solutions provided by technological offerings such as dynamic packaging . The main differences are the strong sense of community , the direct and democratic participation , the role - based assignments of work tasks , the collective responsibility and ownership of the result , social awareness , as well as the direct feedback and feed - through between the members . On the other hand , nothing deprives or suspends individual members from continuing their ordinary lines of work . In terms of beneﬁt , it is spread mutually to all parties involved including the customer . The expense is two - fold , namely the practice toolkit implementing the fabrics of the community and the additional cognitive load resulting from the members’ responsibilities towards the community . 4 . Building practice - oriented toolkits The previous analysis offers useful insight for not only establishing the rationale behind vacation package assembly but also for outlining key design qualities of practice - oriented toolkits . Consequently , this section provides an informative account of the implications on tools for communities of practice and advances a general model for practice - oriented toolkits . 4 . 1 Implications and requirements of practice toolkits Over the years , a wide range of technologies have emerged offering alternative complementary perspectives to the management of collaborative work in community settings . Bos et al . ( 2007 ) provide a classiﬁcation including ontology engineering tools ( Cragin and Shankar , 2006 ) , scientiﬁc data repositories and collaboratories ( Chin and Lansing , 2004 ) , organizational memories ( Ackerman and Halverson , 2004 ) , digital libraries ( van House , 2003 ) , community networks ( Schuler , 1996 ; Kavanaugh et al . , 2005 ) , recommendation systems ( Reichling et al . , 2007 ) , etc . Despite the plethora of proposals , very few of them studied the integration of such tools in uniﬁed architectures for managing distributed collective practices ( Turner et al . , 2006 ) and even fewer claimed that the systems built actually provide a place for engaging in the practice the community is about . It should also be noted that the few studies reporting on tools for JEIM22 , 3 328 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) managing distributed collective practices concentrate on single organization ( intra - organization ) communities of practice . In contrast , the present work focuses on technologies for practice ( or practice - oriented toolkits ) for cross - organization communities of practice . To justify the difference , we will attempt to bring to the surface some of the distinct design requirements for practice - speciﬁc toolkits , thus making explicit the landscape of technologies ( i . e . domain - speciﬁc and interoperable software tools such as workﬂow engines , visual design languages , custom groupware , “socially” designed user interfaces , community data mining tools , as well as models for codifying knowledge and experience ) from which they can be constructed . 4 . 1 . 1 Community workﬂow versus workﬂow technology . Typically , practice domains such as architecture , engineering and software design , are distinctly characterized by workﬂows , visual languages , domain - speciﬁc vocabularies , and social semiotics . Even within the same domain of practice some of these tools may evolve and change . For instance , in software design object - orientation brought about a totally different design language ( methodology , guidelines , visual languages , etc . ) than the more traditional structured systems analysis . Similarly , in tourism semantic - web technologies have begun to change both the traditional workﬂows and models of cooperation and work . An example is destination management systems and dynamic packaging technologies ( Cardoso and Lange , 2007 ) , which have changed the way in which tourist packages are compiled , marketed , and traded . However , in the context of our reference example , technologies such as dynamic packaging offer only partial insight as they fail to convey the sense of community characterizing “collective” products assembled from shared virtual assets , through coordinated action , negotiation and social interactions . Moreover , in contrast to dynamic packaging technologies which produce the same product for designated requirements , our scenario implies assembly of personalized products as customized instances of a more general product family . Thus , assembling entails establishment of community workﬂows for the incremental transformation of an instance of a package family to a concrete offering according to the customers’ needs and preferences . 4 . 1 . 2 Negotiated actions versus groupware . Supporting community of practice workﬂows raises important implications on the underlying “social” model for collaboration as well as the technology used to implement this model . Traditionally , groupware technologies have emphasized the technical aspects of asynchronous and synchronous collaboration advancing proposals for casual interaction systems such as instant messengers ( Nardi et al . , 2000 ) , virtual worlds including MUDs , chat rooms , on - line games ( Bartle , 2004 ) , media spaces ( Mackay , 1999 ) , etc . More recent efforts make use of screen sharing technology ( Kimberly et al . , 2006 ) to address the limited support for activity and artefact awareness of conventional groupware systems . One major issue which stands out very promptly in all these efforts , and which is vital for collaboration in communities of practice , relates to the type , range and scope of the artefacts of collaboration . The vast majority of existing works concentrate on conventional artefacts such as documents , communication transcripts and media ( i . e . video , audio , and images ) , offering little insight to practice - speciﬁc artefacts typically codiﬁed as graphical models and domain speciﬁc visual languages . On the other hand , communities of practice rely heavily on sharing , coordinating and negotiating elements of special vocabularies . For instance , in our reference example vacation package families ascribe to a certain design language according to which Practice - orientedtoolkits 329 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) a package is an aggregation of days , each day is occupied by activities which may have partial or full temporal overlap , an activity has a speciﬁed duration , execution of an activity follows , pre - supposes or is indifferent to the execution of another activity , etc . Moreover , the details of a speciﬁc package result from the negotiation of parameters of ontological elements of this design language . Consequently , collaboration assumes deﬁning the core elements of the design language which suits best the speciﬁc domain of practice and subsequently , devising mechanisms for computer - mediated collaborative manipulation of a valid artefact of this language . 4 . 1 . 3 Social mining for discovering patterns and codifying reusable experiences . Social mining refers to the process of discovering and exploiting the knowledge , behaviours and tendencies in a community of practice . There are two issues of particular interest in the context of our current work . The ﬁrst is applying data mining to discover social networks and “hidden”or emergent communities . The second relates to extracting patterns and codifying reusable experience . To some extent the two issues are interrelated in the sense that identiﬁcation of a “hidden” or emergent community will inevitably result in the consolidation of new patterns and work experiences . However , for the purposes of this discussion , we will address them separately since they constitute subject matters of distinct research communities . Identifying “hidden” communities reveals periodic or permanent clusters formed dynamically as a result of exchanges between members of a social network . For instance , in our reference scenario two types of clusters may occur . The ﬁrst is unintentional clustering between members from different neighbourhoods resulting form customers’ tendencies or purchasing behaviours and offering evidence useful for targeting marketing strategies . For example , a vacation package may be purchased both by elderly people and business travellers . The two “hidden” communities are designated or implied by choice of neighbourhood members . It may be that elderly consistently choose bed and breakfast accommodation , public transportation , and two meals per day , while business travellers favour luxury hotel accommodation , private transportation and no food and beverage . The second type of clustering designates cross - neighbourhood coalitions ( i . e . speciﬁc members of a neighbourhood that tend to be associated with speciﬁc members of another neighbourhood ) . For instance , taverns near by a historical site may be more popular than taverns farther away . In this case , the cluster becomes a community within a community with possible negative implications . Being able to identify or allowing for “hidden” communitiesmaynotalwaysbebeneﬁcialtothecommunity asa whole . Indeed , theremay be negative effects such as community desegregation ( i . e . establishment of new neighbourhoods ) , which in turn , may damage the community’s stability , coherence and members’ trust . For this reason , social mining for discovering “hidden” communities should be carefully designed and used . The second relevant application of social mining is for extracting patterns and codifying them as reusable experience . This is a knowledge management and experience building activity aiming to increase the competencies and the capacity for differentiation of a community of practice . In the context of virtual communities of practice in tourism , such experience building is critical for sustaining an acceptable level of stability between the community members . Moreover , it turns out that it is the presence or absence and periodic reﬁnement and endorsement of community participation policies and rules , which determine both structural and behavioural aspects of the community . To build , maintain and assure endorsement of such rules JEIM22 , 3 330 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) requires experience and access to community’s memoir of interactions . A typical example is the negotiation between customers and providers of a vacation package . Frequently , providers of the same type of service , such as accommodation , in a vacation package comprising accommodation , transport and visit to local cultural heritage , develop antagonistic behaviours manifested as discounts or last minute offers . Such behaviours may damage the community’s stability leading to providers opting out , internal clustering of members , etc . To avoid such negative implications , the community should impose rules of participation and acceptable behaviour . These rules may govern registration and access , acceptance of new members , rules of acceptable behaviour , security , privacy and freedom of speech / act . Moreover , they should be extracted by intelligently manipulating persistent data reﬂecting each member’s behaviour , and negotiated and agreed upon before coming to effect . Therefore , moderating such communities is critical and should facilitate both managing access to shared collaborative resources but more importantly building new capabilities through experience and knowledge management . 4 . 2 A model for practice - speciﬁc toolkits This section attempts to devise an operational reference model for practice - oriented toolkits in light of the analysis so far . Figure 1 shows the key elements of a practice - speciﬁc toolkit . As shown the toolkit is considered as a component separate from the community - support system . The essence of the toolkit is the assembly line which intertwines with two logical constituents annotated as the preparation and deployment . The preparation constituent is responsible for determining process - related aspects involved in the assembly of a particular type of artefact . On the other hand , the deployment constituent delivers the results of the assembly line to the wider environment of the community . For the purposes of this work , we will assume that this amounts to deploying assembled artefacts in a community portal . The assembly line operates on a domain - speciﬁc product line speciﬁcation which characterizes products assembled within the scope of the assembly line . This model is populated by different types of tools devised to facilitate member collaboration and Figure 1 . Components of the assembly line Product ( under development ) Rules ( formal / intangible ) Process ( engineering ) Assembly Portal Applicationserver Deployment Model Squad collaboration Workflows & schema JSPs for assembly Toolkit components XML mapping scheme Domain - specific visual language Supports Assembly line Preparation Practice - orientedtoolkits 331 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) workﬂow management so as to derive an instance of a product under a product line speciﬁcation ( or a product family ) . These tools include general purpose collaboration software ( i . e . collaborative message boards , virtual meeting tools , synchronous communication , etc . ) , and knowledge management tools of the type reviewed in the previous section . Collectively , they constitute the practice - oriented toolkit offering the medium for engaging in the practice the community is about ( i . e . developing new products and services within the scope of an assembly line ) . The next section offers insight to operational details of this model . 5 . A toolkit for regional vacation package assembly In the context of eKoNES we have constructed an operational version of a practice - oriented toolkit for vacation package assembly following the model described earlier . Before presenting the details , a brief description of an eKoNES electronic village is provided . 5 . 1 eKoNES vocabulary and community constituents As in the real world metaphor of the village , eKoNES is made up from neighbourhoods which are thematic communities of practice with topical interest on transport , accommodation , cultural heritage , etc . eKoNES electronic neighbourhoods form a type of network virtual organizations ( Santoro et al . , 2006 ) . Although each neighbour in the network remains autonomous ( i . e . pursuing own business objectives ) , participation in the neighbourhood and the “life” of the electronic village is governed by designated rules of engagement determining acceptable social behaviour and practices in the neighbourhood . Some of these rules are declared explicitly and require the member’s explicit acceptance , others are neighbourhood - speciﬁc and are embedded in the electronic neighbourhood registration system ( i . e . rules governing participation in multiple neighbourhoods ) , while yet another set of rules are designed into the practice - oriented toolkit through which members contribute to the virtual activities taking place . Figure 2 shows a conceptual model of the eKoNES community constituents . The term squad is used to denote a small group of collaborators acting as a team for a speciﬁed period to fulﬁl a particular mission . In eKoNES , squads are cross - neighbourhood collisions with one moderator and several participants joining forces to assemble vacation packages by integrating and customizing generic neighbourhood services and negotiating their details . In the course of developing a package , the eKoNES squad may change in form and structure depending on contextual and circumstantial factors ( i . e . a member may be temporarily unavailable or become unwilling to commit further resources ) . This means that at any time , a member can optout from a squad only through an explicit request for withdrawal . The lifecycle of an eKoNES squad follows typical stages indicated by sociological research into small group activities ( Tuckman , 1965 ) . Speciﬁcally , a squad is initially formed on the grounds of matching mission - speciﬁc requirements against members’ deposited resources . However , dynamic formation does not ensure stabilization and effective performance . Instead , empirical evidence suggests that group stabilization is strongly correlated with the group’s ability to effectively move from the initial forming and storming stages into norming and performing . Packages constitute the outcome of distributed collective practices of eKoNES squads and as such they are the prime result of a conscious effort towards appropriating JEIM22 , 3 332 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) the beneﬁts of virtual networking and cooperative innovation ( Walters and Rainbird , 2007 ) . In eKoNES , packages are assembled as instances of a family , in much similar fashion as a product generated from a corresponding product family or software schema in a software factory ( Greenﬁeld and Short , 2004 ) . As already stated earlier , software factories are based on two pillars , namely some sort of model - based development approach and the integration of models into workﬂows . eKoNES ascribes to both these commitments and supports powerful model - based architecture and a workﬂow engine for large - scale adaptability . Speciﬁcally , the compilation of a package follows four distinct phases or workﬂows with each stage contributing to the transformation of an abstract package to a concrete offering and subsequently to a personalized offer . These stages are embedded into the design of the downloadable software components through which squad members organize and perform their work . The package initiation stage deﬁnes an abstract package and signals the formation of an eKoNES squad . Package deﬁnition entails assignment of a name , indication of resources required and duration . A corresponding squad is initially formed as a coalition of all members offering the resources required by the package . Squad formation continues until members declare either commitment to or withdrawal from the package , following electronic exchanges to assess the package’s requirements against own resources . During the package elaboration stage , members of an eKoNES squad seek to populate a designated package with all possible or alternative offerings . Typical actions Figure 2 . Ontological elements of a vacation package design language Policy policy - id Family 1 . . * Offering + participates * neighborhood - id neighborhood - id Neighborhood member - id SquadModerator SquadMembers Squad Concern Issue + has + is _ Raised 1 . . * 1 . . * 1 1 . . * has fulfills squad - id package - id Stakeholder Package Mission mission - code name summary package - id Customer customer - id member - id + is _ Made family - schema belongs _ To defines defines Practice - orientedtoolkits 333 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) taking place during this stage include deﬁning activities , making commitments , resolving conﬂicts , reserving resources , etc . These exchanges take the form of announcements or questions and result in updates in the package description or pending issues requiring agreement . At the end of the elaboration phase , a new package has been populated in terms of its constituent activities . In the deployment stage , the package is prepared to become an active eKoNES resource . This entails selection of an existing , authoring of a new template or both so as to facilitate package multi - platform presentation ( e . g . desktop using Java or HTML , personal digital assistants or a cellular phone ) . Such templates are classiﬁed by category of package and may accommodate a variety of multimedia content , including narratives , pictures , videos , etc . deﬁned in this stage . At the end of the deployment phase , all end - users who have registered theirinterest in the package are informed of the package’s existence and they are prompted to consider making a personalized reservation . Package personalization / tailoring is the stage where end - users ( i . e . customers ) are exposed to the package and adapt the package so as to reﬂect own preferences . During tailoring users can engage in a variety of social interactions commonly found in on - line communities . For instance , prospective buyers of a package are presented with the feedback provided by persons who have already bought the package . Also when tailoring a package , customers are presented with information on patterns of tailoring which have emerged . Finally , customers are also encouraged to provide ratings and write reviews for services offered and packages obtained . 5 . 2 The practice - oriented toolkit The toolkit comprises two categories of tools . The ﬁrst is the community portal , which supports community - oriented content management functions , access to published packages , and various communication - oriented tasks . The second category constitutes the practice - speciﬁc instruments . These are downloadable applications from the community portal , available only to registered neighbours and providing the only means for contributing to vacation package assembly . 5 . 2 . 1 The community portal . eKoNES content ( of all sorts ) is supported by an augmented instance of the LifeRay ( www . liferay . com ) content management system and application server . Registration to the portal is a two - stage process . In the ﬁrst step , applicants obtain a LifeRay account and become eKoNES villagers . This provides access to dedicated information and communication - oriented services of neighbourhoods . The second stage involves electronic neighbourhood registration for service providers only . Electronic registration toa neighbourhoodallowseKoNESvillagerstoincrementally declare competencies , describe their service offerings and gain neighbour authorities ( i . e . access protected neighbourhood services , add content , etc . ) . Multiple neighbourhood registration is possible provided that the applicant offers services owned by the neighbourhood . Moreover , neighbourhood registration need not be a one - step process . Candidate neighbours may create their proﬁle in stages and update it as required . Upon successful registration , neighbours are presented in the neighbourhood’s directory and obtain access to the software tools needed for their effective participation in the collaborative exchanges of eKoNES squads ( i . e . the assembly line ) . 5 . 2 . 2 Collaborative practicing in the squad virtual work room . Vacation package assembly is a suite of collaborative tools downloadable from the portal upon successful registration to neighbourhoods . It is designed so as to provide an interactive JEIM22 , 3 334 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) embodiment of a virtual work room in which a squad works towards a designated mission . Each work room has two distinct entry points representing the moderator’s view and the squad members’ view of the room . This is shown in Figure 3 which presents schematically mappings between the real world metaphor and the corresponding symbolic components of the moderator’s view of a speciﬁc package in the elaboration stage . The basic concept is that moderators create virtual rooms and populate their contents by manipulating shared resources . Squad members access the room and negotiate its contents . This negotiation is either asynchronous or synchronous . Figure 4 shows an example of the squad members’ view of the room in asynchronous mode . As shown , the squad members’ view of the room is simpler and does not include some of the moderators’ tools . Speciﬁcally , the squad members’ view comprises the current version of the package , which occupies the upper part of the user interface ( although using an alternative layout than that of the moderator’s view ) and the asynchronous tasks pending the member’s attention in the lower part of the screen . Such action prompts , which implement squad members’ contributions to the package , are dynamically updated as the package moves from initiation and elaboration to deployment and tailoring . In other words , this dialogue at any time summarizes the speciﬁc activities pending the attention of a squad member . Squad members are notiﬁed about pending issues by persistent posts to a shared message board . Members reply by expressing opinion on the issue , providing supporting evidence , or attaching documents or multimedia contents useful to the assembly of a vacation package . Such messages may have a dual manifestation . The ﬁrst is through the squad member’s application ( see lower part in Figure 4 ) . The second is through the message board . Figure 5 shows an instance of the message board for the package “Peloponissos Round Trip . ”Asshown , themessageboard functions asa collectivememory containing allsquad Figure 3 . The moderator’s view of the work room Next floor Role - basedaccess Rooms on this floor Previous floor The room ' s contents Practice - orientedtoolkits 335 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) traces leadingtothe package . The graphicalquery interfacefacilitates explorationofwhat has been exchanged / contributed between squad members . The parameterized query component on the left hand - side is used to populate structured query language queries as well as to tailor the layout policy of the dynamic display on the right hand - side . Query reﬁnement is supported by direct manipulation of the graphical display which is built as an extension of the 2D visualization library JGraph ( www . jgraph . com ) . It is important to note the distinct visual appearance between root , child and leaf nodes used to explicitly designate pathway and hierarchical containment . At any time only the farthest ( in the pathway ) child node is visually populated . However , all nodes in the pathway are interactive and can be populated ( through simple selection ) , thus allowing for interactive exploration of the dynamic display . Conﬂicts are usually handled in synchronous collaborative sessions ( virtual meetings ) were all squad members can take part and express opinion . To this end , a Java - based collaboration toolkit has been developed supporting role - based view of collaborative artefacts , object replication , and ﬂoor control for manipulating shared objects . A synchronous session is announced and launched by the squad moderator , who also deﬁnes the collaboration agenda ( i . e . what part of the package is to be shared and replicated during the session . This is achieved by designating the components ( or neighbourhoods ) of a package and the package lifecycle stage ( i . e . elaboration or deployment ) . The package components indicate the parts of the model to be extracted and replicated during a synchronous session . The choice of package lifecycle stage deﬁnes the view in which the replicated object is to be presented . As each package lifecycle stage emphasizes different aspects of a package , the corresponding views follow different interaction metaphors . An illustration of a synchronous interactive session is shown in Figure 6 . As shown , a package’s model is fully separated from its view . This allows the current version of Figure 4 . Asynchronouscollaborationduringpackageelaboration Moderator Squad member Consumer 1 : Request for service 2 : Announcement of proposal and invitation to commit resources 3 : Declare intention and contributions 4 : Notify of results JEIM22 , 3 336 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) the package to be assembled and presented differently to the moderator ( upper view ) and the squad members ( lower view ) . It is also worth mentioning the role - adapted view of activity objects . Speciﬁcally , activity objects in the moderator’s view carry an awareness indicator ( green bullets at the top of each object ) showing the registered collaborating partners . On the other hand , activity objects in the partner’s view have a different visual layout and contain additional information ( as nested interaction elements ) . Finally , it is important to mention that the two views although different are fully synchronized within the same collaborative session so as to preserve consistency of the workspace across the different views . During synchronous collaborative sessions contributions to the shared model is managed by the ﬂoor manager . The role of the ﬂoor manager is runtime permission assignments and participant notiﬁcation of changes in the state of the model . Runtime permission assignment entails assessment of who has permission to act in the collaborative workspace at any time . Every time a new collaborative session is issued , a new instance of a session ﬂoor manager class is assigned to apply the desired policy . Once ﬂoor access is granted to a participant , all replicas of the shared model at the registered clients are locked . Manipulation of the shared object by the ﬂoor owner is transparent . In other words all participants are concurrently notiﬁed of the changes introduced to the shared object by the ﬂoor owner . This allows a kind of feed - through and facilitates task awareness . Figure 5 . The collaborativemessageboard Practice - orientedtoolkits 337 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) 5 . 2 . 3 Assembling and deploying packages through the portal . Assembly of a package is automatic and takes place in the deployment stage where the package is transformed into a concrete offering with clear illustration of package options and alternatives per activity . As already stated package publication entails selection and authoring of a designated template . Once details of the package are ﬁnalized , it is packaged and published as a new resource in a portlet context through the eKoNES portal ( Figure 7 ) . The ultimate assignment of the package’s options is to be ﬁnalized during the tailoring phase to reﬂect a customer’s detailed requirements and preferences . During tailoring , prospective users , informed of the package’s availability , are prompted to consider making a personalized reservation . It is also worth mentioning that the user may request further modiﬁcations to package by submitting requests through the message board and asking the eKoNES administrator and the package squad to consider speciﬁc issues . In such a case , the package enters the deployment phase where it is adapted to the user’s request . This process may be iterated until a personalized package is created to suit speciﬁc user needs and preferences . 6 . Discussion The previous sections have emphasized the need for separating between community management ( i . e . discovering , building , and maintaining communities ) and community Figure 6 . Package views in synchronous collaborative session ( a ) Defining the agenda of collaboration ( b ) The moderator’s view ( c ) The squad members’ view XML , SOAP Domain - specificrendering JEIM22 , 3 338 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) practices ( i . e . the practice - speciﬁc tools and artefacts involved ) . This is an important observation which highlights a common misuse of the term “communities of practice” in the relevant literature ( Turner et al . , 2006 ) . Indeed , the vast majority of research on communities of practice focuses on discovering , building and maintaining community , dismissing or under servicing the elements of practice . Moreover , very few from the existing pool of studies claim and / or provide convincing evidence that the systems built / studied constitute a “place” to actually engage in the practice that the community is about . This is further supported by recent empirical evidence on the use of collaborative technologies ( i . e . discussion forums , shared databases , repositories , and workﬂow ) by organizations ( Merono - Cerdan et al . , 2008 ) . A second issue worth noticing is thatexisting studies on communities of practice analyze community management in single organizations , either public or private ( Juriado and Gustafsson , 2007 ) . The more demanding problem of community formation across organizational boundaries – either through inter - organisational partnerships or external communities of practices – is seldom addressed ( Dewhurst and Cegarra Navarro , 2004 ) . The complexity of this problem in terms of organizational and technological set - up is explored in a recent study by Kern and Kersten ( 2007 ) . The authors investigate technologies for internet - based Figure 7 . An instance of the package in the tailoringphase Package assembly portlet Activity assembly portlet Package exploration portlet Practice - orientedtoolkits 339 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) inter - organizational product development and identify the problems involved in designing the partnership interaction ( Kern and Kersten , 2007 ) . In contrast to the main thrust of recent works , eKoNES strives to tackle the issue of building and sustaining practice - oriented virtual partnerships . Its normative perspective is that in cultivated communities of practice there is a compelling need for technologies for practice in addition to the community medium ( i . e . the WWW portal , Blogs , Wikis , computational grids , etc . ) . Furthermore , such technologies need to be designed so as to encapsulate the requirements of the community and its formal or folklore knowledge . To this end , eKoNES distinguishes community management from practice - speciﬁc tasks and tools . Speciﬁcally , community management tasks are supported by augmenting the capabilities of an open - source portal to allow for community registration , role undertaking and declaration of virtual assets . Practice - speciﬁc tasks are embedded in a domain - speciﬁc software platform which is made available to authorized users , the practice - oriented toolkit . Tools of this platform constitute the only means through which members of a virtual partnership can actively contribute towards the accomplishment of the partnership’s mission . 7 . Conclusion From the results presented in this paper , several conclusions can be drawn regarding the design of technologies for practice in community settings . First , their design should be focused on an acceptable practice - oriented vocabulary ( i . e . models , guidelines , and tools ) . In eKoNES , this has necessitated the development of a suitable domain - speciﬁc design language which comprises visual artefacts for manipulating elements of a package family and an assembly engine for executing statements of the designated vocabulary . In this context , the term execution implies a mapping of abstract features of the language to concrete packages . Second , technologies for practice should encapsulate workﬂows to allow incremental reﬁnement , evolution and reuse of codiﬁed knowledge as well as generation of new knowledge which becomes embedded in new products and services . In eKoNES , we have provided a collaborative workﬂow engine which accommodates distinct stages for new product development and milestones to signify transition from one stage to another . Moreover , this workﬂow engine is designed using a model - based approach so as to allow community members to practice with models ( of the designated design language ) and manipulate their elements . Third , technologies for practice should act as media for social interaction coordinated by rules of participation and engagement . These rules should be explicit , wherever possible designed into the software , visible and transparent to all members of the community . Such rules are also prerequisites for creating and sustaining trust and an environment of mutual beneﬁt and appreciation . In eKoNES , social interaction amounts to interactively manifesting social actions which take into account the actions and reactions of other individuals in a squad . The shared message board and the collaboration toolkit are designed precisely for this purpose . Moreover , the increased functions assumed by the squad moderator are also intended to provide a mechanism for coordinated actions among members of a squad . Finally , itisimportanttounderlinetwo additionaldesirablefeaturesof technologies for practice , namely reuse and scalability . Reuse denotes a capability to re - apply , appropriate and make repeatedly use of previously codiﬁed knowledge . Scalability , on the other hand , JEIM22 , 3 340 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) amounts to addressing / supporting community practices in new thematic domains . In eKoNES , reuse and scalability have been design targets from the early phases of the project . The results today include a reusable class library of Swing components which allows augmentation , expansion and integration of novel domain - speciﬁc design vocabularies with minimal effort . Details on this capability have been presented in ( Akoumianakis et al . , 2008b ) . Scalability has also been investigated by using the tools to address slightly different domains of practice . Speciﬁcally , instead of building vacation packages we have also practiced with building a conference plan , scheduling a semester course and organizing a trade fair . In all these domains , the outcome can be considered as collective “packages” in the sense described earlier . Moreover , their compilation requires some form of mentoring , negotiation , agreement and approval by members of the corresponding squads . On the other hand , their constituent activities are different than those typically found in vacation packages ( i . e . in a semester course the constituents of a plan include lectures , laboratories , slide shows , video projection , etc . ) . References Aaen , I . , Bøtcher , P . and Mathiassen , L . ( 1997 ) , “Software factories” , Proceedings of the 20th Information Systems Research Seminar in Scandinavia , Oslo , available at : www . cin . ufpe . br / , in953 / lectures / papers / Software _ Factories _ 17 . pdf ( accessed May 13 ) . Ackerman , M . S . and Halverson , C . ( 2004 ) , “Organizational memory as objects , processes , and trajectories : an examination of organizational memory in use” , Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Vol . 13 , pp . 155 - 89 . Akoumianakis , D . , Vellis , G . , Milolidakis , I . , Kotsalis , D . and Alexandraki , C . ( 2008a ) , “Distributed collective practices in collaborative music performance” , Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Digital Interactive Media in Entertainment and Arts ( DIMEA 2008 ) , Athens , September 10 - 12 . Akoumianakis , D . , Vidakis , N . , Vellis , G . , Milolidakis , G . and Kotsalis , D . ( 2008b ) , “Interaction scenarios in the ‘social’ experience factory : assembling collaborative artefacts through component reuse and social interaction” , Proceedings of the 3rd IASTED International Conference on Human Computer Interaction , Innsbruck , March 17 - 19 . Alexandraki , C . , Koutlemanis , P . , Gasteratos , P . , Valsamakis , N . , Akoumianakis , D . and Milolidakis , G . ( 2008a ) , “Towards the implementation of a generic platform for networked music performance : the DIAMOUSES approach” , paper presented at the 2008 International Computer Music Conference , Belfast , August 24 - 26 . Alexandraki , C . , Koutlemanis , P . , Gasteratos , P . , Akoumianakis , D . , Milolidakis , G . , Vellis , G . and Kotsalis , D . ( 2008b ) , “DIAMOUSES – an experimental platform for network - based collaborative musical interactions” , Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems ( ICEIS’2008 ) , Barcelona , June 12 - 16 . Bartle , R . ( 2004 ) , Designing Virtual Worlds , New Riders , Indianapolis , IN . Basili , V . R . ( 1993 ) , “The experience factory and its relationship to other improvement paradigms” , in Somerville , I . and Paul , M . ( Eds ) , Proceedings of the 4th European Software Engineering Conference ( ESEC ) , Lecture Notes in Computer Science 717 , Springer , London , pp . 68 - 83 . Basili , V . R . , Lindvall , M . andCosta , P . ( 2001 ) , “Implementing theexperiencefactoryconcepts as aset of experience bases” , Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering ( SEKE ’01 ) , Buenos Aires , available at : www . cs . umd . edu / , basili / publications / proceedings / P90 . pdf ( accessed May 13 ) . Practice - orientedtoolkits 341 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) Bodker , S . ( 2000 ) , “Scenarios in user - centred design - setting the stage for reﬂection and action” , Interacting with Computers , Vol . 13 No . 1 , pp . 61 - 75 . Bos , N . , Zimmerman , A . , Olson , J . , Yew , J . , Yerkie , J . and Dahl , E . ( 2007 ) , “From shared databases to communities of practice : a taxonomy of collaboratories” , Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , Vol . 2 No . 2 , Article 16 , available at : http : / / jcmc . indiana . edu / vol12 / issue2 / bos . html Cardoso , J . and Lange , C . ( 2007 ) , “A framework for assessing strategies and technologies for dynamic packaging applications in e - tourism” , Information Technology & Tourism , Vol . 9 , pp . 27 - 44 . Carroll , J . M . , Rosson , M . B . , Convertino , G . and Ganoe , H . C . ( 2006 ) , “Awareness and teamwork in computer - supported collaborations” , Interacting with Computers , Vol . 18 , pp . 21 - 46 . Chin , G . Jr and Lansing , C . S . ( 2004 ) , “Capturing and supporting contexts for scientiﬁc data sharing via the biological sciences collaboratory” , Proceedings of the 2004 ACM CSCW Conference , ACM Press , New York , NY , pp . 409 - 18 . Cox , M . A . ( 2005 ) , “What are communities of practice ? A comparative review of four seminal works” , Journal of Information Science , Vol . 31 No . 6 , pp . 527 - 40 . Cox , M . A . ( 2008 ) , “An exploration of concepts of community through a case study of UK university web production” , Journal of Information Science , Vol . 34 No . 3 , pp . 327 - 45 . Cragin , M . and Shankar , K . ( 2006 ) , “Scientiﬁc data collections and distributed collective practice” , Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Vol . 15 Nos 2 / 3 , pp . 185 - 204 . Cusumano , F . M . ( 1989 ) , “The software factory : a historical interpretation” , IEEE Software , Vol . 6 No . 2 , pp . 23 - 30 . de Souza , C . and Preece , J . ( 2004 ) , “A framework for analyzing and understanding on - line communities” , Interacting with Computers , Vol . 16 , pp . 579 - 610 . Dewhurst , F . W . and Cegarra Navarro , J . G . ( 2004 ) , “External communities of practice and relational capital” , The Learning Organization : The International Journal of Knowledge and Organizational Learning Management , Vol . 11 Nos 4 / 5 , pp . 322 - 31 . Dignum , V . and van Eeden , P . ( 2005 ) , “Seducing , engaging and supporting communities at Achmea” , in Walter B . ( Ed . ) , Knowledge Management and Management Learning , Extending the Horizons of Knowledge - based Management , Springer , Berlin , pp . 125 - 41 . Enkel , E . , Heinold , P . , Hofel - Alfeis , J . and Wicki , Y . ( 2000 ) , “The power of communities – how to build knowledge management on a corporate level using the bottom up approach” , in Davenport , T . and Probst , G . ( Eds ) , Knowledge Management Case Book , Wiley , New York , NY , pp . 84 - 103 . Fernstrom , C . , Narfelt , H . K . and Ohlsson , L . ( 1992 ) , “Software factory principles , architecture and experiments” , IEEE Software , Vol . 9 No . 2 , pp . 36 - 44 . Franke , N . and Piller , F . ( 2004 ) , “Value creation by toolkits for user innovation and design : the case of the watch market” , The Journal of Product Innovation Management , Vol . 21 , pp . 401 - 15 . Franke , N . and Shah , S . ( 2001 ) , “How communities support innovative activities : an exploration of assistance and sharing among innovative users of sporting equipment” , Sloan Working Paper No . 4164 . Fuller , J . , Bartl , M . , Ernst , H . and Muhlbacher , H . ( 2006 ) , “Community based innovation : how to integrate members of virtual communities into new product development” , Electronic Commerce Research , Vol . 6 , pp . 57 - 73 . Gillam , C . andOppenheim , C . ( 2006 ) , “Reviewingtheimpactofvirtual teamsin theinformation age” , Journal of Information Science , Vol . 32 No . 2 , pp . 160 - 75 . JEIM22 , 3 342 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) Gongla , P . and Rizzuto , R . C . ( 2001 ) , “Evolving communities of practice : IBM global services experience” , IBM Systems Journal , Vol . 40 No . 4 , pp . 842 - 62 . Greenﬁeld , J . and Short , K . ( 2004 ) , Software Factories – Assembling Applications with Patterns , Frameworks , Models & Tools , Wiley , New York , NY . Gutwin , C . , Greenberg , S . and Roseman , M . ( 1996 ) , “Workspace awareness in real - time distributed groupware : framework , widgets , and evaluation” , in Sasse , A . , Cunningham , R . J . and Winder , R . ( Eds ) , People and Computers XI , Springer , Berlin , pp . 281 - 98 . Hinds , P . J . and Keisler , S . ( 2002 ) , Distributed Work , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Hollan , J . D . , Hutchins , L . E . and Kirsh , D . ( 2000 ) , “Distributed cognition : toward a new theoretical foundation for human - computer interaction research” , ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 7 No . 2 , pp . 174 - 96 . Hudson , E . S . and Smith , E . I . ( 1996 ) , “Techniques for addressing fundamental privacy and disruption tradeoffs in awareness support systems” , Proceedings of the 1996 ACM conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ACM Press , New York , NY , pp . 248 - 57 . Hutchins , E . ( 1991 ) , “The social organization of distributed cognition” , in Resnick , L . and Levine , J . ( Eds ) , Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition , APA Press , Washington , DC , pp . 283 - 307 . Hutchins , E . ( 1995 ) , Cognition in the Wild , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Jin , Y . and Hong , P . ( 2007 ) , “Coordinating global inter - ﬁrm product development” , Journal of Enterprise Information Management , Vol . 20 No . 5 , pp . 544 - 61 . Juriado , R . and Gustafsson , N . ( 2007 ) , “Emergent communities of practice in temporary inter - organisational partnerships” , The Learning Organization : The International Journal of Knowledge and Organizational Learning Management , Vol . 14 No . 1 , pp . 50 - 61 . Kavanaugh , A . , Carroll , J . M . , Rosson , M . B . , Zin , T . T . and Reese , D . D . ( 2005 ) , “Community networks : where ofﬂine communities meet online” , Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , Vol . 10 No . 4 , Article 3 , available at : http : / / jcmc . indiana . edu / vol10 / issue4 / kavanaugh . html Kern , E . - M . and Kersten , W . ( 2007 ) , “Framework for internet - supported inter - organizational product development collaboration” , Journal of Enterprise Information Management , Vol . 20 No . 5 , pp . 562 - 77 . Kim , S . - J . ( 2005 ) , “Collaborative interaction behaviors in an information technology problem - solving context : cognitive movements of the helper and the helped” , Journal of Information Science , Vol . 31 No . 6 , pp . 483 - 95 . Kimberly , T . , Greenberg , S . and Gutwin , C . ( 2006 ) , “Providing artifact awareness to a distributed group through screen sharing” , Proceedings of the ACM CSCW’06 Conference , Banff , Canada , November 4 - 8 , ACM Press , New York , NY . Mackay , W . ( 1999 ) , “Media spaces : environments for informal multimedia interaction” , in Beaudouin - Lafon , M . ( Ed . ) , Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Wiley , New York , NY , pp . 55 - 82 . Malhotra , Y . ( 2000 ) , “Knowledge management for e - business performance : advancing information strategy to internet time” , Information Strategy : The Executives Journal , Vol . 16 No . 4 , pp . 5 - 16 . Malhotra , Y . ( 2002 ) , “Enabling knowledge exchanges for e - business communities” , Information Strategy : The Executives Journal , Vol . 18 No . 3 , pp . 26 - 31 . Mason , J . K . and Leek , S . ( 2008 ) , “Learning to build a supply network : an exploration of dynamic business models” , Journal of Management Studies , Vol . 45 No . 4 , pp . 774 - 99 . Practice - orientedtoolkits 343 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) Merono - Cerdan , F . A . , Soto - Acosta , P . and Lopez - Nicolas , C . ( 2008 ) , “Analyzing collaborative technologies effect on performance through intranet use orientations” , Journal of Enterprise Information Management , Vol . 21 No . 1 , pp . 39 - 51 . Nardi , B . , Whittaker , S . and Bradner , E . ( 2000 ) , “Interaction and outeraction : instant messaging in action” , Proceedings of the ACM CSCW Conference , ACM Press , New York , NY , pp . 79 - 88 . Norman , D . A . ( 1991 ) , “Cognitive artifacts” , in Carroll , J . M . ( Ed . ) , Designing Interaction , Psychology at the Human - Computer Interface , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , pp . 17 - 38 . Reichling , T . , Veith , M . and Wulf , V . ( 2007 ) , “Expert recommender : designing for a network organization” , Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Vol . 16 , pp . 431 - 65 . Roberts , J . ( 2006 ) , “Limits to communities of practice” , Journal of Management Studies , Vol . 43 No . 3 , pp . 623 - 39 . Santoro , F . M . , Borges , R . S . M . and Rezende , A . E . ( 2006 ) , “Collaboration and knowledge sharing in network organizations” , Expert Systems with Applications , Vol . 31 , pp . 715 - 27 . Schatzki , T . R . , Knorr - Cetina , K . and von Savigny , E . ( 2001 ) , The Practice turn in Contemporary Theory , Routledge , London . Schmidt , K . ( 2000 ) , “Distributed collective practices : a CSCW perspective” , Invited Talk , Conference on Distributed Collective Practices , Paris , September 19 - 22 . Schmidt , K . ( 2002 ) , “The problem with ‘awareness’” , Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Vol . 11 , pp . 285 - 98 . Schuler , D . ( 1996 ) , New Community Networks : Wired for Change , ACM Press , New York , NY . Schultz , F . and Pucher , H . F . ( 2003 ) , “www . deck – Wissensmanagement bei Volkswagen” , Industrie Management , Vol . 19 No . 3 , pp . 64 - 6 . Seaman , B . C . , Mendonca , G . M . , Basili , R . V . and Kim , Y . - M . ( 2003 ) , “User interface evaluation and empirically - based evolution of a prototype experience management tool” , IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , Vol . 29 No . 9 , pp . 838 - 50 . Sigala , M . ( 2007 ) , “Investigating the internet’s impact on interﬁrm relations : evidence from the business travel management distribution chain” , Journal of Enterprise Information Management , Vol . 20 No . 3 , pp . 335 - 55 . Stockdale , R . and Borovicka , M . ( 2006 ) , “Developing an online business community : a travel industry case study” , Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Press , New York , NY , pp . 134 - 43 . Tuckman , B . ( 1965 ) , “Developmental sequence in small groups” , Psychological Bulletin , Vol . 63 , pp . 384 - 9 . Turner , W . , Bowker , G . , Gasser , L . and Zacklad , M . ( 2006 ) , “Information infrastructures for distributed collective practices” , Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Vol . 15 , pp . 93 - 110 . van House , A . N . ( 2003 ) , “Digital libraries and collaborative knowledge construction , in Ann Peterson Bishop” , in van House , N . A . and Buttenﬁeld , B . P . ( Eds ) , Digital Library Use – Social Practice in Design and Evaluation , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , pp . 271 - 96 . von Hippel , E . and Katz , R . ( 2002 ) , “Shifting innovation to users via toolkits” , Management Science , Vol . 48 No . 7 , pp . 821 - 33 . Walters , D . and Rainbird , M . ( 2007 ) , “Cooperative innovation : a value chain approach” , Journal of Enterprise Information Management , Vol . 20 No . 5 , pp . 595 - 607 . Wenger , E . ( 1998 ) , Communities of Practice : Learning , Meaning , & Identity , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . JEIM22 , 3 344 D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) Wenger , E . and Snyder , W . M . ( 2000 ) , “Communities of practice : the organizational frontier” , Harvard Business Review , January / February , pp . 139 - 45 . Wenger , E . , McDermott , R . and Snyder , W . ( 2002 ) , Cultivating Communities of Practice : A Guide to Managing Knowledge , Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . About the author Demosthenes Akoumianakis is an Associate Professor at the Department of Applied Information Technology and Multimedia , Technological Education Institution of Crete . He is also the Founder and the Director of the Interactive Software and Systems Engineering Laboratory ( www . istl . teiher . gr / ) . He received a BA ( Hons ) in Computing in Business from The University of Huddersﬁeld , UK ( 1990 ) and the MSc and PhD degrees in Human Computer Interaction from the University of Kent at Canterbury , UK , in 1995 and 1999 , respectively . His work in his ﬁnal year dissertation was awarded the 1st IBM prize from the Department of Computing and Mathematics of the University of Huddersﬁeld . He is actively involved in various national and European collaborative research and development projects , with emphasis on tools for scenario - based requirements engineering , on - line communities , multiple user interfaces and the development of collaborative technologies and toolkits . He has published widely in referred archival scientiﬁc journals , international conferences and workshops and is the author / co - author of several books . He also serves as a member of the Scientiﬁc Committee for various established archival journals , international conferences and national / international standards bodies . Demosthenes Akoumianakis can be contacted at : da @ epp . teicrete . gr Practice - orientedtoolkits 345 To purchase reprints of this article please e - mail : reprints @ emeraldinsight . com Or visit our web site for further details : www . emeraldinsight . com / reprints D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T ) This article has been cited by : 1 . Demosthenes Akoumianakis . 2014 . Boundary spanning tactics and “traceable” connections in cross - organizational virtual alliances . Journal of Enterprise Information Management 27 : 2 , 197 - 227 . [ Abstract ] [ Full Text ] [ PDF ] 2 . Demosthenes Akoumianakis . 2014 . Ambient affiliates in virtual cross - organizational tourism alliances . Computers in Human Behavior 30 , 773 - 786 . [ CrossRef ] 3 . Demosthenes Akoumianakis . 2011 . Designing Practice - Oriented Toolkits . International Journal of Virtual Communities and Social Networking 1 : 4 , 50 - 72 . [ CrossRef ] D o w n l o a d e d by S EL C UK UN I V E R S I T Y A t 02 : 56 02 F e b r u a r y 2015 ( P T )