41 Disentangling power and decision - making in participatory design Tone Bratteteig Dept . of Informatics , U . of Oslo POBox 1080 Blindern , 0316 Oslo , Norway tone @ ifi . uio . no Ina Wagner Dept . of Informatics , U . of Oslo POBox 1080 Blindern , 0316 Oslo , Norway ina . wagner @ tuwien . ac . at ABSTRACT This paper uses the example of a participatory design project in support of urban planning to analyse the complexity of design decisions . A set of design decisions is described and discussed , showing who made decisions on what . We discuss big decisions and small decisions , decisions internal to the project and related to the outside world , and decisions that might be called non - decisions . A conceptual framework on power is applied for understanding decision - making , power and conflict in Participatory Design projects . We discuss the concept of power , making distinctions between sources of power ( among them expert knowledge , resource allocation , values , and interpretations ) ; as well as between various mechanisms guiding decision - making : power , influence , trust and seeking understanding . Author Keywords Decision - making , power , influence , trust , participation , materialization ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION At the core of PD is the view that a technical solution is not a given , it could have been different . The decisions that shape the solution should be shared with those who will use it ; hence sharing the power to decide on the scope as well as the shape of the solution is central to PD . Design is decision - making : during a design process a huge number of decisions is taken before the designers end up with a design result - an artefact or system . All decisions are a choice between possibilities , and selecting one of them and making it concrete as a change in an artefact , is a demonstration of the capacity to transform , which is a key aspect of power . Decision - making is the exercising of power . While in commercial design projects there may be some sharing of power , participatory design ( PD ) opens up for systematically including users and other stakeholders in the decision processes in design . It is assumed that their knowledges and skills are also valid in the exploration and evaluation of both big and small decisions . Many mainstream design approaches include users in smaller decisions as a way to arrive at shapes and forms that users recognize , hence easily make sense of . However , at the core of PD there is the ambition that users should take part in all types of decisions – also in the big decisions , like defining the problem and its solution – and be given a voice , as well as the power to participate in the decision - making . PD thus means that designers should share their decision - making power with users – with non - designers – and that users should accept to share this power and take some of the responsibility . Both giving away power and accepting power can be difficult to do ( Bjerknes & Bratteteig 1988 ) . Empirical accounts of how power has been shared between designers and users are scarce . A few papers document the negotiations between users and designers and the decisions they make ( Bowers & Pycock 1994 ; Bjerknes & Bratteteig 1987 ) , but many are not concrete when it comes to how power is exercised and shared . In this paper we analyse the design decisions taken in a research project , in which a participatory tool in support of urban planning was designed . While we have published widely on different aspects of how the MR - Tent was used ( e . g . Maquil et al . 207 , 2010 ; Wagner 2011 ; Bratteteig and Wagner 2010 ) , this paper addresses the design decisions in the project and how they shaped the project ‘outcomes’ . The paper includes two sets of analysis of the design of the MR - Tent : one based on the empirical data , and a theoretical analysis based on the concept of power . In the empirical analysis we have identified several kinds of decisions and we present them along with details from the case . We include big decisions and small decisions , decisions internal to the project and related to the outside world , and decisions that just happened – what we call non - decisions . The big decisions were about values and concepts : the visions ( Bratteteig & Stolterman 1997 ) . These included the decision to support stakeholder participation and openness in design . They provided the normative basis for participation in the project and although participants’ interpretation of them varied , they were not contested ‘as such’ . Another kind of decisions was about how to implement the vision , for example to use haptic tools ( coloured tokens ) in combination with colour tracking as a technical solution or to work with different representations of the site . These decisions were open to alternative solutions and some of them turned out to have implications that were not clear at the time they were taken . Yet another kind of decisions were those that required negotiations with the world outside of the project , e . g . , the selection of urban projects and of participants for the workshop . Our last category is non - decisions , in which a decision is made without explicitly ( c ) 2012 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM acknowledges that this contribution was authored or co - authored by an employee , contractor or affiliate of the national government of Norway . As such , the government of Norway retains a nonexclusive , royalty - free right to publish or reproduce this article , or to allow others to do so , for Government purposes only . PDC ' 12 , August 12 - 16 2012 , Roskilde , Denmark Copyright 2012 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0846 - 5 / 12 / 08 … $ 15 . 00 42 deliberating or communicating about it : a good example is accepting a ‘gift’ . The second type of analysis the paper provides builds on a theoretical understanding of power where we discuss sources of power ( expert knowledge , resource allocation , interpretations , and values ) , as well as the ' mechanisms ' guiding decision - making ( power , influence , trust , loyalty , and creating mutual understanding ) . THE CASE The case in this paper is the design of a collaborative mixed reality application , a project in which one of the authors has been central from its initiation to its end . The application aimed to support mixed teams of urban planners , politicians and citizens in using participatory technologies to create and manipulate design alternatives for real urban planning projects 1 . The Mixed Reality tool : the ColorTable , was the centrepiece of a Mixed Reality Tent , for supporting on - site participatory urban design . The MR Tent was part of the IPCity project , which lasted from 2006 to 2009 . We need , however , to go some years back to include some important design decisions happening before the official start of the project ( Figure 1 ) . A first vision of what to build had been specified in the project proposal in 2005 . This vision was in turn inspired by previous design projects . The ATELIER project ( 2001 - 2004 ) had ended with the notion of bringing technologies out of the studio ( A . Telier 2011 ) . The proposal contained the idea of the tent as a portable mixed reality system , with a ‘mixed - media workbench interface in support of e - painting , e - constructing , scouting , and exploring’ inside it . Figure 1 : Overview of key activities The ColorTable was to a large extent defined in the project kick - off meeting where the chief developer arranged a simple demo of a possible solution together with a scenario ( Figure 2 ) . The demo was inspired by a small application : The Tangible Image Query that had been developed within ATELIER ( A . Telier 2011 ) . This technology probe was further developed in six cycles of design - evaluation - redesign in the context of real urban planning projects with urban planners and a variety of stakeholders as temporary users . Nine participatory 1 IPCity ( FP6 - 2004 - IST - 4 - 27571 ) “ Integrated Project on Interaction and Presence in Urban Environments ” funded by the European Commission . workshops were conducted over a time period of four years ( Figure 1 ) . Figure 2 : A lake in front of the picture of a castle , coloured stones used to create a mixed reality scene ) In line with Participatory Design , the design team decided to move the design idea quickly out into the field , after only six months in the project . The first prototype was brought into a real urban project : the redesign of the grounds of Sainte - Anne , a psychiatric clinic in Paris : Participating users were the leading architect and hospital staff , including a professor of psychiatry . In preparing for the workshop , the whole project team ( both the designers and the users ) spent time on understanding the urban issues at stake and developed two scenarios as well as content for participants to work with . One of these scenarios concerned the wall that encloses the hospital premises ( Figure 3 ) : should the wall be removed , or partially removed , made transparent or its texture be changed ; should it for example be used as a screen and exhibition space for the hospital’s collection of ‘art brut’ ? This raised questions with regard to the function of the wall : could the wall be conceived as a mediator between inside ( of people , history , memory , knowledge , creation ) and outside ( the city , the neighbours ) , in addition to providing protection for patients ? Figure 3 : Wall scenario ( 1 ) and mixed reality scene ( 2 ) The prototype brought to Sainte - Anne was simple : a white cardboard was spread out on a table ; a set of coloured tokens of different shapes ; small cards with a thumbnail representation of ‘content’ ( images , 3D objects ) and with a barcode interface ; a camcorder suspended over the table ; and a projector ( Figure 4 ) . The users immediately started experimenting , composing mixed reality scenes , with the content being projected against a picture of one part of the wall ( Figure 3 ) . Their comments paired with our observations provided valuable feedback , which ‘pushed’ the design in directions that should shape the project to the end . 43 Figure 4 : The first ‘technology probe’ Several key design decisions were taken as a result of this first workshop : to work with multiple representations of the site , including photographic panoramas for being projected on the wall ; to allow for rotating and zooming the table as well as the wall panorama ; to include dynamic , changeable content ; and to dedicate effort on how to design the ' tangibles’ . In retrospect we can say that the following eight participatory workshops mainly served to implement these decisions and to improve the design ( but new functionalities were conceived , evaluated and redesigned ) . But the overall concept of the MR - Tent was maintained throughout the project ( Figure 1 ) . On the final ColorTable prototype users can arrange and position tokens on physical maps of different scales , representing interventions in urban space ( Figure 5 ) . A vertical projection renders the scene against different representations of the real site . Objects of the mixed - reality world can be modified and adapted in scale , transparency , colour , and offset to the ground . Users can place different types of paths animated by flows of pedestrians , cyclists , cars , a train , etc . to a scene . They define areas , and can mark them with textures . They can also create and explore the soundscape connected with the visual scene . Figure 5 : The final prototype ( source : Maquil 2010 ) KINDS OF DECISIONS Analysing the project made us see many different kinds of decisions influencing the design process and its result in significant ways . Most of the decisions were taken with no disagreement or even with no discussion , but some decisions involved negotiations and even conflict . In this section we go through decisions that affected the design result in order to describe what decisions were about and who made them . As mentioned above we identified decisions on values and concepts ; decisions on how to implement the vision ; decisions requiring negotiations with the outside world ; as well as ' decisions and non - decisions ' . When it comes to who took the decisions , we found that different participants made different kinds of decisions . The project was led by the Austrian designer team , which had a strong commitment to participation and expertise in ethnography , interaction and product design , computer graphics , visual arts , sound design , as well as fieldwork experience in architecture . The participatory designer in the Austrian team had full authority as the project leader . The French urban planner team was equally important in the project vision and acted as co - designers and ‘expert users’ , selecting the sites , defining the urban issues at stake , negotiating participation with local authorities , and mobilizing their network of colleagues . A third group was the workshop participants , a heterogeneous set of stakeholders with different competences and interests that varied from workshop to workshop . Decisions on values and concepts The vision for the project is the result of many years of collaboration of the participatory designer with architects and urban planners . The main visions were grounded in almost ten years of fieldwork in architectural offices and constituted the basis for the collaboration between the Austrian and the French team . Openness The participatory designer brought a strong commitment in the form of the notion of ‘openness’ as constitutive of creative ( architectural ) design into the project . Openness implies systematically cultivating the ‘art of seeing’ ; engaging with a plethora of materials , inspirational resources as well as material conceptualizations of a design concept ; being able to work in a ‘meandering’ way , with ‘floating concepts’ and ‘placeholders’ , while maintaining things at different stages of incompletion ( Lainer and Wagner 1998 ) . Openness in the context of an urban project also is to do with giving space to the multiplicity of perspectives and to ambiguity of what a possible solution could be . The commitment to openness inspired many aspects of the MR - Tent , in particular the idea to develop a ‘new language’ that would enable all the participants in an urban project to collaborate on addressing urban issues and expressing their vision . The project team early on agreed upon not developing a simulation tool in order to maintain that the design decisions were the responsibility of the participants in an urban project . The floor would be theirs with regard to what they wanted to do and which level of complexity they wanted to address . Stakeholder participation The second strong commitment was to designing participatory technologies for urban planning that could invite real stakeholders to the design table . This was an idea that also appealed to the French urban planner team in the project , although their thinking about and 44 experiences with participation differed considerably from the PD tradition . They based their arguments in favour of participation in the increasing complexity of political , economic , and social demands , as well as in the large number of stakeholders implicated in urban design , each of them representing diverse professional cultures , academic training , and economic logics . Their problem was to understand what lay people can contribute to an urban project , which is by definition complex and large - scale , involving myriads of open issues . This conflict came to the fore already in one of the first workshops where we were able to observe two different groups work with the ColorTable . One , guided by the chief architect for Sainte - Anne , worked with a precise intervention . Her approach to participation was to carefully prepare scenes , selecting the appropriate content , so that participants only got ‘to have a variation of very small things’ . The other group worked more with stories and ideas about activities . They saw the technologies ‘as eventually opening up a space for mutual learning ( in their words : ‘apprentissage collective’ ) , having different stakeholders exploring and confronting ideas . They stressed the value of engaging in activities that are different from what they termed the ‘ritual space of creating a program’ ( ‘l’espace rituel de programmation’ ) ( Maquil et al . 2007 , p . 73 ) . The decision in favour of giving the floor to lay participants conflicted with a strong expert tradition . However , not all the urban specialists that participated in the MR - Tent workshops claimed a ‘privileged voice’ . As one of them expressed it , the ColorTable helped participants to ' not discuss in a confrontational way ' . Building something together made them positive but it took a long learning process and required relatively mature technologies for the urban specialists to really ‘see’ that all participants in the MR - Tent addressed ‘serious’ urban issues and made valuable contributions . Although participation in urban planning has some tradition ( e . g . Al - Kodmany 1999 ) , it is not common practice . Immediacy Connected to the vision of openness and stakeholder participation was the idea to support the ad - hoc creation of urban mixed reality scenes . This immediacy was made possible by the decision to not develop ‘simulation tools’ that support ‘realism’ but instead emphasize imagination and exploration . It was precisely this decision to support the ad - hoc creation of mixed reality scenes that made working in the MR - Tent different from other tabletop applications in support of urban planning ( e . g . Aris et al . 2000 ) . The implications of this approach for the design of the MR Tent were not clear at the beginning of the project and were also in parts contested by the urban planner team . The tool worked against the expectations of many architects and urban planners to achieve a high degree of ‘precision’ . This became clear , for example , in the third participatory workshop where we focused on urban sound . The team’s approach to sound was qualitative and ‘atmospheric’ and the invited urban sound specialist was irritated that , for example , placing a large building in between her hearing position and the street did not dampen the sound . A long and heated debate started between the urban planners and the designer team about how ‘realistic’ the mixed reality scenes needed to be to ‘carry conviction’ . In the end of the project the urban planning team made a strong argument in favour of the overall approach we had chosen , emphasizing that the possibility for building on everybody’s imagination in a real time design - in - the - making process ‘seems to empower the participants and allows full cycles of discussion to be put in place’ ( Maquil et al . 2010 , p . 117 ) . Urban concepts What had an enormous influence on the project was the joint work of both teams on issues of representation . How to represent an urban project moved to the foreground with the urban planner team defining ‘urban issues’ , such as scale , borders , ambience , mobility , etc . They also provided visual examples for each of these issues , which were discussed in the team . These urban issues moved into the foreground and drove the decisions on functionalities to be developed . One of these decisions was to include dynamic content thereby supporting the discussion of issues of mobility . Flows – of people , bicycles and cars – were introduced . Figure 6 / 1 shows a first instantiation of this idea . In the panorama we can see flows of blue people ; they animate the space and bring a human dimension into the mixed reality scene . We can even see them mix with real people who are passing by outside . The final prototype ( Figure 6 / 2 ) allows for curved paths and different types of flows . Figure 6 : First instantiation of flows ( 1 ) ; curved paths and flows visible on the table map , final prototype ( 2 ) Decisions on how to implement the vision Our next kind of design decisions – how to implement the vision – , were taken rather early on and turned out to have implications that were not clear at that time . These decisions were mainly ‘technical’ . Haptic engagement : working with tokens The decision to develop a tangible user interface was grounded in a strong and shared research interest of the designer team , and strengthened by hiring a product designer . The assumption was that a participatory tool with a tangible user interface and in the form of a ‘round table’ would foster collaboration . The ColorTable uses objects – tokens - of different sizes , shapes and colours . It was inspired by the Token and Constraints ( TAC ) paradigm developed by Shaer et al . ( 2004 ) , which describes a relationship between a token , its variable and one or more constraints as a model of how to link physical and digital objects . 45 Working with ‘abstract’ tokens fitted well with the notion of openness . It also had unforeseen implications , moving the design of tokens , content cards , workflow and workspace into the foreground . Already at the first workshop in Sainte - Anne it became clear that the workflow was too complicated and that the table became cluttered with ' tangibles ' within a short time , making it impossible to maintain order ( e . g . Maquil et al . 2008 ) . In the course of the project the designer team experimented with the design of the tokens as well as with different methods to support the basic interaction . Figure 7 shows three stages of the interface for selecting a colour ( bar code ; RFID separate and integrated with the table ) . Figure 7 : Different designs of colour selection Neither the urban planner team nor the workshop participants took great interest in these issues apart from welcoming these improvements . Tracking framework Following the decision to use colour came the technical challenge to use colour tracking – itself a decision . Using coloured tokens offered several advantages : they were easy to prototype ; the colour of the physical object already provides a name or identifier for the virtual object easy to share for the participants ; and they are easy to understand , invite participation , and are sufficiently neutral so as not to privilege particular perspectives onto an urban project – one participant expressly talked about the colour objects as ‘thinking tools’ . However , computer vision algorithms based on colour cannot provide the same amount of precision as for instance optical markers . Moreover , colour recognition is highly sensitive to light conditions . The designer team argued for colour tracking as ‘a compromise between how people like to work and what computers can do , in this case opting for supporting the free positioning of graspable colour objects on a map’ ( Maquil et al . 2008 ) . The tracking framework developed into a complex tool detecting shapes and their orientation and providing possibilities for calibration of colours and positions , but the sensitivity to changing lighting conditions remained a problem . The interactions and workflow strongly depend upon how well objects are recognized . While workshop participants were ‘in general very patient and willingly waited for the tracking framework to correctly detect the tokens’ and ‘they adapted their behaviour with respect to the tracking framework’ , colour tracking remained a ‘weak spot’ ( see Maquil 2010 ) . Bringing MR outdoors Another topic was the need for a shelter – the MR Tent , with its own requirements : it had to be affordable ( it turned out to be very expensive ) , robust , in compliance with building regulations , easy to transport and easy to set up , and its design had to help stabilize the lighting conditions that were crucial for the whole technical set - up . This is a complex story in itself . Conceptually the decision - process was similar to the one regarding the tracking framework : more resources than planned had to be allocated to the construction of the tent and numerous technical problems had to be mastered before it could actually be used – but the decision was maintained . Panoramas as representations of the site At the workshop in Sainte - Anne participants immediately pointed at the limitations of a static representation : they wanted to be able to ‘walk’ in the projection and change perspective . This led to the idea to enable rotating the table in combination with a static panorama or a real time video image . In the photographic panorama , the viewer stands in the centre , turning his / her body and gaze in a circle . Later in the project the rotating table was replaced by a wheel for rotating and zooming . The decision to work with photographic panoramas , rather than a 3D model of a site , entailed numerous other unforeseen decisions . At the second workshop in Saint - Anne the leading architect stressed the importance of visualizing volume and scale , as measured against the human body , so as to get a feeling for the impact of an intervention . She also defined the ability to engage with the stages of depth , placing objects , for example , behind the wall as a must ( Maquil et al . 2007 ) . The designer team used a depth map to define distances of individual objects and experimented with a height map as shape information of the floor . Creating photographic panoramas from different viewpoints for our workshops also involved a set of choices : which points would offer good views onto the site ; do they represent important vistas for people living there in the future , moving around ? Figure 8 : Edited panorama Pontoise workshop with parts of trees removed to provide vistas and space for interventions When preparing for a workshop the urban planner team spent time on selecting those viewpoints . Much effort was spent then by the designer team on editing the panoramas so as to provide space for interventions , e . g . removing a building that will be replaced or cutting out trees that impede a free view onto important parts of a site but still preserving the characteristics of the real place ( Figure 8 ) . Editing is a highly subjective endeavour similar to film cutting ; through editing the artist in the designer team took decisions on what to make visible , thereby shaping participants’ perception of the site in collaboration with the architects . This editing turned out to be one of the key design decisions that had to be taken in preparing for the participatory workshops , framing the workshops . Participants were offered multiple representations of the site to work with , the most important being physical maps of different scales , panoramas taken from different viewpoints and a real time video stream produced by a fixed and a mobile camera . This decision reflected the 46 practice of urban planning , which traditionally works with different views and perspectives . We much later understood how this design decision allowed participants to use representations for different purposes : planning , performing an intervention , looking from above or far away , capturing the ambience of the site’ ( Wagner 2011 , p . 37 ) . Working with sound Working with sound was already mentioned in the project proposal ( without any further specifications ) and sound was part of the first workshop in Sainte - Anne . As sound is clearly an important aspect of urban environments , the urban planning team supported this decision and also took an active part in the sound research that was started , including interviews with sound specialists . Moreover , open source software ( Ambisonics ) was available . As sound as part of urban mixed reality is a complex medium to work with , this design decision grew into a central concern in the project and required much preparation . It was decided to connect each panorama with its ‘natural sound’ ; to offer participants the opportunity to connect visual objects with specific sounds ; and to link the animated flows with their characteristic sound . This resulted in a highly complex soundscape , which workshop participants liked but did not use as actively as they worked with the visual material . The decision to allocate more resources to sound research also needed to be defended against the representatives of the funding agency that did not see any value in the sound aspect of the ColorTable . The team could clearly demonstrate in the end , how sound strengthened immersion into a mixed reality scene ; how it contributed to the experience of spatial transformations and evoked ambiences . But the team was not able to carry this design decision to a solution that could be appropriated as freely in a collaborative way as the visual components of the ColorTable . Decisions requiring negotiations with the outside world Being committed to Participatory Design , the designer team had insisted from the very beginning on developing and evaluating the MR - Tent in the context of real urban projects with real stakeholders . Nobody was at that point fully aware of what this would entail . This was to be the most ‘dramatic’ decision in terms of workload and potential for conflict . For each new workshop the urban planner team had to find a suitable project and negotiate access . This turned out to be a highly political issue : local authorities had to be ensured that the project would not be intrusive and disrespectful of decisions already taken . Negotiating the legitimate participants proved to be highly sensitive . It was almost impossible to freely select participants according to our own criteria to include as many different voices as possible . Fears of criticism and opposing views had to be managed . In addition , there was a huge amount of practical issues to be tackled . We needed permits to set up the MR Tent , which had to comply with local regulations concerning stability of the construction and fire protection . Transporting , setting up the tent and protecting it during the night were additional practical issues to be resolved . The other part of necessary arrangements concerned understanding the urban issues at stake , defining scenarios and preparing the specific content needed : physical maps of different scales had to be organized and adapted ( i . e . simplified ) ; panoramas had to be taken and edited , measurements for depth - maps taken ; content cards to work with had to be designed and appropriate visualizations be found and edited ; and the agenda and plan for the workshop had to be developed . Another issue was motivating and preparing workshop participants . It took the designer team almost two years before the urban planner team accepted the necessity of planning for more intense user engagement and to convince them that all participants , even the urban specialists that were invited , needed preparation . There was the practical issue of temporal commitment – who would be willing to spend at least two full days for a workshop ? – but also one of being ‘prepared’ . In preparation of two of these later workshops cultural probes were distributed two months before and used for individual interviews with each of the participants to help them develop their own vision ; in the case of the third workshop participants were invited to work in small groups ( with traditional methods ) on their ideas a month before engaging with the technologies . This helped them express their knowledge , experiences and interests and supported the construction of scenarios in the MR - Tent . Decisions and non - decisions Figure 9 : Real time video view from fixed camera with a virtual person in the foreground To work with video was a decision based on the availability of technology . One of our project partners had decided to develop a video application , the UrbanSketcher , which would allow participants to annotate mixed reality scenes directly ‘on the projection screen’ . Hence a powerful video camera in front of the MR - Tent came as a gift . Our partner institution ' s virtual reality and computer graphics specialists were interested in implementing a ‘mobile scouting’ application : a mobile video camera carried by a ‘scout’ which would widen the possibilities of ‘seeing’ a site from different viewpoints . The mobile scout turned into an absolute priority for the urban planner team . That it was only implemented in the last project year was due to the practical difficulties of obtaining a high performance Internet connection in France for just one week . When it finally became available , workshop participants were delighted by both , the fixed and the mobile video 47 view . Although lacking depth information , both views brought reality elements , such as leaves moving in the wind , people or cars passing by into the mixed reality scenes ( Figure 9 ) . This was a decision that had been worthwhile to carry through practical difficulties . Towards the end of the third project year , the designer team discussed the possibilities of moving from a constellation of physical table and colour tracking to a multi - touch version of the ColorTable . This discussion never moved to the decision - making stage , for varying reasons . First of all , the participatory designer lacked the expertise to be able to ‘push’ for such a decision : it was not clear how much design effort would be needed and what the advantages apart from replacing the colour tracking were . Secondly , the ColorTable in its present shape occupied the centre of the stage : would such a decision require abandoning the strong focus on materials and haptic engagement ? This normative design decision prevailed , blurring the visibility of others solutions . Two members of the designer team used a visit to Canterbury University ( NZ ) as an occasion for developing a first prototype of a multi - touch solution and successfully tested it in the context of a small workshop ( Figure 10 ) . This initiative came too late to be taken up in the project . Figure 10 : The multi - touch version of the ColorTable THE DYNAMICS OF DESIGN DECISIONS Central to the understanding of design decisions is the concept of power . In this section we link the kinds of decisions we have identified to concepts of power . We start with a brief introduction to the concept of power aiming at a more conceptual analysis of the design decisions described above . Conceptualizing power One of the founding fathers of sociology , Max Weber ( 1964 ) , conceptualized power as structuring dominance and order in organizations . Foucault has a much more dialectic notion of power , stressing that the exercise of power is ‘not simply a relationship between partners , individual or collective ; it is a way in which certain actions modify others’ ( 1982 , p . 788 ) . In his analyses of power he has stressed the ‘disciplining’ of individuals ( and societies ) arguing for a transference to the self of ‘the rules of law , the techniques of management , and also the ethics , the ethos , the practice of self , which would allow these games of power to be played with a minimum of domination’ ( 1987 , p . 18 ) . Giddens ( 1984 ) moves power away from dominance , equalling it with agency and ‘transformative capacity’ : power is the capacity to achieve outcomes . He identifies four types of power in societies : authoritative ( based on position , knowledge ) ; allocative ( based on economic and technical resources ) ; signification ( based on patterns of thinking and interpretations ) ; and legitimization ( based on belief systems or a vision , norms and values ) . When power is the ability to make happen and transform , it is , as Crozier ( 1964 ) formulates it , a resource in the face of uncertainty ; hence power is intimately linked with the ability to arrive at a decision under conditions of uncertainty or ambiguity . Power is a key concept in the literature on decision - making . Based on empirical studies of decision - making practices in systems development projects Borum and Enderud ( 1981 ) look at conflicts and how different ways of structuring and controlling help avoid addressing these conflicts . The mechanisms they identified are : agenda control ( what is discussed and who decides the themes ) , participants ( who are invited in ) , scope ( which solutions are possible – and hence , which problems are defined and seen as relevant and therefore addressed ) , and resources ( available time and people ) . Applying these arrangements makes the exercising of power less visible , because it is difficult to identify what is not on the agenda or which solutions ( and problems ) are not discussed . Bachrach and Baratz ( 1963 ) introduce the notion of nondecision - making , which is also a strategy of silencing potentially controversial issues . Non - decisions refer to cases where issues are presented in a ' biased ' or ambiguous way . Zündorf ( 1986 ) distinguishes between power , influence , trust , and ' creating mutual understanding’ ( ‘Verständigung’ ) . The exercise of power is either direct or based on authority , control , and structural arrangements ; influence can be either strategic , focused on achieving one ' s goals or more consensus - oriented ; ' creating mutual understanding ' is different from influence as it is more oriented towards an open dialogue . Trust is the delegating of power to people who have the expertise to solve a problem competently ( or to a system that appears ' reliable ' ; Giddens 1990 ) . It implies a certain openness of the outcome of a decision , hence also risk . A concept that is related to trust is loyalty . In analysing a PD project Pedersen ( 2007 ) has argued that participants often ' . . . have dual loyalties and are double agents . … [ They ] may find themselves in a precarious situation in balancing between the demands of their constituency and those of their collaborators’ ( ibid : 123 , 126 ) . Power in PD decisions PD has a strong normative basis that demands the sharing of power . Many of the methods and techniques of PD have been devised to facilitate this sharing , ' with a minimum of dominance ' ( Foucault 1982 ) . Hence , PD can easily be seen as ways to share the ' transformative capacity’ that a project team develops as a common resource . In the remainder of the paper we try to disentangle the notion of power in order to arrive at a more nuanced understanding of design decisions in PD . Power related to the decision - makers The participatory designer and project leader took the lead in the decisions on values and concepts , which were based on long - term research interests and a strong vision . As a project leader and primary researcher she used 48 authority , grounded in her research experience and her knowledge of user’s work practices , but also her power to determine the skill composition of the research team and to allocate resources . While her main strategy concerning decision - making was a mixture of influence oriented towards persuasion and ' creating mutual understanding ' , she also used power by eliminating some choices , e . g . , insisting on ‘immediacy’ or ruling out ‘simulation’ . Her loyalties were divided between the designer team , she was supervising , the urban planner team and her research commitments , hence the communities that represent them . This included the commitment to support and improve the capacity of lay stakeholders to participate . The designer team was responsible for the technologies , TUI and interaction design , the design of content and the production of the panoramas . The technical design decisions regarding the use and further development of colour tracking or the ways to ' model ' the panoramas were based on a mixture of influence and trust . Neither the participatory designer nor the urban team was able to seriously contest decisions requiring specialized technical expertise ; they could only challenge the outcomes of these decisions . TUI and interaction design , as well as the design of content were less technical , hence much more debatable and debated ; here different kinds of expertise ( product design , artistic , technical ) met and the decision - making aimed at arriving at a mutual understanding . The urban planner - users not only accepted and supported the decisions based on values and concepts . They also took normative decisions concerning the representation of urban issues , leaning on the ‘representational tradition’ within architecture , which led to some uncontested decisions ( the panoramas ) but also to considerable conflicts ( the editing of content ) . They also were in charge of negotiations with the outside world . Here they operated on the basis of influence , in both a strategic and consensus - oriented way , and the rest of the team had to trust their local knowledge and negotiation skills . It took the urban planner team a long time to shift some of their loyalty from their own community to the project . Their ' double loyalties ' became visible in their need for peer recognition and the conflicts this created ( the instability of the prototypes , ‘things being imperfect’ ) ; and the time it took them to accept and ' defend ' the ColorTable . The power of workshop participants was indirect , mainly exercised through how they used the ColorTable . They changed the designers’ views of what they had designed , bringing imperfections but also strengths to the fore , in multiple ways . The design decisions regarding TUI and interaction design were entirely based on observations of use . Workshop participants had to accept the frame for participation , which was deliberately made open for them in the sense that they could freely choose the urban issues they wanted to address and construct their vision . They also made choices , concerning the content that had been prepared , sometimes insisting on creating their own content ( supported by a ' sketching ' application ) . As they were short - time visitors to the project , they would keep their original loyalties , bringing in their perspectives and aligning them with those of the other participants in the workshop . The power of the ‘ outside world ’ of urban projects and local authorities influenced the selection of sites and contributed to the framing of the participatory workshops . Power exercised in different kinds of decisions The decisions on values and concepts were clearly based on a vision of participation in urban planning . Their acceptance was due to the mutual recognition of expertise . But different interpretations created conflicts : over issues of representation but also over the value of the participation of lay people . Both the participatory designer and the urban planners used influence based on their expertise in these discussions , but aiming at mutual understanding . These fundamental decisions assumed the quality of a contract , which formulated the conditions for cooperation in the project . As we saw , the project leader also used her power eliminating some choices from the beginning , exercising agenda control and scope ( Borum and Enderud 1981 ; Bachrach and Baratz 1962 , 1963 ) . The decisions on how to implement the vision were based on different types of technical expertise ( colour tracking , use of panoramas ) , specific research interests ( haptic engagement ) and a commitment to bringing mixed reality outdoors . The decision to use colour tracking was taken by the designer team but the algorithm was developed by a project partner . While the latter was interested in a highly sophisticated technical solution , the designer team needed a solution that worked in use , under the conditions of varying lighting conditions . We see different loyalties on the side of the developers : to the solution itself versus to how the solution would enable users to work smoothly . The design decision required trust on the side of the other project participants , who witnessed the problems of the technical solution without being able to contribute . Haptic engagement as a research commitment was strengthened by hiring a product designer in the designer team . The user interface was repeatedly evaluated in use , with observations challenging the actual solution and driving the next version . The many small design decisions that this involved were taken by the designer team , where the different expertises of product designer , artist and developers became beautifully aligned . The decisions concerning the panoramas were based on users wanting to move ' into ' the mixed - reality scene and designers being able to see a solution , which resonated with the representational tradition in architecture . The panoramas required substantial resources allocated by the project leader . Moreover , they turned out to be ‘critical’ to the workshops , as the ways that they were edited shaped how participants would actually see the site . The power of editing was shared by the artist and the urban planners but in the end the artist , as the person who performed the editing , took the decisions on what would become visible . Sound as a highly relevant aspect of an urban planning context came to occupy a special place for debate in the project . The project leader and the urban specialist used influence ( in a strategic sense ) in their negotiations with the external funding agency so as to be able to maintain this shared research commitment . Within the project team decisions concerning sound were mainly based on 49 ‘creating mutual understanding’ . But we have also seen , that the particular approach to integrating sound into the mixed reality scenes , conflicted with the idea of precision which had shaped the expectations of some of the urban specialists . ' Sound ' had to be defended and much effort was required to attract the attention of workshop participants to using it . The use of sound brought up more issues than could be resolved within the project . Here the loyalty of the project team was mainly to the research . Decisions requiring negotiation with the outside world were mostly regulated by power as well as strategic and achievement - oriented influence . Driving these decisions also needed some persuasion , based on the research vision . This is where the expertise and the connections of the urban planners most directly met the reality of decision - making in urban contexts . There are two explicit examples of non - decisions in the project . The first was to use video . As the expensive equipment and expertise were available , this ‘gift’ was unanimously accepted . This was a non - decision in the sense of not involving any debate with trust as the main mechanism . It fitted perfectly into the urban planners’ vision of how to represent an urban site . The other non - decision concerned the possibility to implement a multi - touch solution . It remained a latent issue , which the designer team addressed briefly , but as the designer team – and the project leader – strongly adhered to their vision of haptic engagement they did not really consider the value of a multi - touch solution . No decision was taken , and the multi - touch prototype was not given a voice . One could say , with Bachrach and Baratz ( 1962 ; 1963 ) , that decisions that seemed unavoidable because of earlier decisions or decisions with only one alternative are non - decisions as they give very little space for critical opinions . In this sense many of the decisions were biased – just like non - decisions – paving the way for decision - making with ‘a minimum of domination’ ( Foucault 1987 ) . The materialization of decision - making All decisions are made by people but special to design is that implementing these decisions in an artefact often changes the decision - making process . Schön and Wiggins ( 1992 ) describe design as an iterative process of seeing - moving - seeing : you see , you make a move and see again . A move changes the design – it is a design decision . Any design decision closes some and opens other possibilities for choices and decisions . This describes the dynamics of some of the design decisions we have discussed . Both the haptic user interface and the tracking framework were evaluated in an iterative prototyping process , with observations of use driving a series of small decisions . Having implemented these solutions to be tested in use implied that all further decision - making focused on improving the solution rather than explore a range of alternatives . This made some design decisions irreversible – locked - in the material shape of the artefact . Prototyping and building the artefact has to be seen as more than iterative processes : they are a type of decision - making specific to design . The material solution becomes a key element in this process . This can be observed in the case of the panoramas : everyone can see that it is not possible to place an object behind another one hence a solution for occlusion has to be found ; objects are dangling in the air hence the solution is to implement a height map ; workshop participants reclaim a building that has been removed from a panorama hence the principles of editing have to be reconsidered . CONCLUSIONS With this two - step analysis we have tried to come closer to understanding the sharing of power in a participatory design project . Sharing power is not straightforward . First of all , power is grounded in different resources . We have shown how design decisions based on values and concepts – a strong vision - may survive conflicts over how to interpret this vision . The power to allocate resources may rest in the project leader but it is driven by research commitments as well as by the fact that some solutions have already been made material , hence irreversible . From this perspective prototyping becomes a decision - making process that closes the design space . Moreover , power that is shared comes to reside in the person who implements a decision , making it material . Power is not the only mechanism regulating decision - making . Acting within a participatory framework and doing research require argumentation und ideally , participants strive for mutual understanding . In some decisions influence needs to be exerted more directly , as for example in negotiations with the outside world . Influence can be consensus - oriented , but it often has a strategic element and uses persuasion . We have shown how influence as a regulating mechanism is very common in decisions requiring highly specialized , mostly technical expertise . A large number of decisions have been based on trust . In addition , we have illustrated how structural arrangements frame decisions and how agenda control and scope also contribute to framing decisions , as do ' bias ' and ambiguity . Such arrangements can pave the way for non - decisions ( Bachrach and Baratz 1962 , 1973 ) . Combining expertise , loyalty , influence and trust with decision - making under high degrees of uncertainty ( as in research ) is a basis for decision - making with ‘a minimum of domination’ ( Foucault 1987 ) , as is ‘creating mutual understanding’ ( Zündorf 1986 ) . The sharing of power in PD is a complex interplay of mechanisms , in which different resources and multiple loyalties come to work together . What surprised us in our analysis was how design decisions , especially those based on visions , values and concepts had stayed through open conflicts over time ; how power came to reside in the person who implemented a decision – the trusted expert ; and how prototyping took the form of decision - making , with the artefact having a voice and being a part of the decision - making . We saw that the different participants had different shares in the decision - making depending on the space they were given . We are aware that analysing PD in other contexts , for example PD in collaboration with a community or with marginalized groups in society , may reveal a different mixture of ‘mechanisms’ and require special additional sensitivities in analysing power and decision - making . 50 Disentangling the concept of power and analysing how power materializes in practice has given us a vocabulary for understanding the dynamics of participation and power , and of decision - making in PD – even when the decision - making concerns a non - decision . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank all the participants in the MR - Tent project . We also thank the anonymous reviewers and Guri Verne for valuable comments and suggestions . REFERENCES Al - Kodmany , K . ( 1999 ) : Using visualization techniques for enhancing public participation in planning and design : process , implementation , and evaluation , Landscape and Urban Planning 45 : 37 - 45 Arias , E . , Eden , H . , Fischer , G . , Gomann , A . , & Sharff , E . ( 2000 ) . Transcending the indvidual human mind— creating shared understanding through collaborative design . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , 7 ( 1 ) , 84 – 113 . A . Telier : Binder , T . , Ehn , P . , Jacucci , G . , De Michelis , G . , Linde , P . , & Wagner , I . ( 2011 ) . Design Bachrach , P . & Baratz , M . S . ( 1962 ) : Two Faces of Power , in The American Political Science Review 56 ( 4 ) , pp . 947 - 952 Bachrach , P . & Baratz , M . S . ( 1963 ) : Decisions and Nondecisions : An Analytical Framework , in The American Political Science Review 57 ( 3 ) , pp . 632 - 642 Basile , M . , & Terrin , J . - J . ( 2009 ) . Le projet IPCity . Une recherche sur la place des technologies de réalité mixte dans les représentations du projet urbain . Flux ( Oct – Dec 2009 ) . Bjerknes , G . , & Bratteteig , T . ( 1987 ) . Florence in Wonderland . System Development with Nurses , in Bjerknes , G . , Ehn , P . & Kyng , M . ( eds ) : Computers and Democracy . A Scandinavian Challenge , Avebury , Aldershot Bjerknes , G . , & Bratteteig , T . ( 1988 ) . The memoirs of two survivors – or evaluation of a computer system for cooperative work , Proceedings for The Second Conference on CSCW , ACM , Sept . 26 - 28 1988 , Portland , Oregon : 167 - 177 Borum , F . & Enderud , H . ( 1981 ) : Konflikter i organisationer , Nyt Nordisk Forlag Arnold Busck , Copenhagen Bowers , J . , & Pycock , J . ( 1994 ) . Talking through design : requirements and resistance in cooperative prototyping . In B . Adelson , S . Dumais & J . Olson ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems : celebrating interdependence , Boston , MA ( pp . 299 - 305 ) . New York : ACM Bratteteig , T . and Stolterman , E . ( 2007 ) . Design in groups—and all that jazz . In Kyng and Mathiassen ( eds ) : Computers and Design In Context , MIT Press : 289 - 316 . Bratteteig , T . , & Wagner , I . ( 2010 ) . Spaces for participatory creativity . In PDC 2001 . Proceedings of PDC 2010 , Sydney , AUS , November 29 to December 3 , 2010 , pp . 51 – 60 Crozier , M . ( 1964 ) Le phenomène bureaucratique . Paris . Seuil . Foucault , M . ( 1982 ) : The Subject and Power , in Critical Inquiry 8 ( 4 ) , pp - 777 - 795 Giddens , A . ( 1984 ) The constitution of society . Cambridge : Polity Press Giddens , A . ( 1990 ) The consequences of modernity . Stanford : Stanford U . P . Lainer , R . & Wagner , I . ( 1998 ) . Offenes Planen . Erweiterung der Lösungsräume für architektonisches Entwerfen . Architektur & BauForum ( 196 ) , September / Oktober , 145 - 148 . Maquil , V . ( 2010 ) . The ColorTable : an interdisciplinary design process . PhD thesis , Vienna University of Technology . Maquil , V . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Final prototype of urban renewal applications . FP6 - 2004 - IST - 4 - 27571 IPCity , Brussels 2010 ( www . ipcity . eu ) . Maquil , V . , Psik , T . , Wagner , I . ( 2008 ) . The ColorTable – A Design Story . Proceedings of Tangible and Embedded Interaction 2008 TEI’08 . Bonn , February 18 - 21 , 2008 , 97 - 104 . Maquil , V . , Psik , T . , Wagner , I . , Wagner , M . ( 2007 ) Expressive Interactions Supporting Collaboration in Urban Design . Proceedings of GROUP 2007 , Nov 4 - 7 , Sanibel Island , Florida , USA , 69 - 78 . Pedersen , J . ( 2007 ) Protocols of research and design . Reflections on a participatory design project ( sort of ) , PhD thesis , IT University of Copenhagen . Schon , D . A . and G . Wiggins ( 1992 ) . " Kinds of seeing and their function in designing . " Design Studies 13 : 135 - 156 . Shaer , O . , Leland , N . , Calvillo - Gamez , E . H . , Jacob , R . J . K . The tac paradigm : specifying tangible user interfaces . Personal Ubiquitous Computing , 8 ( 5 ) : 359 _ 369 , 2004 . Wagner , I . ( 2012 ) Building urban narratives : collaborative site - seeing and envisioning in the MR Tent . JCSCW 41 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 - 42 . . Weber , M . ( 1964 ) : Economy and Society : An Outline of Interpretive Sociology , Univ . of California Press Zündorf , L . ( 1986 ) . Macht , Einfluß , Vertrauen und Verständigung . In R . Seltz , U . Mill and E . Hildebrandt ( Eds . ) Zum Problem der Handlungskoordinierung in Arbeitsorganisationen . Organisation als soziales System . Berlin , Sigma Verlag : 33 - 56 .