T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB : ARTICLE © The Rockefeller University Press $ 15 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Vol . 176 , No . 7 , March 26 , 2007 953 – 964 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200609176 JCB 953 Introduction The actin cytoskeleton is essential for numerous cellular and developmental processes involving membrane dynamics . These include endocytosis , cell migration , cytokinesis , and various morphogenetic processes . The polymerization , depolymeri - zation , and 3D organization of actin filaments in cells are governed by vast number of actin - binding proteins . Most actin - binding proteins are composed of multiple domains , per - forming also regulatory and signaling functions . Among the plethora of actin - binding proteins are the actin fi lament nu - cleating Arp2 / 3 complex and its activators Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) and WASP family verprolin homo - logous proteins ( WAVEs ) , which promote formation of membrane protrusions downstream of the Rho - family GTPases ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . Although most actin - dependent processes involve reshaping of cellular membranes , the direct effects of actin - binding proteins on the organization of membranes has not been reported . One central group of proteins functioning at the interface between signaling and the actin cytoskeleton are insulin receptor substrate ( IRS ) p53 , missing - in - metastasis ( MIM ) , and their homologues . These proteins share similar domain organization to each other , possessing a recently identifi ed IRSp53 / MIM domain ( IMD ) at their N terminus . In addition to the IMD , MIM and some IRSp53 isoforms possess a C - terminal WH2 domain that binds actin monomers with high affi nity ( Mattila et al . , 2003 ; Woodings et al . , 2003 ) . Although the exact functions of IRSp53 and MIM are not defi ned , both proteins are linked to the Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin fi lament assembly and formation of plasma membrane protrusions . IRSp53 interacts with the small GTPases Cdc42 and Rac through its N - terminal region and with WAVE2 through its central SH3 domain ( Krugmann et al . , 2001 ) . IRSp53 regulates the Arp2 / 3 - modulating activity of the WAVE2 complex and is involved in lamellipodia and fi lopodia formation in motile cells ( Nakagawa et al . , 2003 ; Suetsugu et al . , 2006a ) . MIM was originally identifi ed as a putative tumor suppressor because it is expressed in nonmetastatic , but absent from metastatic , bladder cancer cells ( Lee et al . , 2002 ; Loberg et al . , 2005 ) . MIM is a sonic hedgehog ( Shh ) responsive gene Missing - in - metastasis and IRSp53 deform PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - rich membranes by an inverse BAR domain – like mechanism Pieta K . Mattila , Anette Pykäläinen , Juha Saarikangas , Ville O . Paavilainen , Helena Vihinen , Eija Jokitalo , and Pekka Lappalainen Institute of Biotechnology , University of Helsinki , 00014 Helsinki , Finland T he actin cytoskeleton plays a fundamental role in vari - ous motile and morphogenetic processes involving membrane dynamics . We show that actin - binding proteins MIM ( missing - in - metastasis ) and IRSp53 directly bind PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - rich membranes and deform them into tubular structures . This activity resides in the N - terminal IRSp53 / MIM domain ( IMD ) of these proteins , which is structurally related to membrane - tubulating BAR ( Bin / amphiphysin / Rvs ) domains . We found that because of a difference in the geometry of the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding site , IMDs induce a membrane curvature opposite that of BAR domains and deform membranes by binding to the interior of the tubule . This explains why IMD proteins induce plasma membrane protrusions rather than invagi - nations . We also provide evidence that the membrane - deforming activity of IMDs , instead of the previously proposed F - actin – bundling or GTPase - binding activities , is critical for the induction of the ﬁ lopodia / microspikes in cultured mammalian cells . Together , these data reveal that interplay between actin dynamics and a novel membrane - deformation activity promotes cell motility and morphogenesis . A . Pykäläinen and J . Saarikangas contributed equally to this paper . Correspondence to Pekka Lappalainen : pekka . lappalainen @ helsinki . ﬁ Abbreviations used in this paper : Bar , Bin / amphiphysin / Rvs ; DLS , dynamic light scattering ; IMD , IRSp53 / MIM domain ; IRS , insulin receptor substrate ; MIM , missing - in - metastasis ; PC , phosphatidylcholine ; PE , phosphatidylethanolamine ; PS , phosphatidylserine ; SPR , surface plasmon resonance ; WASP , Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ; WAVE , WASP family verprolin homologous protein . The online version of this article contains supplemental material . on J une 24 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 19 , 2007 / content / suppl / 2007 / 03 / 19 / jcb . 200609176 . DC1 . html Supplemental Material can be found at : JCB • VOLUME 176 • NUMBER 7 • 2007 954 and is strongly expressed during development in muscles and postmitotic neurons and in adult mice in kidneys , liver , and Purkinje cells of the cerebellum ( Mattila et al . , 2003 ; Callahan et al . , 2004 ) . MIM enhances Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin polymeriza - tion through interactions with cortactin but inhibits WASP - mediated actin polymerization ( Lin et al . , 2005 ) . In cells , MIM and IRSp53 localize to the plasma mem - brane and are involved in the formation of membrane protru - sions . The fi lopodia / membrane ruffl e – inducing activity of MIM and IRSp53 resides in the N - terminal IMD , as indicated by a drastic induction of fi lopodia when this domain is ectopically expressed in mammalian cells ( Yamagishi et al . , 2004 ; Bompard et al . , 2005 ) . Previous studies demonstrated that recombinant IMDs bind and bundle actin filaments and interact with the small GTPase Rac , providing a plausible explanation for their filopodia - forming activity ( Miki et al . , 2000 ; Bompard et al . , 2005 ) . The crystal structures of the IMDs from IRSp53 and MIM revealed an α - helical coiled - coil domain that self - associates into a “zeppelin - shaped” dimer ( Millard et al . , 2005 ; Lee et al . , 2007 ) . Surprisingly , the closest structural homologues of IMD are the lipid - binding BAR ( Bin / amphiphysin / Rvs ) domains . BAR domain proteins ( e . g . , amphipysin , endophilin , and Rvs161 / 167 ) and related F - BAR domain proteins ( e . g . , toca and syndapin ) induce tubular invaginations from the plasma membrane during the formation of an endocytic vesicle ( Itoh and De Camilli , 2006 ) . In vitro , BAR domains evaginate liposomes into narrow tubules . They interact with negatively charged lipids through patches of positively charged residues at the concave face . Membrane deformation is driven by the intrinsic curvature of the rigid “banana - shaped” BAR domain dimer ( Zhang and Hinshaw , 2001 ; Peter et al . , 2004 ) . In addition , an amphipathic N - terminal helix found in a subset of BAR domains ( N - BARs ) penetrates the membrane and potentiates the membrane - tubulating activity ( Gallop et al . , 2006 ; Masuda et al . , 2006 ) . In contrast to BAR domains , IMDs are involved in the formation of membrane protrusions , rather than membrane invaginations , and have not been reported to deform membranes . Here , we provide evidence that IMDs deform PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - rich membranes into tubular structures . Unlike previously char - acterized membrane - tubulating domains , the IMD appears to bind to the inner surface of the membrane tubule and therefore promote the formation of plasma membrane protrusions rather than invaginations . Identification of the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding interface of the IMD provided a molecular explanation for this membrane - tubulating activity and revealed how this novel function is linked to fi lopodia formation in cells . We also show that the fi lopodia - forming activity of MIM is independent of F - actin bundling and GTPase binding of the IMD . Results IMDs bind and deform PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - rich membranes IMDs share remote structural homology with BAR domains , which bind and deform lipid membranes in vivo and in vitro ( Itoh and De Camilli , 2006 ) . Despite the structural similarity , IMDs were proposed to promote fi lopodia formation through their F - actin – bundling activity and thus form a functionally dis - tinct group within the BAR domain family ( Yamagishi et al . , 2004 ; Gonzalez - Quevedo et al . , 2005 ; Millard et al . , 2005 ) . To examine whether IMDs display a BAR domain – like membrane - binding activity , we studied the interaction of the IMD of MIM with various lipids by native gel electrophoresis . We found that it interacts with micelles containing PI ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( Fig . 1 A ) . The polar head group of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , IP 3 , or other phos - pholipids did not shift the motility of MIM / IMD , suggesting the lack of a high - affi nity interaction . The MIM / IMD – PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 interaction was examined further in a more physiological context with a high - speed cosedimentation assay using synthetic lipid vesicles . The IMD of MIM cosedimented with vesicles con - taining 30 % PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , whereas only weak cosedimentation was detected with vesicles without PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( Fig . 1 B ) . A more detailed analysis revealed that already 5 – 10 % of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 considerably increased the affi nity of MIM / IMD to vesicles ( Fig . S1 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200609176 / DC1 ) . This PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 density is similar to the one reported for other PIP 2 - interacting proteins , such as N - WASP , which requires 10 – 15 % PIP 2 density for activation ( Papayannopoulos et al . , 2005 ) . It is also important to note that , based on native gel electrophoresis ( Fig . 1 A ) and cosedimentation assays ( Fig . S1 ) , the IMD of MIM binds PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 with considerably lower affi nity than PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . Sequence database searches revealed two alternative splice variants of mouse MIM’s IMD . These differ from each other by a four - amino - acid insertion encoded by exon 7 ( Fig . S2 , A and B , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200609176 / DC1 ) . These residues are located at distal ends of the dimeric IMD ( Fig . S2 C ) . The two alternatively spliced forms of the IMD of MIM are referred as MIM / IMD - L ( longer splice variant ) and MIM / IMD - S ( variant lacking the four resi - dues coded by exon 7 ) . Importantly , both MIM / IMD - L and - S , as well as the IMD of IRSp53 , interacted strongly with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - containing vesicles , suggesting that PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding is a func - tion common among all IMDs ( Fig . 1 B and Fig . S3 ) . To investigate the possible effects of IMDs on the struc - ture of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - rich membranes , we performed an EM analy - sis of MIM / IMD - L – PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 vesicle complexes . Surprisingly , these experiments revealed a strong membrane deforming / tubulating activity . Synthetic vesicles without MIM / IMD - L were heterogeneous in size , mostly spherical or curved in shape , and evenly distributed throughout the sample . In the presence of MIM / IMD - L , these vesicles formed clusters with complex tubular structures ( Fig . 1 , C and D ) . Similar structures were also predominant in samples containing the IMD of IRSp53 ( un - published data ) . The structural organization of the IMD - induced membrane tubules was examined in more detail by using elec - tron tomography . Because of the complex nature of structures induced by 22 μ M MIM / IMD - L ( Fig . 1 D ) , 1 . 1 μ M protein was used in this experiment . The tomography analysis of a sel - ected section is displayed in Fig . 1 E and Video 1 ( available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200609176 / DC1 ) . MIM / IMD - L – induced tubules were of regular width ( measured diameter of 78 nm ; SD = 7 nm ; n = 65 ; the narrowest tubule on J une 24 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 19 , 2007 MIM AND IRSP53 DEFORM MEMBRANES • MATTILA ET AL . 955 was 60 nm and the widest 93 nm ) independent of the protein concentration ( unpublished data ) . Amount of tubulation corre - sponded with the amount of protein , and similar tubulation was observed in assays performed either with unilamellar or multi - lamellar vesicles ( Fig . 1 D ) . In contrast to the long tubular exten - sions induced by BAR / F - BAR domains , electron tomography revealed that in intact vesicular structures MIM / IMD - induced tubules are typically invaginating toward the interior of the ves - icle ( Fig . 1 E and Video 1 ) . This observation suggests that IMDs tubulate membranes in a direction opposite that of BAR / F - BAR domains . It is also important to note that the amount of mem - brane tubu lation induced by MIM / IMD correlated with the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 density of the vesicles . High amounts of membrane tubules were observed in experiments performed with 10 – 30 % PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 density . MIM / IMD also induced membrane tubula - tion at 3 – 5 % PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , but this was less effi cient than higher PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 density ( Fig . S1 C ) . Only very weak tubulation was detected with vesicles without PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( unpublished data ) . We also performed a similar assay by using two other PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding proteins , α - actinin and heterodimeric capping pro - tein . These proteins did not induce membrane tubulation under similar conditions , confi rming that this activity is not a gen - eral feature of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - bnding proteins ( unpublished data ) . Mapping of the actin and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding sites of the IMD To reveal the mechanisms of actin and phospholipid inter - actions of the IMD , the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - and actin - binding sites of MIM / IMD - L were mapped by systematic mutagenesis . 19 clusters of mutations were individually created on the surface of MIM / IMD - L using the 3D structure of the domain ( Lee et al . , 2007 ) as a guide . Each cluster of mutations contained one to three charged amino acids or surface - exposed hydrophobic residues substituted with alanines . The mutant clusters are evenly distrib - uted over the surface of the IMD ( Fig . 2 , B and C ; and Fig . S3 A ) . The PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding was examined by high - speed co - sedimentation assay with synthetic lipid vesicles containing 30 % PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . Eight mutants displayed a substantially reduced affi n - ity for PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( Fig . 2 A and Fig . S3 B ) . Five of these ( Mut10 , - 11 , - 12 , - 15 , and - 16 ) were clusters of charged residues that map close to the distal ends of the dimeric IMD , and two ( Mut14 and - 17 ) contained substitutions of surface - exposed hydro - phobic residues . These data show that the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding site of IMD consists of relatively large positively charged regions that are located at each end of the dimeric domain . This is fur - ther supported by the observation that neutralizing the negative charge within this region ( Mut13 [ D143A ] ) increased the affi nity Figure 1 . IMDs bind and tubulate PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - rich membranes . ( A ) Native gel electrophore - sis analysis was performed with MIM / IMD - L alone ( without lipids ) or with MIM / IMD - L mixed with ﬁ vefold molar excess of different phos - pholipids . PI ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 caused MIM / IMD - L to move faster toward the anode , indicating an increase in negative charge and a binding interaction . IP 3 , inositol ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) trisphos - phate headgroup ; PI , phosphatidylinositol ; PA , phosphatidic acid ; MIX , lipid mixture ( cholesterol , lecithin , and lysolecithin ) ; and CAR , cardiolipin . MIM / IMD - L without lipids was loaded to the ﬁ rst and last wells of the gels , respectively . ( B ) MIM / IMD - L and IRSp53 / IMD cosedimented with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - rich ( 30 % ) large multilamellar vesicles . More than 50 % of MIM / IMD - L was found in the pellet fraction ( P ) in samples containing PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , whereas much weaker association is seen with vesicles with - out PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . ( C ) EM analysis of multilamellar vesicles containing 30 % of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 with and without MIM / IMD - L . Thin sections ( 60 nm ) were visualized with transmission electron microscope . Images were taken with magniﬁ - cations of 9 , 900 and 60 , 000 . MIM / IMD - L clustered vesicles and deformed them into tubular network structures . Bars : ( top ) 1 μ m ; ( bottom ) 0 . 2 μ m . ( D ) EM micrographs of 120 - nm - thick sections of MIM / IMD - L deformed multi - lamellar ( top ) and unilamellar ( bottom ) vesicles containing 30 % PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . Bars , 0 . 2 μ m . ( E ) 3D electron tomography analysis of MIM / IMD - L induced tubular network . ( left ) EM micrograph of a 250 - nm - thick section ; ( right ) corresponding model where tubules that were not connected with the surface of the mem - brane within the reconstructed volume were removed . Membrane tubules ( diameter of 78 nm ) penetrate the vesicular structure . Bar , 0 . 1 μ m . on J une 24 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 19 , 2007 JCB • VOLUME 176 • NUMBER 7 • 2007 956 of IMD for PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . In addition , surface - exposed leucines located in these regions contribute to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding . Actin fi lament cosedimentation assay performed with 1 μ M IMD and 0 – 10 μ M F - actin revealed that only four clusters of mutations ( Mut11 , - 12 , - 15 , and - 16 ) displayed considerably lower affi nity for F - actin as compared with wild - type IMD . Combining these mutations further reduced F - actin binding , demonstrating the importance of these residues for actin interac - tions ( Fig . 2 A and Fig . S3 C ) . These residues map close to the ends of the dimeric IMD and overlap with the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding site , revealing that the positively charged region located in helix - 2 forms the main actin - and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding site of the IMD ( Fig . 2 C ) . As with the observed increase in PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding , neutraliza - tion of the negative charge within this region ( Mut13 [ D143A ] ) also increased the affi nity of IMD to F - actin . However , in con - trast to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding , none of the mutants ( or double mu - tants ) resulted in a complete lack of F - actin binding , showing that IMDs interact with F - actin mostly through nonspecifi c electro - static interactions . To confi rm the integrity of the mutants , we performed a urea denaturation assay for each double mutant used in the study . The mutants unfolded at the same urea concentra - tion ( 4 . 5 M ) as wild - type MIM / IMD , indicating that the muta - tions did not affect folding of the protein ( unpublished data ) . PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding of MIM / IMD is required for ﬁ lopodia formation Expression of IMDs in cultured mammalian cells induces a dra - matic formation of fi lopodia ( Yamagishi et al . , 2004 ; Gonzalez - Quevedo et al . , 2005 ; Millard et al . , 2005 ) . However , the dynamics of these structures ( i . e . , whether they are true mem - brane protrusions or the result of cell retraction ) have not been reported . Live - cell analysis of U2OS cells expressing MIM / IMD - L revealed that IMD - induced fi lopodia are highly dynamic and extend with a rate of up to 1 μ m / min ( Fig . 3 A and Video 2 , avail - able at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200609176 / DC1 ) . These protrusions are dependent on an intact actin cytoskeleton because treatment of the cells with latrunculin A decreased the dynamics of IMD - induced fi lopodia ( Video 3 ) . Quantifi cation of the data revealed that (cid:5) 40 % of the fi lopodia in untreated cells displayed elongation during the 60 - s detection period , whereas after 6 , 12 , or 18 min of latrunculin A treatment , < 5 % of the fi lopodia displayed elongation . To examine the in vivo roles of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 interactions of IMD , we assayed fi lopodia formation in U2OS cells expressing mutant IMDs . One of these ( Mut12 + 15 ) displays severe de - fects in F - actin binding and a nearly complete lack of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding ( Fig . 2 ) and loss of lipid vesicle tubulation activity ( un - published data ) . The other mutant ( Mut14 + 17 ) interacts with F - actin with a similar affi nity to wild - type IMD but shows a moderate defect in PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding ( Fig . 2 A and Fig . S3 , B and C ) . The mutant defective in actin and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding failed to induce detectable fi lopodia in U2OS cells . Interest - ingly , Mut14 + 17 , which displays defects only in PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding , induced signifi cantly less fi lopodia than wild - type IMD ( Fig . 3 B ) . This demonstrates that interaction with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is critical for fi lopodia formation by IMDs . MIM / IMD localizes to the interface between F - actin bundles and plasma membrane The experiments described above showed that IMDs bind and deform PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - rich membranes in vitro and that the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 Figure 2 . Determination of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - and F - actin – binding sites of the IMD . ( A ) A list of mutants examined in this study . The PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - and F - actin – binding properties of the mutants were determined by cosedimentation assays . The data obtained from F - actin – binding assays performed with four actin concentrations and from three independent PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding assays are displayed ( see Fig . S3 , B and C , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200609176 / DC1 , for the data ) . Afﬁ nities of mutant pro - teins as compared with wild - type IMD are indicated . ( B ) The residues mu - tated in this study are shown as ball and stick in the ribbon structure of MIM / IMD - L ( Lee et al . , 2007 ) . Residues without detectable effects to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding are in green . Residues with moderate and strong defects in binding are in orange and in red , respectively . Substitution of Asp 143 ( blue ) by Ala resulted in an increase in PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding . ( C ) Presentation of the F - actin – binding site of MIM / IMD - L with the same color coding . on J une 24 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 19 , 2007 MIM AND IRSP53 DEFORM MEMBRANES • MATTILA ET AL . 957 binding appears critical for the fi lopodia - inducing activity in vivo . 3D analysis , derived from seven confocal planes of fi lo - podia from cells expressing GFP - tagged MIM / IMD - L , revealed that the IMD does not localize to the F - actin bundle but instead localizes to the plasma membrane surrounding the F - actin bundle . The divergent localization was most obvious at the base of the fi lopodium , where the GFP – MIM / IMD - L signal followed the plasma membrane rather than the F - actin bundle that extended into the cytoplasm ( Fig . 4 A , right ) . In Fig . 4 , MIM / IMD that does not colocalize with F - actin is shown in green . Because it surrounds the interior of fi lopodia , the colocalization ( yellow ) and F - actin ( red ) signals are not visible in thin fi lopodia when all channels are merged . A more detailed analysis revealed that F - actin and MIM / IMD colocalized only at a thin region within the fi lopodia ( Fig . 4 A , middle ) . The channel correlation in colocal - ized volume , taking into account all the pixels in the 3D projec - tion , was 0 . 6713 ( calculated by Pearson’s correlation coeffi cient , where 1 represents perfect colocalization , 0 is no colocalization , and − 1 is perfect inverse colocalization ) . Together , these data demonstrate that MIM / IMD does not localize to the F - actin bundle but is instead found at the plasma membrane surrounding the bundle . Colocalization channel analysis further confi rmed only a very thin interface where both proteins are present . To investigate the possible cooperation between lipid - and actin - binding activities of IMDs , we examined samples con - taining PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - rich vesicles , F - actin , and IMD by light microscopy . Alexa 568 – labeled F - actin , MIM / IMD - L , and fl uorescein phosphatidylethanolamine ( PE ) – labeled vesicles with or without PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 were mixed , applied on polyornithine - coated glass slides , and imaged by light microscopy . In the pres - ence of MIM / IMD - L and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , clear actin dots were found to localize at positions corresponding to vesicles ( Fig . 4 B ) . Importantly , vesicles without PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 showed signifi cantly weaker colocalization with actin , as was also found for PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 vesicles in an experiment using Mut15 ( Fig . 4 , B and C ) . The intensity of actin staining on vesicles was quantifi ed , con - fi rming the importance of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding of IMD in the for - mation of these denser F - actin dots ( Fig . 4 C ) . Similar results were also obtained with the IMD of IRSp53 ( unpublished data ) . The results demonstrate that IMDs are capable of associating actin fi laments with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 vesicles , at least in vitro . How - ever , it is important to note that the actin and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding sites overlap on the surface of the IMD ( Fig . 2 ) . This suggests that a fraction of IMDs associates in this assay with membranes only through one pole , leaving the other binding site access - ible to actin . Alternatively , the membrane - bound IMD may interact with actin through partially different interface than the soluble domain . F - actin – bundling and Rac - binding activities of IMDs do not contribute to ﬁ lopodia formation IMDs were previously reported to induce fi lopodia formation through their actin fi lament – bundling activity ( Yamagishi et al . , 2004 ; Gonzalez - Quevedo et al . , 2005 ; Millard et al . , 2005 ) . However , our data showed that IMDs bind and deform mem - branes and do not localize to actin bundles in fi lopodia , as would be expected for an F - actin cross - linking protein . We thus per - formed low - speed sedimentation assays to compare F - actin – bundling activities of IMDs . Surprisingly , at physiological ionic Figure 3 . Compromised lipid binding weak - ens the ability of an IMD to induce dynamic ﬁ lopodia . ( A ) Time - lapse images of a U2OS cell expressing GFP - tagged MIM / IMD - L . The black arrowhead shows the cell edge , and the white arrowhead indicates the tip of a growing ﬁ lopodium . The ﬁ lopodium extended with a rate of (cid:5) 1 μ m / min . Bar , 1 μ m . ( B ) Confocal images from U2OS cells overexpressing GFP - tagged wild - type and mutant forms of MIM / IMD - L . Mut12 + 15 , which has severe defects in both F - actin and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding in vitro did not induce ﬁ lopodia formation in cells . Mut14 + 17 , which displayed moderate defects in PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding but bound F - actin with wild - type afﬁ nity in vitro , showed reduced ﬁ lo - podia formation compared with wild - type MIM / IMD - L . F - actin is in red . Bar , 10 μ m . Quantiﬁ cation of the number of ﬁ lopodia per cell is shown in the diagram . SEM values are indicated as error bars . Analysis ( t test ) of the number of ﬁ lopodia shows results to be statisti - cally signiﬁ cant ( n = 20 ) . * * * , P < 0 . 001 ; * , P < 0 . 05 . on J une 24 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 19 , 2007 JCB • VOLUME 176 • NUMBER 7 • 2007 958 conditions , MIM / IMD - L , MIM / IMD - S , and IRSp53 / IMD dis - played almost undetectable F - actin – bundling activity ( Fig . 5 , A and C ) , even though these proteins bound F - actin with affi nities similar to the one previously reported for IMDs ( Fig . S3 C ) . Under identical conditions , 1 . 25 μ M α - actinin effi ciently bun - dled F - actin , suggesting that at physiological salt concentration , IMDs display only very weak actin fi lament – bundling activity ( Fig . 5 A ) . Because some previous F - actin bundling assays with IMDs were performed at low ionic strength ( Millard et al . , 2005 ) and IMDs appear to have a tendency to aggregate at low salt ( Fig . 5 D ) , we performed a low - speed F - actin sedimentation assay at various salt concentrations . These data showed that the F - actin – bundling activity of IMDs ( i . e . , the amount of actin in the pellet fraction ) increased sharply at low ionic strength ( Fig . 5 , B and C ) . We next used dynamic light scattering ( DLS ) to reveal whether the increased F - actin – bundling activity at sub - physiological salt concentrations resulted from aggregation of MIM / IMD - L . DLS measures the fl uctuation of scattered light , giving the distribution of hydrodynamic radii , I ( R h ) . Thus , DLS not only provides the information about the size ( hydrodynamic radius ; R h ) but also about the polydispersity of the sample ( Kainov et al . , 2003 ) . DLS performed at different KCl concentrations revealed a peak corresponding to the apparent size of IMD dimer and peaks of larger radius corresponding to protein aggregates . At 100 mM KCl , the amount of aggregates was small , keeping in mind that the intensity of the peaks is proportional to the square of molecular mass and thus strongly enhances the signal from large particles . At lower salt concentrations , the amount of particles with R h of > 50 nm increased dramatically , indicative of protein aggregation ( Fig . 5 D ) . Similar results were also obtained from a high - speed sedimentation assay , which demonstrated that MIM / IMD - L precipitated at low salt ( un - published data ) . Together , these data suggest that the previously reported F - actin – bundling activity of IMDs resulted from protein aggregation at nonphysiological ionic conditions . IMDs display only very weak F - actin bundling at physiological conditions that is unlikely to contribute to filopodia formation in vivo . Furthermore , our analysis revealed that MIM / IMD - L does not bind G - actin or affect the nucleotide exchange or kinetics of actin polymerization ( unpublished data ) . We next compared the binding of MIM / IMD - L and - S to recombinant Rac by GST pull - down and surface plasmon reso - nance ( SPR ) assays . Surprisingly , these assays revealed a clear difference between MIM / IMD splice variant binding to Rac . In the GST pull - down assay , MIM / IMD - S interacted with dominant - active ( V12 ) and - inactive ( N17 ) Rac , as described previously ( Bompard et al . , 2005 ) , whereas no detectable binding of MIM / IMD - L to Rac was seen in this assay ( Fig . 6 A ) . In the SPR assay , a concentration - dependent interaction of MIM / IMD to Rac was studied . Consistent with the pull - down assays , the obtained equilibrium binding level values showed that Rac Figure 4 . MIM / IMD - L localizes to the plasma membrane in ﬁ lopodia and associates actin to membranes in vitro . ( A ) GFP – MIM / IMD - L lo - calized to the plasma membrane and coated the F - actin bundles in ﬁ lopodia of U2OS cell . 3D analysis derived from seven confocal planes shows F - actin in red ( all panels ) , MIM / IMD in green ( right ) , and colocalization in yel - low ( middle and right ) . Colocalization area ( built by ImarisColoc software ) is only a thin layer between actin and MIM / IMD and is al - most invisible when the three channels are merged ( right ) , as the MIM / IMD signal at the plasma membrane covers the interior of ﬁ lo - podia . Bar , 1 μ m . ( B ) In vitro light microscopy assay . 1 μ M F - actin ( 50 % Alexa 568 – labeled ) , 2 . 5 μ M MIM / IMD - L , and 1 . 67 μ M lipid vesi - cles ( 0 / 30 % PI [ 4 , 5 ] P 2 ) were mixed and ap - plied on polyornithine - coated glass slides for imaging . In the presence of MIM / IMD - L and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , actin concentrated at the sites of vesicles , indicating MIM / IMD - L – associating actin and vesicles ( top ) . MIM / IMD - L with vesi - cles without PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 or MIM / IMD - L Mut15 , which displays defects in actin and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding , induced much weaker colocalization between actin and vesicles . Red arrowheads indicate vesicles that show clear colocaliza - tion with actin , and green arrowheads indi - cate vesicles without colocalizing actin . Bar , 20 μ m . ( C ) The intensity of the actin staining on the vesicles was quantiﬁ ed from 19 – 20 randomly selected vesicles . Error bars indi - cate SEM values . A t test was used to analyze p - values and showed statistically signiﬁ cant differences ( * * * , P < 0 . 001 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 ) . on J une 24 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 19 , 2007 MIM AND IRSP53 DEFORM MEMBRANES • MATTILA ET AL . 959 interacted with MIM / IMD - L with a binding level of only 10 – 15 % of that of MIM / IMD - S ( Fig . 6 B ) . A high background was obtained from the His - GST control channel , which makes the observed affi nity of the MIM / IMD - L variant diffi cult to in - terpret , further proposing a very weak Rac interaction for this variant . Furthermore , our pull - down and SPR assays demon - strated also that neither variant of MIM / IMD bound other small GTPases , such as RhoA and / or Cdc42 , with detectable affi nity ( unpublished data ) . Although only MIM / IMD - S binds Rac with detectable affi nity , overexpression of either MIM / IMD - S or - L induced fi lopodia formation in cells ( Fig . 6 C ) . Quantifi cation of fi lopo - dia number from transfected cells revealed no apparent differ - ences between cells expressing MIM / IMD - S and - L ( Fig . 6 D ) . This provided evidence that , in contrast to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding ( Fig . 3 B ) , Rac binding is not necessary for fi lopodia formation by IMDs . Discussion IRSp53 and MIM are relatively large , multidomain proteins that regulate cytoskeletal dynamics during motile and morpho - genetic processes . Expression of full - length proteins or their N - terminal IMDs , which bind Rho family GTPases and bundle actin fi laments , results in dramatic fi lopodia / microspike formation in cultured mammalian cells ( Yamagishi et al . , 2004 ; Bompard et al . , 2005 ) . In this study , we determined the mechanism by which IMDs induce membrane protrusions in cells . We show that ( 1 ) IMDs display only very weak F - actin – bundling activity at physiological ionic conditions that is unlikely to contribute to fi lopodia formation . The previously reported actin - bundling activity appears to result from protein aggregation at low salt conditions . ( 2 ) Interaction with small GTPase Rac is not re - quired for IMD - induced fi lopodia formation . ( 3 ) IMDs bind and deform PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - rich lipid membranes in vitro and localize to the interface of plasma membrane and F - actin bundles in fi lopodia . ( 4 ) IMDs interact with membranes through a similar inter - face to the structurally related BAR domains . However , IMDs and BAR domains generate an opposite membrane curvature because of the different geometries of their membrane - binding interfaces . ( 5 ) Interaction with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - rich membranes is necessary for the fi lopodia - inducing activity of IMDs . Together , these fi ndings show that IMD is a new functional member of the membrane - deforming BAR domain family . However , in contrast to previously characterized membrane - deforming do - mains , IMDs induce formation of membrane protrusions rather than invaginations . Here , we show that , in contrast to previous studies ( Yamagishi et al . , 2004 ; Gonzalez - Quevedo et al . , 2005 ; Millard et al . , 2005 ) , the IMD does not function as an F - actin – bundling motif at physiological ionic conditions . Although the IMD does not bundle F - actin , it binds actin fi laments with a moderate affi nity . Previous charge - reversal mutagenesis studies revealed that a cluster of four positively charged residues at the ends of IMD dimer plays a central role in F - actin binding and bundling ( Bompard et al . , 2005 ; Millard et al . , 2005 ) . Our systematic muta - genesis analysis revealed that the F - actin – binding site of the IMD of MIM is considerably larger and covers an (cid:5) 4 - nm - long posi - tively charged region along helix - 2 . Importantly , none of the muta - tions in this study resulted in a complete lack of F - actin binding . Figure 5 . IMDs display weak F - actin – bundling activity at physiological ionic strength . ( A ) Low - speed F - actin sedimentation assay , where actin bundles sedimented into the pellet fraction ( P ) , whereas unbundled F - actin stayed in the super - natant ( S ) . F - actin concentration was 2 μ M , and MIM / IMD dimer concentrations were 0 , 1 . 25 , 2 . 5 , and 5 μ M . Human α - actinin was used as a control in dimer concentration of 1 . 25 μ M . Note that although α - actinin efﬁ - ciently cross - linked F - actin , neither MIM / IMD - L or - S induced detectable F - actin bundling in this assay . ( B ) Low - speed F - actin sedimentation assay repeated in buffers containing different concentrations ( 100 , 75 , 50 , or 25 mM ) of KCl . The actin - bundling activity of both MIM / IMD - L and IRSp53 / IMD increased at lower KCl concentrations . ( C ) Quantiﬁ cation of F - actin – bundling activities of IMDs from three inde - pendent experiments at 100 / 50 mM KCl . Error bars indicate standard deviations . ( D ) DLS proﬁ les of MIM / IMD - L at 100 , 75 , 50 , or 25 mM KCl . The amount of aggregates > 50 nm in hydrodynamic radius increased at lower KCl concentrations . The mean of R h distribu - tions of two independent measurements is pre - sented in the graphs . on J une 24 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 19 , 2007 JCB • VOLUME 176 • NUMBER 7 • 2007 960 Even mutants in which fi ve lysines / arginines were replaced by alanines bound F - actin with detectable affi nity . This suggests that IMDs do not display a specifi c actin - binding site , but instead interact with F - actin through unspecifi c electrostatic interactions . In contrast , neutralizing specifi c residues at the actin - binding sites of other proteins such as actin - depolymerizing factor / cofi lin or capping protein results in dramatic defects in actin binding ( Lappalainen et al . , 1997 ; Wear et al . , 2003 ) . The affi nity of IMDs to F - actin is relatively low compared with most other F - actin – binding proteins ( Yamagishi et al . , 2004 ; Millard et al . , 2005 ) , suggesting a nonspecifi c interaction with actin . In fi lopodia , the IMD of MIM did not localize to F - actin bundles , as would be expected for an actin - bundling protein . At physio - logical ionic strength , this domain displayed an extremely weak actin - bundling activity compared with the well - characterized cross - linking protein , α - actinin ( Fig . 5 ) . Effi cient bundling was , on the other hand , induced by subphysiological ionic condi - tions , where IMDs also form aggregates . It is important to note that although the IMD dimer contains two F - actin – binding sites , usually indicative of cross - linking activity , it appears to bind F - actin with relatively low affi nity . Therefore , simultaneous interaction of both sites with F - actin , required to induce fi lament cross - linking , is likely to be a rare event . Alternatively , the actin fi lament may interact with these sites in an orientation that steri - cally prevents the binding of another fi lament . Together , these data suggest that IMDs do not bundle F - actin in cells . MIM binds and activates Rac through its IMD . The Rac - binding site is located at the ends of the IMD dimer and over - laps with the actin - binding site ( Bompard et al . , 2005 ) . Here , we show that only the shorter splice variant of MIM’s IMD in - teracted with Rac , whereas the longer splice variant containing a four - amino - acid insertion in the loop between helix - 2 and - 3 did not bind Rac or other Rho - family GTPases with a detect - able affi nity . In the 3D structure , the insertion in MIM / IMD - L is located at the ends of IMD dimer , providing further support that this region plays a central role in Rac binding . Importantly , both MIM / IMD - L and - S , which displayed dramatic differ - ences in Rac binding , induced similar fi lopodia formation when expressed in cells . These data , together with previous studies showing that fi lopodia formation by IMDs was not per - turbed by the coexpression of dominant - negative Cdc42 or Rac1 ( Yamagishi et al . , 2004 ) , provided evidence that Rac binding is not a critical function of IMDs during the formation of membrane protrusions . However , the differences between the two MIM splice variants in Rac binding suggest another , more specifi c role for this interaction in the context of the full - length proteins . Our biochemical and EM analyses revealed that IMDs bind phosphatidylinositides and deform membranes into tubu - lar structures . The observed PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding is in line with recent data showing that the N - terminal region of IRSp53 ( containing the IMD ) binds phospholipids in vitro ( Suetsugu et al . , 2006a ) . IMDs did not bind IP 3 , the polar headgroup of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , with detectable affi nity . This result also implicates that the fatty acid chains of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 are important for the inter - action or that IMD interacts only with membranes where the Figure 6 . Interaction with small GTPase Rac is not required for IMD - induced ﬁ lopodia for - mation . ( A ) The binding of MIM / IMD variants to Rac was determined by a GST pull - down assay under physiological ionic conditions . GST fusion of recombinant Rac ( V12 ) or GST alone were coupled to glutathione – Sepharose beads and incubated with MIM / IMD splice variants . The beads were sedimented , washed three times , and loaded on SDS gels . MIM / IMD - S clearly bound Rac , whereas no binding of MIM / IMD - L was detected with this assay . ( B ) The binding of GST - Rac ( V12 ) to MIM / IMD variants examined with a Biacore 2000 . The histograms represent the equilibrium bind - ing levels ( Req ) in resonance units that were obtained for each Rac concentration with binding of MIM / IMD - L or - S . ( C ) U2OS cells overexpressing GFP - tagged MIM / IMD - S or - L . Both MIM / IMD variants induced ﬁ lopodia - like protrusions in cells in a similar manner . F - actin visualized with Alexa 568 phalloidin . Bar , 10 μ m . ( D ) Quantiﬁ cation of ﬁ lopodia number in GFP , GFP – MIM / IMD - L , and GFP – MIM / IMD - S transfected U2OS cells ( n = 10 ) . Between MIM / IMD splice variants no difference was seen , suggesting that Rac binding is not re - quired for this activity . on J une 24 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 19 , 2007 MIM AND IRSP53 DEFORM MEMBRANES • MATTILA ET AL . 961 inositol headgroups are aligned . The latter alternative is sup - ported by our mutagenesis analysis , revealing that the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding site is composed of relatively large positively charged surfaces at each end of the dimer . Although the peculiar sym - metry of IMDs results in an (cid:5) 140 ° rotation of the dimer ends to each other , the two positively charged PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding patches are facing the same direction when the domain is aligned with amphiphysin BAR domain ( Fig . 7 A ) . This model shows that IMDs bind lipids through an interface similar to that found in BAR domains . It is also important to note that membrane , Rac , and actin binding seem to take place roughly through the same area of the molecule , suggesting that these interactions compete with each other . However , of these activities , only PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding is necessary for the fi lopodia formation , suggesting that the other ( competitive ) interactions may have a regulatory role . The membrane - tubulation activity of IMDs is also sup - ported by a recent study , which demonstrated that the IMD of IRSp53 can deform PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 - rich membranes in vitro ( Suetsugu et al . , 2006b ) . However , this activity was reported to be Rac dependent , whereas our data demonstrates that IMD - induced membrane tubulation is independent from Rac both in vitro and in vivo . Furthermore , in contrast to our study , the IMD of MIM was not capable in deforming membranes in the study by Suetsugu et al . ( 2006b ) . These differences may arise from the fact that these authors used PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 in their EM studies , whereas PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 was used in our study . Our results showed that MIM / IMD binds PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 with substantially higher affi n - ity than PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 both at native gel electrophoresis and co - sedimentation assays . Because PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is also > 25 - fold more abundant at the plasma membrane than PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ( Rameh and Cantley , 1999 ) , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is most likely the physiological bind - ing partner of IMDs during membrane deformation / fi lopodia formation in cells . It is also important to note that the mem - brane - binding interface of an IMD determined in our work is much more extensive than the one identifi ed by Suetsugu et al . ( 2006b ) . This may arise either from the different lipids used in these assays or from the more extensive mutagenesis approach that was applied in our study . Importantly , several lines of evidence suggest that IMDs generate a membrane curvature opposite to that of BAR domains . ( 1 ) Our electron tomography analysis revealed that the tubular structures induced by MIM / IMD - L often penetrate toward the interior of the vesicular structure . In contrast , BAR and F - BAR domains deform liposomes into morphologically different , separate narrow tubes ( Takei et al . , 1999 ; Itoh et al . , 2005 ; Tsujita et al . , 2006 ) . ( 2 ) The lipid - binding interfaces of BAR and IMDs display opposite curvatures ( Fig . 7 A ) . Interest - ingly , the curvature of the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding interface measured from a space - fi lling model of the 18 - nm - long IMD dimer sug - gests that MIM / IMD would induce a formation of a membrane tubule with a diameter of (cid:5) 95 nm . This corresponds well with the diameter of MIM / IMD - L – induced membrane tubules mea - sured from electron micrographs ( (cid:5) 80 nm ) . ( 3 ) When expressed in cells , IMDs induce fi lopodia , as compared with plasma mem - brane invaginations induced by BAR domains . Thus , in contrast to the previously characterized lipid - deforming domains ( BAR , F - BAR , and ENTH / ANTH ) , IMDs appear to generate an opposite membrane curvature . A hypothetical model for how IMDs induce fi lopodia formation through their membrane - tubulating activity is presented in Fig . 7 ( B and C ) . In addition to mem - brane deformation , IMDs may also cross - link F - actin to the plasma membrane . However , further studies are required to elu - cidate the possible biological signifi cance of this activity . Actin dynamics are closely linked to membrane - deformation processes such as endocytosis ( Kaksonen et al . , 2006 ) . Our data provide fi rst evidence that , in addition to N - WASP – induced endocytic processes ( Innocenti et al . , 2005 ) , plasma membrane protrusions are generated through interplay between actin polymerization machinery and direct membrane deformation . IRSp53 has been implicated in lamellipodia formation via WAVE / SCAR - 2 complex and shown to activate WAVE2 , an Arp2 / 3 activator ( Miki et al . , 2000 ; Choi et al . , 2005 ; Suetsugu et al . , 2006a ) . Localization of IRSp53 to the plasma membrane is dependent on its N - terminal IMD ( Miki et al . , 2000 ; Nakagawa et al . , 2003 ; Choi et al . , 2005 ; Suetsugu et al . , 2006a ) . MIM localizes to filopodia , lamellipodia , and cell – cell junctions Figure 7 . Schematic model for the mechanism of ﬁ lopodia formation by IMDs . ( A ) Structures of amphiphysin BAR domain ( left ; Protein Data Bank ID : 1URU ) and MIM / IMD ( right ; Protein Data Bank ID : 2D1L ) . The residues indicated in membrane binding in amphiphysin BAR ( Itoh and De Camilli , 2006 ) and MIM / IMD ( this study ) are indicated in red . Purple dashed line indicates the proposed membrane interface . ( B ) Schematic model of mem - brane tubulation by BAR domain ( left ) and IMD ( right ) . BAR domains form a coat outside of membrane tubule , whereas MIM / IMD curves the membrane in reversed orientation by binding to the inside of the tubule . ( C ) A side view of a BAR domain – induced endocytic invagination and an IMD - induced ﬁ lopodium . Note that in addition to membrane - tubulating activities mediated by BAR and IMDs , both processes are also linked to actin dynamics . on J une 24 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 19 , 2007 JCB • VOLUME 176 • NUMBER 7 • 2007 962 ( unpublished data ) , suggesting a role in actin - dependent mor - phogenetic processes at the plasma membrane . Similarly , sev - eral BAR domain proteins also interact with the regulators of actin dynamics . For example , yeast Rvs167 / 161 complex is intimately involved in actin assembly during endocytosis and mammalian tuba binds Arp2 / 3 activator N - WASP ( Salazar et al . , 2003 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) . Similarly , F - BAR proteins toca - 1 and syndapin interact with N - WASP ( Qualmann et al . , 1999 ; Ho et al . , 2004 ) . In conclusion , our study places the IMD in a new func - tional subbranch of the membrane - deforming BAR domain family . However , because of the unique geometry of its PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding site , an IMD induces membrane protrusions rather than invaginations . In the future , it will be important to reveal the detailed mechanism by which IMDs interact with membranes . Because IMDs have a tendency to form multi - mers at low salt conditions , it will be interesting to determine the possible role of the IMD oligomerization or cooperativity during membrane deformation . Elucidating the mechanism by which the interplay between different functions of IRSp53 and MIM ( membrane deformation , actin monomer binding , and WAVE2 interactions ) contribute to cell migration and morphogenesis will also provide important challenges for future research . Materials and methods Protein expression and puriﬁ cation MIM / IMD - L was cloned into the SpeI – HindIII sites of pHAT1 vector ( Peranen et al . , 1996 ) . The site - directed mutagenesis was performed as in Mattila et al . ( 2004 ) . GFP fusions of MIM / IMDs were constructed into the XhoI – BamHI sites of pEGFP - N1 ( CLONTECH Laboratories , Inc . ) . Alleles encoding mutant GTPases were cloned into BamHI – HindIII ( Rac ) or EcoRI – HindIII ( RhoA , Cdc42 ) sites of pGEX - 2T ( GE Healthcare ; Vartiainen et al . , 2000 ) . The human IRSp53 construct was provided by H . Nakagawa ( Kyushu Institute of Technology , Kyushu , Japan ) , and IRSp53 / IMD cDNA was cloned into SpeI – NsiI sites of pHAT1 . All IMD constructs were expressed as His tag fusion proteins , enriched with Ni - NTA Superﬂ ow beads ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and purified with Q - Sepharose high - performance anion - exchange column ( GE Healthcare ) . Small GTPases Rac , RhoA , and Cdc42 were expressed as GST fusion proteins , enriched with glutathione - agarose beads ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and puriﬁ ed by Superdex - 75 HiLoad gel ﬁ ltration column ( GE Healthcare ) . Human skeletal muscle α - actinin 2 ( provided by J . Ylänne , University of Jyväskylä , Finland ) was expressed and puriﬁ ed from pET8c - 6HTEV plasmid ( Young and Gautel , 2000 ) . Rabbit muscle actin was prepared from acetone powder as described by Pardee and Spudich ( 1982 ) . Preparation of lipid vesicles PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( L - a - phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ; porcine brain tri - ammonium salt ) , PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ( 1 , 2 - dioctanoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - [ phosphoinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ] , tetra - ammonium salt ) , phosphatidylcholine ( PC ; brain ) , phosphatidylserine ( PS ; brain ) , and ﬂ uorescein PE ( 18 : 1 PE / CF 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphoethanolamine - N - [ carboxyﬂ uorescein ] ) were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids , Inc . PC and PS were dissolved in 9 : 1 chloroform / methanol , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 was dissolved in 1 : 2 chloroform / methanol , PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 was dissolved in 65 : 35 : 8 chloroform / methanol / water , and ﬂ uorescein PE was supplied in chloroform . The following mix - tures were prepared : 5 % ﬂ uorescein PE , 20 % PS , 45 – 75 % PC , and 0 – 30 % PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . Samples were vacuum dried under N 2 and hydrated for a minimum of 4 h in 0 . 2 mM Hepes - KOH , pH 7 . 5 , and 100 mM NaCl to a total lipid concentration of 1 mM . Finally , the vesicles were vortexed thoroughly for 2 min to allow formation of large multilamellar vesicles . Vortexing was repeated before each experiment . When preparing uni - lamellar vesicles , hydrated lipids were subjected to extrusion through a 1 - μ m ﬁ lter according to manufacturer’s instructions ( Mini - Extruder ; Avanti Polar Lipids , Inc . ) . EM Vesicles ( 167 μ M total lipid and 3 , 5 , or 30 % PI [ 4 , 5 ] P 2 ) were mixed with 0 , 1 . 1 ( for tomography ) , or 22 μ M IMD dimer in F - buffer ( 5 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 5 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 2 mM DTT , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 2 mM MgCl 2 , and 100 mM KCl ) . Reactions were incubated for 30 min and ﬁ xed by adding 2 . 1 % glutaraldehyde and 0 . 1 M Hepes for 30 min at RT . Samples were sedi - mented ( 17 , 000 g at 4 ° C ) and postﬁ xed by osmication ( 1 % OsO 4 , 15 mg / ml K 4 [ Fe { CN } 6 ] , and 0 . 1 M Na - cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 4 ) , for 1 h , followed by en bloc staining with uranyl acetate ( 1 % uranyl acetate and 0 . 3 M sucrose ) for 1 h at 4 ° C , dehydration , and Epon embedding . Thin ( 60 nm ) or semi - thick ( 120 nm ) sections were prepared and stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate for visualization with a transmission elec - tron microscope ( FEI Tecnai 12 ; FEI Corp . ) operated at 120 kV . Images were recorded using a charge - coupled device camera ( Erlangshen ES500W ; Gatan Corp . ) . Electron tomography For 3D electron tomography , a 250 - nm - thick section was prepared as de - scribed above and imaged with an electron microscope ( Tecnai 20 FEG ; FEI Corp . ) operating at 200 kV . Images were recorded with a 1k × 1k change - coupled device camera ( Multiscan 794 ; Gatan Corp . ) at a magniﬁ cation of 11 , 500 × ( 1 . 63 nm / pixel ) . For collection of tilt series , the specimen was tilted ± 70 ° at 1 ° intervals around two orthogonal axes ( Mastronarde , 1997 ) . The alignment and reconstruction of tilt series was done with the IMOD program package ( Kremer et al . , 1996 ) using 10 - nm colloidal gold particles as ﬁ ducial markers . The tomographic reconstruction was visualized and modeled with Amira software using volume rendering ( TGS , Inc . ) . Cosedimentation assays Actin ﬁ lament cosedimentation assays were performed as described previ - ously ( Mattila et al . , 2003 ; Woodings et al . , 2003 ) . For lipid - binding as - says , 20 μ l of buffer ( 20 mM Hepes - KOH , pH 7 . 5 , and 100 mM NaCl ) or buffer with vesicles of 167 μ M total lipid concentration was added to 25 μ l of F - buffer . IMD constructs ( 5 μ l ) were diluted in desired concentrations in F - buffer . In high - speed ( F - actin or vesicle binding ) assays , samples were sedimented by centrifugation at 360 , 000 g for 30 min at RT . In low - speed F - actin bundling assays , samples were sedimented at 17 , 000 g for 30 min at 4 ° C . 12 % SDS - polyacrylamide gels were scanned with a calibrated imaging densitometer ( GS - 710 ; Bio - Rad Laboratories , Inc . ) and quantiﬁ ed with Quantity One software . Cell culture and light microscopic methods Immunoﬂ uorescence and transfection of human osteosarcoma ( U2OS ) cells with GFP - MIM / IMD constructs were performed as described by Hotulainen and Lappalainen ( 2006 ) . F - actin was visualized with Alexa 568 phalloidin ( dilution 1 : 400 ; Invitrogen ) . To block actin polymerization , cells were treated with 0 . 2 μ g / ml latrunculin A ( Invitrogen ) . For analysis of the asso - ciation of actin and vesicles in vitro , samples containing 2 . 5 μ M MIM / IMD - L dimer , 1 . 67 μ M lipid vesicles ( 0 or 30 % PI [ 4 , 5 ] P 2 ) , and 1 μ M F - actin ( 50 % Alexa Fluor 568 – labeled actin ) were prepared for light micro - scopy in modiﬁ ed F - buffer ( 10 mM imidazole , pH 7 . 5 , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 1 mM DTT , 100 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , and 1 mM EGTA ) . 2 - μ l samples from reactions were applied on polyornithine - coated glass slides . Images were acquired through a charge - coupled device camera ( DP70 ; Olympus ) on a microscope ( AX70 Provis ; Olympus ) . For the image ac - quirement , the AnalySIS software ( Olympus ) and PlanApo 60 × / 1 . 40 ( oil ) objective ( Olympus ) was used . For in vitro samples , images were acquired with ﬁ xed exposure times for quantiﬁ cation with TINA software . The confo - cal image stacks were deconvoluted with AutoQuant AutoDeblur 3D Blind Deconvolution ( AutoQuant Imaging , Inc . ) , and the 3D reconstructions and the colocalization analysis were made with Bitplane Imaris ( Bitplane Inc . ) . The time - lapse images were acquired with an inverted microscope ( IX70 ; Olympus ) equipped with a Polychrome IV monochromator ( TILL Photonics ) with the appropriate ﬁ lters , heated sample environment , CO 2 control , and 40 × / 1 . 35 ( oil ) objective . Total internal reﬂ ectance ﬂ uorescence ( TIRF ) was performed using 60 × / 1 . 45 ( oil ) TIRF objective and 488 nm laser . DLS Samples ( 0 . 5 mg / ml of IMD in F - buffer with desired KCl concentrations ) were prepared , incubated for 1 h at 20 ° C , and monitored with a batch DLS instrument ( Precision Detectors ) equipped with deconvolution software for correlation function analysis ( Kainov et al . , 2003 ) . GST pull - down assay GST pull - down assays were performed as in Mattila et al . ( 2004 ) . Beads containing 5 μ M GST or GST - Rac ( V12 and N17 ) were incubated with on J une 24 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 19 , 2007 MIM AND IRSP53 DEFORM MEMBRANES • MATTILA ET AL . 963 2 . 5 μ M MIM / IMD dimer in 10 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , and 100 mM NaCl for 10 min at RT , washed three times with 500 μ l of reaction buffer , and analyzed on 12 % SDS - PAGE . SPR measurement Interaction of Rac with MIM / IMD was studied with SPR on nitrilotriacetic acid sensor chip on a Biacore 2000 ( Biacore AB ) with a ﬂ ow rate of 20 μ l / min according to the manufacturer’s instructions . The assay was per - formed in 10 mM Hepes - KOH , pH 7 . 2 , and 150 mM NaCl with an injec - tion contact time of 5 min and a dissociation time of 10 min . The recombinant His - tagged MIM / IMD splice variants and His - tagged GST proteins were immobilized by nickel chelation on nitrilotriacetic acid sen - sor surface to saturating levels ( in the range of 9 , 000 resonance units ) to facilitate detection of putatively low - afﬁ nity interactions . Binding of GST - Rac to MIM / IMD splice variants was studied under the system conditions between 20 and 300 nM Rac concentrations . To obtain binding levels at steady state , the control sensorgram , coated with His - GST , was subtracted from each MIM / IMD sensorgram . The steady - state binding levels of sensor - grams were evaluated by Langmuir 1 : 1 binding model modiﬁ ed to mass transfer effect in Biacore Evaluation Software 3 . 1 . The obtained equilib - rium binding level responses are given as resonance units . Miscellaneous The coordinates for 3D structure of the MIM / IMD ( Lee et al . , 2007 ) were obtained from R . Dominguez ( University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA ) . Protein concentrations were determined with a diode array spectro - photometer ( 8452A ; Hewlett Packard ) by using the calculated extinction coefﬁ cients for mouse MIM / IMD - L and - S ( ε 280 = 15 , 220 M − 1 cm − 1 ) , IRSp53 / IMD ( ε 280 = 19 , 770 M − 1 cm − 1 ) , and actin ( ε 290 - 340 = 26 , 600 M − 1 cm − 1 ) . The native PAGE analysis for detecting the lipid interaction of MIM / IMD was performed as previously described ( Palmgren et al . , 2001 ) . Fluorescence - monitored urea denaturation assays were performed as described by Lappalainen et al . ( 1997 ) . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows that MIM / IMD prefers PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 over PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , the bind - ing afﬁ nity correlates with phosphoinositide density of vesicles , and MIM / IMD is capable of tubulating membranes with low PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 density . Fig . S2 illustrates two alternative splice variants of MIM / IMD . Fig . S3 shows the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and F - actin – binding experiments on MIM / IMD - L mutants . Video 1 shows electron tomography of MIM / IMD - induced membrane tubules . In Video 2 , the dynamics of MIM / IMD - induced ﬁ lopodia are shown , and Video 3 demonstrates that the dynamics of MIM / IMD - induced ﬁ lopodia is abolished by latrunculin A treatment . Online supplemental material is avail - able at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200609176 / DC1 . We thank Elina Ikonen and Mirkka Koivusalo for advice on the preparation of lipid vesicles and Roman Tuma for expertise on DLS . Petri Auvinen , Mikko Frilander , Elina Ikonen , Keith Kozminski , and Johan Peränen are acknowledged for critical reading of the manuscript . We thank Roberto Dominguez for discus - sions , comments on the manuscript , and providing MIM / IMD coordinates . Miia Bovellan , Ulla Holopainen , and Pirta Hotulainen are acknowledged for technical assistance , instructions with gel scanning and quantiﬁ cation , and expertise with microscopes , respectively . Hiroyuki Nakagawa and Jari Ylänne are acknowledged for providing the human IRSp53 and α - actinin 2 constructs . This study was supported by grants from the Finnish Cancer Foundation and the Academy of Finland ( grant 111865 ; to P . Lappalainen ) . P . Mattila was supported by fellowships from Viikki Graduate School in Biosciences , the Alfred Kordelin foundation , and the Research and Science Foundation of Farmos . Submitted : 28 September 2006 Accepted : 9 February 2007 References Bompard , G . , S . J . Sharp , G . Freiss , and L . M . Machesky . 2005 . Involvement of Rac in actin cytoskeleton rearrangements induced by MIM - B . J . Cell Sci . 118 : 5393 – 5403 . Callahan , C . A . , T . Ofstad , L . Horng , J . K . Wang , H . H . Zhen , P . A . Coulombe , and A . E . Oro . 2004 . MIM / BEG4 , a Sonic hedgehog - responsive gene that potentiates Gli - dependent transcription . Genes Dev . 18 : 2724 – 2729 . Choi , J . , J . Ko , B . Racz , A . Burette , J . R . Lee , S . Kim , M . Na , H . W . Lee , K . Kim , R . J . Weinberg , and E . Kim . 2005 . Regulation of dendritic spine morpho - genesis by insulin receptor substrate 53 , a downstream effector of Rac1 and Cdc42 small GTPases . J . Neurosci . 25 : 869 – 879 . Gallop , J . L . , C . C . Jao , H . M . Kent , P . J . Butler , P . R . Evans , R . Langen , and H . T . McMahon . 2006 . Mechanism of endophilin N - BAR domain - mediated membrane curvature . EMBO J . 25 : 2898 – 2910 . Gonzalez - Quevedo , R . , M . Shoffer , L . Horng , and A . E . Oro . 2005 . Receptor tyrosine phosphatase - dependent cytoskeletal remodeling by the hedgehog - responsive gene MIM / BEG4 . J . Cell Biol . 168 : 453 – 463 . Ho , H . Y . , R . Rohatgi , A . M . Lebensohn , M . Le , J . Li , S . P . Gygi , and M . W . Kirschner . 2004 . Toca - 1 mediates Cdc42 - dependent actin nucleation by activating the N - WASP - WIP complex . Cell . 118 : 203 – 216 . Hotulainen , P . , and P . Lappalainen . 2006 . Stress fi bers are generated by two distinct actin assembly mechanisms in motile cells . J . Cell Biol . 173 : 383 – 394 . Innocenti , M . , S . Gerboth , K . Rottner , F . P . Lai , M . Hertzog , T . E . Stradal , E . Frittoli , D . Didry , S . Polo , A . Disanza , et al . 2005 . Abi1 regulates the activity of N - WASP and WAVE in distinct actin - based processes . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 : 969 – 976 . Itoh , T . , and P . De Camilli . 2006 . BAR , F - BAR ( EFC ) and ENTH / ANTH do - mains in the regulation of membrane - cytosol interfaces and membrane curvature . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1761 : 897 – 912 . Itoh , T . , K . S . Erdmann , A . Roux , B . Habermann , H . Werner , and P . De Camilli . 2005 . Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev . Cell . 9 : 791 – 804 . Kainov , D . E . , S . J . Butcher , D . H . Bamford , and R . Tuma . 2003 . Conserved inter - mediates on the assembly pathway of double - stranded RNA bacterio - phages . J . Mol . Biol . 328 : 791 – 804 . Kaksonen , M . , C . P . Toret , and D . G . Drubin . 2005 . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell . 123 : 305 – 320 . Kaksonen , M . , C . P . Toret , and D . G . Drubin . 2006 . Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 : 404 – 414 . Kremer , J . R . , D . N . Mastronarde , and J . R . McIntosh . 1996 . Computer visual - ization of three - dimensional image data using IMOD . J . Struct . Biol . 116 : 71 – 76 . Krugmann , S . , I . Jordens , K . Gevaert , M . Driessens , J . Vandekerckhove , and A . Hall . 2001 . Cdc42 induces fi lopodia by promoting the formation of an IRSp53 : Mena complex . Curr . Biol . 11 : 1645 – 1655 . Lappalainen , P . , E . V . Fedorov , A . A . Fedorov , S . C . Almo , and D . G . Drubin . 1997 . Essential functions and actin - binding surfaces of yeast cofi lin revealed by systematic mutagenesis . EMBO J . 16 : 5520 – 5530 . Lee , S . H . , F . Kerff , D . Chereau , F . Ferron , A . Klug , and R . Dominguez . 2007 . Structural basis for actin - binding function of missing - in - metastasis . Structure . 15 : 145 – 155 . Lee , Y . G . , J . A . Macoska , S . Korenchuk , and K . J . Pienta . 2002 . MIM , a potential metastasis suppressor gene in bladder cancer . Neoplasia . 4 : 291 – 294 . Lin , J . , J . Liu , Y . Wang , J . Zhu , K . Zhou , N . Smith , and X . Zhan . 2005 . Differential regulation of cortactin and N - WASP - mediated actin polymerization by missing in metastasis ( MIM ) protein . Oncogene . 24 : 2059 – 2066 . Loberg , R . D . , C . K . Neeley , L . L . Adam - Day , Y . Fridman , L . N . St John , S . Nixdorf , P . Jackson , L . M . Kalikin , and K . J . Pienta . 2005 . Differential expression analysis of MIM ( MTSS1 ) splice variants and a functional role of MIM in prostate cancer cell biology . Int . J . Oncol . 26 : 1699 – 1705 . Mastronarde , D . N . 1997 . Dual - axis tomography : an approach with alignment methods that preserve resolution . J . Struct . Biol . 120 : 343 – 352 . Masuda , M . , S . Takeda , M . Sone , T . Ohki , H . Mori , Y . Kamioka , and N . Mochizuki . 2006 . Endophilin BAR domain drives membrane curva - ture by two newly identifi ed structure - based mechanisms . EMBO J . 25 : 2889 – 2897 . Mattila , P . K . , M . Salminen , T . Yamashiro , and P . Lappalainen . 2003 . Mouse MIM , a tissue - specifi c regulator of cytoskeletal dynamics , interacts with ATP - actin monomers through its C - terminal WH2 domain . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 8452 – 8459 . Mattila , P . K . , O . Quintero - Monzon , J . Kugler , J . B . Moseley , S . C . Almo , P . Lappalainen , and B . L . Goode . 2004 . A high - affi nity interaction with ADP - actin monomers underlies the mechanism and in vivo function of Srv2 / cyclase - associated protein . Mol . Biol . Cell . 15 : 5158 – 5171 . Miki , H . , H . Yamaguchi , S . Suetsugu , and T . Takenawa . 2000 . IRSp53 is an es - sential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of mem - brane ruffl ing . Nature . 408 : 732 – 735 . Millard , T . H . , G . Bompard , M . Y . Heung , T . R . Dafforn , D . J . Scott , L . M . Machesky , and K . Futterer . 2005 . Structural basis of fi lopodia forma - tion induced by the IRSp53 / MIM homology domain of human IRSp53 . EMBO J . 24 : 240 – 250 . Nakagawa , H . , H . Miki , M . Nozumi , T . Takenawa , S . Miyamoto , J . Wehland , and J . V . Small . 2003 . IRSp53 is colocalised with WAVE2 at the tips of on J une 24 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 19 , 2007 JCB • VOLUME 176 • NUMBER 7 • 2007 964 protruding lamellipodia and fi lopodia independently of Mena . J . Cell Sci . 116 : 2577 – 2583 . Palmgren , S . , P . J . Ojala , M . A . Wear , J . A . Cooper , and P . Lappalainen . 2001 . Interactions with PIP2 , ADP - actin monomers , and capping protein regulate the activity and localization of yeast twinfi lin . J . Cell Biol . 155 : 251 – 260 . Papayannopoulos , V . , C . Co , K . E . Prehoda , S . Snapper , J . Taunton , and W . A . Lim . 2005 . A polybasic motif allows N - WASP to act as a sensor of PIP ( 2 ) density . Mol . Cell . 17 : 181 – 191 . Pardee , J . D . , and J . A . Spudich . 1982 . Purifi cation of muscle actin . Methods Enzymol . 85 : 164 – 181 . Peranen , J . , M . Rikkonen , M . Hyvonen , and L . Kaariainen . 1996 . T7 vectors with modifi ed T7lac promoter for expression of proteins in Escherichia coli . Anal . Biochem . 236 : 371 – 373 . Peter , B . J . , H . M . Kent , I . G . Mills , Y . Vallis , P . J . Butler , P . R . Evans , and H . T . McMahon . 2004 . BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science . 303 : 495 – 499 . Pollard , T . D . , and G . G . Borisy . 2003 . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin fi laments . Cell . 112 : 453 – 465 . Qualmann , B . , J . Roos , P . J . DiGregorio , and R . B . Kelly . 1999 . Syndapin I , a synaptic dynamin - binding protein that associates with the neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 501 – 513 . Rameh , L . E . , and L . C . Cantley . 1999 . The role of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase lipid products in cell function . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 8347 – 8350 . Salazar , M . A . , A . V . Kwiatkowski , L . Pellegrini , G . Cestra , M . H . Butler , K . L . Rossman , D . M . Serna , J . Sondek , F . B . Gertler , and P . De Camilli . 2003 . Tuba , a novel protein containing bin / amphiphysin / Rvs and Dbl homology domains , links dynamin to regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 49031 – 49043 . Suetsugu , S . , S . Kurisu , T . Oikawa , D . Yamazaki , A . Oda , and T . Takenawa . 2006a . Optimization of WAVE2 complex - induced actin polymerization by membrane - bound IRSp53 , PIP ( 3 ) , and Rac . J . Cell Biol . 173 : 571 – 585 . Suetsugu , S . , K . Murayama , A . Sakamoto , K . Hanawa - Suetsugu , A . Seto , T . Oikawa , C . Mishima , M . Shirouzu , T . Takenawa , and S . Yokoyama . 2006b . The RAC binding domain / IRSp53 - MIM homology domain of IRSp53 induces RAC - dependent membrane deformation . J . Biol . Chem . 281 : 35347 – 35358 . Takei , K . , V . I . Slepnev , V . Haucke , and P . De Camilli . 1999 . Functional partner - ship between amphiphysin and dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 : 33 – 39 . Tsujita , K . , S . Suetsugu , N . Sasaki , M . Furutani , T . Oikawa , and T . Takenawa . 2006 . Coordination between the actin cytoskeleton and membrane de - formation by a novel membrane tubulation domain of PCH proteins is involved in endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 172 : 269 – 279 . Vartiainen , M . , P . J . Ojala , P . Auvinen , J . Peranen , and P . Lappalainen . 2000 . Mouse A6 / twinfi lin is an actin monomer - binding protein that localizes to the regions of rapid actin dynamics . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 : 1772 – 1783 . Wear , M . A . , A . Yamashita , K . Kim , Y . Maeda , and J . A . Cooper . 2003 . How capping protein binds the barbed end of the actin fi lament . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1531 – 1537 . Woodings , J . A . , S . J . Sharp , and L . M . Machesky . 2003 . MIM - B , a putative metastasis suppressor protein , binds to actin and to protein tyrosine phos - phatase delta . Biochem . J . 371 : 463 – 471 . Yamagishi , A . , M . Masuda , T . Ohki , H . Onishi , and N . Mochizuki . 2004 . A novel actin bundling / fi lopodium - forming domain conserved in insulin receptor tyrosine kinase substrate p53 and missing in metastasis protein . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 14929 – 14936 . Young , P . , and M . Gautel . 2000 . The interaction of titin and alpha - actinin is controlled by a phospholipid - regulated intramolecular pseudoligand mechanism . EMBO J . 19 : 6331 – 6340 . Zhang , P . , and J . E . Hinshaw . 2001 . Three - dimensional reconstruction of dyna - min in the constricted state . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 922 – 926 . on J une 24 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 19 , 2007