Constructing Online Spaces Amid a Pandemic Advocating for Students Through User - Centered Design Hannah L . Stevens Utah State University Hannah . stevens . honeyman @ gmail . com Kailey Collins Utah State University kaileycollins92 @ gmail . com Margaret Hsiao Utah State University shen . margaret @ gmail . com Wesley Mathis Utah State University w . mathis @ usu . edu ABSTRACT With an increase in online learning environments , especially after the onset of the COVID - 19 pandemic , this proposed research paper focuses on the need for student - centered design in online spaces as a form of advocacy . The four authors explore the following question that revolves around online spaces : What are the practices through which user - centered design , especially participatory design through cultural , feminist , enviro - materialist , and disability lenses , might be implemented in online , higher education , or other adult - learning courses ? This research article addresses the question of how we as educators , students , and technical communicators can advocate for students and their environments while amid a global pandemic . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; HCI theory , concepts and models ; Accessibility ; Accessi - bility design and evaluation methods ; • Applied computing → Education ; Computer - managed instruction . KEYWORDS advocacy , online spaces , COVID - 19 , accommodations , environmen - tal justice , habits of whiteness , digital rhetoric ACM Reference Format : Hannah L . Stevens , Kailey Collins , Margaret Hsiao , and Wesley Mathis . 2022 . Constructing Online Spaces Amid a Pandemic : Advocating for Students Through User - Centered Design . In The 40th ACM International Conference on Design of Communication ( SIGDOC ’22 ) , October 06 – 08 , 2022 , Boston , MA , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 9 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3513130 . 3558980 1 INTRODUCTION The COVID - 19 pandemic has shifted how many define what con - stitutes academic teaching and learning [ 1 ] . As the COVID - 19 pan - demic has further revealed , online course design is far more complex than shifting a physical classroom to a digital space [ 2 ] , and its Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . SIGDOC ’22 , October 06 – 08 , 2022 , Boston , MA , USA © 2022 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9246 - 4 / 22 / 10 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3513130 . 3558980 implementation is such that it may not simply mirror the other [ 3 ] . Furthermore , higher education is encountering another shift to a hy - brid format , with some universities choosing to remain online , some returning face - to - face ( F2F ) , and some embracing online and F2F elements , increasing stress for many instructors [ 4 ] and students . With the move to various ( and perhaps less traditional ) modes of learning , instructors are feeling mounting pressure to turn unfamil - iar environments into inclusive spaces with little to no resources available to support practices that anticipate diverse student expe - riences . Instructors may also be feeling the pressure to continue important social justice work while simultaneously balancing the physical practice of working in an online environment . For example , an increase in online instruction has the potential to perpetuate an artificial divide between human culture and natural environments , thus revealing the challenges involved in advocating not only for students but also the physical environments they inhabit . Moreover , online environments are imbued with what MacMullan calls ( 2009 ) “habits of whiteness” ( p . 2 ) [ 5 ] , which is evidenced in how language standardization further marginalizes underrepresented student pop - ulations . These social justice implications cannot be ignored when approaching online environments and student advocacy . In addition , it is not only the learning spaces themselves that are disrupted in the shift to an online environment , but departments and institutions that determine the overall student learning experi - ence ( e . g . , student services ) are also impacted . After all , learning does not only take place in a classroom , and departments across the university were also expected to continue the previously F2F work of advocating for students in an online environment . Many of these higher education institutions that are integral to student success in online learning environments have remained under - researched . For example , research on the extent to which disability accom - modations and disability services have evolved with the onset of the COVID - 19 pandemic and the move to fully online education remains underdeveloped . With an increase in online learning environments due to the COVID - 19 pandemic , this research paper focuses on a simultaneous and needed increase in a student - centered design of online spaces . From a student - centered design approach , the four authors address the following question that revolves around online learning spaces : • What are the practices through which user - centered design , especially participatory design through cultural , feminist , enviro - materialist , and disability lenses , might be imple - mented in online higher education ? 69 SIGDOC ’22 , October 06 – 08 , 2022 , Boston , MA , USA Hannah Stevens et al . Although initially appearing as distinct , the authors argue that the cultural , feminist , enviro - materialist , and disability - based lenses are interconnected approaches to user - centered online course de - sign for a pandemic ( and post - pandemic ) world . Thus , the following sections offer ways of rethinking online spaces in order to continue thinking of ways to recognize , reveal , reject , and replace [ 6 ] the injustices that many online environments tend to perpetuate . In highlighting both the literature on various forms of student advocacy as well as two approaches in action , the authors of this research article hope to contribute theoretical frameworks that inform the way we think about and design for online learning . To conclude , the four authors offer recommendations for practice and further research on COVID - 19 and its effect on online learning spaces , as well as methods for approaching student advocacy in online learning environments . 2 LITERATURE REVIEW The COVID - 19 pandemic offered a unique opportunity for instruc - tors to rethink their approaches to online learning . In making the shift from F2F to online learning environments , human - to - human interaction becomes human - to - computer interaction , and human communication becomes computer - mediated communication . With little to define the difference between online teaching practices and inclusive online teaching best practices , a rapid transferal of F2F courses to an online format risks furthering the divide between instructors and students , or , at a broader scale , students , and educa - tion [ 3 ] , and at an even broader scale , students , and their physical environments . Where technologies are involved , with distance and screens as dividers between teachers and students , best practices are practices that recognize the student experience as a human experience , rather than a solely digital one , placing student users of diverse experiences , identities , and abilities at the center of not only the learning itself , but the online course design . Despite competing definitions and terms related to user - centered design , the authors propose user - centered approaches with an un - derstanding of UCD as a rhetorical process of engaging with users to shape ethical action with emerging technologies [ 7 ] . Further informed by feminist theory , user - centered design is understood as a methodology that works to combat “marginalizing forces” and actively interface with “issues of oppression” ( p . 55 ) as they re - late to human - computer interaction [ 8 ] and technological design [ 9 ] . In this sense , computer - mediated communication is not nec - essarily computer - dominated communication , with technologies filling the roles of instructors , and students are recognized as active participants not only in their learning processes , but also in the design for their learning processes . Applying a “nothing about us without us” ( p . 310 ) [ 10 ] approach to inclusive best practices re - vokes a one - size - fits - all approach to education and instruction and instead explores participatory , reciprocal approaches to technologi - cal design . Furthermore , participatory , user - centered methods for designing online learning spaces and materials extend beyond an isolated instance of collecting student feedback and into an ongo - ing process of co - designing relevant solutions , a process centered around and empowering the students involved [ 11 ] . According to Hewett and Powers , “Understanding how to teach online does not just entail learning a new technology . . . it also in - volves a deepening knowledge of how students respond to and learn in online settings” ( p . 2 ) [ 12 ] . While discussing the translation of F2F to online instruction is nothing new [ 2 ] , little scholarship addresses online instruction’s apparent lack of embodiment or ef - fects that assumptions of bodylessness have on broader ecologies . As Melonçon notes , in a virtual environment , a teacher must alter their “ethos from the embodied form in the physical classroom to a disembodied form listed as an instructor on the course homepage” ( p . 38 ) . Even as some scholars seek to discuss the implications of bodiless or immaterial rhetoric , the solutions are usually discussed in terms of metaphor [ 13 ] , which denies any conversation about dig - ital rhetoric’s literal “connection to the natural world” ( p . 69 ) [ 14 ] . Unfortunately , such a denial helps justify environmental exploita - tion that unduly and almost imperceptibly harms marginalized and vulnerable populations [ 15 , 16 ] , not to mention the way it “others” or disregards the nonhuman agents at work . In that vein , a user that is not considered within the context of their material environment , is a user that is not fully considered . Furthermore , Borgman and Dockter provide research implica - tions related to the dangers of migrating a F2F classroom to an online environment with little consideration of contextual , envi - ronmental factors . The design and structure of an online course affects how students will construct meaning , piecing together prior , current , and future knowledge and experience . Course design de - cisions cannot be based on a F2F pedagogy or method , but rather with purposeful intent of designing for the online context , involving accessibility , inclusivity , and usability principles . Design based on assumptions does not result in a neutral learning space , but rather in pieced - together elements of inaccessible design based not on indi - vidual , realistic students , but on a “generic , homogenous group” ( p . 100 ) [ 17 ] . Thus , Borgman and Dockter suggest user - centered design methods , which anticipate that online “all students face difficulty in accessing the meaning inherent in the teaching materials developed by the teacher because these materials are being accessed through the screen” ( p . 97 ) [ 17 ] rather than as supplemental resources to the teacher’s in - person instruction . Additionally , online courses designed to rely on a standardized language can unintentionally perpetuate a " habit of whiteness” ( p . 2 ) [ 5 ] , a phrase Macmillan coined to describe everyday actions of white Americans that marginalize certain racial groups . In an online course , dominant dialects like Standard American English ( SAE ) can exclude those who do not instinctively speak or write in that dialect , and its use is oftentimes delineated by race , ethnicity , and socioeconomic status . SAE may offer a common dialect and vernac - ular when communicating with others ; however , when students cannot become full , active participants in a technological platform that relies heavily on the typed words on a screen , their participa - tion and academic achievement can be negatively impacted by their lack of complete engagement . Regardless of intent , these habits of whiteness reify a racial and socioeconomic hierarchy that can exclude or oppress others . In addition to courses appearing online , many services at the university level worked to keep business as usual with the onset of the COVID - 19 pandemic and turned to an online format as well . For example , at a postsecondary level in the US , compliance with both 70 Constructing Online Spaces Amid a Pandemic SIGDOC ’22 , October 06 – 08 , 2022 , Boston , MA , USA Section 504 and Title II means that universities provide a Disability Support Services office [ 18 ] , which provides “reasonable accom - modations” that are “necessary means of assistance ( e . g . , special equipment , extra time on tests ) that will aid students with disabili - ties in meeting course requirements without fundamentally altering the academic standards of the course” ( p . 217 - 218 ) [ 18 ] . Thus , rea - sonable accommodations under both Section 504 and the ADA are implemented for the purpose of making services accessible [ 19 ] and aiding students with disabilities in the successful completion of their degrees . During the pandemic , many disability services were moved online in order to accommodate students during a time of unease . However , at a postsecondary level , disability accom - modations are often viewed as individual problems to be “fixed” ( p . 559 ) [ 20 ] rather than a unique opportunity for universities to rethink accessibility and disability access at large , and many univer - sities missed an opportunity to rethink the way that they approach disability accommodation policy with the onset of the pandemic . Many of these conversations of online spaces in higher education continue to remain underdeveloped and undertheorized . However , online learning environments that reflect the voices of participants , as well as their embodied , humanized experiences , is not only ethi - cal technological design , but it also creates a learning environment in which student experiences and their learning processes are an - ticipated , acknowledged , and legitimized . The COVID - 19 pandemic has showcased the various institutions that require changes to re - flect an online world , and student - centered design is an anticipatory method through which these changes can be fulfilled . 3 DEEMPHASIZING HABITS OF WHITENESS IN ONLINE SPACES Currently , the overreliance on SAE in online courses perpetuates deficit ideologies in language variation and can decrease feelings of belonging for students , which ultimately affects their online academic performance . Xu and Jaggars [ 21 ] found that students who identify as Black or Hispanic tended to perform worse in online classrooms than white students—even after accounting for preexisting achievement gaps in F2F classrooms . Part of this poor performance may be attributed to lower rates ofonline participation : Black students viewed and posted fewer messages in discussion boards than their white peers [ 22 ] . In Ruthotto et al . ’s [ 22 ] study , racial discrepancies in online participation rates coincided with feelings of exclusion in online courses . When analyzing variables associated with classroom community and student learning , Black students scored lower across all variables in an online graduate classroom [ 23 ] . When Black students felt excluded from social and learning communities , they distanced themselves from their peers by posting fewer messages in online discussion boards . Educational inequities persist in an online setting because stu - dent interactions are no longer embodied and are instead mediated by a dominant language dialect [ 2 ] , which can be unfamiliar to many students [ 24 ] . As online courses are modeled after F2F class - rooms that are already marginalizing students who do not instinc - tively use SAE , overreliance on standardized languages widens the achievement gap by ignoring the students’ identity , culture , and information needs . Although online courses have afforded students opportunities to exist in two places at the same time [ 25 ] , students can also find themselves in an online space that is antipathetic to language variation . Online courses rely heavily on language to replace F2F inter - actions , so a student may be well represented in their embodied , physical presence but reduced and marginalized in their online one . Their language use online can also be subject to racial discrimi - nation since race is imbued in language , as are social hegemonic structures in students’ technological habits [ 26 ] . Furthermore , user experiences can fall prey to what Jones and Okun ( 2001 ) call the “worship of the written word” ( para . 3 ) [ 27 ] in white supremacy culture , where writing is prioritized over embodied knowledge and that “if it’s not grammatically ‘correct , ’ it has no value” ( para . 3 ) [ 27 ] . By understanding the specific inequities such as “worship of the written word , ” instructors can adjust their pedagogical practices to be more inclusive of students who feel marginalized in an online classroom . As Schmidt explained , “If it is not named and destabi - lized , whiteness risks receding into a kind of double invisibility in the distanced dialogue that can take place online” ( p . 41 ) [ 28 ] . In other words , instructors can enact social justice in their online in - struction by recognizing , revealing , rejecting , and replacing habits of whiteness that are entrenched in online instruction [ 6 ] . While MacMullan [ 5 ] uses “habits of whiteness” to highlight actions rather than intent to hold all white people accountable for racism , marginalized groups may not notice these habits imbued in an online curriculum , nor would they find them problematic . Orzulak [ 29 ] described Black students denigrating their own writ - ing in blog posts because they were written in African American Vernacular English ( AAVE ) , and Payne et al . found that “minority groups rated their own minority dialect as less desirable , lower in status , lower in competence , integrity , and attractiveness . Clearly , these minority groups had assumed the unfavorable stereotypes of their own dialect” ( p . 379 ) [ 30 ] . This internalized racism shows that all racial groups participate in maintaining racist actions through their language preferences , where marginalized racial groups who find their own dialectal language strange perceive themselves as inferior and less desirable [ 31 ] . To address this kind of self - antipathy , MacMullan [ 5 ] suggests that “we can just as easily respond to new experiences , situations , and people with feelings of enjoyment or curiosity” ( p . 173 ) . For those who are marginalized , this may mean responding to them - selves with curiosity instead of disdain for using a dialect other than SAE . For online instructors , this means fostering an online environment that cultivates variations in language and dialect to promote group and self - understanding . One such proposed method of cultivating variations of language in online learning environ - ments is employing user - centered design to anticipate the needs of underrepresented students . User - centered design can increase par - ticipation by encouraging students to contribute to the early design of online courses to increase student agency [ 32 ] . User - centered design also promotes audience awareness , empathy , and dialogic engagement , which allow students to bring their whole selves into a course before being pared down to an online identity defined by their language preferences . Additionally , these pedagogical tools offer marginalized students’ multiple points of entry into a course . User - centered design is understandably a time - consuming under - taking that requires additional resources and individuals to create a course that does not simply replicate a F2F classroom [ 2 ] . This 71 SIGDOC ’22 , October 06 – 08 , 2022 , Boston , MA , USA Hannah Stevens et al . pedagogy is not a step that can be added two days before an on - line course’s launch . However , Rovai and Ponton do not exaggerate when they say that “the achievement gap can be closed by designing and presenting online courses that respond to the culturally - diverse backgrounds of all students” ( p . 89 ) [ 23 ] . For higher education to work as an equalizing force in society , it must move away from the discriminatory practices that are currently found in online course - work that perpetuate habits of whiteness . 4 RECOGNIZING AND LEGITIMIZING DIFFERENT KNOWLEDGES THROUGH USER - CENTERED , PARTICIPATORY DESIGN A feminist , cultural approach to user - centered online course de - sign is concerned with centering upon the realistic , rather than the ideal , student user . Inclusivity of the realistic student experience begins during the design process , and participatory design can be implemented as a methodology that challenges the duality between researcher and “other - researched” by combining the abstract and tacit knowledge that exists between researcher / practitioner and user [ 33 , 34 ] . However , there is a division between the abstract , expert knowledge of an instructor and the tacit , novice knowledge of a student in a traditional , F2F classroom that is further exacer - bated by the technologies that divide human experiences , as well as human knowledge , in an online classroom . Casanova and Mitchell allude to the origin of traditional learning space design in ancient Greece and Rome , in which transmission of knowledge took place between a lecturer and his students [ 35 ] . Design for evolved , non - traditional learning spaces could have never been anticipated by these early classroom models , and yet they still influence current instructional design practices . Rejecting the hierarchical structure of a F2F classroom , Casanova and Mitchell propose a replacement design paradigm in which students are encouraged to be “more active in taking responsibility for the ways in which they engage with their learning” and aligned with “anticipating scenarios and meeting the needs of students of tomorrow” ( p . 1 ) [ 35 ] . Due to tech - nological advancements and global pandemics , tomorrow is here , and with it is the need to replace design practices that reinforce a marginalizing divide with collaborative design strategies that rec - ognize and legitimize many different forms of knowledge . Experts in a content area must also become expert instructional designers , and student users must become experts in navigating the design to anticipate instructional expectations . A participatory , user - centered approach to online course design recognizes the value in tacit user knowledge , as it allows for the anticipation of student experiences as well as the understanding of how to best meet the needs of learners in an environment in which human communication and interaction is mediated through technology . Rather than a method of alienating duality between expert lecturer and novice students , Casanova and Mitchell suggest learning space design that promotes “democratic access to the projection of content” as well as the use of technology to promote “more interaction and engagement in learn - ing” ( p . 10 ) [ 35 ] . In a learning space that limits human interaction , student participation in course design may reveal alternate formats and methods for promoting access to course content that would otherwise remain undiscovered . A cultural approach to user - centered online course design not only acknowledges student experience and feedback but also rec - ognizes and legitimizes different types of knowledge . Blythe’s [ 36 ] approach to user - centered online course design , defines online courses as “technologies themselves” ; thus , technological design and human - computer interaction models can support the develop - ment of the virtual classroom . In relation to technological design , Harbod et . al . [ 10 ] propose practices that result in a shared space for the coproduction of knowledge , especially in marginalized or less dominant forms . Rather than a hierarchical division between expert and novice , this practice takes place through reciprocal processes , in which “knowledge passes from the teacher to the students , but also passes back to the teacher from the students” ( p . 311 ) [ 10 ] . Involving student users in the course design process increases the likelihood of designing technical solutions , rather than technical assumptions that do not guarantee usability for all . Similar to the manner in which designers seek to understand user interaction with their designs , Blythe [ 36 ] recommends that instructors also seek to understand “the know - how and inclinations that students bring to a course – knowledge of how to perform effectively as a student” ( p . 331 ) . Centering on less anticipated expert knowledge through participatory , user - centered practices contributes to the development of courses as technologies that adapt to human needs , rather than as technologies to which humans are expected to adapt . Instead of a focus on teacher - generated interpretations of correct methods for online course access and interaction ( only taking place once the design is considered complete ) , the course design process might be reframed as continuous , thereby incorporating student knowledge , and sharing rhetorical decisions that result in more effective , usable designs overall . User - centered design takes place through iterative processes that involve the users throughout the situational design and develop - ment . It does not assume an idealized student experience behind the screen but invites real , diverse human experiences into the online classroom . User - centered design does not imply that there is only one correct way to access the online course and its content , but rather allows for multiple methods of constructing meaning . There - fore , the following best practices for user - centered , online course design are presented by Borgman and Dockter [ 17 ] as soliciting student feedback early and often , utilizing the feedback to improve course design , presenting content in multiple formats , scaffolding course content with repetition , and adhering to accessibility guide - lines with features such as alt - text for images , content headings for navigability , and transcripts for audio or video files . User - centered approaches to course design begin with a diverse student body in mind and recognize the process as continuous and open to revision , rather than reaching a true point of finalization . Understanding user - centered , participatory design as an ongoing process , Cossham and Irvine [ 11 ] propose an approach in which value is identified in the process over the product , and the prod - uct of an online course can and should remain open to revision . Designing a shared space for knowledge co - production also re - quires a shared power , with the role of instructor as a facilitator rather than an authority , and “opening up the design process to those who are affected by the design” ( para . 2 ) [ 11 ] . However , along with the user experience outcomes for participatory practices in 72 Constructing Online Spaces Amid a Pandemic SIGDOC ’22 , October 06 – 08 , 2022 , Boston , MA , USA online course design , these authors as well as Blythe [ 36 ] also ad - dress the constraints and limiting power structures , specifically regarding the extensive timeline required for building reciprocal relationships , opportunities for genuine dialogue , and gathering and implementing student feedback . Such a timeline and workload may be outside the scope of a single semester or academic school year , but the ongoing participatory process between instructors and student experiences should not be . User - centered design for online learning environments is an ongoing process , and one that is not necessarily complete at the beginning ( or end ) of a semester . Rather , designing with instead of for online student users requires continual placement , and re - placement , of students at the center of online course design . 5 AN ENVIRO - MATERIALIST PARADIGM FOR ONLINE COURSE DESIGN According to Jane Bennett’s theory of vital materialism , when hu - man culture and the nature are no longer interpreted as distinct , but rather as “a knotted world of vibrant matter” then it is easier to understand that “to harm one section of the web may very well be to harm oneself” [ 37 ] . Under the premise of that theory , the more instructors center their online digital design on a user’s ma - terial space and place , the better they serve not only the material environment , but the users themselves . Unfortunately , online in - struction can perpetuate an artificial divide between human culture and “natural” environments when students engage in a techno - logical space with little awareness of their immediate ecologies . Because of this environmental risk , online instructors need to be environmentally cognizant in their course design by highlighting the intersection of social and ecological harms , especially those harms that are local and pertinent to the users of the online space . Sackey’s “environmental justice paradigm for technical communi - cation” ( p . 138 ) [ 15 ] offers one way to rethink the digital rhetoric design of online instruction in a way that helps student users reject a distinction between online space and material place and also rec - ognize environmental injustices that occur when that distinction is assumed . Sackey outlines four major theoretical heuristics for environmentally conscious technical communication , and Mathis emulates Sackey’s approach which “martial [ s ] the best aspects of each theory in order to build a more intersectional and inclusive heuristic” ( p . 151 ) [ 15 ] . In this reframing of digital rhetoric online course design , Mathis offers various pedagogical applications that are informed by the most useful elements of material feminism and environmental justice , two of Sackey’s [ 15 ] underlying heuristics , something Mathis calls an enviro - materialist paradigm . Material feminism ( MF ) centers on “how the material aspects of human culture . . . place burdens on the environment” ( p . 146 ) [ 15 ] . Unfortunately , as Latour notes , enlightenment thinkers like Hobbes and Boyle encouraged a “total separation between nature and culture” ( p . 29 - 30 ) [ 38 ] . That contemporary and Western way of thinking , according to Eichberger , enables us to act in one sphere without “understanding , acknowledging , or mitigating our impact in the other” ( p . 10 ) [ 39 ] . The invisibility of the nonhuman ulti - mately leads to slow almost imperceptible environmental harm , or as Nixon calls it , “slow violence” [ 40 ] that disproportionately harms multiply marginalized and underrepresented ( MMU ) communities . Killingsworth notes how spaces of digital rhetoric reinforce this separation and subsequent violence when we begin to see our “dig - ital display . . . tucked away in climate - controlled offices” as a new nature ( p . 365 ) [ 41 ] . Operating in a new human - constructed nature causes a student’s cumulative impact on physical space to be less visible . One focus in the digital rhetoric design of online curriculum for students , then , should be to make more visible the connection between a student’s online “built environments” ( p . 35 ) [ 13 ] and their local natural environments . Mathis’s use of the term local natural environments is intentional because , as MF’s sister theory , feminist political ecology , suggests , highlighting environmental risk on a local scale can help students recognize environmental risk on global scale [ 15 ] , including the risk to “othered” communities that go unnoticed . The reason that environmental justice ( EJ ) works well as a com - panion to MF in mobilizing users to act on local environmental risks is that EJ movements are rooted in “community - driven response to threats against community health that disproportionately affect people of color” [ 15 ] . Just as humans affect the nonhuman world , the nonhuman world affects human culture . Because human - caused effects on nature affect communities residing in the margins , EJ is foundational for encouraging meaningful community involve - ment . Readers familiar with recent environmentally themed articles published in Communication Design Quarterly will recognize how researchers have leveraged elements of EJ to promote community action on the global front via their designs . For example , Eich - berger [ 39 ] re - envisions map design to include the stories of the marginalized , such as the Indigenous communities whose rights were violated by the construction of the Dakota Access Pipeline . Similarly , Butts & Jones developed an app designed to intentionally draw “attention to slow violence in order to promote environmental justice” ( p . 3 ) [ 42 ] by partnering with Indigenous communities . In the digital rhetoric design of online courses , instructors can make similar moves to highlight the intersection of social and eco - logical harms caused by our current human systems by including resources to community outreach programs , making student users more likely and readily able to take action to prevent the environ - mental risks that put undue burden on the multiply marginalized and underrepresented . Even in online spaces , instructors of technical and professional communication can reveal material environmental risks within students’ local communities through the digital artifacts that stu - dents are asked to analyze and create . In a module of Mathis’s online course , he posted images of harmful algae blooms ( HABs ) found in Mantua Reservoir—a body of water just a few miles from the area where the majority of Mathis’s students live—as well as a Department of Environmental Quality ( DEQ ) warning sign to the public , posted at reservoir access points . To emphasize cul - ture / nature relationships , Mathis included hyperlinks to resources revealing that phosphorus from farm and lawn fertilizers contained in water runoff is one of the major contributors to HABs . Addi - tionally , Mathis included links to resources indicating a connection between HABs and global climate change . As part of the module , students were tasked to use the contextual links to conduct a rhetor - ical analysis of the warning sign and propose revisions to the sign 73 SIGDOC ’22 , October 06 – 08 , 2022 , Boston , MA , USA Hannah Stevens et al . that might motivate users to alter their behavior at home to mitigate the spread of HABs . Helping students eliminate socially constructed divides between the human and nature as well as connecting local environmental concerns to the global stage is all for naught if action is not taken . In Mathis’s course module , not only did he provide images and links to support the rhetorical context behind the HAB warning sign , but he also included links to the DEQ website with a phone number that individuals can call to report sightings of HABs . Including the sign and website are ways of raising awareness , and the phone number was a method in which people can act once aware . Mathis also included a link that routed students to a university extension program webpage designed to raise awareness of local environmen - tal concerns and issues . One of those concerns , of course , are HAB outbreaks . Different from the DEQ website , however , the extension program informs individuals on the cause of HABs . Instead of sim - ply providing a list of how to stay safe around HABs , it includes a list of ways individuals can prevent HABs . Not only did the design of this course’s learning module ask student users to reflect on the cultural influences of their own specific local environment , but it also encouraged them to consider design tactics that might promote behavioral changes that enact justice within their local community and in environmental and political ecologies abroad . In essence , the goal of the module design was to center more comprehensively on the user by considering a user that is “enmeshed” in a “dense network” [ 37 ] of material environments . 6 REVISING AND REPLACING ACCOMMODATION POLICY TO REFLECT BROADER ACCESSIBILITY FOR STUDENTS DURING A GLOBAL PANDEMIC Although studies on the effectiveness ( or lack thereof ) of accom - modations for various students is on the rise , and while disability accommodations at a university level remain an important research topic [ 43 – 45 ] , research on the extent to which accommodations have changed with the onset of the COVID - 19 pandemic and the move to fully online education has remained underdeveloped . More - over , accommodation policy is often drafted without the partici - pation of the primary user ( i . e . , the student ) , and often involves self - advocacy on the part of the student who identifies as being disabled , a stark disconnect between development and application of policy . Using recent university accommodation policy , and a disability studies framework , Stevens seeks to address the follow - ing : In what ways has the COVID - 19 pandemic , and the shift to online learning , changed the way U . S . universities approach dis - ability accommodations and how can these approaches be further user - centered ? According to the “Requesting and Using Accommodations” page of Utah State University’s ( USU ) Disability Resource Center ( DRC ) USU is committed to providing students with disabili - ties reasonable accommodations to provide equal access . . . Please follow the instructions on the Getting Started page to set up a meeting with an accessibility consultant . Accommodations are determined on an in - dividualized basis through an interactive process that begins during a student’s initial appointment with their Accessibility Consultant [ 46 ] . Regarding COVID - 19 accommodation considerations , the “Stu - dents” tab on the webpage header reveals a specific page for “COVID - 19 Accommodation Information . ” This page states , As the University moves to online course delivery for all classes , the DRC wants to assure students that ac - commodations will continue to be provided . In some cases , the way accommodations will be provided may need to be adjusted to fit these unique circumstances . Students should review the following information on this page [ 47 ] . Though USU is moving toward an accessible accommodation model for COVID - 19 , Stevens argues that the university missed a rare opportunity to revise their accommodation policy to reflect broader accessibility for students during a global pandemic and further missed an opportunity to incorporate user involvement into the design of accommodation policy and procedure . Further - more , the university has chosen to employ “strategic ambiguity” [ 51 ] in their policy , a move Stevens argues is more problematic than beneficial . Strategic ambiguity is “ [ when ] individuals use am - biguity purposefully to accomplish their goals” [ 48 ] . According to Davenport and Leitch [ 49 ] , there are four attributes of strategic ambiguity : 1 . Strategic ambiguity can promote ‘unified diversity’ [ 49 ] in that it supports multiple viewpoints and fosters agreement on abstractions without limiting specific interpretations . 2 . Strategic ambiguity “preserves privileged positions” [ 49 ] by shielding the powerful from close scrutiny . 3 . Strategic ambiguity is deniable so that words that seem to mean one thing can , under pressure , “seem to mean some - thing else” [ 49 ] 4 . Strategic ambiguity facilitates organizational change by en - abling shifting interpretations of organizational goals . In this instance , USU has employed strategic ambiguity in its disability accommodation policy to , perhaps , accommodate for a variety of variation in disability accommodation . For example , in the explanation of attendance accommodations , it states , Students using attendance accommodations should be aware that : You may not miss class whenever you want . Attendance accommodations are for disability related absences only ; You are still responsible for all course work . You need to have a plan for obtaining any missed notes , announcements , or class lecture materials [ 50 ] . Without adding specifics to these guidelines , the disability re - source center is making a rhetorical decision to be ambiguous in order to encompass the multiplicity of variation in accommodation . As Edenfield [ 51 ] relays , organizations tend to contain strategically ambiguous content because “Overly precise texts may lack flex - ibility and may require a clear agreement by all parties” ( p . 32 ) [ 51 ] . 74 Constructing Online Spaces Amid a Pandemic SIGDOC ’22 , October 06 – 08 , 2022 , Boston , MA , USA In other words , documents may need flexibility in order to appeal to all stakeholders . However , as Edenfield furthers , “Documents need to be not only flexible enough to adapt to changes but also defined enough to avoid sliding into dysfunction” ( p . 41 ) [ 51 ] . As Davenport and Leitch further , “In its usage to date , strategic ambigu - ity has a particularly instrumental , and possibly unethical . . . flavour” ( p . 1606 ) [ 49 ] . Furthermore , Mandel ( 2019 ) relays that strategic am - biguity is referenced in close relationship to deception and manip - ulation of information [ 52 ] . With the onset of COVID - 19 and the perceived access of online learning , the ambiguity of this particular accommodation process becomes that much more problematic and prioritizes ( whether purposefully or not ) legality over students . Furthermore , this use of strategic ambiguity , and deception de - creases trust both between USU’s DRC and students , and between students to the accommodation process writ large . Though USU may not be intending to fracture trust between various stakeholders in the accommodation process , the ambiguous language does just that . As Davenport and Leitch describe regarding trust and strategic ambiguity , “Stakeholders may perceive the opposite , that is , that the use of strategic ambiguity is another means of constraining or controlling stakeholders , particularly when this continues to be exacerbated by resource dependence” ( p . 1620 ) [ 49 ] . With recent calls for more user - centered design in public policy development [ 53 ] , universities are in a unique position to embrace a more participatory model for accommodation policy moving forward and may choose to forego strategic ambiguity for a much more humanizing approach to disability accommodation policy , which directly involves the end - user . Furthermore , user - centered policymaking can increase transparency in a process that is often already overwhelming for students and can reveal parts of the process that are simply not working , a move that proves beneficial to all policy stakeholders . 7 RECOMMENDATIONS Higher education is in a unique position to reevaluate its current methods for designing and maintaining online learning spaces , particularly through participatory , user - centered approaches . As such , the authors recommend the following based on the specific student - centered advocacy topics discussed in the paper . 7 . 1 Recommendations for deemphasizing habits of whiteness in online learning spaces through a cultural , user - centered approach If higher education wants to be an equalizing force in society , it must recognize , reveal , reject , and replace the habits of whiteness imbued in online coursework . Online instructors can take an active approach to reduce achievement gaps by recognizing and accept - ing student dialects , conducting usability trials before publishing online courses , and teaching about writing to listen and audience awareness . Recommendations for further research include the level of student usability when online courses are designed with and for varied dialects and forms of writing and communication . By accepting language variation in their online instruction , instructors can be more accepting of students themselves . 7 . 2 Recommendations for emphasizing a feminist , participatory approach to online course design Online instructors can practice user - centered , participatory de - sign through usability testing , course check - in surveys , actively implementing student feedback throughout the course , presenting content in multiple formats , and pre / post - course or unit storytelling methods to recognize prior knowledge and its potential effect on current student experience . While there are several potential direc - tions an online course design might take , instructors can provide their current students with the opportunity to determine that di - rection based on objectives , topics , materials , research paths , and course navigation . Recommendations for further research include the effect on the online learning experience when courses are de - signed and maintained in conjunction with student users . A course developed from contributions from all stakeholders involved in the learning process results in the combination of different forms of expert knowledge , and thus determines the learning experience . 7 . 3 Recommendations for implementing an enviro - materialist paradigm in online instruction The following questions can support instructors in designing an on - line course design that encourages users to reject the culture / nature dichotomy and recognize local and global environmental injustices : • Does my design acknowledge the material burdens of human culture ? In other words , does my online content demonstrate the ways in which human culture produces effects on the nonhuman world and vice versa ? Does the content foster in the user a sense of interrelatedness between humans and their ecologies ? • Does my design connect local and global environmental risks ? In other words , do the environmental risks highlighted in the content feel close to home for the user ? Can the issues within the local space be situated within the broader context of global environmental risks ? • Does my design encourage the meaningful involvement of people in environmental regulation and policy ? In other words , do people have the means to act , and are they pro - vided incentive to do so by accessing my content ? Recommendations for further research include the effect on stu - dent perceptions as they relate to their natural and digital embodi - ments when an online course is designed from an enviro - materialist , user - centered approach . 7 . 4 Recommendations for reforming online disability accommodation policy through user - centered design Moving forward , universities should recognize the COVID - 19 pan - demic as an opportunity to revise accommodation policy to reflect the priorities of their stakeholders ( i . e . , students ) . Additionally , higher education might remember that “ensuring that ‘accommo - dations’ provide effective access requires a deliberative and collab - orative process that is responsive to the unique experience of each 75 SIGDOC ’22 , October 06 – 08 , 2022 , Boston , MA , USA Hannah Stevens et al . individual , as advised by the ADA” ( para . 8 ) [ 54 ] . Recommendations for further research include potential learning outcomes for revis - ing online disability accommodation policies through participatory , user - centered methods . 8 CONCLUSION As a less traditional educational format , designing the online learn - ing space goes beyond transitioning traditional learning materials and policies that were intended for F2F environments . Advocacy with and for students during the COVID - 19 pandemic involves the recognition of the human student and material environment behind the representation of the student user and digital space . This paper urges instructors to approach the online learning environment with user - centered design methods that disrupt the hegemonic structure of online spaces . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Lucy Cooker , Tony Cotton , and Helen Toft . 2021 . Transforming teaching : Global responses to teaching under the COVID - 19 pandemic . Routledge . [ 2 ] June Griffin and Deborah Minter . 2013 . The rise of the online writing classroom : Reflecting on the material conditions of college composition teaching . College Composition and Communication ( 2013 ) . 140 - 161 . [ 3 ] NastaranPeimaniandHesamKamalipour . 2021 . OnlineeducationandtheCOVID - 19Outbreak : Acasestudyofonlineteachingduringlockdown . EducationSciences 11 , 72 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / educsci11020072 [ 4 ] Josh Moody . 2022 . Sticking with in - person classes as COVID spikes . Inside Higher Ed . from https : / / www . insidehighered . com / news / 2022 / 01 / 13 / some - colleges - stick - person - classes - covid - spikes [ 5 ] Terrance MacMullan . 2009 . Habits of Whiteness . Indiana University Press . [ 6 ] Rebecca Walton , Kristen Moore , and Natasha Jones . 2019 . Technical Communica - tion After the Social Justice Turn . Routledge . [ 7 ] Dawn S . Opel and Jacqueline Rhodes . 2018 . Beyond student as user : Rhetoric , multimodality , and user - centered design . Computers and Composition 49 , 71 - 81 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compcom . 2018 . 05 . 008 [ 8 ] Alex A . Ahmed . 2017 . Trans competent interaction design : A qualitative study on voice , identity , and technology . Interacting with Computers 30 , 1 , 53 – 71 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / iwc / iwx018 [ 9 ] Natasha N . Jones . 2016 . Narrative inquiry in human - centered design . Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 46 , 471 - 492 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0047281616653489 [ 10 ] Charly Harbord , Patrick Hung , and Ruth Falconer . 2021 . “Nothing about us , with - out us” . The 39th ACM International Conference on Design of Communication . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3472714 . 3473657 [ 11 ] Amanda Cossham and Jan Irvine . 2021 . Participatory design , co - production , and curriculum renewal . Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 62 , 4 ( Sept . 2021 ) , 383 – 402 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3138 / jelis - 62 - 4 - 2020 - 0089 [ 12 ] Beth L . Hewett and Christa Ehmann Powers . 2007 . Guest editors’ introduc - tion : Online teaching and learning : Preparation , development , and organi - zational communication . Technical Communication Quarterly 16 , 1 - 11 , DOI : 10 . 1080 / 10572250709336574 [ 13 ] Lisa Melonçon . 2007 . Exploring electronic landscapes : Technical communication , online learning , and instructor preparedness . Technical Communication Quarterly 16 , 31 - 53 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10572250709336576 [ 14 ] Matthew Ortoleva . 2013 . Let’s not forget ecological literacy . Literacy in Composi - tion Studies 1 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 66 - 73 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 21623 / 1 . 1 . 2 . 5 [ 15 ] Donnie Johnson Sackey . 2018 . An environmental justice paradigm for techni - cal communication . Key theoretical frameworks : Teaching technical communi - cation in the twenty - first century 138 , 160 ( 2018 ) . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7330 / 9781607327585 . c006 [ 16 ] Rob Nixon . 2011 . Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor . Harvard University Press . [ 17 ] Jessie Borgman and Jason Dockter . 2018 . Considerations of access and design in the online writing classroom . Computers and Composition , 49 , ( Sept . 2018 ) , 94 – 105 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compcom . 2018 . 05 . 001 [ 18 ] Sydney Miller , Ryan Zayac , Amber Paulk , and Stacy Lee . 2019 . Disability accom - modation requests : Prevalence and preference of review processes at postsec - ondary institutions in the United States . Journal of Postsecondary Education and Disability 32 , 3 ( 2019 ) , 217 - 226 . [ 19 ] Michael J . Davis . 2018 . Disability accommodation in higher education . Oklahoma Bar Journal 89 , 10 - 17 . [ 20 ] NigelCox . 2017 . Enactingdisabilitypolicythroughunseensupport : Theeveryday use of disability classifications by university administrators . Journal of Education Policy 32 , 542 - 563 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02680939 . 2017 . 1303750 [ 21 ] Di Xu and Shanna Jaggars . 2013 . Adaptability to online learning : Differences across types of students and academic subject areas . Columbia Academic Com - mons , 1 - 36 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7916 / D82N59NB [ 22 ] Isabel Ruthotto , Quintin Kreth , Jillian Stevens , Clare Trively , and Julia Melkers . 2020 . Lurking and participation in the virtual classroom : The effects of gen - der , race , and age among graduate students in computer science . Computers & Education 151 , 103854 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2020 . 103854 [ 23 ] Alfred P . Rovai and Michael K . Ponton . 2019 . An examination of sense of class - room community and learning among African American and Caucasian graduate students . Online Learning 9 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 24059 / olj . v9i3 . 1786 [ 24 ] Christina Cedillo . 2017 . Diversity , technology , and composition : Honoring stu - dents’ multimodal home places . Present Tense : A Journal of Rhetoric in Society , 2 , 6 , ( 2017 ) , 1 - 9 . . [ 25 ] Avery C . Edenfield , Ryan Cheek , and Sam Clem . 2021 . Trans * vulnerability and digital research ethics : A qubit ethical analysis of transparency activism . In The 39th ACM International Conference on Design of Communication ( SIGDOC ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 101 – 107 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3472714 . 3473628 [ 26 ] AngelaM . Haas . 2012 . Race , rhetoric , andtechnology . JournalofBusinessandTech - nical Communication 26 , 277 - 310 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1050651912439539 [ 27 ] Kenneth Jones and Tema Okun . 2001 . Dismantling racism : A workbook for social change . White Supremacy Culture . Retrieved July 21 , 2022 from https : / / www . thc . texas . gov / public / upload / preserve / museums / files / White _ Supremacy _ Culture . pdf [ 28 ] Tyler T . Schmidt . 2011 . “Subjectivities - in - Process : ” Writing race and the on - line discussion board . The Radical Teacher , 36 - 46 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5406 / radicalteacher . 90 . 0036 [ 29 ] Melinda J . McBee Orzulak . 2015 . Disinviting deficit ideologies : Beyond “that’s standard , ”“that’sracist , ”and“that’syourmothertongue . ” . ResearchintheTeaching of English 50 , 176 - 198 . [ 30 ] Kay Payne , Joe Downing , and John Christopher Fleming . 2000 . Speaking Ebonics in a professional context : The role of ethos / source credibility and perceived sociability of the speaker . Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 30 , 367 - 383 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2190 / 93u1 - 0859 - 0vc3 - f5lk [ 31 ] Andil Gosine . 2007 . Brown to blonde at gay . com : Passing white in queer cy - berspace . Queer Online : Media Technology & Sexuality 40 , 139 . [ 32 ] Natasha N . Jones and Miriam F . Williams . 2017 . The social justice impact of plain language : A critical approach to plain - language analysis . IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication 60 , 412 - 429 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / tpc . 2017 . 2762964 [ 33 ] Clay Spinuzzi . 2005 . The methodology of participatory design . Technical Com - munication ( Washington ) 52 , 163 - 174 . [ 34 ] Henry Mainsah and Andrew Morrison . 2014 . Participatory design through a cultural lens . Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference on Short Papers , Industry Cases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium papers , and Keynote abstracts - PDC . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662195 [ 35 ] Diogo Casanova and Paul Mitchell . 2017 . The cube and the poppy flower : Partici - patory approaches for designing technology - enhanced learning spaces . Journal of Learning Spaces 6 , 3 , 1 - 12 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 21125 / edulearn . 2016 . 0462 [ 36 ] StuartBlythe . 2001 . Designingonlinecourses : User - centeredpractices . Computers andComposition18 , 4 , 329 – 346 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s8755 - 4615 ( 01 ) 00066 - 4 [ 37 ] Jane Bennett . 2009 . Vibrant Matter . Duke University Press . [ 38 ] Bruno Latour . 2012 . We Have Never Been Modern . Harvard University Press . [ 39 ] Ryan Eichberger . 2019 . Maps , silence , and Standing Rock . Communication Design Quarterly 7 , 9 - 21 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3331558 . 3331560 [ 40 ] Rob Nixon . 2011 . Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor . Harvard University Press . [ 41 ] M . Jimmie Killingsworth . 2005 . From environmental rhetoric to ecocomposition and ecopoetics : Finding a place for professional communication . Technical Com - municationQuarterly14 , 359 - 373 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15427625tcq1404 _ 1 [ 42 ] Shannon Butts and Madison Jones . 2021 . Deep mapping for environmental communication design . Communication Design Quarterly 9 , 4 - 19 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3437000 . 3437001 [ 43 ] Cynthia Bruce and M . Lynn Aylward . 2021 . Disability and self - advocacy experi - ences in university learning contexts . Scandinavian Journal of Disability Research 23 , 14 - 26 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 16993 / sjdr . 741 [ 44 ] Barbara L . Roberts . 2012 . Beyond psychometric evaluation of the student - task determinants of accommodation : Why students with learning disabilities may not need to be accommodated . Canadian Journal of School Psychology 27 , 1 , 72 - 80 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0829573512437171 [ 45 ] Michael E . Skinner . 2007 . Faculty willingness to provide accommodations and course alternatives to postsecondary students with learning disabilities . Interna - tional Journal of Special Education 22 , 2 , 32 - 45 . 76 Constructing Online Spaces Amid a Pandemic SIGDOC ’22 , October 06 – 08 , 2022 , Boston , MA , USA [ 46 ] Requesting and Using Accommodations | USU . Utah State University . Retrieved July 21 , 2022 from https : / / www . usu . edu / drc / student / accommodations / index [ 47 ] Accommodations and the Transition to Online Course Delivery | USU . Utah State University . Retrieved July 21 , 2022 from https : / / www . usu . edu / drc / student / covid19 - information [ 48 ] Eric M . Eisenberg . 1984 . Ambiguity as strategy in organizational communi - cation . Communication Monographs 51 , 227 - 242 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03637758409390197 [ 49 ] Sally Davenport and Shirley Leitch . 2005 . Circuits of power in practice : Strategic ambiguity as delegation of authority . Organization Studies 26 , 1603 - 1623 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0170840605054627 [ 50 ] Requesting and Using Accommodations | USU . Utah State University . Retrieved July 21 , 2022 from https : / / www . usu . edu / drc / student / accommodations / index [ 51 ] Avery C . Edenfield . 2018 . The burden of ambiguity : Writing at a cooperative . Technical Communication 65 , 31 - 45 . [ 52 ] Robert Mandel . 2019 . Global Data Shock . Stanford University Press . [ 53 ] Stephen Moilanen . 2019 . When to use user - centered design for public policy . Stanford Social Innovation Review . Retrieved July 21 , 2022 from https : / / ssir . org / articles / entry / when _ to _ use _ user _ centered _ design _ for _ public _ policy [ 54 ] AHEAD . n . d . . Supporting accommodation requests : Guidance on documentation practices . from https : / / www . ahead . org / professional - resources / accommodations / documentation 77