Enhanced acetylation of alpha - tubulin in inﬂuenza A virus infected epithelial cells Matloob Husain ⇑ , Kevin S . Harrod Infectious Diseases Program , Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute , Albuquerque , NM 87108 , USA a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 1 October 2010 Revised 27 October 2010 Accepted 12 November 2010 Available online 19 November 2010 Edited by Jacomine Krijnse - Locker Keywords : Inﬂuenza A Tubulin Acetylation Histone deacetylase 6 Rho a b s t r a c t Acetylated microtubules ( AcMTs ) , a post - translationally modiﬁed form of microtubules , promote polarized protein transport . Here we report that inﬂuenza A virus ( IAV ) induces the acetylation of microtubules in epithelial cells . By employing speciﬁc inhibitors and siRNA we demonstrate Rho GTPase - mediated downregulation of tubulin deacetylase activity in IAV - infected cells , resulting in increased tubulin acetylation . Further , we demonstrate that depolymerization / deacetylation or enhanced acetylation of microtubules decreased or increased , respectively , the release of virions from infected cells . IAV assembly requires the polarized delivery of viral components to apical plasma membrane . Our ﬁndings suggest the potential involvement of AcMTs in polarized trafﬁcking of IAV components . (cid:2) 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies . Published by Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Cytoskeleton is actively involved in virus entry , assembly , and release [ 1 , 2 ] . Cytoskeleton has been proposed to be involved in inﬂuenza A virus ( IAV ) assembly too [ 3 ] ; however , a precise role of cytoskeletal elements is not understood . IAV causes an acute febrile respiratory disease in humans . IAV , an enveloped virus , is the prototype of family Orthomyxoviridae and possesses a segmented negative - sense RNA genome [ 4 ] . It replicates in the nucleus , assembles at the plasma membrane and is released by budding [ 5 ] . IAV assembly requires the polarized delivery of viral components to apical plasma membrane . IAV particle consist of three major components : the viral envelope , matrix protein ( M1 ) , and viral ribonucleoprotein ( vRNP ) core . During assembly , constit - uents of viral envelope are directly transported to the plasma membrane via exocytic pathway . However , transport mechanism of M1 and vRNP to the plasma membrane is not fully understood . The likely possibilities are that they use a piggy - back mechanism on viral transmembrane proteins or cytoskeletal elements [ 3 ] . Pre - viously , M1 and nucleoprotein ( NP ) of IAV were shown to interact with actin ﬁlaments [ 6 , 7 ] . Recent reports have described the association of vRNP with microtubules and incorporation of a - and b - tubulin , the heterodimers of microtubules into IAV particles [ 8 – 10 ] . Further , we recently have shown the cleavage of tubulin deacetylase histone deacetylase 6 ( HDAC6 ) by IAV - induced caspase - 3 in infected cells [ 11 ] . Microtubules - based transport machinery helps many viruses to effect their movement within the cell [ 2 ] . Our hypothesis is that IAV modulates the microtubule cytoskeleton to facilitate the transport of viral components . Therefore , we are investigating the modulation of microtubule network and its signiﬁcance during IAV replication . Here , we show that IAV induces the acetylation of a - tubulin in epithelial cells . 2 . Materials and methods 2 . 1 . Cells , virus , and plasmids Madin - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) and normal human bron - chial epithelial ( NHBE ) ( provided by Greg Conner , University of Miami ) cells were grown in MEM ( Invitrogen ) and BEGM ( Lonza ) , respectively . IAV ( H1N1 ) New Caledonia strain was propagated in embryonated chicken eggs and titrated on MDCK cells . Plasmid pcDNA3 ( Invitrogen ) expressing human HDAC6 was provided by Tso - Pang Yao ( Duke University ) . HDAC6 ( D1088E ) mutant has been described elsewhere [ 11 ] . 0014 - 5793 / $ 36 . 00 (cid:2) 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies . Published by Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . febslet . 2010 . 11 . 023 Abbreviations : AcMTs , acetylated microtubules ; AcTub , acetylated a - tubulin ; BIM , bisindolylmaleimide ; CdTB , Clostridium difﬁcile toxin B ; HDAC6 , histone deacetylase 6 ; hpi , hour post - infection ; IAV , inﬂuenza A virus ; INF , infected ; M1 , matrix protein ; mDia , mammalian diaphanous protein ; MDCK , Madin - Darby canine kidney ; MOI , multiplicity of infection ; NHBE , normal human bronchial epithelial ; Noc , nocodazole ; NP , nucleoprotein ; PBS , phosphate - buffered saline ; TSA , trichos - tatin A ; UNI , uninfected ; vRNP , viral ribonucleoprotein ⇑ Corresponding author . Address : 2425 Ridgecrest Drive , SE , Albuquerque , NM 87108 , USA . Fax : + 1 505 3488567 . E - mail address : mhusain @ lrri . org ( M . Husain ) . FEBS Letters 585 ( 2011 ) 128 – 132 journal homepage : www . FEBSLetters . org 2 . 2 . Infection and transfection Cells were washed twice with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) . Virus inoculum , diluted in PBS and supplemented with 3 l g / ml trypsin was added to cells . After 1 h incubation at 37 (cid:3) C , inoculum was removed and cells were washed once with PBS . Fresh MEM was added and cells were incubated at 37 (cid:3) C for 24 h . In some experiments , MEM supplemented with bisindolylmaleimide ( BIM ) , Clostridium difﬁcile toxin B ( CdTB ) , nocodazole ( Noc ) ( Calbio - chem ) or trichostatin A ( TSA ) ( Sigma - Aldrich ) was added to cells after removing the inoculum and cells were incubated as above . To inactivate IAV , inoculum was exposed to 1 – 2 mJ of UV radiation . For transfection , 2 – 3 l g plasmid DNA and 4 – 5 l l Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) were diluted separately in OptiMEM I ( Invitro - gen ) , mixed and incubated for 20 – 30 min at room temperature . DNA - Lipofectamine complex was added to cells and cells were incubated for 24 h at 37 (cid:3) C . 2 . 3 . Western blotting Cells were harvested , washed with PBS , and lysed in lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 5 % SDS , and protease - inhibitor cocktail [ Roche ] ) . The whole cell lysate was re - solved on 10 % Bis – Tris or 7 % Tris - acetate gels ( Invitrogen ) and pro - teins were transferred to nitrocellulose membrane . Membrane was probed with mouse anti - acetylated a - tubulin ( anti - AcTub ) , anti - a - tubulin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , anti - NP ( Chemicon ) , anti - RhoA ( Cytoskel - eton Inc . ) or rabbit anti - actin ( Abcam ) , anti - HDAC6 ( Santa Cruz ) primary antibodies followed by HRP - conjugated donkey anti - mouse ( Afﬁnity BioReagents ) or anti - rabbit ( Pierce ) secondary antibodies , respectively . Protein bands were developed with chemiluminescent kit ( Thermo ) . All the Western blotting steps were performed at room temperature . To re - probe the same mem - brane with another antibody , membrane was stripped with Re - store buffer ( Thermo ) for 20 – 30 min at 37 (cid:3) C . 2 . 4 . siRNA - mediated knockdown Pre - designed target speciﬁc siRNA oligonucleotides against HDAC6 ( Catalogue No . sc - 35544 ) and RhoA ( Catalogue No . sc - 29471 ) genes were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotech . Oligonucle - otides ( 50 nM ) were transfected into cells using 2 l l Lipofectamine RNAiMax ( Invitrogen ) as described above . After 24 – 48 h incuba - tion at 37 (cid:3) C , cells were infected and analyzed by Western blotting as above . 2 . 5 . Real time RT - PCR Cells were grown on transwell ﬁlters ( Corning ) and infected from apical side . At 24 h post - infection ( hpi ) , apical media was col - lected and centrifuged at 2000 (cid:2) g for 5 min . Viral RNA was then isolated from the media by using QIAamp kit ( Qiagen ) . A quantita - tive real time RT - PCR assay was performed using viral RNA as a template to amplify IAV M1 gene , in vitro transcribed M1 RNA was used as standard . QuantiTect RT mix ( Qiagen ) , RNA template , M1 forward primer ( AGATTGCCGACTCCCAGCATAAGT ) , reverse pri - mer ( TGTTCACTCGATCCAGCCATTTGC ) , and probe ( 56 - FAM / AGAAC AGAATGGTTCTGGCCAGCACT / 3BHQ ) were mixed and RT - PCR reac - tion was run on ABI 7900 thermocycler . 2 . 6 . Virions preparation Cells were grown on transwell ﬁlters and infected from apical side . At 24 hpi , apical media was collected , cleared off cell debris , and layered on 30 % sucrose - NTE ( 100 mM NaCl , 10 mM Tris , pH 7 . 4 , 1 mM EDTA ) cushion and centrifuged at 250 000 (cid:2) g for 2 h at 4 (cid:3) C in Beckman TLA55 rotor . The pellet was resuspended in sam - ple buffer and analyzed by Western blotting . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . IAV - infected epithelial cells contain elevated levels of AcTub and a - tubulin We recently demonstrated the cleavage of HDAC6 by IAV - in - duced caspase - 3 in infected cells [ 11 ] . This indicated the potential regulation of HDAC6 activity in IAV - infected cells . Because HDAC6 is a - tubulin deacetylase [ 12 ] , we investigated the acetylation of a - tubulin in IAV - infected cells . MDCK cells were infected with IAV , and total cell lysates were analyzed by Western blotting . We dis - covered that IAV - infected cells contained elevated level of AcTub ( Fig . 1a ) . Over 2 . 5 - times more AcTub was detected in infected cell lysate as compared to uninfected cell lysate ( Fig . 1c ) . Interestingly , elevated levels of total a - tubulin ( Fig . 1a ) and b - tubulin ( not shown ) were also observed at the same time . Over 1 . 5 - fold in - crease in total a - tubulin level was observed in infected cells ( Fig . 1c ) , suggesting that IAV is potentially regulating the level of total tubulin too . To conﬁrm these observations , levels of AcTub and total a - tubulin were analyzed in cells infected with IAV in the presence of BIM , an inhibitor of IAV replication [ 13 ] or with UV - inactivated IAV . No increase was observed in the level of either tubulin in BIM - treated infected cells ( Fig . 1a ) as well as cells in - fected with UV - inactivated IAV ( Fig . 1b ) , suggesting that a produc - tive IAV infection is required . Primary NHBE cells , which are the actual target of IAV in vivo , were used to further conﬁrm the obser - vations made in MDCK cells . Likewise , NHBE cells also showed ele - vated levels of acetylated and total a - tubulin after IAV infection ( data not shown ) . 3 . 2 . Activity of tubulin deacetylase HDAC6 is potentially downregulated in IAV - infected cells To understand the mechanism of enhanced a - tubulin acetyla - tion , cells were treated with TSA , an HDAC6 inhibitor [ 12 ] . As expected , after TSA treatment uninfected cells showed an increase in a - tubulin acetylation due to inhibition of HDAC6’s deacetylase activity ; however , TSA - induced increase in the acetylation of Fig . 1 . IAV - infected cells contain elevated levels of AcTub and total a - tubulin . MDCK cellswereinfected withIAVat MOIof 0 . 5 . Cells weretreated with20 l MBIM ( a ) or infected with UV - inactivated IAV ( b ) where indicated . At 24 hpi cells were lysedand total cell lysates were resolved onSDS – PAGE , and indicated proteinswere detected by Western blotting . ( c ) Quantitation of increase in the amount of AcTub and a - tubulin in infected cells . The intensity of AcTub , a - tubulin , and actin bands was quantitated using Quantity One 4 . 0 software ( Bio - Rad ) . The amount of AcTub and a - tubulin was normalized with actin amount , and was considered a 1 - fold increase in uninfected ( UNI ) cells for comparisons to infected ( INF ) cells . Each bar represents the mean ± standard deviation ( S . D . ) for three independent experiments . M . Husain , K . S . Harrod / FEBS Letters 585 ( 2011 ) 128 – 132 129 a - tubulin was signiﬁcantly higher in infected cells ( data not shown ) . This indicated that HDAC6 activity is potentially downreg - ulated in infected cells , consequently resulting into elevated level of AcTub . To conﬁrm this , expression of HDAC6 was knocked down by siRNA before IAV infection . Like TSA treatment , uninfected cells with reduced level of HDAC6 expression showed an increase in the acetylation of a - tubulin ( Fig . 2b ) . Similarly , acetylation of a - tubu - lin was even higher in infected cells with knocked down expression of HDAC6 ( Fig . 2b ) . To conversely conﬁrm the downregulation of HDAC6 activity in IAV - infected cells , deacetylation efﬁciency of plasmid - expressed HDAC6 was compared in uninfected and infected cells . Plasmid - expressed HDAC6 was signiﬁcantly effective in deacetylating the AcTub in uninfected cells ( Fig . 2c ) , however , in infected cells , plasmid - expressed HDAC6 was moder - ately effective in deacetylating the AcTub ( Fig . 2d ) . Over 57 % AcTub was deacetylated by plasmid - expressed HDAC6 in uninfected cells as compared to only 34 % in IAV - infected cells ( Fig . 2e ) . This data further indicated that HDAC6 activity is downregulated in IAV - infected cells . To assess whether caspase - mediated cleavage of HDAC6 [ 11 ] is responsible for this , deacetylation of AcTub was analyzed in infected cells overexpressing the cleavage - resistant HDAC6 ( D1088E ) mutant . Like cleavage - sensitive wild type HDAC6 , cleavage - resistant HDAC6 ( D1088E ) mutant also deacety - lated the AcTub to a similar degree ( Fig . 2d ) , suggesting that cleavage of HDAC6 by caspase - 3 does not contribute to downregu - lation of its activity . 3 . 3 . Rho GTPase is potentially involved in the downregulation of HDAC6 activity in IAV - infected cells It has been demonstrated earlier that Rho GTPase regulates deacetylation of a - tubulin via HDAC6 [ 14 ] . To assess Rho GTPase’s role in the enhanced acetylation of a - tubulin in IAV - infected cells , expression of Rho was knocked down by siRNA before infecting the cells with IAV . Consistent with Rho - mediated regulation of HDAC6 activity , uninfected cells with depleted Rho expression showed an increase in the acetylation of a - tubulin ( Fig . 3b ) . Similarly , acetyla - tion of a - tubulin was even higher in infected cells with knocked down expression of Rho ( Fig . 3b ) , indicating a Rho - mediated down - regulation of HDAC6 activity in IAV - infected cells . Almost identical results were obtained when infected cells were treated with CdTB , an inhibitor of Rho activity ( data not shown ) . To conversely con - ﬁrm the involvement of Rho , infected cells were treated with Noc , a microtubule depolymerizing drug , which also activates the Rho activity [ 15 ] . We argued that if Rho is involved in the enhanced acetylation of a - tubulin then Noc treatment should result in the signiﬁcant deacetylation of a - tubulin due to activation of Rho and subsequent activation of HDAC6 . Indeed , Noc greatly dimin - ished a - tubulin acetylation in uninfected cells ( not shown ) . Simi - larly , we could not detect the AcTub in Noc - treated infected cells ( Fig . 3c ) . Further , Noc signiﬁcantly reduced the TSA - induced acet - ylation of a - tubulin in infected cells ( Fig . 3d ) . Collectively , these data suggest that a Rho - mediated pathway is involved in the en - hanced acetylation of a - tubulin in IAV - infected cells . 3 . 4 . Acetylation of microtubules affects the release of IAV from infected cells We next investigated the signiﬁcance of enhanced a - tubulin acetylation during IAV replication . A time - course experiment re - vealed that increase in the levels of AcTub and a - tubulin occur simultaneously between 6 and 12 hpi and coincide with IAV growth phase ( data not shown ) . These data indicated the potential role of acetylated microtubules ( AcMTs ) in IAV assembly . Because microtubules are actively involved in the transport of viral compo - nents [ 2 ] , we anticipated the role of AcMTs in the transport of IAV components and evaluated the effect of microtubule acetylation on IAV release from infected cells . For this , cells grown on transwell Fig . 2 . ( a ) Schematic showing the effect of HDAC6 on AcTub . ( b ) siRNA - mediated knockdown of HDAC6 expression further increased the acetylation of a - tubulin in infected cells . NHBE cells were transfected with control ( CT ) or HDAC6 ( HD ) siRNAs for 24 h , and then infected and analyzed as Fig . 1 . ( c and d ) Plasmid - expressed HDAC6 signiﬁcantly or moderately deacetylated the a - tubulin in uninfected ( UNI ) ( c ) or infected ( INF ) ( d ) cells , respectively . MDCK cells were transfected with empty plasmid pcDNA3 ( pc ) or expressing wild - type HDAC6 ( HD ) or HDAC6 ( D1088E ) mutant ( MT ) . Cells then were infected and analyzed as Fig . 1 . ( e ) Quantitation of deacetylation of AcTub by plasmid - expressed HDAC6 . The amount of AcTub was quantitated and normalized with actin as in Fig . 1c . AcTub amount detected in pcDNA3 - transfected cells was considered 100 % for comparisons to HDAC6 - transfected cells . Each bar represents the mean ± S . D . for three independent experiments . NA , not applicable . 130 M . Husain , K . S . Harrod / FEBS Letters 585 ( 2011 ) 128 – 132 ﬁlter supports were infected and treated with Noc or TSA . Viral RNA was isolated from the apical media collected from mock - trea - ted , Noc - treated and TSA - treated infected cells and used as a tem - plate to amplify IAV M1 gene using real time RT - PCR . More than 3 - fold reduction in M1 gene copies was detected in the apical media of Noc - treated infected cells as compared to mock infection ( Fig . 4a ) . Conversely , over 3 - fold increase in the M1 copy numbers was detected in the apical media of TSA - treated infected cells as compared to mock - treated cells ( Fig . 4a ) . Almost identical results were obtained when virions were sedimented by ultracentrifuga - tion from the apical media of mock - treated , Noc - treated and TSA - treated infected cells and detected by Western blotting using anti - NP antibody ( Fig . 4b ) . These data suggest that AcMTs are potentially involved in the trafﬁcking of IAV components . 4 . Discussion We have shown here the upregulation of acetylation of a - tubu - lin after IAV infection in non - polarized as well as polarized ( not shown ) epithelial cells . Further , enhancement in the level of total a - tubulin also was observed in IAV - infected cells . Because of the potential involvement of AcMTs in the trafﬁcking of IAV compo - nents we initially focused on understanding the mechanism of en - hanced acetylation of a - tubulin . At this point , we do not know the mechanism of elevated level of total tubulin in infected cells and currently working on it . Increase in total tubulin level may not be due to increased tubulin synthesis because IAV , mostly through its NS1 protein has been shown to shut off host protein synthesis [ 16 ] . In contrast , NS1 also has been shown to enhance the protein translation [ 17 ] . Therefore , it is likely that IAV differentially regu - lates the protein synthesis in infected cells though this needs to be examined with respect to tubulin . Alternatively , IAV could be regulating the stability of tubulin polypeptides in infected cells . The siRNA - mediated knockdown and overexpression of HDAC6 suggested that HDAC6 activity was potentially downregulated in infected cells , consequently resulting into elevated level of AcTub . In addition , IAV may also be regulating the activity of a - tubulin acetylase to enhance the level of AcTub . Because , there also was a simultaneous increase in the level of total a - tubulin after IAV infection it is possible that newly appeared a - tubulin was greatly acetylated . In the future we may be able to test this event because , at present , mechanism of a - tubulin acetylation is not understood . The caspase - 3 - mediated cleavage of HDAC6 did not contribute to Fig . 3 . ( a ) Schematic showing the effectof Rho onacetylation of a - tubulin . ( b ) siRNA - mediated knockdown of Rho expression further increased the acetylation of a - tubulin in infected cells . MDCK cells were transfected with control ( Cont ) or Rho siRNAs for 48 h , and then infected and analyzed as Fig . 1 . ( c and d ) Noc induces the deacetylation of AcTub in infected cells . MDCK cells were infected and analyzed as Fig . 1 . Noc ( 30 l M ) and / or TSA ( 3 l M ) were included in the medium where indicated . For presentation , some lanes are joined together from different parts of the same blot . UNI , uninfected ; INF , infected . Fig . 4 . Depolymerization / deacetylation and enhanced acetylation of microtubules decreased and increased , respectively , the release of IAV from infected cells . MDCK cells were grown on transwell ﬁlters and infected with IAV at MOI of 0 . 1 . Noc ( 30 l M ) or TSA ( 30 nM ) was included in the medium where indicated . ( a ) Quantitative real time RT - PCR of M1 gene was performed using the viral RNA template isolated from apical media of mock - treated , Noc - treated or TSA - treated infected cells . Each bar represents the mean ± S . D . for three independent infections . ( b ) Released virions were isolated from apical media of mock - treated , Noc - treated or TSA - treated infected cells by ultracentrifugation . Virions were resuspended directly in sample loading buffer , resolved on SDS – PAGE , and detected by Western blotting . M . Husain , K . S . Harrod / FEBS Letters 585 ( 2011 ) 128 – 132 131 downregulation of HDAC6 activity as both cleavage - sensitive and cleavage - resistant HDAC6s deacetylated the a - tubulin in infected cells to similar extents when overexpressed . On the other hand , a Rho - mediated regulation of HDAC6 activity was evident in IAV - in - fected cells . Rho family GTPases , which include Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 , are activated from inactive GDP - bound to active GTP - bound state in response to stimuli . The activated Rho GTPases act on downstream effectors like p21 - activated protein kinase , Rho - asso - ciated coiled - coil - containing protein kinase , neuronal Wiskott - Al - drich syndrome protein , mammalian diaphanous protein ( mDia ) and regulate the organization of cytoskeletal elements . The addi - tional enhancement of a - tubulin acetylation due to silencing of Rho gene and abolition of acetylation in the presence of Rho acti - vator Noc clearly suggest that Rho is potentially modulating the HDAC6 activity in IAV - infected cells . At this point , however , we do not know which Rho effector is involved in the downstream sig - naling and regulation of HDAC6 activity in IAV - infected cells . A Rho - mDia - HDAC6 pathway has been shown to regulate the micro - tubule acetylation in osteoclasts [ 14 ] . Future investigations will re - veal the signaling mechanisms upstream and downstream of Rho in IAV - infected cells . In addition , Rho also could be involved in in - creased level of total a - tubulin because when expression of Rho was repressed in uninfected cells the amount of a - tubulin consid - erably went up ( Fig . 3b ) ; however , this observation needs further investigations . On the other hand , repression ( Fig . 2b ) or overex - pression ( Fig . 2c and d ) of HDAC6 did not alter the level of total a - tubulin in either uninfected or infected cells as compared to the respective controls . For IAV assembly all viral components must be transported to apical surface of plasma membrane . However , little is known about the involvement of cellular pathways and mechanism of the trans - port of vRNP and M1 to assembly site . Recent reports have demon - strated the association of vRNP with the microtubules [ 8 , 9 ] suggesting a role for microtubules in the transport of vRNPs , how - ever , a potential mechanism remains to be elucidated . Acetylation is one of the post - translational modiﬁcations of a - tubulin [ 18 ] ; therefore , IAV is modulating the post - translational modiﬁcations of microtubules in infected cells . This is a novel ﬁnding , which could have implications in understanding the polarized transport of IAV components to apical plasma membrane . Post - translational modiﬁcations tend to stabilize the microtubules , which then pref - erentially promote the polarized protein trafﬁcking [ 18 ] . Recently , some viruses have been shown to modulate the acetylation of microtubules to facilitate delivery of virions to subcellular replica - tion sites [ 19 – 21 ] . We have demonstrated here the enhanced acet - ylation of microtubules in IAV - infected cells , and decrease in the release of virions due to microtubule depolymerization / deacetyla - tion and an increase due to enhanced microtubule acetylation . However , decrease in virions released after Noc treatment was not signiﬁcantly higher . This suggests that without AcMTs , IAV components would randomly diffuse in the cytoplasm of infected cells and reach the plasma membrane in a non - polarized fashion , likely resulting in reduced or inefﬁcient virion assembly and re - lease . Future studies will elucidate the role of AcMTs in the polar - ized trafﬁcking of IAV components . Acknowledgments We thank Jesse vanWestrienen , Richard Jaramillo , and Dr . Jenni - fer Tipper for technical assistance . References [ 1 ] Radtke , K . , Döhner , K . and Sodeik , B . ( 2006 ) Viral interactions with the cytoskeleton : a hitchhiker’s guide to the cell . Cell . Microbiol . 8 , 387 – 400 . [ 2 ] Leopold , P . L . and Pﬁster , K . K . ( 2006 ) Viral strategies for intracellular trafﬁcking : motors and microtubules . Trafﬁc 7 , 516 – 523 . [ 3 ] Nayak , D . P . , Balogun , R . A . , Yamada , H . , Zhou , Z . S . and Barman , S . ( 2009 ) Inﬂuenza virus morphogenesis and budding . Virus Res . 143 , 147 – 161 . [ 4 ] Cheung , T . K . W . and Poon , L . L . M . ( 2007 ) Biology of inﬂuenza A virus . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1102 , 1 – 25 . [ 5 ] Schmitt , A . P . and Lamb , R . A . ( 2005 ) Inﬂuenza virus assembly and budding at the viral budozone . Adv . Virus Res . 64 , 383 – 416 . [ 6 ] Avalos , R . T . , Yu , Z . and Nayak , D . P . ( 1997 ) Association of inﬂuenza virus NP and M1 protein with cellular cytoskeletal elements in inﬂuenza virus infected cells . J . Virol . 71 , 2947 – 2958 . [ 7 ] Husain , M . and Gupta , C . M . ( 1997 ) Interactions of viral matrix protein and nucleoprotein with the host cell cytoskeletal actin in inﬂuenza viral infection . Curr . Sci . 73 , 40 – 47 . [ 8 ] Mayer , D . , Molawi , K . , Martinez - Sobrido , L . , Ghanem , A . , Thomas , S . , Baginsky , S . , Grossmann , J . , García - Sastre , A . and Schwemmle , M . ( 2007 ) Identiﬁcation of cellular interaction partners of the inﬂuenza virus ribonucleoprotein complex and polymerase complex using proteomic - based approaches . J . Proteome Res . 6 , 672 – 682 . [ 9 ] Momose , F . , Kikuchi , Y . , Komase , K . and Morikawa , Y . ( 2007 ) Visualization of microtubule - mediated transport of inﬂuenza viral progeny ribonucleoprotein . Microb . Infect . 9 , 1422 – 1433 . [ 10 ] Shaw , M . L . , Stone , K . L . , Colangelo , C . M . , Gulcicek , E . E . and Palese , P . ( 2008 ) Cellular proteins in inﬂuenza virus particles . PLoS Pathog . 4 , e1000085 . [ 11 ] Husain , M . and Harrod , K . S . ( 2009 ) Inﬂuenza A virus - induced caspase - 3 cleaves the histone deacetylase 6 in infected epithelial cells . FEBS Lett . 583 , 2517 – 2520 . [ 12 ] Hubbert , C . , Guardiola , A . , Shao , R . , Kawaguchi , Y . , Ito , A . , Nixon , A . , Yoshida , M . , Wang , X . F . and Yao , T . P . ( 2002 ) HDAC6 is a microtubule - associated deacetylase . Nature 417 , 455 – 458 . [ 13 ] Root , C . N . , Wills , E . G . , McNair , L . L . and Whittaker , G . R . ( 2000 ) Entry of inﬂuenza virus into cells is inhibited by a highly speciﬁc protein kinase C inhibitor . J . Gen . Virol . 81 , 2697 – 2705 . [ 14 ] Destaing , O . , Saltel , F . , Gilquin , B . , Chabadel , A . , Khochbin , S . , Ory , S . and Jurdic , P . ( 2005 ) A novel Rho - mDia2 - HDAC6 pathway controls podosome patterning through microtubule acetylation in osteoclasts . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 2901 – 2911 . [ 15 ] Chang , Y . C . , Nalbant , P . , Birkenfeld , J . , Chang , Z . F . and Bokoch , G . M . ( 2008 ) GEF - H1 couples nocodazole - induced microtubule disassembly to cell contractility via RhoA . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 2147 – 2153 . [ 16 ] Chen , Z . and Krug , R . M . ( 2000 ) Selective nuclear export of viral mRNAs in inﬂuenza - virus - infected cells . Trends Microbiol . 8 , 376 – 383 . [ 17 ] Salvatore , M . , Basler , C . F . , Parisien , J . P . , Horvath , C . M . , Bourmakina , S . , Zheng , H . , Muster , T . , Palese , P . and Garcia - Sastre , A . ( 2002 ) Effects of inﬂuenzaAvirus NS1 protein on protein expression : the NS1 protein enhances translation and is not required for shutoff of host protein synthesis . J . Virol . 76 , 1206 – 1212 . [ 18 ] Hammond , J . W . , Cai , D . and Verhey , K . J . ( 2008 ) Tubulin modiﬁcations and their cellular functions . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 71 – 76 . [ 19 ] Naranatt , P . P . , Krishnan , H . H . , Smith , M . S . and Chandran , B . ( 2005 ) Kaposi’s sarcoma - associated herpesvirus modulates microtubule dynamics via RhoA - GTP - diaphanous 2 signaling and utilizes the dynein motors to deliver its DNA to the nucleus . J . Virol . 79 , 1191 – 1206 . [ 20 ] Valenzuela - Fernandez , A . , Álvarez , A . S . , Gordon - Alonso , M . , Barrero , M . , Ursa , A . , Cabrero , J . R . , Fernandez , G . , Naranjo - Suarez , S . , Yanez - Mo , M . , Serrador , J . M . , Munoz - Fernandez , M . A . and Sanchez - Madrid , F . ( 2005 ) Histone deacetylase 6 regulates human immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 infection . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 5445 – 5454 . [ 21 ] Warren , J . C . , Rutkowski , A . and Cassimeris , L . ( 2006 ) Infection and replication - deﬁcient adenovirus induces changes in the dynamic instability of host cell microtubules . Mol . Cell . Biol . 17 , 3557 – 3568 . 132 M . Husain , K . S . Harrod / FEBS Letters 585 ( 2011 ) 128 – 132