New Synthesis Route of Hydrogel through A Bioinspired Supramolecular Approach : Gelation , Binding Interaction , and in Vitro Dressing Chieh Cheng , Meng - Che Tang , Chung - Shu Wu , Turibius Simon , and Fu - Hsiang Ko * Department of Materials Science and Engineering , National Chiao Tung University , 1001 University Road , Hsinchu , Taiwan 300 , ROC * S Supporting Information ABSTRACT : Peptide - based supramolecular hydrogels have been comprehensively investigated in biomaterial applications because of their unique bioactivity , biofunctionality , and biocompatible features . However , the presence of organic building blocks in peptide - based hydrogels often results in low mechanical stability . To expand their practical use and range of applications , it is necessary to develop the tool kit available to prepare bioinspired , peptide - based supramolecular hydrogels with improved mechanical stability . In this paper , we present an innovative electrostatic and cross - linking approach in which naphthyl - Phe - Phe - Cys ( NapFFC ) oligopeptides are combined with gold nanoparticles ( AuNPs ) and calcium ions ( Ca 2 + ) to produce peptide - based supramolecular hydrogels . We further investigate the interactions among NapFFC , AuNPs and Ca 2 + by microscopy . The morphology of the nano ﬁ brous network constructions and the binding forces exhibited from the hydrogel demonstrated that the combination of two mechanisms successfully enhanced the mechanical stability through the formation of a densely entangled ﬁ brous network of peptide multimers that is attributed to the AuNP linkage and Ca 2 + - induced agglomeration . UV − vis spectrophotometry and ﬂ uorescence analysis were also used to demonstrate the enhanced stability of the hydrogel under various conditions such as thermal , solvent erosion , pH value and sonication . All results indicate that the presence of AuNPs and Ca 2 + can strengthen the prepared hydrogel by more than doubling the diameter of NapFFC nano ﬁ bers , enabling the formation of stronger frameworks and slowing the release of components . Further experiments con ﬁ rmed that HeLa cells can grow on the bioinspired NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel and exhibit high cell viability and that these cells were killed on contact with a hydrogel containing a drug . Our peptide - based supramolecular hydrogels prepared from the observed electrostatic and cross - linking mechanisn exhibited a signi ﬁ cantly improved mechanical stability , making them well suited to use as a drug carrier in hydrogel dressings and as extracellular materials ( ECMs ) for tissue engineering . KEYWORDS : gold nanoparticles , supramolecular , hydrogel , calcium ions , in vitro dressing ■ INTRODUCTION Hydrogels have been widely employed for the food , pharmaceutical , cosmetics , and medicine industries . Besides the current uses , hydrogels have potential future applications in a broad range of medical areas , such as regenerative medicine , tissue engineering , and drug delivery . 1 − 3 As highly hydrated and porous materials , they can be used as 3D sca ﬀ olds for tissue construction and for the control of drug delivery to provide structural integrity and tissue adhesion between a tissue and the surface of material of interest . 4 , 5 Recently , the study of supramolecular hydrogels consisting of novel low - molecular - weight materials and formed by the self - assembly of simple monomers has rapidly expanded . Contrary to high molecular weight hydrogelators , low molecular weight hydrogelators that form hydrogels generally contain hydrophilic regions , which ensure compatibility with water , and hydrophobic regions , which drive the self - assembly of the peptides in water . 6 Peptides with appropriate hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity can self - assemble into nano ﬁ brous architectures that sub - sequently entangle to form the matrix of the supramolecular hydrogel . As a new type of soft material , 7 supramolecular hydrogels have attracted considerable research interest because of their useful properties ( e . g . , rapid responses to physical or chemical stimuli , biocompatibility , and biodegradability ) for Received : June 16 , 2015 Accepted : August 14 , 2015 Research Article www . acsami . org © XXXX American Chemical Society A DOI : 10 . 1021 / acsami . 5b05360 ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX D o w n l o a d e d by UN I V O F N E BR A S KA - L I N C O L N on A ugu s t 31 , 2015 | h tt p : / / p ub s . ac s . o r g P ub li ca ti on D a t e ( W e b ) : A ugu s t 20 , 2015 | do i : 10 . 1021 / ac s a m i . 5b05360 promising applications in biomedicine . 8 − 10 The three - dimen - sional network of nano ﬁ bers in a molecular hydrogel is porous and allows the incorporation of other bioactive molecules . This makes this new type of biomaterial promising for application in many areas 11 ( e . g . , tissue engineering , 12 drug delivery , 13 biomaterials , 14 bioanalysis , 15 and chemical sensing 16 ) . Many of these hydrogels are composed of naturally occurring components such as monosaccharides , nucleic acids and oligopeptides . 17 − 19 The inherent biological origin of peptides used to form hydrogels makes the hydrogels popular for biological and medical applications , even though one such hydrogel is inspired by peptide interactions seen in Alzheimer ’ s disease . 20 Peptide - based supramolecular hydrogels are advanta - geous compared to polymeric or biopolymer gels . For example , peptide - based hydrogels combine the advantages of synthetic and naturally derived hydrogels . They can be easily mass produced and combined with chemical and biological elements . Such features allow the design of a particular sequence , as well as the incorporation of functional groups , hence promoting the usability and applicability of these hydrogels . 21 Gazit and co - workers demonstrated that diphenylalanine ( FF ) peptides self - assembled into nanotubes and applied them as organic light - emitting diodes . 22 Xu et al . described the use of an enzyme transformation to modulate the mode of ligand − receptor binding , which a ﬀ ects the fate of cells . 23 Ulijn et al . designed three diphenylalanine analogues to support the cell prolifer - ation of chondrocytes in cell culture . 24 However , peptide - based hydrogels composed of small organic building blocks often su ﬀ er from low mechanical stability . Although traditional large - molecular - weight hydro - gelators ( polymeric gels , proteins and polypeptides ) focus on the covalent bond , supramolecular chemistry examines the weaker and reversible noncovalent interactions , such as hydrogen bonding , metal coordination , van der Waals forces , electrostatic e ﬀ ects , and π − π interactions , between mole - cules . 25 , 26 Low molecular weight gels tend to break at relatively low strains and are also often reversible , i . e . , melting and reforming on warming and cooling , respectively . 6 , 27 They are highly susceptible to mechanical destruction and solvent erosion , which may cause structural collapse , greatly hindering their practical application . Therefore , the development of hydrogels with rigid structures is necessary and must be addressed . Increasing numbers of reports have been published on the improvement of the mechanical properties of hydrogels . For example , cross - linking methodologies have been developed to increase the nano ﬁ ber thickness and to densify the nano ﬁ brous networks , including physical , 28 , 29 chemical , 30 , 31 and enzymatic methods . 32 , 33 The mechanical properties and structural characteristics of hydrogels , such as the degree of cross - linking and the integrity of the gels , can be modulated by the amount and type of cross - linking . Second , metal ions mixed with hydrogelators to form metal − organic nanocomposite hydrogels have also attracted growing interest due to their potential biomaterial applications . 34 , 35 Incorporation of metal - binding sites into the ﬁ brous assembly structure has been shown to produce stronger hydrogels with new function - alities . 36 , 37 The interaction between the metal and the organic material arises from the carboxylate moieties , which adopt a range of coordination modes to bridge , chelate , or perform a combination of both . Furthermore , a range of colloidal particles , including carbon - based nanomaterials , inorganic nanoparticles , core − shell nanoparticles and metal / metal - oxide nanoparticles , have been combined with the polymeric network to obtain nanocomposite hydrogels . 38 − 40 These nanoparticles physically or covalently interact with the polymeric chains , and result in a nanocomposite network with novel properties . In addition , another approach to improve the mechanical strength is to generate anisotropy by the alignment of the nano - ﬁ bers . 41 , 42 The majority of these studied methods mentioned above relate to polymeric or macromolecular hydrogels , and there are few research reports concerning the enhancement of the mechanical stability of peptide - based supramolecular hydrogels . 35 , 42 , 43 In the present study , to develop a tool kit for the preparation of bioinspired peptide - based supramolecular hydrogels with improved mechanical stability , we propose an electrostatic and cross - linking approach , which is based on synthesized , cysteine - containing peptide supramolecular hydro - gelators ( NapFFC ) integrated with AuNPs and calcium ions as depicted in Scheme 1 . Through the use of both metal − organic nanocomposites and a cross - linking method , we attempted to design supramolecular hydrogelators that possess many thiol and carboxylic groups on the supramolecular nano ﬁ ber surface as binding sites for the uptake of AuNPs and calcium ions . The positively charged calcium ions induced the agglomeration of the AuNPs , leading to the nano ﬁ ber cross - linking reaction , which resulted in the formation of a densely entangled ﬁ brous network that e ﬀ ectively enhanced the mechanical stability of the peptide - based supramolecular hydrogels . Encouragingly , understanding the biomolecular interaction underlying the gelation behavior is of key importance in a ﬃ nity - based analytics and would be conducive to the possible application of peptide - based hydrogels as functional materials . We also investigate the interaction of NapFFC hydrogelators and AuNPs appended to calcium ions in the self - assembly mechanism . The stable assembled hydrogel retains its high biocompatibility , as well as exhibiting a high degree of physical and chemical stability . We suggest that this favorable approach to improving the mechanical stability of peptide - based hydrogels containing cysteine residues could serve in a variety of technological Scheme 1 . Schematic Diagram Illustrates How the Addition of Components Leads to the Formation of a Densely Entangled Fibrous Network Hydrogel with Enhanced Mechanical Stability ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acsami . 5b05360 ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX B D o w n l o a d e d by UN I V O F N E BR A S KA - L I N C O L N on A ugu s t 31 , 2015 | h tt p : / / p ub s . ac s . o r g P ub li ca ti on D a t e ( W e b ) : A ugu s t 20 , 2015 | do i : 10 . 1021 / ac s a m i . 5b05360 applications in the ﬁ elds of future biomimetic materials and biotechnology . ■ EXPERIMENTAL SECTION Chemicals and Materials . Hydrogen tetrachloroaurate trihydrate ( HAuCl 4 · 3H 2 O ) , phosphate bu ﬀ ered saline tablets ( PBS ) , sodium carbonate ( Na 2 CO 3 ) , dimethyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ) , ethanol , and hydrochloric acid ( HCl ) were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO , USA ) . Sodium hydroxide ( NaOH ) was obtained from SHOWA ( Chemical Co . , Japan ) . 2 - ( Naphthalen - 6 - yl ) acetic acid ( Nap ) , L - phenylalanine ( C 9 H 11 NO 2 ) , N - hydroxysuccinimide ( NHS ) , N , N ′ - dicyclohexylcarbodiimide ( DCC ) , and L - cysteine ( C 3 H 7 NO 2 S ) were purchased from Alfa Aesar ( Ward Hill , MA , USA ) . Chloroform ( CHCl 3 ) and sodium citrate dihydrate ( C 6 H 5 Na 3 O 7 · 2H 2 O ) were purchased from J . T . Baker ( Phillipsburg , NJ , USA ) . Hydrogen peroxide ( H 2 O 2 ) and sulfuric acid ( H 2 SO 4 ) were obtained from Merck ( Darmstadt , Germany ) . Dulbecco ’ s modi ﬁ ed Eagle medium ( DMEM ) was obtained from Biowest ( Lewes , UK ) . Tetrazolium salt 3 - ( 4 , 5 - dimethylthiazol - 2 - yl ) - 2 , 5 - diphenyltetrazolium bromide ( MTT ) was obtained from Bersing Bioscience Technology . Trypsin was obtained from Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁ c ( San Jose , CA , USA ) . HeLa cells were obtained from Bioresource Collection and Research Center ( BCRC , Hsinchu , Taiwan ) . Deionized ( DI ) water was puri ﬁ ed ( > 18 . 2 M Ω cm ) using a Milli - Q water system ( Millipore , Bedford , MA , USA ) . All other chemicals were guaranteed or analytic grade reagents that were commercially available and used without further puri ﬁ cation . Synthesis of AuNPs . Citrate - stabilized AuNPs were synthesized using the classical Turkevich / Frens procedure . 44 , 45 A 40 mL aqueous solution consisting of 1 mM HAuCl 4 · 3H 2 O was subject to a vigorous boil with stirring in a conical ﬂ ask , and 38 . 8 mM sodium citrate ( 5 mL ) was then added rapidly to the solution . The solution was boiled for another 15 min , during which time its color changed from pale yellow to deep red . The solution was cooled to room temperature with continuous stirring . The citrate - stabilized AuNPs appeared to be nearly monodisperse , with an average size of 13 . 1 ± 1 . 2 nm . Synthesis of the NapFFC Hydrogel and NapFFC - AuNPs Nanocomposite . First , 2 mmol of 2 - ( naphthalen - 2 - yl ) acetic acid , 2 mmol of N - hydroxysuccinimide , and 2 . 1 mmol of N , N ′ - dicyclohex - ylcarbodiimide were mixed with chloroform with stirring at room temperature for 4 h and the resulting precipitate was separated by ﬁ ltration . Second , 2 mmol of L - phenylalanine was dissolved in 8 mL of water containing 4 mmol of Na 2 CO 3 . After product 2 ( in Figure S1 ) dissolved , 20 mL of acetone was added and the mixture was stirred at room temperature overnight . The solvent was removed and the residue was redissolved in 40 mL of water . Finally , the precipitate was removed by ﬁ ltration and the ﬁ ltrate was adjusted to pH 3 . The precipitate was collected by ﬁ ltration and dried in a vacuum . The white powder was used to synthesize NapFF by repeating the same procedure . After the NapFF compounds were obtained , 0 . 5 mmol NapFF , 0 . 5 mmol N - hydroxysuccinimide , and 0 . 525 mmol N , N ′ - dicyclohexylcarbodiimide were added into chloroform , and the mixture stirred at room temperature for 4 h before the resulting precipitate was collected by ﬁ ltration . Next , 0 . 5 mmol of L - cysteine was dissolved in 2 mL of water containing 1 mmol of Na 2 CO 3 . 46 After the solution of product 7 ( in Figure S1 ) was added , the mixture was stirred at room temperature overnight . The solvent was then removed and 40 mL of water was added . Finally , the precipitated product was separated and collected by ﬁ ltration , and the ﬁ ltrate was again adjusted to pH 3 . Prior to prepare the NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposites , 5 mg of NapFFC was dissolved in a 1 M NaOH solution and small volumes of 1 M HCl were added to adjust to a pH value of 7 for applications in the biomedical ﬁ eld . Finally , extra DI water was added to achieve a ﬁ nal concentration of 1 wt % . The mixture was then left standing at room temperature for 30 min before being mixed with the AuNP solution to obtain a 0 . 5 wt % NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel . The NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel was then left standing at room temperature for 1 h before carrying out further experiments . Physical and Structural Characterization of AuNPs and Nanocomposite Hydrogels . Sizes of the AuNPs were veri ﬁ ed by scanning electron microscopy ( SEM , JEOL FESEM 6700 ) and dynamic light scattering ( DLS , BECKMAN COULTER Delsa Nano , USA ) . The morphology of the NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposites was characterized by transmission electron microscopy ( TEM , JEOL JEM 100 CX , Japan ) and SEM . The chemical structure and bonding type were analyzed by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy ( FT - IR , PerkinElmer Spectrum 100 , USA ) at a resolution of 1 cm − 1 using 16 scans for each sample and by NMR ( Varian Unity Inova 400 , Germany ) . To study the interactions and mechanical stability of the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel , 100 μ L of hydrogel was added to the bottom of a 1 . 5 mL glass vial and was left standing at room temperature for 1 h before being treated with 900 μ L of various solutions ( DI water , PBS bu ﬀ er or CaCl 2 solution ) that were added into the glass vial . The components of the hydrogel ( NapFFC and AuNPs ) were released into the solvent , and the supernatant was collected to detect the released components . NapFFC release was measured using a ﬂ uorescence spectrophotometer ( Hitachi F - 7000 , Japan ) at 350 PMT voltage , with a 273 . 0 nm excitation wavelength ; the AuNPs were detected by UV − vis absorption spectrophotometry ( Hitachi UV - 3310 ) with an absorption wavelength between 400 and 800 nm . Sonication tool ( DC300H ) used to study the e ﬀ ect of hydrogel stability was purchased from DELTA TAIWAN . In Vitro Cell Studies . The subcultured HeLa cells were trypsinized , centrifuged , and resuspended in DMEM medium in advance . Two hundred microliters of the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel was spread on half of a clean 15 cm cell culture dish to form a transparent thin ﬁ lm , and the same amount of DOX encapsulating hydrogel was also spread on the dish . After 1 h , a CaCl 2 solution was added to treat the hydrogel for 30 min before the hydrogel was washed with a PBS bu ﬀ er solution 3 times . After being prepared and treated with a CaCl 2 solution , the HeLa cells were added into the cell culture dish . Ten milliliters of DMEM supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum and 1 % penicillin - streptomycin was then added to the dish . The culture was then incubated in a humidi ﬁ ed atmosphere containing 5 % CO 2 at 37 ° C . After 24 h incubation , the cell morphology was observed under a bright microscope . The cell viability was characterized by incubating cells with the MTT reagent for 4 h . ■ RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Gelation Properties of the NapFFC - AuNPs Hydrogel . In this study , to form nanocomposites with AuNPs , we synthesized a cysteine amino acid on the terminus of NapFF to form the compound NapFFC . Figure S1 illustrates the synthetic route and chemical structure of NapFFC . The NMR data ( Figure S2 ) suggests that the chemical structure of NapFFC synthesized via this synthetic route is successfully obtained . Hence , we can use this compound to carry out the follow - up experiment . As widely reported , the self - assembly of amphiphilic peptides such as Nap - Phe - Phe - OH ( NapFF ) , the protected form of H - Phe - Phe - OH , have been studied extensively . 10 , 25 , 26 NapFFC can also e ﬀ ectively self - assemble into nanotubes in water to form nano ﬁ brils because of the π − π stacking of the aromatic residues and other hydrophobic interactions . The gelation properties of NapFFC in DI water at pH 7 . 4 is shown in Figure 1A and Figure S3 . The NapFFC solution was prepared using various Nap - FFC concentrations from 0 . 2 to 1 . 0 wt % to investigate the gelation properties . According to the optical images , the Nap - FFC solution remained in the liquid phase at low concentrations , but at increased Nap - FFC concentrations , the Nap - FFC solution became more viscous . At a concentration of 1 . 0 wt % , the Nap - FFC solution formed a complete rigid hydrogel . In general , increasing the peptide concentration leads to the formation of an entangled ﬁ brous network at the microscopic level , resulting in the formation of supramolecular hydrogels on the macro - scopic level . ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acsami . 5b05360 ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX C D o w n l o a d e d by UN I V O F N E BR A S KA - L I N C O L N on A ugu s t 31 , 2015 | h tt p : / / p ub s . ac s . o r g P ub li ca ti on D a t e ( W e b ) : A ugu s t 20 , 2015 | do i : 10 . 1021 / ac s a m i . 5b05360 Based on the veri ﬁ ed supramolecular properties of Nap - FFC hydrogels , gelation of the Nap - FFC - AuNPs is discussed in relation to the following experiments . First , AuNPs were synthesized by a hydrothermal process and the particle size distribution characterized by SEM ( Figure S4 ) . The AuNPs had a mean diameter of 13 . 1 nm . Similar results were observed by dynamic light scattering , with a diameter of 13 . 16 nm obtained ( Figure S5 ) . The uniform AuNPs prepared were then used to investigate the gelation properties of NapFFC - AuNPs in terms of their organization into supramolecular entities . In this experiment , the NapFFC powder was dissolved in DI water ( [ NapFFC ] = 0 . 5 wt % , pH 7 . 4 ) and then mixed with AuNP solutions of various concentrations ( 0 , 120 , 300 , 600 , 900 , 1200 nM ) . As shown in Figures 1B and Figure S6 , NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposites are able to form hydrogels due to the self - assembly of the NapFFC and AuNPs . The optical images clearly show that the interaction between the AuNPs and NapFFC resulted in increased strength and viscosity at di ﬀ erent AuNP concentrations ( 0 , 120 , 300 , 600 , 900 , 1200 nM ) . The viscous liquid phase and weak hydrogel was observed at low concentrations of AuNPs ( 120 and 300 nM ) . In contrast , the NapFFC - AuNPs formed stronger hydrogels at higher concen - trations of AuNPs ( 600 , 900 , and 1200 nM ) . Thus , it can be seen that the introduction of AuNPs can alter the gelling properties of the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel . This phenomenon is a typical gelation process mediated by Au - thiol bonding and carboxyl noncovalent interactions of stimuli - responsive supra - molecules with AuNPs . Instead of dispersing randomly in the hydrogel , notable evidence was found using TEM ( Figure 1C ) that the AuNPs bind to the nano ﬁ bers that tend to form the NapFFC supramolecule by self - assembly . Based on this phenomenon , the nano ﬁ bers - AuNPs exhibited an enhanced mechanical stability in the NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposites because of the densely intermingled networks of cross - linked nano ﬁ bers that are formed . E ﬀ ect of Di ﬀ erent Solvents . Considering that the stability of the cross - linked hydrogels often changes with the environ - ment , the in ﬂ uence of the solvent was also investigated in this work . The NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel was immersed in various solvents ( DI water , PBS and CaCl 2 solution ) as demonstrated in Figure 2 . The NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel was exposed to di ﬀ erent solvents for 10 min . The UV − vis absorption spectrum demonstrated that numerous AuNPs were released into the DI water , and the hydrogel was unstable and deformed ( Figure 2 , inset optical image ) . In the PBS condition , the solid NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel remained at the bottom of the vial in good shape , but the optical image and UV − vis absorption spectra ( inset ) indicate that some AuNPs di ﬀ used into the PBS solution during the 10 min period of exposure . Interestingly , the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel maintained its shape and produced a clear supernatant in 200 mM CaCl 2 , which was in contrast with the results obtained with the other investigated solvents . The UV − vis absorption spectrum showed that no AuNPs were released into solution in the presence of CaCl 2 . These results indicated that a stable and rigid hydrogel was formed . The NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel exhibited excellent mechanical properties under the CaCl 2 conditions . We expect that this observed behavior is due to the Ca 2 + present in the hydrogel , which restricts the release of negatively charged AuNPs into solution . Therefore , this phenomenon prevents the NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposite from detaching from the bottom of vial , which indirectly promotes the mechanical properties of the hydrogel . Interaction between NapFFC - AuNPs and Calcium Ions . In the experiments described above , the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel exhibited excellent mechanical properties under CaCl 2 conditions . To the best of our knowledge , this is the ﬁ rst report to mention the playing role of calcium ion for the hydrogel - based materials . Generally , calcium is one of the most abundant cations present in living organisms . It is the main cation present in the mineral phase of bone and is involved in the control of many important physiological functions , such as muscle contraction . Therefore , in this context , whether calcium ions are the key component in the assembly of the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel should be clearly investigated . First , UV − vis absorption spectroscopy was used to determine how the concentration of Ca 2 + in ﬂ uenced the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel formed . In Figure 3 , the AuNPs that modi ﬁ ed and encapsulated the NapFFC nano ﬁ brous hydrogel were still released into solution at low Ca 2 + concentrations ( 0 . 02 , 0 . 2 , and 2 mM ) but formed more stable hydrogels at the bottom of the vial at high Ca 2 + concentrations ( 200 mM ) . In other words , under Ca 2 + - rich conditions , the solution separates obviously , in which the dark - red gel observed is due to the agglomeration induced by charge e ﬀ ect , with a transparent supernatant ( Inset ) . On the contrary , weak forces cannot a ﬀ ord to form a stable hydrogel , and this situation results in the release of NapFFC - AuNPs into the solution . As a result , the stoichiometry of NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel and Ca 2 + - rich conditions play an important role on mechanical property of hydrogel - related materials . After con ﬁ rming that a high Ca 2 + concentration in ﬂ uences the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel stability , microscopic observation Figure 1 . Optical images showing gelation properties of ( A ) 0 . 5 % NapFFC in DI water at pH 7 . 4 , and ( B ) NapFFC - AuNPs in DI water at pH 7 . 4 . ( C ) TEM image showing the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel ( NapFFC = 0 . 5 % ; AuNPs = 200 nM ) . The scale bar indicates 100 nm . Figure 2 . E ﬀ ect of AuNPs release from UV − vis absorption spectra of the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel in various solvents ( CaCl 2 , PBS , and DI water ) . The hydrogels resided at the bottom of the vial and were inverted ( optical images ) . ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acsami . 5b05360 ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX D D o w n l o a d e d by UN I V O F N E BR A S KA - L I N C O L N on A ugu s t 31 , 2015 | h tt p : / / p ub s . ac s . o r g P ub li ca ti on D a t e ( W e b ) : A ugu s t 20 , 2015 | do i : 10 . 1021 / ac s a m i . 5b05360 of the supramolecular assembly was used for further con ﬁ rmation . From the microscopic perspective , the key factors that determine the mechanical properties of hydrogels are based on the bonding strength among the supramolecular hydrogel components , the average thickness of the nano ﬁ bers and the cross - linking density of the ﬁ brous networks . 43 , 47 To obtain greater insight into the assembly process and stabilizing interactions , we attempted to form a hydrogel with the addition of AuNPs or Ca 2 + to compare the width of nano ﬁ bers that formed . As shown in Figure 4 , examination of the lower critical gelation concentration ( 0 . 5 wt % ) revealed that the NapFFC molecules self - assemble to produce uniform , long nano ﬁ bers with diameters of 12 . 51 ± 3 . 56 nm in DI water at pH 7 . 4 . These nano ﬁ bers entangle to form the low density network and a ﬀ ord a transparent hydrogel ( Figure 4A ) . Using a similar method , we prepared a NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposite hydrogel . Figure 4B illustrates the morphology of a 0 . 5 wt % NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposite with a dense ﬁ brous structure . The diameters of the NapFFC nano ﬁ bers were 28 . 76 ± 2 . 12 nm . There were many 13 . 1 nm AuNPs that adhered to the nano ﬁ bers with a good dispersity as shown in the aforementioned TEM image ( Figure 1C ) . The observed thickening of the ﬁ bers substantiates supports our speculation that the AuNPs enhance the mechanical strength and stability of the hydrogel e ﬀ ectively . The diameter of the 0 . 5 wt % NapFFC nano ﬁ bers was 25 . 38 ± 2 . 34 nm after treatment with 200 mM CaCl 2 ( Figure 4C ) . Interestingly , the modi ﬁ cation with either the AuNPs or by the treatment with CaCl 2 can increase the diameters of the NapFFC nano ﬁ bers obtained . Figure 4D shows the morphology of the 0 . 5 wt % NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel treated with a 200 mM CaCl 2 solution . Under these conditions , both the AuNPs and CaCl 2 elements were added to the NapFFC hydrogel , and the nano ﬁ ber diameter increased to 55 . 48 ± 6 . 27 nm . In addition , the 13 . 1 nm AuNPs that adhered onto the nano ﬁ bers were conspicuously densi ﬁ ed . We suggest that such an observed change in the ﬁ ber diameter in response to an increase results from a charge - induced phenomenon . The AuNPs with negatively charged surface ( Zeta potential : − 38 . 8 mV ) aggregate due to the positively charged calcium ions , resulting in the observed AuNP densi ﬁ cation and agglomeration behavior . The AuNPs that were previously incorporated on the nano ﬁ ber surface through a cysteine group promoted the densi ﬁ cation of NapFFC nano ﬁ bers upon Ca 2 + treatment , which ultimately contributes to the phenomenon of increased ﬁ ber diameters . To further investigate the key role of calcium ions , we further examined the calcium sites and interactions between the calcium ions and the organic molecules by FT - IR spectroscopy . The main mechanism of calcium interaction with organic molecules is based on calcium coordination with the carboxylate group . Figure 4E shows representative FT - IR spectra of pure NapFFC , NapFFC - AuNPs , NapFFC - Ca 2 + and NapFFC - AuNPs - Ca 2 + . According to previous publication , they reported that the ligand bands at 3300 , 1705 , 1390 , 1290 , and 918 cm − 1 could be assigned to O − H stretch , C  O stretch , C − O stretch , and O − H bending vibrations , respectively . The bands at 3280 , 1637 , 1528 , and 1221 cm − 1 can be assigned to the amide A , amide I , amide II , and amide III vibrations , respectively . The band at 1690 cm − 1 can be attributed to the C  O vibration of the carbamate moiety . 35 However , the variation in C  O absorption occurs at 1644 cm − 1 from our experiment in Figure 4E . This phenomenon is ascribed to the amide functional groups of NapFFC ; the C  O group of an amide vibrates at an lower frequency , 1640 − 1680 cm − 1 . 48 As in the previous work by Alexandre Mantion and co - workers , the amide band positions are indicative of a β - sheet structure which also results in the shift of C  O absorption . 49 IR indicates that the β - sheet is conserved after the reaction with calcium and copper , Figure 3 . UV − vis absorption spectra of the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel solutions in di ﬀ erent concentrations ( 0 , 0 . 02 , 0 . 2 , 2 , 20 , and 200 mM ) of CaCl 2 . The data suggested the degree to which the AuNPs were released , determined from the absorption maximum ( A 520 ) . Figure 4 . SEM micrographs of the ( A ) NapFFC nano ﬁ brous hydrogel , ( B ) NapFFC - AuNP nano ﬁ brous hydrogel , ( C ) NapFFC nano ﬁ brous hydrogel immersed in 200 mM CaCl 2 , and ( D ) NapFFC - AuNP nano ﬁ brous hydrogel immersed in 200 mM CaCl 2 . The pH value of each sample was controlled at 7 . 4 . ( E ) FT - IR spectra of the NapFFC carboxylate group interaction with the metal and metal ions . NapFFC ( black line ) , NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposites ( red line ) , NapFFC treated with 200 mM CaCl 2 ( blue line ) , and NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposites treated with 200 mM CaCl 2 ( green line ) , respectively . ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acsami . 5b05360 ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX E D o w n l o a d e d by UN I V O F N E BR A S KA - L I N C O L N on A ugu s t 31 , 2015 | h tt p : / / p ub s . ac s . o r g P ub li ca ti on D a t e ( W e b ) : A ugu s t 20 , 2015 | do i : 10 . 1021 / ac s a m i . 5b05360 because the two bands at 1628 , and 1533 cm − 1 , which are indicative of the β - sheet , are still visible in the crystalline precipitates . In our case , the β - sheet structure was still existed , and the IR also shows di ﬀ erences between the pure peptide and the metal complexes of NapFFC - AuNPs , NapFFC - Ca 2 + and NapFFC - AuNPs - Ca 2 + . After reaction of the ligand with the AuNPs and calcium ions , the C  O stretch at 1644 cm − 1 and the O − H stretch at 3300 cm − 1 of the cysteine carboxylate group disappeared . This is consistent with the interaction between the ligand and metal ion via the carboxylic acid moiety . 50 Finally , the FT - IR spectrum suggests that the carboxylic acid acts as a bridging unit between the metal centers in the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel . Interaction Investigation of NapFFC , AuNPs , and Calcium Ions . As indicated in the previous experiments , the rigid hydrogel components interact with one another and have synergistic impact on the properties of the formed hydrogel . To explore the e ﬀ ect of each component on the rigid hydrogel , including the AuNP modi ﬁ cation of NapFFC , gold − thiol bonding , calcium ion coordination with the NapFFC carboxylate group , and the calcium ion inducing the AuNP agglomeration , we investigated ﬁ ve conditions ( Figure 5 ) . As indicated in Figure 5A , the in ﬂ uence of calcium ions alone on Figure 5 . Interaction analysis by the cumulative percentage of the NapFFC compound released and AuNPs released detected by ﬂ uorescence and UV − vis spectrophotometry , respectively . ( A ) Impact of calcium ions on the NapFFC hydrogel . ( B ) Impact of the AuNP modi ﬁ cation on the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel . ( C ) Impact of gold − thiol binding on the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel . ( D ) Impact of the calcium ions on the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel . ( E ) Impact of calcium ion - induced agglomeration of AuNPs . ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acsami . 5b05360 ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX F D o w n l o a d e d by UN I V O F N E BR A S KA - L I N C O L N on A ugu s t 31 , 2015 | h tt p : / / p ub s . ac s . o r g P ub li ca ti on D a t e ( W e b ) : A ugu s t 20 , 2015 | do i : 10 . 1021 / ac s a m i . 5b05360 the NapFFC hydrogel was probed . Considering the ﬂ uo - rescence of NapFFC , the percentage released from the NapFFC hydrogel through di ﬀ usion into the DI water was determined . In this experiment , we added DI water and a CaCl 2 solution to a 0 . 5 wt % NapFFC hydrogel . The ﬂ uorescence data shows that the addition of calcium ions resulted in a 3 . 9 - fold reduction in the quantity of NapFFC released in a 10 min period . As expected , the addition of calcium ions was observed to slow the release tendency . In other words , the release quantity was limited by enhancing the mechanical stability , which could be attributed to the calcium ions that interact with the carboxylate moieties the supramolecular hydrogelators provided . To further investigate the diversity of the components , we then explored the AuNPs . The impact of the AuNP modi ﬁ cation on the hydrogel is illustrated in Figure 5B . In the case where calcium ions were added to both the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel and the control , it was found that the NapFFC hydrogel with 600 nM AuNPs added exhibited a 3 . 6 - fold decrease in NapFFC release compared with the hydrogel without AuNPs in a 10 min period . The NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel was stable at the bottom of the vial , and no red color was observed , indicating that there was no di ﬀ usion of the AuNPs into the supernatant ( see inset photograph in Figure 5B ) . Notably , on the basis of these results , the release behavior exhibited a saturation , which was approached quickly after 3 min whether AuNPs were present or not . Furthermore , when compared with the hydrogel treated with calcium ions alone , the release percentage decreased from 16 % to below 5 % when AuNPs were added . This observation demonstrates that AuNPs play another important role in the enhancement of the mechanical stability . In fact , there are multiple and complex interactions between the NapFFC and AuNPs , including OH - AuNPs , COOH - AuNPs , NH - AuNPs , and SH - AuNPs . Herein , the SH - AuNPs ( gold − thiol binding ) interaction is recognized as the most powerful force because it is covalent in nature . Therefore , the extent of the competitive binding among various interactions between AuNPs and the hydrogelator was also investigated in depth . For this purpose , the NapFF peptide that lacks the cysteine amino acid was synthesized to compare with the NapFFC peptide ; both the NapFF and NapFFC hydrogel were mixed with AuNPs to form rigid nanocomposites as shown in Figure 5C . As predicted , the NapFFC with gold − thiol binding was more e ﬀ ective in strengthening the hydrogel and restricting component release . The gold − thiol binding decreased the quantity released of NapFFC by 2 . 9 - fold in a 10 min period . This result indicates that the a ﬃ nity between the hydrogelator and AuNPs needs to be taken into account . To summarize the above results , the calcium treatment has a signi ﬁ cant in ﬂ uence on restraining the release of NapFFC compounds into solution ; the modi ﬁ cation of AuNPs with NapFFC to form NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposites through gold − thiol bonding improved the mechanical stability further . To further explore the in ﬂ uence of the calcium ions on the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel , we determined the cumulative percentage of AuNPs released using UV − vis absorption spectrophotometry to examine whether any AuNPs escaped from the prepared hydrogel . In contrast with the experiments shown in Figure 5A , the NapFFC was modi ﬁ ed with the AuNPs before treating with CaCl 2 , instead of adding calcium ions only . In comparison with the treatment with the CaCl 2 solution and DI water , the NapFFC - AuNPs strengthened the mechanical properties of the hydrogel without releasing components into solution only in the presence of calcium ions ( Figure 5D ) . As seen in the inset photograph of Figure 5D , the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel without added calcium ions di ﬀ used into the DI water and the color of the solution turned red . This means that the interactions between the AuNP - modi ﬁ ed NapFFC nano ﬁ bers was not strong enough , resulting in the di ﬀ usion of the components into the DI after 10 min . This phenomenon demonstrates that the AuNPs make the distance between the NapFFC nano ﬁ bers closer , but this force is insu ﬃ cient to make a robust hydrogel . In contrast , calcium ions can help make the AuNP - modi ﬁ ed hydrogel more stable . However , how the calcium ions a ﬀ ect the need for robust hydrogels requires discussion in detail . In the SEM image shown in Figure 4D , we observe the AuNP densi ﬁ cation on the nano ﬁ ber surface after treatment with CaCl 2 . We suggested this phenomenon arises because of the positively charged calcium ions inducing the agglomeration of the surface - negatively charged AuNPs . To investigate the impact of the calcium ions on the agglomeration of AuNPs , we modi ﬁ ed the AuNP surface with Tween - 20 as a protective layer in advance to prevent the positive charge of the calcium ions from inducing agglomer - ation . The appearance of a red color is clearly seen in the CaCl 2 solution in the inserted optical image shown in Figure 5E . The AuNPs di ﬀ used into the CaCl 2 solution instead of congregating within the hydrogel at the bottom of the vial . However , the hydrogel still formed a rigid block , despite the release of AuNPs . We can infer from this experiment that the induced agglomeration reduced the release of AuNPs by 26 . 8 - fold and Figure 6 . Thermal stability of the hydrogel in various solutions from 30 to 100 ° C . ( A ) CaCl 2 , ( B ) PBS bu ﬀ er , and ( C ) DI water . Each of the experimental NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposite hydrogel samples was treated with CaCl 2 for 10 min prior to immersion in the various solutions . ( D ) Chart of the UV − vis absorption spectra showing AuNP release and the ﬂ uorescence spectra of the NapFFC compound in various solutions at di ﬀ erent temperatures . ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acsami . 5b05360 ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX G D o w n l o a d e d by UN I V O F N E BR A S KA - L I N C O L N on A ugu s t 31 , 2015 | h tt p : / / p ub s . ac s . o r g P ub li ca ti on D a t e ( W e b ) : A ugu s t 20 , 2015 | do i : 10 . 1021 / ac s a m i . 5b05360 represents the important interaction in our proposed hydrogel . Based on these results , the Ca 2 + in ﬂ uences both the NapFFC nano ﬁ ber and AuNP distribution . The calcium ions coordinate with the NapFFC carboxylate groups as connectors , and induce the agglomeration of AuNPs . In summary , AuNPs and calcium ions have a mutual and synergistic impact on and interaction with NapFFC . A rigid hydrogel is obtained only when both are present . All of these interactions result in increasing nano ﬁ ber widths , which is consistent with the aforementioned results ( Figure 4 ) . Stability of the Prepared Hydrogel under Various Temperatures , pH Conditions , and Sonication Endur - ance . Thermal stability is an important property of hydro - gelators that have wide applications in a number of biomedical ﬁ elds . In this experiment , the thermal stability of the rigid hydrogel was found to depend on the quantity of NapFFC - AuNPs released . Figure 6 illustrates the results , in which the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel was treated with CaCl 2 for 10 min before being immersed in various solvents , including DI water , PBS , and CaCl 2 , for a further 10 min . Optical images were then taken ( Figure 6A − C ) . From 30 to 60 ° C , the hydrogel maintained an almost identical appearance . When the temper - ature exceeded 70 ° C , the hydrogel contracted . The observation of contraction e ﬀ ect may be attributed to the agglomeration of AuNPs that become unstable and tend to aggregate at high temperature . The supernatant solutions were also examined using ﬂ uorescence and UV − vis adsorption spectrometry . As illustrated in Figure 6D , some NapFFC was detected above 70 ° C . The aromatic − aromatic interactions between the NapFFC molecules weakens with increasing temperature , allowing NapFFC to di ﬀ use into the supernatant . However , the addition of Ca 2 + to the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel causes an irreversible reaction , such that the di ﬀ usion was considered to be typical due to its low proportion ( approximately 10 % ) . In addition , after heating in a water bath , the UV − vis absorption spectra con ﬁ rmed that no AuNPs were released as a result of treating with Ca 2 + in advance ; the result is the same as that shown in Figure 2 . This observation validates the aforementioned statement concerning the agglomeration of the AuNPs . Therefore , Ca 2 + treated NapFFC - AuNP hydrogels have good thermal stability in di ﬀ erent solvents below 60 ° C because the Ca 2 + e ﬀ ectively restricts the release of the negatively charged AuNPs into solution , which prevents the NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposite from detaching from the bottom of the Eppendorf , which indirectly promotes the mechanical properties of the hydrogel . Furthermore , the Ca 2 + containing solvent further interacts with the NapFFC nano ﬁ bers and protects the rigid gel to preserve its form at high temperatures . In addition to thermal stability , pH stability and sonication endurance are also signi ﬁ cant indices of hydrogelators in application to biomedical ﬁ elds . As Figure S7 suggests , the prepared hydrogel exhibits good pH stability in the range of 4 − 10 under room temperature . Despite slight detachment from the bottom of the Eppendorf below pH 5 , the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel maintains its shape and no AuNP in the supernatant was observed from UV − vis spectrophotometry . In alkaline environments , the dark - red hydrogel still performs good stability . Besides , Figure S8 reveals the release of little amount of NapFFC and no AuNP after exposure to the sonication for 10 min . Consequently , the NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposite hydrogel maintains its robust - ness regardless of which solution was used , as long as the hydrogel was treated with Ca2 + in advance . As a result , such an outstanding stability of the hydrogel under di ﬀ erent rigorous conditions con ﬁ rms them suitable for biotechnological applications . Cytotoxicity Performance and Drug Encapsulation . To support the use of the NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposite hydrogel in drug delivery or in the tissue engineering ﬁ eld , the biological safety of this novel material was investigated . The cell viability test is necessary to con ﬁ rm the cytotoxicity of the NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposites . The biocompatibility of the NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposites was evaluated as nontoxic in human cells ( HeLa cells ) by MTT assays . HeLa cells were exposed to di ﬀ erent concentrations ( 20 , 50 , 100 , 200 , 500 μ M ) of the NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposites for 24 , 48 , and 72 h . As shown in Figure 7 , after a 24 h incubation , no toxic e ﬀ ect was observed on the HeLa cells at any concentration . Similar results were observed after 48 h with near or greater than 100 % cell viability at all NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposite concentrations tested . A small decrease was observed in the percent viability only after 3 days of incubation . As a whole , the obtained results demonstrate that the novel nanocomposite hydrogel material will not be toxic in vitro . Intrigued by the proven noncytotoxicity , we sought to study the capability of the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel to encapsulate drugs in biomedical dressing applications . With similar robustness and biocompatibility to those of extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , the NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposites can e ﬀ ectively form rigid hydrogels that resist mechanical destruction and solvent erosion after CaCl 2 treatment . In this experiment , the NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposite hydrogels were spread out smoothly on the bottom of half a Petri dish ( left side ) with a CaCl 2 treatment and hydrogels containing the anticancer drug DOX at concentrations of 0 , 50 μ M , and 100 μ M were prepared in Figure 8 . Figure 8A was a control experiment . In Figure 8B , the optical image suggests visually that there were few surviving HeLa cells on the gel ( left side ) , but there were many healthy cells on the nongel area ( right side ) . Furthermore , on increasing the concentration of encapsulated DOX , no surviving cells were found ( Figure 8C ) . Conversely , the control experiment involving HeLa cells incubated on the Figure 7 . Cytotoxicity of the NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposites in MTT assays . The relative cell viability of HeLa cells incubated with di ﬀ erent concentrations ( 20 , 50 , 100 , 200 , 500 μ M ) of NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposites for 24 , 48 , and 72 h . Each data point results from at least three independent experiments . ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acsami . 5b05360 ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX H D o w n l o a d e d by UN I V O F N E BR A S KA - L I N C O L N on A ugu s t 31 , 2015 | h tt p : / / p ub s . ac s . o r g P ub li ca ti on D a t e ( W e b ) : A ugu s t 20 , 2015 | do i : 10 . 1021 / ac s a m i . 5b05360 nanocomposite hydrogels demonstrated identical normal growth to that of the other half of the plate without the gel ( Figure 8A ) . In general , the cell viability gradually decreased as the concentration of DOX increased and the cell survival ratio was very low when the concentration of DOX was over 5 μ g / mL ( Figure S9 ) . The obtained results imply that the cellular toxicity toward HeLa cells incubated on the DOX encapsulat - ing , mechanical - stability - enhanced NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel originates from the release of DOX molecules inside cells . Despite being incubated on one plate , the cells still survive on the nongel area , whereas the HeLa cells cannot exist on the hydrogel containing the DOX area . This observation con ﬁ rms that only cells attached directly to the gel can interact with the DOX , resulting in cell death . We can speculate that the drug molecules cannot easily di ﬀ use into the culture medium because they are well - captured within the hydrogel . Because of this outstanding performance , NapFFC - AuNP nanocompo - site hydrogels have great potential in tissue engineering . To summarize the above characteristics , NapFFC - AuNP nano - composite hydrogels treated with CaCl 2 are e ﬀ ective carriers for drug delivery and simultaneously have the potential to be applied in future tissue engineering . ■ CONCLUSIONS In conclusion , we have synthesized a new peptide - based supramolecular hydrogel with cysteine ( NapFFC ) and report that the addition of both AuNPs and Ca 2 + to the low molecular weight gelator results in the enhancement of the mechanical stability of the hydrogel based on a novel electrostatic and cross - linking approach . The NapFFC hydrogels incorporate AuNPs , the characteristics of which were revealed by microscopy , and these robust hydrogels exhibit a broadened nano ﬁ brous network derived from NapFFC linked to AuNPs . The hydrogels also incorporate Ca 2 + , suggesting that the coalescence of both metal − organic nanocomposites and cross - linking methods e ﬃ ciently promote an increase in nano ﬁ ber thickness and densi ﬁ cation of the nano ﬁ brous network . The interactions between the NapFFC , AuNPs and Ca 2 + were analyzed using optical microscopy , UV − vis , ﬂ uorescence spectrophotometry and FT - IR clari ﬁ ed that the Ca 2 + interacts with the carboxylic acid of the NapFFC . Such a unique hydrogel architecture also exhibited good stability under various aqueous , thermal and sonication conditions . This demonstrates that the prepared hydrogels exhibit enhanced mechanical property due to synergistic e ﬀ ect . Furthermore , this peptide - based supramolecular hydrogel with high biocompatibility served as a carrier for drug encapsulation for an in vitro dressing . The superior drug - encapsulating capability and release behavior of the hydrogel makes it a promising candidate for the future generation of bioactive nanocomposites that could be used in drug - delivery dressings and extensively exploited in biomedical and tissue engineering applications . ■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT * S Supporting Information The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI : 10 . 1021 / acsami . 5b05360 . Additional information as noted in text ( PDF ) ■ AUTHOR INFORMATION Corresponding Author * Phone : + 886 - 35712121 , ext 55803 . E - mail : fhko @ mail . nctu . edu . tw . Notes The authors declare no competing ﬁ nancial interest . ■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This investigation was supported by fund provided by the Ministry of Science and Technology ( MOST 104 - 2113 - M - 009 - 008 - MY3 ) . ■ REFERENCES ( 1 ) Apostolov , A . A . ; Boneva , D . ; Vassileva , E . ; Mark , J . E . ; Fakirov , S . Mechanical Properties of Native and Crosslinked Gelatins in a Bending Deformation . J . Appl . Polym . Sci . 2000 , 76 , 2041 − 2048 . ( 2 ) Seliktar , D . Designing Cell - Compatible Hydrogels for Biomedical Applications . Science 2012 , 336 , 1124 − 1128 . ( 3 ) Mckay , C . A . ; Pomrenke , R . D . ; McLane , J . S . ; Schaub , N . J . ; DeSimone , E . K . ; Ligon , L . A . ; Gilbert , R . J . An Injectable , Calcium Responsive Composite Hydrogel for the Treatment of Acute Spinal Cord Injury . ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces 2014 , 6 , 1424 − 1438 . ( 4 ) Brandon , V . S . ; Shahana , S . K . ; Omar , Z . F . ; Ali , K . ; Nicholas , A . P . Hydrogels in Regenerative Medicine . Adv . Mater . 2009 , 21 , 3307 − 3329 . ( 5 ) Xavier , J . R . ; Thakur , T . ; Desai , P . ; Jaiswal , M . K . ; Sears , N . ; Cosgriff - Hernandez , E . ; Kaunas , R . ; Gaharwar , A . K . Bioactive Nanoengineered Hydrogels for Bone Tissue Engineering : A Growth - Factor - Free Approach . ACS Nano 2015 , 9 , 3109 − 3118 . ( 6 ) Raeburn , J . ; Zamith Cardoso , A . ; Adams , D . J . The Importance of the Self - Assembly Process to Control Mechanical Properties of Low Molecular Weight Hydrogels . Chem . Soc . Rev . 2013 , 42 , 5143 − 5156 . ( 7 ) Lin , D . C . ; Horkay , F . Nanomechanics of Polymer Gels and Biological Tissues : A Critical Review of Analytical Approaches in the Hertzian Regime and Beyond . Soft Matter 2008 , 4 , 669 − 682 . ( 8 ) De Loos , M . ; Van Esch , J . ; Kellogg , R . M . ; Feringa , B . L . Chiral Recognition in bis - Urea - Based Aggregates and Organogels through Cooperative Interactions . Angew . Chem . , Int . Ed . 2001 , 40 , 613 − 616 . ( 9 ) Yang , Y . ; Suzuki , M . ; Shirai , H . ; Kurose , A . ; Hanabusa , K . Nanofiberization of Inner Helical Mesoporous Silica Using Chiral Gelator as Template under a Shear Flow . Chem . Commun . 2005 , 15 , 2032 − 2034 . ( 10 ) Yang , Z . ; Liang , G . ; Wang , L . ; Xu , B . Using a Kinase / Phosphatase Switch to Regulate a Supramolecular Hydrogel and Forming the Supramolecular Hydrogel in Vivo . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2006 , 128 , 3038 − 3043 . ( 11 ) Rabotyagova , O . S . ; Cebe , P . ; Kaplan , D . L . Protein - Based Block Copolymers . Biomacromolecules 2011 , 12 , 269 − 289 . ( 12 ) Panda , J . J . ; Dua , R . ; Mishra , A . ; Mittra , B . ; Chauhan , V . S . 3D Cell Growth and Proliferation on a RGD Functionalized Nanofibrillar Hydrogel Based on a Conformationally Restricted Residue Containing Dipeptide . ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces 2010 , 2 , 2839 − 2849 . Figure 8 . In vitro drug delivery test on the nanocomposite hydrogel ( right side , nongel ; left side , gel ) . ( A ) Optical images of HeLa cells grown on the NapFFC - AuNP nanocomposite hydrogel . Incubation of HeLa cells on the NapFFC - AuNP hydrogel containing DOX at a concentration of ( B ) 50 and ( C ) 100 μ M . ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acsami . 5b05360 ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX I D o w n l o a d e d by UN I V O F N E BR A S KA - L I N C O L N on A ugu s t 31 , 2015 | h tt p : / / p ub s . ac s . o r g P ub li ca ti on D a t e ( W e b ) : A ugu s t 20 , 2015 | do i : 10 . 1021 / ac s a m i . 5b05360 ( 13 ) Xu , X . D . ; Liang , L . ; Chen , C . S . ; Lu , B . ; Wang , N . L . ; Jiang , F . G . ; Zhang , X . Z . ; Zhuo , R . X . Peptide Hydrogel as an Intraocular Drug Delivery System for Inhibition of Postoperative Scarring Formation . ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces 2010 , 2 , 2663 − 2671 . ( 14 ) Vandermeulen , G . W . M . ; Klok , H . A . Peptide / Protein Hybrid Materials : Enhanced Control of Structure and Improved Performance through Conjugation of Biological and Synthetic Polymers . Macromol . Biosci . 2004 , 4 , 383 − 398 . ( 15 ) Kiyonaka , S . ; Sada , K . ; Yoshimura , I . ; Shinkai , S . ; Kato , N . ; Hamachi , I . Semi - Wet Peptide / Protein Array Using Supramolecular Hydrogel . Nat . Mater . 2004 , 3 , 58 − 64 . ( 16 ) Yamguchi , S . ; Yoshimura , I . ; Kohira , T . ; Tamaru , S . ; Hamachi , I . Cooperation between Artificial Receptors and Supramolecular Hydro - gels for Sensing and Discriminating Phosphate Derivatives . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2005 , 127 , 11835 − 11841 . ( 17 ) De la Rica , R . ; Matsui , H . Applications of Peptide and Protein - Based Materials in Bionanotechnology . Chem . Soc . Rev . 2010 , 39 , 3499 − 3509 . ( 18 ) Hartgerink , J . D . ; Beniash , E . ; Stupp , S . I . Self - Assembly and Mineralization of Peptide − Amphiphile Nanofibers . Science 2001 , 294 , 1684 − 1688 . ( 19 ) Ghadiri , M . R . ; Granja , J . R . ; Milligan , R . A . ; McRee , D . E . ; Khazanovich , N . Self - Assembling Organic Nanotubes Based on a Cyclic Peptide Architecture . Nature 1993 , 366 , 324 − 327 . ( 20 ) Hardy , J . ; Selkoe , D . J . The Amyloid Hypothesis of Alzheimer ’ s Disease : Progress and Problems on the Road to Therapeutics . Science 2002 , 297 , 353 − 356 . ( 21 ) Luo , Z . ; Zhang , S . Designer Nanomaterials Using Chiral Self - Assembling Peptide Systems and Their Emerging Benefit for Society . Chem . Soc . Rev . 2012 , 41 , 4736 − 4754 . ( 22 ) Amdursky , N . ; Molotskii , M . ; Aronov , D . ; Adler - Abramovich , L . ; Gazit , E . ; Rosenman , G . Blue Luminescence Based on Quantum Confinement at Peptide Nanotubes . Nano Lett . 2009 , 9 , 3111 − 3115 . ( 23 ) Shi , J . ; Du , X . ; Yuan , D . ; Haburcak , R . ; Wu , D . ; Zhou , N . ; Xu , B . Enzyme Transformation to Modulate the Ligand − Receptor Inter - actions between Small Molecules . Chem . Commun . 2015 , 51 , 4899 − 4901 . ( 24 ) Jayawarna , V . ; Smith , A . ; Gough , J . E . ; Ulijn , R . V . Three - Dimensional Cell Culture of Chondrocytes on Modified di - Phenyl - alanine Scaffolds . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 2007 , 35 , 535 − 537 . ( 25 ) Mahler , A . ; Reches , M . ; Rechter , M . ; Cohen , S . ; Gazit , E . Rigid , Self - Assembled Hydrogel Composed of a Modified Aromatic Dipeptide . Adv . Mater . 2006 , 18 , 1365 − 1370 . ( 26 ) Yan , C . ; Pochan , D . J . Rheological Properties of Peptide - Based Hydrogels for Biomedical and Other Applications . Chem . Soc . Rev . 2010 , 39 , 3528 − 3540 . ( 27 ) Buerkle , L . E . ; Rowan , S . J . Supramolecular Gels Formed from Multi - Component Low Molecular Weight Species . Chem . Soc . Rev . 2012 , 41 , 6089 − 6102 . ( 28 ) Adhikari , B . ; Nanda , J . ; Banerjee , A . Short Peptide Based Hydrogels : Incorporation of Graphene into the Hydrogel . Soft Matter 2011 , 7 , 9259 − 9266 . ( 29 ) Nanda , J . ; Adhikari , B . ; Basak , S . ; Banerjee , A . Formation of Hybrid Hydrogels Consisting of Tripeptide and Different Silver Nanoparticle - Capped Ligands : Modulation of the Mechanical Strength of Gel Phase Materials . J . Phys . Chem . B 2012 , 116 , 12235 − 12244 . ( 30 ) Locke , A . K . ; Cummins , B . M . ; Abraham , A . A . ; Cote , G . L . PEGylation of Concanavalin A to Improve Its Stability for an In Vivo Glucose Sensing Assay . Anal . Chem . 2014 , 86 , 9091 − 9097 . ( 31 ) Zheng , J . ; Callahan , L . A . S . ; Hao , J . ; Guo , K . ; Wesdemiotis , C . ; Weiss , R . A . ; Becker , M . L . Strain - Promoted Cross - Linking of PEG - Based Hydrogels via Copper - Free Cycloaddition . ACS Macro Lett . 2012 , 1 , 1071 − 1073 . ( 32 ) Gao , J . ; Wang , H . ; Wang , L . ; Wang , J . ; Kong , D . ; Yang , Z . Enzyme Promotes the Hydrogelation from a Hydrophobic Small Molecule . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2009 , 131 , 11286 − 11287 . ( 33 ) Li , Y . ; Ding , Y . ; Qin , M . ; Cao , Y . ; Wang , W . An Enzyme - Assisted Nanoparticle Crosslinking Approach to Enhance the Mechanical Strength of Peptide - Based Supramolecular Hydrogels . Chem . Commun . 2013 , 49 , 8653 − 8655 . ( 34 ) Garmo , Ø . A . ; Davison , W . ; Zhang , H . Effects of Binding of Metals to the Hydrogel and Filter Membrane on the Accuracy of the Diffusive Gradients in Thin Films Technique . Anal . Chem . 2008 , 80 , 9220 − 9225 . ( 35 ) Mantion , A . ; Massu ̈ ger , L . ; Rabu , P . ; Palivan , C . ; McCusker , L . B . ; Taubert , A . Metal − Peptide Frameworks ( MPFs ) : “ Bioinspired ” Metal Organic Frameworks . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2008 , 130 , 2517 − 2526 . ( 36 ) Pan , Y . ; Gao , Y . ; Shi , J . ; Wang , L . ; Xu , B . A Versatile Supramolecular Hydrogel of Nitrilotriacetic Acid ( NTA ) for Binding Metal Ions and Magnetorheological Response . J . Mater . Chem . 2011 , 21 , 6804 − 6806 . ( 37 ) Bush , M . F . ; Oomens , J . ; Saykally , R . J . ; Williams , E . R . Effects of Alkaline Earth Metal Ion Complexation on Amino Acid Zwitterion Stability : Results from Infrared Action Spectroscopy . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2008 , 130 , 6463 − 6471 . ( 38 ) Volkringer , C . ; Marrot , J . ; Fe ́ rey , G . ; Loiseau , T . Hydrothermal Crystallization of Three Calcium - Based Hybrid Solids with 2 , 6 - Naphthalene - or 4 , 4 ′ - Biphenyl - Dicarboxylates . Cryst . Growth Des . 2008 , 8 , 685 − 689 . ( 39 ) Gaharwar , A . K . ; Peppas , N . A . ; Khademhosseini , A . Nanocomposite Hydrogels for Biomedical Applications . Biotechnol . Bioeng . 2014 , 111 , 441 − 453 . ( 40 ) Goenka , S . ; Sant , V . ; Sant , S . Graphene - Based Nanomaterials for Drug Delivery and Tissue Engineering . J . Controlled Release 2014 , 173 , 75 − 88 . ( 41 ) Zheng , X . ; Wu , D . ; Su , T . ; Bao , S . ; Liao , C . ; Wang , Q . Magnetic Nanocomposite Hydrogel Prepared by ZnO - initiated Photopolymeri - zation for La ( III ) Adsorption . ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces 2014 , 6 , 19840 − 19849 . ( 42 ) Zhang , S . M . ; Greenfield , M . A . ; Mata , A . ; Palmer , L . C . ; Bitton , R . ; Mantei , J . R . ; Aparicio , C . ; de la Cruz , M . O . ; Stupp , S . I . A Self - Assembly Pathway to Aligned Monodomain Gels . Nat . Mater . 2010 , 9 , 594 − 601 . ( 43 ) Ma , M . ; Kuang , Y . ; Gao , Y . ; Zhang , Y . ; Gao , P . ; Xu , B . Aromatic − Aromatic Interactions Induce the Self - Assembly of Pentapeptidic Derivatives in Water To Form Nanofibers and Supramolecular Hydrogels . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2010 , 132 , 2719 − 2728 . ( 44 ) Ding , Y . ; Li , Y . ; Qin , M . ; Cao , Y . ; Wang , W . Photo - Cross - Linking Approach to Engineering Small Tyrosine - Containing Peptide Hydrogels with Enhanced Mechanical Stability . Langmuir 2013 , 29 , 13299 − 13306 . ( 45 ) Turkevich , J . ; Stevenson , P . C . ; Hillier , J . A Study of the Nucleation and Growth Processes in the Synthesis of Colloidal Gold . Discuss . Faraday Soc . 1951 , 11 , 55 − 80 . ( 46 ) Frens , G . Controlled Nucleation for the Regulation of the Particle Size in Monodisperse Gold Suspensions . Nature , Phys . Sci . 1973 , 241 , 20 − 22 . ( 47 ) Yang , Z . ; Liang , G . ; Ma , M . ; Gao , Y . ; Xu , B . Conjugates of Naphthalene and Dipeptides Produce Molecular Hydrogelators with High Efficiency of Hydrogelation and Superhelical Nanofibers . J . Mater . Chem . 2007 , 17 , 850 − 854 . ( 48 ) Estroff , L . A . ; Hamilton , A . D . Water Gelation by Small Organic Molecules . Chem . Rev . 2004 , 104 , 1201 − 1218 . ( 49 ) Wade , L . G . , Jr . Organic Chemistry , 6th ed . ; Pearson Prentice Hall : Upper Saddle River , NJ , 2006 . ( 50 ) Mantion , A . ; Taubert , A . TiO 2 Sphere - Tube - Fiber Transition Induced by Oligovaline Concentration Variation . Macromol . Biosci . 2011 , 7 , 208 − 217 . ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces Research Article DOI : 10 . 1021 / acsami . 5b05360 ACS Appl . Mater . Interfaces XXXX , XXX , XXX − XXX J D o w n l o a d e d by UN I V O F N E BR A S KA - L I N C O L N on A ugu s t 31 , 2015 | h tt p : / / p ub s . ac s . o r g P ub li ca ti on D a t e ( W e b ) : A ugu s t 20 , 2015 | do i : 10 . 1021 / ac s a m i . 5b05360