Cell , Vol . 116 , 577 – 589 , February 20 , 2004 , Copyright  2004 by Cell Press Nanoscale Organization of Multiple GPI - Anchored Proteins in Living Cell Membranes son , 2002 ; Jacobson and Dietrich , 1999 ; Simons and Ikonen , 1997 ; Simons and Toomre , 2000 ) . Two major hypotheses regarding the nature of cell membrane rafts are : ( 1 ) rafts are relatively large ( (cid:1) 50 nm ) cholesterol and sphingolipid - rich structures wherein associated Pranav Sharma , 1 , 4 Rajat Varma , 1 , 4 , 5 R . C . Sarasij , 2 , 4 Ira , 3 , 6 Karine Gousset , 6 G . Krishnamoorthy , 3 Madan Rao , 1 , 2 , * and Satyajit Mayor 1 , * 1 National Centre for Biological Science ( TIFR ) UAS - GKVK Campus proteins are likely to be concentrated ( Simons and Iko - GKVK PO nen , 1997 ; Simons and Toomre , 2000 ) , ( 2 ) rafts are dy - Bangalore 560 065 namic assemblies of small size , constituted by compo - India nents that are preferentially associated with lipids ; 2 Raman Research Institute functional organization is dictated by the induction of CV Raman Avenue stable large - scale structures ( Anderson and Jacob - Bangalore 560 080 son , 2002 ) . India Theprevailingoperationaldescriptionofraftsisbased 3 Department of Chemical Sciences on the observation that detergent - resistant membranes Tata Institute of Fundamental Research ( TIFR ) ( DRMs ) obtained by the extraction of living cells with Homi Bhabha Road cold nonionic detergents ( e . g . Triton X - 100 ) , retain a Mumbai 400005 specific set of proteins and lipids , including GPI - anchored India proteins ( GPI - APs ) , signaling proteins such as lipid - linked nonreceptor tyrosine kinases , ( glyco ) sphingoli - pids , and cholesterol ( Brown and London , 2000 ) . DRM - Summary association has also been shown to correlate with the sorting and signaling properties of some proteins Cholesterol and sphingolipid - enriched “rafts” have ( Brown and London , 2000 ; Simons and Ikonen , 1997 ; long been proposed as platforms for the sorting of Simons and Toomre , 2000 ) . More recently however , the specific membrane components including glycosyl - correlation of DRMs with preexisting lipid domains in phosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins ( GPI - APs ) , how - membranes is being seriously contested . For instance , ever , their existence and physical properties have in homogeneous fluid membrane systems , Triton X - 100 been controversial . Here , we investigate the size of treatment was found to induce large - scale ordered do - lipid - dependent organization of GPI - APs in live cells , mains ( Heerklotz , 2002 ) and in some cases the addition using homo and hetero - FRET - based experiments , ofthedetergentseverelyperturbspreexistingl o domains combined with theoretical modeling . These studies ( Heerklotz et al . , 2003 ) . Consequently , in the more com - reveal an unexpected organization wherein cell sur - plex environment of the cell membrane , DRM - associa - face GPI - APs are present as monomers and a smaller tion should not be relied upon to provide information fraction ( 20 % – 40 % ) as nanoscale ( (cid:2) 5 nm ) cholesterol - regarding any kind of preexisting organization of com - sensitive clusters . These clusters are composed of at ponents ( Zurzolo et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , new methodologies most four molecules and accommodate diverse GPI - are necessary for establishing the existence and proper - AP species ; crosslinking GPI - APs segregates them ties of in vivo rafts involved in cellular function . from preexisting GPI - AP clusters and prevents endo - Here , we focus on the cell surface organization of a cytosis of the crosslinked species via a GPI - AP - selec - common raft - marker , GPI - APs , which are a diverse set tive pinocytic pathway . In conjunction with an analysis of exoplasmic , eukaryotic proteins exhibiting specific of the statistical distribution of the clusters , these ob - intracellular sorting and signaling properties regulated servations suggest a mechanism for functional lipid - by alterations in cholesterol and sphingolipid levels in dependent clustering of GPI - APs . cell membranes ( Chatterjee and Mayor , 2001 ; Mayor and Riezman , 2004 ) . The lipid - dependent organization Introduction of GPI - APs at the cell surface will directly reveal the structure of rafts and establish a direct functional signifi - Rafts have been hypothesized as lateral heterogeneities cance for this concept . in membranes of living cells that are enriched in ( glyco ) While experiments on artificial membrane containing sphingolipids , cholesterol , and specific membrane pro - a lipid composition resembling that of DRMs exhibit teins . They have been proposed to be responsible for ordered domains with sizes ranging from the nanometer the sorting of associated proteins and for providing sites to the micron scale ( Silvius , 2003 ) , both fluorescence for the assembly of cytoplasmic signaling complexes in microscopy and conventional electron microscopy have a variety of biological contexts ( Anderson and Jacob - consistently failed to reveal large - scale laterally segre - gated structures enriched in GPI - APs in living cells ( Hao * Correspondence : madan @ rri . res . in ( M . R . ) , mayor @ ncbs . res . in ( S . M ) et al . , 2001 ; Mayor and Maxfield , 1995 ; Mayor et al . , 4 These authors contributed equally to this work . 1994 ; Parton et al . , 1994 ) ; viewed at optical resolution 5 Presentaddress : PrograminMolecularPathogenesis , SkirballInsti - ( (cid:1) 400 nm ) , GPI - APs appear uniformly distributed in cell tuteforBiomolecularMedicine , NewYorkUniversitySchoolofMedi - membranes . Thus , if cellular rafts exist they are likely cine , 540 First Avenue , New York , New York 10016 . to be small and / or extremely dynamic . 6 Presentaddress : DepartmentofBiology , JohnsHopkinsUniversity , 3400 North Charles Street , Baltimore , Maryland 21218 . Innative cellmembranes , methodsdesigned todetect Cell578 proximity between molecules have observed inhomoge - phore ; Figure 1A ) to show clustered distribution of di - verse GPI - APs in multiple cell lines . Second , time re - neous distributions of GPI - APs . Chemical crosslinking withshort ( 1 . 1nm ) crosslinkersindicatethatcholesterol - solved anisotropy decay experiments provide evidence of high density in clusters . Third , steady - state anisot - sensitive complexes of GPI - APs exist at the cell surface ( Friedrichson and Kurzchalia , 1998 ) . Using a fluores - ropy as a function of photobleaching , in conjunction with a detailed theoretical analysis suggests that these cence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) method called homo - FRET which detects proximity between like fluor - dense clusters are small and only a fraction of GPI - APs are clustered . Finally , theoretical modeling of hetero - ophores at 1 – 10 nm scale we had suggested that GPI - APs occur in cholesterol - sensitive , submicron - sized FRET measurements confirm the presence of a fraction of small , dense clusters . We have kept the analytical “domains” at the surface of living cells ( Varma and Mayor , 1998 ) . In contrast , studies based on detecting methods used for these experiments in a single location ( Supplemental Data available on Cell website ) , thus , if FRET between different fluorophores ( hetero - FRET ) re - ported the absence of detectable clustering of GPI - APs , the reader wishes to obtain the details of these calcula - tions they are urged to refer to this section . putting an upper bound on the fraction ( if any ) of clus - tered GPI - APs ( Kenworthy and Edidin , 1998 ; Kenworthy et al . , 2000 ) . Alternative approaches to look for rafts in Diverse GPI - APs Are Present as Clusters cell membranes have relied on single particle tracking at the Cell Surface measurements . Even here there appears to be a remark - At optical microscopy resolution , GFP - GPI ( Figure 1C ) , able lack of consensus on the existence , size , lifetime , mYFP - GPI , and mCFP - GPI ( data not shown ) exhibited and structure of lipid - dependent assemblies ( reviewed a diffuse distribution at the surface of live cells ; based in Subczynski and Kusumi , 2003 ) . on the maximum intensity of GFP - GPI , this corresponds To investigate the structure of lipid - dependent as - to a maximum of (cid:1) 400 GFP - fluorophores / (cid:3) m 2 on the cell semblies of GPI - APs in live cells at a spatial scale below surface ( Supplemental Data available on Cell website ) . If optical resolution we have once again used homo - FRET these molecules are distributed uniformly , the typical microscopy to study the organization of different GPI - interprotein distance would be at least (cid:1) 50 nm , much APs expressed in multiple cell lines ( see Figure 1A ) . too large for any energy transfer ( Forster radius of GFP We have extended our earlier steady - state methods by R 0 (cid:4) 4 . 65 nm , Patterson et al . , 2000 ) . At these separa - theoretically modeling the changes observed in homo - tions , we expect an anisotropy close to its value at FRET efficiencies upon photobleaching the fluoro - infinite dilution in the membrane ( A ∞ (cid:4) 0 . 315 for GFP - phores to provide information about the size of the GPI - GPI in CHO cells ; see Supplemental Data available on AP containing structures , in conjunction with direct Cell website ) . However , upon excitation by polarized measurements of anisotropy decay rates to determine light , GFP - GPI exhibited fluorescence anisotropy values intermolecular distances in the cluster . In addition , we ( 0 . 295 (cid:5) 0 . 005 ) , which were significantly lower , indicat - have revisited the hetero - FRET experiments with addi - ing significant fluorescence depolarization . Even so , the tional theoretical analyses . Together , the experiments fluorescence anisotropy has a constant value over the and theoretical analyses reveal an unexpected nanome - entire fluorescence intensity range ( Figures 1C – 1E ) . ter scale organization of GPI - APs , wherein 20 % – 40 % Similar observations have been made with GFP - GPI in of GPI - APs are organized as clusters consisting of at MDCK cells , mCFP - GPI ( data not shown ) , and mYFP - most four molecules and the remaining are present as GPI ( Figure 1F ) in CHO cells . monomers . We provide evidence that these clusters are The reduced anisotropy observed for GFP - GPI and sensitive to cholesterol depletion , that multiple GPI - APs mYFP - GPI may be either due to homo - FRET and / or due cohabit the same cluster and that crosslinking perturbs to increased rotational mobility . By directly measuring the preexisting organization . Our data also indicate that the rates of anisotropy decay at picosecond time scales , organization at this scale is necessary for the specific we can resolve the respective contributions of homo - endocytic sorting displayed by GPI - APs . FRET and of rotational mobility ( see Figure 1B ) . Time - resolved anisotropy decays of GFP - GPI ( Figure 1H : green line ) and mYFP - GPI ( Figure 1I : green line ) in living Results cells at the picosecond scale exhibited both a fast ( Table 1 ; (cid:6) r1 ) and a slow decay ( Table 1 ; (cid:6) r2 ) component Experimental Strategy to Study the Nature of Organization of Cell Surface GPI - APs for the two proteins . The slow decay component is due to rotational diffusion of the membrane - tethered protein We have principally used homo - FRET microscopy to determinethe sizeand structureof GPI - APorganization . since it was eliminated by placing the cells in a highly viscous medium ( 50 % glycerol : Figure 1G , green line ) ; Homo - FRET is measured by monitoring the extent of depolarization of fluorescence emission over and above we alsonote thatthe slowdecay componentof GFP - GPI is much longer than the measured rotational correlation that produced by rotational diffusion of the fluorophores ( Figure 1B ; see also explanation in Supplemental Data , time of a freely diffusible molecule of similar size ( 29 kDa ; Table 1 ) . The fast decay component then is due to Supplemental Figure S1 available at http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 116 / 4 / 577 / DC1 ) . As earlier , we es - FRET since : ( 1 ) it was absent in GFP molecules in free solution ( Figure 1G ; black line ) and in PI - PLC released timatedhomo - FRETbetweenGPI - APsbymeasuringthe fluorescence emission anisotropy of these proteins at GFP or mYFP molecules from GFP - or mYFP - GPI ex - pressing cells , respectively , where they are beyond the surface of living cells . First , we extend the steady - state homo - FRET measurements to different GPI - APs FRET range ( Table 1 ) ; ( 2 ) it is present upon crosslinking of GFP monomers with glutaraldehyde ( Figure 1G ; red ( principally GFP - GPI and variants of the GFP fluoro - Nanoscale Organization of Raft Components 579 Figure 1 . GFP - GPI Exhibits Concentration - Independent FRET at the Surface of Living Cells ( A ) showscartoonsdepictingthepossibilities of rotational motion ( red arrows ) for the fluor - ophores , PLF - FR - GPI { human folate receptor ( FR - GPI ) labeled via a monovalent fluores - cent folic acid analog , N - (cid:7) - pteroyl - N - (cid:8) - ( 4 (cid:9) - fluorescein - thiocarbamoyl ) - L - lysine ( PLF ) } , GPI - anchored enhanced green fluorescent protein ( GFP - GPI ) and variants of GFP , mCFP - and mYFP - GPI . ( B ) showstheexpectedtime - resolvedanisot - ropy decay profiles for dilute GFP - fluoro - phores ( top ) immobilized in glycerol solution ( viscousmedium , blackline ) orfreely rotating in an aqueous solution ( blue line ) . Fluoro - phores undergoing FRET ( green line , bottom ) haveanadditionalfastanisotropydecayrate , (cid:10) . Totalintensity ( C ) andanisotropy ( D ) images of a single field of GG8Tb - 1 cells expressing GFP - GPI are shown as pseudocolored 8 - bit images . Mean fluorescence emission anisot - ropyofGFP - GPI ( E ) ormYFP - GPI ( F ) express - ingcellsundernormal ( blackcircles ) andcho - lesteroldepleted ( redcircles ) conditionswere obtained for cells with different intensity ranges ( (cid:5) 150 units ) and plotted against the midpoint of the interval . Each data point in ( E ) and ( F ) is the weighted means from two independentdeterminations , eachconsisting of 4 – 40 cells per interval ; vertical bars repre - senterrorsintheestimationofthemean . Note that both GFP - GPI and mYFP - GPI exhibit concentration independent anisotropy that is altered by cholesterol depletion using sapo - nin treatment . The LUT bar in ( C ) represents alinearscaleoffluorescenceintensityofarbi - trary units from 450 ( blue ) to 2000 ( red ) inten - sity corresponding to those shown in ( E ) . The LUT bar in ( D ) represents a linear scale of anisotropy ranging from 0 . 3 ( blue ) to 0 . 45 ( white ) . Time resolved anisotropy decay profiles ( G ) for GFP in 60 % glycerol ( dashed black line ) , glutaraldehyde crosslinked GFP in 60 % glyc - erol ( dashedredline ) andGFP - GPIonsurface ofcellsplacedin50 % glycerol ( dashedgreen line ) are shown along with their correspond - ing best - fits ( thick lines ; see Table 1 for fit parameters ) and residuals in the same color code . ( H ) and ( I ) show time resolved anisotropy decays of GFP - GPI ( H ) and mYFP - GPI ( I ) expressed on surface of CHO cells , with ( dashed blue line ) or without ( dashed green line ) saponin treatment to deplete cholesterol . Corresponding best fits ( represented with thick lines ; see Table 1 for fit parameters ) and residuals are provided in same color code . Note that GFP - GPI and mYFP undergo efficient homo - FRET resulting in a rapid component in the decay of anisotropy that is absent after saponin - treatment . Scale bar is equal to 30 (cid:3) m . line ) ; ( 3 ) it is insensitive to increase in viscosity of the result of protein - protein interactions ; of particular con - cern is the intrinsic oligomerization potential of GFP as medium surrounding the cell ( Figure 1G ; green line ) ; and ( 4 ) it occurs at rates thatare much faster than the lifetime suggested by Zacharias et al . ( 2002 ) . For this purpose , we compared GFP - GPI and mYFP - GPI where specific of fluorophores , consistent with FRET processes ( Clay - ton et al . , 2002 ; Gautier et al . , 2001 ; Tanaka and Mataga , residues have been mutated to abolish oligomerization of the YFP fluorophore ( Zacharias et al . , 2002 ) . We find 1979 ) . Consistent with FRET , reducing the density of fluorophores by chemical quenching results in an in - that FRET between the GPI - AP species requires the GPI - anchor and cholesterol , requirements that are in - crease in the steady - state anisotropy of GFP - GPI ( Sup - plemental Figure S1C available on Cell website ) . To con - consistent with self - oligomerization in membranes . This follows from ( 1 ) cholesterol - depletion of GFP - GPI and clude , the various GPI - AP species are clustered on the cell surface and undergo significant homo - FRET : this mYFP - GPI expressing cells by extraction with saponin ( Figures 1E and 1F ) resulted in a complete loss of the comes from the presence of a fast decay component in the time - resolved anisotropy and significant reduction homo - FRET ( fast ) component ( Table 1 ; Figures 1H , and 1I , blue traces ) and a concomitant increase of steady - in steady - state anisotropy . We rule out that FRET between GPI - AP species is a state anisotropy ( Figures 1E and 1F ; red circles ) , and Cell580 Table 1 . Anisotropy Decay Parameters of GFP , GFP - GPI , mYFP - GPI , and GFP - PIT Expressed on CHO cells d Anisotropy Decay Times c ( (cid:6) r in nsec ) Interprotein Distances ( in nm ) Forster’s Interfluorophore Protein (cid:6) r1 (cid:6) r2 radius ( R 0 ) f distance ( R ) g 1 GFP in PBS 14 . 7 (cid:5) 0 . 7 2 Crosslinked GFP a 0 . 3 (cid:5) 0 . 06 ( 0 . 3 (cid:5) 0 . 04 ) (cid:1) 40 ( 0 . 7 (cid:5) 0 . 04 ) 4 . 65 (cid:5) 0 . 09 3 . 85 (cid:5) 0 . 2 3 GFP - GPI 0 . 23 (cid:5) 0 . 11 ( 0 . 09 (cid:5) 0 . 01 ) (cid:1) 25 ( 0 . 91 (cid:5) 0 . 04 ) 4 . 65 (cid:5) 0 . 09 3 . 53 (cid:5) 0 . 46 4 GFP - GPI 40 (cid:5) 5 . 0 ( saponin b ) 5 GFP - PIT 50 (cid:5) 4 . 0 6 mYFP ( PIPLC e ) 17 . 2 (cid:5) 0 . 9 7 mYFP - GPI 0 . 132 (cid:5) 0 . 05 (cid:1) 35 4 . 96 (cid:5) 0 . 1 3 . 34 (cid:5) 0 . 33 ( 0 . 1 (cid:5) 0 . 004 ) ( 0 . 9 (cid:5) 0 . 004 ) 8 mYFP - GPI 42 (cid:5) 4 . 0 ( saponin b ) a GFP was quantitatively crosslinked with 0 . 25 % glutaraldehyde in phosphate buffered saline , pH 7 . 4 . Time - resolved experiments were conducted in 60 % glycerol ( Supplemental Figure S1 available on Cell website ) . Fluorescence life times of crosslinked GFP in 60 % glycerol are similar to monomeric GFP in 60 % glycerol . b Cells were treated with 0 . 2 % saponin for 30 min on ice . c (cid:6) r values represent average from 6 – 9 fields consisting of 2 – 3 cells each ; amplitudes of the individual components are normalized to one and shown in parenthesis . ( Fluorescence lifetimes for each condition have been independently determined from 2 – 6 fields in each case and shown in Supplemental Data available on Cell website ) . d In all cases , cells were treated with cycloheximide for 3 hr prior to imaging to remove Golgi - associated fluorescence . ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) e CHO cells expressing mYFP - GPI were treated with PIPLC ( on ice ) to obtain mYFP in phosphate - buffered saline , pH 7 . 4 . f Forster’s radii were directly taken from ( Patterson et al . , 2000 ) ; R 0 for YFP was corrected for the experimentally determined extinction coefficient ( (cid:8) ) at pH 7 . 4 , which was 0 . 85 that obtained at pH 8 . 0 . g Interfluorophore distances R , were calculated according to ( Gautier et al . , 2001 ) as described in Experimental Procedures . ( 2 ) bothsteady - state andtime - resolvedanisotropymea - a fast anisotropy decay component ( 0 . 3 (cid:5) 0 . 06 ; Figure 1G , Table 1 ) corresponding to an interfluorophore dis - surements showed that the reduced anisotropy due to FRET was abolished by replacement of the GPI - anchor tanceof 3 . 85 (cid:5) 0 . 2nm ( Table1 ) . Experimentsconducted on mYFP - GPI ( Figure 1I ; green trace ) show that the de - on GFP - GPI with a transmembrane anchor ( GFP - PIT ; Table 1 ) . Furthermore , unlike the wild - type YFP protein cay rate is even shorter ( (cid:6) r1 (cid:4) 0 . 132 (cid:5) 0 . 05 ) than that observed for GFP - GPI ( Table 1 ) . This is entirely consistent ( Zacharias et al . , 2002 ) , GFP molecules in solution do not show any evidence of oligomerization ( see Supple - with the larger value of R 0 for homo - FRET between two YFP molecules ( Patterson et al . , 2000 ) , and corresponds mental Data available on Cell website ) . Thus , we detect robust homo - FRET between mole - tointer - YFP fluorophoredistance indistinguishablefrom the GFP - GPI counterpart ( Table 1 ) . Time - resolved an - cules of diverse GPI - APs in living cell membranes . Given the average concentration of GPI - AP species in mem - isotropy measurements on PLF - labeled FR - GPI ( PLF - FR - GPI ) on the surface of CHO cells also reflect a similar branes , thisisindicativeofaclustereddistributionbelow optical resolution . The clustering of GPI - APs seems to high - densityorganizationofFR - GPIs ( seeSupplemental Data , Supplemental Figure S2 available on Cell website ) . be promoted by the GPI - anchor . Thus the attachment of a GPI - anchor is capable of or - ganizing diverse proteins into cholesterol - dependent GPI - APs Are Present in Extremely high - density structures with interfluorophore distances High - Density Structures (cid:2) 4 nm . FRET efficiencies between different fluorophores ( het - ero - FRET ) have been used to obtain information regard - ing intermolecular distances at the nanometer scale GPI - APs Form Nanometer - Sized Clusters at the Cell Surface ( Stryer and Haugland , 1978 ) . Likewise , homo - FRET effi - ciencies can be used to obtain similar information by To determine the size of these high - density structures , we devised a methodology based on the observation the measurement of the rate of loss of fluorescence anisotropy ( (cid:10) ; see Figure 1B ) at subnanosecond time that the extent of homo - FRET and thus , the steady state anisotropy changes in a theoretically predictable man - domains ( Figure 1B ) . The decay rate is a sensitive mea - sure of the distance between fluorophores undergoing ner ( AgranovichandGalanin , 1982 ; seealsoSupplemen - tal Data available on Cell website ) with changes in con - FRET ; faster rates are indicative of shorter intermolecu - lar distances ( Gautier et al . , 2001 ) . Rapid loss of GFP - centration of fluorophores in a particular structure . We firstverifiedthisconceptinourexperimentalsetup . Thus anisotropy ( 0 . 23 (cid:5) 0 . 11 nsec ; Table 1 ; Figure 1H ) shows that at least a fraction ( (cid:1) 10 % ) of GFP - GPI species are increasing concentrations of lissamine rhodamine in so - lution resulted in predictable changes in fluorescence organized in extremely high - density structures with in - termolecular separation of 3 . 53 (cid:5) 0 . 455 nm ( Table 1 ) . anisotropy ( Supplemental Data , Supplemental Figure S3 available on Cell website ; compare blue circles with For comparison , we produced an artificially clustered GFP organization by crosslinking GFP monomers with theoretical curve in red ) . Similarly , considering that ex - ogenously added C 6 - NBD - SM in cell membranes is uni - glutaraldehyde ( a 0 . 3 nm crosslinker ) ; this also exhibited Nanoscale Organization of Raft Components 581 formly distributed in domains of very large size ( with respect to the molecular size and R 0 ) , we were able to precisely describe the changes in fluorescence anisot - ropy on increasing concentration of the fluorophore ( Supplemental Data , Supplemental Figure S3 available on Cell website ; compare blue circles with theoretical curve in red ) . Thus , in the context of GPI - APs on the cell surface , reducing fluorophore concentration by photobleaching should have a predictable effect on anisotropy ( see Sup - plemental Data , Supplemental Figure S1B available on Cell website ) ; the exact profile will depend on how the fluorophores are organized relative to each other . We tested three spatial arrangements of GPI - APs ( Figure Figure 2 . Photobleaching Induced Changes in Homo - FRET Rule 2A ) . Models a and a’ represent domains where the size Out Large - Sized Domains Containing GPI - APs ismuch largerthan moleculardimensions ; thisorganiza - ( A ) Models of organization of GPI - AP’s . Model a : GPI - APs are uni - tion is most commonly portrayed in the literature as formly distributed within domains of radii R (cid:1) R 0 (cid:2) l ( l (cid:4) molecular functional rafts ( Edidin , 2001 ; Jacobson and Dietrich , size ) . Model a’ : A fraction of the GPI - AP’s are organized as in Model a , while the remaining are dispersed as isolated fluorophores on 1999 ; Varma and Mayor , 1998 ) . This picture is suggested the cell surface . Model b : GPI - APs are distributed uniformly on the byobservation ofphase - segregateddomains inartificial periphery of domains of radii R (cid:1) R 0 (cid:2) l . membrane systems and from interpretations of DRM ( B and C ) Comparison of relative anisotropy profiles ( A / A ∞ ) versus studies ( Edidin , 2003 ) . In Model a GPI - APs are uniformly totalintensity , I ( relativetoitsvaluebeforephotobleaching , I 0 ) , calcu - distributed within domains of large radii ( (cid:1) 10 times R 0 , lated from Models a ( B ; gray line ) and a’ ( B ; black line ) and b ( C ; (cid:1) 50 nm ) while in Model a’ a fraction of the GPI - APs gray line ) using Forster’s theory ( Supplemental Data available on Cell website ) with experimental anisotropy profiles ( black symbols ) are organized as in Model a , while the remaining are determinedfromcellsexpressingdifferentlevelsofGPI - APobtained dispersed as isolated fluorophores on the cell surface afterphotobleaching PLF - labeledFR - GPI . The profilesrepresenting ( Kenworthy and Edidin , 1998 ) . Model b is merely an Models a , a’ and b were calculated with parameters which best fit extension of the organization in Model a wherein GPI - the entire data set while fixing the average intermolecular distance APs are organized along the periphery of the raft . In as 1 . 2 R 0 between fluorophores within domains for Models a and all three cases , we impose the constraint that within b , and 0 . 91 R 0 for Model a’ with 30 % of fluorophores in domains ( for a’ ) . Note Models a , a’ or b fail to describe the experimental data . domains , GPI - APs are densely clustered at distances less than R 0 ( (cid:1) 0 . 9 R 0 ; see Table 1 ) . We used FR - GPI labeled with PLF because it is readily photobleachable . considered all reasonable models of aggregation and The anisotropy of PLF - FR - GPI at the cell surface in - are unable to find another configuration that can ac - creases upon photobleaching , moving from 72 % ( 0 . 178 ) count for all the data . The qualitative feature of the to 85 % ( 0 . 21 ) of A ∞ ( 0 . 247 (cid:5) 0 . 003 ; see Supplemental change in anisotropy with the loss of fluorescence inten - Data available on Cell website ) after a reduction of 68 % sity in Figure 3B is contingent on ( 1 ) the existence of in intensity relative to the starting intensity , I 0 ( Figures monomers and high - density clusters , and ( ii ) the size of 2B and 2C ; black symbols ) . This increase is different the clusters being comparable to R 0 and the size of the from that predicted in Models a , a’ , and b ( compare molecule . The best fit to the data is obtained when we theoretical fits with data in Figures 2B and 2C ) ; Model a’ , estimated the ratio of clusters to monomers by the fares better but the best - fit curve is still not in complete method of least squares to be (cid:1) 22 % ( solid line in Figure agreement with the experiment . ( Additional data from 3B ) . Considering an acceptable range of parameters hetero - FRET experiments [ see below ] , rule out Model based on the lowest values of (cid:11) ( standard deviation ; a’ . ) If Models a and b are force fit onto the data , while Figure 3C ) , and taking data across different cells ( Figure leaving the fluorophore density in each domain as a “fit” 3D ) , we find that the fit provides a range of values for parameter , then the predicted fluorophore density in the fraction of GPI - APs present in clusters ; 20 % – 40 % each domain is much lower ( average intermolecular of all GPI - AP species are engaged in FRET at any given distance (cid:12) 2 . 5 R 0 ) than that obtained from the time - time . Based on how many molecules of size 3 nm ( for resolved anisotropy experiments ( data not shown ) . a 40 kDa FR - protein ) can occupy a cluster of diameter R 0 In searching for an alternative model , we note that ( (cid:1) 5 nm ) , we get a rough upper bound of four molecules the crucial features of the above models are that the within the cluster . size of the domain is much larger than R 0 and the molec - We next studied the cluster to monomer distribution ular size and the density of proteins in the cluster is of GFP - GPI using a similar method . We find that the high . We thus consider a qualitatively different model , extent of change in anisotropy of GFP - GPI upon chemi - Model c ( Figure 3A ) , wherein the size of the domain is cal quenching is consistent with Model c but for techni - comparable to R 0 and the molecular size . Figure 3B cal reasons ( detailed in Supplemental Data available on shows that the experimental data for PLF - FR - GPI is Cell website ) we prefer not to extract a value for the extremely well described by this model in which a frac - fraction of clusters and monomers . Instead , a lower tion of molecules are in domains ( when they undergo bound ( (cid:1) 10 % ; Table 1 ) on the cluster fraction may be FRET ) where the distance between any two molecules obtained from the amplitude of the FRET component in is not larger than R 0 , while the remainder are dispersed the anisotropy decay experiments for both GFP - GPI and as monomers on the cell surface . While we grant that the model that we consider may not be unique , we have YFP - GPI . An upper bound may be obtained if we con - Cell582 Figure 3 . Photobleaching Induced Changes in Homo - FRET Show that GPI - APs Are Pres - entasMonomersandSmallClusters , Consis - tent with Lack of Detectable Hetro - FRET ( A ) Model c : GPI - APs are distributedas a col - lection of monomers ( isolated proteins ) and n - mers ( with n (cid:12) 2 ) , with inter protein dis - tances within an n - mer of the order of R 0 , Forster’s radius ( scale bar ) . ( B ) Comparison of experimental anisotropy profiles ( symbols ) determined from cells ex - pressing different levels of GPI - AP obtained after photobleaching PLF - labeled FR - GPI with best - fit curve for Model c ( red line ) . Fix - ing the steady - state anisotropy of an isolated fluorophore A ( 1 ) (cid:4) A ∞ (cid:4) 0 . 247 , and the steady stateanisotropyofan n - mer , A ( 2 ) (cid:4) A ( 3 ) (cid:4) A ( 4 ) (cid:4) 0 . 1 A ( 1 ) (cid:4) A C , and A ( n ) (cid:4) 0 when n (cid:12) 5 , we find that 22 % of fluorophores are present in clusters . ( C ) Varying A C , the steady state anisotropy of a cluster , we determine the best fit and the standard deviation (cid:11) for the fraction of clus - ters amongst the anisotropy profiles of indi - vidual cells from a single dish . For values of A C / A ∞ (cid:2) 0 . 35 , Model c shows a good fit with the data . ( D ) Cluster fraction ( line ) at different values of A C is the best fit to data collected over cells present in 10 different dishes . Vertical error bars correspond to the standard deviation in the cluster fraction . Given the optimum value of A C / A ∞ , we find that the range in the cluster fraction can be anywhere between 20 % – 40 % . ( E ) Efficienciesofenergytransferbetweendonor ( mCFP ) andacceptor ( mYFP ) speciesversusdifferentacceptortodonorratioswerecalculated using Model c wherein the fluorophores appear as monomers and clusters of the indicated size n , as described in Supplemental Data available on Cell website . The values next to each curve indicate cluster size , n , and percentage of clusters used for determining the energy transfer efficiency . ( F ) Energy transfer efficiency was measured on cells coexpressing different levels of mCFP - GPI and mYFP - GPI . The magnitude of hetero - FRET was determined by analyses of donor dequenching upon acceptor photobleaching in the absence ( open circles ) or presence of acceptor fluorophores ( blue circles ) . Hetero - FRET was also measured on mCFP - and mYFP - GPI - expressing cells incubated with aerolysin toxin to increase the cluster size ( red circles ) . sider that after quantitative crosslinking of GFP with methodology ) . The calculation takes into account : ( 1 ) the probability of finding a donor and acceptor in the glutaraldehyde only (cid:1) 30 % of amplitude of the net an - isotropy decay arises from the FRET ( (cid:1) 0 . 3 ns ; Table 1 ) same cluster , expectedly this factor considerably re - duces the efficiency of FRET for small clusters ; ( 2 ) the component . Taking this value as the maximum ampli - tude from 100 % of GFP species within R 0 , (cid:1) 30 % of possibility of donor - donor transfer ; and ( 3 ) values of homo and heterotransfer rates obtained from the spec - GFP - GPI molecules are likely to be present in high den - sity clusters . tral overlaps of the fluorophores and the experimentally determined densities in clusters . Predictably , we find Although we detect robust homo - FRET between GPI - APs labeled with the same fluorophore , previous studies that hetero - FRET efficiencies vary with donor acceptor ratios , cluster size , and the fraction of clusters and mo - ( Kenworthy and Edidin , 1998 ; Kenworthy et al . , 2000 ) and our experiments using hetero - FRET to detect clus - nomers ( Figure 3E ) ; large clusters give rise to more het - ero - FRET , at similar cluster to monomer and donor ac - tering between different GPI - AP species ( GFP - GPI or FR - GPI , data not shown ) , or between two different GPI - ceptor ratios . Considering that we were unable to detect hetero - FRET beyond the threshold variation inherent in APs ( GFP - GPI and Alexa568 - labeled anti - FR fab frag - ment against FR - GPI ; mCFP - GPI and mYFP - GPI , Figure such an experiment ( (cid:5) 12 % ; Figure 3F , compare open with blue circles ) , this clearly limits the size of GPI - APs 3F ) have failed to detect hetero - FRET beyond the level of noise in the system . As suggested by Kenworthy and clusters ( (cid:2) 4 molecules ) and / or low cluster to monomer ratios ( (cid:1) 20 % ) . To ensure that our setup is indeed capa - Edidin , if20 % oftheproteinswereinlarge - sizedclusters ( as in Models a , a’ , and b ) , hetero - FRET should have ble of detecting the presence of larger sized clusters of GPI - APs when they are present in cell membranes , we been detectedeven atlow expressionlevels inthe mem - brane ( Kenworthy and Edidin , 1998 ) . have used the heptamerizing aerolysin toxin ( Y221G mutant ) , which binds GPI - APs via the GPI - anchor ( Fivaz Using two proteins , mCFP - GPI and mYFP - GPI , orga - nized as described by Model c , we calculate the effi - et al . , 2002 ) . As shown in Figure 3F ( red circles ) , aeroly - sin toxin Y221G induces significant and detectable het - ciency of hetero - FRET between these GPI - AP species for different donor and acceptor ratios ( Figure 3E ; see ero - FRET for the same acceptor to donor ratios . Taken together , the absence of detectable hetero - Supplemental Data available on Cell website for detailed Nanoscale Organization of Raft Components 583 Figure 4 . Effects of Cholesterol and Sphin - golipid Depletion on GPI - AP Organization ( A ) Steady - state anisotropy values from PLF - labeled - FR - GPIin untreated ( blacktriangles ) , sphingolipid - depleted ( gray circles ) , or cho - lesterol - depletedcells ( opensquares ) plotted against normalized intensities ( I / I 0 ) of in - dividual cells obtained after different photo - bleaching times as describedin Figure 2 . The data were fit to parameters ( A c / A ∞ ) and show that the fraction of monomers and clusters in sphingolipid - depleted cells is unchanged with respect to control cells ( 20 % – 40 % ) while it is significantly reduced ( 10 % – 20 % ) in cholesterol - depleted cells . ( B ) Anisotropy versus intensity profiles of PLF - FR - GPI in LYB cells either undepleted ( black triangles ) , depleted of cholesterol by treatment with cyclodextrin ( 1 mM , 30 min ; open squares ) , extensively depleted of sphingolipid ( gray circles ) , or depleted of both cholesterol and sphingolipid ( black diamonds ) , indicate that sphingolipid depletion augments the ability of cyclodextrin to alter the organization of GPI - APs . Mean and standard error from the mean of each data point were obtained from two dishes each with at least 130 cells . Similar data were obtained in two different experiments . FRETandthepresenceofrobusthomo - FRETconsistent higher steady state anisotropy values in double - depleted cells ( Figure 4B ; compare black triangles and open with a minor fraction ( (cid:1) 20 % – 40 % ) of small ( (cid:13) 4 ) dense GPI - AP aggregates ; the remaining proteins must exist squares with black diamonds for the double - depleted cells ) . These observations show that sphingolipid levels as monomers for all the different GPI - AP species ex - amined . influence the availability of cholesterol for stabilizing the GPI - AP clusters at the cell surface , consistent with an indirect role for sphingolipids in the formation of these Cholesterol and Sphingolipid Depletion nanoscale clusters . Differentially Affect GPI - AP Clustering Depletion of cholesterol from CHO cells expressing ei - ther FR - GPI ( Varma and Mayor , 1998 ) or GFP - GPI by Multiple GPI - APs Inhabit the Same Nanometer - Sized Cluster treating cells with the cholesterol lowering agents , com - pactin , methyl - (cid:14) - cyclodextrin ( datanotshown ) , orsapo - We now ask whether a potential consequence of the ability of the GPI - anchor to induce a nanometer - sized nin results in a loss of homo - FRET ( i . e . , the fast compo - nent of anisotropy decay ) between GFP - GPI species clustered distribution is to promote the coexistence of multiple GPI - APs in a single cluster ( Figure 5A ) . Consis - andbetweenmYFP - GPIcomparedtothecorresponding values for undepleted cells ( Table 1 ) . Following treat - tent with the small size of the cluster , we do not detect any hetero - FRET between two different GPI - APs at dif - ment with compactin , the change in anisotropy upon fluorophore photobleaching clearly shows a different ferent donor and acceptor densities ( Figure 3F ) . Thus , one way to look for the cohabitation of two proteins in profile from untreated cells ( Figure 4A , compare black triangles with red open squares , for untreated and the same cluster would be to monitor the extent of homo - FRET exhibited by a labeled GPI - APs by the ex - treated cells , respectively ) . As calculated from Model c ( Supplemental Data available on Cell website ) , these pression of a potentially interacting protein present in the same cluster ( Figure 5A ) . We find that the anisotropy data are still consistent with the presence of a mixture of clusters and monomers , but with a reduced cluster - of GFP - GPI increases with an increase in the ratio of the expression level of FR - GPI to GFP - GPI ( Figure 5B ; to - monomer ratio ( from 20 % – 40 % to 10 % – 20 % ) . This provides evidence that the nanometer scale organiza - black diamonds ) . In contrast , the anisotropy of GFP - GPI is independent of similar expression levels of a tion of GPI - APs is mediated by cholesterol levels in the membrane . transmembrane - anchored FR isoform ( Figure 5B ; open squares ) . Conversely , the anisotropy of GFP - PIT is inde - On the other hand , in cells depleted of sphingolipids to levels that relieve endocytic retention either by treat - pendent of the expression of FR - GPI in the same mem - brane ( data not shown ) . This interaction is not specific ment with a sphingolipid synthesis inhibitor , Fumonisin B 1 ( data notshown ) or in asphingolipid auxotroph grown to a single GPI - AP pair , since PLF - FR - GPI ( Figure 6B ; black circles ) and GFP - GPI ( Figure 6C ; black diamonds ) under sphingolipid deficient conditions ( Chatterjee et al . , 2001 ) , the anisotropy value of FR - GPI and the cluster also exhibit similar shifts in anisotropy when another GPI - AP , decayacceleratingfactor ( DAF ) , iscoexpressed to monomer ratios at the cell surface remain unchanged ( Figure 4A ; compare black triangles with gray circles , for in the same membrane . An important feature of the in - crease in anisotropy observed with the coexpression of control and sphingolipid - depleted cells , respectively ) . Similar results were obtained with GFP - GPI ( data not a second GPI - AP is that it is related to the ratio of the two proteins in the membranes and not to the individual shown ) . This suggests that sphingolipids do not play an irreplaceable role in the organization of the nanoscale densities of the proteins in the membrane . A given value of ratio results from a range of expression levels of both clusters . However , after sphingolipid depletion , while cholesterol is easily extracted from the cells membranes proteins ( Supplemental Data , Supplemental Figure S4 available on Cell website ) , ruling out the possibility that by cyclodextrin ( Fukasawa et al . , 2000 ) , FR - GPI clusters also become more sensitive to cholesterol extraction the combined expression of two GPI - APs depletes a critical limiting component , for example , cholesterol , for compared to undepleted cells ; PLF - FR - GPI exhibits Cell584 Figure 5 . Multiple GPI - APs Are Present in the Same Cluster ( A ) Inthe schematic , iftwodifferentGPI - APs ( gray andblackcircles ) occupy the same cluster ( left ) , increasing expression of one GPI - AP ( black circles ) will lead to decreasing number of homo - FRET events . As a result , homo - FRET between gray circles species will decrease . Consequently , there will be an increase in emission an - isotropy of the fluorescent GPI - AP species being monitored . Alter - natively , if different GPI - AP species are present in separate clusters ( right ) , there will be no change in the anisotropy of the fluorescent species being monitored with increased expression of one of the proteins . cDNAs encoding GFP - GPI ( B ) was transiently transfected into FR - isoform ( FR - GPI , black diamonds ; FR - TM , open squares ) - Figure 6 . Antibody Mediated Crosslinking Reorganizes Native GPI - expressing cellsand the fluorescence intensitiesof Cy5 - conjugated APs Clusters FabfragmentofmonoclonalantibodyMov19 ( Cy5 - anti - FR - Fab ) and ( A ) Schematic showing the effect of crosslinking of one GPI - AP GFP were measured to determine the expression levels of the indi - species ( gray circles ) on emission anisotropy of the noncrosslinked vidual proteins and emission anisotropy of GFP - GPI , respectively . species ( black circles ) . If thenoncrosslinked speciesis reorganized , Mean values of anisotropy ( (cid:5) SE ) were determined for ratio ranges the dependence of anisotropy on the expression level of the other ( (cid:5) 0 . 5 ) , and plotted against the midpoint of the corresponding ratio ( crosslinked ) species is lost . cDNAs encoding FR - GPI ( B ) and GFP - ranges of Cy5 - labeled anti - FR - Fab to GFP - GPI . GPI ( C ) were transfected into DAF - expressing cells . The fluores - cence intensities of Cy5 - conjugated Fab fragment of monoclonal antibody IA10 ( Cy5 - anti - DAF ) , PLF - FR - GPI ( B ) , and GFP ( C ) were the first protein . These results provide evidence that measured to determine the expression levels of the individual more than one protein - species inhabits a single cluster proteins . Fluorescence intensities and corresponding emission ani - solely due to attachment to the membrane by a GPI - sotropyofPLF - labeledFR - GPI ( B ) andGFP - GPI ( C ) weredetermined before ( black circles and diamonds , respectively ) and after ( open anchor . squares ) antibody - mediated crosslinking of DAF . Mean values of anisotropy ( (cid:5) S . E . ) were determined for ratio ranges ( (cid:5) 0 . 5 ) , and Antibody - Crosslinking Reorganizes Preexisting plotted against the midpoint of the corresponding ratio ranges of Clusters and Alters Endocytic Routing anti - DAF ( B and C ) to PLF - FR - GPI ( B ) or GFP - GPI ( C ) intensities as indicated . of Crosslinked Proteins Antibody - mediated crosslinking reorganizes a specific GPI - AP ( for example , DAF ) into visible and stable clus - ters ( Mayor and Maxfield , 1995 ) , but it does not visibly cies at the level of the nanometer scale clusters we monitored anisotropy of GFP - GPI and PLF - FR - GPI after alter the diffuse distribution of other coexpressed GPI - APs ( for example , GFP - GPI or PLF - FR - GPI ; Supplemen - crosslinking coexpressed DAF . The anisotropy values of GFP - GPI and PLF - FR - GPI are restored to the values tal Data , Supplemental Figure S5 available on Cell web - site ; see also Mayor et al . , 1994 ) expressed in the same observed in the absence of DAF expression ( Figures 6B and 6C ) after crosslinking DAF . Similar data have been membrane . To examine whether crosslinking of a spe - cific GPI - AP ( DAF ) reorganizes the noncrosslinked spe - obtained in the case of the GFP - GPI and FR - GPI pair ; Nanoscale Organization of Raft Components 585 crosslinking FR - GPI restores the anisotropy of GFP - GPI experiments . First , fluorescence photobleachingexperi - ments and theoretical modeling of resultant changes to the valve observed in the absence of FR - GPI ( data not shown ) . These results suggest that the crosslinked in anisotropy , in conjunction with a knowledge of the interprotein distances shows that 20 % – 40 % of GPI - AP species is removed from the preexisting clusters , and in the process the composition of the preexisting clus - species are present in clusters on the scale of R 0 , ( i . e . , (cid:2) 4 . 65 nm ) . Second , the lack of detectable hetero - ters is reorganized ( Figure 6A ) . We next investigated the effect of antibody - mediated FRET between identical and dissimilar GPI - AP species ( Kenworthy and Edidin , 1998 ; Kenworthy et al . , 2000 ) crosslinking on endocytic trafficking of GPI - APs . We have recently reported that GPI - anchoring specifies while observing relatively robust homo - FRET can be explained by the presence of a fraction ( (cid:2) 30 % ) of small internalization via a dynamin - independent endocytic pathway into GPI - AP - enriched endocytic compart - clusters ( (cid:2) 3 – 4 molecules in number ) in the presence of a large monomer pool . Our results also suggest that ments ( GEECs ) . This pathway is also responsible for a major fraction of the fluid - phase uptake ( Sabharanjak multiple species of GPI - Aps , but not transmembrane isoforms of the same proteins , inhabit the same na - et al . , 2002 ) . Here , we examined the endocytic route of the crosslinked and noncrosslinked GPI - AP’s . Native , nocluster . Theseresultsarealsoconsistentwithrecentsinglefluor - noncrosslinked GPI - APs are endocytosed via GEECs ( Figures 7A – 7D ) into recycling compartments , however , ophore tracking studies conducted on a GPI - anchored isoform of class II MHC molecules ( Vrljic et al . , 2002 ) if FR - GPIs are crosslinked by primary and secondary antibodies into small visible clusters and allowed to be which reported fast Brownian diffusion motion of almost all molecules and only a small fraction ( between 6 and endocytosed for up to one hour , the internalized cross - linked structures do not reach the recycling compart - 20 % ) of the labeled species with a significantly slower diffusion coefficient consistent with larger oligomers . ment ( SupplementalData , SupplementalFigureS6avail - able on Cell website ) . At an early time after endocytosis , However these studies were unable to characterize the size or origin of the slowly diffusing species . crosslinked complexes are excluded from FITC - dex - tran - containing GEECs ( Figures 7E – 7H ) . Instead , they are predominantly found in transferrin - containing endo - Concentration Independent Anisotropy , Cluster somes ( Figures 7I – 7L ) implying that they are endocy - Distribution , and Large - Scale Organization tosed via the clathrin - mediated pathway ; thus , the size To understand the mechanism of clustering of GPI - APs , of the crosslinked cluster is not an impediment to endo - we perturb this organization by a variety of means . Cho - cytosis per se . In cells expressing both FR - GPI and lesterol depletion or replacement of the GPI - anchor with GFP - GPI , if FR - GPI was extensively crosslinked with a transmembrane domain abrogate association with the antibodies , its endocytosis was prevented , however , nanoscale clusters indicating that the roles of choles - noncrosslinked GFP - GPI continues to be internalized terol and the GPI - anchor are central to the formation of normally via the GEEC route ( Supplemental Data , Sup - GPI - AP nanoclusters ; cohabitation of multiple GPI - APs plemental Figure S7 available on Cell website ) . These in the same nanocluster provides additional evidence data show that antibody crosslinking segregates the thattheyareformedbylipid - basedmechanisms . Pertur - protein from the preexisting clusters , and simultane - bation of this organization by antibody crosslinking sug - ously alters endocytic sorting of the GPI - AP at the cell gests that interactions holding the GPI - AP species to - surface and its endocytic fate . This suggests that asso - gether are likely to be weak ; over short length scales ciation with preexisting nanoscale clusters determines antibody crosslinked proteins can be induced to detach the specific endocytic route and destination for GPI - APs . and reorganize into distinct structures . Any mechanism for the formation of the GPI - AP clus - ters must be consistent with the following features : ( 1 ) Discussion the capacity of the clusters to undergo exchange ( as observed during crosslinking ) and ( 2 ) the observed con - The Size and Composition of GPI - AP - Associated Structures at the Surface of Living Cells centration independence of the steady state anisotropy over a large range of expression levels , implying a fixed To investigate the functional architecture of rafts on the plasma membrane , we have studied the spatial distribu - proportion of monomers and clusters over this concen - tration range . This brings out an apparent contradiction ; tion of one of the constituents and examined functional consequences of perturbation of this organization . We dynamic exchange would result in a distribution of mo - nomers and clusters consistent with chemical equilib - have provided evidence that a small but significant frac - tion of GPI - APs form extremely high density clusters of rium and inconsistent with the existence of fixed propor - tion of monomers and clusters ( see Supplemental Data nanometer size ( (cid:1) 4 – 5 nm ) , each consisting of a few ( (cid:13) 4 ) molecules and different GPI - AP - species . available on Cell website for theoretical explanation ) . Thiscontradictionmayberesolvedifclustersareformed The high local density of GPI - AP molecules is directly derived from the FRET - related fast anisotropy decay in actively generated “domains” that do not allow for ready mixing . This would suggest that the monomer and rates observed in time - resolved anisotropy measure - ments , with an interprotein distance less than 4 nm in cluster distribution is likely to be determined by active processes . The ability of cholesterol levels to modulate the cluster . The amplitude of the component corre - sponding to the fast decay rate indicates that not less the fraction of clusters and monomers suggests that cholesterol homeostasis in turn regulates this activity . than 10 % of the GPI - AP species are present in clusters . Additionally , both the nanometer - size and fraction of Although reduction in sphingolipid levels has no direct effect on the relative concentration of nanoscale clus - clusters are obtained from two independent types of Cell586 Figure 7 . Antibody - Crosslinked GPI - APs Are Excluded from the Native GPI - AP - Specific Endocytic Pathway in CHO Cells ( A – D ) Cy3 - labeled anti - FR Fab ( Mov18 ) fragment against FR - GPI ( A , red in D ) , FITC - dextran ( B , green in D ) and Cy5 - labeled transferrin ( C , blue in D ) were cointernalized in FR - GPI - expressing CHO cells for 5 min at 37 (cid:15) C . ( E – L ) Mouse monoclonal , Mov18 , bound to FR - GPI was crosslinked with a Cy5 - labeled secondary antibody ( E , red in H ) , or Alexa568 - labeled secondary antibody ( I , red in L ) into small clusters by incubation for 30 min on ice . Cells were the incubated with FITC - Dextran ( F , green in H ) , or Cy5 - labeled transferrin ( J , green in L ) for 5 min at 37 (cid:15) C . Endosomes containing internalized crosslinked FR - GPI were identified as surface - inaccessible structures that do not counterstain with appropriately - labeled tertiary antibodies ( G , and K , blue in H , and L ) added on ice . Boxed areas in the images of internalized probes obtained from a single confocal plane are shown at higher magnification in the panels immediately below . Most of the endocytosed noncrosslinked FR - GPI is present in FITC - dextran - filled GEECs ( arrowheads ; A – D ) , distinct from transferrin - containingendosomes ( arrows ; A – D ) . Aftercrosslinkingandendocytosis , internalizedFR - GPI ( int - cr - FR - GPI ) isclearlydistinguished from the spatially segregated surface - accessible crosslinked FR - GPIs ( sur - acc - FR - GPI ; G , K : blue in H and L ) at the cell periphery . Note that internalized crosslinked FR - GPI endosomes do not colocalize with FITC - dextran - containing GEECs ( E – H ; arrowheads ) , instead are mainly found colocalized with internalized transferrin ( I – L ; arrows ) . Scale bar is equal to 10 (cid:3) m . Nanoscale Organization of Raft Components 587 ters , the enhanced susceptibility of these clusters to that any attempt to convert the GPI - APs to monomers by cholesterol depletion ( R . Chadda , M . Kalia , S . Sabha - cholesterol - depletion at the cell surface in sphingolipid - depleted cells suggests that both cholesterol and sphin - ranjak , S . Chatterjee , M . R . , and S . M . , unpublished data ) , or exchanging the GPI - anchor with a transmembrane golipids are involved in this higher level organization . In sphingolipid - depleted cells , other lipids such as phos - anchor as in the case of FR - GPI and GFP - GPI ( Sabha - ranjak et al . , 2002 ) , prevents endocytosis via the GEEC phatidylcholine may substitute , albeit poorly for the functions of sphingolipids . Additional experiments are pathway . We propose that the nanoscale clusters asso - ciated with a potentially actively maintained sphingoli - necessary to address the active nature and the spatio - temporal scales of this higher level organization . pid , cholesterol - dependent domain , define an endocyti - cally active zone . Our observations show that “preexisting” structures of GPI - APs at the surface of living cells undergo signifi - cant reorganization upon crosslinking ; the nanoscale Conclusion clusters are reconfigured and larger and longer - lived crosslinked structures are induced with different conse - Our results show that GPI - anchoring provides a mecha - quences for endocytosis and signaling . However , both nism for bringing diverse proteins within nanometer the crosslinked and noncrosslinked GPI - APs are quanti - proximity of each other in small clusters . At a functional tatively associated with DRMs ( P . S . and S . M . , unpub - level , the preexisting organization that we have discov - lished data ) , once again indicating that DRM - associa - ered has implications for sorting and the ( patho ) physiol - tion is too coarse and provides little structural and ogy of many GPI - APs , while the “induced structures” functional insight . Thus , the FRET - methodology de - may be crucial for signal transduction or sorting . The scribed here will have to be routinely adapted to study observations presented here suggest a hierarchical pic - lipid - dependent raft organization , due to its nonper - ture of an active lipid - dependent organization at differ - turbing nature , sensitivity , and nanometer resolution . entlengthscalesthatareexploitedfordistinctfunctions . Experimental Procedures Functional Consequences of Nanoscale Clustering A combination of monomers and small clusters repre - Theoretical Analyses sent a compromise between enhanced binding affinities Alltheoretical modelingand analysesare availableas Supplemental and dynamic range of sensitivities ( Bray et al . , 1998 ; Data on the Cell website . Irvine et al . , 2002 ) . Since the cluster / monomers distribu - Cell Culture , Antibodies , and Labeling Protocols tion is likely to be determined by an active mechanism Cell culture , antibodies , fluorescent probes including GFP - GPI , in the cell , this suggests that the response behavior of mCFP , and mYFP - GPI ( derived from EGFP variants where nomen - cells will depend on the state of the cell ( e . g . , cholesterol clature for GFP variants follow Tsien , 1998 ) , and labeling protocols homeostasis ) , thereby contributing to the diversification are as described previously ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ; Varma and of cellular responses . Nanoscale - clustering also pro - Mayor , 1998 ) unlessotherwisespecifiedinSupplementalDataavail - vides a natural explanation for the ability of low concen - able on Cell website . trations of ligands to efficiently bind GPI - anchored re - Steady - State and Time - Resolved Anisotropy Measurements ceptors ( e . g . , heparin sulfate proteoglycans , folate Measurements of fluorescence emission anisotropy of labeled pro - receptors , and cell adhesion molecules ) , with functional teins in living cells were carried out essentially as described ( Varma consequences at least in the context of folate transport and Mayor , 1998 ) with the modifications described in Supplemental ( Matsue et al . , 1992 ) and integrin function ( Carman and Data ( availableon Cell website ) . Time - resolvedanisotropymeasure - Springer , 2003 ) . The presence of multiple GPI - AP spe - ments were made on a Nikon Diaphot 300 microscope fitted with a 20 (cid:16) 0 . 75 NA objective maintained at room temperature , using a ciesinatightclusterhaspotentialfortuningthespecific - TCSPC setup and analyzed as previously described ( Lakshmikanth ity of cell - cell adhesion function since many adhesion andKrishnamoorthy , 1999 ) with modificationsin theanalysis proce - molecules are GPI - anchored ( Harris and Siu , 2002 ) . duresasdescribedinSupplementalData ( availableon Cell website ) . More significantly , this nanoscale clustering could be utilizedintheconversionofGPI - anchoredprionproteins Acceptor Photobleaching Hetero - FRET to infectious scrapie ( Kaneko et al . , 1997 ; Taraboulos Acceptor photobleaching hetero - FRET experiments were carried out on a Bio - Rad MRC1024 laser scanning confocal microscope et al . , 1995 ) . These clusters would also provide a high ( GFP - Alexa568 and Alexa568 - Cy5 pairs ) or a wide field microscope density of prion molecules in the plane of the membrane ( mCFP - mYFP pair ) equipped with appropriate filter sets as de - required for efficient conversion to the scrapie form with scribed earlier ( Krishnan et al . , 2001 ) . GPI - AP expressing cells were monomers providing a constant source of substrate for labeled with donor ( Alexa568 ) and acceptor fluorophores ( Cy5 ) la - the transconfiguration . beled Fab fragments of specific antibodies ( Mov18 against FR - GPI As we have demonstrated earlier , GPI - anchoring ap - and 1B3A8 against GFP ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) at fixed ratios of 1 : 1 and 1 : 3 . Efficient ( (cid:1) 60 % ) hetero - FRET efficiency ( defined as ) pears to be necessary for targeting proteins to a specific dynamin - independent , cdc42 - regulated endocytic path - E % (cid:4) (cid:1) 1 (cid:17) Donor pre Donor post (cid:2) (cid:16) 100 way ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ; Sharma et al . , 2002 ) . Cross - linking alters the ability of GPI - APs to associate with the is detected between Alexa568 and Cy5 - labeled Fab fragments of preexisting clusters and prevents endocytosis via Mov18 and Mov19 , respectively which bind noncompetitively to the GEECs but not via the clathrin - dependent pathway . Al - same FR - GPI protein , confirming that these fluorophores and the though other explanations are possible , these results method are capable of reporting a FRET signal . For the mCFP and indicate that the organization of GPI - APs into nanoscale mYFP pair , the mCFP signal was corrected for photobleaching clusters serves as a sorting signal for specific endocytic ( (cid:13) 10 % ) , prior to calculating the FRET efficiency as above . The extent of mCFP photobleaching was determined in the absence routing . This is further substantiated by the observation Cell588 of the mYFP acceptor under the same experimental conditions . Acknowledgments HeptamerformingGPI - anchorbindingtoxin , aerolysin ( Y221G ; Fivaz et al . , 2002 ) , was used at a concentration between 0 . 5 and 1 (cid:3) g / This work was in part supported by a Senior Research Fellowship from The Wellcome Trust ( grant # 056727 / Z / 99 , S . M . ) ; the National ml , to induce large - sized clusters . Centre for Biological Sciences ; and a Swarnajayanthi grant from DST , India ( M . R . ) . P . S . and R . V . are recipients of the Kanwal Rekhi Image Analysis fellowship from the TIFR Endowment Fund . We are grateful to M All image processing and analyses were done using Metamorph Edidin for making available the GFP - variants , and along with M . K . software ( Universal Imaging , PA ) and Microsoft Excel as described Mathew , K . S . Krishnan , and F . J . Barrantes for providing insightful ( Varma and Mayor , 1998 ) with modifications listed in Supplemental comments , G . Gupta and A . Sarin for providing critical comments Data available on Cell website . on the manuscript . We wish to thank B . Rami for help with the DLS experiments , N . Vyas for help with molecular biology , and Shafat Ahmad for purifying GFP . S . M thanks F . F . Bosphorus and K . Belur Interactions between Multiple GPI - APs for inspiration . and Antibody - Mediated Crosslinking For probing interactions between multiple proteins , fluorescence Received : March 5 , 2003 intensity of the interacting species was measured by imaging cells Revised : January 26 , 2004 labeled withCy5 - conjugated antibodies against theprotein in ques - Accepted : February 2 , 2004 tion . For this purpose , we transfected GFP - GPI into CHO cells ex - Published : February 19 , 2004 pressing either FR - GPI , or the transmembrane anchored FR - iso - form , alternatively GFP - GPI or FR - GPI were transfected into cells References expressing another GPI - AP , DAF . Antibody - mediated crosslinking was performedas describedearlier ( Mayorand Maxfield , 1995 ) . The Agranovich , V . M . , and Galanin , M . D . ( 1982 ) . Electronic Excitation ratioofintensitiesofCy5 - fluorescencetoPLF ( inFR - GPIexpressing Energy Transfer in Condensed Matter ( Amsterdam : North Holland cells ) or GFP fluorescence for individual cells was recorded along Publishing Co . ) . with the corresponding anisotropy values of PLF or GFP . To com - parerelativelevelsoftheinteractingproteininthesameexperiment , Anderson , R . G . , and Jacobson , K . ( 2002 ) . A role for lipid shells in fluorescence intensity of cells labeled with the crosslinking second - targeting proteins to caveolae , rafts , and other lipid domains . Sci - ary antibody was normalized to the maximum fluorescence value ence 296 , 1821 – 1825 . obtained from cells labeled with Cy5 - labeled Fab fragment . Anisot - Bray , D . , Levin , M . D . , and Morton - Firth , C . J . ( 1998 ) . Receptor clus - ropy values of individual cells were grouped into suitable intensity tering as a cellular mechanism to control sensitivity . Nature 393 , or ratio intervals as indicated . Weighted mean and standard error 85 – 88 . from duplicate dishes were obtained by considering the average Brown , D . A . , and London , E . ( 2000 ) . Structure and function of anisotropy , and standard deviation for each interval as described . sphingolipid - and cholesterol - rich membrane rafts . J . Biol . Chem . Pseudocolored total intensity and anisotropy images of cells were 275 , 17221 – 17224 . obtained as described earlier ( Varma and Mayor , 1998 ) . Carman , C . V . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2003 ) . Integrin avidity regulation : Endocyticuptakeexperimentsand confocalimagingwerecarried are changes in affinity and conformation underemphasized ? Curr . out essentially as described earlier ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) . In Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 547 – 556 . the experiments where small clusters of GPI - APs were generated , labeled secondary antibodies ( goat antimouse polyclonal antibod - Chatterjee , S . , and Mayor , S . ( 2001 ) . The GPI - anchor and protein ies ; Jackson Laboratories ) were incubated for 30 min on ice with sorting . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 58 , 1969 – 1987 . cells preincubated with unlabeled primary mouse monoclonals Chatterjee , S . , Smith , E . R . , Hanada , K . , Stevens , V . L . , and Mayor , against the respective GPI - AP . After endocytic uptake at 37 (cid:15) C for S . ( 2001 ) . GPI anchoring leads to sphingolipid - dependent retention the indicated times , cells were treated with PI - PLC for 30 min on of endocytosed proteins in the recycling endosomal compartment . ice . Internalized , PI - PLC - resistant , crosslinked proteins were identi - EMBO J . 20 , 1583 – 1592 . fied by colocalization with cointernalized probes and their inability Clayton , A . H . , Hanley , Q . S . , Arndt - Jovin , D . J . , Subramaniam , V . , and to bind appropriately fluorescently labeled antigoat polyclonal anti - Jovin , T . M . ( 2002 ) . Dynamic fluorescence anisotropy imaging mi - body at the cell surface ( sequentially applied on ice for 1 hr ) . croscopy in the frequency domain ( rFLIM ) . Biophys . J . 83 , 1631 – 1649 . Determination of R 0 and Distance between Fluorophores Edidin , M . ( 2001 ) . Shrinking patches and slippery rafts : scales of The Forster’s radius R 0 was determined exactly as described ( La - domains in the plasma membrane . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 492 – 496 . kowicz , 1999 ) , using the formula : R 0 (cid:4) ( 8 . 8 (cid:16) 10 23 (cid:18) 2 (cid:19) (cid:17) 4 Q D J ) 1⁄6 ( A˚ ) Edidin , M . ( 2003 ) . The state of lipid rafts : from model membranes where , (cid:18) , theorientationfactorwastakenas2 / 3 , therefractiveindex to cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 32 , 257 – 283 . (cid:19) (cid:4) 1 . 4 , and Q D (cid:4) 0 . 4 ; the overlap integrals , J (cid:4) 3 . 52 (cid:16) 10 (cid:17) 13 Fivaz , M . , Vilbois , F . , Thurnheer , S . , Pasquali , C . , Abrami , L . , Bickel , ( Alexa568 - Alexa568 ) , 2 . 39 (cid:16) 10 (cid:17) 12 ( Alexa568 - Cy5 ) M - 1 cm 3 were de - P . E . , Parton , R . G . , and van der Goot , F . G . ( 2002 ) . Differential sorting termined analytically . The rates of decay of fluorescence anisotropy andfate ofendocytosed GPI - anchoredproteins . EMBOJ . 21 , 3989 – due to FRET processes were utilized to determine the distances 4000 . between fluorophores using proceduresdescribed previously ( Gau - Friedrichson , T . , and Kurzchalia , T . V . ( 1998 ) . Microdomains of GPI - tier et al . , 2001 ; Tanaka and Mataga , 1979 ) . Interfluorophore dis - anchored proteins in living cells revealed by crosslinking . Nature tances R R , were calculated considering R 0 and that the anisotropy 394 , 802 – 805 . decay times , Fukasawa , M . , Nishijima , M . , Itabe , H . , Takano , T . , and Hanada , K . ( 2000 ) . Reduction of sphingomyelin level without accumulation of (cid:6) r 1 (cid:4) 1 2 (cid:10) ceramide in Chinese hamster ovary cells affects detergent - resistant membrane domains and enhances cellular cholesterol efflux to methyl - beta - cyclodextrin . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 34028 – 34034 . where Gautier , I . , Tramier , M . , Durieux , C . , Coppey , J . , Pansu , R . B . , Nicolas , J . C . , Kemnitz , K . , and Coppey - Moisan , M . ( 2001 ) . Homo - FRET mi - (cid:10) (cid:4) 3 2 (cid:18) 2 (cid:3) R 0 R (cid:4) 6 (cid:6) F (cid:17) 1 , croscopy in living cells to measure monomer - dimer transition of GFT - tagged proteins . Biophys . J . 80 , 3000 – 3008 . Hao , M . , Mukherjee , S . , andMaxfield , F . R . ( 2001 ) . Cholesteroldeple - (cid:6) F (cid:4) averagefluorescencelifetimeand (cid:18) 2 (cid:4) 2 / 3 . Standarddeviations in estimating R were obtained by the method of propagation of tion induces large scale domain segregation in living cell mem - branes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 13072 – 13077 . errors . Nanoscale Organization of Raft Components 589 Harris , T . J . , and Siu , C . H . ( 2002 ) . Reciprocal raft - receptor interac - selection in interacting fixed systems . Photochem . Photobiol . 29 , 1091 – 1097 . tions and the assembly of adhesion complexes . Bioessays 24 , 996 – 1003 . Taraboulos , A . , Scott , M . , Semenov , A . , Avrahami , D . , Laszlo , L . , Prusiner , S . B . , and Avraham , D . ( 1995 ) . Cholesterol depletion and Heerklotz , H . ( 2002 ) . Triton promotes domain formation in lipid raft modification of COOH - terminal targeting sequenceof the prion pro - mixtures . Biophys . J . 83 , 1 – 7 . tein inhibit formation of the scrapie isoform . J . Cell Biol . 129 , Heerklotz , H . , Szadkowska , H . , Anderson , T . , and Seelig , J . ( 2003 ) . 121 – 132 . Thesensitivityoflipiddomainstosmallperturbationsdemonstrated Tsien , R . Y . ( 1998 ) . The green fluorescent protein . Annu . Rev . Bio - by the effect of triton . J . Mol . Biol . 329 , 793 – 799 . chem . 67 , 509 – 544 . Irvine , D . J . , Hue , K . A . , Mayes , A . M . , and Griffith , L . G . ( 2002 ) . Simula - Varma , R . , and Mayor , S . ( 1998 ) . GPI - anchored proteins are orga - tions of cell - surface integrin binding to nanoscale - clustered adhe - nizedinsubmicrondomainsatthecellsurface . Nature 394 , 798 – 801 . sion ligands . Biophys . J . 82 , 120 – 132 . Vrljic , M . , Nishimura , S . Y . , Brasselet , S . , Moerner , W . E . , andMcCon - Jacobson , K . , and Dietrich , C . ( 1999 ) . Looking at lipid rafts ? Trends nell , H . M . ( 2002 ) . Translational diffusion of individual class II MHC Cell Biol . 9 , 87 – 91 . membrane proteins in cells . Biophys . J . 83 , 2681 – 2692 . Kaneko , K . , Vey , M . , Scott , M . , Pilkuhn , S . , Cohen , F . E . , andPrusiner , Zacharias , D . A . , Violin , J . D . , Newton , A . C . , and Tsien , R . Y . ( 2002 ) . S . B . ( 1997 ) . COOH - terminal sequence of the cellular prion protein Partitioning of lipid - modified monomeric GFPs into membrane mi - directs subcellular trafficking and controls conversion into the crodomains of live cells . Science 296 , 913 – 916 . scrapie isoform . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 2333 – 2338 . Zurzolo , C . , van Meer , G . , and Mayor , S . ( 2003 ) . The order of rafts . Kenworthy , A . K . , and Edidin , M . ( 1998 ) . Distribution of a glycosyl - EMBO Rep . 4 , 1117 – 1121 . phosphatidylinositol - anchored protein at the apical surface of MDCKcellsexaminedataresolutionof100Ausingimagingfluores - cence resonance energy transfer . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 69 – 84 . Kenworthy , A . K . , Petranova , N . , and Edidin , M . ( 2000 ) . High - resolu - tion FRET microscopy of cholera toxin B - subunit and GPI - anchored proteins in cell plasma membranes . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 1645 – 1655 . Krishnan , R . V . , Varma , R . , and Mayor , S . ( 2001 ) . Fluorescence meth - ods to probe nanometer - scale organization of molecules in living cell membranes . J . Fluorescence 11 , 211 – 226 . Lakowicz , J . R . ( 1999 ) . Principles of fluorescence spectroscopy , 2nd ed . ( New York : Kluwer Academic / Plenum Publishers ) . Lakshmikanth , G . S . , and Krishnamoorthy , G . ( 1999 ) . Solvent - exposed tryptophans probe the dynamics at protein surfaces . Biophys . J . 77 , 1100 – 1106 . Matsue , H . , Rothberg , K . G . , Takashima , A . , Kamen , B . A . , Anderson , R . G . , and Lacey , S . W . ( 1992 ) . Folate receptor allows cells to grow in low concentrations of 5 - methyltetrahydrofolate . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 89 , 6006 – 6009 . Mayor , S . , andMaxfield , F . R . ( 1995 ) . Insolubilityandredistributionof GPI - anchored proteins at the cell surface after detergent treatment . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 929 – 944 . Mayor , S . , and Riezman , H . ( 2004 ) . Sorting GPI - anchored proteins . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 201 , 110 – 120 . Mayor , S . , Rothberg , K . G . , and Maxfield , F . R . ( 1994 ) . Sequestration of GPI - anchored proteins in caveolae triggered by cross - linking . Science 264 , 1948 – 1951 . Parton , R . G . , Joggerst , B . , andSimons , K . ( 1994 ) . Regulatedinternal - ization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1199 – 1215 . Patterson , G . H . , Piston , D . W . , and Barisas , B . G . ( 2000 ) . Forster dis - tances between green fluorescent protein pairs . Anal . Biochem . 284 , 438 – 440 . Sabharanjak , S . , Sharma , P . , Parton , R . G . , and Mayor , S . ( 2002 ) . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev . Cell 2 , 411 – 423 . Sharma , P . , Sabharanjak , S . , and Mayor , S . ( 2002 ) . Endocytosis of lipid rafts : an identity crisis . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 13 , 205 – 214 . Silvius , J . R . ( 2003 ) . Roleofcholesterolinlipidraftformation : lessons from lipid model systems . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1610 , 174 – 183 . Simons , K . , andIkonen , E . ( 1997 ) . Functionalraftsincellmembranes . Nature 387 , 569 – 572 . Simons , K . , and Toomre , D . ( 2000 ) . Lipid rafts and signal transduc - tion . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 , 31 – 39 . Stryer , L . , and Haugland , R . P . ( 1978 ) . Energy transfer : a spectro - scopic ruler . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 58 , 719 – 726 . Subczynski , W . K . , andKusumi , A . ( 2003 ) . Dynamicsofraftmolecules in the cell and artificial membranes : approaches by pulse EPR spin labeling and single molecule optical microscopy . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1610 , 231 – 243 . Tanaka , F . , andMataga , M . ( 1979 ) . Theoryoftime - dependentphoto -