Participatory Design for the Anarchive The Amagugu Ethu / Our Treasures Documentation Project Hannah Turner University of British Columbia hannah . turner @ ubc . ca Laura K . Gibson Kings College London laura . k . gibson @ kcl . ac . uk Clara Gimenez - Delgado University of British Columbia cgimenez @ student . ubc . ca ABSTRACT This paper documents the collaborative design project : “Amagugu Ethu / Our Treasures : Understanding Zulu History and Language with Zulu - Speaking Communities and Their Belongings . ” With eight Zulu experts , and the company Museum in a Box [ 32 ] , we collaborated to create an oral history documentation project that focuses on the belongings at the Iziko South African Museum ( SAM ) . Using the Museum in a Box tool , we created a movable , audio - based exhibit that compiled stories and images of objects from the SAM , for use back in the community in KwaZulu - Natal . This paper documents our shared process and considers the development of this exhibit and documentation project as a kind of participatory anarchive or counter archive [ 20 , 41 ] . We connect practices and theories in participatory design with those in museum studies and archival studies ; and show the productive tensions that exist in an experimental , community - engaged oral history documentation project . CCS CONCEPTS • Participatory Design ; • Digital Libraries and Archives ; • Cul - tural Characteristics ; KEYWORDS Participatory Design , Anarchive , Oral History , Museum ACM Reference Format : Hannah Turner , Laura K . Gibson , and Clara Gimenez - Delgado . 2021 . Par - ticipatory Design for the Anarchive : The Amagugu Ethu / Our Treasures Documentation Project . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 ( DIS ’21 ) , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 10 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462129 1 INTRODUCTION In April 2019 , a group of 19 Zulu community experts , anthropolo - gists , scholars , entrepreneurs and museum professionals convened at the Iziko Museums of South Africa—the oldest museum in Sub - Saharan Africa—to conduct a three - day encounter with Zulu belong - ings , comprising of beer - drinking vessels , headdresses , ear plugs , snuff spoons , spears , beadwork , medicine containers and more . The former South African Museum ( SAM ) classified this collection as Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA © 2021 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8476 - 6 / 21 / 06 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462129 “Zulu” during the colonial and apartheid periods . Our group en - gaged directly with these belongings in the museum storerooms and boardroom , and more conceptually during an afternoon art session and , on the final day , as part of the storytelling session held in the gardens of Rust en Vreugd—a historic house set against the backdrop of Table Mountain . As well as fostering connections between originating community members and their belongings , the various workshop encounters disrupted colonial - style narratives about the collection by challenging museum naming , classifying , cataloguing , conserving and storing practices . With an emphasis on sharing knowledge produced during the encounters with vari - ous audiences , we photographed and audio - visually recorded the workshop experience . From this , we worked with industry to de - sign a “Museum in a Box”—a resource that pairs images , 3D scans , and prints of belongings with sound recordings collected during the encounters [ 32 ] —that can circulate in museums , community centres or schools in KwaZulu - Natal—the South African province from where the belongings largely originated . This paper conceives of the workshop as a counter - archive , or anarchival design practice . Inspired by the work of Springgay et al . [ 41 ] and Hennessy and Smith [ 20 ] , we conclude that the collaborative and participatory design process and the stories and tools that emerged from this process—the workshop—were grounded out of a desire to create socially responsible educational tools in non - traditional learning environments and museums . Although we are an amorphous group of academics , developers and community experts , we have seen the productive capacities of this kind of participatory design and document the creation of the Amagugu Ethu Museum in a Box as a successful example of counter - archiving or anarchival practice . Amagugu Ethu , and the collaboration on the Museum in a Box , began out of the doctoral dissertation work of Dr . Gibson . Dr . Gib - son worked closely with both the Zulu community experts and the Iziko Museums during her PhD research on decolonizing cul - tural heritage in the digital age . The seven Zulu community experts who attended the Amagugu Ethu workshop had participated in various workshops conducted by Dr . Gibson in KwaZulu - Natal during 2016 - 2017 and had expressed a strong interest in pursuing collaborative research further . Posed with a challenge that arose in KwaZulu - Natal—to connect Zulu knowledge to objects and trea - sures in the Cape Town museum—we explored the possibility of collecting images and stories about objects in the SAM and bring - ing these back to KwaZulu - Natal . This practice of reconnecting stories with treasures has become more common when working with museum collections and originating communities for several reasons and can often present an opportunity or starting point when considering the return of heritage or knowledge . Working with the company Museum in a Box ( MiaB ) , we began to envisage a process to use the educational tool to collect and exhibit stories 1783 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Hannah Turner et al . Figure 1 : George Oates ( MiaB ) presenting the Museum in a Box tool during the workshop . about objects that reside in the collections of the SAM . The “Box” is a small , simple audio player that can play back audio from the cen - tral database with a physical prompt—in this case , image postcards with small RFID stickers attached . Installing the Box , a mobile , low barrier device , in the Luthuli Museum—a national heritage centre in KwaZulu - Natal—would give the local staff a resource to use in educating local school groups and children and other community members . The device as an object or exhibit invites users to place cards on top of it . When this is done , a story plays relating to the images on the postcard . This is a very simple , intuitive and easy to use device . Collecting the stories and engaging the Zulu partners with the SAM collections was an attempt to remove the authority of the institution—to counter the national archive and populate this device with Zulu knowledge and stories . As a museum studies and information scholar and a digital hu - manist ( the principal investigators on this project and the first two authors ) , we position ourselves as white , settler women , while still recognizing the fluidity of those words . The meanings im - plied by ‘settler’ shift across continents and through time , and the term has been recently discussed by Dylan Robinson in his work on settler listening practices . Following Robinson , we recognize that this positionally is not a static construct but is a “process or state that fundamentally guides our action and perception” [ 36 : 38 ] . The Zulu members of this project—Nini Xulu , Thandi Nxumalo , Wilfred Mchunu , Thulani Thusi , Skhumbuzo Miya , Thuli Mtshali , and Boyzie Myeni—wish to make it known that this is their work , intellectual labour and , ultimately , for their communities—in par - ticular their children and for future generations . Amagugu Ethu is more than an oral history or museum documentation project and more than a simple attempt to gather documentation about collections that have long since missed this ; it is also a burgeoning non - governmental , small organization dedicated to history and im - proving access to Zulu knowledge . We recognize that these different positionalities will not be attended to evenly in an academic paper at an interactive systems design conference . For this reason , we wish to remain very clear that these are primarily the insights and observances of the first two authors and a graduate student , from our positions as academics , and that the term settler—as defined and used in the context of Dr . Turner’s home country—has a useful cross - cultural application . The term settler , as Robinson articulates , connotes an extractive hunger , based upon his observation that the Halq’eméylem word for white settler , xwelítem , translates to “starv - ing person” [ 36 ] . Although we endeavour to ultimately ameliorate the extractive practices of white academia , these are the legacies we carry with us in our bodies throughout the world and that we carried with us through the design of this project [ 14 , 24 , 41 , 42 ] . It is also relevant to note this project also produced responsi - bilities for the company , MiaB [ 32 ] . This was founded in 2015 by George Oates , inventor of the Flickr Commons programme . In 2019 , MiaB registered as a Community Interest Company ( Company Number 09849074 ) , a UK category that recognises social enterprises that use their profits and assets for the public good . Abira Hussein , Associate Producer at All Change , Research Associate at Culture & 1784 Participatory Design for the Anarchive DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA and UCL PhD candidate researching “The Archive and The Com - munity : using digital technologies and participatory approaches to co - create new archival spaces and knowledge within Somali com - munities in Britain , ” joined MiaB’s three - person Advisory Board in the same year . These moves are illustrative of the company’s community - centred ethos and its commitment to diversifying the museum landscape , both factors that aligned with the intentions of the Amagugu Ethu project . The goals of this paper are to connect theories and practices in values centred design or community participatory design with those in museum studies and archival studies and to show the productive tensions that exist in experimental , community - engaged projects . We situate this project—the collaborative building of an oral his - tory collection and documentation project—in what might be called design - based or arts - based participatory design [ 40 ] . We also situate it in the long history of building community archives and commu - nity museum documentation projects that have spanned decades , both within South Africa and across the world [ 34 ] . The creation of the shared resource—the interactive Museum in a Box tool with a set of images of objects from the SAM collection and associated recorded stories—was the main reason for the grant funding and completion of this project . Since 2019 we have also begun develop - ing a project - specific database , complete with metadata and object description , that came from our three - day workshop . The stories and knowledge that filled the collections rooms and our lunchtime conversations at the SAM were documented . From these , we have built object descriptions that will be sent back to the museum in the hopes that they can incorporate some of the suggestions and information into what are sparse records . We imagine this project as a design project in the sense used by participatory designers . We built an interactive educational resource for sharing stories about objects . We also conceive of this as something we built together but is not wholly archival or preservative . It is anarchival in Hennessy and Smith’s [ 20 ] definition of that word , in that the documentation project specifically rejects the desire for preservation in perpetuity and is associated outside of the institution—the SAM . It exists in the realm of public education and as an arts - based practice , from the claymaking exercises and the storytelling and performance sessions we included as part of the workshop , to the inclusion of stories about objects rather than descriptions . The shared design is shared in the practicalities or practices of making , moving and telling throughout the three - day workshop . Incorporating claymak - ing , storytelling and performance , we argue , were necessary parts of the participatory design process . We conclude this paper by ques - tioning what obligations were forged in this participatory design process and consider the obligations of other kinds of anarchival or counter - archival museum practices . As hungry academics [ 36 ] , what have we extracted ? And what are our obligations because of this ? 2 NARRATIVE DESCRIPTION OF PROJECT The seven Zulu community experts who had come together as part of Dr . Gibson’s dissertation work were curious about seeing the practices of the institution , reconnecting some of the knowledge with objects and finding a way to bring these findings back to KwaZulu - Natal . In 2017 , Dr . Gibson and Dr . Turner were able to secure funding from a Wenner Gren Foundation grant to enable the visit to happen , and in 2019 , secured increased funding from the Global Challenges Research Fund at the University of Leicester . This work culminated in April 2019 , when a small group—including Zulu experts , academics and the MiaB team—prepared for the first visit to the SAM’s collections . For some , this was their first visit to Cape Town , which meant a mixture of excitement and nervous - ness , and all the challenges that come with collaborative work . Our challenge as academics would be to support the desires of the experts and try to remain useful in our obligation , to document the objects that the experts chose and to work with Museum in a Box to design a mobile exhibit that would fit the community’s needs . On a Tuesday morning in April 2019 , following the previous evening’s Welcome Dinner in Cape Town , we began the first part of our programme at the Iziko Social History Centre . Leaving the hotel in the morning , we were a group of 12 , and we were eager to enter into the museum collections and to work with the staff there . We were all excited about potentially shifting or adding knowledge to the museum’s records about a small collection of Zulu items , and we were curious about how we could best return that knowledge back to the KwaZulu - Natal community . The Iziko Social History Centre building is in downtown Cape Town . It was refurbished and officially re - opened in 2010 . It houses the SAM’s former ethnographic collection , belongings that the Iziko Museums reclassified as Social History items in 2005 . Before entering the museum storerooms , Dr . Gibson and Dr . Turner facili - tated an introduction session where participants read and signed consent forms , and we established group expectations . Although participants had met one another at the welcome dinner and some had worked together previously , this session helped us develop trust and rapport , as well as generating excitement and anticipation about visiting the storerooms themselves . The Social History Centre is spread over eight floors with an additional Mezzanine level that holds the institution’s historical reg - isters , correspondence and catalogues . Guided by Lailah Hisham— Iziko’s Collections Manager—we moved upwards from the ground floor Library , through the large furniture storeroom , into the smaller furniture storeroom , through the textiles level and , finally , to the fourth floor where most of the “Zulu” belongings are held . Zulu community expert Nini Xulu declared that she would need at least ten years to experience everything in the collection . Dr . Gerald Klinghardt—Curator of Anthropology—assisted the group with opening drawers and cupboards so that we could view the rich variety of items amassed at Iziko . A collection of smoking pipes evoked great interest from the group , and an encounter with an isicholo—a Zulu headdress sewn into a married woman’s hair— provoked an animated discussion about ceremonies that celebrate a girl’s transition into womanhood . Thandi Nxumalo subsequently extrapolated from this discussion to develop an oral history for the Museum in a Box . That participants enjoyed such an engaging visit was aided by the Iziko staff’s supportive approach . Rather than instructing the group about what they should view , or what they should be seeing when they looking at items , Hisham and Klinghardt deferred to the Zulu community experts and took seriously their queries , con - cerns and contributions . They ensured participants could see and , in some cases , handle any item that sparked their interest . During 1785 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Hannah Turner et al . these encounters , most participants developed a relationship with a particular item or set of items . Thuli Mtshali , for example , was interested in three beadwork examples classified as Ndebele , Xhosa and Zulu . Inspired by the synergy between them , she intended to produce her own artwork that explored the commonalities across these Nguni groups . The morning encounters segued well into two afternoon demonstrations : The Museum in a Box , given by Charlie Cattel - Killick and George Oates ; and the Reciprocal Re - search Network ( RRN ) —a web - based museum collections search tool—delivered by Dr . Turner . Participants were impressed by the technology used in the Box , and its possibilities for sharing knowl - edge in new and creative ways . Following the Museum in a Box demonstration , the Zulu community experts unanimously agreed that they would like to produce their own Museum in a Box using belongings from Iziko’s collection . Dr . Turner’s RRN demonstra - tion raised awareness about how far Zulu belongings are dispersed around the world . Some of the Zulu items she shared from the RRN , including a “jug , ” were of great interest because few participants had encountered these belongings personally . The younger partici - pants , in particular , expressed interest in the database and search functionality used by the RRN and opportunities for engaging with these far - flung collections using this platform . We concluded the day with a debriefing session , led by Dr . Gibson , where all partici - pants had an opportunity to share their reactions to the day before returning to the hotel . Our second day began with a talk by Iziko Conservator , Fatima February . She guided the group through the various steps and loca - tions that objects must pass through before entering the museum’s collections . With Hisham’s assistance , participants moved the be - longings they had selected to speak about for the audio recordings so that Dr . Turner and Cattel - Killick could photograph them . Follow - ing this , Hisham gave the Collections Manager talk that followed in the Mezzanine level , amongst the old catalogue card filing cabinets . She showed our group some of the SAM’s oldest , handwritten acces - sion registers dating back to the nineteenth century , and explained that these records still have many gaps and so present a very nar - row narrative about the collections , one always constructed by the colonial era collectors . Dr . Gibson shared a story from her research about a “Zulu” sweatscaper that is sparsely documented on the offi - cial catalogue card ; however , exploring the SAM’s archives more thoroughly reveals its disturbing provenance—stolen from the body of a Zulu man killed by the collector’s friend—that is absent from the official record . We concluded this session by returning to the storerooms so that the Zulu community experts could make their final belongings’ selection . During the lunch break , Dr . Gibson , Dr . Turner and Hisham trans - formed the Iziko boardroom into an art space for the afternoon’s Visual Response session , led by artist Gary Frier . Frier conducts art projects in a number of different settings , including as a facilitator for occupational therapy at Valkenberg Psychiatric Hospital . He is also involved in several community - based action groups in the Cape Town area . Working with terracotta clay—a medium Frier prefers for its visceral , tactile qualities—participants sculpted items inspired both by belongings encountered in the Iziko collections and elsewhere in their lives . Wilfred Mchunu—a Tour Guide Opera - tor in Zululand—crafted a clay rhinoceros , for example , while Nini Xulu manipulated her clay into the bust of a Zulu woman wearing an isicholo . The activity gave participants further opportunity to contemplate the physical form of the belongings and how they are created . During earlier conversations , participants had remarked that many of the skills necessary to produce the items are disappear - ing from their communities . They expressed an interest in future encounters facilitated by artists who still make these items as a way of sharing both skills and knowledge . Our second day concluded with a trip to the top of Table Moun - tain , Cape Town’s most iconic landmark and now recognized as one of the Seven Natural Wonders of the World . The famous tablecloth— a layer of cloud that creeps over and submerges the mountain’s summit with little notice—had been lifting and falling throughout the day . The City Bowl side remained uncovered , however , and we were treated to spectacular views across the city and waterfront on the cable car ride up . We spent close to an hour meandering on top of the mountain . The Atlantic side was obscured by dense clouds that thinned as it stretched southwards so that the group could enjoy a view of Cape Point at the very end of the Peninsula . We moved to another location , Rust en Vreugd , for our final morning session . Shaded by the pavilion at the heart of this garden , Mbongeni Nomkonwana and Antonia Porter facilitated a story - telling session that reflected on the belongings encountered and conversations held during the previous days . Nomkonwana led an initial warm - up exercise to invigorate the group physically and mentally , before encouraging us to sit in a circle and discuss the belongings , prompted by reference photographs we had printed the day before . We recorded these stories , and this discussion provided much of the audio material for our Museum in a Box . Nomkonwana divided the Zulu community experts into two groups and , drawing on one of the belongings discussed , asked one group to incorporate the item into a well - known story , and the other group to use the belonging in a favourite song . The performances from each group were a highlight of the workshop for everyone involved . Porter’s more reflective session asked each participant to take a solitary walk through the gardens , reflecting on a question that had arisen for them during the workshop or an issue they were now contem - plating , and to collect an item that seemed to embody this idea . In pairs , we then shared our object and questions , before feeding back to the wider group . Dr . Skhumbuzo Miya shared his concerns about the many powerful belongings held in the Iziko collections , items so powerful they could burn down a house without fire and that are—he believes—stored and treated incorrectly . He asked : What reparation process is the museum following to cleanse these items ? Later that evening , he stated that he had seen spirits living in hell in the storerooms . Thuli Mtshali likewise expressed regret that many of the stories behind the objects had been lost because apartheid and colonialism allowed people to collect , or steal , belongings from people without knowing this information that has since been lost . Thulani Thusi and Wilfred Mchunu spoke about the possibilities for collaboration that arose for them during the workshop , a sen - timent captured for them by a leaf and feather . Nini Xulu’s plant choice also allowed her to reiterate how important it is that we work together and how beautiful it can be when we do . Somewhat weary from exchanging stories in the sunshine and , more generally , from an intense workshop experience , we returned to the Iziko Social History Centre after a picnic lunch at Rust en 1786 Participatory Design for the Anarchive DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Figure 2 : The Amagugu Ethu group working with clay during Frier’s Visual Response session on the second day . From left to right : Boyzie Myeni , Thulani Thusi , Wilfred Mchunu , Nini Xulu , Thandi Nxumalo , Thuli Mtshali . Vreugd . Hisham , February and Dr . Turner accompanied by Cattel - Killick , moved back to the storerooms to photograph the chosen belongings for the Museum in a Box ; everyone else convened in the boardroom to complete a final round of audio recordings about those belongings not discussed during the morning session . Dr . Gibson and Dr . Turner concluded the afternoon with an expression of thanks to all participants and Iziko and , once again , participants were invited to share their ideas about where the project should head next . Our final recording of the day was a song written and performed by Dr . Miya on the guitar , titled “Amagugu Ethu . ” We continued this celebratory spirit into the evening with a farewell dinner at a local restaurant . Perhaps most importantly , the workshop concluded with a list of distinct recommendations : • Continue working as a group but involve influential people from such government institutions as South African Heritage Resource Agency ( SAHRA ) , Department of Arts and Culture ( DAC ) and Department of Tourism , as well as Traditional Leaders . Expand the remit of the workshops to encompass skills sharing—grant application writing , photogrammetry , audio - visual recording , public speaking—and knowledge ex - change . • Train stakeholders within the communities to facilitate fu - ture workshops . • Work with schools in KwaZulu - Natal to host the workshops where learners are participants . • Develop an easily accessible website so that participants can easily contribute their knowledge . • Register Amagugu Ethu as a legal entity . • Conduct this workshop in other museums worldwide hold - ing Zulu collections , such as the British Museum . • Work with Iziko and other museums so that communities can perform cleansing ceremonies for sacred , powerful items . • Facilitate closer partnerships between Iziko Museums ( and , in future , other museums with Zulu collections ) whereby the Zulu - speaking community advises on cataloguing , storing and conservation practices . We refer to these recommendations here because they were an important part of the overall design process—in creating the Museum in a Box we needed to have an understanding of what Springgay et al . term “Anarchival response - ability” [ 41 ] . This in - cludes supporting the work of the future Amagugu Ethu not for profit , non - governmental organization . Back home in the United Kingdom and Canada , Dr . Gibson and Dr . Turner , worked to sort the audio recordings and transcribed and translated the recordings that were in three languages—English , isiZulu and Xhosa . The recordings were then compiled and edited , and incorporated as the audio files on the Museum in a Box . Post - cards were designed and made by MiaB and then the audio files 1787 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Hannah Turner et al . Figure 3 : Museum in a Box postcard “Inkulumo yoMphathi Yezokuqoqa , Usuku 2 / Collections Manager’s Talk , Day 2 . ” associated to the RFID on the postcard so that , every time a post - card is placed on the Box , the associated audio file would play . We created 10 object cards with 10 audio recordings—all taken at the workshop , and all elaborating on the history and knowledge of the objects . We also created postcards based on the performative and experimental aspects of the workshop with audio narrations and descriptions . For example , we included an image of partici - pants looking through object records , called “Inkulumo yoMphathi Yezokuqoqa , Usuku 2 / Collections Manager’s Talk , Day 2” with an audio file from this experience . With the support of MiaB , we also 3D printed a Beer Vessel , based off of the photography of the object collection . When the Museum in a Box was ready in September 2019 , we sent one box to the SAM museum with a set of cards , and one back to the Luthuli Museum in KwaZulu - Natal . The participants gathered together to launch the Box at the Luhtuli Museum , and there were demonstrations for school children and museum visitors . This also resulted in local news coverage and a showcase at Heritage Day in the fall of 2019 in KwaZulu - Natal . Throughout 2019 , the Amagugu Ethu group met in KwaZulu - Natal and communicated via WhatsApp with the goal of working to implement changes based on the recommendations . However , with the advent of the COVID - 19 pandemic in 2020 , discussions have paused . This year , and as noted in the dedication of this paper , one of the participants , Thuli Mtshali , passed away . The impact this tragedy has had on the group has helped us consider the importance of the project and its final product—the Amagugu Ethu collection on Museum in a Box—in documenting storytelling and memory work . Hopefully , projects like Amagugu Ethu have the potential to go beyond their original intended purpose and acknowledge , document and pay tribute to acts of resistance of community leaders and experts . 3 PARTICIPATORY DESIGN , COLLECTIONS DOCUMENTATION AND THE COUNTER ARCHIVE We introduce this narrative—a close description of the practicalities of the project—because it sets the stage for the kind of design project we imagine this to be . Including arts - based methodologies and reflexive practices were not just add - ons to the ultimate goal of creating a small audio - based exhibit on the KwaZulu - Natal history and cultural heritage , but fundamentally integral to the design process . This project gave us many teachings , many of which align with critical research in participatory design [ 4 , 12 , 13 , 18 , 22 , 26 – 29 , 39 , 40 ] , collaborative museum studies [ 21 , 30 , 35 , 37 , 44 , 45 ] and postcustodial and feminist archival studies [ 3 , 6 , 11 , 33 , 38 , 43 ] . We found that the inclusion of performative and arts - based methodologies in a participatory design project was essential to the atmosphere of oral history and memory work . It also raised a question : In making something together and producing a tangible effect , how can we also produce something other than or against institutional archives ? As Springgay et al . remind us : “Research is the active making of an archive that orga - nizes social and political values and systems of knowl - edge , rendering particular bodies , subjects , histories , memories , and affects absent . . . Anarchiving as a research - creation practice is concerned with the event of research , an affective and indeterminate process under continuous variation and intensity . Each anar - chiving moment triggers a new event , and new chance encounters . ” [ 41 : 905 ] We posit that the work done through the process of creating the Amagugu Ethu resource demonstrates a kind of what Springgay et al . [ 41 ] call ‘Anarchival Response - ability , ’ which requires a willing - ness to respond and collective action . Participatory Design ( PD ) has been defined in various ways , but is most recently articulated by Smith et al . [ 39 ] in their work on decolonizing participatory design . They note that PD is “politically motivated , challenges existing power structures through bottom - up engagements , and embraces participation by those previously excluded” [ 39 : 96 ] . This kind of design follows from Harrington et al . ’s observation that PD should : “ . . . devise collaborative research agendas , address imaginative freedom among research participants , consider political forms and objectives of collabo - rative design engagements , and define success as it 1788 Participatory Design for the Anarchive DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Figure 4 : Museum in a Box postcard for one of the belongings with no information on the SAM card . relates to design activities within marginalized and underserved communities . ” [ 18 : 2 ] The research - creation aspects of Amagugu Ethu , therefore , ex - ist at the nexus of oral history , collaborative documentation and participatory design . Designing the Museum in Box within this framework allowed for a flexibility of what could happen , and how it needed to be used . The shoe - box sized museum is , technolog - ically speaking , a simple device centred on a Raspberry Pi — a credit - card sized computer that costs about $ 70 . Working with near - field communication tags , when a scaled 3D print or photograph of the artefact is placed on the box , it starts to “talk” , giving the object’s oral history through the built - in speaker . Cognisant of such criticism as Tuhiwai Smith [ 46 ] and Denzin et al . [ 9 ] ’s that research methodologies in which facilitators fail to share the results with all contributors threatens to replicate neo - colonial claims of owner - ship , and given that Dr . Gibson’s research [ 16 ] concluded that high levels of illiteracy and low confidence in English language skills per - sist amongst significant sections of the originating community , the research team was committed to developing a research outcome that addressed and overcame these challenges . Since the device can record and disseminate the research orally and in the isiZulu language , engaging with the Box requires no reading or writing skills , or knowledge of the English language which made it a very appropriate solution for the Amagugu Ethu research team . The device , once built , functions independently of the MiaB company and requires no network connection , also an important consider - ation for the Amagugu Ethu research team since another finding from Dr . Gibson’s PhD research is that high data costs and limited access to fixed Internet connections are also challenges facing this originating community . The device is now stored at the Luthuli Museum in Groutville , KwaZulu - Natal , and manipulated by the isiZulu researchers . The MiaB company offers Make Your Own kits for £248 ( approx . USD 350 ) . Following the workshop in Cape Town , the isiZulu - speaking Amagugu Ethu researchers have for - mally organised themselves into a Not - for - Profit collective with the stated mission to “preserve and promote Zulu culture and spir - ituality through decolonisation of cultural heritage in the digital age . ” In their 2019 Business Plan , the organisation committed to producing 30 additional Museums in a Box by 2025 , demonstrating their belief that the device is valuable , affordable , and replicable for their community . The Box needed to be usable without a stable and consistent internet connection , and it needed to visually demonstrate a clear connection between what information the museum held and the stories and narratives that were being discussed about the objects . For this reason , we chose to use postcards of object images from the collection , with the reverse side of the postcard showing the original catalogue card for the object , including when information was missing . Because the Museum in a Box of Zulu stories does not hold any - thing ‘real’—no objects and no recordings save those housed on the cloud—and because the narratives are documented outside of the institutional repository , it resists the institution or an institutional lens . It associates knowledge and histories to belongings that may or may not be incorporated back into the museums’ collection , and creates a kind of archive of knowledge outside of the institu - tional repository . Iziko still holds the collection of materials , but the images and sounds that are accessible through the Museum in a Box have left the institution and are able to travel outside of it . Further , the SAM collection , as Gibson notes , is missing key im - portant details , and many catalogue cards are missing information or are completely blank [ 17 ] . These stories , although different in form , address these missing blanks . It would certainly be useful to incorporate this information back into the museum collection , but counter - archive also serves a purpose ; however , we are also not advocating for the museum to abdicate responsibility for caring for the belongings . As participants described , and as was articulated by Dr . Miya in particular , the museum has some responsibility in protecting and caring for the belongings and treasures in the collec - tion . When Dr . Miya expressed his concerns for the many powerful belongings , as noted in the narrative ; this caused us to question the kinds of radical and affective care approaches that have come to the fore in museum work , and can be relevant here for PD work as well [ 2 , 6 , 13 ] . For example , when thinking about how museum objects “are deeply implicated in webs of affective relations , ” and the relation with objects and records can be redefined through “an affective investment in and attachment to damaging neoliberal - ist ideologies that shape the conditions of contemporary archival 1789 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Hannah Turner et al . Figure 5 : Photo of the launch of Amagugu Ethu Museum in a Box at the Luthuli Museum , with Boyzie Myeni , September 2019 . work” [ 7 : 7 ] . Indeed , museum and archival collections often include personal implications and can include deeply personal objects , even when they are mostly treated as institutional collections [ 10 , 19 , 25 ] . As Douglas and Mills offer , “ . . . we should also be thinking about the personal as a way in which records are experienced , or as a type of relationship or orientation between a record of any kind and the person who interacts with it” [ 10 : 258 ] . Dr . Miya’s concerns over some of the belongings in the museum were one of the many affective relationships that the group developed during the project , from connections to personal objects and livings of the participants’ life to envisioning future projects and claims . In the final recom - mendations drafted by the Amagugu Ethu team , it was decided that one of the goals should be to work with institutions to allow cleansing ceremonies—certainly a moment of potential productive tension between institutional policies and ceremonial need . Although many elements of the Museum in a Box were ready - made ; the inclusion of stories referenced with visual postcards was effective on exhibit back in KwaZulu - Natal at the Luthuli Museum . As a non - screen based digital tool , the Box was a “friendly” tech - nology . Viewing the belongings as the stories about them played was interactive and engaging , as well as educational . The workshop included many shared discussions about the pos - sibilities this project held , and all participants were engaged in sharing stories as openly as possible , in part to enhance the overall knowledge about these belongings that had gone unassociated . Yet , participation by itself does not challenge existing power structures . The reasons why we envisioned Amagugu Ethu as design delimited by the community—where the ‘designers’ positioned themselves at the bottom of the design hierarchy , so the communities could make decisions—were : “ . . . the designer assumes the role of a facilitator who offers support for the people’s materialization of their own building design ideas , even if those ideas chal - lenge conventional architectural design wisdom . . . the designer , under this approach , is a participant in the process , just like anyone else in the room . ” [ 1 : 17 ] However , because many of the elements had been pre - decided , especially concerning the readymade design of the Box , this struc - ture of design is not entirely accurate . Instead , as noted , the authors of this paper considered the participatory aspects as one of working and designing “withness” [ 41 ] : “ . . . Withness is not simply about collaboration but rather emphasizes complicated relations and entan - glements with humans , nonhumans , and land , and an ethics of situatedness , solidarity and resistance . ” [ 41 : 904 ] Simply expressing solidarity is not the end of the work of the counter - archive , but it is integral to its process . Similarly , the mak - ing of the Box is shaping the belongings themselves and the un - derstanding of the stories and their meaning . By approaching the belongings through a lens of storytelling , the design of the Box is in - fluenced by the culture and , at the same time , defines culture , having the potential to challenge the structure and practice of knowledge 1790 Participatory Design for the Anarchive DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA interpretation in museum settings , ultimately creating new cultural possibilities [ 29 ] . It is not a perfect situation that MiaB holds the data on its site , but they do not sell this data to other groups to make a profit , nor have Zulu community members expressed concern about digital surrogates being shared publicly [ 16 ] . We recognise , however , that where data is stored is of great significance for certain originating communities . The Ara Irititja and Zuni A : shiwi A : Wan Museum Heritage Centre projects , for example , are considered suc - cessful partnerships with originating communities in part because the data is stored in line with community principles and in places they more directly control [ 5 , 8 , 23 , 31 ] . This aspect of the Am - agugu Ethu project is certainly worthy of greater consideration . In terms of the colonial stance , we also recognise that there are ethical issues with using any digital technologies , including Raspberry Pi - based devices , since they are frequently composed of raw materials whose extraction initiates and prolongs violent conflicts ( such as over cobalt reserves in the DRC ) and these conflicts themselves replicate unequal and historical colonial relationships . We also consider the Cape Town visit as one iteration of wider response - ability to this originating community . The event itself was a response to several years of preceding research findings and developing relationships . Dr . Gibson and Dr . Turner co - authored a research paper [ 15 ] on the challenges presented by making the Luthuli Museum’s digitized collections accessible online several years prior to the Amagugu Ethu workshop in Cape Town . Dr . Gibson lived in KwaZulu - Natal for four years and worked at the Luthuli Museum with Zulu researcher Thulani Thusi , 2009 – 2011 ; Dr . Turner visited KwaZulu - Natal and the Luthuli Museum during her first visit to South Africa in 2011 . Dr . Gibson interned as an Assistant Curator at Iziko in 2009 and continued her working rela - tionship with the Cape Town museums during her PhD research , 2016 – 2018 , itself a response to issues raised previously by the orig - inating community with Dr . Gibson . Dr . Gibson’s relationships with the six other Zulu researchers developed out of numerous work - shops held in KwaZulu - Natal as part of her PhD research ; many of these contacts were initiated through the network of colleagues and friends developed since moving to KwaZulu - Natal in 2009 , more than a decade before the workshop in Cape Town took place . The conversations and discussions that took place across these networks and years fostered and underpinned the Amagugu Ethu workshop in 2019 as one expression of ongoing response - ability . Without this extended history of working , researching , sharing , and mingling with the originating community researchers , there would be no appetite for the Cape Town workshop , however hungry we might be as researchers . 4 CONCLUSION The transformation from one form to another , and the movement through different states of being in the archive , is a key focus of Hennessy and Smith’s work on anarchival materiality . They con - ceptualize this destabilization and as a kind of generative entropic force—as film archives , for example , degrade , they call to attention the precarity of the archive as an institution , and objects that resist the archival force to preserve deemed ‘fugitives’ [ 39 : 130 ] . Thinking through this destabilization and the movement of objects outside of the museum in the context of the Amagugu Ethu project has likewise been a generative force ; and the stories produced by the participants continue to be replayed at a new locale , far away from the confines of the SAM in Cape Town . It is this movement , or generative entropy , that we see as valuable and that came directly from the participatory design process here . Through the workshop , the making of clay objects , spending time with belongings in the collection , and the singing of songs , we cultivated new connections . This created the kind of Anar - chival Response - ability [ 41 ] and crafted new obligations for each participant—some of which have been ultimately affected by the Covid - 19 Pandemic in a myriad of ways . Designing for the counter - archive , as we have found , required the incorporation of non - traditional aspects of museum and archival work , like performance and artistic reproduction as well . The small , nondescript storytelling machine—the Museum in a Box—is an effort to produce something useful for a particular setting , about a particular collection ; yet we hope it provides some insight into the kinds of work that can be done other than by , or outside of , institutional repositories . Although the Museum in a Box is an outcome of the workshop , the end results of the project—the Museum in a Box and all the subsequent online database—have exceeded our original expecta - tions . The Box allowed us to encapsulate the community experts’ insights of the collections into a portable object that not only acts as a counter - narrative and anarchival instrument , but also allows for those belongings and their stories to break free of institutional con - straints ( and some of the constraints of academics and designers ) , and potentially inspire new narratives and storytellings wherever they go . The Box also allowed the community experts to approach a postcustodial role to museum and memory custody , broadening the belongings accessibility and expanding , perhaps even shaping , community memory [ 3 ] . This paper intended to connect different approaches to com - munity participatory design , collaborative museum studies and postcustodial and feminist archival studies colliding in the making of the Amagugu Ethu Museum in a Box . Through the different stages of the narrative and our reflections over the process , we have explored the existing tensions in projects where experimental academic theories join community engaged design . The result has allowed us , both the academics and the community experts , ap - proaches to anarchival and counter - narrative practices where the voices of the communities are centred and the knowledge elicited from close work with belongings are able to return home . The project and the recommendations that arose from it , as well as the Box , created and continue to create essential obligations to us , hungry academics . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This paper is dedicated to Thuli Mtshali . This project was generously supported by the Wenner - Gren Foundation and the Global Challenges Research Fund ( GCRF ) at the University of Leicester . REFERENCES [ 1 ] GabrielArboleda . 2020 . Beyondparticipation : Rethinkingsocialdesign . InJournal of Architectural Education , 74 , 1 , 15 - 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10464883 . 2020 . 1693817 [ 2 ] Shaowen Bardzell . 2010 . Feminist HCI : taking stock and outlining an agenda for design . In Proceedings of the 2010 international conference on Human factors in 1791 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Hannah Turner et al . computing systems , Atlanta , 1301 - 1310 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753521 [ 3 ] Jeannette A . Bastian . 2002 . Taking custody , giving access : A postcustodial role for a new century . In Archivaria , 53 , 76 - 93 . https : / / archivaria . ca / index . php / archivaria / article / view / 12838 [ 4 ] Margot Brereton , Paul Roe , Ronald Schroeter and Anita Lee Hong . 2014 . Beyond ethnography : Engagement and reciprocity as foundations for design research out here . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1183 - 1186 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557374 [ 5 ] Robin Boast and Jim Enote . 2013 . “Virtual Repatriation : It Is Neither Virtual nor Repatriation . ” In Heritage in the Context of Globalization : Europe and the Americas , edited by Peter F . Biehl , 103 – 113 . New York : Springer . [ 6 ] Michelle Caswell and Marika Cifor . 2016 . From human rights to feminist ethics : Radical empathy in the archives . In Archivaria , 81 , 1 , 23 - 43 . https : / / muse . jhu . edu / article / 687705 / summary ? casa _ token = iAJ8RBjAWRMAAAAA : LRyjhnOKT62cYHBCvsDPUZndi7 _ uw0CsEnhEFDCwi9J0pX1ZCpoobFjGVUzsNz5WhhnCdRakhay4 [ 7 ] Marika Cifor . 2016 . Affecting relations : Introducing affect theory to archival discourse . In Archival Science 16 , 1 , 7 - 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10502 - 015 - 9261 - 5 [ 8 ] Kim Christen . 2006 . " Ara Irititja : Protecting the Past , Accessing the Future— Indigenous Memories in a Digital Age . " Museum Anthropology 29 ( 1 ) : 56 - 60 . doi : 10 . 1525 / mua . 2006 . 29 . 1 . 56 . [ 9 ] NormanK . Denzin , YvonnaS . Lincoln , andLindaTuhiwaiSmith . 2008 . Handbook of Critical and Indigenous Methodologies . Los Angeles : SAGE . [ 10 ] Jennifer Douglas and Allison Mills . 2018 . From the sidelines to the center : Re - considering the potential of the personal in archives . In Archival Science , 18 , 3 , 257 - 277 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10502 - 018 - 9295 - 6 [ 11 ] MarisaElenaDuarteandMirandaBelard - Lewis . 2015 . Imagining : Creatingspaces for Indigenous ontologies . In Cataloging & Classification Quarterly , 53 , 5 / 6 , 677 - 702 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01639374 . 2015 . 1018396 [ 12 ] Sheena Erete and Jennifer O . Burrell . 2017 . Empowered participation : How citi - zens use technology in local governance . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Denver , 2307 - 2319 . https : / / dl . acm . org / doi / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025996 [ 13 ] Sarah Fox , Jill Dimond , Lilly Irani , Tad Hirsch , Michael Muller and Shaowen Bardzell . 2017 . Social justice and design : Power and oppression in collaborative systems . In Companion of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing , New York , 117 - 122 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3022198 . 3022201 [ 14 ] Bonnie M . Freeman . 2015 . The spirit of Haudenosaunee youth : The transforma - tion of identity and well - being through culture based activism . Unpublished PhD Thesis , Wilfrid Laurier University . [ 15 ] Laura Kate Gibson and Hannah Turner . 2012 . " Facilitating Inclusivity : The Politics of Access and Digitisation in a South African and Canadian Mu - seum . " International Journal of the Inclusive Museum 4 ( 1 ) . doi : 10 . 18848 / 1835 - 2014 / CGP / v04i01 / 44364 . [ 16 ] Laura Kate Gibson . 2019 . " Decolonising South African Museums in a Digital Age : Re - imagining the Iziko Museums’ Natal Nguni Catalogue and Collection . " PhD , Kings’ College London . [ 17 ] Laura Kate Gibson . 2020 . Pots , belts , and medicine containers : Challenging colonial - eracategoriesandclassificationsinthedigitalage . InJournalofCultural Management and Cultural Policy 6 , 2 , 1 - 30 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 14361 / zkmm - 2020 - 0204 [ 18 ] Christina Harrington , Sheena Erete and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstructing community - based collaborative design : Towards more equitable participatory de - sign engagements . In Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , New York , 216 : 1 - 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359318 [ 19 ] Lynne C . Haworth and Emma Knight . 2015 . To every artifact its voice : Creating surrogates for Hand - Crafted Indigenous Objects . In Cataloging & Classification Quarterly , 53 , 5 / 6 , 580 - 595 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01639374 . 2015 . 1008719 [ 20 ] Kate Hennessy and Trudi Lynn Smith . 2018 . Fugitives : Anarchival materiality in the archives . Public , 29 , 57 , 128 - 144 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1386 / public . 29 . 57 . 128 _ 1 [ 21 ] Ellen Hoobler . 2006 . “To take their heritage in their hands” : Indigenous self - representation and decolonization in the community museums of Oaxaca , Mex - ico . In American Indian Quarterly , 30 , 3 / 4 , 441 - 460 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 4139023 [ 22 ] Lilly Irani , Janet Vertesi , Paul Dourish , Kavita Philip and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2010 . Postcolonial computing : a lens on design and development . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , New York , 1311 – 1320 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753522 [ 23 ] Gwyneira Isaac . 2009 . " Responsibilities toward Knowledge : the Zuni Museum and the Reconciling of Different Knowledge Systems . " In Contesting Knowledge : Museums and Indigenous Perspectives , edited by Susan Sleeper - Smith , 303 – 321 . Lincoln , Neb : University of Nebraska Press . [ 24 ] Jon Johnson . 2015 . Pathways to the eighth fire : Indigenous knowledge and story - telling in Toronto . Unpublished PhD Thesis , York University . [ 25 ] Cara Krmpotich , Heather Hiward and Emma Knight . 2016 . From collection to community to collections again : Urban Indigenous women , material culture and belonging . In Journal of Material Culture 21 , 3 , 343 - 365 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1359183515610362 [ 26 ] Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , Alessandro Soro and Margot Brereton . 2018 . New literacy theories for participatory design : Lessons from three design cases with Australian Aboriginal communities . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory De - sign Conference : Full Papers , New York , 1 : 1 - 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210588 [ 27 ] Christopher A . Le Dantec . 2017 . Design through collective action / collective actionthroughdesign . InInteractions24 , 1 , 24 - 30 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3018005 [ 28 ] Ann Light . 2018 . Writing PD : Accounting for socially - engaged research . In Pro - ceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial , 2 , New York , 1 : 1 - 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210604 . 3210615 [ 29 ] Henry Mainsah and Andrew Morrison . 2014 . Participatory design through a cultural lens : Insights from postcolonial theory . In Proceedings of the 13th Par - ticipatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Industry Cases , Workshop Descrip - tions , Doctoral Consortium papers , and Keynote abstracts , 2 , New York , 83 – 86 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662195 [ 30 ] Marques Miranda and Jully Acuña Suárez . 2019 . Dialogues between an Indige - nous people and a museum . Steps towards decolonization . 2 - 10 . https : / / www . researchgate . net / profile / Marcelo _ Marques _ Miranda / publication / 337228069 _ Dialogues _ Between _ an _ Indigenous _ People _ and _ a _ Museum _ Steps _ Towards _ Decolonization / links / 5df162f04585159aa4766207 / Dialogues - Between - an - Indigenous - People - and - a - Museum - Steps - Towards - Decolonization . pdf [ 31 ] Mason , Rhiannon . 2006 . " Cultural Theory and Museum Studies . " In A Companion to Museum Studies , edited by Sharon Macdonald , 17 – 32 . Malden , MA ; Oxford : Blackwell Pub . [ 32 ] Museum in a Box . 2021 . Hi . Retrieved February 09 , 2021 from https : / / museuminabox . org / [ 33 ] Mpho Ngoepe . 2019 . Archives without archives : A window of opportunity to build inclusive archive in South Africa . In Journal of the South African Society of Archivists , 52 , 149 - 166 . https : / / www . ajol . info / index . php / jsasa / article / view / 191336 [ 34 ] Jisgang Nika and Cara Krmpotich . 2020 . Saahlinda Naay - Saving things house : The Haida Gwaii Museum past , present and future . In The Routledge Companion to Indigenous Repatriation : Return , Reconcile , Renew , 1758 . [ 35 ] Jonathan Paquette . 2012 . From decolonization to postcolonial management : Chal - lenging heritage administration and governance in New Zealand . In Public Orga - nization Review , 12 , 2 , 127 - 138 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11115 - 011 - 0163 - 6 [ 36 ] Dylan Robinson . 2020 . Hungry listening : Resonant theory for Indigenous sound studies . U of Minnesota Press . [ 37 ] Maria Isabel Roque . 2020 . Descolonizar o museu : Exposição e mediação dos es - pólios africanos em museus europeus . In Revista Lusófona de Estudos Culturais , 7 , 2 , 53 - 71 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 21814 / rlec . 3110 [ 38 ] Rebecka T . Sheffield . 2016 . More than acid - free folders : Extending the concept of preservation to include the stewardship of unexplored histories . In Library Trends , 64 , 3 , 572 - 584 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1353 / lib . 2016 . 0001 [ 39 ] Rachel Charlotte Smith , Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Asnath Paula Kambunga and Sarala Krishnamurthy . 2020 . Decolonizing participatory design : Memory making in Namibia . In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory Design Conference , Manizales , 96 - 106 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3385010 . 3385021 [ 40 ] Rachel Charlotte Smith , Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Daria Loi , Asnath Paula Kambunga , Marly Muudeni Samuel and Rogério De Paula . 2020 . Decolonising participatory design practices : Towards participations otherwise . In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory Design Conference , New York , 206 - 208 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3384772 . 3385172 [ 41 ] StephanieSpringgay , AniseTrumanandSaraMacLean . 2020 . Sociallyengagedart , experimental pedagogies , and anarchiving as research - creation . In Qualitative In - quiry 26 , 7 , 897 - 907 . https : / / journals . sagepub . com / doi / 10 . 1177 / 1077800419884964 [ 42 ] Juanita Sundberg . 2014 . Decolonizing posthumanist geographies . In Cultural Geographies , 21 , 1 , 33 - 47 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1474474013486067 [ 43 ] Joan M . Schwarz and Terry Cook . 2002 . Archives , records , and power : The mak - ing of modern memory . In Archival Science , 2 , 1 , 1 - 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF02435628 [ 44 ] Simone Taffe and Meghan Kelly . 2020 . Exchanging expertise across cultures and time : Participatory design approaches for creating community museums . In The Design Journal , 23 , 5 , 715 - 734 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14606925 . 2020 . 1807717 [ 45 ] GustavTaxén . 2004 . Introducingparticipatorydesigninmuseums . InProceedings of the eighth conference on Participatory design : Artful integration : interweav - ing media , materials and practices , 1 , 204 - 213 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1011870 . 1011894 [ 46 ] Linda Tuhiwai Smith . 1999 . Decolonizing Methodologies : Research and Indige - nous Peoples . New York ; London : Zed Books . 1792