Advances in Nursing Science Vol . 43 , No . 1 , pp . E36 – E45 Copyright c (cid:2) 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . Clinical Information Needs A Concept Analysis Cara S . Schlegel , MS , RN ; Linda H . Yoder , PhD , MBA , RN , AOCN , FAAN ; Terry L . Jones , PhD , RN Health care organizations have invested resources to implement and upgrade information systems capable of collecting large quantities of data . Recent technology developments have created a renewed interest in studying clinician information needs . However , a common deﬁnition and analysis of the concept clinical information needs have not been provided . Walker and Avant’s method was used to perform a concept analysis . Following a review of relevant literature , a clinical information need was deﬁned as a conscious expression , which can be verbal or nonverbal , of a desire for knowledge to answer clinical questions in the course of decision making to deliver patient care . Key words : clinician , clinician information needs , concept analysis , informatics , information needs , nursing , physician O N FEBRUARY 17 , 2009 , the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act was signed into law and a component of this legislation included the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health ( HITECH ) Act . Health care information tech - nology requirements from this act , which were released in stages , called Meaningful Use , were aimed at improving health care delivery in the United States by focusing on the implementation and use of health infor - mation technology . 1 As a result of this act and the Meaningful Use reporting requirements , hospitals and health care providers invested signiﬁcant human capital and technology to implement and upgrade information systems within their facilities to be able to document and meet government requirements of Mean - Author Afﬁliations : The University of Texas at Austin , School of Nursing , Austin ( Ms Schlegel and Dr Yoder ) ; and Virginia Commonwealth University , Richmond ( Dr Jones ) . The authors have disclosed that they have no signif - icant relationships with , or ﬁnancial interest in , any commercial companies pertaining to this article . Correspondence : Cara S . Schlegel , MS , RN , The Uni - versity of Texas at Austin , School of Nursing , 1710 Red River St , Austin , TX 78701 ( cara . schlegel @ utexas . edu ) . DOI : 10 . 1097 / ANS . 0000000000000260 ingful Use reporting . Health care organiza - tions , hospitals , and providers had to show that they were meeting federal standards of electronic health record ( EHR ) use through submitting reports that included usage data , such as percentage of medication administra - tions that use bar code veriﬁcation scanning . Although Meaningful Use has now become part of the Merit - based Incentive Reporting System ( MIPS ) , the results of these programs are clinical information systems that are able to collect vast amounts of data , such as pa - tient allergies and medication lists . However , many of these systems remain ineffective in transforming these data into the information needed to assist clinicians in making timely critical decisions regarding patient care . 2 , 3 Furthermore , the current amount of informa - tion available to clinicians can be overwhelm - ing and difﬁcult to manage . Because of the increase in data and information , recent in - formation technology developments have cre - ated a renewed interest in studying the infor - mation needs of clinicians with the goal of providing new information resources to clin - ical decision makers . Although several of the motives for study - ing clinical information needs are related to US regulatory requirements , the foundation of research is important to improve patient care . Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited . E36 Clinical Information Needs E37 Statement of Significance What is known or assumed to be true about this topic : Clinical information needs are common subjects of informatics research . Clini - cians frequently encounter information needs in both inpatient and outpatient settings of care , and their information needs are often unresolved . There is no common deﬁnition or method of mea - surement of a clinical information need and it is common for research to be published without an operational deﬁni - tion of how information needs are being studied . What this article adds : This concept analysis provides clariﬁca - tion of the concept of clinical informa - tion needs and a deﬁnition based on a review of the literature is provided . The concept of clinical information needs is clariﬁed through the presentation and dis - cussion of antecedents , consequences , and deﬁning attributes . Example cases are provided for clariﬁcation of the concept . Clinical informaticians will have a useful theoretical foundation for understanding clinician information needs and a deﬁni - tion that can be used when studying in - formation needs . One foundation of nursing informatics is that data are the basis of information and informa - tion is necessary to build knowledge . Build - ing health care knowledge based on accu - rate and timely data is applicable to clinicians worldwide . 4 , 5 It is crucial for clinicians to have the appropriate information at the right time to inform the decision - making process . 6 Although there is renewed interest in study - ing clinical information needs , studies regard - ing this topic originate back to the late 1960s and early 1970s . The literature shows that clinicians have frequent information needs when caring for patients , both in the inpa - tient and outpatient setting . 7 - 10 Unfortunately , given the length of time the concept of clini - cal information needs has been studied , there has been little development regarding an ac - cepted deﬁnition and concept analysis , espe - cially when focused on the information needs of clinicians . Therefore , the purpose of this article is to provide a concept analysis of clinician information needs using Walker and Avant’s 11 method . BACKGROUND The concept of clinical information need was selected because of its importance for informatics in relation to the clinical decision - making process . Several models present information needs as a starting point for decision making or the information - seeking process 12 - 14 and it is the subject of research articles but as a concept , it is not well deﬁned . 6 , 10 , 15 - 23 A concept analysis regarding information needs was written by Timmins , 24 but it focused on patient information needs and did not include clinician - related , clinical information needs . Therefore , that concept analysis did not ﬁll the void in understanding information needs in a clinical decision - making context that can be used in clinical informatics research . The purpose of this concept analysis is to clarify the concept of clinical information need and how needs can be met through the use of clinical information systems . In - formaticians strive to aid clinicians in having the information to make decisions about pa - tient care . To develop improved clinical in - formation systems , it becomes imperative to increase the understanding of clinicians’ clin - ical information needs and how clinical in - formation ﬂows during communication and decision making . The ultimate goal would be to improve the display and usability of infor - mation systems by clinicians . In addition , new information resources may be given to clinical decision makers with the intent of positively affecting patient outcomes . DATA SOURCES A search for articles about information needs was performed using Academic Search Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited . E38 A DVANCES IN N URSING S CIENCE / J ANUARY – M ARCH 2020 Complete , CINAHL , PubMed , and MEDLINE . Limiting dates were not included in the search and so the full depth and breadth of the con - cept could be understood . Inclusion criteria were that the title and / or abstract contained the term “information need” or “information needs” and the article had to be published in English . The majority of articles discovered were related to patient and clinician informa - tion needs , library science , and information technology . Articles not related to informa - tion needs of professional groups were ex - cluded , such as patient - related information needs . In addition , the articles had to provide information about how to measure , observe , or discuss information needs . Overall , 47 arti - cles published between 1969 and 2017 were included in the literature review . In addition , the concept was investigated in the Oxford English Dictionary 25 - 27 for relevant history . RESULTS Concept definition The ﬁrst step in determining uses of the concept was to ascertain whether clinical in - formation need was deﬁned in the Oxford En - glish Dictionary . Although the complete con - cept of information need was not deﬁned as 1 term , the terms “clinical , ” “information , ” and “need” were individually present . The term “clinical” provided the following entry : “Of or pertaining to the sick - bed , spec . to that of indoor hospital patients . ” 25 Although the Oxford English Dictionary offers a deﬁnition , it also offers the historical development of a word . The deﬁnition provided for clinical is suggested to be outdated with reference to a location rather than from the view of a patient context . An additional deﬁnition was found from Merriam - Webster , “related to . . . involving direct observation of a patient . ” 28 This deﬁnition supports the current focus on patient - centered care rather than one that is location , or hospital based . An entry regarding “information” included the following deﬁni - tion : “knowledge communicated concerning some particular fact , subject , or event ; that of which one is appraised or told . ” 26 The deﬁni - tion of the word “need” is : “necessity for a par - ticular action or course of action arising from the facts or circumstances of a situation . ” 27 Putting these terms together results in the following deﬁnition of an information need : a gap in knowledge about a particular fact , subject , or event necessary for a particular ac - tion or course of action involving the obser - vation and treatment of patients . Most studies reviewed required that knowledge was nec - essary to make a decision but information to make the decision was unknown by the re - search participant . After searching , unsuccessfully , for a stan - dard or commonly referenced deﬁnition for clinical information need , the selected re - search studies were reviewed for deﬁnitions of the concept . Overall , deﬁnitions that were included in the research were insufﬁcient . Many articles were missing a deﬁnition or de - scription of how an information need was being recognized in the context of the re - search study and some evaluated any ques - tion that a clinician had during a patient encounter . 8 , 9 , 15 , 20 , 23 , 29 - 32 The earliest deﬁnition located in the litera - ture was constructed by Line . 33 He believed that an information need was “expressed in the question What information would fur - ther this job or this research and would be recognized as doing so by the recipient ? ” ( p6 ) Forsythe et al 17 included the most compre - hensive deﬁnition of an information need as “conscious expressions ( verbal or nonverbal ) of a desire for more information by one or more people . ” ( p185 ) Another deﬁnition , less cited , was proposed by Nicholas , 21 “informa - tion needs arise when a person recognizes a gap in his / her state of knowledge and wishes to resolve that anomaly . ” ( p20 ) He further de - ﬁned the concept as “the information that in - dividuals ought to have to do their job effec - tively , solve a problem satisfactorily or pursue a hobby or interest happily . ” ( p20 ) Case 34 proposed a deﬁnition by stating that an “information need is a recognition that your knowledge is inadequate to satisfy a goal that you have . ” ( p5 ) Subsequently , Allen et al 6 Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited . Clinical Information Needs E39 deﬁned a clinician’s information need as : “ex - pressed ( implicitly or explicitly ) the need for additional information to formulate a clini - cal decision . ” ( p26 ) This deﬁnition was the ﬁrst that deﬁned an information need in the con - text of a clinical operation . Another deﬁnition was presented by Gorman et al 35 regarding the information needs of rural and nonrural clinicians ; the authors deﬁned an information need as “clinical questions articulated by a [ primary care clinician ] in the course of pa - tient care . ” ( p1133 ) Additional context - speciﬁc deﬁnitions of information need were found in the literature . For example , Shim et al 36 deﬁned information need as “a categorization of various ‘information pieces’ required by a nurse to perform his / her task . ” ( p492 ) This def - inition is considered a context - speciﬁc deﬁni - tion because it takes into account only task - related duties of a nurse . Jonnalagadda et al 19 cited results from Currie et al 37 to create a deﬁnition for an information need , which is a “gap in medical knowledge that providers need to ﬁll in order to make , conﬁrm , or carry out decisions on patient care . ” ( p995 ) Consid - ering all these deﬁnitions , for the purposes of this concept analysis a clinical informa - tion need is deﬁned as a conscious expres - sion , which can be verbal or nonverbal , of a desire for knowledge by health care clin - icians to answer clinical questions in the course of decision making to deliver patient care . 17 , 35 Defining attributes Walker and Avant 11 described attributes as characteristics that repeatedly appear in the reviewed literature . After reviewing the litera - ture , 2 attributes of clinical information needs repeatedly emerged : ( 1 ) temporal recogni - tion of a gap in knowledge and ( 2 ) context ( Figure ) . Temporal recognition of a gap in knowledge One deﬁning attribute of a clinical infor - mation need is the temporal recognition of Clinical Information Need Antecedents Gap in knowledge : (cid:129) physiological (cid:129) affective , (cid:129) cognitive ( conscious or visceral ) Consequences (cid:129) Information - seeking behavior ( Information gathering ) (cid:129) Workarounds Defining Attributes (cid:129) Temporal recognition of a gap in knowledge (cid:129) Context (cid:129) Patient - specific (cid:129) Population - based (cid:129) Discipline - specific (cid:129) Setting or location Empirical Referents (cid:129) Observations of a temporal recognition of a gap in knowledge (cid:129) Characteristics of Context Empirical Referents (cid:129) Frequency and characteristics of information - seeking behaviors (cid:129) Information gathering sources used (cid:129) System logs (cid:129) Observations of workaround Figure . Attributes , antecedents , and consequences of clinical information needs . Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited . E40 A DVANCES IN N URSING S CIENCE / J ANUARY – M ARCH 2020 a gap in knowledge . It is a context - speciﬁc , conscious recognition of an information need , which may be verbal or nonverbal , to make a decision , provide patient care , or complete a task , thereby making the timeli - ness of resolving the need important . 17 , 18 A clinical information need may or may not be phrased in the form of a question , but not all questions equate to a clinical information need . For example , the gap in knowledge may be expressed when ( 1 ) a physician decides to search a patient’s chart to look for a medication list to ﬁnd information about dosing for an inpatient medication , ( 2 ) a nurse asks a question during a patient handoff to determine whether a dressing change was performed , or ( 3 ) while reviewing a patient chart , a pharmacist ﬁnds a new vancomycin peak and trough laboratory result and recog - nizes a need to determine whether a patient’s antibiotic dosing is therapeutic . The notion that the need for information is time - sensitive also is found in the literature about this subject . Although not expressly noted , observational studies were often per - formed at the point of care and observed clini - cians in a direct caregiving mode . 7 , 9 , 17 , 20 , 35 , 38 Researchers also conducted interviews or ob - servations of the clinical information system use immediately following clinician - patient interactions 6 , 10 , 20 , 37 , 39 and performed retro - spective interviews or chart reviews that speciﬁed times when the clinician was with a patient or making a decision about patient care . 22 , 29 , 40 Context The clinical information need also must occur in a clinical context . In reviewing the literature , clinical information needs can be grouped into 1 or more of 4 con - text categories . 17 , 18 The ﬁrst category is patient - speciﬁc information . These clinical information needs are for additional evidence regarding an individual patient and include elements such as history , assessment , and laboratory results . The second category is population - based clinical information needs , which includes information about a speciﬁc group of people . Examples of information needs that are population - based include epidemiologic data , such as prevalence rates . The third category , discipline - speciﬁc knowl - edge is based on the discipline of the clinical information need and can be speciﬁc to that discipline or a combination of clinical disci - plines and specialties . The ﬁnal category is setting or location information needs . These clinical information needs are speciﬁc to the setting ( inpatient , outpatient , emergency department ) , facility ( standard plans of care , policies , laboratory result interpretation ) , or location ( including cultural and political differences ) . All context categories are perti - nent to care of the patient . Information such as disease - speciﬁc literature and evidence , as well as procedural information , is an example of clinical context that can be categorized into multiple groups . Disease - speciﬁc litera - ture and evidence can be population - based and discipline - speciﬁc information , while procedural information can be categorized as discipline or setting speciﬁc . Antecedents According to Walker and Avant , 11 an - tecedents are events that must occur prior to the instance of the concept and the antecedents provided cannot be deﬁning at - tributes . The major antecedent to a clinical information need is the gap in information or knowledge for a physiological , affective , and / or cognitive need . 14 Case 34 stated that “information needs do not arise in a vacuum but rather owe their existence to some his - tory , purpose and inﬂuence . ” ( p226 ) A physio - logical need is an internal need such as hunger and may not be observed or needed by a clin - ician with regard to patient care . 14 Affective needs , such as the need or desire for well - ness , are personal needs . 14 Cognitive needs are those where there is a need to understand or ﬁnd additional information about an unfa - miliar topic . 41 In this analysis , an example of a cognitive need would be collecting a pa - tient’s list of allergies before ordering or ad - ministering medication . These needs may not Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited . Clinical Information Needs E41 be independent and one type may produce another type of need . If the identiﬁcation of the gap in knowledge by the individual is rec - ognized , then it is a conscious information need . 12 If the individual does not identify the gap in knowledge , the information need may not be identiﬁed . Taylor 12 labeled this as a vis - ceral information need because there is dissat - isfaction from the individual with the current state , but there is no action taken to resolve the clinician’s information need . Consequences A consequence is an event that must oc - cur following the instance of the concept , and similar to an antecedent , it cannot be a deﬁning attribute . 11 The consequence of an information need is information - seeking behavior , which includes information seek - ing , information search , information gath - ering , and information use . 42 Information seeking is an all - purposive search , where an information search includes the user forming a question that guides the search . Information - seeking behavior has been used as a mea - sure to determine when an information need had occurred in information needs research . Information - seeking behavior is typically a re - sponse to ﬁll an information need , after the occurrence of the temporal recognition of a gap in information or knowledge , which con - tinues until the information need is satisﬁed . 43 Information use occurs once the informa - tion is found and is added to the user’s knowledge . 42 Another behavior that was recognized in the literature is that of work - arounds . Ni - azkhani and colleagues 44 evaluated the med - ication use process of clinical end users fol - lowing the implementation of a computer - ized physician order entry system . The clin - icians expressed frustration with the usability and uncertainty with the information that was contained within the computerized physi - cian order entry system . The uncertainty re - ported by the clinicians was unmet informa - tion needs . These challenges resulted in the clinicians creating work - arounds to ﬁnd infor - mation , complete clinical tasks , or make deci - sions about patient care . These work - arounds were in the form of paper notes , issuing pa - tient care orders on paper or using verbal or - ders , and making annotations to printed or - ders . Lundgren - Laine et al 45 also discussed clinician - designed tools for supporting infor - mation needs while providing patient care and managing a unit as a charge nurse . The reports are described as clinician - designed tools that integrate information from multiple sources and are gathered manually . Empirical referents Empirical referents are identiﬁed as ways to measure the concept . 11 Clinical informa - tion needs have typically been measured by looking for signs of the concept attributes : ( 1 ) temporal recognition of a gap in knowledge , ( 2 ) context , and ( 3 ) information - seeking behavior . Frequently , researchers examined information - seeking behavior as a trigger to evaluate whether a clinical information need was present . 34 , 38 , 46 , 47 In some studies , sys - tem logs were used , based on infobutton use , search terms , or other similar technology to evaluate information - seeking behavior . 40 , 48 , 49 These studies resulted in descriptive results or were exploratory to determine whether the method could be used to study information needs . When system logs were present , the research consisted of automated evaluation using a software tool to measure information - seeking behavior and determine potential information needs . 48 , 49 Kappa statistics were evaluated to determine interrater reliability between the software tool and human processes . Other quantitative data collected focused on demographic information and areas of information need . For example , some researchers collected categories of information need ( laboratory results inter - pretation or patients’ past medical history ) and others tallied the number of information needs present in an observation period , such as during an outpatient visit . 10 , 31 , 39 , 47 No valid and reliable questionnaires to determine information needs were discovered in the Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited . E42 A DVANCES IN N URSING S CIENCE / J ANUARY – M ARCH 2020 literature review concerning this concept . What is known about information needs has mostly been informed through the use of exploratory qualitative and quantitative descriptive methods . 7 , 9 , 17 , 29 , 32 Cases To have a mental perspective of the con - cept clinical information needs , 4 cases are presented . Model case A registered nurse is performing a dressing change on a wound and is unsure of the appropriate method to use for the type of wound the patient has ( the information need ) . The nurse reviews the documentation in the EHR to gather patient - speciﬁc informa - tion about the type of wound by reviewing documentation and pictures regarding the assessment and treatment of the wound . The nurse then clicks on an infobutton found in the EHR next to the assessment of the type of wound . An infobutton is functionality within an EHR that creates a direct link to a resource for retrieval of additional information about a concept . In this case , clicking the infobutton takes the nurse to a hospital - speciﬁc proce - dure for the type of wound the patient has . The nurse does not have to search through a database for the appropriate information . The nurse reviews the procedure for a dressing change for the patient’s wound and performs the appropriate dressing change . The nurse’s clinical information need was satisﬁed . This case satisﬁes the attributes as a nonverbal communication ( to the computer ) to ﬁll an information need in order to perform the cor - rect dressing change for the patient . This clini - cal information need included patient - speciﬁc information and discipline - based information . Borderline case While on morning rounds , an attending physician asks a medical resident to present the signs and symptoms of a stroke . Doctor Jones states all the signs and symptoms of a stroke appropriately . This case is an example of a borderline case . While a speciﬁc question was communicated , it was addressed to the student to ﬁnd out whether the student had an information need . Because both the attend - ing physician and the resident knew the signs and symptoms of a stroke , this case is not rep - resentative of an information need . If the stu - dent was unable to answer the question and the information was needed to make a deci - sion in a patient’s care , then this case would be an example of a clinical information need . Related case Around lunchtime , a pharmacist ap - proached the nurses’ station and asked the unit secretary for the telephone number to a local restaurant . The unit secretary directed the pharmacist to a resource book of local information located in the unit break room . This is a related case , because the pharma - cist asked a question , but not to ﬁll a clini - cal information need . The question is not an example of a clinical information need be - cause it cannot be categorized as a patient - speciﬁc need , population - based information need , discipline - speciﬁc information , or as a setting / location information need . In addi - tion , this request will not be used in making a patient - related care decision . Contrary case A nurse practitioner received a laboratory result for a patient . The report indicated a positive blood culture ; the culture was gram - positive cocci . Knowing the patient , the clini - cian phoned a telephone order into the nurse responsible for the patient . The appropriate antibiotic was ordered and there were no questions about the medication , dose , route , or schedule . This is an example of a contrary case , because the nurse practitioner has no clinical information need regarding this pa - tient or the order . DISCUSSION Although information needs have been studied for decades , most of the research in - cluded in this concept analysis did not include Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited . Clinical Information Needs E43 a deﬁnition of the concept being studied or how the concept was identiﬁed / measured in the study . The lack of deﬁnitions in the liter - ature makes generalizability or synthesizing results difﬁcult . If future clinical information needs research is to be valuable to infor - maticians to build a body of knowledge , standard deﬁnitions and measurements need to be used . A ﬁrst step toward this would be the development of a middle - range theory for clinical information needs . Fawcett 50 described a middle - range theory as a more concrete theory ( in comparison with a grand theory ) that includes concepts and a schema and can be tested via empirical research . The attributes of a temporal recognition of a gap in knowledge and clinical context in conjunction with the antecedents of information - seeking behavior , information gathering , and analysis of system logs are cur - rently used to measure the information needs of clinicians . The antecedents , consequences , and empirical referents that were described in this concept analysis ( Figure ) can be considered as a beginning middle - range theory for clinical information needs . Before beginning additional studies , an op - erational deﬁnition that describes how to rec - ognize a clinical information need as well as data collection methods needs to be deter - mined . This will allow for data and results to be shared and compared using standard - ized formats . Additional studies using a vari - ety of methods and clinical populations need to be performed . Most of the studies used in this concept analysis of clinical informa - tion needs included only physicians . Other clinician groups such as advanced practice nurses , registered nurses , pharmacists , res - piratory therapists , and registered dieticians have clinical information needs as well as in - dividual domains of study and practice . Ad - ditional research also could be performed about the different clinical information needs when the environment or scope of practice changes . Understanding when clinical infor - mation needs change will add to the under - standing of clinical information needs overall . Another area for future study includes uniden - tiﬁed clinical information needs . There has been minimal research in this area , but these clinical information needs could account for lapses in patient safety and decreased quality of care . Finally , an increase in practitioners’ and researchers’ interest in clinical information needs is a result of the increased use of infor - mation technology in clinical areas . Additional studies need to evaluate information technol - ogy solutions for providing answers to clinical information needs . These studies can be used to improve current software solutions to meet the information needs of clinicians . CONCLUSION A concept analysis of clinical information needs was presented along with deﬁning at - tributes , antecedents , consequences , and pos - sible empirical referents . Delineation of the meaning , structure , and function of the con - cept contributes to the advancement of nurs - ing theory and science . Nurse informaticists can use this concept analysis to enhance their understanding of clinical information needs from a conceptual perspective . The science about this topic is in its infancy and more re - search is needed to further inform theory and practice regarding clinical information needs . REFERENCES 1 . The Ofﬁce of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology . HITECH programs . https : / / www . cdc . gov / ehrmeaningfuluse / introduction . html . Accessed October 29 , 2019 . 2 . Endsley MR , Garland DJ , eds . Situation Aware - ness Analysis and Measurement . Mahwah , NJ : LEA ; 2000 . 3 . Florance V , Giuse NB , Ketchell DS . Information in context : integratinginformationspecialistsintoprac - tice settings . J Med Libr Assoc . 2002 ; 90 ( 1 ) : 49 - 58 . 4 . Blum BI . Clinical information systems—a review . West J Med . 1986 ; 145 ( 6 ) : 791 - 797 . 5 . Matney S , Brewster PJ , Sward KA , Cloyes KG , Staggers N . Philosophical approaches to the nursing Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited . E44 A DVANCES IN N URSING S CIENCE / J ANUARY – M ARCH 2020 informatics data - information - knowledge - wisdom framework . ANS Adv Nurs Sci . 2011 ; 34 ( 1 ) : 6 - 18 . 6 . Allen M , Currie LM , Graham M , Bakken S , Patel VL , Cimino JJ . The classiﬁcation of clinicians’ informa - tion needs while using a clinical information system . AMIA Annu Symp Proc . 2003 ; 2003 : 26 - 30 . 7 . Covell DG , Uman GC , Manning PR . Information needs in ofﬁce practice : are they being met ? Ann Intern Med . 1985 ; 103 ( 4 ) : 596 - 599 . 8 . Davies K . The information - seeking behavior of doc - tors : a review of the evidence . Health Info Libr J . 2007 ; 13 : 78 - 94 . 9 . Osheroff JA , Forsythe DE , Buchanan BG , Bankowitz RA , Blumenfeld BH , Miller RA . Physicians’ informa - tionneeds : analysisofquestionsposedduringclinical teaching . Ann Intern Med . 1991 ; 114 ( 7 ) : 576 - 581 . 10 . CogdillKW . Informationneedsandinformationseek - ing in primary care : a study of nurse practitioners . J Med Libr Assoc . 2003 ; 91 ( 2 ) : 203 - 215 . 11 . Walker LO , Avant KC . Strategies for Theory Con - struction in Nursing . 5th ed . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Pearson Prentice Hall ; 2011 . 12 . Taylor RS . Question - negotiation and information seeking in libraries . Coll Res Libr . 1968 ; 29 : 178 - 194 . 13 . Wilson TD . Information behaviour : an interdisci - plinary perspective . J Doc . 1981 ; 37 ( 1 ) : 3 - 15 . 14 . Wilson TD , Walsh C . Information Behaviour : An In - terdisciplinary Perspective . Shefﬁeld , England : Uni - versity of Shefﬁeld ; 1995 . 15 . Anton B , Woodson SM , Twose C , Roderer NK . The persistence of clinical questions across shifts on an intensive care unit : an observational pilot study . J Med Libr Assoc . 2014 ; 102 ( 3 ) : 201 - 205 . 16 . Cook DA , Sorensen KJ , Linderbaum JA , Pencille LJ , Rhodes DJ . Information needs of generalists and spe - cialists using online best - practice algorithms to an - swer clinical questions . J Am Med Inform Assoc . 2017 ; 24 ( 4 ) : 754 - 761 . 17 . Forsythe DE , Buchanan BG , Osheroff JA , Miller RA . Expanding the concept of medical information : an observationalstudyofphysicians’informationneeds . Comput Biomed Res . 1992 ; 25 ( 2 ) : 181 - 200 . 18 . Gorman PN . Information needs of physicians . J Am Soc Inform Sci . 1995 ; 46 ( 10 ) : 729 - 736 . 19 . Jonnalagadda SR , Del Fiol G , Medlin R , et al . Automat - ically extracting sentences from MEDLINE citations to support clinicians’ information needs . J Am Med Inform Assoc . 2013 ; 20 ( 5 ) : 995 - 1000 . 20 . Koch SH , Weir C , Haar M , et al . Intensive care unit nurses’ information needs and recommendations for integrated displays to improve nurses’ situation awareness . J Am Med Inform Assoc . 2012 ; 19 ( 4 ) : 583 - 590 . 21 . Nicholas D . Assessing Information Needs : Tools , Techniques , and Concepts for the Internet Age . 2nd ed . London , England : Aslib ; 2000 . 22 . Ranade - Kharkar P , Weir C , Norlin C , et al . Informa - tion needs of physicians , care coordinators , and fam - ilies to support care coordination of children and youth with special health care needs ( CYSHCN ) . J Am Med Inform Assoc . 2017 ; 24 ( 5 ) : 933 - 941 . 23 . Rogers M , Zach L , An Y , Dalrymple P . Capturing in - formation needs of care providers to support knowl - edge sharing and distributed decision making . Appl Clin Inform . 2012 ; 3 ( 1 ) : 1 - 13 . 24 . Timmins F . Exploring the concept of “information need . ” Int J Nurs Pract . 2006 ; 12 ( 6 ) : 375 - 381 . 25 . Oxford English Dictionary . Clinical . http : / / www . oed . com . Accessed 2018 . 26 . Oxford English Dictionary . Information . http : / / www . oed . com . Accessed 2018 . 27 . Oxford English Dictionary . Need . http : / / www . oed . com . Accessed 2018 . 28 . Merriam - Webster Dictionary . Clinical . https : / / www . merriam - webster . com / dictionary / clinical . Accessed 2018 . 29 . Borycki E , Lemieux - Charles L . Novice nurse informa - tion needs in paper and hybrid electronic - paper envi - ronments : a qualitative analysis . Stud Health Technol Inform . 2009 ; 150 : 913 - 917 . 30 . Brennan PF , Daly BJ . Information requirements of advanced practice nurses . Adv Pract Nurs Q . 1996 ; 2 ( 3 ) : 54 - 57 . 31 . Strasser TC . The information needs of practicing physicians in northeastern New York State . Bull Med Libr Assoc . 1978 ; 66 ( 2 ) : 200 - 209 . 32 . Woolf SH , Benson DA . The medical information needs of internists and pediatricians at an academic medicalcenter . BullMedLibrAssoc . 1989 ; 77 ( 4 ) : 372 - 380 . 33 . Line MB . Information requirements in the social sci - ences : some considerations . J Libr . 1969 ; 1 ( 1 ) : 1 - 19 . 34 . Case DO . Looking for Information : A Survey of Re - search on Information Seeking , Needs , and Behav - ior . San Diego , CA : Academic Press / Elsevier Science ; 2002 . 35 . Gorman PN , Yao P , Seshadri V . Finding the answers in primary care : information seeking by rural and non - rural clinicians . Stud Health Technol Inform . 2004 ; 107 ( pt 2 ) : 1133 - 1137 . 36 . Shim E , Silfen E , Patel C , et al . Towards a ref - erence model for representing nursing informa - tion needs . Stud Health Technol Inform . 2006 ; 122 : 490 - 495 . 37 . Currie LM , Graham M , Allen M , Bakken S , Patel V , Cimino JJ . Clinical information needs in context : an observationalstudyofclinicianswhileusingaclinicalinformationsystem . AMIA Annu Symp Proc . 2003 ; 11 : 190 - 194 . 38 . Ramos K , Linscheid R , Schafer S . Real - time information - seeking behavior of residency physi - cians . Fam Med . 2003 ; 35 ( 4 ) : 257 - 260 . 39 . Graham MJ , Currie LM , Allen M , Bakken S , Patel V , Cimino JJ . Characterizing information needs and cog - nitive processes during CIS use . AMIA Annu Symp Proc . 2003 ; 8 ( 2 ) : 852 . Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited . Clinical Information Needs E45 40 . Pickering BW , Gajic O , Ahmed A , Herasevich V , Kee - gan MK . Data utilization for medical decision making at the time of patient admission to ICU . Crit Care Med . 2013 ; 41 ( 6 ) : 1502 - 1510 . 41 . Wilson TD . On user studies and information needs . Inf Process Manag . 1997 ; 33 ( 4 ) : 551 - 572 . 42 . Cole C . A theory of information need for information retrieval that connects information to knowledge . J Am Soc Inf Sci Technol . 2011 ; 62 ( 7 ) : 1216 - 1231 . 43 . Krikelas J . Information seeking behaviour : patterns and concepts . Drexel Library Q . 1983 ; 19 ( 2 ) : 5 - 20 . 44 . Niazkhani Z , Pirnejad H , van der Sijs H , Aarts J . Evalu - ating the medication process in the context of CPOE use : the signiﬁcance of working around the system . Int J Med Inform . 2011 ; 80 ( 7 ) : 490 - 506 . 45 . Lundgr´en - Laine H , Kontio E , Kauko T , Korvenranta H , Forsstr¨om J , Salanter¨a S . National survey focusing on the crucial information needs of intensive care charge nurses and intensivists : same goal , different demands . BMC Med Inform Decis Mak . 2013 ; 13 : 15 . 46 . Dawes M , Sampson U . Knowledge management in clinical practice : a systematic review of information seeking behavior in physicians . Int J Med Inform . 2003 ; 71 : 9 - 15 . 47 . Osheroff JA , Bankowitz RA . Physicians’ use of com - puter software in answering clinical questions . Bull Med Libr Assoc . 1993 ; 81 ( 1 ) : 11 - 19 . 48 . Del Fiol G , Haug PJ . Infobuttons and classiﬁcation models : a method for the automatic selection of on - line information resources to fulﬁll clinicians’ infor - mation needs . J Biomed Inform . 2008 ; 41 ( 4 ) : 82 - 89 . 49 . Del Fiol G , Haug PJ . Classiﬁcation models for the predictionofclinicians’informationneeds . J Biomed Inform . 2009 ; 42 ( 1 ) : 82 - 89 . 50 . FawcettJ . The Relationship of Theory and Research . 3rd ed . Philadelphia , PA : F A Davis Company ; 1999 . Copyright © 2019 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited .