Continuum descriptions of membranes and their interaction with proteins : Towards chemically accurate models ☆ David Argudo 1 , Neville P . Bethel 1 , Frank V . Marcoline , Michael Grabe ⁎ Cardiovascular Research Institute , Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry , University of California San Francisco , San Francisco , CA 94158 , United States a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 19 December 2015 Received inrevised form 30 January 2016 Accepted 1 February 2016 Available online 4 February 2016 Biological membranes deform in response to resident proteins leading to a coupling between membrane shape and protein localization . Additionally , themembrane in ﬂ uencesthe function ofmembrane proteins . Herewere - view contributions to this ﬁ eld from continuum elastic membrane models focusing on the class of models that coupletheproteintothemembrane . Whileithasbeenarguedthatcontinuummodelscannotreproducethedis - tortions observed in fully - atomistic molecular dynamics simulations , we suggest that this failure can be over - come by using chemically accurate representations of the protein . We outline our recent advances along these lines with our hybrid continuum - atomistic model , and we show the model is in excellent agreement with fully - atomistic simulations of the nhTMEM16 lipid scramblase . We believe that the speed and accuracy of continuum - atomistic methodologies will make it possible to simulate large scale , slow biological processes , such as membrane morphological changes , that are currently beyond the scope of other computational ap - proaches . This article is part of a Special Issue entitled : Membrane Proteins edited by J . C . Gumbart and Sergei Noskov . © 2016 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . Keywords : Biological membrane Bilayer Electrostatics Transmembrane protein Hydrophobic mismatch 1 . Introduction Biological membranes are crowded with transmembrane proteins and peripherally associated proteins that carry out a host of tasks rang - ing from ion and small molecule transport to cell motility . The distribu - tion of proteins is highly variable and heterogeneous leading to specialized compartments with dedicated chemistries , polarized cells with distinct apical and basal membranes , and membrane structures with intricate morphologies . In this review , we are interested in the role that membrane proteins play in sculpting membrane shape as well as how local membrane properties in ﬂ uence protein function . The distinct shapes of many intracellular membrane structures are often the result of speci ﬁ c membrane proteins as is the case for the spherical vesicles that shuttle between the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) and Golgi that have a de ﬁ ned protein coat composed of COPI or COPII complexes [ 1 ] , the convoluted folds of the inner mitochondrial membrane whose cristea are created by rows of transmembrane F - ATPase dimers [ 2 ] , and ER tubular networks created by the homotypic fusion of embedded proteins on opposing membranes [ 3 ] . Additionally , membranes can adoptexotic con ﬁ gurationssuchas thecubic phases , or ‘ plumber ' s nightmares ’ , and the equilibrium between ﬂ at L α phase and other membrane phases can be biased by the presence of membrane proteins [ 4 , 5 ] , which forms the basis of membrane protein crystalliza - tion from thelipidic cubic phase ( LCP ) [ 4 , 6 ] . Meanwhile , themechanical properties of the membrane can affect the biophysical properties of the protein . For instance , the thickness of the membrane drives dimeriza - tionofgramicidinchannels , antibioticsthatkillbacteriathroughthedis - sipation of ion concentration gradients [ 7 ] , in - plane tension and the hydrophobic thickness of the membrane bias the opening and closing of mechanosensitive channels in response to touch and osmotic stress [ 8 , 9 ] , and tension can induce redistribution of Slm1 proteins that subse - quently lead to downstream signalling [ 10 ] . Additionally , the shape or curvature of the membrane is thought to in ﬂ uence the probability of alamethicin conductance states [ 11 ] and to allosterically regulate the ion channel function of α - hemolysin [ 12 ] , while also in ﬂ uencing the mobility of proteins in the membrane [ 13 ] . There are several mechanisms by which membrane proteins are thoughtto in ﬂ uence theshape of membranes , and here we presentsev - eral top candidates loosely following the work of Kozlov and coworkers [ 14 , 15 ] . We have grouped the shaping mechanisms into two main categories : • First , proteins can induce membrane deformations by forming a coat around the membrane in which hydrophilic protein domains insert into the bilayer while adjacent soluble domains impart forces on the membrane surface . Two examples are the scaffolding mechanism and protein crowding effect . The scaffolding machinery involves the creation of a rigid protein coat composed of a protein template , such Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1858 ( 2016 ) 1619 – 1634 ☆ This article is part of a Special Issue entitled : Membrane Proteins edited by J . C . Gumbartand Sergei Noskov . ⁎ Corresponding author . E - mail address : michael . grabe @ ucsf . edu ( M . Grabe ) . 1 Authors contributed equally . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbamem . 2016 . 02 . 003 0005 - 2736 / © 2016 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Biochimica et Biophysica Acta journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / bbamem as clathrin in the case of endocytosis , that molds the membrane un - derneath ( Fig . 1A ) . COPI and COPII complexes , discussed above , fall into this category since the array of proteins cover the membrane causing bending and curvature to produce a ﬁ nal shape . Additionally , the protein crowding effect gives rise to membrane bending through protein – protein forces resulting from membrane bound proteins [ 16 , 17 ] . As the density of bound proteins increases , the rate of ther - mally drivenprotein – protein collisionsof the soluble domainsalso in - creases causing lateral steric pressure parallel to the membrane surface that can drive bending ( Fig . 1B ) . • Second , membrane shaping can occur through changes induced by the insertion of hydrophobic protein domains into the lipid bilayer . Within this category two non - mutually exclusive mechanisms have been proposed : local spontaneous curvature and the bilayer - couple mechanism [ 14 , 18 ] . In the local spontaneous curvature mechanism , the embedded protein interacts with the surrounding lipid molecules to alter the membrane ' s local properties such as the propensity to curve , which is known as the spontaneous curvature ( Fig . 1C ) . For in - stance , a shallow inserting amphipathic helix ( circle ) or conically shaped transmembrane protein ( wedge ) may differentially distort the packing of the lipid head - groups compared to the hydrocarbon chains resulting in a local change of the spontaneous curvature . How - ever , besides spontaneous curvature changes , the locally induced packing distortions by inserted proteins can potentially change the value of other bilayer parameters such as the Gaussian / mean bending moduli , or compression modulus . In this manner , a few proteins in a region may make the local membrane more accommodating toward tubulating or budding into a vesicle . Proteins that contain BAR ( Bin - Amphiphysin - Rvs ) domains , which are banana - shaped proteins that have their own intrinsic curvature [ 19 , 20 ] , deformmembranes poten - tially through a local spontaneous curvature mechanism ; however , scaffolding may also be important [ 21 – 23 ] . Finally , the bilayer - couple mechanism involves an area expansion of one lea ﬂ et of the membrane with respect to the other ( Fig . 1D ) . This can occur if a large number of proteins partially insert into one lea ﬂ et causing a dif - ferential area expansion . The area mismatch will cause in - plane compression on the protein side and tension in the opposing lea ﬂ et , and the relief of this strain can cause large scale bending into cylindri - cal , spherical and curved surfaces . Because the strain is spread over the entire surface , this mechanism works as a global phenomenon rather than a local one . Different shaping mechanisms may be involved in the formation of speci ﬁ c geometries as recently suggested for endophilin A1 [ 23 ] , where vesiculation and tubulation were found to be a function of the protein depth of insertion . But given the membrane shaping mecha - nisms are not mutually exclusive , it is possible that these mechanism work in concert to generate various types of membrane curvature . Membrane proteins adopt different conformations , and forces from the lipids can bias these conformations . Thus , just as membrane pro - teins can in ﬂ uence the shape of the surrounding membrane , the local structure of the membrane can act back on the protein . There are several ways that this can occur , such as hydrophobic mismatch . In - plane tension canthin membranes causingadecrease in thehydro - phobic thickness , which causes tilting of hydrophobic stretches of transmembrane proteins so that the greasy portions of the protein re - main buried in the membrane core . Mechanosensitive channels , such as MscS and MscL , are thought to gate in this manner , whereby mem - brane thinning causes helix tilting and outward radial expansion that opens a water ﬁ lled pathway through the center of the channel [ 8 ] . A second view of this gating mechanism is that the in - plane tension acts to expand the area of the channel through line tension at the membrane - protein interface . Single channel studies have also demon - strated that the membrane curvature can in ﬂ uence the conduction state of ion channels , as is the case for hemolysins that lyse red blood cells [ 12 ] . It is unclear how the physical forces and torques from the membrane are imparted to the protein in this later case , but it is likely to occur through a mechanism similar to the previous example in which the local ordering of the lipids causes a recon ﬁ gura - tion in the protein to minimize hydrophobic and electrostatic energy . In addition to in ﬂ uencing protein function , membranes may guide the localization , diffusionalproperties , andprotein – protein interactionsof membrane and membrane associated proteins . Fig . 1 . Howcanproteinsbendmembranes ? A . Scaffoldmechanism . Arigidarrayofproteins ( blue ) assembleoverthemuchmorecompliantmembranedeformingtheentiresystemintoa new shape . B . Protein crowding mechanism . Thermally driven protein – protein collisions of bound proteins to the membrane surface can create signi ﬁ cant lateral pressure and drive bending . C . Spontaneous curvature mechanism . The proteins act locally to distort the surrounding lipid molecules and alter their elastic properties , such as the local spontaneous curvature . These local changes can give rise to new stable morphological structures such as tubules or vesicle budding events . Orange lipids inside the dashed boxes represent the region over which the protein insertion induces local distortions . D . Bilayer - couple mechanism . The asymmetric insertion of many proteins on one side of the membrane generates an area mismatch between the upper and lower lea ﬂ ets resulting in stress that spreads globally over the entire surface . The generation of curvature relieves the in - plane components of the stress inboth lea ﬂ ets . 1620 D . Argudo et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1858 ( 2016 ) 1619 – 1634 While there is emerging evidence that the interaction of the mem - brane with resident membrane proteins is important to many biolog - ical phenomena , it is dif ﬁ cult to elucidate these interactions both experimentally and computationally . From an experimental perspec - tive , this is a dif ﬁ cult problem because the length scales are small and the lipid environment is dynamic making it dif ﬁ cult to probe via standard high resolution techniques such as X - ray crystallography , NMR and cryo - electron - microscopy . From a computational stand point , the study of protein interactions with the membrane presents its own challenges . Fully atomistic molecular dynamics ( MD ) simula - tions can elucidate with very high spatial and temporal resolution the interactions that the membrane has with the membrane protein . One particularly illuminating example is the studies of N - BAR proteins interacting with a membrane in which it is shown that the membrane can adopt a curvature similar to the intrinsic curvature of the BAR do - main [ 24 , 25 ] . However , typical simulations last for hundreds of nano - seconds to microseconds , and even long multi - microsecond simulationshavehighlightedthedif ﬁ cultyincapturingthelocalrelax - ation of the membrane to penetration by small amphipathic helices [ 26 ] . The other dif ﬁ culty is the size of relevant systems . Even small highly curved vesicles contain thousands of lipids and millions of atoms [ 27 ] . Propagatingtheselargesystemsforwardintimeiscompu - tationally taxing resulting in even shorter simulation timescales . Coarse - grained MD simulations are becoming more popular , and they makeit possible to simulate larger systemsby reducing thenum - ber of atoms at the expense of some loss of chemical detail [ 28 – 32 ] . However , many of the same problems inherent to fully atomistic MD are still present in CG simulations . That is , timescales are often too short to observe major reorganization events that involve long wave - length , low energy conformational changes in the membrane [ 33 , 34 ] . An alternative to atomistic simulations is the use of continuum methods to model the membrane and the surrounding aqueous envi - ronment . Instead of explicitly representing every atom in the system , or groups of atoms , the biophysical properties and shape of the mem - brane are represented mathematically . Such a description dramatical - ly reduces the computational load allowing for the determination of equilibrium con ﬁ gurations over very long length scales . However , chemical accuracy is lost and the mathematical equation can be very dif ﬁ cult to solve . There is a long history of describing the shapes and equilibrium ﬂ uctuations of membrane systems using elasticity theory starting with the work of Helfrich [ 35 ] and Canham [ 36 ] in the early 1970s . The propensity to bend and adopt different shapes is dictated by the material properties ( elastic moduli ) of the membrane , which must be determined from experiment or atomistic simulation . How - ever , once these values are known , a set of partial differential equa - tions ( PDEs ) can be derived that satisfy the minimum energy con ﬁ gurations of the membrane , and their shapes can be computed . Several theoretical approaches have been developed to incorporate the in ﬂ uence of membrane proteins into this framework . Initial stud - ies focused on the membrane deformation energies of single particles embedded in membranes with ﬁ nite thickness , known as mattress models [ 37 – 39 ] . Later in the 1990s , researchers became interested in the interplay between embedded particles and whether membrane - mediated interactions could give rise to attraction or repulsion [ 40 – 42 ] . A common theme among all of these early studies is that the protein is represented as a simple point particle or rigid cylinder , and its in ﬂ uence on the surrounding membrane is included through a boundary condition imposing height , angle , and / or curvature con - straints at the membrane where it meets the protein . Unfortunately , these models lack all of the complex geometric and chemical features present in real proteins . Later , the Honig lab began to explore the en - ergetics of alpha helices associating with model lipid bilayers using an energy model with terms for continuum electrostatics [ 43 ] , hydro - phobic interactions , lipid perturbation effects , and other terms follow - ing the workof Jacobs andWhite [ 44 ] . While membranedeformations were not explicitly considered , the protein was treated with atomic detail . This allowed for a description of the system with increased chemical accuracy for the protein , while still using fast continuum cal - culations to account for electrostatic and other energetic terms . Inthisreview , wewillfocusonrecentadvancesthathavemergedcon - tinuummodelsofthemembranewithatomisticrepresentationsofthe embedded proteins . In Section 2 , we will brie ﬂ y outline the mathe - matical and geometrical tools required to model thin sheets . Next , in Section 3 we will present the Helfrich Hamiltonian and other com - monly used continuum models to describe the energetic state of pure membranes . We then survey in Section 4 ways in which the pro - tein is coupled to the membrane , and we outline the evolution of pro - tein representations from simple point particles to realistic high resolution structures . In Section 5 , we highlight the recent advances from several groups that have made progress in bridging continuum membrane mechanics with atomistic representations of the protein , whileSection6provides adetailedviewofthehybridmodel andasso - ciated machinery developed in our lab to carry out these calculations . In Section 7 , we present an application of our hybrid atomistic - continuum model showing that the predicted membrane deforma - tionsareingoodagreementwithfully - atomisticMDsimulationsmak - ing it possible to explore thebiologicalfunction of membraneproteins and suggest testable hypotheses . Concluding remarks concerning fu - ture directions and challenges are discussed in Section 8 . 2 . Membrane geometry Lipid bilayers are fascinating soft - matter systems which self - assemble from single molecules into very thin ﬂ uid ﬁ lms that can ex - tend over macroscopic lateral scales . Therefore , the natural limit when the lateral dimensions greatly exceed the thickness is to describe the membrane as a two dimensional curved surface ( single sheet ) embed - dedinathreedimensionalspace . Westart by reviewingsomeoftheim - portant geometric elements and de ﬁ nitions required to describe membranes in a continuum fashion including differences between a two - sheet model that describes the upper and lower lea ﬂ ets indepen - dently versus a one - sheet model that represents the bilayer by a single surface . For a more complete description of the differential geometry tools necessary to model soft materials and membranes , we refer the readers to work by Kamien [ 45 ] and Deserno [ 46 ] ; here , we simplify the discussion to the most essential elements needed to describe mem - brane deformations in the small angle de ﬂ ection limit . The two - lea ﬂ et model is composed of two very thin surfaces ( monolayers ) that are stacked upon each other at an equilibrium dis - tance L 0 = 2 h 0 ( Fig . 2 ) . From here on , we denote variables associated with the upper and lower lea ﬂ ets by + and - superscripts , respectively , unless otherwise noted . We use a Monge Gauge parametrization of the surfaces , such that each lea ﬂ et shape is described by a height function Fig . 2 . Mathematical representation of the membrane . A . A cartoon model representing the upper and lower lea ﬂ ets and the corresponding lipid molecules . N ! is the normal vector of the bilayer midplane ( dashed line ) , n ! is the head - to - tail vector of the lipids , and t ! isthedifferenceofthesetwovectors . B . Theupperandlowersurfacesrepresenting the head - group interfaces with the water from panel A ( solid lines ) and the bilayer midplane ( dashedline ) . Thelipidshavebeenremovedinthispurelymathematicalrepre - sentation , but the vectorial descriptions N ! (cid:2) and n ! (cid:2) remain . 1621 D . Argudo et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1858 ( 2016 ) 1619 – 1634 ( h ± ( x , y ) ) [ 47 ] . Working within the linearized , small de ﬂ ections limit , the normal vector to each surface N ! (cid:2) is [ 45 ] : N ! þ ¼ ∂ h þ ∂ x ; ∂ h þ ∂ y ; (cid:3) 1 (cid:1) (cid:3) ¼ ∇ ! h þ ; (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) (cid:5) ; N ! (cid:3) ¼ (cid:3) ∂ h (cid:3) ∂ x ; ∂ h (cid:3) ∂ y ; (cid:3) 1 (cid:1) (cid:3) ¼ (cid:3) ∇ ! h (cid:3) ; (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) (cid:5) ; ð 1 Þ where the geometries are depicted in Fig . 2 . The thickness variables ( u ± ( x 1 , x 2 ) ) represent compression or expansion perpendicular to the plane of the membrane relative to the undeformed height ± h 0 : u (cid:2) x 1 ; x 2 ð Þ ¼ h (cid:2) x 1 ; x 2 ð Þ ∓ h 0 : ð 2 Þ It is alsoimportanttodistinguishthe true monolayer surfaceinthree dimensional space ( Γ ± ) from the two dimensional projection of the sur - face used in calculations ( Ω ± ) [ 48 ] : d Γ (cid:2) ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 þ ∇ u (cid:2) ð Þ 2 q(cid:7) (cid:8) d Ω (cid:2) ≈ 1 þ ∇ u (cid:2) ð Þ 2 2 " # d Ω (cid:2) ; ð 3 Þ where the d Ω ± is the differential dx dy in the projected plane . Often the bilayer geometry and energetics are represented by the dilation ( d ) and bilayer midplane ( h ) as shown in Fig . 2 : d ¼ u þ (cid:3) u (cid:3) 2 ; h ¼ h þ þ h (cid:3) 2 : ð 4 Þ For those cases where the in - plane compression is ignored , the bi - layer can be represented by a single midplane surface ( h ) and the nor - mal vector and projected surface area are de ﬁ ned analogously to Eqs . ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) . 3 . Continuum elastic energy models of the membrane Manytheoreticalmodelshavebeendevelopedstartingfromdifferent view points [ 35 , 36 , 48 – 51 ] , and they all reach similar a conclusion — the crucial soft - mode is the membrane curvature deformation [ 46 ] . The sep - aration of length scales between the thickness and lateral dimension of lipid membranes makes it possible to construct a large - scale membrane Hamiltonian that primarily depends on the curvature of the surface , and then additional energetic terms concerning local lipid physics enter through a small set of parameters that couple to the curvature [ 46 ] . The seminal work in this ﬁ eld comes from Canham [ 36 ] and Helfrich [ 35 ] wheretheyderivedaHamiltonian , whichis onlyafunctionofmem - brane geometry ( Fig . 2 ) : E Helfrich (cid:3) Canham ¼ ∫ Γ σ þ K c 2 2 H (cid:3) J 0 ð Þ 2 þ K G K (cid:9) (cid:10) d Γ ; ð 5 Þ where σ penalizes the creation of new surface area Γ , 2 H is the mean curvature , K is the Gaussian curvature , J 0 is the preferred curvature of the membrane in the absence of external forces and torques , and K C and K G are the bilayer bending modulus and Gaussian modulus , respec - tively . The integral of σ corresponds to the total surface tension energy ( E S ) , while the second term is the mean curvature bending energy ( E B ) , and the last term is the Gaussian curvature energy ( E G ) . The mean and Gaussian curvatures are de ﬁ ned in the small angle limit as : 2 H ¼ ∇ ! (cid:4) N ! ≈∇ 2 h ; K ≈∂ 2 h ∂ x 2 (cid:4) ∂ 2 h ∂ y 2 (cid:3) ∂ 2 h ∂ y ∂ x ! 2 ; ð 6 Þ and they correspond to shapes shown in Fig . 3 . For the chosen normal vector N ! in Fig . 2 , positive curvature H N 0 corresponds to a concave up bilayer . Similarly , for the two - lea ﬂ et model , positive curvature at the upper lea ﬂ et is a concave up shape , while positive curvature at the lower lea ﬂ et is concave down . Rewriting Eq . ( 5 ) in the small angle de ﬂ ection limit we arrive at : E Helfrich (cid:3) Canham ¼ ∫ Ω σ þ α ∇ h ð Þ 2 2 þ K c 2 ∇ 2 h (cid:3) J 0 (cid:4) (cid:5) 2 þ K G K ! dx dy ; ð 7 Þ where the effective surface tension contribution is given by 2 α = 2 σ + K c J 02 . Since σ isconstant , itdoesnotcontributetotheequilibriumso - lution , and it is commonly dropped ( see Ref . [ 52 ] for instance ) . However , the physical interpretation of α ( σ ) is complicated , and it has generated signi ﬁ cantcontroversy [ 46 ] . Foramoreindepthdescriptionofmembrane surface tension , we refer the reader to the work of Schmid [ 53 ] , Diamant [ 54 ] and Watson et al . [ 52 ] . Here we interpret σ as the conjugate variable thatopposestheadditionofnewarea Γ , inwhichcase σ playstheroleofa chemical potential with the area per lipid constant . The Gauss – Bonnet theorem shows that the total Gaussian bending energyintegrated over a closedsurface , suchasavesicle withnodefects or inclusions , is a constant [ 55 ] . Thus , the Gaussian term is often neglected . However , vesicles undergoing shape transitions with co - existing ﬂ uid phases [ 56 ] or vesicles with open patches that contain embedded protein inclusions , as we consider here , require more care [ 57 , 58 ] . For this reason , we retain the Gaussian term . Next , we consider two extensions to the basic Helfrich model that we believe are impor - tant when considering interactions with membrane proteins : compres - sion of the membrane and orientation of the lipid . 3 . 1 . Compression of the membrane Going beyond the Helfrich Hamiltonian framework , which depends solely on curvature variations , additional microscopic details can be added , andalogical ﬁ rststepistoincludethe ﬁ nitethicknessofthemem - brane [ 48 ] . Assuming incompressibility of individual lipids , changes in thickness can be related to the change in area ( Δ A ) per lipid molecule [ 47 , 48 ] allowing for a description of the membrane in terms of curvature Fig . 3 . Examplesofcurvedsurfaces . A . cylinder , B . sphericalcap , and C . saddle . Thegeometryofeachsurfacecanbe de ﬁ nedasafunctionofthetwoprincipalradiiofcurvature R 1 and R 2 . When R 1 and R 2 change in a bilayer there is a curvature energetic penalty in the Helfrich Hamiltonian ( Eq . ( 5 ) ) . The mean curvature is equal to half the sum of the principal curvatures ( inverse of the radius of curvature ) H ¼ 12 ð 1 R 1 þ 1 R 2 Þ and the Gaussian Curvature is the product K ¼ 1 R 1 (cid:4) 1 R 2 . 1622 D . Argudo et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1858 ( 2016 ) 1619 – 1634 and area changes . In contrast to idealized single sheet descriptions where the midplane is used to describe the membrane , when a single surface alsoaccountsforthicknessvariations , thechoiceofsurfacerepresentation becomes important [ 48 ] . To better illustrate how this choice in ﬂ uences the mathematics , consider the downward bending of a thin ﬁ lm : stretching occurs at the upper surface and compression at the lower sur - face . Thus , a representation of the membrane at the upper surface will re - sult in a different description than a representation at the lower surface . We are free to choose any surface , but it is often useful to construct the socalled neutralplane [ 48 ] . Duetothegeometryatamathematicalsurface and how the geometry relates to the local curvature and thickness values , the energy description may involve cross terms between these two values , and the neutral plane is constructed to explicitly remove these cross terms . Therefore , in the small de ﬂ ection limit , the Helfrich Hamilto - nian ( Eq . ( 7 ) ) is modi ﬁ ed by the addition of a single quadratic energy term related to area changes [ 59 ] : E compression ¼ K a 2 ∫ Γ A (cid:3) A 0 A 0 (cid:9) (cid:10) 2 d Γ ≈ K a 2 ∫ Ω u 2 h 20 ! dx dy ; ð 8 Þ where we have assumed V = Ah = A 0 h 0 , u = h - h 0 , and K a is the bilayer compression modulus [ 46 , 60 ] . 3 . 2 . Lipid tilt The discussion up to this point has assumed that the lipids are oriented along the bilayer normal vector ( N ! ) ; however , this is generally not the case . Experiments on DPPC bilayers in the gel - phase revealed that lipids tilt at an angle of approximately π / 6 with respect to the surface normal [ 61 ] . At low temperatures , lipids exhibit internal struc - tures with long range ordering , which are independent of local curvature andcanonlybedescribedthroughtheinclusionofanadditionaldegreeof freedom corresponding to the local orientation of the lipids [ 50 , 62 , 63 ] . A tilt degree of freedom has also been used in the literature to discuss a numberofdifferentphenomenaincludingorientationallipidorderinves - icles [ 63 ] , inverted amphiphilic mesophases [ 64 ] , and membrane fusion events [ 65 ] . Even for membranes in the liquid state at room temperature , order can be imposed on the tilt of the hydrocarbonchain due to geomet - rical constraints and imposed boundary conditions at the contact sites with rigid proteins [ 50 , 66 ] , and it has been suggested that tilt should be included in continuum models based on results from simulation [ 67 , 68 ] . Recently , the ﬁ rst experimental support for lipid tilt in the ﬂ uid lamellar phase was provided based on X - ray scattering [ 69 ] . While originally introduced by Helfrich [ 35 ] , a rigorous theoretical framework for studying lipid tilt in liquid state membranes was put for - ward by Hamm and Kozlov [ 50 ] in which they assumed that the core of a monolayer could be treated with standard elastic continuum theory ( as in Refs . [ 47 , 70 ] ) . The key element is the de ﬁ nition of a variable t ! , which characterizes the difference between the direction of the mono - layer surface normals N ! and the average local head - to - tail vector of the lipids n ! ( Fig . 2 ) . For small deformations , we have [ 50 , 64 ] : n ! ≈ N ! þ t ! ; ∇ ! (cid:4) n ! ¼ ∇ 2 h þ ∇ ! (cid:4) t ! : ð 9 Þ Incorporation of tilt into the Helfrich model requires some care . First , the gradient of the tilt and surface bending curvature are additive , and both terms are penalized by the same macroscopic elastic moduli , which can be determined from experiment and / or simulation . Thus , in a model with tilt , the curvature ( ∇ 2 h ) in Eq . ( 7 ) is replaced by ∇ ! (cid:4) n ! yield - ing an analogous term to the mean - curvature deformation cost often re - ferred to in the lipid tilt literature as the lipid splay penalty [ 50 , 71 ] : E tilt (cid:3) splay ¼ K c 2 ∫ Ω ∇ 2 h þ ∇ (cid:4) t ! (cid:4) (cid:5) 2 dx dy : ð 10 Þ Second , there is an energy contribution due to the twist of the lipid molecules [ 50 ] : E tilt (cid:3) twist ¼ K tw 2 ∫ Ω ∇ ! (cid:5) n ! (cid:4) (cid:5) 2 dx dy ≈ K tw 2 ∫ Ω ∇ ! (cid:5) t ! (cid:4) (cid:5) 2 dx dy ; ð 11 Þ where × is the cross product ð ∇ ! (cid:5) n ! ¼ ϵ ijk n jk Þ , K tw is the lipid twist modulus , and the last equality comes from applying the small deforma - tion relation ( Eq . ( 9 ) ) together with the fact that the curl of the diver - gence is zero ( ∇ ! (cid:5) ∇ ! h ¼ 0 ) . The lipid twist energy arises from the same physical origin as described above for Eq . ( 10 ) — spatial changes in the direction of the vector n ! [ 72 ] ; however , ð ∇ (cid:4) n ! Þ 2 does not always properly penalize all possible distortions , such as divergence free pat - terns . This is most easily understood by considering a ﬂ at bilayer with a divergence free director ﬁ eld n ! , which adopts vortices as depicted in Fig . 4A . The difference between twist penalty ( Eq . ( 11 ) ) and splay penalty ( Eq . ( 10 ) ) becomes evident when comparing Fig . 4A with Fig . 4B . In Fig . 4A there is no splay since the divergence of n ! is zero , but the curl term properly penalizes the directional spiraling change of thelipid tails . On the other handFig . 4B shows pure splayof thelipids away from the center , which is penalized by the divergence . Third , the use of n ! instead of N ! to penalize changes in orientation yields an analogous term to the Gaussian curvature penalty appearing in Eq . ( 7 ) [ 45 , 73 ] : E saddle (cid:3) splay ¼ ∫ Ω K G K ð Þ dx dy ; ð 12 Þ where K ¼ ∇ ! (cid:4) ½ð ∇ ! n ! Þ n ! (cid:3) ð ∇ ! (cid:4) n ! Þ n ! (cid:6) : Although having the same functional form as the Gaussian curvature term in Helfrich ' s theory , the lipid tilt literature refers to the term above as the lipid saddle - splay penalty [ 50 , 71 ] . Finally , when the tilt vector does not align with the monolayer sur - face normal , thelipids becomestretched , whichis penalized by aninde - pendent tilt elastic modulus K t [ 50 ] : E tilt (cid:3) stretch ¼ K t 2 ∫ Ω t ! (cid:4) t ! (cid:4) (cid:5) dx dy : ð 13 Þ The physical origin of the tilt - stretching penalty can be understood by considering a single hydrocarbon chain , which adopts a resting cross sectional area A 0 . The lipid volume can be approximated by the area times the equilibrium height h 0 : V = h 0 A 0 . Assuming incompressibility , if external forces cause the lipid vector t ! to deviate from the surface normal N ! with no change in the vertical height of the monolayer , then the lipid chain must stretch [ 50 ] as shown in Fig . 4C . The full lipid tilt energy is then : E lipid ¼ E tilt (cid:3) splay þ E saddle (cid:3) splay þ E tilt (cid:3) twist þ E tilt (cid:3) stretch ; ð 14 Þ where E tilt - twist is often assumed to be small , and E saddle - splay is also often ignored since it is a Gaussian term . 3 . 3 . Other approaches to membrane energetics We end this section with a brief survey of additional techniques that havebeendevelopedtostudymembranedeformations . Oneofthemost in ﬂ uential models has come from a liquid crystal description of the elastic energy of orientable molecules by Frank [ 72 ] , and this methodol - ogy has been applied to the study of membranes and other soft mate - rials [ 45 , 55 , 73 ] . Another approach popularized by May and Ben - Shaul [ 49 , 71 ] , has been to build upalipid bilayer total free energy F bystarting from the average free energy per molecule f = F / N , where N is the total number of lipid molecules . The basic premise is that f can be expressed as the sum of three terms ( f = f h + f i + f c ) : where f h is repulsive and arises from electrostatic and / or steric interactions between polar 1623 D . Argudo et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1858 ( 2016 ) 1619 – 1634 heads [ 74 ] ; f i isattractiveand re ﬂ ects thesurfaceenergyassociatedwith thehydrocarbon - waterinterface [ 74 ] ; and f c isthechainconformational energy accounting for lipid - lipid interactions . Yet another more recent developmentistousedimensionalreductiontoobtainmembraneener - getics [ 75 ] . The membrane is treated as a ﬂ uid surface of ﬁ nite thickness with internal structure yielding an effective energy that depends on area changes and misalignment between the surface normal and lipid orientation . The equations naturally recover a large - scale Hamiltonian that depends on curvature with the addition of new terms that account for local - microscopic physics . Finally , while we have focused on single - lipid or single - component membranes , there are a number of continu - um studies addressing multicomponent , ﬂ uid membranes that have varying lipid composition and inhomogeneous spontaneous curvature [ 76 – 78 ] . 3 . 4 . High order bending terms The Helfrich Hamiltonian in Eq . ( 5 ) is a phenomenological expan - sion up to quadratic order in the curvature , and common concerns are whetherhigherordertermsareneededtofaithfullydescribemembrane mechanics and when does this description break down . There are bio - logical situations in which it has been argued that higher order terms are required . For instance , elasticity equations with higher order terms produce stable tubular solutions [ 79 ] , and they have been used to study the periodic , egg carton shaped membranes observed in L - form bacteria , which lack a cell wall [ 80 ] . Moreover , high order equations have proven useful in the analysis of inverted cubic phases [ 81 ] . On the other hand , experiments of membrane tether formation suggest that Eq . ( 5 ) is suf ﬁ cient and that higher order terms are not needed to accurately describe the high curvature regime [ 82 – 84 ] . Similarly , coarse - grained simulations also support the validity of the Helfrich framework for large de ﬂ ections , with only minor errors [ 85 – 88 ] . In support of these later two observations , it has been argued that the higher order quartic curvature terms will only compete with the qua - dratic term when the radius of curvature is of the order of a lipid tail , which is half the bilayer thickness [ 46 ] . This theoretical argument is consistent with a study from the Cui lab showing that deviations be - tween coarse - grained and continuum models of fusion pore formation only become notable when the radius of curvature is close to the mono - layer thickness [ 88 ] . Another concern is whether a particular situation may fail because geometries exceed the small angle de ﬂ ection limit in Eq . ( 7 ) . Next , we will explore how the membrane deformations discussed in this section relate to embedded or associated membrane proteins . 4 . Coupling between the membrane and embedded proteins Membrane proteins are surrounded by a shell of lipid molecules often referred to as a lipid annulus . As the bilayer deforms , the lipids in this annulus will impart forces to the protein potentially in ﬂ uencing its conformation and function . Likewise , the chemistry and geometry of the protein will act back on the membrane causing it to deform . How does onemerge thecontinuumelastic treatmentof the membrane already discussed with the presence of a protein inclusion ? Generally , researchers have treated the proteins as hard constraints on the local membrane geometry , and formally , theproteinsenter asboundary con - ditions imposed on the partial differential equations describing the sur - face . These constraints are based on the assumption that proteins are much more rigid than the membrane so that it is more energetically fa - vorable for the membrane to adjust to the protein than vice versa . How - ever , severalresearch groups have consideredthe gatingor transition of proteins from one conformation to another and explored the role that the membrane plays in biasing those discrete protein conformations [ 89 – 92 ] . The protein is thoughtto in ﬂ uence theneighboringlipid mem - brane through its geometry and its surface chemistry . First , membrane proteins are characterized by a belt of hydrophobic amino acids that in - sertintothehydrophobiccoreofthemembrane ( Fig . 5 ) . Ifthelipidspull away from this protein – membrane interface , then water becomes ex - posed to the region at a very high energetic penalty due to the hydro - phobic effect . Meanwhile , there are typically a ring of residues on the membrane protein surface , such as tryptophans , at both the upper and the lower head - group regions that favor the amphipathic interfacial re - gion . This ring provides favorable electrostatic contacts with the polar and charged moieties on the lipid molecules . These considerations im - posegeometric constraints on the adjacentmembrane through a mech - anism termed hydrophobic mismatch [ 93 ] . The tight hydrophobic seal between the protein and membrane then imposes geometric con - straints on the membrane due to the speci ﬁ c chemistry and shape of the protein . For instance , wedge shaped proteins , such as the KcsA potassium channel ( Fig . 5 ) , can only smoothly mesh with lipids if the membrane approaches the interface at a prescribed angle called the contact angle . This later consideration can also impose tilt con - straints on the adjacent lipids . As we will discuss , the contact angle and hydrophobic mismatch enter the equations through the boundary conditions , and they couple to the curvature , compression , and lipid tilt ultimately in ﬂ uencing the membrane deformation energy . Because theseprotein - induced membranedeformationscan extendfor longdis - tances [ 40 ] , a signi ﬁ cant amount of research has been dedicated to the role of membrane mediated interactions between embedded proteins , which we will review . In what follows , we constrain our survey to Fig . 4 . Lipidtiltdegreesoffreedom . A . Apatchofmembraneexhibitingpuretwist . Inallpanels , thetopimageisasideviewoftheupperlea ﬂ et , andthebottompanelisatopdownviewofa patchoflipids . Vectorsdemonstrate thehead - to - tailorientation of individual lipids . B . Apatchof membraneexhibiting puresplay . C . A patchofmembrane exhibitingpuretilt . The lipid density was intentionally decreased for clarity . 1624 D . Argudo et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1858 ( 2016 ) 1619 – 1634 approaches that retain a geometrical description of the protein shape , but we acknowledge that a number of studies treat the proteins as a mean density ﬁ eld that couples to the membrane curvature [ 76 , 94 – 97 ] . 4 . 1 . Coupling through hydrophobic mismatch One of the most important sources of coupling between the protein and the membrane comes from hydrophobic mismatch [ 93 ] . This phe - nomenon arises when the length of the protein ' s hydrophobic trans - membrane domain ( d p ) is different from the hydrophobic thickness of the bilayer ( d 0 ) . Whenever d p ≠ d 0 the protein and bilayer will adapt to each other either by local changes in lipid bilayer thickness and / or changes in the orientation or tilt of the protein in the membrane [ 93 ] . If the mismatch is positive ( d 0 b d p ) , there is an energetic penalty for ex - posing hydrophobic residues to water , which will cause the membrane thickness to increase through stretching . On the other hand if the mis - match is negative ( d 0 N d p ) , then the bilayer will compress ( pinch down ) to prevent exposure of hydrophilic residues to the hydrophobic core . Early experiments investigated the aggregation propensity of bac - teriorhodopsininphophatidylcholine ( PC ) bilayersofvaryingthickness , whichinduced different degreesof hydrophobicmismatch [ 98 ] . Theau - thors determined that the protein remains mono - dispersed in bilayers with thickness values close to the protein ' s value , but that aggregation occurs at extreme positive and negative mismatch values . Theantibioticionchannelformingpeptide , gramicidinA ( gA ) , hasalso been a model system used to study the role of hydrophobic mismatch in controlling protein function [ 99 ] . Gramicidin is a short peptide that forms functional ion channels when two monomers ( one from each lea ﬂ et ) come together to create a dimer . Each monomer alone cannot span the width of the membrane , and hence , dimer formationand channel activity are tightly coupled to the hydrophobic thickness of the host membrane throughahydrophobicmismatchmechanism . Thechangesintheaverage channel lifetimes are related to the bilayer energetics [ 99 , 100 ] giving rise to a direct experimental readout of the underlying microscopic interac - tions between the membrane and the protein . Moreover , Harroun et al . [ 101 ] used small angle X - ray scattering to provide experimental evidence for the theorized membrane thinning adjacent to channels . 4 . 1 . 1 . Proteins in ﬂ uence bilayer thickness The ﬁ rst two theoretical models that addressed hydrophobic mismatch were carried out using simpli ﬁ ed protein geometries and accounted for only two modes of deformation : interfacial tension ( change in total surface area ) and change in bilayer thickness [ 102 , 103 ] . Marcelja ' s model employed microscopic statistical mechanics in which the protein was treated as a simple hexagonal shape that occu - pied a certain number of lipid chain sites [ 102 ] . Meanwhile , Owicki and McConnell used a phenomenological , Landau - type model , where the protein was assumed to be radially symmetric [ 103 ] . Both models assume that the membrane adopts a ﬁ xed width at the protein surface due to the hydrophobic mismatch constraint . The models predicted that the bilayer thickness relaxes exponentially from the value imposed at the site of contact with the protein to the bulk value . Additionally , both models predicted that the membrane - induced deformations cre - ate a short range , attractive force between proteins that decays mono - tonically with distance . A few years later , Mouritsen and Bloom took a slightly different approach and introduced the well known mattress model , where boththe protein andthe membrane ( mattress ) are repre - sented as one - dimensional springs [ 37 ] . 4 . 1 . 2 . Proteins in ﬂ uence membrane curvature Following initial work that focused on thickness changes [ 37 , 102 , 103 ] , Huang then adapted the free energy description used in smectic liquid crystal theory and introduced membrane curvature as a third mode of deformation , while retaining both compression and tension [ 38 ] . For analytic tractability , Huang also assumed a simple cylindrical protein and imposed constraints on the membrane thickness where it contacted the protein . This study was among the ﬁ rst to show that cur - vature in fact dominated the bilayer deformation energy , not compres - sion , and that the energy density was con ﬁ ned to the vicinity near the protein [ 38 ] . Thus , retaining thickness distortions and introducing cur - vature in the elastic membrane model yields a theoretical framework that describes both long range ( curvature mediated ) and short range ( compression ) deformations 2 . The resulting model is quite similar to the Helfrich model in Eq . ( 7 ) , but rather than expressing the membrane shape as a single sheet representing the bilayer , the compression is in - corporated by describing the upper and lower lea ﬂ ets by two indepen - dent surfaces with similar forms : G me ð Þ ¼ 1 2 Z Ω K c 2 ∇ 2 u þ − J þ 0 h i 2 þ ∇ 2 u − þ J − 0 h i 2 (cid:9) (cid:10) dx dy | ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ { zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ } Mean Curvature Bending þ 1 2 Z Ω α 2 ∇ ! u þ (cid:4) (cid:5) 2 þ ∇ ! u − (cid:4) (cid:5) 2 (cid:9) (cid:10) dx dy | ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ { zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ } Surface tension þ Z Ω K a 2 L 20 u þ − u − ð Þ 2 h i dx dy | ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ { zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ } Compression þ Z Ω K G 2 K − þ K þ (cid:12) (cid:13) dx dy ; | ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ { zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ } Gaussian Curvature ð 15 Þ where all symbols retain their meaning as in Eq . ( 5 ) , we have used the u ± de ﬁ nitions in Eq . ( 2 ) , and factors of 2 are present due to a monolayer versus bilayer description . Fig . 5 . Cartoonmodelsof membrane proteininteractions . A . The potassium channel KcsA adoptsaconicalshapeintheclosedstate ( left ) . Thehydrophilicresiduesareblueandthe hydrophobic residues are white , and the hydrophobic residues localize to a belt around the protein that creates the energetic ‘ seal ’ with the membrane . This seal would impose a negative contact angle on the membrane ( black lines ) potentially causing bending in the simpli ﬁ ed geometry on the right . B . The mechanosensitive channel MscL is cylindrical with a more well de ﬁ ned hydrophobic belt ( left ) . This shape would not impose a contact angle on the protein , but if the hydrophobic height of the protein differed from the equilibrium width of the membrane it may impose a hydrophobic mismatch that causes compression or expansion of the adjacent membrane ( right ) . 2 Insubsection4 . 2wewilldiscussmodelsthatspeci ﬁ callyfocusoncurvaturemediated large - scale deformations . 1625 D . Argudo et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1858 ( 2016 ) 1619 – 1634 The equilibrium shape of the membrane is then determined by tak - ing the functional derivative of Eq . ( 15 ) to arrive at : ∇ 4 u þ (cid:3) ∇ 2 J þ 0 (cid:3) γ ∇ 2 u þ þ β u þ (cid:3) u (cid:3) ð Þ ¼ 0 ; in Ω ð 16 Þ ∇ 4 u (cid:3) þ ∇ 2 J (cid:3) 0 (cid:3) γ ∇ 2 u (cid:3) þ β u (cid:3) (cid:3) u þ ð Þ ¼ 0 ; in Ω ð 17 Þ γ ¼ α K c ; β ¼ 2 K a L 20 K c ; β (cid:2) ¼ 2 K (cid:2) a L 20 K c ; u (cid:2) ¼ h (cid:2) ∓ L 0 2 (cid:9) (cid:10) ; L 0 ¼ 2 h 0 : ð 18 Þ The equations presented above are quite similar to the ones obtain - ed by minimizing the linearized version of the Helfrich – Canham Hamiltonian ( Eq . ( 7 ) ) , except the lateral compression of the membrane becomes an important degree of freedom necessitating the need for an - other independent variable . Additionally , membrane proteins exert their in ﬂ uence on the membrane surface through the boundary condi - tions , which can sometimes make the equations incredibly hard to solve , but does not change their form . The method discussed here for incorporating the in ﬂ uence of membrane proteins into continuum models of the membrane is not unique . Rather than incorporating membrane compression through the use of relative height differences between two monolayers , others have followed the work of Safran and described the membrane thickness changes by a dilatation variable as well as surface curvature [ 59 ] . Nonetheless , the in ﬂ uence of proteins on the membrane energetics and shape is also incorporated through boundary conditions motivated by ideas of hydrophobic mismatch and shape constraints [ 51 , 58 , 59 , 104 , 105 ] . 4 . 1 . 3 . Proteins in ﬂ uence lipid tilt As discussed in Section 3 , the membrane exhibits internal lipid ori - entation degrees of freedom that are independent of the curvatures and compression , and many studies have described how to couple membrane proteins to the lipid tilt [ 71 , 106 – 111 ] . Fournier proposed one of the earliest phenomenological models based on symmetry expansions of a Helfrich - type Hamiltonian in two structural variables for each monolayer : one for lipid orientation and one for shape [ 106 ] . The protein inclusion was treated as an idealized , radially symmetric , piecewise conical shape with two distinct angles pertaining to each monolayer . Theconicalshapeasymmetrycouldconsequentlyleadtoin - dependent deformations of the upper and lower lea ﬂ ets by imposing two different contact angles [ 106 ] . This model was found to always pro - duce repulsive forces betweeninclusions , butthelipid tilt relaxes mem - brane curvature more quickly at short distances reducing interprotein repulsion [ 106 ] . The hydrocarbon chains making up the core of the bilayer can rapid - ly change their conformations often resulting in tilt , which elastically stretches the molecules [ 50 , 106 ] . The large number of conformational states also indicates that lipids have a considerable amount of entropy . Near the membrane – protein interface , tail movement is restricted re - ducing the number of available conformations that can be adopted [ 107 , 108 ] . Thus , the entropic free energy ( E entropic ) of the lipids can be written as an explicit function of the distance from the protein . May constructed a simple 1D model for the entropic energy that depended on the lipid orientation n ! [ 107 ] . It was assumed that at each point in the membrane a spontaneous director ﬁ eld ( n ! 0 ) existed that de ﬁ ned the maximum entropy orientation of the lipids , and a model for n ! 0 wasdevelopedbasedontheassumptionthattheinclusionisanin ﬁ nite - ly hard wall . The value of n ! 0 re ﬂ ects the preferred lipid orientation in the presence of an inclusion ignoring other elastic terms ; and therefore , the value of n ! that maximizes the entropy need not be the value that minimizes the total bending and tilt energies . In the absence of a rigid inclusion , n ! 0 ¼ 0 vanishes , the average lipid orientation will align per - pendicular to the surface normal , and there is no loss of conformational entropy . In the small deviation limit , expanding the entropic energy to quadratic order [ 108 ] results in : E entropic ¼ 1 2 ∫ Ω K e x ; y ð Þ n ! (cid:3) n ! 0 (cid:4) (cid:5) 2 dx dy ; ð 19 Þ where symmetric deformations about the horizontal mid - plane are as - sumed and K e ( x , y ) is the space dependent tilt - entropic modulus . Note that the tilt modulus K t in Eq . ( 13 ) has a different physical origin from K e , and hence they are not the same . Both K e and n ! 0 have been estimat - ed with molecular - level mean ﬁ eld theories [ 107 , 108 , 112 ] and simpler continuum chain models [ 107 , 108 ] , where both methods produce sim - ilar results . Unlike other membrane parameters , they have spatial de - pendence since they vary with the distance from the inclusion having larger values at the protein interface . 4 . 1 . 4 . Additional energetic terms Several studies have included additional re ﬁ nements to the protein - coupled membrane models presented already such as the relaxation of the constant lipid volume constraint [ 58 ] , higher order coupling terms between changes in area per lipid molecule and curvature [ 51 ] , and ad - ditionaldegrees of freedomthat accountfor lipid protrusion intheshort wavelength regime [ 105 , 113 ] . Meanwhile , models for certain proteins such as mechanosensitive ion channels have added membrane tension as an external parameter that contributes to the total deformation free energy [ 89 , 91 , 114 – 117 ] , rather than the intrinsic surface tension term in Eqs . ( 7 ) and ( 15 ) . 4 . 2 . Protein shape impacts membrane deformations The interaction between the lipids and the protein surface imposes height and angle constraints on the membrane , but the shape of the membrane protein itself and the placement and chemistry of residues at the interface are also crucial . For instance , a cylindrical protein with a well de ﬁ ned hydrophobic belt of uniform height will produce a different pattern of distortion than an elliptical protein whose hydrophobic belt changes height along the outer edge . Most theoretical studies have con - sidered proteins as highly idealized shapes suchas point particles , twodi - mensional ﬂ at disks and ellipses , or conical shapes — all lacking chemical detail [ 40 , 41 , 118 ] . Asalreadydiscussed , theheightofthehydrophobicdo - main of the protein , or conversely the membrane width , in ﬂ uence the compression and curvature energies of proteins that exhibit hydrophobic mismatch , but most studies assume simple cylindrically symmetric inclu - sions [ 38 , 39 , 93 , 119 , 120 ] . Similarly , Goulian and co - workers considered circular , conically shaped inclusions that imposed a ﬁ xed contact angle on the membrane all along the membrane - protein contact curve [ 40 ] . Minimizing the membrane elastic energy using a ﬁ eld - theoretic ap - proach , the authors showed that proteins experience a membrane - mediated repulsion , and follow up corrections to these initial calculations also revealed purely repulsive interactions [ 121 ] . Adding membrane ﬂ uc - tuations to this framework , however , produces attractions between pro - teins [ 40 ] . Interestingly , several years later , experiments with symmetric colloidal particles embedded in giant unilamellar vesicles produced col - loidclustering , revealingthatthesourceoftheattractionwaslikelycurva - ture mediated not ﬂ uctuations [ 122 ] . In an attempttodetermineif themembranecould provide attractive forces between inclusions , Fournier and colleagues considered the in - teraction of point - like inclusions that imposed anisotropic curvatures on the membrane [ 123 , 124 ] . With this change in protein geometry , the inclusions now exhibit long - range attractive interactions strong enoughtoinduceaggregation ; however , theresultsstillfailedtoexplain whysymmetric particles aggregated [ 125 ] . Around thesametime , Oster and co - workers employed a mechanical approach involving the solu - tion of a PDE originating from the Helfrich Hamiltonian for the mem - brane with ﬁ xed height and contact angles corresponding to rigid , ﬂ at , circular , inclusions [ 41 ] . They showed that the solution is not additive , 1626 D . Argudo et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1858 ( 2016 ) 1619 – 1634 butrathertheinclusionsinteractviaanN - bodypotentialthatcanexhibit stable clusters of particles . They emphasized that high order aggregates may exist even if the pair - wise forces are repulsive , and later work by Deserno highlighted this ﬁ nding that the boundary conditions give rise to non - additive solutions even though the underlying equations are lin - ear [ 122 , 126 ] . In a follow up study , Oster ' s lab extended the analysis to consider elliptical discs , and they concluded that the change in the shape of the inclusion greatly affects the character of the multi - body in - teractions [ 42 ] . An even more sophisticated treatment of the membrane shape employed a Fourier representation of the membrane - protein con - tact boundary to explore the membrane deformation energies of MscL mechanosensitive channels [ 116 , 117 ] . Nonetheless , the vast majority of continuum membrane models have treated membrane proteins as high - ly idealized shapes that lack the complex geometric and chemical detail that real membrane proteins have , yet several studies have shown that shape is important [ 42 , 116 , 117 , 123 , 124 ] . In Section 5 , we will outline recent advances that have made strides in treating the complex nature of real membrane proteins . 5 . Towards a more realistic geometric and chemical representation of the protein In the last section , we suggested that a more detailed description of the protein is required to better understand how proteins interact with the membrane , how the membrane acts back on proteins , and how the membrane mediates protein – protein interactions . An outstanding question is then , “ Can continuum elastic models really capture the sa - lient features of membrane - protein interactions ? ” One of the best ways to quantitatively address this question is by comparing the mem - brane distortions generated by embedded proteins produced by fully - atomistic MD simulations with those from continuum theory . Lee and colleagues recently did this , and they showed that the lipid behavior in the annulus surrounding a gramicidin channel was quite complex , with speci ﬁ c tryptophan residues playing a key role in sculpting the membrane [ 119 , 127 ] . When they compared their MD results with con - tinuum calculations using a smectic - liquid crystal description of the membrane , they realized that the model failed to produce the same de - formations [ 119 , 127 ] . ArewethenstuckwithatomisticMDsimulations , or are there additional advances that can be made with continuum models ? WhilefullyatomisticMDsimulationsarepowerfulandprovide a high level of chemical and spatial resolution , in certain cases , they are not able to match the timescale of biological phenomena , especially membrane relaxation , which can be very slow [ 26 ] . We believe that a new wave of hybrid continuum - atomistic models will be helpful in bridgingthespeed of continuum methodswiththe accuracy of MD sim - ulations . To do this , the speci ﬁ c chemistry of the protein must be taken into account , as pointed out by Lee and colleagues [ 127 ] , and we must move beyond idealized geometries . In recent years , several research groups have worked on coupling continuum elastic models of the membrane with richer chemical and geometric descriptions of the protein to better understand membrane protein insertion and stability [ 33 , 90 , 128 – 132 ] . In many of these stud - ies , the starting point for the protein is an atomic structure , often deter - mined by X - ray crystallography or NMR , following the seminal work by the Honig lab in which they considered the interaction of a helix with a ﬂ at , rigid membrane [ 43 ] . This approach of bringing atomistic detail to thecontinuum membrane models makesit possible to carry outcontin - uumelectrostaticscalculations , non - polarsolvation energy calculations , and other protein mechanics considerations that are quite standard in molecular biophysics . A ﬁ rst order approximation to the total system energy is then : G T ¼ G e ð Þ þ G np ð Þ þ G me ð Þ ; ð 20 Þ where G ( e ) is the electrostatic energy , G ( np ) is the non - polar energy , is G ( me ) is the membrane bending energy . Thus , Eq . ( 20 ) might serve as a good alternative to fully atomistic approaches , while retaining the speed , and other positive attributes , of continuum membrane models . Moving beyond a ﬂ at , passive description of the bilayer , our group allowed the membrane to move in response to the presence of the pro - tein [ 128 ] by adopting the continuum membrane deformation model put forth by Huang [ 38 ] . The presence of the membrane creates a com - plex dielectric environment around the protein that signi ﬁ cantly im - pacts the electrostatic ( G ( e ) ) and non - polar energies ( G ( np ) ) of the system . We ﬁ rst solve for a given membrane deformation and then feed the shape of the solution into a continuum Poisson – Boltzmann electrostatic solver [ 133 ] by ‘ painting ’ the new dielectric environment around the protein [ 128 ] . Electrostatic considerations are crucial due to the low - dielectric environment of the membrane core , which poses a barrier to charged moieties on the protein , and computationally the protein , membrane , andaqueoussolutionareallgivendistinctdielectric values and solved easily with the numeric software APBS or APBSmem [ 134 – 136 ] . One of the most important driving forces for protein associ - ation with the membrane is the hydrophobic effect or non - polar solva - tion energy . Upon entering the greasy , water free region of the membrane , water is liberated from the surface of the protein , which gives rise to an increase in the entropy of the water . This consideration , which is also an important determinant of protein folding , can be esti - mated from the shape of the protein and how the membrane forms around it . The simplest hydrophobic model assumes that the energy change is proportional to the surface area of the protein buried in the membrane with parameter values obtained from the Sitkoff and col - leagues based on small molecule partitioning [ 137 ] . The membrane distortions around proteins are then determined by identifying the membrane boundaries that minimize the total energy in Eq . ( 20 ) . We identify the contact curve where the membrane touches the protein and then move the curve by hand [ 128 ] or through a search algorithm [ 33 , 129 ] and calculate G T for each con ﬁ guration ( Fig . 6 ) We also use a Fourier expansion to describe the contact curve [ 33 , 128 , 129 ] , similar to Haselwandter and Phillips [ 116 , 117 ] . We can identify stable equilibria that show a mechanical balance between bending en - ergies , electrostatic solvation of buried polar groups , and exposure of transmembrane domains to water [ 128 ] . With this approach , our lab has been able to quantitatively reproduce results from fully - atomistic MD simulations regarding the insertion energy of a helix harboring a charged residue [ 128 ] , and we have qualitatively matched the energetics and deformations produced by the insertion of K + channel voltage sensor segments ( S4 segments ) from coarse - grained and fully - atomistic simulations [ 129 , 138 ] . Moreover , this hybrid atomistic - continuum approach also explains why charged residue insertion into membranes is non - additive — charged residues bend the membrane as theyinsert , andoncethe ﬁ rstresiduehas paidtheelasticcostofbending the membrane , the second residue is water exposed at very little addi - tional cost [ 129 ] . In Latorraca et al . [ 33 ] the work was extended to explore the energetics of ion and small peptide penetration into mem - branes , where thickness and membrane mechanical properties played a crucial role . Most importantly , the hybrid model probes questions re - latedtomembranedistortionatatinyfractionofthecomputationalcost required by fully atomistic approaches . Lastly , we believe that our ap - proach can overcome the failure of simpler continuum models employed by Leeand colleagues [ 127 ] throughtheincorporationofpro - tein side chain chemistry and relaxing the assumption that the protein is cylindrically symmetric . The Feig group has extended this mechanical deformation model to include a more dynamic view of small molecules , peptides , and proteins [ 130 ] . They coupled the membrane elastic energy with a dynamic het - erogeneous generalized Born ( DHDBG ) formalism for fast dynamics simulations in the presence of an implicit membrane . The authors found that when using the dynamic version that allows for membrane bending , instead of a static implicit model of the membrane , the inser - tion of charged and polar molecules ( amino acid side chain analogs , the WALP23 peptide , gramicidin channels and arginine - containing 1627 D . Argudo et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1858 ( 2016 ) 1619 – 1634 helices ) is much more in - line with results from fully - atomistic simula - tions [ 130 ] . Another important advance has been to more realistically treat the membrane - protein boundary . The Weinstein group runs fully atomistic simulations of a membrane protein of interest and then extract the membrane height directly from the simulations for use in continuum elastic energy calculations [ 132 , 139 ] . They developed a Cartesian grid - based ﬁ nite difference method to solve the underlying elasticity equations allowing them to calculate the energetic cost of the membrane deformations arising from hydrophobic mismatch and curvature . The contact angle boundary conditions were not obtained from thesimulations , butrather by aniterative minimization procedure performed over the membrane curvature ( H ) at the boundary . This multiscale modeling approach proved to be a useful tool in quanti - fying the hydrophobic mismatch - driven remodeling of membranes by G - Protein Coupled Receptors ( GPCRs ) [ 132 ] and was later used to un - derstand how the coupling to the membrane in ﬂ uences the conforma - tional state of the bacterial leucine transporter ( LeuT ) [ 139 ] . Other researchers have employed sophisticated numerics , such as ﬁ nite - element methods and mean - ﬁ eld approaches , to treat membrane mechanics , while also retainingsomelevel of chemical detail in the pro - tein [ 90 , 131 , 140 , 141 ] . Powerful numeric schemes , such as these , have the potential to accurately handle large membrane deformations where the small angle limit breaks down [ 142 ] and / or non - linear elas - ticity may play a role . For instance , Zhou and co - workers developed a ﬁ nite - element model of a membrane with non - linear elasticity in close apposition to a curvature inducing BAR domain [ 131 ] . The protein was treated atomistically , and its electrostatic in ﬂ uence on the nearby membrane caused it to curve . Similarly , Khelashvili et al . [ 141 ] studied BAR - domain induced remodeling of a heterogeneous membrane mak - ing use of a self - consistent mean - ﬁ eld model that combined a BAR do - main in atomistic detail with a free energy density functional based on the continuum Helfrich model and on Poisson – Boltzmann ( PB ) electro - statics . Another related area for improvement is the description of lipid order around the protein and how this can give rise to spatially depen - dent moduli [ 143 ] . Finally , while we have focused in this section on hybrid approaches that predict deformation pro ﬁ les around a protein by solving a PDE . However , some authors have used MD simulations to determine the membrane shape , similar to the Weinstein group , but then analyze the energies , forces , and torques with a continuum model without for - mulating and solving a PDE [ 92 , 144 – 146 ] . In Section 6 , we will brie ﬂ y outline the energetic terms of our hybrid continuum - atomistic model , discuss our recent advances in treating complex membrane shapes , and then show how our method compares to fully atomistic MD simulations for complex membrane proteins in Section 7 . 6 . A detailed look at our hybrid continuum - atomistic model Here we describe the energetic terms in Eq . ( 20 ) and the ma - chinery needed for identifying the membrane - protein contact curve , and optimizing the curve to determine deformations that minimize the total energy . As discussed in the last section , many other researchers are approaching this problem from a number of different interesting and unique perspectives — ours is just one of these approaches . 6 . 1 . Electrostatic energy We calculate the electrostatic component of the energetic cost for the protein to be in the membrane using Poisson – Boltzmann ( PB ) theory : (cid:3) ∇ (cid:4) ϵ r ! (cid:4) (cid:5) ∇ ϕ r ! (cid:4) (cid:5) h i þ κ 2 r ! (cid:4) (cid:5) sinh ϕ r ! (cid:4) (cid:5) h i ¼ e k B T 4 πρ r ! (cid:4) (cid:5) ; ð 21 Þ where ϕ ð r ! Þ ¼ Φ ð r ! Þ k B T is the reduced electrostatic potential at position r ! , k B is the Boltzmann constant , T is the absolute temperature , κ is the Debye – Hückel screeningcoef ﬁ cient , ϵ is the spatially - dependent dielec - tric constant , ρ is the space - dependent charge density , and e is the fun - damental charge unit . The in ﬂ uence of the membrane enters through thespatial dependenceof ϵ , κ , and ρ incases wherewe explicitlyinclude charged groups to represent anionic lipids at discrete locations in the head group interface [ 147 ] . The solution to the continuum membrane equations ( Eqs . ( 16 ) and ( 17 ) ) determine the boundaries delineating thesespatialregions , and theAPBSsoftwareprovidesa ﬂ exibleplatform for modifying these three parameters [ 34 ] and solving the PB equation [ 134 ] . Once ϕ ð r ! Þ is calculated , G ( e ) is readily computed : G e ð Þ ¼ 1 2 ∫ allspace Φ r ! (cid:4) (cid:5) ρ r ! (cid:4) (cid:5) d Ω ; ð 22 Þ where G ( e ) is the linearized form , but in practice we report values com - putedwiththefullnon - linearenergy . Theelectrostaticenergyisformal - ly divergent when calculated as in Eq . ( 22 ) , and we always determine values with respect to the protein in solution far from the membrane [ 128 ] , which removes the singularities . 6 . 2 . Non - polar energy The non - polar energy arises , in part , from the solvent reorganiza - tion that happens when large molecules are sequestered away from water . This phenomenon is responsible for the clustering of hydro - phobic proteins and peptides and the stabilization of molecules in the membrane . A fast and simple theory for estimating the strength of this interaction within the continuum framework is to assume that the stabilization energy of the molecule in the hydrophobic en - vironment is proportional to the solvent accessible surface area ( SASA ) [ 137 , 148 ] . The physical motivation is that the number of conformationally restricted water molecules that are released upon removal from solution is related to the amount of surface area ; how - ever , more sophisticated theories have been applied to this problem Fig . 6 . Thegeometryofthemembranenearanatomisticprotein . A . Sideviewofamembraneproteinillustratingthemembranedistortionsaroundtheproteinby h + ( uppergraysurface ) and h - ( lower gray surface ) . B . Close up view of the contact curve , showing the displacement ( u + ) and slope ( S + ) boundary conditions at one point of the upper lea ﬂ et contact curve . 1628 D . Argudo et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1858 ( 2016 ) 1619 – 1634 [ 149 – 151 ] . We model the non - polar energy contribution to the pro - tein in the membrane as [ 128 ] : G np ð Þ ¼ a (cid:4) A mem (cid:3) A sol ð Þ þ b ; ð 23 Þ where A mem is protein ' s SASA in the membrane and A sol is value in so - lution . The phenomenological constant a ( a = 0 . 028 kcal / mol Å 2 ) is taken from earlier work exploring the transfer of small solutes be - tween polar and non - polar solvents [ 137 ] ; however , we set b to zero given that the meaning of this offset is dif ﬁ cult to interpret for partial insertion into a hydrophobic environment and its magnitude is small compared to all other energetic terms in Eq . ( 20 ) . Finally , we use the MSMS program to quickly compute the protein surface area [ 152 ] . As described elsewhere [ 33 ] , we use the solution for the upper and lower membrane lea ﬂ et surfaces to determine which por - tions of the protein are solvent accessible when computing A mem . 6 . 3 . Membrane elastic energy Any of the membrane models proposed in the literature and discussed in Section 4 could be used to compute the membrane energy G ( me ) , but themodels that are most compatible with ourenergetic treat - ment of the protein are ones that explicitly account for the membrane width . Thus , our work has utilized a dual monolayer lea ﬂ et description [ 33 , 128 , 129 ] as proposed by Huang [ 38 ] , which treats the upper and lower lea ﬂ ets independently and depends on changes in curvature ( mean and Gaussian ) , thickness and tension . We assume that the total bilayer elastic energy is given by the sum of the contributions from each monolayer , we employ a Monge gauge representation , and we ig - nore spontaneous curvature . Near the protein , where there is not al - ways a one - to - one correspondence between a patch in the upper lea ﬂ et with a patch in the lower lea ﬂ et , it becomes dif ﬁ cult to de ﬁ ne the compression , and we have recently developed a method for han - dling these complex boundaries ( currently in preparation [ 153 ] ) . In the past , we used a ﬁ nite difference approach to solve the underlying PDEs in Cartesian or radial coordinates , but more recently we have de - veloped a ﬁ nite volume approach [ 154 ] that is more appropriate for solving biharmonic equations on complex boundaries by using a level set function to describe the membrane - protein boundary curves [ 153 ] . In Section 7 , we will employ this membrane model as shown in Eq . ( 15 ) withthestandardparametersgivenin Table1 ; however , oural - gorithmis ﬂ exibleandanysingleenergyterm , including G ( me ) , canread - ily be exchanged with a different theory . 6 . 4 . Identifying and optimizing the contact curve Within the dual monolayer framework , there are two contact curves — one for the upper lea ﬂ et and one for the lower lea ﬂ et ( Fig . 6 ) . These curves represent the lipid excluded surface , which is the surface of closest contact between a spherical lipid probe and the protein atoms [ 155 ] . We ﬁ rst erect a ﬂ at , Cartesian grid for the upper and lower lea ﬂ ets , and then use level set theory to move grid points near the membrane - protein surface onto the boundary curve representing the lipid excluded surface [ 154 ] . Next , we represent the initial displace - mentof themembraneontheprotein ( thehydrophobicmismatch ) by a Fourier expansion with an arbitrary number of terms . Such a represen - tationgivesrise to smoothboundarycurves , which aregenerally seenin simulation , that are not characterized by prohibitively large curvature energies . Once the boundary is set up with particular values of the Fou - rier coef ﬁ cients , we solve for the total membrane shape to determine G ( me ) , then the monolayer surfaces from the solution are used to deter - mine G ( e ) and G ( np ) , as described above . Finally , we optimize using simulated annealing followed by Powell ' s method to determine the membrane - protein contact curves and the total energy of the system as in Eq . ( 20 ) . Convergence of the search is highly dependent on the protein , but generally it requires 500 to 1500 iterations and about 2 to 7 h on a desktop computer . For a more detailed description of the ener - getic model or its solution , we refer the reader to our previous studies [ 33 , 128 , 129 , 147 ] . 7 . Continuum membrane models can match atomistic simulation While membrane elastic models are incredibly fast , compared to coarse - grained and fully - atomistic simulations , and make it possible to quantify membrane bending energies , there is an open question as to whether they can accurately reproduce the true membrane deforma - tions induced by membrane proteins . Unfortunately , experimental methodscannotbeusedtobenchmarkthequalityofcontinuummodels since they lack the spatial resolution required to determine how lipids are con ﬁ gured around proteins , thus , atomistic simulations remain the best means of comparison . Only a few studies have directly com - pared continuum results with coarse - grained [ 33 ] and fully - atomistic [ 127 , 145 , 146 ] simulations , and the main conclusion from Lee and co - workers is that continuum models have major de ﬁ ciencies [ 127 ] . Here we highlight some of the recent developments in our continuum model discussed in Section 6 by showing that we can quantitatively match deformation pro ﬁ les observed in MD simulations for the lipid scramblase nhTMEM16 . The MD simulations and our model predict ex - tensive membrane remodeling . 7 . 1 . The nhTMEM16 lipid scramblase produces large deformations The compositional asymmetry of lipids between the lea ﬂ ets at the plasma membrane in ﬂ uences signaling properties of cells . Scramblases are a class of proteins that disrupt membrane asymmetry by facilitating the transfer of phospholipids from one lea ﬂ et to the other in an energy independent manner . These transmembrane proteins play a role in events such as coagulation of the blood and cellular apoptosis by transporting phosphotidylserine ( PS ) from the inner lea ﬂ et to the outerlea ﬂ etoftheplasmamembrane [ 163 ] . Inparticular , TMEM16fam - ily members have gained recent attention for their role in phospholipid scramblingin platelets and fungi [ 164 , 165 ] . Additional insight has come from the high - resolution structure of a family member from Nectria hematococcus ( nh ) ( nhTMEM16 ) , which has revealed a possible mech - anism for phospholipid conduction across the membrane . The molecule forms a dimer , and each subunit has a hydrophilic cavity that faces the core of the membrane . It is believed that head groups are conducted from one lea ﬂ et to the other through this groove , and this hypothesis is supported by chimera studies carried out on family members that have lost the ability to ﬂ ip lipids [ 166 ] . Nolipidswereresolvedinthe3 . 3Åresolutionstructure , whichisnot surprising , so a molecular level view of how nhTMEM16 interacts with the membrane was not clear . Using their software , MemProtMD , the Sansom group embedded the protein in a DPPC lipid membrane and ran a microsecond coarse - grained simulation of nhTMEM16 , and in this short time frame they observed deviations from a planar bilayer and 15 lipids traversed the lipid - facing cavity [ 167 ] . We turned to all - Table 1 Parameter values used in continuum model calculations in Fig . 7 . All membrane values correspond to POPC bilayers . Additional parameters used in the electrostatic calculations are identical to valuesreported in Ref . [ 33 ] . Parameter Value Reference Membrane thickness ( L 0 ) 28 . 5 Å [ 157 ] Surface tension ( α ) 3 . 00 × 10 - 13 N / Å [ 33 ] Bending modulus ( K c ) 8 . 5×10 - 10 NÅ [ 158 ] Gaussian modulus ( K G ) ~ - 0 . 9× K c [ 159 , 160 ] Compression modulus ( K a ) 2 . 13×10 - 11 N / Å [ 156 , 161 ] Protein dielectric ( ε p ) 2 . 0 [ 148 ] Membrane core dielectric ( ε hc ) 2 . 0 [ 162 ] Head group dielectric ( ε hg ) 80 . 0 [ 162 ] Water dielectric ( ε w ) 80 . 0 [ 148 ] SASA prefactor for non - polar energy ( a ) 0 . 028 kcal / mol Å 2 [ 137 ] 1629 D . Argudo et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1858 ( 2016 ) 1619 – 1634 atom simulations to determine if the distortions around nhTMEM16 compared favorably with results from our continuum method . We cen - tered the dimer in the membrane with far - ﬁ eld boundaries taken from OPM [ 168 ] , and then used our algorithm to identify the membrane - protein boundary followed by optimization to minimize the total ener - gy ( Eq . ( 20 ) ) . Our model shows that nhTMEM16 drives signi ﬁ cant membrane bending in what appears to be a pinching mode from the upper and lower lea ﬂ ets ( green surfaces in Fig . 7A ) indicative of hydro - phobic mismatch . The induced curvature is largest at the hydrophilic groove , butitisalsopresentattheperipheryofthegroove ( Fig . 7B ) . Sur - face views of the upper ( panel C ) and lower ( panel D ) lea ﬂ ets reveal a pseudo - two fold pattern consistent with nhTMEM16 being a dimer , and they also reveal that the lea ﬂ ets bend down by as much as 10 Å fromtheupperlea ﬂ etandupbynearlyasmuchfromthebottomlea ﬂ et . Fig . 7 . MembranebendingaroundnhTMEM16determinedfromfully - atomisticMDandcontinuumelasticity . A . MembranedistortionscausedbynhTMEM16predictedfromcontinuum elasticity . The protein is represented at the atomistic level , with the upper and lower head group - water interfaces in green and the surfaces delineating the hydrocarbon core gray . All hydrophobic amino acids are white and polar residues are blue . B . Enlarged view from panel A with the hydrophilic groove indicated . C , D . Upper and lower membrane surfaces averaged from fully - atomistic MD simulations . E , F . Upper and lower membrane surfaces determined from continuum elasticity . The protein is gray . White values correspond to the undeformed height of the membrane far from the protein , blue are downward de ﬂ ections , and red are upward de ﬂ ections . All color bars are in ångströms . Color scheme is the same throughout . The stars in panel D indicate points of discrepancy between simulations ( panel D ) and continuum solution ( panel F ) . G , H . Curvatures ( G ) and membrane heights ( H ) for upper and lower lea ﬂ ets along the x equal y axis inpanels E and F . The starting point and direction is speci ﬁ ed by the dashed arrows in panelsE and F . 1630 D . Argudo et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1858 ( 2016 ) 1619 – 1634 Additionally , there is little compression as suggested from the compar - ison of the upper lea ﬂ et displacement ( panels C and E ) with the lower lea ﬂ et displacement ( panels D and F ) , but rather the upper and lower lea ﬂ ets move in concert ( panel H ) . Next , we ranfour MDsimulationsfor 50ns ( full simulationdetails in Table 2 ) for an aggregate simulation time of 200 ns and plotted the av - erage height of the upper and lower lea ﬂ ets ( Fig . 7E , F ) . The pattern of the deformations predicted from the all - atom simulations is strikingly similar to the results from our continuum calculations . The two fold symmetry is again present , and the pattern of downward de ﬂ ection ( blue ) and upward de ﬂ ection ( red ) at the upper lea ﬂ et is nearly identi - cal ( panels C and E ) . Moreover , our continuum model is also in quanti - tative agreement with MD in predicting the absolute magnitude of the de ﬂ ections from − 10 to + 5 Å . The agreement at the lower lea ﬂ et is also quite good both qualitatively and quantitatively ( panels D and F ) , with the biggest discrepancy ( of about 5 Å ) occurring at the inlets indi - cated by stars panel ( Fig . 7D ) . We believe that our results provide in - sight into the function of nhTMEM16 , and that the pattern of membrane distortion across the hydrophilic groove is likely essential for its ability to move lipids from one lea ﬂ et to the other ef ﬁ ciently , and this hypothesis can be tested through the design of future experi - ments . Lastly , the continuum calculations are very fast . The molecular dynamics simulations took 32 GPU days to produce the full 200 ns tra - jectory , while the continuum calculation took 8 h to complete on a sin - gle CPU ( 100 times faster without considering the cost differences between GPUs and CPUs ) . We note that in our continuum methods rather than using the averaged structure from our MD , we have per - formed the calculations using the crystal structure of nhTMEM16 [ 169 ] . Often the protein conformation will change during the simula - tion , which can confound comparisons between simulation and contin - uum calculations on static snapshots . To quantify the structural differences and degree of nhTMEM16 drift we calculated the root mean squared deviation ( RMSD ) of the entire protein ( 4 . 3 Å ) and the transmembrane domain ( 1 . 1 Å ) alone . Since the latter region is respon - sibleforinducingmembranedeformations , andhasasmallRMSDvalue , we believe that our continuum results on a single structure are relevant as evidenced by our close match to MD ( Fig . 7 ) . In cases where the pro - tein drifts signi ﬁ cantly , it may be more appropriate to use the averaged structure obtained from molecular simulations or carry out many con - tinuum calculations on many different con ﬁ gurations . 8 . Conclusions In this review , we have brie ﬂ y outlined the evolution of continuum elastic models of the membrane and how these models have been coupled to the presence of embedded integral membrane proteins . The original studies by Helfrich and Canham were concerned with the curvature energies of a membrane represented as a two dimensional sheet [ 35 , 36 ] . Early attempts to include membrane proteins in this framework treated the proteins as simple geometric objects such as point particles , hard discs , or ellipses . Additional degrees of freedom such as bilayer thickness [ 38 , 48 , 106 ] and the tilt of the lipid molecules [ 50 , 106 , 108 ] have become essential considerations for adequately studying different aspects of protein – membrane interactions . With these advances in membrane complexity , the height of embedded pro - teins could be explicitly accounted for , introducing the concept of hy - drophobic mismatch as a means to couple membrane compression and curvature to the protein . Here we have argued that the next generation of continuum models must adopt a more realistic representation of the protein both in terms of its chemical composition and its geometric shape [ 122 , 127 , 128 , 131 , 132 , 170 ] . These steps require moving away from treating proteins as simple geometric shapes and employing modern molecular modeling methods together with high resolution structures to represent the protein . In Section 6 , we presented our approach for merging protein biophysicswith continuumelasticitytheory tobetter understandmem - brane protein interactions . By employing continuum electrostatics and fastnon - polarestimatesoftheenergy , thecalculationsremainextreme - lyfast compared toCGandatomistic MD , butretainaminoacidlevelde - tail . Thus , our model can be used to make in silico point mutations that can be tested experimentally , as we successfully did for the RegIII α toxin [ 147 ] . In Sections 6 and 7 , we highlighted our most recent advances to our continuum elasticity solver , in which we have developed new methods for de ﬁ ning the protein – membrane boundary and applying boundary conditions [ 153 ] . The model does a very good job at quantita - tively predicting membrane deformations around proteins when benchmarked against fully - atomistic MD simulations , but at a tiny frac - tion of the computational cost . This closeconnection allows usto gener - ate soundhypotheses regarding the function of membrane proteins . For instance , both MD and our hybrid atomistic - continuum model reveal extreme bending of the membrane around the hydrophilic groove in nhTMEM16 . Since the continuum calculations are faster , they can be used to scan through various mutants and protein chimeras to deter - minewhichresidues areresponsibleforthelarge - scalemembranerear - rangements . These select residues could then be further examined with molecular dynamics simulations , followed by experimental tests on a muchreduced subsetof candidates . Thus , continuum and moleculardy - namics approaches can be used in a pipeline to accelerate experimental predictions . Nonetheless , continuum elasticity approaches have unique advantages over simulation . First , it is dif ﬁ cult to determine the mem - brane bending energy from atomistic simulations , but this information isreadilyavailablefromthesolutionofthePDEsorfromintegratingsur - faces determined from simulation ( see Refs . [ 2 , 132 ] ) . Second , mem - brane relaxation around transmembrane peptides and proteins can be very slow [ 26 ] , and simulations may not be at equilibrium . Continuum methods do not suffer from this limitation ; however , identifying and optimizing membrane contact boundary curves can be dif ﬁ cult [ 129 ] . While we believe that the ﬁ eld is making good progress towards ac - curate continuum models of the membrane around proteins , there is much to be done . For instance , the comparison of continuum calcula - tions with all - atom simulation from the Andersen and Im groups re - vealed a failure of the continuum models to show the correct behavior near the protein [ 119 ] . Likewise , there are regions around nhTMEM16 in which the direction of membrane de ﬂ ection predicted from the con - tinuum calculation gives the opposite sign from the MD simulations . It will always be dif ﬁ cult to describe speci ﬁ c lipid interactions with the protein using a continuum or ﬁ eld theory , but we spent a good portion of our review highlighting extensions that treat the orientation of the lipids and their entropy , because we believe that adding these degrees of freedom may signi ﬁ cantly improve continuum models . Kim and co - Table 2 Parameter values used in atomistic molecular dynamics simulations of nhTMEM16 . Parameter nhTMEM16 MD engine Amber PDB ID 4WIS Lipid type POPC Force ﬁ eld CHARMM36 Ensemble NPT Barostat Berendsen Pressure coupling 0 . 5 ps Pressure tensor Semi - isotropic Thermostat Langevin Temperature 303 . 15 K Friction coef ﬁ cient 1 ps - 1 Time step 2 fs Shake yes Electrostatics PME Non - bonded cutoff 8 Å Switching distance N / A Atom count 335 , 204 Aggregate time 200 ns 1631 D . Argudo et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1858 ( 2016 ) 1619 – 1634 workers identi ﬁ ed that continuum models failed to reproduce shell hardeningor stiffeningnearthe protein boundary [ 119 ] , and we believe amorein - depthdescriptionofthelipiddegreesoffreedommaycapture this feature . We have focused almost exclusively on the subset of con - tinuum membrane models that have been formulated in the small angle de ﬂ ection limit and represented in the Monge gauge . In order to address large - scale conformational changes that occur during SNARE - mediated fusion [ 171 ] or M2 channel mediated ﬁ ssion [ 172 ] , more so - phisticated mathematical approaches must be employed . Moreover , as with many numeric schemes , the ﬁ delity of the solution to the elasticity equations is highly dependent on how well re ﬁ ned the mesh is around the protein surface where the boundary conditions are applied . Extend - ing dense grids far from the protein creates large sets of equations that are prohibitively dif ﬁ cult to solve , limiting solutions to small membrane patches . If adaptive mesh re ﬁ nement were employed [ 173 ] , then large membrane patches containing many inclusions could be examined , and membrane mediated interactions between proteins could be probed . This advancement would open up the possibility of studying multi - protein processes that involve long - timescale membrane rear - rangements at large length scales while also requiring an accurate view of the protein – membrane interaction at short length scales . Transparency document The Transparency document associated with this article can be found , in online version . Acknowledgments This work was supported by NIH grant R01 - GM117593 and NSF CAREER Award MCB - 0845286 . References [ 1 ] M . Aridor , S . I . Bannykh , T . Rowe , W . E . Balch , Sequentialcouplingbetweencopiiand copi vesicle coats in endoplasmic reticulum to golgi transport , J . Cell Biol . 131 ( 4 ) ( 1995 ) 875 – 893 . [ 2 ] K . M . Davies , C . Anselmi , I . Wittig , J . D . Faraldo - Gómez , W . Kühlbrandt , Structure of theyeastf1fo - atpsynthasedimeranditsroleinshapingthemitochondrialcristae , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 109 ( 2012 ) 13 , 602 – 13 , 607 . [ 3 ] G . Orso , D . Pendin , S . Liu , J . Tosetto , T . J . Moss , J . E . Faust , et al . , Homotypic fusion of ER membranes requires the dynamin - like GTPase atlastin , Nature 460 ( 7258 ) ( 2009 ) 978 – 983 . [ 4 ] E . M . Landau , J . P . Rosenbusch , Lipidic cubic phases : a novel concept for the crystal - lizationofmembraneproteins , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 93 ( 25 ) ( 1996 ) 14 , 532 – 14 , 535 . [ 5 ] N . Schmidt , A . Mishra , J . Wang , W . DeGrado , G . Wong , In ﬂ uenzavirusa M2protein generates negative gaussian membrane curvature necessary for budding and scis - sion , J . Am . Chem . Soc . 135 ( 37 ) ( 2013 ) 13 , 710 – 13 , 719 . [ 6 ] M . Caffrey , Acomprehensivereviewofthelipidcubicphaseorinmesomethodfor crystallizing membraneand solubleproteinsand complexes , Acta Crystallogr . F 71 ( 1 ) ( 2015 ) 3 – 18 . [ 7 ] D . W . Urry , Thegramicidinatransmembranechannel : aproposed Π ( L , D ) helix , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 68 ( 3 ) ( 1971 ) 672 – 676 . [ 8 ] E . Perozo , D . M . Cortes , P . Sompornpisut , A . Kloda , B . Martinac , Openchannelstruc - ture of mscl and the gating mechanism of mechanosensitive channels , Nature 49 ( 418 ) ( 2002 ) 942 – 948 . [ 9 ] E . Perozo , D . C . Rees , Structure and mechanism in prokaryotic mechanosensitive channels , Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 13 ( 4 ) ( 2003 ) 432 – 442 . [ 10 ] D . Berchtold , M . Piccolis , N . Chiaruttini , I . Riezman , H . Riezman , A . Roux , etal . , Plas - ma membrane stress induces relocalization of slm proteins and activation of torc2 to promote sphingolipid synthesis , Nat . Cell Biol . 14 ( 2012 ) 542 – 547 . [ 11 ] S . L . Keller , S . M . Bezrukov , S . M . Gruner , M . W . Tate , I . Vodyanoy , V . A . Parsegian , Probability of alamethicin conductance states varies with nonlamellar tendency of bilayer phospholipids , Biophys . J . 65 ( 1 ) ( 1993 ) 23 – 27 . [ 12 ] A . Tonnesen , S . M . Christensen , V . Tkach , S . Dimitrios , Geometrical membrane cur - vature as an allosteric regulator of membrane protein structure and function , Biophys . J . 101 ( 1 ) ( 2014 ) 201 – 209 . [ 13 ] F . Quemeneur , J . K . Sigurdsson , M . Renner , P . J . Atzberger , P . Bassereau , D . Lacoste , Shape matters in protein mobility within membranes , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 111 ( 14 ) ( 2014 ) 5083 – 5087 . [ 14 ] J . Zimmerberg , M . M . Kozlov , How proteins produce cellular membrane curvature , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 ( 2006 ) 9 – 19 . [ 15 ] M . M . Kozlov , F . Campelo , N . Liska , L . V . Chernomordik , S . J . Marrink , H . T . McMahon , Mechanisms shaping cell membranes , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 29 ( 0 ) ( 2014 ) 53 – 60 ( Cell organelles ) . [ 16 ] J . C . Stachowiak , E . M . Schmid , C . J . Ryan , H . S . Ann , D . Y . Sasaki , M . B . Sherman , et al . , Membrane bending by protein – protein crowding , Nat . Cell Biol . 14 ( 9 ) ( 2012 ) 944 – 949 . [ 17 ] D . J . Busch , J . R . Houser , C . C . Hayden , M . B . Sherman , E . M . Lafer , J . C . Stachowiak , In - trinsically disordered proteins drive membrane curvature , Nat . Commun . 6 ( 7875 ) ( 2015 ) 1 – 11 . [ 18 ] M . P . Sheetz , S . J . Singer , Biological membranes as bilayer couples . a molecular mechanism of drug - erythrocyte interactions , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 71 ( 11 ) ( 1974 ) 4457 – 4461 . [ 19 ] B . J . Peter , H . M . Kent , I . G . Mills , Y . Vallis , P . J . G . Butler , P . R . Evans , et al . , Bar domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin bar structure , Science 303 ( 5657 ) ( 2004 ) 495 – 499 . [ 20 ] A . Frost , V . M . Unger , P . De Camilli , The bar domain superfamily : membrane - molding macromolecules , Cell 137 ( 2 ) ( 2009 ) 191 – 196 . [ 21 ] A . Arkhipov , Y . Yin , K . Schulten , Membrane - bending mechanism of amphiphysin N - BAR domains , Biophys . J . 97 ( 10 ) ( 2009 ) 2727 – 2735 . [ 22 ] B . Qualmann , D . Koch , M . M . Kessels , Let ' s go bananas : revisiting the endocytic bar code , EMBO J . 30 ( 17 ) ( 2011 ) 3501 – 3515 . [ 23 ] M . R . Ambroso , B . G . Hegde , R . Langen , Endophilin a1 induces different membrane shapes using a conformational switch that is regulated by phosphorylation , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 111 ( 19 ) ( 2014 ) 6982 – 6987 . [ 24 ] P . D . Blood , G . A . Voth , Direct observation of bin / amphiphysin / rvs ( bar ) domain - induced membrane curvature by means of molecular dynamics simulations , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 103 ( 41 ) ( 2006 ) 15 , 068 – 15 , 072 . [ 25 ] Y . Yin , A . Arkhipov , K . Schulten , Simulations of membrane tubulation by lattices of amphiphysin N - BAR domains , Structure 17 ( 6 ) ( 2009 ) 882 – 892 . [ 26 ] C . Neale , J . C . Y . Hsu , C . M . Yip , R . Pomes , Indolicidin binding induces thinning of a lipid bilayer , Biophys . J . 106 ( 8 ) ( 2014 ) L29 – L31 . [ 27 ] P . M . Kasson , E . Lindahl , V . S . Pande , Atomic - resolution simulations predict a transi - tion state for vesicle fusion de ﬁ ned by contact of a few lipid tails , PLoS Comput . Biol . 6 ( 6 ) ( 2010 ) e1000829 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1000829 . [ 28 ] P . M . Kasson , V . S . Pande , Control of membrane fusion mechanism by lipid compo - sition : Predictions from ensemble molecular dynamics , PLoS Comput . Biol . 3 ( 2007 ) e220 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 0030220 . [ 29 ] B . J . Reynwar , G . Illya , V . A . Harmandaris , M . M . Muller , K . Kremer , M . Deserno , Ag - gregation and vesiculation of membrane proteins by curvature - mediated interac - tions , Nature 447 ( 2007 ) 461 – 464 . [ 30 ] V . Knecht , S . Marrink , Molecular dynamics simulations of lipid vesicle fusion in atomic detail , Biophys . J . 92 ( 12 ) ( 2007 ) 4254 – 4261 . [ 31 ] G . S . Ayton , P . D . Blood , G . A . Voth , MembraneremodelingfromN - BARdomaininter - actions : insights from multi - scale simulation , Biophys . J . 92 ( 10 ) ( 2007 ) 3595 – 3602 . [ 32 ] G . S . Ayton , E . Lyman , V . Krishna , R . D . Swenson , C . Mim , M . M . Unger , et al . , Newin - sights into BAR domain - induced membrane remodeling , Biophys . J . 97 ( 6 ) ( 2009 ) 1616 – 1625 . [ 33 ] N . R . Latorraca , K . M . Callenberg , J . P . Boyle , M . Grabe , Continuum approaches to un - derstanding ion and peptide interactions with the membrane , J . Membr . Biol . 247 ( 5 ) ( 2014 ) 395 – 408 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00232 – 014 - 9646 - z . [ 34 ] K . M . Callenberg , Membrane Bending Is Critical for Assessing the Thermodynamic StabilityofProteinsintheMembrane ( Ph . D . thesis ) UniversityofPittsburgh , 2013 . [ 35 ] W . Helfrich , Elasticpropertiesoflipidbilayers : theoryandpossibleexperiments , Z . Naturforsch . C 28 ( 11 ) ( 1973 ) 693 – 703 . [ 36 ] P . B . Canham , The minimum energy of bending as a possible explanation of the bi - concave shape of the human red blood cell , J . Theor . Biol . 26 ( 1 ) ( 1970 ) 61 – 81 . [ 37 ] O . G . Mouritsen , M . Bloom , Mattress model of lipid – protein interactions in mem - branes , Biophys . J . 46 ( 2 ) ( 1984 ) 141 – 153 . [ 38 ] H . Huang , Deformation free energyof bilayer membrane and its effect on gramici - din channel lifetime , Biophys . J . 50 ( 6 ) ( 1986 ) 1061 – 1070 . [ 39 ] C . Nielsen , M . Goulian , O . S . Andersen , Energetics of inclusion - induced bilayer de - formations , Biophys . J . 74 ( 4 ) ( 1998 ) 1966 – 1983 . [ 40 ] M . Goulian , R . Bruinsma , P . Pincus , Long - rangeforcesinheterogeneous ﬂ uidmem - branes , Europhys . Lett . 22 ( 1993 ) 145 . [ 41 ] K . S . Kim , J . Neu , G . Oster , Curvature - mediated interactions between membrane proteins , Biophys . J . 75 ( 1998 ) 2274 – 2291 . [ 42 ] K . S . Kim , J . Neu , G . Oster , Effect of protein shape on multibody interactions be - tween membrane inclusions , Phys . Rev . E 61 ( 2000 ) 4281 – 4285 . [ 43 ] N . Ben - Tal , A . Ben - Shaul , A . Nicholls , B . Honig , Free - energy determinants of alpha - helix insertion into lipid bilayers , Biophys . J . 70 ( 4 ) ( 1996 ) 1803 – 1812 . [ 44 ] R . E . Jacobs , S . H . White , The nature of the hydrophobic bindingof small peptidesat the bilayer interface : implications for the insertion of transbilayer helices , Bio - chemistry 28 ( 8 ) ( 1989 ) 3421 – 3437 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / bi00434a042 . [ 45 ] R . D . Kamien , The geometry of soft materials : a primer , Rev . Mod . Phys . 74 ( 2002 ) 953 – 971 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1103 / RevModPhys . 74 . 953 . [ 46 ] M . Deserno , Fluidlipidmembranes : fromdifferentialgeometrytocurvaturestress - es , Chem . Phys . Lipids 185 ( 0 ) ( 2015 ) 11 – 45 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chemphyslip . 2014 . 05 . 001 . [ 47 ] D . Boal , Mechanics of the Cell , second ed . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 2012 . [ 48 ] A . S . Safran , Statistical Thermodynamics of Surfaces , Interfaces , and Membranes , Westview Press , Boulder , Colorado , 2003 ( Frontiers in Physics ) . [ 49 ] S . May , A . Ben - Shaul , Moleculartheoryof lipid – proteininteractionandtheLalpha - HII transition , Biophys . J . 76 ( 1999 ) 751 – 767 . [ 50 ] M . Hamm , M . M . Kozlov , Elasticenergyoftiltandbendingof ﬂ uidmembranes , Eur . Phys . J . E 3 ( 4 ) ( 2000 ) 323 – 335 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s101890070003 . [ 51 ] A . F . Bitbol , D . Constantin , J . B . Fournier , Bilayerelasticityatthenanoscale : theneedfor new terms , PLoS One 7 ( 11 ) ( 2012 ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0048306 . 1632 D . Argudo et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1858 ( 2016 ) 1619 – 1634 [ 52 ] M . C . Watson , A . Morriss - Andrews , P . M . Welch , F . L . H . Brown , Thermal ﬂ uctuations in shape , thickness , and molecular orientation in lipid bilayers . II . Finite surface tensions , J . Chem . Phys . 139 ( 8 ) ( 2013 ) 084706 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1063 / 1 . 4818530 . [ 53 ] F . Schmid , Are stress - free membranes really “ tensionless ” ? EPL 95 ( 2 ) ( 2011 ) 28008 . [ 54 ] H . Diamant , Model - free thermodynamics of ﬂ uid vesicles , Phys . Rev . E 84 ( 2011 ) 061123 . [ 55 ] M . Kleman , O . D . Lavrentovich , Soft Matter Physics : AnIntroduction , Springer , New York , 2003 . [ 56 ] S . L . Das , J . T . Jenkins , T . Baumgart , Neck geometry and shape transitions in vesicles with co - existing ﬂ uidphases : roleofgaussian curvature stiffnessversusspontane - ous curvature , Europhys . Lett . 86 ( 2009 ) 48 , 003 – 48 , 008 . [ 57 ] A . Ring , Gramicidin channel - induced lipid membrane deformation energy : in - ﬂ uence of chain length and boundary conditions , Biochim . Biophys . Acta Biomembr . 1278 ( 2 ) ( 1996 ) 147 – 159 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0005 - 2736 ( 95 ) 00 , 220 – 0 . [ 58 ] G . Brannigan , F . L . Brown , Contributions of Gaussian curvature and nonconstant lipid volume to protein deformation of lipid bilayers , Biophys . J . 92 ( 8 ) ( 2007 ) 864 – 876 . [ 59 ] N . Dan , P . Pincus , S . A . Safran , Membrane - induced interactions between inclusions , Langmuir 9 ( 11 ) ( 1993 ) 2768 – 2771 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la00035a005 . [ 60 ] W . Rawicz , K . C . Olbrich , T . McIntosh , D . Needham , E . Evans , Effect of chain length and unsaturation on elasticity of lipid bilayers , Biophys . J . 79 ( 1 ) ( 2000 ) 328 – 339 . [ 61 ] S . Tristam - Nagle , R . Zhang , R . M . Suter , C . R . Worthington , W . J . Sun , J . F . Nagle , Mea - surement of chain tilt angle in fully hydrated bilayers of gel phase lecithins , Biophys . J . 64 ( 4 ) ( 1993 ) 1097 – 1109 . [ 62 ] T . C . Lubensky , F . C . MacKintosh , Theory of “ ripple ” phases of lipid bilayers , Phys . Rev . Lett . 71 ( 1993 ) 1565 – 1568 . [ 63 ] F . C . MacKintosh , T . C . Lubensky , Orientational order , topology , and vesicle shapes , Phys . Rev . Lett . 67 ( 1991 ) 1169 – 1172 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 67 . 1169 ( URL http : / / link . aps . org / doi / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 67 . 1169 ) . [ 64 ] M . Hamm , M . M . Kozlov , Tilt model ofinverted amphiphilic mesophases , Eur . Phys . J . B Condens . Matter Complex Syst . 6 ( 4 ) ( 1998 ) 519 – 528 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s100510050579 . [ 65 ] A . Grafmüller , P . Shillcock , R . Lipowsky , Pathway of membrane fusion with two tension - dependent energy barriers , Phys . Rev . Lett . 98 ( 2007 ) 218101 . [ 66 ] E . B . Watkins , C . E . Miller , J . Majewski , T . L . Kuhl , Membrane texture induced by spe - ci ﬁ c proteinbinding andreceptorclustering : active roles for lipidsincellularfunc - tion , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 108 ( 17 ) ( 2011 ) 6975 – 6980 . [ 67 ] M . C . Watson , E . S . Penev , P . M . Welch , F . L . H . Brown , Thermal ﬂ uctuations in shape , thickness , and molecular orientation in lipid bilayers , J . Chem . Phys . 135 ( 24 ) ( 2011 ) 244701 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1063 / 1 . 3660673 . [ 68 ] M . C . Watson , E . G . Brandt , P . M . Welch , F . L . H . Brown , Determining biomembrane bending rigidities from simulations of modest size , Phys . Rev . Lett . 109 ( 2012 ) 028102 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 109 . 028102 . [ 69 ] M . S . Jablin , K . Akabori , J . F . Nagle , Experimentalsupportfortilt - dependenttheoryof biomembranemechanics , Phys . Rev . Lett . 113 ( 2014 ) 248102 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 113 . 248102 . [ 70 ] L . D . Landau , E . M . Lifshitz , Theory of Elasticity , Butterworth - Heinemann , Oxford , 1999 . [ 71 ] S . May , Protein - induced bilayer deformations : the lipid tilt degreeof freedom , Eur . Biophys . J . 29 ( 1 ) ( 2000 ) 17 – 28 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s002490050247 . [ 72 ] F . C . Frank , I . liquid crystals . on the theory of liquid crystals , Trans . Faraday 25 ( 1958 ) 19 – 28 . [ 73 ] I . W . Stewart , The Static and Dynamic Continuum Theory of Liquid Crystals , Taylor and Francis , London , UK , 2004 . [ 74 ] J . N . Israelachvili , Intermolecular and Surface Forces , third ed . Academic Press , San Diego , US , 1992 . [ 75 ] L . Deseri , M . D . Piccioni , G . Zurlo , Derivation of a new free energy for biological membranes , Contin . Mech . Thermodyn . 20 ( 5 ) ( 2008 ) 255 – 273 . [ 76 ] U . Seifert , Con ﬁ gurations of ﬂ uid membranes and vesicles , Adv . Phys . 46 ( 1997 ) 13 – 137 . [ 77 ] P . B . S . Kumar , G . Gompper , R . Lipowsky , Modulatedphasesinmulticomponent ﬂ uid membranes , Phys . Rev . E 60 ( 1999 ) 4610 – 4618 . [ 78 ] F . C . MacKintosh , Mixed ﬂ uid bilayers : effects of con ﬁ nement , Phys . Rev . E 50 ( 1994 ) 2891 – 2897 . [ 79 ] J . Fournier , P . Galatola , Tubularvesiclesandeffective fourth - order membraneelas - tic theories , Europhys . Lett . 39 ( 2 ) ( 1997 ) 225 . [ 80 ] R . Goetz , W . Helfrich , The egg carton : theory of a periodic superstructure of some lipid membranes , J . Phys . II France 6 ( 1996 ) 215 – 223 . [ 81 ] D . P . Siegel , Fourth - order curvature energy model for the stability of bicontinuous inverted cubic phases in amphiphile – water systems , Langmuir 26 ( 11 ) ( 2010 ) 8673 – 8683 . [ 82 ] D . Cuvelier , I . Derényi , P . Bassereau , P . Nassoy , Coalescence of membrane tethers : experiments , theory , and applications , Biophys . J . 88 ( 4 ) ( 2005 ) 2714 – 2726 . [ 83 ] A . Tian , T . Baumgart , Sorting of lipids and proteins in membrane curvature gradi - ents , Biophys . J . 96 ( 7 ) ( 2009 ) 2676 – 2688 . [ 84 ] M . Heinrich , A . Tian , C . Esposito , T . Baumgart , Dynamic sorting of lipids and pro - teins in membrane tubes with a moving phase boundary , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 107 ( 16 ) ( 2010 ) 7208 – 7213 . [ 85 ] V . A . Harmandaris , M . Deserno , A novel method for measuring the bending rigidity of model lipid membranes by simulating tethers , J . Chem . Phys . 125 ( 20 ) ( 2006 ) 208905 . [ 86 ] M . Hu , P . Diggins , M . Deserno , Determining the bending modulus of a lipid mem - brane by simulating buckling , J . Chem . Phys . 138 ( 21 ) ( 2013 ) 214110 . [ 87 ] H . Shiba , H . Noguchi , Estimationofthebendingrigidityandspontaneouscurvature of ﬂ uid membranes in simulations , Phys . Rev . E 84 ( 2011 ) 031926 . [ 88 ] J . Yoo , M . B . Jackson , Q . Cui , Acomparisonofcoarse - grainedandcontinuummodelsfor membrane bending in lipid bilayer fusion pores , Biophys . J . 104 ( 4 ) ( 2013 ) 841 – 852 . [ 89 ] P . Wiggins , R . Phillips , Membrane – protein interactions in mechanosensitive chan - nels , Biophys . J . 88 ( 2 ) ( 2005 ) 880 – 902 . [ 90 ] Y . Tang , J . Cao , X . Che , J . Yoo , A . Yethiraj , Q . Cui , A ﬁ nite element framework for studying the mechanical response of macromolecules : application to the gating of the mechanosensitive channel mscl , Biophys . J . 91 ( 4 ) ( 2006 ) 1248 – 1263 . [ 91 ] D . Reeves , T . Ursell , P . Sens , J . Kondev , R . Phillips , Membrane mechanics as a probe of ion - channel gating mechanisms , Phys . Rev . E 78 ( 2008 ) 041901 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 78 . 041901 . [ 92 ] J . M . Vanegas , M . Arroyo , Force transduction and lipid binding in mscl : a continuum - molecular approach , PLoS One 9 ( 12 ) ( 2014 ) e113947 . [ 93 ] O . S . Andersen , R . E . 2ndKoeppe , Bilayer thickness andmembraneproteinfunction : an energetic perspective , Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 36 ( 1 ) ( 2007 ) 107 – 130 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . biophys . 36 . 040306 . 132643 . [ 94 ] S . Leibler , Curvature instability in membranes , J . Phys . 47 ( 1986 ) 507 – 516 . [ 95 ] J . M . Allain , M . BenAmar , Biphasicvesicle : instability inducedbyadsorptionofpro - teins , Physica A 337 ( 2004 ) 531 – 545 . [ 96 ] S . A . Rautu , G . Rowlands , M . S . Turner , Membrane composition variation and underdamped mechanics near transmembrane proteins and coats , Phys . Rev . Lett . 114 ( 2015 ) 098101 . [ 97 ] Z . Shi , T . Baumgart , Membrane tension and peripheral protein density mediate membrane shape transitions , Nat . Commun . 6 ( 183 ) ( 2015 ) 5974 . [ 98 ] B . Lewis , D . Engelman , Bacteriorhodopsinremainsdispersedin ﬂ uidphospholipidbi - layers over a wide range of bilayer thicknesses , J . Mol . Biol . 166 ( 2 ) ( 1983 ) 203 – 210 . [ 99 ] T . A . Harroun , W . T . Heller , T . M . Weiss , L . Yang , H . W . Huan , Theoretical analysis of hydrophobicmatchingandmembrane - mediatedinteractionsinlipidbilayerscon - taining gramicidin , Biophys . J . 76 ( 6 ) ( 1999 ) 3176 – 3185 . [ 100 ] S . May , Theoriesonstructuralperturbationsoflipidbilayers , Curr . Opin . ColloidIn - terface Sci . 5 ( 2000 ) 244 – 249 . [ 101 ] T . A . Harroun , W . T . Heller , T . M . Weiss , L . Yang , H . W . Huan , Experimental evidence for hydrophobic matching and membrane - mediated interactions in lipid bilayers containing gramicidin , Biophys . J . 76 ( 2 ) ( 1999 ) 937 – 945 . [ 102 ] S . Marcelja , Lipid - mediatedproteininteractioninmembranes , Biochim . Biophys . Acta Biomembr . 455 ( 1 ) ( 1976 ) 1 – 7 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0005 - 2736 ( 76 ) 90149 - 8 ( URL http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / 0005273676901498 ) . [ 103 ] J . Owicki , H . McConnell , Theory of protein – lipid and protein – protein interactions in bilayer membranes , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 76 ( 1979 ) 4750 – 4754 . [ 104 ] H . Aranda - Espinoza , A . Berman , N . Dan , P . Pincus , S . Safran , Interactionbetweenin - clusions embedded in membranes , Biophys . J . 71 ( 2 ) ( 1996 ) 648 – 656 . [ 105 ] G . Brannigan , F . L . H . Brown , A consistent model for thermal ﬂ uctuations and protein - induced deformations in lipid bilayers , Biophys . J . 90 ( 2006 ) 1501 – 1520 . [ 106 ] J . B . Fournier , Microscopic membrane elasticity and interactions among membrane inclusions : interplay between the shape , dilation , tilt and tilt - difference modes , Eur . Phys . J . B Condens . Matter Complex Syst . 11 ( 2 ) ( 1999 ) 261 – 272 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF03219168 . [ 107 ] S . May , Membrane perturbations induced by integral proteins : the role of confor - mational restrictions of the lipid chains , Langmuir 18 ( 16 ) ( 2002 ) 6356 – 6364 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la025747c . [ 108 ] K . Bohinc , V . Kralj - Igli č , S . May , Interaction between two cylindrical inclusions in a symmetric lipid bilayer , J . Chem . Phys . 119 ( 14 ) ( 2003 ) 7435 – 7444 . [ 109 ] Y . Kozlovsky , J . Zimmerberg , M . M . Kozlov , Orientation and interaction of oblique cylindrical inclusions embedded in a lipid monolayer : a theoretical model for viral fusion peptides , Biophys . J . 87 ( 8 ) ( 2004 ) 999 – 1012 . [ 110 ] M . Fo š nari č , A . Igli č , S . May , In ﬂ uenceofrigidinclusionsonthebendingelasticityof a lipid membrane , Phys . Rev . E 74 ( 5 ) ( 2006 ) 051503 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 74 . 051503 . [ 111 ] P . Rangamani , A . Benjamini , A . Agrawal , B . Smit , D . J . Steigmann , G . Oster , Small scale membrane mechanics , Biomech . Model . Mechanobiol . 13 ( 4 ) ( 2014 ) 697 – 711 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10237 – 013 - 0528 - 6 . [ 112 ] S . May , A . Ben - Shaul , A molecular model for lipid - mediated interaction between proteins in membranes , Phys . Chem . Chem . Phys . 2 ( 2000 ) 4494 – 4502 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1039 / B003570J . [ 113 ] R . Goetz , G . Gompper , R . Lipowsky , Mobility and elasticity of self - assembledmem - branes , Phys . Rev . Lett . 82 ( 1999 ) 221 – 224 . [ 114 ] P . Wiggins , R . Phillips , Analytic models for mechanotransduction : gating a mechanosensitive channel , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 101 ( 12 ) ( 2004 ) 4071 – 4076 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0307804101 . [ 115 ] R . Phillips , T . Ursell , P . Wiggins , P . Sens , Emerging roles for lipids in shaping membrane - protein function , Nature 459 ( 2009 ) 379 – 385 . [ 116 ] C . A . Haselwandter , R . Phillips , Connection between oligomeric state and gating characteristics of mechanosensitive ion channels , PLoS Comput . Biol . 9 ( 5 ) ( 2013 ) 1 – 13 . [ 117 ] C . Haselwandter , R . Phillips , Directional interactions and cooperativity between mechanosensitive membrane proteins , EPL 101 ( 6 ) ( 2013 ) 68002 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1209 / 0295 - 5075 / 101 / 68002 . [ 118 ] J . B . Fournier , P . Galatola , High - order power series expansion of the elastic inter - action between conical membrane inclusions , Eur . Phys . J . E 38 ( 8 ) ( 2015 ) 86 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1140 / epje / i2015 – 15086 - 3 . [ 119 ] T . Kim , K . Lee , P . Morris , R . W . Pastor , O . S . Andersen , W . Im , In ﬂ uence of hydropho - bic mismatch on structures and dynamics of gramicidin A and lipid bilayers , Biophys . J . 102 ( 7 ) ( 2012 ) 1551 – 1560 . [ 120 ] C . Nielsen , O . S . Andersen , Inclusion - inducedbilayerdeformations : effectsofmono - layer equilibrium curvature , Biophys . J . 79 ( 5 ) ( 2000 ) 2583 – 2604 . 1633 D . Argudo et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1858 ( 2016 ) 1619 – 1634 [ 121 ] J . B . Fournier , P . G . Dommersnes , Comment on “ long - range forces in heterogeneous ﬂ uid membranes ” , EPL ( Europhys . Lett . ) 39 ( 6 ) ( 1997 ) 681 ( URL http : / / stacks . iop . org / 0295 - 5075 / 39 / i = 6 / a = 681 ) . [ 122 ] M . Deserno , K . Kremer , H . Paulsen , C . Peter , F . Schmid , Computational studies of biomembrane systems : theoretical considerations , simulation models , and appli - cations , From Single Molecules to Nanoscopically Structured Materials , Advances in Polymer Science , vol . 260 , Springer International Publishing 2014 , pp . 237 – 283 . [ 123 ] P . G . Dommersnes , J . B . Fournier , N - bodystudyofanisotropicmembraneinclusions : membrane mediated interactions and ordered aggregation , Eur . Phys . J . B 12 ( 1 ) ( 1999 ) 9 – 12 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s100510050968 . [ 124 ] J . B . Fournier , P . Dommersnes , P . Galatola , Dynaminrecruitmentbyclathrincoats : a physical step ? C . R . Biol . 326 ( 5 ) ( 2003 ) 467 – 476 . [ 125 ] I . Koltover , J . O . Radler , C . R . Sa ﬁ nya , Membranemediatedattractionandorderedag - gregation of colloidal particles bound to giant phospholipid vesicles , Phys . Rev . Lett . 82 ( 1999 ) 1991 – 1994 . [ 126 ] C . Yolcu , M . Deserno , Membrane - mediated interactions between rigid inclusions : an effective ﬁ eld theory , Phys . Rev . E 86 ( 2012 ) 031906 . [ 127 ] K . Lee , R . W . Pastor , O . S . Andersen , W . Im , Assessingsmectic liquid - crystal continu - um models for elastic bilayer deformations , Chem . Phys . Lipids 169 ( 0 ) ( 2013 ) 19 – 26 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chemphyslip . 2013 . 01 . 005 ( Computational ap - proaches to understanding lipid - protein interactions ) . [ 128 ] S . Choe , K . A . Hecht , M . Grabe , A continuum method for determining membrane protein insertion energies and the problem of charged residues , J . Gen . Physiol . 131 ( 6 ) ( 2008 ) 563 – 573 . [ 129 ] K . M . Callenberg , N . R . Latorraca , M . Grabe , Membrane bendingiscriticalforthesta - bility of voltage sensor segments in the membrane , J . Gen . Physiol . 140 ( 1 ) ( 2012 ) 55 – 68 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1085 / jgp . 201110766 . [ 130 ] A . Panahi , M . Feig , Dynamicheterogeneousdielectricgeneralizedborn ( dhdgb ) : an implicit membrane model with a dynamically varying bilayer thickness , J . Chem . Theory Comput . 9 ( 3 ) ( 2013 ) 1709 – 1719 . [ 131 ] Y . C . Zhou , B . Lu , A . A . Gorfe , Continuum electromechanical modeling of protein – membrane interactions , Phys . Rev . E 82 ( 2010 ) 041923 . [ 132 ] S . Mondal , G . Khelashvili , J . Shan , O . Andersen , H . Weinstein , Quantitativemodeling of membrane deformations by mutihelical membrane proteins : application to G - protein coupled receptors , Biophys . J . 101 ( 9 ) ( 2011 ) 2092 – 2101 . [ 133 ] B . Honig , A . Nicholls , Classical electrostatics in biology and chemistry , Science 268 ( 5214 ) ( 1995 ) 1144 – 1149 . [ 134 ] N . A . Baker , D . Sept , S . Joseph , M . J . Holst , J . A . McCammon , Electrostatics of nanosys - tems : application to microtubules and the ribosome , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 98 ( 18 ) ( 2001 ) 10 , 037 – 10 , 041 . [ 135 ] K . M . Callenberg , O . P . Choudhary , G . L . de Forest , D . W . Gohara , N . A . Baker , M . Grabe , Apbsmem : a graphical interface for electrostatic calculations at the membrane , PLoS One 5 ( 9 ) ( 2010 ) e12722 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0012722 . [ 136 ] F . V . Marcoline , N . Bethel , C . J . Guerriero , J . L . Brodsky , M . Grabe , Membrane protein properties revealed through data - rich electrostatics calculations , Structure 23 ( 8 ) ( 2015 ) 1526 – 1537 . [ 137 ] D . Sitkoff , N . Ben - Tal , B . Honig , Calculation of alkane to water solvation free ener - gies using continuum solvent models , J . Phys . Chem . 100 ( 7 ) ( 1996 ) 2744 – 2752 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jp952986i . [ 138 ] C . L . Wee , A . Chetwynd , M . S . P . Sansom , Membrane insertion of a voltage sensor helix , Biophys . J . 100 ( 2 ) ( 2011 ) 410 – 419 . [ 139 ] S . Mondal , K . Khelashvili , L . Shi , H . Weinstein , Thecostoflivinginthemembrane : a case study of hydrophobic mismatch for the multi - segment protein leut , Chem . Phys . Lipids 169 ( 0 ) ( 2013 ) 27 – 38 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chemphyslip . 2013 . 01 . 006 ( Computational approaches to understanding lipid – protein interactions ) . [ 140 ] F . Feng , W . S . Klug , Finite element modeling of lipid bilayer membranes , J . Comput . Phys . 220 ( 1 ) ( 2006 ) 394 – 408 . [ 141 ] G . Khelashvili , D . Harries , H . Weinstein , Modeling membrane deformations and lipid demixing upon protein – membrane interaction : the bar dimer adsorption , Biophys . J . 97 ( 6 ) ( 2009 ) 1626 – 1635 . [ 142 ] R . De Vita , I . W . Stewart , Energetics of lipid bilayers with applications to deforma - tions induced by inclusions , Soft Matter 9 ( 2013 ) 2056 – 2068 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1039 / C2SM27102H . [ 143 ] M . B . Partenskii , P . C . Jordan , Membranedeformationandtheelasticenergyofinser - tion : perturbationofmembraneelasticconstantsduetopeptideinsertion , J . Chem . Phys . 117 ( 23 ) ( 2002 ) 10768 – 10776 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1063 / 1 . 1519840 . [ 144 ] O . H . S . Ollila , H . J . Risselada , M . Louhivuori , E . Lindahl , I . Vattulainen , S . J . Marrink , 3D pressure ﬁ eld in lipid membranes and membrane – protein complexes , Phys . Rev . Lett . 102 ( 2009 ) 078101 . [ 145 ] J . Yoo , Q . Cui , Three - dimensionalstress ﬁ eldaroundamembraneprotein : atomistic and coarse - grained simulation analysis of gramicidin A , Biophys . J . 104 ( 1 ) ( 2013 ) 117 – 127B . [ 146 ] A . J . Sodt , R . W . Pastor , Molecular modeling of lipid membrane curvature induction by a peptide : More than simply shape , Biophys . J . 106 ( 9 ) ( 2014 ) 1958 – 1969 . [ 147 ] S . Mukherjee , H . Zheng , M . G . Derebe , K . M . Callenberg , C . L . Partch , D . Rollins , et al . , Antibacterial membrane attack by a pore - forming intestinal c - type lectin , Nature 505 ( 7481 ) ( 2014 ) 103 – 107 . [ 148 ] D . Sitkoff , K . A . Sharp , B . Honig , Accurate calculation of hydration free energies using macroscopic solvent models , J . Phys . Chem . 98 ( 7 ) ( 1994 ) 1978 – 1988 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / j100058a043 . [ 149 ] K . Lum , D . Chandler , J . D . Weeks , Hydrophobicity at small and large length scales , J . Phys . Chem . B 103 ( 22 ) ( 1999 ) 4570 – 4577 . [ 150 ] E . Gallicchio , R . M . Levy , AGBNP : ananalyticimplicitsolventmodelsuitableformo - lecular dynamics simulations and high - resolution modeling , J . Comput . Chem . 25 ( 4 ) ( 2004 ) 479 – 499 . [ 151 ] J . A . Wagoner , N . A . Baker , Assessing implicit models for nonpolar mean solvation forces : the importance of dispersion and volume terms , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 103 ( 22 ) ( 2006 ) 8331 – 8336 . [ 152 ] M . F . Sanner , A . J . Olson , J . C . Spehner , Reduced surface : an ef ﬁ cient way to compute molecular surfaces , Biopolymers 38 ( 3 ) ( 1996 ) 305 – 320 . [ 153 ] D . Argudo , N . P . Bethel , F . V . Marcoline , C . W . Wolgemuth , M . Grabe , Newcontinuum approaches for determining protein induced membrane deformations ( in prepara - tion ) 2016 . [ 154 ] C . W . Wolgemuth , M . Zajac , The moving boundary nodemethod : a level set - based , ﬁ nitevolumealgorithmwithapplicationstocellmotility , J . Comput . Phys . 229 ( 19 ) ( 2010 ) 7287 – 7308 . [ 155 ] F . M . Richards , Areas , volumes , packing , and protein structure , Annu . Rev . Biophys . Bioeng . 6 ( 1 ) ( 1977 ) 151 – 176 . [ 156 ] R . M . Venable , F . L . H . Brown , R . W . Pastor , Mechanical properties of lipid bilayers from molecular dynamics simulation , Chem . Phys . Lipids ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chemphyslip . 2015 . 07 . 014 . [ 157 ] N . Ku č erka , M . Nieh , J . Katsaras , Fluid phase lipid areas and bilayer thicknesses of commonly used phosphatidylcholines as a function of temperature , Biochim . Biophys . Acta Biomembr . 2011 ( 1808 ) 2761 – 2771 . [ 158 ] N . Ku č erka , S . Tristram - Nagle , J . F . Nagle , Structure of fully hydrated ﬂ uid phase lipid bilayers with monounsaturated chains , J . Membr . Biol . 208 ( 2005 ) 193 – 202 . [ 159 ] H . Mingyang , J . Briguglio , M . Deserno , Determining the Gaussian curvature modu - lus of lipid membranes in simulations , Biophys . J . 102 ( 6 ) ( 2012 ) 1403 – 1410 . [ 160 ] M . Hu , D . H . de Jong , S . J . Marrink , M . Deserno , Gaussian curvature elasticity deter - mined from global shape transformationsandlocal stress distributions : a compar - ative study using the MARTINI model , Faraday Discuss . 161 ( 2013 ) 365 – 382 . [ 161 ] J . Henriksen , A . C . Rowat , E . Brief , Y . W . Hsueh , J . L . Thewalt , M . J . Zuckermann , et al . , Universal behavior of membranes with sterols , Biochim . Biophys . Acta Biomembr . 90 ( 2006 ) 1639 – 1649 . [ 162 ] H . A . Stern , S . E . Feller , Calculation of thedielectric permittivity pro ﬁ le fora nonuni - form system : application to a lipid bilayer simulation , J . Chem . Phys . 118 ( 7 ) ( 2003 ) 3401 – 3412 . [ 163 ] E . M . Bevers , J . Rosing , R . F . A . Zwaal , Development of procoagulant binding sites on the platelet surface , in : J . Westwick , M . Scully , D . MacIntyre , V . Kakkar ( Eds . ) , Mechanisms ofStimulus — Response CouplinginPlatelets , Advances inExperimen - tal Medicine and Biology , vol . 192 , Springer , US , ISBN : 978 - 1 - 4615 - 9444 - 4 1985 , pp . 359 – 371 . [ 164 ] M . Malvezzi , M . Chalat , R . Janjusevic , A . Picollo , H . Terashima , A . K . Menon , et al . , Ca2 + - dependent phospholipid scrambling by a reconstituted TMEM16 ion chan - nel , Nat . Commun . 4 ( 2367 ) ( 2013 ) . [ 165 ] H . Yang , A . Kim , T . David , D . Palmer , T . Jin , J . Tien , et al . , TMEM16F Forms a Ca2 + - activatedcation channel requiredforlipid scrambling inplateletsduringblood co - agulation , Cell 151 ( 1 ) ( 2012 ) 111 – 122 . [ 166 ] K . Yu , J . M . Whitlock , K . Lee , E . A . Ortlund , Y . Y . Cui , H . C . Hartzell , Identi ﬁ cation of a lipid scrambling domain in ANO6 / TMEM16F , eLife 4 ( 2015 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 06901 . [ 167 ] P . J . Stansfeld , J . E . Goose , M . Caffrey , E . P . Carpenter , J . L . Parker , S . Newstead , et al . , Memprotmd : automated insertion of membrane protein structures into explicit lipid membranes , Structure 23 ( 7 ) ( 2015 ) 1350 – 1361 . [ 168 ] M . A . Lomize , A . L . Lomize , I . D . Pogozheva , H . I . Mosberg , OPM : orientations of pro - teins in membranes database , Bioinformatics 22 ( 5 ) ( 2006 ) 623 – 625 . [ 169 ] J . D . Brunner , N . K . Lim , S . Schenck , A . Duerst , R . Dutzier , X - ray structure of a calcium - activated TMEM16 lipid scramblase , Nature 516 ( 7530 ) ( 2014 ) 207 – 212 . [ 170 ] J . Yoo , Q . Cui , Membrane - mediated protein – proteininteractionsandconnectionto elastic models : a coarse - grained simulation analysis of gramicidin A association , Biophys . J . 104 ( 1 ) ( 2013 ) 128 – 138 . [ 171 ] T . Weber , B . V . Zemelman , J . A . McNew , B . Westermann , M . Gmachl , F . Parlati , et al . , Snarepins : minimal machinery for membrane fusion , Cell 92 ( 6 ) ( 1998 ) 759 – 772 . [ 172 ] J . S . Rossman , X . Jing , G . P . Leser , R . A . Lamb , In ﬂ uenza virus M2 protein mediates ESCRT - independent membrane scission , Cell 142 ( 6 ) ( 2010 ) 902 – 913 . [ 173 ] M . J . Berger , P . Colella , Local adaptive mesh re ﬁ nement for shock hydrodynamics , J . Comput . Phys . 82 ( 1 ) ( 1989 ) 64 – 84 . 1634 D . Argudo et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1858 ( 2016 ) 1619 – 1634