Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) Foundations of Science ( 2019 ) 24 : 527 – 540 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10699 - 019 - 09600 - z 1 3 Interdisciplinary Approach to Combine Science and Art : Understanding of the Paintings of René Magritte from the Viewpoint of Quantum Mechanics Hunkoog Jho 1 Published online : 16 March 2019 © Springer Nature B . V . 2019 Abstract In the twentieth century , science and art had a grand paradigmatic shift each other . This study aims at comparing the epistemologies of surrealism and quantum mechanics that emerged in the 1930s and interpreting the paintings from a physical viewpoint , with a focus on the Copenhagen interpretation . In terms of epistemologies , the arbitrary relation - ship between an object and an image advocated by Magritte may correspond to the inde - terminacy between physical entities and measurement . This study analysed the paintings of Magritte from the point of view of the features of the Copenhagen interpretation categories of wave – particle duality , indeterminacy , probabilistic interpretation and quantum hypothe - sis . Based on such discussions , this study gives some implications for enhancing creativity through an interdisciplinary approach . Keywords Copenhagen interpretation · Interdisciplinary approach · Quantum mechanics · René Magritte · Surrealism 1 Introduction It is often assumed that science and art are incompatible with each other ( Snow 1998 ) , but a number of studies shed light on the different arguments . Root - Bernstein ( 1999 ) , in his book Sparks of Genius , illustrated 13 ways of thinking commonly found in creative scien - tists and artists , such as observing , abstracting and finding patterns . Weisberg and Miller illustrated the role of visual images in establishing modern physics ( Miller 1996 ; Weis - berg 2006 ) . Vitz and Glimcher ( 1984 ) contended that socio - cultural backgrounds shared in science and art brought about a similar change in both . Scientific understanding has also contributed to creativity in art . For example , when van Eyck drew a convex mirror in The Portrait of Arnolfini , the apparent image was very accurate in terms of aberration ( Cri - minisi et al . 2004 ) and Dürer developed a kind of linear perspective based on the vision of human eyes ( Lützen 2007 ; Massey 2003 ) . Likewise , art has also been helpful in bringing * Hunkoog Jho hjho80 @ dankook . ac . kr 1 Department of General Education , Dankook University , Room 427 - 04 , Building of Humanities , 119 Dandae - ro , Dongnam - gu , Cheonan , Chungnam 31116 , Korea 528 H . Jho 1 3 about new ideas in science . For example , Kepler viewed the universe as harmony in music and envisioned the regularities of orbital motions in the solar planets ( T 2 ∝ R 3 ) ( Ferguson 2002 ) . He drew a few musical notes in his book when thinking of the analogy between acoustic frequency and the orbital period . In addition , revolutions in science and art emerged during similar periods . For example , during the Renaissance , artists became interested in representing the reality of objects on the canvas and developed various canonical methods such as linear perspective and ico - nography ( Babette and Saslow 2013 ; Jho 2014 ; Kemp 1990 ) . On the one hand , Newtonian mechanics replaced the position of Aristotelian science and established principles and laws comprehensive across contexts ( Shapin 1994 ; Schmitt 1981 ; Shirley and Hoeniger 1985 ) . In the twentieth century , science and art encountered a great change : in science , from New - tonian mechanics to quantum mechanics and from deterministic and causal to indetermi - nate and probabilistic views ( Allday 2009 ; Longair 2006 ) and , in art , from representation to expression . The commonality in both cases is the denial of objectivity and the accept - ance of contingency . The representative cases in science and art in the twentieth century are Bohr and Magritte , respectively . With many other physicists , Bohr challenged classical physics with complementarity principles and solved many tantalizing problems at the atomic level . Magritte brought up sensations with ordinary images in unusual contexts , so - called sur - realism , and influenced many genres in the arts such as minimalism and conceptual and pop art . It is intriguing that they both worked actively in their fields during a similar time period and had no explicit acquaintance or relationship . The key ideas in surrealism and the traditional interpretation of quantum mechanics were formed before the 1930s . Socio - cultural or philosophical aspects at that time may have stimulated the progression in both fields and there was something in common between the two . This study aims at examining this commonality by comparing the epistemologies of Magritte and the Copenhagen inter - pretation and analysing his paintings from a physical viewpoint . Searching for similarities between the two different ideas will lead us to make a way of improving creativity through combining science and art . 2 Understanding of Magritte and the Copenhagen Interpretation René Magritte was well known as a pioneer of modern art , specifically surrealism . His paintings are often regarded as surrealistic because they contain unrealistic constructions of images ; he refused to follow automatism and the reckless illusion , unlike main stream of surrealist painting ( Hughes 2008 ) . His idiosyncratic style of uncanny drawing is referred to as dépaysement , which involves the deployment of daily objects in unfamiliar contexts where they cannot exist and evokes a sense of illusion to break the relationship between reality and images in the painting ( Choi 2004 ; Kang 2007 ) . His intention was on drawing an image that was placed in between the real and illusory worlds . He was more concerned with the philosophical aspects , rather than methods , of art . Even though he painted for four decades ( 1925 – 1965 ) , most of his major themes made their appearance by the 1930s , and the paintings that followed were mature elabo - rations of these earlier productions ( Gablik 1985 ) . While he stayed in Paris in the 1920s , he met various artists standing on the edge of new realms in art—surrealism , futurism , and cubism—and he was interested in the metaphysical themes of Giorgio de Chiri - co’s work . He became more renowned after his first individual exhibition in New York . 529 Interdisciplinary Approach to Combine Science and Art : … 1 3 Throughout his life , he drew stereotypical images , such as a gentleman with bowler hat , an open window or door , and a canvas on an easel ( Gohr 2009 ; Hughes 2008 ) . Intriguingly , the fact that he was a polymath in various fields of the arts was not well known to the public . He was keen on poetry and novels . He was well acquainted with André Breton and Paul Éluard , the leaders of surrealism in poetry , and he drew many paintings that included poetic ideas , such as Le jockey perdu ( The Lost Jockey ; 1925 ) and Cosmogonie Elementaire ( Elementary Cosmogony ; 1949 ) . His application of a juxtaposition of symbolic objects in unfamiliar contexts was influenced by de Chirico ( Gablik 1985 ; Rooney and Plattner 2016 ) . He was also interested in Fantômas , a fic - tional character in a famous novel at that time , and painted many works showing the extraordinary actions of this character , such as The Threatened Assassin ( 1926 – 27 ) and Universal Gravitation ( 1943 ) . He even wrote a few novels , although none were ever offi - cially published . He was also connected to philosophy thanks to his distinctive view of painting . A prominent modern philosopher , Michel Foucault , was stimulated by his painting and corresponded with him . Finally , he published a book named The Treachery of Images ( Wear and Zarconi 2011 ) . In this light , he can be considered representative of an interdisciplinary approach . Niels Bohr , a Danish physicist , contributed to the establishment of quantum mechanics while explaining the structure of the hydrogen atom , and the Nobel Prize was conferred on him in 1922 . He studied at the University of Copenhagen and established the Institute for Theoretical Physics there with the support of public and private donations ( Plotnitsky 2006 ) . There he invited celebrated scholars such as Born , De Broglie , Heisenberg , Lorentz , Pauli and Schrödinger to discuss quantum mechanics . The Copenhagen interpretation was first named by Heisenberg when he explained the meaning of quantum mechanics ( Heisen - berg 1955 ) . Bohr established the fundamental ideas of quantum mechanics through a num - ber of discussions with his colleagues and debates at the Solvay Conferences in the 1920s . Even though his atomic model is not applicable to atoms with multiple electrons and the relativistic motion of small particles , his ideas are useful for students in helping them to recognize the differences between classical and quantum mechanics . The main ideas in quantum mechanics were first advocated by Bohr , Heisenberg , Born and others . The discussions at the Solvay Conferences in the 1920s elaborated their ideas . The main features of the Copenhagen interpretation are often introduced in the textbooks of modern physics . A series of questions in relation to its interpretation are crucial in developing new formalisms ( Cramer 2016 ) : The problem of identity : What is the meaning of the wave function ( or state vector ) of wave mechanics and the matrix elements of matrix mechanics and where does it exist ? The problem of wave – particle duality : How can the mutually exclusive particle - like and wave - like behaviours described by quantum mechanical systems and observed in experiments be reconciled ? The problem of indeterminism : Why is quantum formalism able to make only proba - bilistic , but not definite and deterministic , predictions of the outcome of well - speci - fied physical situations ? How can identical conditions produce varying results ? What is the source of this intrinsic randomness ? The problem of measurement and collapse : How and why does the wave function ( or state vector ) of wave mechanics change abruptly and discontinuously when a meas - urement is made ? What is the mechanism behind state reduction ? 530 H . Jho 1 3 The problem of nonlocality : How and why are separated but entangled parts of a quantum mechanical system non - locally connected , so that measurements on one subsystem somehow influence the outcomes of measurements on the other subsys - tem , even when they are out of speed - of - light contact . What is the mechanism behind nonlocality ? The problem of identity is an accompanying issue in quantum mechanics . At that time , several scientists discovered line spectra formed by an electron in a hydrogen atom to not be a continuous form . To solve this problem , Bohr proposed the quantum hypothesis that the orbits of an electron are determined by the equation 2πr = nλ and that an elec - tron absorbs or emits energy when it moves to another orbit as a discrete form of energy . His idea explained many of the questions about atomic phenomena in a hydrogen atom , although the Zeeman effect was later found to be due to the influence of external magnetic fields . Regarding a series of phenomena in compatible with classical physics , various kinds of quantum numbers were introduced that can be drawn in a matrix form ( Cramer 2016 ; Jammer 1989 ) . On the other hand , Schrödinger ( 1926a , b , c , d ) sought a solution to fit classical mechanics , which was a wave form related to thermodynamics . Paradoxically , his argument vindicated the wave form of quantum mechanics and contributed to explaining the undulatory motions of particles such as electrons and photons ( Allday 2009 ) . This indi - cates that any state of a quantum object can be expressed as a wave function . His thought contributed to the statistical approach to quantum mechanics , proposed by Born and Pauli , that a probabilistic density function can be given as the square of the absolute value of a wave function . That is to say , the discovered result , irrespective of particle or wave , is one of eigenvalues and is determined by measurement . The physical state of a particle is only expressed as a probabilistic form because it has different states and our sensory system inevitably affects its original state . The wave form is a useful way to express diverse states of a quantum object , such as energy , whereas the matrix form is more useful for aspects of its motion , such as momentum and position . Hence , both the wave - like and particle - like theories of light and matter are necessary to understand the physical phenomenon in spite of their exclusive natures . Such a marvellous identity affected many ideas about quantum mechanics . Foremost , De Broglie proposed that matter as well as light can be expressed as wave forms , and Bohr believed that while they are mutually exclusive , they are both necessary to understand the whole picture of physics . The intertwined actions demolished the need for the perfectly precise experiment , and Bohr and Heisenberg called it the indeterminacy principle . This implies two different meanings . The first is the inevitable influence of measurement on quantum behaviour , and the other is the innate indeterminacy due to entangled variables— such as momentum and position , and energy and time—which seem independent but are in reality conjugated . This entanglement challenged locality , which had been considered a golden rule in the theory of relativity ( Camilleri 2009 ; Cramer 2016 ) . The indeterminist viewpoint is one of the biggest differences between Newtonian and quantum mechanics . To some extent , quantum mechanics brought about a greater para - digm shift than the theory of relativity due to its philosophical stance about reality and measurement , which was different from classical mechanics ( McAllister 1996 ) . Moreover , mathematical formalism enabled the prediction of interesting phenomena that are contra - dictory to classical mechanics . For example , an electron in an atom can exist everywhere as long as we view it as a dispersed wave , and two electrons can be superimposed like acoustic waves , which does not make any sense in classical mechanics . Based on the afore - mentioned problems , the features of the Copenhagen interpretation can be summarized as 531 Interdisciplinary Approach to Combine Science and Art : … 1 3 wave – particle duality , the indeterminacy principle ( dual meaning ) , probabilistic interpre - tation and the quantum hypothesis ( Bohr’s atomic model ) . Such an idea may arise from the philosophical aspects of quantum mechanics . Actually , Bohr was more concerned with the philosophical meanings of physical expression than the mathematical formalism ( Jam - mer 1989 ) . He was influenced more by other disciplines . His father , Christian Bohr , was a friend of Harald Høffding , who studied the existentialism of Kierkegaard , and Bohr took some courses on philosophy taught by Høffding ( Murdoch 1990 ) . Interpretations about identity in psychology led him to think about the relationship between the agents in an experiment and its experimental results ( Jammer 1989 ; Plotnitsky 2006 ) . To sum up , the two polymaths in science and art had aspects in common in spite of not having had an intimate relationship with each other ( see Table 1 ) . Foremost among these was that both of them built up fundamental ideas before 1930 in each region . Bohr elabo - rated the interpretation of quantum mechanics through discussion with other colleagues , while Magritte had new ideas from meetings in Paris that reassured him to act boldly . Both were actively engaged with other disciplines . Magritte was highly interested in literature , wrote some novels on his own and was acquainted with philosophers such as Foucault . Bohr established conceptual ideas of quantum mechanics under the influence of existen - tial philosophy and psychological ideas of the self . He was more concerned about physical meaning than mathematical expression in explaining the unprecedented phenomena related to quantum mechanics . Thus , we will discuss the features of the two polymaths and their similarities in regard to border - crossing creativity . 3 The Comparison of Worldviews Between Magritte and the Copenhagen Interpretation Although science and art belong to different domains , the relationship between object and image in art can be seen as corresponding to the relationship between physical reality and measurement . Let us discuss the relationship in art advocated by Magritte . In aesthetics , an issue that has long been discussed is the relationship between object and image . In the classical paintings , an image is just a means of describing the object in the world . Since an image is subordinate to an object , art critics are familiar with iconography in the painting ( Hartmann 2014 ; Houston 2012 ; Lopes 1996 ; Stonlitz 1960 ) . For example , in Christian religious art , a bright background behind a human figure stands for divinity , a woman car - rying a baby in her arms was understood as representing St . Mary and a pigeon flying toward a woman was usually meant to represent the Holy Spirit . Many types of icons were Table 1 Brief description of Bohr and Magritte Bohr Magritte Community Copenhagen interpretation Surrealism Formation ~ 1930s ( Solvay conference ) ~ 1930s ( return to Brussels ) Related disciplines Philosophy ( Kierkegaard , Høffding ) , psy - chology ( James ) Philosophy ( Wittgenstein , Foucault ) , literature ( Breton , Éluard ) Keywords Complementarity , correspondence Dépaysement Features Counter - intuitive and arbitrary 532 H . Jho 1 3 used to a great extent in religious art ( Zucker 2013 ) . The meaning of an image is predeter - mined by what it is meant to be . That is to say , an image is not to be seen but to be read as a text . Since the twentieth century , many artists have questioned the relationship between object and image . Among them , Magritte , in his painting La Trahison des images ( The Treachery of Images ) , wrote a sentence in French under the picture of a pipe , ‘Ceci n’est pas une pipe’ : ‘This is not a pipe’ . His intention was to raise an argument that an image is not subordinate to an object even if it may evoke an object in reality . In spite of simi - larities between an object and its image , ‘once painting gave up striving for realistic illu - sion , its space became two - dimensional and flat , so that three - dimensional objects could no longer exist in it’ ( Gablik 1985 ) . He pointed out that a painting is not a means to replicate the world or to represent something that exists already , but a mysterious expression that is based on reality but does not really exist . To break up the stereotypical understanding of images , he put ordinary images in unusual contexts . To him , painting should be a way of evoking meta - reality , which can be real , but not actually real ( Gablik 1985 ; Park 2011 ) . That is to say , the relationship between object and image is arbitrary and indeterminate . His view of the image is connected with Wittgenstein’s . Wittgenstein ( 1978 ) suggested that it is misleading to talk of words ‘standing for things’ or ‘having meanings’ , since everything depends not on the words themselves but on the way in which we use them . In other words , the ostensive definition of a word is not determinate . He exemplified how a child learns words . First , they follow what is heard but do not know what it means . Later , as they use a word iteratively in interaction with others , it confers a specific meaning to the utterance . When they hear the word cake , it may evoke a piece of cake in their mind , but the word itself is just a sound and may evoke a any image in anyone’s mind . On the one hand , Bohr followed the ontological commitment that scientific theory must define and delimit the ontological status of the entities it introduces ( Auletta 2001 ; Heisenberg 1955 ) . In other words , every concept in physics is meaningful as long as it is measurable . From his viewpoint , a theory which cannot be tested empirically is superflu - ous , and every physical concept should be derived from experimental results . Further , he advocated the complementarity principle that both physical properties and measurement are inseparable ( Allday 2009 ) . Actually , this principle entails two different meanings . The first one is concerned with wave – particle duality . In quantum mechanics , both the corpus - cular and undulatory natures of light and matter are exclusive but are complementary in understanding the given phenomena . The other meaning is the inseparability of measure - ment behaviour from the object to be measured . The Stern - Gerlach experiment shows that a particle holds quantum properties and that measuring behaviour influences the object to be measured in regard to the angular momentum of an atom ( Cramer 2016 ) . The comple - mentarity principle is connected to indeterminacy ( Allday 2009 ) . The interaction between the object of observation and the agency of observation makes it impossible to sharply separate the behaviour of the atomic system from the effect of the measuring instrument ( Jammer 1989 ) . His thought may have been affected by the philosophy and psychology of the times . In his university years , he took several courses on existentialism taught by Høffding and the thought of the mind by James . James , in his monumental book , Principles of Psychology ( James 1950 ) , explained that streams of thought are unpredictable , like a bird’s motion comprising flying and perching . From time to time , we begin to think about one thing and change to another . This is the substantive part of thinking , in his view ; however , it is impossible to see the transitional part of thinking where one reaches one idea from another . The unpredictable and discrete nature of thought is similar to the uncertainty principle and 533 Interdisciplinary Approach to Combine Science and Art : … 1 3 probabilistic interpretation . Høffding was an expounder of Kierkegaard’s ‘qualitative dia - lectic’ philosophy of life and religion . He held that thought could attain reality because reality was changed into imagination as soon as one thought about reality . Humans cannot without falsification conceive of themselves as impersonal observers because being only a part of a system cannot explain everything ( Høffding 1905 , 1955 ) . Even human beings’ delimitations between the objective and the subjective are arbitrary and their lives are full of a series of decisions . From Kierkegaard’s point of view , the only truth we can tell is the objective uncertainty , which has been confirmed by reflection , and knowledge cannot exist apart from the objective and is placed in between the subjective and objective ( Sim 2004 ) . Likewise , a human cannot be fully aware of the existence of God even though a human was created as an image of God : ‘God created man in his own image , in the image of God he created him’ ( NIV , Genesis 1 : 27 ) . It is impossible for humans to fully comprehend a phenomenon as it is because we are always a part of the world . Bohr ( 1958 ) addressed this : ‘It is impossible to distinguish sharply between the phenomena themselves and their con - scious perception . ’ Because of this , Bohr had doubts about describing atomic phenomena in terms of the kind of space and time that corresponds to our ordinary images . Besides , as Kierkegaard believed , sudden decisions or leaps in life can lead to progress ( Sim 2004 ) . However , it was likely that ‘if the leaps happen between two states or moments , no one can possibly observe it , and since it therefore can never be a phenomenon , its description ceases to be a description’ ( Jammer 1989 ) . Hence , causality cannot be illustrated . Discon - tinuous change in life and sudden leaps correspond to the discrete and stratified orbits of an atom suggested by Bohr . The transition of an electron in an atom is instantaneous , just like the progress of leaps in life cannot be observed . Such a change can be regarded as a quan - tum jump ( Allday 2009 ; Plotnitsky 2016 ) . To sum up , there are similarities between Magritte’s and Bohr’s worldviews ( see Fig . 1 ) . Magritte was inspired by Wittgenstein’s idea that meaning of a word is not predetermined but arbitrary , and believed that an image is not subordinate to a predetermined object and that an image should be seen per se irrespective of its origin ( object ) even though an image on the canvas is equal to the projection of an object to the two - dimensional space . Bohr had Fig . 1 The correspondence between Magritte’s perspective on art and Bohr’s perspective on physics 534 H . Jho 1 3 a similar attitude towards the relationship between physical reality and observed result . He viewed that data obtained from the experiment reflects the properties of a physical object but only one side of it . Light and matters only show either corpuscular or undulatory nature at one time , because the observation itself affects the reality to be observed , and the incom - patible natures are inseparable and indeterminate . The relationship between the reality and observation corresponds to the inseparable nature of multiple selves in functional psychol - ogy and to the subjective perception of human beings in existential philosophy . In this vein , Bohr regarded the relationship between physical properties and measurement behaviour as inseparable and believed that the result is determined by experimental situation and is con - text dependent . In terms of semantics , Magritte pointed out that the meaning of an image is indeterminate , with emphasis on the absence of ostensive meaning . Bohr’s the complemen - tarity principle suggests that the relationship between physical properties and measurement is indeterminate . 4 Understanding of Magritte from the Copenhagen Interpretation 4 . 1 Wave – Particle Duality Wave – particle duality is a fundamental concept to explain microscopic phenomena . Schrödinger held the view that physics should give up the notion of particles altogether in favour of matter waves , based on the physical interpretation of the mechanical field scalar , Ψ . His equation is used to explain the eigenstate functions for quantum objects ( Allday 2009 ; Jammer 1989 ) . To understand this paradoxical situation , Bohr proposed the comple - mentarity principle , which views the relationship as mutually exclusive but equally nec - essary . Similar to this , Magritte showed a systematic attempt to disrupt a dogmatic view of the physical world . By means of the complexity of two different realities , he causes ordinary phenomena to inherit extraordinary and improbable conclusions ( Gablik 1985 ; Rooney and Plattner 2016 ) . There is a peculiar person in the painting Les jours gigan - tesques ( The Titanic Days ; 1928 ) in Fig . 2a who seems to a naked woman but at the same time an aggressive man . The disparate images are mutually exclusive but comprise the sin - gle character in the middle of the painting . To be aware of it , we should consider both dilemmatic images . Likewise , the therianthrope in l’Invention collective ( The Collective Invention ; 1935 ) in Fig . 2b is divided into human ( lower ) and fish ( upper ) , and the weird combination may stand for the innate nature of duality of the life . 4 . 2 Indeterminacy / Uncertainty Bohr insisted on the indeterminacy of observation in terms of which objects are involved in the system to be observed and in the agent that observes ( Murdoch 1990 ) . Heisenberg , even though his thought was different from Bohr’s to some extent , insisted that the uncer - tainty relation ( ΔpΔx ⋍ ħ / 2 π ) prohibits the simultaneous exact measurement of both vari - ables and that quantum mechanics only offers statistical information about the possible outcomes ( Plotnitsky 2016 ) . The indistinct division between an object and an image can be also found in the paintings of Magritte . In La Tentative de l’impossible ( Attempting the Impossible ; 1928 ) , a man is drawing a woman not on canvas but in the air , and it seems like he is creating a live being in reality with paint ( see Fig . 2b ) . The strange situation found in the painting makes us confused as to what is the real world and what is an image ; it is a 535 Interdisciplinary Approach to Combine Science and Art : … 1 3 sort of illusion . This implies that drawing itself affects the object to be drawn . Such an idea can be found in other of Magritte’s works , such as La clairvoyance ( Clairvoyance ; 1936 ) , in which the painter gazes at an egg on the table but draws a bird stretching its wings on the canvas ( see Fig . 3 ) . He does not paint what is at that moment in front of him , but draws what a bird in the egg will be . Actually , the notion of clairvoyance is the combination of clair ( ‘clear’ ) and voir ( ‘to see’ ) in French , and its lexical meaning is an ability to perceive things or events in the future or beyond normal sensory power . In line with the title of the painting , Magritte himself draws the future of the small egg as he looks at the unhatched egg . Intriguing is that this painting is similar to the ‘Heisenberg’s microscope’ thought experiment that Heisenberg suggested ( Heisenberg 1949 ; Plotnitsky 2016 ) . He proposed a thought experiment about an electron based on classical optics . Imagine a situation where an electron is being observed with a microscope . Observers can perceive the image of the electron only when a ray of light strikes the electron and reflects from the electron to their eyes . When this happens , the moment of the electron will be changed due to Compton scattering . The stronger the intensity of the light , the more inaccurate the momentum of Fig . 2 Magritte’s paintings : the titanic days ( left , a ) , attempting the impossible ( middle , b ) , and the human condition I ( right , c ) ( D’Alessandro et al . 2013 ) Fig . 3 Magritte’s painting : the Clairvoyance ( self - portrait ) ( D’Alessandro et al . 2013 ) 536 H . Jho 1 3 the electron will be . Conversely , a smaller intensity of light will result in a larger deviation of the exact position of the electron due to diffraction . Heisenberg ( 1927 ) said , ‘The more precisely the position is determined , the less precisely the momentum is known’ . When looking at Magritte’s Clairvoyance from the point of view of the uncertainty principle , the painter’s action of seeing may have an impact on the unhatched egg and bring about unexpected outcomes ( see Fig . 3 ) . The interconnected relationship between an object and an image corresponds to the relationship between physical reality and obser - vation behaviour . A few of Magritte’s paintings ponder how to discriminate between the background and the image on the canvas , such as the La condition humaine ( The Human Condition I ; 1933 ) and L’Appel des cimes ( The Call of the Peaks ; 1942 ) . Additionally , pro - cesses of adaptation , which operate between the animal and plant kingdoms for the benefit of each , often entail changes in structure , behaviour or coloration to secure an effective resemblance . Various forms of mimicry and protective colouring that serve as deterrent and camouflaging techniques in plants and animals recall the leaf - bird in the Flavour of Tears ( 1948 ) and the Natural Graces ( 1964 ) . 4 . 3 Probabilistic Interpretation One of founding principles of quantum mechanics is statistical interpretation . As Pauli mentioned , ‘the theory predicts only the statistics of the results of an experiment , when it is repeated under a given condition’ ( Pauli 1994 ) . Relying on the wave function suggested by Schrödinger , the probability density at a specific position is proportional to the square of the magnitude of the particle’s wave function ( p = ∫ Ψ * Ψ dx ) . Such an interpretation is applicable to understanding of Magritte’s paintings . If we consider each image on the canvas as a wave form , they can constructively or destructively interfere with each other . In case of destructive inference , the summation of two different waves can be seen as a hollow or transparent image . The silhouette of a man resting his chin on his hand in The Barbar - ian ( 1928 ) overlaps with the brick wall . Similarly , a man’s silhouette can be found in many paintings : A Friend of Order ( 1964 ) , Decalcomania ( 1966 ) , High Society ( 1962 ) , Place of Creation ( 1966 ) and others . Probabilistic interpretation also gives a few predictions that violate classical mechanics . One of the most frequent images in Magritte’s paintings is a man in a bowler hat ( Gablik 1985 ) . If we look at the man in the painting as corresponding to an electron in the atom , his painting Golconda ( 1953 ) may indicate that he can be anywhere due to the probabilistic interpretation ( Born’s rule ) where the integral in the infinite range is equal to 1 . According to the probabilistic interpretation , the wave function does not go to the zero at the classical turning point . A train or a man can penetrate a wall , as you see in Fig . 4b ( Griffiths 2013 ) . Such a contradictory phenomenon can be understood as the tunnelling effect . 4 . 4 Quantum Hypothesis According to the Copenhagen interpretation , the states that are allowed in quantum mechanics are discontinuous , and the shift from one to another state is instantaneous ( known as ‘quantum jump’ ) . This was called the quantum postulate to cope with the limita - tions of the Rutherford’s atomic model . Similar to Bohr’s quantum hypothesis , Magritte presented a human body consisting of different layers in The Marches of Summer ( 1938 ) and Delusions of Grandeur ( 1948 ; see Fig . 4c ) . Like a traditional Russian matryoshka doll , a representation of a woman’s body overlaps with different sizes of body , and many parts 537 Interdisciplinary Approach to Combine Science and Art : … 1 3 remain hollow instead being filled with flesh and muscle . He also created sculptures of human beings consisting of many compartments . 5 Conclusions and Implications Circa 1900 , many scientists and artists contributed to the advent of new theories in sci - ence and art respectively . The theory of relativity and quantum mechanics superseded the solid chair of Newtonian mechanics for a 100 years . Cubism and surrealism challenged traditional painting canons that dated back to the Renaissance ( Chipp 1996 ; Gombrich 2006 ) . Intriguing is that both Bohr and Magritte who worked in a similar period brought up brand - new ideas in science and art respectively . This study compares the worldviews of Magritte and the Copenhagen interpretation and analyses Magritte’s paintings in relation to the Copenhagen interpretation , a traditional approach to quantum mechanics . To Magritte , the relationship between object and image is arbitrary and indeterminate , as is the rela - tionship between physical reality and observation results in the Copenhagen interpretation . Both have the intent of articulating the relationship between reality and its representation ( in quantum mechanics , experimentation ) , and there are many similarities between the two in spite of rare communication . This indicates that they have an indirect connection under the gigantic stream of socio - cultural background . Even their worldviews are similar to philosophies at that time such as existentialism and logical positivism . The intention of this study is on analysing the paintings of Magritte from a physical viewpoint in order to connect physics and art on a deeper level . The illusive and inscrutable style of Magritte’s painting is associated with his peculiar worldview and corresponds to aspects of the inde - terminate and probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics : wave – particle duality , indetermi - nacy , probabilistic interpretation and quantum hypothesis . This research finding may give some current implications about how science can con - tribute to improving creative thinking in other disciplines . First , it is necessary to have a deeper understanding of different disciplines in order to enhance creative and amalgama - tive thoughts . The creativity of Magritte and Bohr borrowed philosophical aspects from other disciplines , which led them to develop new ideas . It is therefore important to under - stand foundational theories and principles in various disciplines in order to undertake interdisciplinary approaches . Second , a major shift is connected to analogical thinking in the different fields . Connecting two things that appear different is essential to bringing Fig . 4 Magritte’s paintings : Decalcomania ( left , a ) , universal gravitation ( middle , b ) , and the marches of summer ( right , c ) ( D’Alessandro et al . 2013 ; Griffiths 2013 ) 538 H . Jho 1 3 about new ideas . In this vein , it is important to bridge science and art in an ingenious way rather than fragmenting different activities . In order to find more creative ways of doing things , we need to investigate various case studies where creative artists and scientists have actively engaged in various disciplines . In fact , science and art have many things in com - mon . For example , artists identify topics they want to express , observe and depict objects , try to find patterns , and transform them into images with imagination and creativity . Like - wise , physicists select problems , observe phenomena , and do measurement and experimen - tation . They formulate the obtained data using graphs , equations or diagrams and make a conclusion ( Guilemin 2010 ; Miller 1995 ; van der Veen 2012 ) . Hence , understanding contemporary worldviews and epistemologies may help to bring about changes in science and art . Although science and art are irrelevant in appearance , a shared socio - cultural background plays a significant role in progression in science and art . In the context of creative and interdisciplinary education , it is crucial to figure out the underpinning ideas in science and art in a conceptual way . There needs a research to inves - tigate whether border - crossing activities are actually effective to improve creativity in the educational setting as a further study . Acknowledgements This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea ( NRF ) grant funded by the Korean Government ( MSIT ) ( No . NRF - 2017R1C1B1007561 ) . References Allday , J . ( 2009 ) . Quantum reality : Theory and philosophy . New York : CRC Press . Auletta , G . ( 2001 ) . Foundations interpretation of quantum mechanics . Singapore : World Scientific Publish - ing Co . Babette , B . , & Saslow , J . M . ( 2013 ) . A companion to Renaissance to Baroque art . Chichester : Wiley - Blackwell . Bohr , N . ( 1958 ) . Atomic physics and human knowledge . New York : Wiley . Camilleri , K . ( 2009 ) . A history of entanglement : Decoherence and the interpretation problem . Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B : Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics , 40 ( 4 ) , 290 – 302 . Chipp , H . B . ( 1996 ) . Theories of modern art : A source book by artists and critics . Berkeley : University of California Press . Choi , J . - M . ( 2004 ) . ( The ) virtuality of Rene Magritte’s depaysement . Seoul , Korea : Hongik University . Cramer , J . G . ( 2016 ) . The quantum handshake : Entanglement , nonlocality and transactions . Dordrecht : Springer . Criminisi , A . , Kemp , M . , & Kang , S . B . ( 2004 ) . Reflections of reality in Jan van Eyck and Robert Campin . Historical Methods : A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History , 37 ( 3 ) , 109 – 121 . D’Alessandro , S . , Draguet , M . , & Goormans , C . ( 2013 ) . Magritte : the mystery of the ordinary , 1926 – 1938 . New York : The Museum of Modern Art . Ferguson , K . ( 2002 ) . Tycho and Kepler : The unlikely partnership that forever changed our understanding of the heavens . New York : Walker & Company . Gablik , S . ( 1985 ) . Magritte . London : Thames & Hudson . Gohr , S . ( 2009 ) . Magritte : Attempting the impossible . New York : Distributed Art Publishers . Gombrich , E . H . ( 2006 ) . The story of art . New York : Phaidon Press . Griffiths , D . J . ( 2013 ) . Revolutions in twentieth - century physics . New York : Cambridge University Press . Guilemin , R . ( 2010 ) . Similarities and contrasts in the creative processes of the science and the arts . Leon - ardo , 43 ( 1 ) , 59 – 62 . Hartmann , N . ( 2014 ) . Aesthetics . New York : De Gruyter . Heisenberg , W . ( 1927 ) . Über den anschaulichen inhalt der quantentheoretischen kinematik und mechanik . Zeitschrift für Physik , 43 ( 3 – 4 ) , 172 – 198 . Heisenberg , W . ( 1949 ) . The physical principles of the quantum theory ( C . Eckart & F . C . Hoyt , Trans . ) . Mineola , NY : Dover Publications Inc . 539 Interdisciplinary Approach to Combine Science and Art : … 1 3 Heisenberg , W . ( 1955 ) . The development of the interpretation of quantum theory . In W . Pauli , L . Rosenfeld , & V . Weisskopf ( Eds . ) , Niels Bohr and the development of physics . New York : McGraw Hill . Høffding , H . ( 1905 ) . The problems of philosophy . New York : Macmillan . Høffding , H . ( 1955 ) . A history of modern philosophy : A sketch of the history of philosophy from the close of the Renaissance to our own day ( B . E . Meyer , Trans . ) . New York : Dover Publications . Houston , K . ( 2012 ) . Introduction to art criticism : Histories , strategies , voices . New York : Pearson . Hughes , R . ( 2008 ) . Magritte ( N . Park , Trans . ) . Seoul : Maronie Books . James , W . ( 1950 ) . The principles of psychology . New York : Dover Publications . Jammer , M . ( 1989 ) . The conceptual development of quantum mechanics . Los Angeles , CA : Tomash Publishers . Jho , H . ( 2014 ) . Implications of science education as interdisciplinary education through the cases of scien - tists and artists in the modern era : Focus on the relationship between science and the arts . Journal of the Korean Association for Science Education , 34 ( 8 ) , 755 – 765 . Kang , O . - M . ( 2007 ) . ( A ) study on depaysement techniques of Rene Magritte’s work . Seoul : Hongik University . Kemp , M . ( 1990 ) . The science of art : Optical themes in western art from Brunelleschi to Seurat . London : Yale University Press . Longair , M . ( 2006 ) . Revolutions in music and physics , 1900 – 30 . Interdisciplinary Science Reviews , 31 ( 3 ) , 275 – 288 . Lopes , D . ( 1996 ) . Understanding pictures . Oxford : Clarendon Press . Lützen , J . ( 2007 ) . The geometry of an art : The history of the mathematical theory of perspective from Alberti to Monge . New York : Springer . Massey , L . ( 2003 ) . The treatise on perspective : Published and unpublished . Washington , D . C . : Yale Univer - sity Press . McAllister , J . W . ( 1996 ) . Beauty & revolution in science . Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press . Miller , A . I . ( 1995 ) . Aesthetics , representation and creativity in art and science . Leonardo , 28 ( 3 ) , 185 – 192 . Miller , A . I . ( 1996 ) . Insights of genius : Imagery and creativity in science and art . New York : Copernicus . Murdoch , D . ( 1990 ) . Niels Bohr’s philosophy of physics . New York : Cambridge University Press . Park , J . - J . ( 2011 ) . Magritte and simulacre . Seoul : Giparang Pub . Pauli , W . ( Ed . ) . ( 1994 ) . Writings on physics and philosophy . Berlin : Springer . Plotnitsky , A . ( 2006 ) . Reading Bohr : Physics and philosophy . Dordrecht : Springer . Plotnitsky , A . ( 2016 ) . The principles of quantum theory , from Planck’s quanta to the Higgs boson : The nature of quantum reality and the spirit of Copenhagen . Switzerland : Springer . Rooney , K . , & Plattner , E . ( Eds . ) . ( 2016 ) . René Magritte : Selected writings . Minneapolis , MN : University of Minnesota Press . Root - Bernstein , R . S . ( 1999 ) . Sparks of genius : The thirteen thinking tools of the world’s most creative peo - ple . Boston , MA : Houghton Mifflin Co . Schmitt , C . B . ( 1981 ) . Studies in Renaissance philosophy and science . London : Variorum Reprints . Schrödinger , E . ( 1926a ) . Quantisierung als Eigenwertproblem . Annalen der Physik , 384 ( 6 ) , 489 – 527 . Schrödinger , E . ( 1926b ) . Quantisierung als Eigenwertproblem . Annalen der Physik , 384 ( 4 ) , 361 – 376 . Schrödinger , E . ( 1926c ) . Quantisierung als Eigenwertproblem . Annalen der Physik , 386 ( 18 ) , 109 – 139 . Schrödinger , E . ( 1926d ) . Über das Verhältnis der Heisenberg - Born - Jordanschen Quantenmechanik zu der meinem . Annalen der Physik , 384 ( 8 ) , 734 – 756 . Shapin , S . ( 1994 ) . A social history of truth : Civility and science in the seventeenth - century England . Lon - don : The University of Chicago Press . Shirley , J . W . , & Hoeniger , D . ( 1985 ) . Science and the arts in the Renaissance . Washington , DC : Folger Shakesphere Library . Sim , M . - S . ( 2004 ) . The educational implication of Kierkegaard’s existential single individual . The Korea Educational Review , 10 ( 2 ) , 5 – 35 . Snow , C . P . ( 1998 ) . Two cultures . New York : Cambridge University Press . Stonlitz , J . ( 1960 ) . Aesthetics and philosophy of art criticism : A critical introduction . Boston : Houghton Mifflin . van der Veen , J . ( 2012 ) . Draw your physics homework ? Art as a path to understanding in physics teaching . American Educational Research Journal , 49 ( 2 ) , 356 – 407 . Vitz , P . C . , & Glimcher , A . B . ( 1984 ) . Modern art and modern science : The parallel analysis of vision . New York : Praeger . Wear , D . , & Zarconi , J . ( 2011 ) . The treachery of images : How René Magritte informs medical education . Journal of General Internal Medicine , 26 ( 4 ) , 437 – 439 . Weisberg , R . W . ( 2006 ) . Creativity : Understanding innovation in problem solving , science , invention , and the arts . Hoboken , NJ : Wiley . 540 H . Jho 1 3 Wittgenstein , L . ( 1978 ) . Philosophical investigations ( G . E . M . Anscombe , Trans . ) . London : Basil Black - well & Mott . Zucker , M . ( 2013 ) . Iconography in Renaissance and Baroque art . In B . Bohn & J . M . Saslow ( Eds . ) , A com - panion to Renaissance and Baroque art ( pp . 359 – 380 ) . Oxford : Wiley . Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Hunkoog Jho is an assistant professor in the Department of General Education , Dankook University ( DKU ) , Republic of Korea . He received BSc and Ph . D . degrees in Physics Education from the Department of Phys - ics Education , Seoul National University . He serves as a coordinator of the general science program in DKU and an associate editor of New Physics : Sae Mullipublished by the Korean Physical Society ( indexed in Scopus ) . Since 2017 , he has been conducting a series of studies dealing with the relationship between sci - ence and visual arts from a philosophical / historical viewpoint , funded by the National Research Foundation in Korea . As well , he is interested in applying machine learning to science education .