INTRODUCTION Synthese ( 2023 ) 201 : 154 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11229 - 023 - 04127 - 0 Mathematics is , and has been for a very long time , one of the most successful autono - mous fields of research . However , the last five centuries have seen it become so deeply interwoven in virtually every area of scientific inquiry to convince Kant that “in any special doctrine of nature there can be only as much proper science as there is mathematics therein” ( Kant 1786 / 2004 , 6 ; emphases in original ) . While the distinction between pure and applied mathematics remains somewhat elusive , philosophers have been interested in understanding the nature of each . More - over , the idea that there are actually two uses of mathematics , an explanatory and a heuristic one , has begun to feature more and more prominently in recent philosophi - cal debates . This topical collection showcases papers discussing both these uses , with some of the contributions also tackling the way they are related to each other . When it comes to explanation , these debates have touched upon a variety of ques - tions . For example , philosophers have wondered how mathematical theorems , and mathematical formalisms more generally , can be used in explanations in other sci - entific fields such as physics , life sciences , or the social sciences . Another question is how certain parts of mathematics can be used to provide explanations of results belonging to other parts of mathematics . Relatedly , some interesting debates concern the way in which a given philosophical - metaphysical attitude towards mathemati - cal entities ( for instance , a nominalist conception ) affects the explanatory power of Published online : 24 April 2023 © The Author ( s ) , under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B . V . 2023 The explanatory and heuristic power of mathematics Introduction to a topical collection in synthese Marianna Antonutti Marfori 1 · Sorin Bangu 2 · Emiliano Ippoliti 3 Sorin Bangu sorin . bangu @ uib . no Marianna Antonutti Marfori Marianna . Antonutti - Marfori @ univ - paris1 . fr Emiliano Ippoliti emiliano . ippoliti @ uniroma1 . it 1 Institut d’histoire et de philosophie des sciences et des techniques , Université Paris 1 Panthéon - Sorbonne - CNRS , Paris , France 2 University of Bergen , Bergen , Norway 3 Sapienza University of Rome , Rome , Italy 1 3 Synthese ( 2023 ) 201 : 154 a scientific theory . One can also ask whether it is the mathematical elements , rather than non - mathematical ones , that carry most of the explanatory burden in certain scientific explanations . And finally , one might wonder how we ought to assess such comparative claims . The main questions regarding heuristics focus on how mathematics can act as an inter - field heuristic engine ; that is , how certain mathematical results are employed to generate hypotheses and solve problems in other scientific domains . Additionally , since mathematics can act also as an intra - field heuristic engine , one may wonder how it is possible that certain pieces of mathematics are employed to make discover - ies in other parts of mathematics . Another important line of inquiry taken up in the papers below is the ramifications that a heuristic view of mathematics has , both for different accounts of the nature of mathematical objects , and for the method of math - ematical research ( among other things ) . The idea for this collection was inspired by a conference organized by Emiliano Ippoliti in June 2019 at the Sapienza University in Rome . Since not all the speak - ers present at the event could contribute a paper , the collection includes other phi - losophers as well . Meanwhile , one of the most prominent authors in these two areas , Mark Steiner , sadly passed away from Covid in April 2020 . We dedicate this collec - tion to his memory . 1 The explanatory role of mathematics As noted above , modern science , especially physics , is permeated with mathematics . This relationship between the two disciplines has constituted a subject of sustained reflection since at least the days of Kepler and Galileo . A substantial amount of phil - osophical work has been devoted to discussing it , and controversial philosophical theses have been advanced by scientists and philosophers alike . For example , the effectiveness of mathematics in science has been called ‘unreasonable’ , even a ‘mys - tery’ , by major physicists like Eugene Wigner ( 1967 ) . This sentiment was further echoed by philosophers , most notably by Mark Steiner ( 1998 ) . Although much has been said on this topic , it is generally acknowledged that it is still far from clear how such claims ( if true ) should be understood . 1 We recalled Kant’s remark at the outset and , in the same spirit , it is worth mention - ing what Paolo Mancosu ( 2018 ) characterizes as “a change of criteria of explanation and intelligibility” that occurred roughly during the time when the mathematized Newtonian physics became the dominant paradigm in natural science . Historians of science such as Yves Gingras have drawn attention to this development and pointed out that mathematization “transform [ ed ] the very meaning of the term ‘explanation’ as it was used by philosophers in the seventeenth century” ( 2001 , 385 ; cited in Man - cosu 2018 ) . As Gingras also remarks , the idea to provide an explanation of a physical phenomenon in mathematical terms “was something new . ” ( ibid . ) Without presenting any “physical mechanism involved in [ the ] production” of a phenomenon , “Newton’s 1 Works by Morrison ( 2000 ; 2014 ) , Batterman ( 2002 ; 2022 ) , and Wilson ( 2008 ; 2017 ) seek to further illuminate these issues . 1 3 154 Page 2 of 12 Synthese ( 2023 ) 201 : 154 Principia marks the beginning of this shift where mathematical explanations came to be preferred to mechanical explanations when the latter did not conform to calcula - tions . ” ( Gingras , 2001 , 398 . See also Dorato 2017 ) . This historical context is worth sketching , since it is in many respects a good start - ing point for a reflection on the contemporary debates in the philosophy of science and mathematics . From the 1950s onwards , several philosophers , among whom Quine and Putnam stand out , have argued that fundamental questions about the nature of mathematical truth and the ontological status of mathematical objects can be answered by drawing on the indispensable role of mathematics in science . They are generally credited with proposing what is now called the Indispensability Argument for mathematical real - ism . Heavily ( and , many believe , convincingly ) criticized initially by Field ( 1980 ) and Maddy ( 1992 ; 1997 ) , among others , the renewed interest in an enhanced version of the argument is due in large part to the work of Colyvan ( 1998 , 2001 , 2010 ) and Baker ( 2005 ; 2009 ) . These two authors defended it by recasting it in terms of the indispensability of mathematics in formulating explanations of physical phenomena . A large body of literature ensued , mostly critical of the argument ( Leng , 2010 , 2012 ; Saatsi , 2011 ; Bueno , 2012 ; Yablo , 2012 ) , but also supportive of it ( Bangu , 2012 , 2013 ; Baron , 2014 , 2016 ) . In addition to the fascinating case - studies introduced by Colyvan and Baker , Pincock ( 2007 ; 2012 ) proposed an analysis of the famous Konigsberg bridges case - study . ( An updated review of these debates is Paseau and Baker ( forth - coming ) ) . In this context , Marc Lange’s 2017 book Because without Cause deserves a special mention . Although he abandons the pursuit of drawing metaphysical - onto - logical consequences from such explanations , he articulates a detailed and insightful counterfactual approach to such ‘distinctively mathematical explanations’ , character - ized as explanations ‘by constraint’ . For critical assessments of Lange’s position , see Craver and Povich 2017 , Bangu 2021 , and Leng ( this volume ) . Mathematical explanations of mathematical results , and explanatory mathemat - ical proofs in particular , have also been the object of philosophical investigation . Although intuitively clear , the distinction between explanatory and non - explanatory proofs is surprisingly difficult to pin down . As both mathematicians and philosophers have remarked , there seem to be proofs which show that a result holds , and others which do more : they also show why it holds . As Mancosu ( 1996 ; 2000 ) documented in detail , this distinction has been acknowledged since antiquity . Yet , it wasn’t until the late 1970s when the first systematic analyses of it were proposed . The first one of these was Steiner’s ( 1978 ) , and central to this account is the notion of a “characteriz - ing property” , i . e . , “a property unique to a given entity or structure within a family or domain of such entities or structures” ( 1978 , 143 ) . Thus , in Steiner’s view , explana - tory proofs differ from non - explanatory ones because they are given in terms of this kind of property “such that from the proof it is evident that the result depends on the property” ( ibidem ) . This theory has been criticized , e . g . , by Resnik and Kushner ( 1987 ) , and more recently by Hafner and Mancosu ( 2005 ) , as well as Baker ( 2009 ) . An alternative systematic analysis of the notion of explanatory proof has been articulated by Kitcher ( 1989 ) , drawing on his unificationism about explanation in natural science . ( For more discussion , see Tappenden ( 2005 ) ) . Further recent developments in this area are due 1 3 Page 3 of 12 154 Synthese ( 2023 ) 201 : 154 to Pincock ( 2015 ) , Lange ( 2017 , Ch . 7 and 8 ) , Colyvan et al . ( 2018 ) and d’Alessandro ( 2020 ) . 2 The double connection of heuristics and mathematics The heuristic role of mathematics has drawn increasing attention in the past few decades , with a starting point in the works of Lakatos ( 1976 , 1978 ) , Laudan ( 1977 , 1981 ) , followed by the contributions of Nickles ( 1980a , 1980b , 1981 , 2014 ) and Cel - lucci ( 2013 , 2022 ) . The “heuristic side” of mathematics – where “heuristics” is the study of the methods and rules of discovery and invention ( see Pólya 1954 ) , and not the process by which humans use mental shortcuts for decision - making 2 – should be understood in this context in the following two senses , although these clarifications should not be taken as an exhaustive definition : ( i ) how mathematical knowledge advances by solving mathematical problems , and ( ii ) how mathematics acts as a tool for other disciplines . Moving from a problem - based perspective ( Russell , 1912 ; Popper , 1999 ) , whose roots can be found notably in Aristotle ( Quarantotto , 2017 ) , this debate has shifted towards the search for an account of rational hypotheses - generation . In this context , mathematical discovery consists in generating hypotheses that are sufficient condi - tions to solve problems ; it is thus a process that can be investigated and used to guide us . This tenet is the cornerstone of the “heuristic view” ( e . g . , Cellucci 2022 , Ippoliti 2018a , Jaccard - Jacoby 2010 , Polya 1954 , Shelley 2003 ) , which has significantly evolved in the last two decades , providing us with improved theoretical frameworks to account for the process of generation of mathematical hypotheses . In particular , three different problem - based views have been formulated and refined in the last few decades ( see Ippoliti 2018b ) : ( 1 ) The Popper - Laudan position . ( 2 ) The Poincaré - Simon position . ( 3 ) The Lakatos - Cellucci position . Crucially , these three approaches tried , but some have not fully succeeded , to dis - pense with the romantic idea of the ‘mathematical genius’ , idea according to which the production of new hypotheses is entirely subjective and inscrutable – and thus only an individual with mathematically exceptional abilities can generate new such hypotheses to be rationally tested . This romantic idea was appealed to by many logi - cians , philosophers , and scientists who pursued an account of hypothesis - generation based on notions like ‘intuition’ or ‘insight’ ( see e . g . , Frege 1960 ; Einstein 2010 ) . However , this is an appeal to a conceptual black - box and does not offer actionable explanations . As such , this approach constituted one of the main obstacles to the development of a rational account of hypothesis - generation . While historically and conceptually interwoven , it has been argued ( Ippoliti , 2018b ) that the above - men - tioned three approaches differ substantially . Popper’s ( 1999 ) and Laudan’s ( 1981 ) positions are still very close to the romantic idea ; they hold that hypothesis - generation is a subjective and idiosyncratic process , 2 For this , see Gigerenzer and Todd 1999 , Kahneman , Slovic and Tversky 1982 , Chow 2015 . 1 3 154 Page 4 of 12 Synthese ( 2023 ) 201 : 154 and cannot be rationally or logically investigated , reconstructed , and transmit - ted . For them , problem - solving proceeds by random trial and error . In this respect , this approach falls within the romantic tradition : we can’t have a rational account , much less a method , for hypothesis - generation and scientific discovery . This thesis is challenged by other approaches , such as that advocated by Poincaré and Simon , which maintain that , on the contrary , hypothesis - generation is within the purview of rationality . Poincaré ( 1908 ) argues that it is possible to investigate and systematize the sub - conscious processes that underlie the search for a solution to a problem . When con - scious attempts to solve a problem fail , unconscious processes come into play by generating all possible combinations of given ideas and select a small subset ( or a single one ) of them as candidate solution to the problem at hand , if any . Nevertheless , Poincaré’s account lacks a cogent methodology for analysing how these combina - tions are formed and selected in a rational way . To bridge this gap , Simon’s account ( Simon , 1977 ; Simon et al . , 1987 ) sharpened Poincaré’s approach by conceptualizing it in terms of the ‘problem space’ , and by providing a formalization of the process of hypothesis - generation . Simon developed his influential theory of problems in five main steps : 1 ) Human brains and computers are alike : both are information - processing systems ( see Simon et al . 1987 , 8 ) . 2 ) Thinking and problem - solving are a form of computation : “copying and reor - ganizing symbols in memory , receiving and outputting symbols , and comparing symbol structures for identity or difference” ( ibid . ) . 3 ) Problem - solving is a rational process performed by creating a symbolic repre - sentation of the problem ( the ‘problem space’ ) as well as of its operators and constraints . 4 ) Several rational heuristic procedures guide conscious thinking throughout the problem - space to generate a hypothesis to solve the problem . Furthermore , Simon identifies two classes of heuristics , weak and strong . 5 ) Such heuristics can be implemented in algorithms , so the process can be ‘mecha - nized’ into software ( called BACON , versions 1 through 6 ) . A famous case study of these heuristics involves the discovery of Kepler’s law . Unfortunately , this view has important shortcomings ( see e . g . , Nickles 1980a ; Kan - torovich 1993 ; Gillies 1995 ; Weisberg 2006 ) . Firstly , it has been argued that algo - rithms do not perform the crucial part of hypothesis - generation , i . e . , the choice of the relevant variables and data . This choice must be made prior to the launching of the BACON software : the relevant data and variables are selected and supplied by the programmers , and the BACON heuristic procedures only iterate through them . As Donald Gillies ( 1996 , 24 ) has stressed , the software package BACON . 1 already knows both ( i ) which two variables to relate , and ( ii ) the general form of the law that it should look for . Moreover , it has also been objected that BACON only does what a computer does better than humans , namely computation . In fact , BACON finds pat - terns in datasets when given the right data . Thus , this algorithm simply does better the last , and in a sense most trivial , stage of hypothesis - generation : it identifies sta - 1 3 Page 5 of 12 154 Synthese ( 2023 ) 201 : 154 tistical regularities , correlations , and does parameter - estimation . Of course , carrying out these tasks is much harder for humans alone , yet this advantage does not amount to an explanation of hypothesis - generation . Another criticism maintains that BACON is , at best , an ex - post reconstruction of a historical finding . The charge is that it exploits the knowledge of the result , i . e . , it uses the benefit of knowing what the problem is , knowing that the data can be dealt with by certain heuristics , and also knowing that the problem has been solved . As Nickels rightly points out , BACON does “not need to ask itself conceptually pro - found questions or consider deep reformulations of the problem , because the primary constraints ( and therefore the problem itself ) are programmed in from the beginning . Only certain empirical constraints remain to be fed in” ( Nickles 1980b , 38 ) . The third position , advocated by Lakatos and Cellucci , construes “heuristics” as the methods and rules of discovery and invention à la Polya , and aims at overcoming the weaknesses of the other approaches . On this view , there is a method for generat - ing hypotheses , but it is not fully algorithmic . This view also provides an account of hypothesis - generation that reunites problem - finding and problem - solving , as well as discovery and justification , within a single coherent framework . Their concep - tion accomplishes this by showing that they are not separated as the standard view maintains . The most recent version of this standard view argues that the method for hypoth - esis - generation is an appropriately revised version of the ‘analytic method’ proposed by Plato ( see e . g . Cellucci 2013 ) , a method which must be supplemented with a set of heuristic rules , namely types of inferences like induction , analogy , metaphor , and combinations thereof ( e . g . Cellucci 2013 , Jaccard - Jacoby 2010 , Ippoliti 2018b ) . These rules build and shape the problem space which , contrary to Simon’s approach , does not exist until heuristic procedures are applied . On this view , a hypothesis , once introduced , must satisfy the requirement of ‘plausibility’ , and not ‘truth’ . Or , as Cel - luci ( 2013 , 56 ) put it , “the arguments for the hypothesis must be stronger than the arguments against it , on the basis of experience” . 3 This , on the other hand , implies that the solutions to problems are revisable . This position is characterized by a specific set of ontological , epistemological , and methodological tenets . For example , mathematical objects are conceived of as hypotheses introduced to solve given mathematical problems ( to illustrate how this works , recall that imaginary numbers were introduced by Bombelli to solve cubic equations ; see Cellucci 2022 ) . Moreover , these objects have the potential to acquire new properties over time , and can be considered from different points of view ( e . g . , a circle can be regarded as a geometrical , algebraic , topological , etc . object ) . Then , when certain mathematical objects turn out to be useful to solve further problems , “they consolidate and acquire a stability that makes them independent of the problem for which they were originally introduced , and become subjects of study themselves” ( Cellucci , 2022 , 15 ) . 3 One hypothesis is subjected to the following plausibility test ( see Cellucci 2013 , 56 ) : ( 1 ) deduce conclu - sions from the hypothesis → ( 2 ) compare these conclusions with each other , in order to check that they do not produce a contradiction → ( 3 ) compare the conclusions with known results of observations or experi - ments , and with other hypotheses already known to be plausible . 1 3 154 Page 6 of 12 Synthese ( 2023 ) 201 : 154 This approach has clearly boosted the in - depth , systematic study of the rational means used to generate mathematical hypotheses , and paved the way for a fine - grained theory of hypothesis - generation through means such as multiple representa - tions , ampliative inferences , or models . 3 The papers in this collection Recent work on the topic of heuristic has greatly improved our understanding of how mathematical knowledge advances by solving problems ( see e . g . , Paseau 2015 ; Ula - zia 2016 ; Ippoliti 2018a , 2020 ; Clement 2020 ; Cellucci 2022 ; also Grosholz 2007 ) . This work show how mathematics , and mathematical objects in particular , play a major role in generating hypotheses , and serve as a heuristic tool at the intra - mathe - matical and extra - mathematical levels ( e . g . , the use of algebra to solve problems in geometry , and the use of topology to solve problems in biology ) . However , due to the richness of mathematical and scientific practice , many open questions concerning mathematical heuristics remain . Moreover , the rapid development of the literature on mathematical explanation has vastly enriched our understanding of the difficul - ties involved in formulating an account of both intra - and extra - mathematical expla - nation , as well as the role of the explanatory virtues such as simplicity , generality , depth , etc . We believe that the papers in this topical issue contribute to these investi - gations in substantial and original ways . In her paper Diagrams and “Free Rides” in Mathematics , Jessica Carter inves - tigates the heuristic role of visual representations . Focusing on diagrams , Carter applies Atsushi Shimojima’s ( 1996 ) notion of “free rides” to mathematics in order to better understand the fruitfulness of mathematical representations that exploit spatial properties as opposed to symbolic or sentential representations . The notion of a “free ride” characterises those phenomena in which novel information about the properties of a mathematical object – – information which was not contained in its construction – – can be “read off” an external representation of that object in a way that would not be possible from a merely sentential representation . Through examples of fruitful rep - resentations employed to solve problems in mathematical practice , Carter illustrates a variety of uses of “free rides” in mathematics , and demonstrates how mathematical “free rides” have additional properties that differentiate them from those character - ised by Shimojima . On the basis of this analysis , Carter maintains that free rides in mathematics come in different forms , and sometimes require reasoning from the syntactic and semantic properties of diagrams to convey the additional information . Emiliano Ippoliti’s paper , On the Heuristic Power of Mathematical Representa - tions , argues that mathematical representations can have heuristic power since their construction can be ampliative . He examines how the representation of a constructed object introduces elements and properties into an object which are not contained at the beginning of the object’s construction . Moreover , he discusses how representa - tion guides the manipulation of the represented object in ways that restructure its components by gradually adding new pieces of information . These pieces , in turn , then produce a hypothesis to solve a problem . Finally , he shows that these repre - sentations draw on ampliative inferences that form the basis for gradually building 1 3 Page 7 of 12 154 Synthese ( 2023 ) 201 : 154 hypotheses to solve a problem both inside mathematics ( the construction of an alge - braic representation of 3 - manifolds ) , and outside mathematics ( the construction of a topological representation of DNA supercoiling ) . In Arithmetic Enumerative Induction and Order Bias , Alexander Paseau aims at vindicating the use of non - deductive methods in mathematics . The paper proposes an analysis of the general mistrust mathematicians have towards enumerative induc - tive evidence . This phenomenon is particularly evident in the case of arithmetical generalizations , where enumerative inductive evidence is deemed heuristically use - ful but is thought to lack justificatory force . According to Paseau’s analysis ( which is supported by several novel case studies ) the principled reason for scepticism about the value of enumerative inductive evidence in arithmetic is that known instances of an arithmetical conjecture are usually ‘small’ : they appear in the initial segment of the natural number sequence ( e . g . , Goldbach’s Conjecture was checked up to value 4 × 10 18 ) . Such evidence consequently suffers from size bias . Paseau distinguishes between different varieties of size - scepticism as advocated by both mathematicians and philosophers of mathematics , analyses their motivation , and poses a series of challenges to each kind of scepticism . He concludes that in many cases of arith - metical generalizations size - scepticism is in fact not warranted . The paper closes by providing some remarks about enumerative inductive evidence for the consistency of set theory in the light of the consideration drawn from the previous discussion of size scepticism . In his The Derivation of Poiseuille’s Law : Heuristic and Explanatory Consider - ations , Chris Pincock examines the historical development and the debate surround - ing Poiseuille’s law . Pincock focuses on this case study because it helps us better understand the character and value of mathematical explanation in science , espe - cially in those cases where the search for a theoretical explanation of an experimental result has heuristic value in facilitating further experimental discoveries . Poiseuille’s law , which relates the rate of flow for some fluid through a cylinder to the change in pressure , was conclusively supported by Poiseuille’s own measurements in 1846 . However , a lack of clarity as to why the law would hold in controlled laboratory conditions ( while failing in a broader range of circumstances ) , together with the highly mathematical character of the law , led the scientific community to search for a theoretical explanation . Further mathematical investigations eventually pointed to a widely accepted explanation : Poiseuille’s law is derivable from an idealized model of steady , laminar flow . This derivation contributed ( together with strong experimental evidence ) to the establishment of the so - called “no slip” boundary condition : as a fluid flows through such a cylinder , its velocity becomes nil at the walls . Pincock’s paper addresses two important questions concerning this explanation : ( 1 ) How can a derivation supported by an idealized model explain – when the idealizing assump - tions fail to apply to the real - world systems used by Poiseuille to derive his law ? ( 2 ) In such cases , what is the heuristic value of an assumption like the no slip condition , which plays a key role in the measurement of a fluid’s viscosity ? Pincock argues that it was explanatory considerations which both led to the discovery of the deriva - tion , and drove further discoveries concerning turbulent flows where Poiseuille’s law ceases to apply . 1 3 154 Page 8 of 12 Synthese ( 2023 ) 201 : 154 In The Mathematical Stance , Alan Baker defends the Enhanced Indispensability Argument ( EIA ) , considered by many the strongest argument currently available for mathematical platonism . He tackles two important objections against this argument . First , according to the EIA , we should commit to the existence of any entity that is explanatorily indispensable to science . Since mathematical objects are indispensable to our best scientific explanations , we should therefore commit to their existence . However , a critic may complain here that the argument assumes that there is a unique structure that underpins a given physical phenomenon . Another criticism is that the argument over - generates , by committing us to idealized entities—such as perfectly continuous fluids and frictionless surfaces—which play an indispensable explanatory role in our scientific theories . This would imply that explanatory indispensability is not after all a sufficient condition for ontological commitment . 4 According to Baker , these two objections can be overcome by appealing to the notion of “the mathemati - cal stance” , modelled after Dennett’s notion of “the intentional stance” . Namely , we should regard a given physical phenomenon as an abstract mathematical structure in a way that facilitates prediction and explanation of the puzzling aspects of its behav - ior . Baker argues that such a stance - based account of the application of mathematics can lay the grounds for achieving a satisfactory general philosophical account of mathematical explanation in science . In On the Plains and Prairies of Minnesota : The Role of Mathematical Statistics in Biological Explanation , Emily Grosholz considers the explanatory and heuristic aspects of the use of mathematical statistics in the research on plant population . She considers as a case study the work of population geneticist Ruth Geyer Shaw and her group on prairie restoration in Minnesota . In order to adequately capture the complexity of this biological phenomenon , this type of field work involves a combi - nation of intensive collection of empirical data and development of appropriate math - ematical modelling . This , in turn , requires measuring both macroscopic and genetic features of the population involved in their interactions over time . Thus , it involves selecting the significant variables to record , the study of the interaction of different causal mechanisms in the different stages of development , as well as the analysis of the genetic variance , with special attention to avoiding sampling bias . According to Grosholz , the complex issues at the interplay between statistics and biology have been neglected by many philosophers : often , physics and deductive explanations are presented as a regulative ideal for biology ( here , a typical example is Newtonian mechanics ) . On the other hand , explanations in biology are usually partial and pro - visional : living beings have heterogeneous and unpredictable behaviors , and there is an unbridgeable gap between the phenomenon of interest and the limitations of the compiled dataset ( it is simply impossible to study every aspect of every member of a population ) . Grosholz focuses on the use of Aster Models ( a class of statistical models that jointly analyse the measurements of separate , sequential , non - normally distributed components of fitness ) , and examines three case studies . These show why the use of mathematical statistics in biology , if expanded to employ a variety of non - normal distributions , offers insightful explanations and reveals itself to be highly 4 This critique is due to Maddy ( 1997 ) and has been also addressed in Bangu ( 2012 ) . 1 3 Page 9 of 12 154 Synthese ( 2023 ) 201 : 154 valuable in generating predictions . These , in turn , can be the grounds for the develop - ment of local and national environmental policies . Finally , Mary Leng’s paper Models , Structures , and the Explanatory Role of Math - ematics in Empirical Science argues that we should think of explanations by con - straint as structural explanations . “Explanations by constraints” are characterised by Lange ( 2017 ) as being , roughly speaking , explanations which show how a physical phenomenon follows from mathematics together with physical background condi - tions . “Structural explanations” , on the other hand , show how a physical phenom - enon necessarily follows from the features of the mathematical structure instantiated in the physical system under consideration . As such , they are presented in the form of necessitated conditionals . According to Leng , these types of explanations genuinely enhance our understanding of the physical world by providing modal information about their explananda , and by showing how apparently disparate phenomena are instances of a common structure . She then considers the notion of a structural expla - nation in the context of the debate on the enhanced indispensability argument , and contends that since structural explanations can be understood in modal structural terms , they do not engender a commitment to mathematical platonism . Subsequently , Leng discusses case studies where a mathematical structure is only instantiated in an idealised model of a physical description , arguing that even in these cases , structural explanations do not lend support to mathematical platonism . Toward the end , Leng also maintains that viewing mathematical explanations as structural explanations provides a novel perspective on the explanatory role played by mathematics in our understanding of the world . This role reveals how mathematical - structural dependen - cies in mathematical models of physical phenomena reflect mathematical - structural dependencies in the physical world . Acknowledgements Marianna Antonutti Marfori’s work was supported by the German Research Founda - tion ( Gefördert durch die Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( DFG ) —Projektnummer 390218268 ) . Sorin Bangu thanks the Research Council of Norway , grant no . 287101 FRIHUMSAM . Emiliano Ippoliti’s work has been supported by the Italian Ministry of University and Research ( FFABR ) . We are all grateful to Ciprian Bangu and Benedict Eastaugh for proofreading the text . References Baker , A . ( 2005 ) . Are there genuine mathematical explanations of physical phenomena ? Mind , 114 ( 454 ) , 223 – 238 . Baker , A . ( 2009 ) . Mathematical Explanation in Science . British Journal for the Philosophy of Science , 60 ( 3 ) , 611 – 633 . Bangu , S . ( 2012 ) . The Applicability of Mathematics in Science : Indispensability and ontology . Palgrave MacMillan . Bangu , S . ( 2013 ) . Indispensability and explanation . British Journal for the Philosophy of Science , 64 ( 2 ) , 225 – 277 . Bangu , S . ( 2021 ) . Mathematical Explanations of Physical Phenomena . Australasian Journal of Philoso - phy , 99 . 4 , 669 – 682 . Baron , S . ( 2014 ) . Optimization and Mathematical Explanation : Doing the Lévy Walk . Synthese , 191 ( 3 ) , 459 – 479 . Baron , S . ( 2016 ) . Explaining Mathematical Explanation . The Philosophical Quarterly , 66 ( 264 ) , 458 – 480 . Batterman , R . ( 2002 ) . The Devil in the Details : Asymptotic Reasoning in Explanation , Reduction , and Emergence . Oxford University Press . 1 3 154 Page 10 of 12 Synthese ( 2023 ) 201 : 154 Batterman , R . ( 2022 ) . A Middle Way : A Non - Fundamental Approach to Many - Body Physics . Oxford Uni - versity Press . Bueno , O . ( 2012 ) . An Easy Road to Nominalism . Mind , 121 ( 484 ) : 967 – 982 . Cellucci , C . ( 2013 ) . Rethinking Logic : Logic in Relation to Mathematics , Evolution , and Method . Springer . Cellucci , C . ( 2022 ) . The Making of Mathematics . Heuristic philosophy of Mathematics . Berlin : Springer . Chow , S . J . ( 2015 ) . Many meanings of ‘heuristic’ . The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science , 66 ( 4 ) , 977 – 1016 . Clement , J . J . ( 2020 ) . Reasoning patterns in Galileo’s analysis of machines and in expert protocols : Roles for analogy , imagery , and mental simulation . Topoi , 39 : 973 – 985 . Colyvan , M . ( 1998 ) . In defence of indispensability . Philosophia Mathematica , 6 ( 1 ) , 39 – 62 . Colyvan , M . ( 2001 ) . The Indispensability of Mathematics . Oxford University Press . Colyvan , M . ( 2010 ) . There is No Easy Road to Nominalism . Mind , 119 ( 474 ) : 285 – 306 . Colyvan , M . , Cusbert , J . , & McQueen , K . ( 2018 ) . Two Flavours of Mathematical Explanation . In A . Reutlinger , & J . Saatsi ( Eds . ) , Explanation beyond causation ( pp . 231 – 249 ) . Oxford University Press . Craver , C . and Mark Povich ( 2017 ) . The directionality of distinctively mathematical explanations . Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A , 63 , 31 – 38 . D’Alessandro , W . ( 2020 ) . Mathematical Explanation beyond Explanatory Proof . British Journal for the Philosophy of Science , 71 , 581 – 603 . Dorato , M . ( 2017 ) . Dynamical versus Structural Explanations in Scientific Revolutions . Synthese , 194 ( 7 ) : 2307 – 2327 . Einstein , A . ( 2010 ) . Ideas and Opinions . Crown . Field , H . ( 1980 ) . Science without Numbers : A defence of nominalism . Blackwell . Frege , G . ( 1960 ) . The Foundations of Arithmetic . A logic - mathematical enquiry into the concept of num - ber . Transl . by J . L Austin . Harper . Gigerenzer , G . , & Todd , P . M . ( 1999 ) . Simple heuristics that make us smart . Oxford University Press . Gillies , D . ( 1996 ) . Artificial Intelligence and Scientific Method . Oxford University Press . Gingras , Y . ( 2001 ) . What did mathematics do to physics ? History of Science , 39 : 383 – 416 . Grosholz , E . ( 2007 ) . Representation and Productive Ambiguity in Mathematics and the Sciences . Oxford University Press . Hafner , J . , & Mancosu , P . ( 2005 ) . The Varieties of Mathematical Explanation . In P . Mancosu et al . ( Eds . ) , Visualization , explanation and reasoning Styles in Mathematics ( pp . 215 – 250 ) . Springer . Ippoliti , E . ( 2018a ) . Mathematical Knowledge and its Construction : the Heuristic Stance . Paradigmi , XXXVI , I : 209 – 222 Ippoliti , E . ( 2020 ) . Manufacturing a mathematical group . A study in heuristics , Topoi 39 : 963 – 971 Ippoliti , E . ( 2018b ) . Building Theories . The heuristic way . In D . Danks & E . Ippoliti ( Eds . ) , Building Theories ( pp . 3 – 20 ) . Springer . Jaccard , J . , & Jacoby , J . ( 2010 ) . Theory Construction and Model - Building . New York : Guilford Press . Kahneman , D . , Slovic , P . , & Tversky , A . ( Eds . ) . ( 1982 ) . Judgement under Uncertainty : Heuristics and Biases . Cambridge University Press . Kant , I . 1786 / 2004 . Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science . Translated and edited by Michael Friedman . Cambridge University Press . Kantorovich , A . ( 1993 ) . Scientific Discovery : Logic and Tinkering . State University of New York Press . Kitcher , P . ( 1989 ) . Explanatory Unification and the Causal structure of the World . In P . Kitcher & W . Salmon ( Eds . ) , Scientific explanation . Volume XIII . Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science ( pp . 410 – 505 ) . University of Minnesota Press . Lakatos , I . ( 1976 ) . Proofs and Refutations : The Logic of Mathematical Discovery . Cambridge University Press . Lakatos , I . ( 1978 ) . The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes . Cambridge University Press . Lange , M . ( 2017 ) . Because without Cause : Non - causal explanations in science and mathematics . Oxford University Press . Leng , M . ( 2010 ) . Mathematics and Reality . Oxford University Press . Leng , M . ( 2012 ) . Taking it Easy : A Response to Colyvan . Mind , 121 ( 484 ) : 983 – 995 . Laudan , L . ( 1977 ) . Progress and its Problems . University of California Press . Laudan , L . ( 1981 ) . A problem - solving approach to scientific progress . In I . Hacking ( Ed . ) , Scientific Revo - lutions ( pp . 144 – 155 ) . Oxford University Press . Maddy , P . ( 1992 ) . Indispensability and practice . Journal of Philosophy , 89 ( 6 ) , 275 – 289 . Maddy , P . ( 1997 ) . Naturalism in Mathematics . Clarendon Press . 1 3 Page 11 of 12 154 Synthese ( 2023 ) 201 : 154 Mancosu , P . ( 1996 ) . Philosophy of Mathematics and Mathematical Practice in the Seventeenth Century . Oxford University Press . Mancosu , P . ( 2000 ) . On Mathematical Explanation . In E . Grosholz , & H . Breger ( Eds . ) , The Growth of Mathematical Knowledge ( pp . 103 – 119 ) . Kluwer . Mancosu , P . ( 2018 ) . Explanation in Mathematics . The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ( Sum - mer 2018 Edition ) , Edward N . Zalta ( ed . ) , https : / / plato . stanford . edu / archives / sum2018 / entries / mathematics - explanation / . Morrison , M . ( 2000 ) . Unifying Scientific Theories : Physical Concepts and Mathematical Structures . Cam - bridge University Press . Morrison , M . ( 2014 ) . Reconstructing reality . Models , Mathematics and Simulations . Oxford University Press . Nickles , T . ( Ed . ) . ( 1980a ) . Scientific discovery : Logic and rationality . Springer . Nickles , T . ( Ed . ) . ( 1980b ) . Scientific discovery : Case studies . Springer . Nickles , T . ( 1981 ) . What is a problem that we may solve it ? Scientific method as a problem - solving and question - answering technique . Synthese , 47 ( 1 ) , 85 – 118 . Nickles , T . ( 2014 ) . Heuristic appraisal at the frontier of research . In E . Ippoliti ( Ed . ) , Heuristic Reasoning . ( pp . 57 – 88 ) . Springer . Paseau , A . C . , & Baker , A . ( Eds . ) . ( forthcoming ) Indispensability . Cambridge University Press Paseau , A . C . ( 2015 ) . Knowledge of Mathematics without Proof . British Journal for the Philosophy of Science , 66 . 4 , 775 – 799 . Pincock , C . ( 2007 ) . A Role for Mathematics in the Physical Sciences . Noûs 41 : 253 – 275 . Pincock , C . ( 2012 ) . Mathematics and Scientific Representation . Oxford University Press . Pincock , C . ( 2015 ) . The Unsolvability of the Quintic : A Case Study in Abstract Mathematical Explanation . Philosophers’ Imprint , 15 ( 3 ) . Poincaré , H . ( 1908 ) . L’invention mathématique . Enseignement mathématique , 10 , 357 – 371 . Polya , G . ( 1954 ; 2 vols . ) . Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning . Princeton University Press . Popper , K . ( 1999 ) . All Life is Problem Solving . Routledge . Quarantotto , D . ( 2017 ) . Aristotle’s problemata style and aural textuality . In R . Polansky , & W . Wians ( Eds . ) , Reading Aristotle ( pp . 75 – 122 ) . Leiden : Brill . Resnik , M . , & Kushner , D . ( 1987 ) . Explanation , Independence , and Realism in Mathematics . British Jour - nal for the Philosophy of Science , 38 , 141 – 158 . Russell , B . ( 1912 ) . The Problems of Philosophy . Williams and Norgate ; Henry Holt and Company . Saatsi , J . ( 2011 ) . The enhanced indispensability argument : Representational versus explanatory role for mathematics in science . British Journal for the Philosophy of Science , 63 ( 1 ) , 143 – 154 . Shelley , C . ( 2003 ) . Multiple Analogies in Science and Philosophy . John Benjamins B . V . Shimojima , A . ( 1996 ) . On the efficacy of representation . PhD Thesis . The Department of Philosophy , Indiana University , Bloomington , IN . Simon , H . ( 1977 ) . Models of Discovery . Reidel . Simon , H . , Langley , P . , Bradshaw , G . , & Zytkow , J . ( 1987 ) . Scientific discovery : Computational explora - tions of the creative processes . MIT Press . Steiner , M . ( 1978 ) . Mathematical Explanation . Philosophical Studies , 34 : 135 – 151 . Steiner , M . ( 1998 ) . The applicability of mathematics as a philosophical problem . Harvard University Press . Tappenden , J . ( 2005 ) . Proof Style and understanding in Mathematics I : Visualization , Unification and Axiom Choice . In P . Mancosu , K . Jørgensen , & S . Pedersen ( Eds . ) , Visualization , explanation and reasoning Styles in Mathematics . ( pp . 147 – 214 ) . Springer . Ulazia , A . ( 2016 ) . Multiple roles for analogies in the genesis of fluid mechanics : How analogies can coop - erate with other heuristic strategies . Foundations of Science , 21 ( 4 ) , 543 – 565 . Weisberg , R . ( 2006 ) . Creativity : Understanding innovation in problem solving , science , invention , and the arts . Wiley . Wigner , E . ( 1967 ) . The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences . In Wigner , E . , Symmetries and Reflections . ( pp . 222 – 237 ) . Indiana University Press . Wilson , M . ( 2008 ) . Wandering Significance : An essay on conceptual behavior . Oxford University Press . Wilson , M . ( 2017 ) . Physics Avoidance . Oxford University Press . Yablo , S . ( 2012 ) . Explanation , Extrapolation , and Existence . Mind , 121 ( 484 ) : 1007 – 1029 . Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . 1 3 154 Page 12 of 12