DIVERSITY Redress disparities in NIH funding between institutions p . 190 CRISPR TWINS Gene - therapy regulation offers good model p . 190 DEXTERITY A chef , a musician and a chemist walk into a conference bar… p . 188 SOCIETY How water has shaped the history of south Asia p . 186 O ver the past five years , various studies have shown that mouse and human stem cells can spontaneously organ - ize in a dish into 3D structures that are increasingly similar to mouse 1 – 5 or human 6 – 8 embryos . All that is needed is the right num - ber and combination of cells , growth factors and , sometimes , a means of physically con - fining the cells , such as in microwells 8 . In the past 18 months , researchers have taken a significant step forward , using mouse models . They have incorporated tissues into the models that resemble those that become the yolk sac and placenta . In mammals , these ‘extra - embryonic organs’ 1 , 4 , 5 grow in synergy with the embryo , mediate its implantation and form the interface with the mother . In short , it now seems feasible that stem cells can be developed into models that are almost indistinguishable from embryos in the lab . Such models can also be trans - ferred into the womb of a mouse 1 , where they begin to implant . These models open up all sorts of pos - sibilities in research . Studying mouse and human embryogenesis in the lab could lead to better infertility treatments or contraceptives , more - effective and safer in vitro fertilization ( IVF ) procedures , the prevention and treat - ment of developmental disorders and even the creation of organs for people who need a transplant ( see ‘Why model embryos ? ’ ) . These models also raise profound ethical questions . What should their legal and ethi - cal status be now , and in the future as they are refined ? Do the probable insights these embryo models provide outweigh possible ethical concerns ? Because of the potential benefits , is there now a moral imperative to develop this research ? In 2015 , various commentators , including four of us ( M . P . , M . M . , G . deW . and W . D . ) flagged the potential ethical implications of developing embryo models from stem cells 9 . At the time , investigators had modelled only a short span of development . No precursors of the extra - embryonic tissues had been generated . Given the pace of progress , we now think that a major international discussion is needed to help guide this research . NEW AVENUES So far , biologists have produced four differ - ent types of ‘embryo model’ : three in mice 1 , 3 , 5 and one using human cells 7 ( see ‘What’s been modelled ? ’ and ‘Model systems’ ) . All of the models stop developing after a few days , and the extent to which their gene - expression patterns match those of natural embryos has yet to be rigorously assessed 1 , 3 , 5 . Even with these limitations — which are likely to be overcome in the future — stem - cell models open up new avenues for exploring human development and disease . The first few weeks of development are crucial to the success of a pregnancy and the health of a child 10 . But little is known about how the human embryo forms , implants and develops in the days that follow . Embryos can be observed using ultrasound only after about five weeks . And there are strict regu - latory constraints on researchers’ ability to manipulate human embryos experimentally . What is known about this period in human development comes mainly from three lines of research . These are : studies of embryos formed through IVF , including of blasto - cysts cultured in the laboratory for up to 13 days 11 , 12 ; a small number of archival speci - mens of human embryos obtained decades ago through surgery and other procedures Debate ethics of embryo models from stem cells International discussion must guide research , urge Nicolas Rivron , Martin Pera and colleagues . The cells of a 4 - day - old artificial embryo ( left ) resemble those of a 5 . 5 - day - old mouse embryo ( right ) . B . S O Z E N E T A L . / N A T U R E C E LL B I O L . 1 3 D E C E M B E R 2 0 1 8 | V O L 5 6 4 | N AT U R E | 1 8 3 COMMENT that would now be considered unethical in most countries ( see go . nature . com / 2sufgov ) ; and a few comparative studies on closely related primate species , such as cynomolgus monkeys ( Macaca fascicularis ) 13 . Unlike embryos formed through the fusion of a sperm and an egg , model embryos can be generated in large numbers and tweaked , for instance by using gene editing . This means that they can be used in high - throughput genetic tests and drug screens — procedures that generally form the basis of therapeutic discoveries . Biologists can also use model embryos to uncover basic principles . For instance , it is well known that the placenta supports and instructs the embryo’s development . Yet a study this year 1 showed that , in early embryos ( blastocysts ) , the embryo guides the formation and implantation of the future placenta . ( That work was led by one of us ( N . R . ) , building on previous observations 14 . ) We think that stem - cell - based models could transform medicine in at least five ways ( see ‘Why model embryos ? ’ ) . Done properly , studies on embryo models could even obviate some of the ethical conflicts surrounding research on human development : research - ers would have less need to study embryos from people or other primates . FOUR QUESTIONS Future progress depends on addressing now the ethical and policy issues that could arise . Ultimately , individual jurisdictions will need to formulate their own policies and regulations , reflecting their values and priorities . However , we urge funding bodies , along with scientific and medical societies , to start an international discussion as a first step . Bioethicists , scientists , clinicians , legal and regulatory specialists , patient advocates and other citizens could offer at least some consensus on an appropriate trajectory for the field . Two outputs are needed . First , guidelines for researchers ; second , a reliable source of information about the current state of the research , its possible trajectory , its potential medical benefits and the key ethical and policy issues it raises . Both guidelines and information should be disseminated to jour - nalists , ethics committees , regulatory bodies and policymakers . Four questions in particular need attention . Should embryo models be treated legally and ethically as human embryos , now or in the future ? If the majority view is ‘no’ , biologists could use stem - cell - based models both in basic research and in preclinical applications , unfettered by current legislation or guidelines on human - embryo research . If most stakeholders lean towards ‘yes’ , work involving these models would be permitted in countries that allow the creation of human embryos for research , such as the United Kingdom — subject to the usual ethical and legal restrictions . Answering this question could require testing whether these entities are capable of developing to term , but such experiments would themselves raise ethical questions . Moreover , the worldwide ban on human reproductive cloning would prevent such a test from being conducted on models formed from induced pluripotent stem cells . In practice , different models might need to be treated in different ways . For example , it is unlikely that current post - implantation models could ever develop fully into an organism . They mirror only some regions of the embryo , and skip over the develop - mental stage that normally occurs when it implants in the uterus . Complicating mat - ters , researchers might be able to constrain or enhance the developmental capacity of a particular model using gene editing — such as by incorporating suicide genes that destroy the tissue at a certain point . In other words , what might be considered an embryo could be flipped by genetic means into a non - embryo , and vice versa . Which research applications involving human embryo models are ethically acceptable ? Most would agree that research into the origin of infertility and genetic diseases , for example , is a worthy goal and probably achievable within current ethical bounda - ries . Conversely , the use of human embryo models for reproduction is much harder to justify . Such applications are a long way off , but one day it might be feasible to transfer an embryo created from ( genetically edited ) stem cells to a woman’s uterus to treat infertil - ity or circumvent genetic diseases . Most — including the International Society for Stem Cell Research ( ISSCR ) — rightly argue that it is not morally acceptable to create humans in this way , even setting aside the considerable uncertainty regarding the healthy outcome of a stem - cell - derived pregnancy . How far should attempts to develop an intact human embryo in a dish be allowed to proceed ? The response to this will depend on the answer to our first question . If human - embryo models are deemed equivalent to human embryos , they will become part of an ongoing debate on the time limits on cul - turing embryos . In more than 20 countries , it is against the law for researchers to maintain intact human embryos in the laboratory past 14 days of development or beyond the initia - tion of gastrulation ( when three different cell layers appear ) — whichever comes first 12 . Does a modelled part of a human embryo have an ethical and legal status similar to that of a complete embryo ? At the moment , the following are not deemed biologically equivalent to a whole embryo : tissues sampled from embryos for diagnostic purposes ; embryonic stem cells ; and extra - embryonic stem cells . But it is unclear at which point a partial model contains enough ●● Treating infertility . Embryo models could give researchers a better understanding of implantation and gastrulation , and lead to better infertility treatments . ( It is thought that at least 40 % of pregnancies fail by 20 weeks , and that 70 % of those that fail do so at implantation 15 . ) ●● Improving IVF . Only around 20 % of IVF procedures result in a birth 16 . Using stem - cell models , researchers could optimize implantation and minimize cellular abnormalities , such as an aberrant number of chromosomes . As well as safeguarding the health of children conceived in vitro , this could reduce the number of procedures . ●● Designing new contraceptives . Embryo - model work could improve drugs that prevent implantation ( as the oral contraceptive pill or intrauterine devices do , in part ) . Women and health professionals need drugs and devices that are easier to use and that have fewer side effects . Family planning is central to sustainable , global development ( see go . nature . com / 2rdqpvw ) . ●● Preventing disease . Subtle cell abnormalities during the first weeks of pregnancy , such as those caused by the use of alcohol or medications , can do damage throughout pregnancy and beyond 17 . They can alter development of the placenta and restrict embryo growth , affecting the baby’s birth weight and propensity for chronic diseases ( such as those of the heart ) decades later 18 . Entities based on stem cells could help researchers to pinpoint the genetic and epigenetic changes involved 18 , and assess the effects of diets or drugs 10 , 16 . ●● Creating organs . Mini brains , livers , kidneys and other organoids made from stem cells are highly simplified . Initiating organ development in an environment as similar as possible to the developing embryo might enable researchers to reliably generate structures that more closely resemble mature , functional organs , for drug screens or even for transplantation . N . R . , M . P . et al . WHY MODEL EMBRYOS ? Five ways in which embryo models could improve health 1 8 4 | N AT U R E | V O L 5 6 4 | 1 3 D E C E M B E R 2 0 1 8 COMMENT material to ethically represent the whole , so this must also be discussed by regulators . FOUR RECOMMENDATIONS These are complex questions , and discus - sions about all these issues and others will need to be regularly revisited as the field evolves . The pace of progress , however , prompts us to recommend the following . First , we think that the intention of the research should be considered the key ethical criterion by regulators , rather than surrogate measures of the equivalence between the human embryo and a model . This was the approach taken with cloning . In the late 1990s and early 2000s , many nations prohibited human reproductive cloning , but did not ban the transfer of nuclear material from a somatic cell to an egg to produce a blastocyst and generate lines of stem cells . Here , the key consideration was the inten - tion of the study rather than whether the clone was equivalent to a natural embryo . Second , we urge regulators to ban the use of stem - cell - based entities for reproductive purposes . Third , in our view , current stem - cell models that are designed to replicate only a restricted part of development , or that form just a few anatomical structures , should not have the ethical status of embryos . Finally , we urge any scientist using human stem cells for research to abide by existing guidelines , such as those of the ISSCR . They should send their research proposals to a stem - cell oversight committee or a local independent ethical review board before undertaking any studies , submit their results to peer review and publicize their findings . As part of ensuring good practice , stem - cell researchers , developmental biologists , human embryologists and others need to reach consensus on what terminology accu - rately captures the properties of the different models . ( Currently , several terms are used interchangeably to describe the various types . ) Ideally , terms should reflect the cel - lular composition and tissue organization of each , and indicate their developmental stage and potential . Such provisions will help to ensure that this research is conducted ethically . Cru - cially , the recommendations will also help citizens to understand what researchers are doing , and why . Transparency and effective engagement with the public is essential to ensure that promising avenues for research proceed with due caution , especially given the complexity of the science . ■ Nicolas Rivron leads the laboratory for synthetic embryology both at the MERLN Institute , Maastricht University , Maastricht ; and at the Hubrecht Institute ( KNAW ) , Utrecht , the Netherlands . Martin Pera is a professor at the Jackson Laboratory , Bar Harbor , Maine , USA . Janet Rossant , Alfonso Martinez Arias , Magdalena Zernicka - Goetz , Jianping Fu , Susanne van den Brink , Annelien Bredenoord , Wybo Dondorp , Guido de Wert , Insoo Hyun , Megan Munsie , Rosario Isasi . e - mails : n . rivron @ maastrichtuniversity . nl ; martin . pera @ jax . org 1 . Rivron , N . C . et al . Nature 557 , 106 – 111 ( 2018 ) . 2 . van den Brink , S . C . et al . Development 141 , 4231 – 4242 ( 2014 ) . 3 . Beccari , L . et al . Nature 562 , 272 – 276 ( 2018 ) . 4 . Harrison , S . E . , Sozen , B . , Christodoulou , N . , Kyprianou , C . & Zernicka - Goetz , M . Science 356 , eaal1810 ( 2017 ) . 5 . Sozen , B . et al . Nature Cell Biol . 20 , 979 – 989 ( 2018 ) . 6 . Shao , Y . et al . Nature Mater . 16 , 419 – 425 ( 2016 ) . 7 . Shao , Y . et al . Nature Commun . 8 , 208 ( 2017 ) . 8 . Shahbazi , M . N . & Zernicka - Goetz , M . Nature Cell Biol . 20 , 878 – 887 ( 2018 ) . 9 . Pera , M . F . et al . Nature Meth . 12 , 917 – 919 ( 2015 ) . 10 . Bianco - Miotto , T . , Craig , J . M . , Gasser , Y . P . , Van Dijk , S . J . & Ozanne , S . E . J . Dev . Orig . Health Dis . 8 , 513 – 519 ( 2017 ) . 11 . Deglincerti , A . et al . Nature 533 , 251 – 254 ( 2016 ) . 12 . Hyun , I . , Wilkerson , A . & Johnston , J . Nature 533 , 169 – 171 ( 2016 ) . 13 . Nakamura , T . et al . Nature 537 , 57 – 62 ( 2016 ) . 14 . Gardner , R . L . & Johnson , M . H . J . Embryol . Exp . Morphol . 28 , 279 – 312 ( 1972 ) . 15 . Norwitz , E . R . , Schust , D . J . & Fisher , S . J . N . Engl . J . Med . 345 , 1400 – 1408 ( 2001 ) . 16 . Chen , M . & Heilbronn , L . K . J . Dev . Orig . Health Dis . 8 , 388 – 402 ( 2017 ) . 17 . Cha , J . , Sun , X . & Dey , S . K . Nature Med . 18 , 1754 – 1767 ( 2012 ) . 18 . Burton , G . J . , Fowden , A . L . & Thornburg , K . L . Physiol . Rev . 96 , 1509 – 1565 ( 2016 ) . 19 . Warmflash , A . , Sorre , B . , Etoc , F . , Siggia , E . D . & Brivanlou , A . H . Nature Meth . 11 , 847 – 854 ( 2014 ) . 20 . Taniguchi , K . et al . Stem Cell Rep . 5 , 954 – 962 ( 2015 ) . Full affiliations for all authors are listed online ( see go . nature . com / 2sxyqdt ) . WHAT’S BEEN MODELLED ? Using stem cells , researchers have produced entities in the lab that mimic certain structures found in the mouse embryo ( coloured parts ) . Work with human stem cells is less advanced . 0 days 0 days 7 – 9 4 . 5 14 Egg Fertilization Implantation Gastrulation 8 . 5 Organogenesis Early blastocyst In many countries , human embryos cannot be grown in the lab past 14 days of development or beyond the initiation of gastrulation . 6 . 5 Precursors of yolk sac , placenta and amniotic sac ( blue ) . MOUSE HUMAN Embryonic structures ( yellow ) Fetus PRE - IMPLANTATION EARLY POST - IMPLANTATION LATE POST - IMPLANTATION Mouse stem cells can form 3D structures that resemble the 3 . 5 - day - old mouse embryo ( the blastocyst ) before it implants in the uterus . These ‘blastoids’ contain analogues of the three cell lineages thought to form the embryo , placenta and yolk sac . Blastoids implanted into female mice trigger a uterine response . Currently , development stops shortly after implantation 1 . Mouse stem cells can also form entities that are similar to specific regions of the 6 . 5 – 8 - day - old mouse embryo after it has implanted in the uterus 2 – 5 . A process called gastrulation , during which the body plan is established , occurs in these regions . These models are termed ETS / X embryo - like structures 4 , 5 and gastruloids 2 , 3 . In the first type , some interactions between the embryonic and extra - embryonic tissues are repeated 4 , 5 , the anterior – posterior body axis is laid down and analogues of gastrulating cells are generated 5 . In gastruloids , the three basic germ layers are laid down 2 , 3 and the precursors of organs develop 3 . Work with human stem cells is less advanced , but is on a similar trajectory . Currently , human stem cells can model aspects of gastrulation 19 and the formation of the beginnings of the amniotic cavity 20 . They can also form 3D asymmetric cysts that model the development of the epiblast – amniotic ectoderm axis 6 , 7 . As far as we know , this structure arises during the second week , soon after implantation . N . R . , M . P . et al . MODEL SYSTEMS How stem cells are used to study embryo development 1 3 D E C E M B E R 2 0 1 8 | V O L 5 6 4 | N AT U R E | 1 8 5 COMMENT