Signature Pedagogies in Doctoral Education : Are They Adaptable for the Preparation of Education Researchers ? by Chris M . Golde This article describes two practices that can be considered signature pedagogies of doctoral education , one in neuroscience ( the journal club ) and one in English studies ( the list ) . The practices are routinely found in these and neighboring disciplines but are not found in other fields . The journal club and the list share the goal of acquainting students with the literature of a field , but apart from that , they are very different . In addition to teaching students to work with the literature , they serve other pedagogical goals , including socializing students into disciplinary norms and identities . Thus they serve as windows into the underlying culture of their home disciplines . This article considers the value of adapting these practices into education doctoral programs and offers suggestions for how to modify the practices to suit education . Keywords : doctoral education ; doctoral pedagogy ; educational researchers ; graduate education ; literature review C ompetently working with or “knowing” the literature of a field is important for scholarship in all disciplines , although it manifests somewhat differently in different fields . All researchers and scholars work within particular tradi - tions and build on , modify , or overturn that which has gone before . Learning the literature requires far more than simply read - ing widely , regurgitating key phrases and findings , and genu - flecting to seminal researchers . It is integral to any scholarly investigation . For educational research , to advance our collective understanding , a researcher or scholar needs to understand what has been done before , the strengths and weaknesses of existing studies , and what they might mean . A researcher cannot perform significant research without first under - standing the literature in the field . ( Boote & Beile , 2005 , p . 3 ) Students of education must undertake the following ( this list is not exhaustive ) : Absorb the content of what they read , deter - mine what is known and what needs to be known , identify important ongoing disciplinary debates , develop the judgment to discriminate between work of high quality and mediocre efforts , extract useful information on which to build , juxtapose multiple theoretical perspectives and explanations , connect research stud - ies to one another , synthesize and reappraise others’ work , and learn the stylistic conventions of written work , such as norms of what to say and what to omit ( Boote & Beile , 2005 , 2006 ; Delamont & Atkinson , 2001 ; Kamler & Thomson , 2006 ; Maxwell , 2006 ; V . Richardson , 2006 ) . Learning to work with the literature , “to canvass and interpret the field and to construct her version of its terrain , ” is also a form of “identity work” in which the scholar positions herself and her own work in relation to the field ( Kamler & Thomson , pp . 28 – 29 ) . Despite the fact that clear and persuasive writing is essential to , and indeed an integral part of , research and scholarship ( L . Richardson , 1998 ) , writing well and with confidence , particu - larly about others’ work , is a challenge for many students in every discipline ( see , for example , Bolker , 1998 ) . In education , students are expected to write “a substantive , thorough , sophisticated litera - ture review” for their dissertations ( Boote & Beile , 2005 , p . 3 ) , but too many students simply report on the literature rather than build an argument based on the work that has come before theirs . “The literature is neither used to locate their studies , nor to advance an argument about the state of the field in order to make the case for their own work , ” say Kamler and Thomson ( 2006 , p . 32 ) —two experts on doctoral writing . They observe that many students seem unable to make a critique and take a stand , adding , “This is charac - teristic of diffident scholars who lack authority and who are literally overwhelmed by the work of others” ( p . 32 ) . The problem may be that many students are not asked to work with literature in the ways that professional researchers do before confronting the dissertation prospectus itself . These skills are “often neglected or taught inade - quately” ( Maxwell , 2006 , p . 30 ) . If the status quo is not working , then the question is how to teach literature work more effectively . Simply adding a class on literature reviewing or writing ( see , for example , Rose & McClafferty , 2001 ) —helpful as that is—may be insufficient . More radical rethinking of the structures of education doctoral programs might be in order . If working with the literature effec - tively is crucial for every educational researcher , multiple oppor - tunities to do so before the dissertation stage should be woven through the student career . How can this be accomplished ? Practices used in other programs and fields can serve as sources of inspiration . 1 This happens routinely in research and scholarship , Educational Researcher , Vol . 36 , No . 6 , pp . 344 – 351 DOI : 10 . 3102 / 0013189X07308301 © 2007 AERA . http : / / er . aera . net Research News and Comment EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER 344 345 AUGUST / SEPTEMBER 2007 when theories and methods from other disciplines and inquiry traditions are borrowed and adapted . The present article describes practices from other disciplines that could be fruitfully modified for the field of education . Lessons From Other Disciplines Disciplines differ in how research and scholarship are conducted , how the research enterprise is organized and funded , what counts as knowledge , and how knowledge claims are made and verified . Student demographics and students’ post - PhD career paths also vary ( see Golde & Walker , 2006 , for descriptions of six disci - plines ) . So it is not surprising that the normative ways and set - tings in which students are taught differ from one field to the next . Some practices for teaching students are so idiosyncratic , habituated , and completely embedded in a particular discipline that they can be called “signature pedagogies . ” The term was coined by Shulman ( 2005 ) to describe “the char - acteristic forms of teaching and learning . . . that organize the fundamental ways in which future practitioners are educated for their new professions” ( p . 52 ) . Examples of signature pedagogies , those “forms of instruction that leap to mind” ( p . 52 ) , include the case dialogue method of teaching in law schools and bedside teaching on daily clinical rounds in medical education . Signature pedagogies make a difference . They form habits of the mind , habits of the heart , and habits of the hand . . . . [ They ] prefigure the cultures of professional work and provide the early socialization into the practices and values of a field . ( p . 59 ) That is what they do for students . For those of us on the outside , signature pedagogies are windows into the cultures of their fields that reveal professional values . Signature pedagogies share three features : They are pervasive and routine ; they entail public stu - dent performance ; and they are marked by uncertainty , visibility , and accountability , which raise the emotional stakes . ( Shulman , 2005 , pp . 56 – 57 ) Signature pedagogies are not just intriguing oddities . They are widespread across departments within a particular discipline , refined by time and practice , and they meet commonly under - stood pedagogical purposes . Arguably , signature pedagogies are adaptively suited—to borrow language from evolutionary biology—for the particularities of the scholarly enterprises in which they are found and therefore contribute to socializing stu - dents into disciplinary norms and identities . In this article , I will describe two very different practices that share a common overarching goal of teaching students to work with the literature in the field according to the demands and standards of the discipline . They can be considered signature pedagogies in their home ( and neighboring ) disciplines , one in neuroscience ( the journal club ) and one in English ( the list ) . Of course , they are not the only activities that scholars in those fields use for this purpose . And , as will be clear , these pedagogies serve other purposes as well , making each practice particularly well suited to its discipline of origin . In the final section of the arti - cle , I will consider the adaptability of these practices for educa - tion , where they seem to be unknown but might be adapted to good effect . Method The practices described in this article came to my attention through the work of the Carnegie Initiative on the Doctorate ( CID ) , for which I served as research director from 2001 to 2006 . Sponsored by The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching , the CID was an action and research project working in six disciplines : chemistry , education , English , mathematics , history , and neuroscience ( see http : / / www . carnegiefoundation . org / cid for more information ) . An outsider vantage point gave Carnegie CID staff a comparative view of the six fields . The attention to signature pedagogies developed as we saw elements of doctoral programs that occur normally in one discipline but are unusual in others . The research methods for this article are essentially observational . Over the course of the CID we heard faculty and students make passing reference to practices in their doctoral programs that all oth - ers from the field immediately understood ; but these were practices with which the CID team was unfamiliar . Naturally , we began to ask more questions to tease out the essential features of these prac - tices . The reader might imagine that we saw many signature peda - gogies , but that was not the case . 2 My discussion in this article is limited to practices that had the express purpose of mastery of the disciplinary literature . I interviewed faculty and graduate students who were familiar with the practices and were articulate observers . Several of them read and responded to a draft of this article . I also reviewed the literature on the practices ( journal clubs are well stud - ied in medical education circles ) as well as dozens of handbooks and Web pages that describe the practices in use . Extensive literature reviews on doctoral education in English and neuroscience also pro - vided background . It is from these sources that the cases below are drawn . Case 1 : The Journal Club Journal clubs are formally organized reading groups that discuss an article found in the recent research journals . A single article is at the heart of each journal club presentation and discussion ; the articles under discussion are ones deemed scientifically important . Journal clubs are conventionally multigenerational ; they include faculty members , postdoctoral fellows , advanced graduate students , and novice graduate students as equal participants . Journal clubs are organized around specialized themes . For example , some of the journal clubs offered through the Neuroscience Training Program at the University of Wisconsin – Madison in the 2006 – 2007 acade - mic year were Axon Guidance ; Behavioral Neuroscience ; Neural Cell Death and Survival ; Cerebral Ischemic Damage ; and Transmitters , Circuits , and Plasticity ( University of Wisconsin – Madison Neuro - science Training Program , 2006 ) . Journal clubs are a customary part of departmental life in most biological sciences . Although they are not formal courses , journal clubs are a well - understood mechanism for teaching and learn - ing . Participation is generally expected . One of the University of Wisconsin journal clubs advertises that it “has met continuously since 1985” ( University of Wisconsin – Madison Neuroscience Training Program , 2006 , “Hearing and Donuts , ” para . 1 ) . In fact , many doctoral programs in neuroscience require participa - tion in journal clubs ( for example , the University of Pittsburgh Center for Neuroscience Graduate Training Program , 2006 , “5 . 6 Journal Club , ” para . 1 ) . Less formally , the head of a laboratory may expect students to participate in a laboratory - based or cross - laboratory journal club . Journal clubs typically meet weekly for approximately an hour . Each week a different person presents an article to the group , and all participants are expected to have read the article in advance . The presentation is followed by general discussion . The process for presenting the articles is fairly standard : Summarize the article . Locate it in the larger landscape of the field . Describe the experiment in sufficient detail that the audience can understand it without becoming overly wrapped up in the details . Explain why the article is important . Critique the article : Do the data and their analysis withstand scrutiny ? Are there contradictions or competing hypotheses ? The discussion focuses on the big picture : the article’s strengths and weaknesses , how the article extends the field , potential applications of the work , and what questions need to be answered in light of the current findings . Neuroscience programs often support a second kind of jour - nal club : broad introductory ones for students in their early years . These are opportunities to read articles of historic importance and to learn the norms of journal clubs . ( Such opportunities are particularly valuable in neuroscience , as students come from dis - parate undergraduate majors ; broad introductory journal clubs are less common in more established bioscience disciplines . ) Guidelines for making presentations are provided ; these serve to initiate members into the norms of journal clubs . Early journal clubs also build community among graduate students , a particu - lar challenge for neuroscience programs whose students work in laboratories all over campus . Feedback mechanisms can help presenters improve and often are incorporated into journal clubs for which academic credit is offered . In the University of Pittsburgh neuroscience program , all journal club participants use a Student Journal Club Evaluation form to evaluate presenters ; the form includes 13 questions covering the pre - senter’s introduction of the topic , description of the topic , conclu - sion , delivery , and overall quality of the presentation , concluding with , “As a percentage , how much of the presentation could you explain to others ? ” Students also benefit from a postpresentation debriefing with the faculty coordinator and another faculty mem - ber who serves as an “outside expert” for that session . Not all journal clubs are successful . Many of the weaknesses of journal clubs are like those of any optional small - group edu - cational activity , such as seminars or study groups . Journal clubs can face the problem of declining attendance ; initial enthusiasm often wanes , particularly in the face of competing time pressures . Participant learning suffers if participants do not prepare in advance , if articles are selected and appraised without clear crite - ria , or if participants do not have guidance in preparing presen - tations ( Kahn , Dwarakanath , Pakkal , Brace , & Awonuga , 1999 ; Kahn & Gee , 1999 ) . Sometimes a few participants dominate and others , particularly nonnative speakers or newcomers , remain silent . Some people are put off by the norms of heated scientific discourse , which can seem aggressive and combative . What Purposes Are Served by This Practice ? Journal clubs have three well - understood and commonly described purposes . ( Of course , the purposes may be , in each par - ticular case , more or less important and explicit . ) First and fore - most , all members of journal clubs , from the most seasoned faculty member to the newest graduate student , use journal clubs to keep up with the literature . This has been the primary goal of journal clubs since they were invented in 1875 ( Linzer , 1987 ) . Journal clubs provide a forum for a collective effort to promote awareness of current research findings . Second , journal clubs teach many of the forms of sharing and evaluation of scientific findings . Students learn the written conven - tions for presenting science by reading articles and seeing what is well received and what obfuscates . They practice presentation skills : organizing a talk , speaking to others , sharing the appropriate level of detail , and creating effective PowerPoint slides . Journal clubs also model how to discuss and critique work . Students learn to ask good questions , to respond to questions , and to disagree with others— even professors . They learn to appraise research , develop confidence in their own judgment , and , when selecting an article , determine what constitutes important work . Third , journal clubs cross disciplinary and organizational boundaries . They are often interdepartmental or “interlab . ” Researchers in a medical school , a veterinary school , and a school of arts and sciences might share an interest in a particular brain function . Journal clubs establish connections across organiza - tional boundaries that might otherwise be obstacles to advancing knowledge . When people come together , the resulting conversa - tions can build bridges and establish trust . How Is This Practice Suited to Neuroscience ? Why do all scientists , from advanced faculty to new graduate stu - dents , use journal clubs to stay current ? Because journal clubs are a particularly efficient and effective way to help participants meet the three goals described above . The biological sciences have sev - eral distinguishing features to which journal clubs are particularly well suited . First , this is an era of “fast science . ” Emerging findings make it into print very quickly ; the time to publication is short ( weeks or months rather than years ) . New information must be acquired , evaluated , and incorporated into ongoing work as quickly as pos - sible , but the vast quantity makes it nearly impossible to do so . Consequently , scientists must always be aware of new findings and have the judgment to select relevant information from the torrent of available data . Moreover , colleagues who communicate precisely and concisely are valued . All of these skills are taught in journal club . Second , there are clear frontiers of knowledge . There is a con - sensus about what constitutes “important work” so it is possible to determine which articles are of high priority . Third , science is conducted in communal and relatively democratic ways . Scientists argue about ideas . The lively intel - lectual debates during journal club mimic the collaborative yet competitive culture of the laboratory . Fourth , the norms of science must be navigated and negotiated . In principle , findings are freely shared so that others may replicate them and build on them . In reality , scientists are in competition with one another . Therefore , authors must decide when to present their science to others , garnering credit but possibly relinquishing competitive advantage . They must determine how much informa - tion is needed for publication and when to withhold some data for the next article or proposal . Scientists also frame their questions and findings to align with the political priorities of grant making and EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER 346 publication . These choices become visible when an article is discussed . Finally , important problem areas evolve , and they do not always map well onto existing organizational units . Likewise , journal clubs often cross organizational boundaries . Insights from people in other fields or with different training can be critically important . The website for the Bioinformatics Journal Club at the University of Tennessee says , “This is a rapidly changing . . . topic area that can use insights from those with different types of training ; the instructors and the students all should learn from each other” ( University of Tennessee Bioinformatics Journal Club , 2003 , para . 4 ) . These five features of neuroscience , and indeed of most biolog - ical sciences , help to explain why journal clubs are such a wide - spread practice . They are an effective and efficient tool for helping senior scientists keep up with the literature , and they are equally important as a pedagogical strategy for training new scientists . Case 2 : The List The discipline of English makes use of a very different mecha - nism for ensuring that students know the literature of the field . The list is the group of works or texts that forms the basis of the comprehensive or qualifying examination for a doctoral student in English studies . 3 Exams are usually administered in the 2nd or 3rd year . The list is long , typically containing 60 to 100 works . One work might be a collection of poems , a novel , a theoretical work , or a group of secondary sources . The examination based on the list of works demonstrates that the student has “mastered the field . ”After this demonstration of breadth and mastery , students are expected to develop an idea ( project ) that they will pursue for the dissertation . The dissertation project builds on the specialty reflected in the list . ( English studies scholars describe themselves as working on “projects , ” not “problems . ” A project has a larger scope than a set of research experiments , and its goal is reaching understanding by developing an argument rather than arriving at a solution to a problem or an answer to a question . ) Anyone in English studies who is asked to describe the list has - tens to point out that it has undergone a fundamental shift in the past two decades . 4 At one time there was a single list for all stu - dents , composed of the classics of British and American literature ( “from Beowulf to Virginia Woolf” ) ; the works were understood to represent “genius” ( Guillory , 1991 , p . 52 ) . Today’s English doctoral students typically are expected to pass one or more “field exams , ” each of which encompasses a smaller subset of the literature . Students and faculty members work together to define an individual list for each field , which is shaped to the students’ interests and emerging expertise . Students make active choices of exclusion and inclusion in creating their lists . As stated in the Duke University English Department’s graduate studies handbook , “you should expect to play a very active role in formulating the questions you bring to texts” ( Duke University Department of English , 2006 , p . 7 ) . Although more constructed and negotiated than in the past , the lists are still rel - atively standardized in their own way . The theme of each list is usually dependent on a prior conceptual construction of a recog - nizable subfield , such as romanticism or feminist theory , that already exists in the discipline . Thus the works selected must not only be deemed “major works” but also reflect the student’s own position in the field . What does it mean to display “mastery” ? The process of prepa - ration for the comprehensive examination is a period of intensive reading and usually stretches over several months , if not an entire year . Usually the examination is oral , lasting 2 to 3 hours , and the examiners are a committee of faculty members . The examination can be on any aspect of the works on the list . It is more than an advanced Jeopardy quiz on authors , dates , plot points , and characters , although students would surely know all of those . The questions are broad and conceptual : Discuss this dynamic , compare and contrast , and the like . Emerging scholars must demonstrate that they “know” the literature . This includes understanding the broad contexts in which works are located and understanding the evolution of the literature and of its themes and ideas . The reading list – based examination is persistent but certainly not perfect . The shift from “comprehensive” lists to tailored lists risks a loss of historical context and breadth , driving students too quickly to preparing for the dissertation ( Delbanco , 2000 ) . As a result , students may lack a sufficiently broad foundation on which to base subsequent projects or on which to ground their teaching . Even with focused lists , the intensive reading period can extend for many , many months . This makes it all too easy for stu - dents to disappear from the department and lose the benefit of interactions with faculty members . The structure of , and stan - dards for , evaluating the examination itself are highly variable among programs and individual students’ committees . As a result , for some students , the examination itself can seem more like arbitrary hazing than an authentic intellectual discussion . What Purposes Are Served by This Practice ? Three purposes are served by the creation of and examination on the list . First , students must self - define and defend their location in the field . To do so , they must enter into the discourse and commentaries surrounding the works of literature that have grown and evolved over time . Mastery of the list ( s ) is one step along the way toward definition of a professional identity , which has instrumental purposes in terms of getting a job but , more important , is about entering into a disciplinary community . The examination is “the bridge between coursework and the disserta - tion , ” according to the English Department handbook from the University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign . Mastering core knowledge “makes possible productive engagement with other scholars in the field ( at lectures , conferences , on e - mail discussion groups , in print , at job interviews ) ” ( University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign Department of English , n . d . , “The Special Field Examination , ” para . 1 ) . Second , the list and the examination on the list are explicit preparation for the dissertation . It is the public foundation on which the dissertation is built . Quoting from the Brown University Department of English ( n . d . ) description of the qual - ifying examination , It is important to remember that the qualifying examination is pre - liminary to the dissertation and not to be confused with your disser - tation proposal . . . . Through the examination process , you will ideally 347 AUGUST / SEPTEMBER 2007 EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER 348 develop the kind of familiarity with the methods and materials of your field that you will need to wage a specific argument that earns the respect of those now at the forefront of your chosen field . ( p . 8 ) Third , the development of the list is intimately related to the ability to teach within a broad area of the discipline . “Your exam should also help to make you a confident and fearless teacher , ” states another handbook ( Duke University Department of English , 2006 , p . 7 ) . How Is This Practice Suited to English ? Creating and defending a list is an important step in every English doctoral program because it helps students to meet the three goals just described . These goals are relevant for English , the quintes - sential humanities field . One feature that sets humanities scholarship apart is that it remains fundamentally solo work . Contributions to literature and analysis spring from the imagination of the individual . The list is particularly at home in a discipline that requires a scholar to under - stand a wide swath of the field . Another defining characteristic of the humanities is that knowledge builds slowly over time . The con - tribution that a scholar makes to the discipline is not understood in terms of advancing the frontiers in the same way as in the scientific enterprise . Instead , scholarship involves conceiving new under - standings and juxtapositions . One needs broad and deep founda - tional knowledge to enter the conversation . Good work in the humanities is judged by its completeness , sub - tlety , and insight . Doing work quickly , beating others to the punch , is less important than getting it right and being thorough . The humanities emphasize the written word , so scholars value nuance and elaboration . Although articles and conference papers ( carefully crafted narratives that are read aloud in their entirety without over - heads or PowerPoint slides ) are used to work through ideas in progress , the result of a project is typically a book . This process requires time and a mature perspective developed by the careful examination and reexamination of the works at hand . The humanities maintain a clear sense of the appropriate sequence for student work . Extensive undergraduate and gradu - ate course work build the foundation—a foundation that is pub - licly defended before students begin the dissertation project . Clearly , these features are emphasized in the deliberate and time - consuming process of mastering the works on the list . Finally , English departments are financially supported in large part by the efforts of graduate students and faculty members who teach . Scholars and faculty members are expected to have the ver - satility needed to teach a wide range of courses . The ability to address a broad range of texts is tested in the list defense . Can Education Usefully Adapt These Practices ? Before turning to the field of education , two more points should be made . First , not only do journal clubs and list - based examinations advance discipline - specific versions of knowing the literature , but each serves several other purposes as well . This is not unusual in doc - toral education ; many program elements serve several pedagogical purposes . Indeed , the forthcoming volume on doctoral education by the Carnegie Foundation CID team argues that all program ele - ments ought to be scrutinized and , when possible , reconfigured to promote student formation along several dimensions simultane - ously ( Walker , Golde , Jones , Bueschel , & Hutchings , 2007 ) . Second , the reader certainly has seen how journal clubs and the examination on the list help to shape the professional identi - ties of neuroscientists and English scholars , respectively . To return to Shulman , the implicit structure of these practices trans - mits professional attitudes and values ( Shulman , 2005 , p . 55 ) . One neuroscientist described journal clubs as an avenue for sci - entists to “learn to play well together . ” These practices are forms of legitimate peripheral participation , in which novice practi - tioners engage in authentic practice even while they are develop - ing a professional identity , gradually moving to more central community membership ( Lave & Wenger , 1991 ) . This is one of the most important , if generally implicit , purposes of doctoral education , instilling the “values and intellectual leanings” of the guild in its newest members ( Cronon , 2006 , p . 330 ) . I have argued that journal clubs and list - based examinations are adaptively suited to the knowledge structures and conventions of their disciplines . Their stability ( they must be doing something right ) makes them enticing , but wholesale adoption of these prac - tices in the field of education may not be wise or feasible . Education is different from the humanities or the laboratory sciences , and these practices are not likely to flourish in a new setting without modifi - cation . Education is a multidisciplinary field ; it spans areas allied with the humanities ( philosophy of education ) and areas akin to the sciences ( mathematics and science education ) . But most domains of education research and study are part of the social sciences , featur - ing yet another set of knowledge structures and practices that some - times seem like hybrids of the humanities and the sciences . Further complicating matters , most education graduate students are markedly different from their English or neuroscience counterparts . Coming to school in midcareer , education graduate students often are older , have complex and demanding home and work lives , and enroll on a part - time basis , making the adoption of new ways of interacting especially challenging ( Eisenhart & DeHaan , 2005 ; Golde & Walker , 2006 , pp . 245 – 249 ; Labaree , 2004 , pp . 83 – 108 ) . One question is whether either of these practices could be adapted into education doctoral programs to good effect . The answer may well be yes , because work at the highest level of the field , whether for the PhD or the EdD , requires knowing and working with the literature . The subsequent question is how to adapt these practices to take advantage of their strengths and minimize their known weaknesses . Instituting either or both of these practices into a doctoral program , even in a revised form , demands a reallocation of faculty and student time and energy . In conducting this thought experiment , recall the key features of signature pedagogies : They are pervasive and routine , they entail public student performance , they have high emotional stakes , and they socialize students into disci - plinary norms ( Shulman , 2005 , pp . 55 – 57 ) . Adapting Journal Clubs What utility could journal clubs have in the field of education ? Searching widely for relevant research findings and building on them are necessary skills for all researchers . To do so is particularly challenging in education , one of the highly interdisciplinary learn - ing sciences that draw from many literatures ( Eisenhart & DeHaan , 2005 ) . Journal clubs are a useful tool for searching out , sharing , and evaluating new findings . The current emphasis on “scientifically based educational research” demands that new researchers develop familiarity with emerging work . 349 AUGUST / SEPTEMBER 2007 Researchers must also be able to frame meaningful yet man - ageable research questions . Although the ability to ask good ques - tions is vital , formal attention is rarely paid to teaching this skill , and in some cases research problems are simply assigned . One strategy for learning what constitutes a good question is to see examples and evaluate them . Journal clubs are one of many set - tings in which this can happen . But the benefits of introducing journal clubs could be far - reaching , because they could advance several other goals particular to the field of education . Journal clubs would expand students’ con - ception of what constitutes “expected student behavior” beyond attending classes and completing course assignments . They would connect faculty and students with shared interests and thus promote productive intellectual communities in schools of education , where all too often students interact only with the peers in their cohort group . Most important , journal clubs would help socialize students into the norms and values of the profession by immersing them in an ongoing conversation about what matters in education research and practice . Foregrounding and modeling scholarly argument and debate could help combat education’s culture of affirmation , in which students may be reluctant to say anything that could be per - ceived as unsupportive or critical . Research on journal clubs with medical residents shows that “factors associated with high attendance and longevity [ of the journal club ] include mandatory attendance , availability of food , and perceived educational value by the program director” ( Alguire , 1998 , p . 351 ) . Emphasizing public performance ( with the high emotional stakes that it entails ) requires that every stu - dent present regularly and get feedback . Developing a rubric for teaching the appraisal of article quality can increase the quality of article selection and help students learn to assess research ( Burstein , Hollander , & Barlas , 1996 ) . Incorporating such adap - tations would be fairly simple and would help journal clubs suc - ceed , becoming part of the departmental culture . Journal club meetings would need to be strategically sched - uled to make them available for students who are on campus only part - time while still including faculty members to preserve the clubs’ essential multigenerational character . The format is flexi - ble in time and place ; a journal club could meet on Saturday mornings in a coffee shop or as a Thursday evening brown - bag dinner before class . For cohort - based programs , incorporating students from several cohorts in a topic - based journal club—say , on the superintendency , on classroom - based research , or on com - munity college leadership—could expand students’ horizons and provide occasions for other kinds of peer mentorship . Given that education research is not a “fast science” field , a journal club could focus on key debates in a narrowly defined area , classical works in education , or provocative articles from other disciplines . Adapting List - Based Examinations The demand for specialized focus must be offset by attention to foundational breadth . Some education faculties have reorganized their curricula to include common core courses required of all students regardless of subfield ; examples are the University of Southern California , the University of North Carolina , and the University of Colorado ( see summaries of their work at http : / / gallery . carnegiefoundation . org / cid ) . Although faculty and students at many other schools of education may wish to define such a core , political obstacles might necessitate an interim strat - egy . The middle road of negotiated lists—including classics of the field , not just texts germane to the dissertation project , and defined by the student and gatekeeping faculty experts—can establish an important shared foundation . Surely there is much that is desirable in expecting all students to read Dewey , Thorndike , and Vygotsky ( or whatever the correct list is ! ) . The goal is not for students simply to read more , and more widely , but to read strategically . As Maxwell ( 2006 ) argues , “there may be extremely relevant theories , findings , or methods in other fields or disciplines” ( p . 29 ) . Therefore , faculty guidance is essential as students craft a broad , reasonable , and appropriate reading list . Studying for list - based exams can drive students to isolate them - selves , so the process must be structured to keep the intensive read - ing period to a reasonable duration . Retreating from the community is especially counterproductive for education researchers , who rou - tinely pursue team projects and publish coauthored articles . The skills of collaboration should be encouraged rather than inhibited . Requiring study groups , perhaps facilitated by advanced students who have passed the exam , would be a useful corrective . The list is driven by a vision of the scholar in conversation with the major theorists and critics in his or her specialty . To reveal that sense of connection , the list - based oral and written examinations need to be wisely structured . For instance , imagine an examination asking students to summarize persuasively the assumptions of their subfields for scholars in other areas or to defend a syllabus for a course on their topic . In any case , the exams should be collectively designed , administered , and moni - tored ; faculty should debate and work together to develop appro - priate questions and formats for the examination . In doing so , they can assess what students know while avoiding the problem of examinations’ being disconnected from the dissertation , and skirting the danger of great variation in standards and expecta - tions among individual advisors . Rethinking Doctoral Education Neither practice is a panacea , of course , but together , journal clubs and list - based examinations could help doctoral students learn to work with the literature with the ease and sophistication of mature practitioners and professionals . And many additional elements could be introduced to meet that goal . Careful study of professional education shows the value of pedagogies that require students to perform publicly with appropriate support and feed - back and to do so early and often . It is vital for education doc - toral programs to adopt , adapt , and develop more sophisticated pedagogies to help students learn . Literature work is not the only aspect of doctoral education in need of attention . The starting point could be to focus on a pro - grammatic element ( qualifying examinations ) or a desired outcome ( the ability to conduct credible research ) . In any case , what is needed is to approach the doctoral program in a spirit of inquiry . Through the CID we asked several questions : What are the goals of the doctoral program ? What knowledge , skills , and habits of mind are graduates expected to attain ? Do current practices serve those goals ? Would other strategies be more effective ? These ques - tions prompted rethinking in the departments participating in the EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER 350 CID . Many found it useful to search far and wide , even in unre - lated disciplines , for adaptable practices . It is also important , perhaps more so for education than for any other discipline , that new pedagogies and program elements be treated as educational experiments . They must be carefully assessed and the resulting knowledge shared with those in the field so that good ideas can travel and ineffective pedagogies can be avoided . In the CID we learned that changing a doctoral program is not easy . But it is important . Even a partial list of the forces buffet - ing universities—shifting disciplinary paradigms , shrinking pub - lic investments , rapidly changing workplaces for graduates , and demands for accountability—reminds us that complacency is not an option . Even more important , we learned that change is pos - sible and that scholars in other disciplines are important col - leagues in the effort . NOTES The other members of the Carnegie Initiative on the Doctorate team—George Walker , Andrea Conklin Bueschel , Laura Jones , and Kim Rapp—were instrumental in the development of these ideas . Carnegie President Lee S . Shulman provided inspiration , guidance , and early forums for my thoughts . Neuroscientists Richard Clarke and Rebecca Jakel ; English studies scholars Eric Clarke , Amy Montz , and David Laurence ; and Carnegie scholars Rose Asera , Bridget O’Brien , Mary Taylor Huber , and Andrea Conklin Bueschel gave feedback on drafts of this article . Margaret Eisenhart offered encouragement at a critical moment . An early version of the article was presented at the 2005 annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association in Montréal , on a panel that included Lee S . Shulman , Michael Feuer , and Peter Bergethon . Three anonymous reviewers vastly improved this article with their thoughtful comments and ideas . 1 This is the thinking behind the extensive Promising Practices data - base maintained by the University of Washington . It began as part of the Re - envisioning the PhD project , funded by The Pew Charitable Trusts ( http : / / www . grad . washington . edu / envision / practices / index . html ) . 2 Research rotations , often used in the laboratory sciences to help 1st - year students match with a research laboratory and adviser , might also be categorized as a signature pedagogy . We describe apprenticeship as the signature pedagogy of doctoral education in The Formation of Scholars ( Walker , Golde , Jones , Bueschel , & Hutchings , 2007 ) . 3 Terminology varies locally ; exams can be called general , preliminary , comprehensive , qualifying , field , or area . Examinations might be oral , writ - ten , or a combination , and there may be more than one examination . 4 Several forces converged to prompt this evolution . First , the list itself was under attack for not being inclusive on one hand and ( by postmod - ernists ) for being overly predetermined on the other ( Guillory , 1991 ) . Second , the shift was a response to the continuous expansion of the field—which now includes literatures in other languages and texts from other media , such as film . Another force was the increasingly tight aca - demic job market , which pressured students to professionalize and spe - cialize earlier to be more competitive . Finally , the humanities are under considerable pressure to reduce the time to degree , which is longer than in the social , physical , or biological sciences . REFERENCES Alguire , P . C . ( 1998 ) . A review of journal clubs in postgraduate medical education . Journal of General Internal Medicine , 13 , 347 – 353 . Bolker , J . ( 1998 ) . Writing a dissertation in 15 minutes a day : A guide to starting , revising , and finishing your doctoral thesis . New York : Henry Holt . Boote , D . N . , & Beile , P . ( 2005 ) . Scholars before researchers : On the centrality of the dissertation literature review in research preparation . Educational Researcher , 34 ( 6 ) , 3 – 15 . Boote , D . N . , & Beile , P . ( 2006 ) . On “Literature Reviews of , and for , Educational Research” : A response to the critique by Joseph Maxwell . Educational Researcher , 35 ( 9 ) , 32 – 35 . Brown University Department of English ( n . d . ) . Graduate student handbook : Graduate program in literatures and cultures in English . Retrieved September 13 , 2006 , from http : / / www . brown . edu / Departments / English / graduate / handbook . pdf Burstein , J . L . , Hollander , J . E . , & Barlas , D . ( 1996 ) . Enhancing the value of journal club : Use of a structured review instrument . American Journal of Emergency Medicine , 14 ( 6 ) , 561 – 563 . Cronon , W . ( 2006 ) . Getting ready to do history . In C . M . Golde & G . E . Walker ( Eds . ) , Envisioning the future of doctoral education : Preparing stewards of the discipline . Carnegie essays on the doctorate ( pp . 327 – 349 ) . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Delamont , S . , & Atkinson , P . ( 2001 ) . Doctoring uncertainty : Mastering craft knowledge . Social Studies of Science , 31 ( 1 ) , 87 – 107 . Delbanco , A . ( 2000 ) . What should PhD mean ? PMLA , 115 , 1205 – 1209 . Duke University Department of English . ( 2006 ) . Duke English graduate studies handbook . Retrieved September 13 , 2006 , from http : / / www . duke . edu / web / english / graduate / Handbook2006 – 7 . pdf Eisenhart , M . , & DeHaan , R . L . ( 2005 ) . Doctoral preparation of scien - tifically based education researchers . Educational Researcher , 34 ( 4 ) , 3 – 13 . Golde , C . M . , & Walker , G . E . ( Eds . ) . ( 2006 ) . Envisioning the future of doctoral education : Preparing stewards of the discipline . Carnegie essays on the doctorate . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Guillory , J . ( 1991 ) . Canon , syllabus , list : A note on the pedagogic imag - inary . Transition , 1991 ( 52 ) , 36 – 54 . Kahn , K . S . , Dwarakanath , L . S . , Pakkal , M . , Brace , V . , & Awonuga , A . ( 1999 ) . Postgraduate journal club as a means of promoting evidence - based obstetrics and gynaecology . Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology , 19 , 231 – 234 . Kahn , K . S . , & Gee , H . ( 1999 ) . A new approach to teaching and learn - ing in journal club . Medical Teacher , 21 , 289 – 293 . Kamler , B . , & Thomson , P . ( 2006 ) . Helping doctoral students write : Pedagogies for supervision . New York : Routledge . Labaree , D . F . ( 2004 ) . The trouble with ed schools . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Lave , J . , & Wenger , E . ( 1991 ) . Situated learning : Legitimate peripheral participation . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Linzer , M . ( 1987 ) . The journal club and medical education : Over one hun - dred years of unrecorded history . Postgraduate Medical Journal , 63 , 475 – 478 . Maxwell , J . A . ( 2006 ) . Literature reviews of , and for , educational research : A commentary on Boote and Beile’s “Scholars Before Researchers . ” Educational Researcher , 35 ( 9 ) , 28 – 31 . Richardson , L . ( 1998 ) . Writing : A method of inquiry . In N . K . Denzin & Y . S . Lincoln ( Eds . ) , Collecting and interpreting qualitative materi - als ( pp . 345 – 371 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Richardson , V . ( 2006 ) . Stewards of a field , stewards of an enterprise : The doctorate in education . In C . M . Golde & G . E . Walker ( Eds . ) , Envisioning the future of doctoral education : Preparing stewards of the discipline . Carnegie essays on the doctorate ( pp . 251 – 267 ) . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Rose , M . , & McClafferty , K . A . ( 2001 ) . A call for the teaching of writ - ing in graduate education . Educational Researcher , 30 ( 2 ) , 27 – 33 . Shulman , L . S . ( 2005 ) . Signature pedagogies in the professions . Daedalus , 134 ( 3 ) , 52 – 59 . 351 AUGUST / SEPTEMBER 2007 University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign Department of English . ( n . d . ) . Graduate studies in English . Retrieved September 13 , 2006 , from http : / / www . english . uiuc . edu / - graduate - / english / students _ current . html University of Pittsburgh Center for Neuroscience Graduate Training Program . ( 2006 ) . PhD 05 – 06 guidelines . Retrieved July 4 , 2007 , from http : / / cnup . neurobio . pitt . edu / training / phd / guidelines / phd _ 05 – 06 _ guidelines . aspx University of Tennessee Bioinformatics Journal Club . ( 2003 ) . Synopsis . Retrieved September 13 , 2006 , from http : / / web . utk . edu / ~ jsnoddy / jclub / University of Wisconsin – Madison Neuroscience Training Program . ( 2006 ) . Neuroscience journal club . Retrieved September 13 , 2006 , from http : / / ntp . neuroscience . wisc . edu / jrnlclub . html Walker , G . E . , Golde , C . M . , Jones , L . , Bueschel , A . C . , & Hutchings , P . ( 2007 ) . The formation of scholars : Rethinking doctoral education for the 21st century . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . AUTHOR CHRIS M . GOLDE is associate vice provost for graduate education at Stanford University ; 450 Serra Mall , Building 310 , Room 110 , Stanford University , Stanford , CA 94305 ; golde @ stanford . edu . This article was written while she was a senior scholar and research director for The Carnegie Initiative on the Doctorate at the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching . Her research interests include doctoral student attrition , the experiences of graduate students , and doctoral pedagogies . Manuscript received August 11 , 2006 Final revision received July 17 , 2007 Accepted August 6 , 2007