DOI : 10 . 1126 / science . 1157784 , 828 ( 2009 ) ; 325 Science et al . Allen H . Renear , Scientific Publishing Strategic Reading , Ontologies , and the Future of www . sciencemag . org ( this information is current as of August 13 , 2009 ) : The following resources related to this article are available online at http : / / www . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / 325 / 5942 / 828 version of this article at : including high - resolution figures , can be found in the online Updated information and services , http : / / www . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / 325 / 5942 / 828 # otherarticles , 4 of which can be accessed for free : cites 28 articles This article http : / / www . sciencemag . org / cgi / collection / sci _ commun Scientific Community : subject collections This article appears in the following http : / / www . sciencemag . org / about / permissions . dtl in whole or in part can be found at : this article permission to reproduce of this article or about obtaining reprints Information about obtaining registered trademark of AAAS . is a Science 2009 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science ; all rights reserved . The title Copyright American Association for the Advancement of Science , 1200 New York Avenue NW , Washington , DC 20005 . ( print ISSN 0036 - 8075 ; online ISSN 1095 - 9203 ) is published weekly , except the last week in December , by the Science on A ugu s t 13 , 2 009 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Strategic Reading , Ontologies , and the Future of Scientific Publishing Allen H . Renear * and Carole L . Palmer The revolution in scientific publishing that has been promised since the 1980s is about to take place . Scientists have always read strategically , working with many articles simultaneously to search , filter , scan , link , annotate , and analyze fragments of content . An observed recent increase in strategic reading in the online environment will soon be further intensified by two current trends : ( i ) the widespread use of digital indexing , retrieval , and navigation resources and ( ii ) the emergence within many scientific disciplines of interoperable ontologies . Accelerated and enhanced by reading tools that take advantage of ontologies , reading practices will become even more rapid and indirect , transforming the ways in which scientists engage the literature and shaping the evolution of scientific publishing . T he 1980s abounded in descriptions of a coming new world of scholarly commu - nication , predicting functionality that we knew was possible and would soon be techno - logicallyfeasible . Thisimaginedworld , whichwas never fully realized , predicted advanced naviga - tion ; discipline - specific intelligent tools for search - ing , browsing , and analysis ; reader - initiated hypertext linking ; “ live ” data - driven diagrams ; computationally available information objects ; searchable indexed annotations ; thorough - going interoperability ; and so on . Substantial improve - ments in hardware and software and an infrastruc - ture of networked communications now make this anticipated functionality possible . Lying at the heart of the changes taking place is an escalation of strategic reading practices . Scientists have always read strategically , working with many articles simultaneously to search , filter , compare , arrange , link , annotate , and analyze fragments of content . Now , however , two important trends are interacting to support and intensify the effectiveness of these practices . The first is the wide - scale use by scientists of digital indexing , retrieval , and navigation re - sources ( such as PubMed , Web of Science , the ACM Digital Library , NASA ’ s Astrophysics Data System , CiteSeer , Scopus , and Google Scholar ) to exploit large quantities of relevant information without reading individual articles . The second is the emergence within many scientific disciplines of ontologies for representing and linking scien - tific data . This convergence of digital resources and data - linking ontologies will result in even more rapid and indirect use of the literature , supported not only by text mining ( 1 ) and literature - based discovery applications ( 2 ) , but by “ ontology - aware ” strategic reading tools as well . Why Will the Revolution Happen Now ? When it was launched in 1992 , the Online Journal of Current Clinical Trials , jointly designed by the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the OCLC Online Computer Library Center , was seen by some as the beginning of the long - awaited world of ad - vanced digital publishing . However , the journal failed to flourish , and the new world did not ma - terialize . In retrospect , we can see that in the early 1990s , none of the basic conditions required for an advanced scientific publishing system existed . Not only was the basic technology and infra - structure inadequate , but the entire publishing system also would have required extensive co - ordinated changes . Although there was no revo - lution , an important transforma - tion did take place in the 1990s . In 1993 , very few scientific , tech - nical , and medical ( STM ) jour - nals had an electronic version , and yet by 2003 , virtually all of them did . For the daily work rou - tines of most scientists , that new format had already become more important than print . The system of digital publishing that emerged from 1993 to 2003 was impres - siveinsomerespects , butwasstill largely another case of new tech - nologycompromisedbyimitation of the old . The reasons a more radical change failed to occur are under - standable in retrospect , and they also suggest why we are now on the cusp of a larger change . None of the developments during this period required costly or uncer - tain changes in workflow and production pro - cesses , software tools , user behavior , or business models . STM publishers were already creating Adobe PostScript files for print production . These could be automatically converted to the Adobe page description language format ( PDF ) , which was suitable for distribution over the existing Internet and could be browsed with existing free software applications . Users , in turn , were presented with a printlike experience that was at once familiar and yet had additional ad - vantages , including Internet delivery , digital stor - age , full - text searching , and local printing , all of which was easily realized with existing technol - ogies . Hence , as its value became apparent , PDF - based digital STM publishing emerged relatively quickly , with few changes in production or exist - ing infrastructure . Since 1992 , processor speeds , memory , stor - age , and bandwidth to the desktop have under - goneenormousimprovements , ashaveconnectivity and costs . Standard protocols for network com - municationhavebeenadopted , newsoftwaretools and software engineering strategies have emerged , and there is now a supporting infrastructure of information professions and institutions . The per - vasive use of the World Wide Web via intuitive Web browsers is an especially visible change , and the widespread use of Extensible Markup Language ( XML ) , with its associated standards and technologies , provides a foundational frame - work for storing , processing , and presenting in - formation on the Web . In addition , an important recent development is the convergence within the STM publishing community on a single XML schema for the representation of scien - tific articles : the National Library of Medicine ( NLM ) ’ s Journal Archiving and Interchange Tag Suite ( 3 ) . REVIEW Center for Informatics Research in Science and Scholarship , Graduate School of Library and Information Science , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign , Champaign , IL 61820 , USA . * To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : renear @ illinois . edu 7000 6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 1000 0 1950 Total MEDLINE abstracts Papers published on cell cycle 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 Year C oun t Fig . 1 . Increase in number of papers published each year in bio - medicine and in one specialized topic , the cell cycle . [ Adapted with permission from MacMillan Publishers , Nature ( 5 ) , copyright 2006 ] 14 AUGUST 2009 VOL 325 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 828 on A ugu s t 13 , 2 009 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m The driving force for change remains the same : the growing quantity and complexity of information in combination with limited time for reading . But in some disciplines , we seem to be past the point where any further specialization of research focus or elaboration of collaborative relationships are effective ( 4 , 5 ) ( Fig . 1 ) . Just as the increased quantity of information and general intensity of scientific activity is reaching the point where it cannot be sustained with current prac - tices , technology and user behavior are making new practices feasible , and research scenarios that a decade ago were utopian are now widely antic - ipatedby practicing scientists . P . Bourne , a Public Library of Science journal editor , offers this vision of the near future the scientific literature will seamlessly provide annotation of records in the bio - logical databases . Imagine reading a description of an active site of a bio - logical molecule in a paper , being able to access immediately the atomic coor - dinates specifically for that active site , and then using a tool to explore the intricate set of hydrogen - bonding interactions described in the paper . … Alternatively , if you are starting with the data … viewing the chromosome location of a human single - nucleotide polymorphism associ - ated with a neurological disorder , … im - mediately access a variety of papers ranked in order of relevance to your pro - file … pinpointing the reference to the single - nucleotide polymorphism in the full - text article ( 6 ) , p . 179 . This sort of information gathering goes well beyond conventional digital publishing and reveals why the current state of affairs has failed to meet some expectations . As chemists P . Murray - Rust and H . S . Rzepa remarked in 2004 , “ The current transition to [ PDF - based ] e - journals seems to be welcomed by many — but not us … a cultural change in our approach to information is needed ” ( 7 ) . How Are Scientists Working with the Literature ? Scientists have always strived to avoid unnec - essaryreading . Likeallresearchers , theyuseindex - ing and citations as indicators of relevance , abstracts and literature reviews as surrogates for full papers , and social networks of colleagues and graduate students as personal alerting services . The aim is to move rapidly through the literature to assess and exploit content with as little actual reading as possible . As indexing , recommending , and navigation has become more sophisticated in the online environment , these strategic reading practices have intensified . Now , as scientists search and browse , they are making queries and selecting information in much tighter iterations and with many different kinds of objectives in mind , almost as if they wereplayingafast - pacedvideogame . Theysweep through resources , changing search strings , chaining refer - ences backward and citations for - ward , dodging integrator and publisher sites to find open - access copies , continually working to re - ducethenumberofclicksrequiredforaccess . By note - taking or cut - ting and pasting , scientists often extract and accumulate bits of specific information , such as find - ings , equations , protocols , anddata . Inthisprocess , rapidjudgmentsare made — such as assessments of relevance , impact , and quality — while search queries are being formulated and refined . ( Fig . 3 ) . The goal often seems to be un - differentiated assimilation of in - formation about a domain or a problem at hand , and the online experience may be highly valu - able , even though no clear aim is met and no articles to read are located . In a compelling analogy , Nicholas et al . ( 8 ) describe a “ slightly irritated ” father watching his young daughter flick from channel to channel while watching television [ the ] father asks … why she cannot make up her mind and she answers that she is not attempting to make up her mind but is watching all the channels . … gathering information horizontally , not vertically ( 8 ) , p . 40 . And they conclude Now we see what the migration from traditional to electronic sources has meant in information seeking terms . We are all bouncers and flickers , and the success of Google is a testament to that , with its marvelous ability to enhance and amplify this flicking and bouncing ( like a really good remote ) … . In the past , information seeking was seen to be the first step to creating knowledge . Now … it is a continuous process ( 8 ) , pp . 41 – 42 . Just as the aim of channel surfing is not to find a program to watch , the goal of literature surfing , is not to find an article to read , but rather to find , assess , and exploit a range of information by scanning portions of many articles . This be - havior is common among scientists ( 9 ) . Longitudinal studies of e - journal use confirm that scientists are indeed “ reading ” more papers at a faster pace ( 10 ) . That is , the total time spent reading journal articles has risen only a little , whereas the number of journal articles read per year has gone up much faster and appears to be growing still . The number of articles read ( as distinguished from those merely browsed ) by scientists was ~ 50 % higher in 2005 than in the mid - 1990s . Furthermore , though the average read - ingtimeperarticledidnotchangemuchfrom1977tothemid - 1990s ( 48 versus 47 min ) , it started fall - ing in the mid - 1990s and is now just over 30 min per article ( Fig . 2 ) . At the same time , identifying papers by searching online increased more than fourfold between 1977 and 2005 . These changes in journal use are far greater in STM disciplines than the averages over all disciplines , suggesting that as work with the literature has moved online , scientists are scanning more and reading less . Early digital library research also showed how scientists scan individual printed journal articles to identify key components — such as tables of con - tents , references , figures , formattedlists , equations , and scientific names — for quick review and ab - sorption of information ( 11 , 12 ) . More recent studies of the research process have emphasized the varied ways in which scientists work with information ( 13 , 14 ) . The literature is scanned not only to position new findings in cognate fields and learn about collaborators ’ domains , but also to monitor the progress of peers and competitors . Information is collated to compare measurement and instrumentation details ; it is also used to compile personal collections in evolv - ing areas of interest and to extract the facts and evidence needed to build databases . These are all aspects of strategic reading , a robust , well - entrenched behavior that is vastly more efficient in the digital realm and is thus a promising target for digital support . HowIsScientificInformationBeingRepresented ? Structured terminologies for representing scien - tific data , along with standard XML - based tech - niques for defining and using these terminologies , are forming the basis for new types of scientific publishing . Although computer - processible scien - tific terminologies range from simple standardized 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 1977 Average number of articles read per year Average minutes spent reading per article 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 Year C oun t Fig . 2 . Increase in the number of papers read by scientists per year and decrease in minutes spent reading each paper , trends based on a series of survey studies conducted by Tenopir et al . between 1977 and 2005 ( 10 , 34 , 35 ) . www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 325 14 AUGUST 2009 829 REVIEW on A ugu s t 13 , 2 009 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m vocabularies to sophisticated formal systems with logical axioms , we have called all of them ontologies . Ontologies are particularly prominent in the biological sciences ( 15 , 16 ) . One example of rapid adoption is the Gene Ontology ( GO ) ( 17 ) , which started in 1998 to support the annotation of genes and gene products and is now very widely used , containing more than 25 , 000 terms and 3 . 3 million annotations . Although many biological ontologies were originally developed indepen - dently , the need for interoperability has driven collaboration , a good example being the Open Biomedical Ontologies ( OBO ) , which currently has 54 participating projects ( 18 ) , including Microarray Gene Expression Data ( MGED ) , BioPAX , for biological pathways data , and Foun - dational Model of Anatomy ( FMA ) . Although the size , complexity , and logical de - sign of scientific ontologies may vary , a partial description of GO , drawing on examples from the GO introductory material , will illustrate some of their general features ( 19 , 20 ) . GO consists of three separate ontologies : ( i ) molecular function , ( ii ) bio - logicalprocess , and ( iii ) cellularcomponent . Within each of these , termsare uniquely identified , defined , and related in a network of “ is a ” relationships ( e . g . , a nuclear chromosome is a chromosome ) . GO also contains the relationship “ part of ” ( e . g . , periplasmic flagellum is part of periplasmic space ) , and recently , the relationship “ regulates ” and sub - type relationships “ positively regulates ” and “ neg - atively regulates ” were added . These relationships have logical features ; for instance , “ is a ” and “ part of ” are transitive ( e . g . , if X is part of Y and Y is part of Z , then X is part of Z ) . It is easy to see not only how the controlled vocabulary of a shared ontology can facilitate the integration of data from multiple sources , but also how relationships such as “ is a ” , “ part of ” , and “ regulates ” can support other information management tasks as well , in - cluding information retrieval and text mining , error checking , and automated inferencing . Neither controlled vocabularies nor even logic - based ontologies are entirely new , although the enormous increase in the amount and com - plexity of biological data makes such organiza - tionalstrategiesincreasingly urgent . Now , however , we can make ontologies and their applications computationally available and interoperablethrough well - supported standards associated with the Internet and World Wide Web . In 1998 , as work began on GO , the World Wide Web Consortium ( W3C ) released XML ( 21 ) , a metalanguage for defining markup lan - guages ( 22 ) for representing information on the WorldWideWeb . Originallydesignedfordocument - oriented languages , XML was soon used for other kinds of information as well . XML languages are defined by a computer - readable schema , which specifies , among other things , the terms of the markup language and the ways those terms can be arrangedinvaliddocuments . XMLorganizesinfor - mation as a hierarchical structure ( an “ ordered tree ” ) of labeled nodes and attribute / value pairs and rep - resents that structure in a linear format readable by both humans and computers . Software can read data in this format and construct the correct tree structure , even without the schema that defines the language ( this is a virtue of XML ) . If a schema is available , additional processing is possible , such as verifying that the data are complete and cor - rectly organized ; a schema can also configure edit - ing tools so that human coders are only offered legal coding options , making coding easier and syntax errors impossible . In just 10 years , XML and related supporting software and standards have come to dominate information represen - tation in networked environments — all popular Web browsers support XML , and most major database systems import and export XML - formatted data . Although using XML to declare and apply a terminological vocabulary improves interoperabil - ity and access to software applications , it does have some limitations . XML schemas specify syntax , not semantics ( 23 ) . An XML schema does not itself indicate how to interpret portions of a particular XML tree structure in terms of scientific assertions , nor is it , alone , suitable for defining logical relationships among terms . That informa - tion must be recorded in the natural language documentation for the schema , but then it is un - available for computer processing . To address this problem , the semantic Web languages Resource Description Framework ( RDF ) , Resource Descrip - tion Framework Schema ( RDFS ) , Web Ontology Language ( OWL ) , and Semantic Web Rule Lan - guage ( SWRL ) were developed ( 24 ) . These are computer - processible knowledge representation languages that provide a standard technique for defining ontologies and expressing assertions that use terms from those ontologies . Although tech - nically independent of any particular computer - encoding format , RDFS and OWL each have a standard XML syntax that is now well - supported by software applications and widely used for on - tology representation . Today , an emerging infrastructure of edu - cation , research , conferences , organizations , and software tools is sustaining the development and adoption of scientific ontologies and providing opportunities for coordination to improve inter - operability and share best practices . Particularly important for biology are the National Center for Biomedical Ontology , OBO , and the International Society for Biocuration , as well as more broadly defined organizations such as the National Center for Biotechnology Information and the European Bioinformatics Institute . One notable software ap - plication for ontology development is the widely used and well - supported Protégé ontology editor . How Can Ontologies Help Scientific Publishing ? Originally motivated by the need for data inte - gration , scientific ontologies are now being ex - plored for STM publishing to support information retrieval and text mining , with applications for hypothesis generation and knowledge discovery wellunderway . Nevertheless , reading - likeengage - ment with scientific articles is not likely to dis - appear entirely : The natural language prose of scientific articles provides too much valuable Scanning , assessing Searching , browsing , chaining , linking Extracting , comparing , arranging , analyzing , annotating 1 2 3 Scanning , gathering Filtering Fig . 3 . Current work with digital resources . 14 AUGUST 2009 VOL 325 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 830 REVIEW on A ugu s t 13 , 2 009 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Fig . 4 . Two examples of ontology - aware text mining / retrieval systems that support strategic reading . ( Top ) Textpresso ( www . textpresso . org / ) and ( Bottom ) iHOP ( www . ihop - net . org / ) . www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 325 14 AUGUST 2009 831 REVIEW on A ugu s t 13 , 2 009 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m nuance and context to be treated only as data ( 25 ) . Scientists may have moved well beyond traditional reading , but they still remain engaged with the narrative of scientific articles and need tools to help them read , and not only mine , that narrative . The integration of ontologies into the scien - tific literature has been recommended by leading scientists ( 26 – 28 ) , and the current generation of ontology - based text mining and retrieval tools in the biomedical sciences is already taking advantage of natural language processing and databases of annotations ( 5 , 29 , 30 ) . One ex - ample is Textpresso , an ontology - based mining and retrieval system that works with prepared collections of articles , split into sentences and annotated with terms from 33 ontology cate - gories , three of which correspond to the GO ontologies ( 31 ) . Results screens present a ranked list of sentences within a ranked list of articles , with term highlighting , and links to articles and external databases ( Fig . 4 , top ) . Reading the sentences of an article in relevance order rather than narrative order is an example of strategic reading within an article . An example of strategic reading across a collection is provided by Infor - mation Hyperlinked over Proteins ( iHOP ) , which uses genes and proteins to create a network of sentences and abstracts for searching and nav - igating MEDLINE abstracts ( 32 ) . The iHOP database processes abstract sentences using Na - tional Center for Biotechnology Information taxon - omy identifiers and the Medical Subject Headings ( MeSH ) thesaurus and supplies pages of con - figurable results , in ranked lists of sentences re - trieved from many abstracts ( Fig . 4 , bottom ) . Unlike similar explorations in the 1980s and 1990s , these are not computer science experi - ments or pilot projects requiring substantial invest - ment and large upfront changes in infrastructure and practices to scale them up for general use . These are projects that are already producing practical and widely used tools . How Do We Support and Shape These Changes ? The infrastructures and services to support stra - tegic reading practices will no doubt be promoted by open access and alternative publishing mod - els , which are already being widely discussed in the academic community . However , research on information behavior and the use of ontologies is also needed . Traditional approaches to evaluating infor - mation systems , such as precision , recall , and sat - isfaction measures , offer limited guidance for further development of strategic reading technol - ogies . Finer - grained methods that analyze what scientists actually do and value are required if we want to understand the nearly subconscious tac - tics that govern second - by - second interactions with the literature and the nuances of intention and use . We know , for instance , that scientists often have trouble locating very problem - specific information ( on methods and protocols , for instance ) and that the occasional exploration of results from another discipline can have con - siderable impact on progress or the direction of research . These are the kinds of information be - haviors that we need to understand more fully to design tools that go beyond search and retrieval to support creative strategic reading . For ontology - aware reading tools to function well , terminological annotations must be included in , or mapped to , the XML encoding of articles during the publishing production process , to con - nect names and phrases in narrative text with ap - propriate standard terminology . The emergence of the NLM schema as a standard XML encoding for scientific articles provides a promising shared con - text for terminological annotation ; however , we also need specific strategies that are economically sustainable within the current context of STM publishing workflows , as well as remedies for “ legacy data , ” the articles already published and stored in repositories . To exploit terminological annotations across the Internet , reading tools will have to operate in real time to take advantage of the ontologies that define and relate terms and connect terms with relevant databases with the use of “ service - oriented architectures ” ( 33 ) . Finally , the development of ontology languages with ad - ditional expressive power is needed , as well as continued support for evolving , coordinating , and harmonizing ontologies . How Will Scientists Work with the Literature in 2019 ? Scientists will still read narrative prose , even as text mining and automated processing become common ; however , these reading practices will become increasingly strategic , supported by en - hanced literature and ontology - aware tools . As part of the publishing workflow , scientific ter - minology will be indexed routinely against rich ontologies . More importantly , formalized asser - tions , perhaps maintained in specialized “ struc - tured abstracts ” ( 27 ) , will provide indexing and browsing tools with computational access to causal and ontological relationships . Hypertext linking will be extensive , generated both automatically and by readers providing commentary on blogs and through shared annotation databases . At the same time , more tools for enhanced searching , scanning , and analyzing will appear and exploit the increasingly rich layer of indexing , linking , and annotation information . There are no technical obstacles to this tra - jectory , and it is already under way . The changes , as always , will be incremental : Scientists , who today already make extensive use of existing indexing and retrieval services , will encounter a steady stream of new enhancements and adopt those that allow rapid and productive engage - ment with the literature . The new functionality will sometimes be provided as part of the appli - cation interface ( new features in PubMed , for instance ) or as shared external tools that users can add to their Web browsers . These developments chart a middle course between the already ob - solete activity of finding an article to read on the one hand , and the narrower objectives of text mining on the other , responding directly to the entrenched necessity and value of strategic read - ing in the daily work of today ’ s scientists . References and Notes 1 . I . Spasic , S . Ananiadou , J . McNaught , A . Kumar , Brief . Bioinform . 6 , 239 ( 2005 ) . 2 . D . R . Swanson , N . R . Smalheiser , Artif . Intell . 91 , 183 ( 1997 ) . 3 . National Library of Medicine , http : / / dtd . nlm . nih . gov / . 4 . B . Mons , BMC Bioinform . 6 , 142 ( 2005 ) . 5 . L . J . Jensen , J . Saric , P . Bork , Nat . Rev . Genet . 7 , 119 ( 2006 ) . 6 . P . Bourne , PLoS Comput . Biol . 1 , e34 ( 2005 ) . 7 . P . Murray - Rust , H . S . Rzepa , J . Digit . Inform . 5 , issue 1 ( 2004 ) . 8 . D . Nicholas , P . Huntington , P . Williams , T . Dobrowolski , J . Doc . 60 , 24 ( 2004 ) . 9 . D . Nicholas , P . Huntington , H . R . Jamali , T . Dobrowolski , Inf . Process . Manage . 43 , 1085 ( 2007 ) . 10 . C . Tenopir , D . W . King , D - Lib Mag . 14 , issue 11 / 12 ( 2008 ) . 11 . B . Schatz et al . , Computer 32 , 51 ( 1999 ) . 12 . A . P . Bishop , Inf . Process . Manage . 35 , 255 ( 1999 ) . 13 . C . L . Palmer , Work at the Boundaries of Science : Information and the Interdisciplinary Research Process ( Kluwer , Dordrecht , Netherlands , 2001 ) . 14 . C . L . Palmer , M . H . Cragin , T . P . Hogan , Inf . Process . Manage . 43 , 808 ( 2007 ) . 15 . O . Bodenreider , R . Stevens , Brief . Bioinform . 7 , 256 ( 2006 ) . 16 . L . Strömbäck , D . Hall , P . Lambrix , Proteomics 7 , 857 ( 2007 ) . 17 . M . Ashburner et al . , Nat . Genet . 25 , 25 ( 2000 ) . 18 . B . Smith et al . , Nat . Biotechnol . 25 , 1251 ( 2007 ) . 19 . Gene Ontology , www . geneontology . org / . 20 . The examples are from “ An Introduction to the Gene Ontology ” www . geneontology . org / GO . doc . shtml . 21 . World Wide Web Consortium , www . w3 . org / XML / . 22 . J . H . Coombs , A . H . Renear , S . J . DeRose , Commun . ACM 30 , 933 ( 1987 ) . 23 . A . Renear , D . Dubin , C . M . Sperberg - McQueen , C . Huitfeldt , in Proceedings of the 2002 ACM Symposium on Document Engineering , R . Furuta , J . I . Maletic , E . Muson , Eds . ( Association for Computing Machinery Press , New York , 2002 ) , pp . 119 – 126 . 24 . World Wide Web Consortium , www . w3 . org / 2001 / sw / . 25 . J . A . Blake , C . J . Bult , J . Biomed . Inform . 39 , 314 ( 2006 ) . 26 . J . Blake , Nat . Biotechnol . 22 , 773 ( 2004 ) . 27 . M . R . Seringhaus , M . B . Gerstein , BMC Bioinform . 8 , 17 ( 2007 ) . 28 . D . Sholton , Learn . Publ . 22 , 85 ( 2009 ) . 29 . M . Krallinger , A . Valencia , Genome Biol . 6 , 224 ( 2005 ) . 30 . J . - j . Kim , D . Rebholz - Schuhmann , Brief . Bioinform . 9 , 452 ( 2008 ) . 31 . H . M . Müller , E . E . Kenny , P . W . Sternberg , PLoS Biol . 2 , e309 ( 2004 ) . 32 . R . Hoffmann , A . Valencia , Nat . Genet . 36 , 664 ( 2004 ) . 33 . I . Foster , Science 308 , 814 ( 2005 ) . 34 . P . Boyce , D . W . King , C . Montgomery , C . Tenopir , Ser . Libr . 46 , 121 ( 2004 ) . 35 . D . W . King , C . Tenopir , C . Montgomery , S . E . Aerni , D - Lib Mag . 9 , issue 10 ( 2003 ) . 36 . We thank G . Bilder ( Crossref ) , M . Sperberg - McQueen ( Black Mesa Technologies ) , M . Smith ( MIT Libraries ) , and W . J . MacMullen and L . C . Smith ( University of Illinois ) for helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper and L . Teffeau ( University of Illinois ) for assistance with the examples and illustrations . Earlier versions were presented at the 2006 STM Innovations Seminar ( London ) , the 2007 Annual Meeting of the American Chemical Society ( Chicago ) , the 2007 STM Spring Conference ( Cambridge , MA ) , and the 2007 annual meeting of the American Library Association ( Washington , DC ) . This research was supported in part by NSF grant 0222848 . 10 . 1126 / science . 1157784 14 AUGUST 2009 VOL 325 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 832 REVIEW on A ugu s t 13 , 2 009 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m