Biochem . J . ( 2004 ) 383 , 1 – 11 ( Printed in Great Britain ) 1 REVIEW ARTICLE Cargo - and compartment - selective endocytic scaffold proteins Iwona SZYMKIEWICZ * 1 , Oleg SHUPLIAKOV † and Ivan DIKIC * 2 * Institute of Biochemistry II , Goethe University Medical School , 60590 Frankfurt , Germany , and † Department of Neuroscience , CEDB , Karolinska Institutet , 171 77 Stockholm , Sweden The endocytosis of membrane receptors is a complex and tightly controlled process that is essential for maintaining cellular homo - eostasis . The removal of receptors from the cell surface can be constitutive or ligand - induced , and occurs in a clathrin - dependent or - independent manner . The recruitment of receptors into special - ized membrane domains , the formation of vesicles and the trafﬁcking of receptors together with their ligands within endo - cytic compartments are regulated by reversible protein modiﬁ - cations , and multiple protein – protein and protein – lipid interac - tions . Recent reports describe a variety of multidomain molecules that facilitate receptor endocytosis and function as platforms for the assembly of protein complexes . These scaffold proteins typi - cally act in a cargo - speciﬁc manner , recognizing one or more re - ceptor types , or function at the level of endocytic cellular micro - compartments by controlling the movement of cargo molecules and linking endocytic machineries to signalling pathways . In the present review we summarize present knowledge on endocytic scaffold molecules and discuss their functions . Key words : cargo , endocytosis , microcompartment , scaffold . INTRODUCTION Endocytosis ensures the rapid clearance of transmembrane pro - teins from the cell surface and inﬂuences the extent of cell res - ponses to stimuli . Ligand - stimulated receptor internalization appears to be controlled by multimeric protein complexes that function both in desensitization and in signalling by activated receptors . In recent years , a large number of adaptor molecules have been identiﬁed that are required for the efﬁcient assembly of complexes necessary for the endocytosis of plasma membrane receptors . The features of classical cytoplasmic adaptor proteins include the presence of protein binding domains , sites for indu - cible post - translational modiﬁcations , and a lack of catalytic do - mains . In a broader sense , scaffold molecules are characterized by their ability to bind simultaneously to multiple proteins and form higher - order complexes . Work by many research groups has indicated that molecular scaffolds play critical roles in the regulation of receptor endocytosis by binding to numerous endo - cytic accessory and regulatory proteins . In such protein clusters , increased local concentrations of proteins enable otherwise low - efﬁciency interactions and transient binding in a simultaneous or sequential manner . Dynamic changes in protein and lipid com - position at discrete membrane microregions were initially shown to couple the fate of the cargo with membrane invagination and internalization . Similar mechanisms direct receptors to speciﬁc domains at the plasma membrane and in endosomes , leading to the endosomal retention and degradation of receptors . Moreover , similar principles appear to govern other trafﬁcking processes in cells , including biosynthetic , recycling and secretory pathways . Several mechanisms underlying these processes have been pro - posed , including speciﬁc post - translational modiﬁcations of trafﬁcking cargoes , such as phosphorylation and mono - ubiquit - ination , as well as functions of endocytic scaffold molecules that act in a cargo - and compartment - speciﬁc manner . In this review , we will introduce and discuss the concept of receptor - speciﬁc adaptor proteins that bind to the cytoplasmic part of a class or family of receptors and connect it to the com - ponents of the endocytic machinery at the plasma membrane and in endosomal compartments . In addition , we will describe a class of scaffold proteins that are compartment - speciﬁc and participate in the recognition and sorting of trafﬁcking cargoes along func - tional microdomains in the endosome . RECEPTOR ENDOCYTOSIS – COMMON PRINCIPLES The removal of receptors from the cell surface can be either a constitutive ( ligand - independent ) or an induced ( ligand - depend - ent ) process . Thebeststudiedexamplesarethetransferrinreceptor and the EGFR ( epidermal growth factor receptor ) respectively . Endocytosis can be regarded as a general desensitization mech - anism that allows the system to reset its sensitivity to repeated stimulation . It also has a marked impact on signalling speciﬁcity by changing the location and composition of signalling complexes that are assembled at the active receptor . Transferrin and LDL ( low - density lipoprotein ) receptors , whose primary function is the transport of nutritional molecules into the cell , are internalized via clathrin - coated pits in a ligand - independent manner and are rapidly recycled back to the cell surface . On the other hand , signalling receptors , such as the EGFR , require ligand binding before they can be concentrated in clathrin - coated pits and enter the cells [ 1 , 2 ] . Unoccupied EGFRs also undergo constitutive endocytosis at the rate of 2 – 3 % per min [ 1 , 2 ] , which corresponds to the random entrapment of receptors in endocytic structures . Abbreviations used : Alix , ALG - 2 ( apoptosis - linked gene 2 ) - interacting protein X ; ANTH domain , AP180 N - terminal homology domain ; AP - 2 , adaptor protein - 2 ; ARH , autosomal recessive hypercholesterolaemia ; BAR domain , Bin / amphiphysin / Rvs domain ; CD2AP , CD2 - associated protein ; CIN85 , Cbl - interacting protein of 85 kDa ; Dab2 , Disabled - 2 ; EEA1 , early endosome antigen 1 ; EGFR , epidermal growth factor receptor ; EH domain , Eps15 homology domain ; ENTH domain , epsin N - terminal homology domain ; ESCRT , endosomal sorting complexes required for transport ; FYVE , Fab1p , YOTB , Vac1p and EEA1 ; GAP , GTPase - activating protein ; GPCR , G - protein - coupled receptor ; Hrs , hepatocyte growth factor - regulated tyrosine kinase substrate ; LBPA , lysobiphosphatidic acid ; LDL , low - density lipoprotein ; LNX , ligand of Numb protein X ; MVB , multivesicular body ; NAK , Numb - associated kinase ; NSF , N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein ; PON , partner of Numb ; PTB domain , phosphotyrosine - binding domain ; RTK , receptor tyrosine kinase ; SH3 , Src homology 3 ; SNARE , soluble NSF attachment protein receptor ; STAM , signal - transducing adaptor molecule ; TCR , T - cell receptor . 1 Present address : Serono Pharmaceutical Research Institute , 1228 Geneva , Switzerland . 2 To whom correspondence should be addressed ( email Ivan . Dikic @ biochem2 . de or dikic @ biochem2 . uni - frankfurt . de ) . c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society 2 I . Szymkiewicz , O . Shupliakov and I . Dikic Ligand - induced internalization is up to 10 - fold faster , and appears to involve dynamic mechanisms that control distinct steps in receptor transport through the endosome . The classical key components of clathrin - dependent endocyto - sis are clathrin , AP - 2 ( adaptor protein - 2 , the adaptor complex ) and dynamin [ 3 – 5 ] . These proteins form part of the coat complex at a very early stage , and are recruited in various combinations in dif - ferent receptor pathways . According to the current view , the recruitment of AP - 2 to the plasma membrane is a complex pro - cess , which involves interactions with phospholipids , tyrosine - or dileucine - based endocytic sorting motifs present in the cyto - plasmic tails of receptors [ 6 ] , synaptotagmin , and accessory proteins such as Eps15 [ 7 ] . AP180 / CALM ( clathrin assembly pro - tein lymphoid myeloid ) , epsins and HIP1 / HIP1R ( huntingtin - interacting proteins ) may function as cargo adaptors in addition to AP - 2 , as they bind simultaneously to receptors and to clathrin and phospholipids , and can promote clathrin assembly in vitro [ 8 – 10 ] . Other proteins that are more speciﬁc for a particular re - ceptor cargo , e . g . β - arrestin , can also recruit receptors to clathrin lattices , although these proteins do not promote clathrin assembly and work in combination with AP - 2 [ 11 ] . After the clathrin lattice is formed , endophilin , epsin and amphiphysin are involved in membrane invagination and clathrin rearrangements . The GTPase dynamin has been convincingly implicated at the ﬁssion stage [ 12 ] . According to one hypothesis , dynamin functions as a force - generating mechanochemical motor protein . Another hypothe - sis implies that dynamin acts as a regulator of the ﬁssion event , possibly by recruiting other effector proteins [ 13 ] . Both mechanisms may also work simultaneously . Observation of clath - rin - coated pit dynamics using total internal reﬂection microscopy has indicated that , during ﬁssion , dynamin recruitment to coated pits is followed rapidly by the recruitment of actin [ 14 ] . Moreover , perturbation of actin in the lamprey giant synapse disrupts the endocytic reaction , with the accumulation of coated pits with wide necks [ 15 ] , suggesting a role for actin and dynamin - interacting accessory proteins in promoting constriction of the neck . The basic endocytic machinery involves numerous accessory proteins that facilitate and modulate receptor internalization . However , it remains to be clariﬁed how these proteins are co - ordinated to participate in sequential steps of the endocytic pro - cess in different cellular compartments . Another important and not yet understood topic deals with the speciﬁcity of transport of a particular receptor along the endosomal pathway . This pathway represents a major route for transporting receptors from the cell surface to different destinations in the cells . Endosomes are com - posed of a network of vesicular , tubular and lamellar structures thatformmorphologicallydistinctcellularcompartments . Import - antly , they are not only distinguished based on their shape , but also play different functional roles and are usually decorated by speciﬁc protein or lipid resident markers . Transmembrane recep - tors are removed from the cell membrane via clathrin - dependent and - independent pathways and are delivered to early endosomes . Early endosomes are characterized by a mildly acidic pH that favours dissociation of the ligand from the receptor . Molecules that are destined for recycling leave the early endosome , and either are translocated directly and very rapidly to the plasma mem - brane , or are initially sorted to the so - called endocytic recycling compartment and then returned back to the plasma membrane . The remaining receptors anchored in early endosomal vesicles are translocated together along microtubules to form a more acidic late endosomal compartment during the maturation process . Whereas early endosomes tend to be tubular and are located to - wards the cell periphery , late endosomes are more spherical and are often closer to the nucleus . In addition , a subset of late endo - somes has a multivesicular appearance , and hence are called MVBs ( multivesicular bodies ) . Late endosomes form a dynamic network together with lysosomal structures , which represents the end point of endocytosis and the site of protein degradation . CARGO - SPECIFIC SCAFFOLD PROTEINS Cargo - speciﬁc scaffold proteins can be deﬁned as multifunctional proteins that are able to co - ordinate distinct steps in the inter - nalization and sorting of selected types of cargos . While certain adaptors have been considered to be dedicated exclusively to the endocytosis of a particular receptor type , others have been shown to regulate the endocytosis of several kinds of cargo in a speciﬁc manner . They share a common mode of action via their ability to bind directly or indirectly to cargo and at the same time to interact with membrane lipids , coat components , endocytic accessory pro - teins and enzymes involved in the regulation of phospholipid metabolism . They are also commonly subject to dynamic post - translational modiﬁcations , including phosphorylation and ubi - quitination , that regulate their scaffolding functions . Thus cargo - speciﬁc scaffolds act as major regulators of incoming signals that drive the endocytosis and sorting of cargoes along common pathways in the endosome . On the other hand , there is also a high degree of diversity among cargo - speciﬁc adaptors . This is exempliﬁed by distinct means of recognizing cargoes either via direct binding to a receptor or by binding to receptor - associated proteins that are trafﬁcking together with the receptor through the endosome . In addition , more evidence is emerging that a single adaptor , rather than being highly speciﬁc for a particular receptor type , can in fact regulate the endocytosis of several types of cargo . Moreover , cargo - speciﬁc adaptor proteins typically form families of structurally related proteins that are functionally redundant , such that the internalization of one class of receptors may employ several related adaptors ( see below ) . Of note , the endocytic scaf - folds often act at the nexus of trafﬁcking and signalling , and in this way affects numerous cellular responses . Here we review several prototype cargo scaffolds , indicate their mode of action and dis - cuss some recent evidence about their role in several receptor pathways . β - Arrestin β - Arrestins are clathrin adaptors that regulate the endocytosis of GPCRs ( G - protein - coupled receptors ) via clathrin - coated vesicles [ 16 ] . Arrestins were initially characterized as desensitizing agents that uncouple receptors from G - proteins . There are four known members of the arrestin family in mammals . Expression of the two visual arrestins is restricted to the retina , whereas β - arres - tin 1 and 2 are expressed ubiquitously and are involved in the down - regulation of numerous GPCRs . Various aspects of arrestin function in the endocytosis and signalling of GPCRs has been discussed in earlier reviews [ 17 , 18 ] , and here we focus on the speciﬁcity of action of β - arrestins in receptor - mediated endo - cytosis . In response to receptor activation , β - arrestins are recruited to the plasma membrane and associate preferentially with activated and phosphorylated GPCRs . There are marked differences in the ability of arrestin isoforms to bind different GPCRs [ 19 ] . β - Arrestin 2 binds preferentially to class A GPCRs , such as the β 2 - adrenergic receptor , and dissociates from it before internal - ization . Class B GPCRs , such as the V 2 vasopressin receptor , bind to β - arrestins 1 and 2 in a more prolonged fashion . While persis - tent association of β - arrestins targets receptors for lysosomal degradation , dissociation of β - arrestins from GPCRs favours receptor dephosphorylation and recycling back to the plasma membrane [ 20 ] . c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society Cargo - and compartment - selective endocytic scaffold proteins 3 β - Arrestins , with exception of the visual arrestins , interact simultaneously with clathrin and with the β 2 subunit of AP - 2 through their C - terminus . It has been shown that the latter asso - ciation is required for the efﬁcient targeting of β - arrestins to the membrane [ 21 ] . Unlike other AP - 2 - binding adaptors , such as the epsins , arrestins do not induce clathrin polymerization , but target cargo to pre - existing clathrin - coated pits . In addition , β - arrestins bind the phosphoinositide Ins P 6 , which mediates the recruitment of β - arrestin to phosphoinositide - rich plasma mem - brane microdomains , causing their concentration in clathrin - coated pits [ 22 ] . β - Arrestins also interact with a number of sig - nalling molecules , including the kinases Src , JNK3 ( c - Jun N - ter - minal kinase 3 ) , ASK1 ( apoptosis signal - regulating kinase 1 ) , ERK1 / 2 ( extracellular - signal - regulated kinase 1 / 2 ) and Raf , pos - sibly recruiting these molecules to the activated GPCRs . Addi - tionally , they associate with NSF ( N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein ) , an ATPase whose catalytic activity seems to pro - mote the internalization of GPCRs [ 23 ] , as well as with the GDP - bound form of ARF6 ( ADP - ribosylation factor 6 ) and with ARNO ( ARF nucleotide - binding - site opener ) , thus promoting receptor endocytosis [ 24 , 25 ] . Upon ligand stimulation , β - arrestins are rapidly and transiently ubiquitinated by Mdm2 E3 ligase . Usually β - arrestins associate transiently with receptors , but if the molecule is fused with ubi - quitin it remains associated with the GPCR in the endosomes . Expression of such a chimaera increases the rate of receptor inter - nalization , suggesting that the ubiquitination of arrestins affects receptor trafﬁcking [ 26 ] . Interestingly , while ubiquitination of β - arrestinsiscriticalfortheinternalizationofGPCRs , ubiquitination ofthereceptoritselfisrequiredforitsdegradation [ 26 ] . Inaddition to ubiquitination , the phosphorylation of β - arrestins also regulates the clathrin - mediated internalization of β 2 - adrenergic receptors , as the ligand - induced phosphorylation at Ser - 412 controls the binding of β - arrestin 1 to clathrin [ 27 ] . The binding site for β - arrestins is located either at the C - ter - minus of the GPCR ( as in the case of the β 2 - adrenergic receptor ) [ 28 ] or within the third cytoplasmic loop ( as for the D 1 dopamine receptor ) [ 29 ] . Arrestins can also be recruited indirectly to GPCR complexes and mediate the internalization of heterologous recep - tor types . For example , Fz4 is a seven - transmembrane receptor that , upon activation by glycoproteins of the Wnt family , binds to Dvl2 ( dishevelled ) , which initiates a signal transduction cascade that is involved in regulation of developmental processes [ 30 , 31 ] . It is phosphorylated Dvl2 that recruits β - arrestin 2 to the receptor complex , which is a critical step required for the endocytosis of Fz4 [ 32 ] . The speciﬁcity of β - arrestins for GPCRs is not absolute , since β - arrestin 2 is involved in the endocytosis of other types of mem - brane receptors , such as type II and type III transforming growth factor - β receptors , leading to the down - regulation of signalling [ 33 ] . The association is mediated by Thr - 841 in the type III recep - tor that is phosphorylated by the type II receptor . It has also been shown that β - arrestins bind to the ligand - occupied insulin - like growth factor receptor , promoting its endocytosis , and enhancing ligand - dependent mitogen - activated protein kinase phosphoryla - tion and DNA synthesis [ 34 ] . Finally , β - arrestin 2 associates with and enhances internalization of the LDL receptor [ 35 ] . Dab2 ( Disabled - 2 ) , ARH ( autosomal recessive hypercholesterolaemia ) and Numb Dab2 has been characterized as a speciﬁc adaptor protein that or - chestrates the internalization of lipoprotein receptors . Dab2 con - tains an N - terminal PTB ( phosphotyrosine - binding ) domain that binds preferentially to non - phosphorylated NPXY ( Asn - Pro - Xaa - Tyr ) motifs . These sequences are found in the LDL receptor family that is represented by the LDL receptor , ApoER2 ( apolipo - protein E receptor 2 ) and gp330 / gp600 megalin , as well as amyloid precursor protein [ 36 ] . The same domain associates with PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 [ 37 ] . In addition , Dab2 contains two types of motifs commonly found in endocytic proteins , namely two DPF ( Asp - Pro - Phe ) motifs and ﬁve NPF ( Asn - Pro - Phe ) motifs . DPF / W modules are found in Eps15 , epsin , amphiphysin , auxillin and AP180 , and mediate binding to the α - adaptin ear domain of AP - 2 . NPF triplets , also present in epsin , intersectin , Numb , Rab , Pan1 and stonin 2 , interact with the EH ( Eps15 homology ) domain of Eps15 , intersectin , POB - 1 and EHD1 [ 38 ] . Due to its ability to bind to speciﬁc internalization motifs in AP - 2 as well as in EH domains , Dab2 links LDL receptors to the endocytic machinery and downstream signalling pathways . Most reports describing the function of Dab proteins have been based on attempts to increase or decrease its expression level . Overexpression of Dab2 resulted in the redistribution of AP - 2 into clusters that did not contain clathrin [ 36 ] , while overexpression of the PTB domain of Dab2 speciﬁcally blocked LDL receptor uptake [ 37 ] . A conditional knockout of Dab2 in kidney proximal tubule cells resulted in a decreased number of apical coated pits and vesicles and the excretion of certain plasma proteins , transport of which is megalin - dependent [ 39 ] . In Caenorhabditis elegans , the corresponding protein Ce - DAB - 1 is required for the efﬁcient secretion of ﬁbroblast growth factor , mediated by the lipoprotein receptor - related proteins [ 40 ] . Similarly to Dab2 , ARH binds to the LDL receptor , clathrin and AP - 2 [ 41 ] . It has been suggested that ARH and Dab2 act sequentially in endocytic cargo protein selection . Initially at the plasma membrane , ARH sequesters receptors at the rim of coated pits due to association with the β - appendage domain of AP - 2 . Binding of clathrin to AP - 2 results in dissociation of ARH from the complex , and in this way cargo can be transferred on to Dab2 , which is associated with the α - appendage of AP - 2 [ 42 ] . A dif - ferent model has been suggested for the co - operation of ARH and Dab2 in mediating endocytosis of the multi - ligand receptor megalin . This receptor has two FXNPXY motifs , and ARH in - teracts preferentially with the ﬁrst [ 43 ] , while Dab2 associates with the second [ 44 ] . Current data agree with a model whereby Dab2 associates initially with megalin in clathin - coated pits and then passes it on to ARH , which escorts the receptor all the way through early endosome and recycling endosome compartments [ 43 ] . The co - operation among these adaptors is supported by the observation that the importance of ARH for the efﬁcient uptake of LDL varies between cell types . Patients with an autosomal recessive form of hypercholesterolaemia who bear mutations in the ARH gene display impaired degradation of LDL in hepato - cytes and lymphocytes , but not in ﬁbroblasts [ 45 ] . Some data suggest that Dab2 [ 43 ] or β - arrestin 2 [ 35 ] can compensate for the lack of ARH in ﬁbroblasts . Numb , the third PTB - domain - containing adaptor , induces the endocytosis and down - regulation of the transmembrane receptor Notch . The PTB domain of Numb interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of Notch , and associates with PON ( partner of Numb ) , NAK ( Numb - associated kinase ) , and LNX ( ligand of Numb pro - tein X ) . Numb interacts with the AP - 2 complex via the DPF motif , and with Eps15 via the NPF motif . Numb and Eps15 are found in separate clathrin - coated pits , where both proteins associate with AP - 2 , while in endosomes Numb and Eps15 bind simultaneously and co - localize [ 46 ] . Notably , Numb is negatively regulated by the Ser / Thr kinase NAK [ 47 ] and the ubiquitin ligase LNX [ 48 ] . The adaptor protein PON directs the asymmetrical distri - bution of Numb in dividing neuroblasts [ 49 ] . The asymmetrical localization of Numb is also regulated by its association with the c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society 4 I . Szymkiewicz , O . Shupliakov and I . Dikic Figure 1 CIN85 is an endocytic scaffold CIN85 is an example of a multimeric adaptor that is involved in cargo internalizaton and sorting . Through its multiple domains , CIN85 associates with a number of proteins , which are divided here into functional groups . CIN85 oligomerizes and simultaneously binds various molecules , changing its conformation and binding partners upon cell stimulation , thus co - ordinating the trafﬁcking of several cargo proteins . Abbreviations : STAP , stem - cell - speciﬁc adaptor protein containing pleckstrin homology and SH2 domains ; BLNK , B cell linker protein ; SHIP - 1 , SH2 - containing inositol phosphatase - 1 ; GEF , guanine nucleotide exchange factor ; ASAP1 , Arf - GTPase - activating protein 1 ; ARAP3 , Arf GAP and Rho GAP with ankyrin repeat and pleckstrin homology domains protein 3 ; PDGFR , platelet - derived growth factor receptor ; HGFR , hepatocyte growth factor receptor ; PI3K , phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ; PAK , p21 - activated kinase ; SFK , Src family kinase ; CC , coiled - coil . transmembrane protein NIP ( Numb - interacting protein ) , which recruits Numb from the cytosol to the plasma membrane [ 50 ] . An asymmetrical distribution of Numb during cell division results in the polarized distribution of α - adaptin and thereby differentially regulates endocytosis in daughter cells [ 51 ] . This mechanism is involved in the development of the nervous system and muscles in Drosophila , where asymmetrical partitioning of Numb at mitosis deﬁnes Notch activity in daughter cells originating from sensory precursor cells , thus determining cell fate in several lineages [ 52 ] . CIN85 ( Cbl - interacting protein of 85 kDa ) and CD2AP ( CD2 - associated protein ) as clustering scaffolds The family of CIN85 and CD2AP / CMS [ Cas ligand with multiple SH3 ( Src homology 3 ) domains ] adaptor proteins has attracted considerable interest due to recent ﬁndings that they act as scaffold molecules in the internalization and endocytic sorting of seve - ral RTKs ( receptor tyrosine kinases ) [ 53 ] . The down - regulation of RTKs is governed largely by the Cbl family of ubiquitin ligases , which mediates the ligand - dependent ubiquitination of RTKs and also recruits CIN85 / CD2AP proteins in complexes with activated RTKs . Involvement of a Cbl – CIN85 or Cbl – CD2AP complex is vital for the internalization of EGFR [ 54 ] , c - Met [ 55 ] , the platelet - derived growth factor receptor , c - Kit [ 56 ] and Flt - 1 [ 57 ] . Importantly , CIN85 appears to be critical for clustering of Cbl in these complexes , and additionally regulates the recruitment of endocytic accessory proteins such as endophilins , and may pro - vide the link to the clathrin coat as well as to reorganization of the actincytoskeleton . Similarly , CblassociateswithCD2APthatalso links the receptor complex with endophilin , and additionally re - cruits cortactin , thus associating receptor endocytosis with Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin polymerization [ 58 ] . The scaffolding properties of CIN85 and CD2AP are clearly suggested by the multidomain composition of these ubiquitious adaptors , which are composed of three SH3 domains , polyproline motifs and a coiled - coil domain [ 59 ] . A number of independent groups identiﬁed these adaptors based on their binding to various partners . CD2AP has been independently characterized as a part - ner of CD2 [ 60 ] and p130Cas [ 61 ] . The adaptor CIN85 [ 62 ] is also known as Ruk ( regulator of ubiquitous kinase ) [ 63 ] and SETA ( SH3 domain - containing gene expressed in tumorigenic astro - cytes ) [ 64 ] . CIN85 has been shown to associate with a number of signalling and adaptor proteins , including phosphoinositide 3 - kinase , Src and Grb2 [ 59 ] , the actin - capping protein CAPZ [ 65 ] , endophilin [ 55 ] and Rab4 [ 66 ] , which link this adaptor with the actin cytoskeleton , clathrin - coated pits and the early endosome compartment respectively ( Figure 1 ) . The coiled - coil is required for the localization of CIN85 to the plasma membrane [ 65 ] , and mediates the homo - and hetero - typic oligomerization of CIN85 and CD2AP [ 67 ] . The three SH3 domains of CIN85 and CD2AP are particularly important for their scaffolding functions in receptor endocytosis . They bind to an atypical proline – arginine ( PXXXPR ) motif pre - sent in Cbl , Cbl - b , synaptojanin 2B1 , SHIP - 1 ( SH2 - containing inositol phosphatase - 1 ) , Hip1R , p115RhoGEF ( guanine nucleo - tide - exchange factor ) and the Arf GTPase - activating proteins ASAP1 [ Arf - GAP ( GTPase - activating protein ) 1 ] and ARAP3 ( Arf GAP and Rho GAP with ankyrin repeat and pleckstrin homology domains protein 3 ) [ 68 ] ( Figure 1 ) . Importantly , the relatively low afﬁnity of individual CIN85 SH3 domain – PXXXPR interactions [ 69 ] allows the rapid exchange of CIN85 binding partners , depending on their local concentration , cellular compartmentalization and / or post - translational modiﬁcations , in response to changes in the environment . Consistent with this hypothesis , CIN85 was shown to form high - molecular - mass c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society Cargo - and compartment - selective endocytic scaffold proteins 5 complexes in native lysates of cells that could be dynamically exchanged following ligand stimulation [ 68 ] . These various complexes that assemble around CIN85 SH3 domains can differ - ently inﬂuence the fate of internalized receptors . For example , Dab2 associates with the SH3 domains of CIN85 and links it to clathrin complexes [ 70 ] . Ligand stimulation of the EGFR leads to dissociation of the Dab2 – CIN85 interaction and recruitment of CIN85 to the Cbl receptor complex [ 70 ] . All of this evidence suggests that CIN85 may serve as a platform that interacts simul - taneously with multiple endocytic effectors and rapidly exchanges them along the endocytic pathway . Recent studies on transgenic mice deﬁcient in CD2AP revealed additional functions of CD2AP in the regulation of receptor endo - cytosis in T cells [ 71 ] , where CD2AP is likely to facilitate TCR ( T - cell receptor ) patterning in the contact area by linking speciﬁc adhesion receptors to the cytoskeleton [ 60 ] . Since CD2 is asso - ciated with the TCR , clustering of CD2 can recruit TCR to the con - tact surface . Concentrating antigen , receptors and kinases in the stable central cluster of TCR enhances signalling and simultan - eously induces receptor degradation . T cells deﬁcient in CD2AP do not form this immunological synapse and show sustained tyro - sine phosphorylation as well as enhanced proliferation [ 71 ] . This corresponds with reduced down - regulation of TCR , which nor - mally occurs after T cell activation . CD2AP seems to participate in regulating the delivery of TCR to lysosomes for degradation , rather than removal of receptors from the plasma membrane [ 71 ] . Notably , Cbl and Cbl - b proteins , known to bind to CD2AP and CIN85 , are also associated with TCR complexes and are essential for their targeting for degradation . This effect is observed only in Cbl / Cbl - b double knockout cells , whereas T cells lacking Cbl or Cbl - b did not show signiﬁcant defects in the targeting of TCR for degradation [ 72 ] . COMPARTMENT - SELECTIVE SCAFFOLDS Based on recent reports , the traditional view of the endocytic system being divided into distinct early , late and recycling endo - somes seems to be giving way to the recognition of a set of func - tional membrane subdomains , or endocytic microcompartments , that are critical for the transport of cargoes [ 73 ] . These membrane regions exist in each endocytic compartment and are characterized by deﬁned biophysical properties . At the critical points of tran - sition between these distinct functional regions , several regulatory protein and lipids are speciﬁcally distributed . For example , func - tional regions of the early endosome contain membrane domains enriched in clathrin , Rab5 GTPases , raft components and an - nexin II , which are all important for the transport of cargo through this compartment . Usually , the recruitment of lipid kinases or phosphatases induces local lipid enrichment and leads to the exchange of lipid - binding proteins . It is thought that the presence of compartment - speciﬁc scaffolds might be essential for the co - ordination of these multiple effector – membrane interactions and preservation of the functional integrity of particular compart - ments . Basedonthislocalassemblyofmultifunctionalcomplexes , cargo sorting is also coupled functionally to the process of mem - brane invagination and biogenesis of endosomes [ 74 ] . Scaffolds in plasma membrane microcompartments Several groups of molecular scaffolds have been implicated in the initial steps of endocytosis , forming distinct plasma membrane microcompartments . These include proteins involved in nucl - eation of the clathrin coat and in linking it to lipid membranes , proteins involved in bending of the lipid bilayer and recruiting molecules involved in ﬁssion , and large protein complexes that couple cargo recognition and vesicle tethering . Scaffolds with a BAR ( Bin / amphiphysin / Rvs ) domain Certain endocytic adaptors are able to sense and alter membrane curvature by modifying the lipid content or by deforming the membrane mechanically via their BAR domains [ 75 ] . The BAR domain has a coiled - coil structure that binds preferentially to negatively charged membranes [ 76 ] . This curvature - sensing and - inducing module is present in diverse groups of endocytic pro - teins , including amphiphysins , endophilins , nadrins , the Rab5 effectors APPL 1 and 2 , sorting nexins , arfaptins , centaurins and oligophrenins [ 77 ] . The endophilins participates in invagination , scission and vesi - cle recycling , representing a good example of a scaffold protein that orchestrates multiple activities at the nexus of signalling and internalization ( Figure 2A ) . The SH3 domain at the C - terminal end of endophilin associates with synaptojanin , intersectin , dy - namin and amphiphysin [ 78 , 79 ] . The coiled - coil BAR domain at the N - terminus is required for dimerization and membrane tubul - ation . Stimulation by EGF induces the association of endophilin with neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein , enhancing the activity of the Arp2 / 3 protein complex and leading to the accumu - lation of actin at the internalization sites , thus contributing to the ﬁssion of clathrin - coated vesicles [ 80 ] . In addition to co - ordinating cargo , membrane shape and cytoskeleton , endophilin may also participate in ubiquitin - dependent sorting , as it is mono - ubiquitinated upon ligand stimulation [ 81 ] . The amphiphysins are another group of BAR domain proteins , which link the clathrin coat components to the membrane [ 82 – 84 ] ( Figure 2B ) . Amphiphysins 1 and 2 are composed of three main binding regions . The N - terminal region forms the BAR domain that is involved in dimerization [ 76 ] . The central region binds the heavy chain of clathrin and the α subunit of AP - 2 via distinct sites . In addition , it contains a proline - rich region , which binds efﬁciently to the SH3 domain of amphiphysin itself [ 83 ] . The C - terminal region comprises an SH3 domain , which interacts with dynamin and synaptojanin [ 4 ] . The interactions of this SH3 domain and those of the central region are both regulated by phosphorylation [ 85 ] . Experimental manipulations of living cells that disrupt the interactions of amphiphysin with either dynamin or clathrin and AP - 2 lead to potent inhibition of clathrin - mediated endocytosis [ 85 – 87 ] . Scaffolds with an ENTH ( epsin N - terminal homology ) domain Initially described as phospholipid - binding domains , ENTH domains are present in a variety of proteins involved in the for - mation of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles [ 88 – 91 ] . The inter - action of the ENTH domain with the head of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 results in the formation of an amphipathic helix , which may account for bilayer penetration and bending [ 9 ] . The related ANTH ( AP180 N - terminal homology ) domain lacks this ability , and instead re - gulates lattice size [ 9 ] . In a model mechanism , AP180 and AP - 2 induce polymerization of the clathrin lattice at the plasma mem - brane , while epsins facilitate its invagination [ 9 , 91 ] . Epsins 1 – 3 were initially identiﬁed based on their ability to bind to the EH domains of Eps15 ( ‘epsin’ is derived from Eps15 - interacting pro - tein ) [ 92 ] . In addition to the ENTH domain , epsin contains two ubiquitin - interacting motifs , a DPW ( Asp - Pro - Trp ) domain that binds to the α subunit of AP - 2 , a clathrin box , and three NPF mo - tifs that bind Eps15 . It promotes the assembly of clathrin in vitro and , although it is not a constitutive compound of clathrin - coated pits , it participates in dynamic rearrangements during the assem - bly , invagination and scission of clathrin - coated vesicles [ 92 ] c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society 6 I . Szymkiewicz , O . Shupliakov and I . Dikic Figure 2 Examples of dynamic protein – lipid complexes that couple the cargo with the biogenesis and trafﬁcking of vesicles in endocytic micro - compartments ( A ) Endophilinco - ordinatescargoentryandactinpolymerizationatclathrin - coatedpits . ItsBAR domainsensesandinducesmembranecurvature . ( B ) TheBARdomainofamphiphysinbindsto curved negatively charged phospholipids , while its other domains associate with AP - 2 , clathrin and dynamin . ( C ) Epsin interacts with clathrin , AP - 2 , Eps15 , intersectin and ubiquitin ( purple oval ) . Its ENTH domain binds PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 [ PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ] and introduces membrane curvature . ( D ) The Rab domain at the level of the early endosome is a functional protein multimer that is coupled to the membrane phospholipid PtdIns3P via binding of FYVE - domain - containing proteins . For details , see the text . ( Figure 2C ) . The afﬁnity of epsin for the α - appendage of AP - 2 is greater than that of AP180 [ 93 ] and , similarly to Eps15 , dephos - phorylation of epsin enhances its association with AP - 2 [ 94 ] . In addition , the ubiquitin - interacting motif of epsin is considered to play an important role in recognizing the ubiquitinated cargo and triggering internalization events [ 95 ] . Characteristically , the location of action of these scaffolds seems to be dependent on their speciﬁcity of binding to membrane lipids . The ENTH domain of epsin associates preferentially with PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 enriched at the plasma membrane , whereas the ENTH domain of the related protein enthoprotin shows a pre - ference for PtdIns4 P enriched in the trans - Golgi network [ 91 ] . Interestingly , enthoprotin , as well as the yeast proteins Ent3p and Ent5p , associate with the GGA family and AP - 1 complex [ 96 ] . The ENTH domains of these proteins bind the SNARE ( soluble NSF attachment protein receptor ) Vti1b and are required for transport from the trans - Golgi network to late endosomes [ 97 ] . Ent5p localizes to endosomes and binds speciﬁcally to PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 via its ENTH domain . Ent3p and Ent5p are associated with Vps27p , the yeast homologue of Hrs ( hepatocyte growth factor - regulated tyrosine kinase substrate ) , and deletion of both Ent3p and Ent5p disrupts the ubiquitin - dependent sort - ing of biosynthetic and endocytic cargo into MVBs [ 98 ] . Scaffold proteins linked with Rab - decorated compartments The classical case of functionally distinct microdomains is deﬁned by the presence of speciﬁc Rab GTPases and their effectors . Based on the work of Zerial and colleagues [ 99 , 100 ] , the concept of spatially restricted and functionally specialized regions deﬁned by the presence of particular Rab proteins and their effectors has becomeaprototypeforendocyticmicrocompartments . Thefamily of Rab GTPases , as well as their regulators and adaptors , has been reviewed in detail elsewhere [ 99 , 101 ] . In a highly organized and sequential manner , they form oligomeric complexes involving several adaptor proteins that co - ordinate membrane fusion and budding , vesicle tethering , and the microtubule - and actin - depen - dent motility of vesicles . The activity of Rab proteins depends on the rate of nucleotide exchange and hydrolysis , and is regulated by positive feedback loops generated by Rab effectors . For example , Rab5 co - ordinates membrane trafﬁc from the plasma membrane to early endosomes . Expression of the constitutively active , GTP - bound mutant Q79L - Rab5 stimulates endosome fusion and the enlargement of early endosome compartments ( Figure 2D ) . This results in increased internalization of the transferrin receptor . Expression of the S34N mutant that preferentially binds GDP has the opposite effect [ 102 ] . Importantly , ligand - induced endocytosis seems to require speciﬁc adaptor proteins that modulate the func - tion of Rab proteins and link them to various neighbouring com - partments . Rabenosyn - 5 contains a FYVE ( Fab1p , YOTB , Vac1p and EEA1 ) ﬁnger binding PtdIns ( 3 ) P and ﬁve copies of the NPF tripeptide that can associate with EH - domain proteins . Rabaptin - 5 and rabaptin - 5b have oligomerizing coiled - coil domains and a DPF motif that interacts with the AP - 2 complex . Co - operation and an ability to self - organize results in the formation of high - molecular - mass complexes at the membrane of early endosomes , including the Rab nucleotide exchange factor Rabex - 5 as well as the tethering molecule EEA1 ( early endosome antigen 1 ) . Local - ization of EEA1 to Rab5 domains is dependent on an association with phospholipids via the FYVE domain and on direct binding to Rab5 , resulting in NSF / SNARE - mediated early endosome dock - ing and fusion . The lipid - modifying enzyme VPS34 is targeted to Rab5 domains on early endosomes and produces PtdIns3 P , which in turn recruits FYVE - domain - containing proteins . One of these is PIKfyve , which converts PtdIns3 P into PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 in the late endosome [ 103 ] . In addition , the trafﬁcking of the EGFR is regulated speciﬁcally via Rin1 , an exchange factor for Rab5 [ 104 , 105 ] , and Eps8 , which is a partner of the Rab5 GTPase - activating protein RN - tre [ 106 ] . Through the action of the rabenosyn - 5 , rabaptin - 5 and rabap - tin - 5 β adaptors , Rab5 is connected to Rab4 domains that are involved in the rapid recycling of cargo to the plasma membrane . Similar adaptors are predicted to link Rab4 and Rab11 in c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society Cargo - and compartment - selective endocytic scaffold proteins 7 recycling endosomes , and probably constitute a common pattern of interactions that ensure sequential membrane trafﬁc between interchanging Rab complexes . Scaffold proteins controlling trafﬁc of ubiquitinated cargo In recent years , the modiﬁcation of cargo and endocytic proteins by a single ubiquitin molecule has become a well recognized mechanism responsible for differential sorting at both the internal - ization and MVB formation steps . Internalization of a number of RTKs , GPCRs and immune receptors , as well as membrane transporters and channels , is mediated by conjugated ubiquitin thatfunctionsasasignalforcargorecruitment [ 107 ] . Whilemono - ubiquitination of the EGFR appears to be sufﬁcient to trigger inter - nalization , it does not appear to be essential , due to the presence of several redundant pathways [ 108 ] . Notably , the classical clathrin adaptor AP - 2 , which was thought to be the main adaptor that regu - lates the selection and recruitment of activated receptors into clathrin - coated pits , is not required for the internalization of ubi - quitinated receptors [ 109 – 111 ] . Instead , epsin and Eps15 are ac - cepted candidates for ubiquitin - speciﬁc scaffolds at the level of clathrin - coated vesicles . These pathways may substitute for each other under physiological conditions , and can also be involved in the regulation of multiple entry routes into the cell . On the other hand , modiﬁcation by a single or multiple ubiquitin moieties is a common feature required for sorting of the majority of cargo into MVBs , being the crucial step for their degradation in lysosomes . It is currently believed that recognition of mono - ubiquitin by a set of ubiquitin receptors [ proteins containing one or more ubiquitin - binding domain , i . e . UBA ( ubiquitin - associated ) domain , ubi - quitin - interacting motif , CUE ( coupling of ubiquitin conjugation to endoplasmic reticulum degradation ) domain ] present in the microdomains of endosomal membranes allows transfer of cargo from one compartment to another . In addition , numerous endo - cytic proteins involved in cargo transport are themselves subject to mono - ubiquitination , a process that is dependent on the pre - sence of their ubiquitin - binding domains . Obviously , ubiquitin - ation regulates the endocytic function of molecular scaffolds . According to one hypothesis , the ubiquitin - interacting motif may associate with ubiquitin appended on the same molecule ( cis - interactions ) , which induces a structural change of the adaptor and the release of ubiquitinated cargo . In general , ubiquitin - binding domainshaveratherlowafﬁnityformono - ubiquitin , thusensuring readily reversible interactions , which therefore require associated protein complexes that will affect the avidity and duration of their interactions . In accordance with this , multifunctional scaffold proteins have been identiﬁed , which may regulate ubiquitin - dependent transport in a sequential and highly organized manner that is conserved from yeast to mammals ( Figure 3 ) . Most of our current understanding of these multiprotein com - plexes has been revealed by genetic studies of the Vps class E pro - teins that are involved in MVB biogenesis and protein sorting in yeast . There are around 20 known class E mutants in yeast , which can be divided into three subgroups called ESCRTs ( endo - somal sorting complexes required for transport ) . ESCRT - I is re - cruited to the membrane of early endosomes by the ubiquitin - and clathrin - binding protein Vps27p . Vps23p in ESCRT - I and Vps36p in ESCRT - II contain ubiquitin - binding motifs and may interact directly with ubiquitinated cargo . The sequential actions of ESCRT - I , - II and - III result in inward budding and sorting of cargo to the inner vesicles of endosomes [ 112 – 114 ] . Hrs Hrs is a mammalian homologue of the yeast vacuolar sorting pro - tein Vps27p . It is localized in endosomes , where it recognizes Figure 3 Ubiquitin trafﬁc Lysosomal degradation of ubiquitinated receptors is directed by the sequential action of the ubiquitin - binding protein complex composed of Hrs , Tsg101 and Alix with associated proteins . All three molecules form oligomers . Hrs and Tsg101 bind ubiquitin directly via UIM ( ubiquitin - interacting motif ) and UEV ( ubiquitin - conjugating enzyme E2 variant ) domains respectively . Hrs binds PtdIns3P [ PI ( 3 ) P ] and sequesters cargo in clathrin - coated regions of early endosomes , preventing it from recycling . The UEV domain of Tsg101 associates with PSAP motifs in HrsandAlix ( blockarrows ) . Tsg101andAlix co - ordinatethefunction ofESCRT protein complexes involved in the biogenesis of MVBs . Alix associates with LPBA , a lipid that is necessary for the formation of inner vesicles of MVBs . Upon ligand stimulation , several accessoryproteins , includingHrs , undergomono - ubiquitnation ( indicatedbyapurpleasterisk ) . This has been implicated in co - ordinating vesicular transport . The endocytic sorting machinery is recruited during the budding of RNA viruses , whose Gag proteins are ubiquitinated and have motifs that bind Tsg101 and Alix . Abbreviations : VHS , Vsp27p , Hrs , STAM ; CC , coiled - coil ; SNAP - 25 , 25 kDa synaptosome - associated protein ; BRD , Bro1 - rhophilin conserved domain ; CHMP4 , charged MVB protein ; ALG , apoptosis - linked gene 2 . ubiquitinated cargo , sequesters it to the clathrin - coated micro - domains , and recruits the ESCRTs [ 115 ] . Hrs has a phospholipid - binding FYVE domain and is therefore concentrated in clathrin - coated regions of endosomal membranes that contain low levels of PtdIns3 P . This is in contrast with other FYVE domain - con - taining proteins , such as EEA1 , SARA ( Smad anchor for receptor activation ) and CISK ( cytokine - independent survival kinase ) , which co - localize in domains rich in PtdIns3 P and Rab5 [ 116 ] . Hrs is a part of a large 550 kDa complex [ 117 ] and binds to the adaptor molecules STAM ( signal - transducing adaptor molecule ) , STAM2 and Smad2 , SNAP - 25 ( 25 kDa synaptosome - associated protein ) andEps15 [ 118 ] . TheVHS ( Vsp27p , Hrs , STAM ) domain of Hrs is structurally similar to E / ANTH domains and determines its membrane localization . In the early endosome , a clathrin - associated complex containing Hrs , STAM2 and Eps15 binds ubiquitinated cargo , promoting its retention in the endocytic com - partments , and prevents recycling [ 119 ] . All three proteins seem to participate in a multivalent complex that sorts ubiquitinated mem - brane proteins into the MVB pathway . In addition , Hrs contains the tetrapeptide motif PSAP ( Pro - Ser - Ala - Pro ) , similar to the PTAP motif present in Tsg101 and the HIV Gag protein , which mediates association with the UEV ( ubiquitin - conjugating en - zyme E2 variant ) domain of Tsg101 [ 120 ] . c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society 8 I . Szymkiewicz , O . Shupliakov and I . Dikic In Vps27 - deﬁcient yeast cells , proteins normally transported to the vacuole , such as the α - factor Ste3p , accumulate in pre - vacuolar endosomal compartments [ 121 ] . In mammalian cells , both deletion and overexpression of Hrs lead to enlargement of the early endosome compartment [ 119 , 122 ] . With respect to constitutive endocytosis , some reports found that overexpression of Hrs inhibited the internalization of transferrin [ 122 ] , while the others stated that , under conditions when Hrs overexpression blocked the trafﬁcking of receptor - bound ( EGF ) and ﬂuid phase marker ( dextran ) , transferrin uptake and recycling was not affected [ 123 ] . Stimulation by EGF , hepatocyte growth factor or platelet - derived growth factor , as well as interleukin - 2 or granulo - cyte / macrophage colony - stimulating factor , induced phosphoryl - ation of Hrs [ 124 , 125 ] and its partner STAM [ 126 ] . This leads to dissociation of Hrs from endosomes , and is prevented under conditions that inhibit endocytosis [ 127 ] . Depletion of Hrs by small interfering RNA impairs the degradation of internalized EGFR and inhibits MVB biogenesis , resulting in a decreased number of internal vesicles [ 119 ] . In accordance with its import - ance for maintaining functional endocytic processing , Hrs − / − mouse embryos die at day 11 [ 128 ] . Alix [ ALG - 2 ( apoptosis - linked gene 2 ) - interacting protein X ] Alix , also known as AIP1 ( ALG - 2 - interacting protein 1 ) , is a 95 kDa protein with a coiled - coil motif and a proline - rich region . It interacts with Tsg101 ( a component of ESCRT - I ) and several CHMP4 ( charged MVB protein ; component of ESCRT - III ) [ 129 , 130 ] , thus linking these two protein complexes [ 131 ] and co - ordinating late steps of MVB sorting . Subsequent recruitment of the ATPase Vps4 induces dissociation of Alix and the sorting complexes from endosome membranes [ 114 ] . The polyproline motifs of Alix bind to CIN85 [ 132 ] and endophilin [ 133 ] , further suggesting an involvement of this protein in endocytosis pro - cesses . The yeast orthologue Bro1 / Vps31p is required for the ubi - quitin - dependent vacuolar sorting of Gap1 amino acid permease , and a deﬁciency of Bro1 results in recycling and de - ubiquitination of Gap1 [ 134 ] . Bro1 is also required for endosomal sorting of the uracil permease Fur4 , the maltose permease Mal61 , the hexose permease Hxt6 / 7 [ 135 ] , Ste2 and carboxypeptidase S [ 136 ] . In addition , data obtained with yeast , fungal and mammalian homo - logues of Alix suggest a role in the recruitment of cargo possessing the YPXL / I motif to the late steps of endocytosis . Intriguingly , this motif is present in the p9 Gag protein of the equine infectious anaemia virus and in p6 Gag of HIV - 1 , both of which require Alix for efﬁcient budding through endosomal and plasma membranes [ 129 , 131 ] . Apparently , the process of budding of enveloped viruses resembles the vesicle budding inside MVBs and recruits the same cellular compounds [ 131 ] . The late stages of retroviral budding are ubiquitin - dependent and can be blocked by the use of proteasome inhibitors [ 137 , 138 ] , with the retroviral Gag proteins mimicking the endocytic adaptor Hrs [ 120 , 139 ] . In addition , Alix was recently shown to bind to LBPA ( lysobi - phosphatidic acid ) , a resident phospholipid of internal vesicles of the late endosome , thus being localized in subdomains of internal membranes of the MVBs [ 140 ] . LBPA is a fusogenic lipid that has an intrinsic ability to induce the formation of vesicles within acidic liposomes . Interestingly , the addition of a recombinant Alix to LBPA - containing liposomes leads to inhibition of MVB for - mation , whereas its depletion by speciﬁc antibodies stimulates MVB formation [ 140 ] . In vivo , down - regulation of Alix by small interfering RNA decreases the number of acidic late endosomal compartments and reduces the level of LBPA [ 140 ] . Thus Alix may regulate endosome biogenesis and receptor sorting in the late endosome via its interactions with sorting complexes and LBPA . FINAL COMMENTS AND PERSPECTIVES In the past few years we have seen great progress in understanding the complexity of interactions at the membrane – cytosol interface . Studies in yeast , Drosophila and mammalian cells have revealed common themes underlying membrane trafﬁc in the cell . The speciﬁcity of cargo transport is co - ordinated by a class of multi - functional scaffold proteins that act in a cargo - or compartment - selective manner . Owing to numerous interactions and often overlapping mechanisms of action , classiﬁcation of endocytic adaptors is currently far from being complete . In this review we have tried to emphasize the interconnection and importance of scaffold protein functions in the trafﬁcking and signalling of vari - ous receptors . Dissecting the cross - linked pathways by studying the role of a particular adaptor must be placed in the global con - text of the endocytic machinery that co - ordinates cargo sorting , membrane ﬁssion , lipid metabolism , signalling pathways and local modiﬁcation of the cytoskeleton . Detailed mechanistic ana - lysis of the roles of scaffold networks on the molecular level , particularly under physiological and pathological conditions , remains a challenge for future research . We apologize to investigators whose important contributions were not included in this review due to space limitations . We thank Daniela Hoeller and Mirko Schmidt for critical reading of the manuscript . REFERENCES 1 Herbst , J . J . , Opresko , L . K . , Walsh , B . J . , Lauffenburger , D . A . and Wiley , H . S . ( 1994 ) Regulation of postendocytic trafﬁcking of the epidermal growth factor receptor through endosomal retention . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 12865 – 12873 2 Wiley , H . S . , Herbst , J . J . , Walsh , B . J . , Lauffenburger , D . A . , Rosenfeld , M . G . and Gill , G . N . ( 1991 ) The role of tyrosine kinase activity in endocytosis , compartmentation , and down - regulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 266 , 11083 – 11094 3 Mousavi , S . A . , Malerod , L . , Berg , T . and Kjeken , R . ( 2004 ) Clathrin - dependent endocytosis . Biochem . J . 377 , 1 – 16 4 Murthy , V . N . and De Camilli , P . ( 2003 ) Cell biology of the presynaptic terminal . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 26 , 701 – 728 5 Gundelﬁnger , E . D . , Kessels , M . M . and Qualmann , B . ( 2003 ) Temporal and spatial coordination of exocytosis and endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 , 127 – 139 6 Bonifacino , J . S . and Traub , L . M . ( 2003 ) Signals for sorting of transmembrane proteins to endosomes and lysosomes . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 72 , 395 – 447 7 Brodsky , F . M . , Chen , C . Y . , Knuehl , C . , Towler , M . C . and Wakeham , D . E . ( 2001 ) Biological basket weaving : formation and function of clathrin - coated vesicles . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 , 517 – 568 8 Ford , M . G . , Pearse , B . M . , Higgins , M . K . , Vallis , Y . , Owen , D . J . , Gibson , A . , Hopkins , C . R . , Evans , P . R . and McMahon , H . T . ( 2001 ) Simultaneous binding of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 and clathrin by AP180 in the nucleation of clathrin lattices on membranes . Science 291 , 1051 – 1055 9 Ford , M . G . , Mills , I . G . , Peter , B . J . , Vallis , Y . , Praefcke , G . J . , Evans , P . R . and McMahon , H . T . ( 2002 ) Curvature of clathrin - coated pits driven by epsin . Nature ( London ) 419 , 361 – 366 10 Wendland , B . ( 2002 ) Epsins : adaptors in endocytosis ? Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 971 – 977 11 Goodman , Jr , O . B . , Krupnick , J . G . , Gurevich , V . V . , Benovic , J . L . and Keen , J . H . ( 1997 ) Arrestin / clathrin interaction . Localization of the arrestin binding locus to the clathrin terminal domain . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 15017 – 15022 12 Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2000 ) Dynamin and its role in membrane ﬁssion . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 16 , 483 – 519 13 Praefcke , G . J . and McMahon , H . T . ( 2004 ) The dynamin superfamily : universal membrane tubulation and ﬁssion molecules ? Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 133 – 147 14 Merriﬁeld , C . J . , Feldman , M . E . , Wan , L . and Almers , W . ( 2002 ) Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 691 – 698 15 Shupliakov , O . , Bloom , O . , Gustafsson , J . S . , Kjaerulff , O . , L¨ow , P . , Tomilin , N . , Pieribone , V . A . , Greengard , P . and Brodin , L . ( 2002 ) Impaired recycling of synaptic vesicles after acute perturbation of the presynaptic actin cytoskeleton . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 , 14476 – 14481 c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society Cargo - and compartment - selective endocytic scaffold proteins 9 16 Claing , A . , Laporte , S . A . , Caron , M . G . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2002 ) Endocytosis of G protein - coupled receptors : roles of G protein - coupled receptor kinases and beta - arrestin proteins . Prog . Neurobiol . 66 , 61 – 79 17 Shenoy , S . K . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2003 ) Multifaceted roles of beta - arrestins in the regulation of seven - membrane - spanning receptor trafﬁcking and signalling . Biochem . J . 375 , 503 – 515 18 McDonald , P . H . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2001 ) Beta - Arrestins : new roles in regulating heptahelical receptors’ functions . Cell . Signalling 13 , 683 – 689 19 Oakley , R . H . , Laporte , S . A . , Holt , J . A . , Caron , M . G . and Barak , L . S . ( 2000 ) Differential afﬁnities of visual arrestin , beta arrestin1 , and beta arrestin2 for G protein - coupled receptors delineate two major classes of receptors . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 17201 – 17210 20 Luttrell , L . M . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2002 ) The role of beta - arrestins in the termination and transduction of G - protein - coupled receptor signals . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 455 – 465 21 Laporte , S . A . , Miller , W . E . , Kim , K . M . and Caron , M . G . ( 2002 ) beta - Arrestin / AP - 2 interaction in G protein - coupled receptor internalization : identiﬁcation of a beta - arrestin binding site in beta 2 - adaptin . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 9247 – 9254 22 Gaidarov , I . , Krupnick , J . G . , Falck , J . R . , Benovic , J . L . and Keen , J . H . ( 1999 ) Arrestin function in G protein - coupled receptor endocytosis requires phosphoinositide binding . EMBO J . 18 , 871 – 881 23 McDonald , P . H . , Cote , N . L . , Lin , F . T . , Premont , R . T . , Pitcher , J . A . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1999 ) Identiﬁcation of NSF as a beta - arrestin1 - binding protein . Implications for beta2 - adrenergic receptor regulation . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 10677 – 10680 24 Claing , A . , Chen , W . , Miller , W . E . , Vitale , N . , Moss , J . , Premont , R . T . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2001 ) beta - Arrestin - mediated ADP - ribosylation factor 6 activation and beta 2 - adrenergic receptor endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 42509 – 42513 25 Delaney , K . A . , Murph , M . M . , Brown , L . M . and Radhakrishna , H . ( 2002 ) Transfer of M2 muscarinic acetylcholine receptors to clathrin - derived early endosomes following clathrin - independent endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 33439 – 33446 26 Shenoy , S . K . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2003 ) Trafﬁcking patterns of beta - arrestin and G protein - coupled receptors determined by the kinetics of beta - arrestin deubiquitination . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 14498 – 14506 27 Lin , F . T . , Krueger , K . M . , Kendall , H . E . , Daaka , Y . , Fredericks , Z . L . , Pitcher , J . A . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1997 ) Clathrin - mediated endocytosis of the beta - adrenergic receptor is regulated by phosphorylation / dephosphorylation of beta - arrestin1 . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 31051 – 31057 28 Kovoor , A . , Celver , J . , Abdryashitov , R . I . , Chavkin , C . and Gurevich , V . V . ( 1999 ) Targeted construction of phosphorylation - independent beta - arrestin mutants with constitutive activity in cells . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 6831 – 6834 29 Kim , O . J . , Gardner , B . R . , Williams , D . B . , Marinec , P . S . , Cabrera , D . M . , Peters , J . D . , Mak , C . C . , Kim , K . M . and Sibley , D . R . ( 2004 ) The role of phosphorylation in D1 dopamine receptor desensitization : evidence for a novel mechanism of arrestin association . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 7999 – 8010 30 Wodarz , A . and Nusse , R . ( 1998 ) Mechanisms of Wnt signaling in development . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 14 , 59 – 88 31 Malbon , C . C . ( 2004 ) Frizzleds : new members of the superfamily of G - protein - coupled receptors . Front . Biosci . 9 , 1048 – 1058 32 Chen , W . , ten Berge , D . , Brown , J . , Ahn , S . , Hu , L . A . , Miller , W . E . , Caron , M . G . , Barak , L . S . , Nusse , R . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 2003 ) Dishevelled 2 recruits beta - arrestin 2 to mediate Wnt5A - stimulated endocytosis of Frizzled 4 . Science 301 , 1391 – 1394 33 Chen , W . , Kirkbride , K . C . , How , T . , Nelson , C . D . , Mo , J . , Frederick , J . P . , Wang , X . F . , Lefkowitz , R . J . and Blobe , G . C . ( 2003 ) Beta - arrestin 2 mediates endocytosis of type III TGF - beta receptor and down - regulation of its signaling . Science 301 , 1394 – 1397 34 Lin , F . T . , Daaka , Y . and Lefkowitz , R . J . ( 1998 ) Beta - arrestins regulate mitogenic signaling and clathrin - mediated endocytosis of the insulin - like growth factor I receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 31640 – 31643 35 Wu , J . H . , Peppel , K . , Nelson , C . D . , Lin , F . T . , Kohout , T . A . , Miller , W . E . , Exum , S . T . and Freedman , N . J . ( 2003 ) The adaptor protein beta - arrestin2 enhances endocytosis of the low density lipoprotein receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 44238 – 44245 36 Morris , S . M . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2001 ) Disabled - 2 colocalizes with the LDLR in clathrin - coated pits and interacts with AP - 2 . Trafﬁc 2 , 111 – 123 37 Mishra , S . K . , Keyel , P . A . , Hawryluk , M . J . , Agostinelli , N . R . , Watkins , S . C . and Traub , L . M . ( 2002 ) Disabled - 2 exhibits the properties of a cargo - selective endocytic clathrin adaptor . EMBO J . 21 , 4915 – 4926 38 Santolini , E . , Salcini , A . E . , Kay , B . K . , Yamabhai , M . and Di Fiore , P . P . ( 1999 ) The EH network . Exp . Cell Res . 253 , 186 – 209 39 Morris , S . M . , Tallquist , M . D . , Rock , C . O . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2002 ) Dual roles for the Dab2 adaptor protein in embryonic development and kidney transport . EMBO J . 21 , 1555 – 1564 40 Kamikura , D . M . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2003 ) Lipoprotein receptors and a disabled family cytoplasmic adaptor protein regulate EGL - 17 / FGF export in C . elegans . Genes Dev . 17 , 2798 – 2811 41 He , G . , Gupta , S . , Yi , M . , Michaely , P . , Hobbs , H . H . and Cohen , J . C . ( 2002 ) ARH is a modular adaptor protein that interacts with the LDL receptor , clathrin , and AP - 2 . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 44044 – 44049 42 Mishra , S . K . , Watkins , S . C . and Traub , L . M . ( 2002 ) The autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia ( ARH ) protein interfaces directly with the clathrin - coat machinery . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 , 16099 – 16104 43 Nagai , M . , Meerloo , T . , Takeda , T . and Farquhar , M . G . ( 2003 ) The adaptor protein ARH escorts megalin to and through endosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 4984 – 4996 44 Oleinikov , A . V . , Zhao , J . and Makker , S . P . ( 2000 ) Cytosolic adaptor protein Dab2 is an intracellular ligand of endocytic receptor gp600 / megalin . Biochem . J . 347 , 613 – 621 45 Garcia , C . K . , Wilund , K . , Arca , M . , Zuliani , G . , Fellin , R . , Maioli , M . , Calandra , S . , Bertolini , S . , Cossu , F . , Grishin , N . et al . ( 2001 ) Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia caused by mutations in a putative LDL receptor adaptor protein . Science 292 , 1394 – 1398 46 Santolini , E . , Puri , C . , Salcini , A . E . , Gagliani , M . C . , Pelicci , P . G . , Tacchetti , C . and Di Fiore , P . P . ( 2000 ) Numb is an endocytic protein . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 1345 – 1352 47 Chien , C . T . , Wang , S . , Rothenberg , M . , Jan , L . Y . and Jan , Y . N . ( 1998 ) Numb - associated kinase interacts with the phosphotyrosine binding domain of Numb and antagonizes the function of Numbinvivo . Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 , 598 – 607 48 Nie , J . , McGill , M . A . , Dermer , M . , Dho , S . E . , Wolting , C . D . and McGlade , C . J . ( 2002 ) LNX functions as a RING type E3 ubiquitin ligase that targets the cell fate determinant Numb for ubiquitin - dependent degradation . EMBO J . 21 , 93 – 102 49 Lu , B . , Rothenberg , M . , Jan , L . Y . and Jan , Y . N . ( 1998 ) Partner of Numb colocalizes with Numb during mitosis and directs Numb asymmetric localization in Drosophila neural and muscle progenitors . Cell 95 , 225 – 235 50 Qin , H . , Percival - Smith , A . , Li , C . , Jia , C . Y . , Gloor , G . and Li , S . S . ( 2004 ) A novel transmembrane protein recruits Numb to the plasma membrane during asymmetric cell division . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 11304 – 11312 51 Berdnik , D . , Torok , T . , Gonzalez - Gaitan , M . and Knoblich , J . A . ( 2002 ) The endocytic protein alpha - Adaptin is required for numb - mediated asymmetric cell division in Drosophila . Dev . Cell 3 , 221 – 231 52 Greenwald , I . ( 1998 ) LIN - 12 / Notch signaling : lessons from worms and ﬂies . Genes Dev . 12 , 1751 – 1762 53 Dikic , I . ( 2003 ) Mechanisms controlling EGF receptor endocytosis and degradation . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 31 , 1178 – 1181 54 Soubeyran , P . , Kowanetz , K . , Szymkiewicz , I . , Langdon , W . Y . and Dikic , I . ( 2002 ) Cbl - CIN85 - endophilin complex mediates ligand - induced downregulation of EGF receptors . Nature ( London ) 416 , 183 – 187 55 Petrelli , A . , Gilestro , G . F . , Lanzardo , S . , Comoglio , P . M . , Migone , N . and Giordano , S . ( 2002 ) The endophilin - CIN85 - Cbl complex mediates ligand - dependent downregulation of c - Met . Nature ( London ) 416 , 187 – 190 56 Szymkiewicz , I . , Kowanetz , K . , Soubeyran , P . , Dinarina , A . , Lipkowitz , S . and Dikic , I . ( 2002 ) CIN85 participates in Cbl - b - mediated down - regulation of receptor tyrosine kinases . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 39666 – 39672 57 Kobayashi , S . , Sawano , A . , Nojima , Y . , Shibuya , M . and Maru , Y . ( 2004 ) The c - Cbl / CD2AP complex regulates VEGF - induced endocytosis and degradation of Flt - 1 ( VEGFR - 1 ) . FASEB J . 18 , 929 – 931 58 Lynch , D . K . , Winata , S . C . , Lyons , R . J . , Hughes , W . E . , Lehrbach , G . M . , Wasinger , V . , Corthals , G . , Cordwell , S . and Daly , R . J . ( 2003 ) A Cortactin - CD2 - associated protein ( CD2AP ) complex provides a novel link between epidermal growth factor receptor endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 21805 – 21813 59 Dikic , I . ( 2002 ) CIN85 / CMS family of adaptor molecules . FEBS Lett . 529 , 110 – 115 60 Dustin , M . L . , Olszowy , M . W . , Holdorf , A . D . , Li , J . , Bromley , S . , Desai , N . , Widder , P . , Rosenberger , F . , van der Merwe , P . A . , Allen , P . M . and Shaw , A . S . ( 1998 ) A novel adaptor protein orchestrates receptor patterning and cytoskeletal polarity in T - cell contacts . Cell 94 , 667 – 677 61 Kirsch , K . H . , Georgescu , M . M . , Ishimaru , S . and Hanafusa , H . ( 1999 ) CMS : an adapter molecule involved in cytoskeletal rearrangements . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 , 6211 – 6216 62 Take , H . , Watanabe , S . , Takeda , K . , Yu , Z . X . , Iwata , N . and Kajigaya , S . ( 2000 ) Cloning and characterization of a novel adaptor protein , CIN85 , that interacts with c - Cbl . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 268 , 321 – 328 63 Gout , I . , Middleton , G . , Adu , J . , Ninkina , N . N . , Drobot , L . B . , Filonenko , V . , Matsuka , G . , Davies , A . M . , Waterﬁeld , M . and Buchman , V . L . ( 2000 ) Negative regulation of PI 3 - kinase by Ruk , a novel adaptor protein . EMBO J . 19 , 4015 – 4025 64 Bogler , O . , Furnari , F . B . , Kindler - Roehrborn , A . , Sykes , V . W . , Yung , R . , Huang , H . J . and Cavenee , W . K . ( 2000 ) SETA : a novel SH3 domain - containing adapter molecule associated with malignancy in astrocytes . Neuro - oncology 2 , 6 – 15 c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society 10 I . Szymkiewicz , O . Shupliakov and I . Dikic 65 Hutchings , N . J . , Clarkson , N . , Chalkley , R . , Barclay , A . N . and Brown , M . H . ( 2003 ) Linking the T cell surface protein CD2 to the actin - capping protein CAPZ via CMS and CIN85 . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 22396 – 22403 66 Cormont , M . , Meton , I . , Mari , M . , Monzo , P . , Keslair , F . , Gaskin , C . , McGraw , T . E . and Le Marchand - Brustel , Y . ( 2003 ) CD2AP / CMS regulates endosome morphology and trafﬁc to the degradative pathway through its interaction with Rab4 and c - Cbl . Trafﬁc 4 , 97 – 112 67 Verdier , F . , Valovka , T . , Zhyvoloup , A . , Drobot , L . B . , Buchman , V . , Waterﬁeld , M . and Gout , I . ( 2002 ) Ruk is ubiquitinated but not degraded by the proteasome . Eur . J . Biochem . 269 , 3402 – 3408 68 Kowanetz , K . , Husnjak , K . , Holler , D . , Kowanetz , M . , Soubeyran , P . , Hirsch , D . , Schmidt , M . H . , Pavelic , K . , De Camilli , P . , Randazzo , P . A . and Dikic , I . ( 2004 ) CIN85 associates with multiple effectors controlling intracellular trafﬁcking of EGF receptors . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 3155 – 3166 69 Kowanetz , K . , Szymkiewicz , I . , Haglund , K . , Kowanetz , M . , Husnjak , K . , Taylor , J . D . , Soubeyran , P . , Engstrom , U . , Ladbury , J . E . and Dikic , I . ( 2003 ) Identiﬁcation of a novel proline - arginine motif involved in CIN85 - dependent clustering of Cbl and down - regulation of epidermal growth factor receptors . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 39735 – 39746 70 Kowanetz , K . , Terzic , J . and Dikic , I . ( 2003 ) Dab2 links CIN85 with clathrin - mediated receptor internalization . FEBS Lett . 554 , 81 – 87 71 Lee , K . H . , Dinner , A . R . , Tu , C . , Campi , G . , Raychaudhuri , S . , Varma , R . , Sims , T . N . , Burack , W . R . , Wu , H . , Wang , J . et al . ( 2003 ) The immunological synapse balances T cell receptor signaling and degradation . Science 302 , 1218 – 1222 72 Naramura , M . , Jang , I . K . , Kole , H . , Huang , F . , Haines , D . and Gu , H . ( 2002 ) c - Cbl and Cbl - b regulate T cell responsiveness by promoting ligand - induced TCR down - modulation . Nat . Immunol . 3 , 1192 – 1199 73 Gruenberg , J . ( 2001 ) The endocytic pathway : a mosaic of domains . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 721 – 730 74 Gruenberg , J . and Stenmark , H . ( 2004 ) The biogenesis of multivesicular endosomes . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 317 – 323 75 Zimmerberg , J . and McLaughlin , S . ( 2004 ) Membrane curvature : how BAR domains bend bilayers . Curr . Biol . 14 , R250 – R252 76 Peter , B . J . , Kent , H . M . , Mills , I . G . , Vallis , Y . , Butler , P . J . , Evans , P . R . and McMahon , H . T . ( 2004 ) BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science 303 , 495 – 499 77 Habermann , B . ( 2004 ) The BAR - domain family of proteins : a case of bending and binding ? EMBO Rep . 5 , 250 – 255 78 Huttner , W . B . and Schmidt , A . A . ( 2002 ) Membrane curvature : a case of endofeelin’ . Trends Cell Biol . 12 , 155 – 158 79 Micheva , K . D . , Ramjaun , A . R . , Kay , B . K . and McPherson , P . S . ( 1997 ) SH3 domain - dependent interactions of endophilin with amphiphysin . FEBS Lett . 414 , 308 – 312 80 Otsuki , M . , Itoh , T . and Takenawa , T . ( 2003 ) Neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is recruited to rafts and associates with endophilin A in response to epidermal growth factor . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 6461 – 6469 81 Stamenova , S . D . , Dunn , R . , Adler , A . S . and Hicke , L . ( 2004 ) The Rsp5 ubiquitin ligase binds to and ubiquitinates members of the yeast CIN85 - endophilin complex , Sla1 - Rvs167 . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 16017 – 16025 82 Wigge , P . and McMahon , H . T . ( 1998 ) The amphiphysin family of proteins and their role in endocytosis at the synapse . Trends Neurosci . 21 , 339 – 344 83 Farsad , K . , Slepnev , V . , Ochoa , G . , Daniell , L . , Hauke , V . and De Camilli , P . ( 2003 ) A putative role for intramolecular regulatory mechanisms in the adaptor function of amphiphysin in endocytosis . Neuropharmacology 45 , 787 – 796 84 Evergren , E . , Marcucci , M . , Tomilin , N . , L¨ow , P . , Slepnev , V . , Andersson , F . , Gad , H . , Brodin , L . , De Camilli , P . and Shupliakov , O . ( 2004 ) Amphiphysin is a component of clathrin coats formed during synaptic vesicle recycling at the lamprey giant synapse . Trafﬁc 5 , 514 – 528 85 Slepnev , V . I . , Ochoa , G . C . , Butler , M . H . , Grabs , D . and Camilli , P . D . ( 1998 ) Role of phosphorylation in regulation of the assembly of endocytic coat complexes . Science 281 , 821 – 824 86 Evergren , E . , Tomilin , N . , Vasylieva , E . , Sergeeva , V . , Bloom , O . , Gad , H . , Capani , F . and Shupliakov , O . ( 2004 ) A pre - embedding immunogold approach for detection of synaptic endocytic proteinsinsitu . J . Neurosci . Methods 135 , 169 – 174 87 Shupliakov , O . , L¨ow , P . , Grabs , D . , Gad , H . , Chen , H . , David , C . , Takei , K . , De Camilli , P . and Brodin , L . ( 1997 ) Synaptic vesicle endocytosis impaired by disruption of dynamin - SH3 domain interactions . Science 276 , 259 – 263 88 De Camilli , P . , Chen , H . , Hyman , J . , Panepucci , E . , Bateman , A . and Brunger , A . T . ( 2002 ) The ENTH domain . FEBS Lett . 513 , 11 – 18 89 Nossal , R . and Zimmerberg , J . ( 2002 ) Endocytosis : curvature to the ENTH degree . Curr . Biol . 12 , R770 – R772 90 Hurley , J . H . and Wendland , B . ( 2002 ) Endocytosis : driving membranes around the bend . Cell 111 , 143 – 146 91 Legendre - Guillemin , V . , Wasiak , S . , Hussain , N . K . , Angers , A . and McPherson , P . S . ( 2004 ) ENTH / ANTH proteins and clathrin - mediated membrane budding . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 9 – 18 92 Chen , H . , Fre , S . , Slepnev , V . I . , Capua , M . R . , Takei , K . , Butler , M . H . , Di Fiore , P . P . and De Camilli , P . ( 1998 ) Epsin is an EH - domain - binding protein implicated in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature ( London ) 394 , 793 – 797 93 Kalthoff , C . , Alves , J . , Urbanke , C . , Knorr , R . and Ungewickell , E . J . ( 2002 ) Unusual structural organization of the endocytic proteins AP180 and epsin 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 8209 – 8216 94 Chen , H . , Slepnev , V . I . , Di Fiore , P . P . and De Camilli , P . ( 1999 ) The interaction of epsin and Eps15 with the clathrin adaptor AP - 2 is inhibited by mitotic phosphorylation and enhanced by stimulation - dependent dephosphorylation in nerve terminals . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 3257 – 3260 95 Umebayashi , K . ( 2003 ) The roles of ubiquitin and lipids in protein sorting along the endocytic pathway . Cell Struct . Funct . 28 , 443 – 453 96 Duncan , M . C . , Costaguta , G . and Payne , G . S . ( 2003 ) Yeast epsin - related proteins required for Golgi - endosome trafﬁc deﬁne a gamma - adaptin ear - binding motif . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 77 – 81 97 Chidambaram , S . , Mullers , N . , Wiederhold , K . , Haucke , V . and von Mollard , G . F . ( 2004 ) Speciﬁc interaction between SNAREs and epsin N - terminal homology ( ENTH ) domains of epsin - related proteins in trans - Golgi network to endosome transport . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 4175 – 4179 98 Eugster , A . , Pecheur , E . I . , Michel , F . , Winsor , B . , Letourneur , F . and Friant , S . ( 2004 ) Ent5p is required with Ent3p and Vps27p for ubiquitin - dependent protein sorting into the multivesicular body . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 3031 – 3041 99 Zerial , M . and McBride , H . ( 2001 ) Rab proteins as membrane organizers . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 107 – 117 100 Miaczynska , M . and Zerial , M . ( 2002 ) Mosaic organization of the endocytic pathway . Exp . Cell Res . 272 , 8 – 14 101 Stenmark , H . and Olkkonen , V . M . ( 2001 ) The Rab GTPase family . Genome Biol . 2 , REVIEWS3007 102 Stenmark , H . , Parton , R . G . , Steele - Mortimer , O . , Lutcke , A . , Gruenberg , J . and Zerial , M . ( 1994 ) Inhibition of rab5 GTPase activity stimulates membrane fusion in endocytosis . EMBO J . 13 , 1287 – 1296 103 Sbrissa , D . , Ikonomov , O . C . andShisheva , A . ( 2002 ) Phosphatidylinositol3 - phosphate - interacting domains in PIKfyve . Binding speciﬁcity and role in PIKfyve endomenbrane localization . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 6073 – 6079 104 Barbieri , M . A . , Kong , C . , Chen , P . I . , Horazdovsky , B . F . and Stahl , P . D . ( 2003 ) The SRC homology 2 domain of Rin1 mediates its binding to the epidermal growth factor receptor and regulates receptor endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 32027 – 32036 105 Tall , G . G . , Barbieri , M . A . , Stahl , P . D . and Horazdovsky , B . F . ( 2001 ) Ras - activated endocytosis is mediated by the Rab5 guanine nucleotide exchange activity of RIN1 . Dev . Cell 1 , 73 – 82 106 Lanzetti , L . , Rybin , V . , Malabarba , M . G . , Christoforidis , S . , Scita , G . , Zerial , M . and Di Fiore , P . P . ( 2000 ) The Eps8 protein coordinates EGF receptor signalling through Rac and trafﬁcking through Rab5 . Nature ( London ) 408 , 374 – 377 107 Hicke , L . and Dunn , R . ( 2003 ) Regulation of membrane protein transport by ubiquitin and ubiquitin - binding proteins . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 141 – 172 108 Holler , D . and Dikic , I . ( 2004 ) Receptor endocytosis via ubiquitin - dependent and - independent pathways . Biochem . Pharmacol . 67 , 1013 – 1017 109 Huang , K . M . , D’Hondt , K . , Riezman , H . and Lemmon , S . K . ( 1999 ) Clathrin functions in the absence of heterotetrameric adaptors and AP180 - related proteins in yeast . EMBO J . 18 , 3897 – 3908 110 Nesterov , A . , Carter , R . E . , Sorkina , T . , Gill , G . N . and Sorkin , A . ( 1999 ) Inhibition of the receptor - binding function of clathrin adaptor protein AP - 2 by dominant - negative mutant mu2 subunit and its effects on endocytosis . EMBO J . 18 , 2489 – 2499 111 Hinrichsen , L . , Harborth , J . , Andrees , L . , Weber , K . and Ungewickell , E . J . ( 2003 ) Effect of clathrin heavy chain - and alpha - adaptin speciﬁc small interfering RNAs on endocytic accessory proteins and receptor trafﬁcking in HeLa cells . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 45160 – 45170 112 Katzmann , D . J . , Babst , M . and Emr , S . D . ( 2001 ) Ubiquitin - dependent sorting into the multivesicular body pathway requires the function of a conserved endosomal protein sorting complex , ESCRT - I . Cell 106 , 145 – 155 113 Conibear , E . ( 2002 ) An ESCRT into the endosome . Mol . Cell 10 , 215 – 216 114 Babst , M . , Katzmann , D . J . , Estepa - Sabal , E . J . , Meerloo , T . and Emr , S . D . ( 2002 ) Escrt - III : an endosome - associated heterooligomeric protein complex required for mvb sorting . Dev . Cell 3 , 271 – 282 115 Bache , K . G . , Brech , A . , Mehlum , A . and Stenmark , H . ( 2003 ) Hrs regulates multivesicular body formation via ESCRT recruitment to endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 435 – 442 116 Gillooly , D . J . , Raiborg , C . and Stenmark , H . ( 2003 ) Phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate is found in microdomains of early endosomes . Histochem . Cell Biol . 120 , 445 – 453 c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society Cargo - and compartment - selective endocytic scaffold proteins 11 117 Chin , L . S . , Raynor , M . C . , Wei , X . , Chen , H . Q . and Li , L . ( 2001 ) Hrs interacts with sorting nexin 1 and regulates degradation of epidermal growth factor receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 7069 – 7078 118 Komada , M . and Kitamura , N . ( 2001 ) Hrs and hbp : possible regulators of endocytosis and exocytosis . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 281 , 1065 – 1069 119 Bache , K . G . , Raiborg , C . , Mehlum , A . and Stenmark , H . ( 2003 ) STAM and Hrs are subunits of a multivalent ubiquitin - binding complex on early endosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 12513 – 12521 120 Garrus , J . E . , von Schwedler , U . K . , Pornillos , O . W . , Morham , S . G . , Zavitz , K . H . , Wang , H . E . , Wettstein , D . A . , Stray , K . M . , Cote , M . , Rich , R . L . et al . ( 2001 ) Tsg101 and the vacuolar protein sorting pathway are essential for HIV - 1 budding . Cell 107 , 55 – 65 121 Piper , R . C . , Cooper , A . A . , Yang , H . and Stevens , T . H . ( 1995 ) VPS27 controls vacuolar and endocytic trafﬁc through a prevacuolar compartment in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 603 – 617 122 Bean , A . J . , Davanger , S . , Chou , M . F . , Gerhardt , B . , Tsujimoto , S . and Chang , Y . ( 2000 ) Hrs - 2 regulates receptor - mediated endocytosis via interactions with Eps15 . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 15271 – 15278 123 Raiborg , C . , Bache , K . G . , Mehlum , A . , Stang , E . and Stenmark , H . ( 2001 ) Hrs recruits clathrin to early endosomes . EMBO J . 20 , 5008 – 5021 124 Komada , M . and Kitamura , N . ( 1995 ) Growth factor - induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Hrs , a novel 115 - kilodalton protein with a structurally conserved putative zinc ﬁnger domain . Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 , 6213 – 6221 125 Asao , H . , Sasaki , Y . , Arita , T . , Tanaka , N . , Endo , K . , Kasai , H . , Takeshita , T . , Endo , Y . , Fujita , T . and Sugamura , K . ( 1997 ) Hrs is associated with STAM , a signal - transducing adaptor molecule . Its suppressive effect on cytokine - induced cell growth . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 32785 – 32791 126 Takeshita , T . , Arita , T . , Asao , H . , Tanaka , N . , Higuchi , M . , Kuroda , H . , Kaneko , K . , Munakata , H . , Endo , Y . , Fujita , T . and Sugamura , K . ( 1996 ) Cloning of a novel signal - transducing adaptor molecule containing an SH3 domain and ITAM . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 225 , 1035 – 1039 127 Urbe , S . , Mills , I . G . , Stenmark , H . , Kitamura , N . and Clague , M . J . ( 2000 ) Endosomal localization and receptor dynamics determine tyrosine phosphorylation of hepatocyte growth factor - regulated tyrosine kinase substrate . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 , 7685 – 7692 128 Komada , M . and Soriano , P . ( 1999 ) Hrs , a FYVE ﬁnger protein localized to early endosomes , is implicated in vesicular trafﬁc and required for ventral folding morphogenesis . Genes Dev . 13 , 1475 – 1485 129 Strack , B . , Calistri , A . , Craig , S . , Popova , E . and Gottlinger , H . G . ( 2003 ) AIP1 / ALIX is a binding partner for HIV - 1 p6 and EIAV p9 functioning in virus budding . Cell 114 , 689 – 699 130 Katoh , K . , Shibata , H . , Suzuki , H . , Nara , A . , Ishidoh , K . , Kominami , E . , Yoshimori , T . and Maki , M . ( 2003 ) The ALG - 2 - interacting protein Alix associates with CHMP4b , a human homologue of yeast Snf7 that is involved in multivesicular body sorting . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 39104 – 39113 131 von Schwedler , U . K . , Stuchell , M . , Muller , B . , Ward , D . M . , Chung , H . Y . , Morita , E . , Wang , H . E . , Davis , T . , He , G . P . , Cimbora , D . M . et al . ( 2003 ) The protein network of HIV budding . Cell 114 , 701 – 713 132 Chen , B . , Borinstein , S . C . , Gillis , J . , Sykes , V . W . and Bogler , O . ( 2000 ) The glioma - associated protein SETA interacts with AIP1 / Alix and ALG - 2 and modulates apoptosis in astrocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 19275 – 19281 133 Chatellard - Causse , C . , Blot , B . , Cristina , N . , Torch , S . , Missotten , M . and Sadoul , R . ( 2002 ) Alix ( ALG - 2 - interacting protein X ) , a protein involved in apoptosis , binds to endophilins and induces cytoplasmic vacuolization . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 29108 – 29115 134 Nikko , E . , Marini , A . M . and Andre , B . ( 2003 ) Permease recycling and ubiquitination status reveal a particular role for Bro1 in the multivesicular body pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 50732 – 50743 135 Springael , J . Y . , Nikko , E . , Andre , B . and Marini , A . M . ( 2002 ) Yeast Npi3 / Bro1 is involved in ubiquitin - dependent control of permease trafﬁcking . FEBS Lett . 517 , 103 – 109 136 Odorizzi , G . , Katzmann , D . J . , Babst , M . , Audhya , A . and Emr , S . D . ( 2003 ) Bro1 is an endosome - associated protein that functions in the MVB pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 1893 – 1903 137 Patnaik , A . , Chau , V . and Wills , J . W . ( 2000 ) Ubiquitin is part of the retrovirus budding machinery . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 97 , 13069 – 13074 138 Ott , D . E . , Coren , L . V . , Sowder , II , R . C . , Adams , J . and Schubert , U . ( 2003 ) Retroviruses have differing requirements for proteasome function in the budding process . J . Virol . 77 , 3384 – 3393 139 Pornillos , O . , Higginson , D . S . , Stray , K . M . , Fisher , R . D . , Garrus , J . E . , Payne , M . , He , G . P . , Wang , H . E . , Morham , S . G . and Sundquist , W . I . ( 2003 ) HIV Gag mimics the Tsg101 - recruiting activity of the human Hrs protein . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 425 – 434 140 Matsuo , H . , Chevallier , J . , Mayran , N . , Le Blanc , I . , Ferguson , C . , Faure , J . , Blanc , N . S . , Matile , S . , Dubochet , J . , Sadoul , R . et al . ( 2004 ) Role of LBPA and Alix in multivesicular liposome formation and endosome organization . Science 303 , 531 – 534 Received 1 June 2004 ; accepted 24 June 2004 Published as BJ Immediate Publication 28 June 2004 , DOI 10 . 1042 / BJ20040913 c (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society