Organizational Adaptation to Institutional Change : A Comparative Study of First - Order Change in Prospector and Defender Banks Author ( s ) : Susan J . Fox - Wolfgramm , Kimberly B . Boal , James G . ( Jerry ) Hunt Source : Administrative Science Quarterly , Vol . 43 , No . 1 ( Mar . , 1998 ) , pp . 87 - 126 Published by : Johnson Graduate School of Management , Cornell University Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2393592 Accessed : 27 / 03 / 2009 19 : 26 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use , available at http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use provides , in part , that unless you have obtained prior permission , you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles , and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal , non - commercial use . Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work . Publisher contact information may be obtained at http : / / www . jstor . org / action / showPublisher ? publisherCode = cjohn . Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission . JSTOR is a not - for - profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship . We work with the scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon , and to build a common research platform that promotes the discovery and use of these resources . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . Johnson Graduate School of Management , Cornell University is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to Administrative Science Quarterly . http : / / www . jstor . org Organizational Adaptation to Institutional Change : A Comparative Study of First - order Change in Prospector and Defender Banks Susan J . Fox - Wolfgramm San Francisco State University Kimberly B . Boal Texas Tech University James G . ( Jerry ) Hunt Texas Tech University ? 1998 by Cornell University . 0001 - 8392 / 98 / 4301 - 0087 / $ 1 . 00 . 0 We thank George Dodge , Jane Dutton , Anne Huff , various colleagues , and Chris - tine Oliver and three anonymous review - ers for their helpful comments on various versions of this manuscript that improved both its content and readability . An earlier version was presented at the 52nd An - nual Meeting of the Academy of Manage - ment . This article is based , in part , on a dissertation by the first author in partial fulfillment of her Ph . D . ( Texas Tech Uni - versity ) , Kimberly B . Boal and James G . Hunt , co - chairs . The authors contributed equally to the manuscript , and communi - cations may be sent to any of them . Using grounded theory , we examined a " defender " and a " prospector " bank ' s strategic adaptation to the Com - munity Redevelopment Act across seven years during which they were under increasing regulatory pressure to comply . The interplay of institutional , organizational , and strategic issue context patterns led the defender to an aborted adaptation and the prospector to a reorientation . Each demonstrated a different form of resistance to de - mands for compliance to the act : identity resistance ( change inconsistent with organizational identity ) and vir - tuous resistance ( change not needed since already part of the bank ' s identity ) . We observed both incremental and punctuated equilibrium change modes , though only incremental change was sustained . Institutional isomor - phism and organizational performance exerted counterin - tuitive pressures for initiating and sustaining change . Drawing on our results , we develop propositions on or - ganizations ' adaptations to change . ' Do organizations exhibit different processes of change in re - sponse to a pressing institutional issue , and if so , how and why does this occur ? In spite of the ubiquity of research on change , the when , how , and why aspects are not at all clear . Van de Ven ( 1992 ) and Huff , Huff , and Thomas ( 1992 ) ar - gued that we know very little about the order and sequence of events or activities that describe how things change over time , how organizations adapt to environmental changes , and whether these events or activities will lead to second - order change , in which the system itself changes , or to more modest first - order change , which occurs within the system itself . Change is the movement away from a present state toward a future state ( George and Jones , 1995 ) . The popularity of studies on changes labeled second order , framebreaking , or radical might lead the casual reader to believe that these are the norm . Several authors have chronicled such changes as responses to environmental upheavals ( e . g . , Hrebiniak and Joyce , 1985 ; Meyer , Brooks , and Goes , 1990 ; Meyer , Goes , and Brooks , 1994 ; Miller and Friesen , 1980a , 1980b ) . Still other studies have described such changes in terms of cusp - catastrophe models ( e . g . , Gresov , Haveman , and Oliva , 1993 ) or by observing such changes in the organization ' s strategic orientation ( Zajac and Shortell , 1989 ) , structure ( Meyer and Rowan , 1977 ) , organizational identity ( Dutton and Dukerich , 1991 ; Dutton , Dukerich , and Harquail , 1994 ) , or even in the cognitive maps of top - level managers ( Barr , Stimert , and Huff , 1992 ) . More substantial research suggests , however , that second - order change , a shift from one strategic orientation to an - other ( cf . Greenwood and Hinings , 1988 ) , is atypical even in times of environmental upheaval ( Tushman and Romanelli , 1985 ) . Authors have noted , for example , that organizations typically converge around a prevailing archetype : strategic orientation and inertia tend to bound the organizational change to that which is consistent with the archetype , repre - senting first - order change . Empirically , Meyer and his col - leagues ( Meyer , Brooks , and Goes , 1990 ; Meyer , Goes , and Brooks , 1994 ) found that second - order change occurred only 87 / Administrative Science Quarterly , 43 ( 1998 ) : 87 - 1 26 about 30 percent of the time , in spite of substantial upheaval in their organizations of study . In spite of its ubiquity , there appears to be a pejorative connotation to the study of first - order change . Perhaps because terms such as incremental - ism , inertia , status quo , or even drift are often associated with it , its study appears to be out of fashion . For us , the literature ' s prevailing emphasis on second - order change , ac - companied by a relative lack of emphasis on first - order change in response to environmental upheaval , substantially contributes to the dearth of information indicated above . Our research is an attempt to present a more balanced per - spective . Rather than emphasizing second - order change in response to pressing institutional forces , we focus on under - standing how the interplay between the forces that resist or inhibit change and the forces that push the organization to change play out in differing processes of adaptation involving first - order change . Our emphasis is on first - order adaptive changes in two organizations , each with a different strategic orientation , as they respond to a major institutional issue over a seven - year period . We contrast the first - order , within - strategic - orientation adaptation patterns of two banks with different but relatively stable strategic orientation as they responded to major changes mandated in the banking indus - try by the Community Reinvestment Act ( CRA ) of 1977 ( re - vised 1989 and 1990 ) , an act passed to address the problem of banks discriminating against certain areas in their commu - nities . THEORETICAL BACKGROUND Tracks as Modes of Adaptation According to Greenwood and Hinings ( 1993 ) , organizational structures and management systems are best understood as design archetypes or holistic patterns . These " patterns are a function of the ideas , beliefs , and values - the components of an ' interpretative scheme ' ( Ranson , Hinings , and Green - wood , 1980 ) - that underpin and are embodied in organiza - tional structures and systems . A design archetype is thus a set of structures and systems that reflects a single interpre - tative scheme " ( Greenwood and Hinings , 1993 : 1052 ) . To understand the interplay of sequences or events through which organizations adapt to changes in their environment , Greenwood and Hinings ( 1988 , 1993 ) introduced the concept of change tracks . For them , the most important fact about organizations is change . Thus , Hinings and Greenwood ( 1988 : 192 ) argued : " Because organizations are conceptual - ized as archetypes , tracks are configurations of interpretive decoupling and recoupling arising from the loss or retention of structural coherence and the displacement or stability of underpinning interpretive schemes . " They maintain that all organizations generate tracks as they move through time , and these tracks reveal whether and how the organizations change . Tracks reveal the degree to which organizations ei - ther move from the constraining assumptions of a given ar - chetype , for example , their strategic orientation , and assume the characteristics of an alternative one or remain within the assumptions and parameters of a given archetype over time . Tracks may be seen as combinations of cognitions and be - haviors . 88 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change Hinings and Greenwood ( 1988 ) suggested four potential tracks through which organizations decouple and recouple their interpretive scheme from the structures and processes of organizational design . First is an " aborted excursion , " which involves a temporary and limited departure from struc - tural coherence . The movement away from the underlying archetype , however , is eventually followed by a return to the initial archetype . Second is a " reorientation " track , by which an organization leaves one type of archetype and ultimately moves to another . Second - order change is a type of reorien - tation track . While some reorientations may be linear in pro - gression , oscillating or delayed patterns also may be ob - served , and reorientations need not follow a pattern described in cusp - catastrophe terms as punctuated equilib - rium , in which sudden , discontinuous shifts occur , followed by convergence around a framework ( Tushman and Ro - manelli , 1985 ; Gresov , Haveman , and Oliva , 1993 ) . Rather , reorientations can be achieved through incremental steps ' The third track is an " unresolved excursion . " Following Ran - son , Hinings , and Greenwood ( 1980 ) , Hinings and Green - wood ( 1988 ) noted that organizations often get locked into competing battles between different interpretive schemes . Unresolved excursions involve movement from a coherent archetype without attaining a reorientation . The fourth track , " inertia , " involves the retention of the existing design arche - type . As Starbuck , Greve , and Hedberg ( 1978 ) argued , the most likely response to environmental changes , even ones that create a crisis for the organization , is to retain its current values and structural modes . Thus , change inconsistent with the prevailing interpretative scheme will be nonexistent or suppressed . Why Similarities or Differences in Modes of First - order Change Emerge There are several reasons for expecting either similar or dif - ferent modes of adaptation to emerge in different organiza - tions . An organization may follow similar modes of adapta - tion because of coercive , mimetic , or normative pressures to remain legitimate ( DiMaggio and Powell , 1983 ) . Coercive iso - morphism occurs if an organization ' s responses resemble those of other organizations due to mandates by institutional regulation . Mimetic isomorphism exists if an organization copies characteristics of other organizations ' processes that are perceived to be successful in an uncertain institutional context . Finally , normative isomorphism happens if an orga - nization ' s adaptation reflects the professionalization and nor - mative structure that exists within the institutional context ( Levitt and Nass , 1989 ) . Thus , the institutional context can serve to constrain the interests and activities of organiza - tions ; resulting in similar patterns of organizational adaptation among them . Greenwood and Hinings ( 1993 ) noted that organizations have biographies that affect how they respond to change . One way in which these biographies are reflected is in their iden - tities . For Albert and Whetten ( 1985 ) , identity describes what is central , distinctive , and enduring about an organization . Dutton , Dukerich , and Harquail ( 1994 ) suggested that it is important to distinguish between how members perceive themselves ( identity ) and how members think others per - 89 / ASQ , March 1998 ceive them ( construed external identity or image ) . Also , for us , and consistent with Markus and Nurius ( 1986 ) and Gioia and Thomas ( 1996 ) , identity and image have a temporal ori - entation of past ( who we used to be ) , present ( who we are now ) , and envisioned ( who we want to become ) . Further - more , we assume that while organizational members can envision a negative identity and image , they aspire to a posi - tive identity and image . Prior research ( Dutton and Dukerich , 1991 ; Elsbach and Kramer , 1996 ; Gioia and Thomas , 1996 ) has shown that both identity and image influence organiza - tional adaptation . A second way organizations ' biographies are reflected is in their strategic orientation . Miles and Snow ' s ( 1978 ) typology of strategic orientations is consistent with Greenwood and Hinings ' ( 1988 ) design archetype notion in that it includes the ideas , beliefs , and values or ideologies concerning what an organization should be doing , how it should be doing it , how it should be evaluated , and how these what and how aspects should be reflected in structures and processes . We found Miles and Snow ' s ( 1978 ) typology to be particularly appropriate for our study and were especially interested in their prospector and defender strategic orientations as ways to differentiate the two banks ultimately selected for study . Prospectors are dynamic organizations with broad product lines that focus on product innovation and market opportuni - ties . They tend to emphasize creativity over efficiency . Pros - pectors adapt to their environment by using high levels of scanning to identify opportunities for developing new prod - ucts or markets that are critical to their success . Structurally , prospectors are organic , with low levels of formalization and specialization , but high levels of decentralization . Compared with prospectors , defenders are less dynamic and focus on efficiency in their existing operation . Structurally , they are more mechanistic , formalized , centralized , and specialized than prospectors ( Miles and Snow , 1978 ; Daft and Weick , 1984 ; Doty , Glick , and Huber , 1993 ) . Defenders and prospectors also tend to differ in the way they act on information ( Hambrick , 1982 ) , their adaptation to environmental jolts ( Meyer , 1982 ) , and in responses to stra - tegic issues involving new technologies ( Ginsberg and Ven - katraman , 1992 ) . These differences suggest that prospectors generally are more responsive to changes in their environ - ment and open to change ; change should thus come easier and require less coercion from their institutional environ - ment . Finally , these strategic orientations should serve as an interpretive scheme through which environmental change is processed and acted upon , resulting in different patterns of adaptation ( cf . Gioia and Thomas , 1996 ) . Prerequisites for Studying First - order Change In addition to the recommendations made by Pettigrew ( 1992 ) for studying process issues in organizations , we be - lieve there are three prerequisites for studying processes of first - order change . First , the organization must be facing an environmental change that requires an organizational re - sponse that is nontrivial . Such an environmental change is often referred to as a strategic issue . Strategic issues repre - sent potentially important developments that , in the minds 90 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change of organizational decision makers , are likely to influence an organization ' s ability to achieve its objectives ( Ansoff , 1980 ; Dutton , 1983 ) . They represent potential problems , opportuni - ties , and threats that activate and focus organizational atten - tion toward the future ( Ansoff , 1975 ; Grant and King , 1982 ; Dutton and Duncan , 1987 ) . They often arise out of a gap be - tween an organization ' s performance and the public expecta - tions of that performance ( Post , 1978 ) and frequently are laden with ambiguity and informational insufficiency ( Ansoff , 1975 ; Dutton , 1983 ) . Second , any study of change should adopt a multilevel perspective that simultaneously examines the institutional and organizational contexts within which change occurs . Despite calls for such an orientation ( e . g . , Miller and Friesen , 1984 ; Gersick , 1991 ; Pettigrew , 1992 ) , relatively few empirical studies have used a multilevel per - spective ( for notable exceptions , see Ginsberg and Venkatra - man , 1992 ; Gioia and Thomas , 1996 ; Meyer , Brooks , and Goes , 1990 ; Meyer , Goes , and Brooks , 1994 ; Thomas , " Shankster , and Mathieu , 1994 ) . Greenwood and Hinings ( 1993 ) suggested that ignoring a multilevel perspective re - sults in a lack of understanding of how change is embedded in and affected by its institutional and temporal context . Without examining the patterns of changes in the institu - tional environment concurrently with changes within the or - ganization , understanding the potential cause of different modes of organizational adaptation is limited . Finally , there must be evidence that the organization did not adapt to the environmental change by undergoing a second - order change . Such second - order changes , while not the norm , are not un - common , as suggested by Zajac and Shortell ( 1989 ) and Zajac and Kraatz ( 1993 ) . Context of the Study In this study , we investigated patterns of change over a seven - year period in two banks in response to the Commu - nity Reinvestment Act ( CRA ) . According to local banking ex - perts , the CRA is an extremely important regulatory issue affecting U . S . banks ( Hogwood , 1990 ) . The CRA sought to address the problem of banks discriminating against certain areas in their communities . That discrimination involved not making loans to individuals living in areas considered as high risk in terms of loan repayment , regardless of the individual ' s credit - worthiness . The legislation mandated that banks con - duct business consistent with the needs of the broad mar - kets they set out to serve . Banks were required to deter - mine the credit needs of their community and not discriminate against any so - called red - lined areas considered high risk in terms of loan repayment . Implementation mecha - nisms consisted of regulators using 12 specific assessment factors to monitor the banks ' documentation of their compli - ance efforts . These factors covered three broad categories : documentation effort , marketing effort , and effort involving the community . Among other penalties for noncompliance , regulators were empowered to prohibit growth in a bank ' s branch banking activities . Since July 1 , 1990 , public disclo - sure of banks ' CRA ratings has been required . Over time , the importance of this issue has increased for all banks be - cause of demands for comprehensive documentation of compliance efforts , public disclosure of CRA ratings , and in - 91 / ASQ , March 1998 creased community interest ( Hogwood , 1990 ) . Because of its importance , this act served as this study ' s strategic issue focus . We studied response to the issue at three levels of analysis : the organizations ' institutional setting , where the issue origi - nated ; the organizational level , where structures and roles were changed ; and the strategic issue level , where the issue was interpreted and processed . As previously mentioned , one bank demonstrated a defender archetype or strategic orientation , while the other demonstrated a prospector orien - tation . We examined each bank ' s pattern of change in terms of the first - order change track it evidenced . A comparison of tracks revealed the way in which each organization adapted to its environment , within a given strategic orientation , and is consistent with the holistic arguments of Greenwood and Hinings ( 1988 , 1993 ) . We then used these findings to pro - vide theoretical insights and develop a number of proposi - tions . METHODOLOGY Phase 1 : Getting Started Institutional context . The institutional context of strategic issue processing describes the larger environment in which support and interest in strategic issues are facilitated , sus - tained , or constrained ( Dutton , 1989 ) . The banking industry was chosen for study because the passage of the CRA pro - vided a unique opportunity to study how organizations adapted over time to a major change in their institutional en - vironment . In addition , deregulation , new regulation , mergers and acquisitions , and new products have led to continuous and discontinuous change ( Haraf and Kushmeider , 1987 ; Wooldridge and Floyd , 1990 ) . Therefore , the banking industry as a whole is facing extreme challenges to its profitability ( Sheshunoff , 1987 ) . Furthermore , Meyer , Goes , and Brooks ( 1994 ) argued that single industry studies allow a compari - son of a uniform set of exogenous changes . Consistent with Dutton ( 1993 ) , we operationalized the institutional context in terms of domain , form , and criteria . Domain relates to the prescribed institutional sphere of strategic issue activity en - gaged in , here , the banking industry and its regulators . Form describes what the standard institutional response to the issue is like . The American Banking Association offered workshops to bankers for dealing with the CRA , though indi - vidual responses were unique . The criteria component de - scribes how success is defined in the institutional context for dealing with the strategic issue . Here , it was passing the bank regulators ' CRA review . Organizational context . Like Dutton ( 1983 ) and Dutton and Ottensmeyer ( 1987 ) , we operationalized the organizational context in terms of ideology / structures , enacted environ - ment , and strategy - where strategic details are considered , consistent with the organization ' s overall strategic orientation and the strategic issue content in question . Our concern was with how decision making takes place in the organization , especially with regard to strategic issues . In terms of the selection of organizations for the study , we initially contacted banks that at one time or another had 92 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change been involved with a major southwestern university ' s school of banking . After interviewing several chief executive officers ( CEOs ) , we decided to focus on those banks that had com - prehensive archival documentation and top managers who were familiar with their bank ' s operations since the CRA had been passed . Discussions with bankers suggested that the period for this study should be narrowed to 1984 - 1990 to ensure reliable and complete documentation . Many felt that archival data would be incomplete for their bank prior to 1984 . Furthermore , ease of entry and access , as well as geographical proximity ( to minimize socioeconomic differ - ences between banks ' communities ) , were important consid - erations . Seven banks met these criteria . The decision was made to reduce the number of sites to enhance comparability , depth , and quality of data collected , as recommended by Berg and Smith ( 1988 ) and Eisenhardt ( 1989 ) . As detailed below , two banks were ultimately chow sen , each with a different but stable strategic orientation . The first bank , hereafter identified as the defender bank , was state chartered and followed a defender strategy . The second bank , the prospector bank , was federally chartered and followed a prospector strategy ( Miles and Snow , 1978 ) . Both banks were multibranch banks located in West Texas . During the period under study , 1984 - 1990 , in terms of de - posits , the prospector bank was number one in local market share , and the defender bank was initially number three . When the second - largest bank failed in 1988 , however , the defender bank became number two in size . While the spe - cific agencies responsible for CRA administration and the accompanying institutional pressures differ somewhat be - tween state - and federally chartered banks , it was the pres - sure per se and not the source that was crucial for this study . Furthermore , a former member of the Federal Re - serve Bank of Dallas indicated that there is typically as much intra - agency difference as interagency difference in adminis - tering the CRA . Strategic issue context . The issue context includes the im - mediate conditions that surround the fashioning of a strate - gic issue , and Dutton ( 1993 ) suggested that three dimen - sions are important in describing it : first , how issues are identified , e . g . , as a low or high priority issue ; second , how issues are interpreted , e . g . , requires minimum technical compliance or explicit compliance procedures ; and finally , how issues are responded to , e . g . , as a problem or an op - portunity . The issue context we studied was compliance with the CRA . Grounded theory processual approach . This study delin - eates processual patterns of change at the institutional , orga - nizational , and strategic issue level of each bank across time as each attempted to deal with the same strategic issue im - posed by the U . S . Federal Reserve System . Consistent with a multilevel theoretical approach , and Dutton and Ottens - meyer ' s ( 1987 ) discussion of strategic issue diagnosis , ac - tions of regulators were mapped onto perceptions held by each bank ' s top managers . These perceptions , in turn , were mapped onto each bank ' s responses . The interplay of these responses was then used to form tracks of organizational adaptation ( cf . Hinings and Greenwood , 1988 ) . 93 / ASQ , March 1998 Since it is currently unclear how strategic issue processing occurs across organizations and across time , a processual grounded theory approach is an appropriate methodology for studying first - order change and for developing theoretical insights ( see Eisenhardt , 1989 ; Ropo , 1989 ; Patton , 1990 ) . Following Glaser and Strauss ( 1967 ) , Eisenhardt ( 1989 ) , Yin ( 1989 ) , Hunt and Ropo ( 1995 , 1997 ) , and Ropo and Hunt ( 1994 ) , this investigation was oriented toward grounded theory concepts focusing on the temporal dimension of orga - nizational settings , while investigating a contemporary phe - nomenon within its real - life context when the boundaries between phenomenon and context are not clear . Instead of using Glaser ' s ( 1992 ) approach to grounded theory , in which the researcher engages the subject without pre - existing ideas or frameworks , we adopted Strauss and Corbin ' s ( 1990 ) approach , which allows for use of existing theory to guide the research ( Locke , 1996 ) . We drew on ex - , isting ideas from the literatures on strategic management and organization theory . For example , initially we were heav - ily influenced by the work of Dutton and her associates ( e . g . , Dutton and Dukerich , 1991 ; Dutton and Ottensmeyer , 1987 ) , as well as that of Greenwood and Hinings ( 1988 ) , and Isa - bella ( 1990 ) . In examining the interplay mentioned above , not unexpectedly , findings and theoretical implications emerged from this grounded theory that were not anticipated or were more important than anticipated . Such was particularly the case for organizational identity and image . Sample selection . Given the previous arguments , it was necessary to select banks that best fit Miles and Snow ' s de - fender and prospector strategic orientation categories and whose strategic orientation did not change during the time period of the study , to provide evidence that the banks had not adapted to the environmental change by undergoing a second - order change . In selecting these banks , we adminis - tered a questionnaire based on Miles and Snow ' s ( 1978 ) work , refined and validated by Doty ( 1990 ) , Doty and Glick ( 1994 ) , and Doty , Glick , and Huber ( 1993 ) . This question - naire , adapted from Doty ( 1990 ) , was used to measure the extent to which each bank conformed to Miles and Snow ' s categories , since , following Doty and associates , we recog - nized that any given organization would not be a " pure " type . Doty and Glick ( 1994 : 236 ) argued that when measur - ing typologies , " the quantitative model must capture the similarity of real organizations to one or more of the ideal types . " The questionnaire was administered to four managers at or above the vice - president level from each of seven competing banks , as well as three finance professors associated with the Southwest School of Banking who were familiar with each of the banks . Each respondent was asked to rate the degree to which a particular bank corresponded to a descrip - tion of a bank following a prospector , defender , analyzer , or reactor strategy . Respondents used a 7 - point scale , on which 1 = " Not at all , " 4 = " To some extent , " and 7 = " To a great extent . " We asked the respondents to describe each of the seven banks for 1984 and 1990 , the two years which prior discussions with bankers had suggested should bracket 94 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change this study . Descriptions of the defender and prospector strat - egies we used are as follows : [ Defender : ] This bank attempts to locate and maintain a secure niche in a relatively stable product or service area . The organization tends to offer a more limited range of products or services than its competitors and it tries to protect its domain by offering higher quality , superior service , lower prices , and so forth . This bank is at the forefront of developments in the industry - it tends to ignore changes that have no direct influence on current areas of operation and concentrates instead on doing the best job possible in a limited product or service area . [ Prospector : ] This bank typically operates within a broad product - market domain that undergoes periodic redefinition . The bank val - ues being " first in " in new product and market areas even if not all of these efforts prove to be highly profitable . The bank responds rapidly to early signs concerning areas of opportunity , and these responses often lead to a new round of competitive action . How - ever , this bank does not attempt to maintain market strength iQ all of the areas that it enters . The first author collected the data in June 1990 . Following Doty ( 1990 ) and Doty and Glick ( 1994 ) , we used the ques - tionnaire data to classify each of the seven banks in terms of their relative standings in 1984 and 1990 on Miles and Snow ' s ( 1978 ) typology . Also , following Snow and Hambrick ( 1980 ) , for any given bank , we used only the responses from top managers at competing banks and from the finance pro - fessors for classifying that bank ( N = 27 ) . To do otherwise would confound intended with realized strategies . It was easier for respondents to determine each bank ' s realized strategies exhibited over time , as revealed through the bank ' s actions ( see Snow and Hambrick , 1980 ) . We selected one relatively pure defender bank and one rela - tively pure prospector bank based on Doty ' s Pureness Scale , which allows for the extent to which an organization fits a given type . The Pureness Scale indicates the ratio of the ex - tent to which one ideal type ( e . g . , defender ) characterizes an organization compared with the extent to which each of the other three ideal - type descriptions characterize that organiza - tion ( e . g . , prospector , analyzer , reactor ) . The higher the pure - ness score , the greater the extent to which a bank was per - ceived to be an example of a realized strategy type . For a sample of 109 organizations , Doty found a mean pureness score of 46 percent for defenders and 36 percent for pros - pectors . The highest rated banks in our sample that also were most similar in terms of asset size and other character - istics had scores of 40 and 46 percent for defender in 1984 and 1990 and 45 and 44 . 5 percent for prospector in 1984 and 1990 . Phase II : Conducting the Case Study Interviews . The first author conducted interviews , typically lasting one to two hours . These were tape recorded , and printed verbatim transcripts were given to the interviewees for corrections and adjustments . Multiple informants were interviewed concerning each event . Those interviewed were as follows : four executives from each bank responsible for compliance efforts ; one external board member from each bank concerning top management aspects ; a representative from each of the three regulatory agencies - Texas State De - 95 / ASQ , March 1998 partment of Banking ( TSDB ) , Office of the Controller of the Currency ( OCC ) , and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corpora - tion ( FDIC ) - and representatives of community interest groups from predominantly lower - middle class neighbor - hoods , e . g . , Black Chamber of Commerce . A list of infor - mants and sample interview questions is shown in table 1 . A complete interview guide is available from the first author . Other sources of evidence . Documents , archival records , and the first author ' s personal observations were collected to corroborate and augment evidence from interviews and other sources ( Yin , 1989 ) . Printed documents and records from banks , regulatory agencies , and community groups were used for verification , inquiry , and drawing inferences about strategy , structure , and process . Table 2 lists the Table 1 Interviewees and Sample Interview Guide for Bankers , Regulators , and Community Leaders Respondents Interview guide Illustrative questions Banks Defender CEO / president Issue identification How great do you perceive the time Executive vice president pressure in working on CRA compliance ? Loan officer ; senior vice president Has this changed since 1984 ? How ? Compliance officer Marketing officer ; vice president Issue interpretation What types of information do you need External board member in the course of resolving CRA ? Where Former compliance officer do you get this information ? Issue response What alternatives , if any , are being considered for resolving the CRA issue ? Prospector CEO / president Issue identification How great do you perceive the time Executive vice president pressure in working on CRA compliance ? Loan officer ; senior vice president Has this changed since 1984 ? How ? Compliance officer Marketing officer ; senior vice president Issue interpretation What types of information do you need External board member in the course of resolving CRA ? Where do you get this information ? Issue response What alternatives , if any , are being considered for resolving the CRA issue ? Regulatory agencies Defender Texas State Department of Banking : General perceptions Why do you think the banks in this area regional director comply with CRA ? Office of the Comptroller of the Currency : national bank examiner Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation : state bank examiner Community agencies City : community development director General perceptions How do you think banks in this area could improve their responsiveness to CRA and their obligation to serving the community ' s needs ? ( Do they need any improvement ? ) Hispanic Chamber of Commerce : President ; chair , Economic Development Committee Black Chamber of Commerce : President / founder 96 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change sources . This material was collected to the point of theoreti - cal saturation , when no new insights were gained ( Glaser and Strauss , 1967 ) . Between the two banks , a total of more than 200 documents were analyzed , and this analysis was supplemented with the interviewer ' s observations from site visits . Data analysis . Because procedures for analyzing data from case studies of this type are not yet firmly established in the literature , procedures were designed especially for this study , based on an integration of case research and related methodologies ( e . g . , Miles and Huberman , 1984 ; Hinings and Greenwood , 1988 ; Van de Ven , 1988 ; Eisenhardt , 1989 ; Ropo , 1989 ) . Figure 1 shows the flow chart for data analysis . A detailed description of each procedure is available from the first author . Data obtained from documentation , interviews , and observa - tions were put into various displays , as advocated by Miles and Huberman ( 1984 ) , and then were coded during the data collection phase according to organization schemes ( e . g . , Table 2 Additional Sources of Evidence , 1984 - 1990 Source Evidence Bank documents and records Annual reports ( 1984 - 1990 ) Financial standing Scope of activities Strategic plans Environmental perceptions Officers / board members Employee handbooks Mission statements Philosophies Records of advertising Image / identity Personnel records Number of employees Product and service fee schedules Products / services offered Organizational charts Structure of organization Board minutes CRA - related policy discussions Deposit and loan statements Deposits and loans HMDA Mortgage Loan Amount / types of loans made Disclosure Statements Community involvement questionnaires Community involvement Other CRA - related documentation Industry and regulatory agency documents and records Banking textbooks General information on banking / finance / regulatory compliance Banking journals Real - time information on CRA Community Reinvestment Act ( 1977 ) Regulatory policies of the FDIC and OCC Community Reinvestment Act tape Regulators ' interpretations Uniform interagency guidelines CRA performance ratings American Bankers ' Association Consultants ' interpretations training video tape of compliance Financial Institutions Reform , Recovery , Public CRA rating criteria and Enforcement Act of 1989 CRA evaluation formats / procedures Performance evaluations Community group documents Membership information Mission / philosophies Membership directories Types of business loans needed Personal observation Interviews and visits Workplace and officer interactions 97 / ASQ , March 1998 Figure 1 . Flow chart for data analysis . 1 ) OBTAIN BASIC BANK INFORMATION 2 ) CONDUCT INTERVIEW Probe : identification ( focus ) , interpretation ( form ) , response ( function ) dimensions of strategic issue processing 3 ) TRANSCRIBE INTERVIEW 4 ) VERIFY INTERVIEW NOTES WITH RESPONDENTS 5 ) INDEX AND CODE DATA IN RAW FORM Yes REVISE 6 ) 1st INTERVIEW / VISIT ? INTERVIEW / DOCUMENT GUIDE ; No CONDUCT 7 ) SORT CARDS AND CATEGORIZE INFORMATION SESSION 8 ) DEVELOP MEMORANDUM FOR CASE PROFILE 9 ) DEVELOP CHRONOLOGICAL LISTING OF EVENTS / STRATEGIC ISSUE PROCESSING ACTIVITIES ( figure 2 ) 10 ) CODE CHRONOLOGICAL NOTES INTO PROCESS PATTERNS 11 ) COMBINE PROCESS PATTERNS INTOTRACKS 12 ) THEORETICAL SATURATION ? No J Yes 13 ) TRAIN CO - ANALYSTS 14 ) ASK CO - ANALYSTSTO CATEGORIZE RAW DATA ( USE EXISTING CODES ) 15 ) SYSTEMATICALLY COMPARE CO - ANALYSTS ' CATEGORIZATION WITH RESEARCHER ' S 16 ) CHECK INTERRATER AGREEMENT 17 ) ALL CASES ANALYZED ? No 18 ) DEVELOP THEORETICAL INSIGHTS AND PROPOSITIONS chronology , key events / people , initial research questions , emergent insights ) and existing and emergent pattern codes , as shown in the Appendix . Detailed coding schemes are available from the first author . The first author simulta - neously prepared memoranda , based on her interpretations of documentation , interviews , and observations , which turned into themes used to develop the pattern codes 98 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change ( shown in the Appendix ) that expressed ideas about codes and data relationships during coding . Next , a chronological listing of events and strategic issue processing activities was developed , and this listing was used to analyze each bank at the institutional , organizational , and strategic issue levels of analysis . Each of the above contexts played out temporally in a different process pattern across varying time periods , and the first author content - analyzed them separately . Two co - analysts separately coded the raw data and devel - oped the processual patterns , each with differing time peri - ods . Agreement among the raters and the first author was checked by dividing the number of coding agreements by the total number of coding agreements and disagreements among the co - analysts and the first author ( Miles and Huber - man , 1984 ) . General coding agreement on the major head - ings listed in the Appendix was 90 percent for the defender bank and 95 percent for the prospector bank across the first author and two co - analysts . Corresponding percentages for the more specific kinds of categories shown in the Appendix were 64 percent and 67 percent , respectively . With these percentages as a baseline , the three parties carefully re - evaluated and discussed in detail their earlier pattern catego - rizations . This process led to rethinking and improving the theoretical ideas generated and tended to lead to consensual categorizations . In those few instances in which agreement could not be reached , the first author ' s categorization pre - vailed . The content of each process pattern outlines the cog - nitive and behavioral tendencies underlying each bank ' s stra - tegic issue processing , and the interplay of these process patterns forms the change tracks , discussed later . Table 3 provides examples of the evidence collected to develop the process patterns at each level of analysis . Creation of process patterns . The institutional context pat - tern includes time - ordered events oriented around regulator activities that shape the domain , form , and evaluation criteria previously mentioned . This time - ordered information came mainly from analysis of documents and archival material and secondarily from interviews . Consistent with Ropo ( 1 989 ) and Isabella ( 1990 ) , we assigned pattern labels for both banks for each change period that occurred at the institu - tional , organizational , and strategic issue level of analysis . The organizational process pattern describes cognitive and behavioral change periods in each bank ' s ideology / structure , enacted environment , and specific strategies across time ( Dutton and Ottensmeyer , 1987 ) . This information came from a triangulation of initial questionnaire data , interviews , documents , archival material , and the first author ' s personal observation . The strategic issue process pattern includes time - ordered descriptions of cognitive interpretations and behavioral activities , oriented toward the CRA issue , in terms of their identification , interpretation , and response . Informa - tion came primarily from interview data and secondarily from archival data . The pattern labels matched cognitive interpre - tations of bank officers with key changes in strategic issue process activities for each of the time periods ( cf . Isabella , 1990 ) . We also developed a measure of the intensity of strategic issue process activities , as shown in figure 2 . We defined 99 / ASQ , March 1998 Table 3 Example of Evidence Collected for Development of the Three Process Patterns Interviews Archival / documents Questionnaire Observations Institutional process patterns Discussions with Banking industry guides N / A Observations made of the regulatory authorities , on CRA compliance , regulatory agency bank officers , and regulatory agencies ' representatives ' community leaders . documents , handbooks , appearance , the and records ( e . g . , characteristics of agency American Banking offices ( e . g . , large or Association literature on small , busy or not , CRA compliance aids , numerous manuals or not , written legislation , banking relaxed or business - like experts ' interpretation of atmosphere ) . the written legislation ) . Organizational process pattern Discussions with bank Analysis of each bank ' s Perceptions of the Observations made of the officers , regulatory documentation and enacted environment , size , appearance , and authorities , and archival data about its ideologies , and strategies location of each bank ; community leaders on various characteristics utilized by each bank in personal interactions general characteristics of ( e . g . , annual reports , competing within the local between banking officers ; each bank since its personnel records , community and informal structure and founding . historical records , southwestern region of communication within employee handbooks ) . the United States . each bank ; interactions between banking officers and the community ; location of the compliance area in each bank compared with other departments . Strategic issue pattern Discussions with bank Counting of pertinent N / A Observations made about officers and community activities related to each each bank ' s efforts to leaders on each bank ' s bank ' s documentation , reach its community documentation , marketing , marketing , and community ( e . g . , types of media and community outreach efforts as related to CRA relied upon ; amount spent efforts related to CRA compliance guidelines for various outreach compliance guidelines . established by the programs , creativity regulatory agencies shown in designing CRA ( e . g . , low - income compliance activities ) . products / services , educational efforts , geographical distribution of loans made ) . intensity in terms of how key decision makers viewed and responded to the issue as a function of that issue ' s impor - tance to the decision makers across time . We based inten - sity of the strategic issue process activities on the 12 spe - cific assessment factors used by the bank regulators for the CRA examination . Examples of each activity within the docu - mentation , marketing , and community efforts categories in - clude : the nature / type of internal CRA monitoring procedures ( documentation ) ; the type of market credit / services or spe - cial programs developed by the bank ( marketing ) ; and fair geographic distribution of credit extension ( community ) . In - tensity measures were based on ( 1 ) qualitative descriptions of the content of these strategic issue activities across time and ( 2 ) a count of pertinent activities related to the identifica - tion , interpretation , and response activities of the strategic issue process . Each activity engaged in that corresponded to 100 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change an actual assessment category was given a weight of one . Activities were summed for each year , with the previous year ' s activities subtracted from this number , and the result - ing total was divided by the previous year ' s number of activi - ties . This process provided relative percentage changes over time in strategic process activities / intensity . Creation of tracks from process patterns . The process pat - terns , summarized in tables 4 and 5 , below , served as the , core of the change track for each bank . The patterns of change , evidenced across the institutional , organizational , and strategic issue levels of analysis , were interpreted in terms of the theoretical tracks discussed by Hinings and Greenwood ( 1988 ) . To derive these tracks , we analyzed the time - ordered descriptions that make up the process pattern for the institutional , organizational , and strategic issue con - texts for each bank , supplementing the strategic issue con - text data with the intensity data summarized in figure 2 . For example , table 4 , below , shows a period label for various time periods ( relaxed , resistance , denial , etc . ) for each of the contexts . The content summarized within these periods was evaluated , as a whole , both horizontally across time and ver - Figure 2 . Intensity of strategic issue process activities . 160 140 120 Emerging trends ~ 100 ~ 80 60 40 20 0 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 YEAR Denial Consternation Acceptance Resentment 0 Defender Bank Noncommittal Discretionary Acquiescence Enthusiasm Prospector Bank 101 / ASQ , March 1998 tically across contexts or levels , in terms of the bank ' s initial archetype or strategic orientation . This procedure was then supplemented with consideration of the bank ' s intensity of strategic issue process activities . These procedures were to determine the extent to which there were within - archetype changes across time . We then interpreted the nature of these changes for each bank in terms of Hinings and Green - wood ' s ( 1988 ) tracks : aborted excursion , reorientation , unre - solved excursion , or inertia . The second author made the initial evaluations , and the three authors discussed these un - ti ) consensus was reached . PROCESS PATTERNS AND CHANGE TRACKS In general , our findings suggest that in dealing with the CRA strategic issue , the two banks exhibited different process patterns and change tracks in response to institutional pres - sures for change . We interpret these differences to mean , that the organizations ' strategic orientation , defender or pros - pector , acted as an interpretive scheme resulting in ( 1 ) differ - ent reasons , deriving from the organization ' s identity and im - age , for complying with or resisting institutional pressures for change and ( 2 ) different patterns of change in organiza - tional structures and systems . The key findings , based on the institutional , organizational , and strategic issue proces - sual patterns , are summarized in the tables below . While we examined the same overall time period for each bank , 1984 - 1990 , we found the patterns of change and their temporal periods within each level of analysis to be unique to each bank . Table 4 presents a summary of the defender bank ' s process patterns . The Defender Bank : 1984 - 1990 Institutional process pattern . Table 4 shows the three im - portant periods in the data for the institutional context for the defender bank , which are marked by break points , such as a shift in regulator behavior from the relaxed to the guid - ance period , or sharp turning points , e . g . , intensity of strate - gic issue process activities . First was the relaxed period , 1984 - 1986 , in which the state - chartered bank ' s CRA activi - ties were mainly controlled by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( FDIC ) . During this period , the bank had a " no surprise " relationship with regulatory authorities . The FDIC was simply concerned with the bank ' s continuing obligation , consistent with safe and sound operation , to help meet the credit needs of the bank ' s entire community , including low and moderate - income neighborhoods . Second , was the guidance period , 1986 - 1989 , in which there were changes in federal law accompanied by in - creased coercive pressure from regulatory agencies ; how - ever , the emphasis was on technical compliance . During 1986 , compliance also included maintaining Home Mortgage Disclosure Act ( HMDA ) data on loans made . The FDIC peri - odically assessed CRA compliance as part of an overall ex - amination , basing its assessment mainly on what bank offi - cials orally described to examiners . A satisfactory rating and a one - page write - up were considered criteria for regulatory approval , but the approval was scrutinized if the FDIC was aware of any written complaints about the bank ' s compli - 1 02 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change Table 4 Summary of Defender Bank ' s Process Patterns Institutional context Relaxed ( 1984 - 1986 ) Guidance ( 1986 - 1989 ) Demonstration ( 1990 ) Routine examination of CRA emphasis CRA enforcement CRA efforts Compliance suggestions measures Adequate attention to Increased assessment and Interest in documentation community required evaluation efforts and proof CRA is second to safety Public ratings and soundness Tendency to be content Tendency to zero - in on all Tendency to pressure with average bank ' s compliance banks conforming banks efforts Organizational context Resistance ( 1984 - 1985 ) Exploration ( 1985 - 1987 ) Push ( 1987 - 1990 ) Recidivism ( 1990 ) Conservatism in internal Growing conflict in New emphasis on Change " how " it is done operations organization between compliance and banking not " what " is done " Weather the storms in security and growth schools Stick to traditional in a the banking industry " decisions Increased CRA thinking certain environment " Standard products and See more environmental and monitoring Take unusual actions only quality service offered " uncertainty Implementation of to stay competitive Develop new service procedures to verify compliance Tendency to operate as Tendency to focus on what can block or enhance Tendency to settle into usual competition and status old routine when possible Strategic context Denial ( 1984 - 1986 ) Consternation ( 1987 - 1988 ) Acceptance ( 1988 - 1989 ) Resentment ( 1990 ) " Backwater issue " " Big city issue " " Beef - up compliance " Define CRA for Minimal technical Minor technical CRA exam preparation community compliance adjustments Prove responsiveness Administrative duties Minimal information " Good banking " change processing CRA rating is a measure Abide by letter of the law of success Tendency to do the Tendency to be curious Tendency to present best Tendency to become minimum for approval about what is happening compliance efforts to complacent from regulators to other banks regulators ance with the CRA , or if the examiner noted major violations of the Equal Credit Opportunity Act , Fair Housing Act , or Home Mortgage Disclosure Act . Federal agencies provided guidance by outlining compliance policies that would fulfill a financial institution ' s responsibilities under the CRA ; never - theless , no specific activities were prescribed to fulfill these responsibilities . Decisions on types of new activities to en - gage in , which activities were more important to focus on , how to determine the credit / financial needs of the entire community , and the like were left solely to the bank to de - termine on its own . Finally , in 1989 , the demonstration period began , in which both state - and federally charted banks had to conform to specific criteria , and their standing was publicized . The Finan - cial Institution Reform , Recovery and Enforcement Act , FIR - REA , placed a tremendous burden on the FDIC as insurer and regulator of savings and loans . This act reduced the presence of FDIC examiners in many state - chartered banks . One FDIC examiner believed that his agency ' s mission " was 103 / ASQ , March 1998 to promote confidence in the banking industry . " At the same time , FIRREA and a Joint Policy Statement , issued by the Financial Institutions Examination Council - composed of members of the Federal Reserve and other financial institu - tion regulators - amended the CRA information statement of 1980 . CRA compliance now required : ( 1 ) disclosure to the public of an institution ' s CRA rating beginning in July 1990 and ( 2 ) a revised interagency CRA rating system . CRA com - pliance was now broken down into 12 specific assessment factors that had to be followed , and criteria were provided for outstanding , satisfactory , needs to improve , and substan - tial noncompliance ratings . According to the FDIC bank ex - aminer , even though the CRA " didn ' t require a whole lot , " the FDIC expected banks " to devote significant time toward CRA . " The agency expected a considerable amount of writ - ten documentation and system development , for example , in tracking loans . According to one FDIC examiner , " most cor - respondence with banks was through examinations " during this period . The defender bank took and passed a CRA ex - amination in June 1990 , just prior to ratings being made pub - lic . Organizational process pattern . The defender bank ' s resis - tance period , 1984 - 1985 , involved primarily weathering the storms occurring in the banking world by holding on to its conservative practices as the third largest bank in the com - munity . In 1984 , no bank response was specifically geared toward the CRA . The bank ' s MIS director , who served as the first compliance officer , recounted that minimal technical compliance with the CRA was viewed as all that was neces - sary to comply ; in fact , the bank ' s lawyer wrote up the CRA statement so that " the bank complied with the letter of the law . " Hence , minimal time and effort was spent on it . The defender bank relied on bureaucratic devices of structure for coping , and about half of all decisions were made at the vice - presidential level or above . During the exploration period , 1985 - 1987 , the bank was torn between operating as it always had and branching out . It fi - nally purchased two small defaulted banks but did that " just to maintain its position , since other banks were growing too " ( CRA compliance officer ) . These banks ' operations were immediately converted to the defender bank ' s estab - lished policies and procedures for conformity and consis - tency . The bank also started to offer new services specifi - cally targeted to health care professionals , since this market was growing dramatically in the community . It also received national recognition as a strong , " safe " bank . During the push period , 1987 - 1990 , the bank assigned one of its loan officers to the part - time responsibility of compli - ance officer . He attended the American Bankers ' Association Compliance School , as well as a university regional banking school . Around 1989 , the part - time compliance officer imple - mented more CRA procedures , just to " verify " what the bank had always done and " to play by the rules . " Board meetings , which included CRA updates , began to occur more frequently as time went on . The bank tried to become " community wise , " attending more functions , increasing its advertising in minority mediums , and trying to improve rec - ognition and its accessibility to lowv - to - moderate income level 1 04 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change groups . Furthermore , by mid - 1 989 , a new executive vice president , in charge of business development and marketing , was designated as CRA officer in charge of overall CRA pro - grams for the bank . The part - time compliance officer , how - ever , saw all compliance issues as requiring enough atten - tion in the future for the bank to hire a full - time compliance officer . He discussed this with the president , who had no hands - on experience with the CRA , and various committees that had resource allocation power in the bank . Thus , by 1990 , a vice president from one of the sister banks in the defender bank ' s holding company was brought in as a full - time compliance officer . His duties were very " detail - ori - ented " and included " spending more time in the bank think - ing about CRA and monitoring ongoing procedures . " In 1990 , a CRA committee was established that consisted of representatives from Lending , Marketing , Compliance ( the full - time officer ) , and Operations and the CRA officer who was a member of senior management . For the first time , officers below senior - management level assisted in CRA ef - forts . These committee members were charged with the responsibility of making sure the board of directors knew about CRA legislation , as well as trying to involve the bank more in CRA efforts . For example , the marketing officer who was in charge of training customer contact people made her training sessions on the CRA " entertaining " by showing an American Bankers ' Association videotape on the CRA to them . Furthermore , she held " buzz " groups concerning what else the bank could do for the community . Some of the first activities that the CRA Committee engaged in revolved around becoming more involved with community leaders than before . For example , a " Needs Ascertainment Break - fast " was given at the main branch , as well as at each branch , at which a questionnaire was distributed to ascertain the needs of the community . Other activities the CRA Com - mittee stressed included the active solicitation of home im - provement loans through advertising and contact with con - tractors , the beginnings of a loan - tracking system , and the written recording of every activity that related to community investment and improvement . The recidivism period , 1990 , showed the defender bank ' s hesitancy , over time , to let go of its identity and its historical ways of operating . For example , once the examination was passed , the full - time compliance officer was told to be a part - time compliance officer and a part - time loan officer . Ac - cording to the vice presidential compliance officer , the bank was aware of the public becoming more educated on the CRA , therefore , " in order for the bank to be competitive " as well as " accepted by its public , " it complied with the CRA . By late 1990 , however , the CRA officer noted that " CRA laws did not change , but administrative duties have . " During this period , the bank began to decrease its emphasis on spe - cific CRA - targeted behaviors , but it continued to document its efforts so that it would not be prevented from branch banking , which bank officials saw as necessary " just to keep up with the competition . " Strategic issue process pattern . As table 4 shows , the pe - riod of 1984 - 1986 for the defender bank involved bank offic - ers treating the CRA as a " backwater issue " or " just another 105 / ASQ , March 1998 law . " We labeled this the denial period . Not much attention was paid to the CRA , according to officers ' perceptions , and it was not closely examined in the bank . The frequently mentioned identity of the bank was that it had a " small , hometown bank ' s charm and friendliness . " Consistent with this identity , " person - to - person " banking was advertised as the bank ' s " strongest asset . " Consistency in philosophy and policies was also seen as a plus . " Conservatism in money management " described the beliefs of the officers in the defender bank and was consistent with its image as a na - tionally recognized " safe " bank . Because the bank believed that " there are no diverse interest groups with extreme dif - ferences " within the community served , it directed its prod - ucts and services to " all " customers . The bank ' s overall goal was " to give better than average service . " The defender bank ' s senior management saw the CRA as a " part - time re - sponsibility " that was " passed around " by senior manage - ment . The constructed reality of this period was composed of both rumors and scattered information , but there was no bankwide awareness of the CRA , and the philosophy that prevailed was " no news is good news . " The bank measured its success in terms of " never receiving a complaint regarding its CRA efforts . " The CRA was inter - preted as being " ambiguous " because efforts to comply were not quantifiable . Because the CRA was " a big city " issue , it was really perceived as a " non - issue . " The bank be - lieved that it was involved in enough government - based loan plans and local bond programs to serve its community well . This was " good banking . " Anyway , " deposit customers were the bank ' s main priority over loan customers . " The bank saw the issue as controllable because it viewed mini - mal technical compliance as all that was necessary to com - ply . Beginning with the consternation period , 1987 - 1988 , the CRA became the most discussed regulation , although not necessarily the highest strategic agenda priority . There was still the feeling that it was a " big city " issue and the feeling by some that " the bank had to do more record keeping for a law that didn ' t apply to it . " There was an attitude of " already having CRA spirit , due to the [ hometown ] identity of the bank . " Yet , the defender bank was a bit shaken by the " hor - ror " stories that its part - time compliance officer had heard during his CRA training about the CRA emphasis the govern - ment was putting on other financial institutions in larger cit - ies . The acceptance period , 1988 - 1989 , reflected the defender bank ' s response to increased federal regulation , particularly FIRREA , and the threat of CRA evaluation ratings being made public for the first time . This added pressure to com - ply more carefully with newly specified CRA policies seemed to alter the bank ' s norms and behaviors . Officers actually began searching for ways to " beef up " CRA compliance , which became easier for the bank to do as it relied on " quantifiable " guidelines . The bank mimicked ideas ex - pressed by the American Bankers ' Association ( ABA ) and in various banking publications . From mid - 1989 until 1990 , " CRA practically controlled the bank for six months " be - cause of anxieties associated with an upcoming compliance 1 06 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change examination , need for more documentation , and public rat - ings . The CRA was now ranked " on the low side of high " for the bank , and the officers saw it as being less control - lable than before . A CRA examination was scheduled to be given to the bank in 1990 . The bank relied on information from the ABA " to get it through the examination . " As the new CRA officer said , he relied on the American Bankers ' Association Compliance Manual as " his bible . " At this time , the issue became identified as " a critical factor to be consid - ered in everything done , " as well as an opportunity , i . e . , " What can we do ? " The examination itself was felt to be " the only major information the bank had to prepare for CRA , " according to one banking official . During the resentment period , which followed in late 1990 , the defender bank learned that it had passed its examination with a satisfactory rating . This rating reinforced officers ' per - ceptions that the bank had always been on target in terms of meeting CRA standards : " it just needed to put everything in writing . " After evaluating the CRA ' s impact on the bank , the only weakness the officers collectively believed the bank had was " in its image of accessibility as a ' bank ' in general . " Also , officers began expressing their resentment toward community members who told them " they could help them comply with CRA . " According to the CEO , " We were not going to let the CRA manage the bank . " " The only thing that will change in the future is how we do it , not what we do , " according to a senior officer at the bank . In fact , the bank tried to communicate its own interpretation of CRA to com - munity groups . " CRA was not supposed to make banks grant every request , " according to one of the defender bank ' s officers . The Prospector Bank : 1984 - 1990 Institutional process pattern . As table 5 summarizes , ini - tially during its relaxed period , 1984 - 1985 , the prospector bank experienced a " no surprise " relationship with its regu - latory authority , according to an official in the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ( OCC ) . Oversight was minimal , according to OCC standards , which had always included an - nual visits and on - site examinations of CRA compliance as part of its overall consumer compliance examinations . " Banks were only scrutinized if operations were under pro - test or if there were major violations of the Equal Credit Op - portunity Act , Fair Housing Act , or Home Mortgage Disclo - sure Act " noted by the examiner . Furthermore , banks were not required to make high - risk loans that jeopardized their safety . One OCC examiner saw even consumer compliance regulations as " protecting the bank ' s interest and the pub - lic - the depositor ' s interest . " Coercive isomorphism was at a minimum . During the censory period , 1985 - 1988 , the OCC initiated on - going rather than annual visits . This new concept in supervis - ing banks more closely was initiated in response to the high percentage of national bank failures , especially in the South - west . The OCC wanted to " detect trends in performance " so that " earlier intervention " would be possible and hired a very large number of examiners , so that banks could be su - pervised more frequently . Also , in 1985 the prospector bank 107 / ASQ , March 1998 Table 5 Summary of Prospector Bank ' s Process Patterns Institutional context Relaxed ( 1984 - 1985 ) Censory ( 1985 - 1988 ) Guidance ( 1989 ) Demonstration ( 1990 ) Adequate attention to Enforce standards CRA emphasis CRA enforcement community required More supervision Emphasis on real estate measures Expect standard technical loans Interest in documentation compliance Suggest guidelines efforts and proof Annual examination of Increase assessment and Public ratings CRA efforts evaluation CRA is second to safety Tendency to be content Tendency to prevent Tendency to zero - in on all Tendency to pressure with average holding company growth bank ' s compliance banks conforming banks efforts Organizational context Status Quo ( 1984 - 1985 ) Responsive ( 1985 - 1988 ) Momentum ( 1988 - 1989 ) Internalization ( 1990 ) " First to lead the way " Profitability as goal Examine bank ' s activities " Prepare for nineties " See non - financial Sensitive to ambiguous Develop increased Vision importance institutions and holding economic environment documentation Strive and thrive through companies as Not " business as usual " procedures chaos and change competition Renovation for service Increase customer Creative products and Diversify products and enhancement services services for growth services Unintentional CRA activities Tendency to operate as Tendency to adjust Tendency to refine Tendency to listen to usual direction , outlook , and direction , outlook , and community ' s actual operations operations needs Strategic context Noncommittal ( 1984 ) Discretionary ( 1985 - 1987 ) Acquiescence Enthusiasm ( 1990 ) " Problem vs . opportunity " More CRA interest ( 1987 - 1990 ) Action orientation CRA second to profitability Board discussion Want top CRA rating Move up on agenda Minimal technical Demonstrate awareness Enhanced technical Develop policies and compliance compliance procedures Minimal information Realized responsibility More information processing Shift CRA responsibility to processing " Leader in everything " higher level Monitor community ' s needs Plan for future Tendency to do the Tendency to be alert to compliance opportunities Tendency to surpass minimum for approval regulators ' expectations from regulators was required to maintain Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data on loans made . In mid - 1987 , the bank was given an official CRA compliance examination , due to its holding company starting the process of acquiring another bank in the Southwest . This examina - tion proved to be the first full - blown compliance examination under the OCC ' s new approach , which emphasized system - atic consideration of 12 assessment factors and involved sta - tistical sampling . A full crew was sent to the bank , and sev - eral weeks were spent assessing compliance . The bank was found " below average " in CRA compliance and was prohib - ited from further branching until compliance was shown . During the guidance period of 1989 , new federal regulations meant closer monitoring and clearer guidelines issued by the 108 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change regulators . Real estate lending and the increased percentage of national bank failures became the focus of OCC examin - ers . At the same time , FIRREA and the Joint Policy State - ment issued by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council amended the 1980 CRA information statement to require : ( 1 ) disclosure to the public of an institution ' s CRA rating , beginning July 1 , 1990 ; and ( 2 ) a revised interagency CRA rating system . The regulatory agencies provided guid - ance by describing the form of activities that would fulfill a financial institution ' s responsibilities under the CRA . For ex - ample , ( 1 ) compliance had to begin with determining the credit and financial service needs of the entire community ; ( 2 ) banks then had to focus on the products available to help meet those needs ; and ( 3 ) banks had to convey information on their credit and financial service products to their entire communities , using appropriate communication devices . Dur - ing this period , the prospector bank was able to obtain ap - proval to branch again . The demonstration period , beginning in 1990 , was character - ized by increasing CRA enforcement pressures . Examiners began to judge banks ' CRA compliance seriously by relying extensively on written documentation and systems . OCC examiners were undertaking intensive CRA examination training of their own , and their evaluation procedures were " in - depth , " with reports at least twelve pages in length . As with the defender bank , criteria were now provided for out - standing , satisfactory , needs to improve , and substantial noncompliance on the 12 assessment factors . With in - creased sensitivity to banks ' CRA compliance efforts , accord - ing to one OCC examiner , it would take banks doing some - thing " very unbelievable " to obtain an outstanding public rating . Now , the prospector bank had " to prove that it was complying , " according to the OCC examiner . In the past , it was up to the OCC to determine whether it was complying . Organizational process pattern . At the beginning of the status - quo period , 1984 - 1985 , the prospector bank was the largest bank in the county . " Size has historically been relied upon , when comparing this bank ' s performance to other banks , " according to an external board member . Of course , size can be a detriment , in terms of looking " cold and un - friendly " to the community . Thus , employees were willing to go out and interact with the environment , since senior man - agement believed that " you just can ' t go out and wait for customers . " Consistent with the bank ' s identity , these man - agers responded to a changing environment by continuing to believe in " being the first to lead the way " and by engaging in a number of additional activities . A substantial number of these activities in 1984 " unintentionally fell under CRA com - pliance . " Such activities included " looking for loan business in lower - income strata , " softening the bank ' s requirements on government - insured student loans , offering a wide variety of loan programs , and offering banking classes to high school students . Furthermore , these activities were well documented , and a CRA file was maintained . In 1984 , the primary responsibility of the CRA belonged to a lower - level officer in the Loan Review Department . This part - time com - pliance officer was in charge of maintaining the CRA file , as well as following technical requirements of the act . 109 / ASQ , March 1998 During the responsive period , 1985 - 1988 , the bank empha - sized flexibility in meeting increasing environmental chal - lenges . From 1985 to 1986 , the bank continued to increase its CRA - related activities and documented them well . Also , a new person who was a compliance analyst in the Credit Ad - ministration Department was placed in charge of the CRA . During this period , the board of directors " began to review CRA consciously . " In early 1987 , the bank placed " increased emphasis " on the CRA . The bank ' s executive management gave responsibility for CRA compliance to a senior vice presi - dent in the Auditing Department of the holding company , who consequently became the part - time compliance officer for the prospector bank ' s holding company . During 1987 , this part - time compliance officer attended the American Bankers ' Association Compliance School , after which he vol - untarily put together a compliance audit program for the bank based on the OCC ' s standardized assessment factors . Based on his analysis , he believed the bank would be rated " average , " but the bank failed its examination . This in - creased the momentum to comply with the CRA so that the holding company could resume its acquisitions . Among other changes , the part - time compliance officer implemented a loan - tracking system during late 1987 and began monitoring marketing programs to see if they were reaching low - to - moderate income areas . He tried to get everyone in the bank interested and involved in the CRA . During the momentum period , 1988 - 1989 , the bank steadily increased its contacts with low - to - moderate income level groups and to home - building projects . Bank real estate per - sonnel began contacting governmental officials and realtors who served low - to - moderate income areas and logged in even more loans . Student loans also became a priority , as the bank became an " Open Door Lender " for Texas Guaran - teed Student Loans . During this period , the bank was re - leased from its poor CRA rating after the regulators ap - proved a report on changes being made by the bank . As the part - time compliance officer prepared a new CRA action plan , he carefully examined what the bank did and found , historically and consistent with its community leadership identity , that " it had been doing what the CRA encouraged , " e . g . , offering low - to - moderate income loans and access to depository services . He also developed an extensive filing system for documentation that separated private , in - house memos , reading materials , and program information concern - ing the CRA from public CRA files , which contained letters about CRA complaints and the CRA exam rating . Further - more , during this period , the prospector bank was given na - tional recognition as one of the safest banks in the state . Thus , the bank was able to maintain and even expand its customer services . For instance , the bank worked on cross - selling products and services to increase customer loyalty . During the internalization period , 1990 , the president estab - lished a CRA committee to formalize the bank ' s commit - ment . This committee included the president , executive vice president , managers from Real Estate and Installment and Commercial Loans . In addition , the heads of Marketing and Lending were members , as was the part - time compliance officer who served as chair . This committee began reporting 1 1O / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change on CRA compliance to the board " at least four times a year , " versus the " once a year reports " done earlier . The committee was taking an interest in starting a community development corporation with other banks in the area , and this was being pursued with the City Community Develop - ment Office . Furthermore , the compliance officer developed a CRA Mission Statement , CRA Equal Credit Opportunity Policy , and CRA Community Involvement form . Television and radio ads in Spanish were being developed to reach low - income groups . The bank hosted a CRA meeting with guest speakers , including some from the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas , which members of both low - to - moderate income community groups and competitor banks attended . At the close of 1990 , the bank ' s holding company hired a full - time compliance officer to manage its banks ' CRA - related activi - ties . Ideas for developing more innovative and creative prod - ucts were already on the drawing board , and a board of di - rectors ' CRA committee was appointed . Also , new loan - tracking systems were being planned , and the emphasis evolved to " needing to hear back from the community " about " what the bank can do to meet its needs . " Strategic issue process pattern . Members of management believed the bank was as strong as it was because the bank ' s portfolio of loans was so diversified . Hence , the bank emphasized " wanting to do many things and to do them well for customers . " The bank was a conservative yet ag - gressive lender . It extended loans to problematic energy and real estate sectors , and it remained " confident in opportuni - ties ahead . " During 1984 , in the noncommittal period , as table 5 shows , the prospector bank was more concerned with safety and soundness than with the CRA . " CRA ranked about 85 percent in strategic issue importance , " according to a senior bank officer . " It was viewed as a luxury to even have the time to look at CRA . " Labels given to the CRA var - ied across the bank . To some officers it was seen as a " problem . " To others , it represented " an opportunity . " Still others viewed it as an " infringement , " a " nuisance , " or " more overhead . " Despite different hunches and scattered pieces of information leaving room for disagreement across the bank , the CRA was still seen as controllable . As a bank whose identity was " to be a leader in everything , " the pros - pector bank felt that its activities , such as looking for more loan business in lower - income strata , " unintentionally fell under CRA compliance , " though according to the internal auditor of the bank , " it would be unheard of that a bank would be proactive in finding out about community needs . " Gradually the CRA assumed more importance . During the discretionary period , 1985 - 1987 , the bank ' s board of direc - tors began to give it serious attention , " looking at it and talk - ing about it . " In 1985 , a parent holding company had been formed , making the prospector bank its flagship bank . Senior managers believed that this action increased the bank ' s competitive ability " to consider an expanded variety of finan - cial services permitted solely to holding companies . " At the same time , management recognized that economic fore - casts were confusing and contradictory . Hence , 1986 brought with it " a tough , demanding , disappointing , yet piv - otal year and challenging year . " It was " not business as 111 / ASQ , March 1 998 usual . " " Sheer size was no longer a measure of success in the industry . " At the same time , senior management be - lieved that the holding company structure allowed the bank to be even more " flexible and sensitive to changing consum - ers ' needs " and that its strengths at this time were " its capital , people , and commitment to the area . " " Each day is an opportunity all its own , inviting a commitment to suc - ceed " summarized the prospector bank ' s philosophy in 1986 . Senior management now described 1987 as " a year of demanding challenge . " According to these managers , " oper - ating profitably in an environment with less than ideal condi - tions remained a primary challenge . " During the acquiescence period , 1987 - 1990 , the bank shifted CRA responsibility from a lower - level person to a se - nior vice president . The senior vice president conducted his own compliance audit , and although he believed that the bank would rate " average , " it turned in a " below - average " score in the official CRA compliance examination . The bank believed that the OCC was " demanding " and " critical . " Be - cause the bank ' s rating was preventing its holding company from making more acquisitions , however , the examination " forced the bank to do things it would have been slower do - ing . " CRA compliance became known as a " responsibility " area in terms of " making sure the bank was a good citizen to minority communities " ( senior vice president - internal audi - tor ) . The part - time compliance officer , consequently , was credited by the other bank officers with " making the bank become proactive with CRA knowledge and tools . " The bank continued to struggle , successfully , with the volatile environ - ment , in which banking was compared to an " art . " That , in combination with FIRREA , moved the CRA to major issue status in terms of " how " to comply and " wanting a top rat - ing on its next CRA examination . " Finally , during the enthusiasm period , starting in 1990 , the prospector bank ' s top managers took action to give CRA " one - hundred percent responsibility and commitment . " Al - though the issue of " profitability " still competed heavily with the CRA in bank officers ' minds , they believed that the bank " is trying to make an effort to be responsive to sections of the community and asked them what it can do to help . " The prospector bank was committed to " turning CRA around and making it positive . " Emphasis was now on " needing to hear back from the community in terms of what the bank can do to meet its needs . " This increased emphasis was attributed to " regulators rating CRA harder and harder , " as well as heightened community group interest in the CRA ratings . In 1990 , the bank grew to be the largest independent bank in West Texas . The bank ' s senior officers attributed this fact to learning that " successful banks must survive and thrive through chaos and change . " Strategic planning became for - malized and publicized , centering around the identity and im - age the bank promoted , " Yesterday ' s pioneer . Today ' s inno - vator . Tomorrow ' s pacesetter . " By the end of 1990 , executive management and marketing officials saw the CRA as an " opportunity " to do more than was required and a " re - sponsibility " as a leader of the community . These officers believed that " as the leader in the community , the bank wants to do more than is required . " It wants to be ahead of 1 12 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change community groups in terms of being more knowledgeable about CRA and its obligations . " " The bank wants to turn CRA around and make it positive . " Furthermore , it was be - lieved that " CRA , after capital , is probably the thing that can most restrict growth . " Hence , the bank was interested in trying to make deals work for people " creatively , " rather than lower its credit standards for CRA . As one senior - level manager said , " CRA hasn ' t changed much , just expectations are much higher . " Comparison of Process Patterns between Banks Three different process patterns for each bank suggest that there are major differences between the banks , but we can shed more light on these differences by directly comparing the patterns in the two banks . For the institutional process patterns , regulators ' attempts to enforce compliance on each bank resulted in different levels and patterns of stress being placed on each bank . The defender bank seemed to have had less regulatory supervision than the prospector bank , as revealed by the different types of behaviors and demands exhibited by their respective regulatory authorities . Over time , the prospector bank ' s regulatory agency , OCC , seemed more demanding than the defender ' s regulatory agency , the FDIC . For example , both banks were regulated relatively similarly prior to 1984 and after 1989 , but in the period between , detectable differences in criteria were em - phasized for each bank , e . g . , during the prospector bank ' s censory period . For the organizational process patterns , the defender bank ' s activities during the 1988 - 1990 period seem consistent with what might be expected ' during a punctuated - equilibrium pe - riod of change , but unlike in models by Tushman and Ro - manelli ( 1985 ) or Gresov , Haveman , and Oliva ( 1993 ) , this period of upheaval was not followed by a period of conver - gence but of recidivism . For example , the defender bank , after a stubborn delay with threatening rumors and bits and pieces of information , decided it was desirable to adopt ideas that were being pushed by regulators . It seemed ac - tively to experiment with these ideas while operating under its own set of values . Yet after it passed its CRA examina - tion , the bank became disenchanted with regulators ' recom - mended activities and seemed slowly to drop the " disguise " over time so that it could resume being its familiar self . Thus , during the defender bank ' s recidivism period , there was a sharp downturn in CRA intensity , with movement back toward the bank ' s original level . In contrast , during the 1984 - 1987 period , especially in the latter two years , the prospector bank had a hard time getting off the ground with its CRA activities due to priorities that were centered on . safety and soundness issues , as well as varying opinions about what the CRA meant . Because of its size , resources , strategy , and identity , it " unintentionally " engaged in " CRA - related " activities . The above suggests that prospectors have their own form of organizational inertia but that their process pattern allows for some incremental change . Thus , prior research has led many researchers to conclude that prospectors are more open than defenders to their environ - ment and change . 1 13 / ASQ , Ma rch 1998 We believe prospectors are " open " to change that is consis - tent with the direction of their inertial movement but not to change in a different direction . Once an effort was made to come to some kind of consensus after failing its first CRA examination , the prospector bank ' s officers began to realize that it actually was beneficial to engage in more CRA activi - ties . Hence , action momentum seemed to pick up over time , and yet the bank ' s overall pattern resembles one of incre - mental change . Finally , figure 2 , above , shows that the inten - sity of the defender bank ' s CRA activities tended to increase more sharply across later periods than did that of the pros - pector bank . Overall , these findings suggest that despite in - creasingly strong regulatory pressures to comply , each bank ' s strategic orientation played a major role in the way it managed the strategic issue across a number of years . Tracks : The Interplay of Processual Patterns Thus far we have treated the institutional , organizational , and strategic issue process patterns separately within each bank and made between - bank comparisons of these . We now ex - amine the interplay of each of these contexts , conceptualiz - ing this interplay in terms of a modified , within - archetype version of Greenwood and Hinings ' ( 1988 , 1993 ) strategic tracks , which we derived from the separate process pat - terns . Defender bank track . The defender bank engaged in a pro - cess of activity that Hinings and Greenwood ( 1988 ) called an " aborted excursion . " There was a weakening of the bank ' s initial assumptions and cognitive interpretations at first , ac - companied by changes in behavior consistent with these in - terpretations , followed by reversion to the original interpreta - tions and behavioral mode . From the initial organizational and strategic issue coherence , in which the structures and pro - cesses of the organization ' s design consistently reflected and reinforced one interpretive scheme , there was a limited and temporary fraying or loosening of that coherence within the initial archetype . This loosening of coherence led to an " embryonic " ( see Hinings and Greenwood , 1988 ) variation within the initial archetype , such that the defender bank ' s track pursued a temporary movement within the initial , rela - tively consonant archetype toward a less consonant varia - tion , but with an ultimate movement back to the consonance of the initial archetype . These modes can be better under - stood by examining three distinct time periods . Initial archetype : 1984 - 1985 . Original orientation . The bank operated within its " business as usual , small - town banking " identity . Decisions or changes made tended to fall under these guidelines ; otherwise , they were suppressed or re - jected . Since the institutional setting offered no reason to change existing operations , the CRA had no major impact on routine operations . Essentially , management put a selective emphasis on the environment , considering the letter of the law . There was a high consensus about compliance activi - ties , with the bank only interested in minimal compliance and maintaining its small - town identity . Movement within the initial archetype toward an embryonic variation : 1985 - 1990 . Temporary weakening of original orien - tation takes place . During this period , the bank management 1 14 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change perceived the external environment as becoming more un - certain . There was a growing conflict in the dominant man - agement coalition between maintaining the status quo and making out - of - the - ordinary changes to remain competitive . Managers decided to succumb to the uncertainty of the en - vironment by experimenting with activities that might enable the bank to maintain its competitiveness . Hence , some of these activities were discordant with the prevailing ideology , structure , and strategy . During this period , the bank seemed to be struggling between retaining a clear identity and changing its identity . Albert and Whetten ( 1985 ) suggested that organizations might be characterized as having either a " mono " identity or a " dual " identity . They suggested that shifts from a mono to a dual identity usually occur gradually , though important life cycle events can make the organiza - tion ' s identity more salient . The CRA appears to have trig - gered such a self - examination . Movement back to initial archetype : 1990 . Getting back to normal . After the bank had engaged in experimentation with out - of - the - ordinary activities , it appeared to be working its way back to its original style of operations . It engaged in un - usual activities infrequently . They were used only as a last resort for maintaining status and position within the de - fender bank ' s market area . CRA concerns had been del - egated back to lower - level managers . Overall , in cusp - catastrophe terms ( Gresov , Haveman , and Oliva , 1993 ) , the defender bank seemed to go through a pe - riod of catastrophe , with sudden discontinuous activity shifts in the response system , moving from one plane to another during the 1988 - 1990 period . Although Gresov , Haveman , and Oliva ( 1993 ) suggested that once a sharp change is made , a drop in pressure for change will not result in a drop in intensity , the defender bank demonstrates the opposite , beginning about 1990 , as shown in figure 2 , above . Prospector bank track . The prospector bank engaged in a mode of activity most resembling what Hinings and Green - wood ( 1988 ) called a " reorientation , " but recognizing that this reorientation was within its current strategic orientation . The reorientation involved a within - archetype change in as - sumptions and cognitive interpretations , followed by a per - manent change in behaviors . The prospector bank moved away from its initial archetype , reflecting assumptions , inter - pretations , and behaviors , toward a less concordant embry - onic variation , with further movement from that embryonic variation to a still different embryonic variation . This move - ment led ultimately to the fully developed variation , with a substantially changed set of interpretations and behaviors within the original archetype or strategic orientation . These modes can be seen by examining four distinct time periods . Initial archetype : 1984 - 1985 . Original orientation . Bank off i - cials saw competition as fierce . The bank maintained its leadership identity in terms of profitability , not the CRA . Even so , its environmental sensitivity and existing organiza - tional structure encouraged a diversity of opinions . This di - versity led to conflicting priorities , specifically profitability is - sues , but essentially no change . 1 15 / ASQ , Ma rch 1998 Movement within initial archetype toward embryonic varia - tion A : 1985 - 1987 . Temporary weakening of original orienta - tion takes place . Sensitivity to the confusing and contradic - tory economic environment created the need for this bank to take a second look at its current direction , outlook , and op - erations . Short - term emphasis was put on modifying struc - ture for enhanced service delivery . The bank also was made aware of new compliance opportunities and responsibilities , but managers were still conflicted about how to avoid sacri - ficing profitability for the sake of CRA compliance . Movement toward embryonic variation B : 1987 - 1989 . Diver - sion from earlier embryonic variation A . Structures and pro - cesses became more discordant as the prospector bank con - tinued to learn how to manage its changing external environment . It pursued new growth opportunities and achieved consensus on CRA compliance . The bank experi - mented with new systems and processes as the impact of CRA grew . An organizational structure that permitted diver - sity in viewpoints created the need for even more informa - tion processing , which helped the bank to surpass even the regulator ' s expectations for the bank ' s CRA - related activities . Also , reliance on a growth - oriented strategy supported longer - term organizational transformation . Movement to solidifying the changes involved in variation B : 1989 - . A reorientation in progress . With pressures for change perceived to be on the rise , the prospector bank en - gaged in an action orientation to reinforce the changes within its initial archetype . The bank began to plan for the 1 990s by establishing new policies and procedures that were designed to help it manage its internal and external environment . The bank now placed considerable emphasis on being aggressively responsive to the immediate commu - nity ' s needs . It was strengthening its ties to the community in terms of full - time dedication to CRA compliance action . Even though the bank ' s strategic orientation had not changed , its understanding of the environment , and behav - iors and interpretations consistent with that new understand - ing , did change . These new understandings and behaviors seemed to be incorporated into the organization ' s identity . In a sense , its identity did not change , but it did expand . This suggests that some strategic orientations or archetypes are inherently more flexible , or have a greater niche width ( Han - nan and Freeman , 1977 ) , thus allowing for a greater range of norms and behaviors while still being consistent with the archetype . Hence , we think it is useful to distinguish be - tween what we call a replacement orientation and a develop - mental orientation . In a replacement orientation , one inter - pretative scheme replaces another . This is similar to the type of reorientation Greenwood and Hinings discussed . In a de - velopmental orientation , as encountered here , the original interpretative scheme is expanded to include new elements , but the fundamental character of the archetype is not changed . Mathematically , cusp models also allow for incremental change to result in a movement from one plane to the next ( see Gresov , Haveman , and Oliva , 1993 ) . What is interesting , from a catastrophe perspective , is that the changes in the prospector bank were not as discontinuous as the defender 1 16 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change bank ' s , although the prospector bank ' s regulator appeared to exhibit much more coercive pressure than did that of the defender bank . EXTENSION AND THEORETICAL INSIGHTS This study has contrasted the within - strategic - orientation ad - aptation patterns of a defender and a prospector bank for a key regulatory issue across a seven - year period . In so doing , we have examined change at the institutional , organizational , and strategic issue levels , both separately and as the inter - play of process patterns as tracks in this period . In some ways , the results seem predictable , if one only considers the difference between the state of affairs for both the defender and prospector banks in 1984 and 1990 . The literature sug - gests that defenders , compared with prospectors , are gener - ally both less open to change and have a lower capacity for change . Because this assumption would result in defenders being more resistant to change , it might be assumed that greater pressure would be necessary to overcome this resis - tance . Prospectors , in contrast , are assumed to be more en - trepreneurial , actively searching their environments for new market opportunities , and thus more open to change . The result we would predict ceteris paribus would be that pros - pectors would change more and that the institutional envi - ronment would need to place less stress on them to induce them to change . The data in figure 2 ( above ) suggest that this is the most likely ultimate outcome if the defender ' s downturn contin - ues . The dotted and dashed lines in figure 2 represent dis - cussions with executives at both banks after 1990 , when the data collection period ended . They confirmed that the trends reported in this article continue . In the case of the defender bank , the CRA is still handled on a part - time basis by a lower - level manager , and in the prospector bank , the CRA is handled on a full - time basis by a senior - level executive . Also , the prospector bank has recently placed ads in the major re - gional newspaper aimed at customers in what would be con - sidered locally as " red - lined " neighborhoods . But the data also suggest that the simple reasoning given above could seriously mislead both practitioners and researchers about the dynamics that create and support change . They would overlook the processual patterns and change tracks taking place during the entire 1984 - 1990 period and misinterpret the overall findings . Furthermore , some of the results are counterintuitive . For example , contrary to expectations , prospectors , like defend - ers , resisted pressures for change , but for apparently differ - ent reasons . The defender bank appeared to resist change because it did not fit its hometown bank identity ( cf . Dutton and Dukerich , 1991 ) , while the prospector bank seemed to resist change because top management believed that the bank was already fulfilling institutional expectations consis - tent with its " first to lead the way " identity and thus did not think change was needed . Furthermore , evidence of perfor - mance failure , failing the CRA examination , was necessary to counter this belief in fulfilling institutional expectations and bring about a more proactive attitude about change , as well as an increased level and intensity of activity in the 1 17 / ASQ , March 1998 prospector bank . This activity change was both lower in in - tensity and more incremental , however , than the change ex - hibited by the defender bank , despite stronger institutional pressure to change . Such evidence of performance failure was not necessary for the defender bank to overcome resistance to change and engage in the intense and rapid change traditionally charac - terized as punctuated equilibrium ( Tushman and Romanelli , 1985 ) . Here , rather than the coercive isomorphism necessary to overcome resistance in the prospector bank , mimetic and normative isomorphism appeared to operate with the bank following ABA suggestions for compliance . Also counterintui - tive is the role that positive performance feedback , passing the CRA examination , played . Rather than reinforcing the changes made to cope with the CRA requirements , and thus leading to a period of convergence ( Gresov , Haveman , and Oliva , 1993 ) , passing the CRA examination appeared to sig - nal and justify a return to previous behavior . Such an as - sumption of convergence appears to be inherent in discus - sions of second - order change in which this change is typically treated as if it were virtually irreversible ( Gresov , Haveman , and Oliva , 1993 ) . For the defender bank , this does not appear to be the case . Greenwood and Hinings ( 1988 ) suggested that some aborted excursions might be politically motivated . They argued , in keeping with institutional theory ( Meyer and Rowan , 1977 ) , that for political reasons , organizations may adapt certain structural trappings even though they are operating with an alternative set of ideas . Subsequently , when this symbolic disguise becomes unnecessary , these structural trappings are cast off , as appears to be the case for the defender bank . Passing the CRA examination made the changes un - necessary . Even so , such a disguise does explain why suc - cess was not self - reinforcing and , thus , why the bank re - verted . Success is typically seen as a reinforcing mechanism for existing practices ( Starbuck , Greve , and Hedberg , 1978 ; Miller , 1990 ) . Thus , because the changes were successful , they should have been retained . They were not . We offer a tentative explanation in terms of what we call " identity resistance , " resistance that results from nonconver - gence between both current identity and image and envi - sioned identity and image . Previous research has suggested ( e . g . , Dutton and Dukerich , 1991 ) that identity resistance is resistance because pressure for change is in opposition to current identity or image , and the results reported by Els - bach and Kramer ( 1996 ) support the view that threats to identity result in members ' attempts to retain their identity and image . But envisioned identity and image are also impor - tant . Convergence between identity and image and pressure for change exist both for current and envisioned identity and image . Gioia and Thomas ( 1996 ) argued that both current and envisioned identity and image constitute the major lenses through which issues are interpreted . According to them , it is in the articulation for change that past , present , and envisioned future come together . Research by Barr , Stimert , and Huff ( 1992 ) and Gioia and Thomas ( 1996 ) sug - gested that successful strategic change is preceded by a change in identity . 1 18 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change That organizational members prefer a state of cognitive con - sonance between identity and image , rather than states of cognitive dissonance , cannot be disputed . But what if cur - rent identity and image are incongruent with envisioned identity and image ? Then , resistance would not necessarily be encountered . The literature on charismatic or transforma - tional leadership ( see Bryman , 1992 ; House and Shamir , 1993 ) often stresses the need for a leader to create a vision of the future . In this regard , this literature reinforces the en - visioned temporal aspect of identity and image and its poten - tial effect on change . If we look at the general tenor of the defender bank ' s responses to the CRA , we see feelings that the CRA was a " backwater issue " or a " big city issue " or " [ in our community ] there are no diverse groups with ex - treme differences . " In other words , CRA really did not seem to be an important part of the bank ' s hometown identity and image . Here , although the organization experienced stress due not only to coercive pressures from the regulators but to the " horror stories " members heard from other banks , these pressures were insufficient to cause the defender bank to change its identity , present or envisioned . Thus , even though the bank engaged in mimetic isomorphism , following ABA recommendations to adapt to CRA regulatory pressures , it never converged around these changes . Passing the CRA examination seemed to have had two ef - fects . First , it removed pressure to make any further changes . Since the defender bank had already undertaken successful changes , however , the reduction in coercive pressure does not explain the failure of the bank to institu - tionalize , or converge around , the changes it had already made . Thus , our second point is that the coercive pressures were not sufficient to cause the bank to change its identity . The results suggest , consistent with institutional theory ( Meyer and Rowan , 1977 ) , that organizations attempt to adapt to environmental changes by changing systems and structures , but not core features . For us , the failure of the defender bank to change its identity accounts for the aborted excursion track and why the changes were not sus - tainable . If we conceptualize the changes throughout this period in terms of cusp catastrophe theory ( Lord and Maher , 1993 ) , the bank probably was near the cusp during the earlier pe - riod when it was intensively embracing the change . Never - theless , because the bank ' s identity and image did not rein - force the institutional forces and it was successful anyway ( passed its test ) , it appears to have fallen back over the cusp into recidivism . To the bank ' s top management , success jus - tified its present as well as its envisioned identity and image . This recidivism suggests to us that between periods of up - heaval and convergence , there is a period of indeterminacy in which the organization can go either way - move toward a new archetype or return to the previous archetype . Congru - ence between the organization ' s current identity and image and its envisioned identity and image will influence whether the change is permanent or not . The previous discussion leads to the following propositions and corollaries : 1 19 / ASQ , March 1998 Proposition 1 : Organizations whose identity and image are incon - sistent with institutional pressures for change will resist change attempts . Proposition 2 : Evidence of organizational success will be used to reinforce and justify an organization ' s identity . Proposition 3 : Change , even if successful , will not be sustainable and will lead to an aborted excursion adaptation track if it is incon - sistent with an organization ' s current identity or envisioned identity and envisioned image . Corollary 3a : To sustain an organizational change , it is necessary to change an organization ' s envisioned identity and envisioned image . Corollary 3b : An organization ' s identity and image are stronger forces in sustaining change than is success . Corollary 3c : Second - order change , characterized as punctuated equilibrium , is not necessarily permanent . The prospector bank ' s strategic issue process pattern , de - picted in figure 2 , above , shows change that is more incre - mental than the defender bank ' s as the prospector bank moves through the noncommittal , discretionary , and acquies - cence periods , ultimately leading to enthusiasm for the change . The change , while incremental , appears long lasting and permanent compared with the more intensive , punctu - ated change of the defender bank . After the prospector bank ' s initial resistance , it appears as if institutional and orga - nizational forces essentially were in alignment , and bank offi - cials never looked back . The prospector bank ' s initial resistance to institutional coer - cive and mimetic forces , which we term " virtuous resis - tance , " is encountered when an organization ' s top manage - ment feels it is already doing what is being called for by institutional forces : its current identity and image are congru - ent with its current and envisioned identity and image . For the prospector bank , this virtuous resistance was because the bank already believed it was meeting societal demands for CRA compliance because of its community leadership - " [ our activities ] unintentionally fell under CRA compliance . " To us , organizations engaging in virtuous resistance are like the Pharisees in the temple , crying out that they obey the law : they initially interpret calls for change as not applying to them . Only unambiguous evidence of identity and image in - congruence , such as performance failure , is likely to moti - vate such an organization to change . The prospector bank ' s virtuous resistance appeared to continue until the bank did poorly on its CRA examination in 1987 . When this occurred , management interpreted the examination performance as an indication of identity and image incongruence . The bank re - sponded by internalizing the changes needed to pass the test and incorporating these into its ideology , strategy , and other organizational and issue aspects of its " community leadership " so as to be isomorphic with institutional forces . These changes , though permanent , are incremental and evo - lutionary , as opposed to punctuated , because changes are interpreted as falling within an existing identity and previ - ously existing systems designed to handle change . The bank ' s ability to incorporate these changes within its existing identity raises an interesting question concerning the criticality of the " enduring " component included in Albert 120 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change and Whetten ' s ( 1985 ) description of identity . Findings such as Gioia and Thomas ' s ( 1996 ) suggest that identities may be less than enduring . Even so , our results suggest that organi - zations can change without necessarily changing their identi - ties . This , in turn , suggests a further aspect of identity and image , which we label " plasticity . " Some identities and im - ages , like some balloons , can be expanded more than others without breaking ; in Kimberly and Bouchikhi ' s ( 1995 ) terms , some are expansive and some are restrictive . The plasticity of an organization ' s identity and image may be what allows it to adjust its niche width ( Freeman and Hannan , 1983 ) . That organizations differ in their ability to adjust their niche width as a function of the plasticity of their organizational identity and image follows by analogy from personality theory , which suggests that people differ in their capacity to adapt their behavior to their surroundings . Individuals with this adaptive capacity are labeled " high self - monitors " ; those without this capacity are " low self - monitors " ( Snyder and Gangestad , 1986 ) . The behavior of low self - monitors is con - sistent across situations , since they are not vigilant in moni - toring and responding to changes in their environment . High self - monitors , in contrast , pay attention to what is appropri - ate in particular situations and behave accordingly , as do or - ganizations with high plasticity . Also , to the extent that orga - nizations are imprinted at their birth by the personality of their founders ( Schein , 1983 ) , an organization ' s plasticity may be a function of the founder ' s adaptive capacity . The plasticity of an organization ' s identity and image may have two survival functions . First , to the extent that organi - zations can change their niche width , they could more easily refocus their businesses and operate as specialists when the environment is stable but expand their business lines , fol - lowing a generalist strategy , when the environment be - comes more turbulent . Such an ability to move from general - ist to specialist , and vice versa , depending on environmental conditions , may indicate that there is a middle ground be - tween population ecologists ( Hannan and Freeman , 1977 , 1989 ) and strategic choice ( Child , 1972 ) or adaptation theo - rists ( Meyer , Brooks , and Goes , 1990 ; Meyer , Goes , and Brooks , 1994 ) . Organizations may not be able to determine the survival of their niche , but they differ in their ability to expand or change niches . Examining the plasticity of an or - ganization and its ability to integrate acquired companies and divest unrelated businesses successfully would be one way of testing this speculation . A second survival function of the plasticity of an organiza - tion ' s identity comes from institutional theory ( Meyer and Rowan , 1977 ) and Quinn ' s ( 1988 ) behavioral complexity theory of leadership . According to institutional theory , organi - zations increase their ability to grow and survive by satisfy - ing stakeholders . But stakeholders often have multiple and conflicting criteria for assessing organizations that put the legitimacy and survival of the organization at risk . Denison , Hooijberg , and Quinn ( 1995 : 526 ) argued that while manag - ers face competing or paradoxical requirements , " the test of a first - rate leader [ or , we would argue , an organization ] may be the ability to exhibit contradictory or opposing behaviors [ as appropriate or necessary ] while still maintaining some 1 21 / ASQ , March 1998 measure of integrity , credibility , and direction . " Organizations with high degrees of plasticity may be better able to do this and thus satisfy the multiple competing demands of their stakeholders . Thus , within limits , organizational identities appear flexible enough to allow for adaptation without changing the organi - zation ' s identity and image fundamentally . The plasticity of the prospector bank ' s identity seems to have allowed it to incorporate new elements into its interpretative scheme . This incorporation , in turn , accounts for why the prospector bank adapted incrementally , but permanently , to changes in its environment . Defenders ' strategic orientations , however , appear to have less plasticity than do prospectors ' orienta - tions . Hence , the prospector bank was able to undertake an incremental reorientation within its existing but expanded identity . Following Tolbert and Zucker ( 1996 ) , we suggest that the prospector bank ' s plasticity allowed it to reach what these authors termed the sedimentation stage of institution - alization , in which its changes took on a taken - for - granted , experienced reality that survived whatever individuals were involved . In contrast , the defender bank ' s restrictive identity and image did not allow it to move to this stage and incorpo - rate these changes into its interpretive scheme . The previous discussion suggests the following propositions and corollaries : Proposition 4 : Organizations that believe they are already meeting society ' s demands will resist calls for change . Proposition 5 : When there is virtuous resistance to change , an or - ganization will be unresponsive to calls for change , unless there is clear and unambiguous evidence of identity and image incongru - ence . Proposition 6 : Organizational identities and images have the prop - erty of plasticity . Corollary 6a : Once there is clear and unambiguous evidence of identity and image incongruence , organizations that previously have evidenced virtuous resistance will embrace the call for change and proceed on a steady and permanent course of change . Corollary 6b : The more plasticity the organization ' s identity and image have , the more its mode of organizational change will be in - cremental rather than punctuated . Corollary 6c : The more plasticity the organization ' s identity and im - age have , the greater its capacity to adjust or change its niche width , satisfy stakeholders , and survive . The propositions above can be used to study whether other organizations similarly exhibit different modes of change in response to an increasingly pressing institutional issue across time and , if so , why and how such differences occur . In future studies , as in this one , studying change at multiple levels is important . Without such multilevel consideration , an understanding of the interplay between institutional and or - ganizational forces will be missed . Simply examining institu - tional forces in our study would not have made intelligible why the defender bank went through a period of punctuated equilibrium and succeeded , only to revert to old ways . Nor would such a level of analysis explain why the prospector bank , seemingly open to change , required coercive pressure to change and then did so only incrementally . Examining 122 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change only the organizational level of analysis would not explain the recidivism in the defender bank ' s behavior in the face of suc - cess , nor why the defender bank evidenced punctuated change but the prospector bank evidenced incremental change . At the same time , examining only the strategic is - sue process level of analysis would not reveal the important role that performance feedback , both negative and positive , and institutional pressures play in initiating and sustaining change . The processual track emphasis here , with the inter - play of external and internal forces and different levels of analysis across time , allows for a richer understanding than a focus on only one level because of the interplay of forces described above . Finally , this study shows the value of studying first - order change as a response to intense and increasing institutional pressure . The first - order changes in the banks we studied led to sharp insights into how and why these organizations adapted to an increasingly dramatic change in their environ - ments and chronicled their different levels of success . Per - haps it ' s time for scholars to pay more attention to such changes , which move outward from the heart of the organi - zation , its identity and image , and to focus less on the infre - quent second - order , more radical changes that have gotten so much press in turbulent industries . REFERENCES Albert , Stuart , and David A . Whetten 1985 " Organizational identity . " In L . L . Cummings and B . M . Staw ( eds . ) , Research in Orga - nizational Behavior , 7 : 263 - 295 . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Ansoff , H . Igor 1975 " Managing strategic surprise by response to weak signals . " California Management Re - view , 18 ( 2 ) : 21 - 33 . 1980 " Strategic issue manage - ment . " Strategic Management Journal , 1 : 131 - 148 . Barr , Pamela S . , J . L . Stimert , and Anne S . Huff 1992 " Cognitive change , strategic action , and organizational re - newal . " Strategic Manage - ment Journal , 13 : 13 - 36 . Berg , David N . , and Kenwyn K . Smith 1988 The Self in Social Inquiry : Re - searching Methods . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Bryman , Alan 1992 Charisma and Leadership in Organizations . London : Sage . Child , John 1972 " Organization structure , envi - ronment and performance : The role of strategic choice . " Sociology , 6 : 1 - 22 . CRA Report 1990 Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 as Revised in 1989 and 1990 . Washington , DC : Government Printing Office . Daft , Richard L . , and Karl E . Weick 1984 " Toward a model of organiza - tions as interpretation sys - tems . " Academy of Manage - ment Review , 9 : 284 - 295 . Denison , Daniel R . , Robert Hooijberg , and Robert E . Quinn 1995 " Paradox and performance : Toward a theory of behavioral complexity in managerial lead - ership . " Organization Science , 6 : 524 - 540 . DiMaggio , Paul J . , and Walter W . Powell 1983 " The iron cage revisited : Insti - tutional isomorphism and col - lective rationality in organiza - tion fields . " American Sociological Review , 48 : 147 - 160 . Doty , D . Harold 1990 " Context , structure , and strat - egy : A configurational ap - proach to organizational effec - tiveness . " Unpublished dissertation , University of Texas at Austin . Doty , D . Harold , and William H . Glick 1994 " Typologies as a unique form of theory building : Toward im - proved understanding and modeling . " Academy of Man - agement Review , 19 : 230 - 251 . Doty , D . Harold , William H . Glick , and George P . Huber 1993 " Fit , equafinality , and organi - zational effectiveness : A test of two configurational theo - ries . " Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 36 : 1196 - 1250 . Dutton , Jane E . 1983 " The process of strategic is - sue resolution . " Unpublished Ph . D . dissertation , Northwest - ern University . 1989 " Interpretations on automatic : A different view of strategic issue diagnosis . " Working pa - per , University of Michigan Business School . 1993 " Interpretations on automatic : A different view of strategic issue diagnosis . " Journal of Management Studies , 30 : 339 - 357 . Dutton , Jane E . , and Janet M . Dukerich 1991 " Keeping an eye on the mir - ror : Image and identity in or - ganizational adaptation . " Acad - emy of Management Journal , 34 : 517 - 554 . 123 / ASQ , March 1998 Dutton , Jane E . , Janet M . Dukerich , and Celia V . Harquail 1994 " Organizational images and member identification . " Ad - ministrative Science Quarterly , 39 : 239 - 263 . Dutton , Jane E . , and Robert B . Duncan 1987 " The creation of momentum for change through the pro - cess of strategic issue diagno - sis . " Strategic Management Journal , 8 : 279 - 295 . Dutton , Jane E . , and Edward Ottensmeyer 1987 " Strategic issue management systems : Forms , functions , and contexts . " Academy of Management Review , 12 : 355 - 365 . Eisenhardt , Kathleen M . 1989 " Building theories from case study research . " Academy of Management Review , 14 : 532 - 550 . Elsbach , Kimberly D . , and Roderick M . Kramer 1996 " Members ' responses to or - ganizational identity threats : Encountering and countering the Business Week rankings . " Administrative Science Quar - terly , 41 : 442 - 476 . Freeman , John H . , and Michael T . Hannan 1983 " Niche width and the dynam - ics of organizational popula - tions . " American Journal of Sociology , 88 : 1116 - 1145 . George , Jennifer M . , and Gareth R . Jones 1995 Understanding and Managing Organizational Behavior . Read - ing , MA : Addison - Wesley . Gersick , Connie J . G . 1991 " Revolutionary change theo - ries ; A multilevel exploration of the punctuated equilibrium paradigm . " Academy of Man - agement Review , 16 : 10 - 36 . Ginsberg , Ari , and N . Venkatraman 1992 " Investing in new information technology : The role of com - petitive posture and issue di - agnosis . " Strategic Manage - ment Journal , 13 : 37 - 53 . Gioia , Dennis A . , and James B . Thomas 1996 " Identity , image , and issue interpretation : Sensemaking during strategic change in aca - demia . " Administrative Sci - ence Quarterly , 41 : 370 - 403 . Glaser , Barney G . 1992 Basics of Grounded Theory Analysis . Mill Valley , CA : Soci - ology Press . Glaser , Barney G . , and Anselm L . Strauss 1967 The Discovery of Grounded Theory : Strategies for Qualita - tive Research . Chicago : Al - dine . Grant , John H . , and William R . King 1982 The Logic of Strategic Plan - ning . Boston : Little , Brown . Greenwood , Royston , and C . R . Hinings 1988 " Organizational design types , tracks , and the dynamics of strategic change . " Organiza - tion Studies , 8 : 293 - 316 . 1993 " Understanding strategic change : The contribution of archetypes . " Academy of Management Journal , 36 : 1052 - 1 081 . Gresov , Christopher , Heather A . Haveman , and Tony A . Oliva 1993 " Organizational design , inertia and the dynamics of competi - tive response . " Organization Science , 4 : 181 - 208 . Hambrick , Donald C . 1982 " Environmental scanning and organizational strategy . " Stra - tegic Management Journal , 3 : 159 - 1 74 . Hannan , Michael T . , and John H . Freeman 1977 " The population ecology of organizations . " American Jour - nal of Sociology , 82 : 929 - 964 . 1989 Organizational Ecology . Cam - bridge , MA : Harvard Univer - sity Press . Haraf , William , and Rose Marie Kushmeider 1987 Restructuring Banking and Financial Services in America . Washington , DC : American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research . Hinings , C . R . , and Royston Greenwood 1988 The Dynamics of Strategic Change . New York : Blackwell . Hogwood , A . W . 1990 Assistant vice president and community affairs officer , Fed - eral Reserve Bank of Dallas . Telephone interview con - ducted on May 29 , 1990 . House , Robert J . , and Boas Shamir 1993 " Toward the integration of transformational , charismatic , and visionary theories . " In M . M . Chemers and R . Ayman ( eds . ) , Leadership Theory and Research Perspectives and Directions : 81 - 107 . San Di - ego : Academic Press . Hrebiniak , Lawrence G . , and William F . Joyce 1985 " Organizational adaptation : Strategic choice and environ - mental determinism . " Admin - istrative Science Quarterly , 30 : 336 - 349 . Huff , James O . , Anne S . Huff , and Howard Thomas 1992 " Strategic renewal and the interaction of cumulative stress and inertia . " Strategic Management Journal , 13 : 55 - 76 . Hunt , James G . , and Arja Ropo 1995 " Multi - level leadership : Grounded theory and main - stream applications to the case of General Motors . " Leadership Quarterly , 6 : 375 - 412 . 1 1997 " Leadership and faculty moti - vation . " In J . L . Bess ( ed . ) , Teaching Well and Liking It : The Motivation of Faculty in Higher Education : 219 - 247 . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins Uni - versity Press . Isabella , Lynn 1990 " Evolving interpretations as a change unfolds : How manag - ers construe key organiza - tional events . " Academy of Management Journal , 33 : 17 - 41 . Kimberly , John R . , and Hamid Bouchikhi 1995 " The dynamics of organiza - tional development and change . " Organization Sci - ence , 6 : 9 - 18 . Levitt , Barbara , and Clifford Nass 1989 " The lid on the garbage can : Institutional constraints on decision making in the techni - cal core of college text pub - lishers . " Administrative Sci - ence Quarterly , 34 : 190 - 207 . Locke , Karen 1996 " Rewriting the discovery of grounded theory after 25 years ? " Journal of Manage - ment Inquiry , 5 : 239 - 245 . Lord , Robert G . , and Karen J . Maher 1993 Leadership and Information Processing : Linking Percep - tions and Performance . Bos - ton : Rutledge . Markus , Hazel , and P . Nurius 1986 " Possible selves . " American Psychologist , 41 : 954 - 969 . Meyer , Alan D . 1982 " Adapting to environmental jolts . " Administrative Science Quarterly , 27 : 515 - 537 . 124 / ASQ , March 1998 First - order Change Meyer , Alan D . , Geoffrey R . Brooks , and James B . Goes 1990 " Environmental jolts and in - dustry revolutions : Organiza - tional responses to discontinu - ous change . " Strategic Management Journal , 11 : 93 - 110 . Meyer , Alan D . , James B . Goes , and Geoffrey R . Brooks 1994 " Organizations reacting to hy - perturbulence . " In G . P . Huber and W . H . Glick ( eds . ) , Organi - zational Change and Redesign : Ideas and Insights for Improv - ing Performance : 66 - 111 . New York : Oxford University Press . Meyer , John W . , and Brian Rowan 1977 " Institutionalized organiza - tions : Formal structure as myth and ceremony . " Ameri - can Journal of Sociology , 83 : 340 - 363 . Miles , Mathew B . , and A . Michael Huberman 1984 Qualitative Data Analysis : A Sourcebook of New Methods . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Miles , Raymond E . , and Charles C . Snow 1978 Organizational Strategy , Struc - ture , and Process . New York : McGraw - Hill . Miller , Danny 1990 The Icarus Paradox . New York : Harper Business . Miller , Danny , and Peter Friesen 1980a " Archetypes of organizational transitions . " Administrative Science Quarterly , 25 : 268 - 299 . 1980b " Momentum and revolution in organizational adaptation . " Academy of Management Journal , 22 : 591 - 614 . 1984 Organizations : A Quantum View . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Patton , Michael Q . 1990 Qualitative Evaluation and Re - search Methods . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Pettigrew , Andrew M . 1992 " The character and signifi - cance of strategy process re - search . " Strategic Manage - ment Journal , 13 ( Special Issue , Winter ) : 5 - 16 . Post , James E . 1978 Corporate Behavior and Social Change . Reston , VA : Reston Publishing . Quinn , Robert E . 1988 Mastering the Paradoxes and Competing Demands of High Performance . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Ranson , S . , C . R . Hinings , and Royston Greenwood 1980 " The structuring of organiza - tion structures . " Administra - tive Science Quarterly , 25 : 1 - 17 . Ropo , Arja 1989 Leadership and Organizational Change . Acta Universitatis Tamperensis ser A / vol . 280 . Tampere , Finland : University of Tampere . Ropo , Arja , and James G . Hunt 1994 " Leadership and organizational change : Development of a processual grounded theory . " Working paper , Institute for Management and Leadership Research , College of Business Administration , Texas Tech University . Schein , Edgar G . 1983 " The role of the founder in creating organizational cul - ture . " Organizational Dynam - ics , 12 ( 2 ) : 13 - 28 . Sheshunoff , Alex 1987 " Which way to the bottom line ? " ABA Banking Journal , August : 33 - 36 . Snow , Charles C . , and Donald C . Hambrick 1980 " Measuring organizational strategies : Some theoretical and methodological prob - lems . " Academy of Manage - ment Review , 5 : 527 - 538 . Snyder , Mark , and S . Gangestad 1986 " On the nature of self - moni - toring : Matters of assess - ment , matters of validity . " Journal of Personality and So - cial Psychology , 51 : 123 - 139 . Starbuck , William H . , Arent Greve , and B . L . T . Hedberg 1978 " Responding to crises . " Jour - nal of Business Administra - tion , 9 : 111 - 137 . Strauss , Anselm L . , and Juliet Corbin 1990 Basics of Qualitative Re - search : Grounded Theory Pro - cedures and Techniques . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Thomas , James B . , Laura J . Shankster , and John E . Mathieu 1994 " Antecedents to organiza - tional issue interpretation : The roles of single - level , cross - level , and content cues . " Academy of Management Journal , 37 : 1252 - 1284 . Tolbert , Pamela S . , and Lynne G . Zucker 1996 " The institutionalization of in - stitutional theory . " In R . Clegg , C . Hardy , and W . R . Nord ( eds . ) , Handbook of Or - ganizational Studies : 175 - 190 . London : Sage . Tushman , Michael L . , and Elaine Romanelli 1985 " Organizational evolution : A metamorphosis model of con - vergence and reorientation . " In L . L . Cummings and B . M . Staw ( eds . ) , Research in Orga - nizational Behavior , 7 : 171 - 222 . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Van de Ven , Andrew H . 1988 " Review essay : Four require - ments for processual analy - sis . " In A . Pettigrew ( ed . ) , The Management of Strategic Change . Oxford , U . K . : Black - well . 1992 " Suggestions for studying strategy process : A research note . " Strategic Management Journal , 13 ( Special Issue ) : 169 - 1 88 . Wooldridge , Bill , and Steven W . Floyd 1990 " The strategy process , middle management involvement , and organizational perfor - mance . " Strategic Manage - ment Journal , 11 : 231 - 241 . Yin , Robert K . 1989 Case Study Research : Design and Methods . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Zajac , Edward J . , and Matthew Kraatz 1993 " A diametric forces model of strategic change : Assessing the antecedents and conse - quences of restructuring in the higher education indus - try . " Strategic Management Journal , 14 : 83 - 102 . Zajac , Edward J . , and Steven M . Shortell 1989 " Changing strategies : Likeli - hood , direction , and perfor - mance implications . " Strategic Management Journal , 10 : 413 - 430 . 125 / ASQ , March 1998 APPENDIX : Existing and Emergent Pattern Codes Institutional - Organizational Context Code 1 . 0 Regulation ( CRA ) policies , procedures , regulations 1 . 1 Office of SIP 1 . 1 Office of the Comptroller of the Currency 1 . 2 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 1 . 3 Texas State Department of Banking 2 . 0 Banking industry ( BI ) 2 . 1 American Bankers ' Association 2 . 2 Texas Bankers ' Association 2 . 3 Banking journals 2 . 4 Consultant services 3 . 0 Enacted environment ( EE ) 3 . 1 Competitor ( s ) ( substitutes ) 3 . 2 Community ( served customers ) 3 . 3 Depositors ( suppliers ) 3 . 4 Borrowers ( buyers ) Organizational - Issue Context Code 4 . 0 Bank profile ( BP ) 4 . 1 Ideology ( BP - I ) 4 . 1 . 1 Hierarchy 4 . 1 . 2 Dominant management coalition 4 . 1 . 3 Mission / philosophy ( image , identity ) 4 . 1 . 4 Risk preference 4 . 1 . 5 Nature of management 4 . 1 . 6 Perceived environmental uncertainty 4 . 2 Structure ( decision making ) ( BP - ST ) 4 . 2 . 1 Organic ( decentralized , participative , liaison devices ) 4 . 2 . 2 Mechanistic ( centralized , standardized , formalized ) 4 . 3 Process ( distinctive competences ) ( BP - P ) 4 . 3 . 1 Market research , research and development 4 . 3 . 2 Applied engineering , production , finance 4 . 4 Strategy ( BP - SY ) 4 . 4 . 1 Societal strategy 4 . 4 . 2 Corporate strategy 4 . 4 . 3 Business strategy 4 . 4 . 4 Functional strategy 4 . 4 . 5 Strategy change 5 . 0 Strategic issue process ( SIP ) 5 . 1 Strategic issue process identification ( SIP - ID ) 5 . 1 . 1 Issue source ( internal , external ) 5 . 1 . 2 Issue attention ( agenda rank ) 5 . 1 . 3 Issue sponsor ( s ) ( involved individuals / groups ' characteristics ) 5 . 1 . 4 Issue conditions 5 . 2 Strategic issue process interpretation ( SIP - IN ) 5 . 2 . 1 Administrative routine 5 . 2 . 2 Strategic issue management 5 . 3 Strategic issue process response ( SIP - RP ) 5 . 3 . 1 System design 5 . 3 . 2 Evaluation of SIP 6 . 0 Open to empirically driven codes 1 26 / ASQ , March 1998