Paper ID # 19946 The Role of Trust in Collaborative Research Settings : Opportunities for Fu - ture Research in Graduate Engineering Education Carey Whitehair Dr . Catherine G . P . Berdanier , Pennsylvania State University , University Park Catherine G . P . Berdanier is a Research Associate in the Department of Mechanical and Nuclear Engi - neering at Pennsylvania State University . She earned her B . S . in Chemistry from The University of South Dakota , her M . S . in Aeronautical and Astronautical Engineering and Ph . D . in Engineering Education from Purdue University . Her research interests include graduate - level engineering education , including inter - and multidisciplinary graduate education , online engineering cognition and learning , and engineer - ing communication . c (cid:13) American Society for Engineering Education , 2017 The role of trust in collaborative research settings : Opportunities for future research in graduate engineering education Abstract Collaborative research is becoming the norm for science and engineering graduate students as the future of engineering research is increasingly interdisciplinary . However , little research describes the competencies required for graduate student success on collaborative and interdisciplinary teams . In related work , researchers in “science of team science” ( usually focused on collaborative medical research settings ) have begun to study the factors for success of collaborative and often interdisciplinary teams . One of the least - studied and abstract of these factors is the construct of trust—both within team members and in relation to the team leaders . This paper uses a systematic literature review method to investigate the role of trust within collaborative research settings , with the intention of unveiling future research directions for graduate - level engineering education . The results of this systematic literature review demonstrate that there is not a singular , clear , standard definition of trust within collaborative research and that there is a lack of studies that explore trust and collaboration within research settings and particularly none are aimed at the ways in which people develop these skills . The results of this review are immediately relevant to researchers involved with interdisciplinary and collaborative research , and have implications for those that educate graduate students to be future collaborative and interdisciplinary researchers . Introduction In an increasingly global society , collaboration plays an important role in an engineer’s success . Advancements in modern technology allow for truly global teams and more advanced long distance communication . Modern technologies for collaboration and the emphasis on collaboration in competitive industries and academia do not necessarily ensure success , which depends on a number of factors . From here the implications of this grouping are discussed The “Science of Team Science ( SciTS ) ” is emerging as a research area to explore how large - scale research ( initiated in the medical research context ) endeavors can be best accomplished across multiple institutions and potentially hundreds of colleagues 1 – 3 . The Science of Team Science literature has high value in studying collaborations in engineering and particularly the ways in which students learn to become collaborative members of their research teams . SciTS findings have only recently been introduced in an engineering and graduate engineering student educational context 3 . Most of these studies promote competency - or logistical - bases for success : that by having the right conditions for success , all teams will be able to be successful . However , other studies identify abstract concepts as being critical antecedents ( precursors to ) and descendants ( results of ) having a high - performing team . One of these is trust . The importance of trust within teams has already been demonstrated through several studies 4 – 8 . Efforts to understand trust as a construct have been made since the 1970s , with Driscoll and Scott being some of the first to define different forms of trust in modern terms 9 , 10 . However , the majority of the research into team trust has been in business and industry settings 4 , 11 – 15 . While there may be some similarities in research teams and business teams , it is inaccurate to say that these teams may be treated the same due to their different roles within organizations , different objectives , and different outcomes . Several case studies and commentaries have addressed trust and collaboration within research teams but lack experimental validation of their theories and conclusions 2 , 14 , 16 , 17 . Moreover , these studies lack a clear definition of trust within the context of their observations , leaving the term and thus their findings open to interpretation . For engineering educators , most of the teaming literature is either conducted with undergraduate students learning to design in teams or in studies that seek to understand the working patterns of practicing professionals . While current engineering “teaming” and collaboration literature explores the factors that can make a successful team 18 , 19 , there is an enormous gap in studies in collaborative research settings , especially at the graduate level . Graduate engineering students are immediately expected to assimilate into a laboratory group , usually an interdependent team , with varying degrees of guidance by faculty members . The group dynamics and the role of trust as graduate students learn to conduct collaborative research is underexplored , but may have ramifications for the way in which graduate programs are structured or in how graduate students are matched with potential research advisors . Other theories and research also seek to understand mechanisms by which experts innovate in professional settings , and many of these have been applied to engineering education . Theories of distributed cognition 20 have been employed to understand the ways in which professionals share disciplinary knowledge across teams of diverse expertise 21 , 22 , but have to date failed to study the ways in which developing experts ( graduate students , as an example ) learn to share knowledge efficiently . Similarly , there is much current work in the area of creativity in design research 23 , 24 , and how diverse teams result in more innovative solutions to engineering problems ; however , most research does not address graduate - level engineering education despite the importance of these researchers to innovation . As a result of the lack of literature surrounding the development of “collaborative competencies” in graduate - level engineering education , and because of the ambiguous role that “trust” plays in collaborative research contexts , this paper seeks to illuminate the ways in which studies in collaboration across all fields define and study the role of trust . This systematic literature review seeks to identify common issues across studies in trust . The following research questions guide the systematic literature review in order to unveil future directions for the study of collaborative competency development in graduate engineering education : ( 1 ) To what extent does current literature explore trust within collaborative research teams ? ( 2 ) What are the overarching findings of these studies ? ( 3 ) How is trust defined within research teams and what is its role ? A systematic literature review is a rigorous method of making sense of large bodies of work in order to identify areas where new studies may be needed . Unlike a typical literature review , a systematic literature review is a rigorous and scientific approach to reviewing relevant bodies of literature ; traditional literature reviews may be somewhat amorphous and variable in structure while systematic literature reviews are structured prior to performing the actual literature review and strictly adhere to the structured format . This systematic literature review will first address the methods to be used followed by the selection process for the literature . From this selected body of literature , each work is reviewed and grouped appropriately . These groups are then analyzed for themes across the studies . These themes and their implications for the larger area of study ( trust in collaborative research settings ) are discussed . Finally conclusions are drawn looking towards the future of the field . Methods The principals guiding the methods for this systematic literature review are based on those outlined by Petticrew & Roberts 25 . A systematic literature review follows a rigorous process to ensure a comprehensive and thorough review . A set of methods determined by the reviewer is used to identify , analyze and synthesize relevant studies to answer specific questions or hypotheses . While the goals of a traditional literature review are to reveal the gaps in the research in order to motivate present research , a systematic literature review begins by clearly defining research questions for the literature review itself . After defining research question for the literature review , the researcher must specify inclusion and exclusion criteria for studies . These criteria are applied rigorously throughout the review process to ensure consistency in literature selection . Once all relevant databases have been searched , and preliminary literature collected , all literature is subjected to a methodical selection process . In systematic literature review methods , the researchers catalog the reason for exclusions of any paper . This aids in understanding of where large bodies of works are lacking or where there is an overabundance of studies . Another defining feature of the systematic literature review is the use of a data extraction sheet to gather the same information from each study as well as to compare within and across the categories of the data extraction sheet . Again , this is to ensure consistency in the information included . In addition , the quality of each study is assessed by methods defined by the reviewer . The included studies are then tabulated and categorized by quality and characteristics . This process allows for analysis within categories and synthesis across categories . From there , findings are summarized and relevant future research areas are identified . Ultimately , the systematic literature review presents a clear review process to the audience for transparency and replicability , which in turn ensures a higher quality comprehensive review . Trust and the Science of Team Science : Selection of Literature The literature search included peer - reviewed papers published from January 1986 to December 2016 . This allowed the presentation of data after the introduction of the computer to the work place to account for then - novel methods of collaboration . This time frame also prevents the inclusion of significantly outdated research in trust and team sciences . Searches were performed using the following databases : ERIC , Google Scholar , Wiley Online Library , SpringerLink , ScienceDirect , JSTOR , Taylor and Francis Online , IEEE Xplore , and ProQuest . Within these searches the following keywords were used : trust , collaboration , collaborative research , communication , team science , and team trust . Additional articles were retrieved from the references of the articles found and approved from the initial searches . Inclusion Criteria and Data Extraction Methods Several inclusion criteria were developed to identify acceptable papers for the review . The inclusion criteria are shown in Table 1 . Table 1 : Inclusion criteria for the systematic literature review Inclusion Criteria i Papers published in peer - reviewed journals ii Papers that focus on trust and / or collaboration as factors that affect team work iii Papers that define trust and collaboration as a model , concept , framework or measure of study iv Papers with clearly defined methods ( rather than commentaries or best practices ) v Non - undergraduate student participants Conversely , papers that met two or more of the following exclusion criteria shown in Table 2 were discarded before analysis . Studies of undergraduate students were also excluded . These studies were excluded due to short - lived , temporary nature of these teams . Furthermore this study is focused on research settings which rarely occur in undergraduate classrooms . Dissertations , books , commentaries , guides , case studies , and literature reviews were excluded . These works were excluded in order to have consistent criteria for analysis which would have been more difficult and complicated to achieve if too wide of a variety study types were included . Table 2 : Exclusion criteria for the systematic literature review Exclusion Criteria a Papers that do not detail the number of participants and / or teams b Papers that do not discuss participant details c Papers that do not discuss team sizes d Papers that do not outline variables observed / accounted for e Papers that do not outline their methods for data collection f Papers that do not outline methods of data analysis Articles were not excluded on the basis of quality nor the country of focus . Detailed information about each study was recorded in a data exaction sheet . The following variables were included in the data extraction sheet : author , publication date , measures , number of participants , team size ( s ) , methods of data collection ( survey , interview , etc . ) , methods of analysis ( descriptive statistics , regression , structural equation modeling , etc . ) , and conclusions with respect to trust . Conclusions related to the relationship of trust and team success were sorted into “trust descendant conclusions” and “trust antecedent conclusions . ” Descendants of trust are defined as variables or aspects of teamwork and success directly affected by trust . Antecedents of trust are those variables or aspects of teamwork and success that directly affect trust within a team . Study Selection As shown in Figure 1 , the initial search generated 140 studies . The 140 studies initially included were reviewed first by their title and abstract according to the inclusion criteria . Of these , 28 were not published in peer reviewed journals , 15 did not address trust as a factor that affects teamwork , 15 did not define trust and / or collaboration as a model , concept , framework , or measure of study and 5 studies had only undergraduate students as participants . The remaining 77 papers were reviewed . Of the 77 , 5 did not address trust as a factor that affects teamwork , 7 did not define trust and / or collaboration as a model , concept , framework , or measure of study , 26 had unclearly defined methods , and 15 studies had only undergraduate students as participants . A total of 24 studies remained . A search of the references from these papers yielded 37 additional papers . The same procedure for inclusion was performed for these additional papers . After the two step review process , 7 of the 37 were included . In total , 31 papers met the inclusion criteria for this study and were reviewed . Figure 1 : The exclusion process for the papers found and the number of papers remaining at each stage of the exclusion process . See Table 1 for explanation of criteria i – v . Results of Systematic Literature Review Study Characteristics The characteristics of the 31 papers included in this research can be found in Appendix A . Studies were categorized into those that took place in one of 4 settings : business , research00 , academic ( student ) , and other ( any settings not in aforementioned categories ) . Table 3 : Reviewed papers’ characteristics Characteristic Business ( k = 20 ) Research ( k = 4 ) Academic ( Student ) ( k = 5 ) Other ( k = 2 ) Pub . Date 1992 - 1996 2 0 0 0 1997 - 2001 1 0 1 1 2002 - 2006 5 1 2 0 2007 - 2011 7 2 0 0 2012 - 2016 5 1 2 1 Team Size ( s ) 2 - 5 7 0 4 0 6 - 10 7 1 1 0 11 - 15 6 0 0 1 16 - 20 4 0 0 0 21 - 25 3 0 0 0 25 - 30 2 0 0 0 31 + 2 0 0 1 Outcomes Comparison of types of trust 10 1 2 1 antecedents of trust 13 1 2 1 descendants of trust 18 3 3 2 The purpose of this grouping was to emphasize the lack of studies in collaborative research settings . With the exception of a few studies , the primary method of data collection was a single self - administered survey . There was a wide variety in duration of time that the teams existed . For example , teams in educational contexts had a shorter “lifetime” whereas teams in industry contexts tended to have longer “lifetimes . ” Team lifetime information was only available for a small portion of the studies included . In general , the number of relevant studies drastically increased in the early 2000s but has remained relatively steady since then ( albeit not in engineering contexts ) . Of the studies included in this systematic literature review , the majority took place in business settings as opposed to the desired research setting . Study Quality Quality Assessment As no papers were excluded on the basis of quality , quality assessment was performed after selection of papers for review . Each aspect was rated on a scale of 1 to 3 with 3 being the highest quality and 1 being the lowest quality . The aspects of quality assessment used in this study can be found in Table 4 . It is important to note that although all variables were rated on a scale of 1 to 3 , trust as a direct measure is only a value of 1 or 3 , in order to more effectively weight trust in this review : If trust is not a direct measure then the study is less relevant to this review as the goals of this review pertain to the role of trust in collaborative research settings . The specifics of how each rating was determined for each variable can be found in Table 4 . Table 4 : Quality Assessment Measures Measure Score = 3 Score = 2 Score = 1 Theoretical basis for experimental method Methods are based on explicit theory Methods may be based on implied theory Methods are based on no theory Sample size 100 people , 20 teams or more 50 people , 10 teams to 99 people , 19 teams Less than 50 people , 10 teams Team longevity 6 months or more 3 months to 5 months Less than 3 months Piloting of methods prior to implementation Piloting of methods Methods based on other research designs No piloting nor methods based on other research designs Sample heterogeneity Substantial heterogeneity Some heterogeneity Minimal heterogeneity ; almost entirely homogeneous Generalizability Applicable across many disciplines , cultures , and settings Applicable across some disciplines , cultures or settings Applicable only to a specific discipline , culture or settings Trust as a direct measure Trust was a measured variables - Trust was not a measured variable Appropriateness of measures All measures are appropriate and / or have been previously defined and measured Most measures are appropriate or have been previously defined and measured Measures are inappropriate and / or have not been previously defined and measured Measure Score = 3 Score = 2 Score = 1 Reliability and validity of measures Reliability and validity of all measures are calculated Reliability and validity are calculated for some measures Reliability and validity are not calculated Discussion of limitations Limitations of the study are thoroughly addressed Limitations of the study are briefly mentioned Limitations of the study are not discussed From the methods of assessment laid out in Table 4 the total quality rating for each category was calculated and split into 3 ranges as show in Table 5 : Table 5 : Overall Study Quality by Category Quality Business ( k = 20 ) Research ( k = 4 ) Academic ( Student ) ( k = 5 ) Other ( k = 2 ) 14 - 18 1 0 1 1 19 - 23 13 3 2 1 24 - 27 6 1 2 0 The average study quality overall was 22 out of 30 , ranging from 14 to 27 . Research setting studies scored marginally higher than business setting studies , both of which were slightly above the overall average , while academic and other setting studies scored below average . It is important to note that the marginal difference cannot be treated as statistically significant due to the significantly smaller sample size of all other settings compared to the number of business setting studies . The average score of each setting type for each quality assessment measure can be found in Table 6 . Table 6 : Average study quality measures as compared against setting Measure Busines s Research Academi c Other theoretical basis for experimental method used 2 . 65 2 . 5 2 . 6 2 sample size 2 . 95 3 2 . 2 2 . 5 team longevity 3 3 2 . 2 2 . 5 piloting of methods prior to implementation 1 . 95 2 2 . 2 2 . 5 sample heterogeneity 1 . 95 1 . 5 1 . 4 1 generalizability 1 . 85 1 . 75 1 . 6 1 trust as a direct measure 2 . 9 3 2 . 6 2 appropriateness of measures 2 . 6 3 2 . 6 2 reliability and validity of measures 2 . 6 2 . 75 2 . 2 1 . 5 discussion of limitations 2 . 2 2 . 5 2 . 2 2 1 , 26 – 28 , 30 , 32 , 39 – 63 In most quality assessment measures , research conducted in research and business setting studies scored comparatively . Business setting studies were slightly less likely to directly measure trust and were less likely to have experimental methods that had been piloted before research was conducted . Generally , research settings had poor heterogeneity which may be attributed to smaller sample sizes . Studies in academic settings with students tended to have the greatest heterogeneity , which can be attributed to a diverse student body . As a result of greater heterogeneity with larger sample sizes and reliable measures , business setting studies had greater generalizability than research studies . However , it is important to note that all settings scored an average of below 2 on the criteria of sample heterogeneity and generalizability . No statistical conclusions can be drawn because of the small sample sizes of articles used in this systematic literature review . Emergent Themes and Findings Related to Trust in Collaborative Settings Within the business setting category , the studies varied widely in all characteristics . This is most notable in the variety of team sizes not only between studies but within individual studies . Studies in this setting tended to focus on descendants of trust in their outcomes though the majority of these studies looked at both the antecedents and descendants of trust . Only about half of these studies compared the antecedents and descendants of different types of trust . The different types of trust compared were not necessarily consistent , though the most common type of trust comparisons was affective trust versus cognitive trust , and trust in the team versus trust in a leader . For the research settings the majority of the studies were of small teams . Within any given research setting study there was a smaller range of team sizes . As with studies in business settings , these studies tended to focus on descendants of trust . Far fewer studies were found that took place in collaborative research settings . None of the studies in the collaborative research setting explicitly focused on collaboration between graduates students and their faculty advisors . While the quality of the papers found for research settings was not poor , the sample size within studies was small and the quality was not ideal . The majority of these studies focused on descendants of trust rather than antecedents of trust and defining trust within a collaborative research setting . Only one of the studies in the research setting 26 mentioned antecedents of trust and only one factor ( transformational leadership ) was explored as an antecedent of trust . Emerging from the body of literature reviewed , the most common descendants and antecedents of trust are shown in Table 7 . Table 7 : Common descendants and antecedents of trust in the literature Common antecedents of trust  Transformational leadership  Team diversity  Leader opinion of workers  Leader consideration of member input  Team familiarity , longevity and experience Common descendants of trust  Creativity  Job satisfaction  Knowledge sharing  Team efficacy and performance  Team cooperation and cohesion Of the descendants , team efficacy and performance , and knowledge sharing were the most commonly identified and measured . These studies noted that trust was most critical to team performance as a whole , however , many of the descendants of trust were interrelated ( the level of analysis of descendant “interrelatedness” varied by study ) . In several studies trust was essential to mitigating conflict and enhancing communication and cohesion which in turn increased the overall team performance 27 , 28 . Studies that observed the relationship between trust and knowledge sharing generally surveyed teams within industry . These teams required trust among teams and companies in sharing pertinent project information . As noted previously , the most common antecedent of trust that was identified and measured was transformational leadership . Transformational leadership is a leadership style defined by a leader who considers the input of her or his team members to identify where change is needed and how to achieve this change while inspiring the team to commit to the needed change 29 . By this definition , transformational leadership correlates with leader consideration of member input . The studies that looked at transformational leadership all concluded that transformational leadership positively affected trust within the team 26 , 30 – 32 . Outside of transformational leadership team familiarity , longevity and experience also were significant antecedents of trust , all correlating positively with trust . Limitations Limitations of this research study include the high number of non - research setting studies found . For this systematic literature review , the search terms used resulted in a variety of general “best practices” articles and commentaries from popular business magazines , such as the Harvard Business Review . This is an indicator of how few peer - reviewed articles have studied trust in collaborative research contexts . More targeted and limited search terms may have more easily illuminated niche papers that would have better addressed the questions of trust in research settings . Similarly , the inclusion and exclusion criteria of this paper were intentionally broad allowing for the inclusion of a wider body of work . To focus solely on trust in research settings , more narrow and explicit inclusion and exclusion criteria may be needed . In addition , this review did not exclude papers based on quality . While this does not negate the findings of this review , it would be beneficial to perform another review that excludes any papers of poor quality to ensure substantial contributions from each included study . Discussion We first discuss the findings from this systematic literature review in terms of opportunities for future work as well as the opportunity to link our findings from this study with other bodies of literature in engineering education research . The emergent findings of the antecedents and descendants of trust in collaborative settings are not inherently groundbreaking : anecdotal evidence , commentaries , and accounts of best practices often mention these criteria . However , by grouping these parameters with the concept of trust at the core , we illuminate a new relationship between the criteria . Rather than assuming a direct relationship between transformational leadership ( as an example ) with team productivity or creativity , we can see that trust has a mediating effect . In terms of current engineering education literature , many of the comment antecedents of trust are commonly studied in engineering education . For example , teaming literature in engineering education 22 , 33 also suggests that strong leadership and relationships between team member is essential to a successful and productive team . In addition , many studies in engineering education and engineering suggest team - members’ skills and diversity ( of lived experiences and of thought ) enhances overall team creativity and the ability to generate more user - focused and innovative solutions to engineering problems 19 , 23 , 24 , 34 , 35 . Lastly , “knowledge sharing” is a skill that is emphasized in design courses and project - based learning classes through emphasis on engineering communication ( written , oral ) with team members and team sponsors 18 . We posit that one of the results of this systematic literature review is to re - frame this discussion of engineering competencies as “line items” to teach students throughout their time in an undergraduate or graduate degree program . Instead , if in collaborative coursework or research settings , an emphasis can be placed by a research advisor or a course instructor on facilitating team trust via the antecedents , then potentially the “line items” such as knowledge sharing and creativity will happen more naturally as a result . Ultimately , this is taking a more learner - centric and relationship - building point of view , housed in theories of social constructivism 36 , 37 and cognitive dissonance theory . 38 If students work to establish a strong network of trust among teammates and with team leaders ( whether they be professors or student leaders ) , then the collaboration becomes a social and mutually beneficial relationship fostered through strong communication . If a student ( graduate or undergraduate ) feels safe to express opinions and that they are accepted even if they come from a different background or point of view than the rest of the team , the student then will more easily share innovative ideas that can productively move a team forward . From this paper it is clear that there is much work that can and should be done in exploring trust and collaboration among teams . There is a lack of studies not only in research settings but in exploring teams of graduate students and their advisors , which likely vary from traditional business teams . Graduate student teams within engineering may also work on several projects at a time led by multiple faculty members , a unique dynamic that has not been studied . Future research areas also include : How is trust defined within the context of research teams and how does this differ from other contexts of teamwork ? How does trust develop within a team over time ? Is trust development different in mature versus new research groups / teams ? How does the development of trust in traditional research teams differ from global and from interdisciplinary team ? What behaviors and milestones are critical for new team members to develop mutual trust with other team members ? In graduate level engineering settings , this type of research could be helpful in three practical respects . First , today’s graduate students are tomorrow’s experts working to lead global and interdisciplinary teams in industry and in academia . By illuminating mechanisms by which collaborative competencies such as trust are developed and the impact they have on collaboration success over time , there is a potential for graduate students to be able to be more immediately productive in their future careers . Second , determining the role of trust in research group collaborations could “jump start” the onboarding process with which many first - year graduate students struggle as they seek to navigate the often unclear expectations for working in an established research group . Third , research in this area could be useful in developing tools and strategies for junior professors starting new research groups who need graduate students to become productive as fast as possible in an academic setting . If the role of trust is as critical to collaborative research as this systematic literature review indicates , then establishing strong trust between research advisors and graduate students and among the students themselves is critical to the success of tenure - track research faculty . In all three of these respects , trust in general could lead to more efficient and effective communication and thus improved productivity . Conclusion This paper presented a systematic literature review of studies focused on trust in collaborative settings . Of the 31 papers reviewed only 4 of these took place in research settings . These results highlight the lack of studies investigating the role of trust and how it is developed in collaborative research teams ; however , the synthesized results of this study did indicate common antecedents and descendants of trust . The discussion of the findings from this study posit that engineering educators might re - frame the discussion of engineering competencies ( creativity , diversity , etc . ) in terms of how best to establish trust in collaborative settings . In addition , several future research areas are proposed as a result of this review , many of which have enormous implications for graduate level engineering education and in faculty development . References 1 . Mâsse , Louise C . et al . 2008 . “Measuring Collaboration and Transdisciplinary Integration in Team Science . ” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 35 ( 2 SUPPL . ) : S151 – 60 . 2 . Stokols , Daniel , Kara L . Hall , Brandie K . Taylor , and Richard P . Moser . 2008 . “The Science of Team Science . Overview of the Field and Introduction to the Supplement . ” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 35 ( 2 SUPPL . ) . 3 . Berdanier , Catherine G P et al . 2016 . “Learning to Conduct ” Team Science ” through Interdisciplinary Engineering . ” 4 . Butler , John K . 1991 . “Toward Understanding and Measuring Conditions of Trust : Evolution of a Conditions of Trust Inventory . ” Journal of Management 17 ( 3 ) : 643 – 63 . 5 . Jones , Gareth R . , Jennifer M . George , Gareth R . Jones , and Jennifer M . George . 1998 . “The Experience and Evolution of Trust : Implications for Cooperation and Teamwork . ” Academy of Management Review 23 ( 3 ) : 531 – 46 . http : / / amr . aom . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 5465 / AMR . 1998 . 926625 . 6 . Dirks , Kurt T . 1999 . “The Effects of Interpersonal Trust on Work Group Performance . ” Journal of Applied Psychology 455 ( 84 ) : 445 – 55 . 7 . Child , John . 2001 . “Trust—the Fundamental Bond in Global Collaboration . ” Organizational Dynamics 29 ( 4 ) : 274 – 88 . 8 . Vangen , Siv , and Chris Huxham . 2008 . “Nurturing Collaborative Relations : Building Trust in Interorganizational Collaboration . ” The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 39 ( 3 ) : 490 – 504 . 9 . Scott , Dow . 1980 . “The Causal Relationship between Trust and the Assessed Value of Management by Objectives . ” Journal of Management 6 ( 2 ) : 157 – 75 . 10 . Driscoll , James W . 1977 . Trust and Participation in Organizational Decision Making as Predictors of Satisfaction . 11 . Dodgson , Mark . 1993 . “Learning , Trust and Technological Collaboration . ” Human Relations 46 ( 1 ) . 12 . Clark , Murray C , and Roy L Payne . 1997 . “The Nature and Structure of Workers â€TM Trust in Management . ” Journal of Organizational Behavior 18 ( 3 ) : 205 – 24 . 13 . Carmeli , Abraham , Asher Tishler , and Amy C . Edmondson . 2012 . “CEO Relational Leadership and Strategic Decision Quality in Top Management Teams : The Role of Team Trust and Learning from Failure . ” Strategic Organization 10 ( 1 ) : 31 – 54 . 14 . Schoorman , F . David , Roger C . Mayer , and James H . Davis . 2007 . “An Integrative Model of Organizational Trust : Past , Present , and Future . ” Academy of Management Review 32 ( 2 ) : 344 – 54 . 15 . Ruohomaa , Sini , and Lea Kutvonen . 2010 . “Trust and Distrust in Adaptive Inter - Enterprise Collaboration Management . ” Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research 5 ( 2 ) : 118 – 36 . 16 . Stokols , Daniel , Shalini Misra , et al . 2008 . “The Ecology of Team Science . Understanding Contextual Influences on Transdisciplinary Collaboration . ” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 35 ( 2 SUPPL . ) . 17 . Adams , L . Garry . 2014 . “Putting Together a Scientific Team : Collaborative Science . ” Trends in Microbiology 22 ( 9 ) : 483 – 85 . 18 . Neill , Colin J . , and Joanna F . DeFranco . 2016 . “Facilitating Collaborative Learning in Online Engineering Student Teams . ” INCOSE International Symposium 26 ( 1 ) : 1219 – 30 . http : / / doi . wiley . com / 10 . 1002 / j . 2334 - 5837 . 2016 . 00222 . x . 19 . Meyer , L . L . , J . H C Pretorius , and L . Pretorius . 2016 . “Effects of Culture on Project Management Contributing to the Success of Managing Culturally Diverse Engineering Teams in a Global Environment . ” IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management 2016 – Janua : 640 – 45 . 20 . Cooke , Nancy J . 2015 . “Team Cognition as Interaction . ” Current Directions in Psychological Science 24 ( 6 ) : 415 – 19 . http : / / proxy . lib . umich . edu / login ? url = http : / / search . proquest . com / docview / 1752177100 ? accountid = 14667 % 5Cnhttp : / / mgetit . lib . umich . edu / ? ctx _ ver = Z39 . 88 - 2004 & ctx _ enc = info : ofi / enc : UTF - 8 & rfr _ id = info : sid / ProQ % 3Apqrl & rft _ val _ fmt = info : ofi / fmt : kev : mtx : journal & rft . genr . 21 . Gren , Lucas , Richard Torkar , and Robert Feldt . 2017 . “Group Development and Group Maturity When Building Agile Teams : A Qualitative and Quantitative Investigation at Eight Large Companies . ” Journal of Systems and Software 124 : 104 – 19 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jss . 2016 . 11 . 024 . 22 . Zhang , Lianying , and Jiajia Cheng . 2015 . “Effect of Knowledge Leadership on Knowledge Sharing in Engineering Project Design Teams : The Role of Social Capital . ” Project Management Journal 46 ( 5 ) : 111 – 24 . 23 . Toh , Christine A . , and Scarlett R . Miller . 2015 . “How Engineering Teams Select Design Concepts : A View through the Lens of Creativity . ” Design Studies 38 : 111 – 38 . 24 . Hernan Casakin , Petra Badke - Schaub . 2015 . “Mental Models and Creativity in Engineering and Architectural Design Teams . ” Design Computing and Cognition ’14 : 155 – 71 . 25 . Petticrew , M . , & Roberts , H . ( 2006 ) . Systematic Reviews in the Social Sciences : A Practical Guide . Cebma . Org . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1027 / 1016 - 9040 . 11 . 3 . 244 26 . Braun , Susanne , Claudia Peus , Silke Weisweiler , and Dieter Frey . 2013 . “Transformational Leadership , Job Satisfaction , and Team Performance : A Multilevel Mediation Model of Trust . ” The Leadership Quarterly 24 : 270 – 83 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . leaqua . 2012 . 11 . 006 % 5Cnhttp : / / linkinghub . elsevier . com / retrieve / pii / S10489843 12001075 . 27 . Peterson , Randall S . , and Kristin Jackson Behfar . 2003 . “The Dynamic Relationship between Performance Feedback , Trust , and Conflict in Groups : A Longitudinal Study . ” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 92 : 102 – 12 . 28 . Bierly , Paul E . , Eric M . Stark , and Eric H . Kessler . 2009 . “The Moderating Effects of Virtuality on the Antecedents and Outcome of NPD Team Trust . ” The Journal of Product Innovation Management 26 : 551 – 65 . 29 . Dinh , Jessica E . et al . 2014 . “Leadership Theory and Research in the New Millennium : Current Theoretical Trends and Changing Perspectives . ” Leadership Quarterly 25 ( 1 ) : 36 – 62 . 30 . Schaubroeck , John , Simon S . K . Lam , and Ann Chunyan Peng . 2011 . “Cognition - Based and Affect - Based Trust as Mediators of Leader Behavior Influences on Team Performance . ” The Journal of Applied Psychology 96 ( 4 ) : 863 – 71 . http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pubmed / 21299271 . 31 . Frost - Arnold , Karen . 2013 . “Moral Trust & Scientific Collaboration . ” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A 44 ( 3 ) : 301 – 10 . 32 . Chou , Huey - Wen , Yu - Hsun Lin , Hsui - Hua Chang , and Wen - Wei Chuang . 2013 . “Transformational Leadership and Team Performance : The Mediating Roles of Cognitive Trust and Collective Efficacy . ” SAGE Open 3 ( 3 ) : 1 – 10 . 33 . Somerville , Mark , and Jessica Townsend . 2015 . “A Student - Centered Approach to Designing Teaming Experiences . ” Proceedings - Frontiers in Education Conference , FIE 2015 – Febru ( February ) : 1 – 2 . 34 . Bradley , Bret H , Heather J Anderson , John E Baur , and Anthony C Klotz . 2015 . “When Conflict Helps : Integrating Evidence for Beneficial Conflict in Groups and Teams under Three Perspectives . ” Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice 19 ( 4 ) : 243 – 72 . 35 . Chan , Joel , Steven P . Dow , and Christian D . Schunn . 2015 . “Do the Best Design Ideas ( Really ) Come from Conceptually Distant Sources of Inspiration ? ” Design Studies 36 ( C ) : 31 – 58 . 36 . Kivunja , Charles . 2014 . “Do You Want Your Students to Be Job - Ready with 21st Century Skills ? Change Pedagogies : A Pedagogical Paradigm Shift from Vygotskyian Social Constructivism to Critical Thinking , Problem Solving and Siemens’ Digital Connectivism . ” International Journal of Higher Education 3 ( 3 ) : 81 – 91 . http : / / www . sciedu . ca / journal / index . php / ijhe / article / view / 5156 . 37 . Chompalov , Ivan Mihailov , and Lubomir Savov Popov . 2014 . “Sociology of Science and the Turn to Social Constructivism . ” Social Sciences 3 ( 2 ) : 59 – 66 . 38 . Hinojosa , A . S . et al . 2016 . “A Review of Cognitive Dissonance Theory in Management Research : Opportunities for Further Development . ” Journal of Management XX ( X ) : 1 – 30 . http : / / jom . sagepub . com / cgi / doi / 10 . 1177 / 0149206316668236 . 39 . Arnold , Kara A . , Julian Barling , and E . Kevin Kelloway . 2001 . “Transformational Leadership or the Iron Cage : Which Predicts Trust , Commitment and Team Efficacy ? ” Leadership & Organization Development Journal 22 ( 7 ) : 315 – 20 . 40 . Brattström , Anna , Hans Löfsten , and Anders Richtnér . 2012 . “Creativity , Trust and Systematic Processes in Product Development . ” Research Policy 41 : 743 – 55 . 41 . Bruneel , Johan , Pablo D’Este , and Ammon Salter . 2010 . “Investigating the Factors That Diminish the Barriers to University - Industry Collaboration . ” Research Policy 39 : 858 – 68 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2010 . 03 . 006 . 42 . Chowdhury , Sanjib . 2005 . “The Role of Affect - and Cognition - Based Trust in Complex Knowledge Sharing . ” Journal of Manegerial Issues 17 ( 3 ) : 310 – 26 . 43 . Collins , Ngan , and Yu - Min Chou . 2013 . “Building Team Trust : A Study in the Asian Context . ” The Journal of American Business Review , Cambridge . 1 ( 2 ) : 181 – 88 . http : / / ezproxy . net . ucf . edu / login ? url = http : / / search . proquest . com / docview / 1356599313 ? accountid = 10003 % 5 Cnhttp : / / sfx . fcla . edu / ucf ? url _ ver = Z39 . 88 - 2004 & rft _ val _ fmt = info : ofi / fmt : kev : mtx : journal & genre = article & sid = ProQ : ProQ : abiglobal & atitle = Building + Team + Trust : + A + . 44 . Costa , Ana Cristina , Robert a . Roe , and Tharsi Taillieu . 2001 . “Trust within Teams : The Relation with Performance Effectiveness . ” European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 10 ( 3 ) : 225 – 44 . 45 . Dayan , Mumin , and C . Anthony Di Benedetto . 2010 . “The Impact of Structural and Contextual Factors on Trust Formation in Product Development Teams . ” Industrial Marketing Management 39 ( 4 ) : 691 – 703 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . indmarman . 2010 . 01 . 001 . 46 . De Jong , Bart A . , and Tom Elfring . 2007 . “Mediated and Differential Effects of Trust on Team Performance : A Study of Ongoing Work Teams . ” Academy of Management Proceedings 8 : 1 – 6 . http % 5Cn / / search . ebscohost . com / login . aspx ? direct = true & db = buh & AN = 26523468 & site = ehost - live & scope = site % 5Cn / / ezp . waldenulibrary . org / login ? url = http . 47 . Dirks , Kurt . T . 2000 . “Trust in Leadership and Team Performance : Evidence from NCAA Basketball . ” Journal of Applied Psychology 85 ( 6 ) : 1004 – 12 . 48 . Erdem , Ferda , and Janset Ozen . 2003 . “Cognitive and Affective Dimensions of Trust in Developing Team Performance . ” Team Performance Management : An International Journal 9 ( 5 / 6 ) : 131 – 35 . 49 . Hansen , Mark H . , J . L . Morrow , and Juan C . Batista . 2002 . “The Impact of Trust on Cooperative Membership Retention , Performance , and Satisfaction : An Exploratory Study . ” International Food and Agribusiness Management Review 5 ( 1 ) : 41 – 59 . 50 . Jo , Nam Yong , Kun Chang Lee , Dae Sung Lee , and Minhee Hahn . 2015 . “Empirical Analysis of Roles of Perceived Leadership Styles and Trust on Team Members’ Creativity : Evidence from Korean ICT Companies . ” Computers in Human Behavior 42 : 149 – 56 . 51 . Kiffin - Petersen , Sandra A . , and John L . Cordery . 2003 . “Trust , Individualism and Job Characteristics as Predictors of Employee Preference for Teamwork . ” The International Journal of Human Resource Management 14 ( 1 ) : 93 – 116 . 52 . Korsgaard , M . Audrey , David M . Schweiger , and Harry J . Sapienza . 1995 . “Building Commitment , Attachment , and Trust in Strategic Decision - Making Teams : The Role of Procedural Justice . ” The Academy of Management Journal 38 ( 1 ) : 60 – 84 . 53 . Krishnan , Rekha , Xavier Martin , and Niels G Noorderhaven . 2006 . “When Does Trust Matter to Alliance Performance ? ” The Academy of Management Journal 49 ( 5 ) : 894 – 917 . 54 . Lau , Dora C . , and Robert C . Liden . 2008 . “Antecedents of Coworker Trust : Leaders’ Blessings . ” The Journal of Applied Psychology 93 ( 5 ) : 1130 – 38 . http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pubmed / 18808230 . 55 . Lee , Pauleen , Nicole Gillespie , Leon Mann , and Alexander Wearing . 2010 . “Leadership and Trust : Their Effect on Knowledge Sharing and Team Performance . ” Management Learning 41 ( 4 ) : 473 – 91 . http : / / mlq . sagepub . com / cgi / doi / 10 . 1177 / 1350507610362036 . 56 . Lu , Luo . 2015 . “Building Trust and Cohesion in Virtual Teams : The Developmental Approach . ” Journal of Organizational Effectiveness : People and Performance 2 ( 1 ) : 55 – 72 . 57 . Lusher , Dean , Peter Kremer , and Garry Robins . 2014 . “Cooperative and Competitive Structures of Trust Relations in Teams . ” Small Group Research 45 ( 1 ) : 3 – 36 . http : / / www . scopus . com / inward / record . url ? eid = 2 - s2 . 0 - 84891960692 & partnerID = tZOtx3y1 . 58 . McAllister , Daniel J . 1995 . “Affect - and Cognition - Based Trust as Foundations for Interpersonal Cooperation in Organizations . ” Academy of Management Journal 38 ( 1 ) : 24 – 59 . 59 . Pinjani , Praveen , and Prashant Palvia . 2013 . “Trust and Knowledge Sharing in Diverse Global Virtual Teams . ” Information & Management 50 ( 4 ) : 144 – 53 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2012 . 10 . 002 . 60 . Santoro , Michael D . , and Patrick A . Saparito . 2003 . “The Firm’s Trust in Its University Partner as a Key Mediator in Advancing Knowledge and New Technologies . ” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 50 ( 3 ) : 362 – 73 . 61 . Spector , Michele D . , and Gwen E . Jones . 2004 . “Trust in the Workplace : Factors Affecting Trust Formation between Team Members . ” The Journal of Social Psychology 144 ( 3 ) : 311 – 21 . 62 . Tsai , Wei - Chi , Nai - Wen Chi , Alicia A . Grandey , and Sy - Chi Fung . 2011 . “Positive Group Affective Tone and Team Creativity : Negative Group Affective Tone and Team Trust as Boundary Conditions . ” Journal of Organizational Behavior 33 ( 5 ) : 638 – 56 . 63 . Tseng , Hung - Wei , and Hsin - Te Yeh . 2013 . “Team Members’ Perceptions of Online Teamwork Learning Experiences and Building Teamwork Trust : A Qualitative Study . ” Computers & Education 63 : 1 – 9 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2012 . 11 . 013 . Appendix Appendix A : Summary of Findings and Quality Assessments Author Pub . Date Measures Number of Participants Team Size ( s ) Methods of Data Collection Methods of Analysis Conclusions w / Respect to Trust Quality Scores Arnold et al . 2001 team efficacy , transformational leadership , trust , commitment , and iron cage perceptions 177 people , 42 teams 2 - 7 , ave 4 self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Hierarchical regression analysis Antecedents of trust : Transformational leadership 25 Bierly et al . 2009 cooperation , trust , virtuality , relationship conflict , process conflict , training , familiarity , goal clarity 116 people , 116 teams 3 - 20 + self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Regression analysis Antecedents of trust : Goal clarity ( for face to face teams ) familiarity Minimized initial conflict ( virtual teams ) Descendants of trust : Cooperation ( for face to face teams ) 23 Brattstrom et al . 2012 systematic processes and structures , goodwill trust , competence trust , creativity 99 people , 99 teams N / A self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Regression analysis Descendants of trust : Creativity 22 Braun et al . 2013 transformational leadership , trust in supervisor , trust in team , job satisfaction , team performance 360 people , 39 teams N / A self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Hierarchical regression analysis Antecedents of trust : Transformational leadership Descendants of trust : Job satisfaction 23 Author Pub . Date Measures Number of Participants Team Size ( s ) Methods of Data Collection Methods of Analysis Conclusions w / Respect to Trust Quality Scores Bruneel et al . 2010 orientation related barries , transaction related barriers 503 people , 503 teams N / A self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Fractional logic regression analysis Descendants of trust : Lower barriers to knowledge sharing 19 Chou 2013 transformational leadership style , team cognitive trust , collective efficacy , team performance 92 people , 46 teams 3 - 35 , ave 9 self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Structural equation modeling Antecedents of trust : Transformational leadership Descendants of trust : Team efficacy Cognitive trust is necessary but not sufficient Trust in team members is more important than in leadership 27 Chowhury 2005 affect based trust , cognition based trust 164 people , 31 teams N / A self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Regression analysis Descendants of trust : Complex knowledge sharing Cognition - based trust is more important for knowledge shairng 23 Author Pub . Date Measures Number of Participants Team Size ( s ) Methods of Data Collection Methods of Analysis Conclusions w / Respect to Trust Quality Scores Collins and Chou 2013 interpersonal trust , insitutional trust , member satisfaction w / outcomes , member satisfaction w / process , team effectiveness 29 people , 3 - 4 mixed methods ( self - administered survey , qualitative , and case studies ) Descriptive statistics Theme extraction Descendants of trust : Virtual team success Team effectiveness Interpersonal trust - more for traditional teams Institutional trust - more for virtual teams 21 Costa et al . 2001 trust , perceived task performance , team satisfaction , relationship commitment , stress 395 people , 112 teams 3 - 6 , ave 4 self - administered survey Analysis of variance Structural equation modeling Antecedents of trust : Perceived trustworthiness Descendants of trust : Team performance Team satisfaction Commitment Reduced stress 25 Dayan and Di Benedet - 2010 functional diversity , demographic diversity , proximity of team members , team longevity , procedural justice , interactional justice , cognitive based trust , affect based trust , team learning , speed - market , NPS , task complexity routine , task complexity knowledge , team size 93 people , 93 teams N / A self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Structural equation modeling Antecedents of trust : Moderate demographic diversity Team longevity Descendants of trust : Team learning Product success 24 Author Pub . Date Measures Number of Participants Team Size ( s ) Methods of Data Collection Methods of Analysis Conclusions w / Respect to Trust Quality Scores De Jong and Elfiring 2007 intrateam trust , team effort , team moni - ring , team effectiveness , team efficiency 638 people , 73 teams N / A self - administered survey Principal component analysis Hierarchical regression analysis Descendants of trust : Team performance Individual effort Trust indirectly affects team effort via motivation 18 Dirks 2000 trust in leader , team performance , trust in teammates , team talent , coach record , experience , player tenure , team performance 355 people , 30 teams 12 ave self - administered survey and archival data Descriptive statistics Regression analysis Descendants of trust : Team performance Trust in teammates isn’t as important as trust in leader 21 Erdem and Ozen 2003 cognitive trust , affective trust 279 people , 50 teams 5 - 46 self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Descendants of trust : Team performance 19 Hansen et al . 2002 cognitive trust , affective trust , performance and satistfaction , group cohesion 779 people , 2 teams N / A self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Hierarchical regression analysis Descendants of trust : Group cohesion 21 Jo et al . 2015 perception of leader ' s consideration , perception of leader ' s initiating structure , trust in leader , trust in organization , member creativity 350 people N / A self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Structural equation modeling Antecedents of trust : Leader consideration of member input Descendants of trust : creativity 22 Author Pub . Date Measures Number of Participants Team Size ( s ) Methods of Data Collection Methods of Analysis Conclusions w / Respect to Trust Quality Scores Kiffin - Petersen and Cordery 2003 preference for teamwork , propensity - trust , individualism , trust in co - workers , trust in management , job control , opportunity for skill utilization 218 people , 40 teams N / A self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Hierarchical regression analysis Descendants of trust : Opinions on structure of team 22 Korsgaard et al . 1995 perceived procedural fairness , attachment - group , trust in leader , decision quality 209 people , 20 teams N / A survey Descriptive statistics Analysis of variance Antecedents of trust : Leader consideration of member input 23 Krishnan et al . 2006 trust , interdependence , interpartner competition , environmental instability , environmental unpredictability 126 people , 126 teams N / A interview Descriptive statistics Regression analysis Descendants of trust : Team performance Reduced effects from behavioral uncertainty 24 Lau and Liden 2008 coworker trust , leader trust , trust in leader , group performance 146 people , 32 teams 4 - 8 , 5 ave self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Hierarchical regression analysis Antecedents of trust : Leader opinion of individual Descendants of trust : Poorer performance if leader and coworker trust has strong relationship 21 Lee et al . 2010 knowledger builder role , team knowledge sharing , trust in leader and trust in team , team performance 214 people , 34 teams 3 - 19 , ave 8 self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Regression analysis Antecedents of trust : Team expertise Descendants of trust : Knowledge sharing 26 Author Pub . Date Measures Number of Participants Team Size ( s ) Methods of Data Collection Methods of Analysis Conclusions w / Respect to Trust Quality Scores Lu 2015 psychological similarity , shared social activities , team trust , team cohesion , job satisfaction , team peformance 388 people , 14 ave self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Structural equation modeling Antecedents of trust : Team socialization Psychological similarity Descendants of trust : Team performance Job satisfaction 21 Lusher et al . 2014 experience , individual performance , overall team performance , density , highest degree 107 people , 3 teams 36 ave survey Descriptive statistics Analysis of variance Antecedents of trust : Individual experience and performance Descendants of trust : Team performance 17 Masse et al . 2008 satisfaction with collaboration , impact of collaboration , trust and respect 202 people , N / A self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Analysis of variance Trust and satisfaction are correlated 22 McAllister 1995 affect and cognition based trust , behavioral response 175 people , N / A self - administered survey Descriptive statics Structural equation modeling Antecedents of trust : Work quality Supervisor trust in invidual Descendants of trust : Social needs are met 22 Peterson and Behfar 2003 task conflict , relationship conflict , group performance , trust 225 people , 67 teams 4 self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Regression analysis Descendants of trust : Reduced negative effects of conflict 26 Author Pub . Date Measures Number of Participants Team Size ( s ) Methods of Data Collection Methods of Analysis Conclusions w / Respect to Trust Quality Scores Pinjani and Palvia 2013 functional diversity , deep level diversity , mutual trust , shared knowledge , task interdependence , collaborative technology , GVT effectiveness 213 people , 58 teams 11 survey Descriptive statistics Hierarchical regression analysis Antecedents of trust : Deep level diversity Descendants of trust : Team effectiveness 27 San - ro and Sapari - 2003 communication of status and results , commincation frequency , commincation personalness , trust 202 people , 202 teams N / A self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Hierarchical regression analysis Descendants of trust : Relationship between communication , knowledge outcomes and tech outcomes 22 Shaubroeck et al . 2011 trust , team psychological saget and team potency , transformational leadership , team performance 999 people , 191 teams 4 - 7 , 5 ave self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Regression analysis Antecedents of trust : Transformational leadership Descendants of trust : Team potency Team psychological safety 23 Spec - r and Jones 2004 trusting stance , initial trust level 127 people N / A self - administered survey Descriptive stsatistics Analysis of variance Antecedents of trust : Trusting disposition prior - group formation Gender ( men trust men ) 19 Tsai et al . 2011 postive and negative group affective - nes , taerm creativity , team trust 270 people , 68 teams 6 ave self - administered survey Descriptive statistics Hierarchical regression analysis Descendants of trust : Group affective - ne negatively impacts creativity Increased creativity 24 Author Pub . Date Measures Number of Participants Team Size ( s ) Methods of Data Collection Methods of Analysis Conclusions w / Respect to Trust Quality Scores Tseng and Yeh 2013 N / A 15 people , 4 teams 3 - 4 , ave 4 open - ended and inverview Theme extraction Antecedents of trust : individual accountability Teammate familiarity Commitment - quality work Team cohesion 14