Key challenges for the surveillance of respiratory viruses : transitioning out of the acute phase of the SARS - CoV - 2 pandemic Oliver Eales 1 , 2 , 3 , Michael J . Plank 4 , Benjamin J . Cowling 5 , 6 , Benjamin P . Howden 7 , 8 , Adam J . Kucharski 9 , Sheena G . Sullivan 3 , 10 , Katelijn Vandemaele 11 , Cecile Viboud 12 , Steven Riley 1 , 2 , James M . McCaw 3 , 13 , Freya M . Shearer 3 , * 1 School of Public Health , Imperial College London , UK 2 MRC Centre for Global infectious Disease Analysis and Abdul Latif Jameel Institute for Disease and Emergency Analytics , Imperial College London , UK 3 Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics , Melbourne School of Population and Global Health , The University of Melbourne , Australia 4 School of Mathematics and Statistics , University of Canterbury , Christchurch , New Zealand 5 Laboratory of Data Discovery for Health , Hong Kong Science and Technology Park , Shatin , Hong Kong Special Administrative Region , China 6 WHO Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Control , School of Public Health , LKS Faculty of Medicine , The University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong Special Administrative Region , China 7 Microbiological Diagnostic Unit Public Health Laboratory , Department of Microbiology and Immunology , The University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity , Melbourne , VIC , Australia 8 Centre for Pathogen Genomics , University of Melbourne , Melbourne , Australia 9 Centre for Epidemic Preparedness and Response , London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine , London , UK 10 WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza , Royal Melbourne Hospital , and Department of Infectious Diseases , University of Melbourne , at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity , Melbourne , Vic , Australia 11 Global Influenza Programme , World Health Organization , Geneva , Switzerland 12 Division of International Epidemiology and Population Studies , Fogarty International Center , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD , USA 13 School of Mathematics and Statistics , The University of Melbourne , Australia * Corresponding author : Freya Shearer freya . shearer @ unimelb . edu . au . Abstract To support the ongoing management of viral respiratory diseases , many countries are moving towards an integrated model of surveillance for SARS - CoV - 2 , influenza , and other respiratory pathogens . While many surveillance approaches catalysed by the COVID - 19 pandemic provide novel epidemiological insight , continuing them as implemented during the pandemic is unlikely to be feasible for non - emergency surveillance , and many have already been scaled back . Furthermore , given anticipated co - circulation of SARS - CoV - 2 and influenza , surveillance activities in place prior to the pandemic require review and adjustment to ensure their ongoing value for public health . In this perspective , we highlight key challenges for the development of integrated models of surveillance . We discuss the relative strengths and limitations of different surveillance practices and studies , their contribution to epidemiological assessment , forecasting , and public health decision making . 1 . Introduction Surveillance plays a critical role in the management of epidemic diseases . This has most recently been demonstrated by the COVID - 19 pandemic , during which existing approaches to respiratory pathogen surveillance , such as community testing , were rapidly scaled up and many enhanced or new surveillance activities , such as infection prevalence surveys , were implemented ( 1 ) . The data generated by COVID - 19 surveillance systems has provided situational awareness and informed myriad policy questions ( 2 , 3 ) . The unprecedented circumstances of the pandemic have revealed both surveillance system strengths , where required data were available in a timely manner , and shortcomings , where data were delayed , unavailable or uninformative . Many components of COVID - 19 surveillance systems that were established to support pandemic response provided insight into epidemic dynamics and intervention impacts that were not possible through surveillance systems in place prior to the pandemic . For example , in the United Kingdom ( UK ) national infection prevalence surveys provided near - real - time insight into the infection ( as opposed to case ) dynamics of SARS - CoV - 2 ( 4 , 5 ) , including infection rates over time by age group ( 6 ) . Household studies and the systematic collection of contact tracing data , particularly in Europe ( 7 ) and Asia ( 8 ) , enabled estimation of key biological quantities affecting transmission ( e . g . , the generation interval ) . Systematic collection of behavioural data from population surveys — with prominent examples in Australia ( 9 ) , Hong Kong ( 10 ) , and the UK ( 11 ) — provided information on the impact of public health measures , including the functioning of various surveillance components . International and country - level platforms for genomic data integration and reporting enabled early characterisation of variants of concern and provided insight into the global patterns of variant spread ( 12 – 15 ) . As we transition out of the pandemic , many countries have discontinued or scaled back COVID - 19 surveillance activities and are moving towards an integrated model of surveillance for COVID - 19 , influenza , and other viral respiratory pathogens of epidemic or pandemic potential ( 16 ) . Globally , COVID - 19 continues to place a significant burden on population health and health systems ( 17 ) . While seasonal patterns are not yet possible to predict , future epidemic waves of SARS - CoV - 2 are anticipated ( 18 ) , and we continue to face the threat of novel variants . With less social disruption due to COVID - 19 , seasonal circulation patterns of other respiratory viruses have resumed ( 19 ) . The long - term impact of co - circulation and behavioural - and immune - mediated interactions between SARS - CoV - 2 and other respiratory pathogens is unknown but is expected to place substantial additional pressure on healthcare systems . Effective surveillance will enable rapid understanding of the status of concurrent epidemics and preparation for any increased impact on healthcare during interpandemic periods . To assess , anticipate , and respond to this overall viral respiratory disease burden , the individual dynamics of each pathogen need to be monitored . Furthermore , effective surveillance will enhance levels of preparedness for responding to the next ( inevitable ) global respiratory virus emergency , including establishing criteria for activating ( and deactivating ) enhanced surveillance activities ( such as special studies ) , according to surveillance objectives . While surveillance objectives will vary by locality and epidemiological context ( as explored by the World Health Organization’s Mosaic framework ( 20 , 21 ) ) a collaborative surveillance approach will support national , regional and global preparedness ( 20 , 21 ) . To inform the design of a sustainable , integrated model of viral respiratory pathogen surveillance ( Figure 1 ) , now is a critical time to review both surveillance practices in place prior to the pandemic and novel approaches adopted for pandemic response . Resuming pathogen specific surveillance approaches , such as those for monitoring influenza , would represent a missed opportunity to build on learnings from emergency response efforts . Herein we describe key challenges for the design of integrated viral respiratory pathogen surveillance as the world transitions out of the COVID - 19 pandemic . We focus on both challenges that apply to the monitoring of any individual viral respiratory pathogen and those that arise due to their co - circulation and integrated nature of a surveillance system . Furthermore , we explore how additional surveillance methods and studies can enhance knowledge and support our ability to anticipate the impact of these respiratory viruses Figure 1 . An integrated surveillance system for multiple circulating respiratory pathogens . ( A ) Surveillance systems , which collect data continuously , monitor changes in infection outcomes ( or behaviour ) at different levels of severity on the ‘severity pyramid’ . In general , the proportions in each level can vary over time ( for example , due to the emergence of new variants ) and so surveillance should be undertaken at multiple levels . Collecting additional behavioural data can help disentangle changes in the data streams due to behaviour specifically ( e . g . , changes in healthcare - seeking behaviour ) or due to behaviour indirectly ( e . g . , changes in transmission rates due to changes in contact rates ) . In general , multiple pathogens will circulate concurrently , and it may be necessary for surveillance systems to be extended to distinguish between the different pathogens ( see Section 2 . 1 ) . Integrating genomic sequencing of samples collected at all levels can additionally allow differences in dynamics between variants to be identified . ( B ) Enhanced surveillance activities conducted periodically can augment continuous surveillance . Enhanced surveillance activities may inform on key epidemiological quantities , such as the generation interval and vaccine effectiveness , which are important for predicting future transmission dynamics . ( C ) Data collected from different sources of clinical , epidemiological , and genomic surveillance can be synthesised through data analysis pipelines and used to generate epidemic forecasts and scenario projections ( long - and short - term ) . ( D ) These forecasts and projections can be used to support public health decision making and planning . 2 . Measuring the clinical burden of multiple circulating respiratory pathogens 2 . 1 How can sentinel syndromic surveillance handle multiple pathogens with overlapping symptom profiles ? In many parts of the world , the public health response to COVID - 19 — including stay - at - home orders ( 22 , 23 ) and a requirement to isolate if testing positive — strongly suppressed viral respiratory transmission ( 9 ) . Accordingly , co - circulation of other respiratory pathogens such as influenza and respiratory syncytial virus ( RSV ) was limited ( 24 , 25 ) . In the absence of other circulating pathogens , for individuals reporting symptoms , it could be assumed that SARS - CoV - 2 was the causative virus , simplifying interpretation of syndromic surveillance data . In the context of co - circulating pathogens , interpretation of data from syndromic surveillance is more complicated ; the overall clinical burden will most often be the result of multiple concurrent epidemics . As a case in point , the 2022 autumn season in the US was characterised by large overlapping epidemics of influenza , RSV and SARS - CoV - 2 , exerting unusual pressure on ICU capacity — a phenomenon coined the “tripledemic” ( 26 ) . Prior to the COVID - 19 pandemic , surveillance of seasonal influenza primarily relied on ‘sentinel syndromic surveillance’ , where a fraction of healthcare sites routinely report the daily number of individuals presenting with influenza - like illness ( ILI ) ( 27 , 28 ) . ILI defining symptoms are not influenza specific , and the temporal signal can be biased by other respiratory pathogens with similar symptom profiles ( 29 , 30 ) ; for this reason , a subset of ILI cases undergo testing to estimate the proportion for which influenza was the causative virus ( ILI + ) . The overlapping symptom profiles of COVID - 19 and influenza will likely result in an increase in the number of individuals presenting with ILI ( i . e . , a decrease in the specificity of ILI defining symptoms for identifying influenza infection ) and previously suitable sampling strategies for testing may no longer yield a sufficient sample size for reliable evaluation of each virus’s contribution to overall burden . Expanding influenza sentinel syndromic surveillance to incorporate COVID - 19 surveillance , as proposed by the World Health Organization ( 16 ) , would avoid the need for two partially redundant surveillance systems . Just as for influenza surveillance , commonly used ILI definitions used for reporting would not ( nor would be required to ) capture all symptomatic COVID - 19 infections ( 31 ) . Broadening the symptom criteria ( and increasing the total sample ) for reporting would capture a greater fraction of symptomatic infections , irrespective of the underlying virus . However , since this could reduce the specificity of the symptom criteria , consideration should be given into how the symptom criteria might be optimised to provide the most epidemiological insight , while maintaining cost - effective sampling rates ( low specificity would require greater sampling rates ) . As any syndromic signal detected would include infections due to influenza , SARS - CoV - 2 , and other pathogens , a random subset of individuals meeting the symptom criterion could undergo testing to identify potential causative virus ( es ) ( 32 ) . This would enable the time - series for each circulating pathogen to be resolved , improving prediction of individual and overall disease burden ( 30 ) ( see Figure 1D ) . 2 . 2 How can trends in community levels of infection be monitored ? Sentinel syndromic surveillance of ILI and ILI + are typically assumed to be proportional to community levels of infection ( 33 ) , despite these indicators only capturing infected individuals who report to a healthcare provider . As was already clear prior to COVID - 19 , the subset of the infected population seeking healthcare will be a biased subsample of the total infected population , and there is evidence of significant inter - and intra - season variation in the fraction of all infections detected for various reasons ( 34 ) . Hence , developing systems for monitoring the underlying levels of infection in the general population is important in order to provide a less biased , more stable denominator for assessments of clinical severity ( see section 3 . 2 ) and intervention effectiveness . Measuring the true levels of infection is difficult and would require testing a representative sample of the general population regularly ( see section 2 . 3 ) . However , if quantities that reliably correlate with the population level of infection can be estimated ( and their biases understood ) , the underlying dynamics of transmission can be inferred . This is not straightforward . First and foremost , case time - series data will not necessarily provide such a correlate . During the COVID - 19 pandemic , many surveillance activities — including wastewater surveillance , symptom - based participatory studies , and mass testing — were used as correlates of SARS - CoV - 2 infection , but not all of them will be sustainable into the future , and many have already been scaled back . Furthermore , while measuring correlates of infection rates is useful for estimating how infection rates vary over time i . e . relative changes , it does not provide estimates of the absolute level of infection in the population over time . Wastewater surveillance of SARS - CoV - 2 was used extensively during the COVID - 19 pandemic ( 35 – 37 ) . Monitoring viral concentration in wastewater over time could provide an indicator of relative changes in the level of incidence that is insensitive to changes in case ascertainment ; when genomic sequencing is also performed on wastewater samples , changes in the level of incidence can be inferred for individual variants ( 38 ) . However , to inform estimates of absolute infection levels , the relationship between viral concentration and incidence of infections must be robustly quantified , which while many approaches have been proposed ( 39 – 41 ) , remains an open scientific challenge . Additionally , wastewater surveillance cannot identify who in a population is infected or provide any clinical information about the severity of those infections , and it is not yet clear if such approaches would be as efficient for influenza surveillance , with limited studies ( 42 , 43 ) . Symptom - based participatory surveillance — such as Outbreaks Near Me ( 44 ) , FluTracking ( 45 ) and InfluenzaNet ( 46 ) — in which cohorts of individuals regularly report their symptoms , is a long - established approach to monitoring seasonal influenza ( 47 ) . During the COVID - 19 pandemic , those systems were rapidly adapted ( or established ) to contribute to SARS - CoV - 2 surveillance ( 48 , 49 ) . Now , with anticipated co - circulation of pathogens with similar symptom profiles , extending these surveillance approaches to include a respiratory sample testing component would be beneficial ( 50 ) . At - home testing with validated , self - administered rapid antigen tests could provide a convenient option . However , symptom - based surveillance systems are sensitive to changes in symptomatology ( 51 ) and symptom reporting , and other surveillance systems that assess the full spectrum of disease caused by infection , including asymptomatic infection , would be required to monitor such changes . At the outset of the COVID - 19 pandemic , many countries implemented large - scale community testing to detect active infections , irrespective of symptoms or epidemiological risk ( 52 ) . While not necessarily articulated in guidelines or surveillance plans , the primary objective of such mass testing was to support case and contact management to reduce transmission . The data generated by these programs ( case time - series data ) includes information on individuals who sought a test because they exhibited symptoms , were identified as contacts of confirmed cases , and / or were part of a workplace screening program ( irrespective of symptoms ) , among other reasons . The fraction of infections detected by mass testing programs will not be representative of the infected population in ways that are difficult to quantify due to the range of reasons for testing . Furthermore , these biases will change over time ( 34 ) in response to policy , epidemiological , and socio - cultural factors . As already described , all the above methods are highly useful for monitoring changes in infection prevalence , but they only measure correlates of infection . To estimate the infection prevalence from these correlates , we need to know how to map between infections and the correlates . This mapping will often depend on biological and / or behavioural factors ( that need to be quantified ) that should be expected to vary over time . An alternative approach to estimate the level of infection is to measure it directly . Random population testing , discussed below , is a key methodology that has been used to measure infection prevalence of SARS - CoV - 2 and has been proposed for the ongoing surveillance of SARS - CoV - 2 and other respiratory pathogens ( 53 ) . 2 . 3 What is the value added from random sampling studies for monitoring infections ? By regularly testing a random subset of the population for the presence of a virus , one can obtain estimates of the infection prevalence over time . These studies are specifically designed to generate less biased estimates of infection prevalence compared to other testing strategies , and if demographic data are also collected , then heterogeneities in infection prevalence can be identified , and biases in the sample can be better understood . In contrast to most surveillance approaches that focus on symptomatic infections , random sampling studies identify asymptomatic and paucisymptomatic infections . Many countries have performed one - off small - scale studies to measure infection prevalence at a single point in time ( 54 – 56 ) . However , the use of repeated random sampling for measuring infection prevalence through time has been extremely limited , with only two studies that we are aware of , both of which estimated infection prevalence of SARS - CoV - 2 within the United Kingdom : the Office for National Statistics’ ( ONS ) Coronavirus Infection Survey ( CIS ) ( 5 ) and the REal - time Assessment of Community Transmission - 1 ( REACT - 1 ) study ( 57 ) . These studies enable robust estimation of the time - series of past infections , and in turn the proportion of the population who are no longer susceptible to infection due to recent exposure , improving epidemic forecasts and scenario projections ( 58 ) . They can be extended ( or integrated with other data sources ) to gain greater insight into key epidemiological quantities , including real - world vaccine effectiveness ( 59 , 60 ) , the transmission advantage of new variants ( 61 , 62 ) , symptomatology ( 31 ) , and post - viral sequelae ( 63 ) . Additionally , indirect ( mathematical and statistical ) models based on other surveillance systems can be validated or refined , by quantifying their relationship to directly measured infection levels ( 64 ) . Insights gained from suitably designed and regularly deployed infection prevalence studies are even greater when infection levels are high , and many positive individuals are identified . Random sampling studies could be implemented ( or continued ) for the ongoing surveillance of SARS - CoV - 2 and other respiratory pathogens , enabling less biased estimates of infection in the community , and supporting situational assessments and forward planning . However , this would not be without challenges . Over the course of the COVID - 19 pandemic , there was a decline in recruitment rates in both the ONS CIS and REACT - 1 studies – this has the potential to increase bias in the sample . Sustainability and feasibility both require further assessment since infection prevalence studies require significant investment . Different approaches , such as embedding randomised testing in existing cohorts or developing new indirect methods to assess infection levels , should be investigated , including the development of new analytical techniques to interpret the data . These may be trialled and evaluated in the seasonal context over the next 2 - 5 years in order to determine the most sustainable , informative and cost - effective ways to generate time - series of infection rates as part of routine viral respiratory surveillance . Testing for multiple pathogens in each sample instead of testing exclusively for SARS - CoV - 2 would allow the infection prevalence and co - circulation of many respiratory pathogens ( and their interactions ) to be quantified ; this is already being trialled by the ONS CIS ( 65 ) . Implementing longitudinal studies ( either separate or embedded ) that employ frequent testing to quantify the relationship between the time since infection and test - positivity ( 66 , 67 ) , could additionally allow the daily incidence of new infections to be estimated from estimates of infection prevalence . Further , long - term longitudinal studies could help quantify the risk of reinfection , and the degree of cross - immunity between different variants in the face of viral evolution . 3 . Assessing changes in key biological quantities 3 . 1 How can key epidemiological quantities be inferred ? Surveillance approaches that collect information on pairs of “infectors” and “infectees” in successive chains of transmission are required for directly estimating ( and monitoring for changes in ) a number of key biological quantities that drive epidemic dynamics , including the incubation period , generation interval and relative contagiousness of asymptomatic infecteds ( 68 ) . For example , the generation interval can most directly be estimated by linking dates of infection onset for infector – infectee pairs , data which are not collected through traditional “case - based” surveillance . While contact tracing activities and outbreak investigations do typically collect relevant data , they have not traditionally been conducted with that goal in mind , and may be scaled back or stopped entirely based on a perceived lack of need , leaving a potential knowledge gap . Knowledge of the generation interval is required for accurate estimation of the effective reproduction number ( 69 ) , itself critical in evaluating the likely impact of alternative control strategies . To date , estimates of the generation interval for COVID - 19 have relied on ( often opportunistically ) collected contact tracing data ( 8 ) ( noting that these studies typically use symptom onset dates rather than infection onset dates , and so estimate the serial interval , which is then used as a proxy for the generation interval ) . While these data provide reliable estimates , they are only available when contact tracing is occurring , which is generally not the case for respiratory pathogens . If studies were specifically designed for this purpose , and / or embedded within other studies ( e . g . , infection prevalence surveys ) then data availability would not depend on the presence of contact tracing and or outbreak investigations . Data quality would likely be enhanced since we might expect more precise recording of time intervals of likely infection and symptom onset . Further , the generation interval of SARS - CoV - 2 changed as the pathogen evolved ( 70 , 71 ) and under different policy settings ( 8 ) , and transmission settings ( 70 ) . If surveillance were augmented by genomic data ( see section 3 . 3 ) from infector - infectee pairs during periods of variant emergence , changes in the generation interval between variants could be measured in real - time , and used to assess potential mechanisms of transmission advantage . This would also allow estimation of the effective reproduction numbers of circulating variants during periods of variant replacement ( 72 ) , improve real - time forecasts of variant impact , and inform intervention planning . Genomic data may also improve accuracy of the inferred transmission links e . g . , excluding coincidental infections in close contacts that were actually acquired from independent sources . 3 . 2 How can a virus’ clinical severity be quantified ? To predict the future numbers of severe outcomes ( e . g . , death , hospitalisation , etc . ) , the relationship between infection and the probability of a severe outcome needs to be well characterised , including how it varies with age , vaccination - status , comorbidities , and other epidemiological covariates . For this to be possible , accurate estimates of infection levels ( to compare to the levels of severe outcomes ) ( 73 ) , or the infection outcomes of an unbiased sample of infected individuals are required . The infection fatality ratio ( IFR ) and infection hospitalisation ratio ( IHR ) are measures of the proportion of infections that result in death or hospitalisation respectively . Over the course of the COVID - 19 pandemic , the IFR and IHR for SARS - CoV - 2 changed due to mass vaccination and the emergence of new variants ( 73 ) . For seasonal influenza , in countries with suitable data systems and resources , the case fatality ratio ( CFR ) and case hospitalisation ratio ( CHR ) are routinely computed and may vary from season to season ( 74 ) . However , it is difficult to distinguish the extent to which changes in the CFR and CHR for seasonal influenza are due to changes in case ascertainment or the intrinsic biology of the circulating strain and effectiveness of the vaccine . The IFR and IHR for seasonal influenza ( which are independent of case ascertainment ) are seldom known since the underlying levels of infection in the community are rarely measured and hospitalisations / deaths are not always attributed to a specific pathogen , undercounting the true burden . It is crucial we are able to measure any changes in the IFR and IHR of a pathogen so they can be incorporated into situational assessments and scenario planning ( 58 ) . Severe outcomes are recorded by public health systems in many countries , but their definitions may vary between ( and within ) countries or over time and are often not universal , but sentinel based or for a subset of hospitals . And for mortality surveillance , this is often only available near real time for all cause mortality rather than for disease specific mortality . Linking the data collected on severe outcomes ( and key covariates such as co - morbidities ) to surveillance systems that identify the level of infection in the general population , could allow estimates of the IFR , and IHR to be made quickly . If the definitions used for severe outcomes were standardised through time , then changes in severity between and within epidemic seasons could be more easily detected . 3 . 3 How can the emergence of antigenically distinct variants be accounted for when quantifying epidemiological quantities ? High levels of population immunity drive a significant transmission advantage for antigenically distinct variants . Although emerging variants are often genetically similar to previously circulating variants , even small numbers of changes in critical regions of the genome can result in significant differences in their intrinsic biology and their resulting epidemic dynamics . Unprecedented rates of genomic sequencing ( in some countries ) during the COVID - 19 pandemic ( 75 ) enabled epidemiological studies to distinguish infections caused by different SARS - CoV - 2 variants , identify the eradication of outbreak clusters related to public health interventions ( 76 ) , and identify differences in their epidemiological characteristics ( 62 , 70 ) . However , in many countries , sequencing was either too limited or sampling strategies were not sufficiently effective to identify changes in the transmission dynamics due to the emergence of biologically distinct variants . Past surveillance of seasonal influenza has also been relatively limited in its ( per capita or per case ) rate of sequencing ( 77 ) . More strategic integration of genomic sequencing ( even at low levels ) into future surveillance systems is required to capture epidemiologically relevant differences between variants ( 78 – 80 ) . Monitoring the mix of genetic variants circulating in the general community is critical for situational awareness , but in some countries the focus has been on monitoring SARS - CoV - 2 variants in clinical settings ( 78 ) . While sequencing of cases with severe disease provides important data on disease severity , including for the detection of changes in the IFR ( see section 3 . 2 ) , detecting if a variant has a transmission advantage should also be a priority , and this requires sequencing of cases from the general community ( e . g . , embedded within an infection prevalence study ( 81 ) ) . An increase in inherent transmissibility of a pathogen ( i . e . , increased basic reproduction number ) causes clinical outcomes to grow exponentially ( 72 ) whereas the same proportional increase in the IFR only causes a linear increase in clinical outcomes . Of course from epidemic theory , over the longer term , for a highly transmissible pathogen , a transmission advantage will have only minimal effect on average prevalence ( and the clinical burden ) , whereas an increase in the IFR will result in a linear increase in the clinical burden . By developing sequencing strategies that incorporate representative sampling of infections in the general population ( e . g . , through infection prevalence studies ) , variant proportions can be reliably estimated in near - real - time ; and in the early stage of variant emergence , these data can be used to track transmission advantage for incorporation into epidemic forecasts and other situational analyses ( 72 , 82 ) . While the early pandemic was characterised by waves of distinct variants , the situation for SARS - CoV - 2 now is that a diverse set of Omicron sub - variants are co - circulating at any time , with many differing by only a small number of mutations . It is important that a classification method exists so that this diverse strain set can be clustered into a smaller number of functional ( from a public health response perspective ) groupings with similar epidemiological characteristics ; differences in epidemiological quantities can then be inferred between variants . During the pandemic , classification systems mainly grouped SARS - CoV - 2 strains based on how closely they were phylogenetically related ( 83 ) . However , convergent and directional evolution may lead to many overlapping clusters , or numerous genetically distinct strains which are antigenically similar ( 84 ) . Antigenic cartography , which has been used extensively for influenza ( 85 , 86 ) , could allow genetically diverse sets of strains to be clustered based on their antigenic characteristics ( 87 ) ; though there are some practicality issues for high throughput surveillance whilst SARS - CoV - 2 is classified as a BSL3 virus . 4 . Quantifying changes in epidemiological dynamics 4 . 1 In an increasingly complex immune landscape how can infection history be quantified ? Population immunity to SARS - CoV - 2 infection has increased in complexity through the course of the pandemic . At the beginning of the pandemic there was likely minimal population immunity . With multiple vaccination courses , the emergence and spread of multiple variants , and waning of both vaccine - and infection - induced immunity , the individual - and population - level characteristics of immunity are now highly complex ( 88 ) . Repeated epidemics of Omicron sub - variants indicate that immunity against reinfection may not be long - lasting , but reduced severity of infections over time is consistent with increasing levels of population immunity against severe disease ( 89 ) . In principle all possible combinations of exposures and vaccinations , and their timing , must be considered to estimate immunity and the relative level of susceptibility . With future variants and updated vaccines , the problem will undergo a combinatorial explosion ; this is a known challenge for influenza and there exist some modelling approaches designed to manage this complexity ( 90 ) . Significant improvements ( for both influenza and SARS - CoV - 2 ) could be made to forward projections of clinical burden and the design of future vaccination campaigns if the immune landscape could be more accurately quantified . Serological data , which is used to measure the presence of specific antibodies in an individual’s blood , can be used to quantify immunity when the antibodies correlate sufficiently with protection against infection ( 91 ) . Serological studies of influenza have greatly improved the understanding of long - term dynamics of influenza antibody - mediated immunity ( 92 ) , but such serological data has not been used for routine surveillance . The collection of serological data was commonplace during the SARS - CoV - 2 pandemic ( 93 , 94 ) . Studies found that serum antibody titres correlated with protection against symptomatic infection during the first two years of the pandemic ( 95 , 96 ) , with neutralising antibodies offering the strongest correlation ( 97 , 98 ) . Most of the global population will now have antibodies against SARS - CoV - 2 in their sera ( following infection and / or vaccination ) , but future infections are likely to be caused by variants able to evade these existing antibodies . Additionally , the long - term dynamics of immunity against SARS - CoV - 2 are not yet understood ; correlate - of - protection studies ( e . g . , longitudinal cohort studies ) should be established to identify appropriate immunological tests that can quantify population - or individual - level immunity against infection with future SARS - CoV - 2 variants . If suitable correlates - of - protection could be identified , then it is possible that serological surveillance systems could be established to quantify population immunity against newly emerging variants before waves of infection occur . If these immunological observations could be combined with predictions of strain evolution ( 99 , 100 ) the future burden of respiratory viruses could be anticipated . 4 . 2 How will we determine the drivers of changes in future transmission dynamics ? The COVID - 19 pandemic saw marked heterogeneities in age - specific transmission , infection and severity of infection ( 101 , 102 ) . As we transition out of the acute phase of the pandemic , the age distribution of infections will likely change due to changing patterns of population immunity ( infection - and vaccine - induced ) ( 103 , 104 ) . Monitoring age - specific infection rates and transmission could improve epidemic projections by allowing differences between age - groups to be incorporated in epidemic models ; this is highly important for projections of the clinical burden , since disease severity can be highly dependent on age ( 105 – 107 ) . Further , comparison of age - specific infection rates with severe outcomes could allow any changes in the relationship between age and IFR to be identified and incorporated into situational assessments . Infection prevalence studies ( see section 2 . 3 ) could explicitly measure differences in infection rates between age - groups , with fewer sampling biases than other testing strategies . The future dynamics of SARS - CoV - 2 transmission will not only be influenced by biological factors such as immunity . They will also be highly dependent on human behaviour , including changes in human contact networks , and changes in behaviour that influence the likelihood of transmission given contact . The pandemic saw dramatic changes in social contact networks ( 11 ) , which altered the transmission dynamics of SARS - CoV - 2 ( 108 ) and many other pathogens ( 109 ) . With most travel and social restrictions now relaxed , levels of social mixing and movement have rebounded , but it is not clear when or whether contact networks will eventually reconfigure to their pre - pandemic patterns . Distinguishing changes in epidemiological dynamics due to changes in the biology of the virus from changes in human contact networks will be crucial for quantifying the future transmission dynamics of SARS - CoV - 2 and other respiratory pathogens . Behavioural studies , which quantify human contact networks , and how they vary between populations and over time , will be paramount for identifying the origins of any epidemiological changes . Such studies will also support the refinement of epidemiological models that incorporate human behaviour , improving their value for situational assessment , planning and control . 4 . 3 Can the frequency and timing of recurrent epidemics be projected ? Long - term projections of the potential magnitude and timing of future epidemic seasons can assist health systems in better preparing for the resulting clinical burden . This work is distinct ( and complementary ) to the statistical near - term forecasting of peak timing and size routinely conducted throughout an epidemic season ( 110 ) . Influenza transmission is highly seasonal ; in temperate regions there are yearly winter epidemics ( 111 ) , whereas in tropical regions there is a high background level of influenza infection with additional epidemics occurring with less regular timings ( 112 ) . The long - term dynamics of SARS - CoV - 2 are uncertain , but recurrent epidemics are likely to occur into the future ( 113 , 114 ) . In situations with significant circulation of SARS - CoV - 2 , influenza , and other respiratory pathogens it is not yet known how concurrent epidemics will interact . Virus - virus interference at the individual host level is a well - established phenomena ( 115 – 117 ) , but far less is understood about the epidemiological consequences of that interference ( 111 ) . Will concurrent epidemics cause increased pressure on health services ? Or could epidemics interfere with each other , resulting in misalignment , or less predictable behaviour ? Multiple recurrent epidemics involving SARS - CoV - 2 and other established viruses will need to be observed to answer these questions . In the meantime , surveillance planning should consider these longer - term surveillance objectives . It is important that any data collected from surveillance systems is consistent between years , so that dynamics between years can be reliably compared and such questions over inter - epidemic timescales can be answered . If serological data were routinely collected , it might be possible to regularly estimate population immunity ( see section 4 . 1 ) , informing estimates of epidemic timing . Studies would first be required to identify when and what serological data should be collected , and by how much it could improve estimates of epidemic timing . 5 . Leveraging the global dynamics of transmission 5 . 1 How should data from across regions be incorporated into local situational assessments ? Surveillance systems are largely designed and implemented at the local scale ( country , state , etc ) to support local public health decision making , but respiratory viruses exhibit global transmission patterns . Monitoring the transmission dynamics in other regions can often help predict future local dynamics . For seasonal influenza , epidemic dynamics during one hemisphere’s winter can sometimes be suggestive of the future epidemic dynamics during the other hemisphere’s winter ( 118 ) ; though there can still be much variation in epidemic dynamics even within a single hemisphere’s flu season ( 119 ) . During the SARS - CoV - 2 pandemic , data from regions with high infection rates were relied on to inform risk assessment and scenario planning in regions with very low levels of infection or which had achieved local ( temporary ) elimination ( 120 , 121 ) . When a novel variant emerges , detailed epidemic data can only be obtained in regions where there is a high degree of circulation . Analysis based on epidemic data obtained from other regions can be crucial for informing local public health strategies , especially for countries with common profiles . This may also benefit low - or middle - income countries since they may have insufficient resources to collect local data ( 21 ) ( though there are some initiatives aimed at providing resources to such countries ( 122 ) ) . Sharing local surveillance data , and data analyses , between locales would be mutually beneficial , but there are open challenges ; though some countries have shared enormous amounts of data both officially ( e . g . through the WHO ) and via country - specific public dashboards , there are others from which data has been minimal . Additionally , even when data are widely shared there can be international differences in data acquisition , definitions and reporting standards which make comparisons difficult . Successful examples exist such as GISAID ( 123 ) , which has allowed global genomic sequence data to be shared widely ; though there remain strong geographic biases in the sequences uploaded with North America and Europe over - represented ( 77 , 124 ) . 5 . 2 How can global genomic sampling procedures be optimised to improve vaccine strain selection ? Vaccine strain compositions need to be updated regularly to manage the emergence of new antigenically distinct variants ( SARS - CoV - 2 ) / strains ( influenza ) . Influenza vaccine compositions are reviewed bi - annually ; SARS - CoV - 2 vaccine compositions will likely also be reviewed frequently . The process by which influenza vaccine composition is selected is multifaceted and complex , and even after an appropriate strain is selected for inclusion the manufacturing process can take a significant amount of time . For this reason , vaccine composition recommendations are based on predictions of the dominant strains at some point in the future ( 77 ) . Improving these predictions will improve future vaccine effectiveness and health outcomes . Variants / strains can emerge anywhere . Seasonal influenza strains have been thought to predominantly be seeded from South / South - East Asia ( 125 , 126 ) , though there is no guarantee that future strains will originate there . It is still not known what the geographic distribution of SARS - CoV - 2 variants will be after an evolutionary equilibrium is reached , but in the first two years of the pandemic variants of concern were first detected in the UK ( Alpha ) ( 82 ) , South Africa ( Beta , Omicron ) ( 127 , 128 ) and India ( Delta ) ( 129 ) . Predictions of future dominant variants / strains could be improved if they were detected and characterised earlier . More strategic and standardised global genomic sampling would decrease the time between emergence and detection , and potentially be more cost - effective . In the past there have been large geographic and temporal biases in sampling for influenza ( 77 ) and SARS - CoV - 2 ( 75 , 124 ) . However , as we do not know where in the world a new variant / strain will emerge , more geographically distributed sampling rates would improve global epidemiological insights and could be more cost - effective . In the future , geographic sampling distributions could be targeted to reflect any geographic heterogeneities in variant / strain emergence . 5 . 3 How can gaps in global surveillance be handled ? Complementing initiatives to improve within - country surveillance — such as increasing global coverage of existing sentinel surveillance systems and expanding them to cover multiple respiratory pathogens — methods have been proposed for leveraging traveller datasets ( 130 ) . During the SARS - CoV - 2 pandemic , international travellers were often required to undergo pre - or post - flight testing , as a method of reducing imported cases . The results from these tests were often informative for global surveillance ; a country’s local transmission dynamics could be inferred from the test results of people travelling out of the country ( 131 ) . Genomic sequencing of these tests could further inform the dynamics of variants within the country . Testing requirements for international travellers have now been scaled back in many countries based on local public health surveillance and response requirements . While well justified from that perspective , it has also removed a valuable tool for global surveillance . It is not clear if there is a suitable surveillance mechanism that could perform this role during the post - pandemic period , and for viruses other than SARS - CoV - 2 . Testing and sequencing even a small percentage of travellers ( for a specific respiratory pathogen ) entering a few major airports would likely provide great insight into the pathogen’s global patterns of prevalence , circulation and evolution . A surveillance system designed for routine testing of frequent international travellers , such as airline crews , could be one possible approach . Another possible approach that has been considered is testing the wastewater from international flights ( 132 , 133 ) . 6 . Conclusion As the world transitions out of the acute phase of the COVID - 19 pandemic , international and national surveillance systems are moving towards integrated models of surveillance for SARS - CoV - 2 , influenza , and other viral respiratory pathogens . This integration requires a re - evaluation of the public health objectives of surveillance , and consideration of how both pre - pandemic practices and new approaches adopted during the COVID - 19 pandemic can best support those objectives . We have highlighted how different surveillance practices , previously applied to influenza and or COVID - 19 , contribute to specific areas of epidemiological analysis and insight . We have identified challenges associated with respiratory virus surveillance , many of which relate to the monitoring of individual viral respiratory pathogens , while others are specific to the development of integrated models of surveillance . Open questions remain on the design of integrated models of surveillance , including a need to further optimise individual components , and identify synergies and redundancies across them . Furthermore , the cost - effectiveness and feasibility of surveillance approaches in interpandemic and pandemic situations requires investigation ; as does the transferability of information across countries and regions . Our insights can assist surveillance planners as they assess the public health value and costs of various surveillance practices against the objectives of integrated models of surveillance for SARS - CoV - 2 , influenza , and other viral respiratory pathogens , supporting interpandemic surveillance and preparedness for the next pandemic . Author declarations The authors alone are responsible for the views expressed in this article and they do not necessarily represent the views , decisions or policies of the institutions with which they are affiliated . References 1 . Ibrahim NK . Epidemiologic surveillance for controlling Covid - 19 pandemic : types , challenges and implications . J Infect Public Health . 2020 Nov ; 13 ( 11 ) : 1630 – 8 . 2 . Wells CR , Townsend JP , Pandey A , Moghadas SM , Krieger G , Singer B , et al . Optimal COVID - 19 quarantine and testing strategies . Nat Commun . 2021 Jan 7 ; 12 ( 1 ) : 356 . 3 . Nguyen T , Adnan M , Nguyen BP , de Ligt J , Geoghegan JL , Dean R , et al . COVID - 19 vaccine strategies for Aotearoa New Zealand : a mathematical modelling study . Lancet Reg Health West Pac . 2021 Oct ; 15 : 100256 . 4 . Elliott P , Eales O , Steyn N , Tang D , Bodinier B , Wang H , et al . Twin peaks : The Omicron SARS - CoV - 2 BA . 1 and BA . 2 epidemics in England . Science . 2022 May 24 ; 376 : eabq4411 . 5 . Pouwels KB , House T , Pritchard E , Robotham JV , Birrell PJ , Gelman A , et al . Community prevalence of SARS - CoV - 2 in England from April to November , 2020 : results from the ONS Coronavirus Infection Survey . Lancet Public Health . 2021 Jan ; 6 ( 1 ) : e30 – 8 . 6 . Eales O , Wang H , Haw D , Ainslie KEC , Walters CE , Atchison C , et al . Trends in SARS - CoV - 2 infection prevalence during England’s roadmap out of lockdown , January to July 2021 . PLoS Comput Biol . 2022 Nov 23 ; 18 ( 11 ) : e1010724 . 7 . Manica M , De Bellis A , Guzzetta G , Mancuso P , Vicentini M , Venturelli F , et al . Intrinsic generation time of the SARS - CoV - 2 Omicron variant : An observational study of household transmission . Lancet Reg Health Eur . 2022 Aug ; 19 : 100446 . 8 . Chen D , Lau YC , Xu XK , Wang L , Du Z , Tsang TK , et al . Inferring time - varying generation time , serial interval , and incubation period distributions for COVID - 19 . Nat Commun . 2022 Dec 13 ; 13 ( 1 ) : 7727 . 9 . Golding N , Price DJ , Ryan G , McVernon J , McCaw JM , Shearer FM . A modelling approach to estimate the transmissibility of SARS - CoV - 2 during periods of high , low , and zero case incidence . Elife [ Internet ] . 2023 Jan 20 ; 12 . Available from : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 78089 10 . Du Z , Wang L , Shan S , Lam D , Tsang TK , Xiao J , et al . Pandemic fatigue impedes mitigation of COVID - 19 in Hong Kong . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2022 Nov 29 ; 119 ( 48 ) : e2213313119 . 11 . Jarvis CI , Van Zandvoort K , Gimma A , Prem K , CMMID COVID - 19 working group , Klepac P , et al . Quantifying the impact of physical distance measures on the transmission of COVID - 19 in the UK . BMC Med . 2020 May 7 ; 18 ( 1 ) : 124 . 12 . Msomi N , Mlisana K , de Oliveira T , Network for Genomic Surveillance in South Africa writing group . A genomics network established to respond rapidly to public health threats in South Africa . Lancet Microbe . 2020 Oct ; 1 ( 6 ) : e229 – 30 . 13 . Hoang T , da Silva AG , Jennison AV , Williamson DA , Howden BP , Seemann T . AusTrakka : Fast - tracking nationalized genomics surveillance in response to the COVID - 19 pandemic . Nat Commun . 2022 Feb 14 ; 13 ( 1 ) : 865 . 14 . Khare S , Gurry C , Freitas L , Schultz MB , Bach G , Diallo A , et al . GISAID’s Role in Pandemic Response . China CDC Wkly . 2021 Dec 3 ; 3 ( 49 ) : 1049 – 51 . 15 . COVID - 19 Genomics UK ( COG - UK ) . An integrated national scale SARS - CoV - 2 genomic surveillance network . Lancet Microbe . 2020 Jul ; 1 ( 3 ) : e99 – 100 . 16 . World Health Organization Global Influenza Programme . Integrated sentinel surveillance of influenza and SARS - CoV - 2 and the development of the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System Plus : virtual meeting , 12 – 14 October 2021 [ Internet ] . World Health Organization ; 2022 Jun [ cited 2022 Dec 19 ] . Available from : https : / / www . who . int / publications / i / item / 9789240050228 17 . World Health Organization . Statement on the fourteenth meeting of the International Health Regulations ( 2005 ) Emergency Committee regarding the coronavirus disease ( COVID - 19 ) pandemic [ Internet ] . 2023 [ cited 2023 Feb 2 ] . Available from : https : / / www . who . int / news / item / 30 - 01 - 2023 - statement - on - the - fourteenth - meeting - of - the - i nternational - health - regulations - ( 2005 ) - emergency - committee - regarding - the - coronavirus - disease - ( covid - 19 ) - pandemic 18 . Telenti A , Arvin A , Corey L , Corti D , Diamond MS , García - Sastre A , et al . After the pandemic : perspectives on the future trajectory of COVID - 19 . Nature . 2021 Aug ; 596 ( 7873 ) : 495 – 504 . 19 . Lee SS , Viboud C , Petersen E . Understanding the rebound of influenza in the post COVID - 19 pandemic period holds important clues for epidemiology and control . Int J Infect Dis . 2022 Sep ; 122 : 1002 – 4 . 20 . World Health Organization Mosaic Respiratory Surveillance Framework . “Crafting the mosaic” : a framework for resilient surveillance for respiratory viruses of epidemic and pandemic potential . World Health Organization ; 2023 Mar . 21 . WHO Health Emergencies Programme ( WHE ) . 10 proposals to build a safer world together Strengthening the Global Architecture for Health Emergency Preparedness , Response and Resilience [ Internet ] . World Health Organization ; 2022 Jun . Available from : https : / / cdn . who . int / media / docs / default - source / emergency - preparedness / who _ hepr _ june 30draftforconsult . pdf ? sfvrsn = e6117d2c _ 4 & download = true 22 . Prime Minister’s Office . Prime Minister announces national lockdown [ Internet ] . GOV . UK . 2021 [ cited 2021 Apr 22 ] . Available from : https : / / www . gov . uk / government / news / prime - minister - announces - national - lockdown 23 . Premier of Victoria . Extended Melbourne Lockdown to Keep Victorians Safe [ Internet ] . 2021 [ cited 2021 Sep 10 ] . Available from : https : / / www . premier . vic . gov . au / extended - melbourne - lockdown - keep - victorians - safe - 0 24 . Burstein R , Althouse BM , Adler A , Akullian A , Brandstetter E , Cho S , et al . Interactions among 17 respiratory pathogens : a cross - sectional study using clinical and community surveillance data . medRxiv [ Internet ] . 2022 Feb 6 ; Available from : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 02 . 04 . 22270474 25 . Olsen SJ , Azziz - Baumgartner E , Budd AP , Brammer L , Sullivan S , Pineda RF , et al . Decreased Influenza Activity During the COVID - 19 Pandemic - United States , Australia , Chile , and South Africa , 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 2020 Sep 18 ; 69 ( 37 ) : 1305 – 9 . 26 . Cohen J . Will viral interference hold off the tripledemic ? Science . 2022 Nov 25 ; 378 ( 6622 ) : 814 – 5 . 27 . Brown CS , Jorgensen P , Mott JA , Pereyaslov D , Martiryosan L , Meerhoff T , et al . WHO Regional Office for Europe guidance for sentinel influenza surveillance in humans [ Internet ] . WHO Regional Office for Europe ; 2011 May . Available from : https : / / apps . who . int / iris / bitstream / handle / 10665 / 349780 / WHO - EURO - 2011 - 4258 - 44021 - 62085 - eng . pdf ? sequence = 1 & isAllowed = y 28 . Biggerstaff M , Dahlgren FS , Fitzner J , George D , Hammond A , Hall I , et al . Coordinating the real - time use of global influenza activity data for better public health planning . Influenza Other Respi Viruses . 2020 Mar ; 14 ( 2 ) : 105 – 10 . 29 . Zambon MC , Stockton JD , Clewley JP , Fleming DM . Contribution of influenza and respiratory syncytial virus to community cases of influenza - like illness : an observational study . Lancet . 2001 Oct 27 ; 358 ( 9291 ) : 1410 – 6 . 30 . Pei S , Shaman J . Aggregating forecasts of multiple respiratory pathogens supports more accurate forecasting of influenza - like illness . PLoS Comput Biol . 2020 Oct ; 16 ( 10 ) : e1008301 . 31 . Elliott J , Whitaker M , Bodinier B , Eales O , Riley S , Ward H , et al . Predictive symptoms for COVID - 19 in the community : REACT - 1 study of over 1 million people . PLoS Med . 2021 Sep ; 18 ( 9 ) : e1003777 . 32 . Howard PF , McCaw JM , Richmond PC , Nissen M , Sloots T , Lambert SB , et al . Virus detection and its association with symptoms during influenza - like illness in a sample of healthy adults enrolled in a randomised controlled vaccine trial . Influenza Other Respi Viruses . 2013 May ; 7 ( 3 ) : 330 – 9 . 33 . Wong JY , Wu P , Nishiura H , Goldstein E , Lau EHY , Yang L , et al . Infection fatality risk of the pandemic A ( H1N1 ) 2009 virus in Hong Kong . Am J Epidemiol . 2013 Apr 15 ; 177 ( 8 ) : 834 – 40 . 34 . Moss R , Zarebski AE , Carlson SJ , McCaw JM . Accounting for Healthcare - Seeking Behaviours and Testing Practices in Real - Time Influenza Forecasts . Trop Med Infect Dis [ Internet ] . 2019 Jan 11 ; 4 ( 1 ) . Available from : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3390 / tropicalmed4010012 35 . Bibby K , Bivins A , Wu Z , North D . Making waves : Plausible lead time for wastewater based epidemiology as an early warning system for COVID - 19 . Water Res . 2021 Sep 1 ; 202 : 117438 . 36 . Levy JI , Andersen KG , Knight R , Karthikeyan S . Wastewater surveillance for public health . Science . 2023 Jan 6 ; 379 ( 6627 ) : 26 – 7 . 37 . Farkas K , Hillary LS , Malham SK , McDonald JE , Jones DL . Wastewater and public health : the potential of wastewater surveillance for monitoring COVID - 19 . Curr Opin Environ Sci Health . 2020 Oct ; 17 : 14 – 20 . 38 . Kaya D , Falender R , Radniecki T , Geniza M , Cieslak P , Kelly C , et al . Correlation between Clinical and Wastewater SARS - CoV - 2 Genomic Surveillance , Oregon , USA . Emerg Infect Dis . 2022 Sep ; 28 ( 9 ) : 1906 – 8 . 39 . McMahan CS , Self S , Rennert L , Kalbaugh C , Kriebel D , Graves D , et al . COVID - 19 wastewater epidemiology : a model to estimate infected populations . Lancet Planet Health . 2021 Dec ; 5 ( 12 ) : e874 – 81 . 40 . Li X , Kulandaivelu J , Zhang S , Shi J , Sivakumar M , Mueller J , et al . Data - driven estimation of COVID - 19 community prevalence through wastewater - based epidemiology . Sci Total Environ . 2021 Oct 1 ; 789 : 147947 . 41 . Xiao A , Wu F , Bushman M , Zhang J , Imakaev M , Chai PR , et al . Metrics to relate COVID - 19 wastewater data to clinical testing dynamics . Water Res . 2022 Apr 1 ; 212 : 118070 . 42 . Kilaru P , Hill D , Anderson K , Collins MB , Green H , Kmush BL , et al . Wastewater Surveillance for Infectious Disease : A Systematic Review . Am J Epidemiol [ Internet ] . 2022 Oct 13 ; Available from : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / aje / kwac175 43 . Nadeau S , Devaux AJ , Bagutti C , Alt M , Ilg Hampe E , Kraus M , et al . Influenza transmission dynamics quantified from wastewater [ Internet ] . medRxiv . 2023 . Available from : https : / / www . medrxiv . org / content / 10 . 1101 / 2023 . 01 . 23 . 23284894v1 . abstract 44 . Outbreaks Near Me [ Internet ] . [ cited 2023 Apr 4 ] . Available from : https : / / outbreaksnearme . org / us / en - US 45 . Flutracking [ Internet ] . [ cited 2023 Apr 4 ] . Available from : https : / / info . flutracking . net / 46 . InfluenzaNet [ Internet ] . [ cited 2023 Apr 4 ] . Available from : https : / / influenzanet . info / explore - data 47 . Wójcik OP , Brownstein JS , Chunara R , Johansson MA . Public health for the people : participatory infectious disease surveillance in the digital age . Emerg Themes Epidemiol . 2014 Jun 20 ; 11 : 7 . 48 . Chan AT , Brownstein JS . Putting the Public Back in Public Health - Surveying Symptoms of Covid - 19 . N Engl J Med . 2020 Aug 13 ; 383 ( 7 ) : e45 . 49 . Rader B , Gertz A , Iuliano AD , Gilmer M , Wronski L , Astley CM , et al . Use of At - Home COVID - 19 Tests - United States , August 23 , 2021 - March 12 , 2022 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 2022 Apr 1 ; 71 ( 13 ) : 489 – 94 . 50 . Hansen C , Perofsky AC , Burstein R , Famulare M , Boyle S , Prentice R , et al . Trends in Risk Factors and Symptoms Associated With SARS - CoV - 2 and Rhinovirus Test Positivity in King County , Washington , June 2020 to July 2022 . JAMA Netw Open . 2022 Dec 1 ; 5 ( 12 ) : e2245861 . 51 . Townsley H , Carr EJ , Russell TW , Adams L , Mears HV , Bailey C , et al . Non - hospitalised , vaccinated adults with COVID - 19 caused by Omicron BA . 1 and BA . 2 present with changing symptom profiles compared to those with Delta despite similar viral kinetics [ Internet ] . medRxiv . 2022 . Available from : https : / / www . medrxiv . org / content / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 07 . 07 . 22277367v1 . abstract 52 . Workman J . The proportion of COVID - 19 cases that are asymptomatic in South Korea : Comment on Nishiura et al . Int J Infect Dis . 2020 Jul ; 96 : 398 . 53 . Dean N . Tracking COVID - 19 infections : time for change . Nature . 2022 Feb ; 602 ( 7896 ) : 185 . 54 . Yiannoutsos CT , Halverson PK , Menachemi N . Bayesian estimation of SARS - CoV - 2 prevalence in Indiana by random testing . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A [ Internet ] . 2021 Feb 2 ; 118 ( 5 ) . Available from : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 2013906118 55 . Guerriero M , Bisoffi Z , Poli A , Micheletto C , Conti A , Pomari C . Prevalence of SARS - CoV - 2 , Verona , Italy , April - May 2020 . Emerg Infect Dis [ Internet ] . 2021 Jan ; 27 ( 1 ) . Available from : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3201 / eid2701 . 202740 56 . Merkely B , Szabó AJ , Kosztin A , Berényi E , Sebestyén A , Lengyel C , et al . Novel coronavirus epidemic in the Hungarian population , a cross - sectional nationwide survey to support the exit policy in Hungary . Geroscience . 2020 Aug ; 42 ( 4 ) : 1063 – 74 . 57 . Riley S , Ainslie KEC , Eales O , Walters CE , Wang H , Atchison C , et al . Resurgence of SARS - CoV - 2 : Detection by community viral surveillance . Science . 2021 May 28 ; 372 ( 6545 ) : 990 – 5 . 58 . Sonabend R , Whittles LK , Imai N , Perez - Guzman PN , Knock ES , Rawson T , et al . Non - pharmaceutical interventions , vaccination , and the SARS - CoV - 2 delta variant in England : a mathematical modelling study . Lancet . 2021 Nov 13 ; 398 ( 10313 ) : 1825 – 35 . 59 . Chadeau - Hyam M , Wang H , Eales O , Haw D , Bodinier B , Whitaker M , et al . SARS - CoV - 2 infection and vaccine effectiveness in England ( REACT - 1 ) : a series of cross - sectional random community surveys . Lancet Respir Med . 2022 Jan 24 ; 10 ( 4 ) : 355 – 66 . 60 . Pouwels KB , Pritchard E , Matthews PC , Stoesser N , Eyre DW , Vihta KD , et al . Effect of Delta variant on viral burden and vaccine effectiveness against new SARS - CoV - 2 infections in the UK . Nat Med . 2021 Dec ; 27 ( 12 ) : 2127 – 35 . 61 . Eales O , Page AJ , de Oliveira Martins L , Wang H , Bodinier B , Haw D , et al . SARS - CoV - 2 lineage dynamics in England from September to November 2021 : high diversity of Delta sub - lineages and increased transmissibility of AY . 4 . 2 . BMC Infect Dis . 2022 Jul 27 ; 22 ( 1 ) : 647 . 62 . Eales O , de Oliveira Martins L , Page AJ , Wang H , Bodinier B , Tang D , et al . Dynamics of competing SARS - CoV - 2 variants during the Omicron epidemic in England . Nat Commun . 2022 Jul 28 ; 13 ( 1 ) : 1 – 11 . 63 . Office for National Statistics ( ONS ) . Prevalence of ongoing symptoms following coronavirus ( COVID - 19 ) infection in the UK [ Internet ] . Office for National Statistics ; 2023 [ cited 2023 Apr 19 ] . Available from : https : / / www . ons . gov . uk / peoplepopulationandcommunity / healthandsocialcare / conditionsa nddiseases / bulletins / prevalenceofongoingsymptomsfollowingcoronaviruscovid19infectio nintheuk / 30march2023 64 . Nicholson G , Lehmann B , Padellini T , Pouwels KB , Jersakova R , Lomax J , et al . Improving local prevalence estimates of SARS - CoV - 2 infections using a causal debiasing framework . Nat Microbiol . 2022 Jan ; 7 ( 1 ) : 97 – 107 . 65 . Lloyd L , Murphy C . The Bigger Picture : Using the COVID - 19 Infection Survey to track other infections [ Internet ] . 2022 [ cited 2022 Dec 18 ] . Available from : https : / / blog . ons . gov . uk / 2022 / 12 / 15 / the - bigger - picture - using - the - covid - infection - survey - to - track - other - infections / 66 . Ke R , Martinez PP , Smith RL , Gibson LL , Mirza A , Conte M , et al . Daily longitudinal sampling of SARS - CoV - 2 infection reveals substantial heterogeneity in infectiousness . Nat Microbiol . 2022 May ; 7 ( 5 ) : 640 – 52 . 67 . Hellewell J , Russell TW , SAFER Investigators and Field Study Team , Crick COVID - 19 Consortium , CMMID COVID - 19 working group , Beale R , et al . Estimating the effectiveness of routine asymptomatic PCR testing at different frequencies for the detection of SARS - CoV - 2 infections . BMC Med . 2021 Apr 27 ; 19 ( 1 ) : 106 . 68 . Kraemer MUG , Pybus OG , Fraser C , Cauchemez S , Rambaut A , Cowling BJ . Monitoring key epidemiological parameters of SARS - CoV - 2 transmission . Nat Med . 2021 Nov ; 27 ( 11 ) : 1854 – 5 . 69 . Wallinga J , Lipsitch M . How generation intervals shape the relationship between growth rates and reproductive numbers . Proc Biol Sci . 2007 Feb 22 ; 274 ( 1609 ) : 599 – 604 . 70 . Hart WS , Miller E , Andrews NJ , Waight P , Maini PK , Funk S , et al . Generation time of the alpha and delta SARS - CoV - 2 variants : an epidemiological analysis . Lancet Infect Dis . 2022 May ; 22 ( 5 ) : 603 – 10 . 71 . Park SW , Sun K , Abbott S , Sender R , Bar - on Y , Weitz JS , et al . Inferring the differences in incubation - period and generation - interval distributions of the Delta and Omicron variants of SARS - CoV - 2 [ Internet ] . medRxiv . 2022 . Available from : https : / / www . medrxiv . org / content / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 07 . 02 . 22277186v1 . abstract 72 . Davies NG , Abbott S , Barnard RC , Jarvis CI , Kucharski AJ , Munday JD , et al . Estimated transmissibility and impact of SARS - CoV - 2 lineage B . 1 . 1 . 7 in England . Science [ Internet ] . 2021 Apr 9 ; 372 ( 6538 ) . Available from : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . abg3055 73 . Eales O , Haw D , Wang H , Atchison C , Ashby D , Cooke GS , et al . Dynamics of SARS - CoV - 2 infection hospitalisation and infection fatality ratios over 23 months in England . PLoS Biol . 2023 May ; 21 ( 5 ) : e3002118 . 74 . Biggerstaff M , Kniss K , Jernigan DB , Brammer L , Bresee J , Garg S , et al . Systematic Assessment of Multiple Routine and Near Real - Time Indicators to Classify the Severity of Influenza Seasons and Pandemics in the United States , 2003 - 2004 Through 2015 - 2016 . Am J Epidemiol . 2018 May 1 ; 187 ( 5 ) : 1040 – 50 . 75 . Brito AF , Semenova E , Dudas G , Hassler GW , Kalinich CC , Kraemer MUG , et al . Global disparities in SARS - CoV - 2 genomic surveillance . Nat Commun . 2022 Nov 16 ; 13 ( 1 ) : 7003 . 76 . Seemann T , Lane CR , Sherry NL , Duchene S , Gonçalves da Silva A , Caly L , et al . Tracking the COVID - 19 pandemic in Australia using genomics . Nat Commun . 2020 Sep 1 ; 11 ( 1 ) : 4376 . 77 . Morris DH , Gostic KM , Pompei S , Bedford T , Łuksza M , Neher RA , et al . Predictive Modeling of Influenza Shows the Promise of Applied Evolutionary Biology . Trends Microbiol . 2018 Feb ; 26 ( 2 ) : 102 – 18 . 78 . Porter AF , Sherry N , Andersson P , Johnson SA , Duchene S , Howden BP . New rules for genomics - informed COVID - 19 responses - Lessons learned from the first waves of the Omicron variant in Australia . PLoS Genet . 2022 Oct ; 18 ( 10 ) : e1010415 . 79 . European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control . Guidance for representative and targeted genomic SARS - CoV - 2 monitoring [ Internet ] . ECDC : Stockholm ; 2021 May . Available from : https : / / www . ecdc . europa . eu / sites / default / files / documents / Guidance - for - representative - a nd - targeted - genomic - SARS - CoV - 2 - monitoring - updated - with % 20erratum - 20 - May - 2021 . p df 80 . CDGN . CDGN , PHLN and CDNA Sampling Strategy for SARS - CoV - 2 Genomic Surveillance [ Internet ] . CDGN ; 2021 Nov . Available from : https : / / www . health . gov . au / sites / default / files / documents / 2021 / 11 / cdgn - phln - and - cdna - sa mpling - strategy - for - sars - cov - 2 - genomic - surveillance _ 0 . pdf 81 . Eales O , Page AJ , Tang SN , Walters CE , Wang H , Haw D , et al . The use of representative community samples to assess SARS - CoV - 2 lineage competition : Alpha outcompetes Beta and wild - type in England from January to March 2021 . Microb Genom [ Internet ] . 2023 Feb ; 9 ( 2 ) . Available from : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1099 / mgen . 0 . 000887 82 . Volz E , Mishra S , Chand M , Barrett JC , Johnson R , Geidelberg L , et al . Assessing transmissibility of SARS - CoV - 2 lineage B . 1 . 1 . 7 in England . Nature [ Internet ] . 2021 Mar 25 ; Available from : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 021 - 03470 - x 83 . Rambaut A , Holmes EC , O’Toole Á , Hill V , McCrone JT , Ruis C , et al . A dynamic nomenclature proposal for SARS - CoV - 2 lineages to assist genomic epidemiology . Nat Microbiol . 2020 Nov ; 5 ( 11 ) : 1403 – 7 . 84 . Nunes DR , Braconi CT , Ludwig - Begall LF , Arns CW , Durães - Carvalho R . Deep phylogenetic - based clustering analysis uncovers new and shared mutations in SARS - CoV - 2 variants as a result of directional and convergent evolution . PLoS One . 2022 May 24 ; 17 ( 5 ) : e0268389 . 85 . Smith DJ , Lapedes AS , de Jong JC , Bestebroer TM , Rimmelzwaan GF , Osterhaus ADME , et al . Mapping the antigenic and genetic evolution of influenza virus . Science . 2004 Jul 16 ; 305 ( 5682 ) : 371 – 6 . 86 . Fonville JM , Wilks SH , James SL , Fox A , Ventresca M , Aban M , et al . Antibody landscapes after influenza virus infection or vaccination . Science . 2014 Nov 21 ; 346 ( 6212 ) : 996 – 1000 . 87 . Mykytyn AZ , Rissmann M , Kok A , Rosu ME , Schipper D , Breugem TI , et al . Antigenic cartography of SARS - CoV - 2 reveals that Omicron BA . 1 and BA . 2 are antigenically distinct . Sci Immunol . 2022 Sep 23 ; 7 ( 75 ) : eabq4450 . 88 . Sun K , Tempia S , Kleynhans J , von Gottberg A , McMorrow ML , Wolter N , et al . Rapidly shifting immunologic landscape and severity of SARS - CoV - 2 in the Omicron era in South Africa . Nat Commun . 2023 Jan 16 ; 14 ( 1 ) : 246 . 89 . World Health Organization . Interim statement on hybrid immunity and increasing population seroprevalence rates [ Internet ] . World Health Organization ; 2022 Jun [ cited 2023 Mar 15 ] . Available from : https : / / www . who . int / news / item / 01 - 06 - 2022 - interim - statement - on - hybrid - immunity - and - in creasing - population - seroprevalence - rates 90 . Kucharski AJ , Andreasen V , Gog JR . Capturing the dynamics of pathogens with many strains . J Math Biol . 2016 Jan ; 72 ( 1 - 2 ) : 1 – 24 . 91 . Cox RJ . Correlates of protection to influenza virus , where do we go from here ? Hum Vaccin Immunother . 2013 Feb ; 9 ( 2 ) : 405 – 8 . 92 . Kucharski AJ , Lessler J , Cummings DAT , Riley S . Timescales of influenza A / H3N2 antibody dynamics . PLoS Biol . 2018 Aug ; 16 ( 8 ) : e2004974 . 93 . Le Vu S , Jones G , Anna F , Rose T , Richard JB , Bernard - Stoecklin S , et al . Prevalence of SARS - CoV - 2 antibodies in France : results from nationwide serological surveillance . Nat Commun . 2021 May 21 ; 12 ( 1 ) : 3025 . 94 . Ward H , Atchison C , Whitaker M , Ainslie KEC , Elliott J , Okell L , et al . SARS - CoV - 2 antibody prevalence in England following the first peak of the pandemic . Nat Commun . 2021 Feb 10 ; 12 ( 1 ) : 905 . 95 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Science Brief : SARS - CoV - 2 Infection - induced and Vaccine - induced Immunity [ Internet ] . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ; 2021 Oct [ cited 2022 Dec 19 ] . Available from : https : / / www . cdc . gov / coronavirus / 2019 - ncov / science / science - briefs / vaccine - induced - imm unity . html 96 . Khoury DS , Cromer D , Reynaldi A , Schlub TE , Wheatley AK , Juno JA , et al . Neutralizing antibody levels are highly predictive of immune protection from symptomatic SARS - CoV - 2 infection . Nat Med . 2021 Jul ; 27 ( 7 ) : 1205 – 11 . 97 . Gilbert PB , Montefiori DC , McDermott AB , Fong Y , Benkeser D , Deng W , et al . Immune correlates analysis of the mRNA - 1273 COVID - 19 vaccine efficacy clinical trial . Science . 2022 Jan 7 ; 375 ( 6576 ) : 43 – 50 . 98 . Frenck RW Jr , Klein NP , Kitchin N , Gurtman A , Absalon J , Lockhart S , et al . Safety , Immunogenicity , and Efficacy of the BNT162b2 Covid - 19 Vaccine in Adolescents . N Engl J Med . 2021 Jul 15 ; 385 ( 3 ) : 239 – 50 . 99 . Neher RA , Russell CA , Shraiman BI . Predicting evolution from the shape of genealogical trees . Elife [ Internet ] . 2014 Nov 11 ; 3 . Available from : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 03568 100 . Luksza M , Lässig M . A predictive fitness model for influenza . Nature . 2014 Mar 6 ; 507 ( 7490 ) : 57 – 61 . 101 . Davies NG , Klepac P , Liu Y , Prem K , Jit M , CMMID COVID - 19 working group , et al . Age - dependent effects in the transmission and control of COVID - 19 epidemics . Nat Med . 2020 Aug ; 26 ( 8 ) : 1205 – 11 . 102 . Monod M , Blenkinsop A , Xi X , Hebert D , Bershan S , Tietze S , et al . Age groups that sustain resurging COVID - 19 epidemics in the United States . Science [ Internet ] . 2021 Mar 26 ; 371 ( 6536 ) . Available from : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . abe8372 103 . Lavine JS , Bjornstad ON , Antia R . Immunological characteristics govern the transition of COVID - 19 to endemicity . Science . 2021 Feb 12 ; 371 ( 6530 ) : 741 – 5 . 104 . Cohen LE , Spiro DJ , Viboud C . Projecting the SARS - CoV - 2 transition from pandemicity to endemicity : Epidemiological and immunological considerations . PLoS Pathog . 2022 Jun ; 18 ( 6 ) : e1010591 . 105 . COVID - 19 Forecasting Team . Variation in the COVID - 19 infection - fatality ratio by age , time , and geography during the pre - vaccine era : a systematic analysis . Lancet . 2022 Apr 16 ; 399 ( 10334 ) : 1469 – 88 . 106 . Czaja CA , Miller L , Alden N , Wald HL , Cummings CN , Rolfes MA , et al . Age - Related Differences in Hospitalization Rates , Clinical Presentation , and Outcomes Among Older Adults Hospitalized With Influenza - U . S . Influenza Hospitalization Surveillance Network ( FluSurv - NET ) . Open Forum Infect Dis [ Internet ] . 2019 Jul 1 ; 6 ( 7 ) . Available from : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / ofid / ofz225 107 . Saravanos GL , Sheel M , Homaira N , Dey A , Brown E , Wang H , et al . Respiratory syncytial virus - associated hospitalisations in Australia , 2006 - 2015 . Med J Aust . 2019 Jun ; 210 ( 10 ) : 447 – 53 . 108 . Nouvellet P , Bhatia S , Cori A , Ainslie KEC , Baguelin M , Bhatt S , et al . Reduction in mobility and COVID - 19 transmission . Nat Commun . 2021 Feb 17 ; 12 ( 1 ) : 1090 . 109 . Dhanasekaran V , Sullivan S , Edwards KM , Xie R , Khvorov A , Valkenburg SA , et al . Human seasonal influenza under COVID - 19 and the potential consequences of influenza lineage elimination . Nat Commun . 2022 Mar 31 ; 13 ( 1 ) : 1721 . 110 . Reich NG , Brooks LC , Fox SJ , Kandula S , McGowan CJ , Moore E , et al . A collaborative multiyear , multimodel assessment of seasonal influenza forecasting in the United States . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2019 Feb 19 ; 116 ( 8 ) : 3146 – 54 . 111 . Bloom - Feshbach K , Alonso WJ , Charu V , Tamerius J , Simonsen L , Miller MA , et al . Latitudinal variations in seasonal activity of influenza and respiratory syncytial virus ( RSV ) : a global comparative review . PLoS One . 2013 Feb 14 ; 8 ( 2 ) : e54445 . 112 . Viboud C , Alonso WJ , Simonsen L . Influenza in tropical regions . PLoS Med . 2006 Apr ; 3 ( 4 ) : e89 . 113 . Kissler SM , Tedijanto C , Goldstein E , Grad YH , Lipsitch M . Projecting the transmission dynamics of SARS - CoV - 2 through the postpandemic period . Science . 2020 May 22 ; 368 ( 6493 ) : 860 – 8 . 114 . Saad - Roy CM , Wagner CE , Baker RE , Morris SE , Farrar J , Graham AL , et al . Immune life history , vaccination , and the dynamics of SARS - CoV - 2 over the next 5 years . Science . 2020 Nov 13 ; 370 ( 6518 ) : 811 – 8 . 115 . Chan KF , Carolan LA , Korenkov D , Druce J , McCaw J , Reading PC , et al . Investigating Viral Interference Between Influenza A Virus and Human Respiratory Syncytial Virus in a Ferret Model of Infection . J Infect Dis . 2018 Jul 2 ; 218 ( 3 ) : 406 – 17 . 116 . Laurie KL , Guarnaccia TA , Carolan LA , Yan AWC , Aban M , Petrie S , et al . Interval Between Infections and Viral Hierarchy Are Determinants of Viral Interference Following Influenza Virus Infection in a Ferret Model . J Infect Dis . 2015 Dec 1 ; 212 ( 11 ) : 1701 – 10 . 117 . Cao P , Yan AWC , Heffernan JM , Petrie S , Moss RG , Carolan LA , et al . Innate Immunity and the Inter - exposure Interval Determine the Dynamics of Secondary Influenza Virus Infection and Explain Observed Viral Hierarchies . PLoS Comput Biol . 2015 Aug ; 11 ( 8 ) : e1004334 . 118 . Zhang Y , Yakob L , Bonsall MB , Hu W . Predicting seasonal influenza epidemics using cross - hemisphere influenza surveillance data and local internet query data . Sci Rep . 2019 Mar 1 ; 9 ( 1 ) : 3262 . 119 . Sullivan SG , Arriola CS , Bocacao J , Burgos P , Bustos P , Carville KS , et al . Heterogeneity in influenza seasonality and vaccine effectiveness in Australia , Chile , New Zealand and South Africa : early estimates of the 2019 influenza season . Euro Surveill [ Internet ] . 2019 Nov ; 24 ( 45 ) . Available from : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2807 / 1560 - 7917 . ES . 2019 . 24 . 45 . 1900645 120 . Conway E , Walker C , Baker C , Lydeamore M , Ryan GE , Campbell T , et al . COVID - 19 vaccine coverage targets to inform reopening plans in a low incidence setting [ Internet ] . medRxiv . 2022 [ cited 2023 Jan 3 ] . p . 2022 . 12 . 04 . 22282996 . Available from : https : / / www . medrxiv . org / content / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 04 . 22282996v1 . abstract 121 . Steyn N , Plank MJ , Binny RN , Hendy SC , Lustig A , Ridings K . A COVID - 19 vaccination model for Aotearoa New Zealand . Sci Rep . 2022 Feb 17 ; 12 ( 1 ) : 2720 . 122 . World Bank : Health Emergency Preparedness and Response Program [ Internet ] . [ cited 2023 May 10 ] . Available from : https : / / www . healthemergencies . org / 123 . Elbe S , Buckland - Merrett G . Data , disease and diplomacy : GISAID’s innovative contribution to global health . Glob Chall . 2017 Jan ; 1 ( 1 ) : 33 – 46 . 124 . Chen Z , Azman AS , Chen X , Zou J , Tian Y , Sun R , et al . Global landscape of SARS - CoV - 2 genomic surveillance and data sharing . Nat Genet . 2022 Apr ; 54 ( 4 ) : 499 – 507 . 125 . Russell CA , Jones TC , Barr IG , Cox NJ , Garten RJ , Gregory V , et al . The global circulation of seasonal influenza A ( H3N2 ) viruses . Science . 2008 Apr 18 ; 320 ( 5874 ) : 340 – 6 . 126 . Bedford T , Riley S , Barr IG , Broor S , Chadha M , Cox NJ , et al . Global circulation patterns of seasonal influenza viruses vary with antigenic drift . Nature . 2015 Jul 9 ; 523 ( 7559 ) : 217 – 20 . 127 . Tegally H , Wilkinson E , Giovanetti M , Iranzadeh A , Fonseca V , Giandhari J , et al . Detection of a SARS - CoV - 2 variant of concern in South Africa . Nature . 2021 Apr ; 592 ( 7854 ) : 438 – 43 . 128 . Viana R , Moyo S , Amoako DG , Tegally H , Scheepers C , Althaus CL , et al . Rapid epidemic expansion of the SARS - CoV - 2 Omicron variant in southern Africa . Nature [ Internet ] . 2022 Jan 7 ; Available from : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 022 - 04411 - y 129 . Dhar MS , Marwal R , Vs R , Ponnusamy K , Jolly B , Bhoyar RC , et al . Genomic characterization and epidemiology of an emerging SARS - CoV - 2 variant in Delhi , India . Science . 2021 Nov 19 ; 374 ( 6570 ) : 995 – 9 . 130 . Thompson HA , Imai N , Dighe A , Ainslie KEC , Baguelin M , Bhatia S , et al . SARS - CoV - 2 infection prevalence on repatriation flights from Wuhan City , China . J Travel Med [ Internet ] . 2020 Dec 23 ; 27 ( 8 ) . Available from : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / jtm / taaa135 131 . Kucharski AJ , Chung K , Aubry M , Teiti I , Teissier A , Richard V , et al . Real - time surveillance of international SARS - CoV - 2 prevalence using systematic traveller arrival screening [ Internet ] . medRxiv . 2022 . Available from : https : / / www . medrxiv . org / content / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 10 . 12 . 22280928v1 . abstract 132 . Farkas K , Williams R , Alex - Sanders N , Grimsley JMS , Pântea I , Wade MJ , et al . Wastewater - based monitoring of SARS - CoV - 2 at UK airports and its potential role in international public health surveillance . PLOS Global Public Health . 2023 Jan 19 ; 3 ( 1 ) : e0001346 . 133 . Morfino RC , Bart SM , Franklin A , Rome BH , Rothstein AP , Aichele TWS , et al . Notes from the Field : Aircraft Wastewater Surveillance for Early Detection of SARS - CoV - 2 Variants - John F . Kennedy International Airport , New York City , August - September 2022 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 2023 Feb 24 ; 72 ( 8 ) : 210 – 1 .