trends in CELL BIOLOGY ( Vol . 10 ) March 2000 0962 - 8924 / 00 / $ – see front matter © 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . 85 PII : S0962 - 8924 ( 99 ) 01710 - 9 The Ras superfamily of small GTPases contains over 80 members . Although the function of many of these remains obscure , they can be grouped into six broad subfamilies – Ras , Ran , Rad , Rab , Arf and Rho – according to a combination of protein homology and function . Proteins in each subfamily tend to have related cellular functions , and the Arf and Rab subfamilies have been shown to have crucial func - tions in intracellular trafficking , controlling the budding and targeting of vesicles , respectively 1 . The general role of the Rho GTPases seems to be regu - lation of the actin cytoskeleton 2 , 3 . However , there is an increasing body of evidence concerning the role of members of this subfamily in a wide range of as - pects of endocytic traffic ( Fig . 1 ) . Although some of these processes might involve actin rearrangement , others might not . This article aims to present an overview of our , as yet , fragmentary understanding of these events and to propose that the regulation of endocytic traffic might represent a general function of the Rho GTPases . Internalization : Rac and RhoA Internalization , the budding - off of membrane ves - icles from the plasma membrane , represents the first step of endocytosis . Several different mechanisms of internalization have been described . The most well - studied of these is clathrin - dependent endo - cytosis , in which receptors are clustered into clathrin - coated pits , which are then pinched off to form coated endocytic vesicles . Activated forms of Rac and RhoA have been shown to block internalization of the transferrin receptor 4 , and activated RhoA also blocks internalization of the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor 5 . The potential role for actin in this is unclear . Although actin is not involved directly in the forma - tion of clathrin - coated pits , one mechanistic problem in endocytosis is thought to be the need for internal - izing vesicles to negotiate the band of cortical actin that lies directly underneath the plasma membrane . Studies with actin - depolymerizing agents have shown that minor depolymerization of the actin cytoskeleton can stimulate vesicle budding , thereby supporting this idea . Greater depolymerization of actin was found to prevent budding of clathrin - coated vesicles , suggest - ing that local remodelling of the actin cytoskeleton ( i . e . a combination of polymerization and de - polymerization ) is required 6 . This could represent the site of action of Rac and / or RhoA . Several clathrin - independent mechanisms of in - ternalization have also been described in mam - malian cells . Uptake through these pathways can be stimulated by inhibition of clathrin - dependent in - ternalization 7 ; in keeping with this , activated RhoA causes an increase in clathrin - independent endocy - tosis in Xenopus oocytes 8 . Similarly , activated Rac stimulates fluid - phase uptake by pinocytosis 9 , and the pinocytic vesicles are coated in the Rac sig - nalling partner , PAK1 10 . Actin rearrangement would seem to be required for the generation of pinocytic vesicles and might also be involved in their intra - cellular movement . Recent real - time imaging stud - ies with green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) - tagged actin have demonstrated the existence of pinocytic vesicles within the cell that appear to be propelled by short - lived actin tails 11 . The role of Rho GTPases in the generation of these structures has not yet been investigated . Another clathrin - independent internalization pathway involves caveolae . The plasma membrane of mammalian cells contains microdomains of concentrated glycosphingolipids and cholesterol , termed lipid rafts . Caveolae are specialized rafts , con - sisting of pear - shaped invaginations of the plasma membrane , coated with the protein caveolin and as - sociated with actin 12 . Lipid rafts concentrate a large number of receptors and other signalling machinery , and it has recently been demonstrated that the acti - vated forms of Rac and RhoA localize to caveolae 13 . The contribution of caveolae to clathrin - indepen - dent endocytosis is unclear 12 ; however , as activated RhoA has been shown to increase the number of caveolae 14 , one possibility is that RhoA could func - tion to inhibit internalization by sequestering recep - tors in caveolae and away from clathrin - coated pits . By far the clearest example of regulation of internal - ization by Rho family GTPases comes from the spe - cialized case of phagocytosis . Phagocytosis involves the actin - dependent endocytosis of large particles such as bacteria . Caron and Hall have recently defined two distinct mechanisms . In type I phagocytosis , plasma membrane protrusions extend to engulf the particle and drag it into the cell ; this is mediated by coordi - nated actions of Cdc42 and Rac . In type II phagocytosis , particles sink into actin - lined invaginations in the plasma membrane ; here , internalization is dependent Regulation of endocytic traffic by Rho family GTPases Sara Ellis and Harry Mellor Endocytosis is a complicated yet highly efficient process that involves the uptake and processing of cargoes , ranging from small molecules , to activated signalling receptors , to whole microorganisms . Regulation of endocytic pathways is poorly understood . Recent evidence suggests that the Rho GTPase family of signalling proteins is intimately involved in endocytic traffic , providing novel insights into the control mechanisms that govern this process . F O R U M c o mm e n t FORUM comment 86 trends in CELL BIOLOGY ( Vol . 10 ) March 2000 on RhoA 15 . There are striking morphological similar - ities between these processes and the invasion of mammalian cells by certain pathogenic bacteria . Adhesion of Salmonella or Shigella bacilli to epithelial cells leads to the production of membrane ruffles at the site of contact ; these membrane ruffles are in - volved in an entry process that is reminiscent of type I phagocytosis 16 . Furthermore , Salmonella injects into the host a bacterial protein , SopE , that is an activat - ing GDP – GTP exchange factor ( GEF ) for host Cdc42 . A number of other bacterial toxins that also target Rho family GTPases have been isolated 17 , and it would seem that the bacterial subversion of Rho - regulated internalization mechanisms might be widely relevant to invasion . Endosomal Rho GTPases : RhoD and RhoB On internalization , receptors travel through a number of endocytic compartments , where sorting decisions are made that determine their cellular fate . Some receptors , such as the transferrin receptor , are recycled to the cell surface , whereas others , such as the epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor , are tar - geted for degradation in lysosomes . Two members of the Rho GTPase family have been shown to localize to endocytic vesicles , suggesting that they might per - form roles in regulating intracellular traffic . RhoD localizes to vesicles that can mostly be la - belled by brief uptake of transferrin , and are therefore likely to correspond to early and / or recycling endo - somes 18 . The small GTPase Rab5 has a similar subcel - lular distribution , and regulates traffic through this compartment by controlling the rate of endosomal fu - sion 1 . RhoD does not effect the fusion of early endo - somes but , instead , regulates the rate of traffic of ves - icles along cytoskeletal tracks . Endocytic vesicles are moved along cytoskeletal tracks ( usually micro - tubules ) by motor proteins . This is a way of increasing the speed and efficiency of sorting , instead of allowing trends in Cell Biology MVB L SE EE RE EE RE SE Rac RacRhoA Cdc42 RhoD RhoB Cdc42Rac RhoA RacRhoA I II III IV V VI VII VIII TTF ( RhoH ) G25K Cdc42 RhoGRac2Rac3 Rac1 Chp ( a ) ( b ) RhoBRhoCRhoA Rnd1Rnd2 Rnd3 ( RhoE ) RhoD Tc10 FIGURE 1 Rho family GTPases and endocytic traffic . ( a ) A dendrogram of the 15 known members of the Rho subfamily of small GTPases ( Cdc42 and G25K are splice variants ) . ( b ) A cartoon of a hypothetical cell showing all of the known sites of action of Rho GTPases in endocytic traffic ( numbered I – VIII ) ; sites of actin polymerization are shown in blue . I , Rac and RhoA inhibit internalization of the transferrin receptor ; II , activation of Rac causes production of membrane ruffles or lamellipodia and associated pinocytic vesicles ; III , Rac and RhoA are localized to , and cause production of , caveolae ; IV , in polarized epithelial cells , Cdc42 regulates endocytic traffic at the basolateral membrane ; V and VI , in macrophages , the phagocytosis of opsinized bacteria is mediated by RhoA and Cdc42 / Rac in two distinct , actin - dependent processes ; VII , RhoD controls early endosomal motility ; VIII , RhoB regulates the trafficking of the epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor to the lysosome . Abbreviations : EE , early endosome ; L , lysosome ; MVB , multivesicular body ; RE , recycling endosome ; SE , sorting endosome . FIGURE 2 Cellular distribution of RhoD and RhoB GTPases . NIH 3T3 cells were cotransfected with cDNAs encoding wild - type RhoB and RhoD . The figure shows a confocal image of cells fixed and stained for RhoB ( red ) and RhoD ( green ) . Areas of colocalization are seen as yellow . RhoB is absent from the small peripheral RhoD - positive vesicles , which probably represent early endosomes . Bar , 10 m m . The authors are in the Dept of Biochemistry , School of Medical Sciences , University of Bristol , UK BS8 1TD . E - mail : h . mellor @ bristol . ac . uk FORUM comment trends in CELL BIOLOGY ( Vol . 10 ) March 2000 87 vesicles to find their destination by simple diffusion 19 . Whether the tracks that RhoD - containing endosomes travel on are microtubules or actin filaments is un - clear , although endosomes in cells expressing activated RhoD show a striking alignment with actin fila - ments 18 . It might be expected that reduction of early endosome motility by RhoD would reduce the effi - ciency of sorting and hence slow the kinetics of re - ceptor traffic . Surprisingly , overexpression of RhoD has only a very small effect on the recycling time of the transferrin receptor 18 . Although this apparent contradiction is confusing , it could be that the actions of RhoD are more relevant to receptors en route to other endocytic compartments , such as the lysosome . The RhoB GTPase , although not closely related to RhoD , also localizes to endocytic vesicles . The pre - cise identity of the RhoB compartment has yet to be defined . RhoB shows some colocalization with in - ternalized transferrin receptor and is absent from lysosomes 20 . Studies of RhoB distribution by elec - tron microscopy show that RhoB is associated pre - dominantly with structures resembling multivesicu - lar bodies 21 , a prelysosomal compartment that is thought to be involved in the sorting of internalized receptors for degradation . Interestingly , although RhoB shows some degree of colocalization with RhoD , it is absent from the smaller , peripheral RhoD - positive vesicles ( Fig . 2 ) . This observation , and the fact that the EGF receptor does not enter the RhoB - positive compartment until approximately 30 min after internalization 22 , suggests that RhoB might be absent from early endosomes . The precise localization of RhoB would seem key to its function . RhoB is highly homologous to RhoA ( 83 % identical ) and shares an overlapping set of bind - ing partners . However , whereas RhoB localizes to en - docytic vesicles , RhoA is largely cytoplasmic , translo - cating to the plasma membrane on activation . This suggests that any specificity of action of RhoB would have to depend on its differential compartmentaliz - ation . Evidence for this comes from the finding that RhoB , but not RhoA , regulates endocytic trafficking of the EGF receptor . RhoB retards the progress of the activated receptor through the RhoB - positive com - partment on its way to the lysosome for degrada - tion 22 . Mitogenic signals from the EGF receptor ( and many other receptors ) terminate in the lysosome , and the duration of growth - promoting signals is therefore governed by the time taken for activated re - ceptor to reach this compartment . The regulation of EGF - receptor traffic by RhoB suggests ways in which signalling pathways could be regulated indirectly by controlling intracellular traffic . RhoB expression is rapidly induced by the stimulation of cells with EGF and other growth factors 23 , and a marked increase in RhoB protein is seen within 30 – 60 min of treatment , suggesting that RhoB could mediate both acute and adaptive responses to growth factor stimulation . Some details of RhoB action are known . RhoB regu - lates traffic through activation of the PRK kinases , members of the protein kinase C superfamily 24 . This suggests that phosphorylation of an endosomal pro - tein is involved ; however , the identity of the pre - sumed PRK substrate ( s ) is unknown . Products of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase are also required because activation of PRK involves both RhoB and the phos - phatidylinositol lipid - dependent PDK1 kinase ( P . Flynn , pers . commun . ) . This could be important because it suggests a possible basis for at least some of the multiple effects of these signalling lipids on endosomal traffic 25 . Traffic in polarized cells : Cdc42 Polarized epithelial cells present special problems for endocytic traffic . Maintenance of polarity requires that receptors expressed on the apical or basolateral membranes are returned to their appropriate location after internalization . Additionally , epithelial cells possess mechanisms of transcytosis – the endocytic traffic of receptors from one face of the cell to the other . Of all the aspects of endocytosis , the evidence for a role of actin in traffic in polarized cells is the most compelling . Transcytosis is sensitive to the actin - depolymerizing drug cytochalasin D 26 , 27 , and several studies have provided evidence for a role for actin in both apical 28 and basolateral 29 uptake . A role for Rho GTPases in the generation of cell polarity is conserved from yeast to mammalian cells . Underscoring this is the recent finding that Cdc42 , which plays a key role in cell polarity in yeast 30 , regu - lates polarized endocytosis at the basolateral mem - brane of mammalian epithelial cells 31 . Concluding remarks Of the 15 members of the Rho GTPase subfamily that have been isolated so far , five have already been shown to be involved in the regulation of endocytic traffic . The scope of this article does not encompass other aspects of intracellular traffic , such as secre - tion , for which there is further evidence of a role for these signalling proteins . The mechanisms by which Rho GTPases exert their effects on endocytosis are still largely obscure , but they seem to represent an interface between signal transduction and mem - brane traffic . It seems possible that Rho GTPases might be used to mediate acute regulation of endo - cytic processes . The extent and nature of the involvement of actin in mammalian endocytosis is also unclear . Studies with actin - depolymerizing drugs have yielded in - definite and sometimes contradictory results . Functional mutants of Rho GTPases are potentially more subtle and discriminating tools to address this question . Hopefully , studies of the mechanisms of action of Rho GTPases in endocytic traffic will clar - ify this issue , as well as uncovering novel regulatory mechanisms of this fundamental cellular process . References 1 Chavier , P . and Goud , B . ( 1999 ) The role of ARF and Rab GTPases in membrane transport . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 466 – 475 2 Hall , A . ( 1998 ) Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science 279 , 509 – 514 3 Ridley , A . J . ( 1996 ) Rho : theme and variations . Curr . Biol . 6 , 1256 – 1264 4 Lamaze , C . et al . ( 1996 ) Regulation of receptor - mediated endocytosis by Rho and Rac . Nature 382 , 177 – 179 5 Vogler , O . et al . ( 1999 ) RhoA - sensitive trafficking of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors . J . Pharmacol . Exp . Ther . 288 , 36 – 42 6 Lamaze , C . et al . ( 1997 ) The actin cytoskeleton is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 20332 – 20335 FORUM comment 88 trends in CELL BIOLOGY ( Vol . 10 ) March 2000 7 Damke , H . et al . ( 1995 ) Clathrin - independent pinocytosis is induced in cells overexpressing a temperature - sensitive mutant of dynamin . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 69 – 80 8 Schmalzing , G . et al . ( 1995 ) Involvement of the GTP - binding protein Rho in constitutive endocytosis in Xenopus laevis oocytes . J . Cell Biol . 130 , 1319 – 1332 9 Ridley , A . J . et al . ( 1992 ) The small GTP - binding protein Rac regulates growth factor - induced membrane ruffling . Cell 70 , 401 – 410 10 Dharmawardhane , S . et al . ( 1997 ) Localization of p21 - activated kinase 1 ( PAK1 ) to pinocytic vesicles and cortical actin structures in stimulated cells . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 1265 – 1278 11 Merrifield , C . J . et al . ( 1999 ) Endocytic vesicles move at the tips of actin tails in cultured mast cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 72 – 74 12 Kurzchalia , T . V . and Parton , R . G . ( 1999 ) Membrane microdomains and caveolae . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 424 – 431 13 Michaely , P . A . et al . ( 1999 ) Polarized distribution of endogenous Rac1 and RhoA at the cell surface . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 21430 – 21436 14 Senda , T . et al . ( 1997 ) Bordetella bronchiseptica dermonecrotizing toxin , which activates a small GTP - binding protein Rho , induces membrane organelle proliferation and caveolae formation . Exp . Cell Res . 230 , 163 – 168 15 Caron , E . and Hall , A . ( 1998 ) Identification of two distinct mechanisms of phagocytosis controlled by different Rho GTPases . Science 282 , 1717 – 1721 16 Goosney , D . L . et al . ( 1999 ) Enteropathogenic E . coli , Salmonella , and Shigella : masters of host cell cytoskeletal exploitation . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 5 , 216 – 223 17 Aktories , K . ( 1997 ) Rho proteins : targets for bacterial toxins . Trends Microbiol . 5 , 282 – 288 18 Murphy , C . et al . ( 1996 ) Endosome dynamics regulated by a Rho protein . Nature 384 , 427 – 432 19 Allan , V . J . and Schroer , T . A . ( 1999 ) Membrane motors . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 476 – 482 20 Adamson , P . et al . ( 1992 ) Intracellular localization of the P21rho proteins . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 617 – 627 21 Robertson , D . et al . ( 1995 ) Ultrastructural localization of Ras - related proteins using epitope - tagged plasmids . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 43 , 471 – 480 22 Gampel , A . et al . ( 1999 ) Regulation of EGF receptor traffic by the small GTPase RhoB . Curr . Biol . 9 , 955 – 958 23 Zalcman , G . et al . ( 1995 ) Regulation of Ras - related RhoB protein expression during the cell cycle . Oncogene 10 , 1935 – 1945 24 Mellor , H . et al . ( 1998 ) PRK1 is targeted to endosomes by the small GTPase , RhoB . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 4811 – 4814 25 Corvera , S . and Czech , M . P . ( 1998 ) Direct targets of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase products in membrane traffic and signal transduction . Trends Cell Biol . 8 , 442 – 446 26 Zegers , M . M . et al . ( 1998 ) Actin filaments and microtubules are involved in different membrane traffic pathways that transport sphingolipids to the apical surface of polarized HepG2 cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 1939 – 1949 27 Maples , C . J . et al . ( 1997 ) Both microtubules and actin filaments are required for efficient postendocytotic traffic of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor in polarized Madin – Darby canine kidney cells . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 6741 – 6751 28 Shurety , W . et al . ( 1996 ) The effects of cytochalasin D and phorbol myristate acetate on the apical endocytosis of ricin in polarised Caco - 2 cells . J . Cell Sci . 109 , 2927 – 2935 29 Shurety , W . et al . ( 1998 ) Fluid - phase markers in the basolateral endocytic pathway accumulate in response to the actin assembly - promoting drug Jasplakinolide . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 957 – 975 30 Palmieri , S . J . and Haarer , B . K . ( 1998 ) Polarity and division site specification in yeast . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 1 , 678 – 686 31 Kroschewski , R . et al . ( 1999 ) Cdc42 controls secretory and endocytic transport to the basolateral plasma membrane of MDCK cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 8 – 13 Acknowledgements H . M . is a recipient of a Career Development Award Fellowshipfrom the Wellcome Trust . S . E . is supportedby an MRC studentship . We thank George Banting and Peter Parker for useful comments . Pictures in cell biology Monoastral spindles Small molecules are able to perturb specific protein functions on a fast time scale and are therefore extremely powerful tools to study dynamic cellular processes such as mitosis . Until recently , this approach was limited by the fact that all known small molecules that specifically affect the mitotic machinery target tubulin , the subunit of the microtubules in the mitotic spindle . To identify membrane - permeable small molecules that target other mitotic proteins , a combination of two phenotype - based screens , one based on a mitosis - specific posttranslational modification , the other visualizing microtubules and chromatin , and an in vitro microtubule - polymerization assay were performed 1 . Out of 16 320 compounds , five small molecules were identified that specifically affect mitosis without targeting tubulin . The phenotype of one compound , named monastrol , was especially intriguing . In BS - C - 1 ( monkey epithelial kidney ) cells treated with this 1 , 4 - dihydropyrimidine - based compound , the bipolar mitotic spindle was replaced by a monoastral microtubule array surrounded by a ring of chromosomes ( Fig . 1 ) . Monastrol specifically and reversibly inhibits in vitro the motility of the mitotic kinesin Eg5 , a motor protein known to be required for spindle bipolarity . Monastrol will now be used to dissect the function of Eg5 in establishing and maintaining spindle bipolarity . For these studies , it is very useful that this small - molecule inhibitor rapidly induces monoastral spindle formation in cells , allowing an exact temporal control of the induction of and release from the desired phenotype . For further information , visit the following Web site : http : / / iccb . med . harvard . edu Reference 1 Mayer , T . U . ( 1999 ) Small molecule inhibitor of mitotic spindle bipolarity identified in a phenotype - based screen . Science 286 , 971 – 974 FIGURE 1 Immunofluorescence image of BS - C - 1 ( monkey epithelial kidney ) cells treated for 4 h with 68 m M of the small molecule , monastrol . Microtubules ( red ) and chromatin ( blue ) were stained with antibodies to a - tubulin and Hoechst , respectively . Monastrol treatment of mitotic cells replaces the normal bipolar spindle with a rosette - like microtubule array surrounded by chromosomes . Bar , 2 . 5 m m . Contributed by Thomas U . Mayer and Tarun M . Kapoor , Dept of Cell Biology , and Institute of Chemistry and Cell Biology , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 , USA . E - mail : Thomas _ Mayer @ hms . harvard . edu