THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY Vol . 268 , No . 23 , Issue of August 15 , pp . 17038 - 17044 , 1993 Printed in U . S . A . Orientation of Cholera Toxin Bound to Target Cells * ( Received for publication , February 10 , 1993 , and in revised form , March 29 , 1993 ) Palmer A . Orlandi and Peter H . Fishmanl From the Membrane Biochemistry Section , Laboratory of Moleculur and Cellular Neurobiology , National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke , The National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland 20982 Cholera toxin ( CT ) consists of a pentameric B subunit that binds to specific cell surface receptors identified as ganglioside G M ~ and an A subunit that activates adenylylcyclase . The A subunit consists of A , and Az peptides linked by a disulfide bond ; As acts to connect A to B , whereas A , is an ADP - ribosyltransferase that modifies the a subunit of the stimulatory G protein ( G , ) . How the toxin is oriented when it binds to the cell surface and the related issue of the mechanism by which A , gains access to G , are not known . In the present study , we used subunit - specific antibodies and their corresponding Fab fragments to assess their af - fects on holotoxin binding to target cells and their immunoreactivity to cell - bound toxin . Our results sug - gest that CT binds with A1 facing away from the mem - brane . Our hypothesis is further supported by the abil - ity to assemble active CT on the cell surface of cultured human intestinal and neurotumor cells by the sequen - tial addition of purified B and A subunits . We also observed that when cells containing bound CT were incubated at 37 “C , both subunits rapidly became in - accessible to their respective antibodies . We propose that the holotoxin binds with its A subunit facing away from the membrane and must enter the cell in order for A1 to be released , gain access to G , , and activate adenylylcyclase . The mechanism of action of cholera toxin ( CT ) ’ and the structurally related heat - labile toxin ( LT ) from Escherichia coli have been extensively investigated ( 1 - 4 ) . Each toxin consists of six polypeptides : five identical monomers of 11 . 6 kDa that form a pentameric B or binding subunit and a 27 - kDa A or activating subunit . The cell surface receptors for the B subunit have been identified as the ganglioside G M ~ , whereas the intracellular target for the A subunit is the adenylylcyclase system , the rise in cAMP mediating the path - op ~ ysio ~ ogical effects of the toxins . After binding to the cell surface , the holotoxin must undergo processing in order to release the active A , peptide , which is an ADP - ribosyltrans - ferase and catalyzes the transfer of ADP - ribose from NAD to G , . It is not known how the toxins are oriented when they bind to the cell surface ( 5 , 6 ) . The crystal structure of LT indicates that it is asymmetric and could bind with either A1 facing * The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . $ To whom correspondence should be addressed Park Bldg . , Rm . 411 , NIH , Bethesda , MD 20892 . Tel . : 301 - 496 - 1325 ; Fax : 301 - 496 - 8244 . The abbreviations used are : CT , cholera toxin ; LT , E . coli heat - labile toxin ; G . , stimulatory G protein of adenylylcyclase ; PBS , phos - phate - buffered saline . toward or away from the membrane ( 6 ) , there being indirect evidence for both possibilities ( 7 - 10 ) . The orientation could determine how the toxin is processed to generate the AI peptide . With AI facing toward the membrane , the A subunit would be able to directly penetrate the membrane as envi - sioned in some models of toxin action ( 4 ) . With A , facing away from the membrane , the holotoxin would more likely first have to be internalized as envisioned in other models ( 11 ) . We now directly demonstrate that CT binds to the cell surface with AI facing away from the membrane . We used two different cell lines , human neurotumor SK - N - MC and human intestinal Caco - 8 , for our studies . The latter cells behave in culture as highly differentiated enterocytes ( E ! ) , the natural targets for CT as well as LT . In addition , we employed two different methods to arrive at our conclusions . In the first , we used antisera specific for the AI and B components along with their corresponding Fab fragments to probe the orientation of bound toxin . We also examined their effects in inhibiting holotoxin binding . In the second method , we assembled active holotoxin at the cell surface by the sequential addition of its inactive subunits . Immunoreactivity of subunit - specific anti - sera confirmed the cell surface assembly of holotoxin . Finally , using these antibodies , we have found that both components rapidly disappear from the cell surface , which supports the model of holotoxin internalization . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Materials - CT , CT - A , CT - B , and anti - CT - B antibodies were ob - tained from List Biological Laboratories , Campbell , CA . LT and LT - B were generous gifts of Drs . R . Holmes , Uniformed Services Univer - sity of the Health Sciences , Bethesda , MD , and J . D . Clements , Tulane Medical Center , New Orleans , LA , respectively . Ricin 60 and its B subunit were from Sigma . ‘251 - Protein A ( 8 . 6 pCi / pg ) was from Du Pont - New England Nuclear . Anti - CT - A , antibodies were raised in rabbits immunized with CT - A , conjugated to keyhole limpet he - mocyanin ( 13 ) . Briefly , rabbits were injected with 250 pg of antigen in Freund’s complete adjuvant and boosted twice at 2 - week intervals with 100 pg in Freund’s incomplete adjuvant . Fab fragments were generated using an established procedure ( 14 ) . Cells and Cell Culture - Human intestinal Caco - 2 and neurotumor SK - N - MC cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection ( Rockville , MD ) and grown in Eagle’s minimal essential medium supplemented with nonessential amino acids and sodium pyruvate ( BioWhittaker , Walkersville , MD ) and either 20 % ( Caco - 2 ) or 10 % ( SK - N - MC ) NUSERUM IV ( Collaborative Biomedical Prod - ucts , Bedford , MA ) . For experiments , cells were grown to confluency in 24 - well cluster plates ; the medium was replaced with serum - free medium buffered with 25 mM HEPES and containing 0 . 01 % bovine serum albumin , and the cells were used as described below . Methods - CT - A was absorbed with anti - CT - B , and CT - B was absorbed with anti - CT - A1 to remove any contaminating CT . The cells were incubated with the holotoxins or the purified subunits for 30 min at 4 “C . When individual subunits were added sequentially , the cells were washed between additions . Cells were then incubated for 2 h at 37 “C in the same medium containing 1 mM 3 - isobutyl - l - methylxanthine and analyzed for intracellular cAMP content by radioimmune assay ( 15 ) . Binding of lz5I - CT to cells and detection of 17038 Sequential Assembly and Orientation of Active Cholera Toxin 17039 surface - bound CT subunits were done as previously described ( 15 , 16 ) . For the latter , the treated cells were incubated with specific antisera for 1 h at 4 " C , washed , and incubated with ' 251 - protein A ( 30 nM , lo6 cpm / pmol ) . After 1 h at 4 " C , the cells were washed with ice - cold PBS , solubilized in 1 M NaOH , and counted for bound ' * ' I - protein A . When Fab fragments were used , the cells were incubated with anti - F ( ab ' ) Z fragment - specific IgG ( Cappel , Organon Tekinika , Durham , NC ) at 4 " C and then with Iz5I - protein A . Protein synthesis was assayed as previously described ( 17 ) . ' % I - CT - A was isolated by acid dissociation of ' 251 - CT into its individual subunit components as described by Hardy et al . ( 18 ) . Briefly , " ' 1 - CT was treated with 50 mM HCl for 30 min at room temperature before rapidly neutralizing and diluting 10 - fold with ice - cold PBS . The preparation was routinely absorbed one to two times with anti - CT - B bound to protein A - Sepharose for 30 min at 4 " C to remove any holotoxin and CT - B . Isolation of cell surface - bound CT or its sequentially assembled subunits was performed on Caco - 2 cells grown to confluence in 6 - well cluster plates . CT or its subunits were added sequentially as described above . Cells were then washed and scraped in PBS containing 1 mM EDTA and pelleted . Cells were lysed in 10 mM Tris , pH 7 . 4 , containing 1 mM MgClz , 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride , and 0 . 5 mg / mI DNase I on ice for 15 min . Membranes were subsequently pelleted and extracted with PBS , 1 % Triton X - 100 for 1 h at 4 ' C . Triton X - 100 extracts were then analyzed by nondena - turing gel electrophoresis as described by Davis ( 19 ) using a 5 - 15 % acrylamide gradient and visualized by autoradio ~ aphy . Unless otherwise indicated , data are presented as means + . S . D . of triplicate determinations from a representative experiment ; each experiment was repeated at least twice . RESULTS Inhibition of Toxin Binding with Subunit - specific Antisera and Fab Fragments - The specificity of the subunit - specific polyclonal antisera was confirmed by Western blotting ( data not shown ) . The ability of the antisera to interact with native CT was examined by preincubating them with ' * ' J - CT prior to exposure to SK - N - MC cells and measuring the amount of toxin that bound ( Fig . lA ) . Antisera to both CT - AI and CT - B inhibited Iz5I - CT binding as did anti - CT - B Fab fragments . Anti - CT - A , Fab fragments , however , no longer inhibited CT binding ( Fig . U ) , though they still bound to the toxin ( Fig . 1B ) . The dissimilar effects of anti - CT - Al and its Fab frag - ments suggested that anti - CT - A1 inhibition resulted from antigen aggregation . This might prevent CT from aligning parallel to the membrane , which may be a prerequisite for stable , multivalent binding to several G M ~ oligosaccharide moieties ( 4 ) . In the presence of anti - CT - Al Fab fragments , however , this effect would not be expected . The binding inhibition seen with polyclonal anti - CT - B and its Fab frag - ments may be due to either masking of the G M ~ ganglioside binding domain or to physically preventing receptor - toxin interactions due to the size of the IgG or Fab fragments . The inability of the anti - CT - Al Fab fragments to block binding of ' ' ' I - CT while still binding to the toxin suggested that CT was oriented with the A subunit directed away from the plasma membrane during binding . In this regard , anti - CT - Al Fab fragments reacted equally with CT when either bound to the surface of target cells or in solution ( Fig . 1B ) . Sequential Assembly of Active Toxin at the Cell Surface - If CT binds to the cell surface with its A subunit facing away from the membrane , then CT - A might be able to reassociate with cell surface - bound CT - B . We tested this hypothesis by sequentially adding purified CT - B and CT - A to cells . The extent of subunit association was assessed by both its immu - noreactivity and its ability to activate adenylylcyclase in human intestinal Caco - 2 and SK - N - MC neurotumor cells . As shown in Fig . 2A , when purified CT - A was added to Caco - 2 cells pretreated with 10 nM CT - B at 4 " C , a dose - dependent increase in the binding of anti - CT - Al to cell surface - associ - ated CT - A was observed . No appreciable levels of cell - asso - 120 1 LOG [ Ab or Fab ] ( M ) L . I t t d t 0 Y 0 - 7 - 6 - 5 - 4 LOG [ Anti - CT - A , Fab ] ( M ) FIG . 1 . Reactivity of CT with CT - AI - and CT - B - specific antisera and Fab fragments . A , inhibition of lz5I - CT binding to SK - N - MC cells by subunit - specific antisera and their respective Fab fragments . Portions of " ' I - CT ( lo5 cpm ) were incubated with the indicated concentrations of anti - CT - Al antibodies ( O ) , anti - CT - A , Fab fragments ( e ) , anti - CT - B antibodies ( U ) , or anti - CT - B Fab fragments ( B ) for 1 h at 4 " C and added to cells in multicluster plates . The amount of bound ' " 1 - CT was determined as described under " Experimental Procedures " and is expressed as a percent of binding to control cells . B , effects of anti - CT - AI Fab fragments on the binding of CT to SK - N - MC cells . Fab fragments ( 10 PM ) were incubated at 4 " C for 30 min either with 10 nM CT in solution prior to adding to cell monolayers ( 0 ) or to cells pretreated with 10 nM CT ( e ) . Bound Fab fragments were detected with anti - F ( ab ' ) * fra ~ ent - speci ~ c IgG and " ' 1 - protein A as described under " Experimental Procedures . " ciated CT - A were detected in the absence of CT - B . The immunoreactivity of anti - CT - Al on intact cells reflected an efficiency of reassembly of approximately 25 % compared with cells treated with holotoxin . The formation of CT at the cell surface was also reflected in its ability to activate adenylylcyclase . Whereas Caco - 2 cells were highly responsive to CT , the resolved , purified subunits did not stimulate the cells to produce cAMP ( Fig . 2s ) . Addi - tion of CT - A to cells pretreated with 10 nM CT - B , however , resulted in a dose - dependent increase in CAMP . The ability to reassemble active CT at the cell surface was also dependent on the concentration of CT - B ( Fig . 3A ) . Stimulation of cAMP at 10 nM of each subunit was about 60 % of that observed with native holotoxin . The shift in dose response between cells exposed to CT and those sequentially exposed to its subunits ( Fig . 223 ) may be due to several possibilities . The reassembled CT may only be partially active ( see below ) ; based on the concentrations required for half - maximal stimulation , the activity of the reconstituted toxin represented a level of less than 5 % of native CT . Alternatively , the affinity of CT - A for Sequential Assembly and Orientation of Active Cholera Toxin 0 - 10 - 9 - 0 - 7 LOG [ CT or CT - A ] ( M ) LOG [ CT or SUBUNITS ] ( M ) FIG . 2 . Sequential assembly of active CT on Caco - 2 cells . Cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of CT or purified subunits at 4 " C for 30 min . When individual subunits were added sequentially , the cells were first incubated with 10 nM CT - B at 4 " C for 30 min , washed , and then incubated with CT - A at 4 " C for 30 min . The cells then were washed and assayed either for cell surface CT - A using anti - CT , antiserum and ' 251 - protein A ( A ) or incubated for 2 h at 37 " C and assayed for intracellular cAMP content ( B ) as described under " Experimental Procedures . " 0 , native CT ; 0 , CT - A alone ; . , CT - B alone ; and 0 , CT - A added to cells pretreated with 10 nM CT - B . The data represent the means & S . D . of triplicate deter - minations from one experiment ; additional experiments gave similar results . cell - bound CT - B may be lower than that of native CT for its cell surface receptor , GMl . In addition to providing a cell surface acceptor for CT - A , prior exposure of cells to CT - B effectively blocked their response to CT ( Fig . 3A ) . This confirmed that CT - B was able to bind to the cells and remain bound during subsequent treatments . It also ruled out the possibility that the stimula - tion caused by the sequentially added subunits might be due to CT formed in the medium by reassociation of the added CT - A with dissociated CT - B . By contrast to the effectiveness of CT - B as a specific acceptor for the attachment of CT - A , the B subunit of ricin , a lectin that also recognizes terminal galactose residues , had no effect ( Fig . 3B ) . Ricin B treatment followed by the addition of CT - A did not result in any increase in cAMP even at concentrations of ricin B , which significantly protected the cells from ricin as measured by its effect on protein synthesis . This confirmed that the cells were able to bind ricin B . Thus , the association of CT - A with cell - bound CT - B to form active toxin appeared to be a specific interac - tion . 0 - 10 - 9 - 0 - 7 LOG [ CT - B SUBUNrr ] ( M ) I I P 1 - 0 - 10 - 9 - 0 - 7 - 6 LOG [ RICIN B - SUBUNrr ] ( M ) FIG . 3 . Specificity of CT - A association with Caco - 2 cells ( effects of B subunits of CT and ricin ) . A , cells were first incu - bated with increasing concentrations of CT - B at 4 " C for 30 min , washed , and incubated with either no addition ( O ) , 0 . 1 nM CT ( 0 ) , or 10 nM CT - A ( 0 ) at 4 " C for 30 min . Then all the cells were washed , incubated for 2 hat 37 " C , and assayed for intracellular cAMP content as described under " Experimental Procedures . " B , details are the same as in panel A except the cells were incubated with increasing concentrations of ricin B subunit . In addition , another set of cells were first treated with ricin B subunit , washed , and incubated with 0 . 1 mg / ml of ricin at 4 " C for 30 min ( W ) . The cells then were washed , incubated at 37 " C for 4 h , and pulsed with 1 pCi of [ 3H ] leucine for 1 h . The cells subsequently were assayed for protein synthesis ( C - - - 4 ) as described under " Experimental Procedures . " Time and temperature were found to be factors that influ - enced the efficiency of holotoxin formation . Maximum CT assembly occurred within 30 min when assayed by both anti - CT - A1 immunoreactivity and cAMP stimulation under con - ditions in which CT - B - treated cells were exposed to 10 nM CT - A at 4 " C ( data not shown ) . Prolonged exposure of cells treated with CT - B to 0 . 1 nM CT - A resulted in a significant increase in cAMP levels to almost 10 % of that observed with cells exposed to 0 . 1 nM CT under the same conditions ( Fig . 4A ) . To assess the effect of temperature on subunit associa - tion , cells pretreated with CT - B at 22 " C were incubated for 30 min at 37 " C with increasing concentrations of CT - A , then washed and incubated an additional 2 h . Under these condi - tions , cAMP levels approached 95 % of that caused by the same concentration of CT ( Fig . 4B ) . Based on the differences in response curves , the efficiency of toxin reconstitution at the cell surface increased to > IO % . Again , only basal levels of Se ~ uent ~ al Assembly and Orientation o ~ Act ~ ue Cholera Toxin 1704 1 A 25m O l 0 loo 200 300 TIME ( rnin ) . . 0 - 12 - 11 - 10 - 9 - 8 - 7 LOG [ CT or SUBUNITS ] ( M ) FIG . 4 . Effects of time and temperature on sequential as - sembly of active CT at the surface of Caco - 2 cells . A , cells were incubated at 4 ' C with 0 . 1 nM CT ( 0 ) or first incubated with 10 nM CT - B for 30 min at 4 " C , washed , and incubated without ( H ) and with ( 0 ) 0 . 1 nM CT - A at 4 " C . After the indicated times , all the cells were washed , incubated for 2 h at 37 " C , and assayed for intracellular cAMP content as described under " Experimental Procedures . " B , control cells and cells incubated at 22 " C for 30 min with CT - B and washed were incubated for 30 min at 37 " C with increasing concen - trations of CT or CT - A . All the cells then were washed , incubated for 2 h at 37 " C , and assayed for cAMP content . 0 , native CT ; El , CT - A alone ; and 0 , CT - A added to cells treated with CT - B . cAMP were observed in the absence of CT - B . The enhanced efficiency was not due to the temperature at which CT - B bound to the cells based on the following observations . Cells were incubated with 10 nM CT - B at 4 or 22 " C for 30 min , washed , and incubated with 1 nM CT - A at 4 , 22 , or 37 " C for 30 min . After washing , all the cells were incubated at 37 " C for 2 h and assayed for CAMP . When cells were incubated with CT - B at 4 " C and then with CT - A at either 4 or 22 " C , the latter accumulated twice as much CAMP as the former ( data not shown ) . Similarly , when cells incubated with CT - B at 22 " C and with CT - A at either 22 or 37 " C , the latter were twice as responsive as the former . Similar results in CT reassembly were obtained with SK - N - MC cells ( Table I ) . As with Caco - 2 cells , the assembly of active CT on SK - N - MC cells was both time - and concentra - tion - dependent ( data not shown ) . When the order of subunit addition was reversed , no stimulation was observed . The association of CT - A with cell surface - bound CT - B was de - pendent on the presence of CT - A , , as reduced CT - A was unable to stimulate cells treated with CT - B . Thus , the A , - pentameric B interactions characteristic of the native holo - TABLE I Cell surface assembly of active CT on SK - N - MC neurotumor cells Cells were incubated at 4 " C for 30 min with 10 nM of the indicated toxins or subunits and assayed for cAMP or surface binding with specific antisera as described under " Experimental Procedures . " The cells were washed between and after each addition . Each data point reuresents the mean f S . D . of triplicate determinations from a representative experiment . Additions Cyclic AMP . _ _ _ _ ' 251 - Protein A bound " Anti - CT - Ai Anti - CT - B pmollmg protein Reduced CT - A ' 10 f 4 CT 4 , 050 f 76 CT - A 33 f 5 CT - B 29 f 6 CT - B / CT - A 2 , 570 rt 174 CT - A / CT - B 14 rlr 8 CT - B / reduced 3 . 2 LT CT - Ab LT - B LT - BICT - A 2 , 700 * 81 26 i 4 3 . 020 f 212 fmollmg protein 25 f 14 ND 9 i 1 ND 37 f 3 1 , 070 f 86 545 i 8 1 , 240 f 184 155 rt 8 ( 23 ) 1 , 020 & 19 50 f 11 ( 3 ) 1 , 145 - + 155 82 rt 10 ( 9 ) 1 , 090 f 129 ND ND ND 1 , 170 rlr 58 351 rlr 24 ND Values have been corrected for nonspecific binding of t . he anti - bodies to control cells . Optimum concentrations for anti - CT - A1 and - CT - B were 4 . 4 and 2 . 5 PM , respectively . Not determined . Similar results were obtained when the reduced CT - A was di - alyzed to remove CT - A ? . * Values represent the percentage of anti - CT - A1 immunoreactivity after correcting for CT - B cross - reactivity . toxin ( 6 ) appear to be required for subunit assembly and activity . Similar to results depicted in Fig . 2A , the sequentially assembled toxin represented 23 % of the levels of native bound CT as detected by anti - CT - A1 . Again the anti - CT - B con - firmed that CT - B was bound to the cells . Table I also shows that an active heterotoxin of LT - B and CT - A could be assembled sequentially at the cell surface . As expected , the activity of this heterotoxin was dependent on the A subunit , as the CT - A / LT - B heterotoxin activity was greater than native LT . Presumably , LT - A is less potent than CT - A , because it is unnicked and requires additional proteo - lytic processing to release its active A , peptide ( 20 ) . Similar differences have been found when active heterotoxins are formed by allowing denatured subunits to refold together in solution ( 21 ) . This indicates the considerable structural ho - mology that exists between the two enterotoxins , particularly those charged residues of their central pentameric B pores and Az peptides , which appear to interact to anchor the A subunits ( 6 ) . Comparison of Subunit Reassembly in Solution and at the Cell Surface - It had previously been shown that a very limited amount of CT is formed in solution when micromolar concen - trations of CT - A and pentameric CT - B are mixed ( 18 ) . In solution , the potential for toxin reassembly from its subunits would be free of constraints created by CT - B binding to the cell surface . Theoretically , this might allow for greater holo - toxin reconstitution . When the activity of toxin formed by the sequential addition of CT - B and CT - A was compared with that observed by the premixing of subunits in solution prior to their addition to the cells , identical dose - response curves were obtained ( Fig . 5A ) . This suggested that the premixing of subunits in solution did not result in greater CT formation . To verify that holotoxin was indeed reconstituted at the cell surface , Caco - 2 cells were either exposed sequentially to 10 nM CT - B and 10 nM lZ5I - CT - A or to 10 nM " ' I - CT at 4 " C under the conditions described , extracted with a non - ionic detergent and examined by nondenaturing gel electrophoresis . 17042 Sequential Assembly and Orientation of Active Cholera Toxin 2000 A B 1500 t 1 2 3 CT - B , - CT - CT - A - 4 5 6 LOG [ CT - A ] ( M ) FIG . 5 . Comparison of CT subunit assembly in solution and at the cell surface . A , increasing concentrations of CT - A were either incubated for 30 min at 4 " C with Caco - 2 cells previously treated with 10 nM CT - B and washed ( 0 ) or incubated in solution with 10 nM CT - B for 30 min at 4 " C and then added to control cells for an additional 30 min at 4 " C ( 0 ) . All the cells were washed , incubated for 2 h at 37 " C , and assayed for intracellular cAMP content as described under " Experimental Procedures . " B , Caco - 2 cells were incubated for 30 min at 4 " C as follows : lane 3 , with 10 nM ' 2sI - CT ; lane 4 , first for 30 min with 10 nM CT - B and washed and then with 10 nM ' " 11 - CT - A ; and lane 5 , with 10 nM " ' 1 - CT - A only . The cells were washed , lysed , and extracted with Triton X - 100 . The detergent extracts were then separated by nondenaturing gel electrophoresis followed by autoradiography as described under " Experimental Procedures . " Standard solutions also were applied to the gel : lane 1 , " ' I - CT ; lane 2 , ' " I - CT - A ; and lane 6 , 10 nM 12 ' I - CT - A and 10 nM CT - B incubated in solution for 30 min at 4 " C . Under these nondenaturing conditions , CT remained intact and migrated slower than free CT - A ( Fig . 5B , lanes 1 and 2 ) . Hence , nondenaturing conditions should distinguish between the formation of a native holotoxin , a metastable toxin - like complex , and the individual subunit components . 2 As shown in Fig . 5B , lane 4 , sequential addition of CT subunits resulted in the formation of a complex with the same electrophoretic mobility as native CT ( lanes 1 and 3 ) . Free CT - A was also present in lane 4 and may be due to the presence of a metastable toxin complex in which the interaction of CT - B and CT - A was strong enough to withstand the rigors of cell washing and lysis but not extraction and electrophoresis . These results may explain the discrepancy observed between the amount of sequentially assembled holotoxin as detected by anti - CT - Al and that detected by its activity . The recovery of both reconstituted toxin as well as CT - A from the cells , however , were highly dependent on the presence of surface - bound CT - B ; in its absence , no detectible CT - A was found ( Fig . 5B , lane 5 ) . Similarly , no detectible holotoxin was formed when the subunits were only incubated in solution ( Fig . 5B , lane 6 ) . This suggested that the activity seen in Fig . 5A when subunits were premixed prior to cell exposure was indeed a result of CT - A associating with CT - B only after the latter had bound to the cell surface . Disappearance of Toxin Subunits from the Cell Surface with Time - When Caco - 2 cells were exposed to CT at 4 " C , both anti - CT - A , and - CT - B antibodies bound to the cells ( Fig . 6 ) as had been observed for SK - N - MC cells ( Table I ) . Thus , both CT - A , and CT - B were accessible based on their immu - noreactivity . When the Caco - 2 cells were incubated at 37 " C , the immunoreactivity of both CT - A , and CT - B rapidly dis - appeared and preceded the rise in cAMP levels ( Fig . 6 ) . In separate experiments using ' 251 - CT , we confirmed that ljttle if any of the bound toxin was dissociating from the cell surface with time at 37 " C . Similar results were obtained with SK - N - MC cells , although the rate of disappearance of both subunits was much slower but still preceded the increase in cAMP ( data not shown ) . * On the nondenaturing gels , pentameric CT - B migrated slower than CT , whereas monomeric B migrated near the dye front . Thus , CT and its subunits were resolved from one another by this method . 0 . . 20 40 60 12i TIME ( rnin ) FIG . 6 . Disappearance of CT subunits bound to Caco - 2 cells with time . Caco - 2 cells were incubated at 4 " C with 10 nM CT , washed , and incubated at 37 " C for the indicated times . Then the cells were assayed for surface CT - A ( 0 ) and CT - B ( 0 ) with specific antisera and for intracellular cAMP levels ( 0 ) as described under " Experimental Procedures . " DISCUSSION A representation of the structure of CT based on the published crystal structure of LT ( 6 ) is depicted in Fig . 7 . In theory , CT can bind to the cell surface in either of two orientations as follows : ( i ) with the pentameric B held close to the plasma membrane by G M l oligosaccharides and A1 facing away , or ( ii ) with CT tethered to the cell surface by G M 1 oligosaccharides and A , directed into the membrane . The pentameric doughnut - shaped B subunit contains two distinct surfaces as follows : a highly charged flat " lower surface , " and an irregularly - shaped " upper surface " that contains looped regions of the central helices . The G M l oligosaccharide binding sites are closer to the upper surface in clefts formed between adjacent B subunit monomers . The 21 - kDa AI peptide , which resides uponethe lower surface , is triangular shaped with a base of 57 A . It is covalently attached through a single disulfide bond to the 6 - kDa A2 peptide , which serves to anchor the entire A subunit to the B pentamer . One salient feature of the crystal structure of LT is the distinct interaction ~ e q ~ n ~ i a ~ Assenbty and Or ~ entation of Active Cholera Toxin 17043 I . n . Plasma Membrane FIG . 7 . Probable cholera toxin orientations when bound to target cells . I , CT bound with the A subunit directed away from the plasma membrane ; 11 , CT bound with the A subunit compressed into the plasma membrane with the B pentamer tethered by the extended ganglioside , GM1 ( see text ) . between the AS peptide and the pentameric B pore . Greater than 50 % of AP is buried in the pore , coordinating at defined , charged residues of individual B monomers that line the 30 A - long central pore . There is little interaction between AI and B , as the association of A and B appears to be mainly via AS and results in only one possible orientation of A and B subunit interaction . Our data support orientation I in Fig . 7 . CT binds to the cell surface with its A subunit facing away from the mem - brane . We base this conclusion on three observations . First , we found that anti - CT - A , Fab fragments , while remaining bound to CT in solution , did not prevent the toxin from binding to the cells . It is difficult to envision CT binding to the cell surface with Al facing the membrane under these circumstances . Second , we were able to assemble biologically active CT at the cell surface by sequentially exposing the cells to its B and A subunits . Given the above described constraints on A and B interactions , it is improbable for A to associate with surface - bound B in such a way that A , is facing the cell membrane . In this regard , anti - CT - Al Fab fragments only partially inhibited the sequential assembly of active CT at the cell surface ( data not shown ) . Again , it is most unlikely that CT - A with a bound Fab fragment could interpose itself be - tween bound CT - B and the cell surface to form holotoxin . Third , we were able to confirm the sequential assembly of holotoxin with specific antisera as well as by nondenaturing gel electrophoresis . In addition , the immunological experi - ments clearly demonstrated that AI was accessible to anti - CT - AI in both the surface - bound holotoxin and the surface - assembled toxin . The level of anti - CT - Al binding to cells treated with CT was similar to that of anti - CT - B binding , and both were in the range of CT binding to Caco - 2 and SK - N - MC cells ( 2 - 2 . 5 pmol / mg of protein ) . If CT - A , were facing the cell membrane and under CT - B , it would not be as immunoreactive as the B subunit . The discrepancy between the amount of assembled holo - toxin detected immunolo ~ cally and through its ability to activate adenylylcyclase may be attributed to the formation of some nonactive , metastable A - B complex . This was con - firmed by extracting the cell - bound complexes with non - ionic detergent and analyzing them by gel electrophoresis under nondenaturing conditions ( Fig . 5B ) . The sample from cells sequentially exposed to the subunits contained , in addition to a significant amount of holotoxin , some free CT - A . No free CT - A was detected , however , in the sample from cells exposed only to lZ5I - CT - A . Thus , the interaction of CT - A with the cells depended on the presence of surface - bound CT - B . The formation of a metastable subunit complex may involve weak in ~ ractions between CT - A1 and CT - B . While the crys - tal structure of LT clearly demonstrates that the A2 peptide is responsible for the most of the A - B subunit interactions , there are several regions of A , that also interact specifically with the B pentamer ( 6 ) . As shown in Table I , there was some association between CT - B and CT - A1 as detected by anti - CT - A , antiserum ; however , this interaction did not lead to a biological response . The lack of proper insertion of the A : ! peptide into the B6 pore to stabilize the toxin or the complete absence of the Az peptide to anchor the A subunit may result in the formation of a metastable complex unable to be inter - nalized or undergoing the intracellular processing required for activation of adenylylcyclase . It was particularly striking that while small but significant amounts of holotoxin were formed at the cell surface from the sequentially added subunits , no CT was detected when similar concentrations of the subunits were incubated in solution . Whereas the formation of holotoxin in solution from dena - tured subunits is quite efficient ( 21 ) , the ability of A to reassociate with pentameric B in solution is relatively low ( 18 ) . The greater efficiency that we observed when the sub - units were allowed to reassemble at the cell surface may be due to subtle conformational changes that the pentameric B undergoes when it binds to G M ~ at the cell surface ( 20 , 22 ) . In this regard , we observed that substantially more active CT was formed when CT - A was allowed to interact with B sub - unit - treated cells at 37 " C compared with 4 " C . Thus , our results are consistent with the conclusions of Sixma et al . ( 23 ) who determined the three - dimensional crys - tal structure of LT complexed with lactose . The boundogalac - tose residue is oriented with its anomeric carbon - 25 A from the flat surface of the B subunit upon qwhich the A1 peptide resides . The anomeric carbon also is 8 A from the side of the B subunit . If the galactose of lactose represents the terminal galactosepf GM1 , then the oligosaccharide chain , which ex - tends 25 A from the plasma membrane ( 241 , would be unable to reach the binding site - in orientation I1 unless all of the AI peptide and at least 8 A of the hydrophilic B pentamer is buried in the membrane . This theoretical analysis , however , assumes a relatively flat membrane , not the irregular surface of a typical cell wit . h its extensive glycocalyx and numerous pits , invaginations , and microvilli . Our experimental approach based on the interaction of CT with intact cells resolves any ambiguity in favor of orientation I . While orientation I places the five ganglioside binding sites on the B pentamer close to the membrane , it raises questions about how CT - A is able to get across the lipid bilayer . As the size of the B pore ranges from 11 A at the surface adjacent to the A subunit to 15 at the opposite surface ( 61 , the size of CT - A physically precludes its translocation through the pore of the B pentamer unless it unfolds or the B pentamer dissociates . The B pentamer is highly stable ( 6 ) and does not dissociate in SDS unless heated ( 25 ) . When ' 251 - CT bound to intact cells is analyzed by SDS - gel electrophoresis without heating , most of the radioactivity runs as a multimeric com - plex even after the cells are incubated at 37 " C for 1 h ( 26 ) . In this regard , we found that CT bound to Caco - 2 as well as SK - N - MC cells exhibited a time - dependent loss of immuno - reactivity to both anti - CT - A , and anti - CT - B antisera , which preceded the stimulation of adeny ~ ylcyclase activity . The more rapid disappearance of CT - B compared with CT - A may be a result of the B subunit becoming imbedded into the membrane with a concomitant loss in anti - CT - B epitopes and immunoreactivity . The concerted loss of immunoreactivity of both subunits , however , agrees with previous studies on mouse 17044 Sequential Assembly and Orit thymocytes ( 27 ) and rat hepatocytes ( 28 ) and is consistent with internalization of the intact holotoxin and not just the A subunit . It remains to be determined where in the cell and by what mechanism the active AI peptide is generated . REFERENCES 1 . Holmgren , J . ( 1981 ) Nature 292 , 413 - 417 2 . van Heyningen , S . ( 1983 ) in Curr . Top . Membr . Tramp . 18 , 445 - 471 3 . Finkelstein , R . , A . ( 1988 ) in Immunochemical and Molecular Genetic Andy - sis of . & cterial Pathogens ( Owen , P . , and Foster , T . J . , & ) pp , 85 - 102 , Elsevler Science Publishing Co . , Inc . , New York 4 . Fishman , P . H . ( 1990 ) in ADP - Ribosylattng Toxrm and G Proteins : Insights into Sigd Transduction ( Moss , J . , and Vaughan , M . , eds ) pp . 127 - 140 , American Society for Microbiology , Washington , D . C . 5 . van Hevninnen . S . ( 1991 ) Nature 351 . . 251 6 . Sixma , ? , E , ~ Pronk , SrE : , Kdk , K . - H . yWartna , E . S . , van Zanten , B . A . 7 . Tomasi . M . . and Montecucco . C . ( 19811 J . Bioi . Chem . 256 . 11177 - 11181 M . , Witholt , B . , and Hol , W . G . J . ( 1991 ) Nature 351 , 371 - 377 9 , Dwyer , J . D . , and Broomfield , V . A . ( 1982 ) Biochemistry 21 , 3227 - 3231 8 . Wisnieski , B . J . , and Bramhdl , J . . S . ( 1981 ) Nature 289 , 319 - 321 10 . Ribi , H . 0 . . Ludwig , D . S . , Mercer , K . L . , Schoolnik , G . K . , and Kornberg , 11 . Tran , D . , Carpentier , J . - L . , Sawano , F . , Gordon , P . , and Orci , L . ( 1987 ) R . D . ( 1988 ) Scrence 239 , 1272 - 1276 Proc . Natl . Acad . Scr . U . S . A . 84 , 7109 - 7113 ntation of Active Cholera Toxin 12 . Hidalgo , I . J . , Raub , T . J . , and Borchardt , R . T . ( 1989 ) Gastroenterology 13 . Reichlin , M . ( 1980 ) Methods Enzymol . 70 , 159 - 165 14 . Hudson , L . , and Hay , F . C . ( 1980 ) Practical Immunology , 2nd Ed . , pp . 192 - 15 . Pacuszka , T . , and Fishman , P . H . ( 1990 ) J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 7673 - 7678 16 . Fishman , P . H . ( 1982 ) J . Cell . Bioi . 93 , 860 - 865 17 . Fishman , P . H . , and Curran , P . C . ( 1992 ) FEBS Lett . 314 , 371 - 374 18 . Hardy , S . J . S . , Holmgren , J . , Johansson , S . , Sanchez , J . , and Hirst , T . R . 19 . Davis , B . J . ( 1964 ) Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 121 , 404 - 427 ( 1988 ) Pm . Natl . Acad . Sci . Lr . S . A . 85 , 7109 - 7113 20 . Moss , J . Osborne , J . C . , Jr . , Fishman , P . H . , Nakaya , S . , and Robertson , 21 . Takeda , Y . , Honda , T . , Taga , S . , and Miwatani , T . ( 1981 ) Infect . Irnmun . D . C . ( 1981 ) J . Bioi . Chem . 256 , 12861 - 12865 22 . Fishman , P . H . , Moss , J . , and Osbotne , J . C . , Jr . ( 1978 ) Biochemistry 17 , 34 , 341 - 346 23 . Sixma , T . K . , Pronk , S . E . , Kalk , K . H . , van Zanten , B . A . M . , Berghuis , 24 . McDaniel , R . V . , and McIntosh , T . J . ( 1986 ) Biophys . J . 49 , 94 - 96 25 . Gill , D . M . ( 1976 ) Biochemistry 15 , 1242 - 1248 26 . Kassis , S . , Hagmann , J . , Fishman , P . H . , Chang , P . P . , and Moss . J . ( 1982 ) 27 . Tsuru , S . , Matsuguchi , M . , Ohtomo , N . , Zinnaka , Y . , andTakeya , K . ( 1982 ) 28 . Janicot , M . , Clot , J . - P . , and Deshuquois , B . ( 1988 ) Bioehem . J . 253 , 735 - 96 , 736 - 749 194 , Blackwell Publishers , Oxford 711 - 716 A . M . , and Hol , W . G . J . ( 1992 ) Nature 355 , 561 - 564 J . Bioi . Chem . 257 , 12148 - 12152 J . Gen . Mmobrol . 128 , 497 - 502 743