APPLIED COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) Published online 17 December 2004 in Wiley InterScience ( www . interscience . wiley . com ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / acp . 1086 Cognitive Effort during Note Taking ANNIE PIOLAT 1 * , THIERRY OLIVE 2 and RONALD T . KELLOGG 3 1 University of Provence , France 2 CNRS and University of Poitiers , France 3 Saint Louis University , USA SUMMARY Note taking is a complex activity that requires comprehension and selection of information and written production processes . Here we review the functions , abbreviation procedures , strategies , and working memory constraints of note taking with the aim of improving theoretical and practical understanding of the activity . The time urgency of selecting key points and recording them while comprehending new information at the same time places signiﬁcant demands on the central executive and other components of working memory . Dual - and triple - task procedures allow the measurement of the momentary cognitive effort or executive attention allocated to note taking . Comparative data show that note taking demands more effort than reading or learning . However , it requires less effort than the creative written composition of an original text . Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Note taking occurs in frequent and various everyday life situations . To make purchases , to plan future events and activities , to study for examinations , to prepare a technical talk , to design a model in an industry , and to record the minutes of work meetings are a few examples . Furthermore , the reasons why individuals take notes are highly variable . Despite the diversity of contexts and intentions , all note taking entails recording information collected from one or several sources . Such a record constitutes a stable external memory that is intended to help to plan a future activity , to learn , to think , or to create . It is important to understand this common activity for both theoretical and practical reasons . Although a large body of studies had investigated the different techniques that note takers use and their effectiveness , surprisingly few have focused on the cognitive processes underlying note taking . For cognitive psychologists , it is important to study the mental operations that underlie note taking in addition to studying the product itself , as linguists do . A cognitive analysis is even more critical to understanding when it is recognized that note taking cannot be equated to simply copying what is heard , observed or thought . On the contrary , in a large majority of cases , note taking implies comprehension ( van Dijk & Kintsch , 1983 ) and Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . * Correspondence to : Dr A . Piolat , Centre for Research on Psychology of Cognition , Language and Emotion , Universite´ de Provence , 29 avenue Robert Schuman , 13621 Aix - en - Provence Cedex 1 , France . E - mail : annie . piolat @ up . univ - aix . fr Contract / grant sponsor : French ACI programme ‘Ecole et Sciences Cognitives’ . written production ( Alamargot & Chanquoy , 2001 ) that is similar to original composition . Note takers , as readers , must comprehend information and , as learners , try to store information in long - term memory by writing it down . As writers , note takers must select the information to record and format it in ways that differ from the source material . They employ abbreviating operations , syntactical short - cuts , paraphrasing statements , and often a physical formatting of the notes that differs from the linear text of written source material ( Piolat , 2001 ) . Accordingly , the goal of a cognitive analysis is to specify the processes , knowledge , and working memory resources that note takers activate when they produce this unique kind of written product . The present review will be organized as follows . We begin by characterizing the written products ( the notes ) and the reasons for their production . We then focus on the central attribute of note taking , namely , the speed with which both comprehension and production processes must be carried out . This brings forward the important role of working memory in note taking ( Baddeley , 2000 ) . Next , we describe the dual - and triple - task methods that are fruitful for measuring the cognitive effort required by note taking ( Olive , Kellogg , & Piolat , 2002 ) . We then report the ﬁndings of a series of studies that compare the cognitive effort involved in note taking versus other language activities ( reading comprehension , verbal learning , and writing original texts ) . Finally , we examine how different contexts of note taking affect the cognitive effort involved , including variations in the kind of source material , the technique of note taking , the source medium , and the amount of information contained in the source . THE WHAT AND WHY OF NOTE TAKING Functions and factors regulating note taking Notes can be deﬁned as short condensations of a source material that are generated by writing them down while simultaneously listening , studying , or observing . Their function is to gather information distributed in a lecture , a book or in any other situation that needs to be remembered . In other words , notes are external memories whose content is more or less explicit ( Hartley , 1976 ; Kiewra , 1989 ; Kiewra & Frank , 1988 ; Kiewra , DuBois , Christensen , Kim , & Lindberg , 1989 ) . The function of notes is not only to provide a record of information , however . Indeed , even if note taking is frequently used in situations where transmission of information is crucial , as in academic contexts ( Armbruster , 2000 ; Canelos , Dwyer , Nichols , & Randall , 1984 ; Kiewra , 1987 , 1988a , 1991 ; Piolat & Boch , 2004 ; Piolat , Roussey , & Barbier , 2003 ) , it is also frequent in everyday life and in many professional contexts ( Hartley , 2002 ) . In these situations , manipulating and anticipating relevant information are crucial , as in judging ( Houdek Middendorf & Hoff Macan , 2002 ) , problem solving ( Cary & Carlson , 1999 ) , and decision making ( Castello & Monereo , 1999 ) , including when the work is collective ( e . g . industrial design , preparation of an exhibition , etc . ) . In such cases , note taking could facilitate an ongoing work . In academic contexts ( secondary school and university ) , after several years of practice , students develop speciﬁc conceptions of the functions of note taking . These representa - tions relate to the purposes of the notes ( to record information , to concentrate , etc . ) , their content and structure ( abbreviating procedures , structure of information , etc . ) as well as to contextual factors ( style of the teacher and how important information is signalled , kind of 292 A . Piolat et al . Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) course , etc . ) that mediate note taking ( Badger , White , Sutherland , & Haggis , 2001 ; Dunkel & Davy , 1989 ; Van Meter , Yokoi , & Pressley , 1994 ) . The students’ conceptions differ widely , however , as a function of the kinds of academic courses for which they take notes ( Badger et al . , 2001 ; Hadwin , Kirby , & Woodhouse , 1999 ) . For two decades , a few experimental studies have analysed different contextual factors that affect note taking ( for a review , see Piolat et al . , 2003 ) . When taking notes from lectures , students are very attentive to a variety of signals given by the lecturer to control comprehension ( ﬂuency , changes in prosody , notes on the blackboard , explicit instructions for taking notes , etc . ; see Isaacs , 1994 ; Titsworth , 2001 ) . When taking notes from written documents , typographic and linguistics marks present in the text ( title and headings , summarized statements , connectives , etc . ) are used for selecting and structuring the information ( Rickards , Fajen , Sullivan , & Gillespie , 1997 ; Sanchez , Lorch , & Lorch , 2001 ) . Notes : Summarized products with different formats Note taking is often realized under severe time pressure . To take notes quickly , it is necessary to shorten and reduce information . Such constraints led to the invention of stenography whose graphic traces and transcribed units are simpliﬁed compared with alphabetical writings . But this technique is so scarcely mastered that note takers rarely use stenography . They generally fashion their own method of note taking during their studies or in their profession . This leads to much diversiﬁcation in note - taking practices ( Bretzing , Kulhavy , & Caterino , 1987 ; Hartley & Davies , 1978 ) . Analyses of the structures of notes show that the techniques used when taking notes affect three levels of language . First , abbreviating procedures may apply on lexical units ( namely spelling ; see Figure 1 ) . For instance , end truncation ( writing down ‘ poss . ’ for ‘ possibility ’ ) , conservation of the frame of consonants , and sufﬁx contraction ( writing down ‘ recog ed ’ for ‘ recognized ’ ) are usual techniques of note taking ( cf . Branca - Rosoff , 1998 ; Kiewra & Benton , 1988 ; Kiewra , Benton , & Levis , 1987 ; Lindberg - Risch & Kiewra , 1990 ) . It is also important to notice that the same note taker can use a variety of techniques and that these techniques may be quite different from one individual to another . Moreover , the variation with which a note taker uses these techniques is astonishing . For example , the same word can be shortened in different ways within the same note - taking task or from one note - taking task to another . Despite this variety of techniques , some are automatized sufﬁciently to be transferred from one language to another , as indicated by research on note taking in ﬁrst and second languages ( Chaudron , Loschsky , & Cook , 1994 ; Clerehan , 1995 ) . For instance , as Figure 1 illustrates , when the lexical structure of two languages is comparable , sufﬁx contraction can be used in the same way . In the two excerpts in Figure 1 , the same student contracted a sufﬁx both in French ( ‘ ind elle ’ for ‘ individuelle ’—‘individual’ in English ) and in English ( ‘ recog ed ’ for ‘ recognized ’ ) . By contrast , because Japanese and French are two languages that are very differently structured , Japanese students have to discover and to learn new techniques when they take notes in French ( Barbier , Faraco , Piolat , Roussey , & Kida , 2003 ) . Second , syntax can be transformed by shortening statements . For this purpose , note takers may adopt a telegraphic style to record the information . They may also use substitutive techniques , with mathematical ( þ , ¼ ) , iconic ( ) , Greek - alphabetic ( ß ) symbols for example . Such symbols ( dash , arrow , star ) are also ways for increasing the speed of note taking , as for example when they are used in lists ( see Figure 2 ) . They further Note taking 293 Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) avoid formatting the syntax of the source material that is heard or read ( Branca - Rosoff , 1998 ; Barbier et al . , 2003 ) . Third , the physical formatting of the notes may be quite different from the usual linear formatting used when producing a text ( for a synthesis , see Piolat , 2001 ; Piolat et al . , 2003 ) . In general , the format of the notes ( tabulation , inserts , etc . ) exploits all the physical space of a sheet in a non - linear way ( see Figures 2 and 3 ) . The formatting of the notes written down on the paper is thus often near that of preparatory rough drafts of an essay ( Kellogg , 1988 ; Piolat , 1998 , 1999 ; Piolat & Roussey , 1996 ) . They can , however , look very similar to a polished draft or a linear text ( Slotte & Lonka , 2001 ) . Note - taking strategies use the physical space of the sheet to provide organizational cues of the information that is recorded ( for a synthesis , see Kiewra et al . , 1989 ; Piolat , 2001 ) . When they take notes during their courses , a majority of students focus on the discourse of the teacher that they will have to restore during their examination . So , they frequently resort to a linear method of note taking that gives to their notes a traditional textual appearance ( Piolat & Boch , 2004 ; Van Meter et al . , 1994 ) . However , in some particular educational settings ( observation method for example ) or in professional contexts ( notes taken during a meeting ) note takers can voluntary pre - select information they wish to integrate in their notes by following particular and well - deﬁned note structures . For example , as shown in Figure 3 , the note taker has used a variant of the seven - question method of note taking ( Who ? What ? Where ? When ? How ? Why ? How many ? ) . Note taking and learning outcomes Research on note taking has generally attempted to delineate the strategies and techniques that lead to notes that are relevant and effective for knowledge acquisition ( Baker & Figure 1 . An example of abbreviating procedures used by the same undergraduate student in ﬁrst language ( French ) and in second language ( English ) 294 A . Piolat et al . Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) Lombardi , 1985 ; Barnett , Di Vesta , & Rogozinski , 1981 ; Kiewra et al . , 1991 ; Kiewra , DuBois , Christian , & McShane , 1988 ; Morgan , Lilley , & Boreham , 1988 ; Norton , 1981 ; Norton & Hartley , 1986 ; Nye , Crooks , Powley , & Tripp , 1984 ; Peck & Hannaﬁn , 1983 ; Russell , Caris , Harris , & Hendricson , 1983 ; Slotte & Lonka , 1999 ; Spires , 1993 ) . However , notetakers must endeavour to learn how to note ( Stahl , King , & Henk , 1991 ) , more especially because they often take notes with difﬁculty ( Suristky , 1992 ) . The majority of the studies that investigate the effects of note - taking strategies on learning have focused on the quality of the selection and the organization of the information that is recorded ( Boyle & Weishaar , 2001 ; Brown & Day , 1983 ; Dyer , Riley , & Yekovitch , 1979 ; Einstein , Morris , & Smith , 1985 ; Horton , Lovitt , & Christensen , 1991 ; Howe , 1974 ; Kiewra et al . , 1987 ; King , 1992 ; Ladas , 1980 ; Nist & Hogrebe , 1987 ; Oakhill & Davies , 1991 ; Piolat , in press ; Smith & Tompkins , 1988 ; Thomas , 1978 ; Williams & Eggert , 2002 ) . These studies suggest that nearly all non - linear note - taking strategies ( e . g . with an outline or a matrix framework ) beneﬁt learning outcomes more than does the linear recording of information , with graphs and concept maps especially fostering the selection and organization of information . As a consequence , the remembering of information is most effective with non - linear strategies ( Dye , 2000 ; Fisher & Harris , Figure 2 . Use of abbreviating procedures ( e . g . ‘ Organizat (cid:1) , cr . ’ ) and application of several list effects with indentations for physical and linguistic formatting of notes in a second language ( English ) by undergraduate students Note taking 295 Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) 1974 ; Frank , 1984 ; Gruneberg & Mathieson , 1997 ; Robinson & Kiewra , 1995 ; Robinson , Katayama , DuBois , & DeVaney , 1998 ; Slotte & Lonka , 2000 ; Titsworth & Kiewra , 2004 ) . Studies on the impact of note - taking strategies on recall and achievement in exams have shown that students not only learn when they review their notes , but also while they take their notes . The notes constitute an external memory that can be used later for studying and other tasks ( Kiewra , 1985a , 1985b ; Kiewra , Benton , Kim , Risch , & Christensen , 1995 ; Knigth & McKelvie , 1986 ; Laidlaw , Skok , & McLaughlin , 1993 ; Peters , 1972 ) . Taking notes themselves can also increase learning by fostering retention and connections of information , as seen in the generation effect ( NB : ‘The generation effects refers to the ﬁnding that individuals retain materials that they have generated better than materials that have been generated by others and given to them’ Foos , Mora , & Tkacz , 1994 , 567 ) . Moreover , students also memorize during note taking , particularly when they engage in deep comprehension of the source ( Williams & Eggert , 2002 ) . All the studies mentioned above focus on the integration of information in long - term memory , but fail to explore the role of working memory in note taking . Hartley and Davies ( 1978 ) had considered that attentional capacity of note takers decreased as a function of several factors such as the importance given to the course and to the information delivered . Kiewra ( 1988b , 1989 ) mentioned the role of working memory in note taking , indicating that quantity and quality of notes might be quite different according to the ‘working memory skill’ of note takers . Scerbo , Warm , Dember , and Grasha ( 1992 ) analysed the nature of the information that was noted and concluded that the attentional capacity of note takers decreases throughout a course or lecture . Some other authors have considered Figure 3 . Notes recorded during the reading of a report in a professional context with the seven - question method by a business woman 296 A . Piolat et al . Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) that the role of working memory when note taking is a means to decrease cognitive load during reading ( Yeung , Jin , & Sweller , 1997 ) or in problem solving ( Cary & Carlson , 2001 ; Cohn , Cohn , & Bradley , 1995 ) . The notes , as an external memory , thus support retention in working memory of intermediate information or solutions that will be used for comprehension or for elaborating a ﬁnal solution . Researchers have neglected to study the critical relation between working memory and note taking , given that taking notes involves juggling comprehension and production processes under , at times , severe time pressure . MEASURING COGNITIVE EFFORT OF NOTE TAKING Note taking : A high resource - consuming activity Note takers have to deal with several problems related to the ﬂow of information , particularly when taking notes from lectures . When writing notes , the note taker is constrained by the rate of speech of the lecturer : writing speed is about 0 . 2 to 0 . 3 words per second whereas speaking speed is about 2 to 3 words per second ( Foulin , 1995 ; A . Piolat , unpublished phD thesis , 1982 ) . In other words , note takers must maintain an active representation of what they are hearing in order to get sufﬁcient time to exploit and to transcribe a portion , while being faced with a continuous updating of the message content as it is spoken . Even with written documents , note takers must also deal with a temporal pressure , because their transcription remains slower than their reading . They cannot delay or slow their writing time too much in order to still be able to maintain in working memory the intermediate representations that result from comprehension . The temporal management of information is , therefore , a special difﬁculty in note taking . Note takers must coordinate the attention and storage demands of both comprehension and written production . They are thus constrained by the limited resources of the central executive and storage components of working memory ( Baddeley , 1996 ) . Working memory , as deﬁned by Baddeley ( 2000 ) , plays a crucial role in all cognitive activities that require the temporary storage and manipulation of information , whether the individual accomplishing these activities is just learning or is highly skilled . Working memory is engaged in comprehension ( Daneman & Merikle , 1996 ) and in writing ( Kellogg , 1996 ; Levy & Ransdell , 2002 ; Olive , 2004 ) . These two activities are also elicited in note taking . Although taking notes implies activating automatized processes speciﬁcally related to comprehension ( e . g . accessing the mental lexicon ) and to writing ( e . g . letter formation ) , it also implies a set of anticipating and control mental operations ( i . e . executive functions ) that are resource demanding . Multiple cognitive processes must be coordinated in rapid succession for note taking to be successful . Such coordination involves the central executive component of working memory ( Baddeley , 1996 , 2000 ) . In note taking , these controlled operations are for a large part conscious and are subject to a metacognitive control ( Castello & Monereo , 1999 ; Piolat & Bloch , 2004 ) . In others words , note takers may deliberately regulate their activity to simultaneously comprehend , evaluate , sort , and write down the information that must be recorded . To circumvent the limited capacity of working memory , note takers may choose between two main strategies , with this choice being susceptible to change while taking Note taking 297 Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) notes ( Piolat , 2001 ; Piolat et al . , 2003 ) . They may reduce their activity either to comprehension ( listening or reading and noting the less possible ) or to transcription ( without processing the content of what is heard or read in order to be able to transcribe the maximum of information ) . In the later case , the on - line verbatim transcription of speech poses a serious psychomotor problem that note takers solve by giving up the transcription of letters , words , part of sentences , even of whole sentences , by using abbreviating procedures . Nevertheless , the use of such procedures is not always effective for resolving the variation of rate between fast oral production and slow writing . Even if , for some note takers , the abbreviating procedures do not require working memory resources , the selection of information cannot be performed in an automatic way , even when note takers have at their disposal procedures that markedly shorten their notes , as for example , with concept maps ( Piolat , 2001 ; Piolat & Boch , 2004 ) . Thus , these activities of comprehension and production of notes are , in large measure , deliberate operations that require central executive resources . The cognitive effort ( Kahneman , 1973 ; Kellogg , 1987 , 1988 , 1994 ) that note taking engages should vary according to different situational parameters such as the nature of the information that is noted , the domain - knowledge of the note taker about the lecture or the reading , etc . The assessment of the amount of cognitive resources that is required by a complex cognitive activity may be carried out by several techniques according to the nature of the task that is investigated . For our part , we elected the dual - task paradigm and the triple - task techniques . Measuring cognitive effort with the dual - task paradigm Cognitive effort refers to the fraction of limited attentional resources that are momentarily allocated to a process ( Kahneman , 1973 ; Tyler , Hertel , McCallum , & Ellis , 1979 ) . Among the experimental methods that are available , the dual - task technique has often been used for evaluating the cognitive effort engaged in higher - order cognitive tasks , such as comprehension or text production . In these tasks , participants are asked to perform concurrently a primary task and a secondary probe task . For example , while composing a text or taking notes , participants must react as fast as possible to tones ( by pressing a mouse button or by saying ‘stop’ to a microphone linked to a vocal key ) that are periodically distributed in a random interval ( in general between 15 and 45 s ) . The central executive of working memory must coordinate the concurrent tasks , focus attention when each tone is detected , and select a motor response as instructed . Reaction time ( RT ) in this dual - task situation is compared with a control condition when the probe is responded to as a single task . The degree of interference in RT ( IRT ) caused by the primary task provides a measure of the amount of cognitive effort devoted to composition or note taking . So , if the composition of two texts whose content is quite different engages a comparable degree of cognitive effort , the IRT should not differ . Conversely , if one task engages more cognitive effort than another , then this should be revealed in their respective IRTs . In sum , the longer the IRT , the more the primary task places demands on the central resources of working memory . Using this kind of secondary task , Kellogg ( 1986 , 120 ; 1994 , 17 ) compared the cognitive effort of adults engaged in intentional and incidental learning of nonsense syllables ( Kellogg , 1986 ) , text composition ( Kellogg , 1994 ) , reading comprehension ( Britton , Glynn , Meyer , & Penland , 1982 ) , and game playing in chess ( Britton & Tesser , 1982 ) . As shown on Figure 4 , undergraduates composing short texts in the laboratory 298 A . Piolat et al . Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) expend a high degree of cognitive effort , matched only by chess experts as they select a move in the middle stages of a match . What is common to these two tasks is that they both involve retrieval of large amounts of knowledge , conceptual planning , and the develop - ment of solutions to the problems posed in each situation . In such activities , the engagement of the individual in the task is critical and the cognitive effort allocated is more substantial than when these operations are not needed , such as in reading , rote learning or text copying ( Olive & Kellogg , 2002 ) . Although texts with complex sentences demanded more effort than those with simple sentence structures , it is of interest that reading syntactically complex texts , is still less demanding than writing . Thus , it appears that the manipulation of information retrieved from long - term memory and management of these processes in working memory ( either in text composition or when making a skilled move during a chess game ) are highly demanding on the central executive . In the remaining review , similar comparisons are made across different tasks . It is recognized that these comparisons lead to inferences that must be tested in a single experiment using statistical procedures . Even so , the comparisons suggest interesting research questions that can be tested in future experiments . Measuring cognitive effort with the triple task The chronometric approach of mental functioning just discussed can be further extended by analysing the cognitive effort associated with speciﬁc processes involved in note taking Figure 4 . Cognitive effort ( in milliseconds ) in different processing information tasks [ ( 1 ) Olive & Piolat , 2002 ; ( 2 ) Kellogg , 1986 ; ( 3 ) Britton et al . , 1982 ; ( 4 ) Britton & Tesser , 1982 ; ( 5 ) Piolat , in press , and ( 6 ) Piolat et al . , 1996 ] . NB : the values of standard errors are not available Note taking 299 Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) or writing . This involves asking for an immediate directed introspection after each tone’s detection . The participant categorizes his or her thoughts at the moment the tone occurred . For example , in studying text composition , the participants indicated whether their thoughts reﬂected planning ideas , translating ideas into text by generating sentences , or reviewing ideas or text ( Kellogg , 1987 ; Levy & Ransdell , 1995 ) . With the triple task , then , participants perform : ( 1 ) the primary task under investigation , ( 2 ) the secondary probe task described above , and ( 3 ) a verbalization task that asks participants to label the process that was interrupted by the probe . For this last task , participants have ﬁrst been trained to identify the cognitive processes activated at the moment based on immediate recollection of their conscious thoughts at the time of the probe . In most of the writing studies , the three major writing processes ( i . e . planning , translating and reviewing ) have been the focus of the researcher and writers are thus trained to identify these processes . Obviously , different processes can be the targets of the investigation . The time course of the triple task is as follows : while writers compose their text , just after having reacted as fast as possible to the auditory probes , they designate the process interrupted by the probe , and then the task continues with several cycles of reaction to the probes followed by directed introspection . Two variables are then analysed . First , the verbalization data provide information about the processing time of the writing processes and how this processing time changes throughout a writing session . The percentage of times spent on a writing process constitutes an index of its processing time . Second , the RTs to the probes allow one to study the allocation of cognitive resources to these processes . Each RT to a probe is associated with an immediate , directed introspection response and the latency of these RTs ( in terms of a difference with a baseline RT ) estimates the cognitive effort given to the reported writing process . This method , then , sheds light on how writers succeed or fail in managing the demands of writing by tracking the time and effort devoted to speciﬁc processes . The triple task uses directed introspection as opposed to the undirected introspection obtained in think aloud protocols ( Ericsson & Simon , 1980 ) . Verbal protocols provide a much richer record of the cognitive processes engaged in by the writer . However , thinking out loud as one writes is particularly challenging given the heavy demands of the primary task on working memory . When generating sentences , the think aloud protocol requires speaking a sentence at the same time that it is written and the protocol is often nothing more than a verbalization of the written sentence . Undirected verbalization is quite informative with respect to planning and reviewing , but the continuous verbalization requirement is more intrusive than training writers to identify one of three or four categories ( Olive et al . , 2002 ; Piolat & Olive , 2000 ) . A brief , categorical response minimizes the disruption of the primary task and at the same time allows one to estimate processing time and cognitive effort . Further , it allows participants to report nonverbal processes , such as visual imagery in planning , without the cost of recoding into words as required in a think aloud protocol ( Piolat , Olive , Roussey , Thunin , & Ziegler , 1999 ) . The use of directed introspection has proven extremely valuable in other research areas , such as the categories of ‘remember’ versus ‘know’ in studies of episodic memory ( Gardiner & Richardson - Klavehn , 2000 ) . The triple task may appear complex and disruptive of the primary task . Several experiments have been carried out to test the impact of the probe task and directed introspection on the primary task ( Kellogg , 1987 ; Pe´lissier & Piolat , 1999 ; Piolat , Kellogg , & Farioli , 2001 ; Piolat , Roussey , Olive , & Farioli , 1996 ) . The ﬁndings of these experi - ments show that the functioning and performance of the participants to the primary task 300 A . Piolat et al . Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) are neither degraded nor altered . Moreover , processing time and cognitive effort of the writing processes do not necessarily co - vary ; for instance , although translating processes are activated more often than planning and revising , the cognitive cost of translating is usually smallest . The triple – task method is a powerful technique that highlights key features of the strategies writers use when composing a text . In sum , with such tools of mental chronometry and according to the goals of the study , researchers can elect to focus on only the holistic cognitive effort engaged by a particular task ( e . g . by comparing note taking from a lecture or from a written document ) . For this purpose , the dual - task technique with a secondary probe task sufﬁces . The researcher might , however , want to track the time course and cognitive effort of the cognitive processes that underlie an activity . The triple - task technique offers a way to do so that is un - intrusive and informative . COGNITIVE EFFORT IN DIFFERENT SITUATIONS OF NOTE TAKING Several complex cognitive processes involved in language processing activities are simultaneously activated when taking notes ( comprehension , writing , and learning ) . To assess their respective cost , in terms of cognitive effort , ﬁndings from various studies are compared in this section . Results are not presented in the following sections in a canonical way for the following reasons . Firstly , our goal is to offer a synopsis of the different studies that have evaluated cognitive effort during note taking and the detailed statistics of each study are not presented here . Secondly , putting all these studies together is meant only to present an overview of a large sample of results in order to suggest hypotheses , as was done in Kellogg’s ( 1986 ) review of writing tools . Our main goal is to attempt to predict in which way working memory is engaged depending on the writing activity ( e . g . writing versus note taking ) and on the different contexts ( e . g . note taking from a document versus from a website ) . Comparing note taking with comprehension , learning and writing Taking notes implies comprehending either a written document or a lecture and recording information by writing it down . So , we ﬁrst compare noting from a lecture , reading a text ( to assess the cognitive effort of comprehension ) , and writing by longhand . Figure 4 shows the results of four areas of enquiry in which cognitive effort was measured . In a difﬁcult intentional learning task , participants learned ( psychology undergraduate students ) a list of nonsense syllables ( Kellogg , 1986 ) . In the reading study ( Britton et al . , 1982 ) , participants read a brief text . The note - taking situation asked participants ( psychology undergraduate students ) to take notes from a 12 - min lecture on literature before ﬁlling a questionnaire ( Piolat , in press ; Roussey & Piolat , 2003 ) . In the last study , participants ( psychology undergraduate students ) composed an approximately one - page long argumentative text ( Piolat et al . , 1996 ) . As Figure 4 shows , the cognitive effort engaged by note taking is greater than learning and comprehending ( reading in Figure 4 ) . This indicates that taking notes demands more of the central executive than either learning or comprehending alone , and supports the assumption that both of these activities are engaged in note taking . In another experiment that used the triple - task technique ( Ge´rouit , Piolat , Roussey , & Barbier , 2001 ) , note takers had to categorize their activity after each reaction to a tone Note taking 301 Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) according to whether they were reading a booklet or recording information by writing it down . Despite the reading task being highly effortful , judging from the large IRTobserved ( 590 ms ) , the note - taking task ( 661 ms ) was still reliably more demanding . As this ﬁnding shows , the writing activity of note taking seems to be more costly than that of comprehension . Thus , taking notes consumes at least as many resources as composing a text . Noting and writing both involve comprehension processes because both writers and note takers build a conceptual mental representation of what they are composing—for the former , and of what they are hearing—for the latter . But they also activate other processes to format their notes with the various physical and linguistic formatting procedures they have at their disposal . Applying these procedures is more effortful than comprehending ( see reading in Figure 4 ) . This ﬁnding is compatible with data from a comparison between creative and non - creative activities ( see next section , and text copying in Figure 4 ) . Comparing note taking with the processes involved in text composition The analysis of the processes involved in note taking indicates that note taking is closer to text composition than to graphic transcription ( Piolat et al . , 2003 ) . This interpretation is supported by data from the comparison between cognitive effort associated to note taking , copying , and the three major cognitive processes ( planning , translating and revising ; Piolat , in press ; Roussey & Piolat , 2003 ) with data from an experiment that assessed cognitive effort of the three major writing processes ( Piolat et al . , 1996 ) and with data from an experiment in which the cognitive effort of copying was assessed ( Olive & Piolat , 2002 ) . In this last experiment , participants ( psychology undergraduate students ) had to copy a text that they had just composed in one of the conditions . As Figure 4 illustrates , note taking is not only transcribing ( cf . copying ) . The cognitive effort devoted to note taking is indeed reliably higher than the effort devoted to copying . In other words , taking notes is not a simple graphic transcription of the information that is carried out in the lecture or in the reading . Indeed , in addition to operations of comprehension , when taking notes , note takers also select information , reformulate the contents ( abbreviations , telegraphic style , linguistic formatting of the notes ) , operations which all require an effort that is greater than that required for a simple sequential transcription . Finally , the low cognitive effort of copying ( i . e . handwriting ) also suggests that gaining access to meaning , sorting and selecting information can be elicited simultaneously with writing ( more precisely , with translating and the associated motor execution of handwriting ) . The comparison between note taking and the three writing processes ( planning , translating and revising ) ﬁrst shows that planning the content of a text is the most effortful process ( Kellogg , 1994 ) . Retrieving and organizing ideas during a text composition are still more effortful than selecting the information that will be recorded . Searching a new and ‘creative’ solution ( i . e . the text written down ) requires more resources than taking notes , even if the notes often present content characteristics different from what has been heard or read . Comparing note taking from different sources and with different techniques Note taking is used in very different situations that impose different information processing demands . Note takers frequently extract information from a written document 302 A . Piolat et al . Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) ( an article , a book ) to learn its content , or in order to use this information later . By contrast with note taking from a lecture , the pace at which note takers have to comprehend and select information from a document is slower when they read . They can , therefore , activate successively and not concurrently some of the operation needed to record the information via handwriting . Techniques also vary substantially , with almost all note takers using a personalized method for taking notes on a blank sheet . Some of them use pre - planned methods that reduce the urgency in taking notes . The sheets are marked with a plan , such as an outline , that guides the selection and recording of information from readings or lectures . Piolat ( in press ) has compared these different situations of note taking by psychology undergraduate students ( Roussey & Piolat , 2003 ) . More precisely , she compared note taking when listening to a lecture on literature with note taking while reading a transcript of it , and she contrasted these two contexts with two methods : taking notes with one’s own usual method or with a pre - planned method ( Figure 5 ) . Not surprisingly , taking notes from reading requires less cognitive effort than from a lecture . When listening , more operations are concurrently engaged and , thus , taking notes from a lecture places more demands on working memory resources . In Piolat’s experiment ( in press ) , the note - taking method did not affect the amount of working memory resources note takers engaged in the task . One possible interpretation is that the different methods that can be used for taking notes only affect the temporal management of the different activities that underlie note taking rather than their cognitive effort . This ﬁnding needs to be replicated , however . Comparing note taking from different mediums with different amounts of information Both the amount of information and its support can affect the cognitive effort of note takers . The written documents that constitute the source of the note - taking activity can be of various lengths ( from a few pages to a book ) . Information can , moreover , be presented on paper ( books ) or on a computer screen or notepad ( hypertexts ) . In Figure 6 the ﬁndings from two studies are presented . In one study , students took notes from a two - page written document of 1680 words . Psychology undergraduate students were instructed that they Figure 5 . Mean cognitive effort ( in milliseconds , and standard errors ) when taking notes from a lecture or while reading and with two methods ( usual versus pre - planned ; Piolat , in press ; Roussey & Piolat , 2003 ) Note taking 303 Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) had to take notes because they had then to complete a questionnaire ( Piolat , in press ; Roussey & Piolat , 2003 ) . In the other experiment , psychology undergraduate students explored a large document ( around 30 pages ) on pollution that results from shipwrecks and on speciﬁcities of maritime transport . Their task was to write an argumentation defending the sea transport of dangerous products . Information was presented either in a booklet or through a hypertext document ( namely , a website ; for a discussion of the differences between the two types of documents , see Ge´rouit et al . , 2001 ) . As this comparison indicates ( see Figure 6 ) , taking notes from a short text is less effortful than from a long document . In addition to activating text comprehension processes , when taking notes from a large document , note takers also must generate a large mental representation of the text ( namely , a more complex mental model ) . Furthermore , to perform the task well , they develop strategies for scanning the whole text that are very different from the strategies developed for reading short texts . With short text , the note takers generally adopt linear scanning strategies , while they do not for longer texts . Searching and sampling part of a text in order to ﬁnd information to be recorded are more effortful with a hypertext than with a paper document . Using computer technology to manage information through the click of a mouse can actually increase cognitive effort , judging from these results . It may be that the use of these technologies is less practised than reading and handwriting . Similar results were obtained by Kellogg and Mueller ( 1993 ) , however , who found that writing by longhand was less effortful than using a word processor even for skilled typists . Note taking and linguistic skill Note takers’ linguistic skill , and in particular their mastery of a language , is another factor that might affect cognitive effort . Barbier and Piolat ( M . - L . Barbier & A . Piolat , paper presented at the Sig Writing Conference , Geneva , 2004 ) examined the notes produced by undergraduate French students in their third year of English ( as a foreign language ) . These students were instructed to take notes from an 8 - min lecture ( an 840 - word text was recorded and then played ) and they had then to summarize the text . They took notes ﬁrst in French ( ﬁrst language ) from a lecture about enrollment in French universities and second in English ( second language ) from a lecture about the general organization of studies in French universities ( test order was counterbalanced : half of the students passed L1 and then L2 , the other half L2 then L1 ) . Figure 6 . Mean cognitive effort ( in milliseconds ) according to the size of the written source ( two pages versus 30 pages ) and the medium ( paper versus hypertext ) [ ( 1 ) Piolat , in press ; Roussey & Piolat , 2003 ; ( 2 ) Ge ´ rouit et al . , 2001 ] . NB : the values of standard errors are not available 304 A . Piolat et al . Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) Producing a text ( in our case summarizing it , see Figure 7 ) requires more executive attention than taking notes in both languages . This ﬁnding supports the results reported in Figure 4 . Not surprisingly , both note taking and text composition in a second language demands much more effort than in a ﬁrst language . Level of skill in a speciﬁc activity ( as for example linguistic skill or domain knowledge , cf . Olive , Piolat , & Roussey , 1997 ) does not explain all the observed inter - individual differences . For instance , Piolat ( in press ) and Roussey and Piolat ( 2003 ) have shown that working memory capacity—assessed with the French adaptation of a reading span test ( Desmette , Hupet , Schelstraete , & Van der Linden , 1995 ) —favours the adoption of different strategies of note taking and affects the cognitive effort that is engaged by note takers . CONCLUSION We have argued that the time urgency of note taking imposes signiﬁcant demands on the limited resources of working memory . The problems encountered by the note taker can be understood in terms of the major cognitive effort required in speciﬁc contexts or situations . Note taking is a complex activity that involves interweaving both comprehension and production processes . As with reading , writing and other complex activities , working memory is a critical cognitive component and individual differences in performance can be traced to how well the demands on working memory are managed . The ﬁndings reviewed here show that the dual - task paradigm ( and its variants ) provides a relevant window on the mental functioning of note takers . The effects of different situational factors on the engagement of central executive of working memory can be fruitfully studied . It is important in future work to use the triple - task method to identify and investigate more precisely all the information processing operations engaged in note taking . Identifying when and how many times comprehension , selection and production processes are activated , as well as how these processes are orchestrated constitutes an important challenge to understanding the functional characteristics of note taking . Our objective here was to delimit the basic process of note taking in a manner paralleling the written composition of original texts to lay the foundation for decomposing the task and its mental components further ( Hayes & Flower , 1980 ; Kellogg , 1994 ) . Figure 7 . Mean cognitive effort ( in milliseconds , and standard errors ) by undergraduate students when taking notes or when summarizing a lecture after having taken the notes in ﬁrst language ( French ) and second language ( English ) ( Barbier & Piolat , in press ) Note taking 305 Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) It also remains for future research to relate cognitive effort ( that most often results from strategic adaptation ) with behavioural outcomes , such as the quality of the notes taken or the performance or the time required to complete the task . However , in contrast to texts written for public consumption , notes are generally a private product intended to be meaningful only to the note taker . It may be more difﬁcult to adopt criteria of quality that are agreed upon as valid for note taking in comparison to written texts . However , because processing time ( or frequency ) of the processes involved in note taking can also be assessed with the triple - task method , the effect of the different methods ( or formats ) and strategies ( for instance focusing essentially on comprehension on recording of information ) of note taking can be investigated . Moreover , inter - individual characteristics of note takers , already visible in the notes , may be discovered . Perhaps there are individual ‘writing signatures’ for note taking similar to those observed already in full texts’ compositions ( Levy & Ransdell , 1995 ; van Waes & Schellen , 2003 ) . In text composition , writers have to ﬁnd a balance between the quality of the text they want to reach and the cognitive cost of the activity ( Kellogg , 1994 ; Olive & Piolat , 2003 ) . In particular , this balance is sensitive to the level of expertise ( domain knowledge , linguistic skill ) . By analogy with text composition , evidence for such a trade - off between procedures in note taking , namely the nature of the produced notes , and the requirements in cognitive resources should appear a promising way for a better understanding of note taking and of its learning outcomes . The observations reviewed here indicate that , from a cognitive perspective , note taking cannot be conceived of as only a simple abbreviated transcription of information that is heard or read . Rather , on the contrary , it is an activity that strongly depends on the central executive functions of working memory to manage comprehension , selection , and production processes concurrently . Indeed , the severe time pressure of note taking requires that information is both quickly comprehended and recorded in written form . It is a unique kind of written activity that cumulates both the inherent difﬁculties of comprehending a message and of producing a new written product . Yet , it differs in many of its characteristics from the usual linear and conventionally presented written texts . AUTHORS’ NOTE Annie Piolat , Centre PsyCLE , University of Provence ( France ) . Thierry Olive , Laboratory Language and Cognition , CNRS and University of Poitiers ( France ) . Ronald T . Kellogg , Department of Psychology , Saint Louis University ( Missouri , USA ) . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank Professor J . Hartley and an anonymous reviewer for their suggestions to improve the manuscript . The article was supported by a grant from the French ACI programme ‘Ecole et Sciences Cognitives’ . REFERENCES Alamargot , D . , & Chanquoy , L . ( 2001 ) . Through the models of writing . In G . Rijlaarsdam ( Series Ed . ) , Studies in writing ( Vol . 9 ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers . 306 A . Piolat et al . Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) Armbruster , B . B . ( 2000 ) . Taking notes from lectures . In R . F . Flippo , & D . C . Caverly ( Eds . ) , Handbook of college reading and study strategy research ( pp . 175 – 199 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Baddeley , A . D . ( 1996 ) . Exploring the central executive . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 49A , 5 – 28 . Baddeley , A . ( 2000 ) . The episodic buffer : a new component of working memory ? Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 4 ( 11 ) , 417 – 423 . Badger , R . , White , G . , Sutherland , P . , & Haggis , T . ( 2001 ) . Note perfect : an investigation of how students view taking notes in lectures . System , 29 ( 3 ) , 405 – 417 . Baker , L . , & Lombardi , B . R . ( 1985 ) . Students’ lecture notes and their relation to test performance . Teaching of Psychology , 12 , 28 – 32 . Barbier , M . - L . , & Piolat , A . ( in press ) . L1 and L2 cognitive effort of note taking and writing . In L . Allal , & B . Schneuwly ( Eds . ) . Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Writing . Geneva , Switzerland . Barbier , M . - L . , Faraco , M . , Piolat , A . , Roussey , J . - Y . , & Kida , T . ( 2003 ) . Comparaison de la prise de notes d’e´tudiants japonais et espagnols dans leur langue native et en franc¸ais L2 [ Comparing note taking between Japanese and Spanish students in L1 and L2 ] . Retrieved from May 20 , 2004 , from Arob @ se 7 , 1 - 2 [ http : / / www . arobase . to / v7 / ] . Barnett , J . E . , Di Vesta , F . J . , & Rogozinski , J . T . ( 1981 ) . What is learned in note - taking ? Journal of Educational Psychology , 73 , 181 – 192 . Boyle , J . R . , & Weishaar , M . ( 2001 ) . The effects of strategic note taking on the recall and comprehension of lecture information for high school students with learning disabilities . Learning Disabilities : Research & Practice , 16 ( 3 ) , 133 – 141 . Branca - Rosoff , S . ( 1998 ) . Abre´viations et icoˆnes dans les prises de notes des e´tudiants . [ Abbrevia - tions and icons in note taking by students ] In M . Bilger , K . dan den Eynde , & F . Gadet ( Eds . ) , Analyse linguistique et approches de l’oral . Recueil d’e ´ tudes offert en hommage a ` Claire - Blanche - Benveniste [ Speech analysis . Festchrift to Claire Blanche - Benveniste ] ( pp . 286 – 299 ) . Leuven - Paris : Peeters . Bretzing , B . H . , Kulhavy , R . W . , & Caterino , L . C . ( 1987 ) . Note taking by junior high students . Journal of Educational Research , 80 , 359 – 362 . Britton , B . K . , & Tesser , A . ( 1982 ) . Effects of prior knowledge on use of cognitive capacity in three complex cognitive tasks . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 21 , 421 – 436 . Britton , B . K . , Glynn , S . M . , Meyer , B . J . F . , & Penland , M . J . ( 1982 ) . Effects of text structure on use of cognitive capacity during reading . Journal of Educational Psychology , 74 , 51 – 61 . Brown , A . L . , & Day , J . D . ( 1983 ) . Macrorules for summarizing texts : the development of expertise . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 22 , 1 – 14 . Canelos , J . , Dwyer , F . , Nichols , B . , & Randall , T . W . ( 1984 ) . The note taking strategy of directed overt activity for improving learning on three types of intellectual tasks . Journal of Instructional Psychology , 11 ( 3 ) , 139 – 148 . Cary , M . , & Carlson , R . A . ( 1999 ) . External support and the development of problem - solving routines . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 25 ( 4 ) , 1053 – 1070 . Cary , M . , & Carlson , R . A . ( 2001 ) . Distributing working memory resources during problem solving . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 27 , 836 – 848 . Castello , M . , & Monereo , C . ( 1999 ) . Strategic knowledge in note - taking : a study in high education . Infancia y Aprendizaje , 88 , 25 – 42 . Chaudron , C . , Loschky , L . , & Cook , J . ( 1994 ) . Second language listening comprehension and lecture note - taking . In J . Flowerdew ( Ed . ) , Academic listening : Research perspectives ( pp . 75 – 92 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Clerehan , R . ( 1995 ) . Taking it down : note taking practices of L1 and L2 students . English for speciﬁc purposes , 14 ( 2 ) , 137 – 157 . Cohn , E . , Cohn , S . , & Bradley , J . J . ( 1995 ) . Note - taking , working memory , and learning in principles of economics . Research in Economic Education , 26 ( 4 ) , 291 – 307 . Daneman , M . , & Merikle , P . M . ( 1996 ) . Working memory and language comprehension : a meta - analysis . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 3 ( 4 ) , 422 – 433 . Desmette , D . , Hupet , M . , Schelstraete , M . A . , & Van der Linden , M . ( 1995 ) . Adaptation en langue franc¸aise du ‘reading span test’ de Daneman et Carpenter [ French adaptation of Daneman & Carpenter’ reading span test ] . L’Anne´e Psychologique , 95 , 459 – 482 . Note taking 307 Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) Dunkel , P . A . , & Davy , S . ( 1989 ) . The heuristic of lecture note taking : perceptions of American and international students regarding the value and practice of note taking . English for Speciﬁc Purposes , 8 ( 1 ) , 33 – 50 . Dye , G . A . ( 2000 ) . Graphic Organizers to the Rescue ! Helping Students Link—and Remember— Information . Teaching Exceptional Children , 32 ( 3 ) , 72 – 76 . Dyer , J . , Riley , J . , & Yekovitch , F . ( 1979 ) . An analysis of three study skills : note - taking , summarizing and rereading . Journal of Educational Research , 73 ( 1 ) , 3 – 7 . Einstein , G . O . , Morris , J . , & Smith , S . ( 1985 ) . Note - taking , individual differences , and memory for lecture information . Journal of Educational Psychology , 77 ( 5 ) , 522 – 532 . Ericsson , K . A . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1980 ) . Verbal reports as data . Psychological Review , 87 , 215 – 251 . Fisher , J . L . , & Harris , M . B . ( 1974 ) . Effects of note taking preference and types of notes taken on memory . Psychological Reports , 35 , 384 – 385 . Foos , P . W . , Mora , J . J . , & Tkacz , S . ( 1994 ) . Student study techniques and the generation effect . Journal of Educational Psychology , 86 ( 4 ) , 567 – 576 . Foulin , J . N . ( 1995 ) . Pauses et debits : les indicateurs temporels de la production e´crite [ Pauses and ﬂuency : chronometrics indices of writing production ] . L’Anne ´ e Psychologique , 95 , 483 – 504 . Frank , B . M . ( 1984 ) . Effects of ﬁled independence - dependence and study technique on learning from a lecture . American Educational Research Journal , 21 , 669 – 678 . Gardner , J . M . , & Richardson - Klavehn , A . ( 2000 ) . Remembering and knowing . In E . Tulving , & F . I . M . Craik ( Eds . ) , The Oxford handbook of memory ( pp . 229 – 244 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Ge´rouit , C . , Piolat , A . , Roussey , J . - Y . , & Barbier , M . L . ( 2001 ) . Couˆt attentionnel de la recherche d’informations par des adultes sur hypertexte et sur document papier . In M . Mojahid , & J . Virbel ( Eds . ) , Actes du 4 (cid:1) Colloque International sur le Document Electronique ( pp . 201 – 215 ) . Paris : Europia production . Gruneberg , M . M . , & Mathieson , M . ( 1997 ) . The perceived value of minds maps ( spider diagrams ) as learning and memory aids . Cognitive Technology , 2 ( 1 ) , 21 – 24 . Hadwin , A . F . , Kirby , J . R . , & Woodhouse , R . A . ( 1999 ) . Individual differences in note - taking , summarization and learning from lectures . Alberta Journal of Educational Research , 45 ( 1 ) , 1 – 17 . Hartley , J . ( 1976 ) . Lecture handouts and student note taking . Programmed Learning and Educa - tional Technology , 13 , 58 – 64 . Hartley , J . ( 2002 ) . Note taking in non academic settings : a review . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 16 , 559 – 574 . DOI : 10 . 1002 / acp . 814 Hartley , J . , & Davies , I . K . ( 1978 ) . Notetaking : a critical review . Programmed Learning and Educational Technology , 15 , 207 – 224 . Hayes , R . , & Flower , L . S . ( 1980 ) . Identifying the organization of writing processes . In L . W . Gregg , & E . R . Steinberg ( Eds . ) , Cognitive processes in writing ( pp . 3 – 30 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Horton , S . V . , Lovitt , T . C . , & Christensen , C . C . ( 1991 ) . Note taking from textbooks : effects of a columnar format on three categories of secondary students . Exceptionality , 2 , 19 – 40 . Houdek Middendorf , C . , & Hoff Macan , T . ( 2002 ) . Note taking in the employment interview : effects on recall and judgments . Journal of Applied Psychology , 87 ( 2 ) , 293 – 303 . Howe , M . J . A . ( 1974 ) . The utility of taking notes as an aid to learning . Educational Research , 16 , 222 – 227 . Isaacs , G . ( 1994 ) . Lecturing practices and note taking purposes . Studies in Higher Education , 19 ( 2 ) , 203 – 216 . Kahneman , D . ( 1973 ) . Attention and effort . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Kellogg , R . T . ( 1986 ) . Designing idea processors for document composition . Behavior Research Methods , Instruments , & Computers , 18 , 118 – 128 . Kellogg , R . T . ( 1987 ) . Effects of topic knowledge on the allocation of processing time and cognitive effort to writing processes . Memory and Cognition , 15 , 256 – 266 . Kellogg , R . T . ( 1988 ) . Attentional overload and writing performance : effects of rough draft and outline strategies . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 14 ( 2 ) , 355 – 365 . Kellogg , R . T . ( 1994 ) . The psychology of writing . New York : Oxford University Press . 308 A . Piolat et al . Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) Kellogg , R . T . ( 1996 ) . A model of working memory in writing . In M . C . Levy , & S . E . Ransdell ( Eds . ) , The science of writing : Theories , methods , individual differences and applications ( pp . 57 – 71 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Laurence Erlbaum Associates . Kellogg , R . T . , & Mueller , S . ( 1993 ) . Performance ampliﬁcation and process restructuring in computer - based writing . International Journal of Man - Machine Studies , 39 , 33 – 49 . Kiewra , K . A . ( 1985a ) . Investigating note taking and review : a depth of processing alternative . Educational Psychologist , 20 , 23 – 32 . Kiewra , K . A . ( 1985b ) . Learning from a lecture : an investigation of note taking , review and attendance at a lecture . Human Learning , 4 , 73 – 77 . Kiewra , K . A . ( 1987 ) . Note taking and review : the research and its implications . Journal of Instructional Science , 16 , 233 – 249 . Kiewra , K . A . ( 1988a ) . Cognitive aspects of autonomous note taking : control processes , learning strategies , and prior knowledge . Educational Psychologist , 23 , 39 – 56 . Kiewra , K . A . ( 1988b ) . Comparing of self - questioning , summarizing , and note taking - review as strategies for learning from lectures . American Educational Research Journal , 29 ( 2 ) , 303 – 323 . Kiewra , K . A . ( 1989 ) . A review of note - taking : the encoding storage paradigm and beyond . Educational Psychology Review , 1 , 147 – 172 . Kiewra , K . A . ( 1991 ) . Aids to lecture learning . Educational Psychologist , 26 , 37 – 53 . Kiewra , K . A . , & Benton , S . L . ( 1988 ) . The relationship between information - processing ability and note - taking . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 13 , 33 – 44 . Kiewra , K . A . , & Frank , B . M . ( 1988 ) . Encoding and external storage effects of personal lecture notes , skeletal notes , and detailed notes for ﬁeld - independent and ﬁeld - dependent learners . Journal of Educational Research , 81 , 143 – 148 . Kiewra , K . A . , Benton , S . L . , & Levis , L . B . ( 1987 ) . Qualitative aspects of note taking and their relationship with information - processing ability and academic achievement . Journal of Instruc - tional Psychology , 14 ( 3 ) , 110 – 117 . Kiewra , K . A . , DuBois , N . F . , Christian , D . , & McShane , A . ( 1988 ) . Providing study notes : a comparison of the three types of notes for review . Journal of Educational Psychology , 80 ( 4 ) , 595 – 597 . Kiewra , K . A . , DuBois , N . F . , Christensen , M . , Kim , S . , & Lindberg , N . ( 1989 ) . A more equitable account of the note taking functions in learning from lecture and from text . Instructional Science , 18 ( 3 ) , 217 – 232 . Kiewra , K . A . , DuBois , N . F . , Christian , D . , McShane , A . , Meyerhoffer , M . , & Roskelley , D . ( 1991 ) . Note taking functions and techniques . Journal of Educational Psychology , 83 ( 2 ) , 240 – 245 . Kiewra , K . A . , Benton , S . L . , Kim , S . , Risch , N . , & Christensen , M . ( 1995 ) . Effects of note - taking format and study technique on recall and relational performance . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 20 , 172 – 187 . King , A . ( 1992 ) . Comparison of self - questioning , summarizing , and note - taking - review as strategies for learning from lectures . American Educational Research Journal , 29 ( 2 ) , 303 – 323 . Knigth , L . J . , & McKelvie , S . J . ( 1986 ) . Effects of attendance , note taking and review on memory for lecture : encoding versus external storage function of notes . Canadian Journal of Behavioral Science , 18 , 52 – 61 . Ladas , H . ( 1980 ) . Note taking on lectures : an information - processing approach . Educational Psychology , 15 ( 1 ) , 44 – 53 . Laidlaw , E . N . , Skok , R . L . , & McLaughlin , T . F . ( 1993 ) . The effects of note taking and self - questioning on quiz performance . Science Education , 77 ( 1 ) , 75 – 82 . Levy , C . M . , & Ransdell , S . E . ( 1995 ) . Is writing as difﬁcult as it seems ? Memory & Cognition , 23 ( 6 ) , 767 – 779 . Levy , C . M . , & Ransdell , S . E . ( 2002 ) . Writing with concurrent memory loads . In G . Rijlaarsdam ( Series Ed . ) , Studies in Writing & T . Olive , & C . M . Levy ( Eds . ) , Studies in Writing : Contemporary tools and techniques for studying writing ( pp . 9 – 29 ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers . Lindberg - Risch , N . , & Kiewra , K . A . ( 1990 ) . Content and form variations in note taking : effects among junior high students . Journal of Educational Psychology , 83 ( 6 ) , 355 – 357 . Morgan , C . H . , Lilley , J . D . , & Boreham , N . C . ( 1988 ) . Learning from lectures : the effect of varying the detail in lecture handouts on note taking and recall . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 2 , 115 – 122 . Note taking 309 Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) Nist , S . L . , & Hogrebe , M . C . ( 1987 ) . The role of underlining and annotating in remembering textual information . Reading Research and Instruction , 27 , 12 – 25 . Norton , L . S . ( 1981 ) . The effects of note taking and subsequent use on long term recall . Programmed Learning and Educational Technology , 18 ( 1 ) , 16 – 22 . Norton , L . S . , & Hartley , J . ( 1986 ) . What factors contribute to good examination marks : the role of note taking in subsequent examination performance . Higher Education , 15 , 355 – 371 . Nye , P . A . , Crooks , T . J . , Powley , M . , & Tripp , G . ( 1984 ) . Student note taking related to university examination performance . Higher Education , 13 , 85 – 97 . Oakhill , J . , & Davies , A . M . ( 1991 ) . The effects of test expectancy on quality of note taking and recall of text at different times of day . British Journal of Psychology , 82 , 179 – 189 . Olive , T . ( 2004 ) . Working memory in writing : empirical evidence from the dual - task - technique . European Psychologist , 9 ( 1 ) , 32 – 42 . Olive , T . , & Kellogg , R . T . ( 2002 ) . Concurrent activation of high - and low - level writing processes . Memory & Cognition , 30 ( 4 ) , 594 – 600 . Olive , T . , & Piolat , A . ( 2002 ) . Suppressing Visual Feedback in written composition : effects on Processing Demands and Coordination of the Writing . International Journal of Psychology , 37 ( 4 ) , 209 – 218 . Olive , T . , & Piolat , A . ( 2003 ) . Activation des processus re´dactionnels et qualite´ des textes [ Writing processes and texts quality ] . Le Langage et L’Homme , 38 ( 2 ) , 191 – 206 . Olive , T . , Piolat , A . , & Roussey , J . - Y . ( 1997 ) . Effort cognitif et mobilisation des processus : Effet de l’habilete´ re´dactionnelle et du niveau de connaissances [ Cognitive effort and time processing of the writing processes : effect of writing skills and level of knowledge ] . In D . Mellier , & A . Vom Hofe ( Eds . ) , Attention et contro ˆ le cognitif : Me ´ canismes , de ´ veloppement des habilete ´ s et pathologies [ Attention and control : mechanisms , development and pathologies ] ( pp . 71 – 85 ) . Rouen : P . U . R . Olive , T . , Kellogg , R . T . , & Piolat , A . ( 2002 ) . The triple task technique for studying the processus of writing : why and How ? In G . Rijlaarsdam ( Series Ed . ) , Studies in Writing & T . Olive , & C . M . Levy ( Vol . Eds . ) , Contemporary tools and techniques for studying writing ( pp . 31 – 59 ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers . Peck , K . , & Hannaﬁn , M . ( 1983 ) . The effects of note taking pretraining and the recording notes on the retention of aural instruction . Journal of Educational Research , 75 ( 2 ) , 100 – 107 . Pe´lissier , A . , & Piolat , A . ( 1999 ) . Are writing processes activated sequentially or in parallel ? The way to approprietly use Kellogg’s three task method . In E . Espe´ret , & L . Tolchinsky ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 1998 European Writing Conference : writing and Learning to Write at the dawn of the 21st Century ( pp . 71 – 76 ) . Poitiers : MSHS . Peters , D . L . ( 1972 ) . Effect of the note taking and rate of presentation on short - term objective test performance . Journal of Educational Psychology , 63 , 276 – 280 . Piolat , A . ( 1998 ) . Evaluation and Assessment of Written Texts . The encyclopedia of language and education , language testing and assessment ( Vol . 7 , pp . 189 – 198 ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers . Piolat , A . ( 1999 ) . Planning and text quality among undergraduate students : ﬁndings and questions . In M . Torrance , & D . Galbraith ( Eds . ) , Knowing what to write : Conceptual processes in text production ( pp . 121 – 136 ) . Amsterdam : Amsterdam University Press . Piolat , A . ( 2001 ) . La prise de notes [ Note Taking ] . Paris : Presses Universitaires de France . Piolat , A . ( in press ) . Effects of note taking technique and working - memory span on cognitive effort . In G . Rijlaarsdam ( Series Ed . ) , Studies in Writing , & D . Galbraith , M . Torrance , & L . van Waes ( Vol . Eds . ) , Recent developments in writing process research ( Vol . 1 : Basic processes and word - level effects ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers . Piolat , A . , & Boch , F . ( 2004 ) . Apprendre en notant et apprendre a ` noter . In E . Gentaz , & P . Dessus [ Learning by taking notes and learning to take notes ] ( Eds . ) , Comprendre les apprentissages . Psychologie cognitive et e´ducation [ Understanding learning . Cognitive psychology and educa - tion ] ( pp . 133 – 152 ) Paris : Dunod . Piolat , A . , & Olive , T . ( 2000 ) . Comment e´tudier le couˆt et le de´roulement de la re´daction de textes ? La me´thode de la triple taˆche : Un bilan me´thodologique [ How to study the cost and the unfolding of writing ? Theoretical constraints and research methods ] . L’Anne´e Psychologique , 100 , 465 – 502 . Piolat , A . , & Roussey , J . - Y . ( 1996 ) . Students’ drafting strategies and text quality . Learning and Instruction , 61 , 111 – 129 . 310 A . Piolat et al . Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) Piolat , A . , Roussey , J . - Y . , Olive , T . , & Farioli , F . ( 1996 ) . Charge mentale et mobilisation des processus re´dactionnels : examen de la proce´dure de Kellogg [ Mental load and time processing of writing : test of Kellogg’s procedure ] . Psychologie franc¸aise , 41 - 4 , 339 – 354 . Piolat , A . , Olive , T . , Roussey , J . - Y . , Thunin , O . , & Ziegler , J . C . ( 1999 ) . Scriptkell : a tool for measuring cognitive effort and time processing in writing and other complex cognitive activities . Behavior Research Methods , Instruments , & Computer , 31 , 113 – 121 . Piolat , A . , Kellogg , R . T . , & Farioli , F . ( 2001 ) . The triple task technique for studying writing processes : on which task is attention focused ? Current Psychology Letters . Brain , Behavior and Cognition , 4 , 67 – 83 . Piolat , A . , Roussey , J . - Y . , & Barbier , M . L . ( 2003 ) . Mesure de l’effort cognitif : Pourquoi est – il opportun de comparer la prise de notes a ` la re´daction , l’apprentissage et la lecture de divers documents ? [ Measuring cognitive effort : why is it relevant to compare note taking , writing , learning and reading ] Arob @ se , 1 - 2 , 118 – 140 [ http : / / www . arobase . to ] . [ 20 May 2004 ] . Rickards , J . P . , Fajen , B . R . , Sullivan , J . F . , & Gillespie , G . ( 1997 ) . Signaling , Note - taking , and ﬁeld independence - dependence in text comprehension and recall . Journal of Educational Psychology , 89 , 508 – 517 . Robinson , D . H . , & Kiewra , K . A . ( 1995 ) . Visual argument : graphic organizers are superior to outlines in improving learning from text . Journal of Educational Psychology , 87 ( 3 ) , 455 – 467 . Robinson , D . H . , Katayama , A . D . , DuBois , N . F . , & DeVaney , T . ( 1998 ) . Interactive effects of graphic organizers and delayed review in concept acquisition . The Journal of Experimental Education , 67 , 17 – 31 . Roussey , J . - Y . , & Piolat , A . ( 2003 ) . Prendre des notes et apprendre . Effet du mode d’acce ` s a ` l’information et de la me´thode de prise de notes [ Taking notes and learning . Effects of the access mode to information and to the note taking procedure ] . Arob @ se 7 , 1 - 2 . [ http : / / www . arobase . to / somm . html ] . [ 20 May 2004 ] . Russell , I . J . , Caris , T . N . , Harris , G . D . , & Hendricson , W . D . ( 1983 ) . Effects of three types of lectures notes on medical student achievement . Journal of Medical Education , 58 , 627 – 636 . Sanchez , R . P . , Lorch , E . P . , & Lorch , R . F . ( 2001 ) . Effects of headings on text processing strategies . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 26 ( 3 ) , 418 – 428 . Scerbo , M . W . , Warm , J . S . , Dember , W . N . , & Grasha , A . F . ( 1992 ) . The role of time and cueing in a college lecture . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 17 , 312 – 328 . Slotte , V . , & Lonka , K . ( 1999 ) . Review and process effects of spontaneous note taking on text comprehension . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 24 ( 1 ) , 1 – 20 . Slotte , V . , Lonka , K . ( 2000 ) . Spontaneous concept maps aiding the understanding of scientiﬁc concepts . International Journal of Sciences and Education , 21 , 515 – 531 . Slotte , V . , & Lonka , K . ( 2001 ) . Note taking and essay writing . In G . Rijlaarsdam ( Series Ed . ) , & P . Tynja¨la¨ , L . Mason , & K . Lonka ( volume Eds . ) , Studies in writing , writing as a learning tool : Integrating theory and practice ( Vol . 7 , pp . 131 – 141 ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers . Smith , P . , & Tompkins , G . E . ( 1988 ) . Structured note taking : a new strategy for content area readers . Journal of Reading , 32 , 46 – 53 . Spires , H . A . ( 1993 ) . Learning from a lecture : effects of comprehension monitoring . Reading Research & Instruction , 32 ( 2 ) , 19 – 30 . Stahl , N . A . , King , J . R . , & Henk , W . A . ( 1991 ) . Enhancing students’ note taking through training and evaluation . Journal of Reading , 34 ( 8 ) , 614 – 622 . Suritsky , S . K . ( 1992 ) . Note taking approaches and speciﬁc aeras of difﬁculty reported by university students with learning disabilities . Journal of Postsecondary Education and Disability , 10 ( 1 ) , 3 – 10 . Thomas , G . S . ( 1978 ) . Use of student’s notes and lecture summaries as studies guides for recall . Journal of Educational Research , 71 , 316 – 319 . Titsworth , B . S . ( 2001 ) . The effects of teacher immediacy , use of organizational lecture cues , and students’ note taking on cognitive learning . Communication Education , 50 ( 4 ) , 283 – 297 . Titsworth , B . S . , & Kiewra , K . A . ( 2004 ) . Spoken organizational lecture cues and student note taking as facilitators of student learning . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 29 ( 4 ) , 447 – 461 . Tyler , S . W . , Hertel , P . T . , McCallum , M . C . , & Ellis , H . C . ( 1979 ) . Cognitive effort and memory . Journal of Experimental Psychology . Human Learning & Memory , 5 , 607 – 617 . van Dijk , T . A . , & Kintsch , W . ( 1983 ) . Strategies of discourse comprehension . New York : Academic Press . Note taking 311 Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 ) Van Meter , P . , Yokoi , L . , & Pressley , M . ( 1994 ) . College students’ theory of note taking derived from their perceptions of note - taking . Journal of Educational Psychology , 86 , 323 – 338 . van Waes , L . , & Schellens , P . J . ( 2003 ) . Writing proﬁles : the effect of the writing mode on pausing and revision patterns of experienced writers . Journal of Pragmatics , 35 , 829 – 853 . Williams , R . L . , & Eggert , A . ( 2002 ) . Note taking predictors of test performance . Teaching of Psychology , 29 ( 3 ) , 234 – 237 . Yeung , A . S . , Jin , P . , & Sweller , J . ( 1997 ) . Cognitive load and learner expertise : split attention and redundancy effects in reading with explanatory notes . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 23 , 1 – 21 . 312 A . Piolat et al . Copyright # 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Appl . Cognit . Psychol . 19 : 291 – 312 ( 2005 )