1 Supporting Material Quantitative analysis of filament branch orientation in Listeria actin comet tails Marion Jasnin † * and Alvaro H . Crevenna ‡ † Department of Molecular Structural Biology , Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry , Martinsried , Germany ; ‡ Physical Chemistry , Department of Chemistry and Center for Nanoscience ( CeNS ) , Ludwig - Maximilians - Universität München , Munich , Germany . * Correspondence : jasnin @ biochem . mpg . de Supplemental Figures Fig . S1 . Influence of the missing wedge for a tilt range of - 55º to + 55º on a synthetic dataset of actin filaments of various orientations . The tilt axis coincides with the y - axis . A , xy plane . B , xz plane . 2 Fig . S2 . Overlay between a tomographic slice along the buckling bundle and the traced filaments in the immature comet tail shown in Fig . 2 . A , superimposition of an oblique slice through the tomogram along the buckling bundle ( green ) and the traced filaments displayed in a blue - to - red color map shown in Fig . 2 B . B , zoom in the region of the buckling bundle . C , same zoom as in ( B ) showing the oblique slice only . The arrow points at filaments belonging to the buckling bundle . 3 Supplemental Movie Legends Movie S1 . Live cell imaging of Listeria actin comet tails in the motility assay . Actin polymerization is triggered at the surface of the Listeria strain L028 ( BUG 666 ) in presence of Xenopus egg extract and rhodamine - actin . Frames every 3s ; 8 frames per second . Movie S2 . Tomogram and segmented filaments of the early tail network shown in Fig . 2 . In the top view , filaments are displayed relative to the long axis of the bacteria , in the blue - to - red color map shown in Fig . 4 A . In the rotating side view , filaments are displayed as a function of their orientation relative to the surface of the substrate , in the blue - to - red color map shown in Fig . 2 B . Movie S3 . Tomogram and segmented filaments of the mature actin tail shown in Fig . 4 . Filament orientation relative to the long axis of the bacteria pointing from rear - to - head is represented in a blue - to - red color map covering a range from 0° to 90° and shown in Fig . 4 A . Movie S4 . Correlation field , and putative branch and parent filaments in vicinity of the bacterial surface in the mature actin tail shown in Fig . 4 . The correlation field shows high ( white ) to low ( black ) cross - correlation coefficients , which are used for the tracing of the filaments . The orientation of the filaments is represented as a function of their orientation relative to the surface of the substrate , in the blue - to - red color map shown in Fig . 4 C . Branching points are represented by yellow spheres ; the cell wall of the bacterium is shown in gray .