Epithelial cells carry out key vectorial functions for host multicellular organisms that depend on the polarized distribution of plasma - membrane proteins into apical and basolateral domains . The first observa - tions of the vectorial properties of epithelial cells date back to the 1940s : physiologists , using radioactive tracers in combination with electrophysiological pro - cedures , showed that epithelial cells could transport nutrients vectorially against steep electrical and chem - ical gradients ( reviewed in REF . 1 ) . In the following three decades ( see the TIMELINE ) , electron micro - scopists described the complex asymmetric structure of epithelial cells , including the polarized organelles in the secretory pathway 2 and the junctional complex ( TIGHT JUNCTIONS , ADHERENS JUNCTIONS and DESMOSOMES ) at the border of the apical and lateral regions of the cell ( the apical – lateral border ) 3 . In the late 1970s , the fun - damental question of how epithelial cells establish and maintain their polarized phenotype became experi - mentally approachable when Cereijido , Misfeld and co - workers 4 , 5 made the groundbreaking discovery that Madin – Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells develop an electrically tight epithelial monolayer when plated on a permeable substratum 4 , 5 ( BOX 1 ) . The MDCK model was refined to study polarized protein targeting after it was shown that influenza virus assembles from the APICAL SURFACE and vesicular stomatitis virus ( VSV ) assembles from the BASOLATERAL SURFACE guided by the polarized distribution of their envelope glycoproteins — influenza haemagglutinin ( HA ) and VSV G protein ( VSVG ) 6 , 7 ( BOX 1 ) . The impact that was generated by the MDCK model ( see REF . 1 for its history ) can be estimated from the steep increase in the number of publications — on epithelial polarity , epithelial morphogenesis and the epithelial junctional complex — that followed its introduction . The experimental advantages that were provided by virus - infected MDCK cells ( such as high biosynthetic levels of envelope glycoproteins and no interfering pool of endogenous plasma - membrane proteins ) led to the identification of the TRANS - GOLGI NETWORK ( TGN ; the distal region of the Golgi complex ) 8 as the sorting compart - ment in the biosynthetic route for apical influenza HA and basolateral VSVG 9 – 11 . In the late 1980s , epithelial cell biologists characterized the biosynthetic , endo - cytic , recycling and transcytotic routes of MDCK cells and other epithelial cell lines using sensitive protein - targeting assays 12 , 13 ( BOX 1 ) . This knowledge led to the concept of the flexible epithelial phenotype — that is , that different epithelial cell types can change the final localization and transport routes of apical and basolat - eral proteins to carry out tissue - specific vectorial func - tions 14 ( BOX 2 ) . Insights into the mechanisms that are responsible for this variation first emerged in the late 1980s and early 1990s with the discovery of apical and basolateral sorting signals 15 , 16 , and in the 1990s with the identification of cellular components that regulate polarized vesicular trafficking 17 , 18 . The molecular ORGANIZATION OF VESICULAR TRAFFICKING IN EPITHELIA Enrique Rodriguez - Boulan * , Geri Kreitzer ‡ and Anne Müsch * Abstract | Experiments using mammalian epithelial cell lines have elucidated biosynthetic and recycling pathways for apical and basolateral plasma - membrane proteins , and have identified components that guide apical and basolateral proteins along these pathways . These components include apical and basolateral sorting signals , adaptors for basolateral signals , and docking and fusion proteins for vesicular trafficking . Recent live - cell - imaging studies provide a real - time view of sorting processes in epithelial cells , including key roles for actin , microtubules and motors in the organization of post - Golgi trafficking . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 6 | MARCH 2005 | 233 * Margaret Dyson Vision Research Institute , Weill Medical College ofCornell University , 1300 York Avenue , New York , New York 10021 , USA . ‡ Department ofCell and Developmental Biology , Weill Medical College of Cornell University , 1300 York Avenue , New York , New York 10021 , USA . e - mails : boulan @ med . cornell . edu ; gek2006 @ med . cornell . edu ; amuesch @ med . cornell . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1593 TIGHT JUNCTION The most apical intercellular junctions in mammalian epithelial cells , which function as selective ( semi - permeable ) diffusion barriers between individual cells . They are identified as a belt - like region in which two lipid - apposing membranes lie close together . ADHERENS JUNCTION A cell – cell adhesion complex that contains cadherins and catenins that are attached to cytoplasmic actin filaments . R E V I E W S DESMOSOME A patch - like adhesive intercellular junction found in vertebrate tissues that is linked to intermediate filaments . APICAL SURFACE The surface ofan epithelial or endothelial cell that faces the lumen ofa cavity or tube or the outside ofthe organism . BASOLATERAL SURFACE The surface ofan epithelial cell that adjoins underlying tissue . TRANS - GOLGI NETWORK ( TGN ) . Membranous compartment from which vesicles bud to deliver proteins and other materials to the cell surface or to the late endosomes for delivery to lysosomes . DOCKING / FUSION SITE Vesicles and tubules that are targeted to the plasma membrane from the Golgi complex or from endosomes possess mechanisms by which to dock and fuse at the cell surface . These include tethering factors , Rab proteins and SNARE proteins . GPI - ANCHOR The function ofthis post - translational modification is to attach proteins to the exoplasmic leaflet ofmembranes , possibly to specific domains therein . The anchor is made of one molecule of phosphatidylinositol to which a carbohydrate chain is linked through the C - 6 hydroxyl of the inositol . This anchor is linked to the protein through an ethanolamine phosphate moiety . 234 | MARCH 2005 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S in the biosynthetic route of MDCK cells was carried out in the TGN ( routes 1 and 2 in FIGS 1 , 2 ) , recent work indicates that some apical – basolateral sorting in the biosynthetic route could occur in common recycling endosomes , immediately at the exit of the TGN ( routes 3 , 4 and 5 in FIGS 1 , 2 ) 21 . Common recycling endosomes are also the main sorting site for membrane proteins that are internalized from the apical and basolateral surfaces 22 . Different epithelial cells vary widely in the use of direct and transcytotic routes for apical proteins ( BOX 2 ) . Until recently , it was assumed that most apical proteins are transferred to the apical surface of MDCK cells directly from the TGN , but a recent paper 23 has introduced lively controversy on this issue . The authors found that addition of tannic acid , a mild fixative , to the basolateral medium of live MDCK cells prevented the delivery of newly synthesized glycosylphosphatidyli - nositol ( GPI ) - ANCHORED proteins ( GPI - APs ) to the apical surface , but did not interfere with the transport of another apical protein , the p75 neurotrophin receptor ( p75NTR ) . Apical GFP - tagged GPI - APs and basolateral VSVG were present in common tubular transporters , which indicates that some apical proteins might be sorted after arrival at the basolateral surface . These latest results indicate that the transcytotic mode of apical transport might be more widespread among epithelial cells than was previously thought , a proposition that needs to be further tested by the field . Apical sorting mechanisms Apical sorting signals . Apical sorting signals ( FIG . 1 ) are localized in EXOPLASMIC , membrane or cytoplasmic domains of the sorted protein . An initial clue on the nature of apical sorting signals was the demonstra - tion that endogenous GPI - APs were localized at the apical surface of MDCK cells and other epithelial cell lines 24 . The first demonstration of an epithelial sort - ing signal came from experiments showing that recombinant addition of GPI to a secretory protein 25 , 26 resulted in the apical localization of the chimeric plasma - membrane proteins . analysis of genetically tractable model organisms — Saccharomyces cerevisiae , Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster — led to the discovery of a growing list of ‘polarity genes’ , the products of which are clustered around the junctional complex . Recent work has provided fascinating details of their complex inter - actions and roles in epithelial morphogenesis 19 , 20 , but their role in polarized vesicular trafficking remains largely unknown . In the late 1990s and the new millen - nium , the advent of green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) and its derivatives , combined with high - resolution optical - imaging techniques ( BOX 1 ) , started to provide a real - time view of the sorting processes that occur in the Golgi complex and recycling endosomes of polarized cells . This provided an increased understanding of the fundamental role that is carried out by the cytoskeleton in the organization of the delivery and fusion of transport vesicles to the plasma membrane . Here , the mechanisms that have a role in vesicular trafficking to apical and basolateral membranes are reviewed , with a predominant focus on MDCK cells , in which most of this work has been carried out . A histori - cal perspective , which highlights the main discoveries in the field , the current status , and the remaining open questions , is provided . We focus sequentially on the mechanisms that : first , carry out the initial segregation of apical and basolateral proteins into different transport intermediates ; second , mediate the formation and move - ment of these transport intermediates to the cell surface ; and , third , determine DOCKING and FUSION at specific sites in the plasma membrane . Because of the restrictions in reference numbers and length , the review focuses on vesicular trafficking and omits exciting parallel discov - eries on cell – cell junctions or epithelial morphogenesis and the role of cell – cell adhesion 1 , 17 , 18 , unless the findings are directly relevant to vesicular - trafficking mechanisms . Trafficking routes in epithelial cells The biosynthetic , endocytic , recycling and transcytotic routes of MDCK cells are summarized in FIG . 1 . Although it was initially believed that most of the protein sorting Radioisotopesfirst used ( early 1940s ) . Ion transport across epithelia . Cell fractionation discovered . Electron microscopy developed . Junctional complexes in epithelia . Endocytosis and endocytic signals . Secretory pathway in exocrine pancreas . Polarized viral budding from MDCK cells . Ca 2 + - switch protocol developed . Sorting of apical and basolateral proteins in Golgi complex . Transcytosis routes in MDCK , intestinal and liver cells . Assays to study polarized protein delivery developed . Zona occludens - 1 identified as first tight - junction component . Polarized MDCK cells grown on monolayers and cultured on permeable substrates . 1940 1946 1949 1952 1963 1964 – 1966 1974 1976 , 1978 1978 1984 1985 1985 – 1987 1985 – 1990 1986 Timeline | Discoveries in the field of epithelial polarity : the impact of the MDCK model . Important discoveries in epithelial polarity are represented by a red outline ; important methodologies are outlined in blue boxes . Even once the polarized function and structure of epithelial cells had been known for several decades , it was only after the introduction of the Madin – Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) model in the late 1970s that the fields of epithelial polarity , epithelial morphogenesis and epithelial junctions developed , as evidenced by the large increase in the number of publications in these areas , many of them involving MDCK cells or other epithelial cell lines . Publications in all areas of epithelial cell biology totalled about 100 in 1970 but , from 1980 , rapidly increased to the present level of several thousand . Laser scanning confocal microscopy developed . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 6 | MARCH 2005 | 235 R E V I E W S implied by experiments showing that the apical secre - tion of some soluble non - glycosylated proteins became saturated at high expression levels and could be outcom - peted by the overexpression of a second apical protein 39 . However , these receptors have not yet been identified . N - glycans have been proposed to sort apically by inter - acting with a LECTIN sorting receptor 32 . A candidate lectin , VIP36 , localizes to the TGN when it is overex - pressed . However , endogenous VIP36 is present mainly in the cis - Golgi , and its possible role in apical protein sorting is now considered doubtful 40 . Finally , there are many exceptions to the ability of N - glycans to function as conventional apical sorting signals , which implies that they might have a different , unconventional role in apical protein sorting . The lipid - raft hypothesis . An alternative to the conven - tional sorting - receptor model for apical sorting is presented by the lipid - raft hypothesis , which was put forward by van Meer and Simons in 1988 ( REFS 41 , 42 ) . The lipid - raft hypothesis postulates that many proteins are sorted apically because they have an affinity for micro - domains of glycosphingolipids and cholesterol ( lipid rafts ) that are assembled in the Golgi complex . According to this hypothesis , lipid rafts and their associated proteins form sorting platforms that , on recognition by special - ized machinery in the TGN , recycling endosomes or plasma membrane , become incorporated into apical transport intermediates that deliver them to the apical membrane ( FIG . 1 ) . The experimental evidence support - ing the lipid - raft hypothesis is substantial and is discussed in BOX 3 . Examples of proteins that show affinity for lipid - rafts are GPI - APs and influenza HA ; the association of these proteins with lipid rafts is mediated by the GPI anchor and by the transmembrane domain , respectively , and occurs at the level of the Golgi complex ( BOX 3 ) . However , full acceptance of the lipid - raft hypothesis for apical sorting has been compromised by inconsis - tencies that have , so far , been difficult to explain . For example , several GPI - APs are found on the basolateral surface of MDCK cells , even when they are associated A second group of apical signals comprises N - GLYCANS 27 and O - glycans 28 , 29 — the latter are usually present in juxtamembrane regions of transmembrane proteins . Removal of N - or O - glycans results in the non - polarized release of luminal secretory proteins in MDCK cells 27 , 30 . Removal of N - glycans blocks the exit from the Golgi complex of two apically targeted plasma - membrane proteins 31 . N - and O - glycans usually function as reces - sive signals relative to basolateral sorting signals ( described below ) ; their wide distribution in plasma - membrane and secretory proteins explains the frequent finding that removal of basolateral signals from a basolateral protein results in its apical localization 16 , 28 , 32 . A third group of apical sorting signals encompasses proteinaceous motifs in the exoplasmic , transmem - brane or cytoplasmic domains of the protein . Complete deletion of N - glycans does not alter the apical secretion of some soluble glycoproteins 33 , endogenous plasma - membrane proteins 34 or exogenous glycoproteins 30 , which implies that there are also proteinaceous apical targeting motifs . The transmembrane domain of influenza HA contains apical sorting information , which mediates incorporation of the protein into LIPID RAFTS ( discussed below ) . The cytoplasmic domain of the light - sensitive protein rhodopsin 35 has binding sites for the microtubule motor protein cytoplasmic dynein , which mediates translocation of rhodopsin to the apical mem - brane in MDCK cells . The cytoplasmic domains of mega - lin 36 , 37 and other apical proteins contain apical sorting signals that have not yet been fully characterized 38 . Apical sorting receptors ? Apical sorting signals that mediate association with dynein are thought to function by promoting microtubule - mediated directional trans - port to the apical surface ( discussed later in this review ) . By contrast , the sorting mechanisms that are used by other apical signals are still poorly understood . They could function as conventional sorting signals — for example , by interacting with an apical sorting receptor that promotes incorporation into an apical transport vesicle . The existence of apical sorting receptors was EXOPLASMIC Facing the outside ofthe cell or the topologically equivalent lumen oforganelles in the secretory pathway ; the opposite ofcytoplasmic . GLYCAN A polymer that consists of several monosaccharide residues ( polysaccharide ) . In the case of GPI - anchored proteins , the basic unit is composed ofglucosamine and three mannose residues . LIPID RAFTS Membrane microdomains that are enriched in cholesterol , sphingolipids and lipid - modified proteins such as GPI - linked proteins and palmitoylated proteins . These microdomains often function as platforms for signalling events . LECTIN A protein that can bind to carbohydrates with high selectivity . For example , concanavalin A is a lectin with affinity for mannose residues in glycoproteins . MDCK cells mechanically and biochemically perforated . GPI identified as apical sorting signal . Crumbs identified as apical polarity gene . Advent of green fluorescent protein . AP1B , an epithelial - specific adaptor , identified . Lipid - raft hypothesis proposed . E - cadherin identified as epithelial organizer . Apical and basolateral endosomes observed in MDCK cells . Basolateralsorting signals identified . N - Glycans and O - glycans identified as apical sorting signals . Polarized exocytic trafficking viewed in live MDCK cells . Molecules that regulate polarized trafficking discovered . Polarity genes identified in junctional complex . 1987 1987 – 1990 1988 1988 – 1989 1989 1990 1991 1995 1995 , 1997 1995 – 2000 1998 – 2002 1999 2003 promote additional association with lipid rafts . Finally , lipid rafts are difficult to visualize by optical microscopy ; indeed , recent studies 45 indicate that lipid rafts are small and highly dynamic structures with a capacity to accommodate a maximum of 3 – 5 GPI - APs . with lipid rafts according to the usual criterion of insol - ubility in non - ionic detergents at 4 o C ( discussed in REF . 43 ; see BOX 3 ) . Some GPI - anchored proteins also require the presence of N - glycans before they can localize apically 44 , even though the presence of N - glycans does not always Influenza virus Vesicular stomatitis virus Polarized MDCK cells GFP – apical marker GFP – basolateral marker Total - internal - reflection fluorescence microscopy Golgi Tubulo – vesicular structures Nucleus Golgi Nucleus 12 11 10 8 6 4 µ m Live confocal microscopy IS a b c d 236 | MARCH 2005 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S Box 1 | The Madin – Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cell model MDCK monolayers MDCK cells were the first epithelial cells that were used to form electrically tight monolayers on permeable filters in vitro 4 , 5 ( see figure , part a ) . MDCK cells that were grown on filters were also used to develop all of the techniques that are available to study polarized molecular targeting . These include : • Biotinylation and protease assays to study steady - state polarity and domain - specific biosynthetic protein delivery 9 , 132 , 133 . • Assays that use mechanically or biochemically ( streptolysin - O - ) permeabilized cells to experimentally manipulate post - Golgi exocytosis 65 , 134 – 136 . • Assays to study the establishment of polarity , such as the Ca 2 + switch 117 , collagen embedding or the collagen overlay of MDCK cells 18 , 118 , 121 . Polarized viral assembly The envelope glycoproteins of viruses that bud from either the apical ( influenza haemagglutinin ) or basolateral ( vesicular stomatitis virus G protein ) domains of MDCK cells are still widely used apical and basolateral markers 6 . They provided the first evidence of polarized biosynthetic routes and sorting at the Golgi complex ( see figure , part b ) . IS , intercellular space . Live - cell - imaging of polarized post - Golgi exocytosis Apical or basolateral cargo proteins that are tagged with green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) accumulate in the trans - Golgi network of polarized MDCK cells at 20 o C ( REFS 23 , 88 ) . Their exit from the Golgi complex and delivery to the cell surface is visualized using time - lapse fluorescence microscopy , total - internal - reflection microscopy ( see figure , part c ) or confocal microscopy ( see figure , part d ) . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 6 | MARCH 2005 | 237 R E V I E W S lipid - raft - associated apical proteins . In the case of influenza HA , the evidence supports a role for the proteolipid MAL ( myelin and lymphocyte protein ) 52 in apical targeting , but whether this protein participates in lipid - raft clustering is not known 52 . Basolateral sorting mechanisms Basolateral signals . Basolateral signals are usually located in cytoplasmically exposed regions of the protein ; their participation in biosynthetic and recycling trafficking in MDCK cells is shown in FIG . 1 . Mostov and co - workers showed in 1986 that deletion of the cytoplasmic domain of polymeric immunoglobulin - A receptor prevented its basolateral localization 53 and in 1991 that the signal was transplantable to other proteins 54 . Mellman and co - workers reported in 1991 ( REF . 55 ) the existence of basolateral signals in the cytoplasmic domain of the low - density lipoprotein ( LDL ) receptor and subsequently showed that these signals were also transplantable 56 . Two other groups showed in 1991 that basolateral signals could be created by introducing mutations that gener - ated endocytic motifs in the cytoplasmic domains of the apical proteins influenza HA 57 and p75NTR 58 . The finding that basolateral proteins had sorting signals was surprising , as it was then thought that trans - port to the basolateral plasma membrane occurred by default 13 — an extension of an earlier hypothesis on biosynthetic transport to the cell surface in non - polar - ized cells . Many studies have since confirmed that baso - lateral signals are localized in the cytoplasmic domain of basolateral proteins and consist of tyrosine 55 , 57 or dileucine 59 motifs , which are often in the vicinity of patches of acidic amino acids , as well as other uncharac - terized motifs ( recently reviewed in REF . 60 ) . More recent work has uncovered a new type of basolateral signal that consists of a single leucine motif 61 . Mutations in baso - lateral signals might result in disease — for example , a form of familial hypercholesterolaemia is caused by a mutated signal in the LDL receptor 62 . Relative to single - span basolateral proteins , such as those discussed above , less information is available on the sorting signals of hetero - oligomeric membrane proteins . Many ion or nutrient transporters are non - glycosylated multispan proteins that require chaperon - ing by a glycosylated single - span protein for transport to the cell surface . Among the most well - studied exam - ples are the Na + / K + - ATPase , which is found basolater - ally in all mammalian epithelia ( with the exception of neuroepithelia , the retinal pigment epithelium and CHOROID PLEXUS ) and the H + - ATPase , which is found apically in the parietal ( hydrochloric - acid - secreting ) cells of the stomach and in other cells 60 . In these two proteins , the apical and basolateral exocytic - trafficking signals are contained in the multispan non - glycosylated α - subunit . The glycosylated β - subunit in the H + - ATPase contains a tyrosine - based endocytic motif that mediates re - incorporation into a regulated secretory compartment that , when the cell is stimulated , is exocytosed to the api - cal plasmalemma . However , trafficking signals do not solely account for the basolateral - surface localization of the Na + / K + - ATPase . The α - subunit also has binding sites A recent report , together with older data , provides some clues to the mystery of how lipid - rafts might con - tribute to apical sorting : Zurzolo and co - workers 43 showed that GPI - anchored GFP is targeted to the apical membrane of MDCK cells , but is missorted to the baso - lateral membrane when mutations are introduced into GFP that prevent its natural tendency to oligomerize . These experiments agree with decade - old data by Hannan et al . 46 that show that newly synthesized GPI - APs arrive at the apical surface of MDCK cells in large immobile clusters ( as determined by FRAP ) , which pro - gressively disperse into small mobile clusters ( as deter - mined by FRET ) . That the formation of large clusters of GPI - APs is required for their apical sorting is shown by studies with lectin ( concanavalin A ) - resistant MDCK cells that prevent the ability of GPI - APs to form larger clusters in the apical route . These GPI - APs are missorted to the basolateral membrane 46 . Parallel experiments imply that clustering is important in the general endocytic sorting of GPI - APs . Crosslinking of GPI - APs by antibodies that are directed against their ectodomains promotes their incorporation into pre - existing CAVEOLAE in fibroblasts 47 and into newly formed caveolae at the apical surface of MDCK cells 48 . ( Like most epithelial cells , MDCK cells have only baso - lateral caveolae , but they develop apical caveolae after crosslinking of GPI - APs . ) The experiments that are described above indicate that the lipid - raft hypothesis might be refined as follows : apical proteins are sorted by association with small lipid rafts that are converted into functional apical sorting platforms by a ‘clustering event’ ( see FIG . 1 and insets ; also discussed in REF . 43 ) . This modified lipid - raft hypothesis gives rise to secondary hypotheses , which could be tested using available experimental data or future experiments . The first secondary hypothesis is that any feature of a lipid - raft - associated protein that promotes oligomerization could promote apical tar - geting . This could be tested using approaches that are similar to those used in REF . 43 . The next secondary hypothesis is that the formation of clustered lipid rafts might be promoted by a luminal lectin ( FIG . 1 , insets ) . On the basis of available data with lectin - resistant MDCK cells , a luminal lectin with affinity for mannose - rich N - glycan cores could participate in such clustering 49 , 50 . The third secondary hypothesis is that the formation of functional lipid rafts could be promoted by proteins that promote the coalescence of small lipid rafts into larger rafts . Indeed , there is evidence that caveolin - 1 , a cholesterol - binding protein that resides on the cyto - plasmic side of lipid rafts , forms large homo - oligomers in the apical route 51 ( FIG . 1 , insets ) . Luminal and cytoplasmic clustering of lipid rafts could facilitate apical sorting of GPI - APs not only at the TGN but also at other sorting stations in the biosynthetic or recycling routes ( FIG . 1 ) . So , a luminal lectin with an affinity for the mannose cores of GPI - APs might promote their clustering and sorting into the apical route , in cooperation with oligomerized caveolin on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane ( FIG . 2 , insets ) . There is no evidence yet that a similar mechanism could operate for other FRAP ( fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ) . A live - cell - imaging technique used to study the mobility offluorescent molecules . A pulse ofhigh - intensity light is used to irreversibly photobleach a population offluorophores in a target region . Recovery of fluorescence in the bleached region represents movement of fluorophores into that region . FRET ( fluorescence resonance energy transfer ) . The non - radiative transfer ofenergy from a donor fluorophore to an acceptor fluorophore that is typically < 80 Å away . FRET will only occur between fluorophores in which the emission spectrum ofthe donor has a significant overlap with the excitation of the acceptor . CAVEOLAE Flask - shaped invaginations of the plasma membrane that are coated with the protein caveolin . Caveolae are endocytosed in a clathrin - independent manner . CHOROID PLEXUS A capillary bed that is covered by transporting epithelial cells , and that protrudes on the cerebral ventricles . The cells are responsible for producing cerebral spinal fluid . 238 | MARCH 2005 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S recombinant - DNA techniques causes their retention at the Golgi complex 31 . Adding peptides that contain the tail of VSVG to the cytoplasm of MDCK cells blocks the vesicular release of the VSVG protein from both the Golgi complex and the endoplasmic reticulum 64 – 66 but does not affect the exit of the epidermal growth factor receptor ( which has a different basolateral signal ) from these organelles 66 . This indicates that basolateral - like signals operate at various levels of the secretory pathway . Similar peptide - blocking experiments in fibroblasts , which lack apical – basal polarity , showed that basolat - eral signal peptides selectively abrogated the exit of exogenous basolateral proteins from the TGN , but did not affect the exit of exogenous apical proteins 65 . for ankyrin — a spectrin - binding protein that is linked to the basolateral actin cytoskeleton — which mediates its selective retention at the basolateral membrane 63 . Finally , the Na + / K + - ATPase might be retained at the lateral membrane through its β - subunits , which have adhesive properties 1 . Alternative mechanisms for baso - lateral - ( and apical - ) domain - selective retention include interaction with scaffold proteins , such as proteins that contain PDZ DOMAINS ( reviewed in REFS 38 , 60 ) . A recognized role of both apical and basolateral trafficking signals is to promote the sorting of cargo proteins into different vesicles at the Golgi complex , plasma membrane or recycling endosomes . Removing sorting signals from certain basolateral proteins by PDZ DOMAIN A protein - interaction domain that often occurs in scaffolding proteins , and is named after the founding members ofthis protein family ( Post - synaptic density protein of95 kDa , Discs large and Zona occludens - 1 ) . Caveolin ? AP2Clathrin AP1BClathrin Caveolin ? MAL ? 5 4 4 1 8 6 6 7 7 3c 3b 3a 2b 2a 8 AP4 ? AP3 ? AP4 ? AP1AGGA AP2Clathrin AP1A ? Clathrin Lipidrafts Tightjunction BSE LE LYS CREpH 5 . 8 AREpH 6 . 5 Caveolin ? Caveolin ? MAL ? Apical sorting signals • GPI , N - glycans , O - glycans • Proteinaceous motifs ASE TGN TGN Clusteredlipid rafts Non - clathrin AP4 coat ? Smalllipid raft Adaptor ? Clathrin Clustering factor or lectin Caveolin - 1 oligomers CRE Clusteredlipid rafts Clathrin Smalllipid raft AP1B Basolateral sorting signals • YXX Φ • NPXY • LL • L Figure 1 | Trafficking routes and sorting mechanisms in epithelial cells . Apical exocytic routes ( 1 and 4 ) : glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) anchors , N - glycans and O - glycans sort apical proteins at the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) , common recycling endosomes ( CREs ) and apical recycling endosomes ( AREs ) . This sorting might involve clustering small lipid rafts into larger functional lipid rafts , a process that might be promoted by a luminal lectin , caveolin oligomers and MAL ( inset ) . Basolateral exocytic routes ( 2 and 5 ) : basolateral signals interact with adaptors of the clathrin ( adaptor protein - 1 ( AP1 ) , AP3 , GGA ( Golgi - localized , γ - ear - containing , Arf - binding protein ) ) or non - clathrin ( AP4 ) type at the TGN or CREs . AP1B operates at the level of CREs ( route 5 ; inset ) ; the participation of other adaptors in basolateral sorting is hypothetical . AP4 might mediate basolateral sorting through microtubule motors . Newly synthesized lysosomal membrane proteins ( LAMPs ) seem to be transported to the lysosome via the basolateral membrane 151 ( route 2 followed by route 7 to basal sorting endosomes ( BSEs ) , late endosomes ( LEs ) and lysosomes ( LYS ) ) , although some authors believe they follow a direct intracellular route ( 3c ) 152 . Endocytic routes ( 6 and 7 ) : endocytosed apical ( route 6 ) or basolateral ( route 7 ) membrane proteins are internalized into apical sorting endosomes ( ASEs ) or BSEs by AP2 , mix in CREs 18 , 22 , 153 and are sorted into apical and basolateral exocytic routes by sorting signals that are similar to those used in the biosynthetic route 69 , 70 ( routes 4 and 5 ) . Soluble proteins are sorted from membrane proteins in ASEs and BSEs , mixed in LEs and degraded in LYS . Biosynthetic route through endosomes ( routes 3a – c ) : some newly synthesized basolateral proteins reach CREs directly from the TGN 21 , 76 – 78 ( routes 3a and 3b ; via unknown adaptors ) from where they are sorted to the basolateral membrane via AP1B ( route 5 ) . Mannose - 6 - phosphate receptors and their ligands ( lysosomal hydrolases ) move through clathrin - coated vesicles , possibly into LEs ( route 3c ) from where they are transported back to the TGN . Recycling and transcytosing apical membrane proteins transfer from CREs to AREs ( route 4 ) . Some GPI - anchored proteins seem to use a transcytotic route ( route 8 ) in Madin – Darby canine kidney cells 23 . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 6 | MARCH 2005 | 239 R E V I E W S signals that interact with a family of organelle - specific adaptor protein ( AP ) complexes 71 . The interaction of basolateral signals with organelle - specific APs ( which can be thought of as sorting receptors ) explains the find - ing that the basolateral sorting of the LDL receptor can be saturated by overexpression of the protein , which results in apical transport of the excess protein 56 . Available evidence indicates that two members of a family of heterotetrameric APs — AP1B 72 and AP4 ( REF . 73 ) — are involved in the sorting of basolateral membrane proteins ( FIG . 2 ) . AP1B shares subunits β , γ and σ with AP1A , but has an epithelial - specific medium subunit ( µ 1B ) 74 . This subunit is absent in LLC - PK1 cells ( a porcine epithelial cell line ) , which explains the apical missorting of transferrin receptors and LDL receptors in these cells 72 . Transfection of the µ 1B subunit into LLC - PK1 cells enables the AP1B complex to assemble and reverses the targeting defect 72 . AP1B promotes the Accordingly , some biochemical properties that are asso - ciated with polarized pathways ( for example , lipid - raft association ) are preserved in fibroblastic cell lines 67 , 68 , which implies that vesicular - trafficking pathways with ‘apical’and ‘basolateral’features might be present in non - epithelial cells that are normally thought to be ‘non - polarized’ . Adaptins . A striking realization that came from the dis - covery of basolateral sorting signals was their remarkable resemblance to the signals used by receptors that are endocytosed through coated pits from the plasma mem - brane , or to signals that are used for endocytosis and transport to lysosomes 56 , 57 ( FIG . 1 ) . Early experiments had indicated that similar basolateral sorting signals operate in the recycling and biosynthetic routes 69 , 70 . These find - ings are now understood , as endocytic , recycling and basolateral sorting signals belong to a family of peptide RETROMER COMPLEX A protein complex that consists ofVps35 , Vps26 , Vps29 , Vps17 and Vps5 , which was discovered through genetic screens in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . It functions in the retrieval of proteins from the prevacuolar compartment and transport to the Golgi . Rab5 Cdc42Rab8RalAExocystPKDMyo1Actin 5 4 4 1 8 6 6 7 7 3c 3b 3a 2b 2a 8 Cdc42Rab8RalAExocystPKD Rab4 , 5 Dynamin 2 Lipidrafts Tightjunction BSE LE LYS CRE ARE ASE TGN CRE Dynamin Clustering factor or lectin Caveolin - 1 oligomers Myo6DAB2ARF6 / ARNO Dynamin 1 Rab17 MyoVbRab11aRab11 - FIP2 Rab25Rab3bRetromer KinesinDyneinCdc42Dynamin Hip1R PKD RalARab8Exocyst TGN Dynamin Kinesin ? PKD Kinesin Adaptor AP1B Figure 2 | Machinery that controls polarized vesicular trafficking in epithelial cells . The vesicular - trafficking routes correspond to those in FIG . 1 . Sorting signals promote the incorporation of apical proteins at the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) or in common recycling endosomes ( CREs ) into clustered lipid rafts that recruit microtubule motors ( such as kinesin ) directly or through unknown adaptors ; in some cases ( rhodopsin ) the motor ( dynein ) is recruited through direct interactions . The motors generate tubular elements that move along microtubules ( inset ) . Basolateral proteins are incorporated into clathrin - coated or into uncoated tubules ( which are pulled by unidentified microtubule motors that are presumably different from those used by apical proteins ) . Cdc42 stimulates the exit of apical proteins and inhibits the exit of basolateral proteins from the TGN 92 through unknown downstream effectors and might have similar functions at CREs . Fission of apical transporters is mediated by the GTPase dynamin 83 , 86 ; protein kinase D ( PKD ) promotes vesicle release for the basolateral route 110 ( see inset ) . Dynamins 1 and 2 , the adaptor DAB2 and the GTPase ARNO regulate specific endocytic steps 38 . Other regulators of protein trafficking include phosphatidylinositol 4 - kinases 154 , heterotrimeric G - proteins 65 , 135 and RETROMER 155 . Microtubule and actin motors ( myosins I , II , Vb and VI ) probably participate at several stages of endocytic and biosynthetic trafficking 38 , 93 . Hip1R , a linker between actin and clathrin , promotes the release of clathrin - coated vesicles that contain mannose - 6 - phosphate receptors from the TGN 156 . The production of a vesicle from a donor compartment is coordinated with delivery to the acceptor compartment by various compartment - specific Rab proteins 18 , 38 . The exocyst , together with RalA and Rab8 , coordinates basolateral exocytic routes , whereas Rab25 and Rab11 coordinate apical recycling 157 . ARE , apical recycling endosome ; ASE , apical sorting endosome ; BSE , basal sorting endosome ; LE , late endosome ; LYS , lysosome . 240 | MARCH 2005 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S LDL , transferrin and mannose - 6 - phosphate , but their study did not fully clarify the organelle location of this sorting event . CLATHRIN is expected to be involved in basolateral protein sorting ( FIG . 2 ) , as AP1 , AP2 and AP3 ( but not AP4 ) have binding sites for clathrin 71 . And biochemical and immunoelectron - microscopy experi - ments show that clathrin is associated with the trans - ferrin receptor in endosomes 81 and with VSVG protein in µ 1B - expressing LLC - PK1 cells , but not in wild - type cells 76 . However , no functional evidence is available yet to support a role for clathrin in polarized transport . Transport to the plasma membrane The sorting of apical and basolateral proteins at the TGN and common recycling endosomes must be coor - dinated with their incorporation into vesicular and tubular transport intermediates and the transport of these intermediates across the cytosol to specific areas of the cell surface . These different processes are coordi - nated by various factors including organelle - specific RAB proteins , elements of the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons and a particle known as the exocyst ( FIG . 2 ) . The microtubule cytoskeleton . Extensive experimenta - tion with microtubule - disrupting agents showed a selec - tive requirement for microtubules in the transport of apical membrane proteins ( reviewed in REF . 82 ) but did not determine at what step microtubules were required . Recent live - cell - imaging experiments indicate impor - tant roles for microtubules and microtubule motors in the exit of apical proteins ( and possibly some basolat - eral proteins ) from the TGN and endosomes ( FIG . 2 , inset ) and in their transport across the cytosol 83 . In non - polarized cells 84 – 89 and in fully polarized MDCK cells 23 , 88 , GFP - tagged apical and basolateral markers were shown to leave the Golgi complex in long , tubular transport intermediates and small vesicles that move along microtubule tracks . Three lines of evidence imply that specific micro - tubule motors participate in the sorting / transport of apical proteins . First , antibodies that were directed against the motor protein kinesin blocked the produc - tion of tubules that contained the apical marker p75NTR – GFP ; they also blocked transport from the Golgi area to the cell surface of small vesicles contain - ing p75NTR – GFP , which were presumably released from the Golgi by an independent mechanism 86 . These antibodies cause basolateral missorting of apical mark - ers in polarized MDCK cells ( G . K . , unpublished data ) . Second , cytoplasmic dynein , a minus - end - directed microtubule motor , interacts with the C - terminal end of rhodopsin through the dynein light chain TCTEX , and is crucially involved in the apical transport of rhodopsin in MDCK cells 35 . Third , the kinesin - family member KIFC3 , another minus - end - directed micro - tubule motor , has been associated with the apical deliv - ery of influenza HA and annexin - 13b ( REF . 90 ) ; however , the motor function of KIFC3 in this process has still not been shown . These experiments are consistent with the observation that microtubules orientate their negative ends towards the apical pole of polarized basolateral sorting of the LDL and transferrin receptors at recycling endosomes rather than at the TGN , as has been established by recycling assays 75 and colocalization with endosomal , rather than TGN , markers 75 , 76 . Recent work 21 , 76 indicates that VSVG protein might transit through recycling endosomes en route to the plasma membrane ( see routes 3a and 3b in FIGS . 1 , 2 ) , in agree - ment with previous data for other basolateral pro - teins 77 , 78 . Experiments with antibodies that block the function of AP1B indicate that AP1B might sort baso - lateral proteins in a post - TGN compartment at the crossroads of both the recycling and the biosynthetic routes ( J . Cancino , A . Soza , G . Mardonez , E . R . - B . and A . Gonzalez , manuscript in preparation ) . AP1A and GGAs ( Golgi - localized , γ - ear - containing , Arf - binding proteins ) are ubiquitous ADAPTINS that , unlike AP1B , localize to the TGN and cooperate in sorting the mannose - 6 - phosphate receptor from the TGN to endosomes 71 ( see route 3c in FIGS 1 , 2 ) . It is unknown whether they participate in basolateral sort - ing at the TGN or endosomes . An interesting outcome of the studies on AP1A and AP1B is the realization that their different µ - subunits , which are more than 80 % identical , mediate the different organelle localiza - tions of these adaptors . This could depend on the µ - subunits binding to TGN - or endosome - specific phosphatidylinositol ( PtdIns ) phosphate lipids , as it was recently shown that AP1A binds through its µ 1A subunit to PtdIns 4 - phosphate that is synthesized by a Golgi - localized PtdIns 4 - kinase 79 . The AP3 adaptor protein regulates the exit of exoge - nous VSVG from the Golgi complex in non - polarized cells 80 , but its role in basolateral sorting in polarized cells has not been studied yet . Simmen et al . 73 have proposed a role for AP4 in basolateral sorting of receptors for ADAPTIN A tetrameric ( for example , AP1 , AP2 , AP3 and AP4 ) or monomeric ( such as GGAs ) protein that promotes the formation ofcoated vesicles . Adaptins might interact with clathrin , small GTPases ( such as Arf1 ) and microtubule - based motor proteins . CLATHRIN The main component ofthe coat that is associated with clathrin - coated vesicles , which are involved in membrane transport both in the endocytic and biosynthetic pathways . RAB A small protein with GTPase activity that is involved in the formation and delivery of vesicles . Box 2 | The flexible epithelial phenotype Different epithelial cell types show ‘flexibility’in their polarized trafficking , which is defined as the ability to localize a given protein to different regions of the cell or to use a different targeting route to reach the same ( usually apical ) region 15 . Examples of the first scenario occur in the retinal pigment epithelium 137 and the LLC - PK1 kidney - tubule cell line 138 , in which several proteins that are basolateral in Madin – Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells are concentrated on the apical surface . Examples of the second scenario are provided by apical proteins such as dipeptidylpeptidase IV or influenza haemagglutinin , which are transported by a direct route from the trans - Golgi network in MDCK cells , but follow a transcytotic route in the liver , intestinal epithelium or retinal pigment epithelium 139 , 140 , or even change from a transcytotic to a direct route ( for dipeptidylpeptidase IV ) as the epithelial monolayer matures in vitro 141 . Liver cells represent an extreme case in which a large majority of apical proteins use the transcytotic route 142 ; however , some multispan membrane proteins use a direct delivery route from the Golgi complex to the bile canalicular surface of hepatocytes 143 . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 6 | MARCH 2005 | 241 R E V I E W S TGN of MDCK cells 86 and the release of VSVG – GFP in non - polarized cells 97 . Finally , actin could negatively regulate the release of some proteins from the TGN by forming a physical barrier that must be removed for vesicular budding to occur . In summary , the microtubule and the actin cytoskeletons have important regulatory roles in sorting apical and basolateral proteins in the TGN , recycling endosomes and at the plasma membrane . The mecha - nisms underlying this regulation and the roles of spe - cific actin and microtubule motors in the generation of transport intermediates are still largely unknown . The microtubule and actin cytoskeletons are also involved at specific steps in the transport of vesicular and tubular transport intermediates across the cytosol ( FIG . 2 ) . Future work needs to elucidate in detail the participation of these motors in the transport of specific cargos and their regulation . Polarized exocytosis of transport intermediates The release of transport intermediates that carry apical and basolateral proteins from the TGN and endosomes must be coordinated with their transport across the cytoplasm and their insertion in the plasma membrane at specific sites . Work over the past 10 years has identi - fied various components of the exocytic machinery that transport apical and basolateral proteins and has started to identify the mechanisms that regulate their localization and function ( FIG . 3 ) . Apical exocytosis is mediated by a tetanus - toxin - insensitive vesicle membrane ( v ) - SNARE ( ti - VAMP ) 98 and by the target membrane ( t ) - SNAREs syntaxin - 3 and SNAP23 ( REFS 99 – 101 ) . Epithelial - specific Munc18 - 2 reg - ulates the assembly of the apical SNARE complex 102 . Annexin - 2 and annexin - 13B might promote docking of epithelial cells ( discussed below ) . Microtubules also form arrays of mixed polarity underneath the apical membrane , which implies that plus - end - directed motors might also participate in apical delivery . The actin cytoskeleton . The actin cytoskeleton has an increasingly recognized role in the assembly of vesicular transport intermediates at the Golgi complex and on recycling endosomes , and in their translocation across the cytoplasm 83 . Actin , actin - associated proteins ( such as spectrin , ankyrin and myosins I , II and VI ) and actin - regulatory proteins ( Cdc42 and several of its downstream effectors , and dynamin ) are present in the Golgi complex ( reviewed in REF . 91 ) . Interfering with the function of Cdc42 using constitutively active or inactive mutants slows the exit of the basolateral protein N - CAM ( neuronal cell - adhesion molecule ) but accel - erates exit of the apical protein p75NTR from the TGN 92 . Inhibiting actin polymerization causes missort - ing of basolateral proteins from recycling endosomes and promotes their TRANSCYTOSIS to the apical surface 93 , 94 . How do actin filaments work in apical – basolateral sorting ? They could function conventionally as tracks for the myosin - driven movement of vesicles by Rabs — as has been suggested for myosin VI and Rab11 in apical recycling 95 . In vitro assays indicate that a myosin activity promotes the release of basolateral , but not apical , vesicles from the TGN of MDCK cells 96 , but the iden - tity of this myosin activity remains controversial 83 . Alternatively , by analogy with its role at the plasma membrane , actin might participate in a less conventional role — that is , in the fission of vesicles from the Golgi complex in response to dynamin or downstream effec - tors of Cdc42 ( REF . 97 ) ( FIG . 3 , inset ) . Dominant - negative dynamin inhibits the release of p75NTR from the TRANSCYTOSIS Transport ofmacromolecules across a cell , which consists of the endocytosis ofa macromolecule at one side ofa monolayer and its exocytosis at the other side . PRENYLATION The enzymatic addition of prenyl moieties ( geranyl , farnesyl or geranylgeranyl groups ) to a protein as a post - translational modification . Box 3 | Sorting by lipid rafts The influential lipid - raft hypothesis 41 postulates that many apical proteins are sorted through their affinity for microdomains of glycosphingolipids and cholesterol ( lipid rafts ) that are initially assembled in the Golgi complex . This proposal is supported by strong experimental evidence : • First , many apical proteins , such as influenza haemagglutinin ( HA ) 67 and glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins ( GPI - APs ) 144 , become insoluble in non - ionic detergents at 4 o C as they reach the Golgi complex . Detergent insolubility reflects lipid - raft - association , as raft lipid components are insoluble in non - ionic detergents at 4 o C . Biophysical techniques such as fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) , which measure lipid - raft association more accurately than detergent insolubility does , show a good correlation between apical targeting for HAs and mutations in the transmembrane anchor that disrupt association with lipid rafts 145 . • Second , epithelial cell types that fail to incorporate GPI - APs into detergent - insoluble complexes missort these proteins to the basolateral membrane 146 . • Third , depletion of glycosphingolipids or cholesterol results in the missorting of GPI - APs and influenza HA on their way to the apical plasma membrane of Madin – Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells 147 , 148 . Additional work is necessary to show that missorting results from the disruption of lipid rafts in the sorting compartment rather than indirectly from defective PRENYLATION of key apical sorting factors or from increased signalling by ceramide precursors in cells that have been exposed to inhibitors of glycosphingolipid synthesis . • Finally , lipid rafts are enriched in the apical membrane 41 , 42 . There is strong evidence for the presence and sorting of lipid rafts in the endocytic and recycling pathways but there is no definitive evidence that raft lipids have the intrinsic ability to be sorted apically in the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) . Early results in MDCK cells 149 have been contested by later evidence 150 . Furthermore , it remains unclear whether lipid sorting drives protein sorting or vice versa . Progress in this area has been slowed by technical difficulties with available raft lipids tagged with fluorescent dyes ; these lipids frequently lose their association with lipid rafts , which makes the interpretation of live - cell - imaging studies difficult . 242 | MARCH 2005 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S The exocyst . Further factors are required , in addition to the SNARE machinery , to promote translocation of transport intermediates to the apical or basal poles of cells . Basolateral vesicle delivery requires tethering of the vesicles by a highly conserved complex of eight pro - teins that is known as the exocyst 107 ( FIG . 3 ) . A tethering factor for vesicles in the apical route has not been identi - fied yet . Exocyst antibodies selectively block the transport of basolateral proteins in MDCK cells but do not inhibit the delivery of apical proteins 108 . Interestingly , the exocyst has a second role at sorting organelles — it probably participates in the formation of basolateral transport vesicles from a perinuclear compartment 109 — and a third role at the endoplasmic reticulum , where it selectively modulates the synthesis of basolateral proteins 107 . Consistent with these different functions , the exocyst localizes not only at the junctional complex 108 , but also at a perinuclear compartment 109 , which is more likely to comprise recycling endosomes than the TGN 76 . Both of these localizations might be regulated by AP1B 76 , whereas the junctional localization of the exocyst is promoted by E - cadherin and nectin 110 . The small GTPases RalA 111 and Rab8 ( REF . 112 ; the yeast orthologue of which ( Sec4 ) interacts genetically with the exocyst ) have activities that are consistent with the regulation of the vesicular - trafficking roles of the exocyst . In MDCK cells , dominant - negative Rab8 inhibited basolateral exocytosis 113 , and constitutively active Rab8 promoted missorting of basolateral proteins 112 . The dual regulation of both production and tethering of basolateral vesicles by the exocyst resembles the dual trafficking role of Rab proteins and probably contributes to the homeostasis of the basolateral membrane . The cytoskeleton and polarized trafficking Growing evidence indicates that exit from the sorting organelles ( TGN and recycling endosomes ) and translo - cation to the plasma membrane are also coordinated by the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons , which show a division of function in this regard . Whereas micro - tubules seem to be important in the organization of apical exocytosis , the actin cytoskeleton seems to be an organizer for basolateral exocytosis . Microtubules and apical delivery . The organizing role of the microtubule cytoskeleton in apical exocytosis is shown by live - cell - imaging experiments in non - polarized and polarized MDCK cells ( FIG . 4 ) . TOTAL - INTERNAL - REFLECTION FLUORESCENCE MICROSCOPY , which allows high - resolution analysis of cell – substrate contact areas , shows extensive fusion of post - Golgi transport inter - mediates that contain p75NTR – GFP with the basal plasma membrane of non - polarized MDCK cells 88 ( and also , presumably , with the rest of the plasma membrane , which cannot be imaged with this tech - nique ) . By contrast , post - Golgi transport intermediates that contain p75NTR – GFP fuse with neither the basal nor the lateral membrane in polarized MDCK cells ; therefore , they must fuse with the apical surface , although this event has been difficult to image so far 88 ( FIG . 4 ) . The restriction of fusion sites to the apical membrane apical transport intermediates by remodelling cortical actin at the apical pole and / or chaperoning the interme - diates to specific attachment sites 103 , 104 . Basolateral post - Golgi transporters dock at the cell surface using a tetanus - sensitive v - SNARE ( ts - VAMP ) and the basolateral v - SNAREs syntaxin - 4 and SNAP23 ( REFS 98 , 100 ) . The assembly of the basolateral SNARE complex is regulated by Munc18c ( REF . 105 ) . It was recently shown that Mlgl , the mammalian homologue of Lethal giant larvae ( Lgl , a D . melanogaster protein that is essential for epithelial polarity ) interacts with syntaxin - 4 at the lateral membrane of MDCK cells 106 . Although functional data are still lacking , the available evidence indicates that Mlgl regulates the syntaxin system that is involved in basolateral exocytosis ( FIG . 3 ) . SNARE ( soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein attachment protein ( SNAP ) receptor ) . SNARE proteins are a family ofmembrane - tethered coiled - coil proteins that regulate fusion reactions and target specificity in vesicle trafficking . They can be divided into v - SNAREs and t - SNAREs on the basis oftheir localization . Tethering particles and receptors ( unknown ) Non - centrosomal microtubules UnknownSNAREs Syntaxin - 3 SNAP23 Zonulaoccludens Zonulaadherens CrumbsPals1Patj PAR3PAR6aPKC PAR1 PAR4 Transcytoticand recycling apical vesicles Direct and recyclingbasolateralvesicles Syntaxin - 4 SNAP23 Syntaxin - 4 SNAP23 Nectin Directapicalvesicle ti - VAMP Munc18 - 2 ts - VAMP Munc18c Junctionalcomplex Syntaxin - 4 SNAP23 ScribbleDiscs large Lethal giant larva Cdc42RalARab8 Exocyst Figure 3 | The exocytic machinery of MDCK cells . At the apical surface : apical vesicles in the direct route contain a tetanus - insensitive v - SNARE ( ti - VAMP ) that heterotrimerizes with the apical syntaxins SNAP23 and syntaxin - 3 ( REF . 98 ) , a process that is regulated by Munc18 - 2 . Apical syntaxins are restricted apically by microtubules , using unknown mechanisms 88 . PAR1 , which is located near the junctional complex , organizes microtubules non - centrosomally into vertical and subapical networks 121 . Unknown SNAREs mediate the fusion of transcytotic and recycling apical vesicles with the apical membrane . At the basolateral surface : basolateral vesicles carry a tetanus - sensitive v - SNARE ( ts - VAMP ) that interacts with syntaxin - 4 and SNAP23 , which are components of the basolateral docking / fusion machinery . The syntaxins localize to the lateral membrane independently of microtubules . Many proteins that are involved in regulating basolateral exocytosis ( indicated by a green background ) are orthologues of regulators of the secretory pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . These include Cdc42 , exocyst , RalA , Rab8 ( Sec4 in yeast ) and Lethal giant larvae ( Lgl ; Sro7 / Sro77 in yeast ) . Lgl interacts with syntaxin - 4 but a vesicular - trafficking regulatory role has not been shown . The recruitment of exocyst to the junctional area is promoted by nectin 158 and is a key determinant of the fusion of vesicles in this area . The products of three sets of physically and / or genetically interacting polarity genes ( Crumbs – Pals1 – Patj ; atypical protein kinase C ( aPKC ) – PAR3 – PAR6 ; scribble – discs - large – Lgl ) 19 along with PAR1 and PAR4 are also likely to have important vesicular - trafficking regulatory roles . These gene products are restricted to either the apical or lateral domain , and are often concentrated just above or below the apical junctional complex . Their crosstalk ensures the maintenance of distinct epithelial surface domains . SNARE , soluble NSF ( N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein ) accessory protein ( SNAP ) receptor ; VAMP , vesicle - associated membrane protein . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 6 | MARCH 2005 | 243 R E V I E W S cells , syntaxin - 4 shifts from a random localization to a lateral membrane distribution . That syntaxin - 4 has a broader localization than just basolateral exocytic sites indicates that additional factors ( such as the exo - cyst ) contribute to the localized fusion of basolateral transport intermediates near junctional areas of the plasma membrane . The basolateral delivery routes to the lateral mem - brane and the lateral localization of syntaxin - 4 are not antagonized by microtubule disruption ; instead , evidence is accumulating that the actin cytoskeleton and its regula - tors are involved in this process ( FIG . 3 ) . Several ortho - logues of gene products that control the docking and fusion of post - Golgi vesicles in S . cerevisiae regulate baso - lateral exocytosis . Paramount in both yeast and MDCK systems is Cdc42 . Expression of dominant - negative or activated Cdc42 disrupts both post - Golgi targeting and endosomal recycling of basolateral proteins in MDCK cells 115 , 116 . Consistent with this observation , depolymeriz - ing the actin cytoskeleton disrupts basolateral targeting of recycling basolateral proteins 93 , 94 . Epithelial lumen formation The role ofPAR proteins . Simple ( non - stratified ) epithe - lial cells position their lumen at the apex in columnar epithelia ( which is therefore known as the apical domain , for example , in the kidney and intestine ) or at the lateral parallels the redistribution of syntaxin - 3 to the apical surface 88 . Importantly , disrupting microtubules results in the depolarization of syntaxin - 3 and the fusion of post - Golgi transport intermediates that contain p75NTR – GFP with the basal membrane in a syntaxin - 3 - dependent manner 88 ( FIG . 4 ) . These experiments strongly indicate that microtubules can organize apical trafficking routes , at least in part through their capacity to position syntaxin - 3 at the apical membrane . How they accom - plish this is not yet understood . Also unclear is the exact site in the apical membrane at which apical transport intermediates dock and fuse . Early experiments by Louvard indicate that delivery could occur in the vicinity of the junctional area 114 . Actin and basolateral delivery . In contrast to the key role of microtubules in organizing the apical exocytic machinery , the leading role in the organization of vesicu - lar exocytosis to the basolateral pole seems to be held by the actin cytoskeleton . In subconfluent , non - polarized MDCK cells , post - Golgi vesicles carrying basolateral proteins fuse randomly with the plasma membrane ; this correlates with the random distribution of the basolateral t - SNARE syntaxin - 4 ( REF . 88 ) . By contrast , in polarized MDCK cells , post - Golgi vesicles with basolat - eral proteins fuse exclusively with the top third of the lateral membrane ( FIG . 4 ) . During polarization of MDCK TOTAL - INTERNAL - REFLECTION MICROSCOPY Fluorescence - microscopy technique with significant depth discrimination that can selectively excite only those fluorescent molecules within 100 nm ofthe interface between a cell and a coverslip . Non - polarized MDCK cell Polarized MDCK cell Nucleus Golgi Fusion with basal membrane Apical vesicle - fusion site Basolateralvesicle - fusion site Polarized MDCK cells + microtubule depolymerization Tightjunction Basolateralvesicle - fusion site Tightjunction a b c Apical vesicle - fusion site Basolateral carrier Apical carrier Figure 4 | Microtubules organize vesicular trafficking to the apical pole . a | Total - internal - reflection fluorescence microscopy shows fusion of apical and basolateral post - Golgi transport intermediates with the basal surface in subconfluent Madin – Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells . b | These fusions are not observed in polarized MDCK cells 88 . In polarized MDCK cells , basolateral post - Golgi transport intermediates ( which contain low density lipoprotein ( LDL ) receptors ) fuse with the upper third of the lateral membrane as determined by spinning disc confocal microscopy 88 ( see also BOX 1 ) . The restriction of basolateral fusion sites to the lateral membrane correlates with a restricted localization of fusion ( syntaxin - 4 ) and tethering ( exocyst ) machinery ( see FIG . 3 ) . In polarized MDCK cells , post - Golgi transport intermediates that contain the apical marker p75 neurotrophin receptor ( p75NTR ) tagged with green fluorescent protein fuse directly with the apical surface . c | Microtubule depolymerization results in a dispersed Golgi complex and the fusion of apical , but not basolateral , post - Golgi transport intermediates with the basal membrane ; these fusions are inhibited by antibodies to syntaxin - 3 . Microtubule depolymerization does not disrupt the fusion of basolateral post - Golgi transport intermediates with the lateral membrane . 244 | MARCH 2005 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S protein that , when prevented from binding 14 - 3 - 3 pro - teins by mutation of a potential PAR1 phosphorylation site 127 , interferes with MDCK lumen formation in a sim - ilar manner to PAR1 ( REF . 128 ) . In some systems , PAR4 ( another serine / threonine kinase , also known as LKB1 ) activates PAR1 , which implies that there are possible common polarizing signalling routes that are mediated by PAR1 , PAR3 and PAR4 ( REF . 129 ) . Recent work 130 has shown that PAR4 , under the influence of the adaptor protein STRAD ( STE20 - related adaptor protein ) , pro - motes polarization of intestinal epithelial cells with polarized apical MICROVILLI and luminal proteins , in the absence of cell – cell contacts — that is , in single cells . PAR1 , however , seems to be unique in that it promotes not only lumen formation per se , but it also regulates lumen position . Overexpression of PAR1 locks MDCK cells in a ‘liver polarity phenotype’ , with lateral lumina that resemble bile canaliculi 121 ( FIG . 5 ) and , interestingly , promotes a transcytotic route for apical proteins , which is also a characteristic of liver epithelial cells 131 . These experiments imply that levels of PAR1 activity might control the developmental decision between the establishment of columnar or hepatic epithelia , a hypoth - esis that needs to be tested experimentally . The lumen polarity and traffic - organizing functions of PAR1 might be mediated by its known ability to regulate micro - tubules . Inhibition of PAR1 function prevents the change in the organization of microtubules from the radial centrosomal array that is found in non - polarized MDCK cells ( and in other non - polarized cells such as fibroblasts ) to the non - centrosomal , vertical microtubule arrays that are characteristic of polarized epithelia ( FIG . 5 ) . Overexpression of PAR1 in MDCK cells organizes microtubules in horizontal arrays with their minus ends facing lateral lumina , which is similar to the organization that is found in liver cells 121 . Concluding remarks The study of the generation and maintenance of epithelial polarity has been , and will continue to be , a challenging endeavour , as polarization involves the coordination of all of the main subcellular systems in membrane in liver cells ( which are known as BILE CANALI - CULI ) 12 , 14 . The mechanisms that are involved in the for - mation and positioning of epithelial lumina are still poorly understood . The process of lumen formation and tubulogenesis in MDCK cells has been studied using the Ca 2 + switch 117 and using MDCK cells embed - ded in collagen 18 , 118 . In the Ca 2 + - switch experiment ( FIG . 5 ) , MDCK cells that are cultured in low ( ~ 5 µ M ) concentrations of Ca 2 + accumulate luminal ( apical ) markers intracellularly in large vacuoles that are known as vacuolar apical compartments ( VACs ) 119 ; equivalent structures accumulate basolateral markers under these conditions 120 . VAC - like structures have been observed in pathological conditions — for example , in transformed epithelial cells ( reviewed in REF . 121 ) — but are difficult to observe in subconfluent MDCK cells . After switching to normal concentrations of Ca 2 + ( 2 mM ) , the VACs move towards the lateral membrane , where they form transient intercellular lumina that are reminiscent of liver bile canaliculi ; these lateral lumina progressively relocate to the apical domain 121 , 122 . Similar transient lateral lumina are observed in MDCK cells that are polarizing within collagen gels 118 , 121 or under standard conditions after dissociation by trypsin ( D . Cohen and A . M . , unpublished data ) . Importantly , transient lateral lumina are also observed in vivo , in developing rat intestinal epithelial cells 123 . These data indicate that tran - sient lateral lumina represent an intermediate morpho - genetic step in the generation of polarity in columnar epithelial cells . Important regulators of the processes of lumen for - mation and polarization are the partitioning ( PAR ) genes ( FIG . 3 ) . PAR genes were discovered as cell - fate determinants in the C . elegans embryo ; many studies have characterized their participation in the formation of the tight - junction complex , which is a key aspect of cell polarization 124 . Inhibition of PAR1 prevents the for - mation of MDCK - cell lumina in three - dimensional collagen - gel assays 121 . PAR1 is a serine / threonine kinase with the unique ability to bind and transfer 14 - 3 - 3 PROTEINS to its substrates 125 , 126 . A candidate PAR1 substrate in the lumen - assembly pathway is PAR3 , a PDZ - domain BILE CANALICULI Tiny channels on the surface of liver cells that collect the bile that they produce . 14 - 3 - 3 PROTEIN A scaffolding protein that regulates the localization of other proteins by binding to conserved phosphotyrosine - containing motifs in a phosphorylation - dependent manner . MICROVILLI Small , finger - like projections ( 1 – 2 - µ m long and 100 - nm wide ) that occur on the exposed surfaces ofepithelial cells to maximize the surface area . MICROTUBULE - ORGANIZING CENTRE ( MTOC ) . Also called the centrosome or spindle - pole body , this structure nucleates and organizes microtubules . Non - polarized MDCK cell Liver polarity stage Columnar MDCK cell VAC MTOC Microtubules PAR1 ( low levels ) PAR1 PAR1 ( high levels ) Apical Basal + – TJ TJ + – a b c Figure 5 | PAR1 controls epithelial microtubule organization and lumen morphogenesis . a | Madin – Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells cultured at 5 µ M Ca 2 + lack cell – cell contacts 117 show a centrosomal microtubule array with the negative ends emanating from a juxtanuclear MICROTUBULE - ORGANIZING CENTRE ( MTOC ) 121 , 159 and accumulate luminal ( apical ) markers ( green ) in large intracellular vacuoles that are known as vacuolar apical compartments ( VACs ) 119 . b | After addition of Ca 2 + , MDCK cells establish E - cadherin - mediated cell – cell contacts . VACs are exocytosed , forming intercellular lumina ( green ) that are surrounded by tight junctions ( TJs ; red ) — these are reminiscent of liver bile canaliculi 122 . Microtubules rearrange to a horizontal position , with the MTOC immediately under the lumen 121 — such an arrangement is typical of hepatocytes 82 . c | Several hours after the addition of Ca 2 + , the lateral lumen is displaced to the apical surface 122 and the microtubules acquire a non - centrosomal vertical arrangement that is typical of columnar epithelial cells 121 , 159 . PAR1 promotes the formation of lateral lumina and inhibits the progression to columnar morphology . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 6 | MARCH 2005 | 245 R E V I E W S pathway from the mother cell to the budding daughter cell in S . cerevisiae . Future research will uncover important details of the machinery that is involved in Golgi and endoso - mal sorting , including the roles of lipid rafts , sorting signals , adaptins and the cytoskeleton . Individual microtubule - and actin - based motors that participate in the exit of various classes of proteins from the TGN need to be identified . The molecular interactions that underlie the control by the microtubule cytoskeleton and the actin cytoskeleton of the establishment of luminal and basolateral docking sites for post - Golgi routes will be elucidated . MDCK cells will continue to be an important tool in this task , as they are the most well - studied mammalian epithelial cell and have provided the context for the development of the most incisive cell - biological tech - nology with which to test hypotheses and candidate genes in polarized vesicular trafficking . response to cues that are provided by cell – cell and cell – substrate contacts . The establishment of polarized trafficking requires precise coordination between mechanisms that are involved in the sorting of plasma - membrane proteins into post - Golgi and post - endosomal transport vesicles , and the delivery of these vesicles to restricted sites at the cell surface . Several apical and basolateral routes exit the Golgi complex and fuse ran - domly with the cell surface in non - polarized cells . The reorganization of the microtubule cytoskeleton that occurs during epithelial polarization under the control of signalling proteins such as PAR1 and PAR4 leads to the apical delivery of luminal markers , probably by restricting specialized docking and fusion machinery to the apical surface . The organization of basolateral delivery to the apical third of the lateral membrane is , instead , under the control of Cdc42 , some of its down - stream effectors , and the actin cytoskeleton — the same protagonists that are involved in the secretory 1 . Cereijido , M . , Contreras , R . G . & Shoshani , L . Cell adhesion , polarity , and epithelia in the dawn of metazoans . Physiol . Rev . 84 , 1229 – 1262 ( 2004 ) . 2 . Palade , G . E . Intracellular aspects of the process of protein secretion . Science 189 , 374 – 358 ( 1975 ) . 3 . Farquhar , M . G . & Palade , G . E . Junctional complexes in various epithelia . J . Cell Biol . 17 , 375 – 412 ( 1963 ) . 4 . Cereijido , M . , Robbins , E . S . , Dolan , W . J . , Rotunno , C . A . & Sabatini , D . D . Polarized monolayers formed by epithelial cells on a permeable and translucent support . J . Cell Biol . 77 , 853 – 880 ( 1978 ) . A landmark paper that characterized the formation of an epithelium in vitro . 5 . Misfeldt , D . S . , Hammamoto , S . T . & Pitelka , D . R . Transepithelial transport in cell culture . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 73 , 1212 – 1216 ( 1976 ) . 6 . Rodriguez - Boulan , E . & Sabatini , D . D . Asymmetric budding of viruses in epithelial monolayers : a model system for study of epithelial polarity . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 75 , 5071 – 5075 ( 1978 ) . Showed that enveloped viruses can be used as tools to study the generation and maintenance of epithelial polarity . 7 . Rodriguez - Boulan , E . & Pendergast , M . Polarized distribution of viral envelope proteins in the plasma membrane of infected epithelial cells . Cell 20 , 45 – 54 ( 1980 ) . 8 . Griffiths , G . & Simons , K . The trans Golgi network : sorting at the exit site of the Golgi complex . Science 234 , 438 – 443 ( 1986 ) . 9 . Matlin , K . S . & Simons , K . Sorting of an apical plasma membrane glycoprotein occurs before it reaches the cell surface in cultured epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 99 , 2131 – 2139 ( 1984 ) . 10 . Misek , D . E . , Bard , E . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Biogenesis of epithelial cell polarity : intracellular sorting and vectorial exocytosis of an apical plasma membrane glycoprotein . Cell 39 , 537 – 546 ( 1984 ) . 11 . Rindler , M . J . , Ivanov , I . E . , Plesken , H . , Rodriguez - Boulan , E . & Sabatini , D . D . Viral glycoproteins destined for apical or basolateral plasma membrane domains traverse the same Golgi apparatus during their intracellular transport in doubly infected Madin – Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 98 , 1304 – 1319 ( 1984 ) . 12 . Rodriguez - Boulan , E . & Nelson , W . J . Morphogenesis of the polarized epithelial cell phenotype . Science 245 , 718 – 725 ( 1989 ) . 13 . Simons , K . & Wandinger - Ness , A . Polarized sorting in epithelia . Cell 62 , 207 – 210 ( 1990 ) . 14 . Tuma , P . L . & Hubbard , A . L . Transcytosis : crossing cellular barriers . Physiol . Rev . 83 , 871 – 932 ( 2003 ) . 15 . Rodriguez - Boulan , E . & Powell , S . K . Polarity of epithelial and neuronal cells . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 8 , 395 – 427 ( 1992 ) . 16 . Matter , K . & Mellman , I . Mechanisms of cell polarity : sorting and transport in epithelial cells . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 6 , 545 – 554 ( 1994 ) . 17 . Yeaman , C . , Grindstaff , K . K . & Nelson , W . J . New perspectives on mechanisms involved in generating epithelial cell polarity . Physiol . Rev . 79 , 73 – 98 ( 1999 ) . 18 . Mostov , K . , Su , T . & ter Beest , M . Polarized epithelial membrane traffic : conservation and plasticity . Nature Cell Biol . 5 , 287 – 293 ( 2003 ) . 19 . Nelson , W . Adaptation of core mechanisms to generate cell polarity . Nature 422 , 766 – 774 ( 2003 ) . 20 . Schock , F . & Perrimon , N . Molecular mechanisms of epithelial morphogenesis . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 463 – 493 ( 2002 ) . 21 . Ang , A . L . et al . Recycling endosomes can serve as intermediates during transport from the Golgi to the plasma membrane of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 531 – 543 ( 2004 ) . 22 . Brown , P . S . et al . Definition of distinct compartments in polarized Madin – Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells for membrane - volume sorting , polarized sorting and apical recycling . Traffic 1 , 124 – 140 ( 2000 ) . 23 . Polishchuk , R . , Di Pentima , A . & Lippincott - Schwartz , J . Delivery of raft - associated , GPI - anchored proteins to the apical surface of polarized MDCK cells by a transcytotic pathway . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 297 – 307 ( 2004 ) . 24 . Lisanti , M . , Sargiacomo , M . , Graeve , L . , Saltiel , A . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Polarized apical distribution of glycosyl phosphatidylinositol anchored proteins in a renal epithelial line . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 85 , 9557 – 9561 ( 1988 ) . First indication that a lipid ( GPI ) contributes to apical targeting . 25 . Lisanti , M . , Caras , I . P . , Davitz , M . A . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . A glycophospholipid membrane anchor acts as an apical targeting signal in polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 2145 – 2156 ( 1989 ) . 26 . Brown , D . A . , Crise , B . & Rose , J . K . Mechanism of membrane anchoring affects polarized expression of two proteins in MDCK cells . Science 245 , 1499 – 1501 ( 1989 ) . 27 . Scheiffele , P . , Peranen , J . & Simons , K . N - glycans as apical sorting signals in epithelial cells . Nature 378 , 96 – 98 ( 1995 ) . First demonstration of N - glycans as apical sorting signals . 28 . Yeaman , C . et al . The O - glycosylated stalk domain is required for apical sorting of neurotrophin receptors in polarized MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 929 – 940 ( 1997 ) . First indication that O - glycans function as an apical targeting mechanism . 29 . Alfalah , M . et al . O - linked glycans mediate apical sorting of human intestinal sucrase - isomaltase through association with lipid rafts . Curr . Biol . 9 , 593 – 596 ( 1999 ) . 30 . Rodriguez - Boulan , E . & Gonzalez , A . Glycans in post - Golgi apical targeting : sorting signals or structural props ? Trends Cell Biol . 9 , 291 – 294 ( 1999 ) . 31 . Gut , A . et al . Carbohydrate - mediated Golgi to cell surface transport and apical targeting of membrane proteins . EMBO J . 17 , 1919 – 1929 ( 1998 ) . 32 . Fiedler , K . & Simons , K . The role of N - glycans in the secretory pathway . Cell 81 , 309 – 312 ( 1995 ) . 33 . Marzolo , M . P . , Bull , P . & Gonzalez , A . Apical sorting of hepatitis B surface antigen ( HBsAg ) is independent of N - glycosylation and glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored protein segregation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 1834 – 1839 ( 1997 ) . 34 . Bravo - Zehnder , M . et al . Apical sorting of a voltage - and Ca 2 + - activated K + channel α - subunit in Madin – Darby canine kidney cells is independent of N - glycosylation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 13114 – 13119 ( 2000 ) . 35 . Tai , A . W . , Chuang , J . Z . , Bode , C . , Wolfrum , U . & Sung , C . H . Rhodopsin’s carboxy - terminal cytoplasmic tail acts as a membrane receptor for cytoplasmic dynein by binding to the dynein light chain Tctex - 1 . Cell 97 , 877 – 887 ( 1999 ) . 36 . Takeda , T . , Yamazaki , H . & Farquhar , M . G . Identification of an apical sorting determinant in the cytoplasmic tail of megalin . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 284 , C1105 – C1113 ( 2003 ) . 37 . Marzolo , M . P . et al . Differential distribution of low - density lipoprotein - receptor - related protein ( LRP ) and megalin in polarized epithelial cells is determined by their cytoplasmic domains . Traffic 4 , 273 – 288 ( 2003 ) . 38 . Altschuler , Y . , Hodson , C . & Milgram , S . L . The apical compartment : trafficking pathways , regulators and scaffolding proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 423 – 429 ( 2003 ) . 39 . Marmorstein , A . D . et al . Saturation of , and competition for entry into , the apical secretory pathway . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 3248 – 3253 ( 2000 ) . 40 . Fullekrug , J . , Scheiffele , P . & Simons , K . VIP - 36 localisation to the early secretory pathway . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 2813 – 2821 ( 1999 ) . 41 . van Meer , G . & Simons , K . Lipid polarity and sorting in epithelial cells . J . Cell Biochem . 36 , 51 – 58 ( 1988 ) . The concept of lipid rafts was proposed . 42 . Simons , K . & Ikonen , E . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature 387 , 569 – 572 ( 1997 ) . 43 . Paladino , S . et al . Protein oligomerization modulates raft partitioning and apical sorting of GPI - anchored proteins . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 699 – 709 ( 2004 ) . An exciting observation that throws light on the role of protein oligomerization in promoting apical targeting . 44 . Benting , J . H . , Rietveld , A . G . & Simons , K . N - Glycans mediate the apical sorting of a GPI - anchored , raft - associated protein in Madin – Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 313 – 320 ( 1999 ) . 45 . Sharma , P . et al . Nanoscale organization of multiple GPI - anchored proteins in living cell membranes . Cell 116 , 577 – 589 ( 2004 ) . 46 . Hannan , L . A . , Lisanti , M . P . , Rodriguez - Boulan , E . & Edidin , M . Correctly sorted molecules of a GPI - anchored protein are clustered and immobile when they arrive at the apical surface of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 353 – 358 ( 1993 ) . Initial proposal that a clustering event might be involved in apical targeting of GPI - anchored proteins . 47 . Mayor , S . , Rothenberg , K . G . & Maxfield , F . R . Sequestration of GPI - anchored proteins in caveolae triggered by cross - linking . Science 264 , 1948 – 1951 ( 1994 ) . 48 . Verkade , P . , Harder , T . , Lafont , F . & Simons , K . Induction of caveolae in the apical plasma membrane of Madin – Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 727 – 739 ( 2000 ) . 49 . Lisanti , M . P . , Le Bivic , A . , Saltiel , A . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Preferred apical distribution of glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) anchored proteins : a highly conserved feature of the polarized epithelial cell phenotype . J . Memb . Biol . 113 , 155 – 167 ( 1990 ) . 246 | MARCH 2005 | VOLUME 6 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S 50 . Le Bivic , A . , Garcia , M . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Ricin resistant Madin – Darby canine kidney cells missort a major endogenous apical sialoglycoprotein . J . Biol . Chem . 10 , 6909 – 6916 ( 1993 ) . 51 . Scheiffele , P . et al . Caveolin - 1 and - 2 in the exocytic pathway of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 795 – 806 ( 1998 ) . 52 . Puertollano , R . , Martinez - Menarguez , J . A . , Batista , A . , Ballesta , J . & Alonso , M . A . An intact dilysine - like motif in the carboxyl terminus of MAL is required for normal apical transport of the influenza virus hemagglutinin cargo protein in epithelial Madin – Darby canine kidney cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 1869 – 1883 ( 2001 ) . 53 . Mostov , K . E . , Kops , A . B . & Deitcher , D . L . Deletion of the cytoplasmic domain of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor prevents basolateral localization and endocytosis . Cell 47 , 359 – 364 ( 1986 ) . The first demonstration that basolateral sorting information exists in the cytoplasmic domain . 54 . Casanova , J . E . , Apodaca , G . & Mostov , K . E . An autonomous signal for basolateral sorting in the cytoplasmic domain of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor . Cell 66 , 65 – 75 ( 1991 ) . Identification of one of the first basolateral signals . 55 . Hunziker , W . , Harter , C . , Matter , K . & Mellman , I . Basolateral sorting in MDCK cells requires a distinct cytoplasmic domain determinant . Cell 66 , 907 – 920 ( 1991 ) . Identification of one of the first basolateral signals . 56 . Matter , K . , Hunziker , W . & Mellman , I . Basolateral sorting of LDL receptor in MDCK cells : The cytoplasmic domain contains two tyrosine - dependent targeting determinants . Cell 71 , 741 – 753 ( 1992 ) . 57 . Brewer , C . B . & Roth , M . G . A single amino acid change in the cytoplasmic domain alters the polarized delivery of influenza viral hemagglutin . J . Cell Biol . 114 , 413 – 421 ( 1991 ) Showed dual importance of tyrosine signals in endocytosis and basolateral targeting . 58 . Le Bivic , A . et al . An internal deletion in the cytoplasmic tail reverses the apical localization of human NGF receptor in transfected MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 115 , 607 – 618 ( 1991 ) . 59 . Hunziker , W . & Fumey , C . A di - leucine motif mediates endocytosis and basolateral sorting of macrophage IgG Fc receptors in MDCK cells . EMBO J . 13 , 2963 – 2969 ( 1994 ) . 60 . Muth , T . R . & Caplan , M . J . Transport protein trafficking in polarized cells . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 333 – 366 ( 2003 ) . 61 . Wehrle - Haller , B . & Imhof , B . A . Stem cell factor presentation to c - Kit . Identification of a basolateral targeting domain . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 12667 – 12674 ( 2001 ) . 62 . Koivisto , U . M . , Hubbard , A . L . & Mellman , I . A novel cellular phenotype for familial hypercholesterolemia due to a defect in polarized targeting of LDL receptor . Cell 105 , 575 – 585 ( 2001 ) . 63 . Nelson , W . J . & Veshnock , P . J . Ankyrin binding to ( Na + , K + ) ATPase and implications for the organization of membrane domains in polarized cells . Nature 328 , 533 – 536 ( 1987 ) . Demonstration of an alternative mechanism for basolateral localization : immobilization by the membrane cytoskeleton . 64 . Pimplikar , S . W . , Ikonen , E . & Simons , K . Basolateral protein transport in streptolysin O - permeabilized MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 1025 – 1035 ( 1994 ) . 65 . Musch , A . , Xu , H . , Shields , D . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Transport of vesicular stomatitis virus G protein to the cell surface is signal mediated in polarized and nonpolarized cells . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 543 – 558 ( 1996 ) . 66 . Soza , A . et al . Sorting competition with membrane - permeable peptides in intact epithelial cells revealed discrimination of transmembrane proteins not only at the trans - Golgi network but also at pre - Golgi stages . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 17376 – 17383 ( 2004 ) . 67 . Skibbens , J . E . , Roth , M . G . & Matlin , K . S . Differential extractability of influenza virus hemagglutinin during intracellular transport in polarized epithelial cells and non polar fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 821 – 832 ( 1989 ) . First demonstration that an apical transmembrane protein might be associated with lipid rafts . 68 . Yoshimori , T . , Keller , P . , Roth , M . G . & Simons , K . Different biosynthetic transport routes to the plasma membrane in BHK and CHO cells . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 247 – 256 ( 1996 ) . 69 . Matter , K . , Whitney , J . A . , Yamamoto , E . M . & Mellman , I . Common signals control low density lipoprotein receptor sorting in endosomes and in the Golgi complex of MDCK cells . Cell 74 , 1053 – 1064 ( 1993 ) . Showed common signals that control sorting in endosomes and the Golgi complex . 70 . Aroeti , B . & Mostov , K . E . Polarized sorting of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor in the exocytic and endocytic pathway is controlled by the same amino acids . EMBO J . 13 , 2297 – 2304 ( 1994 ) . 71 . Bonifacino , J . S . & Lippincott - Schwartz , J . Coat proteins : shaping membrane transport . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 , 409 – 414 ( 2003 ) . 72 . Folsch , H . , Ohno , H . , Bonifacino , J . S . & Mellman , I . A novel clathrin adaptor complex mediates basolateral targeting in polarized epithelial cells . Cell 99 , 189 – 198 ( 1999 ) . Reports the characterization of an epithelial adaptor for basolateral sorting signals . Provides a review of the basolateral signal subfield . 73 . Simmen , T . , Honing , S . , Icking , A . , Tikkanen , R . & Hunziker , W . AP - 4 binds basolateral signals and participates in basolateral sorting in epithelial MDCK cells . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 154 – 159 ( 2002 ) . 74 . Ohno , H . et al . Mu1B , a novel adaptor medium chain expressed in polarized epithelial cells . FEBS Lett . 449 , 215 – 220 ( 1999 ) . 75 . Gan , Y . , McGraw , T . E . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . The epithelial - specific adaptor AP1B mediates post - endocytic recycling to the basolateral membrane . Nature Cell Biol . 8 , 605 – 609 ( 2002 ) . Shows that two different forms of the AP1 adaptor localize to different organelles and that AP1B controls basolateral sorting in endosomes . 76 . Folsch , H . , Pypaert , M . , Maday , S . , Pelletier , L . & Mellman , I . The AP - 1A and AP - 1B clathrin adaptor complexes define biochemically and functionally distinct membrane domains . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 351 – 362 ( 2003 ) . 77 . Futter , C . E . , Connolly , C . N . , Cutler , D . F . & Hopkins , C . R . Newly synthesized transferrin receptors can be detected in the endosome before they appear on the cell surface . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 10999 – 11003 ( 1995 ) . 78 . Orzech , E . , Cohen , S . , Weiss , A . & Aroeti , B . Interactions between the exocytic and endocytic pathways in polarized Madin – Darby canine kidney cells . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 15207 – 15219 ( 2000 ) . 79 . Wang , Y . J . et al . Phosphatidylinositol 4 phosphate regulates targeting of clathrin adaptor AP - 1 complexes to the Golgi . Cell 114 , 299 – 310 ( 2003 ) . 80 . Nishimura , N . , Plutner , H . , Hahn , K . & Balch , W . E . The δ subunit of AP - 3 is required for efficient transport of VSV - G from the trans - Golgi network to the cell surface . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 6755 – 6760 ( 2002 ) . 81 . Futter , C . E . et al . In polarized MDCK cells basolateral vesicles arise from clathrin – γ - adaptin - coated domains on endosomal tubules . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 611 – 623 ( 1998 ) . 82 . Musch , A . Microtubule organization and function in epithelial cells . Traffic 5 , 1 – 9 ( 2004 ) . 83 . Allan , V . J . , Thompson , H . M . & McNiven , M . A . Motoring around the Golgi . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , E236 – E242 ( 2002 ) . 84 . Hirschberg , K . et al . Kinetic analysis of secretory protein traffic and characterization of Golgi to plasma membrane transport intermediates in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1485 – 1503 ( 1998 ) . 85 . Toomre , D . , Keller , P . , White , J . , Olivo , J . C . & Simons , K . Dual - color visualization of trans - Golgi network to plasma membrane traffic along microtubules in living cells . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 21 – 33 ( 1999 ) . 86 . Kreitzer , G . , Marmorstein , A . , Okamoto , P . , Vallee , R . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Kinesin and dynamin are required for post - Golgi transport of a plasma - membrane protein . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 125 – 127 ( 2000 ) . 87 . Keller , P . , Toomre , D . , Diaz , E . , White , J . & Simons , K . Multicolour imaging of post - Golgi sorting and trafficking in live cells . Nature Cell Biol 3 , 140 – 149 ( 2001 ) . 88 . Kreitzer , G . et al . Three - dimensional analysis of post - Golgi carrier exocytosis in epithelial cells . Nature Cell Biol . 5 , 126 – 136 ( 2003 ) . Reports live - cell - imaging studies that show the relocation of exocytosis sites when MDCK cells polarize . Basolateral exocytosis localizes to the junctional area . 89 . Jacob , R . & Naim , H . Y . Apical membrane proteins are transported in distinct vesicular carriers . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1444 – 1450 ( 2001 ) . 90 . Noda , Y . et al . KIFC3 , a microtubule minus end - directed motor for the apical transport of annexin XIIIb - associated Triton - insoluble membranes . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 77 – 88 ( 2001 ) . 91 . Stammes , M . Regulating the actin cytoskeleton during vesicular transport . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 , 428 – 433 ( 2002 ) . 92 . Musch , A . , Cohen , D . , Kreitzer , G . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Cdc42 regulates the exit of apical and basolateral proteins from the trans - Golgi network . EMBO J . 20 , 2171 – 2179 ( 2001 ) . 93 . Durrbach , A . , Raposo , G . , Tenza , D . , Louvard , D . & Coudrier , E . Truncated brush border myosin I affects membrane traffic in polarized epithelial cells . Traffic 1 , 411 – 424 ( 2000 ) . 94 . Sheff , D . R . , Kroschewski , R . & Mellman , I . Actin dependence of polarized receptor recycling in Madin – Darby canine kidney cell endosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 262 – 275 ( 2002 ) . 95 . Hales , C . M . , Vaerman , J . P . & Goldenring , J . R . Rab11 family interacting protein 2 associates with Myosin Vb and regulates plasma membrane recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 50415 – 50421 ( 2002 ) . 96 . Musch , A . , Cohen , D . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Myosin II is involved in the production of constitutive transport vesicles from the trans - Golgi network . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 291 – 306 ( 1997 ) . 97 . Orth , J . D . & McNiven , M . A . Dynamin at the actin – membrane interface . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 31 – 39 ( 2003 ) . 98 . Galli , T . et al . A novel tetanus neurotoxin - insensitive vesicle - associated membrane protein in SNARE complexes of the apical plasma membrane of epithelial cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 1437 – 1448 ( 1998 ) . 99 . Low , S . H . et al . The SNARE machinery is involved in apical plasma membrane trafficking in MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 1503 – 1513 ( 1998 ) . 100 . Low , S . H . et al . Differential localization of syntaxin isoforms in polarized Madin – Darby canine kidney cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 7 , 2007 – 2018 ( 1996 ) . 101 . Lafont , F . et al . Raft association of SNAP receptors acting in apical trafficking in Madin – Darby canine kidney cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 3734 – 3738 ( 1999 ) . 102 . Riento , K . , Kauppi , M . , Keranen , S . & Olkkonen , V . M . Munc18 - 2 , a functional partner of syntaxin 3 , controls apical membrane trafficking in epithelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 13476 – 13483 ( 2000 ) . 103 . Lafont , F . , Lecat , S . , Verkade , P . & Simons , K . Annexin XIIIb associates with lipid microdomains to function in apical delivery . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 1413 – 1427 ( 1998 ) . 104 . Jacob , R . et al . Annexin II is required for apical transport in polarized epithelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 3680 – 3684 ( 2004 ) . 105 . Thurmond , D . C . & Pessin , J . E . Discrimination of GLUT4 vesicle trafficking from fusion using a temperature - sensitive Munc18c mutant . EMBO J . 19 , 3565 – 3575 ( 2000 ) . 106 . Musch , A . et al . Mammalian homolog of Drosophila tumor suppressor lethal ( 2 ) giant larvae interacts with basolateral exocytic machinery in Madin – Darby canine kidney cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 158 – 168 ( 2002 ) . 107 . Lipschutz , J . H . & Mostov , K . E . Exocytosis : the many masters of the exocyst . Curr . Biol . 12 , R212 – R214 ( 2002 ) . 108 . Grindstaff , K . et al . Sec6 / 8 complex is recruited to cell – cell contacts and specifies transport vesicle delivery to the basal – lateral membrane in epithelial cells . Cell 93 , 731 – 740 ( 1998 ) . Reports a key role for exocyst in basolateral targeting . 109 . Yeaman , C . , Grindstaff , K . , Wright , J . & Nelson , W . Sec 6 / 8 complexes on trans - Golgi network and plasma membrane regulate late stages of exocytosis in mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 593 – 604 ( 2001 ) . 110 . Yeaman , C . et al . Protein kinase D regulates basolateral membrane protein exit from trans - Golgi network . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 106 – 112 ( 2004 ) . 111 . Moskalenko , S . et al . The exocyst is a Ral effector complex . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 66 – 72 ( 2002 ) . 112 . Ang , A . , Fölsch , H . , Koivisto , U . , Pypaert , M . & Mellman , I . The Rab8 GTPase selectively regulates AP - 1B - dependent basolateral transport in polarized Madin – Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 339 – 350 ( 2003 ) . 113 . Huber , L . A . et al . Rab8 , a small GTPase involved in vesicular traffic between the TGN and the basolateral plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 35 – 45 ( 1993 ) . 114 . Louvard , D . Apical membrane aminopeptidase appears at site of cell – cell contact in cultured kidney epithelial cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 77 , 4132 – 4136 ( 1980 ) . 115 . Kroschewski , R . , Hall , A . & Mellman , I . Cdc42 controls secretory and endocytic transport to the basolateral plasma membrane of MDCK cells . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 8 – 13 ( 1999 ) . 116 . Cohen , D . , Musch , A . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Selective control of basolateral membrane protein polarity by cdc42 . Traffic 2 , 556 – 564 ( 2001 ) . 117 . Gonzalez - Mariscal , L . , Chavez de Ramirez , B . & Cereijido , M . Tight - junction formation in cultured epithelial cells ( MDCK ) . J . Membr . Biol . 86 , 113 – 125 ( 1985 ) . 118 . Ojakian , G . K . , Nelson , W . J . & Beck , K . A . Mechanisms for de novo biogenesis of an apical membrane compartment in groups of simple epithelial cells surrounded by extracellular matrix . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 2781 – 2794 ( 1997 ) . 119 . Vega Salas , D . E . , Salas , P . J . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Modulation of the expression of an apical plasma membrane protein of Madin – Darby canine kidney epithelial cells : cell – cell interactions control the appearance of a novel intracellular storage compartment . J . Cell Biol . 104 , 1249 – 1259 ( 1987 ) . 120 . Low , S . H . et al . Intracellular redirection of plasma membrane trafficking after loss of epithelial cell polarity . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 3045 – 3060 ( 2000 ) . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 6 | MARCH 2005 | 247 R E V I E W S 121 . Cohen , D . , Brennwald , P . , Rodriguez - Boulan , E . & Musch , A . Mammalian PAR - 1 determines epithelial lumen polarity by organizing the microtubule cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 717 – 728 ( 2004 ) . A kinase for microtubule - associated proteins is a key organizer of microtubules and lumen polarity in epithelial cells . 122 . Vega - Salas , D . E . , Salas , P . J . I . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Exocytosis of vacuolar apical compartment ( VAC ) : a cell – cell contact controlled mechanism for the establishment of the apical plasma membrane domain in epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 107 , 1717 – 1728 ( 1988 ) . 123 . Amerongen , H . M . , Mack , J . A . , Wilson , J . M . & Neutra , M . R . Membrane domains of intestinal epithelial cells : distribution of Na + , K + ATPase and the membrane skeleton in adult rat intestine during fetal development and after epithelial isolation . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 2129 – 2138 ( 1989 ) . 124 . Anderson , J . M . , Van Itallie , C . M . & Fanning , A . S . Setting up a selective barrier at the apical junction complex . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 140 – 145 ( 2004 ) . 125 . Benton , R . , Palacios , I . M . & Johnston , D . S . Drosophila 14 - 3 - 3 / PAR5 is an essential mediator of PAR - 1 function in axis formation . Dev . Cell 3 , 659 – 671 ( 2002 ) . 126 . Suzuki , A . et al . aPKC acts upstream of PAR - 1b in both the establishment and maintenance of mammalian epithelial polarity . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1425 – 1435 ( 2004 ) . 127 . Benton , R . & St Johnston , D . Drosophila PAR - 1 and 14 - 3 - 3 inhibit Bazooka / PAR - 3 to establish complementary cortical domains in polarized cells . Cell 115 , 691 – 704 ( 2003 ) . 128 . Hurd , T . W . et al . Phosphorylation - dependent binding of 14 - 3 - 3 to the polarity protein Par3 regulates cell polarity in mammalian epithelia . Curr . Biol . 13 , 2082 – 2090 ( 2003 ) . 129 . Macara , I . G . Par proteins : partners in polarization . Curr . Biol . 14 , R160 – R162 ( 2004 ) . 130 . Baas , A . et al . Complete polarization of single intestinal cells upon activation of LKB1 by Strad . Cell 116 , 457 – 466 ( 2004 ) . 131 . Cohen , D . , Rodriguez - Boulan , E . & Musch , A . Par - 1 promotes a hepatic mode of apical protein trafficking in MDCK cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 13792 – 13797 ( 2004 ) . 132 . Sargiacomo , M . , Lisanti , M . , Graeve , L . , Le Bivic , A . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Integral and peripheral protein compositions of the apical and basolateral membrane domains in MDCK cells . J . Memb . Biol . 107 , 277 – 286 ( 1989 ) . 133 . Le Bivic , A . , Real , F . X . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Vectorial targeting of apical and basolateral plasma membrane proteins in a human adenocarcinoma epithelial cell line . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 86 , 9313 – 9317 ( 1989 ) . 134 . Gravotta , D . , Adesnik , M . & Sabatini , D . D . Transport of influenza HA from the trans - Golgi network to the apical surface of MDCK cells permeabilized in their basolateral membranes : energy dependence and involvement of GTP - binding proteins . J . Cell Biol . 111 , 2893 – 2908 ( 1990 ) . 135 . Pimplikar , S . W . & Simons , K . Activators of protein kinase A stimulate apical but not basolateral transport in epithelial Madin – Darby canine kidney cells . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 19054 – 19059 ( 1994 ) . 136 . Simons , K . & Virta , H . Perforated MDCK cells support intracellular transport . EMBO J . 6 , 2241 – 2247 ( 1987 ) . 137 . Marmorstein , A . D . et al . Apical polarity of N - CAM and EMMPRIN in retinal pigment epithelium resulting from suppression of basolateral signal recognition . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 697 – 710 ( 1998 ) . 138 . Roush , D . L . , Gottardi , C . J . , Naim , H . Y . , Roth , M . G . & Caplan , M . J . Tyrosine - based membrane protein sorting signals are differentially interpreted by polarized Madin – Darby canine kidney and LLC - PK1 epithelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 26862 – 26869 ( 1998 ) . 139 . Casanova , J . E . , Mishumi , Y . , Ikehara , Y . , Hubbard , A . L . & Mostov , K . E . Direct apical sorting of rat liver dipeptidylpeptidase IV expressed in Madin – Darby kidney cells . J . Biol . Chem . 266 , 24428 – 24432 ( 1991 ) . 140 . Bonilha , V . L . , Marmorstein , A . D . , Cohen - Gould , L . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Apical sorting of hemagglutinin by transcytosis in retinal pigment epithelium . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 1717 – 1727 ( 1997 ) . 141 . Zurzolo , C . , Le Bivic , A . , Quaroni , A . , Nitsch , L . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Modulation of transcytotic and direct targeting pathways in a polarized thyroid cell line . EMBO J . 11 , 2337 – 2344 ( 1992 ) . 142 . Bartles , J . R . , Feracci , H . M . , Stieger , B . & Hubbard , A . L . Biogenesis of the rat hepatocyte plasma membrane in vivo : comparison of the pathways taken by apical and basolateral proteins using subcellular fractionation . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 1241 – 1251 ( 1987 ) . Identifies transcytosis as a primary mode of delivery of apical proteins in liver cells . 143 . Kipp , H . & Arias , I . M . Newly synthesized canalicular ABC transporters are directly targeted from the Golgi to the hepatocyte apical domain in rat liver . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 15917 – 15925 ( 2000 ) . 144 . Brown , D . A . & Rose , J . K . Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins to glycolipid enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface . Cell 68 , 533 – 544 ( 1992 ) . Showed that GPI - anchored proteins become lipid - raft - associated as they move into the Golgi complex . 145 . Shvartsman , D . E . , Kotler , M . , Tall , R . D . , Roth , M . G . & Henis , Y . I . Differently anchored influenza hemagglutinin mutants display distinct interaction dynamics with mutual rafts . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 879 – 888 ( 2003 ) . Reports the biophysical characterization of different types of lipid rafts and their possible role in apical targeting . 146 . Zurzolo , C . , van’t Hof , W . , van Meer , G . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . VIP21 / caveolin , glycosphingolipid clusters and the sorting of glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchored proteins in epithelial cells . EMBO J . 13 , 42 – 53 ( 1994 ) . 147 . Mays , R . W . et al . Hierarchy of mechanisms involved in generating Na / K - ATPase polarity in MDCK epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 130 , 1105 – 1115 ( 1995 ) . 148 . Keller , P . & Simons , K . Cholesterol is required for surface transport of influenza virus hemagglutinin . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 1357 – 1367 ( 1998 ) . 149 . van Meer , G . , Stelzer , E . H . , Wijnaendts - van - Resandt , R . W . & Simons , K . Sorting of sphingolipids in epithelial ( Madin – Darby canine kidney ) cells . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 1623 – 1635 ( 1987 ) . 150 . van Helvoort , A . et al . MDR1 P - glycoprotein is a lipid translocase of broad specificity , while MDR3 P - glycoprotein specifically translocates phosphatidylcholine . Cell 87 , 507 – 517 ( 1996 ) . 151 . Nabi , I . R . , Le Bivic , A . , Fambrough , D . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . An endogenous MDCK lysosomal membrane glycoprotein is targeted basolaterally before delivery to lysosomes . J . Cell Biol . 115 , 1573 – 1584 ( 1991 ) . 152 . Harter , C . & Mellman , I . Transport of the lysosomal membrane glycoprotein lgp120 ( lgp - A ) to lysosomes does not require appearance on the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 117 , 311 – 325 ( 1992 ) . 153 . Apodaca , G . , Katz , L . A . & Mostov , K . E . Receptor - mediated transcytosis of IgA in MDCK cells is via apical recycling endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 67 – 86 ( 1994 ) . 154 . Bruns , J . , Ellis , M . , Jeromin , A . & Weisz , O . A . Multiple roles for phosphatidylinositol 4 - kinase in biosynthetic transport in polarized MDCK cells . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 2012 – 2018 ( 2002 ) . 155 . Verges , M . et al . The mammalian retromer regulates transcytosis of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 763 – 769 ( 2004 ) . 156 . Carreno , S . , Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Zhang , C . X . , McDonald , K . L . & Drubin , D . G . Actin dynamics coupled to clathrin - coated vesicle formation at the trans - Golgi network . J . Cell Biol . 165 , 781 – 788 ( 2004 ) . 157 . Casanova , J . E . et al . Association of Rab25 and Rab11a with the apical recycling system of polarized Madin – Darby canine kidney cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 47 – 61 ( 1999 ) . 158 . Yeaman , C . , Grindstaff , K . K . & Nelson , W . J . Mechanism of recruiting Sec6 / 8 ( exocyst ) complex to the apical junctional complex during polarization of epithelial cells . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 559 – 570 ( 2004 ) . 159 . Bacallao , R . et al . The subcellular organization of Madin – Darby canine kidney cells during the formation of a polarized epithelium . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 2817 – 2832 ( 1989 ) . Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge the support of the National Institutes of Health ( E . R . - B . ) , a Jules and Doris Stein Professorship from the Research to Prevent Blindness Foundation ( E . R . - B . ) and a Career Development Award from the American Heart Association ( A . M . ) . We are grateful to A . Gonzalez , T . McGraw , J . Nelson and V . Malhotra for useful comments on the manuscript . Our goal to cite mostly primary references is not free of arbitrariness given the limited number of references allowed by the format of the review and the rapid growth of the field . We apologize that several excellent papers could not be cited individually and could only be discussed indirectly or through reviews . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . Online links DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : Swiss - Prot : http : / / us . expasy . org / sprot / annexin 13b | µ 1B | caveolin - 1 | Cdc42 | GFP | HA | KIFC3 | LDL receptor | p75NTR | PAR1 | PAR3 | Rab8 | Rab11 | RalA | rhodopsin | SNAP23 | STRAD | TCTEX | ti - VAMP | VIP - 36 | VSVG Access to this links box is available online .