Association of Type 3 Protein Kinase C with Focal Contacts in Rat Embryo Fibroblasts Susan Jaken , * Karen Leach , * and Theresa Klauck * * w . Alton Jones Cell Science Center , Inc . , Lake Placid , New York 12946 ; and * The Upjohn Co . , Kalamazoo , Michigan 49001 Abstract . We have used immunocytofluorescence tech - niques to determine the subcellular distribution of the Ca 2 + , phospholipid - dependent protein kinase , protein kinase C ( PKC ) . Using monoclonal antibodies that are specific for Type 3 ( or ) PKC , we have determined that there are least two pools of PKC in normal rat embryo fibroblasts ( REF52 cells ) : diffuse cytoplasmic and fiber - associated . Extraction with chelators and de - tergent before fixing and staining removes the cyto - plasmic PKC . The fiber - associated staining remains in these cytoskeleton preparations . The cytoskeleton Type 3 PKC staining closely resembles that of the fo - cal contact protein vinculin and coiocalizes with an - other focal contact protein , talin . Cytochalasin , but not colchicine , coordinately disrupts the staining pattern of vinculin and PKC . Activation of PKC by treatment with phorbol esters causes depolymerization of mi - crofilaments and reorganization of vinculin staining . We propose that Type 3 PKC is a modulatory compo - nent of the focal contact and has a primary role in regulation of the association of microfilament bundles with the plasma membrane . ROTEIN kinase C ( PKC ) ' , the Ca 2÷ and phospholipid - dependent kinase is recognized to be a key regulatory enzyme . Several growth factors and hormones which are essential for normal cell growth and differentiated func - tion regulate the activation state of PKC ( 26 ) . This is due to their ability to stimulate phospholipase C activity , and conse - quently , to increase cellular diacylglycerol , an endogenous regulator of PKC . Tumor - promoting phorbol esters mimic diacylglycerol ; they also bind and activate PKC ( 7 , 25 ) . Therefore , prolonged activation of PKC by phorbol esters , which is used in tumor promotion protocols , is thought to play a major role in tumorigenesis . These data demonstrate the importance of PKC both in normal cell function and in carcinogenesis . These results , which underscore the key regulatory role of PKC , have led to efforts to identify substrates for PKC which are relevant to the observed biological responses . Identifica - tion of specific substrates has been complicated both by the demonstration that many proteins can serve as PKC sub - strates in vitro and by the lack of specific PKC inhibitors . Furthermore , because phorbol esters and PKC activation have been linked to a wide variety of biological responses , it has been difficult to distinguish between primary and sec - ondary effects of PKC action ( 26 ) . PKC is now recognized to be a group of enzymes encoded by a family of genes ( reviewed in reference 27 ) . If the iso - zymes have different substrate specificities , then PKC hetero - geneity may also complicate identification of PKC sub - strates . Although little data exist to directly compare isozyme 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : CSK , cytoskeleton ; PDBu , phorbol dibutyrate ; PKC , protein kinase C . substrate specificities , evidence for differential ability to phosphorylate the EGF receptor has been presented ( 14 ) . Subtle differences in cofactor requirements among the iso - zymes have also been reported ( 16 , 31 ) . However , it is not yet known if biochemical differences in cofactor requirements contribute to differential isozyme activation . Clearly , type - specific reagents , such as mAbs , are required to address questions regarding the role of individual isozymes in spe - cific biological processes . Using biochemical fractionation techniques , PKC is found in both the soluble and particulate fractions . Activation with growth factors or hormones causes redistribution to the par - ticulate fraction ( 11 , 19 ) . Presumably , membrane association , which implies proximity with the activating phospholipids , is required for PKC activity ( 26 ) . We have considered that the primary targets for phosphorylation by activated PKC would be concentrated in proximity to the membrane - associ - ated PKC . The nature of the components of the particulate fraction with which PKC associates has not yet been de - scribed . We have , therefore , directed our efforts towards identifying the membrane association sites of PKC . To accomplish this goal , we have developed highly specific mAbs to Type 3 PKC ( 21 ) , the most widely expressed iso - zyme ( 18 ) . We now report the use of these mAbs for immu - nocytochemical localization of Type 3 PKC . Our results sug - gest that there are several pools of Type 3 PKC in normal rat embryo fibroblasts ( REF52 cells ) . A substantial fraction of Type 3 PKC is a component of the focal contact , the specialized area of the cytoskeleton ( CSK ) that mediates at - tachment of the microfilaments with the plasma membrane ( 6 , 9 ) . Furthermore , our results indicate that activation of PKC by treating cells with phorbol dibutyrate ( PDBu ) , © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 89 / 08 / 697 / 8 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 109 , August 1989 697 - 704 697 causes disruption of microfilament organization . Thus , PKC appears to be spatially located to phosphorylate proteins that are important in regulating CSK structure . Materials and Methods lmmunochemical Reagents All anti - CSK antibodies were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co . ( St . Louis , MO ) except for antitubulin which was obtained from Southern Bio - technology Associates ( Birmingham , AL ) . Rhodamine - conjugated phal - Ioidin was purchased from Molecular Probes Inc . ( Junction City , OR ) . Fluorescein - and rhodamine - conjugated second antibodies were from Cap - pel Laboratories ( Malvern , PA ) . Alkaline phosphatase - conjugated antibod - ies and substrates were from Promega Biotec ( Madison , WI ) . Rabbit anti - talin antibody was a gift of Dr . Keith Burridge ( Chapel Hill , NC ) . Other Reagents Cytochalasin B , colchicine , and PDBu were all from Sigma Chemical Co . Triton X - 100 , Afli - gel 10 , and protein assay reagents were from Bio - Rad Laboratories ( Richmond , CA ) . All other reagents were of the highest qual - ity available . Cell Culture Rat embryo fibroblasts ( REF52 cells ) were used between passage 10 and 20 . Cells were grown in a 1 : 3 mixture of Ham ' s F - 12 and DME containing 10 % FBS . REF52 cells were originally obtained from Dr . D . B . McClure ( Eli Lilly and Co . , Indianapolis , IN ) . Antibodies to PKC The preparation and properties of the anti - Type 3 PKC mAb M6 used in these studies are described in reference 21 . This mAb is specific for Type 3 PKC ; it does not recognize Type 1 or 2 PKC . The epitope recognized is within the catalytic domain . Preparation of CSKs Cells grown on coverslips were washed twice in modified microtubule stabilization buffer without GTP and with glycerol instead of polyethylene - glycol as described by Osborn and Weber ( 28 ) . Soluble proteins were ex - tracted during a 5 - rain incubation in microtubule stabilization buffer con - taining 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 , 10 / tg / ml leupeptin , and 10 ttg / ml agrotinin . After washing twice in microtubule stabilization buffer , samples were fixed and stained as described for whole cells . lmmunofluorescence Protocol Cells were grown on 12 - ram glass coverslips . Cells or CSKs were washed twice with PBS , then fixed for 10 min at room temperature in 4 % formalde - hyde in PBS . After washing twice with PBS , cells were permeabilized for 5 rain in PBS containing 0 . 2 % TritonX - 100 and finally washed twice with PBS . Staining was performed by incubating for 1 h in first antibody diluted in PBS containing 10 mg / ml BSA ( PBA ) , washing , then incubating in rhodamine - or fluorescein - conjugated second antibody diluted in PBA ( 1 : 300 ) for I h . M6 was used at a 1 : 20 dilution . Rhodamine - conjugated phal - Ioidin was used at 1 : 40 dilution in PBA . Coverslips were viewed on a Zeiss Axioplan microscope with a 63 x objective . Photomicrographs were taken on Kodak T Max 400 film using 8 - 15 - s exposure times for PKC stained samples . Immunoblot Analysis CSKs were prepared from cells grown in 35 - ram dishes as described above . CSK protein , which remained on the dish , was collected by scraping into PAPA ( 50 mM Tris - Cl , pH 7 . 4 , 0 . 15 M NaCI , 1 mM EDTA , 1 % deoxycho - late , 1 % Triton X - 100 , and 0 . 1 % SDS ) . Protein from both the soluble and CSK fractions was precipitated with chloroform and methanol as described by Wessel and Fliigge ( 33 ) . Samples were resuspended in 80 ml of Laemmli sample preparation buffer ( 20 containing 5 % fl - mercaptoethanol for SDS - PAGE and subsequent transfer to nitrocellulose . Equal aliquots ( 30 td ) were applied to the gel . Immunoblots were blocked with 5 % instant nonfat milk in TBS ( 50 mM Tris - CI containing 0 . 5 M NaCI ) , incubated in M6 diluted in TBA ( TBS containing 1 % BSA ) , and finally in alkaline phosphatase - con - jugated goat anti - mouse lgG diluted in TBA . At least tv ~ washes in TBS were included between each incubation . Color was developed according to the manufacturer ' s procedures . Preparation of PKC - absorbed Antibody Solution PKC was purified as described ( 16 ) with the addition of a phenyI - Sepharose column . Approximately 5 mg of PKC isozyme mixture of > 90 % purity was coupled to Afli - gel 10 according to the manufacturer ' s instructions . Condi - tioned medium from the hybridoma culture was concentrated by ammonium sulfate , dialyzed against PBS , and applied to the PKC - aflinity column equilibrated in PBS . The column flow through was collected . The starting material was diluted to adjust the protein concentration to that of the nonad - sorbed column flow through . We verified that the column flow through was depleted of anti - PKC mAb relative to the starting material by dot blots with purified Type 3 PKC . Protein was measured by the method of Bradford ( 3 ) . Results l ~ pe 3 PKC lmmunofluorescence in Whole Cells and CSKs Subconfluent REF52 cells were fixed , permeabilized , stained with the anti - catalytic domain , Type 3 PKC specifc mAb M6 and finally , with fluorescein - conjugated second antibody ( Fig . 1 ) . Diffuse cytoplasmic as well as nuclear staining was apparent . Some of the extranuclear staining appeared to line up on fibers in an arrowhead pattern . The specificity of the staining was demonstrated in several ways . First , fluores - cence was diminished if M6 was omitted . Some nuclear stain - ing was observed in these minus M6 controls , however . Therefore , although nuclear staining appears brighter in samples incubated with M6 , it is difficult for us to evaluate specific nuclear staining in these preparations . Second , fluo - rescence was greatly diminished if the M6 solution was first passed over a PKC affinity column . Third , immunoblots of cell lysates stained with M6 revealed only one major immu - noreactive band of 82 kD which comigrated with purified brain Type 3 PKC ( data not shown , but see Fig . 3 ) . The fiber - associated staining pattern suggested that some of the Type 3 PKC may be associated with CSK components . We , therefore , prepared CSKs by extracting soluble compo - nents with chelator and detergent . The CSKs were then fixed and stained as described for whole cells . The diffuse back - ground fluorescence observed in whole cells is not apparent in the CSK preparations ( Fig . 2 ) . However , much of the fiber - associated staining remains . We used immunoblots to identify the immunoreactive spe - cies associated with the CSKs ( Fig . 3 ) . Both the soluble and CSK fractions contained mainly 82 - kD PKC as the major immunoreactive species . A higher molecular mass cross - reactive species was also found in the soluble fraction . Pretreatment of the cells with PDBu for 10 min before prepa - ration of the CSKs did not substantially alter the distribution of Type 3 PKC between the soluble and CSK fractions . Comparison of PKC Staining with CSK Protein Staining Patterns To determine to what CSK compartment PKC is associated , we compared the PKC staining pattern to that of known CSK proteins using available antisera . Type 3 PKC staining was decidedly different from the microfilament staining ob - served with phalloidin , the intermediate filament staining The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 109 , 1989 698 Figure L Type 3 PKC immunofluorescence in whole cells . REF52 cells ( A - C ) were fixed and stained as described in Materials and Methods . The first antibodies used were as follows : A , M6 ; B , minus first antibody control ; C , PKC - absorbed M6 control . observed with antivimentin , and the microtubule staining observed with antitubulin ( Fig . 4 ) . PKC staining was also different from that of the actin - binding proteins a - actinin , spectrin , filamin , and tropomyosin . However , Type 3 PKC staining was very similar to that of the focal contact protein , vinculin . Double immunofluorescence with M6 and rabbit antibody to another focal contact protein , talin ( 5 ) demon - strates that staining patterns for Type 3 PKC and talin within the same cell are very similar ( Fig . 5 ) . In both cases , short strips of intense fluorescence were found throughout the cytoplasm . Nuclear staining is much more apparent with M6 than with vinculin or talin . The similarity in distribution of PKC with vinculin and ta - lin indicates that PKC is also a component of the focal con - tact . In addition to its localization in the focal contact , talin has also been reported in ruffling membranes and at the lead - ing edges of cells ( 5 ) . It is therefore , possible that Type 3 PKC may also be found in other CSK structures . Some evi - dence for this can be seen in Fig . 5 ( top ) in which fibrils Figure 2 . Type 3 PKC immunofluorescence in CSKs . Whole cells ( A ) or CSKs ( B ) were fixed and stained with M6 . l ~ gure 3 . Immunoblot of REF - 52 cell fractions . Preparation of samples and immunoblot - ting protocol is described in Materials and Methods . Where indicated , cells were treated with PDBu ( 100 ng / ml ) for 10 min at 37 ° . The soluble ( SOL ) and cytoskeletal ( CSK ) frac - tions from control ( - ) and PDBu - treated ( + ) cultures were analyzed with M6 . Jaken et al . lmr ~ unocytochemical Localization of PKC 699 Figure 4 . Immunofluorescence of CSK proteins in REF52 cells . CSKs were prepared , fixed , and stained as described in Materials and Methods . The first antibodies were directed against the follow - ing proteins : A , vinculin ; B , oeac - tinin ; C , spectrin ; D , vimentin ; E tropomyosin ; G , filamin ; H , Tu - bulin . In E , the CSKs were stained with rhodamine - phalloidin . staining for both PKC and talin appear to be above the nu - cleus , and therefore , cannot be at the substrate adhesion site . Effects of CSK - aitering Drugs on ~ pe 3 PKC Staining REF52 cells were treated with drugs that depolymerize spe - cific CSK filaments to determine if PKC is directly asso - ciated with microfilaments or microtubules ( Fig . 5 ) . Col - chicine caused depolymerization of microtubules without affecting the microfilaments ( as observed with phalloidin staining ) . Colchicine did not significantly affect either PKC or vinculin staining . This demonstrates that PKC in the CSK is not associated with microtubules . Treatment of REF52 cells with cytochalasin B caused marked disruption of microfilaments without disturbing mi - crotubules ( Fig . 6 ) . Cytochalasin decreased the quantity and size of the stress fibers observed with phalloidin . In addition , some completely depolymerized actin dots were found . Cy - tochalasin also changed vinculin and PKC staining patterns . In both cases , the fiber - associated staining was lost . Very short , thin , and disordered remnants of the fibers could be seen throughout the cytoplasm . An intense staining at the rim of the cells was also observed . The coordinate changes in vinculin and PKC staining with cytochalasin - treatment indi - cate that PKC and vinculin share a common subcellular lo - calization . Effects of Phorbol - Ester Treatment on Fluorescent Staining Patterns The similar staining patterns observed for Type 3 PKC and the focal contact proteins , vinculin and talin , along with the The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 109 , 1989 700 Figure 5 . Colocalization of ot - PKC and talin in REF52 cells . CSKs were prepared , fixed , and stained as described in Materials and Methods . Preparations were sequentially incubated with M6 , rabbit antiserum to talin , and a mixture of TRITC - conjugated anti - rabbit and FITC - conjugated anti - mouse antibodies . Bar , 16 # m . Figure 6 . Effect of CSK - interacting drugs on PKC and vinculin staining patterns . Cells were treated with nothing ( control ) , cytochalasin B ( 1 # g / ml ) , or colchicine ( 1 # g / ml ) for 18 h . CSKs were then prepared , fixed , and stained as described in Materials and Methods . Jaken et al . lmmunocytochemical Localization of PKC 701 Figure 7 . Effect of PDBu on PKC , vinculin , and microfilaments . Cells were treated without or with PDBu ( 100 ng / ml ) for 10 min at 37°C . CSKs were prepared , fixed , and stained as described in Materials and Methods . Similar effects were observed in whole cell preparations . cytochalasin experiments indicate that PKC is associated with focal contacts . Consequently , activation of PKC by treating cells with phorbol esters might lead to phosphoryla - tion events that are important for regulating focal contact and / or microfilament structure . In fact , treatment of REF52 cells with PDBu causes a rapid depolymerization of micro - filaments ( Fig . 7 ) . Actin bundles are less numerous and thin - ner . In some areas , complete depolymerization is seen . In PDBu - treated cells , vinculin staining in the cell interior is as - sociated with shorter fibers and becomes disorganized . The staining no longer lines up in a parallel pattern . Effects on staining at the cell periphery are not as readily apparent . In PDBu - treated cells , changes in PKC staining paralleled those observed for vinculin . Discussion Cellular mechanisms for regulating the activation state of PKC are not clearly understood . In resting cells , PKC is found largely in the soluble fraction . Activation of PKC is associated with redistribution to the insoluble fraction ( 19 ) . The insoluble components with which PKC associates are undefined . Several lines of evidence suggest that interaction of PKC with the CSK is a likely candidate for regulating the partitioning of PKC between soluble and pelletable frac - tions . First , many CSK proteins are known to be good PKC substrates . These include several proteins associated with the actin cytoskeleton such as vinculin ( 32 ) , filamin ( 17 ) , profilin ( 12 ) , and red cell band 4 . 1 ( 23 ) . Phosphorylation of the inter - mediate filament protein , desmin , by PKC inhibits its ability to polymerize ( 15 ) . Phosphorylation of the microtubule - associated protein MAP2 by PKC reduced its ability to inter - act with actin ( 1 ) . PKC activation has also been associated with phosphorylation of the nuclear membrane protein , lam - in B ( 8 , 13 ) . Second , phorbol esters cause morphological changes , which are likely a consequence of effects on CSK organization , in a variety of cells . Third , using biochemical techniques , Papadapoulos et al . demonstrated that PKC mem - brane association is chelator - and detergent - stable ( 27a ) . These are conditions similar to those we have used to prepare The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 109 , 1989 702 CSKs from REF52 cells . Fourth , Wolf and Sahyoun found evidence that PKC may associate with detergent - insoluble CSK proteins using an overlay technique ( 34 ) . We have ex - tended these results using immunocytochemical techniques to demonstrate that the most widely expressed PKC isozyme , Type 3 ( c0 , is in the CSK of REF52 cells . Furthermore , we were able to determine that a substantial portion of Type 3 PKC is concentrated in the specialized area of the CSK known as the focal contact . " Focal contacts are the specialized area of the cell that mediate attachment to the extracellular matrix ( for reviews , see references 6 and 9 ) . In this region , several proteins , in - cluding vinculin , talin , integrin , and c ~ actinin mediate the attachment of microfilament bundles to the plasma mem - brane . Several less abundant proteins which may serve regu - latory functions , have also been localized to this area , includ - ing calpain II ( 2 ) and the tyrosine kinases pp60src ( 29 ) , p120 gag - abl ( 30 ) , and p90 gag - yes ( 10 ) . In addition , immunocy - tochemical studies using anti - phosphotyrosine antibodies indicate that tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins are also en - riched in this area ( 24 ) . Our data demonstrate that PKC Type 3 is also found in this region . Taken together , these data strongly suggest that the focal contact is not merely a struc - tural link between the CSK , plasma membrane , and the ex - tracellular matrix . Instead it appears to be a highly dynamic structure which functions in communication between the cell and the extracellular environment . Vinculin , talin , and integrin play a functional role in at - tachment of microfilament bundles to the plasma membrane ( 6 ) . There is evidence that each of these may be a PKC sub - strate ( 4 , 6 , 32 ) . Our data demonstrate that one consequence of PKC activation in these cells involves reorganization of vinculin and depolymerization of actin . Our working hy - pothesis to explain these results is that PKC is a regulatory component of the focal contact . In resting cells , PKC is inac - tive . Upon stimulation with phorbol ester , PKC is activated and phosphorylates proteins that are important for stabiliza - tion of the microfilament - membrane interaction . This leads to depolymerization of the actin filaments , as well as deterio - ration of the adhesion plaque . This model allows us to postu - late that proteins that mediate plasma membrane association of microfilaments are important PKC substrates , and allows us to design experimental approaches to determine which of these may be the primary targets for Type 3 PKC phosphory - lation events . More importantly , these results provide a framework for understanding the multitude of phorbol es - ter - directed responses including changes in morphology , CSK organization , and adhesiveness ( 26 ) . Our data indicate that other pools of Type 3 PKC are also present in REF52 cells . In the accompanying article in which we have studied Type 3 PKC localization in 3T3 cells ( 22 ) , several pools were also apparent including diffuse cytoplas - mic , CSK , and nuclear . Because both studies used highly specific mAbs to Type 3 PKC , a direct comparison of the two cell types can be made , That is , our analysis is not compli - cated by the possibility that the mAbs are recognizing differ - ent PKC types in different cell lines . In 3T3 cells , the striking focal contact pattern observed in REF52 cells was not readily apparent . This difference may in part be due to the remark - ably well - organized CSK characteristic of the REF52 cells . Consequently , the concentration of Type 3 PKC in the focal contact may be easier to discern in these cells compared with others . The most notable feature of Type 3 PKC staining in the 3T3 cells was the redistribution to the nuclear envelope after phorbol ester treatment . This was not as readily ob - served in the REF52 cells . These differences indicate that Type 3 PKC has the potential for several different subcellular locations , and that individual cell type characteristics may influence the distribution . Such differences might stem from differences in the cellular Type 3 PKCs themselves , or to differences in the abundance of proteins with which Type 3 PKC associates . Further studies will address these issues . We have demonstrated PKC localization in focal contacts of REF52 cells and the nuclear envelope of 3T3 cells ( 22 ) . In spite of the specific differences , there is an underlying general theme in that Type 3 PKC is associated with CSK components in each cell line . More significantly , in each case , the association is with CSK structures that are of con - siderable importance in signal transduction and gene expres - sion . In the REF52 cells , we demonstrated an effect of PKC activation by PDBu on focal contact structure . If we may ex - trapolate from focal contacts a similar function for PKC in other subcellular locations , we may suggest that Type 3 PKC may also function in regulating the association of other CSK filaments with other membranes , including the nuclear mem - brane . Higher resolution such as that obtained with the elec - tron microscope will be used to address these issues . We thank Dr . Keith Burridge for providing the anti - talin antibody . This work is supported by Council for Tobacco Research grant 2375 and National Institutes of Health grant CA48137 . Received for publication 16 December 1988 and in revised form 17 April 1989 . References I . Akiyama , T . , E . Nishida , J . lshida , N . Sail , H . Ogawara , M . Hoshi , Y . Miyata , and H . Sakai . 1986 . Purified protein kinase C phosphorylates microtubule - associated protein 2 . J . Biol . Chem . 261 : 15648 - 1565 I . 2 . Beckerle , M . C . , K . Burridge , G . N . DeMartino , and D . E . Croall . 1987 . Colocalization of calcium - dependent protease II and one of its substrates at sites of cell adhesion . Cell . 51 : 569 - 577 . 3 . Bradford , M . M , 1976 . A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein dye binding . Anal . Biochem . 72 : 248 - 254 . 4 . Burn , P . , A . Kupfer , and S . J . Singer . 1988 . Dynamic membrane - cyto - skeletal interactions : specific association of integrin and talin arises in vivo after phorbol ester treatment of peripheral blood lymphocytes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 85 : 497 - 501 . 5 . Burridge , K . , L . Connell . 1983 . A new protein of adhesion plaques and ruffling membranes . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 359 - 367 . 6 . Burridge , K . , L . Molony , and T . Kelly . 1987 . Adhesion plaques : sites of transmembrane interaction between the ¢xtracellular matrix and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell . Sci . 8 ( suppl . ) : 211 - 229 . 7 . Castagna , M . , Y . Takai , K . Kaibuchi , K . Sano , U . Kikkawa , and Y . Nishizuka . 1982 . Direct activation of calcium - activated , phospholipid - dependent protein kinase by tumor - promoting phorbol esters . J . Biol . Chem . 257 : 7847 - 7851 . 8 . Fields , A . P . , G . R . Pettit , and W . S , May . 1988 . Phosphorylation oflamin B at the nuclear membrane by activated protein kinase C . J . Biol . Chem . 263 : 8253 - 8260 . 9 . Geiger , B . , T . Volk , T . Volberg , and R . Bendori . 1987 . Molecular interac - tions in adherens - type contacts . J . Cell . Sci . 8 ( suppl . ) : 251 - 272 . 10 . Gentry , L . E . , and L . R . Rohrschneider . 1984 . Common features of the yes and src gene products defined by peptide - specific antibodies . J . Virol . 51 : 539 - 546 . I I . Gopalakrishna , R . , S . H . Barsky , T . P . Thomas , and W . B . Anderson . 1986 . Factors influencing chelator - stable , detergent - extractable , phorbol diester - induced membrane association of protein kinase C . J . Biol . Chem . 261 : 16438 - 16445 . 12 . Hansson , A . , G . Skoglund , I . Lassing , U . Lindberg , and M . Ingleman - Sundberg . 1988 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 150 : 526 - 531 . 13 . Hornbeck , P . , K . P . Huang , and W . E . Paul . 1988 . Lamin B is rapidly phosphorylated in lymphocytes after activation of protein kinase C . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 85 : 2279 - 2283 . Jaken et al . lmmunocytochemical Localization of PKC 703 14 . ldo , M . , K . Sekiguchi , U . Kikkawa , and Y . Nishizuka . 1987 . Phosphoryla - tion of the EGF receptor from A431 epidermoid carcinoma cells by three distinct types of protein kinase C . FEBS ( Fed . Fur . Biol . Soc . ) Left . 219 : 215 - 218 . 15 . Inagaki , M . , Y . Gonda , M . Matsuyama , K . Nishizawa , Y . Nishi , and C . Sata . 1988 . Intermediate filament reconstitution in vitro . J . Biol . Chem . 263 : 5970 - 5978 . 16 . Jaken , S . , and S . C . Kiley . 1987 . Purification and characterization of three types of protein kinase C from rabbit brain cytosol . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 84 : 4418 - 4422 . 17 . Kawamoto , S . , and H . Hidaka . 1984 . Ca : + activated , phospholipid - depen - dent protein kinase catalyzes the phosphorylation of actin - binding pro - teins . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 118 : 736 - 742 . 18 . Kosaka , Y . , K . Ogita , K . Ase , H . Nomura , U . Kikkawa , and Y . Nishizuka . 1988 . The heterogeneity of protein kinase C in various rat tissues . Bio - chem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 151 : 973 - 981 . 19 . Kraft , A . , and W . B . Anderson . 1983 . Phorbol esters increase the amount of Ca 2 + , phospholipid - dependent protein kinase associated with the plas - ma membrane . Nature ( Lond . ) . 301 : 621 - 623 . 20 . Laemmli , U . K . 1970 . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage " 1 " 4 . Nature ( Lond . ) . 227 : 680 - 685 . 21 . I . each , K . L . , E . A . Powers , J . C . McGuire , L . Dong , S . C . Kiley , and S . Jaken . 1988 . Monoclonal antibodies specific for type 3 protein kinase C recognize distinct domains of protein kinase C and inhibit in vitro func - tional activity . J . Biol . Chem . 263 : 13223 - 13230 . 22 . Leach , K . L . , E . A . Powers , V . A . Ruff , S . Jaken , and S . Kaufman . 1989 . Type 3 protein kinase C localization to the nuclear envelope of phorbol ester - treated NIH 3T3 cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 685 - 695 . 23 . Ling , E . , Y . N . Danilov , and C . M . Cohen . 1988 . Modulation of red cell Band 4 . I Function by cAMP - dependent kinase and protein kinase C phos - phorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 263 : 2209 - 2216 . 24 . Maber , P . A . , E . B . Pasquale , J . Y . J . Wang , and S . J . Singer . 1985 . Phosphotyrosine - containing proteins are concentrated in focal adhesions and intracellular junctions in normal cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 82 : 6576 - 6580 . 25 . Niedel , J . E . , L . J . Kuhn , and G . R . Vandenbark . 1983 . Phorbol diester receptor copurifies with protein kinase C . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 80 : 36 - 40 . 26 . Nishizuka , Y . 1986 . Studies and perspectives on protein kinase C . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 233 : 305 - 311 . 27 . Nishizuka , Y . 1988 . The molecular heterogeneity of protein kinase C and its implications for cellular regulation . Nature ( Lond . ) . 334 : 661 - 665 . 27a . Papadapoulos , V . , and P . F . Hall . 1989 . Isolation and characterization of protein kinase C from Y - 1 adrenal cell cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 553 - 567 . 28 . Osboru , M . , and K . Weber . 1982 . Immunoltuorescence and immunocyto - chemical procedures . Methods Cell Biol . 24 : 97 - 132 . 29 . Rohrschneider , L . R . 1980 . Adhesion plagues of Rous sarcoma virus - transformed cells contain the src gene product . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 77 : 3514 - 3518 . 30 . Rohrschneider , L . R . , and L . M . Najita . 1984 . Detection of the v - abl gene product at cell - substratum contact sites in Abelson routine leukemia virus - transformed fibroblasts . J . Virol . 51 : 547 - 552 . 31 . Sekiguchi , K . , M . Tsukuda , K . Ase , U . Kikkawa , and Y . Nishizuka . 1988 . Mode of activation and kinetic properties of three distinct forms of protein kinase C from rat brain . J . Biochem . ( Tokyo ) . 103 : 759 - 765 . 32 . Werth , D . K . , and I . Pastan . 1984 . Vinculin phosphorylation in response to calcium and phorbol esters in intact cells . J . Biol . Chem . 259 : 5264 - 5270 . 33 . Wessel , D . , and U . I . Flfigge . 1984 . A method for the quantitative recovery of protein in dilute solution in the presence of detergent and lipids . Anal . Biochem . 138 : 141 - 143 . 34 . Wolf , M . , and N . Sahyoun . 1986 . Protein kinase C and phosphatidylserine bind to Mr 110 , 000 / 115 , 000 polypeptides enriched in cytoskeletai and postsynaptic density preparations . J . Biol . Chem . 261 : 13327 - 13332 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 109 , 1989 704