108 CULTURE SHOCK EXPERIENCED BY MAIN CHARACTER IN LAUREN KATE’S NOVEL “TORMENT” BY USING THE PSYCHOLOGY OF CULTURE SHOCK BY COLLEN WARD Syahruni Junaid Indah Pertiwi English and literature Department , adab and Humanities Faculty Alauddin Islamic State University of Makassar , Indonesia Email : syahruni . Junaid @ gmail . com Indahhhpertiwii606 @ yahoo . co . id _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Abstract This is a study which focuses on processes and affects of culture shock by main character in Lauren Kate’s novel “Torment” when she enters to new country through U - curve theory ( the psychology of culture shock ) by Collen Ward . The result shows that the phases of culture shock experienced by the main character are honeymoon , crisis , recovery and adjustment phase . There are two affects that is appeared through the phases of culture shock , they are the positive effects includes amazement , excitement , self confidence , good social interaction and life changes and negative effects including nervousness , fearness , confusion , feeling isolated and homesick . Keywords : Culture Shock , Psychology , Process , Affects Abstrak Culture Shock pada Pemeran Utama dalam Novel “Torment” karya Lauren Kate dengan Menggunakan Teori Psikologi Culture Shock oleh Collen Ward . Penelitian ini berfokus pada proses dan dampak dari culture shock yang dialami pemeran utama saat ia memasuki negara baru dalam novel “Torment” karya Lauren Kate . Penelitian ini menggunakan teori U - curve ( psikologi culture shock ) oleh Collen Ward . Hasil penelitian mengungkapkan bahwa tahapan culture shock yang dialami pemeran utama adalah tahap honeymoon , crisis , recovery dan adjustment . Kemudian ada dua dampak yang dialami , yaitu dampak positif terdiri atas amazement , excitement , self confidence , good social interaction and life changes ; dan dampak negatif yang terdiri dari nervousness , fearness , confusion , feeling isolated dan homesick . Kata kunci : Culture Shock , Psikologi , Proses , Dampak 109 INTRODUCTION Literature is one of important subject to learn because it implicates daily life through the experience of human that is represented by words that is written by an author . According to Aminuddin in Tahir ( 2013 : 1 ) , literature is the desirability of authors to reveal their existence as human that contains idea , thought and social life from their imagination by using language as medium . Through literature , persons can understand life that includes moral , culture , custom and social environment . As Harris ( 1999 : 19 ) stated that moral , culture and social life are completely human activity , which is retrieved by learning mind and behavior . From two statements above , the writer can consider that literature and culture have the same object that is human activity so that indirectly they have relationship each other . Literature in culture describes the society interact each other to form a custom , behavior and norm . They tend to appear their community differs from the others . As Keith ( 2011 : 4 ) defined culture as the notion of a group with shared behaviors , values , and beliefs that are passed from generation to generation . According to Haviland ( 1999 : 56 ) culture consists of the shared ideals , values , and beliefs members of a society to interpret experience and to generate behavior . Generally , every culture has different customs and behaviors that include domestic and foreign culture . They have their own rules which are different from other culture . As Mustari ( 1998 : 1 ) described that every country has its own uniqueness culture so that persons have to know about how to avoid the possible cultural problem . When someone is trying to communicate with people in different cultures and adjust the differences on them , it proves that the culture is studied . But there are some people will experience anxiety and discomfort when they enter to the new country that is different from their own country . One of the biggest worries is about how to communicate and to accept the custom . In addition , the physical and mental condition also will affect interaction process with them so that it will be possible to experience the culture shock . Oberg ( 1960 : 142 ) called culture shock as the anxiety that is resulted from losing all familiar signs and symbols of social intercourse . Meanwhile Novinger ( 2001 : 41 ) explained that interacting with a person from a foreign culture in the process of intercultural communication is often an unfamiliar experience . Torment is a novel which has full of anxiousness of main character . The novel has love and fantasy genre that makes this novel has its own uniqueness . It tells about the relationship between Daniel and Luce , but their love is accursed . Daniel sends Luce to new school at Shoreline in North California . It is the new country that makes her discomfort with the new condition . Therefore she experiences culture shock from Georgia to Shoreline . It is the first time Luce comes to California . During several time , she lives at Shoreline dormitory . She does not know how to interact with them because there are many different customs that is applied at Shoreline such as different dress , custom , scenery , physical appearance and social behavior . In addition , there are some rule and etiquette that must be committed obediently . She is very confused to receive some courses that have not taught before . So that it can affect her mental condition and make her feeling is homesick . However , she begins to adapt with the new condition around her . It makes the writer is interested in researching culture shock of main character . The problems of this research are : 1 . How does the main character experience culture shock in the novel Torment ? 2 . How does the culture shock affect main character in the novel Torment ? The writer knows that there are some aspects that might be analyzed in the literary work , but in this research , the writer just focuses on analyzing the culture shock , especially the 110 processes and the effects of cullture shock experienced by main character in the novel Torment by Lauren Kate . 1 . Interpretive Approach According to Martin and Nakayama ( 2010 : 327 ) , interpretive approach focuses on in - depth description of the adaptation process that often employs phenomenological perspective and emphasizes the complex and continuous nature of cultural adaptation . The researchers are using this approach to explore the essential structure of lived experience through systematic analysis of person’s observation . The lived experiences in the interpretive may come from social interaction as the part of phenomenology . As Wolff in Endraswara ( 2011 : 39 ) defined that phenomenology is start from meaning of the life . He said that individual is not alone in the world but shared with the others through social interaction , so that phenomenology cannot separated from social life . Interpretive approach is conducted from an experience perspective from encounters between domestic or overseas ( Institute of Public and International Affairs of The University of Utah , 2009 ) . 2 . Culture Shock a . Definition of Culture Shock The term of Culture Shock was first introduced by an anthropologist named Kalervo Oberg in the late 1950s . Oberg himself defined it as a " disease " that is inflicted by individuals who live in a new cultural environment . Culture shock is the individual’s anxiety as a result of the loss of cultural signs and symbols which are known in the social interaction , especially when a person lives in the new culture for long time ( Kristian , 2013 : 10 ) . Furthermore Eickelmann in Miller ( 2008 : 26 ) explained that culture shock has been a topic of research for over 30 years by European and American anthropologists and psychologists . It is usually used to describe the physical and emotional discomfort experienced when someone moves to a new environment . According to Kohls ( 2001 : 91 ) Culture shock is the term used to describe the reactions to the psychological disorientation that is experienced by most individual when they move for an extended period of time into a culture that is differs from their own . From definitions above , the writer can conclude that culture shock is the conditions that make persons anxiety , surprise , and confuse when they enter to new environment . Culture shock is the personal disorientation a person may feel when experiencing an immigration . b . Phases of Culture Shock Ward ( 2001 : 81 ) states that culture shock can be described as consisting of four distinct phases Adjustment . These phase are illustrated through theories depict how persons adapt to new cultural environment describes this theory based on research operated by Sverre Lysgaard , a Norwegian sociologist . 1 ) Honeymoon Phase The first stage always contains excitement , amazement and euphoria and that are called ‘Honeymoon’ it emphasis on the first reactions of fascination ( Ward , 2001 : 81 ) . person may feel when experiencing an unfamiliar way of life due to Phases of Culture Shock ( 2001 : 81 ) states that culture shock can be described as consisting of 111 four distinct phases : Honeymoon , Crisis , Recovery and Adjustment . These phase are illustrated through U - curve theory , where many theories depict how persons adapt to new cultural environment . describes this theory based on research operated by Sverre Lysgaard , a Norwegian sociologist who interviewed Norwegian students studying in the on the book Breaking through Culture Shock ( Marx , 1999 : 9 ) . Honeymoon Phase The first stage always contains excitement , amazement and euphoria and that are called ‘Honeymoon’ it emphasis on the first reactions of fascination ( Ward , 2001 : 81 ) . unfamiliar way of life due to ( 2001 : 81 ) states that culture shock can be described as : Honeymoon , Crisis , Recovery and theory , where many 2 ) Crisis Phase According to Ward ( 2001 : 81 ) , crisis is characterized by feelings of nervous with unfamiliar ways of custom and fear with some differences in new country . The differences might be come from some aspects of interaction with the host of country that include cross cultural differences in how people communicate . As Ward ( 2001 : 53 ) stated that there are consistent and systematic cultural differences in the way in which people send and receive information . When person from two different cultures meet , they will have difficulty in communicating with one another to the extent that their respective ‘codes’ differ . From the statement above , Ward ( 2001 : 53 ) divided cultural differences in how people communicate into etiquette , resolving conflict , and non - verbal communication . It may be good in one culture but nasty in others . Ward ( 2001 : 57 ) divided three elements of non - verbal communication include Mutual Gaze , Bodily Contact , Gesture ( Artifact and Physical Appearance ) . 3 ) Recovery Phase After some time , persons begin accustomed to the new culture and develop the daily routines . It is called Recovery . Recovery is the stage where persons will try to understand the culture in a new environment and to adapt the habits on the environment . As Ward ( 2001 : 81 ) stated that recovery is including crisis resolution and culture learning . Culture learning occurs when persons who previously experienced culture shock began to get calm in living daily life . They begin to interact to the host country because of adaptability process . According to Novinger ( 2001 : 161 ) Adaptability is the capability to adapt the attributes of the psychic system to meet the demands of the environment , and to manage cultural differences . Recovery stage is important because it can develop problem - solving Skills for facing with the culture . If persons begin to accept the culture’s ways with positive attitude , negative reactions and responses to the culture will reduce . 4 ) Adjustment Phase In Adjustment stage individuals are able to participate fully and comfortably in the host culture . It is reflecting enjoyment and functional competence ( Ward , 2001 : 81 ) . Moreover , Kevinsky ( 2010 : 8 ) stated that the persons will begin to adjust and to accept the new culture in a new environment as a new lifestyle , besides things become more normal eventhough , it does not really become normal when persons face honeymoon phase previously , for instance the Sojourners may have the capability to manage themselves and self confidence . 112 c . Effects of the Phases of Culture Shock The effects of culture shock can be shown when the persons are far from their own country , they are far from the place that is considered as “home” , and they far from the environment and their own custom . Based on these conditions , they cannot be able to participate in their new life so that it can bring the negative effect to the person . But persons will learn the new condition to continue their life . It is called as adaptation . If persons can accept the dissimilarity and learn the new environment , they will get the positive effect of culture shock . 1 ) Positive Effect In the U - curve theory , the positive effect can be shown when the first time the Sojourners arrive in new country that called honeymoon phase and after adaptation process in recovery phase . According to Ward ( 2001 : 81 ) , first phase always brings the effects of excitement and amazement to Sojourners . Because they might love the new people , beautiful scenery and good infrastructure in new environment . Excitement is a feeling of great enthusiasm , eagerness and interest and exhilaration . While amazement is a feeling of great surprise and wonder or the feeling of being incredulity . After Sojourners learn and adapt the new culture in recovery phase , they can bring the positive effect of their life . As Ward ( 2001 : 77 ) explained that Expectation - experience attests to the psychological preparation required to cope with potentially stressful life changes , and it may positively affect subsequent appraisals of stressful situation , bulid confidence and alleviate anxiety . Furthermore , Kevinsky ( 2011 : 8 - 9 ) explained the positive effects of culture shock as follows : Di pihak lain culture shock bisa membawa implkasi positif jika di manage dengan penuh kesabaran . Contohnya kemampuan untuk mengurus diri sendiri , kekayaan emosional , kepercayaan diri dalam bergaul dan kompetensi dalam berinteraksi hubungan sosial . Kadangkala shock culture juga membawa perubahan dalam diri seseorang , misalnya dulu dia seorang yang tertutup , namun menjadi agresif ketika mengalami shock culture , begitu juga sebaliknya . From quotation above , the writer inferred that culture shock not only brings the negative side but also it will become the positive effect for Sojourners after they accept and adapt their new culture patiently . The positive effects of culture shock includes the capability to manage self , self Confidence , good social interaction and life changes . According to Ward ( 2001 : 79 ) , life changes is changing the self to suit the environment while good social interaction means a dynamic changing sequence of social action between individuals or group in intercultural communication . Sojourners try to change their life after they experience culture shock for example when they live in hometown , they are prude people but after they live in new environment they may became aggressive . As Ward ( 2001 : 73 ) added the factor affecting stress and adjustment of culture shock is life changes through acculturation process for example eating practice or type of clothes . Based on the explanations above , the writer concluded that the positive effects can be reached in honeymoon and recovery phase . Those effects include excitement , amazement , good social interaction and life Changes . a ) Excitement : a feeling of great enthusiasm , eagerness and interest and exhilaration 113 b ) Amazement : a feeling of great surprise and wonder or the feeling of being astonished and incredulity . c ) Good social interaction : a dynamic changing sequence of social action between individuals or groups in intercultural communication . d ) Life changes : the change of person’s life through adaptation process . 2 ) Negative Effect Culture shock is the negative case that is faced by someone when has own country differ from the new country . As Oberg in Kristian ( 2013 : 10 ) considered culture shock as a disease that occurs when someone moves to one country . Moreover , Ward ( 2001 : 268 ) discussed the negative effect of culture shock as follows : The culture learning or behavioral component of ‘culture shock’ is also related too much of the negative affect associated with culture contact . Conversely , people who are nervous , depressed and withdrawn are less likely to make efforts to develop culture - appropriate skills . From explanations above the writer can see any negative effect that is contained in the word culture shock . The negative effects of culture shock can be shown in the crisis phase . The effects occur when persons feel the customs that are different from their own custom . Furthermore , everything that is found in the new place becomes horrible because they are not still used to the new environment and meet people with whom they are not familiar every day . Ward ( 2001 : 81 ) characterized the effect of culture shock is by feelings of nervous with unfamiliar ways of custom and fear with some differences in new country . Besides , Marx ( 1999 : 24 ) also described the negative effect of culture shock as follows : In unfamiliar situation we often feel anxious . We have no idea what is going to happen and we do not know whether we will be able to cope . We have no automatic responses in international encounters . It is therefore normal to feel nervous and to worry . Those effects include nervousness , fearness , confusion , feeling isolated and homesick . a ) Nervousness : a feeling of worry of persons when they do not know how to express the feeling and emotion and how to accept the different customs . b ) Fearness : a feeling of an unpleasant that is caused by the belief that someone or something in new environment is dangerous . c ) Confusion : a feeling of unable to understand something clearly . In other word , it is the state of being bewildered or unclear in person’s mind about something . d ) Feeling isolated : feeling set or kept apart from others in different culture . As a consequence , persons do not build essential relationship with other people . e ) Homesick : a feeling of distress or impairment that is caused by an actual separation from home . It occurs because persons are away from their family and home . 3 . Novel Denziger in Hermanto ( 2007 : 11 ) defines novel as follows : “Novel is a piece of literature which attempts to describe the universe in which we live and try to give a specific impression of universe . It has a special value , for we can learn so much from it . It often presents something that we can see in every daily life is as well . ”The definition of novel above demonstrates that novel is type of literary work that has special value so that persons can learn about every daily life from it . Moreover Qalbiyullah ( 2009 : 7 ) defined novel as a long work of narrative prose fiction that deals with characther’s situation and setting comes from imagination of author . 114 According to Abrams in Tahir ( 2013 : 2 ) , novel as a fiction introduces an imagination world that consists of intrinsic elements like setting , plot , characterization , point of view , etc . they are existential elements because theydepends on the author creation . In line with Koesnosoebroto ( 1988 : 20 ) explained that novel is any long work of prose fiction which makes some claims be considered as a work of art . Koesnosoebroto also reminded that the novel is like any genre , it is not a pigeonhole but an ingredient and an element that enters into the art of the novels and their relatives . From the explanation above , the writer can conclude that novel is the fiction from the human activity that is reflected in to the story as an imagination of author . Novel often describes about part of human life with the passage of life from character . The elements of novel are theme , plot , setting , character , point of view , conflict and style . They have purpose to develop the story so that it feels complete . Those elements give a strong effect and impression to the writing . Koesnosoebroto ( 1988 : 28 ) explained that in a work of literature , each element are used or chosen by the writer only in relation with other elements . These elements must work together to make a good story . The writer inferred that the reader needs to understand some elements used by author to achieve understanding to the novel . 4 . Synopsis of the Novel Torment is the second book in the Fallen series , written by Lauren Kate . It tells about the relationship between Daniel and Luce . They are falling in love each other but their love is accursed . There are many enemies called as the outcasts - immortals will attack them . The Outcasts - immortals want to kill Luce . The angles had called a truce for the battle that started at Georgia . The two sides , Daniel and Cam , would work together for several times destroying any threat that approaches Luce . For protecting Luce from the evil , Daniel sent Luce to Shoreline . It wasthe name of school in North California . She would be spending her time in yet another boarding school . Across the states of Georgia to California , Luce several time that seems like an eternity . Unlike Sword & Cross in Georgia , Shoreline is a beautiful school set on a cliff overlooking the ocean . Shoreline is a more prestige school to attend . Luce is very confused to live there . Because it is differ from her country in Georgia especially in her school . She faced new custom , different dress and social environment . Even though Daniel had told Luce that he could not see her for severaltimes on school . Seeing Daniel was like Heaven for Luce , however when Daniel got demanding with Luce needing to stay on school , she got upset and defensive with his attitude , leaving the pleasant visit with a heated conversation ( Kate , 2010 ) . 5 . Autobiography of Lauren Kate Lauren Kate was born on March 21th 1981 . Lauren Kate is an internationally bestselling author of young adult fiction Kate was raised in Dallas , Texas , and attended college in Atlanta , Georgia and started writing in New York . Her books have been translated into over thirty languages and include The Betrayal of Natalie Hargrove and Fallen , which reached the third rank on The New York Times Best Seller List for children ' s chapter books on January 8 , 2010 . Kate has stated that her experience of the " Old South " in the Atlanta area inspired her to set Fallen in a Civil War era academy . Kate has stated that her high school did not provide the basis for Sword and Cross in the Fallen series . In fact , she based the high school setting of The Betrayal of Natalie Hargrove on the Dallas high school she attended . She has stated she got the idea for the series whilst studying the Bible in graduate school in California . Kate currently 115 lived in Los Angeles . She lived in Laurel Canyon with her husband and hoped to work in a restaurant kitchen , get a dog , and learn how to surf ( Shelfari , 2006 ) . METHODS According to Palayukan ( 2010 : 21 ) methodology is set of general conceptions where the writer research by applying structural method . The data sources is taken from the novel Torment by Lauren Kate . The novel consists of 452 pages and it is in serial form that has 19 chapters . The novel was published by Delacorte Press in 2010 . The kinds of data were taken by texts and actions of main character in novel that related to the theory . The writer took words , sentences or paragraphs from the novel that has been analyzed . In addition , every actions of the character such as attitude and gesture are the data sources that is used by the writer to analyze this research . The instrument of data used by the writer is note taking . In note taking process , the data which is not relevant to the topic is left while the relevant data is given a stress such as underline or boldface , so that it can help the writer to analyze the data . That notes focuses on page , lines , and information related to the theory . ` The writer described and analyzed the data by intrinsic aspect namely character in the novel through psychology of culture shock’s theory by Collen Ward to describe mental condition of main character when entering in new environment that has different customs from her own environment . The theory explains about the phases and the effects of culture shock toward main character in the novel Torment . The phases of culture shock are honeymoon , crisis , recovery and adjustment phases . FINDINGS The process of culture shock consisting of four distinct phases : Honeymoon , Crisis , Recovery and Adjustment through U - curve theory . Furthermore , the U - curve theory contains positive and negative effects of culture shock . Through this model , two effects of culture shock will be appeared . 1 . Honeymoon Phase a . Beautiful Scenery Datum 1 Out the window , the view was startling . The plane was making its descent in to San Francisco . Luce had never seen anything like it before . As they traced the south side of the bay , a winding blue tributary seemed to cut through the earth on its to the sea . She pressed her forhead to the double plastic pane and tried to get a better view . “What is that ? ” She wondered aloud . ( C . I / P . 14 / D . 1 ) Datum 2 116 The sky was a brilliant bright blue , a line of mountains framed it all , tawny brown with scraggly dots of green trees , one hill rolling into the next . She was not in Georgia anymore . ( C . I / P . 20 / D . 2 ) Datum 3 Her eyes darted around to keep up with all the sights . Amazement Excitement on the Golden Gate Bridge , throngs of pedestrians , and joggers flanked the cars . Far below was the brilliant bay , dotted with white sailboats and the beginning notes of a violet sunset . ( C . I / P . 24 / D . 3 ) b . Good infrastructure Datum 4 This lawn was bordered on three sides by thick blue hydrangea bushes , and on the fourth by the steep , straight drop into the sea . It was hard for Luce to believe how very beautiful the school’s setting was . ( C . II / P . 45 / D . 4 ) Datum 5 An impressive two—story A - frame cabin stood alone at the end of the path . It had been built in the middle of a shady pocket of redwoods . There was a nice grassy patch with some picnic tables , like something Frank Lioyd could have designed . “Welcome to the Nephi - lodge , ” Jasmine said “ This is where you guys have class ? ” Luce mouth’s was agape . ( C . II / P . 57 / D . 5 ) 2 . Crisis Phase a . Etiquette Datum 6 “Breakfast is served on the terrace . ” Amazement Shelby gestured at a broad green expanse of land . He terrace was filled with whitewashed iron lawn furniture . About a hundred of the most laid - back looking students Luce had ever seen . Most of them had their shoes kicked off , their feet propped up on the tables as they dined on elaborate breakfast dishes . Kids were reading the paper , gabbing on cell phones , playing croquet on the lawn . The whole scene looked more like the first day of summer than a Tuesday in early November . ( C . II / P . 45 - 46 / D . 6 ) Datum 7 Shelby took a big slurp of her coffee and wiped her mouth with the back of her hand . “Um , Shelby _ _ ”Ever heard of eating in peace ? ” ( C . II / P . 49 / D . 7 ) b . Non - verbal Communication Mutual Gaze Datum 8 Looking around , she accidentally caught the eyes of a couple of students . A pretty girl with olive skin and a green scraft tied . Luce’s instinct was to turn her head away as soon as she made eye contact always the safest bet at Sword & Cross . ( C . II / P . 46 / D . 8 ) Datum 9 117 “Morning girls . ” The man smiled at them and waved . He looked at Confusion Nervousness FearnessLuce long enough to make her veer toward nervousness , but the smile stayed on his face . “Steven Filmore , ” Jasmine whispered . ( C . II / P . 58 / D . 9 ) Datum 10 Luce caught Francesca’s eye in the doorway . She looked at Luce - though whether it was an off - you - go dismissal smile or a don’t - think - you’re fooling - me kid smile , it was impossible to tell . ( C . VIII / P . 203 / D . 10 ) Gesture Datum 11 Eventhough Shelby had acted cool about Luce’s new look , she wasn’t effusive with compliments . Stepping out into the world this morning , Luce had been overcome by nerves . Miles had been the first to see her , and he’d given her a thumbs - up , but he’d never let on if he really thought she looked terrible . ( C . IV / P . 94 / D . 11 ) Datum 12 “I never done this , ” Luce said lamely . Lilith laughed and whipped the point of her foil to form Z . “The mark of zero , loser , ” she said . She slid the mask down over her face , took her foil from Francesca . She didn’t know how to hold it . ( C . X / P . 251 / D . 12 ) Nervousness Confusion Nervousness Fearness c . Artifact Dress Datum 13 Steven and Francesca had a way of dressing in complementarycolors that made them look better outfitted for a photo shoot than a lecture . ( C . III / P . 75 / D . 13 ) Datum 14 Luce could feel her face pinching up into a scowl . The last thing she wanted was to “ease right in” to Shoreline . She didn’t belong with a lot of gifted kids on a cliff overlooking the ocean . She belonged with real people , people with soul . ( C . II / P . 48 / D . 14 ) Datum 15 Luce looked down at the paper . She little unnerved to see things like “Speaks more than eighteen languages and has visited the outerworld” It was about to be painfully obvious that Luce was the only non - Nephilim in the class . She thought maybe she would be more comfortable among the scholar - Ship kids . ( C . II / P . 63 / D . 15 ) Datum 16 She hated not telling her parents the truth , hated not being able to tell them how far away she felt , and Confusion Feeling Isolated Feeling Isolated Homesick how alone . Every false word she said _ _ A on a made - up history test , tryouts for some bogus swim team , it would only make her feel that much more homesick . ( C . IV / P . 87 / D . 16 ) 118 Datum 17 Cam returned to Luce’s side with three arrows in one hand and silver bow in the other . She’d never seen anything like it . For some reason , it sent a strange ripple of fascination through her . Goose Bumps rose on her skin . ( C . V / P . 131 / D . 17 ) d . Physical Appearance Datum 18 “Change your hair . ”Change my hair ? ”Fresh start , ” Shelby said . Luce ran her fingers through her short black hair . She had to let go of who she’d been at Sword & Cross . She turned around to face Shelby . “Get the bootle . ” ( C . IV / P . 92 / D . 18 ) Datum 19 “that’s awful . ” Luce squeezed Shelby’s hand . “I know the rest of the kids at Shoreline look at the Nephilim funny , Phil must have had something freakish about him . ”Actually , there was something about his eyes . They were blue , but faded , almost washed out . He had to wear these special contacts so Life Changes Fearness Fearness people wouldn’t stare at him . ” ( C . VIII / P . 207 / D . 19 ) e . Rules & Conventions Datum 20 “Does that include a limbo contest ? ”Second later , the branch was raised , the drumbeat changed , nd it seemed like the whole party had dropped what they were doing to form one long , animated limbo line . “Luce , you’re not just going to stand there , are you ? ” Miles called to her . She studied the crowd , feeling stiff and rooted to her spot in the sand . ( C . IV / P . 111 / D . 20 ) Datum 21 “Miles , what people do around here for thanksgiving ? ”she said . “Thanksgiving at my house is obnoxiously enormous . At least a hundred people . Like ten courses . And it’s black - tie . ”“you’re kidding . ”“ seriously , we have to hire parking attendants . ” ( C . IX / P . 222 / D . 21 ) Datum 22 It was a Dawn and Jasmine social event , part of Nephilim Night . Luce was supposed to have helped organize , but all she’d really done was request a few bags of marshmallows and some chocolate from the mess hall . And then she’d escaped out to the shadowy fringe of the woods to avoid everyone at Shoreline . ( C . XI / P . 260 / D . 22 ) Datum 23 “I don’t even know what Harvest Fest is . ” Luce said“It’s basically a big banquet where all of Shoreline’s donors come out to raise money for the school . Everyone goes home feeling all charitable because they unloaded a few old cans of green beans on a food bank in Fort Bragg . You will see tomorrow night . ” Shelby said ( C . XIV / P . 340 - 341 / D . 23 ) f . Form of Address Datum 24 119 “Wait . ” Luce paused . “The Silver Fox and Francesca are our teachers ? And you call them by their first name ? ”Luce bit her lip . ( C . II / P . 58 / D . 24 ) 3 . Recovery Phase Datum 25 Feeling inspired by the very relaxed dress code at Shoreline , Luce had swapped out her standard black getup . She was wearing a red sundress with a short white cardigan . ( C . III / P . 69 / D . 25 ) Datum 26 Luce was still getting used to being at a school where they handed out computers , complete with wireless Internet , right in the middle of class . Sword & Cross had a total of seven student computers , Life changes Life changes Confusion Confusion all of which were in the library . Even if you managed to get your hands on the encrypted password to access the Web , every site was blocked . ( C . VIII / P . 184 / D . 26 ) 4 . Adjustment Phase Datum 27 Every day in California , Luce’s memories of Sword & Cross grew hazier . ( C . XVII / P . 383 / D . 27 ) Datum 28 She’d been seeking transformation when she first got out to California . Now she realized that the worthwhile way to make a change was to earn a real one ( C . XVII / P . 398 / D . 28 ) Enjoyment DISCUSSION 1 . The culture shock experienced by main character in novel “Torment” a . Honeymoon Phase According to Ward ( 2001 : 81 ) , the first stage emphasizes on the first reactions of fascination . The persons will experience this phase from beginning of first moving to the new environment . They will feel happy with everything around their new experiences , when the first time persons arrive to a new country , they might love the facilities , beautiful sceneries and good infrastructures . There are two kinds of honeymoon phase indicating that Luce experiences this phase when the first time she enters to California . The excitements are from beautiful scenery and good infrastructure . The first is beautiful scenery , in datum 1 , it appeared that Luce on plane . She pressed her for head to the window to see a winding blue tributary through the sea . She wondered to see the beautiful sight below . The datum 2 showed that Luce arrived in California . She looks at a line of mountains framed all the sight with the green trees and the scraggly hills . Luce realized that she is not in Georgia anymore . Next datum 3 described that Luce is on the Golden Gate Bridge . She looked at a wide river at below , white sailboats and a violet sunset . The second point is good infrastructure . In datum 4 , it illustrated that school’s setting is at Shoreline . The lawn is bordered on three blue hydrangea flowers and on the fourth steep , they straight drop into the sea . The last is datum 5 which described the class building of Shoreline . It was built in the middle of a shady forest which seems like design of Frank Lioyd Wright , the impressive cabin to form A - frame . She thought that it looks like a hotel than a school building . 120 Based on the explanations above , the writer inferred that datum 1 , 2 and 3 are the honeymoon phase experienced by Luce from beautiful scenery because they explain the beauty of the sight in California when the first time she enters to it . Moreover , datum 4 and 5 are the honeymoon phase from the form of good infrastructure because they described the great building at Shoreline , her new school . b . Crisis Phase This phase is the second stage of culture shock where the person experiences unknown and negative aspects . The differences might be come from the some aspects of interaction with the host of country that includecross cultural differences in how people communicate . Ward ( 2001 : 53 ) devided cultural differences in how people communicate into : 1 ) Etiquette According to Ward ( 2001 : 54 ) , Cultures differ in the extent to which people are direct or indirect , how requests are made , and more importantly , how requests are denied or refused . The first is datum 6 . It indicated the etiquette of breakfast . Breakfast at Shoreline is served on the terrace . Most of students open their shoes and prop their foot on the table . There are also reading the paper , gabbing cell phone and playing croquet on the yard . The whole scene seems like the first day in summer not the tuesday at school . Next isdatum 7 which appear the table manner of Shelby on the terrace . She drinks her coffee with a big slurp and wipes her mouth with the back of her hand . Based on the two data above , the writer inferred that datum 6 and 7 are include the rule of etiquette because they show that the table of manner at Shoreline . 2 ) Non - verbal Communication a ) Mutual gaze Direct eye contact will become indicator that can make someone or Sojourner experiences culture shock when they interact with other person in different culture . Culture has explicit rules about eye behavior such as staring ( Ward , 2001 : 57 ) . There are three data in the aspect of mutual gaze . The first is in Datum 8 which showed that Luce makes eye contact with her new friends at Shoreline . But Luce thinks that they will glare at her because she is a new student . Luce is lowering her eyes directly . It is her usuality to safe the gaze at Sword & Cross . But no one of them glared at her . The second is in datum 9 , which told that Steven Filmore , the Luce’s new teacher is greeting to her with a smile but his staring is long enough . She does not know whether his gaze is shown as the attentive gaze or arrogance . The last is datum 10 , Luce catches the Francesca’s eye in doorway . She looks at Luce with unclear smile whether it is a dismissal smile or a kid smile . Based on the three data above , the writer inferred that all of the data cointain the aspect of mutual gaze because Luce confronted with the staring of new people around her . b ) Gesture Ward ( 2001 : 58 ) stated that gesture is a sign that represents a specific meaning in a culture . Persons may become confused if the gesture has different meaning between two cultures . In this aspect , the writer found two data from gesture . The first is datum 11which explains the new appearance of Luce . When Miles looks at Luce , he gave her a thumbs - up but Luce is still nervous whether it is a compliment or looks terrible . The 121 second is datum 12which describe in the fencing area . Luce never plays a fencing . Lilith laughs and whips her foil to form Z . Francesca said that it is the mark of loser . From the statements of Ward , both of the datums above include the aspect of gesture because they mean the specific meaning from the signs of a thumbs - up and form Z at Shoreline . c ) Artifacts Novinger ( 2001 : 71 ) added artifact as one of the aspect of culture shock . It is the tools of physical self , dress , gift and jewelry or property . In the aspect of artifacts , the writer found three kinds of artifact which are dress , gift and property . The forming of dress can be found in datum 13 . It describes about the dress of Luce’s new teachers . Steven and Francesca always wear the luxurious and complementary dress . Luce thinks that they more suitable for photography than lecture . Next , datum 14illustrated that the gifts of the students at Shoreline . Actually Luce really wants to get the ease in Shoreline but she thinks that she does not belong to the gifted students . She is just ordinary student . At the same story , it showed datum 15 . There are some students at Shoreline who can speak more than eighteen languages and visit around the world . Luce thinks that she is more comfortable in scholarship students than in gifted students . Moreover , datum 16indicated that Luce lies to her parent about the A score in history test and tryouts for some bogus swimming team . Actually she is wrong , she does not include as the gifted student . The last dimension of artifact is property . In datum 17 , Cam showed the arrow and silver bow , the tools at Shoreline . She never looks anything like that . Based on the explanations above , the writer inferred that artifacts can become the aspect of culture shock that is experienced by Luce when she makes interaction to new people . From five data , datum 13 demonstrates that the different dress between at Shoreline and Luce’s old school , datum 14 , 15 and 16 describe the different gift between Luce and her new friends . And datum 17 describes the arrow , property at Shoreline . d ) Physical Appearance Physical appearance leads to person’s physical feature . It can be viewed that accentuate perceptions of cultural differences ( Novinger , 2001 : 72 ) . The writer found two data about the different physical appearance . First is datum 18 . Shelby asked Luce to change her hair because most of students at Shoreline have blond hair . Shelby said that Luce has to change her hair for the fresh start . Most of students at Shoreline have blond hair , and datum 19 comes from the strange physical appearance of Luce’s new friend , Phil . He has blue eyes but faded so that he uses contact lens . Based on the explanation above , both of the data illustrated the different physical appearance at Shoreline that make Luce seems like strange people . e ) Rules & Conventions Rule in different country is major source of difficulty in intercultural communication , rules about punctuality vary from culture to culture ( Ward , 2001 : 58 ) . Besides , Novinger ( 1999 : 37 ) called rules as customs . After analyzing the data , the writer found customs as rule aspect in intercultural communication . Datum 20 indicated the custom at Shoreline that called limbo contest . It was a dance from California by using stick with the drum changed . Miles invites Luce to join it . Next , the datum 21 showed about thanksgiving . Miles said that thanksgiving in his home is at least a hundred people 122 with black tie and ten kinds of dishes . Furthermore , they have to hire parking attendants . Same with the previous data , datum 22 also showed the custom at Shoreline . It is about the Social Night event at Shoreline . Luce should help the other friends to prepare it but she just takes some marshmallows and chocolates from mess room . Then she goes out to the fringe of the forest to avoid them . The last custom in datum 23is Harvest Fest Day which is celebrated every year at Shoreline . Luce did not know about it . Shelby said that it is a big banquet to Shoreline’s donors . They come to give money for the school . Everyone will pleasure with the banquet . Based on the explanations above , the writer concluded that datum 20 , 21 , 22 , and 23 are include the customs because they showed that the big celebrations at Shoreline that differ from Luce’s old school . 4 . Form of Address One of the aspects of culture shock that is experienced by main character is form of address . Ward ( 2001 : 60 ) explained that form of address is the terms whether to use first name or last name in the name of person . Person or Sojourner probably confronts the trouble when they have to call the name of host country . And it is shown in datum 24 . Students in Shoreline call their teacher by the first name . Based on the explanation above , only datum 24 includes the aspect of form of address . Form of address can make someone in different culture confused especially in terms of whether to use first or last name to person . c . Recovery Phase According to Ward ( 2001 : 81 ) , recovery includes crisis resolution and culture learning . The Sojourners begin learn about the customs in new country . Based on the statement above , the writer found culture learning experienced by main character in the novel . It contains two data , the first is datum 25 which shows that Luce begins to change her dress . Feeling inspired by the luxurious dress at Shoreline , Luce changes her black dresses to gown and cardigan . The second isdatum 26 which show that Luce still gets used to being at Shoreline . Shoreline gives a computer to every students , completes with wireless internet in the middle of class , whereas her old school at Sword & cross just has seven student computers and all of them are in library . Both of the schools are different . Based on the explanations above , the writer considered that recovery phase stresses the capability of adaptation through cultural learning . Datum 25 and 26 stated that Luce begins to learn about her new school . d . Adjustment Phase In Adjustment stage individuals are able to participate fully and comfortably in the host culture . It is reflecting enjoyment and functional competence ( Ward , 2001 : 81 ) . The writer found two datum about the phase of adjustment . The first is datum 27that told about Luce has accepted her new environment . Everyday in California can make her forget her own country . The second is Datum 28which meant that Luce has been seeking the changes when the first time she comes to California . She realized that for seeking the change , she must be doing the worthwhile things . Based on the explanations above , the writer concluded that adjustment phase is the last stage that makes Sojourners able to reflect enjoyment . Datum 27 and 28 described that Luce finally can accept and enjoy her new life at Shoreline . 123 2 . The effect of the phases of culture shock toward main character in the novel “Torment”The effects of culture shock experienced by main character are devided into two effects , they are positive and negative effects toward the main character . These effects can be shown through the phases of culture shock . Honeymoon phase always appears the excitement and amazement Excitement is a feeling of great enthusiasm , eagerness and interest and exhilaration . While amazement is a feeling of great surprise and wonder or the feeling of being astonished and incredulity . Datum 1 demonstrated that Luce feels amazed to look the beautiful scenery when she is on the plane . The second is datum 2 showed that Luce is exciting to see a line of mountains in California . Next is datum 3 , Luce is pleasure to see a brilliant bay at Golden Gate Bridge . Datum 4 appeared that Luce is amaze of looking at canteen in the big yard . Whereas datum 5 illustrated that Luce surprises to look the class building at Shoreline . After analyzing all of the data , the writer inferred that honeymoon phase contains effects of excitement and amazement . Datum 1 , 4 and 5 showed the effect of amazement because Luce surprises to see the wonder place in new environment while datum 2 and 3 appeared the effect of excitement because Luce is eager and interested in seeing the beautiful scenery . CONCLUSION The conclusion is the answer of the problem statement . There are four phases of culture shock experienced by main character in the novel . Those phase are described through U - curve theory of Ward as follows : a ) Honeymoon phase , b ) Crisis , c ) Recovery , d ) Adjustment There are two effects of the culture shock that is experienced by main character in the novel . a . The Positive Effects , b . The Negative Effects REFERENCES Endraswara , Suwardi . Metodologi Penelitian Sastra . Yogyakarta : CAPS , 2003 Firman . Analysis of Conflict in Veronica Roth’s Novel “Divergent” . English and Literature Department . State Islamic Univesity of Alauddin , 2013 . Harris , Marvins . Theories of Culture in Postmodern Times . New York : AlmitraPress , 1999 . Haviland , William . Cultural Anthropology ( Ninth Edition ) . USA : Earl McPeek , 1999 . Hermanto . A Conflict Analysis in Emily Bronte’s Wuthering Heights . English and Literature Department . State Islamic University , 2007 . 124 Institute of Public and International Affairs . What is Interpretive Research . University of Utah , 2009 . Retrieved from : www . ipia . utah . edu . / imps / html / research . html . ( accessed on February 5 , 2014 ) . Kate , Lauren . Torment ( A Fallen Novel ) . New York : Delacorte Press , 2010 . Keith , Kenneth . Cross - Cultural Psychology Contemporary Themes and Perspectives . USA : Blackwell Publishing Ltd , 2011 . Kevinsky , Haykal . Proses Dinamika Komunikasi Dalam Menghadapi “Culture Shock” Pada Adaptasi Mahasiswa Perantauan . Science of Communication Department . University of Indonesia , 2011 . Koesnosoebroto , Sunaryono Basuki . The Anatomy of Prose Fiction . Jakarta : Departement Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan , 1988 . Kohls , Robert . Survival Kit for Overseas Living ( Fourth Edition ) . USA : Intercultural Press , 2001 . Kristian , Sonny . Culture Shock dan Negosiasi Identitas Diri di Lingkungan Baru ( Studi Autoethnography tentang Proses Penyesuaian Diri ke Budaya Akademik Universitas Brawijaya Malang ) . Fakultas Ilmu Sosial dan Politik . Universitas Brawijaya Malang , 2012 . Martin , Judith and Thomas K . Nakayama . Intercultural Communication in Context ( Fifth Edition ) . USA : Higher Education , 2010 . Marx , Elisabeth . Breaking Through Culture Shock . London : Nicholas Brealey , 1999 . Miller , Stephen . Culture Shock : Cause and Symptoms . USA : College of Business and Economic . California State University , 2008 . Retrieved from : www . ccsenet . org / journal . html ( accessed on December 3th , 2013 ) . Mustari . Toraja land as Tourists Destination Area and It’s influence on the Local Inhabitant’s Ability to Speak English . English Literature Department . Letters faculty . Moslem University of Indonesia , 1998 . Ningsih , Sri Amin . Cultural Conflict in Intercultural Communication of Paul Haggis Film’s “Crash” . English Department . Hasanuddin University , 2007 . Novinger , Tracy . Intercultural Communication : A Practical Guide . USA : University of Texas Press , 2001 . Nurhaedah . Theme in mitch Albom’s Novel “For one More Day” . English and Literature Department . Adab and Humanities Faculty . Alauddin State Islamic University , 2010 . 125 Oberg , Kalervo . Culture Shock : Adjustment to New Cultural Environment ( Practical Anthropology ) , 1960 . Retrieved from : www . agem - ethnomedizin . de . / cu29 _ 2 - 3 _ 2006 _ S _ 142 - 146 _ Repr _ Oberg . pdf . ( accessed on February 3 , 2014 ) . Palayukan , Norpa T . Cultural Clash in Frances Hudgson Burnett’s “The Secret Garden” . English Department . Faculty of Letters . Hasanuddin University , 2010 . Poedjiastutie , Dwi . Culture Shock Experienced by Foreign Students Studying at Indonesian University . English Department . University of Muhammadiyah Malang , 2009 . Retrieved from : journal . teflin . org / index . php / teflin / article / viewFile / 130 / 116 . ( accessed on January 30 , 2014 ) . Qalbiyullah , Al . A Conflict Analysis in Jane Austen’s “Sense and Sensibility” . English and Literature Department . Adab and Humanities Faculty . Alauddin State Islamic University , 2009 . Rahmawati , Ita . Citra Tokoh Utama Pria Generasi Ketiga Turki di Jerman Dalam Hurriyet Love Express , Liebe Ist Machtiger Als Tito dan Wintersonne Karya Imran Ayat . Science of Culture Faculty . University of Indonesia , 2011 . Ratna , Nyoman Kutha . Teori . Metode , dan Teknik Penelitian Sastra . Yogyakarta : Pustaka Pelajar , 2008 . 126