Talin B is required for force transmission in morphogenesis of Dictyostelium Masatsune Tsujioka 1 , Kunito Yoshida 2 and Kei Inouye * Department of Botany , Graduate School of Science , Kyoto University , Sakyo - ku , Kyoto , Japan Talin plays a key role in the assembly and stabilisation of focal adhesions , but whether it is directly involved in force transmission during morphogenesis remains to be eluci - dated . We show that the traction force of Dictyostelium cells mutant for one of its two talin genes talB is consider - ably smaller than that of wild - type cells , both in isolation and within tissues undergoing morphogenetic movement . The motility of mutant cells in tightly packed tissues in vivo or under strong resistance conditions in vitro was lower than that of wild - type cells , but their motility under low external force conditions was not impaired , indicating inefﬁcient transmission of force in mutant cells . Antibody staining revealed that the talB gene product ( talin B ) exists as small units subjacent to the cell membrane at adhesion sites without forming large focal adhesion - like assemblies . The total amount of talin B on the cell membrane was larger in prestalk cells , which exert larger force than prespore cells during morphogenesis . We conclude that talin B is involved in force transmission between the cytoskeleton and cell exterior . The EMBO Journal ( 2004 ) 23 , 2216 – 2225 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7600238 ; Published online 13 May 2004 Subject Categories : cell & tissue architecture Keywords : cytoskeleton ; Dictyostelium ; morphogenesis ; talin ; traction force Introduction Force is an important component of morphogenesis . In developmental processes involving cell migration and tissue shape changes , the force generated by molecular motors within the cells has to be effectively transmitted to the extracellular matrix from which they get traction . Molecules involved in the interaction between the extracellular matrix , cell membrane and cytoskeleton are therefore important in understanding the mechanism of morphogenesis . Talin is a large cytoskeletal protein ( Burridge and Connell , 1983 ) with a molecular mass of ca . 270 kDa containing integrin - , F - actin - and vinculin - binding domains ( reviewed in Critchley , 2000 ) . In metazoan cells , this protein is localised in cell adhesion structures such as focal contacts ( Burridge and Connell , 1983 ) and myotendinous junctions ( Tidball et al , 1986 ) . Since these structures are subject to large tensile forces , it was suggested that talin may be a force - transmitting molecule . Later studies using antibody microinjection ( Nuckolls et al , 1992 ; Bolton et al , 1997 ) , antisense inhibition ( Albige ` s - Rizo et al , 1995 ) and gene disruption ( Priddle et al , 1998 ) have revealed a role of talin in the assembly and stabilisation of focal adhesions , while the question as to whether talin is directly involved in force transmission across the cell membrane is yet to be answered . Apart from the role of talin in attachment of cells to the substratum , its role in development remained unknown until recently . The ﬁrst evidence for the involvement of talin in development came from a study of a talin homologue in Dictyostelium ( Tsujioka et al , 1999 ) , which will be described in some detail below . In the mouse , knockout of one of the talin genes was shown to result in incomplete gastrulation leading to embryonic death ( Monkley et al , 2000 ) . Homozygous mutants of the single talin gene in Drosophila show a failure in germ band retraction and pronounced muscle detachment ( Brown et al , 2002 ) . These results indi - cate important roles of talin during morphogenesis . The purpose of the present study is to examine whether talin mediates transmission of force during multicellular morphogenesis in Dictyostelium . This eukaryotic microorgan - ism displays a remarkable series of morphogenetic move - ments of multicellular structures composed of highly motile cells , and it shares much of its basic machinery of multi - cellular morphogenesis with metazoan development ( Coates and Harwood , 2001 ) . One of the advantages of using this organism in studies of morphogenesis is its structural sim - plicity ; force generated by a tissue undergoing morphogen - esis can be measured and simple interpretation of the results is possible . The ﬁrst multicellular structure formed is a hemispherical structure called the ‘mound’ . A small protru - sion called the tip emerges from the top of the mound , which then elongates to form a cylindrical structure known as a ‘slug’ . Prestalk and prespore cells differentiate within mounds , where the majority of prestalk cells accumulate to the apical regions and lead morphogenetic movements of the slug throughout multicellular development ( Raper , 1940 ; Rubin and Robertson , 1975 ) . Two genes ( talA and talB ) that encode talin homologues have been identiﬁed in Dictyostelium ( Kreitmeier et al , 1995 ; Tsujioka et al , 1999 ) . Interestingly , their products talin A ( encoded by talA ) and talin B ( encoded by talB ) have distinct functions in this organism . While talin A has a function during growth and the single - cell phase of development ( Niewo¨hner et al , 1997 ; Simson et al , 1998 ; Merkel et al , 2000 ) , morphogenesis after the mound stage is unaffected by disruption of talA . By contrast , talB mutant cells grow and develop normally up until they form tight mounds , but the development is completely blocked at that stage . Received : 20 January 2003 ; accepted : 21 April 2004 ; published online : 13 May 2004 * Corresponding author . Department of Botany , Graduate School of Science , Kyoto University , Sakyo - ku , Kyoto 606 - 8502 , Japan . Tel . : þ 81 75 753 4130 ; Fax : þ 81 75 753 4137 ; E - mail : inoue @ cosmos . bot . kyoto - u . ac . jp 1 Present address : Wellcome Trust Biocentre , School of Life Science , University of Dundee , Dow Street , Dundee DD1 5EH , UK 2 Present address : Department of Biological Sciences , Sir Alexander Fleming Building , Imperial College London , London SW7 2AZ , UK The EMBO Journal ( 2004 ) 23 , 2216 – 2225 | & 2004 European Molecular Biology Organization | All Rights Reserved 0261 - 4189 / 04 www . embojournal . org The EMBO Journal VOL 23 | NO 11 | 2004 & 2004 European Molecular Biology Organization EMBO THE EMBO JOURNAL THE EMBO JOURNAL 2216 Examination using prestalk and prespore differentiation mar - kers showed that mutant cells differentiate normally within the mounds and , when mixed with a sufﬁcient number of wild - type cells , they participate in the morphogenetic move - ment and differentiate into stalk cells and spores upon fruiting body formation ( Tsujioka et al , 1999 ) . In this study , using the wild - type and talB mutant strains , we measured the force generated by slugs during migration and also examined the motility and traction force of isolated cells under different magnitudes of resistance . We further investigated subcellular as well as tissue - level localisation of talin B in detail using an antibody directed to a partial sequence of the protein . The results obtained provide evi - dence for the involvement of talin B in force transmission at the membrane – cytosol interface . Results Mutant strains Mutant strains with a disrupted talB gene ( HKT102 , HKT104 and HM1011 ) were obtained by gene replacement by homo - logous recombination with plasmids carrying different dis - ruption constructs ( Figure 1A ; Tsujioka et al , 1999 ) . The phenotype of HKT102 and HM1011 has been described pre - viously ( Tsujioka et al , 1999 ) , and that of the newly isolated mutant HKT104 was essentially identical to those of the other talB mutants . A polyclonal antibody was raised against a bacterially expressed polypeptide corresponding to the region between the 737th and 876th amino - acid residues of talin B , which is downstream of the FERM domain and shows only low homology to talin A ( amino - acid sequence identity 23 % ) . Western blots of total cell extracts with this antibody ( Figure 1B ) indicated the presence of a polypeptide with an apparent molecular mass of 250kDa in Ax2 and one of 190 kDa in HKT102 , but there were no detectable bands in the extracts of HKT104 and HM1011 . The nucleotide sequence of the inserted plasmid and the patterns of partial degradation products of the protein on Western blots ( not shown ) sug - gested that the 190kDa polypeptide corresponds to a partial sequence of talin B from its N - terminal end to Ala1899 followed by nine amino - acid residues derived from the plasmid sequence . The presence of the truncated protein , albeit at a lower level , in HK102 suggests that the C - terminal region of the protein may be indispensable for its function during morphogenesis . This C - terminal region contains an I / LWEQ domain ( McCann and Craig , 1997 ) and a villin headpiece - like domain , both implicated in interaction with F - actin ( Figure 1A ) . Measurement of force generated by migrating slugs Motive force of a migrating slug can be determined by measuring the force that is just large enough to stall its advancement ( balance force hereafter ) . In this study , we used hydrostatic pressure as the external force . To apply hydrostatic pressure along the length of a slug , each migrat - ing slug was introduced into a capillary made in a hard agar block with a bore that ﬁtted the slug . In reality , the force generated by a migrating slug is usually too large to be balanced by external force without causing excessive distor - tion of the agar . Therefore , the balance force was determined by measuring the velocity of slugs under various pressures ( both positive and negative , here positive being counter - pressure ) and extrapolating the linear regression line of the pressure – velocity relationship to the zero - velocity point for each slug ( Inouye and Takeuchi , 1980 ) . Since talB mutant cells do not form migrating slugs on their own , mutant and wild - type cells were mixed at a ratio of 1 : 1 and allowed to develop into chimeric slugs . Figure 2A shows examples of the pressure – velocity rela - tionship for chimeric slugs and a wild - type control of about the same size . It can be seen that the speed decreases linearly with increasing pressure in all slugs . The balance force was obtained by multiplying the pressure corresponding to the zero velocity with the cross - section of the slug . It has been shown that the balance force of a slug is approximately proportional to its volume , and therefore the force divided by the volume is a measure of the force exerted by a unit volume of cell averaged over the entire slug . Figure 2B summarises the results of all measurements . The motive forces of the chimeric slugs ( 16 . 2 and 14 . 6 Ncm (cid:2) 3 for HKT102 and HKT104 , respectively ) are clearly smaller than wild type ( 30 . 7Ncm (cid:2) 3 ) , with the difference being statistically signiﬁcant . It should also be noted in Figure 2A that at negative pressure ( i . e . when the slug is pulled forward by the external Figure 1 ( A ) Schematic representation of talin B . The FERM do - main , I / LWEQ domain and villin headpiece homology domain ( VHP ) are shown . Asterisk indicates the antigen region for the antibody , and arrowheads the positions of insertion or replacement of the knockout constructs ( a : HKT104 ; b : HKT102 ; c : HM1011 ) . ( B ) Immunoblot demonstration of the polypeptides recognised by the anti - talin B antibody . Total cell lysates of the indicated strains were separated by SDS – PAGE , transferred to nitrocellulose ﬁlter and reacted with the antiserum ( 2000 - fold dilution , right panel ) . Half the gel with duplicate lanes was stained with Coomassie blue ( left panel ) . Talin B requirement for force transmission M Tsujioka et al & 2004 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 23 | NO 11 | 2004 2217 pressure ) the chimeric slugs , despite their smaller forces , moved even faster than the wild type . Considering that the speed of movement is determined by the balance between the propelling force and counteracting resistance , this reversal of speed in the negative pressure zone should mean that the total resistance to the movement is also small in the chimeric slugs . Sorting patterns of prestalk and prespore cells in chimeric slugs It has been shown that cells with larger motive force take up more anterior positions along the slug length , and this is proposed to be the primary cause of the antero - posterior pattern of prestalk and prespore cells in the slug ( Inouye and Takeuchi , 1979 ; Umeda and Inouye , 2004 ) . In chimeric slugs consisting of wild - type and talB mutant cells , the latter cells are often observed to form two bands , one at the ‘neck’ of the slug and the other at its ‘tail’ ( Tsujioka et al , 1999 ) . To identify the cell types in the ‘neck’ and ‘tail’ bands , mutant cells were transformed with a prestalk - speciﬁc ecmAO - lacZ construct ( expressed in all prestalk cells ) , ecmB - lacZ con - struct ( expressed in a subclass of prestalk cells some of which cluster near the tip of the slug and the rest scattering in the posterior zone ) , and a prespore - speciﬁc cotC - lacZ construct ( Williams et al , 1989 ; Haberstroh and Firtel , 1990 ) . Cells of each transformant were separately mixed with Ax2 cells at ratios of 1 : 9 to 3 : 7 ( mutant : wild - type ) , allowed to form migrating slugs , and examined for b - galactosidase expression . Figure 3 shows typical staining patterns obtained . In the chimaera composed of wild - type cells and ecmAO - lacZ - trans - formed talB mutant cells , lacZ staining ( i . e . mutant prestalk cells ) was invariably observed within the prestalk zone of the slug corresponding to the ‘neck’ band ( Figure 3A ) . The few blue - stained cells in the prespore zone are anterior - like cells , a subpopulation of prestalk cells found in the prespore zone during slug migration ( Sternfeld and David , 1981 ) . In mixed slugs containing talB mutant cells with the ecmB - lacZ label , lacZ - positive cells of the mutant were observed only in the rear part of the slug ( Figure 3B ) . In mixes of wild - type cells and talB mutant cells carrying the cotC - lacZ construct , almost all mutant cells expressing the cotC - lacZ construct were localised in the posterior half of the prespore region ( Figure 3C ) . These results demonstrate that prestalk and prespore cells of the talB mutant strain were sorted out behind their wild - type counterparts within the chimeric slugs . This conclusion was conﬁrmed in double - staining experiments using cell - type - speciﬁc antibody with chimaeras consisting of ﬂuorescently labelled mutant cells and unla - belled wild - type cells ( Figure 3D ) . These results suggest that mutant cells are inefﬁcient in exerting force within multi - cellular tissues . Figure 2 ( A ) Measurement of motive force of migrating slugs . Shown are examples of pressure – velocity relationship of an Ax2 slug ( open circles ) and chimeric slugs composed of Ax2 cells and talB mutant cells mixed at a 1 : 1 ratio ( open triangles , HKT102 ; ﬁlled triangles , HKT104 ) . Migrating velocity of each slug in an agar capillary is plotted against the hydrostatic pressure ( relative to atmospheric pressure ) applied to the anterior end of the slug . The posterior end of the slug was exposed to atmospheric pressure . Linear regression lines are drawn by the least square method . ( B ) Motive forces ( in Ncm (cid:2) 3 , mean 7 s . e . m . ) of Ax2 slugs and chimeric slugs were 30 . 7 7 3 . 1 ( n ¼ 13 ) , 16 . 2 7 1 . 8 ( n ¼ 9 ) and 14 . 6 7 1 . 1 ( n ¼ 10 ) , respectively , the difference between Ax2 and the chi - maeras being statistically signiﬁcant ( P o 0 . 01 by the Mann – Whitney test ) . Figure 3 Cell - type marker expression in talB mutant cells in chi - meric slugs . HKT102 cells expressing either ecmAO - lacZ ( A ) , ecmB - lacZ ( B ) or cotC - lacZ ( C ) were mixed with Ax2 cells without marker at a ratio of 7 : 3 ( A , B ) or 9 : 1 ( C ) , allowed to form slugs and subjected to lacZ staining . ( D ) Pseudocolour representation of a ﬂuorescence micrograph of a chimeric slug composed of HKT104 cells labelled with ﬂuorescein - dextran and unlabelled Ax2 cells stained with a rhodamine - conjugated antibody recognising pre - spore vacuoles ( PSV ) . The contour of the slug is depicted in grey . Mutant cells are shown in green and prespore cells in magenta , and consequently wild - type prestalk cells appear black , mutant prestalk cells green , wild - type prespore cells magenta and mutant prespore cells white ( due to the overlap of green and magenta ) . Scale bar : 100 m m . Talin B requirement for force transmission M Tsujioka et al The EMBO Journal VOL 23 | NO 11 | 2004 & 2004 European Molecular Biology Organization 2218 If the mutant : wild - type ratio of the chimaera was too high ( 4 : 6 to 6 : 4 ) , slugs often split transversely to leave their posterior parts behind as a large lump of cell mass consisting predominantly of mutant cells . If the percentage of mutant cells was even higher ( 7 : 3 to 9 : 1 ) , the cells remained as mounds without forming a tip . Motility and traction force of dissociated cells To test whether the difference in the force exists in cells in isolation , wild - type and talB mutant cells were allowed to develop separately up to the mound stage , dissociated into single cells , and subjected to cell motility assay and traction force measurement . Normally , dissociated cells of Dictyostelium in buffer solution do not sufﬁciently adhere to the substratum and are unable to locomote effectively even though they actively extend pseudopodia ; however , if con - ﬁned in a thin layer of liquid , they show active movement in a manner very similar to that within migrating slugs ( Yoshida and Inouye , 2001 ; Inouye , 2003 ) . In the cell motility assay , dissociated cells were placed between two layers of agar , where the magnitude of mechanical resistance to cell move - ment was controlled by changing the space between the agar sheets . Under conditions where the cells can move freely without strong mechanical resistance , both wild - type and mutant cells showed active locomotion , and the motility of mutant cells was comparable to wild type . Under strong mechanical resistance , by contrast , only a small fraction of the talB mutant cells moved over a signiﬁcant distance and their mean velocity was very small , while wild - type cells still showed active locomotion ( Table I ) . The defective motility of talB mutant cells dissociated from mounds was ﬁrst noted by Cole ( 1997 ) with another talB mutant strain derived from the DH1 background . The above results indicate that talB mutant cells are defective in exerting force on the substratum . To test this possibility , we attempted to measure the traction force of dissociated mound cells using elastic polyacrylamide sub - strata containing ﬂuorescent beads as position markers . As in the previous assay , dissociated cells were placed between two layers of elastic substrata , and their movements as well as the positions of marker beads were recorded with a confocal microscope . Cellular forces were assumed to be exerted on the substratum by discrete small patches uniformly distrib - uted over the cell surface , and their magnitude and direction were deduced from the marker displacement data by solving the equations of linear elasticity theory followed by statistical evaluation ( Schwarz et al , 2002 ) . Figure 4B shows a typical force pattern of a locomoting wild - type cell . Here , the density of the force - transmitting points was set to be about 1 / 4 the mean density of the talin B - rich dots described below ( cf . Figure 6 ) . In many cells , the force ﬁeld was not uniform , showing a few areas of relatively large forces , which were mostly stationary with respect to the substratum , as the cell advanced . Soft substrata were Table I Movement of wild - type and talB mutant cells in response to cAMP gradient Strain % cells moving towards cAMP source Locomotion speed ( m mmin (cid:2) 1 ) Strong resistance Weak resistance Ratio Strong resistance Weak resistance Ratio Ax2 49 . 9 7 7 . 5 ( 10 ) 55 . 7 7 7 . 4 ( 9 ) 0 . 90 3 . 09 7 0 . 31 ( 100 ) 6 . 05 7 0 . 85 ( 66 ) 0 . 51 HKT102 8 . 4 7 3 . 8 ( 11 ) * 54 . 4 7 7 . 8 ( 6 ) 0 . 16 1 . 09 7 0 . 27 ( 59 ) * * 5 . 68 7 0 . 47 ( 51 ) 0 . 19 HKT104 4 . 1 7 0 . 3 ( 11 ) * 50 . 5 7 5 . 7 ( 8 ) 0 . 08 1 . 39 7 0 . 20 ( 56 ) * * 7 . 12 7 0 . 65 ( 84 ) 0 . 19 Dissociated cells at the mound stage were plated between agar sheets with two conditions of mechanical resistance , and a ﬁne glass capillary containing cAMP solution was inserted as a chemoattractant source . In the left half of the table , percentage of the cells that moved towards the cAMP source within 15min ( see Materials and methods for details of the criteria ) are shown as means 7 s . e . m . ( number of experiments ) . In the right half , mean translocation speeds of the cells are shown ( number of cells in parentheses ) . Ratios of the values under strong resistance to those under weak resistance are also shown . The differences between wild - type and each of the mutant strains in the values under the strong resistance condition are statistically signiﬁcant ( * P o 0 . 01 , * * P o 0 . 001 ) . Figure 4 Force vector ﬁelds of a locomoting Ax2 cell . ( A ) Example of marker displacements overlaid on the photograph of the cell . The vectors are shown twice the actual size . ( B ) Deduced force vectors shown at 10s intervals from top to bottom on the same horizontal coordinate . The forces were calculated from the marker displace - ment data at each time point ( the one shown in ( A ) corresponds to the last ﬁgure of ( B ) ) at grid points of 1 . 6 m m intervals . ( C ) Deduced force vectors of an HKT104 cell . Values not exceeding the noise level are not shown . Scale bar : 5 m m ; arrow : 200pN . Talin B requirement for force transmission M Tsujioka et al & 2004 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 23 | NO 11 | 2004 2219 required for mutant cells to migrate , and the deduced forces were signiﬁcantly lower than wild - type cells moving on the same substrata ( Figure 4C ) . The magnitude of the forces per unit area averaged ca . 129 7 20Pa ( n ¼ 8 ) for wild - type cells and 62 7 6 Pa ( n ¼ 7 ) for mutant cells . These results are consistent with the cellular force estimated from the in situ measurements shown above , and provide further support for the defects of talB mutant cells in force transmission . Localisation of talin B If the function of talin B is force transmission between the cytoskeleton and cell adhesion molecules , the presence of larger numbers of talin B molecules subjacent to the cell membrane would be required in prestalk cells than in prespore cells . To conﬁrm this , subcellular and tissue level localisation of talin B was investigated using the anti - body directed to part of the talin B polypeptide shown in Figure 1 . In undifferentiated cells , talin B was predominantly dis - tributed in regions near the cell membrane closely apposed to the substratum and at sites of cell - to - cell adhesion ( Figure 5A ) . Simultaneous staining with ﬂuorescent phalloi - din indicates an overall tendency of colocalisation of talin B and F - actin , but unlike the latter the former showed speckled patterns of staining ( Figure 5B ) . At the multicellular stage , pronounced accumulation of talin B to the cell membrane was evident in both prestalk and prespore cells , while weak yet signiﬁcant staining persisted in the cytosol , often accumulating in the front of the cell ( Figure 5C – E ) . Double staining with an antibody that recognises prespore vacuoles ( PSVs ) indicates that prestalk cells are more strongly stained with the talin B antibody ( see below ) . Speckled staining patterns were often observed when focused on the cell membrane . This staining pattern was particularly conspicu - ous when tissues were ﬂattened between a coverslip and agar . Under such conditions , cells move out from the tissue , forming streams of cells ﬂowing outwards without losing their prestalk / prespore differentiation characters . When focused on the cell membrane of such cells directly attached to the external substratum , numerous small dots of ﬂuorescence were invariably seen ( Figure 5F ) . On focal planes cutting through the cells , strong staining was concen - trated on the cell border as a row of ﬂuorescent dots ( Figure 5G ) . Fluorescent dots on the membrane with high staining intensity were more abundant , and the average intensity per area signiﬁcantly higher , in prestalk cells than in prespore cells ( Figure 6 ) . During fruiting body formation , the prestalk - enriched dis - tribution of talin B became even more pronounced , and the difference in the intensity of talin B antibody staining at the prestalk – prespore boundary was very clear without exception in over 100 culminating slugs examined ( Figure 7 ) . In parti - cular , regions of cell membranes near , but not directly apposed to , the stalk tube were heavily stained with the antibody . These regions are very close to the sites of adherens junctions where actin ﬁlaments and the Dictyostelium b - catenin homologue Aardvark are shown to be concentrated ( Grimson et al , 2000 ) . Densitometry measurements along the cell borders indicate that the peak of talin B distribution was ca . 1200nm distal from the surface of the stalk in average , which can be distinguished from the radial distributions of F - actin and myosin II , both peaking at ca . 600 – 800 nm from the stalk surface ( Figure 7B and E ; see also Figure 1 of Grimson et al , 2000 ) . Figure 5 Localisation of talin B in cells at unicellular and multi - cellular stages of Ax2 . ( A , B ) Cells at the growth phase were ﬁxed with ethanol – formaldehyde and double - stained with the anti - talin B antibody ( A ) and ﬂuorescent phalloidin ( B ) . Focal plane immedi - ately above the glass surface is shown . Insets show vertical sections reconstructed from horizontal sections made at intervals of 178nm . Scale bar : 5 m m . The positions of the vertical sections are indicated by small arrows . ( C ) Whole - mount staining of a migrating slug with anti - talin B antibody . Anterior to the left . Scale bar : 50 m m . ( D , E ) Cells in the anterior prestalk region ( D ) and in the prespore region ( E ) at a higher magniﬁcation . Direction of cell movement is to the left . Scale bar : 10 m m . ( F , G ) Cells migrating away from a ﬂattened slug . Focal planes right above the glass surface ( F ) and 500nm above ( G ) are shown . Scale bar : 5 m m . Talin B requirement for force transmission M Tsujioka et al The EMBO Journal VOL 23 | NO 11 | 2004 & 2004 European Molecular Biology Organization 2220 Discussion Talin has been proposed to be a major link between the actin cytoskeleton and cell adhesion proteins that bind to the extracellular matrix . However , evidence for its involvement in force transmission during morphogenesis has been lack - ing . In the present study , we have demonstrated that talin B is indeed required for efﬁcient exertion of force by Dictyostelium cells participating in multicellular morphogen - esis . Although indirect effects cannot be ruled out , we would propose that a major function of talin B would be to link mechanically the actin cytoskeleton to the substratum out - side via an integrin - type membrane protein . The close asso - ciation of talin B with the cell membrane along with actin ﬁlaments , as well as its enrichment in prestalk cells , which generate large force during morphogenesis , is consistent with its proposed function . Why is talin B required for tip formation ? The requirement of talin B for efﬁcient exertion of force upon the substratum would explain the failure of talB mutant cells to form the tip . In a mound , a tip is formed at the site where prestalk cells have accumulated ( Early et al , 1995 ) . Formation of a tip probably requires large force since it involves drastic changes in the curvature of the tissue surface , which is covered with the cellulose - containing extracellular matrix ( Freeze and Loomis , 1977 ) . This view is supported by the inability of tip formation in some mutants that have defects in components of the cytoskeleton . For example , mutants lack - ing the heavy chain of myosin II do not show the sorting of prestalk cells to the apex of the mound and cannot form the tip ( Springer et al , 1994 ; Traynor et al , 1994 ) . Likewise , the absence of myosin regulatory light chain results in abnormal distribution of myosin heavy chain within the cell and the failure of tip formation ( Chen et al , 1994 ) . Mutants lacking both a - actinin and gelation factor ( ABP120 ) are severely defective in tip formation ( Witke et al , 1992 ) . In talB mutants , even though prestalk cells sort to the position where a tip would normally form , no clear tip has ever been observed ( Tsujioka et al , 1999 ) . Therefore , the inability of talB mutants to form the tip is most likely a consequence of the reduced force of the mutant prestalk cells . Sorting - out of talB mutant cells in chimeric slugs The sorting pattern of talB mutant cells in chimeric slugs can be interpreted as a consequence of the balance of the three forces acting on each cell within the slug : ( 1 ) the motive force of the cell , ( 2 ) internal resistance to its movement , and ( 3 ) the external force acting on it ( Inouye and Takeuchi , 1979 ; Umeda and Inouye , 2004 ) . Since there is a gradient of the resistance force ( 3 ) within a migrating slug , being high in the prestalk region and much lower in the prespore region ( Inouye and Takeuchi , 1979 ) , cells will normally sort them - selves out in the slug by the magnitude of the motive force ( 1 ) , and this has been proposed to be the reason as to why prestalk cells are positioned in the anterior region of a slug . By the same token , the sorting pattern seen in chimeric slugs would result if the motive force of mutant prestalk cells is smaller than that of wild - type prestalk cells but still stronger than that of wild - type prespore cells , which in turn is large compared to the motive force of mutant prespore cells . The rearward sorting of mutant prespore cells within the prespore zone of mixed slugs indicates that talin B has an effect within prespore cells as well . In 1 : 1 mixtures of wild - type and mutant cells , this sorting pattern persisted throughout slug migration and culmination , indicating that talin B continues to function throughout morphogenesis . The failure of morphogenesis in cell aggre - gates containing large fractions of mutant cells indicates that the defect of mutant cells in locomotion becomes even worse Figure 6 Fluorescent intensity distribution of ﬂuorescent spots observed on the cell membrane of prestalk and prespore cells . A small area of a single slug sample is shown as an example of densitometry measurements . Cells of a ﬂattened slug composed of wild - type and talB null ( HM1011 ) cells ( added as internal control ) were double - stained with antibodies against PSV and talin B . ( A ) Nomarski image ( greyscale ) and PSV staining ( green ) . Focal plane 2 . 15 m m above that of the image in ( B ) is presented to show PSVs . ( B ) Talin B staining . Focal plane right above the glass surface is shown . The original ﬂuorescence image has been inverted for densitometry and then smoothed to eliminate noise components with wavelengths shorter than the theoretical spatial resolution of the optical system . Scale bar : 2 m m . ( C ) Density proﬁle along the horizontal line indicated with the arrowheads in ( B ) to show the spatial resolution of ﬂuorescent spots . The cell type along this line is shown below the density proﬁle ( pst : prestalk ; psp : prespore ; m : talB mutant prestalk ) . Ordinate indicates relative staining intensity with zero at the background staining determined from mean grey - scale values of 12 null mutant cells present in the visual ﬁeld ( of which one is seen in ( A , B ) ) . The unit is the root mean square of the noise of the image ( deﬁned as the difference between the original and smoothed image ) . ( D ) Histograms of the peak staining intensity of ﬂuorescent spots in wild - type prestalk cells ( open bars ) and prespore cells ( closed bars ) . Abscissa indicates relative intensity as expressed in the same unit as in ( C ) , and ordinate the frequency in 0 . 1dot m m (cid:2) 2 . Fluorescent spots with peak intensity over 2 units were scored in a total of 42 wild - type cells present in a single visual ﬁeld that could be identiﬁed as either prestalk cells ( n ¼ 11 ) or prespore cells ( n ¼ 31 ) . The intensity of staining relative to the overall average for the 42 cells was 1 . 52 7 0 . 07 ( mean 7 s . e . m . ) for prestalk cells and 0 . 81 7 0 . 04 for prespore cells . Nonspeciﬁc staining deﬁned by the staining of null mutant cells ( 0 . 29 7 0 . 03 , n ¼ 10 ) has been subtracted from these values . The mean density of the ﬂuorescent spots was 1 . 4 m m (cid:2) 2 for both cell types . Cell border regions where individual spots could not be distinguished were excluded from the measurements . Talin B requirement for force transmission M Tsujioka et al & 2004 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 23 | NO 11 | 2004 2221 if there are not enough wild - type cells around , and further suggests that even wild - type cells become unable to move efﬁciently if totally surrounded by mutant cells . This can be explained if talin B is also required for a cell to be an effective substratum for locomotion of other cells . Function of talin B Double staining with ﬂuorescent phalloidin indicated coloca - lisation of talin B with actin ﬁlaments in the cell cortex at cell adhesion sites , which , together with the presence of two highly conserved F - actin - binding domains in the talin B molecule ( Tsujioka et al , 1999 ) , suggests that talin B interacts with F - actin in the membrane regions at the sites of cell – cell and cell – substrate adhesion . Although cell adhesion mole - cules that interact with talin have not been identiﬁed in Dictyostelium , it is reasonable to expect that there might exist adhesion molecules with functions similar to metazoan b - integrins . With this assumption , the lack of talin B in a cell would result in the failure of force transmission from the actin - based cytoskeleton to the extracellular substratum on which the cell crawls . This would also account for the reduced effective force and defective movements of wild - type cells in chimaeras when outnumbered by talB mutant cells ; a wild - type cell surrounded by mutant cells would have to get traction from the mutant’s cell adhesion molecules , which are less ﬁrmly linked to the cytoskeleton due to the lack of talin B . The reduced resistance in talB mutant cells found in the motive force measurement experiments ( Figure 2A ) can also be explained by the proposed role of talin B . This resistance force corresponds to the force ( 2 ) discussed in the previous section . In a cell undergoing fast and continuous movement , the cytoskeletal components must be rapidly recycled for reuse in the extending pseudopods in order to maintain the architecture of its locomotion machinery ( Janson and Taylor , 1993 ) . For this , actin ﬁlaments would need to be detached from the cell membrane at the rear of the cell , and the force required for such detachment would be proportional to the number of molecules linking them to the membrane . In fast - moving cells , which translocate by extending large pseudo - podia , detachment of actin ﬁlaments from the cell membrane at the leading edge is also required for pseudopod extension ( Yoshida and Inouye , 2001 ) . It has been demonstrated in isolated Dictyostelium cells at the single - cell stage that talin A antagonises the detachment of the cell membrane from the cortical cytoskeleton ( Merkel et al , 2000 ) , and it would be expected that talin B does the same in cells at the multi - cellular stage . If the speckled distribution of talin B on the cell membrane corresponds to the positions of adhesion structures of the cells , they are much smaller in size and more numerous than typical focal adhesions in animal cells . The lack of large focal adhesions would be advantageous for turnover of compo - nents of adhesion structures in such fast - moving cells as Dictyostelium , which can cover a distance of its own length within 30s . The large number would be necessary to with - stand large stress loaded on the membrane of individual cells within slugs . The results of our force measurements suggest that a single cell at the multicellular stage with a mean surface area of 150 m m 2 ( value estimated from confocal sections of slugs ) can exert a force of ca . 15nN upon the surrounding tissues with a stress in the order of 100Pa ( i . e . pN m m (cid:2) 2 ) . Considering that about half the force is dependent on talin B , it can be estimated that talin B is involved in transmission of force of some 40pN per ﬂuorescent spot of antibody staining on average . In ﬁbroblasts , Jiang et al ( 2003 ) demonstrated talin 1 - dependent links between extracellular matrix and cytoskeleton that can be broken by a force of 2 pN . If a similar mechanism applies to talin B , the above ﬁgures may reﬂect the number of talin B molecules present in the complex , or possibly suggest the presence of reinforcement mechanisms that require this protein ( Giannone et al , 2003 ) . Finally , it should be noted that talin A does not compensate for the defects of talin B even though it is expressed at a signiﬁcant level during morphogenesis , whereas talin B does not rescue talA mutant cells , which show defects at single - cell stages ( Kreitmeier et al , 1995 ; Tsujioka et al , 1999 ) . Also , talA mutant cells are normal at the multicellular stages without showing any apparent motility defects as observed with the talB mutants ( Niewo¨hner et al , 1997 ; our unpub - lished observations ) . If there is still some overlap in function between these talins , it will be small , and how this division Figure 7 Distribution of talin B , F - actin and myosin II in developing fruiting bodies . ( A – C ) Confocal section showing talin B antibody ( A ) , phalloidin ( B ) and PSVantibody ( C ) staining of a developing fruiting body of Ax2 . ( D , E ) Confocal section of a developing fruiting body of GFP - myosin - expressing strain showing talin B antibody staining ( D ) and GFP ﬂuorescence ( E ) . All pictures are with the same magniﬁcation . Scale bar : 20 m m . Talin B requirement for force transmission M Tsujioka et al The EMBO Journal VOL 23 | NO 11 | 2004 & 2004 European Molecular Biology Organization 2222 of work within a cell is accomplished is another interesting question to be addressed . Materials and methods Strains and conditions for growth and development Dictyostelium discoideum Ax2 ( referred to as wild type in this paper , which is an axenic derivative of the wild - type strain NC4 ) , HKT102 , HKT104 , HM1011 ( talB mutant strains obtained by homologous recombination ) and a GFP - myosin II - expressing strain ( Moores et al , 1996 ) were used in the present study . Isolation and characterisation of HKT102 and HM1011 were described previously ( Tsujioka et al , 1999 ) . HKT104 was obtained in a similar way using a disruption construct carrying a 1 . 9kb hygromycin resistance cassette ( Pang et al , 1999 ) inserted between a 0 . 8kb fragment of the 5 0 UTR ( nucleotides (cid:2) 815 to (cid:2) 20 ) of talB generated by PCR and a 2 . 6kb Kpn I fragment of the coding region ( nucleotides 780 – 3380 ) . Transformed cells were selected with 50 m gml (cid:2) 1 hygromycin ( Wako ) . Axenic strains were grown in axenic medium ( Sussman , 1987 ) or in association with Escherichia coli B / r or Klebsiella aerogenes . The lacZ reporter constructs ecmAO - lacZ , ecmB - lacZ and cotC - lacZ were introduced by electroporation , and transformant clones were selected and maintained in medium containing 20 m gml (cid:2) 1 G418 . Cells were allowed to develop at 22 1 C on 1 % water agar or on cellulose nitrate ﬁlter ( Advantec ) on 1 % agar buffered with 20mM Na / K 2 phosphate , pH 6 . 4 . For whole - mount staining experiments , cells were allowed to develop on washed Millipore ﬁlter ( type HV ) placed on two layers of ﬁlter paper ( Whatman no . 3 ) soaked with 20mM potassium phosphate buffer , pH 6 . 0 or 7 . 0 . Preparation of migrating slugs for motive force measurements Growth phase cells were collected at a cell density of ca . 5 (cid:3) 10 6 cellsml (cid:2) 1 , washed once in phosphate buffer ( pH 6 . 0 ) , and the cell number was counted using a haemocytometer after appropriate dilution . Cell suspensions of Ax2 alone and 1 : 1 mixture were separately plated on 2 % water agar plates , and incubated at 22 1 C in a humidiﬁed chamber . Chimeric and wild - type slugs that formed next day were subjected to motive force measurement . Measurement of motive force Motive force of a migrating slug was measured essentially by the method described earlier ( Inouye and Takeuchi , 1980 ) . Agar capillaries of 50 – 120 m m bore were made with puriﬁed agar ( Difco , 4 % in water ) in a thin rectangular tunnel of a chamber made of acrylic resin and a slide glass . A small block of agar carrying a migrating slug was cut out from the plate and placed beside the oriﬁce of the agar capillary in such a way that the tip of the slug pointed towards it . The chamber was placed in a small humidiﬁed box and illuminated from the side of the chamber opposite to the oriﬁce in order to encourage the slug ( by phototaxis ) to proceed into the agar capillary . When the entire slug was in the capillary , with its all sides attached to the inner face of the capillary , the chamber was connected to a manometer and a rubber bulb for the control of the hydrostatic pressure , and the advancement of the anterior end of the slug under various hydrostatic pressures was recorded with a low observation light ( wavelength 4 600nm ) at a rate of 4sframe (cid:2) 1 with a (cid:3) 20 objective using an inverted microscope ( Nikon , TMD ) and a video camera ( Tokyo Denshi , CS8310 ) connected to a personal computer via an image grabber board ( Scion , AG - 5 ) . Advancement of the tip over a period of 4 80s was recorded for each pressure at least in duplicate . The length and width of the slug were determined right before and after the speed measurement . NIH Image ( developed at the US National Institutes of Health and available at http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / nih - image / ) was used for the control of image capturing and data analysis . Cell motility assay Ax2 and talB mutant cells were allowed to develop separately on membrane ﬁlters to obtain homogeneous populations of tight mounds . After visually checking the morphology of the mounds with a dissection microscope , they were collected from the membrane ﬁlters into chilled 20mM Na / K 2 phosphate buffer ( pH 6 . 4 ) and disaggregated by three rounds of forced passage through a 26G or 27G needle . The motility of disaggregated cells responding to a cAMP gradient was examined under conditions with and without strong mechanical resistance . To produce the strong resistance condition , ca . 1 m l of cell suspension was placed on 1 % buffered agar and overlaid with a thin sheet of 2 % agar cut into ca . 8mm (cid:3) 8mm . To produce weak resistance condition , the amount of cell suspension was increased three - to four - fold and 1 % agar was used as the top agar . A ﬁne glass capillary ( Eppendorf , Sterile Femtotips ) containing 1mM cAMP ( carboxyﬂuorescein was in - cluded for checking the gradient formation in some experiments ) was stuck into the agar overlay , and movement of cells near the capillary tip was recorded on a time - lapse video cassette recorder ( National , AG - 6011A ) or using the same system as described in the previous section . To quantify the movement towards the cAMP source , the numbers of cells that crossed the circle of radius 32 m m centred at the tip of the capillary inward and outward were scored over a period of 15min . Cells that initially located outside the range of 68 or 100 m m , depending on the cell density , from the tip of the capillary were excluded from the scores . The mean velocity of cell locomotion was measured by tracking the cell centroid at intervals of 60s . Measurement of traction force Polyacrylamide substrata were made according to Dembo and Wang ( 1999 ) with several modiﬁcations . The composition of the substrata used was 3 . 95 – 6 . 95 % acrylamide , 1 % allylamine and 0 . 05 % bisacrylamide in potassium phosphate ( pH 6 . 0 ) , containing ﬂuorescent marker beads ( FluoSpheres , 0 . 2 m m diameter , Molecular Probes ) . The substratum made on a coverglass ( 22mm (cid:3) 40mm ) was put in a plastic dish with a rectangular hole ( ca . 18mm (cid:3) 32mm ) in its bottom . Thick water agar was placed in the rest of the plate to keep humid . About 3 m l of cell suspension was placed on the substratum and , after the cells were settled , the buffer was removed as much as possible . A small sheat of polyacrylamide of the same composition without maker beads was gently overlaid . Cells showing directional movement were chosen for simultaneous ﬂuorescence and transmission recording at 1 – 5s intervals using a confocal microscope ( Zeiss , LSM410 ) with (cid:3) 40 Neoﬂuar lens . The rigidity of the substrata was calibrated immediately after each set of recordings with a precalibrated ﬁne glass needle made with a microelectrode puller . Since mechanical properties of the substrata ( typical values of Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio being 3 . 6kPa and 0 . 35 , respectively ) were subject to variations , these calibrations were used for correction of the results . The ﬂuorescence images of the same visual ﬁelds with and without cells were processed by a high - pass ﬁlter ( Zamir et al , 1999 ) , and analysed using NIH Image to obtain the coordinates and displace - ments of marker beads . In some cases where depression of the substratum under the cell was detectable , centripetal displacements of the markers caused by volume exclusion by the cell were calculated using the Boussinesq equations ( Landau and Lifshitz , 1970 ) from the magnitudes of the depression obtained by z - scanning , and subtracted from the actual displacements . In these calculations , the contributions of the tangential forces were estimated to be sufﬁciently small to be ignored relative to the vertical forces . Force vectors were obtained from the displacement data by the Tikhonov regularisation method as described by Schwarz et al ( 2002 ) . Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio of the substrata were determined based on the methods of Dembo and Wang ( 1999 ) and Takigawa et al ( 1996 ) , respectively . Generation of polyclonal antibody against talin B A region of talin B showing low sequence similarity to talin A was expressed as a histidine - tagged fusion protein in E . coli . For this , the 416bp Eco RI – Acc I fragment of the gene was inserted into pUC119 that had been cut with the same enzymes . The Eco RI – Hin dIII fragment containing the insert was cut out from the plasmid and inserted into pTrcHisB ( Invitrogen ) , which was transfected into E . coli strain JM109 . Expression of the fusion protein was induced by addition of IPTG to a ﬁnal concentration of 1mM , and production of a fusion protein of the predicted size was conﬁrmed by SDS – PAGE of bacterial lysates . The fusion protein was puriﬁed from the bacterial lysates using a nickel afﬁnity column ( Pharmacia , HisTrap ) , and used for the production of rabbit polyclonal antibody ( Takara Custom Services ) . The speciﬁcity of the antibody was checked on Western blots of Ax2 cell lysates ( see Figure 1 ) . In Western blotting experiments , speciﬁc binding was visualised by Talin B requirement for force transmission M Tsujioka et al & 2004 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 23 | NO 11 | 2004 2223 reaction with an alkaline phosphatase - conjugated anti - rabbit anti - body followed by incubation with BCIP / NBT ( Sigma ) . For immunohistological staining , nonspeciﬁc binding of the antibody was eliminated by absorbing the antisera with an excess of methanol - ﬁxed HM1011 cells at the tight mound stage ( 10 9 cells for 3ml of 3000 - fold diluted antisera ) . Histological methods Isolated cells and tissues were ﬁxed in ethanol containing 1 % formaldehyde at (cid:2) 20 and 4 1 C , respectively , washed in PBS – Tween ( 10mM phosphate buffer ( pH 7 . 0 ) , 0 . 9 % NaCl , 0 . 05 % Tween 20 ) , and preincubated with PBS – Tween containing 0 . 5 % each of bovine serum albumin and gelatin before staining . For immunostaining , specimens were incubated with preab - sorbed anti - talin B antiserum ( 1 : 9000 dilution ) overnight or longer at 4 1 C , washed three times in PBS – Tween , then incubated with afﬁnity - puriﬁed goat anti - rabbit IgG conjugated with either Alexa 488 ( Molecular Probes ) , TRITC or Cy5 ( Chemicon International ) overnight at 4 1 C . Control staining was performed with a preimmune serum or with the omission of primary antibody , both giving almost undetectable ﬂuorescence under the same optical conditions as used for the experimentals . F - actin and PSVs were visualised by staining with TRITC - phalloidin ( Sigma ) and FITC - or TRITC - conjugated anti - D . mucoroides spore IgG , respectively . The samples were observed with a confocal microscope ( Zeiss LSM410 ) with a (cid:3) 63 Neoﬂuar objective ( NA 1 . 40 ) . For quantitative analysis of antibody staining , confocal images recorded at a magniﬁcation of 1 pixel ¼ 56 . 6nm were inverted and smoothed to reduce noise by averaging 5 (cid:3) 5 pixels for each pixel . All image analyses were performed with NIH Image on a personal computer . For lacZ staining , migrating slugs on ﬁlters were ﬁxed with 0 . 5 % glutaraldehyde and stained with X - gal ( Jermyn and Williams , 1991 ) . Acknowledgements We thank S Yumura and J Spudich for the GFP - myosin strain , R Kay for HM1011 , D Knecht for the hygromycin - resistant plasmid , and J Williams and V Nanjundiah for comments on an earlier version of the manuscript . References Albige ` s - Rizo C , Frachet P , Block MR ( 1995 ) Down regulation of talin alters cell adhesion and the processing of the a 5 b 1 integrin . J Cell Sci 108 : 3317 – 3329 Bolton SJ , Barry ST , Mosley H , Patel B , Jockusch BM , Wilkinson JM , Critchley DR ( 1997 ) Monoclonal antibodies recognizing the N - and C - terminal regions of talin disrupt actin stress ﬁbers when microinjected into human ﬁbroblasts . Cell Motil Cyto - skeleton 36 : 363 – 376 Brown NH , Gregory SL , Rickoll WL , Fessler LI , Prout M , White RA , Fristrom JW ( 2002 ) Talin is essential for integrin function in Drosophila . Dev Cell 3 : 569 – 579 Burridge K , Connell L ( 1983 ) A new protein of adhesion plaques and rufﬂing membranes . J Cell Biol 97 : 359 – 367 Chen PX , Ostrow BD , Tafuri SR , Chisholm RL ( 1994 ) Targeted disruption of the Dictyostelium RMLC gene produces cells defec - tive in cytokinesis and development . J Cell Biol 127 : 1933 – 1944 Coates JC , Harwood AJ ( 2001 ) Cell – cell adhesion and signal trans - duction during Dictyostelium development . J Cell Sci 114 : 4349 – 4358 Cole SL ( 1997 ) The isolation and characterisation of two genes required for tip formation in Dictyostelium discoideum . DPhil Thesis , University College London Critchley DR ( 2000 ) Focal adhesions—the cytoskeletal connection . Curr Opin Cell Biol 12 : 133 – 139 Dembo M , Wang Y - L ( 1999 ) Stress at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of ﬁbroblasts . Biophys J 76 : 2307 – 2316 Early A , Abe T , Williams J ( 1995 ) Evidence for positional differ - entiation of prestalk cells and for a morphogenetic gradient in Dictyostelium . Cell 83 : 91 – 99 Freeze H , Loomis W ( 1977 ) The isolation and characterization of a component of the surface sheath of Dictyostelium discoideum . J Biol Chem 252 : 820 – 824 Giannone G , Jiang G , Sutton DH , Critchley DR , Sheetz MP ( 2003 ) Talin1 is critical for force - dependent reinforcement of initial integrin – cytoskeleton bonds but not tyrosine kinase activation . J Cell Biol 163 : 409 – 419 Grimson MJ , Coates JC , Reynolds JP , Shipman M , Blanton RL , Harwood AJ ( 2000 ) Adherens junctions and b - catenin - mediated cell signalling in a non - metazoan organism . Nature 408 : 727 – 731 Haberstroh L , Firtel RA ( 1990 ) A spatial gradient of expression of a cAMP - regulated prespore cell type - speciﬁc gene in Dictyostelium . Genes Dev 4 : 596 – 612 Inouye K ( 2003 ) Pattern formation by cell movement in closely - packed tissues . In Morphogenesis and Pattern Formation in Biological Systems , Sekimura T , Noji S , Ueno N , Maini PK ( eds ) pp 191 – 202 . Tokyo : Springer - Verlag Inouye K , Takeuchi I ( 1979 ) Analytical studies on migrating , move - ment of the pseudoplasmodium of Dictyostelium discoideum . Protoplasma 99 : 289 – 304 Inouye K , Takeuchi I ( 1980 ) Motive force of the migrating pseudo - plasmodium of the cellular slime mould Dictyostelium discoi - deum . J Cell Sci 41 : 53 – 64 Janson LW , Taylor DL ( 1993 ) In vitro models of tail contraction and cytoplasmic streaming in amoeboid cells . J Cell Biol 123 : 345 – 356 Jiang G , Giannone G , Critchley DR , Fukumoto E , Sheetz MP ( 2003 ) Two - piconewton slip bond between ﬁbronectin and the cytoske - leton depends on talin . Nature 424 : 334 – 337 Jermyn KA , Williams JG ( 1991 ) An analysis of culmination in Dictyostelium using prestalk and stalk - speciﬁc cell autonomous markers . Development 111 : 779 – 787 Kreitmeier M , Gerisch G , Heizer C , Mu¨ller - Taubenberger A ( 1995 ) A talin homologue of Dictyostelium rapidly assembles at the leading edge of cells in response to chemoattractant . J Cell Biol 129 : 179 – 188 Landau LD , Lifshitz EM ( 1970 ) Theory of Elasticity . Course of Theoretical Physics , 2nd edn , Vol . 7 Oxford : Pergamon Press McCann RO , Craig SW ( 1997 ) The I / LWEQ module : a conserved sequence that signiﬁes F - actin binding in functionally diverse proteins from yeast to mammals . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 : 5679 – 5684 Merkel R , Simson R , Simson DA , Hohenadl M , Boulbitch A , Wallraff E , Sackmann E ( 2000 ) A micromechanic study of cell polarity and plasma membrane cell body coupling in Dictyostelium . Biophys J 79 : 707 – 719 Monkley SJ , Zhou XH , Kinston SJ , Giblett SM , Hemmings L , Priddle H , Brown JE , Pritchard CA , Critchley DR , Fassler R ( 2000 ) Disruption of the talin gene arrests mouse development at the gastrulation stage . Dev Dyn 219 : 560 – 574 Moores SL , Sabry JH , Spudich JA ( 1996 ) Myosin dynamics in live Dictyostelium cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93 : 443 – 446 Niewo ¨ hner J , Weber I , Maniak M , Mu ¨ ller - Taubenberger A , Gerisch G ( 1997 ) Talin - null cells of Dictyostelium are strongly defective in adhesion to particle and substrate surfaces and slightly impaired in cytokinesis . J Cell Biol 138 : 349 – 361 Nuckolls GH , Romer LH , Burridge K ( 1992 ) Microinjection of antibodies against talin inhibits the spreading and migration of ﬁbroblasts . J Cell Sci 102 : 753 – 762 Pang KM , Lynes MA , Knecht DA ( 1999 ) Variables controlling the expression level of exogenous genes in Dictyostelium . Plasmid 41 : 187 – 197 Priddle H , Hemmings L , Monkley S , Woods A , Patel B , Sutton D , Dunn GA , Zicha D , Critchley DR ( 1998 ) Disruption of the talin gene compromises focal adhesion assembly in undifferen - tiated but not differentiated embryonic stem cells . J Cell Biol 142 : 1121 – 1133 Raper KB ( 1940 ) Pseudoplasmodium formation and organization in Dictyostelium discoideum . J Elisha Mitchell Sci Soc 56 : 241 – 282 Rubin J , Robertson A ( 1975 ) The tip of the Dictyostelium discoideum pseudoplasmodium as an organizer . J Embryol Exp Morphol 33 : 227 – 241 Schwarz US , Balaban NQ , Riveline D , Bershadsky A , Geiger B , Safran SA ( 2002 ) Calculation of forces at focal adhesions from elastic substrate data : the effect of localized force and the need for regularization . Biophys J 83 : 1380 – 1394 Talin B requirement for force transmission M Tsujioka et al The EMBO Journal VOL 23 | NO 11 | 2004 & 2004 European Molecular Biology Organization 2224 Simson R , Wallraff E , Faix J , Niewo¨hner J , Gerisch G , Sackmann E ( 1998 ) Membrane bending modulus and adhesion energy of wild - type and mutant cells of Dictyostelium lacking talin or cortex - illins . Biophys J 74 : 514 – 522 Springer ML , Patterson B , Spudich JA ( 1994 ) Stage - speciﬁc require - ment for myosin II during Dictyostelium development . Development 120 : 2651 – 2660 Sternfeld J , David CN ( 1981 ) Cell sorting during pattern formation in Dictyostelium . Differentiation 20 : 10 – 21 Sussman M ( 1987 ) Cultivation and synchronous morphogenesis of Dictyostelium under controlled experimental conditions . In Methods in Cell Biology , Spudich JA ( ed ) Vol . 28 , pp 9 – 29 . Orlando , FL : Academic Press Takigawa T , Morino Y , Urayama K , Masuda T ( 1996 ) Poisson’s ratio of polyacrylamide ( PAAm ) gels . Polym Gels Networks 4 : 1 – 5 Tidball JG , O’Halloran T , Burridge K ( 1986 ) Talin at myotendinous junctions . J Cell Biol 103 : 1465 – 1472 Traynor D , Tasaka M , Takeuchi I , Williams J ( 1994 ) Aberrant pattern formation in myosin heavy chain mutants of Dictyostelium . Development 120 : 591 – 601 Tsujioka M , Machesky LM , Cole SL , Yahata K , Inouye K ( 1999 ) A unique talin homologue with a villin headpiece - like domain is required for multicellular morphogenesis in Dictyostelium . Curr Biol 9 : 389 – 392 Umeda T , Inouye K ( 2004 ) Cell sorting by differential cell motility : a model for pattern formation in Dictyostelium . J Theor Biol 226 : 215 – 224 Williams JG , Jermyn KA , Duffy KT ( 1989 ) Formation and anatomy of the prestalk zone of Dictyostelium . Development 107 ( Suppl ) : 91 – 98 Witke W , Schleicher M , Noegel AA ( 1992 ) Redundancy in the microﬁlament system—abnormal development of Dictyostelium cells lacking two F - actin cross - linking proteins . Cell 68 : 53 – 62 Yoshida K , Inouye K ( 2001 ) Myosin II - dependent cylindrical protrusions induced by quinine in Dictyostelium : antagonizing effects of actin polymerization at the leading edge . J Cell Sci 114 : 2155 – 2165 Zamir E , Katz B - Z , Aota S , Yamada KM , Geiger B , Kam Z ( 1999 ) Molecular diversity of cell – matrix adhesions . J Cell Sci 112 : 1655 – 1669 Talin B requirement for force transmission M Tsujioka et al & 2004 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 23 | NO 11 | 2004 2225