Monkey business : Children’s use of character identity to infer shared properties Mijke Rhemtulla * , D . Geoffrey Hall University of British Columbia , 2136 West Mall , Vancouver , BC , Canada V6T 1Z4 a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 9 October 2008 Revised 25 May 2009 Accepted 31 July 2009 Available online xxxx Keywords : Cognitive development Fictional characters Individuals Proper names Property induction a b s t r a c t Children’s toys provide a rich arena for investigating conceptual ﬂexibility , because they often can be understood as possessing an individual identity at multiple levels of abstrac - tion . For example , many dolls ( e . g . , Winnie - the - Pooh ) and action ﬁgures ( e . g . , Batman ) can be construed either as characters from a ﬁctional world or as physical objects in the real world . In two experiments , 72 4 - and 5 - year - olds took part in a property extension task , the results of which provide evidence of an understanding that ( 1 ) two representations of a character share certain properties in virtue of their shared character identity , and this sharing does not stem simply from having the same name , and ( 2 ) one representation of a character is more likely to share properties with another representation of the character if the properties were acquired by the character than if they were acquired by the represen - tation . Children’s understanding of a representational object’s abstract character identity thus enabled them to transcend using its unique spatio - temporal history as a sole basis for inferring its idiosyncratic properties . (cid:2) 2009 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Research in cognitive development has begun to explore not only children’s knowledge of kinds ( e . g . , dog ) but also their understanding of individuals ( e . g . , Fido ) . A key ﬁnding in this recent work is that young children show a strong reliance on spatiotemporal history when making judgments that pertain to individual identity . For example , one line of research has revealed that children as young as 20 months old will use an object’s spatiotemporal history , rather than its visible properties , as a basis for extending its proper name . At this age , children will continue to apply a proper name to a doll after it undergoes a displacement , failing to extend it to another doll , even one that looks identical ( e . g . , Bélanger & Hall , 2006 ; Hall , Lee , & Bélanger , 2001 ; Liittschwager & Markman , 1993 ; Sorrentino , 2001 ) . Another line of studies has revealed that young children will often extend a proper name ( or a unique identifying phrase ) to an individual object that maintains a spatiotem - poral path , even if it undergoes extensive changes in appearance , form , and / or material ( e . g . , Gutheil & Rosen - gren , 1996 ; Hall , 1998 ; Hall , Waxman , Brédart , & Nicolay , 2003 ; Liittschwager , 1995 ; see also Blok , Newman , & Rips , 2005 ; Rhemtulla & Hall , 2009 ; Rhemtulla & Xu , 2007 ; Rips , Blok , & Newman , 2006 ) . Recently , Hood and Bloom ( 2007 ) showed that preschoolers treat some valuable artifacts as having greater worth than exact replicas , which are identi - cal in everything but spatiotemporal history . Similarly , Gutheil , Gelman , Klein , Michos , and Kelaita ( 2008 ) re - ported that preschoolers distinguish the knowledge states of individual objects that are the same in every respect but spatiotemporal history . One outstanding question about children’s concepts of individuals pertains to objects that can be construed as possessing an individual identity at more than one level of abstraction . It is striking that many highly familiar ob - jects in children’s daily lives – their toys – fall into this cat - egory . A Batman action ﬁgure , for example , has many of Batman’s features ( e . g . , wearing a mask , having big mus - cles ) that arise in virtue of sharing Batman’s character identity ; but it also has many idiosyncratic features ( e . g . , 0010 - 0277 / $ - see front matter (cid:2) 2009 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2009 . 07 . 012 * Corresponding author . Tel . : + 1 604 822 9294 ; fax : + 1 604 822 6923 . E - mail address : mijke @ psych . ubc . ca ( M . Rhemtulla ) . Cognition xxx ( 2009 ) xxx – xxx Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Cognition journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / COGNIT ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Rhemtulla , M . , & Hall , D . G . Monkey business : Children’s use of character identity to infer shared properties . Cognition ( 2009 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2009 . 07 . 012 being made of plastic , having ketchup stains ) that arise in virtue of its unique spatiotemporal history . Many toys are representations of ﬁctional characters from movies or books , and as such , they are objects that share an individ - ual identity with countless other representations of the same character , while remaining numerically distinct indi - vidual objects in and of themselves . Gutheil et al . ( 2008 ) used character toys ( e . g . , Winnie - the - Pooh dolls ) to inves - tigate children’s reliance on spatiotemporal history when inferring the knowledge state of individual objects . On one trial of their task , one Pooh ‘‘watched” as children played a game in one room ; then children moved to an - other room where an identical Pooh doll was present . Chil - dren were asked whether the second Pooh knew about the events that the ﬁrst Pooh had watched . Children’s re - sponses showed that they considered spatiotemporal his - tory to be necessary for attributions of an individual’s knowledge state : Pooh 2 , though physically identical to Pooh 1 , was not credited with knowledge of the earlier events . Gutheil et al . ’s ( 2008 ) study is important because it re - veals that preschoolers are able to view two representa - tions of the same character as distinct individuals with distinct properties . In the current research , we looked at the ﬂip side of this issue : can children view numerically distinct ( and perceptually distinctive ) representations of the same character as having properties in common in vir - tue of sharing a character identity ? Gutheil et al . ’s evidence that children rely on spatiotemporal history when judging the knowledge states of individual objects suggests that it may be difﬁcult for children to use a shared character iden - tity as a basis for inferring shared properties . In order to construe two representations of the same character as sharing an individual identity , children must overcome dif - ferences not only in the toys’ appearance but also in their spatiotemporal history . In Experiment 1 , we asked whether preschoolers recog - nize the individual identity shared by two toys that look different but represent the same ﬁctional character , and use this identity to infer that the toys share certain charac - ter - based properties . We tested children’s ability to use shared character identity in this way by comparing their property extensions in two conditions where a pair of toys had the same proper name : one where the shared name re - ﬂected the fact that the two toys represented the same character , and one where the shared name arose by mere coincidence . Prior research in developmental psychology has documented the important role of a shared label in promoting inductive inferences across objects , but that work has also highlighted the importance of the word’s lexical form class in licensing such inferences ( e . g . , Gelman & Coley , 1990 ; Keates & Graham , 2008 ) . Of particular note , Heyman and Gelman ( 2000 ) found that preschoolers were likely to judge that two dissimilar - looking people shared certain psychological properties if the people were labelled with the same trait adjective ( e . g . , ‘‘shy” ) but not if they were labelled with the same proper name ( e . g . , ‘‘Anna” ) . Experiment 1 provided a test of whether preschoolers will extend certain properties across objects that share a proper name , if the shared proper name reﬂects a shared character identity . In Experiment 2 , we further explored children’s under - standing of the properties shared by representations of the same ﬁctional character . We pitted properties that arose in virtue of one representation’s character history against those that arose in virtue of its unique spatiotemporal his - tory , and we explored children’s willingness to generalize these properties to another representation of the character . A number of recent ﬁndings from the developmental psy - chology literature have revealed the importance of the ori - gin of an object’s properties in children’s decisions about its category membership ( e . g . , Ahn , Gelman , Amsterlaw , Hohenstein , & Kalish , 2000 ; Gelman & Wellman , 1991 ) and in their judgments about whether the properties ex - tend to other objects of the same category ( e . g . , Gelman , 1988 ; Kalish & Gelman , 1992 ; Nguyen & Murphy , 2003 ) . For example , Gelman ( 1988 ) found that 4 - year - olds who saw a picture of an object ( e . g . , a rabbit ) failed to generalize properties that arose in virtue of the object’s unique spa - tiotemporal history ( e . g . , is cold ) but extended across pic - tures of other category members those properties that arose in virtue of its category membership ( e . g . , likes to eat alfalfa ) . Experiment 2 examined whether preschoolers show sensitivity to property origins when reasoning about representations of ﬁctional characters , by restricting prop - erties arising from the representation’s unique spatiotem - poral history but extending properties arising from the character’s history to another representation of the character . The reasoning ability under investigation in Experiment 2 is a speciﬁc case of a more general capacity to think ﬂex - ibly about an object under multiple conceptual descrip - tions . Several recent studies using inductive projection tasks have found evidence of this ﬂexibility in preschool - ers . For example , Gelman’s ( 1988 ) results suggest that 4 - year - olds can appropriately reason about an object ( e . g . , a rabbit ) either as a unique individual ( e . g . , as a par - ticular rabbit ) or as an instance of an object category ( e . g . , as a rabbit ) . Furthermore , Kalish and Gelman ( 1992 ) uncovered evidence that 4 - year - olds are able to reason aptly about an object ( e . g . , a metal bow ) either as an in - stance of an object category ( e . g . , as a bow ) or as a portion of a material category ( e . g . , as metal ) . More recently , Ngu - yen and Murphy ( 2003 ) found evidence that 4 - year - olds have a nascent ability to think appropriately about a food object ( e . g . , a piece of toast ) either as an instance of a tax - onomic food category ( e . g . , grains ) or as an instance of a script food category ( e . g . , breakfast foods ) . Experiment 2 provided an opportunity to determine whether children’s conceptual ﬂexibility extends to the case of reasoning about representational objects : can children think appro - priately about these objects either as unique individuals or as ﬁctional characters ? In these experiments , we examined character toys be - cause of their familiarity to preschoolers , but children ( at least those in Western societies ) regularly encounter many other objects that possess an abstract individual identity on top of their unique object identity . These include books , DVDs , and CDs ( which are representations of intellectual objects : stories , movies , and songs ) , as well as other com - mon objects , such as items of clothing , electronic goods , and vehicles ( which are representations of individual 2 M . Rhemtulla , D . G . Hall / Cognition xxx ( 2009 ) xxx – xxx ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Rhemtulla , M . , & Hall , D . G . Monkey business : Children’s use of character identity to infer shared properties . Cognition ( 2009 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2009 . 07 . 012 brand models ) . Moreover , although many of the people in children’s daily experience ( e . g . , their parents , their friends , their teachers ) are not representations of abstract individ - uals , children routinely come across people who embody a dual individual identity , including actors playing the role of ﬁctional characters on television , in ﬁlm , and on stage . Our examination of children’s reasoning about character toys thus holds relevance for understanding their capacity to think ﬂexibly about a wide range of everyday objects understood to possess an individual identity on multiple levels of abstraction . 2 . Experiment 1 : shared character identity , but not shared name , as a basis for property extension 2 . 1 . Method 2 . 1 . 1 . Participants Twenty - four children participated : 12 4 - year - olds ( mean age = 4 ; 5 ; 8 girls ) and 12 5 - year - olds ( mean age = 5 ; 8 ; 6 girls ) . We focused on 4 - year - olds because prior research indicates that children of this age have the ability to reason ﬂexibly about objects under multiple conceptual descriptions ( e . g . , Gelman , 1988 ; Kalish & Gelman , 1992 ; Nguyen & Murphy , 2003 ) , and we included 5 - year - olds in order to assess any increase in this ﬂexibility in a slightly older group . Equal numbers of each age group were ran - domly assigned to either the character - shared name ( N = 12 ; 7 girls ) or the accidentally - shared name ( N = 12 ; 7 girls ) condition . A further nine children participated but were excluded for failing the mapping test ( N = 3 ) , failing to answer at least three of the four ﬁller questions correctly ( N = 2 ) , or because of experimenter error ( N = 4 ) . 2 . 1 . 2 . Materials We created two versions of an illustrated storybook , entitled ‘‘Boris and the Tiger’s Trap . ” ( See Appendix for both versions of the text . ) In the character - shared name condition , the story was the tale of a purple , freckled , toothless monkey , named Boris , who was rescued from a tiger by his two best monkey friends , named Igor and Fred . In the illustrations , Igor was depicted as similar in appearance to Boris ( purple , freckled , and toothless ) ; Fred was depicted as dissimilar in appearance to Boris ( pink , unfreckled , and buck - toothed ) . In the accidentally - shared name condition , the story and illustrations were identical , with one exception . In the text , Boris’ purple monkey friend was also named Boris , not Igor ; in other words , two of the characters happened to share the same name . Page two of the storybook contained a written descrip - tion of four of the main character’s , Boris’ , idiosyncratic properties . Boris was described as having ( 1 ) a banana on his ear that he got when he was a baby , ( 2 ) a pink heart on his back that he got from his mother , ( 3 ) a mark on his back that he got from being chased by a tiger , and ( 4 ) a dark patch on his bum that he got from falling out of a tree . On this page and on all other pages in the storybook , Boris was depicted facing forward , so that none of these properties was ever visible . We kept the properties out of sight in the storybook to encourage children in the prop - erty extension task ( described next ) to associate the prop - erties of the target toy ( a representation of the main character , Boris ) with the character rather than with his illustrated representation . We also used three toys to represent the storybook characters . The target toy was a purple , freckled , toothless monkey that represented the main character , Boris . It was large , furry , and stuffed . This toy had on its back - side the four physical properties described in the previous para - graph . These properties could not be seen from the front . The distracter toy was a pink , unfreckled , buck - toothed monkey that represented Boris’ friend , Fred . Like the target toy , it was large , furry , and stuffed . The distracter toy thus matched the target toy in size , texture , and material . The name - match toy was another freckled , toothless , purple monkey . It was small ( less than half the size of the target ) , smooth , and made of hard modelling clay . The name - match toy thus matched the target toy in facial features and color . The name - match toy was described differently to children in the two conditions . In the character - shared name condition , it was said to be another representation of the main character , Boris . In the accidentally - shared name condition , it was said to be a representation of Boris’ friend , Boris . See Fig . 1 . We also used three stuffed toys of familiar kinds – a bear , a dog , and a rabbit – for the practice phase . 2 . 1 . 3 . Procedure 2 . 1 . 3 . 1 . Practice phase . The child sat at a small table across from the experimenter . The experimenter explained that they were going to play a game that had one rule : the child was allowed to point and look at the toys , but was not allowed to touch them . She placed the three familiar stuffed animals on the table : the bear and the dog beside each other on one side of the table , and the rabbit on the other side . The experimenter explained that she would ask the child some questions that would require pointing to either the bear or the dog . The experimenter asked , ‘‘Which one of these is a dog ? ” and ‘‘Which one of these is a bear ? ” For both these practice questions , the child was encouraged to point . He was praised for pointing correctly , and he was corrected for pointing to the wrong animal , pointing to both objects , or touching the toys . This set - up and these questions were meant to familiarize chil - dren with what they would encounter later in the test phase , and to give them experience in picking both objects that occupied the positions where the test objects would later appear . 2 . 1 . 3 . 2 . Storybook phase . The experimenter brought out the version of the storybook , ‘‘Boris and the Tiger’s Trap , ” appropriate for the condition and read it to the child , pointing out each character on every page of the book as she read . After hearing the story , the child was asked to re - call the names of the three characters , making reference to each character’s illustrated representation on the front page of the storybook . If he could not do this , the experi - menter reminded him of each character’s name . The experimenter then said , ‘‘I was in a toy store the other day , and guess what I found ! Look ! I found Boris ! ” M . Rhemtulla , D . G . Hall / Cognition xxx ( 2009 ) xxx – xxx 3 ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Rhemtulla , M . , & Hall , D . G . Monkey business : Children’s use of character identity to infer shared properties . Cognition ( 2009 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2009 . 07 . 012 She presented the target toy and placed it on one side of the table . She then presented the name - match toy and placed it on the other side of the table . In the character - shared name condition , the experimenter declared , ‘‘Look what else I found ! It’s another Boris ! See , so this [ target ] is Boris , and this [ name - match ] is another Boris ! ” In the accidentally - shared name condition , she declared , ‘‘Look what else I found ! It’s the other Boris ! See , so this [ target ] is Boris , and this [ name - match ] is his friend Boris ! ” Finally , the experimenter brought out the distracter toy and placed it next to the name - match toy . The experimenter then said , ‘‘And I also found Fred ! ” The left - right placement of the name - match and distracter toys was counterbalanced be - tween children . In the accidentally - shared name condition , notice that each toy represented a different character from the story : the target toy was Boris ( the main character ) ; the name - match toy was Boris ( Boris’ friend ) ; and the distracter toy was Fred ( Boris’ other friend ) . In the character - shared name condition , two of the toys represented the same character from the story : the target toy was Boris ( the main charac - ter ) ; the name - match toy was Boris ( another representa - tion of the main character ) ; and the distracter toy was Fred ( Boris’ other friend ) . To clarify for children in the char - acter - shared name condition that there was no toy surro - gate for the third character from the story , Igor , the experimenter made a brief comment , noting that she couldn’t ﬁnd Igor in the toy store . The experimenter asked the child to recall the names of the three toys on the table . If he could not , he was re - minded of each toy’s name . The experimenter then administered a mapping test to ensure that the child understood the connections between the toys and the story characters , as represented by their illustrations in the storybook . For each toy on the table , the experimenter asked the child to point to the represen - tation of the corresponding character on the cover of the storybook . By passing this mapping test , children in the accidentally - shared name condition revealed a grasp of the one - to - one mapping between toys and characters and , in particular , that the two toys named ‘‘Boris” corre - sponded to different characters in the story . Children who passed this test in the character - shared name condi - tion revealed an understanding of the two - to - one mapping between the Boris toys and the main character in the story . The three children who failed the mapping test were excluded from the experiment . The experimenter then removed the storybook from the table . 2 . 1 . 3 . 3 . Test phase . The experimenter asked four test ques - tions , interspersed with four ﬁller questions . The order of the four test questions and the order of the four ﬁller ques - Fig . 1 . Materials from Experiment 1 . 4 M . Rhemtulla , D . G . Hall / Cognition xxx ( 2009 ) xxx – xxx ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Rhemtulla , M . , & Hall , D . G . Monkey business : Children’s use of character identity to infer shared properties . Cognition ( 2009 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2009 . 07 . 012 tions were counterbalanced across participants within each condition . Before asking each test question , the exper - imenter picked up the target toy and showed the child one of the four hidden properties on its back - side . For example , the experimenter said , ‘‘Remember in my story , Boris had a banana on his ear . He got that when he was a baby . And look ! This Boris has a banana on [ the back - side of ] his ear ! See ? ” The experimenter then pointed to the two other test toys ( the name - match and the distracter ) , looked at the child , and asked , ‘‘What about these two ? Which one of these do you think has a banana on his ear ? This Fred , or this Boris ? ” The order of mentioning the two options was counterbalanced between participants within each condition . The experimenter continued to look only at the child’s face until the child pointed to one of the test toys . If the child expressed doubt , he was encouraged to guess . The ﬁller questions were similar to the test questions , but they queried properties that were clearly visible from the front of the toys . Two properties applied to the name - match ( i . e . , has freckles , is purple ) , and two applied to the distracter ( i . e . , has teeth , is pink ) . The two children who answered more than one ﬁller question incorrectly were excluded from the experiment . 2 . 2 . Results and discussion We predicted more choices of the name - match toy in response to test questions in the character - shared name condition , where the name - match was another representa - tion of the same character as the target , than in the accidentally - shared named condition , where it was a repre - sentation of a different character . In the accidentally - shared name condition , we expected random choosing between the toys , anticipating that the perceptual similarity be - tween the target toy and the distracter toy ( in size , texture , and material ) would make the distracter toy a salient alter - native to the name - match toy . Children received a score out of 4 corresponding to the number of choices of the name - match toy they made in re - sponse to the test questions . The results were clear . Chil - dren in the character - shared name condition over - whelmingly extended the properties to the name - match toy ( M = 3 . 92 , SD = . 29 ) , while those in the accidentally - shared name condition did not ( M = 1 . 58 , SD = 1 . 73 ) . To examine the effect of our manipulation as well as the effect of age on children’s choices , we conducted a 2 ( age ) by 2 ( condition ) between - subjects ANOVA . This analysis re - vealed a main effect of condition , F ( 1 , 20 ) = 20 . 63 , p < . 001 , g 2 p = . 51 , but no effect of age , F ( 1 , 20 ) = . 42 , p > . 50 , g 2 p = . 02 , and no interaction , F ( 1 , 20 ) = . 95 , p > . 25 , g 2 p = . 05 . Two single - sample t - tests allowed us to compare the means of each condition to chance . If children had no sys - tematic basis for making their toy choices , they should have chosen the name - match toy on 2 of 4 trials , on aver - age . The mean in the accidentally - shared name condition did not differ from chance , t ( 11 ) = (cid:2) . 83 , p > . 25 , d = . 24 , whereas the character - shared name condition mean was signiﬁcantly higher than chance , t ( 11 ) = 23 . 00 , p < . 001 , d = 6 . 62 . Finally , non - parametric analyses allowed us to compare the numbers of children in each condition who showed a strong tendency to choose the name - match toy . All 12 of the children in the character - shared name condition chose the name - match toy on at least 3 of 4 test trials . In the acci - dentally - shared name condition , just 4 children chose the name - match toy on at least 3 trials . This difference is highly signiﬁcant according to a chi - square test , v 2 ( 1 , N = 24 ) = 12 . 00 , p < . 001 , u = . 71 . In Experiment 1 , 4 - and 5 - year - olds who learned a character - based physical property of a toy representation of a character tended to extend the property to another toy with the same name if the second toy was described as another representation of the same character . In con - trast , children did not do so if the second toy was de - scribed as a representation of a different character who happened to share the same name . The results offer evi - dence that children as young as four years can look beyond a representational object’s unique spatiotemporal history to its abstract character identity to infer some of its prop - erties . Furthermore , our ﬁnding that children did not ex - tend the properties across objects that accidentally shared a proper name is consistent with the results of Hey - man and Gelman ( 2000 ) , who found that preschoolers did not expect two girls who happened to share a proper name to share psychological properties . At the same time , our discovery that children did generalize the properties across objects that shared a proper name when the objects represented the same character extends and qualiﬁes those prior ﬁndings . 3 . Experiment 2 : shared character identity as a basis for extending character - based , but not representation - based , properties Do children expect objects that share a character iden - tity to share all the same properties ? Clearly they do not . In Experiment 1 , children appeared willing to accept that a large , furry , stuffed Boris toy and a small , smooth , clay Boris toy both represented the same character and shared character - based physical properties , despite their differing appearances . In Experiment 2 , we examined whether chil - dren understand that two representations of a character should have only certain properties in common . As adults , we realize that properties possessed by a representation in virtue of the character it represents ( e . g . , a heart - shaped birthmark on a toy ) should be shared by other representa - tions of the same character . Properties possessed by a rep - resentation in virtue of its identity as a unique physical object ( e . g . , a heart - shaped stain on a toy ) should not be shared . In Experiment 2 , we investigated children’s under - standing of this distinction . The method of Experiment 2 differed from that of Experiment 1 . In Experiment 2 , we sought to manipulate whether the test properties under consideration pertained to the main character in the storybook or to one represen - tation of the character . As a result , we could not present the properties as belonging to both an illustrated represen - tation of the main character from the storybook and a toy representation of the character , as we did in Experiment 1 . M . Rhemtulla , D . G . Hall / Cognition xxx ( 2009 ) xxx – xxx 5 ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Rhemtulla , M . , & Hall , D . G . Monkey business : Children’s use of character identity to infer shared properties . Cognition ( 2009 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2009 . 07 . 012 ( Doing so would inform children that the properties gener - alized across representations of the character . ) Instead , in Experiment 2 we showed children the test properties di - rectly on one representation of the main character in the storybook , and we varied whether we described these properties as originating from the character’s history or from the representation’s ( i . e . , the physical storybook’s ) history . We then asked children whether they thought the properties could be extended to either of two test toys , one representing the main character and one representing a different character from the story . 3 . 1 . Method 3 . 1 . 1 . Participants Forty - eight children participated : 24 4 - year - olds ( mean age = 4 ; 8 ; 14 girls ) and 24 5 - year - olds ( mean age = 5 ; 6 ; 14 girls ) . Equal numbers of each age group were randomly as - signed to participate in either the character - based proper - ties ( N = 24 ; 15 girls ) or the representation - based properties ( N = 24 ; 13 girls ) condition . A further 21 children participated but were excluded for failing the mapping test ( N = 5 ) , failing to answer at least three of the four ﬁller tri - als correctly ( N = 10 ) , touching the objects in an attempt to look for the hidden properties ( N = 2 ) , failing to point ( N = 1 ) , or because of experimenter error ( N = 3 ) . 3 . 1 . 2 . Materials We used a modiﬁed version of ‘‘Boris and the Tiger’s Trap” from the character - shared name condition of Experi - ment 1 . Recall that the text on page two of that storybook described four properties pertaining to the main character , Boris , and this description was accompanied by an illustra - tion of Boris facing forward . In Experiment 2 , we altered this illustration so that Boris now faced away , making his back - side visible . Doing this allowed us to show the four properties directly on the representation of Boris on the page . We then created two versions of this altered story - book for use in the two conditions of the experiment . For the version used in the character - based properties condi - tion , the text accompanying the illustration on page two was identical to the text in Experiment 1 , involving a description of the four properties , along with a statement of how the character came to possess them . For the version used in the representation - based properties condition , we removed the text from the page . Doing so allowed the experimenter to present a description of the same four physical properties as in the character - based properties condition , along with an explanation of how the represen - tation ( i . e . , the illustration in the physical storybook ) came to possess them . In all other respects , the two ver - sions of the storybook were identical to each other and to the one used in the character - shared name condition of Experiment 1 . We used the purple , large , furry , stuffed monkey from Experiment 1 as the character - match toy ( representing the main character , Boris ) and the pink , large , furry , stuffed monkey from Experiment 1 as the distracter toy ( represent - ing Boris’ friend , Fred ) . In addition , we used a red stuffed bear and a pink stuffed dog for the practice phase . 3 . 1 . 3 . Procedure 3 . 1 . 3 . 1 . Practice phase . The experimenter sat across from the child and explained the no - touching rule , as in Exper - iment 1 . The experimenter then placed the red stuffed bear and the pink stuffed dog beside each other on the table , and asked the child four practice questions : ‘‘Is one of these a dog ? ” ‘‘Is one of these a ﬁsh ? ” ‘‘Is one of these red ? ” and ‘‘Is one of these green ? ” When the correct answer was ‘‘yes” ( i . e . , for two questions ) the child was encouraged to say ‘‘yes” and point to the correct toy . When the correct an - swer was ‘‘no” ( i . e . , for two questions ) the child was encouraged to say ‘‘no” . Children received praise for right answers and were corrected for mistakes . As in Experiment 1 , this set - up and these questions were meant to familiar - ize children with what they would encounter later in the test phase of the experiment ; they were also intended to give children experience in answering both ‘‘yes” and ‘‘no” to questions . 3 . 1 . 3 . 2 . Storybook phase . The experimenter brought out the version of ‘‘Boris and the Tiger’s Trap” appropriate for the condition and read it to the child , pointing out each char - acter on every page of the book as she read . In the charac - ter - based properties condition , the experimenter read the description of the properties as written on page two , point - ing out each property on the back of the illustrated monkey on the page as she read . Each property was described as originating from the history of the character . For example , pointing to the banana on the back of the illustrated mon - key’s ear , the experimenter read , ‘‘Boris had a banana on his ear ; he got that when he was a baby . ” In the represen - tation - based properties condition , there was no text on page two . Instead , the experimenter used similar language to describe the same properties as in the character - based properties condition , also pointing out each property on the back of the illustrated monkey on the page as she spoke . Each property was described as originating from the history of the illustrated representation . For example , pointing to the banana on the back of the illustrated mon - key’s ear , the experimenter said , ‘‘Boris has a banana on his ear ; my friend drew that on my book . ” See Table 1 for a full list of test properties and origins in the two conditions . As in Experiment 1 , the child was then asked to recall the names of the three characters , making reference to each character’s illustrated representation on the front page of the storybook . If he could not do this , the experimenter re - minded him of each character’s name . As in Experiment 1 , the experimenter then presented the two test toys , in a counterbalanced order , describing them as coming from the toy store , as in Experiment 1 . The character - match toy was the large , furry , stuffed , pur - ple monkey , introduced as the main character , Boris . The distracter toy was the large , furry , stuffed , pink monkey , introduced as Boris’ friend , Fred . The experimenter then asked the child to recall the names of the two toys on the table . If he could not , he was reminded of each toy’s name . As in Experiment 1 , the experimenter administered a mapping test to ensure that the child understood the con - nections between the toys and the story characters . For both toys on the table , the experimenter asked the child 6 M . Rhemtulla , D . G . Hall / Cognition xxx ( 2009 ) xxx – xxx ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Rhemtulla , M . , & Hall , D . G . Monkey business : Children’s use of character identity to infer shared properties . Cognition ( 2009 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2009 . 07 . 012 to point to the representation of the corresponding charac - ter on the cover of the storybook . The ﬁve children who failed the mapping test were excluded from the experiment . 3 . 1 . 3 . 3 . Test phase . As in Experiment 1 , the experimenter asked four test questions , interspersed with four ﬁller questions . Again , the orders of the test and ﬁller questions were counterbalanced across participants within each con - dition . The experimenter began by re - opening the story - book to page two . Before asking each test question , the experimenter reminded the child of one of the four proper - ties shown on the back of the illustration of Boris . For example , in the character - based properties condition , the experimenter said , ‘‘In my book , Boris has a banana on his ear . Remember , he got that when he was a baby . ” In the representation - based properties condition , the experi - menter said , ‘‘In my book , Boris has a banana on his ear . Remember , my friend drew that on my book . ” The child was then asked whether he thought the property extended to one of the two test toys on the table . For example , the experimenter asked , ‘‘Do you think that one of these has a banana on his ear ? ” The experimenter looked only at the child’s face until the child answered . If the child ex - pressed doubt , he was encouraged to guess . The child was free to answer ‘‘yes” or ‘‘no” ; and if he answered , ‘‘yes , ” the experimenter asked him to point to his choice . As in Experiment 1 , four ﬁller questions queried proper - ties visible from the front of the toys . Two of the properties applied to neither toy ( i . e . , is green , has a bellybutton ) , one applied to the character - match toy , Boris ( i . e . , has freckles ) , and one applied to the distracter toy , Fred ( i . e . , has teeth ) . The 10 children ( ﬁve 4 - year - olds , eight boys ) who an - swered more than one ﬁller question incorrectly were ex - cluded from the experiment . We speculate that the number of excluded children was higher in Experiment 2 ( 10 / 48 ) than in Experiment 1 ( 2 / 24 ) because the ﬁller questions in Experiment 2 were more difﬁcult . In Experi - ment 1 , answering a forced - choice ﬁller question correctly simply required children to look for a property on both ob - jects and then point to the object that had that property ; one of the objects always had the property . In Experiment 2 , answering a yes – no ﬁller question correctly required children to look for a property on both objects and then an - swer ‘‘yes” if one of them had that property ( two ques - tions ) and ‘‘no” if neither of them had it ( two questions ) . Children who were distracted or inattentive could have gi - ven a wrong answer if they failed to search carefully for the property on both objects . 3 . 2 . Results and discussion For the test questions , we predicted more ‘‘yes” re - sponses accompanied by choices of the character - match toy in the character - based properties condition , where the properties originated with the character , than in the repre - sentation - based properties condition , where the properties originated with the illustrated representation of the char - acter . In the representation - based properties condition , we expected ‘‘no” responses . Children received a score out of 4 corresponding to the number of test questions on which they both answered ‘‘yes” and selected the character - match toy . The results supported our prediction . Children in the character - based properties condition had an average score of 2 . 67 ( SD = 1 . 74 ) , while those in the representation - based proper - ties condition had an average score of 1 . 21 ( SD = 1 . 64 ) . To examine the effects of condition and age , we conducted a 2 ( age ) by 2 ( condition ) between - subjects ANOVA . This analysis revealed a main effect of condition , F ( 1 , 44 ) = 8 . 91 , p < . 01 , g 2 p = . 17 , but no effect of age , F ( 1 , 44 ) = . 18 , p > . 50 , g 2 p = . 00 , and no interaction , F ( 1 , 44 ) = 1 . 64 , p > . 20 , g 2 p = . 04 . Two single - sample t - tests allowed us to compare per - formance in each condition to chance . For these tests , we used the mean numbers of test questions ( out of 4 ) on which children answered ‘‘yes , ” regardless of what object they subsequently chose . Doing so enabled us to use 2 / 4 ( 50 % ) as our index of chance responding , as children would have been expected to answer ‘‘yes” to half of the ques - tions , on average , if they were simply guessing . Children’s responses matched our predictions in both conditions . The mean number of ‘‘yes” responses in the character - based properties condition was signiﬁcantly higher than chance , t ( 23 ) = 1 . 88 , p ( one - tailed ) < . 05 , d = . 39 ; moreover , all these ‘‘yes” responses were accompanied by a choice of the character - match toy . In contrast , the mean number in the representation - based properties condition was signiﬁ - cantly lower than chance , t ( 23 ) = (cid:2) 1 . 69 , p ( one - tailed ) = . 05 , d = . 36 ; all but four of these ‘‘yes” responses were accompanied by a choice of the character - match toy . This latter result indicates that children had a signiﬁ - cant tendency to answer ‘‘no” in the representation - based properties condition . Finally , we conducted a chi - square test to compare the numbers of children in each condition who showed a strong tendency to answer ‘‘yes” and to choose the charac - ter - match toy . Out of 24 children in the character - based properties condition , 16 did so on at least 3 of 4 test trials . In the representation - based properties condition , just 5 chil - Table 1 Test properties and origins from Experiment 2 . Property Origin of property Character - based properties condition Representation - based properties condition Banana on his ear He got that when he was a baby My friend drew that on my book Pink heart on his back He got that from his mother My mom drew that on my book Mark on his back He got that when the tiger was chasing him I accidentally drew that with a marker on my book Dark patch on his bum He got that from falling out of a tree I accidentally spilled some ink there on my book M . Rhemtulla , D . G . Hall / Cognition xxx ( 2009 ) xxx – xxx 7 ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Rhemtulla , M . , & Hall , D . G . Monkey business : Children’s use of character identity to infer shared properties . Cognition ( 2009 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2009 . 07 . 012 dren did so . This difference is highly signiﬁcant according to a chi - square test , v 2 ( 1 , N = 48 ) = 10 . 24 , p = . 001 , u = . 46 . In Experiment 2 , 4 - and 5 - year - olds who learned that a physical property shown on an illustrated representation of a character in a storybook arose from an incident in the character’s history tended to extend the property to a toy representation of the character . In contrast , children who learned that the same property arose from an incident in the history of the representation itself tended not to ex - tend the property . Depending on its origin , children thus appeared to link the same physical property to different levels of individual identity ( i . e . , that of a ﬁctional charac - ter or that of a unique representation ) . The ﬁndings indi - cate not only that young children can use a character’s identity as a basis for extending properties across repre - sentations of the character , but also that they are appropri - ately selective about which properties they will generalize . These results furnish new support for the claim that chil - dren as young as four years are sensitive to the origin of an object’s properties in making decisions about their extendibility to other objects ( e . g . , Gelman , 1988 ; Kalish & Gelman , 1992 ; Nguyen & Murphy , 2003 ; see also Ahn et al . , 2000 ; Gelman & Wellman , 1991 ) . 4 . General discussion In two experiments , 4 - and 5 - year - olds demonstrated that they could use a ﬁctional character’s identity as a basis for inferring the presence of certain physical properties in multiple representations of the character . In Experiment 1 , children extended a character - based physical property ( e . g . , a banana tattoo that a monkey character received when he was a baby ) from one toy representation of the character to another same - named toy , when the two toys were described as sharing a character identity , but not when they were described as coincidentally sharing a name . In Experiment 2 , children distinguished between properties that belonged to a representation of a character in virtue of its character identity ( e . g . , a banana tattoo that the monkey character received when he was a baby ) and those that belonged to it in virtue of its unique spatiotem - poral history ( e . g . , a banana tattoo that the experimenter’s friend drew on a representation of the monkey character in a storybook ) , extending only character - based properties to another representation of the character . Our ﬁndings indicate that young children are able to look past a representational object’s unique spatiotempo - ral history when inferring some of its idiosyncratic proper - ties . Recent research has revealed that children rely heavily on spatiotemporal evidence when making inferences per - taining to individual identity ( Gutheil et al . , 2008 ; Hall et al . , 2001 ; Hood & Bloom , 2007 ) . For example , Gutheil et al . found that children treated two toy representations of the same character as distinct individuals , and attrib - uted to them distinct knowledge - state properties . In the current research , we found that children readily extended character - based physical properties from one representa - tion to another , despite the representations’ spatiotempo - ral distinctiveness , when the representations shared an identity at the level of the character . The abstract character identity thus supplied a further foundation for inferring some of a representation’s properties . In addition , the re - sults of Experiment 1 speak to the issue of whether chil - dren expect objects that share a proper name to share other properties ( cf . Heyman & Gelman , 2000 ) . Our ﬁnd - ings indicate that children believe that two representa - tional objects sharing a proper name do share certain properties , if the shared name is connected to a shared character identity . Furthermore , the results of Experiment 2 provide evidence that children are sensitive to the origins of a representational object’s properties when making decisions about the extendibility of these properties to other objects ( cf . Gelman , 1988 ; Kalish & Gelman , 1992 ; Nguyen & Murphy , 2003 ) . The reasoning ability we examined in this research is a speciﬁc example of a more general capacity to think ﬂexi - bly about an object on multiple conceptual levels . Several previous results from the developmental psychology liter - ature suggest that children as young as four years possess this capacity : their patterns of property extensions in inductive inference tasks indicate that they are capable of construing the same material object as a unique individual , as an instance of an object category , or as a portion of a material category ( e . g . , Gelman , 1988 ; Kalish & Gelman , 1992 ; Nguyen & Murphy , 2003 ) . The current results are consistent with those past ﬁndings . At the same time , our ﬁndings reveal that young children’s conceptual ﬂexibility is even broader in scope , in that it also enables them to rea - son aptly about certain objects construed either as unique individuals or as ﬁctional characters . Character toys are examples of representational objects that are familiar in preschoolers’ daily lives , but children ( at least those in Western societies ) regularly encounter many other artifacts that possess a dual individual identity . These artifacts include physical copies of intellectual ob - jects , like novels , movies , and songs . For example , every copy of the novel ‘‘Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows” contains the same plot details ( e . g . , Voldemort’s death ) , characters ( e . g . , Harry , Ron , & Hermione ) , and settings ( e . g . , Hogwarts school ) in virtue of its being a particular work of ﬁction , but each copy may have dog - ears and creases in its spine in virtue of its unique spatiotemporal history . Moreover , copies of the book may differ drastically in value , depending on these speciﬁc histories : a tattered mass - market paperback may sell for just a few dollars , but a ﬁrst edition hardcover autographed by the author may command a much higher price . Many other artifacts represent an individual brand model , including articles of clothing , electronic goods , and vehicles . For instance , every Nike Air Skyraider shoe has a mesh upper with supportive overlays , a dual - density mid - sole , and special carbon rubber at the heel in virtue of its identity as a particular model , but each one may have its own ﬂaws , scuffs , and stains in virtue of its unique spatio - temporal history . Furthermore , the brand model identity of these objects depends on the origin of the model - relevant properties . Authentic representations must come to pos - sess these properties through a legitimate process ( e . g . , production in a Nike factory ) ; objects that acquire the same properties in any other way are mere knockoffs . As in the case of character toys , children must learn to reason 8 M . Rhemtulla , D . G . Hall / Cognition xxx ( 2009 ) xxx – xxx ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Rhemtulla , M . , & Hall , D . G . Monkey business : Children’s use of character identity to infer shared properties . Cognition ( 2009 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2009 . 07 . 012 aptly about these other types of artifacts , recognizing which of their properties are relevant to each level of indi - vidual identity . The current ﬁndings suggest that young children possess the necessary conceptual ﬂexibility to do so , but it remains a project for future research to probe directly children’s grasp of the complexity involved in thinking appropriately about these objects . To be sure , many of the objects in young children’s experience are not representations of abstract individuals . In particular , most of the people children encounter on a daily basis are non - representational , including their par - ents , friends , and teachers . Reasoning about these entities does not require the speciﬁc ability we have documented in this research . Despite this fact , the general need to think ﬂexibly about such people ( and other non - representational objects ) under multiple conceptual descriptions certainly does arise , because these entities can be construed either as unique individuals or as instances of various different categories ( e . g . , a woman may be construed as Mrs . Jones or as a person , a teacher , a singer , or a vegetarian . ) Of course , thinking about representational objects also calls for this ﬂexibility : in addition to being conceptualized as a unique physical object or as Batman , a Batman action toy could be conceptualized , among other things , as a toy , an action ﬁgure , or a piece of plastic . Young children also occasionally need to reason about people as embodiments of abstract individuals , for exam - ple , when they observe human actors playing the role of ﬁctional characters on television , on stage , and in ﬁlm . A particularly interesting avenue for future research would be to examine young children’s understanding of cases of multiple individuals instantiated in a single person . The current ﬁndings suggest that children may have little trou - ble distinguishing between the properties that pertain to a ﬁctional character played by an actor ( e . g . Voldemort is evil ) and those that belong to the actor by virtue of his un - ique history ( e . g . , Ralph Fiennes is philanthropic ) . Teasing apart two sets of human - relevant properties in a single person may , however , turn out to be harder than distin - guishing representation - based from character - based prop - erties in toys . Hawkins ( 1977 ) reported that children’s understanding of the distinction between actors and char - acters on television increases dramatically between six and 11 years , with younger children more likely to agree that , for example , police offers on television are police ofﬁcers in real life ( see also Nikken & Peeters , 1988 ; Wright , Hus - ton , Reitz , & Piemyat , 1994 ) . Anecdotal reports of fans requesting medical advice from actors who play ﬁctional doctors on television suggest that the keeping these two identities separate may be a difﬁcult task , even for many adults . Reasoning appropriately about people who possess an individual identity at multiple levels of abstraction thus may present a persistent challenge well beyond early childhood . Acknowledgements We are grateful to three anonymous reviewers for very helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper . We thank all the parents and children who participated in the research . We also thank Emily Black , Candace Brown , David Ehlen , Stephanie Helm for their assistance in data collection ; Emily Black for creating clay Boris ; and Mark Verbitsky for conceiving the plot of ‘‘Boris and the Tiger’s Trap . ” This work was supported by a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council ( NSERC ) grant to D . G . Hall , and an NSERC doctoral fellowship and a David Strang - way fellowship to M . Rhemtulla . Appendix . Text of illustrated storybook , ‘‘Boris and the Tiger’s Trap , from Experiment 1 [ Page 1 ] Once , there were three monkeys . One was called Boris , and his best friends were called Igor ( in char - acter - shared name condition ) [ Boris ( in accidentally - shared name condition ) ] and Fred . Boris , Igor [ Boris ] , and Fred . Isn’t that silly ? Boris was a monkey who liked to do silly things like swing around in the trees and tease the tigers in the jungle . [ Page 2 ] Boris had a banana on his ear that he got when he was a baby , and a pink heart on his back that he got from his mother . He also had a mark on his back that he got when the tiger was chasing him , and a dark patch on his bum that he got from falling out of a tree . [ Page 3 ] There was one tiger in the jungle who really didn’t like Boris , and he made a plan to catch Boris in a trap . He dug a big hole , ﬁlled it up with wet , sticky mud , and covered it up with sticks and leaves . But guess who was watching ? Boris’s friends , Igor [ Boris ] and Fred were watching from up in their tree ! They watched as the tiger built his trap . [ Page 4 ] The tiger started to chase Boris toward the trap so that Boris would fall into the mud hole . But Igor [ Boris ] and Fred were still watching from their tree , and they knew what the tiger was planning . So when the tiger started to chase Boris toward the trap , Igor [ Boris ] and Fred swung down from their tree and lifted Boris into the air . They carried him safely into the tree . [ Page 5 ] The tiger was so surprised that he kept run - ning , and fell into his own trap ! Boris , Igor [ Boris ] , and Fred all laughed at the tiger , who was all covered in mud . References Ahn , W . , Gelman , S . , Amsterlaw , J . , Hohenstein , J . , & Kalish , C . ( 2000 ) . Causal status effect in children’s categorization . Cognition , 76 , B35 – B43 . Bélanger , J . , & Hall , D . G . ( 2006 ) . Learning proper names and count nouns : Evidence from 16 - and 20 - month - olds . Journal of Cognition and Development , 7 , 45 – 72 . Blok , S . , Newman , G . , & Rips , L . J . ( 2005 ) . Individuals and their concepts . In W . - K . Ahn , R . L . Goldstone , B . C . Love , A . B . Markman , & P . Wolf ( Eds . ) , Categorization inside and outside the lab . Washington , DC . : American Psychological Association . Gelman , S . ( 1988 ) . The development of induction within natural kind and artifact categories . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 65 – 95 . Gelman , S . , & Coley , J . ( 1990 ) . The importance of knowing a dodo is a bird : Categories and inferences in 2 - year - old children . Developmental Psychology , 26 , 796 – 804 . Gelman , S . , & Wellman , H . ( 1991 ) . Insides and essences : Early understanding of the non - obvious . Cognition , 38 , 213 – 244 . Gutheil , G . , Gelman , S . A . , Klein , E . , Michos , K . , & Kelaita , K . ( 2008 ) . Preschoolers’ use of spatiotemporal history , appearance , and proper name in determining individual identity . Cognition , 107 , 366 – 380 . Gutheil , G . , & Rosengren , K . ( 1996 ) . A rose by any other name : Preschoolers’ understanding of individual identity across name and M . Rhemtulla , D . G . Hall / Cognition xxx ( 2009 ) xxx – xxx 9 ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Rhemtulla , M . , & Hall , D . G . Monkey business : Children’s use of character identity to infer shared properties . Cognition ( 2009 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2009 . 07 . 012 appearance changes . British Journal of Developmental Psychology , 14 , 477 – 498 . Hall , D . G . ( 1998 ) . Continuity and the persistence of objects : When the whole is greater than the sum of the parts . Cognitive Psychology , 37 , 28 – 59 . Hall , D . G . , Lee , S . , & Bélanger , J . ( 2001 ) . Young children’s use of syntactic cues to learn proper names and count nouns . Developmental Psychology , 37 , 298 – 307 . Hall , D . G . , Waxman , S . R . , Brédart , S . , & Nicolay , A . ( 2003 ) . Preschoolers’ use of form - class cues to learn descriptive proper names . Child Development , 74 , 1547 – 1560 . Hawkins , R . ( 1977 ) . Thedimensional structure of children’s perceptions of television reality . Communication Research , 4 , 299 – 320 . Heyman , G . , & Gelman , S . ( 2000 ) . Preschool children’s use of trait labels to make inductive inferences . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 77 , 1 – 19 . Hood , B . , & Bloom , P . ( 2007 ) . Children prefer certain individuals over perfect duplicates . Cognition , 106 , 455 – 462 . Kalish , C . , & Gelman , S . ( 1992 ) . On wooden pillows : Multiple classiﬁcation and children’s category - based inductions . Child Development , 63 , 1536 – 1557 . Keates , J . , & Graham , S . ( 2008 ) . Category labels or attributes : Why do labels guide infants’ inductive inferences ? Psychological Science , 19 , 1287 – 1293 . Liittschwager , J . ( 1995 ) . Children’s reasoning about identity across transformations . Dissertation abstracts international , Doctoral dissertation ( Vol . 55 , p . 4623B ) . Stanford University . Liittschwager , J . , & Markman , E . ( 1993 ) . Young children’s acquisition of proper versus count nouns . Paper presented at the biennial meeting of the Society for Research in child development , New Orleans , LA . Nguyen , S . , & Murphy , G . ( 2003 ) . An apple is more than just a fruit : Cross - classiﬁcation in children’s concepts . Child Development , 74 , 1783 – 1806 . Nikken , P . , & Peeters , A . ( 1988 ) . Children’s perceptions of television reality . Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media , 32 , 441 – 452 . Rhemtulla , M . , & Hall , D . G . ( 2009 ) . Basic - level kinds and object persistence . Memory and Cognition , 37 , 292 – 301 . Rhemtulla , M . , & Xu , F . ( 2007 ) . Sortal concepts and causal continuity : Comment on Rips , Blok , and Newman ( 2006 ) . Psychological Review , 114 , 1087 – 1095 . Rips , L . , Blok , S . , & Newman , G . ( 2006 ) . Tracing the identity of objects . Psychological Review , 113 , 1 – 30 . Sorrentino , C . ( 2001 ) . Children and adults represent proper names as referring to unique individuals . Developmental Science , 4 , 399 – 407 . Wright , J . , Huston , A . , Reitz , A . , & Piemyat , S . ( 1994 ) . Young children’s perceptions of television reality : Determinants and developmental differences . Developmental Psychology , 30 , 229 – 239 . 10 M . Rhemtulla , D . G . Hall / Cognition xxx ( 2009 ) xxx – xxx ARTICLE IN PRESS Please cite this article in press as : Rhemtulla , M . , & Hall , D . G . Monkey business : Children’s use of character identity to infer shared properties . Cognition ( 2009 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2009 . 07 . 012