Author ' s personal copy How schema and novelty augment memory formation Marlieke T . R . van Kesteren 1 , 2 , Dirk J . Ruiter 2 , Guille´n Ferna´ndez 1 , 3 * and Richard N . Henson 4 * 1 Donders Institute for Brain , Cognition and Behaviour , Radboud University Nijmegen , P . O . Box 9101 , 6500 HB , Nijmegen , The Netherlands 2 Department of Anatomy , Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre , P . O . Box 9101 , 6500 HB , Nijmegen , The Netherlands 3 Department of Cognitive Neuroscience , Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre , P . O . Box 9101 , 6500 HB , Nijmegen , The Netherlands 4 MRC Cognition & Brain Sciences Unit , Cambridge , CB2 7EF , UK Information that is congruent with existing knowledge ( a schema ) is usually better remembered than less con - gruent information . Only recently , however , has the role of schemas in memory been studied from a systems neuroscience perspective . Moreover , incongruent ( nov - el ) information is also sometimes better remembered . Here , we review lesion and neuroimaging ﬁndings in animals and humans that relate to this apparent para - doxical relationship between schema and novelty . In addition , we sketch a framework relating key brain regions in medial temporal lobe ( MTL ) and medial pre - frontal cortex ( mPFC ) during encoding , consolidation and retrieval of information as a function of its congru - ency with existing information represented in neocor - tex . An important aspect of this framework is the efﬁciency of learning enabled by congruency - dependent MTL – mPFC interactions . Introduction The existence of prior knowledge to which new information can be related generally improves memory for that infor - mation . Although the role of such schemas in learning has long been studied in psychology ( Box 1 ) , this role has only recently been studied in neuroscience [ 1 , 2 ] . In particular , whereas structures within the MTL , such as the hippo - campus , have long been implicated in the learning of declarative information [ 3 ] , recent neuroscientiﬁc data have implicated an additional , time - dependent involve - ment of the mPFC [ 4 , 5 ] , particularly when new informa - tion is congruent with a schema [ 6 – 8 ] . A second line of research has studied how the novelty of information can also improve its retention ( Box 2 ) . This raises the question of when information conforming to a schema ( congruent information ) is remembered better or worse than information that does not ( unrelated , or incon - gruent , information ) [ 1 , 9 ] , a question that has important implications for optimising learning in educational settings [ 10 ] . Below , we review recent neuroscientiﬁc research addressing this question before presenting a new framework that tries to explain the complex relation - ship between schema , novelty and memory . Review of schema in systems neuroscience of memory Several theories exist about how new information becomes consolidated into memory [ 1 , 11 – 13 ] . The so - called stan - dard systems - level theory of consolidation [ 14 ] proposes Opinion Glossary Declarative memory : memories that can be declared , that is , have a propositional truth value ( events or facts ) , normally associated with conscious recall as distinct from procedural ( non - declarative ) memories such as skill - learning , which cannot be verbalised and are often expressed unconsciously . Episodic or instance memory : declarative memory for a specific event in space and time , which normally includes other contextual information present at that time ( e . g . internal thoughts and states ) . We use instance to refer to a specific pattern of neocortical activity that is bound to an index in the MTL according to our SLIMM framework ; we use episodic more generally to refer to memories with contextual information , which is often incidental ( i . e . non - recurring , not part of an existing schema ) . mPFC ( medial prefrontal cortex ) : medial aspect in the prefrontal cortex , encompassing Brodmann areas ( BA ) 10 , 11 and 32 in humans , and prelimbic , infralimbic and anterior cingulate cortex in rodents . MTL ( medial temporal lobe ) : part of the brain comprising hippocampus , perirhinal and enthorhinal cortices and parahippocampal gyrus . Neocortex : association cortex that stores elements of a memory trace ( visual , spatial , auditory , somatosensory , emotional , etc . ) . Note that the mPFC is part of the neocortex anatomically , but not considered to represent memory elements in the present framework . Novelty : response to information that is not expected or predicted in a given context on the basis of prior experience . Note that we distinguish here between two types of novelty ( Box 2 ) : unrelated information that does not strongly match any schema , and incongruent information that is inconsistent with a dominant schema . Within the present SLIMM framework , only the latter improves memory , and note that this type of novelty cannot exist without a schema ( i . e . the two concepts are intimately related ) . Reactivation : reinstatement of a memory trace , either by online re - encountering of similar information or by replaying the memory trace during offline periods . Resonance : neural state of co - activity of multiple mental representations ( possibly across multiple brain regions ) , most probably bound via coherent ( synchronous ) activity . Schema : network of neocortical representations that are strongly intercon - nected and that can affect online and offline information processing . Semantic or schematic memory : general , factual declarative memory that captures regularities extracted from multiple encounters ( instances ) over time , and divorced from accompanying episodic details . We use schematic to refer to a ( resonating ) pattern of activity produced by strong connections within neocortex ( i . e . an activated schema ) within our SLIMM framework ; we use semantic more generally to refer to acontextual knowledge that people possess . Systems consolidation : time - dependent and offline process by which connec - tions between elements of a memory trace in the neocortex are strengthened so they are retained over the long term , independently of MTL structures such as the hippocampus . Corresponding author : van Kesteren , M . T . R . ( marlieke . vankesteren @ donders . ru . nl ) Keywords : schema ; novelty ; memory formation ; medial temporal lobe ; medial prefrontal cortex ; prediction error . * These authors made equal contributions . 0166 - 2236 / $ – see front matter (cid:2) 2012 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tins . 2012 . 02 . 001 Trends in Neurosciences , April 2012 , Vol . 35 , No . 4 211 Author ' s personal copy that new ( declarative ) information is initially dependent on MTL structures such as the hippocampus , but over time ( possibly through reactivation [ 15 ] , e . g . during sleep [ 16 , 17 ] ) this information becomes relatively more depen - dent on the neocortex . This proposal is based on evidence that MTL lesions not only impair the ability to form new memories ( anterograde amnesia ) but also impair the abili - ty to retrieve memories formed within a period before the lesion ( retrograde amnesia ) [ 18 ] . After consolidation , long - term memories are believed to be represented by networks of interconnected neocortical brain regions representing the constituents of those memories , retrieval of which has become independent of the MTL ( although see below and [ 19 ] ) . More recently , an additional role has been suggested for the mPFC in such consolidation [ 20 – 22 ] , consistent with evidence of ofﬂine replay of learning - related brain activity in mPFC ( as well as MTL ) [ 23 – 25 ] and by its prominent anatomical location within memory - related brain networks [ 26 – 28 ] . It has been suggested that the presence of a schema , in terms of a pre - existing network of interconnected neocor - tical representations ( see Glossary ) , accelerates consolida - tion [ 2 ] . For example , a lesion study in rodents showed that memories congruent with a pre - learned spatial schema ( Figure 1a ) became hippocampally independent after only 48 h ( Figure 1b ) [ 29 ] , whereas memories that lacked a prior schema were still hippocampally dependent . In addition , functional imaging in humans during a period of rest shortly after encoding revealed decreased hippocampal – mPFC functional coupling for more versus less congruent information ( Figure 1d ) [ 6 ] , whereas successful retrieval of congruent information was associated with increased func - tional coupling between mPFC and a neocortical region coding that information ( Figure 1e ) [ 7 ] . A schema thus appears to act as a catalyst for consolidation , affecting interactions between mPFC , MTL and other neocortical regions , and possibly increasing the likelihood or effective - ness of replay of congruent information [ 1 , 30 ] . A schema can also inﬂuence processes occurring during initial acquisition . For example , functional imaging showed increased activity in mPFC for more versus less congruent information immediately after encoding in rodents ( Figure 1c ) and increased MTL – mPFC coupling in humans for less congruent information during encoding , related to the strength of the schema ( Figure 1d ) [ 6 ] . These results are consistent with a large body of evidence that MTL – mPFC interactions , along with activity in other brain regions [ 31 – 33 ] , are important for successful encod - ing and retrieval [ 34 – 39 ] . They are also consistent with more general claims that the mPFC is important for mak - ing online predictions ( e . g . during perception [ 40 , 41 ] ) en - abled by schemas , whereas the MTL is important for detecting the type of novelty [ 42 – 44 ] associated with an incongruent schema ( Box 2 ) . Although there is much debate about whether patients with MTL damage can form new memories [ 45 ] , and in many situations they appear to be unable to do so ( antero - grade amnesia ) , they can still show a congruency beneﬁt [ 46 ] and there are certain situations in which they appear to be able to learn new information [ 47 – 52 ] ; these situa - tions are possibly related to the existence of schemas . In particular , recent data have suggested that such patients can learn some information as well as controls can [ 53 – 55 ] – so - called fast ( cortical ) mapping [ 54 ] – which may relate to schemas ( see below ) . Damage to the mPFC , by contrast , has been associated with a reduced ability to ﬁlter and integrate incoming information , resulting in confabulation [ 56 ] , a lack of a congruency beneﬁt [ 46 ] and more errors during retrieval [ 57 ] , which may reﬂect an inability to utilise schema ( Box 1 ; although see also [ 58 ] ) . These observations , along with lesion data in rodents [ 59 ] , sug - gest that memories mediated by MTL and mPFC might be different in nature , ranging from more detailed , episodic memories ( instances ) supported by MTL , to more general , semantic ( schematic ) memories integrated by mPFC , as expanded below . Box 1 . History of schema research The term schema was introduced from the philosophical work of Kant to developmental and cognitive psychology during the early 20th century by Piaget and Bartlett , respectively [ 83 , 84 ] , and refers loosely to an abstract , structured mental representation . This concept led to a cascade of both empirical behavioural research [ 85 , 86 ] and theoretical developments in artificial intelligence and connectionist modelling [ 68 , 77 , 87 ] ; it also influenced educational theory [ 88 ] . A primary focus of behavioural research was how schemas aid the retrieval of complex information by providing a scaffold for organis - ing retrieval of that information . This reconstructive aspect of memory offered a natural explanation of biases and false memories that occur from an over - reliance on schema [ 83 ] . Importantly however , schemas may also affect the encoding and consolidation of memories ( [ 68 ] ; see the main text ) . For example , the superior recall of schema - congruent information cannot always be explained by facilitated retrieval [ 46 ] ( e . g . by generation of schema - related information at test , followed by episodic recognition of information present at study [ 89 ] ) . A primary focus of connectionist modelling was the extraction of regularities from exposure to new information ( instances ) during learning [ 90 ] . A core problem here is the stability – plasticity dilemma , which is the degree to which a new instance should alter existing knowledge about a class of instances ( schema ) without destabilizing such knowledge . One solution to this problem ( adopted in adaptive resonance theory [ 69 ] ) was a global parameter ( vigilance ) that determined whether or not a new instance needs to be represented separately as a function of its similarity to existing schemas . Another solution was to draw on different learning rules in complementary learning systems , in particular a fast - learning system ( in MTL ) that stores unique instances , which can then be replayed in an interleaved fashion to a slower - learning system ( in neocortex ) that extracts their commonalities [ 30 , 77 ] . Enthusiasm for schema research waned since the 1980s , partly because of the overextended definition of schema that arose from the explosion of interest and partly because of some apparently contra - dictory behavioural results , where novel information ( that does not conform to a schema ) can sometimes be remembered well ( Box 2 ) . Nonetheless , there has been a recent revival of interest in schema within the neuroscience community [ 1 , 6 – 8 , 29 ] . Here , the concept of a schema is simpler than in previous psychological research , operatio - nalised , for example , as a familiar spatial layout such as the relationship between a number of locations within an arena in which a rat expects to find food [ 29 ] , or as whether a word that must be associated with a novel visual stimulus is congruent with a simultaneously presented tactile stimulus [ 7 ] . Our present ( neuroscientific ) concept of a schema therefore refers simply to a network of neocortical representations that are strongly interconnected , activation of which affects processing of new information , as expanded in the main text . Opinion Trends in Neurosciences April 2012 , Vol . 35 , No . 4 212 Author ' s personal copy Memory for incongruent ( novel ) information can also be enhanced ( Box 2 ) . This novelty advantage has been asso - ciated with greater MTL activity during encoding [ 60 – 64 ] . Moreover , the precise type of novelty is likely to be impor - tant [ 42 ] , for example whether information is novel be - cause it is incongruent with an existing schema or because it is unrelated to any existing schemas . Here we focus on enhanced memory owing to the former type of novelty ( or prediction error ; Box 2 ) , although the latter type of novelty ( such as a completely new environment for a rodent [ 65 ] ) might also improve memory through other means , such as arousal , reward and dopamine release [ 66 , 67 ] . Although the role of novelty has been acknowledged by some schema theorists ( e . g . in terms of schemas being used to direct attention to novel aspects of an experience [ 68 ] ) , there is no clear consensus , at least within neuroscientiﬁc theories , about the precise conditions under which memory is super - ior for congruent or incongruent information . Below , we outline a framework termed SLIMM ( schema - linked inter - actions between medial prefrontal and medial temporal regions ) that draws on two complementary modes for learning new information , determined by MTL – mPFC interactions , to reconcile the facilitatory effects of schema and novelty on memory . A new framework relating schema and novelty to memory SLIMM extends standard consolidation theory , in terms of a time - dependent shift from MTL to neocortical representa - tions , by adding a third component – the mPFC – that acts to accelerate direct neocortical learning independent of the MTL . Within SLIMM , the main function of the mPFC is to detect the congruency of new information with existing information in neocortex , which we term resonance ( akin to adaptive resonance theory , ART [ 69 ] ) in the sense that congruent information resonates with existing information . Box 2 . Novelty and prediction error Novelty has long been suspected as an important factor in learning [ 91 ] . For example , people are often better able to remember an item that deviated from its prevailing context [ 92 ] . Conversely , there would seem little ( e . g . metabolic ) sense in the brain encoding information that is already fully predicted . For example , there is no need to encode the presence of your BathToy each time you enter your Bathroom ( Figure 2a ) , assuming you always find it there . This is consistent with so - called predictive coding models of memory [ 81 , 93 ] , in which the key factor that drives learning is the amount of prediction error ( PE ) . Clearly , schemas still play an essential role , in that predictions are based on such knowledge . This perspective seems to entail greater learning for incongruent than for congruent information , however , in opposition to schema theories ( Box 1 ) . However , the precise predictions depend on the nature of the learned information and how it is subsequently retrieved , as expanded below . From a Bayesian perspective , PE can be viewed as the divergence between prior and likelihood probability distributions . Thus , a familiar location would establish prior probabilities over the objects one expects to encounter there , whereas the ( noisy ) sensory input would provide the likelihood that certain objects are in fact present ( Figure I ) . If one encounters a novel object in a novel location , such that both the likelihood and prior distributions are imprecise ( flat ) , PE will be low ( Figure Ia ) , at least relative to a familiar object in a novel location ( Figure Ib ) . Thus , maximal overall novelty does not necessarily entail maximal learning ; indeed , novel stimuli are often less well associated with unpredictive contexts than are familiar stimuli [ 82 ] . Alternatively , when a familiar object ( e . g . Cake ) occurs unexpect - edly in a familiar context ( e . g . Bathroom ) PE will be high ( Figure Ic ) . This situation corresponds to a maximal match – mismatch [ 42 ] , where an initial match ( recognition of BathRoom ) does not match other information ( Cake ) . High PE results in substantial learning , that is , updating of the prior distribution to more closely match the posterior distribution . This can improve subsequent episodic recognition of the object by virtue of reactivating a distinctive context ( Bathroom ) when that object is repeated [ 81 , 82 ] . However , memory will not always be improved : if cued with the location instead , the overlap between the new predictions ( updated prior ) and the object representation still may not be sufficient for Cake to be recalled . This contrasts with finding a PlasticDuck in your BathRoom ( Figure Id ) , for which PE will be low ( assuming PlasticDucks and BathToys have similar representations ) , but the updated prior for your Bathroom will overlap with the PlasticDuck representation , allowing it to be recalled . Thus , although incongruent information may produce the greatest PE , the accuracy of subsequent retrieval of that information will depend on how it is cued . This may be one reason why an additional system ( e . g . in the MTL ) is needed to store incongruent instances , in case they recur and become important for extraction of new schemas ( see the main text ) . Objects P r obab ili t y ( O b j e c t / S c ene ) Novel context , novel object PE = 0 . 3 ( RP = 0 . 2 ) Prior Evidence Posterior Key : PE = 1 . 1 ( RP = 0 . 6 ) P r obab ili t y ( O b j e c t / S c ene ) Objects Novel context , familiar object PE = 1 . 6 ( RP = 0 . 1 ) P r obab ili t y ( O b j e c t / S c ene ) Objects Unexpected , familiar object PE = 0 . 6 ( RP = 0 . 9 ) P r obab ili t y ( O b j e c t / S c ene ) Objects Expected , familiar object ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) TRENDS in Neurosciences Figure I . Bayesian perspective on prediction - error - driven learningBayesian perspective on prediction - error - driven learningBayesian perspective on prediction - error - driven learning [ 81 ] . The curves represent probability distributions , for example over a dimension of objects ( ordered by similarity ) . The red line represents the likelihood of an object being present , given ( bottom - up , noisy ) sensory evidence ; the solid blue line represents the prior distribution , given ( top - down ) predictions from the current context ( e . g . location in the environment ) ; the dotted blue line represents the posterior probability of objects being present ( and resembles the updated priors that would result from the learning experience ) . PE refers to the prediction error – the divergence between prior and likelihood distributions – whereas RP refers to recall prospect – proportional to the posterior probability ( from updated priors ) of retrieving the object when cueing with the previous context ( both PE and RP have arbitrary units ) . ( a ) A novel object in a novel context , with flat ( imprecise ) prior and likelihood distributions ( akin to the new sequence condition of [ 42 ] , source memory for unfamiliar proverbs of [ 82 ] , and the unrelated case in the main text ) . Although maximally novel overall , PE is relatively low and little can be learned . ( b ) A familiar object in a novel context ( akin to the familiar proverbs of [ 82 ] ) , where PE is increased relative to ( a ) . ( c ) A familiar object that is not expected in a familiar context , giving highest PE ( akin to the changed condition of [ 42 ] and incongruent case in the main text ) . Because of the residual divergence between posterior and likelihood distributions , however , RP is lower than in ( d ) , which corresponds to a familiar object that is expected in a familiar context ( akin to the old sequence condition of [ 42 ] , and the congruent condition in the main text ) . This has low PE , but high RP , given high overlap between posterior and likelihood distributions . Opinion Trends in Neurosciences April 2012 , Vol . 35 , No . 4 213 Author ' s personal copy Greater resonance leads to greater mPFC activity , which in turn is assumed to potentiate direct connections between neocortical representations ( e . g . through phase synchroni - sation [ 70 ] ) . Note that these are the same connections assumed to be more gradually strengthened in the absence of such mPFC input as in standard consolidation theory ; the mPFC thus accelerates neocortical learning [ 54 ] . Important - ly , mPFC is assumed to have a reciprocal relationship with MTL , such that mPFC activity inhibits MTL activity [ 71 , 72 ] . This relates to the assumption that MTL automati - cally captures new experiences [ 73 ] except , according to SLIMM , when inhibition from mPFC means that the new Original New3hrs Control HPC Key : % d i g t i m e 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 IEG counts in PrL OPA Key : NPA NM CC 50 100 150 200 250 Z i f 268 c oun t s ( % CC ) † ∗∗ A r c c o un t s ( % CC ) 100 200 300 400 ††† ††† ∗∗∗ F1 - L1 F2 - L2 F3 - L3 F4 - L4 F5 - L5 F6 - L6 ∗ ∗ P a r t i a l c o rr e l a t i on c oe ff i c i en t h i ppo c a m pu s - v m P F C Consistentschema group Key : Encoding ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) Inconsistentschema group Post - encoding rest New48hrs TRENDS in Neurosciences Figure 1 . Overview of ( a – c ) rodent and ( d – e ) human data on schema and memory . ( a ) Rodent studies have used an event arena in which rodents initially learn a number of flavour – location associations [ 8 , 29 ] . A photo of the area and a schematic of the six locations ( L1 – 6 ) of the wells and their association with six different flavours ( F1 – 6 ) are shown . The different landmarks used to navigate in the arena are also shown . ( b ) After learning such a schema , rats showed rapid hippocampal independence ( after 48 h , but not after 3 h ) of new flavour – location associations within the same arena [ 29 ] . The graph shows data for hippocampally lesioned ( HPC ) versus control animals , represented as percentage dig time in the correct well . A separate group of rodents who had not learned the initial schema did not show such rapid consolidation of the new associations ( data not shown ) . ( c ) In a later study [ 8 ] , the expression of two immediate early genes ( IEGs ) , zinc finger protein 225 ( Zif268 , left panel ) and activity - regulated cytoskeletal protein ( Arc , right panel ) , was higher immediately after encoding of the new associations ( NPA , new paired associates ) , relative to retrieval of the original associations ( OPA , old paired associates ) , learning of associations in a completely new area ( NM , new map ) and the performance of caged control ( CC ) animals , in prelimbic ( PrL ) structures ( equivalent to human mPFC ) and in the hippocampus ( not shown ) . ( d ) In humans , mPFC – hippocampal connectivity was greater , both while participants watched a movie ( i . e . during the encoding period ) and during a resting period shortly afterwards ( i . e . post - encoding rest period ) , the less congruent that movie was with the first part of the movie watched the previous day ( i . e . the inconsistent schema group ) [ 6 ] . ( e ) In a later study [ 7 ] , mPFC activity and the connectivity between mPFC and a neocortical ( somatosensory ) region representing the schema - related information were higher during retrieval of information congruent with a schema than of information incongruent with a schema . For an explanation of these different effects of congruency on regional activity and inter - regional connectivity , see Figure 2 . Reproduced , with permission , from [ 29 ] ( a , b ) , [ 8 ] ( c ) , [ 6 ] ( d ) and [ 7 ] ( e ) . Opinion Trends in Neurosciences April 2012 , Vol . 35 , No . 4 214 Author ' s personal copy information can be related via a schema . Only when there is low resonance ( or high prediction error ; Box 2 ) , as occurs for incongruent information , will the MTL bind those elements into an instance ( e . g . via a unique index in hippocampus [ 74 ] , given its pattern separation capability ) . Encoding As an example , imagine that you encounter a model duck ( PlasticDuck ) in your bathroom ( Figure 2a ) that resembles your favourite bath rubber duck ( BathToy ) but that has not been encountered in your bathroom before . According to SLIMM , your memory for this new ( congruent ) pairing of PlasticDuck and BathRoom is likely to be good because you already possess an association between BathToy and Plas - ticDuck and between BathToy and BathRoom ( the schema ) to which the new PlasticDuck can be related . The simulta - neous perception of PlasticDuck and BathRoom activates their corresponding neocortical representations , and this activity spreads to other strongly connected neocortical representations , such as BathToy , owing to previously learned associations . These strong connections mean that the BathToy , BathRoom and PlasticDuck representations resonate ( e . g . via synchronous oscillations [ 75 ] ) . This reso - nance is detected by the mPFC [ 8 , 76 ] , which then potenti - ates the strengthening of neocortical connections between the resonating representations , leading speciﬁcally to fast learning of a new , direct connection between BathRoom and PlasticDuck ( i . e . good learning ) . The high activity in mPFC also inhibits activity in MTL [ 6 ] such that no indi - rect association is made between PlasticDuck and Bath - Room via a new MTL instance . Conversely , the same PlasticDuck encountered in a Bakery ( Figure 2c ) will produce a strong novelty effect ( prediction error ; Box 2 ) because such objects are not normally expected there . In this ( incongruent ) case , SLIMM predicts that you are also likely to remember the pairing of PlasticDuck and Bakery , but for a different reason . The lack of any strong pre - existing connections , direct or indirect , between PlasticDuck and Bakery repre - sentations leads to little resonance in the neocortical net - work . Thus , mPFC is not activated , MTL is not inhibited and the MTL serves to bind the active representations of PlasticDuck and Bakery via a new instance . This leads to good ( episodic ) encoding [ 8 ] that is sensitive to MTL dis - ruption [ 46 , 50 , 54 ] . Finally , if you encounter PlasticDuck in a ToyShop ( Figure 2b ) , a location assumed to be only loosely related to BathToy ( less congruent ) , neither a speciﬁc schema nor a prediction error is likely to be evoked , and memory for that encounter is predicted to be poor . This is because there is weak resonance , requiring increased MTL – mPFC interac - tions for resolution , as both try to encode the memory [ 6 ] . Consequently , neither is strongly activated and there is neither good schematic ( mPFC - mediated ) nor good in - stance ( MTL - mediated ) encoding , leading to poor memory . Retrieval before consolidation Imagine walking back into the BathRoom shortly after encoding the congruent case . Activation of the BathRoom representation will lead to processes similar to those at encoding : reactivation of BathToy ( schema ) and hence PlasticDuck representations , resonance , mPFC activation and further strengthening of the direct neocortical connec - tion between PlasticDuck and BathRoom . Note that con - current activation of other elements of the schema ( e . g . BathToy ) can explain the bias towards remembering sche - matic aspects of PlasticDuck . Similar processes are as - sumed to happen during replay , when the BathRoom E n c od i ng ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Facilitation Congruent mPFC MTL mPFC MTL mPFC MTL Less congruent Incongruent Resonance New connection Existingconnection Activity Lowactivity Stimulus / activity Not active PlasticDuck BathRoom ToyShop Bakery Key : BathToy Inhibitoryconnection TRENDS in Neurosciences Figure 2 . Schematic depiction of the SLIMM model during encoding . Interactions between the mPFC , MTL and neocortex ( indicated by the grey - green plane ) during encoding of associations between a familiar object ( PlasticDuck ) and a familiar environment , which is either ( a ) a BathRoom , providing a congruent schema by virtue of a similar BathToy kept there , ( b ) a ToyShop , for which the schema is less congruent , in that a BathToy is only loosely related , or ( c ) a Bakery , in which a BathToy is not part of the schema . In the congruent case , the neocortical representations of PlasticDuck and BathRoom are activated by their perception , and BathToy is activated by its existing associations to both . The mPFC is activated by the resonance ( synchronous co - activity ) of these representations , and therefore potentiates neocortical connections between all of them , resulting in a new direct connection between PlasticDuck and BathRoom representations ( whereas other connections in the schema may have already reached maximum strength ) . The mPFC additionally inhibits the MTL ( indicated by the inhibitory connection ) . In the incongruent case , the lack of resonance between activated neocortical representations means that mPFC is not activated , MTL is not inhibited and the new association between PlasticDuck and Bakery is stored instead via a separate instance in MTL . In the less congruent case , in which there is only a weak connection between BathToy and ToyShop representations ( indicated by a weaker arrow ) , there is only partial activation of the BathToy representation , and hence partial resonance , and greater inhibition from mPFC to MTL is required to resolve this intermediate state . Hence , memory encoding is less effective . Opinion Trends in Neurosciences April 2012 , Vol . 35 , No . 4 215 Author ' s personal copy representation is reactivated by internal processes rather than by sensory input [ 30 ] . In the incongruent case , walking into the Bakery leads to retrieval of an instance from the MTL , which entails reactivation of not only the PlasticDuck representation but also other incidental ( episodic ) representations that were present at encoding ( see below and Figure 3d ) . Walking into the ToyShop , by contrast , only leads to weak reactiva - tion of PlasticDuck , given only weak neocortical connec - tions and the low likelihood of the MTL having encoded an instance . Note , however , that if PlasticDuck and ToyShop are repeatedly experienced together , gradual strengthen - ing of neocortical – neocortical connections can eventually lead to effective storage in long - term memory ( see the next section ) , as in standard consolidation theory . Retrieval after consolidation After a longer delay , the outcome depends on whether consolidation has occurred , that is , whether there has been repeated reactivation of the crucial representations , either by re - exposure to both or by ofﬂine replay . Such reactivation is particularly likely for the congruent case , resulting in the connection between the PlasticDuck and BathRoom repre - sentations reaching an asymptote ( Figure 3a ) . In this case , cueing by Bathroom still activates the mPFC through reso - nance [ 4 , 7 , 8 ] , but because no further neocortical strength - ening is needed , the mPFC is not necessary for retrieval . For the incongruent case , there are two possibilities . If PlasticDuck and Bakery have been repeatedly reactivated ( Figure 3c ) , multiple instances will be encoded by the MTL ( in addition to gradual cortical learning ) . The greater number of such MTL instances also increases the likeli - hood of ofﬂine reactivation of these representations , allow - ing commonalities across instances to effectively be extracted by gradual learning [ 30 , 77 ] . Thus , eventually the PlasticDuck is no longer incongruent but has become part of the Bakery schema . However , even if PlasticDuck and Bakery have not been reactivated , such that no direct neocortical – neocortical connection exists ( Figure 3b ) , re - trieval of PlasticDuck can still occur after a long delay via retrieval of the MTL instance . Although not predicted by standard consolidation theory , this possibility is consistent with other theories and evidence that some remote episodic memories are MTL - dependent [ 19 , 28 ] . R e t r i e v a l ( Long de l a y ) Incongruent without reactivation Congruent Incongruent with reactivation S e l e c t i v e en c od i ng ( d ) ( e ) ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Facilitation Key : Resonance Inhibition New connection Existingconnection Inhibitoryconnection Strongactivity Activity Lowactivity Stimulus / activity Not active Unrelated object with schema Unrelated object without schema mPFC MTL mPFC MTL mPFC MTL mPFC MTL mPFC MTL TRENDS in Neurosciences PlasticDuck BathRoom Bakery BathToy Figure 3 . Schematic depiction of the SLIMM model during ( a – c ) memory retrieval and ( d , e ) selective encoding . ( a – c ) mPFC , MTL and neocortical interactions during retrieval of associated objects after consolidation when cued by perception of the familiar BathRoom or Bakery representations from Figure 2 . ( a ) In the congruent case , PlasticDuck is likely to be recalled owing to high activity of its representation following activation spread from the BathRoom ( and indirectly from the BathToy ) representation . ( b ) In one incongruent case , recall of PlasticDuck can occur through retrieval of the MTL instance ( episodic recall ) , although this may be rare ( see the text ) . ( c ) Alternatively , if there have been repeated reactivations of the PlasticDuck and Bakery representations during the delay , for example by their repeated co - occurrence in the environment , recall of PlasticDuck can occur owing to a direct connection from the Bakery representation ( i . e . PlasticDuck has now become part of the Bakery schema ) . ( d ) Associations with incidental , unrelated events ( e . g . mobile phone ringing ) are suppressed when not consistent with the dominant ( e . g . BathRoom ) schema in the congruent case , and are hence not well encoded . ( e ) By contrast , in the incongruent case , when all activated representations are bound into the same instance , such associations are encoded by the MTL . Opinion Trends in Neurosciences April 2012 , Vol . 35 , No . 4 216 Author ' s personal copy Selective encoding and interference If memories can be retrieved via indices within the MTL system , as in Figure 3c , why is an additional mPFC system needed ? Our proposal is that an additional learning system is necessary to overcome the high levels of interference resulting from multiple MTL instances sharing common elements . The function of the mPFC is then to select the most relevant elements of an experience ( those congruent with existing schema ) during both encoding and retrieval . Thus , the mPFC not only detects resonance but also ampliﬁes activity in congruent representations by addi - tionally suppressing activity in representations inconsis - tent with the dominant schema ( possibly through an attractor - type mechanism [ 78 ] ) . Imagine , for example , that on encountering PlasticDuck in your BathRoom , your mo - bile phone rings ( Figure 3d ) . Because telephone calls are not particularly related to the BathRoom schema , any connections between the MobilePhone representation and the other active representations are de - potentiated ( Figure 3d ) . In this way , only information that is related to the dominant ( active ) schema is effectively selected for direct neocortical learning . This automatic highlighting of schema - relevant information is likely to maximise the efﬁciency of learning of new information [ 79 ] . By contrast , when experiencing the PlasticDuck and MobilePhone call in the Bakery , where there is no dominant schema activat - ed ( Figure 3e ) , all of these elements are bound into a single instance by the MTL ( i . e . incidental , episodic details , such as the phone call , are better remembered in the incongru - ent case ) . This mPFC ampliﬁcation is also important for reducing interference during retrieval by focusing on representations congruent with existing knowledge . This might explain why patients with mPFC lesions often con - fabulate , retrieving semantic or episodic information not directly relevant to the retrieval cue [ 56 ] . Predictions of SLIMM SLIMM provides several predictions for future experi - ments in both healthy subjects and subjects with MTL or mPFC damage . Foremost , it predicts that memory performance in healthy subjects can be a non - linear func - tion of congruency , with better ( schematic ) memory for congruent items mediated by mPFC and better ( instance ) memory for incongruent items mediated by MTL . Howev - er , because the nature of the memories underlying perfor - mance at either end of this congruency dimension differs , the precise shape of this function will depend on the nature of the retrieval test . Free recall or cued recall , for example , may show only an advantage for congruent items ( particu - larly if a generate - and - recognise strategy is used ; Box 1 ) , whereas tests of incidental episodic detail ( unrelated to a schema ) , such as recognition or source memory tests , may show an advantage for incongruent items . For future neuroimaging experiments , the framework predicts that MTL and mPFC will show differential activi - ty patterns and functional coupling ( both between each other and with neocortical regions representing compo - nents of the memory ) as a function of congruency during encoding , ofﬂine replay and retrieval . During encoding and replay , mPFC activity is predicted to increase with con - gruency , MTL activity is predicted to decrease with congruency , and mPFC – MTL coupling is predicted to be maximal for partially congruent conditions when mPFC and MTL are both partially activated ( Figure 2b ) . After consolidation , initially incongruent information will en - gage mPFC ( because it has effectively become incorporated in the schema ) , whereas successful retrieval of unconsoli - dated incongruent information will still engage the MTL ( Figure 3 ) . Damage to either the mPFC or the MTL is expected to disrupt the balance between the two types of learning described above . Selective MTL damage is predicted to disrupt episodic encoding and produce complete retrograde amnesia for instances [ 19 ] , along with temporally graded retrograde amnesia sparing those memories that have al - ready been consolidated [ 18 ] . However , the still - functioning mPFC will continue to encode information congruent with prior knowledge ( producing congruency effects [ 46 ] ) via strengthening of neocortical connections between novel in - formation and existing schemas . Conversely , mPFC damage will disrupt schematic encoding of information and hence lead to absence of a congruency effect , because all memories will be stored as instances by the MTL . This will result in difﬁculties in integrating new information into a schema and increased interference during retrieval of information ( confabulation ) . For information acquired shortly before the mPFC lesion ( recent memories ) , there will still be a congru - ency effect , because congruent information has been consol - idated into neocortical networks in an accelerated manner relative to incongruent information . However , there may be a brief period of retrograde amnesia for highly congruent information acquired very shortly before the mPFC lesion , when no instances were likely to be encoded and consolida - tion has not yet occurred . For more remote memories al - ready consolidated in neocortex , the mPFC lesion should have no effect ( unlike , e . g . , damage to anterior , lateral temporal lobes [ 80 ] ) , nor should mPFC lesions affect long - term instances still indexed by the intact MTL . In sum , MTL and mPFC lesions will produce speciﬁc problems encoding new - instance and schematic memories respectively , and differential retrograde amnesia gradients for recent and remote memories as a function of congruency . Conclusions and future directions Our aim has been to integrate research and theories on schema , novelty and the contributions of the MTL and mPFC to memory formation within a single framework . SLIMM is broadly consistent with a number of other consolidation theories [ 11 – 13 , 19 ] , but makes the role of schema , mPFC and mPFC – MTL interactions more explic - it . We accept that the framework is simplistic ( e . g . when assuming mechanisms that are not yet fully empirically tested , such as resonance detection by mPFC ) , and faces problems with some existing data ( Box 3 ) . Nonetheless , at a minimum , SLIMM should help the understanding and interrelation of previous , sometimes paradoxical , ﬁndings in the neuroscientiﬁc and psychological literature . We hope it will also prompt future behavioural , neuroimaging and lesion studies that test the predictions outlined above . We believe that these developments will be of fundamental importance for optimising life - long learning and education , and for treating learning and memory disorders . Opinion Trends in Neurosciences April 2012 , Vol . 35 , No . 4 217 Author ' s personal copy Acknowledgements We wish to thank Bernhard Staresina , Pierre Gagnepain , Maria Wimber , Andrea Greve , Atsuko Takashima , Marijn Kroes , and three anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on the manuscript . We also wish to thank Vincent Schoots and Simon Strangeways for graphical assistance . M . T . R . v . K . is funded by Radboud University Medical Centre , and this work was made possible by the UK Experimental Psychology Society . R . N . H . is funded by the UK Medical Research Council ( MC _ US _ A060 _ 0046 ) . References 1 Wang , S . H . and Morris , R . G . ( 2010 ) Hippocampal - neocortical interactions in memory formation , consolidation , and reconsolidation . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 61 , 49 – 79 2 Morris , R . G . ( 2006 ) Elements of a neurobiological theory of hippocampal function : the role of synaptic plasticity , synaptic tagging and schemas . Eur . J . Neurosci . 23 , 2829 – 2846 3 Squire , L . R . ( 1992 ) Memory and the hippocampus : a synthesis from ﬁndings with rats , monkeys , and humans . Psychol . Rev . 99 , 195 – 231 4 Takashima , A . et al . ( 2006 ) Declarative memory consolidation in humans : a prospective functional magnetic resonance imaging study . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 , 756 – 761 5 Frankland , P . W . and Bontempi , B . ( 2006 ) Fast track to the medial prefrontal cortex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 , 509 – 510 6 van Kesteren , M . T . et al . ( 2010 ) Persistent schema - dependent hippocampal – neocortical connectivity during memory encoding and postencoding rest in humans . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 7550 – 7555 7 van Kesteren , M . T . et al . ( 2010 ) Retrieval of associative information congruent with prior knowledge is related to increased medial prefrontal activity and connectivity . J . Neurosci . 30 , 15888 – 15894 8 Tse , D . et al . ( 2011 ) Schema - dependent gene activation and memory encoding in neocortex . Science 333 , 891 – 895 9 van Kesteren , M . T . et al . ( 2012 ) Schema - dependent neocortical connectivity during information processing . In Encyclopedia of the Sciences of Learning ( Seel , N . , ed . ) , pp . 2953 – 2956 , Springer 10 Ruiter , D . J . et al . ( 2010 ) How to achieve synergy between medical education and cognitive neuroscience ? An exercise on prior knowledge in understanding . Adv . Health Sci . Educ . Theory Pract . DOI : 10 . 1007 / s10459 - 010 - 9244 - 5 11 Squire , L . R . and Bayley , P . J . ( 2007 ) The neuroscience of remote memory . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 17 , 185 – 196 12 McKenzie , S . and Eichenbaum , H . ( 2011 ) Consolidation and reconsolidation : two lives of memories ? Neuron 71 , 224 – 233 13 Winocur , G . et al . ( 2010 ) Memory formation and long - term retention in humans and animals : convergence towards a transformation account of hippocampal - neocortical interactions . Neuropsychologia 48 , 2339 – 2356 14 Marr , D . ( 1970 ) A theory for cerebral neocortex . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . Sci . 176 , 161 – 234 15 Rasch , B . and Born , J . ( 2007 ) Maintaining memories by reactivation . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 17 , 698 – 703 16 Skaggs , W . E . and McNaughton , B . L . ( 1996 ) Replay of neuronal ﬁring sequences in rat hippocampus during sleep following spatial experience . Science 271 , 1870 – 1873 17 Wilson , M . A . and McNaughton , B . L . ( 1994 ) Reactivation of hippocampal ensemble memories during sleep . Science 265 , 676 – 679 18 Scoville , W . B . and Milner , B . ( 1957 ) Loss of recent memory after bilateral hippocampal lesions . J . Neurol . Neurosurg . Psychiatry 20 , 11 – 21 19 Moscovitch , M . et al . ( 2006 ) The cognitive neuroscience of remote episodic , semantic and spatial memory . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 16 , 179 – 190 20 Frankland , P . W . and Bontempi , B . ( 2005 ) The organization of recent and remote memories . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 6 , 119 – 130 21 Maviel , T . et al . ( 2004 ) Sites of neocortical reorganization critical for remote spatial memory . Science 305 , 96 – 99 22 Bontempi , B . et al . ( 1999 ) Time - dependent reorganization of brain circuitry underlying long - term memory storage . Nature 400 , 671 – 675 23 Wierzynski , C . M . et al . ( 2009 ) State - dependent spike – timing relationships between hippocampal and prefrontal circuits during sleep . Neuron 61 , 587 – 596 24 Takehara - Nishiuchi , K . and McNaughton , B . L . ( 2008 ) Spontaneous changes of neocortical code for associative memory during consolidation . Science 322 , 960 – 963 25 Euston , D . R . et al . ( 2007 ) Fast - forward playback of recent memory sequences in prefrontal cortex during sleep . Science 318 , 1147 – 1150 26 Ongur , D . and Price , J . L . ( 2000 ) The organization of networks within the orbital and medial prefrontal cortex of rats , monkeys and humans . Cereb . Cortex 10 , 206 – 219 27 Pandya , D . N . et al . ( 1981 ) Efferent connections of the cingulate gyrus in the rhesus monkey . Exp . Brain Res . 42 , 319 – 330 28 Maguire , E . A . ( 2001 ) Neuroimaging studies of autobiographical event memory . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . Sci . 356 , 1441 – 1451 29 Tse , D . et al . ( 2007 ) Schemas and memory consolidation . Science 316 , 76 – 82 30 Lewis , P . A . and Durrant , S . J . ( 2011 ) Overlapping memory replay during sleep builds cognitive schemata . Trends Cogn . Sci . 15 , 343 – 351 31 Staresina , B . P . et al . ( 2009 ) Event congruency enhances episodic memory encoding through semantic elaboration and relational binding . Cereb . Cortex 19 , 1198 – 1207 32 Atienza , M . et al . ( 2011 ) Semantic congruence enhances memory of episodic associations : role of theta oscillations . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 23 , 75 – 90 33 Crespo - Garcia , M . et al . ( 2010 ) Functional neural networks underlying semantic encoding of associative memories . Neuroimage 50 , 1258 – 1270 34 Siapas , A . G . et al . ( 2005 ) Prefrontal phase locking to hippocampal theta oscillations . Neuron 46 , 141 – 151 35 Benchenane , K . et al . ( 2010 ) Coherent theta oscillations and reorganization of spike timing in the hippocampal – prefrontal network upon learning . Neuron 66 , 921 – 936 36 Peyrache , A . et al . ( 2009 ) Replay of rule - learning related neural patterns in the prefrontal cortex during sleep . Nat . Neurosci . 12 , 919 – 926 37 Paz , R . et al . ( 2008 ) Theta synchronizes the activity of medial prefrontal neurons during learning . Learn . Mem . 15 , 524 – 531 Box 3 . Outstanding questions (cid:2) How precisely does the mPFC detect resonance , amplify con - gruent representations and suppress less congruent representa - tions ? How does it then potentiate synaptic changes between resonating neocortical representations ( e . g . in terms of synaptic tagging or neurotransmitters ) ? (cid:2) How precisely do the mPFC and the hippocampus interact : does the mPFC only inhibit the MTL , or is there mutual competition ? Do they interact differently during online experience and during offline replay ( when instances may be retrieved from MTL ) ? (cid:2) Why do temporary lesions of the hippocampus impair encoding of schema - congruent information [ 94 ] ? Does this happen only when the schemas are spatial , given evidence that hippocampus also represents spatial information in the rodent ? (cid:2) How does the role of MTL in SLIMM relate to other theories of MTL function , such as scene construction [ 95 ] and future simulation [ 96 ] ? Is reconsolidation related to integration of new information into schemas , and will blocking of reconsolidation thus also affect schema - related memories [ 12 ] ? (cid:2) Do different subparts of the mPFC have different functions ? And how are the mPFC subparts in the rodent related to those in human mPFC ? (cid:2) What are the precise memory deficits following mPFC lesions , for example in terms of interference , transient retrograde amnesia ( for congruent information ) and possibly even encoding of greater episodic detail than in controls ? (cid:2) How do the effects of schemas vary across development ? For example , given the relatively slow maturation of PFC relative to other brain regions [ 97 ] , does the ability to use schema change from childhood to early adulthood ? And does healthy ageing reduce the mPFC efficiency in learning new schema - congruent information ? (cid:2) How are more complex or structured schemas represented in the brain , and how can their formation be manipulated ( during encoding , consolidation and retrieval ) to optimise learning and education ? Opinion Trends in Neurosciences April 2012 , Vol . 35 , No . 4 218 Author ' s personal copy 38 Ranganath , C . et al . ( 2005 ) Functional connectivity with the hippocampus during successful memory formation . Hippocampus 15 , 997 – 1005 39 Kumaran , D . et al . ( 2009 ) Tracking the emergence of conceptual knowledge during human decision making . Neuron 63 , 889 – 901 40 Bar , M . ( 2009 ) The proactive brain : memory for predictions . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . Sci . 364 , 1235 – 1243 41 Summerﬁeld , C . and Koechlin , E . ( 2008 ) A neural representation of prior information during perceptual inference . Neuron 59 , 336 – 347 42 Kumaran , D . and Maguire , E . A . ( 2009 ) Novelty signals : a window into hippocampal information processing . Trends Cogn . Sci . 63 , 889 – 901 43 Knight , R . ( 1996 ) Contribution of human hippocampal region to novelty detection . Nature 383 , 256 – 259 44 Strange , B . A . et al . ( 2000 ) Brain mechanisms for detecting perceptual , semantic , and emotional deviance . Neuroimage 12 , 425 – 433 45 Gabrieli , J . D . ( 1998 ) Cognitive neuroscience of human memory . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 49 , 87 – 115 46 Kan , I . P . et al . ( 2009 ) Contribution of prior semantic knowledge to new episodic learning in amnesia . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 21 , 938 – 944 47 Rosenbaum , R . S . et al . ( 2005 ) The case of K . C . : contributions of a memory - impaired person to memory theory . Neuropsychologia 43 , 989 – 1021 48 Vargha - Khadem , F . et al . ( 1997 ) Differential effects of early hippocampal pathology on episodic and semantic memory . Science 277 , 376 – 380 49 O’Kane , G . et al . ( 2004 ) Evidence for semantic learning in profound amnesia : an investigation with patient H . M . Hippocampus 14 , 417 – 425 50 Tramoni , E . et al . ( 2011 ) Long - term consolidation of declarative memory : insight from temporal lobe epilepsy . Brain 134 , 816 – 831 51 Stark , C . et al . ( 2005 ) New semantic learning and generalization in a patient with amnesia . Neuropsychology 19 , 139 – 151 52 Bayley , P . J . et al . ( 2008 ) New semantic learning in patients with large medial temporal lobe lesions . Hippocampus 18 , 575 – 583 53 Duff , M . C . et al . ( 2006 ) Development of shared information in communication despite hippocampal amnesia . Nat . Neurosci . 9 , 140 – 146 54 Sharon , T . et al . ( 2011 ) Rapid neocortical acquisition of long - term arbitrary associations independent of the hippocampus . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 1146 – 1151 55 Goshen - Gottstein , Y . et al . ( 2000 ) Intact implicit memory for newly formed verbal associations in amnesic patients following single study trials . Neuropsychology 14 , 570 – 578 56 Schnider , A . ( 2003 ) Spontaneous confabulation and the adaptation of thought to ongoing reality . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 4 , 662 – 671 57 Gilboa , A . et al . ( 2009 ) Ventromedial prefrontal cortex lesions produce early functional alterations during remote memory retrieval . J . Neurosci . 29 , 4871 – 4881 58 Bird , C . M . et al . ( 2004 ) The impact of extensive medial frontal lobe damage on ‘theory of mind’ and cognition . Brain 127 , 914 – 928 59 Wang , S . H . et al . ( 2009 ) The precision of remote context memories does not require the hippocampus . Nat . Neurosci . 12 , 253 – 255 60 Kirchhoff , B . A . et al . ( 2000 ) Prefrontal – temporal circuitry for episodic encoding and subsequent memory . J . Neurosci . 20 , 6173 – 6180 61 Nyberg , L . ( 2005 ) Any novelty in hippocampal formation and memory ? Curr . Opin . Neurol . 18 , 424 – 428 62 Detterman , D . K . ( 1975 ) The von Restorff effect and induced amnesia : production by manipulation of sound intensity . J . Exp . Psychol . Hum . Learn . 1 , 614 – 628 63 Kumaran , D . and Maguire , E . A . ( 2007 ) Match mismatch processes underlie human hippocampal responses to associative novelty . J . Neurosci . 27 , 8517 – 8524 64 Fenker , D . B . et al . ( 2008 ) Novel scenes improve recollection and recall of words . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 20 , 1250 – 1265 65 Wang , S . H . et al . ( 2010 ) Relevance of synaptic tagging and capture to the persistence of long - term potentiation and everyday spatial memory . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 19537 – 19542 66 Lisman , J . E . and Grace , A . A . ( 2005 ) The hippocampal – VTA loop : controlling the entry of information into long - term memory . Neuron 46 , 703 – 713 67 Lisman , J . et al . ( 2011 ) A neoHebbian framework for episodic memory ; role of dopamine - dependent late LTP . Trends Neurosci . 34 , 536 – 547 68 Alba , J . W . and Hasher , L . ( 1983 ) Is memory schematic ? Psychol . Bull . 93 , 203 – 231 69 Grossberg , S . ( 1987 ) Competitive learning – from interactive activation to adaptive resonance . Cogn . Sci . 11 , 23 – 63 70 Fell , J . and Axmacher , N . ( 2011 ) The role of phase synchronization in memory processes . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 12 , 105 – 118 71 Laroche , S . et al . ( 2000 ) Plasticity at hippocampal to prefrontal cortex synapses : dual roles in working memory and consolidation . Hippocampus 10 , 438 – 446 72 Colgin , L . L . ( 2011 ) Oscillations and hippocampal - prefrontal synchrony . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 21 , 467 – 474 73 Moscovitch , M . ( 2008 ) The hippocampus as a ‘stupid’ , domain - speciﬁc module : implications for theories of recent and remote memory , and of imagination . Can . J . Exp . Psychol . 62 , 62 – 79 74 Murre , J . M . ( 1996 ) TraceLink : a model of amnesia and consolidation of memory . Hippocampus 6 , 675 – 684 75 Engel , A . K . et al . ( 2001 ) Dynamic predictions : oscillations and synchrony in top - down processing . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 2 , 704 – 716 76 Maguire , E . A . et al . ( 1999 ) The functional neuroanatomy of comprehension and memory : the importance of prior knowledge . Brain 122 , 1839 – 1850 77 McClelland , J . L . et al . ( 1995 ) Why there are complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex : insights from the successes and failures of connectionist models of learning and memory . Psychol . Rev . 102 , 419 – 457 78 McKenna , T . M . et al . ( 1994 ) The brain as a dynamic physical system . Neuroscience 60 , 587 – 605 79 Sweller , J . ( 1988 ) Cognitive load during problem - solving – effects on learning . Cogn . Sci . 12 , 257 – 285 80 Patterson , K . et al . ( 2007 ) Where do you know what you know ? The representation of semantic knowledge in the human brain . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 8 , 976 – 987 81 Henson , R . N . and Gagnepain , P . ( 2010 ) Predictive , interactive multiple memory systems . Hippocampus 20 , 1315 – 1326 82 Poppenk , J . et al . ( 2011 ) Revisiting the novelty effect : when familiarity , not novelty , enhances memory . J . Exp . Psychol . Learn . Mem . Cogn . 36 , 1321 – 1330 83 Bartlett , F . C . ( 1932 ) Remembering : A Study in Experimental and Social Psychology , Cambridge University Press 84 Piaget , J . ( 1926 ) The Child’s Conception of the World , Littleﬁeld , Adams 85 Bransford , J . D . et al . ( 2000 ) How People Learn : Brain , Mind , Experience and School , National Academy Press 86 Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1983 ) Mental Models : Towards a Cognitive Science of Language , Inference , and Consciousness , Harvard University Press 87 Neisser , U . ( 1976 ) Cognitive Psychology , Appleton - Century - Crofts 88 Anderson , R . C . ( 1984 ) Role of the reader’s schema in comprehension , learning , and memory . In Learning to Read in American Schools : Basic Readers and Content Texts ( Anderson , R . C . et al . , eds ) , pp . 243 – 257 , Routledge 89 Watkins , M . J . and Gardiner , J . M . ( 1979 ) Appreciation of generate – recognize theory of recall . J . Verb . Learn . Verb . Behav . 18 , 687 – 704 90 McClelland , J . L . and Rumelhart , D . E . ( 1986 ) Pyschological and Biological Models , In Parallel Distributed Processing : Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition ( Vol . 2 ) , MIT Press 91 Tulving , E . and Kroll , N . ( 1995 ) Novelty assessment in the brain and long - term - memory Encoding . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 2 , 387 – 390 92 von Restorff , H . ( 1933 ) U¨ber die Wirkung von Bereichsbildungen im Spurenfeld . Psychol . Forsch . 18 , 299 – 342 93 Friston , K . ( 2005 ) A theory of cortical responses . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . Sci . 360 , 815 – 836 94 Bethus , I . et al . ( 2010 ) Dopamine and memory : modulation of the persistence of memory for novel hippocampal NMDA receptor - dependent paired associates . J . Neurosci . 30 , 1610 – 1618 95 Hassabis , D . and Maguire , E . A . ( 2007 ) Deconstructing episodic memory with construction . Trends Cogn . Sci . 11 , 299 – 306 96 Schacter , D . L . and Addis , D . R . ( 2009 ) On the nature of medial temporal lobe contributions to the constructive simulation of future events . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . Sci . 364 , 1245 – 1253 97 Casey , B . J . et al . ( 2000 ) Structural and functional brain development and its relation to cognitive development . Biol . Psychol . 54 , 241 – 257 Opinion Trends in Neurosciences April 2012 , Vol . 35 , No . 4 219