Semantic - based Knowledge Discovery in Biomedical Literature Fatiha Boubekeur 1 , Sabrina Cherdioui 1 and Yassine Djouadi 2 1 Department of Computer Science , Mouloud Mammeri University , Tizi - Ouzou , Algeria 2 Department of Computer Science , USTHB University , Algiers , Algeria Keywords : Knowledge Discovery , Biomedical Literature , MEDLINE , MeSH Concepts , Semantic Relatedness , Swanson’s Discovery . Abstract : Knowledge discovery in literature aims at searching for hidden and previously unknown knowledge within the published literature . Swanson’s discoveries on fish oil / Raynaud disease or migraine / magnesium connections from MEDLINE , an online bibliographic biomedical database , exemplify such discovery . In this paper , we present a novel approach for literature - based knowledge discovery that relies on the joint use of ( 1 ) flexible information retrieval techniques and ( 2 ) concepts’ semantic relatedness to discover hidden connections between MeSH concepts in the published biomedical scientific literature . The approach has been tested by replicating the Swanson ' s early discovery on fish oil / Raynaud disease connection . The obtained results show the effectiveness of our approach . 1 INTRODUCTION Literature - Based Discovery ( LBD ) has been proposed by Don Swanson ( Swanson et al . , 1986a ) as a means to identify latent connections between concepts of interest , that have not been previously explicitly stated in the published literature ( Ganiz et al . , 2005 ) . For this aim , in most LBD approaches , the literature associated with each concept of interest is first extracted from an online database , and then indexed with concepts . The existence of shared concepts between two literatures reveals a correlation between the corresponding concepts of interest . A key characteristic of these approaches is that the correlation between two concepts depends on the existence of shared concepts between their respective literatures . Therefore , in such “ lexical focused ” approaches , correlations are not discovered between two given concepts if the corresponding literatures do not share concepts in common , even if they contain semantically related ones . To address this shortcoming , in this paper we propose a novel “ semantic focused ” approach for discovering hidden connections between MeSH concepts in the published biomedical scientific literature , that relies on concepts semantic relatedness . In our proposed approach , concepts of interest are first used to retrieve the corresponding literatures from MEDLINE database , documents of which are then indexed using MeSH concepts . The intersection of these literatures is then examined through the existence or not of semantically related concepts . This " semantic intersection " aims at finding hidden correlations between concepts of interest that a classical " lexical intersection " does not succeed to find . The remainder of the paper is structured as follows : Section 2 introduces background knowledge about LBD and biomedical resources , namely MEDLINE / PubMed and MeSH thesaurus . Section 3 presents some representative works in LBD and situates our contribution . Section 4 details our semantic - based LBD approach . Experimental results are presented in section 5 . Section 6 concludes the paper . 2 BACKGROUND 2 . 1 What is LBD ? LBD was first proposed by Don R . Swanson in his pioneering works ( Swanson , 1986a ; 1986b ) as a solution to discover implicit connections among information contained in the published biomedical literature . In his so - called open discovery model ( Figure 1 ) , also known as A  B  C or ABC model , the discovery process begins with a starting concept 37 A , also called A - concept , related to a research question . This concept is used to query MEDLINE online database . The set of all documents that contain A - concept are retrieved in response to this query . This set of retrieved documents is called start - literature or A - literature . Important concepts are then manually extracted from A - literature . These concepts are called intermediate concepts or B - concepts . B - concepts are again used to query the online database ; the resulting document set is the intermediate literature or B - literature . The intermediate literature is then processed and important concepts , deemed the target concepts or C - Concepts , are selected ( e . g . if A refers to an activate substance such as drug , chemical substance , proteins and so on , then B might be a physiological function , a symptom , …and C a pathology or disease ) . If concepts A and C do not appear together in the literature , one has discovered a new ( latent ) connection between A and C through the common B - concepts . This revealed connection is a potential hypothesis that should be confirmed or rejected by human experts . Figure 1 : Open discovery ( Liu and Fu , 2012 ) . Based on his ABC model , Swanson has contributed several major discoveries , from which his first discovery ( Swanson , 1986a ; 1986b ) on the connection between fish oil ( A - concept ) and Raynaud ' s disease ( C - concept ) through the common physiological B - concepts blood viscosity , platelet aggregation and vascular reactivity ; or the connection between of magnesium deficiency and migraine ( Swanson , 1988 ; 1989 ) . Relying on a different discovery approach , closed discovery models ( Figure 2 ) , or A  B  C models ( Weeber et al . , 2001 ) aim at explaining an initial observation or hypothesis on a potential correlation between two given concepts A and C . Starting with A - and C - literatures , the models explore the potential connections between A and C concepts through the existence of common B - concepts between the corresponding A - and C - literature’s . Figure 2 : Closed discovery ( Liu et al . , 2012 ) . 2 . 2 Biomedical Resources In this section , we briefly introduce the main biomedical resources used in our approach . 2 . 2 . 1 MEDLINE / PubMed MEDLINE is the most important biomedical bibliographic database . It is freely accessible online via the Entrez information retrieval system , PubMed 1 . MEDLINE contains more than 22 million records of articles from leading biomedical journals . Each MEDLINE record contains citation , abstract ( if available ) and MeSH ( Medical Subject Headings ) ( Coletti et al . , 2001 ) indexing terms corresponding to a particular article . An example of MEDLINE record displayed by PubMed is presented in Table 1 , where TI , AB and MH respectively stand for title , abstract and MeSH terms corresponding to the article . PubMed / MEDLINE’s information retrieval ( IR ) model is based on a strict boolean search without ranking . Therefore , PubMed returns a huge amount of biomedical documents without being able to rank them according to their relevance . Table 1 : A Pubmed displayed MEDLINE record . TI - The effects of dietary omega - 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on erythrocyte membrane phospholipids , erythrocyte deformability and blood viscosity in healthy volunteers . AB - We have examined , in normal subjects , the effects of a daily dietary supplement of fish oil concentrate ( ' max EPA ' ) , providing 3 g of omega - 3 fatty acids , on erythrocyte membrane phosphor - lipids , erythrocyte deformability and blood viscosity . MH - Blood Viscosity / * drug effects MH - * Docosahexaenoic Acids MH - Drug Combinations MH - * Eicosapentaenoic Acid MH - Erythrocyte Deformability / * drug effects MH - Erythrocyte Membrane / analysis / * drug effects MH - Fatty Acids / blood MH - … 1 http : / / www . pubmed . gov KDIR2013 - InternationalConferenceonKnowledgeDiscoveryandInformationRetrieval 38 2 . 2 . 2 MeSH Thesaurus MeSH ( Coletti et al . , 2001 ) is the U . S . NLM’s ( National Library of Medicine ) controlled vocabulary thesaurus used for indexing biomedical articles for the MEDLINE database . It consists of about 26 , 853 main headings ( or descriptors ) representing concepts found in the biomedical literature . A MeSH concept consists of one or several synonymous terms , one of which is the preferred term . A MeSH heading ( or MeSH descriptor ) is formed of one or several related concepts , one of which is the preferred concept . Other subordinates concepts are semantically related to the preferred concept , either through hierarchical relationships , traditionally thought of as broader / narrower relationships ( such as is - a or part - of ) , or through associative ( non - hierarchical ) relationships ( such as is - caused - by ) . An example of MeSH heading is depicted in Table 2 . Table 2 : MeSH heading example . MeSH Heading Blood Platelets Tree Number A11 . 118 . 188 A15 . 145 . 229 . 188 Preferred Concept Blood Platelet s Entry Term Platelets Entry Term Thrombocytes MeSH descriptors are organized into 16 main fields ( or categories ) ranging from Anatomy [ A ] , Organisms [ B ] , Diseases [ C ] , Chemicals and Drugs [ D ] , Analytical , Diagnostic and Therapeutic Techniques and Equipment [ E ] , … Each category is structured into a hierarchy . A given descriptor may appear at several locations in the hierarchical tree . The tree locations carry systematic labels known as tree numbers , and consequently one descriptor can carry several tree numbers . Table 3 shows an excerpt from the hierarchy of MeSH’s Diseases category . Table 3 : A MeSH sub - hierarchy . Diseases [ C ] … Cardiovascular Diseases [ C14 ] Vascular Diseases [ C14 . 907 ] Peripheral Vascular Diseases [ C14 . 907 . 617 ] Blue Toe Syndrome [ C14 . 907 . 617 . 249 ] Erythromelalgia [ C14 . 907 . 617 . 500 ] Livedo Reticularis [ C14 . 907 . 617 . 625 ] Peripheral Arterial Disease [ C14 . 907 . 617 . 671 ] Phlebitis [ C14 . 907 . 617 . 718 ] + … 3 RELATED WORK Most of LBD works attempt to replicate Swanson’s early discoveries on fish oil / Raynaud disease ( Swanson , 1986b ) , or on migraine / magnesium deficiency connections ( Swanson , 1988 ) , through either open or closed discovery approaches . 3 . 1 Open LBD Approaches Existing open LBD approaches , inspired from Swanson’s ABC model , rely on various automatic text indexing techniques to represent the literatures of interest with accurate features . In ( Gordon et al . , 1996 ; 1999 ) , A - literature is indexed with mono - and bi - gram keywords that are weighted using a classical TF * IDF weighting scheme . More advanced approaches ( Gordon and Dumais , 1998 ; Weeber et al . , 2001 ; Srinivasan , 2004 ; Hu et al . , 2010 ; Chen et al . , 2011 ) base on concepts to index the A - literature . The indexing concepts are identified either from the document content using a latent semantic indexing ( LSI ) technique ( Gordon and Dumais , 1998 ) , or from a biomedical resource such as MeSH thesaurus ( Chen et al , 2011 ; Hu et al . , 2010 ; Srinivasan , 2004 ) or UMLS 2 ( Unified Medical Language Systems ) meta - thesaurus ( Weeber et al . , 2001 ) , using a document - ontology mapping technique . Moreover , in ( Srinivasan , 2004 ) , MeSH terms ( representing MeSH concepts ) are grouped into vectors according to their UMLS semantic types ( - UMLS organizes MeSH terms into 134 semantic types or categories - ) . The set of all vectors thus obtained is the MeSH - based profile of the A - literature deemed AP . The ranked set of weighted index terms is then filtered leading to a list of selected terms , deemed B - terms . Filtering consists on selecting important terms / concepts regarding ( 1 ) a specific user selected topic ( Gordon and Dumais , 1998 ) , ( 2 ) a user - selected UMLS semantic type ( Weeber et al . , 2001 ; Srinivasan , 2004 ; Hu et al . , 2010 ; Chen et al . , 2011 ) and / or ( 3 ) the weighting score ( Gordon and Lindsay , 1996 ; 1999 ; Srinivasan , 2004 ; Hu et al . , 2010 ; Chen et al . , 2011 ) . The filtered terms , also known as B - terms , are generally used to query PubMed again and to retrieve B - literature ( Gordon and Lindsay , 1996 ; 1999 ; Weeber et al . , 2001 ; Srinivasan , 2004 ; Hu et al . , 2010 ; Chen et al , 2011 ) . B - literature is again processed through the same process as A - literature , leading to C - Concepts . 2 https : / / www . nlm . nih . gov / research / umls / Semantic - basedKnowledgeDiscoveryinBiomedicalLiterature 39 C - concepts are considered as potentially correlated with A - concepts through the intermediate common B - concepts . The strength of this correlation is measured using co - occurrence analysis ( Stegmann and Grohmann , 2003 ) , association rules ( Hristovski et al . , 2001 ) or semantically associated relationships ( Liu et al . , 2011 ) . 3 . 2 Closed LBD Approaches Closed LBD approaches start with A - and C - concepts . These concepts are respectively used to query PubMed and to retrieve the corresponding A - and C - literatures . These working literatures are then indexed , and common index terms , the intermediate B - concepts , identified ( Weeber et al . , 2001 ) . In ( Srinivasan , 2004 ) , the set of common B - Concepts , also called B - profile or BP , is build as the lexical intersection of AP and CP MeSH - based profiles associated with A - and C - literatures respectively . In this paper , we propose a novel closed LBD approach that relies on concepts’ semantic relatedness to identifying intermediate related B - Concepts from two starting A - and C - literatures . To evaluate our approach , we use it to replicate the Swanson’s discovery ( Swanson , 1986b ) on fish oil and Raynaud disease connection . 4 PROPOSED APPROACH In this paper , we propose a semantic - based approach for closed discovery in the published biomedical scientific literature . The approach aims at discovering hidden connections between two starting concepts of interest , based on the semantic intersection of the related literatures . For this aim , our approach relies on : ( 1 ) a flexible IR model to select the most relevant documents from the MEDLINE retrieved biomedical literature , ( 2 ) MeSH - concepts based indexing to represent these documents with only representative items , and ( 3 ) concepts’ semantic relatedness ( or semantic similarity ) to identify the semantic intersection between the literatures of interest . Intuition behind our proposition can be summarized as follows :  Firstly , using a flexible IR model allows retrieving a set of ranked documents likely to be relevant to the given concept of interest , from which the related literature to use in the discovery process can be effectively selected among the highly ranked documents .  Thereafter , indexing with biomedical MeSH concepts results in better sources of evidence ( intermediate concepts ) that will be used for potential hypothesis validation .  Finally , the semantic intersection of the literatures of interest allows identifying the semantically related B - concepts ( which may not be discovered through a lexical intersection ) . Our four - step approach is depicted in Figure 3 . The corresponding steps are detailed in the following . Figure 3 : The proposed approach . 4 . 1 Retrieving A - and C - Literatures from MEDLINE Starting from a given hypothesis about a potential correlation between two focuses ( concepts ) A and C , we first have to query PubMed with concepts A and C respectively . The set of biomedical documents retrieved by PubMed in response to the query on concept A - ( respectively C - ) is the A - literature ( respectively the C - literature ) . KDIR2013 - InternationalConferenceonKnowledgeDiscoveryandInformationRetrieval 40 4 . 2 Filtering a - and C - Literatures through a Flexible IR Model Filtering a literature consists on selecting its most relevant documents . For this aim , the concerned literature is passed through a flexible IR system . Practically , this consists on using this literature as a corpus in the flexible retrieval process , and then querying the flexible IR system based on the related concept . The retrieved documents are ranked according to their relevance to the query . Filtering this retrieved documents consists on keeping the only most relevant ones ( in the following , we limit the filtered results to the top 1000 relevant documents for each query ) . This process is applied to filter both A - and C - literatures . 4 . 3 Indexing the Filtered Literatures with MeSH Concepts The main objective of this step is to identify the set of representative biomedical MeSH concepts from each filtered literature . For this aim , each document in the filtered literature is indexed , and related biomedical MeSH concepts identified . Indexing consists on first extracting representative terms from the document based on linguistic text analysis ( tokenization , lemmatization , stop - words elimination ) , then mapping these terms onto MeSH entries in order to identify the corresponding concepts . An ambiguous ( polysemic ) term may correspond to several entries ( ie . concepts ) in MeSH , it must be disambiguated . To disambiguate a term , we rely on the disambiguation approach proposed in ( Baziz et al . , 2005 ) for its simplicity . The underlying idea is to estimate the semantic relatedness of each MeSH concept with other MeSH concepts associated with the other terms of the document . The MeSH concept which maximizes this estimation is then retained as the appropriate concept in the indexed document . The result of this step is a list of representative disambiguated MeSH concepts associated with each filtered literature . We denote by Ca the list of A - concepts associated with A - literature , and by Cc the list of C - concepts associated with C - literature . 4 . 4 Identifying Semantically Related B - Concepts The objective of this step is to identify the Cb list of semantically related intermediate B - concepts using the so - called semantic intersection between Ca and Cc lists . To perform semantic intersection between A - and C - literatures , we rely on the following steps : Step 1 : identifying semantically related concepts in the two literatures of interest . For this aim , we propose to calculate the semantic similarity of each concept C i in the Ca list with each concept C j in the Cc list using a semantic similarity measure . Formally : Score ( C i ) = Sim ( C i , C j ) ( 1 ) Where Sim ( C i , C j ) estimates the semantic similarity between the two concepts C i and C j on the basis of the Wu - Palmer measure ( Wu et al . , 1994 ) . Highly related concepts , similarity score of which is higher than a fixed threshold α , in both literatures are then retained to be examined in the next step . Step 2 : building the semantic intersection set . The semantic intersection set is composed of :  Common B - concepts to A - and C - literatures ;  Semantically related B - concepts in A - and C - literatures . In this case , only the is - a semantic relation is considered . If two concepts X and Y respectively of A and C - literatures are related through is - a relation , the most specific concept is semantically seen as pertaining to both A - and C - literatures ( because if X is - a Y then the specific concept X is included in Y and not vice versa ) and therefore is included into their semantic intersection set . For example , if the concept thrombosis pertains to A - literature and venous thrombosis pertains to C - literature , knowing that venous thrombosis is - a thrombosis , then the venous thrombosis specific concept will be included in the semantic intersection set of A - and C - literatures . 5 TESTS AND RESULTS 5 . 1 Evaluation Settings We evaluate the performances of our approach by using it to replicate the Swanson’s first hypothesis on fish oil and Raynaud disease connection . To comply with the bibliographic context in which Swanson made his first discovery :  only the bibliographical references prior to November 1985 are retrieved from MEDLINE ;  only the titles of the bibliographical references are used in the discovery process ;  A - concept is « fish oil » , C - concept C is « Raynaud disease » . To initially retrieve A - and C - literatures from Semantic - basedKnowledgeDiscoveryinBiomedicalLiterature 41 MEDLINE , we have used the following keywords _ based flexible queries : QA : Fish oil and QC : Raynaud disease . Then to filter these literatures through a flexible retrieval model , we used the more strict concept - based queries : Q’A : “ Fish oil” and Q’C : “ Raynaud disease” . These queries allow retrieving selected literatures of which documents only contain the considered concepts “ Fish oil” ( in case of Q’A ) and “ Raynaud disease” ( in case of Q’C ) . In our experiments , we have tested various flexible IR models in the filtering step , ranging from traditional models like Term Frequency Inverse Document Frequency ( TF - IDF ) model , probabilistic models such as OKAPI - BM25 ( Robertson et al . , 1998 ) and a group of DFR ( Divergence from Randomness ) models ( Amati , 2003 ) , as well as language models ( Ponte et al . , 1998 ) . The list of all tested models is summarized in Table 4 . Table 4 : Flexible IR models . IR Models Description TF _ IDF The tf * idf weighting function . BM25 The OKAPI probabilistic model . Dirichlet _ L M Dirichlet language model . Hiemstra _ L M Hiemstra ' s language model . DFR _ BM25 ( DFR ) The DFR version of BM25 . IFB2 ( DFR ) Inverse term frequency model with Bernoulli’s process and 2 - normalisation for term frequency . In _ expB2 ( DFR ) Inverse expected document frequency model for randomness , the ratio of two Bernoulli ' s processes for first normalisation , and 2 - normalisation for term frequency . In _ expC2 ( DFR ) Inverse expected document frequency model for randomness , the ratio of two Bernoulli ' s processes for first normalisation , and 2 - normalisation for term frequency with natural logarithm . InL2 ( DFR ) Inverse document frequency model for randomness , Laplace succession for first normalisation , and 2 - normalisation for term frequency . LGD ( DFR ) A log - logistic DFR model . PL2 ( DFR ) Poisson model with Laplace succession for first normalisation , and 2 - normalisation for term frequency . BB2 ( DFR ) Bose - Einstein model with Bernoulli ' s processes for first normalisation , and 2 - normalisation for term frequency . All these models are implemented in the generic Information Retrieval platform IR - ToolKit 3 that we 3 http : / / www . irit . fr / ~ Duy . Dinh / tools / irtoolkit / used for the purpose of our experiments . Moreover , to extract MeSH concepts from the A - and C - literatures , we used the Extractor 4 plateform which implements the state - of - the - art concept extraction methods . 5 . 2 Evaluation Protocol PubMed / MEDLINE is first queried with the related queries QA and QC respectively , then A - and C - literatures are retrieved and filtered through a flexible IR model . The filtered literatures are finally indexed with MeSH concepts . Semantic relatedness of each concept in A - literature to each concept in C - literature is then computed using the Wu - Palmer similarity score ( Wu et al . , 1994 ) , and highly related concepts ( the score of which is higher than the fixed threshold α = 0 , 5 ) are examined for inclusion in the semantic intersection set . The results obtained with semantic intersection approach are compared to those of a classical lexical intersection approach performed on PubMed results . The comparison is mainly performed through the number of identified concepts ( depicted as # concepts in the following tables ) , especially at the level of :  Intermediate B - concepts ,  Intermediate B - concepts that are related to physiology . In this case , we have to check that blood viscosity and Platelet Aggregation ( identified in early Swanson’s discovery ( Swanson , 1986b ) ) are among the returned B - concepts . 5 . 3 Experimental Results When asking PubMed / MEDLINE with query QA , we downloaded a collection of 1092 titles representing A - literature . When asking it with query QC , we downloaded a collection of 2692 titles which represents C - literature . Filtering these literatures through a flexible IR model leads to 131 ( 376 for language models ) titles representing A - literature and 380 titles representing C - literature . The indexing results obtained after filtering A - and C - literatures and the results of PubMed , as well as the results of both semantic intersection and lexical intersection are summarized in Table 5 . In each case , we ensured that B - concepts include blood viscosity and Platelet Aggregation . 4 http : / / www . irit . fr / ~ Duy . Dinh / tools / cxtractor / KDIR2013 - InternationalConferenceonKnowledgeDiscoveryandInformationRetrieval 42 Table 5 : Discovered B - concepts . # A - concepts # C - concepts # Common B - concepts # Related B - concepts TF _ IDF 196 237 32 34 BM25 196 237 32 34 Dirichlet _ LM 196 219 31 33 Hiemstra _ LM 196 229 32 35 DFR _ BM25 196 237 32 34 IFB2 196 237 32 34 In _ expB2 196 129 32 34 In _ expC2 196 237 32 34 InL2 196 237 32 34 LGD 196 237 32 34 PL2 196 237 32 34 BB2 196 237 32 34 PubMed 236 1052 103 84 The semantic intersection allowed us to identify , besides the A - and C - literatures common B - concepts , more than thirty supplementary semantically related B - concepts that were not discovered before . Table 6 depicts the B - concepts that were selected through the semantic intersection between A - and C - literatures . These concepts are classified according to their MeSH respective categories . When examining the semantic intersection set for physiology - related ( Phenomena and Processes [ G ] category ) B - concepts , we found the concepts vasodilation and vasoconstriction that has not been previously published in Swanson’s works ( 1986a ; 1986b ) . Whereas vasodilation was discovered by M . Weeber ( Weeber , 2001 ) using UMLS types and Metamap 5 ( a program to discover UMLS biomedical concepts referred to in texts ) , vasoconstriction was discovered by P . Srinivasan ( Srinivasan , 2004 ) through his MeSH - profil based approach . To the best of our knowledge , none of the state - of - art LBD approaches have discovered these two concepts simultaneously . From this point of view , our approach seems to be promising . This is especially true as we discovered many other semantically related concepts of which the ones related to diseases ( such as : venous thrombosis , cerebral infarction , brain ischemia , … ) or to drugs ( such as : stanozolol , epinephrine , apoproteins , … ) seem to be interesting features for assessing new correlations between Raynaud disease and fish oil and have to be validated by experts . 5 http : / / metamap . nlm . nih . gov / Table 6 : Semantically selected B - concepts . Category B - Concepts Similarity Score Anatomy [ A ] Aorta 0 . 89 erythrocyte membrane 0 . 89 Neutrophils 0 . 8 Blood platelets 0 . 75 blood vessels 0 . 67 bone and bones 0 . 55 Blindness 0 . 55 adipose tissue 0 . 5 Aorta 0 . 89 erythrocyte membrane 0 . 89 Organisms [ B ] Blindness 0 . 55 Diseases [ C ] Hypertriglyceridemia 0 . 92 Keratoconjunctivitis 0 . 89 cerebral infarction 0 . 86 Brain ischemia 0 . 83 angina pectoris 0 . 8 thrombosis 0 . 75 0 . 67 myocarditis formates 0 . 67 syphilis 0 . 55 conjunctivitis 0 . 5 Chemicals and Drugs [ D ] dinoprostone 0 . 88 bilirubin 0 . 75 vitamin a 0 . 75 alkaline phosphatase 0 . 71 norepinephrine 0 . 67 Nitroglycerin 0 . 6 Apoproteins 0 . 57 fish proteins 0 . 57 polyvinyl chloride 0 . 57 Carnitine 0 . 55 stanozolol 0 . 55 Captopril 0 . 5 Epinephrine 0 . 5 cholinesterases 0 . 5 ethylestrenol 0 . 5 Phenomena and Processes [ G ] vasodilation 0 . 55 vasoconstriction 0 . 55 6 CONCLUSIONS In this paper , we presented a new semantic - based approach for biomedical knowledge discovery that relies on semantic information retrieval techniques . This approach brings a novel method for discovering unknown correlations between biomedical concepts through the so - called semantic intersection between the corresponding semantically indexed literatures . Using this approach to replicate Swanson’s early discovery leads to discovering new B - concepts that were not previously identified in the state - of - art LBD works . This seems a very promising issue for LBD . F l e x i b l e R e t r i e va l M o d e l s Semantic - basedKnowledgeDiscoveryinBiomedicalLiterature 43 Works are in progress to first validate the newly discovered B - Concepts , and then to experiment the proposed approach on an open discovery process . REFERENCES Amati G . , 2003 . Probabilistic models for Information Retrieval based on Divergence from Randomness , PhD Thesis , University of Glasgow . Baziz M . , Boughanem M . , Aussenac - Gilles N . , 2005 . A Conceptual Indexing Approach for the TREC Robust Task . In The Fourteenth Text REtrieval Conference Proceedings ( TREC 2005 ) , Gaithersburg , Maryland , 15 / 11 / 2005 - 18 / 11 / 2005 . E . M . Voorhees , Lori P . Buckland ( Eds . ) , NIST , November 2005 . Chen R . , Lin H . , Yang Z . , 2011 . Passage retrieval based hidden knowledge discovery from biomedical literature . Expert Systems with Applications , pp . 9958 – 9964 . Coletti M . H . , and Bleich H . L . , 2001 . Medical subject headings used to search the biomedical literature . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , Vol . 8 , pp . 317 – 323 . Ganiz M . C . , Pottenger W . M . , Janneck C . D , 2005 . Recent Advances in Literature Based Discovery . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , JASIS . Gordon M . D . , Lindsay R . K . , 1996 . Towards discovery support systems : a replication , re - examination , and extension of Swanson’s work on literature - based discovery of a connection between Raynaud’s and fish oil . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , Vol . 47 , p . 116 - 128 . Gordon M . D . , Dumais S . , 1998 . Using Latent Semantic Indexing for literature based discovery . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , Vol . 49 , p . 674 - 685 . Gordon M . D . , Lindsay R . K . , 1999 . Literature - based discovery by lexical statistics . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , Vol . 50 , p . 574 - 587 . Hristovski D . , Stare J . , Peterlin B . , Dzeroski S . , 2001 . Supporting discovery in medicine by association rule mining in MEDLINE and UMLS . Medinfo , Vol . 10 , p . 1344 - 1348 . Hu X . , Zhang X . , Yoo I . , Zhou X . , Xu X . , 2010 . Mining Hidden Connections among Biomedical Concepts from Disjoint Biomedical Literature Sets through Semantic - Based Association Rule . International Journal of Intelligent Systems , Vol . 25 , Issue 2 , ( February 2010 ) , pp . 207 - 223 . Liu H . , Le Pendu P . , Ruoming Jin , Dejing Dou . , 2011 . A Hypergraph - based Method for Discovering Semantically Associated Itemsets . In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE 11th International Conference on Data Mining ( ICDM ' 11 ) . IEEE Computer Society , Washington , DC , USA , pp . 398 - 406 . Liu X . , Fu H . , 2012 . Literature - based knowledge discovery : the stat of the art . CoRR abs / 1203 . 3611 . Ponte J . M . , Croft W . B . A Language Modeling Approach to Information Retrieval . In Proceedings of the 21st annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval , pp . 275 - 281 Robertson S . E . , Walker S . , Hancock - Beaulieu M . , 1998 . Okapi at TREC - 7 : Automatic AdHoc , Filtering , VLC and Interactive . In Proceedings Text REtrieval Conference , TREC - 7 , p . 199 – 210 . Srinivasan P . , 2004 . Text Mining Generating Hypotheses from MEDLINE . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , Vol . 55 , pp . 396 - 413 . Stegmann J . , Grohmann G . , 2003 . Hypothesis generation guided by co - word clustering . Scientometrics , Vol . 56 N°1 , pp . 111 – 135 . Swanson D . R . , 1986a . Undiscovered public knowledge . Library Quarterly , Vol . 56 , N°2 , pp . 103 - 118 . Swanson D . R . , 1986b . Fish oil , Raynaud’s syndrome , and undiscovered public knowledge . Perspectives in Biology and Medicine , Vol 30 , p . 7 - 18 . Swanson D . R . , 1988 . Migraine and magnesium : eleven neglected connections . Perspectives in Biology and Medicine , Vol 31 , pp . 526 - 557 . Swanson D . R . , 1989 . Online search for logically - related noninteractive medical literature : A systematic trial - and - error strategy . Journal of the American Society of Information Science , Vol . 40 , pp . 356 - 358 . Weeber M . , Klein H . , de Jong - van den Berg L . T . W . , 2001 . Using concepts in literature - based discovery : Simulating Swanson’s Raynaud – fish oil and Migraine – magnesium discoveries . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , Vol . 52 , pp . 548 - 557 . Wu Z . , Palmer M . , 1994 . Verb semantics and Lexical selection . In Proceedings of the 32th Annual Meetings of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pp . 133 - 138 . KDIR2013 - InternationalConferenceonKnowledgeDiscoveryandInformationRetrieval 44