Cell size and shape are determined by developmental programmes that involve changes in gene transcrip - tion 1 . In proliferating cells , cell size regulation depends on growth rates and cell cycle progression and has been most thoroughly studied in unicellular organisms . How cell size feeds back to transcription remains largely unknown , but it may involve , among other factors , the titration of DNA - binding proteins 1 . By contrast , vertebrate cell volume regulation 2 – 4 , as discussed here , involves the rapid adjustment ( within minutes to a few hours ) of cellular volume in response to external chal - lenges or during the execution of cellular functions . Cell volume regulation is of fundamental importance for almost every vertebrate cell . Cell swelling , shrink - age and regulatory volume adjustments generally occur without significant exocytic insertion or endocytic retrieval of surface membrane . As cells are not ideal spheres and often have membrane wrinkles , they have enough plasma membrane reserve to undergo substan - tial swelling before bursting 5 , 6 . Acute volume regulation involves the net transport of potassium ( K + ) , sodium ( Na + ) , chloride ( Cl – ) and organic osmolytes across the plasma membrane ( FIG . 1 ) . This transport occurs through various ion channels and transporters ( BOX 1 ) and is followed by osmotically driven water transport , often through specialized water channels ( BOX 2 ) . As channels and transporters recruited for cell volume regulation almost always have additional important roles , cell vol - ume regulation is inextricably linked to other cellular functions ( BOX 3 ) . While also addressing sensors of cell volume and subsequent signal transduction cascades , this Review focuses on effectors of cell volume regulation 4 — that is , proteins responsible for the transport of osmolytes across the plasma membrane — in mammals and dis - cusses their involvement in short - term cell volume regu - lation and other cellular processes . Particular attention is paid to volume - regulated anion channels ( VRACs ) , which are key players in vertebrate cell volume regula - tion that not only transport Cl − , but also various organic osmolytes . VRACs have been studied biophysically and physiologically for decades 7 , 8 , but their molecular com - position ( of LRRC8 proteins ) and the ability of particular LRRC8 heteromers to transport certain metabolites and drugs have only been established recently 9 – 11 . Necessity of volume regulation Biochemical reactions and equilibria depend on the concentrations of the reaction partners involved . Consequently , cells must avoid short - term changes in volume that will globally affect the concentrations of cellular constituents and thereby interfere with cellular functions . For instance , molecular crowding and ionic imbalance caused by cell shrinkage slows diffusion and affects vesicle traffic 12 . Furthermore , changes to intra cellular ion concentrations resulting from volume changes can affect cellular excitability and signalling by altering ion gradients across the plasma membrane . Cell swelling is dangerous as it may — in extreme cases — lead to cell bursting . When vertebrate cells are exposed to a hypo - or hyper - tonic external medium , they swell or shrink , respectively , because they lack rigid extracellular cell walls ( as found , for example , in plants and bacteria ) , and osmotic Leibniz - Institut für Molekulare Pharmakologie ( FMP ) and Max - Delbrück - Centrum für Molekulare Medizin ( MDC ) , Robert - Rössle - Strasse 10 , 13125 Berlin , Germany . jentsch @ fmp - berlin . de doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2016 . 29 Published online 1 April 2016 Osmolytes Dissolved substances that contribute to osmolarity ; in biology , the term mainly refers to substances playing a significant part in osmoregulation . Osmolytes can be electrically charged or neutral , as only the concentration of particles matters . Hypo - or hypertonic Condition in which the concentration of osmolytes that are not freely membrane permeable is lower or higher , respectively , on the reference side of a membrane , compared with the other side . This concentration difference creates an osmotic pressure . VRACs and other ion channels and transporters in the regulation of cell volume and beyond Thomas J . Jentsch Abstract | Cells need to regulate their volume to counteract osmotic swelling or shrinkage , as well as during cell division , growth , migration and cell death . Mammalian cells adjust their volume by transporting potassium , sodium , chloride and small organic osmolytes using plasma membrane channels and transporters . This generates osmotic gradients , which drive water in and out of cells . Key players in this process are volume - regulated anion channels ( VRACs ) , the composition of which has recently been identified and shown to encompass LRRC8 heteromers . VRACs also transport metabolites and drugs and function in extracellular signal transduction , apoptosis and anticancer drug resistance . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 17 | MAY 2016 | 293 © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Osmolarity Concentration of solute particles per kg of solution , irrespective of their ability to freely cross a given membrane . gradients drive water across their outer membrane . Even disregarding differences in volume - regulatory processes , the rate of osmotic cell swelling or shrinkage can vary widely between cell types because of differences in the water permeability of their plasma membranes . Biological lipid bilayers have finite water permeability , which can be markedly increased by dedica ted water channels termed aquaporins 13 , 14 ( BOX 2 ) . Although most mammalian cells are protected from large exter - nal osmotic disturbances , because the extracellular space of these tissue - embedded cells is controlled by systemic osmoregulation 15 , some cells — such as those in the gastrointestinal tract or distal kidney tubules — may be exposed to substantial changes in extracellular osmolarity . Moreover , with a pathological decrease in extracellular Na + levels ( known as hyponatraemia ) , extracellular osmolarity may be reduced to a degree that causes cerebral oedema . Osmotic challenges may also originate in the cytoplasm , for instance , during the breakdown of macromolecules into a large number of ( hence osmotically more active ) building blocks or during glucose stimulation of pancreatic β - cells 16 . In almost all cells , osmotic swelling or shrinkage is followed by cell - intrinsic regulatory processes that are called regulatory volume decrease ( RVD ) or regulatory volume increase ( RVI ) , respectively , which tend to restore the initial cell volume ( FIG . 1 ) . RVD and RVI are generally studied ( see Supplementary information S1 ( box ) ) using Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology TAUT NKCC KCC VRAC K + channels NHE AE HICC H 2 O H 2 O H 2 O HCO 3 – AE Na + Na + Na + Na + , K + K + , Na + Taurine Organic osmolytes CI – CI – CI – CI – H + Ca 2 + - activated CI – channels Na + K + H + CI – HCO 3 – 145 5 10 – 7 . 4 12025 10 – 35 to – 80 mV 140 10 – 7 . 2 5 – 40 20 0 mV Typical extra - and intracellular ion concentrations ( mM , or M for H + ) and voltages in mammals Extracellular Intracellular K + K + Figure 1 | Plasma membrane channels and transporters involved in cell volume regulation . Cells regulate their volume by adjusting the levels of intracellular osmolytes , including the inorganic ions Cl − , K + and Na + , and small organic compounds such as taurine or amino acids . This generates osmotic gradients , which then drive water across the membrane by diffusion through the bilayer or , more efficiently , through aquaporin water channels ( BOX 2 ) . Shrunken cells ( left ) recover their volume by regulatory volume increase ( RVI ) . Depending on the cell type , this mainly involves the parallel activation of Na + / H + exchangers ( NHEs ; mainly NHE1 ) and Cl − / HCO 3− anion exchangers ( AEs ; mainly AE2 ) , or the stimulation of Na + / K + / 2Cl − cotransporters ( NKCCs ; mainly NKCC1 ) . Both processes increase cytoplasmic Na + and Cl − concentrations . In some cells , the activation of hypertonicity - activated , non - selective cation channels ( HICCs ) , for which molecular correlates have not been firmly established , can also be involved and mainly leads to Na + influx , which requires a parallel conductance for electroneutrality of overall transport ( not shown ) . In all three cases , the Na + / K + - ATPase ( not shown ) will gradually replace intracellular Na + with K + . Na + - coupled uptake of taurine by Na + - and Cl − - dependent taurine transporter TAUT ( also known as SLC6A6 ) rather contributes to long - term uptake of this organic osmolyte during RVI . In regulatory volume decrease ( RVD ; right ) , cells recover their volume by extruding K + , Cl − and organic osmolytes like taurine . Loss of KCl may occur through K + / Cl − cotransporters ( KCCs ; mainly KCC1 , 3 or 4 ) or through parallel Cl − and K + channels . Key players in RVD are the ubiquitously expressed volume - regulated anion channels ( VRACs ) , which are LRRC8 heteromers . These , depending on subunit composition , conduct not only Cl − , but also organic osmolytes . In some cells , in which swelling induces a rise in intracellular Ca 2 + concentration , Cl − may also exit through various Ca 2 + - activated Cl − channels . Channel - mediated Cl − exit must be electrically balanced by K + efflux , which can occur through a range of constitutively open or swelling - activated K + channels . Inset : typical extra - and intracellular concentrations of ions involved in mammalian volume regulation . Note that the direction of passive ( channel - mediated ) ion transport depends not only on the concentration difference , but also on the voltage across the plasma membrane ( the electrochemical gradient as given by the Nernst equation ; see glossary term ‘Electrochemical gradients’ ) . The intracellular Cl − concentration shows substantial variation between cell types . In most cells , with the notable exception of most adult neurons , its electrochemical potential will favour Cl − exit ( through VRACs or other Cl − channels ) . R E V I E W S 294 | MAY 2016 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nrm © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Depolarization A change in the resting voltage of cells ( - 40 to - 80 mV inside versus outside ) to more positive values . A change to more negative potentials is called hyperpolarization . large non - physiological changes in osmolarity . Under most physiological conditions , however , cell volume regulation occurs in the absence of large osmotic gradi - ents or can be initiated without any osmotic imbalance , a process termed near - isotonic volume regulation . Cell volume changes , or ‘side - products’ of volume regulation such as changes in the voltage across the plasma mem - brane , may influence other cellular processes ( BOX 3 ) . For instance , hepatocyte metabolism can be influenced by cell swelling or shrinkage 17 , and glucose - induced swell - ing of β - cells may stimulate insulin secretion , because activation of VRACs may lead to Cl − efflux and thereby to depolarization of the cell 18 ( BOX 3 ) . In these cases , changes in cell volume may be signals for separate cellular events . Even in the absence of osmotic challenges , cells must regulate their volume , for instance , during cell division and growth 2 . Volume - regulatory mechanisms may also play a part in cell migration , with local intracellular osmolarity and volume being increased at the leading edge and decreased at the trailing edge 19 , 20 . The passage of salt and water across apical and basolateral mem - branes must be closely balanced during transepithelial transport , and this may involve volume - sensitive ion transporters . Cells can also change their cell volume in response to external stimuli . For instance , hepato - cytes shrink or swell upon stimulation by glucagon and insulin , respectively 21 . Finally , cell volume changes during cell death , with necrosis being generally associated with cell swelling and apoptosis with cell shrinkage . Cell shrinkage precedes other apoptotic changes 22 – 24 in most mammalian cells , with only a few exceptions 25 . Inhibition of this apoptotic volume decrease ( AVD ) by extracellular hypertonicity 26 , various K + channel blockers 22 , 27 , inhibitors of VRACs 22 , 28 or genetic disruption of underlying LRRC8 proteins 11 suppressed drug - induced apoptosis . These findings sug - gest a role for AVD in the progression of apoptosis and in drug resistance in cancer 11 , 22 – 24 . Cellular osmolytes Cells regulate their volume by adjusting the intra cellular concentrations of dissolved particles ( osmolytes ) that secondarily drive water flux across their membrane ( FIG . 1 ) . Osmolytes can be electrically charged ( such as Cl − , K + or glutamate − ) or neutral ( such as myo - inositol or taurine , a ‘zwitterion’ that carries both a positive and a negative charge at physiological pH ) . To exert signifi cant osmotic pressure , osmolytes must be poorly membrane - permeable and should be present at suffi - ciently high concentrations . Among inorganic ions , only K + ( with intracellular concentration ( [ K + ] i ) ~ 140 mM ) , Na + ( [ Na + ] i ~ 10 mM ) and Cl – ( [ Cl − ] i ~ 5 – 40 mM , varying with cell type ) are important osmolytes in vertebrate vol - ume regulation ( see FIG . 1 , inset ) . Although intra cellular cytosolic bicarbonate concentrations ( [ HCO 3− ] i ) are sufficiently high ( ~ 20 mM ) , the equilibrium between [ HCO 3− ] i and [ H + ] i at a given , constant concentration of CO 2 ( ~ 5 % ) implies that large changes in [ HCO 3− ] i during volume regulation would lead to sizeable , pos - sibly harmful , changes in intracellular pH ( pH i ) . Hence , HCO 3 − is poorly suited as a volume - regulatory osmolyte . An important consideration with charged osmolytes is the requirement for the maintenance of overall electro - neutrality of transport . In RVD , for instance , the efflux of Cl − and K + must be almost exactly matched , either by directly coupled , electroneutral transport through K + / Cl − cotransporters or by indirect electrical coupling of K + and Cl − channels . Even very small imbalances between the transport of positive and negative charges lead to large changes in the plasma membrane voltage , which must be maintained within a maximal range of a few tens of mVs . Besides inorganic ions , small organic compounds are key cellular osmolytes . These include taurine , sorbitol , betaine , myo - inositol and glycerophosphocholine . The concentrations of these compounds seem to be suffi cient for their function as osmolytes . For instance , tissue concentrations of taurine typically range from 3 to 40 mM 29 . Particularly high concentrations of organic Box 1 | Ion transporting proteins Ion transporting proteins are membrane - embedded proteins or protein complexes that span the lipid bilayer several times to create an ion translocation pathway . Some transporters function as monomers , whereas others are multimers of identical , homologous or non - homologous proteins . They may form a single translocation pathway , but some may have two or more translocation pathways ( for instance , one per subunit in the dimeric CLC chloride channels or in tetrameric water channels ( BOX 2 ) ) . Functionally , ion transporting proteins can be classified into pumps , transporters and channels . Pumps can transport fixed numbers of ions against their electrochemical gradients through conformational changes driven by direct input of metabolic energy , mostly ATP hydrolysis . This type of transport is called ‘active’ . Examples include H + - ATPases that transport protons , and the Na + / K + - ATPase ( which extrudes 3 Na + ions and imports 2 K + ions in one transport cycle ) that is a major determinant of all other ion plasma membrane ion gradients in mammalian cells . Ion transporters are generally defined as also requiring a conformational change per translocation of a fixed number of ions , but they operate without direct input of metabolic energy . The transporter subclasses are cotransporters ( symports ) that couple the movement of two or more ion species in the same direction ( for instance , KCC K + / Cl + cotransporters or NKCC Na + / K + / 2Cl − cotransporters ) , or exchangers ( antiports ) that obligatorily exchange an ion from one side of the membrane for another one on the other side ( such as Na + / H + exchangers ( NHEs ) or Cl − / HCO 3− anion exchangers ( AEs ) ) . Strict coupling means that the gradient of one ion can drive the other ion against its gradients ( termed ‘secondary active’ transport ) . Mammalian cells often use the large inwardly directed Na + gradient to drive the transport of other ions or organic substrates . The charge of transported ions and the coupling ratio determines whether their transport is ‘electroneutral’ ( meaning that it does not generate electrical currents ; examples are KCC and NKCC cotransporters and AEs ) , or ‘electrogenic’ ( such as CLC 2Cl − / H + exchangers or NCX 3Na + / Ca 2 + exchangers ) . Ion channels , by contrast , have a conduction pathway ( that is , a ‘pore’ ) for the passive diffusion of ions along their electrochemical gradient . Their transport is intrinsically electrogenic . Channels are generally ‘gated’ ( opened and closed ) by a conformational change . Once a channel is open , a non - fixed , large number of ions can pass through . Ion channels generally have much higher transport rates than ion transporters or pumps . Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Cotransporter ( symport ) Exchanger ( antiport ) Channel Extra - cellular Cytosol ATP ADP + P i Pump Active transport Passive diﬀusion Secondary active transport R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 17 | MAY 2016 | 295 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Electrochemical gradients The passive , diffusive transport of an ion across a membrane through a channel is driven not only by the concentration difference of that ion , but also by the voltage across that membrane . The driving force is given by the difference in electrochemical potential according to the Nernst equation , for example , for a singly charged anion A − by E A = ( RT / F ) * ln ( [ A − ] i / [ A − ] o ) , with R being the gas constant , T the absolute temperature , F Faraday’s constant , and [ A − ] i the intracellular and [ A − ] o the extracellular concentration of the anion . Donnan effects Effects on the voltage and concentration differences of charged particles across a semipermeable membrane , caused by the impermeability of the membrane to one ionic species . osmolytes are found in kidney medulla 30 , which needs to be hyperosmolar to concentrate urine . After exposure to hypertonicity causing cell shrinkage and an initial , rapid RVI response based on ionic fluxes , these organic osmolytes accumulate in cells , mainly through Na + gradient - driven transporters , which are regulated by the hypertonicity - activated transcription factor TONEBP ( also known as NFAT5 or OREBP ) . The gradual substi - tution of the accumulated ions by biologically rather inert organic osmolytes allows intracellular ion concentrations to slowly return to near - normal levels , thereby avoiding the harmful effects of high intracellular ionic strength and altered plasma membrane ion gradients . Whereas organic osmolytes play a minor part in short - term RVI because of their low uptake rates , some organic osmolytes like taurine or glutamate play a part in short - term RVD , because they can be rapidly released by VRACs ( FIG . 1 ) . Mechanisms of cell volume regulation Short - term regulatory volume changes ( RVD and RVI ) require a fast reversal of the osmotic gradients that led to cell swelling or shrinkage , respectively . This is accom - plished by the activation of plasma membrane channels and transporters ( BOX 1 ) that transport Na + , K + , Cl − or ( in RVD ) organic osmolytes . The net transport by both channels and transporters is determined by the electro - chemical gradients of their substrates and does not involve direct expenditure of metabolic energy . However , ion pumps ( mainly the Na + / K + - ATPase ) are ultimately responsible for the generation of cellular ion gradients . Inhibition of the Na + / K + - ATPase — for example , during anoxia — eventually leads to a dissipation of ion gradi - ents and to cell swelling owing to Donnan effects . None of the channels or transporters that are involved in RVD or RVI is exclusively , and often not even mainly , dedicated to cell volume regulation . Given the molecular diversity of ion channels and transporters , there is a consider able redundancy of volume - regulatory effectors ( TABLE 1 ) . Different cells may use different sets of ion transport proteins for regulating their volume . This section will describe the major mechanisms and principles governing volume regulation by these membrane effectors . Regulatory volume increase . RVI mainly involves the cellular uptake of Na + , K + and Cl − . Excess intra - cellular Na + is secondarily exchanged for K + by the Na + / K + - ATPase . Although large electrochemical gradi - ents favour Na + entry , which could secondarily drive Cl − influx in response to cellular depolarization , Na + - and Cl − - selective channels are generally not used in RVI . However , hypertonicity - induced cation channels ( HICCs ) that conduct both Na + and K + can be involved in RVI in some cells 31 , 32 . The molecular identity of these channels has not yet been firmly established . RVI probably mainly involves Na + / K + / 2Cl − ( NKCC ) cotransporters or a parallel activation of Na + / H + and Cl − / HCO 3 − exchangers ( FIG . 1 ; TABLE 1 ) . NKCCs couple the movement of one Na + , one K + and two Cl − ions in the same direction and hence do not generate cur - rents ( that is , they are ‘electroneutral’ ) . In this case , the inwardly directed Na + and Cl − gradients of mammalian cells drive K + uptake against its considerable outward gradient . Mammals have two genes encoding NKCC proteins . NKCC1 ( also known as SLC12A2 ) is almost ubiquitously expressed , whereas NKCC2 ( SLC12A1 ) is mainly found in the kidney , where it mediates salt reabsorption . NKCC1 is activated by cell shrinkage in a phosphorylation - dependent manner 33 ( see below ) . Apart from mediating RVI , it has basal transport activity that leads to the accumulation of intracellular Cl − . This role of NKCC1 is shared with Cl − / HCO 3− exchangers and is important for VRAC - mediated efflux of Cl − in RVD . Other major players in RVI are Na + / H + exchangers of the NHE ( SLC9A ) family 34 , 35 ( FIG . 1 ; TABLE 1 ) . Mammals express nine different NHEs , which reside in the plasma membrane or in intracellular organelles . Consistent with its role in pH i regulation , the widely expressed NHE1 is activated by acidic pH i ( REF . 36 ) . Cell shrinkage activates NHE1 by shifting its activation curve towards more alka - line pH i and by relieving inhibition by extracellular Na + ( REF . 37 ) . As the vast majority of H + ions that are extruded by NHE1 are derived from intracellular buffers , proton efflux per se is osmotically irrelevant and NHE activation increases cellular osmolarity through Na + influx . In the presence of CO 2 , the cytoplasmic alkalinization caused by NHE1 activation leads to slow HCO 3− accumulation , which is counteracted by Cl − / HCO 3− exchangers , mostly the widely expressed anion exchange 2 ( AE2 ; also known as SLC4A2 ) isoform . AE2 is activated by intracellular alkalinization 38 and , with physiological ion gradients , mediates Cl − influx and HCO 3− efflux ( FIG . 1 ; TABLE 1 ) . The indirect coupling of NHEs and anion exchangers by pH i results in electroneutral uptake of NaCl with only minor effects on pH i or [ HCO 3− ] i . Regulatory volume decrease . RVD involves the exit of K + and Cl − through electroneutral K + / Cl − cotransport - ers or through parallel K + and Cl − channels ( promi - nently including VRACs ) , as well as an efflux of organic Box 2 | Water flux across membranes : the role of aquaporins Although water can diffuse across lipid bilayers without the need for water - transporting proteins , dedicated water channels ( aquaporins ) can , depending on the cell type , drastically enhance ( by 5 – 50 - fold ) the water permeability of biological membranes 13 , 14 . As cell volume regulation involves osmotically driven water transport across the plasma membrane , expression of aquaporins can significantly affect the speed of cell volume regulation ( and , of course , the rate at which cells swell or shrink upon changes in extracellular osmolarity ; see , for example , REF . 136 ) . There are 13 aquaporin ( AQP ) genes in humans , of which many encode proteins ( including AQP1 , 2 , 4 , 5 and 8 ) that function as bidirectional water channels 13 . Some aquaporins can also transport glycerol and possibly other small molecules , owing to their wider channel pore . Aquaporin channels function as tetramers of ~ 30 kDa AQP proteins that have six membrane - spanning domains and two short helical segments that dip into the pore from either side , as revealed by crystal structures . Each of the four subunits has its own pore . Whereas aquaporins have a major , well - established role in osmotically driven water transport , it should be mentioned that some transporters , including Na + / K + / 2Cl − cotransporter 1 ( NKCC1 ) or K + / Cl − cotransporter 4 ( KCC4 ) have been suggested to cotransport water together with ions 137 , and that one report suggested that volume - regulated anion channels ( VRACs ) may also be water - permeable to some degree 138 . Therefore , osmolyte transporters involved in volume regulation might also , to a minor degree , participate in facilitating water transport across membranes , and thereby further contribute to cell volume changes . R E V I E W S 296 | MAY 2016 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nrm © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . GABA ( γ - aminobutyric acid ) type A receptor ( GABA A receptor ) . A pentameric anion channel that is opened by the binding of GABA . Channels of this type mediate fast synaptic inhibition in the nervous system by allowing a passive influx of Cl − which hyperpolarizes the membrane . This requires a low intracellular Cl − concentration , as found in most adult neurons . Glycine receptor A pentameric anion channel that inhibits neuronal excitability by mediating a hyperpolarizing Cl − influx upon extracellular binding of the amino acid and neurotransmitter glycine . Conductance Electrical conductance is the inverse of electrical resistance . For instance , the K + conductance of a biological membrane is a quantitative measure of the current mediated by K + channels divided by the driving force ( given by potential and concentration differences across the membrane ) . It depends on the number of open K + channels and how readily they allow the passage of K + ions . osmolytes through VRACs . K + / Cl − cotransporters ( KCCs ) are encoded by four genes , KCC1 – KCC4 ( SLC12A4 – SLC12A7 ) . By coupling the large outward gradient of K + ( ~ 140mM / 5mM ) to Cl − transport , KCCs lower [ Cl − ] i to less than 5 mM at thermodynamic equilib - rium . Low values of [ Cl − ] i ( ~ 5 – 10 mM ) are maintained in adult neurons , in which KCC2 ensures synaptic inhib ition by generating the appropriate driving force for Cl − entry through GABA ( γ - aminobutyric acid ) type A receptor ( GABA A receptor ) and glycine receptor chan - nels 39 . In most other cells , [ Cl − ] i is about 20 – 40 mM , and activation of KCCs leads to net KCl efflux , thereby decreasing cell osmolarity and volume . All KCC iso - forms can be activated by cell swelling , with KCC3 being more sensitive than KCC1 ( REF . 40 ) . KCC2 additionally displays constitutive activity 41 . KCC1 is almost ubiqui - tously expressed , whereas KCC3 and KCC4 have more restricted expression patterns and KCC2 is neuron - specific . A role for K + / Cl − cotransport in erythrocyte RVD was recognized at an early stage 42 . Mammalian erythrocytes express KCC1 and KCC3 ( REF . 43 ) , with KCC3 mediating the bulk of swelling - induced K + / Cl − cotransport in mouse erythrocytes 43 . Increased eryth - rocyte volume and higher susceptibility to osmotic lysis suggested that RVD was severely compromised in Kcc1 − / − Kcc3 − / − but not in either Kcc1 − / − or Kcc3 − / − erythrocytes 43 , indicating that KCC1 and KCC3 can partially substitute for each other . Conversely , erythrocyte volume was reduced in mice carrying a Kcc1 mutation that constitu - tively activates KCC1 ( REF . 44 ) . These mouse models 43 , 44 demonstrate that volume - regulatory processes can determine steady - state cell volume in vivo . RVD was also reduced in cultured hippocampal neurons from Kcc3 − / − mice , and in renal proximal tubules , RVD was more severely affected in Kcc3 − / − than in Kcc4 − / − mice 45 . Another , probably more widespread , mechanism in RVD involves the exit of K + and Cl − through independ - ent K + and Cl − channels that are coupled by the plasma membrane voltage 2 ( FIG . 1 ; TABLE 1 ) . The opening of K + channels hyperpolarizes the membrane and thereby increases the driving force for Cl − exit . Conversely , Cl − channel opening depolarizes the membrane of most cells and hence increases K + efflux . K + conductance exceeds that of Cl − under resting conditions in most cells . Swelling - induced opening of Cl − channels may then be sufficient to elicit RVD . In many , but by no means all cells , swelling is associ - ated with an increase in [ Ca 2 + ] i ( for a list of such cells , see REF . 2 ) . In these cells , RVD may involve the opening of Ca 2 + - activated K + and Cl − channels 46 – 48 . These channels are molecularly diverse . Ca 2 + - activated K + channels belong to small , intermediate and big conductance classes Box 3 | Additional processes associated with volume regulation Cell division and migration , and necrotic and apoptotic cell death provide examples of processes that are directly linked to volume regulation . Obviously , overall cell volume increases during the generation of daughter cells , but so far it remains largely unclear whether and how this relates to the change in expression of various ion channels and transporters during the cell cycle . Cell migration may depend , in addition to cell – matrix interaction , on the cytoskeleton and motor proteins , as well as on cell volume regulatory processes 19 , 20 . It is thought that the leading edge of migrating cells recruits transporters involved in regulatory volume increase ( RVI ) — such as Na + / H + exchanger 1 ( NHE1 ) and anion exchange protein 2 ( AE2 ) ( for examples , see REFS 139 , 140 ) , as well as aquaporins 141 , 142 — thereby increasing local intracellular osmotic pressure and volume . Conversely , the trailing edge may decrease its volume by regulatory volume decrease ( RVD ) , which may involve various K + channels ( for example , EAG2 ( REF . 143 ) ) and possibly volume - regulated anion channels ( VRACs ) 144 . Cells may indeed generate sufficient differences in hydrostatic pressure over distances of several micrometres and timescales of several seconds 145 , and recent experimental and theoretical work showed that under spatial confinement ( as possibly found during cell migration within tissues ) , such ‘osmotic engines’ can support migration even if actin polymerization and myosin contractility are blocked 20 . Furthermore , activation of VRACs , in parallel to K + channels , participates in apoptotic volume decrease ( AVD ) that might foster the progression of apoptosis 11 , 22 , 146 ( although probably not in all cell types 25 , 146 ) . For the role of VRACs in apoptosis , see the main text and FIG . 3a . It should be noted that in many processes , including cell migration and AVD , the primary trigger that activates the cell volume - changing channels and transporters is not a change in cell volume . This does not exclude , of course , the possibility that the activation of respective transporters uses part of the same , poorly understood signal transduction machineries that are used for RVI or RVD . The ion transport associated with cell volume regulation not only changes intracellular osmolarity , but also affects the plasma membrane voltage ( in the case of ion channels ) or intracellular pH ( pH i ; in the case of Na + / H + or Cl − / HCO 3− exchangers ( NHEs or AEs ) ) . In general , these potentially deleterious effects are avoided by neutralizing currents through other channels ( for example , by parallel operation of K + and Cl − channels ) or by the activation of transporters with opposite effects on pH i ( acid - extruding NHE1 is activated by acidic pH i , whereas base - extruding AE2 is activated by alkaline pH i , resulting in a pH - mediated coupling of these transporters ) . Nonetheless , relatively minor changes in pH i and plasma membrane voltage may be observed during volume regulation in some cells . In insulin - secreting pancreatic β - cells , for instance , an increase in glucose concentration might lead to cell swelling , activation of VRAC and Cl − efflux . The subsequent depolarization may open voltage - dependent Ca 2 + channels and raise cytosolic Ca 2 + levels , and thereby trigger exocytosis of insulin - containing granules 16 , 147 . However , this hypothesis , like many others , will require confirmation using the tools available after the identification of VRAC components 9 , 10 . Many of the ion transporters and channels have crucial roles in other processes . For instance , NHE1 and AE2 are major regulators of pH i . Like NKCC1 , they also have important roles in salt and water transport across several epithelia . An imbalance of ion transport across basolateral and epithelial membranes of epithelia may change cell volume , in particular , during acute stimulation of transepithelial transport . This might activate some of these volume - regulatory processes . In line with these considerations , recent work suggests a role for VRAC in β - adrenergic - induced fluid secretion in salivary glands 148 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 17 | MAY 2016 | 297 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . ( SK , IK and BK channels ) . Both the bestrophin 49 and TMEM16 ( also known as anoctamin ) 50 gene fami - lies may encode Ca 2 + - activated Cl − channels . Whereas Drosophila melanogaster Bestrophin 1 is dually regulated by [ Ca 2 + ] i and cell swelling 51 , 52 , mammalian bestrophins are inhibited upon hypertonic shrinkage 53 but , in the absence of increases in [ Ca 2 + ] i , fail to activate upon hypotonic swelling 51 . Similarly , TMEM16 channels do not seem to be swelling - activated without an increase in [ Ca 2 + ] i ( REFS 46 , 48 ) . These channels must be distin - guished from canonical volume - regulated Cl − channels , which are nearly ubiquitously expressed in vertebrates , display a distinct , well - studied biophysical fingerprint 7 , 54 and comprise LRRC8 heteromers 9 ( FIG . 2 ) . Table 1 | Main ion channels and transporters involved in cell volume regulation Effector Protein ( s ) Transport Regulation Other roles Regulatory volume increase ( RVI ) Na + / H + exchangers ( NHEs ) Mainly NHE1 ( possibly also NHE2 and NHE4 ) , widely expressed across tissues 1 : 1 exchange of external Na + for internal H + ( electroneutral ) • Activated by acidic intracellular pH ( pH i ) • Several mechanisms discussed for shrinkage - activation • Regulation of pH i ( counteracts acidification ) • Transepithelial transport ( of acid and Na + ; also prominent for NHE3 ) Cl − / HCO3 − exchangers Mainly anion exchanger 2 ( AE2 ) , widely expressed 1 : 1 exchange of external Na + for internal H + ( electroneutral ) Activated by alkaline pH i • Regulation of pH i ( counteracts alkalinization ) • Transepithelial transport ( of acid and Cl − ) • Raising intracellular Cl − concentration ( [ Cl − ] i ) Na + / K + / 2Cl − ( NKCC ) cotransporters Mainly NKCC1 , widely expressed Coupled uptake of 1Na + , 1K + and 2Cl − into cells ( electroneutral ) Activation through SPAK and OSR1 kinases that are activated by Cl − - sensing WNK kinases ( inhibited by [ Cl − ] i ) , leading to inhibition of NKCC1 by [ Cl − ] i • Transepithelial transport ( of Cl − or K + ) • Raising [ Cl − ] i Hyperosmolarity - induced non - selective cation ( HICC ) channels Unclear ( possibly several distinct channels , some candidates that require confirmation ) Passive influx of Na + and efflux of K + ( electrogenic ; may need parallel Cl − influx for electroneutrality ) ? ? Regulatory volume decrease ( RVD ) K + / Cl − cotransporters ( KCCs ) KCC3 , KCC4 and KCC1 Coupled efflux of 1K + and 1 Cl − ( electroneutral ) Inhibited by SPAK and OSR1 kinases , which are in turn activated by WNK kinases . These are directly inhibited by [ Cl − ] i , leading to activation of KCCs by [ Cl − ] i • Lowering of [ Cl − ] i • Transepithelial transport Volume - regulated anion channels ( VRACs ) Various heteromers of LRRC8A with LRRC8B , C , D or E ( LRRC8D increases taurine permeation ) , nearly ubiquitously expressed • Passive efflux of Cl − ( in cells with appropriate Cl − gradient ; electrogenic ) • Passive efflux of organic osmolytes ( for example , taurine or glutamate ; electrogenic or electroneutral ( electrogenic operation needs parallel K + channels ) ) Several mechanisms discussed ( ionic strength , ROS , RHO signalling , cytoskeleton , tyrosine phosphorylation and others ) • Effector of apoptotic volume decrease ( AVD ) • Release of signalling molecules ( glutamate , aspartate , taurine ) • Drug uptake ( for example , Pt - based anticancer drugs ) • Transepithelial transport ( ? ) , insulin secretion ( ? ) Calcium - activated Cl − channels Bestrophins ( BEST1 , BEST2 ? ) , TMEM16 / anoctamin proteins ( ANO1 , ANO6 ? ) , distinct tissue distributions Passive efflux of Cl − ( in cells with appropriate Cl − gradient ; electrogenic ( needs parallel K + channels ) ) • Activated by rise in cytosolic Ca 2 + • Can mediate RVD only in subset of cells that raise [ Ca 2 + ] i in response to swelling and express one of these proteins Transepithelial Cl − transport and others Calcium - activated K + channels Various SK , IK and BK channels , distinct tissue distributions Passive efflux of K + ( electrogenic ; needs parallel Cl − channels ) • Activated by rise in cytosolic Ca 2 + • Can mediate RVD only in a subset of cells that raise [ Ca 2 + ] i in response to swelling and express one of these channels Various Other K + channels Two - pore domain K2P K + channels ( for example , TRAAK , TREK and TASK2 ) and various voltage - dependent K v channels , distinct tissue distributions Passive efflux of K + ( electrogenic ; needs parallel Cl − channels ) Membrane stretch and curvature , lipid mediators ( K2P channels ) Various OSR1 , oxidative stress - responsive 1 protein ; Pt , platinum ; ROS , reactive oxygen species ; SK , IK and BK channels , small , intermediate and big conductance K + channels ; SPAK , SPS1 - related proline / alanine - rich kinase ; WNK , with no lysine . R E V I E W S 298 | MAY 2016 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nrm © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Various Ca 2 + - independent K + channels can be acti - vated by cell swelling . These include voltage - dependent K v channels , such as several KCNQ ( K v 7 ) channels 55 and K2P channels 56 , 57 , some of which directly respond to membrane stretch 58 – 60 ( TABLE 1 ) . Swelling - or stretch - activation of a channel , however , does not automatically imply its involvement in cell volume regulation . Even if the pharmacological inhibition of a channel impairs RVD , this does not prove that its swelling - activation is important for , or triggers , RVD . This stems from the fact that blocking any major constitutive K + conduct - ance may impair RVD by preventing charge com - pensation for Cl − efflux through volume - regulated Cl − channels . Two molecularly identified mammalian Cl − chan - nel types , VRACs 7 and Cl – channel protein 2 ( ClC - 2 ) 61 , have been shown to be swelling - activated , and residues crucial for swelling - activation have been mapped in ClC - 2 ( REFS 61 , 62 ) . Furthermore , a distinct swelling - activated , ATP - conducting ‘maxi - anion channel’ has been described 63 , but its molecular identity is unknown and its contribution to volume regulation is ill - defined . ClC - 2 and VRACs are widely expressed across tissues but strongly differ in their biophysical properties 7 , 63 , 64 . Although glial cells appeared slightly swollen in Clcn2 − / − mice 65 , convincing evidence for a role of ClC - 2 in volume regulation is lacking 66 . This contrasts with VRACs , which play a major part in RVD in a wide range of cells 7 . This may be related , in part , to the fact that VRACs ( unlike ClC - 2 ) also conduct organic osmolytes and are more strongly regulated by cell swelling . Sensors and transducers in volume regulation . While the list of effectors in cell volume regulation is becoming reasonably complete , our understanding of the mech - anisms involved in sensing cell volume and in the com - plex signal transduction to plasma membrane effectors is frustratingly incomplete . It is clear that cells cannot directly sense their volume , which is an extensive param - eter . Mechanical forces at the outer membrane , concen - trations of intracellular ions or molecules , or altered interactions of macromolecules following changes in cell shape are candidates for parameters that indirectly reflect volume changes . In principle , ‘volume’ sensing might involve mechano sensitive plasma membrane proteins such as signalling receptors or ion channels . Mechanosensitive channels may directly be effectors ( that is , significantly transport osmolytes ) , or they may change intracellular concentrations of ions such as Ca 2 + that regulate other channels 67 or transporters . Mechanosensitive channels may either directly sense the lateral tension in the lipid bilayer ( known as the ‘force from lipid’ model ) or be gated by mechanical push or pull from extra - or intra - cellular molecules ( called the ‘tethered model’ ) 68 . The bacterial MscL channel is a prime example of a directly mechanosensitive channel 69 , and many vertebrate chan - nels may be similarly mechanosensitive 70 . For instance , TRAAK ( also known as KCNK4 ) K2P K + channels respond to changes in both pressure and membrane Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Hypotonic 0 – 50 – 100 – 150 – 200 0 200 400 600 C u rr e n t d e n s i t y ( p A / p F ) Not transfected LRRC8A siRNA Time ( s ) Extracellular b d a c Cytosol C N 1 2 3 4 5 120 mV – 120 mV – 80 mV 5 nA 0 . 5 s Wild - type LRRC8A – / – LRRC8C – / – LRRC8 ( B / C / D / E ) – / – Isotonic Hypotonic Figure 2 | Properties of volume - regulated anion channels ( VRACs ) . a | VRAC currents ( I Cl , vol ) can be measured using the patch - clamp technique . An isolated HEK cell attached to a cover slip is approached by a glass pipette filled with saline ( shown on the right ) . After contact with the plasma membrane is established , negative pressure of the pipette solution ( suction ) seals the polished glass pipette with the membrane . This ensures mechanical stability and a high electrical resistance ( G Ω range ) . Further suction ruptures the membrane patch and allows electrical access to the cell interior in the ‘whole - cell configuration’ of the patch - clamp technique . An electrical amplifier attached to the pipette allows measurements of cell voltage and current injection . The cell is then superfused with hypotonic solution ( typically ~ 25 % ) , leading to slow cell swelling as shown below . b | VRAC - mediated I Cl , vol currents develop over minutes after exposure to hypotonicity during the course of cell swelling . Ionic conditions are chosen in such a way as to virtually exclude cation currents . Anion currents elicited by test pulses to negative voltages are shown . Short interfering RNA ( siRNA ) - mediated knockdown of the essential VRAC subunit LRRC8A nearly abolishes these currents . c | To obtain a biophysical fingerprint of currents , the cell interior is clamped by the amplifier through the patch pipette to several distinct voltages . The first panel ( 1 ) shows a superposition of these sequentially applied voltage steps . The current that the amplifier needs to inject into the cell to attain the desired voltage is measured . This equals the current flowing through all plasma membrane channels of the cell . Superimposed currents of hypotonically swollen wild - type HCT116 cells are shown in ( 2 ) . These currents show outward rectification ( larger currents at positive than at negative voltage ) and inactivation at positive voltages ( currents decline over time at constant voltage ) . Both features are typical of I Cl , vol but are unlikely to be physiologically important . ( 3 ) LRRC8A – / – cells , which lack the essential VRAC subunit LRRC8A , lack I Cl , vol currents , but ( 4 ) cells lacking LRRC8C ( or B , D or E ; not shown ) display currents with changed inactivation kinetics . ( 5 ) Parallel disruption of LRRC ( B – E ) genes also abolishes I Cl , vol . d | Topology model of a LRRC8 subunit ( not to scale ) with 4 transmembrane spans and a cytosolic carboxyl terminus containing 17 leucine - rich repeats that gave rise to its name ( leucine - rich repeat - containing 8 ) . VRACs are hypothesized to be hexamers 105 of LRRC8A and at least one of the other LRRC8 proteins ( B – E ) 9 . Images in part a are courtesy of Florian Ullrich , Leibniz - Institut für Molekulare Pharmakologie ( FMP ) and Max - Delbrück - Centrum für Molekulare Medizin ( MDC ) , Berlin , Germany . Images in parts b and c adapted with permission from REF . 9 , AAAS . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 17 | MAY 2016 | 299 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Outward rectification A channel is called outwardly rectifying if its currents are larger at inside - positive than at inside - negative voltages , which corresponds to an outward transport of positive charge . For anion channels this corresponds to an inward transport of anions . Channel inactivation The spontaneous closure of a channel at constant voltage . curvature 71 . Recent biophysical and structural studies provide strong evidence for direct ‘force from lipid’ mechanosensitivity of TRAAK and TREK2 ( also known as KCNK10 ) K + channels 58 , 59 . However , the large plasma membrane reserve of most cells ( in the form of wrinkles and infoldings ) 6 suggests that direct membrane stretch may require rather extreme swelling . Therefore , changes in membrane curvature or forces exerted by the cytoskeleton or the extracellular matrix are more likely to modulate ion transport during cell volume changes . Indeed , many channels and transporters involved in vol - ume sensing and / or regulation are thought to be gated or influenced by cytoskeletal elements 72 – 74 . However , only experiments involving procedures such as muta - tion 73 or outcompeting 72 of cytoskeletal binding sites on target proteins can prove the specificity of signal - ling ; the mere disruption of cytoskeletal elements is not sufficient . ‘Force from lipid’ activation and ‘tether - ing’ may , in principle , converge on the same transport protein , as has been suggested for TRAAK channels 71 and NHE1 ( REF . 75 ) . Alterations in cell volume can also affect the concentrations of plasma membrane lipids . These include phosphoinositide phosphates such as phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate that influence many targets , including various ion channels ; however , the mechanisms by which cell volume affects these lipids remain unclear 76 , 77 . In addition to processes at the plasma membrane , cell swelling or shrinkage may be sensed by associated changes in the intracellular concentrations of ions or other molecules . For instance , VRACs could be acti - vated by reducing the intracellular ionic strength 78 , 79 , even when purified VRACs were reconstituted into lipid bilayers 80 , suggesting that VRACs are both sen - sors and effectors of cell volume regulation . Fascinating insights were also obtained for the regulation of cation - Cl – cotransporters . Both NKCCs and KCCs are phosphoryl ated by SPAK ( SPS1 - related proline / alanine - rich kinase ) and OSR1 ( oxidative stress - responsive 1 protein ) , which are serine / threonine kinases that bind to a site in their carboxyl termini 33 , 81 , 82 . Phosphorylation of these transporters activates Cl − - accumulating Na + - driven transporters , but inhibits Cl − - extruding K + / Cl − cotransporters , resulting in a molecular switch for cytosolic Cl − homeostasis and volume regulation . SPAK and OSR1 themselves are activated by phosphoryl ation through WNK ( with no lysine ) kinases . WNKs are acti - vated by autophosphoryl ation in response to a reduc - tion in [ Cl − ] i or hypertonic shrinkage 83 , 84 . Excitingly , the crystal structure of the WNK1 kinase domain revealed a bound Cl − ion that inhibits autophosphoryl - ation 85 . Thus , WNK1 — like probably also VRACs 78 – 80 — may represent a genuine ( indirect ) sensor of cell volume changes . Various signalling pathways have been implicated in cell volume regulation 2 , 7 . As an example , VRACs were shown to be affected by cytoplasmic ionic strength 78 – 80 , NADPH oxidase and reactive oxygen species 86 , 87 , RHO - family GTPases and the cytoskeleton 74 , 88 , tyrosine phosphorylation 89 , leukotrienes 90 , plasma membrane cholesterol 91 , and integrins and epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor signalling 92 , among others . None of these regulatory processes seems to be prominent in all cell types . Generally , the promiscuity of the proposed sig - nalling pathways and their crosstalk hampers conclu - sions on their relevance in physiological settings . This problem is further complicated by the mostly drastic and often unspecific experimental interventions that have been used to investigate cell volume regulation and the underlying signalling pathways , and — until recently — by our ignorance concerning the molecular identity of VRACs . Solving the puzzle of VRAC composition Swelling - activated Cl – currents have been known since the 1980s 93 – 95 , and the biophysical properties , regulation and roles of the underlying VRACs have been studied extensively ( reviewed in REFS 5 , 7 , 8 , 96 ) . More than eight molecular VRAC ‘candidates’ ( including the multidrug resistance P - glycoprotein pICln and ClC - 3 ) have been proposed , but all were disproved 5 , 8 . Therefore , until the recent discovery of LRRC8 proteins as crucial VRAC components 9 , 10 , physiological roles ascribed to VRACs mostly hinged on experiments with nonspecific drugs , and the field stagnated . VRACs are also known as VSORs ( volume expansion - sensing outwardly rectifying anion chan - nels 5 ) or VSOACs ( volume - stimulated organic osmolyte and anion channels 97 ) , although the latter name refers specifically to channels also transporting organic osmolytes , which some authors thought to be distinct from VRACs 48 , 98 , 99 . We now know that the observed vari - ability in properties of VRACs , including their ability to transport organic substances , is due to differences in their LRRC8 subunit composition 9 , 11 . VRAC - generated currents . VRAC currents ( named I Cl , vol or I Cl , swell when activated by swelling ) show moderate outward rectification , variable channel inactivation at inside - positive voltages ( FIG . 2c ) and I − > Cl − > Br − selectivity . They also require intracellular ATP 97 and background levels of [ Ca 2 + ] i and can be inhibited by various nonspecific drugs 7 . Depending on their subunit composition 11 , VRACs also conduct organic substances such as taurine 9 – 11 , 100 . I Cl , vol activates over minutes after reducing extracellular osmolarity by ~ 25 % to induce cell swelling ( FIG . 2a , b ) . However , VRACs can also be activated to a lesser degree without cell swelling by pro - apoptotic drugs 11 , 87 and can be opened or potentiated by the stimulation of certain plasma membrane receptors 86 , 101 – 103 . Typical I Cl , vol currents have been observed in many vertebrate cell types 7 , 104 , suggesting an almost ubiquitous expression . However , these currents have not been found in non - chordates such as insects 51 . This is consistent with the fact that the expression of protein components of VRACs ( discussed below ) is observed in vertebrates and some other chordates , but not in non - chordates ( with the surprising exception of sea anemones ) 105 . In many studies 2 , 7 , pharmacological inhibition of VRACs severely impaired or blocked RVD . This pivotal role of VRACs in volume regulation may partially be owing to its ability to also mediate efflux of organic osmolytes . R E V I E W S 300 | MAY 2016 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nrm © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . LRRC8 proteins as core components of VRACs . Using a functional assay in genome - wide short interfering RNA ( siRNA ) screens , two groups independently identi fied LRRC8A as an essential VRAC component 9 , 10 . CRISPR – Cas9 - mediated gene ablation 9 and partial knockdown with siRNAs 10 revealed that LRRC8A is required for I Cl , vol . However , LRRC8A needs at least one other LRRC8 isoform ( LRRC8B , C , D or E ) to form functional chan - nels , as demonstrated by parallel disruption of multiple LRRC8 genes 9 ( FIG . 2c ) or by re - expressing LRRC8 iso - forms in cells engineered to lack all five LRRC8 proteins 9 . LRRC8A physically interacts with the other LRRC8 isoforms 9 , 106 and is required for the transport of these isoforms ( in a heteromeric complex with LRRC8A ) to the plasma membrane 9 . Hence , LRRC8 heteromers are crucial VRAC components 9 . However , hetero logous co - expression of LRRC8 isoforms has so far failed to signifi cantly increase I Cl , vol above native levels 9 . It is therefore possible that yet another subunit is necessary to form functional VRACs in cells , although purified LRRC8 heteromers were sufficient to yield currents in artificial bilayers 80 . Alternatively , heterologous expres - sion may have yielded few correctly assembled hetero - mers , or strict feedback regulation might exist to limit VRAC currents despite an increased abundance of channels . RVD was reduced in HeLa cells upon LRRC8A knockdown 10 and was virtually abolished in LRRC8A − / − or LRRC8 ( B / C / D / E ) − / − HEK cells 9 , 11 , demonstrating that VRACs are major players in cell volume regula - tion . Notably , swelling - induced taurine efflux was also reduced by LRRC8A knockdown in HeLa cells 10 , and by genomic disruption of either LRRC8A or all other LRRC8 subunits ( B to E ) in HCT116 and HEK cells 9 , 11 . Hence , LRRC8 heteromers are also essential for swell - ing - induced taurine release , and VRACs and ‘VSOACs’ are either identical or at least share subunits . LRRC8 proteins have four predicted transmem - brane domains and up to 17 carboxy - terminal leucine - rich repeats ( hence their name leucine - rich repeat containing 8 ) ( FIG . 2d ) . They were originally specu - lated to be receptors with an extracellular leucine - rich repeat - containing interaction domain 107 , but it is now established that their amino and carboxyl termini are cytoplasmic 9 , 10 , 105 , 106 . The transmembrane part of LRRC8 proteins has weak but significant sequence homo - logy to pannexins 108 , which are probably hexameric plasma membrane channels that have structural but not sequence similarity to gap junction - forming con - nexins 105 . Similar to VRACs , pannexins conduct ions and organic compounds and are blocked by carbenox - olone 108 . On the basis of their similarity to pannex - ins 105 , it was suggested that VRACs function as LRRC8 heterohexamers 9 , but the exact number of LRRC8 proteins constituting VRACs remains unknown . As there are five different LRRC8 proteins , an assumed heterohexameric assembly suggests that many differ - ent VRACs , with different subunit composition and properties , may exist . These may coexist in the same cell , as most LRRC8 genes are widely expressed across tissues and cells . LRRC8 composition and VRAC function . First insights into the roles of different VRAC subunits have been obtained . For instance , the combination of LRRC8 sub - units determines the inactivation of I Cl , vol at positive volt - ages ( FIG . 2c ) , and inactivation characteristics of native I Cl , vol correlate with the expression of LRRC8 isoforms 9 . Importantly , the subunit composition of a VRAC deter - mines its substrate selectivity 11 and single - channel con - ductance 80 . Small changes in halide ion selectivity with LRRC8 composition were observed in one study 80 but not in another 9 . Much larger effects of subunit com - position were observed when comparing the transport of Cl – with that of organic substrates 11 . LRRC8D was crucial , although not absolutely required , for the trans - port of taurine and the anticancer drug cisplatin 11 , and of the antibiotic blasticidin 106 . The ratio of cisplatin or taurine to Cl – transport was much larger with LRRC8A / LRRC8D than with LRRC8A / LRRC8C heteromers 11 . These changes in selectivity , together with more recent reconstitution experiments 80 , strongly bolster previous suggestions 9 , 10 that LRRC8 proteins themselves form the channel pore . The reported differences between Cl − - conducting ‘VRACs’ and organic osmolyte - conducting ‘VSOACs’ , which were based on divergent regulation and drug sensitivities of I Cl , vol and osmolyte fluxes 46 , 98 , 99 , 109 , probably reflect the distinct properties of differently composed LRRC8 heteromers 11 . VRACs beyond volume regulation As discussed above , volume - regulatory transport pro - teins have roles beyond volume regulation . These addi - tional roles are particularly evident in the case of VRACs , as these channels transport not only Cl − , but also organic osmolytes , metabolites that are involved in extracellular signalling and even clinically important drugs . VRACs in apoptosis and cancer drug resistance . VRAC - like currents can be induced without cell swelling by pro - apoptotic compounds such as staurosporine or by platinum - based drugs ( Pt - drugs ) such as cispla - tin 87 , 110 . These currents probably play a major part in AVD , which is a hallmark of programmed cell death that generally precedes other features of apoptosis such as caspase induction 22 . Inhibition of drug - induced apopto - sis by several nonspecific VRAC inhibitors ( and various K + channel blockers 27 ) suggested that AVD facilitates the progression of apoptosis 22 , 23 , 28 , 111 by mechanisms that are poorly understood but that might involve a decrease in intracellular cations 27 . Several drug - resistant cancer cell lines display less I Cl , vol , AVD , RVD and swelling - activated taurine efflux compared to their parent cells 28 , 112 , 113 . Of note , a histone deacetylase inhibitor ( which can activate transcription of certain genes ) restored cisplatin sensitiv - ity and I Cl , vol of resistant cells 113 . It was therefore hypoth - esized that VRAC downregulation causes drug resistance by reducing AVD and , as a consequence , apoptosis . Following the identification of LRRC8 proteins as VRAC components , this hypothesis was rigorously tested 11 . Disruption of the essential VRAC subunit LRRC8A indeed suppressed cisplatin - or staurosporine - induced activation of anion and taurine transport and of R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 17 | MAY 2016 | 301 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . apoptosis . However , there was an unforeseen twist , as it was revealed that as well as functioning in AVD , VRACs participate in the uptake of cisplatin ( but probably not of staurosporine ) . Under resting conditions , about 50 % of cellular uptake of cisplatin or carboplatin ( which are both widely used anticancer drugs ) occurs through LRRC8A - and LRRC8D - containing VRACs 11 . Drug uptake was much higher when VRACs were opened by cell swelling . Both LRRC8A and LRRC8D genes were independently identified in a genomic screen for carboplatin resist - ance 11 . By mediating cisplatin uptake and facilitating AVD - dependent apoptosis , VRACs may therefore have a dual role in cancer drug sensitivity ( FIG . 3a ) . At the low Pt - drug concentrations used to treat tumours in patients , non - apoptotic cell death is thought to be prevalent , and VRAC - related drug sensitivity depends Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Na + / K + - ATPase Na + Glutamate VRAC Hypoxia ( stroke ) GluRNa + , Ca 2 + Astrocyte Neuron Neuron Astrocyte Na + Taurine ADH ADH ADH VRAC GlyR TRPV1 Hypotonicity Hypertonicity Isotonicity CI – CI – A + D A CisplatinCarboplatin Staurosporine b a c ? DNAdamage Non - apoptotic cell death Apoptosis TaurineCI – TaurineCI – AVD VRACopening B / C / E B / C / E B / C / E A + D R E V I E W S 302 | MAY 2016 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nrm © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Astrocytes A major class of glial ( non - neuronal ) cells in the central nervous system , which have important functions , for instance , in buffering extracellular ion concentrations , in removal of neurotransmitters and in neuronal metabolism . predominantly on VRAC - dependent drug uptake rather than on VRAC - dependent AVD 11 . The role of VRACs in Pt - drug sensitivity may be clinically relevant , as LRRC8D downregulation correlated with poor survival of patients with cancer who were treated with Pt - drugs 11 . No down - regulation of LRRC8A was apparent in the patients’ tumours , suggesting that VRAC - dependent cell volume regulation , which is abolished with a loss of LRRC8A , but not LRRC8D , is important for the growth of tumour cells . VRAC - mediated transport of metabolites . As VRACs are able to transport anticancer Pt - drugs 11 and structurally distinct antibiotics 106 , these channels could potentially transport a broad range of small compounds . Such trans - port is surely not indiscriminate , as compounds such as the larger Pt - drug oxaliplatin apparently do not permeate VRACs 11 . Metabolites such as taurine , glutamate , aspartate and inositol ( and possibly even ATP 114 ) are believed to pass through VRACs or have been confirmed as LRRC8 channel substrates 9 – 11 , 115 . As already mentioned , their release may be important for cell volume regulation . Indeed , quantitative considerations 116 indicate that loss of inorganic ions can only decrease cell volume by 20 – 30 % , less than is typically observed in AVD , suggesting an important role for organic osmolytes 116 . A key role for taurine in volume regulation is indicated by diminished , but not abolished , RVD in LRRC8D − / − HEK cells that dis - play severely reduced swelling - induced taurine efflux but normal I Cl , vol ( REF . 11 ) . A VRAC - mediated release of organic osmolytes might be particularly rele vant for RVD in neurons , which ( as discussed above ) maintain a low [ Cl − ] i that is set by constitutively active KCC2 ( REF . 39 ) to enable inhibitory Cl − influx through GABA A receptors . Indeed , Cl − entry through VRACs , together with Na + influx through glutamate receptors , may contribute to neuronal swelling in excitotoxicity 117 ( see below ) . The loss of valuable intracellular metabolites through VRACs probably has no deleterious consequences during AVD , as such cells will typically die . In RVD , the disadvantage of such a loss may be offset by the advantage of avoid - ing cell lysis with extreme swelling . Moreover , the loss of metabolites is less pronounced and more easily com - pensated for following small volume changes . Released osmolytes such as glutamate and taurine , however , can have significant effects on neighbouring cells . Two notable examples are discussed here . Glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter that acti - vates cognate receptors on neurons . In excess , glutamate stimulation can lead to excitotoxicity , which prominently involves overstimulation of Ca 2 + - permeable glutamate receptors , contributing to neuronal cell death in stroke and other pathologies of the central nervous system . This condition is induced upon ischaemia , and several mechanisms for ischaemia - induced glutamate release have been proposed 118 , including reversal of Na + - driven glutamate transporters of astrocytes . Notably , one of the proposed mechanisms involves the release of glutamate from astrocytes through VRACs 119 – 122 ( FIG . 3b ) . Astrocytes are more susceptible to ischaemic swelling than neu - rons 122 and may be the main source of VRAC - released amino acids in the brain . VRAC - dependent glutamate release probably occurs mainly in the area surrounding the hypoxic core ( termed the penumbra ) 121 , because VRACs need permissive intracellular concentrations of ATP and hence sufficient oxygen levels . Although cell swelling may be less pronounced in the penumbra , astrocytic VRAC opening may be potentiated by stroke - related increases of substances like ATP and react ive oxygen species 102 , 115 , 123 . Animal experiments indeed showed that VRAC inhibitors blunted hypoxia - induced release of excitatory amino acids in the brain 124 . In addi - tion to its role in astrocytic glutamate release , Cl − influx into neurons through VRACs might further contribute to pathology by promoting neuronal swelling initiated by Na + entry through glutamate receptors 117 . Thus , VRAC inhibition might be beneficial in stroke . Several studies have indeed reported protective effects of anion transport inhibitors in stroke models 125 , 126 . However , all of the VRAC inhibitors used in those studies also affect other channels and cellular processes . Using LRRC8 mutant mouse models subject to stroke might provide more definitive results . Besides glutamate , the VRAC substrate taurine has many cellular functions 29 . For instance , taurine acti - vates inhibitory neuronal glycine receptor and GABA A receptor channels 127 , 128 . Interestingly , VRAC may link cellular to systemic volume regulation by releasing tau - rine from glia in the osmosensing supraoptical nucleus ( SON ) 15 , 127 , 129 , 130 ( reviewed in REF . 131 ) ( FIG . 3c ) . Neurons of the SON secrete antidiuretic hormone ( ADH ; also Figure 3 | Some proposed roles of volume - regulated anion channels ( VRACs ) beyond volume regulation . a | Apoptosis - inducing compounds such as the anticancer drug cisplatin or the alkaloid staurosporine can enter cells by passive diffusion across the plasma membrane and promote cell death . Additionally , by an unknown mechanism ( indicated here by ‘ ? ’ ) that may involve reactive oxygen species , both drugs open VRACs , leading to efflux of Cl − and taurine ( the latter preferentially through LRRC8D - containing VRACs 11 ) and , consequently , to apoptotic volume decrease ( AVD ) , which is believed to stimulate the progression of apoptosis . Opening of VRACs also further potentiates cisplatin uptake in a feedforward mechanism , as cisplatin ( but not staurosporine ) can also enter cells through LRRC8D - containing VRACs 11 . Therefore , whereas disruption of the indispensable VRAC subunit LRRC8A suppresses both cisplatin - and staurosporine - induced apoptosis through inhibition of AVD , LRRC8D disruption suppresses cisplatin - but not staurosporine - induced cell death through inhibition of enhanced cisplatin uptake 11 . A , B , C and D indicate the various LRRC8 subunits . b | A role for VRAC in stroke has been proposed . Occlusion of brain blood vessels leads to hypoxia , thereby decreasing cellular ATP levels and impairing ion pumping by the Na + / K + - ATPase . This entails swelling of astrocytes , opening of VRACs on their plasma membranes and the subsequent release of glutamate that binds to neuronal glutamate - gated cation channels ( GluR ) . The massive opening of these receptors results in an influx of Na + and Ca 2 + , which leads to neuronal damage ( termed ‘excitotoxicity’ ) , in addition to that directly caused by hypoxia . c | VRAC - mediated taurine release may link cellular to systemic osmoregulation 15 , 129 , 130 . Neurons of the supraoptical nucleus ( SON ) poorly regulate their volume 132 , 133 . In hypertonic solution , these neurons shrink and depolarize , owing to the opening of transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily V member 1 ( TRPV1 ) cation channels and Na + influx . This results in increased action potential firing of SON neurons ( shown schematically in graphs ) , thereby stimulating the release of antidiuretic hormone ( ADH ) in the pituitary , which in turn increases renal water retention . Conversely , under hypotonic conditions , astrocytes neighbouring SON neurons undergo swelling and open their VRACs , thereby releasing taurine . Taurine then activates glycine receptors ( GlyR ) on SON neuronal cell bodies , leading to Cl − influx and hyperpolarization and inhibition of SON neurons , thereby decreasing ADH release . This collectively results in a push – pull mechanism controlling SON neuronal activity and body fluid homeostasis . Image in panel c adapted with permission from REF . 129 , Elsevier . ▶ R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 17 | MAY 2016 | 303 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . known as vasopressin ) and oxytocin , which are hor - mones involved in body fluid homeostasis . These neurons function as osmosensors and were previously thought to lack RVD and RVI 132 ; however , they do slowly develop I Cl , vol and undergo RVD when swollen for more than 10 minutes 133 . In a hypertonic environment , SON neurons shrink and depolarize owing to Na + influx through transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily V member 1 ( TRPV1 ) cation channels that are opened by a shrinkage - induced pushing force from a channel - attached microtubule scaffold 72 . Depolarization , in turn , increases their firing rate , leading to increased secretion of ADH and resulting in enhanced renal water retention . Whereas extracellular hypertonicity directly activates SON neurons , hypotonicity is sensed by SON astrocytes , which release taurine in response to hypo - tonic swelling through VRAC - like channels 127 , 129 , 130 . By activating glycine receptor Cl − channels on neuronal cell bodies , taurine hyperpolarizes and thereby inhibits the activity of SON neurons and secretion of vasopressin . The interplay between direct hypertonicity - induced excitation of SON neurons and inhibition by VRAC - mediated astrocytic taurine release upon hypotonicity allows for efficient systemic osmoregulation in both directions ( FIG . 3c ) . Conclusions and outlook Cell volume regulation is crucial for almost every verte - brate cell . It involves the regulated transport of osmolytes such as ions or small organic compounds across the plasma membrane . The resulting osmotic gradients drive water across the plasma membrane and restore cell volume . The transport proteins ( effectors ) involved in osmolyte transport almost always have additional cellu - lar functions . This is particularly true for VRACs , which transport not only inorganic anions , but also metabolites with functions in extracellular signalling . The recent dis - covery of LRRC8 proteins as essential components of VRACs 9 , 10 has already led to the conclusion that the same type of channel is able to conduct both ions and organic osmolytes , and that it is involved both in RVD and 1 . Ginzberg , M . B . , Kafri , R . & Kirschner , M . On being the right ( cell ) size . Science 348 , 1245075 ( 2015 ) . 2 . Hoffmann , E . K . , Lambert , I . H . & Pedersen , S . F . Physiology of cell volume regulation in vertebrates . Physiol . Rev . 89 , 193 – 277 ( 2009 ) . This is an exhaustive review of the mechanisms involved in volume regulation and their physiological importance . 3 . Lang , F . et al . Functional significance of cell volume regulatory mechanisms . Physiol . Rev . 78 , 247 – 306 ( 1998 ) . 4 . Koivusalo , M . , Kapus , A . & Grinstein , S . Sensors , transducers , and effectors that regulate cell size and shape . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 6595 – 6599 ( 2009 ) . 5 . Okada , Y . Volume expansion - sensing outward - rectifier Cl − channel : fresh start to the molecular identity and volume sensor . Am . J . Physiol . 273 , C755 – C789 ( 1997 ) . 6 . Groulx , N . , Boudreault , F . , Orlov , S . N . & Grygorczyk , R . Membrane reserves and hypotonic cell swelling . J . Membr . Biol . 214 , 43 – 56 ( 2006 ) . 7 . Nilius , B . et al . Properties of volume - regulated anion channels in mammalian cells . Prog . Biophys . Mol . Biol . 68 , 69 – 119 ( 1997 ) . This is an excellent , detailed review on the properties of VRACs . 8 . Pedersen , S . F . , Klausen , T . K . & Nilius , B . The identification of VRAC ( Volume Regulated Anion Channel ) : an amazing odyssey . Acta Physiol . 213 , 868 – 881 ( 2015 ) . 9 . Voss , F . K . et al . Identification of LRRC8 heteromers as an essential component of the volume - regulated anion channel VRAC . Science 344 , 634 – 638 ( 2014 ) . This study shows that LRRC8 heteromers , composed of LRRC8A and at least one other LRRC8 isoform , are indispensable for swelling - activated VRAC currents and taurine efflux , and that subunit composition determines I Cl , vol inactivation . 10 . Qiu , Z . et al . SWELL1 , a plasma membrane protein , is an essential component of volume - regulated anion channel . Cell 157 , 447 – 458 ( 2014 ) . This study identifies LRRC8A ( renamed SWELL1 ) as a crucial VRAC component and shows , using knockdown experiments , that it is important for volume regulation and taurine fluxes . 11 . Planells - Cases , R . et al . Subunit composition of VRAC channels determines substrate specificity and cellular resistance to Pt - based anti - cancer drugs . EMBO J . 34 , 2993 – 3008 ( 2015 ) . This paper reports , for the first time , that the selectivity of a VRAC depends on its LRRC8 subunit composition ( thereby indicating that LRRC8 proteins form its pore ) and demonstrates that VRACs have a dual role in cellular drug resistance by mediating cisplatin uptake and facilitating apoptosis . 12 . Nunes , P . et al . Ionic imbalance , in addition to molecular crowding , abates cytoskeletal dynamics and vesicle motility during hypertonic stress . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , E3104 – E3113 ( 2015 ) . 13 . Verkman , A . S . Aquaporins at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 2107 – 2112 ( 2011 ) . 14 . Gomes , D . et al . Aquaporins are multifunctional water and solute transporters highly divergent in living organisms . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1788 , 1213 – 1228 ( 2009 ) . 15 . Bourque , C . W . Central mechanisms of osmosensation and systemic osmoregulation . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 9 , 519 – 531 ( 2008 ) . 16 . Miley , H . E . , Sheader , E . A . , Brown , P . D . & Best , L . Glucose - induced swelling in rat pancreatic β - cells . J . Physiol . 504 , 191 – 198 ( 1997 ) . 17 . Schliess , F . & Häussinger , D . Osmosensing and signaling in the regulation of liver function . Contrib . Nephrol . 152 , 198 – 209 ( 2006 ) . 18 . Best , L . , Brown , P . D . , Sener , A . & Malaisse , W . J . Electrical activity in pancreatic islet cells : the VRAC hypothesis . Islets 2 , 59 – 64 ( 2010 ) . AVD . This discovery has also revealed that VRACs can mediate the uptake of anticancer drugs , an observation of potential importance for tumour drug resistance 11 . The biological importance of VRACs is highlighted by a recently reported study in Lrrc8a − / − mice 134 . The pheno types of these mice , which were erroneously inter - preted 134 in terms of VRACs being plasma membrane receptors with extracellular leucine - rich repeats 107 , 135 , include high embryonic and postnatal lethality and pathological changes in many organs 134 . It has also been reported that a heterozygous truncation of the LRRC8A protein is associated with a congenital absence of serum γ - globulins , but this observation was based only on a single patient 135 . Although the severe phenotypes of Lrrc8a − / − mice underline the importance of VRACs , the survival of a few mice 134 and the viability of Lrrc8 − / − cells lacking all LRRC8 isoforms 9 , 11 prove that VRACs are not strictly required for processes such as apoptosis , cell death , division , growth and migration . However , this does not exclude the important , but partially redundant , roles of VRACs in these processes . The diverse cellular and systemic roles of VRACs can now be addressed by cell - and tissue - specific disruption of individual sub - units . It may emerge that the transport of metabolites and signalling molecules by VRACs is as important as their role in volume regulation . LRRC8 proteins may also have roles independent of their channel function , for instance , by interacting with other proteins . Identification of sensors and transducers involved in cell volume regulation remains another major challenge . The difficulty of identifying specific pathways is prob - ably due , at least in part , to redundancies at the levels of sensors and effectors . As it is likely that all effectors have additional cellular roles and sometimes only ‘moonlight’ in cell volume regulation , their regulation is expected to be complex . A good way to study the signalling pathways involved may be to work back from known effectors to identify signals directly impinging on them . Owing to the recent progress in our understanding of the com - position and functions of VRACs , such analysis should now also be possible for these channels . R E V I E W S 304 | MAY 2016 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nrm © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . 19 . Schwab , A . , Fabian , A . , Hanley , P . J . & Stock , C . Role of ion channels and transporters in cell migration . Physiol . Rev . 92 , 1865 – 1913 ( 2012 ) . 20 . Stroka , K . M . et al . Water permeation drives tumor cell migration in confined microenvironments . Cell 157 , 611 – 623 ( 2014 ) . These experiments with cells migrating in narrow channels , together with mathematical modelling , show that osmolarity - driven asymmetric water transport can support cell migration in an actin - and myosin - independent manner . 21 . Vom Dahl , S . , Hallbrucker , C . , Lang , F . , Gerok , W . & Häussinger , D . Regulation of liver cell volume and proteolysis by glucagon and insulin . Biochem . J . 278 , 771 – 777 ( 1991 ) . 22 . Maeno , E . , Ishizaki , Y . , Kanaseki , T . , Hazama , A . & Okada , Y . Normotonic cell shrinkage because of disordered volume regulation is an early prerequisite to apoptosis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 9487 – 9492 ( 2000 ) . This paper shows that AVD precedes caspase induction and other features of apoptosis , and that both AVD and apoptosis can be suppressed by pharmacological inhibitors of Cl − and K + channels . 23 . Okada , Y . et al . Volume - sensitive chloride channels involved in apoptotic volume decrease and cell death . J . Membr . Biol . 209 , 21 – 29 ( 2006 ) . 24 . Lang , F . & Hoffmann , E . K . Role of ion transport in control of apoptotic cell death . Compr . Physiol . 2 , 2037 – 2061 ( 2012 ) . 25 . Hortelano , S . , Zeini , M . , Castrillo , A . , Alvarez , A . M . & Boscá , L . Induction of apoptosis by nitric oxide in macrophages is independent of apoptotic volume decrease . Cell Death Differ . 9 , 643 – 650 ( 2002 ) . 26 . Wehner , F . , Shimizu , T . , Sabirov , R . & Okada , Y . Hypertonic activation of a non - selective cation conductance in HeLa cells and its contribution to cell volume regulation . FEBS Lett . 551 , 20 – 24 ( 2003 ) . 27 . Bortner , C . D . & Cidlowski , J . A . Cell shrinkage and monovalent cation fluxes : role in apoptosis . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 462 , 176 – 188 ( 2007 ) . 28 . Poulsen , K . A . et al . Deregulation of apoptotic volume decrease and ionic movements in multidrug - resistant tumor cells : role of chloride channels . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 298 , C14 – C25 ( 2010 ) . 29 . Lambert , I . H . , Kristensen , D . M . , Holm , J . B . & Mortensen , O . H . Physiological role of taurine — from organism to organelle . Acta Physiol . 213 , 191 – 212 ( 2015 ) . 30 . Burg , M . B . , Ferraris , J . D . & Dmitrieva , N . I . Cellular response to hyperosmotic stresses . Physiol . Rev . 87 , 1441 – 1474 ( 2007 ) . 31 . Wehner , F . et al . Hypertonicity - induced cation channels . Acta Physiol . 187 , 21 – 25 ( 2006 ) . 32 . Numata , T . et al . The Δ C splice - variant of TRPM2 is the hypertonicity - induced cation channel in HeLa cells , and the ecto - enzyme CD38 mediates its activation . J . Physiol . 590 , 1121 – 1138 ( 2012 ) . 33 . Alessi , D . R . et al . The WNK - SPAK / OSR1 pathway : master regulator of cation - chloride cotransporters . Sci . Signal . 7 , re3 ( 2014 ) . 34 . Alexander , R . T . & Grinstein , S . Na + / H + exchangers and the regulation of volume . Acta Physiol . 187 , 159 – 167 ( 2006 ) . 35 . Rotin , D . & Grinstein , S . Impaired cell volume regulation in Na + - H + exchange - deficient mutants . Am . J . Physiol . 257 , C1158 – C1165 ( 1989 ) . 36 . Wakabayashi , S . , Hisamitsu , T . , Pang , T . & Shigekawa , M . Kinetic dissection of two distinct proton binding sites in Na + / H + exchangers by measurement of reverse mode reaction . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 43580 – 43585 ( 2003 ) . 37 . Dunham , P . B . , Kelley , S . J . & Logue , P . J . Extracellular Na + inhibits Na + / H + exchange : cell shrinkage reduces the inhibition . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 287 , C336 – C344 ( 2004 ) . 38 . Stewart , A . K . , Kurschat , C . E . , Vaughan - Jones , R . D . & Alper , S . L . Putative re - entrant loop 1 of AE2 transmembrane domain has a major role in acute regulation of anion exchange by pH . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 6126 – 6139 ( 2009 ) . 39 . Hübner , C . A . et al . Disruption of KCC2 reveals an essential role of K - Cl cotransport already in early synaptic inhibition . Neuron 30 , 515 – 524 ( 2001 ) . 40 . Mount , D . B . et al . Cloning and characterization of KCC3 and KCC4 , new members of the cation - chloride cotransporter gene family . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 16355 – 16362 ( 1999 ) . 41 . Mercado , A . , Broumand , V . , Zandi - Nejad , K . , Enck , A . H . & Mount , D . B . A C - terminal domain in KCC2 confers constitutive K + - Cl − cotransport . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 1016 – 1026 ( 2006 ) . 42 . Dunham , P . B . , Stewart , G . W . & Ellory , J . C . Chloride - activated passive potassium transport in human erythrocytes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 77 , 1711 – 1715 ( 1980 ) . 43 . Rust , M . B . et al . Disruption of erythroid K - Cl cotransporters alters erythrocyte volume and partially rescues erythrocyte dehydration in SAD mice . J . Clin . Invest . 117 , 1708 – 1717 ( 2007 ) . Using mice with disrupted Kcc1 and Kcc3 genes , this work shows that KCC3 is more important than KCC1 in erythrocyte volume regulation , and that erythrocytes have a larger volume when both isoforms are eliminated . 44 . Brown , F . C . et al . Activation of the erythroid K - Cl cotransporter Kcc1 enhances sickle cell disease pathology in a humanized mouse model . Blood 126 , 1683 – 1670 ( 2015 ) . An activating mutation in the gene encoding the K + - Cl cotransporter KCC1 identified in a mouse random mutagenesis study is shown here to constitutively decrease erythrocyte volume in mice . 45 . Boettger , T . et al . Loss of K - Cl co - transporter KCC3 causes deafness , neurodegeneration and reduced seizure threshold . EMBO J . 22 , 5422 – 5434 ( 2003 ) . 46 . Hoffmann , E . K . , Holm , N . B . & Lambert , I . H . Functions of volume - sensitive and calcium - activated chloride channels . IUBMB Life 66 , 257 – 267 ( 2014 ) . 47 . Milenkovic , A . et al . Bestrophin 1 is indispensable for volume regulation in human retinal pigment epithelium cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , E2630 – E2639 ( 2015 ) . Using ATP - free intracellular solutions that suppress VRAC currents , these authors suggest that the Ca 2 + - activated Cl − channel bestrophin 1 is crucial for volume regulation in retinal pigment epithelial cells . 48 . Juul , C . A . et al . Anoctamin 6 differs from VRAC and VSOAC but is involved in apoptosis and supports volume regulation in the presence of Ca 2 + . Pflügers Arch . 466 , 1899 – 1910 ( 2014 ) . 49 . Hartzell , H . C . , Qu , Z . , Yu , K . , Xiao , Q . & Chien , L . T . Molecular physiology of bestrophins : multifunctional membrane proteins linked to best disease and other retinopathies . Physiol . Rev . 88 , 639 – 672 ( 2008 ) . 50 . Pedemonte , N . & Galietta , L . J . Structure and function of TMEM16 proteins ( anoctamins ) . Physiol . Rev . 94 , 419 – 459 ( 2014 ) . 51 . Stotz , S . C . & Clapham , D . E . Anion - sensitive fluorophore identifies the Drosophila swell - activated chloride channel in a genome - wide RNA interference screen . PLoS ONE 7 , e46865 ( 2012 ) . This paper reports a genome - wide siRNA screen in D . melanogaster cells , which are devoid of canonical VRAC ( LRRC8 heteromers ) , and identifies Bestrophin 1 as a swelling - activated anion channel . 52 . Chien , L . T . & Hartzell , H . C . Rescue of volume - regulated anion current by bestrophin mutants with altered charge selectivity . J . Gen . Physiol . 132 , 537 – 546 ( 2008 ) . Using ion selectivity - changing mutants to confirm the identity of the channel , this paper demonstrates that the D . melanogaster anion channel Bestrophin 1 can be activated by cell swelling . 53 . Fischmeister , R . & Hartzell , H . C . Volume sensitivity of the bestrophin family of chloride channels . J . Physiol . 562 , 477 – 491 ( 2005 ) . 54 . Okada , Y . Cell volume - sensitive chloride channels : phenotypic properties and molecular identity . Contrib . Nephrol . 152 , 9 – 24 ( 2006 ) . 55 . Grunnet , M . et al . KCNQ1 channels sense small changes in cell volume . J . Physiol . 549 , 419 – 427 ( 2003 ) . 56 . Niemeyer , M . I . , Cid , L . P . , Barros , L . F . & Sepúlveda , F . V . Modulation of the two - pore domain acid - sensitive K + channel TASK - 2 ( KCNK5 ) by changes in cell volume . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 43166 – 43174 ( 2001 ) . 57 . Barrière , H . et al . Role of TASK2 potassium channels regarding volume regulation in primary cultures of mouse proximal tubules . J . Gen . Physiol . 122 , 177 – 190 ( 2003 ) . 58 . Lolicato , M . , Riegelhaupt , P . M . , Arrigoni , C . , Clark , K . A . & Minor , D . L . Jr . Transmembrane helix straightening and buckling underlies activation of mechanosensitive and thermosensitive K 2P channels . Neuron 84 , 1198 – 1212 ( 2014 ) . 59 . Brohawn , S . G . , Su , Z . & MacKinnon , R . Mechanosensitivity is mediated directly by the lipid membrane in TRAAK and TREK1 K + channels . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 3614 – 3619 ( 2014 ) . 60 . Patel , A . J . et al . A mammalian two pore domain mechano - gated S - like K + channel . EMBO J . 17 , 4283 – 4290 ( 1998 ) . 61 . Gründer , S . , Thiemann , A . , Pusch , M . & Jentsch , T . J . Regions involved in the opening of CIC - 2 chloride channel by voltage and cell volume . Nature 360 , 759 – 762 ( 1992 ) . 62 . Jordt , S . E . & Jentsch , T . J . Molecular dissection of gating in the ClC - 2 chloride channel . EMBO J . 16 , 1582 – 1592 ( 1997 ) . 63 . Sabirov , R . Z . , Merzlyak , P . G . , Islam , M . R . , Okada , T . & Okada , Y . The properties , functions , and pathophysiology of maxi - anion channels . Pflügers Arch . 468 , 405 – 420 ( 2016 ) . 64 . Thiemann , A . , Gründer , S . , Pusch , M . & Jentsch , T . J . A chloride channel widely expressed in epithelial and non - epithelial cells . Nature 356 , 57 – 60 ( 1992 ) . 65 . Hoegg - Beiler , M . B . et al . Disrupting MLC1 and GlialCAM and ClC - 2 interactions in leukodystrophy entails glial chloride channel dysfunction . Nat . Commun . 5 , 3475 ( 2014 ) . 66 . Nehrke , K . et al . Loss of hyperpolarization - activated Cl − current in salivary acinar cells from Clcn2 knockout mice . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 23604 – 23611 ( 2002 ) . 67 . Cahalan , S . M . et al . Piezo1 links mechanical forces to red blood cell volume . eLife 4 , e07370 ( 2015 ) . This study shows that mechanical activation of the PIEZO1 channel in red blood cells leads to Ca 2 + influx that activates the Ca 2 + - sensitive Gardos ( KCa3 . 1 ) K + channel and thereby leads to smaller erythrocyte volume . 68 . Ranade , S . S . , Syeda , R . & Patapoutian , A . Mechanically activated ion channels . Neuron 87 , 1162 – 1179 ( 2015 ) . 69 . Sukharev , S . I . , Blount , P . , Martinac , B . , Blattner , F . R . & Kung , C . A large - conductance mechanosensitive channel in E . coli encoded by mscL alone . Nature 368 , 265 – 268 ( 1994 ) . 70 . Anishkin , A . , Loukin , S . H . , Teng , J . & Kung , C . Feeling the hidden mechanical forces in lipid bilayer is an original sense . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 7898 – 7905 ( 2014 ) . 71 . Maingret , F . , Fosset , M . , Lesage , F . , Lazdunski , M . & Honoré , E . TRAAK is a mammalian neuronal mechano - gated K + channel . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 1381 – 1387 ( 1999 ) . 72 . Prager - Khoutorsky , M . , Khoutorsky , A . & Bourque , C . W . Unique interweaved microtubule scaffold mediates osmosensory transduction via physical interaction with TRPV1 . Neuron 83 , 866 – 878 ( 2014 ) . This paper shows that the TRPV1 cation channel is activated in osmosensory neurons by cell shrinkage through a pushing force of an attached microtubule scaffold . 73 . Zhang , W . et al . Ankyrin repeats convey force to gate the NOMPC mechanotransduction channel . Cell 162 , 1391 – 1403 ( 2015 ) . 74 . Tilly , B . C . et al . Activation of the osmo - sensitive chloride conductance involves P21 rho and is accompanied by a transient reorganization of the F - actin cytoskeleton . Mol . Biol . Cell 7 , 1419 – 1427 ( 1996 ) . 75 . Fuster , D . , Moe , O . W . & Hilgemann , D . W . Lipid - and mechanosensitivities of sodium / hydrogen exchangers analyzed by electrical methods . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 10482 – 10487 ( 2004 ) . 76 . Nasuhoglu , C . et al . Modulation of cardiac PIP 2 by cardioactive hormones and other physiologically relevant interventions . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 283 , C223 – C234 ( 2002 ) . 77 . Yamamoto , M . et al . Hypertonic stress increases phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate levels by activating PIP5KI β . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 32630 – 32638 ( 2006 ) . 78 . Voets , T . , Droogmans , G . , Raskin , G . , Eggermont , J . & Nilius , B . Reduced intracellular ionic strength as the initial trigger for activation of endothelial volume - regulated anion channels . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 5298 – 5303 ( 1999 ) . This work convincingly shows that VRACs can be stimulated by reducing intracellular ionic strength , independent of cell volume changes . 79 . Emma , F . , McManus , M . & Strange , K . Intracellular electrolytes regulate the volume set point of the organic osmolyte / anion channel VSOAC . Am . J . Physiol . 272 , C1766 – C1775 ( 1997 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 17 | MAY 2016 | 305 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . 80 . Syeda , R . et al . LRRC8 proteins form volume - regulated anion channels that sense ionic strength . Cell 164 , 499 – 511 ( 2016 ) . Using reconstitution of purified LRRC8 heteromers into lipid bilayers , this paper shows that LRRC8 proteins are sufficient for forming a VRAC channel , and that it can be activated under conditions of low ionic strength . 81 . Rinehart , J . et al . Sites of regulated phosphorylation that control K - Cl cotransporter activity . Cell 138 , 525 – 536 ( 2009 ) . 82 . de Los Heros , P . et al . The WNK - regulated SPAK / OSR1 kinases directly phosphorylate and inhibit the K + - Cl − co - transporters . Biochem . J . 458 , 559 – 573 ( 2014 ) . 83 . Melo , Z . et al . N - terminal serine dephosphorylation is required for KCC3 cotransporter full activation by cell swelling . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 31468 – 31476 ( 2013 ) . 84 . Gagnon , K . B . , England , R . & Delpire , E . Volume sensitivity of cation - Cl - cotransporters is modulated by the interaction of two kinases : Ste20 - related proline - alanine - rich kinase and WNK4 . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 290 , C134 – C142 ( 2006 ) . 85 . Piala , A . T . et al . Chloride sensing by WNK1 involves inhibition of autophosphorylation . Sci . Signal . 7 , ra41 ( 2014 ) . This report of the crystal structure of the catalytic domain of the WNK1 kinase reveals that it directly binds to Cl – , and this binding is shown to prevent kinase activation . 86 . Varela , D . , Simon , F . , Riveros , A . , Jørgensen , F . & Stutzin , A . NAD ( P ) H oxidase - derived H 2 O 2 signals chloride channel activation in cell volume regulation and cell proliferation . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 13301 – 13304 ( 2004 ) . 87 . Shimizu , T . , Numata , T . & Okada , Y . A role of reactive oxygen species in apoptotic activation of volume - sensitive Cl − channel . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 6770 – 6773 ( 2004 ) . This paper shows that I Cl , vol - like currents are activated by several pro - apoptotic stimuli and provides evidence for a role of reactive oxygen species in the activation of those currents and in apoptosis . 88 . Carton , I . et al . RhoA exerts a permissive effect on volume - regulated anion channels in vascular endothelial cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 283 , C115 – C125 ( 2002 ) . 89 . Lepple - Wienhues , A . et al . The tyrosine kinase p56 lck mediates activation of swelling - induced chloride channels in lymphocytes . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 281 – 286 ( 1998 ) . 90 . Holm , J . B . , Grygorczyk , R . & Lambert , I . H . Volume - sensitive release of organic osmolytes in the human lung epithelial cell line A549 : role of the 5 - lipoxygenase . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 305 , C48 – C60 ( 2013 ) . 91 . Levitan , I . , Christian , A . E . , Tulenko , T . N . & Rothblat , G . H . Membrane cholesterol content modulates activation of volume - regulated anion current in bovine endothelial cells . J . Gen . Physiol . 115 , 405 – 416 ( 2000 ) . 92 . Browe , D . M . & Baumgarten , C . M . EGFR kinase regulates volume - sensitive chloride current elicited by integrin stretch via PI - 3K and NADPH oxidase in ventricular myocytes . J . Gen . Physiol . 127 , 237 – 251 ( 2006 ) . 93 . Grinstein , S . , Clarke , C . A . , Dupre , A . & Rothstein , A . Volume - induced increase of anion permeability in human lymphocytes . J . Gen . Physiol . 80 , 801 – 823 ( 1982 ) . 94 . Hoffmann , E . K . , Simonsen , L . O . & Lambert , I . H . Volume - induced increase of K + and Cl − permeabilities in Ehrlich ascites tumor cells . Role of internal Ca 2 + . J . Membr . Biol . 78 , 211 – 222 ( 1984 ) . 95 . Hazama , A . & Okada , Y . Ca 2 + sensitivity of volume - regulatory K + and Cl − channels in cultured human epithelial cells . J . Physiol . 402 , 687 – 702 ( 1988 ) . 96 . Okada , Y . , Sato , K . & Numata , T . Pathophysiology and puzzles of the volume - sensitive outwardly rectifying anion channel . J . Physiol . 587 , 2141 – 2149 ( 2009 ) . 97 . Jackson , P . S . , Morrison , R . & Strange , K . The volume - sensitive organic osmolyte - anion channel VSOAC is regulated by nonhydrolytic ATP binding . Am . J . Physiol . 267 , C1203 – C1209 ( 1994 ) . 98 . Stutzin , A . et al . Separate taurine and chloride efflux pathways activated during regulatory volume decrease . Am . J . Physiol . 277 , C392 – C402 ( 1999 ) . 99 . Lambert , I . H . & Hoffmann , E . K . Cell swelling activates separate taurine and chloride channels in Ehrlich mouse ascites tumor cells . J . Membr . Biol . 142 , 289 – 298 ( 1994 ) . 100 . Jackson , P . S . & Strange , K . Volume - sensitive anion channels mediate swelling - activated inositol and taurine efflux . Am . J . Physiol . 265 , C1489 – C1500 ( 1993 ) . 101 . Akita , T . & Okada , Y . Regulation of bradykinin - induced activation of volume - sensitive outwardly rectifying anion channels by Ca 2 + nanodomains in mouse astrocytes . J . Physiol . 589 , 3909 – 3927 ( 2011 ) . 102 . Mongin , A . A . & Kimelberg , H . K . ATP potently modulates anion channel - mediated excitatory amino acid release from cultured astrocytes . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 283 , C569 – C578 ( 2002 ) . 103 . Deng , W . , Baki , L . & Baumgarten , C . M . Endothelin signalling regulates volume - sensitive Cl − current via NADPH oxidase and mitochondrial reactive oxygen species . Cardiovasc . Res . 88 , 93 – 100 ( 2010 ) . 104 . Nilius , B . et al . Volume - activated Cl − currents in different mammalian non - excitable cell types . Pflügers Arch . 428 , 364 – 371 ( 1994 ) . This paper suggests that VRACs are widely , and maybe ubiquitously , expressed in mammalian cells . 105 . Abascal , F . & Zardoya , R . LRRC8 proteins share a common ancestor with pannexins , and may form hexameric channels involved in cell - cell communication . Bioessays 34 , 551 – 560 ( 2012 ) . This is a bioinformatic analysis showing that LRRC8 proteins are homologous to pannexins and suggesting that LRRC8 proteins form hexameric ion channels . 106 . Lee , C . C . , Freinkman , E . , Sabatini , D . M . & Ploegh , H . L . The protein synthesis inhibitor blasticidin S enters mammalian cells via leucine - rich repeat - containing protein 8D . J . Biol . Chem . 289 , 17124 – 17131 ( 2014 ) . This work shows that the cellular uptake of blasticidin depends on LRRC8D , a gene that was previously identified in a genome - wide reporter screen for genes involved in NF - κ B activation that used blasticidin as trigger . 107 . Kubota , K . et al . LRRC8 involved in B cell development belongs to a novel family of leucine - rich repeat proteins . FEBS Lett . 564 , 147 – 152 ( 2004 ) . 108 . Bond , S . R . & Naus , C . C . The pannexins : past and present . Front . Physiol . 5 , 58 ( 2014 ) . 109 . Shennan , D . B . Swelling - induced taurine transport : relationship with chloride channels , anion - exchangers and other swelling - activated transport pathways . Cell Physiol . Biochem . 21 , 15 – 28 ( 2008 ) . 110 . Min , X . J . et al . Dysfunction of volume - sensitive chloride channels contributes to cisplatin resistance in human lung adenocarcinoma cells . Exp . Biol . Med . 236 , 483 – 491 ( 2011 ) . 111 . Ise , T . et al . Roles of volume - sensitive Cl − channel in cisplatin - induced apoptosis in human epidermoid cancer cells . J . Membr . Biol . 205 , 139 – 145 ( 2005 ) . 112 . Sørensen , B . H . , Thorsteinsdottir , U . A . & Lambert , I . H . Acquired cisplatin resistance in human ovarian A2780 cancer cells correlates with shift in taurine homeostasis and ability to volume regulate . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 307 , C1071 – C1080 ( 2014 ) . 113 . Lee , E . L . et al . Impaired activity of volume - sensitive Cl − channel is involved in cisplatin resistance of cancer cells . J . Cell . Physiol . 211 , 513 – 521 ( 2007 ) . In this work , sensitivity to cisplatin and VRAC currents are restored in parallel in a drug - resistant cell line that displays small VRAC currents by nonspecifically changing gene expression with a histone deacetylate inhibitor . 114 . Hisadome , K . et al . Volume - regulated anion channels serve as an auto / paracrine nucleotide release pathway in aortic endothelial cells . J . Gen . Physiol . 119 , 511 – 520 ( 2002 ) . 115 . Hyzinski - García , M . C . , Rudkouskaya , A . & Mongin , A . A . LRRC8A protein is indispensable for swelling - activated and ATP - induced release of excitatory amino acids in rat astrocytes . J . Physiol . 592 , 4855 – 4862 ( 2014 ) . 116 . Model , M . A . Possible causes of apoptotic volume decrease : an attempt at quantitative review . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 306 , C417 – C424 ( 2014 ) . 117 . Inoue , H . & Okada , Y . Roles of volume - sensitive chloride channel in excitotoxic neuronal injury . J . Neurosci . 27 , 1445 – 1455 ( 2007 ) . 118 . Lai , T . W . , Zhang , S . & Wang , Y . T . Excitotoxicity and stroke : identifying novel targets for neuroprotection . Prog . Neurobiol . 115 , 157 – 188 ( 2014 ) . 119 . Kimelberg , H . K . , Goderie , S . K . , Higman , S . , Pang , S . & Waniewski , R . A . Swelling - induced release of glutamate , aspartate , and taurine from astrocyte cultures . J . Neurosci . 10 , 1583 – 1591 ( 1990 ) . 120 . Pasantes - Morales , H . , Murray , R . A . , Sánchez - Olea , R . & Morán , J . Regulatory volume decrease in cultured astrocytes . II . Permeability pathway to amino acids and polyols . Am . J . Physiol . 266 , C172 – C178 ( 1994 ) . 121 . Feustel , P . J . , Jin , Y . & Kimelberg , H . K . Volume - regulated anion channels are the predominant contributors to release of excitatory amino acids in the ischemic cortical penumbra . Stroke 35 , 1164 – 1168 ( 2004 ) . 122 . Mongin , A . A . Volume - regulated anion channel - a frenemy within the brain . Pflügers Arch . 468 , 421 – 441 ( 2015 ) . 123 . Haskew - Layton , R . E . , Mongin , A . A . & Kimelberg , H . K . Hydrogen peroxide potentiates volume - sensitive excitatory amino acid release via a mechanism involving Ca 2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 3548 – 3554 ( 2005 ) . 124 . Phillis , J . W . , Song , D . & O’Regan , M . H . Inhibition by anion channel blockers of ischemia - evoked release of excitotoxic and other amino acids from rat cerebral cortex . Brain Res . 758 , 9 – 16 ( 1997 ) . 125 . Zhang , Y . , Zhang , H . , Feustel , P . J . & Kimelberg , H . K . DCPIB , a specific inhibitor of volume regulated anion channels ( VRACs ) , reduces infarct size in MCAo and the release of glutamate in the ischemic cortical penumbra . Exp . Neurol . 210 , 514 – 520 ( 2008 ) . This is one of several studies showing that anion channel inhibitors reduce cerebral infarct size , now using a somewhat more specific VRAC inhibitor that is applied intracisternally . 126 . Inoue , H . , Ohtaki , H . , Nakamachi , T . , Shioda , S . & Okada , Y . Anion channel blockers attenuate delayed neuronal cell death induced by transient forebrain ischemia . J . Neurosci . Res . 85 , 1427 – 1435 ( 2007 ) . 127 . Hussy , N . , Deleuze , C . , Pantaloni , A . , Desarmenien , M . G . & Moos , F . Agonist action of taurine on glycine receptors in rat supraoptic magnocellular neurones : possible role in osmoregulation . J . Physiol . 502 , 609 – 621 ( 1997 ) . This seminal paper supports the notion that hypotonicity - induced release of taurine from astrocytes activates glycine receptors on nearby osmosensing neurons and suggests that this plays an important part in systemic volume regulation . 128 . Le - Corronc , H . , Rigo , J . M . , Branchereau , P . & Legendre , P . GABA A receptor and glycine receptor activation by paracrine / autocrine release of endogenous agonists : more than a simple communication pathway . Mol . Neurobiol . 44 , 28 – 52 ( 2011 ) . 129 . Hussy , N . , Deleuze , C . , Desarmenien , M . G . & Moos , F . C . Osmotic regulation of neuronal activity : a new role for taurine and glial cells in a hypothalamic neuroendocrine structure . Prog . Neurobiol . 62 , 113 – 134 ( 2000 ) . 130 . Choe , K . Y . , Olson , J . E . & Bourque , C . W . Taurine release by astrocytes modulates osmosensitive glycine receptor tone and excitability in the adult supraoptic nucleus . J . Neurosci . 32 , 12518 – 12527 ( 2012 ) . 131 . Prager - Khoutorsky , M . & Bourque , C . W . Mechanical basis of osmosensory transduction in magnocellular neurosecretory neurones of the rat supraoptic nucleus . J . Neuroendocrinol . 27 , 507 – 515 ( 2015 ) . 132 . Zhang , Z . & Bourque , C . W . Osmometry in osmosensory neurons . Nat . Neurosci . 6 , 1021 – 1022 ( 2003 ) . This work suggests that osmosensory neurons from the SON function as osmometers , because they apparently lack both RVD and RVI . 133 . Sato , K . , Numata , T . , Saito , T . , Ueta , Y . & Okada , Y . V 2 receptor - mediated autocrine role of somatodendritic release of AVP in rat vasopressin neurons under hypo - osmotic conditions . Sci . Signal . 4 , ra5 ( 2011 ) . Investigating RVD and I Cl , vol on longer time scales , this work contradicts reference 132 by showing that these neurons slowly activate VRACs and RVD . 134 . Kumar , L . et al . Leucine - rich repeat containing 8A ( LRRC8A ) is essential for T lymphocyte development and function . J . Exp . Med . 211 , 929 – 942 ( 2014 ) . Although based on the wrong assumption that LRRC8A is a receptor , this first description of the severe phenotype of constitutive Lrrc8a - knockout mice highlights the importance of VRACs in many tissues . R E V I E W S 306 | MAY 2016 | VOLUME 17 www . nature . com / nrm © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . 135 . Sawada , A . et al . A congenital mutation of the novel gene LRRC8 causes agammaglobulinemia in humans . J . Clin . Invest . 112 , 1707 – 1713 ( 2003 ) . 136 . Krane , C . M . et al . Salivary acinar cells from aquaporin 5 - deficient mice have decreased membrane water permeability and altered cell volume regulation . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 23413 – 23420 ( 2001 ) . 137 . Zeuthen , T . Water - transporting proteins . J . Membr . Biol . 234 , 57 – 73 ( 2010 ) . 138 . Nilius , B . Is the volume - regulated anion channel VRAC a “water - permeable” channel ? Neurochem . Res . 29 , 3 – 8 ( 2004 ) . 139 . Klein , M . , Seeger , P . , Schuricht , B . , Alper , S . L . & Schwab , A . Polarization of Na + / H + and Cl − / HCO 3− exchangers in migrating renal epithelial cells . J . Gen . Physiol . 115 , 599 – 608 ( 2000 ) . 140 . Denker , S . P . & Barber , D . L . Cell migration requires both ion translocation and cytoskeletal anchoring by the Na - H exchanger NHE1 . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 1087 – 1096 ( 2002 ) . 141 . Saadoun , S . , Papadopoulos , M . C . , Hara - Chikuma , M . & Verkman , A . S . Impairment of angiogenesis and cell migration by targeted aquaporin - 1 gene disruption . Nature 434 , 786 – 792 ( 2005 ) . 142 . Papadopoulos , M . C . , Saadoun , S . & Verkman , A . S . Aquaporins and cell migration . Pflügers Arch . 456 , 693 – 700 ( 2008 ) . 143 . Huang , X . et al . EAG2 potassium channel with evolutionarily conserved function as a brain tumor target . Nat . Neurosci . 18 , 1236 – 1246 ( 2015 ) . 144 . Schneider , L . et al . H - ras transformation sensitizes volume - activated anion channels and increases migratory activity of NIH3T3 fibroblasts . Pflügers Arch . 455 , 1055 – 1062 ( 2008 ) . 145 . Charras , G . T . , Yarrow , J . C . , Horton , M . A . , Mahadevan , L . & Mitchison , T . J . Non - equilibration of hydrostatic pressure in blebbing cells . Nature 435 , 365 – 369 ( 2005 ) . 146 . Orlov , S . N . , Platonova , A . A . , Hamet , P . & Grygorczyk , R . Cell volume and monovalent ion transporters : their role in cell death machinery triggering and progression . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 305 , C361 – C372 ( 2013 ) . 147 . McGlasson , L . , Best , L . & Brown , P . D . The glucokinase activator GKA50 causes an increase in cell volume and activation of volume - regulated anion channels in rat pancreatic β - cells . Mol . Cell . Endocrinol . 342 , 48 – 53 ( 2011 ) . 148 . Catalán , M . A . et al . A fluid secretion pathway unmasked by acinar - specific Tmem16A gene ablation in the adult mouse salivary gland . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 2263 – 2268 ( 2015 ) . Acknowledgements The author thanks Rosa Planells - Cases for help with figures , and members of his laboratory for critical reading of the manuscript . Work on VRACs is supported in the author’s laboratory by the European Research Council Advanced Grant ( FP / 2007 - 2013 ) 294435 ‘Cytovolion’ and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( Exc 257 ‘Neurocure’ and JE164 / 12 ) . Competing interests statement The author declares no competing interests . SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article : S1 ( box ) ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 17 | MAY 2016 | 307 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . © 2016 Mac m illan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved .