Winter , 2002 149 This research assesses two individual differences—general self - efﬁcacy and regretful thinking—in the context of technological innovation . Results , obtained from a random sample of 217 patent inventors show that both general self - efﬁcacy and regretful thinking distinguish inventors who started a business ( i . e . , technological entrepreneurs ) from inven - tors who did not start a new business ( i . e . , technological nonentrepreneurs ) . More to the point , patent inventors , who at the time of our survey were actively involved in new busi - ness formation , tended to have signiﬁcantly higher self - efﬁcacy . Also , while technological entrepreneurs tended to have stronger regrets about business opportunities , technological nonentrepreneurs tended to have stronger regrets regarding career and education deci - sions . The two groups did not differ in terms of the quantity of these regrets . Implications for theory , practice , and future study of individual differences in entrepreneurship are discussed . T he ﬁeld of entrepreneurship seeks to understand how opportunities are dis - covered , created , and exploited , by whom , and with what consequences ( Shane & Venkataraman , 2000 ; Venkataraman , 1997 ) . Although the person—the entrepreneur—is central to the creation of new ventures , entrepreneurs themselves are seldom explicitly taken into account in formal models of new venture formation . For example , notwith - standing the important role that entrepreneurs play in forging new ventures and creating new jobs , research to identify attitudes , traits , behaviors , or other characteristics that dis - tinguish entrepreneurs from others remains questionable . The goal of this article is to assess two dimensions ( general self - efﬁcacy and regretful thinking ) on which entrepre - neurs and nonentrepreneurs may differ . P T E & Inventors and New Venture Formation : the Effects of General Self - Efﬁcacy and Regretful Thinking Gideon D . Markman David B . Balkin Robert A . Baron 1042 - 2587 - 01 - 262 Copyright 2002 by Baylor University Please send all correspondence to : Gideon D . Markman , Terry College of Business , University of Georgia , Athens , GA 30602 . email : gmarkman @ terry . uga . edu Challenges to Research on Individual Differences in Entrepreneurship Identifying attributes that distinguish entrepreneurs from nonentrepreneurs is central to the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship ; yet with a few exceptions ( e . g . , Baum , Locke , & Smith , 2001 ) a paucity of research on individual differences in entrepreneurship has been pub - lished in leading journals in the ﬁelds of psychology and management . Several theoret - ical and methodological challenges may explain this situation . Some scholars argued that people become entrepreneurs because of low opportunity costs ( Amit & Schoemaker , 1993 ) . Others hypothesized that individuals choose between entrepreneurial or employ - ment careers ( or a combination of the two ) based on expected utility , such as income , risk , work , and independence ( Douglas & Shepherd , 2000 ) . According to disadvantage theory , entrepreneurship is a reaction to barriers in the labor market : Striving to increase their income , immigrants , minorities , and others seek entrepreneurship when they learn that their job prospects are slim ( Mesch & Czamanski , 1997 ) . A similar view suggests that new ventures emerge when people encounter insurmountable obstacles in their task environment ( Timmons , 1999 ) . The main problem with such views of entrepre - neurship is lack of balance ; they overemphasize environmental factors and rationality and underemphasize the role of cognitions and individual differences . Indeed , utility max - imization , low opportunity costs , and workplace barriers do not necessarily lead people to start a company . Finally , the fact that many entrepreneurs—as matched up to employ - ees with comparable backgrounds and experience—earn lower income with lower earn - ings potential ( Hamilton , 2000 ) hints that utilitarian paradigms , though undoubtedly useful , fail to fully explain individual differences in this context ( Mitchell & Mickel , 1999 ) . Inappropriate sampling techniques , questionable measures , and inadequate statistical control ( e . g . , issues of direct versus indirect effects ; cf . , Baum & Locke , 2002 ) also hinder research on individual differences in entrepreneurship . For example , what is the theoret - ical rationale for comparing entrepreneurs with managers ( Busenitz & Barney , 1997 ) , bankers ( Sarasvathy , Simon , & Lave , 1999 ) , or students ( Chen , Greene , & Crick , 1998 ; Krueger , 1993 ) ? Entrepreneurs build new businesses regardless of resource availability ( Timmons , 1999 ) ; they erect their ﬁrms from the ground up , are normally fully vested in their venture , and subsequently are liable for their ﬁrm’s success or failure . Managers and bankers , on the other hand , command and control established businesses ; they are agents not owners , and they are not as exposed to personal risks as entrepreneurs are . In that respect ( excluding deeper cognitive phenomena , such as opportunity recognition , see Fiet , 2002 ) , students are even less suitable as a comparison group . The challenge of selecting appropriate control groups is related to the daunting ques - tion “who is an entrepreneur and who is not” ( Robinson et al . , 1991 ) . Thus , an impor - tant factor that hinders research in entrepreneurship evolves around samples and procedures by which subjects are selected . First , due to the aura surrounding economic growth and innovation , some studies suffer from the bias of over - selecting successful entrepreneurs and most research simply ignores the issue of survival bias . Second , and despite the importance of innovation , few studies control for subjects’ inventive capac - ity , and hence it remains unclear whether reported differences are due to group mem - bership ( e . g . , entrepreneurs vs . nonentrepreneurs ) or ability to innovate . Third , to our knowledge , few studies used homogenous groups of entrepreneurs and even fewer relied on random sampling techniques . Ignoring that large variations among entrepreneurs make comparisons within and across studies difﬁcult , much research used convenient samples of entrepreneurs who work in diverse , frequently even unrelated , industries . Finally , researchers in entrepreneurship have a tendency to ‘handpick’ their samples despite the 150 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE fact that prestudy knowledge of group membership ( i . e . , entrepreneur vs . nonentrepre - neurs ) might have inadvertently introduced additional biases . For the past several years , Baron and his colleagues ( 1998 , 2000 ) and others ( cf . , Baum , Locke , & Smith , 2001 ; Shane , 2000 ) have sought to augment methodological rigor and create closer conceptual links between entrepreneurship and cognitions by using rig - orous methodologies and well - established psychological constructs that seem relevant to understanding the characteristics and activities of entrepreneurs . Our research sought to extend this ongoing work . Building on emergent research on individual differences and entrepreneurship ( Baron , 1998 , 2000 ; Busenitz & Barney , 1997 ; Chen , Greene , & Crick , 1998 ; Honig , 1998 , Stewart et al . , 1999 , to name a few ) , we focus on two dimensions that have been validated by psychologists , but which , for a variety of reasons , have not been adequately applied in entrepreneurship research . The factors examined are general self - efﬁcacy —our belief in our ability to perform successfully ( Chen , Gully , & Eden , 2001 ; Eden & Aviram , 1993 ) and regretful thinking , which are thoughts regarding events and outcomes different from the ones that actually occurred ( Baron , 2000 ) . As we explain below , we predicted that inventors who use their newly developed technologies to start new companies ( hereinafter referred to as technological entrepreneurs ) and inventors who work and invent for established organizations ( hereinafter termed technological nonentrepreneurs ) would differ on these two dimensions . Why This Study Is Interesting As we approach the theory section , it is important to identify some of the key factors that make this study interesting and valuable to entrepreneurship research . First , Davis ( 1971 ) asserts that theories become interesting once they refute old truths or long held assumptions . The foregoing review and the historical context suggest that , at least until very recently , studies on individual differences added limited value to entrepreneurship research . Similarly , we challenge the view that entrepreneurs—perhaps because they are future - focused—have very few regrets ( Baron , 2000 ) . Second , importance is also in - creased when what hitherto seemed to be a single phenomenon is in reality composed of assorted heterogeneous elements ( Davis , 1971 ) . For example , recent entrepreneurship research treated regretful thinking as a unidimensional or homogenous construct ( Baron , 2000 ) , but as our research shows such cognition is actually made of several distinct types of speciﬁc regrets . Third , research draws additional interest when it shows that what seemed to be a questionable methodological tool is in reality a good one . As we will show shortly , general measures of self - efﬁcacy appear to be particularly useful under ambiguous conditions and multidimensional tasks ( Chen , Gully , & Eden , 2001 ; Eden & Aviram , 1993 ) . Moreover , research that combines a random sample and quantitative and qualitative methodology provides richer insights at the same time that it raises the stan - dard on future studies on individual differences in entrepreneurship . THEORY AND HYPOTHESES Self - Efﬁcacy : Beliefs in Our Ability to Effectively Accomplish Certain Tasks Self - efﬁcacy involves the belief that we can organize and effectively execute actions to produce given attainments ( Bandura , 1997 ; Chen , Greene , & Crick , 1998 ; Gist & Mitchell , 1992 ) . Self - efﬁcacy impacts our perceived control , how much stress , self - blame , and depression we experience while we cope with taxing circumstances , and the Winter , 2002 151 level of accomplishments we realize . It also inﬂuences our courses of action , level of effort , how long we persevere , our resilience in the face of obstacles , adversity , or failure , and whether our thoughts are self - hindering or self - aiding ( Bandura , 1999 ; Wood & Bandura , 1989 ) . Vasil ( 1992 ) found that when the effects of experience , academic rank , and disciplinary afﬁliation are controlled , scholars high in self - efﬁcacy excel . While many occupations call for high self - efﬁcacy ( Gist & Mitchell , 1992 ) , inventing patents is a good example since it is constrained by time , funding , and uncertain outcomes despite relent - less intellectual effort . Moreover inventions are scrutinized , challenged , and frequently refuted before ( and sometimes after ) they attain patent status . Since the process of sci - entiﬁc discovery is strewn with technological obstacles , successful patenting rests heavily on sustained effort , creative work , and strong self - belief ( Bandura , 1999 ; Gist & Mitchell , 1992 ; Wood & Bandura , 1989 ) . In short , perceived self - efﬁcacy is central to most human functioning , and since actions are based more on what people believe than on what is objectively true , thoughts are a potent precursor to one’s level of motivation , affective states , and actions . If self - efﬁcacy impacts career undertaking , performance , and success , would it also predict , or at the very least be related to , entrepreneurial pursuits ? We think that it would because of three main reasons . First , people avoid careers and environments they believe exceed their capabilities ( regardless of the beneﬁts these may hold ) , but they readily undertake vocations they judge themselves capable of handling ( Krueger & Dickson , 1994 ) , and the higher their self - efﬁcacy , the more challenging the activities they pursue . Individuals high in self - efﬁcacy not only prefer challenging activities but also they display higher staying power in those pursuits ( Bandura , 1997 ) . Since the undertaking of new business formation—particularly in high - tech domains—is replete with difﬁculties , high self - efﬁcacy may be necessary ( even if insufﬁcient ) for such pursuits . Second , because technological entrepreneurs operate at the crux of change , innovation , and market perturbation , they personally realize higher ﬁnancial , technological , and legal uncertain - ties . On the other hand , inventors “working - for - others” continue to operate in relative seclusion and predictability ; they are less exposed to market resistance , competitors’retal - iation , or suppliers’ protest . Past research indicates that under taxing circumstances , indi - viduals with higher self - efﬁcacy perform more adeptly ( cf . , Bandura , 1997 ) . Thus , social cognitive theory suggests that technological efforts to overcome the adversities described above call for high self - efﬁcacy . Finally , although some research has suggested that self - efﬁcacy successfully differentiates entrepreneurs from nonentrepreneurs ( Chen , Greene , & Crick , 1998 ; De Noble , Jung , & Ehrlich , 1999 ) , as we noted earlier , such inferences stem from studies with students or managers . We suggest that starting a new venture — obtaining external funding , recruiting key partners and employees , and overcoming what appear to be insurmountable business and technological obstacles—is substantially dif - ferent than managing an existing operation or undergoing classroom simulations . Since self - efﬁcacy reliably predicts the scope of career options considered , occupational inter - ests , perseverance in difﬁcult ﬁelds , and personal effectiveness , we suggest that it will also be related to the pursuit of entrepreneurial activity . Thus our ﬁrst hypothesis is as follows : Hypothesis 1 : Technological entrepreneurs have higher self - efﬁcacy than techno - logical nonentrepreneurs . Regretful Thinking : Thinking About Unexpected Outcomes Experiencing unintended detrimental consequences or imagining favorable outcomes that did not materialize is a frequent experience for most people . Such regretful thinking 152 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE often occurs in response to information about unfavorable outcomes and unmet expec - tations , and frequently leads , in turn , to strong emotional reactions , such as disappoint - ment and blame ( Zeelenberg et al . , 1998 ) . For instance , regretful thinking can be observed among Olympic athletes who win silver medals . Such athletes have been found to be less happy with their success than are athletes who receive bronze medals ( Medvec , Madey , & Gilovich , 1995 ) . Research on counterfactual thinking explains this seemingly anom - alous result in the following manner : Silver medal winners are unhappy because they imagined winning a gold medal ( i . e . , they imagined better outcomes than they actually received ) , while bronze medallists are happier because they imagined receiving no medal at all ( i . e . , worse outcomes than they actually received ) . Thus , like counterfactual think - ing , regretful thinking is a cognitive representation of alternative consequences and they are activated automatically , particularly ( though not exclusively ) in response to misfor - tunes and disappointments ( Baron , 2000 ) . Regretful thinking is important because such strong sentiments may have profound effects on entrepreneurs’ mood , understanding of cause - effect relationships , decision - making , and task performance ( Roese , 1997 ) . Research shows that regret and blame are particularly vivid in contexts involving product failure ( Creyer & Gurhan , 1997 ) . Although Baron ( 2000 ) found that entrepreneurs , as compared with students , experience fewer regrets , we suspect that technological entrepreneurs , because they encounter potent market and technological obstacles , experience substantially more regrets than others who invent yet take no part in the commercialization of their technologies . Championing a new venture can evoke strong emotions ; capitalizing on poor opportunities ( and the subsequent failure ) or caving in to competition ( and observing how others reap the rewards ) can stir up strong regrets . Since persons launching a new business based on their inventions are constrained by ﬁnancial and nonﬁnancial resources , time , and technological know - how , it is reasonable to expect that they would experience many—and sometimes repeated—negative out - comes . It is not uncommon for entrepreneurs to identify an opportunity , struggle to attain resources , industriously develop a working prototype , and pitch it to prospective buyers , only to see it rejected—sometimes rather swiftly—by skeptical markets . Since techno - logical entrepreneurs , as compared with technological nonentrepreneurs , make more private sacriﬁces and have more professionally , ﬁnancially , and socially at stake , product rejections and limited capital may bear more memorable regrets . In short , exploiting tech - nical opportunities through ﬁrm formation , working with very limited budgets , and bat - tling to gain product legitimacy among buyers within ephemeral opportunity windows may bring early mishaps and failure . On the basis of these considerations , we suggest that entrepreneurs experience more regrets and experience them more intensely than nonentrepreneurs . We also suspect that entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs regret dif - ferent things because the environment in which they work and the challenges that they face are substantially different . Hence , the following hypotheses : Hypothesis 2 : Technological entrepreneurs experience a higher number of regrets than technological nonentrepreneurs . Hypothesis 3 : Technological entrepreneurs experience their regrets more intensely than technological nonentrepreneurs . Hypothesis 4 : Technological entrepreneurs regret different things than technological nonentrepreneurs . The above discussion and the predicted differences between inventors’ self - efﬁcacy and regretful thinking are succinctly captured by Figure 1 . Winter , 2002 153 METHODS To avoid the selection biases discussed earlier , yet to obtain evidence on individual differences in this context , we used a random sample of 217 patent inventors . This random sample was obtained according to the following procedure : First , we attained from the U . S . Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce ( USPTO ) a list of all the patent inventors ( N = 4 , 861 ) who were granted patents for their inventions ( e . g . , patent class 606 , which encompasses surgery devices ) during 1997 and 1998 . Since the list of 4 , 861 inventors included only minimal contact information ( i . e . , ﬁrst and last name , city , and state ) , a large - scale effort took place to obtain the complete address and phone number for each and every inven - tor . As manual search deemed time consuming and costly , we used Visual Basic to scan the Nation Wide Phone Directory ( NWPD ) software that resides on CD - ROMs and then retrieves the data based on pre - speciﬁed criteria . When there was a match between an inventor’s name and city in the USPTO dataset and the full address given by the NWPD software , we retained the inventor in our sample . The Visual Basic output encompassed 3 , 491 nonduplicated entries . Although the Visual Basic output encompassed 3 , 491 nonduplicated entries , we ran - domly selected a sample of 586 inventors for our study . This was done using Excel Spreadsheet and the “randomize” command function . Then , a courtesy phone call was made to all 586 potential participants notifying them that a survey was sent to them . Ten working days later we called all the participants who did not send their surveys back , and then we sent our second batch of surveys . Finally , in two - week intervals beginning after the second mailing , two to six additional phone calls were made and surveys were sent to all nonresponding inventors . Hence , in contrast to previous studies that compared entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs—but “manually” selected their participants—we relied on a random sample of 217 inventors ( 37 percent response rate ) , all of whom invent in the same technological space at the same time period . To identify technological entrepreneurs from technological nonentrepreneurs , we used a qualifying question ( placed at the last section of the mail survey ) , asking inven - tors to indicate whether they used their invention to start or continue to build their own business . Such a qualifying question was used successfully in previous studies including 154 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE Entrepreneurship vs . Non entrepreneurship Build a new venture around own inventions Quantity & Strength ∑ Higher General Self - Efficacy ∑ More Regretful Thinking ∑ Stronger Regretful Thinking ∑ Moderate General Self - Efficacy ∑ Limited Regretful Thinking ∑ Weaker Regretful Thinking Invent as employees for established companies Individual Differences Self - Efficacy Regretful Thinking Figure 1 Hypothesized Relationship Among Study Variables the ERC project mentioned earlier ( Carter , Gartner , & Reynolds , 1996 ; Reynolds , 1997 ) . This “stipulation” is important because it means that identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of inventors as technological entrepreneurs or as technological nonentrepreneurs was made only after the surveys were collected and data were coded . Also , unlike Internet - type patents that may be developed at one’s home , inventing surgical devices takes time and requires costly infrastructure ( e . g . , facilities and instruments ) . This implies that it is improbable that participants had ventured substantial amounts of their time , personal capital , and labor to devise useful , nonobvious , and valuable inventions , with which they did virtually nothing . While it is impossible to ascertain completely whether some inven - tors may be neither entrepreneurs nor nonentrepreneurs , combining the procedure described above with the technological space in which these patents were invented provide conﬁdence in the validity and reliability of group membership ( at least at the time inventors were surveyed ) . Of the 217 qualiﬁed inventors , 55 ( 25 percent ) used their invention to start a new company and therefore were classiﬁed as technological entrepreneurs ( coded as 1 ) , whereas the remaining 162 ( 75 percent ) did not , and thus were classiﬁed as technologi - cal nonentrepreneurs ( coded as 0 ) . Sampling patent inventors is appropriate since patents are a proxy for important technological innovation , a precursor to newly developed prod - ucts , and an indication of intellectual property and technological capital ( Balkin , Markman , & Gomez - Mejia , 2000 ) . Strategically speaking , patents also erect legal and technical barriers to competitors while creating opportunities for wealth . Indeed , our interviews of patent inventors , technology transfer executives , and patent attorneys sug - gested that patents serve as key footholds to speciﬁc markets ; they are an important source of competitive insulation . Methodologically speaking , the use of inventors , all of whom invented patents at roughly the same time in the same technological domain , trims down on competing and confounding factors . For example , this study holds several contextual factors constant , including the technological domain , inventors’ experience , and time in which an innovation was available to compete in the market . Finally , as research should rely on appropriate samples and sampling techniques , so should it try to account for nonresponse bias . To this end , we compared the respondents— on age , formal education , annual income , and number of patents developed—with 46 inventors who refused to participate . Data on these inventors were obtained via postsur - vey phone calls to nonresponding inventors , and analysis showed no signiﬁcant differ - ences between the two samples . PROCEDURES AND OPERATIONAL MEASURES Inventors were asked to complete a short questionnaire consisting of scales adapted from widely used measures of self - efﬁcacy and regretful thinking . Although self - efﬁcacy measures have generally relied on scales relating to speciﬁc tasks , some research calls for broader measures , particularly when the vocations under consideration have little in common or require a very diverse set of skills ( cf . , Bandura , 1997 ) . Since starting high - tech ventures requires human capabilities in diverse domains ( De Noble , Jung , & Ehrlich , 1999 ) and validated self - efﬁcacy scales for patent inventors are not yet available , we used a general self - efﬁcacy scale . This construct was measured in terms of the belief about what one can do under different conditions with whatever skills one possesses ( Chen , Gully , & Eden , 2001 ; Eden & Aviram , 1993 ) . This measure was an eight - item , seven - point scale ( 1 = strongly disagree ; 7 = strongly agree ) that was used successfully in pre - vious research ( Maurer & Pierce , 1998 ) . Items included such statements as “I am strong Winter , 2002 155 enough to overcome life’s struggles , ” “I can handle the situations that life brings , ” and “I usually feel I can handle the typical problems that come up in life” ( a = . 89 ) . All eight measures of self - efﬁcacy are depicted in the Appendix . Unlike previous research that treated regretful thinking as a unidimensional or homogenous construct , we assessed three dimensions of regretful thinking , including a quantitative , qualitative , and magnitude measure of inventors’ regrets . The quantitative and qualitative measures were based on inventors’ responses to an open - ended question : “think about your life and career and list the decisions that you regret most . ” Thus , three different dimensions of regretful thinking were measured . First , we counted the quanti - tative measure of regrets by adding up the decisions that inventors regretted most . Second , a content analysis of the same decisions by two independent raters had identiﬁed six types of regrets ( e . g . , decisions regarding business opportunities , career , education , investment and ﬁnance , personal value , and relationships ) . Interrater consistency was high ; in 92 percent of the cases they were in complete agreement . This was the measure of the qual - itative nature of regrets . Finally , on the next page of our survey , participants were also asked to indicate , on a seven - point scale , how much regret they had experienced regard - ing the decisions they had just listed ( 1 = little regret ; 7 = much regret ) . This was the measure of the magnitude of regrets . All three measures of regretful thinking are depicted in the Appendix . Consistent with previous research on individual differences in entrepreneurship , the control variables were age , education , and annual income for 1998 ( Baron , 2000 ) . An additional control variable that our study brings to this type of research is a measure of innovation as captured by the number of patents obtained by each inventor ( Griliches , 1990 ; Romer , 1996 ) . Analyses Table 1 provides means , standard deviations , and intercorrelations for the measures . The average inventor in this study was approximately 47 years old , had almost 20 years of formal education , and at the time of the survey had more than 13 patented inventions 156 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE Table 1 Means , Standard Deviations , and Correlations among Study Variables a Mean s . d . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 . Entrepreneurs b . 25 . 43 2 . Age 47 . 23 9 . 33 . 03 3 . Education 19 . 69 2 . 69 . 20 * * - . 04 4 . Innovation 13 . 14 17 . 00 . 04 . 04 . 10 5 . Income c 118 , 273 83 , 845 . 03 - . 01 . 24 * * . 10 6 . General Self - Efﬁcacy 6 . 01 . 99 . 18 * * . 03 . 01 . 11 . 05 7 . Regret Magnitude 2 . 79 1 . 68 . 17 * * - . 07 . 08 . 16 * . 10 . 14 * 8 . Regret Count 5 . 99 1 . 04 . 11 . 12 . 00 - . 06 - . 13 * - . 01 . 02 * p < . 05 level ( 2 - tailed ) ; * * p < . 01 level ( 2 - tailed ) a N = 217 b Entrepreneurs refers to technological entrepreneurs versus technological nonentrepreneurs . c Income is annual earnings in dollars . with average annual earnings of approximately $ 118 , 000 . The subgroup of inventors who also became entrepreneurs ( N = 55 ) had started 1 . 5 ﬁrms with two cofounders and had raised approximately $ 6 million to build his or her company . Entrepreneurs and nonen - trepreneurs were closely matched on education , age , income , and innovations . A MANOVA was used to examine the relationship between the entrepreneur and nonentrepreneur variable on a set of three dependent variables : self - efﬁcacy , magnitude of regrets , and number of regrets . Variables such as age , years of education , and innova - tion ( i . e . , number of patents ) were included as covariates . RESULTS The MANOVA revealed signiﬁcant difference between entrepreneurs and nonentre - preneurs on the set of the dependent variables ( Pillai’s Trace = . 05 , F = 3 . 80 , p < . 05 ) . The size of the multivariate effect of entrepreneurship on the set of dependent variables , as indexed by partial eta squared , was . 05 . Univariate ANOVAs conﬁrmed that entre - preneurship had signiﬁcantly higher self - efﬁcacy ( F = 5 . 51 p < . 05 ) as well as stronger regrets ( F = 6 . 01 , p < . 05 ) . Stated differently , self - efﬁcacy and magnitude of regrets were higher for entrepreneurs than for nonentrepreneurs ( respectively 6 . 30 vs . 5 . 90 and 6 . 15 vs . 5 . 67 ) . However , the two groups did not differ on the number of regrets ( F = 1 . 44 , p = ns ) . Table 2 shows the adjusted means for the three dependent variables broken down for entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs . As described earlier , a content analysis of the qualitative measure of regretful thinking identiﬁed six types of regretful decisions , including business opportunities , decisions regarding career , education , investments , personal values , and personal rela - tionships . A discriminant analysis suggested that technological entrepreneurs regret more decisions regarding business opportunities whereas technological nonentrepreneurs list more regrets about education and career decisions ( Chi - square = 30 . 84 ; p = . 01 ) . The discriminant function accounted for 78 percent of the between - group variability . The discriminant function of the structure matrix and the test of group means are reported in Table 3 . Our study suggests several important ﬁndings . As stipulated by our ﬁrst hypothesis and shown in Table 2 , technological entrepreneurs’ self - efﬁcacy was signiﬁcantly higher Winter , 2002 157 Table 2 MANOVA Analysis : Dependent Variable Means a For Entrepreneurs and Nonentrepreneurs Dependent Variable Entrepreneurs Nonentrepreneurs F - value eta 2 General Self - Efﬁcacy 6 . 30 5 . 90 5 . 41 * . 03 Magnitude of Regrets 6 . 15 5 . 67 6 . 01 * . 03 Number of Regrets 3 . 21 2 . 90 1 . 44 . 01 Multivariate effect : Pillai’s trace = . 05 , F = 3 . 80 * , eta 2 = . 05 * p < . 05 a Means adjusted for covariates : age , years of education , and number of patents . than that of technological nonentrepreneurs . Thus , the data offered support for Hypoth - esis 1 . Coincidentally , we also found a signiﬁcant relationship between self - efﬁcacy and patent inventors’ annual earnings . To be more speciﬁc , patent inventors whose self - efﬁcacy was in the top 10 percent earned over $ 35 , 000 per year more than patent inven - tors whose self - efﬁcacy was in the bottom 10 percent . Thus , regardless of group membership , higher general self - efﬁcacy was related to higher personal income . The dif - ference in technological entrepreneurs’ and technological nonentrepreneurs’ regret count was not signiﬁcant . Although , on average , entrepreneurs reported a somewhat higher number of regretful decisions than nonentrepreneurs , the difference was not statistically signiﬁcant . On the other hand , the two groups differed on the magnitude of their regrets ; technological entrepreneurs reported signiﬁcantly stronger regrets than technological nonentrepreneurs ( see Table 2 ) . Additionally , and as seen in Table 3 , entrepreneurs pri - marily reported regrets concerning business opportunities whereas nonentrepreneurs reported mainly regrets about their career and education . To recap , ﬁndings reported in Tables 2 and 3 provide support for Hypotheses 1 , 3 , and 4 , but not for Hypothesis 2 . Technological entrepreneurs , as compared with techno - logical nonentrepreneurs , tend to have higher self - efﬁcacy , more intense regrets , and dif - ferent types of regrets . Nonetheless , the two groups did not differ with respect to the quantity of their regrets . DISCUSSION The centrality of technical innovation to economic growth is not new and research is providing a better understanding of the innovation processes and strategies that yield high returns . However , we still know very little about the persons—the entrepreneurs— who discover and create “new combinations . ” To remedy this , we investigated four variables ( two constructs , one of which was captured by three different measures ) on which patent inventors who were classiﬁed as technological entrepreneurs and technol - ogical nonentrepreneurs may differ and found support for three of our four hypotheses . 158 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE Table 3 Discriminant Analysis : Structure Matrix of Regret Variables a Function Wilks’ Lambda F Sig . Business Opportunity . 85 . 94 23 . 58 . 001 Education - . 43 . 99 4 . 00 . 05 Career - . 35 . 98 6 . 07 . 01 Value . 12 1 . 00 . 45 . 50 Relationship . 03 1 . 00 . 02 . 88 Investment - . 01 1 . 00 . 58 . 45 a Dependent Function : Technological entrepreneurs versus technological nonentrepreneurs . Inventors who started a business were higher on general self - efﬁcacy than inventors who did not start a business ( Hypothesis 1 ) . Evidence also showed that technological entre - preneurs experience stronger regrets than their counterparts ( Hypothesis 3 ) and the two groups appeared to experience regrets over different types of decisions ( Hypothesis 4 ) . Technological entrepreneurs’ regretful thinking focused mainly on business opportunities and technological nonentrepreneurs focused on decisions relating to education and careers . Contrary to Hypothesis 2 , however , the number of these regrets did not differ across the two groups . Finally , regardless of group membership , highly efﬁcacious inven - tors tended to earn signiﬁcantly higher annual income . This result suggests that inven - tors with high general self - efﬁcacy may attain a higher level of personal success ( as measured by annual income ) than inventors with lower levels of self - efﬁcacy . Since self - efﬁcacy is crucial for the pursuits of challenging attainments , it is not sur - prising that it was signiﬁcantly related to annual income , a general measure of personal success . More important to our study , general self - efﬁcacy was related to group mem - bership ; inventors who used their patents to start or build new companies had signiﬁ - cantly higher self - efﬁcacy than inventors who did not use their patents in this manner . It has been observed that highly talented individuals often fail to leverage their capabil - ities , and a large body of evidence ( e . g . , Wanberg , Kanfer , & Rotundo , 1999 ) suggests that this may be due , in part , to deﬁcits with respect to self - efﬁcacy . In essence , it is dif - ﬁcult to attain challenging goals when one has doubt about one’s ability . For this reason , we suggest that a strong perception of general self - efﬁcacy may well be crucial in many entrepreneurial undertakings . Unlike previous research that shows that entrepreneurs—as compared to others— engage in limited counterfactual thinking ( cf . , Baron , 2000 ) , we found that entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs report an almost identical number of regretful decisions . We found that not only do technological entrepreneurs experience stronger regrets they also expe - rience regrets over different kinds of decisions than their counterparts ( i . e . , business opportunities vs . career and education decisions ) . We attribute these ﬁndings , which diverge from the ones reported by Baron ( 2000 ) , to our unique and random sample of patent inventors ( rather than students ) and our qualitative measures of regrets . While the ﬁnding that technological entrepreneurs regret mostly decisions about busi - ness opportunities has high face validity ( e . g . , pursuing opportunities is at the core of many entrepreneurial activities ) , a key question is why did technological nonentrepre - neurs , but not technological entrepreneurs , regret career and education decisions ? Though this question should be fully addressed in future research , we offer the following expla - nation . Job autonomy , particularly in inventive capacity , inﬂuences how incumbents perceive their work and experience career - related regrets . Unlike technological entre - preneurs , technological nonentrepreneurs work and invent for their employers , and as such they encounter stronger barriers to career mobility , limited discretionary power , and of course , restricted autonomy . A career plateau—the point at which advancement is improbable—can occur to many astute inventors despite years of experience . Good engi - neers have strong problem - solving skills in their respective technical domains ; however , to become executives or managers they need new skills in leadership , decision making , business acumen , working well with a diverse workforce , as well as foresight and per - severance . Thus , one’s early decision to become a skilled scientist or engineer may limit the subsequent likelihood of being groomed for leadership roles and succession to the top management team ( Daily , Certo , & Dalton , 1999 ) . While our explanation is quite plausible , this proposition is beyond the scope of our study and thus awaits further empir - ical testing . Winter , 2002 159 Limitations and Future Research Even though regretful thinking is an important cognition in the context of decision making , until recently very little research has focused on this topic in the context of entre - preneurship . For example , researchers ( e . g . , Loomes & Sugden , 1986 ) have noted that decisionmakers anticipate and take into account that their decisions might bring about regretful thoughts . As such , future research on entrepreneurs’ regretful thinking could be helpful in understanding how these thought processes and cognitions affect decisions and actions . For instance , regretful thinking , which is primarily associated with the presence of negative outcomes , together with people’s natural tendency to avoid disappointment , could explain why some people , but not others , tend to be so cautious in their decision to launch a new venture . Others showed that people are generally risk averse and that this tendency is stronger under conditions of possible gains than possible loss ( Kahneman & Tversky , 1982 ) . To extrapolate from the work of van Dijk , Zeelenberg , and van der Pligt ( 1999 ) , one reason for this tendency could be that opting not to start a new business may be associated with limited disappointment and few regrets . In other words , increased anticipation of disappointment and regrets might motivate risk - averse career paths . Being risk averse allows us to expect less , obtain what we expect more easily , and therefore avoid the risk of becoming chagrined from disappointments and regretful thinking . Clearly , cognitions , such as regretful thinking are an interesting area of research awaiting further investigation in the context of new venture formation . Figure 1 is a crude depiction of the relationship between inventors’ self - efﬁcacy and regretful thinking and new venture formation . Naturally , methodological constraints limited our ability to test for other important individual differences ( e . g . , locus of control , expectancy , self - esteem , and so on ) or contextual factors ( e . g . , resource availability ) . Similarly , the cross - sectional design prohibits any causal inferences , and thus direction - ality , despite the diagramed arrows , remains questionable . Notwithstanding these limita - tions , we hope that future research may draw on our simpliﬁed model and expand it to test additional cognitive differences . As described in the “Methods” section , our study focused narrowly on patent inventors who invented at roughly the same time period in a single technological domain ( i . e . , surgery devices ) . While this did not account for resource availability , it certainly controlled for other situational factors , such as techno - logical context , experience , and time in which the innovation was available to compete in the market . Future testing of this model therefore should maintain the same level of methodological rigor , but at the same time try to account for other contextual and cognitive factors overlooked here . One obvious limitation of our study is uncertainty regarding causality of self - efﬁcacy . Since data were collected after inventors began building their new ventures , it is uncertain whether founding a company increases one’s self - efﬁcacy or whether high self - efﬁcacy leads one to start a new venture . However , two points suggest that general self - efﬁcacy is more likely to be a cause of starting a new venture than the result of it ( Bandura , 1997 ) . First , general self - efﬁcacy is the result of lifelong experiences , and as such , it is quite stable by the time individuals are adults ( Bandura , 1997 ) . Thus , it seems unlikely that the experience of starting a new venture could , in and of itself , signiﬁcantly elevate general self - efﬁcacy . In fact , since we obtained data from entrepreneurs only a few months after they had launched their new ventures , the possibility that such short - term activity could signiﬁcantly alter one’s self - perception , which is based on many years of prior experience , seems unlikely . Second , general self - efﬁcacy is shaped by individu - als’ success or failure in various activities . The new ventures founded by our sample of technological entrepreneurs were quite new—so new , in fact , that these persons had not 160 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE yet received clear feedback on whether they were ( or were going to be ) successful in this activity . For this reason , too , we believe it is more reasonable to assert that differences in self - efﬁcacy contributed to the decision to become an entrepreneur rather than the opposite . We hasten to point out , however , that self - efﬁcacy is founded on a model of triadic reciprocal causation in which cognitive , affective , and behavioral patterns all operate as interacting determinants that inﬂuence one another bidirectionally ( Bandura , 1999 ) . We also realize that the possibility that starting a new business enhances one’s self - efﬁcacy exists . Hence , only further research—employing longitudinal methods—will adequately address this question and we therefore hope that future studies on entrepreneurship and self - efﬁcacy may address this challenge more thoroughly . The key challenge to cognitive researchers in ﬁeld settings is the unavoidable trade - off between casting a broad empirical net and attaining a high response rate . Unfortu - nately , extensive survey research ( in ﬁeld settings , such as with patent inventors ) with innumerable scales and questions hinders response rates . Highly inclusive survey instru - ments ( e . g . , with a myriad of cognitive scales ) are lengthy and time—consuming ; and while such surveys may work in classroom settings , they are prohibitively difﬁcult to justify to inventors and scientists who volunteer their scarce time . Hence , it is our view that precisely because we used a parsimonious survey , we were able to harness inven - tors’ attention and goodwill ( e . g . , 37 percent response rate ) . Clearly , cognitive scholars must consider this delicate tradeoff between breadth of constructs studied and the qual - itative richness of each construct before embarking on ﬁeld research . Finally , and in the context of the special issue on information processing and entre - preneurial cognition , we hope to communicate a broader vision for methodological and theoretical development . As discussed earlier , since information processing and cogni - tions are individual - level phenomena and entrepreneurial pursuits are highly multidi - mensional , it is incumbent upon us to pay closer attention to methodological factors ( e . g . , sample selection , contextual variables , and so on ) . This study , we believe , made impor - tant methodological strides and also provided insights regarding self - efﬁcacy and regret - ful thinking , but the theoretical frontiers of information processing and cognitions are substantially broader . For example , future research and theory should focus on entrepre - neurs’ mental models—one’s implicit cognitive framework of reality or unarticulated theory of action . Speciﬁcally , because mental models are determined by past experience , expertise , knowledge , and learning , do such models become a liability in new and unfa - miliar contexts ? How do entrepreneurs think , learn , rebound , and elude mental model traps as they create new combinations and ultimately wealth , even in declining indus - tries ? Other , and perhaps more basic questions , are “why do some persons but not others become entrepreneurs ? ” Or “what makes some entrepreneurs so much more successful than others ? ” Although cognitive processes are constructed to assist in decision making , the overwhelming evidence that cognitions become barriers to change suggests that this would be a fertile area for future research in entrepreneurship . Conclusion To recap , we suggested that efforts to attain greater insight into the characteristics of persons who discover , create , and exploit opportunities is important as it may yield rich dividends with respect to our ability to address fundamental questions concerning indi - vidual differences in the context of entrepreneurship . We showed that inventors who use their inventions to start a new business , as compared with those who don’t , tend to have higher self - efﬁcacy and more intense regrets over certain kinds of decisions . We also Winter , 2002 161 found that while the two groups tend to regret different decisions , the number of regrets was highly similar . Finally , we also found that as a group , inventors with high self - efﬁcacy tend to earn signiﬁcantly higher income ; patent inventors whose self - efﬁcacy was in the top 10 percent earned over $ 35 , 000 per year more than patent inventors whose self - efﬁcacy was in the bottom 10 percent . Although other studies assessed self - efﬁcacy and regretful thinking , this research appraised these two factors simultaneously . Hence , our study assessed the cumulative variance that has not already been accounted for by previous research . Sample selection is another factor hindering entrepreneurship research . While in the past researchers “hand - picked” their participants ( frequently from hetero - geneously diverse business domains ) , this study relies on a random sample of inventors all of whom had invented patents in the same technological space and at the same time period . In closing , entrepreneurial activity is a complex and costly process characterized by an unfavorable success rate ( Baum & Locke , 2002 ) . This suggests that identifying and investing in the right persons who discover and quickly transform such innovation into commercial offerings is important . One key implication then is that while management scholars and public and private investors should continue to study the market , technol - ogy , resources , and environment of business opportunities , we recommend that they also scrutinize the persons—the entrepreneurs . Certainly , research and investment decisions should consider a wide range of elements : the nature of the opportunity , resource attain - ment , market and competitive conditions , the experience and technical knowledge of the entrepreneurs , and so on . Included among these factors , we contend , should be charac - teristics of the entrepreneurs—modes of thought , behavior , and traits that may help , or hinder them in their entrepreneurial efforts . Since high self - efﬁcacy appears to be one characteristic strongly linked to entrepreneurial pursuits , new venture growth ( Baum & Locke , 2002 ) , and personal success , scholars and investors may be wise to devote more attention to this factor . REFERENCES Amit , R . & Schoemaker , P . J . H . ( 1993 ) . Strategic assets and organizational rent . Strategic Management Journal , 14 , 33 – 46 . Balkin , D . B . , Markman , G . D . , & Gomez - Mejia , L . ( 2000 ) . Is CEO pay in high technology ﬁrms related to innovation ? Academy of Management Journal , 43 , 1118 – 1129 . Bandura , A . ( 1997 ) . Self - efﬁcacy : The exercise of control . New York : W . H . Freeman & Company . Bandura , A . ( 1999 ) . Social cognitive theory : An agentic perspective . Asian Journal of Social Psychology , 2 ( 1 ) , 21 – 41 . Baron , R . A . ( 1998 ) . Cognitive mechanisms in entrepreneurship : Why and when entrepreneurs think differ - ently than other people . Journal of Business Venturing , 13 , 275 – 294 . Baron , R . A . ( 2000 ) . Counterfactual thinking and venture formation : The potential effect of thinking about “what might have been . ” Journal of Business Venturing , 15 , 79 – 92 . Baum , R . J . & Locke , E . A . , ( 2002 ) Entrepreneurial traits , skill , and motivation and subsequent venture growth . Working Paper , University of Maryland . Baum , R . J . , Locke , E . A . , & Smith , K . G . ( 2001 ) . A multidimensional model of venture growth . Academy of Management Journal , 44 ( 2 ) , 292 – 303 . Busenitz , L . & Barney , J . ( 1997 ) . Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations : Biases and heuristics in strategic decision - making . Journal of Business Venturing , 12 , 9 – 30 . 162 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE Carter , N . M . , Gartner , W . B . , & Reynolds , P . D . ( 1996 ) . Exploring start - up event sequences . Journal of Business Venturing , 11 , 151 – 166 . Chen , C . C . , Greene , P . G . , & Crick , A . ( 1998 ) . Does entrepreneurial self - efﬁcacy distinguish entrepreneurs from managers ? Journal of Business Venturing , 13 , 295 – 316 . Chen , G . , Gully , S . M . , & Eden , D . ( 2001 ) . Validation of a new general self - efﬁcacy scale . Organizational Research Methods , 4 ( 1 ) , 62 – 83 . Creyer , E . H . & Gurhan , Z . ( 1997 ) . Who’s to blame ? Counterfactual reasoning and the assignment of blame . Psychology and Marketing , 14 , 209 – 222 . Daily , C . M . , Certo , S . T . , & Dalton , D . R . ( 1999 ) . Entrepreneurial ventures as an avenue to the top : Assess - ing the advancement of female CEOs and directors in the Inc . 100 . Journal of Developmental Entrepre - neurship , 4 ( 1 ) , 19 – 32 . Davis , M . S . ( 1971 ) . That’s interesting ! Philosophy of the Social Sciences , 1 , 309 – 344 . De Noble , A . F . , Jung , D . , & Ehrlich , S . B . ( 1999 ) . Entrepreneurial self - efﬁcacy : The development of a measure and its relationship to entrepreneurial action . In P . D . Reynolds , W . D . Bygrave , S . Manigart , C . M . Mason , G . D . Meyer , H . J . Sapienza & K . S . Shaver ( Eds . ) . Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research . Wellesley , MA : Babson College , pp . 73 – 87 . Douglas , E . J . & Shepherd , D . A . ( 2000 ) . Entrepreneurship as a utility maximizing response . Journal of Business Venturing , 15 ( 3 ) , 231 – 251 . Eden , D . & Aviram , A . ( 1993 ) . Self - efﬁcacy training to speed reemployment : Helping people . Journal of Applied Psychology , 78 ( 3 ) , 352 – 360 . Fiet , J . O . ( 2002 ) . The Systematic Search for Entrepreneurial Discoveries . Westport , CT : Greenwood Publishing Group . Gist , M . E . & Mitchell , T . R . ( 1992 ) . Self - efﬁcacy : A theoretical analysis of its determinants and malleabil - ity . Academy of Management Review , 17 ( 2 ) , 183 – 211 . Griliches , A . ( 1990 ) . Patent statistics as economic indicators . Journal of Economic Literature , 28 , 1661 – 1707 . Hamilton , B . H . ( 2000 ) . Does entrepreneurship pay ? An empirical analysis of the returns to self - employ - ment . The Journal of Political Economy , 108 ( 3 ) , 604 – 631 . Honig , B . ( 1998 ) . What determines success ? Examining the human , ﬁnancial , and social capital of Jamaican microentrepreneurs . Journal of Business Venturing , 13 , 371 – 394 . Kahneman , D . & Tversky , A . ( 1982 ) . The psychology of preferences . Scientiﬁc American , 246 , 136 – 142 . Krueger , N . , Jr . ( 1993 ) . The impact of prior entrepreneurial exposure on perceptions . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 18 ( 1 ) , 5 – 21 . Krueger , N . , Jr . & Dickson , P . R . ( 1994 ) . How believing in ourselves increases risk taking : Perceived self - efﬁcacy and opportunity recognition . Decision Sciences , 25 ( 3 ) , 385 – 400 . Loomes , G . & Sugden , R . ( 1986 ) . Disappointment and dynamic inconsistency in choice under uncertainty . Review of Economic Studies , 53 , 271 – 282 . Maurer , T . J . & Pierce , H . R . ( 1998 ) . A comparison of Likert scale and traditional measures of self - efﬁcacy . Journal of Applied Psychology , 83 , 324 – 329 . Medvec , V . H . , Madey , S . F . , & Gilovich , T . ( 1995 ) . When less is more : Counterfactual thinking and satis - faction among Olympic medallists . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 69 , 603 – 610 . Mesch , G . S . & Czamanski , D . ( 1997 ) . Occupational closure and immigrant entrepreneurship : Russian Jews in Israel . Journal of Socio - Economics , 26 , 597 – 610 . Winter , 2002 163 Mitchell , T . R . & Mickel , A . E . ( 1999 ) . The meaning of money : An individual - difference perspective . Academy of Management Review , 24 ( 3 ) , 568 – 578 . Reynolds , P . D . ( 1997 ) . Who starts new ﬁrms ? Preliminary explorations of ﬁrms - in - gestation . Small Busi - ness Economics , 9 , 449 – 462 . Robinson , P . B . , Stimpson , D . V . , Huefner , J . C . , & Hunt , H . K . ( 1991 ) . An attitude approach to the predic - tion of entrepreneurship . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 15 ( 4 ) , 13 – 31 . Roese , N . J . ( 1997 ) . Counterfactual thinking . Psychological Bulletin , 121 , 133 – 149 . Romer , P . M . ( 1996 ) . Why , indeed , in America ? Theory , history , and the origins of modern economic growth . The American Economic Review , 86 ( 2 ) , 202 – 206 . Sarasvathy , D . K . , Simon , H . A . , & Lave , L . ( 1999 ) . Perceiving and managing business risks : Differences between entrepreneurs and bankers . Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization , 33 , 207 – 225 . Shane , S . ( 2000 ) . Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities . Organization Science , 11 , 448 – 469 . Shane , S . & Venkataraman , S . ( 2000 ) . The promise of entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research . Academy of Management Review , 25 ( 1 ) , 217 – 226 . Stewart , W . H . , Jr . , Watson , W . E . , Carland , J . C . , & Carland , J . A . ( 1999 ) . Proclivity for entrepreneurship : A comparison of entrepreneurs , small business owners , and corporate managers . Journal of Business Venturing , 14 , 189 – 214 . Timmons , J . A . ( 1999 ) . New venture creation , 5th ed . Boston : Irwin McGraw - Hill . van Dijk , W . W . , Zeelenberg , M . , & van der Pligt , J . ( 1999 ) . Not having what you want versus having what you do not want : The impact of type of negative outcome on the experience of disappointment and related emotions . Cognition & Emotion , 13 ( 2 ) , 129 – 148 . Vasil , L . ( 1992 ) . Self - efﬁcacy expectations and causal attributions for achievement among male and female university faculty . Journal of Vocational Behavior , 41 , 259 – 269 . Venkataraman , S . ( 1997 ) . The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research : An Editor’s perspective . In J . Katz & R . Brockhaus ( Eds ) , Advances in Entrepreneurship , Firm Emergence and Growth , Vol . 3 , 119 – 138 . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Wanberg , C . R . , Kanfer , R . , & Rotundo , M . ( 1999 ) . Unemployed individuals : Motives , job - search compe - tencies , and job - search constraints as predictors of job seeking and reemployment . Journal of Applied Psychology , 84 ( 6 ) , 897 – 910 . Wood , R . & Bandura , A . ( 1989 ) . Social cognitive theory of organizational management . Academy of Management Review , 14 ( 3 ) , 361 – 384 . Zeelenberg , M . , van Dijk , W . W . , van der Pligt , J . , Manstead , A . S . R . , van Empelen , P . , Reinderman , D . ( 1998 ) . Emotional reactions to the outcomes of decisions : The role of counterfactual thought in the experi - ence of regret and disappointment . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 75 ( 2 ) , 117 – 141 . Gideon D . Markman is an Assistant Professor of Innovation Management and Entrepreneurship at the Terry College of Business , University of Georgia . David B . Balkin is the Chair of the Management Department at the Leeds School of Business , University of Colorado at Boulder . Robert A . Baron is a professor at the Lally School of Management and Technology at Renssealer Polytech - nic Institute , NY . The authors gratefully thank Ronald K . Mitchell , the co - editor of this special issue , and two anonymous reviewers for their insightful suggestions and encouragement , which greatly improved this article . 164 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE APPENDIX General Self - Efﬁcacy Scale Please indicate the extent to which you agree with each of the following statements ( circle one number for each item ) . Strongly Disagree = 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 = Strongly Agree 1 . I am strong enough to overcome life’s struggles 2 . At root , I am a weak person 3 . I can handle the situations that life brings 4 . I’m usually an unsuccessful person 5 . I often feel that there is nothing I can do well 6 . I feel competent to deal effectively with the real world 7 . I often think that I’m a failure 8 . I usually feel I can handle the typical problems that come up in life Regretful Thinking Looking back over your entire life , please list the things that you regret most : _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Little Regret = 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 = Much Regret Considering these things you listed on the previous page , how regretful are you ? Winter , 2002 165 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7