Journal of Engineering Design Vol . 23 , No . 4 , April 2012 , 271 – 296 Investigating effects of oppositely related semantic stimuli on design concept creativity I . Chiu a and L . H . Shu b * a Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering , Ryerson University , 350 Victoria Street , Toronto , ON , Canada M5B 2K3 ; b Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering , University of Toronto , 5 King’s College Road , Toronto , ON , Canada M5S 3G8 ( Received 25 February 2011 ; ﬁnal version received 4 July 2011 ) We are motivated to investigate methods to increase creativity in conceptual design since creativity is essential to design success , and no other stage inﬂuences ﬁnal design success as much as conceptual design . Existingworksupportsthatdesignstimulimayencouragecreativeconceptgeneration , butdoesnot give details on how to systematically generate stimuli . The established relationship between language and cognition , and the systematic nature of language prompt us to examine its use as design stimuli . Language relationships such as opposition provide a systematic method of generating non - obvious semantic stimuli fordesignproblems . Inthispaper , wepresenttwoexperiments , apen - and - paperandaverbalprotocolstudy , whereparticipantsusedoppositelyrelatedandsimilarlyrelatedwordstimuliinconceptualdesign . Wefound that designers using oppositely related word stimuli developed more creative concepts . Language analysis revealedhowoppositestimulieliciteddesignerbehavioursthatmayencourageandsupportcreativeconceptgeneration . Our empirical results combined with linguistic theory lead us to propose a model explaining the interactions and effects of opposite - stimulus words on concept creativity . This knowledge can be used to facilitate more creative , and ultimately , more successful design . Keywords : language ; creativity ; design stimuli ; concept generation ; engineering design 1 . Introduction We have been studying and quantifying the application of natural language , i . e . human language , notartiﬁciallanguage , totheprocessofstimulatingcreativeconceptualdesign . Wearemotivatedto study language in relation to design because language appears ubiquitously , is inherent in people , andisconnectedtocognition . Researchershaveestablishedalinkbetweenlanguageandcognition , although the exact relationship is disputed . Some have shown that language affects cognition ( Levinson1996 ) , whileothershaveshownthatlanguagereﬂectscognition ( Pinker2007 ) . Designis a cognitively intensive activity requiring such tasks as information gathering , spatial manipulation , searching , decision - making , etc . ( Simon 1969 , Gero et al . 1994 , Coley et al . 2007 ) . The cognition required of design suggests that we can take advantage of the relationship between language and cognition to facilitate and understand design . * Corresponding author . Email : shu @ mie . utoronto . ca ISSN 0954 - 4828 print / ISSN 1466 - 1837 online © 2012 Taylor & Francis http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2011 . 603298 http : / / www . tandfonline . com 272 I . Chiu and L . H . Shu In this paper , we present and describe work on stimulating creative concept generation using language . Creativity is an important measure of design effectiveness ( Kan and Gero 2007 ) . While customers seek creative designs , they may not explicitly indicate creativity as a requirement ( Cross 2006 ) . There is general agreement that creativity is essential to design ( Gordon 1961 , de Bono 1992 , Altshuller and Shulyek 1996 , Hubka and Eder 1996 , Adams 2001 , Cross 2006 , Kan and Gero 2007 , Shai et al . 2009 , Yang 2009 , Brown 2008 , etc . ) , and some assert that design necessarily entails creativity ( Holt 1993 , Hubka and Eder 1996 , Hatchuel and Weil 2009 ) . We are speciﬁcally interested in the concept generation stage of design because the early stages of design have the largest inﬂuence on the ﬁnal design ( Ullman 2003 , Keller et al . 2009 ) , and creative concepts result in creative and successful designs . We investigate the effects of language stimuli on concept creativity in experiments , where we provided participants with stimulus words that were either oppositely or similarly related to the desired functions of the solution . Stimulus words were systematically generated , using a thesaurus and WordNet . Words were chosen as stimuli because words are the smallest unit of language that carry meaning , and thus a natural starting point for our investigations . Verbs were the chosen part of speech for the stimuli because verbs denote abstract actions or functions and not speciﬁc forms . Word stimuli provided were verbs in root form , e . g . ‘remove’ . Many agree that verbs should be used to model functions for design ( cf . Pahl and Beitz 1996 , Stone and Wood 2000 ) . The opposite / similar relationship was used to generate stimulus words because it is a systematic and well - understood relationship and one of only two valid verb relationships . While we may never fully understand the effects of language on design cognition , insights gained from our empirical results combined with linguistic theory enable us to propose a model of the language and design cognition interactions required to generate more creative concepts . In this paper , we will ﬁrst review related work in language , design and creativity . Then we will describe and discuss our experiments with respect to the speciﬁc effects of different types of word stimuli on concept creativity ( Experiments 1 and 2 ) and on designer behaviour ( Experiment 2 ) . Finally , we will discuss our experiments within an empirical and theoretical context and propose a model explaining the effects of opposite / similar word stimuli on creative concept generation . 2 . Background 2 . 1 . Language and design The connection between language and cognition was ﬁrst observed by the ancient Greeks , who used the same word , logos , to denote both reasoning and language ( Kalmar and Davidson 1997 ) . The Sapir - Whorf hypothesis dating from the early twentieth century argues that the language of a person determines how he or she understands the world ( Ratner and Gleason 1993 ) . While there is debate over whether cognition inﬂuences language ( Levinson 1996 , Li and Gleitman 2002 , etc . ) , or language inﬂuences cognition , many agree that language and cognition are closely related ( e . g . Pinker , Fodor , Boaz from Saeed 2003 ) . Researchers such as Chomsky ( 1968 ) , Jackendoff ( 1983 ) and Pinker ( 2007 ) argue that language provides insight into human cognitive processes . In our work , we explore the use of language to stimulate creative design . Language , speciﬁcally at the word level , appears ideal as design stimuli , and ﬁts well within early stages of the design process , where the problem is likely to be ill - deﬁned , and exploration of the solution space encouraged . Words are the smallest unit of language that carry meaning , and thus an appropriate starting point for investigating language as design stimuli . While words impose a pre - existing symbol system on the user that can be shared and manipulated ( Bruner 1964 ) , they are not necessarily ﬁxed to a particular form ( Segers 2004 ) , and ambiguity enables Journal of Engineering Design 273 freedom of interpretation ( Miller et al . 1993 ) . Not only is language connected to reasoning , words also appear connected to our knowledge of the world . In one model of lexical memory , when a speciﬁc word is found in the internal lexicon of permanent memory , simultaneously retrieved are properties associated with that word , e . g . meaning , spelling , pronunciation , etc . At the same time , properties not strictly linguistic are also retrieved , e . g . if the word ‘elephant’ is retrieved , it might also trigger the common knowledge that elephants never forget ( Carroll 1999 ) . The knowledge retrieved is not necessarily just part of the word - meaning , but may be related to the conceptual knowledge of the world in general . While words seem simple and familiar , word meaning can be complex and ambiguous ( Carroll 1999 ) . A designer’s familiarity with the complexities of language may make language a useful design tool . While natural language is familiar and ubiquitous to most , it is not generally considered a conventional engineering tool . However , many researchers are investigating the use of natural language as a formal tool to support the engineering design process . For example , language has beenusedasinputinrequirementsgathering ( NuseibehandEasterbrook2000 ) , conceptgeneration and synthesis ( Thomas and Carroll 1984 , Hacco and Shu 2002 , Nagai and Taura 2006 , Chiu and Shu 2007 , Tseng et al . 2008 ) , design modelling and representation ( Stone and Wood 2000 ) , and design analysis ( Dong et al . 2003 , Dong 2006 ) . Some concept generation and creativity methods explicitly use language as stimuli in an attempt to increase creativity . Thomas and Carroll ( 1984 ) demonstrated that participants who were given 20 pages of semi - random stimulus words generated more creative concepts compared with par - ticipants not given stimulus words . Nagai and Taura ( 2006 ) investigated the interpretation of noun – noun combinations for promoting creativity in concept synthesis . Some work in biomimetic design uses functional keywords to systematically retrieve analogies from biological corpora for use as stimuli in engineering design ( Hacco and Shu 2002 , Chiu and Shu 2007 , Cheong et al . 2011 ) . Methods implicitly using language to stimulate creative design include synectics and random input . In synectics , Gordon ( 1961 ) proposes the use of metaphors and similes , which are ﬁgures of speech , to draw parallels and connections between disparate topics or domains . Metaphors and similes promote analogical thinking and can allow solutions to be applied from one domain to another . The random input method involves randomly selecting stimulus , e . g . a picture from a catalogue , to relate back to the design problem through a series of word associations . The process of relating the problem to random stimulus , which may be non - obvious and unexpected , may provide new perspectives and thus stimulate creative design ( de Bono 1970 ) . The above examples show that language is frequently used to facilitate design . However , fewer researchers have attempted to examine and model the effect of language on design . Nagai and Noguchi ( 2003 ) developed a model of the thinking path required for creative thinking . In an experiment where designers used keywords while designing , Nagai and Noguchi observed that difﬁcult and remote keywords caused designers to extend their thinking pathways . They concluded that extending thinking pathways may help to realise creative concepts . In our experiments , we observed that oppositely related keywords result in designer behaviours that may increase concept creativity . Wethenproposeamodeltoexplaintheeffectsofoppositelyrelatedstimulionincreasing concept creativity . 2 . 2 . Opposition in design We study opposite versus similar - language stimuli because opposition and opposing relation - ships are common in language and reasoning . Antonyms , or opposite words , are universally found in language , and most people demonstrate good intuition in recognising antonym / synonym pairs ( Fellbaum 1993 , Murphy 2003 ) . The antonym / synonym relationship is also one of only 274 I . Chiu and L . H . Shu two valid verb relationships , with the other being the hypernym / hyponym relationship . The hypernym / hyponym relationship can be thought of as a super - ordinate / sub - ordinate relationship , where words are hierarchically related in either a more general or more speciﬁc manner . Design methods using opposition include TRIZ , design - by - analogy / contrast , argumentation and argumentative negotiation ( Rittel and Webber 1984 , Altshuller and Shulyak 1996 , Fantoni et al . 2006 , Jin et al . 2007 ) . In TRIZ , the Russian abbreviation for the theory of inventive problem solving , the problem at hand is ﬁrst phrased in contradictions to identify parameters to be improved and those degraded as a consequence . Fantoni et al . ( 2006 ) proposed a method of design - by - analogy / contrast involving the use of synonyms and antonyms as design stimuli . Argumentation and argumentative negotiation involve the verbalisation of contradictory demands and then a move towards agreement to produce novel solutions in collaborative engineering ( Rittel and Webber 1984 , Jin et al . 2007 ) . Hubka and Eder ( 1996 ) even speculate that opposites and dissimilarities may contribute to creativity in engineering design through the resolution of ‘cognitive dissonance’ , e . g . resolving ideas from intuitive versus intellectual modes of thinking . Festinger , the originator of the theory of cognitive dissonance , theorised tensions occur when an individual becomes simultaneously aware of two inconsistent thoughts . To resolve the tensions , the individual must implement change ( Myers 1999 ) , thus creating new , alternative solutions . In design , resolving tensions between the problem statement and other factors , e . g . the degraded parameter versus the improved parameter in TRIZ , and stimuli oppositely related to the design problem , may lead to creative design . 2 . 3 . Measuring creativity in design Many approaches have been developed to assess the creativity of a concept or idea . In general , most agreethatcreativityismulti - dimensional ( Torrance1974 , Amabile1983 , Shah etal . 2000 , etc . ) and that using a single measure of creativity may result in identifying strange or even incorrect ideas as being creative . For example , inWilson’s ( 1951 ) method of statistical infrequency , infrequent ideas are considered novel , and therefore creative . Two generally agreed upon measures of creativity within science and engineering are novelty and usefulness , deﬁned below : Novelty : A creative idea must contain some degree of newness , originality or surprise ( Wilson 1951 , Torrance 1974 , Hubka and Eder 1996 , Howard et al . 2008 , Shai et al . 2009 , Brown 2008 ) . Usefulness : A creative idea must contain some degree of appropriateness and value ( Besemer and Trefﬁnger 1981 , Amabile1989 , deBono1992 , AkinandAkin1998 , Howard etal . 2008 , Shai etal . 2009 , etc . ) . Amabile ( 1989 ) deﬁnes appropriateness in the sciences as being correct . Usefulness is especially emphasized in the engineering literature , often in the context of functionality ( Pahl and Beitz 1996 , Dieter 2000 , Shah et al . 2000 , Ullman 2003 ) . Some researchers assert that creative ideas only need to be novel and useful , e . g . Amabile ( 1989 ) and Akin and Akin ( 1998 ) . However , novelty and usefulness alone may not sufﬁciently measure creativity , especially at the abstract conceptual level . Many suggest that the wholeness , clarity , elaboration , or cohesiveness of an idea must also be considered : Cohesiveness : A creative idea must contain some degree of wholeness , elaboration , detail , style and clarity ( Torrance 1974 , Besemer and Trefﬁnger 1981 , Hubka and Eder 1996 , Adams 2001 , Kudrowitz and Wallace 2010 ) . Other measures of creativity may also be used to assess the effectiveness of a creativity method or individual . These measures can include ﬂuency , or the quantity of concepts , generated by an individual or the creativity method ( Torrance 1974 , Shah et al . 2000 , Yang 2009 ) and variety , or the number of different categories of concepts generated ( Torrance 1974 , Shah et al . 2000 ) . This paper focuses on the use of the direct measures of novelty , usefulness and cohesiveness for the evaluation of each individual concept . Journal of Engineering Design 275 2 . 4 . Previous work Previous exploratory experiments showed that designers provided with opposite - stimulus words tend to generate concepts that were more novel . These previous experiments are summarised below . The ﬁrst exploratory experiment was a pen - and - paper study where participants indicated their concepts on worksheets . Forty - two participants were provided with opposite and simi - lar words simultaneously for a series of four problems and then instructed to use the words as stimuli for design . For three of the problems , participants who chose at least one opposite - stimulus word generated more novel concepts ( Chiu and Shu 2008a ) . Novelty was determined using statistical infrequency , where less frequently occurring concepts were deemed more novel ( Wilson 1951 , Shah et al . 2000 ) . However , because all participants were provided with opposite - and similar - stimulus words simultaneously , results may have been confounded , i . e . were participants affected by only the opposite words , or by the pairs of opposite / similar words ? From this experiment , we were also unable to gain further insight into how par - ticipants used language stimuli due to the nature of data collected from pen - and - paper experiments . The second exploratory experiment was a small - scale between - subjects experiment where par - ticipants verbalised all thoughts as they designed . Six participants received either opposite words or similar words while generating concepts for one problem . Those receiving opposite stimuli generated more novel concepts , however the difference was not signiﬁcant . Novelty in this exper - iment was determined by two independent human raters . Two raters were recruited because two is the minimum number of human raters required for judgement tasks ( Landis and Koch 1977 ) . Spearman’s correlation between the two raters was r = 0 . 51 , p = 0 . 054 ∼ 0 . 05 , showing a large , borderline signiﬁcant agreement between the two raters ( Chiu and Shu 2008b ) . No training was provided to the raters in this exploratory experiment . Using the session transcripts from the second experiment , we were able to conduct an explicit content analysis to examine participants’ language use and behaviours with respect to different stimulustypes . Speciﬁcally , weexaminedthestimuluspart - of - speech ( POS ) , todeterminewhether a given stimulus word was used as a noun , verb or adjective . While stimulus words were given as root verbs , e . g . ‘remove’ and not ‘removing’ or ‘removed’ , participants were not told that the stimuli were verbs . We found that opposite - stimulus participants used stimulus words signiﬁcantly more often as verbs than similar - stimulus participants . Furthermore , in this second exploratory experiment , we found that opposite - stimulus participants tended to introduce more new words and phrases ( NWPs ) in their concept generation process , but not signiﬁcantly so . NWPs are identiﬁed by comparing words and phrases given in a problem statement with the words and phrases generated by participants in relationship to the stimulus words . NWPs may represent new concept elements that have been expressed , or lexicalised , within concept generation . Increased NWP introduction appears linked to the use of stimuli as verbs rather than nouns . Increased NWPs appear advantageous for concept generation because NWPs may form the basis of creative concepts . An expanded verbal protocol experiment , i . e . in terms of participants and problems , would allow for more thorough analysis . Overall , previous experiments showed that opposite stimuli appear to increase concept novelty , one of the measures that contribute to total concept creativity . These preliminary results serve as motivation for current experiments ( described in Sections 3 and 4 ) that overcome limitations of previous work described above . On the basis of our preliminary results , we hypothesise the following : ( 1 ) Opposite - stimulus words increase concept creativity in terms of all creativity measures ; ( 2 ) Opposite - stimulus words used as verbs increase the introduction of NWPs 276 I . Chiu and L . H . Shu The following sections will describe two experiments where we focus on further quantifying the above two hypotheses . 3 . Experiment 1 : a between - subjects pen - and - paper experiment Experiment 1 was a fully between - subjects pen - and - paper experiment where participants gener - ated concepts for a series of four problems : ( 1 ) Bushing problem ( 2 ) Egg problem ( 3 ) Grinding problem and ( 4 ) Sunﬂower problem . Participants generated concepts under one of the following experimental conditions : ( 1 ) Opposite stimulus ; ( 2 ) Similar stimulus . Four independent raters were recruited to judge the concepts based on the creativity components of novelty , usefulness and cohesiveness . For two of the experiment problems , the Sunﬂower and Egg problems , raters judged opposite - stimulus concepts as being signiﬁcantly more novel , useful and cohesive than similar - stimulus concepts . For the other two problems , the Bushing and Grinding problems , there were no signiﬁcant differences in any of the creativity component scores . Details are given below . 3 . 1 . Method 3 . 1 . 1 . Participants and procedure Participants consisted of nine graduate engineering students from the Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering at the University of Toronto . At the time of the experiment , participants were enrolled in a graduate design course . Participants consisted of two females and seven males with an average age of 27 . 2 years ( sd = 5 . 38 ) . Eight out of nine participants indicated they had industry design experience ranging from a few months to ﬁve years . Participants were randomly assigned to one of two experimental conditions where they gen - erated concepts using either opposite stimuli or similar stimuli . All participants completed four problems , but in a different , random order as determined by a random number generator . Partici - pants were allotted a total time of 10 min per problem to review given stimulus words ; to select stimulus words ; and to generate and describe their concepts using selected stimulus words on provided worksheets . The total experiment duration was 40 min . The worksheets were collected for analysis . The exact instructions are given below : This is an experiment investigating the use of stimuli in concept generation . The following are four unrelated design problems . For each design problem , a set of related word stimuli is supplied . For each problem : ( 1 ) Review the problem and associated word stimuli . ( 2 ) Perform a functional decomposition , e . g . what needs to be done ? ( 3 ) Select the word ( s ) you want as stimuli and indicate your selection ( s ) . Each stimulus set is only relevant to the associated design problem . ( 4 ) Use selected word ( s ) to develop concepts to solve the design problem . If you determine that you cannot complete a concept using your selected word ( s ) , you may select another word . ( 5 ) Please consider each problem in the order given . Youhave10minutesforeachproblem . Recordallconcepts . Youmaywrite , sketch , calculate , etc . , onyourworksheets . Pen - and - paper experiments are a fairly time - efﬁcient method for collecting design data . Others have used pen - and - paper experiments to study various aspects of conceptual design such as effects of random stimulus words , analogical similarity , generation of form alternatives and sketching abilities ( Thomas and Carroll 1984 , Tseng et al . 2008 , Yang 2009 , Corremans 2011 ) . Journal of Engineering Design 277 3 . 1 . 2 . Experiment problems and stimuli Participants were provided with four problems and related - stimulus sets on worksheets . Stimulus words were obtained by ﬁrst performing a functional decomposition of the problem . Functional decomposition identiﬁes the functions , i . e . physical actions or behaviours , required to transform an initialstateintothedesiredﬁnalstate ( PahlandBeitz1996 ) . Ahigh - levelfunctionaldecomposition yielded functional keywords that were then used to generate similar - or opposite - stimulus words using a thesaurus ( Merriam - Webster . com 2008 ) and WordNet 3 . 0 ( Princeton University 2008 ) . Problems and stimuli are summarised in Table 1 . For the Sunﬂower problem , the required high - level functions to transform whole seeds into oil were ‘extracting’the seeds from the shell , and then ‘separating’the seeds from the shell fragments for the production of oil . From the original functional keyword ‘extract’ , we generated using a thesaurus and WordNet similar words ‘empty’ and ‘withdraw’ , and opposite words ‘insert’ and ‘ﬁll’ . From ‘separate’ , similar words generated were ‘disconnect’and ‘divide’ , and opposite words were ‘join’ and ‘combine’ . The original functional keywords were not provided to participants . 3 . 1 . 3 . Concept evaluation Concept evaluation for our previous studies ( described in Section 2 . 4 ) was limited to the evaluation of concept novelty , using statistical infrequency or human raters . Since the creativity literature suggests that creativity is more than merely novelty , and that creativity is ultimately a human judgment , e . g . from a customer’s point of view ( Cross 2006 , Brown 2008 ) , we recruited human Table 1 . Summary of problems and stimulus sets for Experiment 1 . Stimulus words Problem Problem description and decomposition Similar Opposite Sunﬂower - seed shelling Sunﬂower seed oil is a nutritious and valuable commodity in sub - SaharanWestAfrica . Mechanical presses to make oil from the shelled seeds exist locally , but machines to remove the shells do not . At present , there exists no alternative to the laborious and time - consuming process of shelling the sunﬂower seeds individually by hand before loading them into the press . Develop a concept for shelling sunﬂower seeds that can be used locally with minimal resources ( DTM 2006 ) Empty Fill Withdraw Insert Disconnect Join Divide Combine Soft - material grinding Grinding of metals is quite common to obtain a ﬁne surface ﬁnish and tight tolerances . But when grinding soft materials such as rubber or plastic , the grinding wheels quickly become clogged . Repeated dressings ( sharpening and shaping of the grinding wheel ) do not help . Develop concepts that will enable surface ﬁnishing ( with or without grinding wheels ) to be used on soft materials ( Kosse 2004 ) Smooth Roughen Subtract Add Clean Clog Remove Replace Egg orientation Develop concepts to automatically orient raw chicken eggs with the pointed ends all facing one direction ( Kosse 2004 ) Select Reject Detect Miss PivotMove FixRestrain Bushing - and - pin assembly Parts that are automatically mated , e . g . a bushing and a pin , must be positioned so that their axes coincide . Using chamfers on mating parts does not solve the alignment problem . Develop a concept to centre mating parts that does not require high positioning accuracy ( Kosse 2004 ) Straighten Skew Match Mix Inject Eject Install Extract 278 I . Chiu and L . H . Shu Low novelty Average novelty High novelty 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Not novel Very novel Figure 1 . Rating scale for novelty . Reprinted with permission . Copyright ASME 2010 . Table 2 . Example anchor concepts for Sunﬂower problem . Low / high Novelty Usefulness Cohesiveness Low Place whole seeds in machine . Divide the shell by machine with chisel / knife edge and open like hinge securing shell . Empty the seeds from the shell and discard the shells from the hinge device Machinegripstwosidesofseed . Seed is cut into half ( divide ) . The seed is emptied using vibration ( empty ) . Shells are discarded . Separate seeds processed as before Divide the shell into two . Empty shell and remove seed from shell High Combine two wheels with sticky surfaces to crack the seeds . Shells stick to the surface and get carried away Whole seeds go into a hopper . Use edible solvent to dissolve shells . Clean seeds . Dry seeds . Grind to get oil Refer to high usefulness concept . High usefulness concept is also a high cohesiveness concept raters to judge concept creativity for this study . Human raters assessed concept creativity using all three components described previously : Novelty , usefulness and cohesiveness . Each component was scored on an 11 - point scale between 0 and 10 . The rating scale for novelty is illustrated in Figure 1 , with the same numeric scale applied to usefulness and cohesiveness . For this experiment , four independent raters were recruited to score each concept . Raters con - sisted of one female and three males , all with an engineering background and interest in design . Raters were not provided with the identity of the designers , nor the stimulus condition under which the concepts were generated . Concepts were presented to raters in random order . Raters were provided with low anchor and high anchor concepts , i . e . ‘not novel / useful / cohesive’ and ‘very novel / useful / cohesive’ concepts obtained from previous experiments , and instructed to evaluate all concepts based on those anchors . This method of anchoring and obtain - ing human judgements is known as direct scaling and is commonly used in psychophysics , a branch of psychology that deals with relating physical stimuli with mental phenomena ( Engen 1972 ) . The direct scaling method has been applied to rating pleasantness of smells , perception of heaviness , and even to rating of emotions and beauty . Examples of anchor concepts for the Sunﬂower problem are provided in Table 2 . 3 . 2 . Results 3 . 2 . 1 . Inter - rater agreement Kendall’s W concordancecoefﬁcientwascalculatedtomeasureinter - rateragreement . Kendall’s W measures the agreement of more than two raters scoring N entities and ranges from 0 , signifying no agreement or random ratings , to 1 , signifying consensus between the multiple raters . As Kendall’s W is related to Spearman’s correlational coefﬁcient , Kendall’s W can be interpreted similarly to a correlation coefﬁcient , where 0 . 1 , 0 . 3 and 0 . 5 are small , medium and large agreements , respectively ( Siegal 1956 ) . The inter - rater agreements are given in Table 3 . Although the coefﬁcients above suggest medium to large degrees of agreement , the sample sizes are too small to draw conﬁdent conclusions ( p (cid:3) 0 . 05 ) . Upon aggregating ratings for all concepts from all four problems , the coefﬁcients indicate medium to large degrees of agreement that are signiﬁcant , or borderline signiﬁcant , as seen in Table 4 . Journal of Engineering Design 279 Table 3 . Inter - rater agreement for Experiment 1 concepts . Problem Novelty Usefulness Cohesiveness Bushing and pin ( N = 9 ) W = 0 . 3711 W = 0 . 5482 W = 0 . 6181 χ 2 ( 8 ) = 8 . 91 χ 2 ( 8 ) = 13 . 16 χ 2 ( 8 ) = 14 . 83 p = 0 . 35 p = 0 . 11 p = 0 . 06 Egg ( N = 15 ) W = 0 . 5531 W = 0 . 6502 W = 0 . 5278 χ 2 ( 14 ) = 23 . 23 χ 2 ( 14 ) = 27 . 31 χ 2 ( 14 ) = 22 . 17 p = 0 . 06 p = 0 . 02 p = 0 . 08 Grinding ( N = 16 ) W = 0 . 6004 W = 0 . 5024 W = 0 . 4634 χ 2 ( 15 ) = 27 . 02 χ 2 ( 15 ) = 22 . 61 χ 2 ( 15 ) = 20 . 85 p = 0 . 03 p = 0 . 09 p = 0 . 14 Sunﬂower ( N = 13 ) W = 0 . 4839 W = 0 . 3261 W = 0 . 497 χ 2 ( 12 ) = 17 . 42 χ 2 ( 12 ) = 11 . 74 χ 2 ( 12 ) = 17 . 89 p = 0 . 13 p = 0 . 47 p = 0 . 12 Table 4 . Kendall’s W for aggregated results of Experiment 1 concepts . Problem Novelty Usefulness Cohesiveness Aggregated results ( N = 53 ) W = 0 . 507 W = 0 . 4426 W = 0 . 4908 χ 2 ( 52 ) = 79 . 091 χ 2 ( 52 ) = 69 . 052 χ 2 ( 52 ) = 76 . 5592 p = 0 . 009 p = 0 . 06 p = 0 . 015 Therefore , based on the aggregated results , there is signiﬁcant agreement among the raters ( p approximately 0 . 05 or less ) . 3 . 2 . 2 . Creativity results In this section , we will ﬁrst present examples of participant concepts and resulting rater scores to illustrate the experimental and concept rating methodology . Then , the overall results of the quantitative comparisons are provided . Three concept examples from the Sunﬂower problem are given in Table 5 along with associated averageraterscores . Conceptsareuneditedandascollecteddirectlyfromtheworksheets . Stimulus words used by participants are italicised for reference . Table 5 . Example concepts and creativity scores for the Sunﬂower problem . Avg . rater score ( N = 4 ) Participant Example Concept experimental condition Nov . Use . Coh . Concept 2 : To divide : Orient the seed so that it lies ﬂat , then use a knife to split along the ﬂat side of the shell . Or cut into half , then use vibration or gravity to empty , blow it out to extract inner part Similar 2 2 . 5 2 . 25 Concept 13 : ( 1 ) Air hose insert into seed . ( 2 ) Air ﬁlls the seed , cracking the shell using pressure . ( 3 ) The newly cracked seed is collected and joined with the rest of the seeds from before Opposite 8 4 . 5 5 . 25 Concept 16 : Second concept – Grind shell and seed together . Then ﬁnd a ﬂuid , ( hopefully water will do ) that has the proper density to ﬂoat the lighter shells to the surface and leave the heavier seeds on the bottom Opposite 5 . 25 7 . 5 7 . 5 Average concept creativity for all Sunﬂower concepts ( N = 13 ) 4 . 35 4 . 88 5 . 0 280 I . Chiu and L . H . Shu Concept 2 was generated under the similar - stimulus condition , while concepts 13 and 16 were generated under the opposite - stimulus condition . Note that concept 16 does not incorporate stimu - lus words . However , the participant had indicated that this was his second concept for this problem , and stimulus words were used in his ﬁrst concept for this problem ; demonstrating he had reviewed the stimulus words . Concept 2 was rated as the least creative concept , and concepts 13 and 16 were rated as being above - average concepts . While raters judged concept 13 to be the most novel , concept 16 was rated as more useful and cohesive . This may reﬂect that raters considered batch processing of multiple seeds simultaneously ( concept 16 ) to be more practical than processing of individual seeds ( concept 13 and concept 2 ) . For each problem , rater scores for concepts were averaged to facilitate analysis , and independent T - tests were conducted to compare concept novelty , usefulness and cohesiveness . Rater scores were averaged because our main interest is in designer behaviour , not rater behaviour . For two of the experiment problems , the Sunﬂower and Egg problems , raters judged opposite - stimulus concepts as being more novel , useful and cohesive than similar - stimulus concepts . The T - tests showed that these differences were either signiﬁcant , or borderline signiﬁcant , in all but the Egg problem novelty scores . This can be seen in Figure 2 and Table 6 . Novelty Usefulness Cohesiveness Sun f l o w er M e a n R a t i n g s Novelty Usefulness Cohesiveness 6 . 00 4 . 00 2 . 00 . 00 6 . 00 4 . 00 2 . 00 . 00 8 . 00 6 . 00 4 . 00 2 . 00 . 00 sim opp sim opp sim opp E gg - o r i e n t a t i o n M e a n R a t i n g s Sim . Opp . Sim . Opp . Sim . Opp . Sim . Opp . Sim . Sim . Opp . Opp . 6 . 00 4 . 00 2 . 00 . 00 6 . 00 4 . 00 2 . 00 . 00 6 . 00 4 . 00 2 . 00 . 00 sim opp sim opp sim opp Figure 2 . Graph of novelty , usefulness and cohesiveness results for the Sunﬂower and Egg problems . Table 6 . T - test results for Sunﬂower and Egg concept creativity . Sunﬂower Egg Creativity Sim . Mean Opp . Mean Sim . Mean Opp . Mean Component Rating ( N = 7 ) Rating ( N = 6 ) t ( 11 ) p ( one - tail ) Rating ( N = 9 ) Rating ( N = 6 ) t ( 13 ) p ( one - tail ) Novelty 3 . 51 5 . 33 − 1 . 80 0 . 048 5 . 00 5 . 83 − 0 . 96 0 . 16 Usefulness 3 . 93 6 . 00 − 3 . 32 0 . 004 3 . 75 5 . 58 − 2 . 98 0 . 006 Cohesiveness 4 . 15 5 . 97 − 2 . 25 0 . 02 3 . 97 5 . 50 − 1 . 80 0 . 048 Journal of Engineering Design 281 For the other two problems , the Bushing and Grinding problems , there were no signiﬁcant differences in the creativity component scores , and thus different stimuli had no signiﬁcant effects . 3 . 2 . 3 . Language results While pen - and - paper experiments are not the most conducive to examining language use , we were able to examine aggregated frequency of stimulus use by counting and categorising stimulus words usedbytheparticipants . Manyinstancesofstimuluswordsfoundonworksheetsweremerelylisted and not used in a phrase or sentence . When these ‘unknown’ uses of stimuli are subtracted from the frequency totals , opposite - stimulus concepts incorporate signiﬁcantly more stimulus words , t ( 51 ) = 2 . 791 , p = 0 . 0035 < 0 . 05 , than similar - stimulus concepts . This can be seen in Figure 3 , and suggests that using more opposite - stimulus words may result in more creative concepts . 3 . 3 . Experiment 1 discussion There was strong inter - rater agreement with regard to aggregated concept creativity measures . This is illustrated by the below - average usefulness scores for concepts involving individual seed processing ( concepts 2 and 13 ) , versus a higher score for concepts involving batch processing of multiple seeds ( concept 16 ) . This may reﬂect that batch processing is seemingly more practical . However , it should be noted that strong agreement does not necessarily mean that the raters were correct ( Siegal 1956 ) , nor does it necessarily account for other factors which may have inﬂuenced concept creativity . Despite any drawbacks associated with human ratings of creativity , creativity is a human judgment , and what is considered creative is not necessarily ‘correct’ or ‘incorrect’ . For two of the problems , the Sunﬂower and Egg problems , opposite - stimulus concepts were signiﬁcantly more creative than similar - stimulus concepts . However , for the Bushing and Grinding problems , opposite - and similar - stimulus concepts were found to be equally creative . Results may reﬂect the difference in problem type and problem novelty . The Sunﬂower and Egg problems are general - domain problems that may be more novel to the participants , while the Bushing and Grinding problems are more technically oriented and should be familiar to most engineers , i . e . participants and raters . The results shown above suggest that opposite - stimulus words can Opp Sim Stim . 00 . 50 1 . 00 1 . 50 M e a n f r e qu e n cy o f un k no w n Error Bars show 95 % CI of Mean Figure 3 . Aggregated frequency of stimulus word - use with no unknown uses of stimulus words . 282 I . Chiu and L . H . Shu stimulate more creative concepts for general - domain problems or problems that may be more novel to the designers . In cases where problems are more technically oriented , experience may neutralise the effects of stimuli . Both rater and participant experience affect creativity ; experience is an important factor in individual creativity ( Amabile 1989 , Akin 1990 ) . It is difﬁcult to determine if participant concepts arebasedondesignsencounteredelsewhere , anddifﬁculttoseparatehistoricallycreativeconcepts , concepts that never existed before in the world , from personally creative concepts , concepts that never existed before in the participant’s mind , but existing in the world ( Amabile 1983 ) . In addition , a more experienced rater may tend to judge a participant’s personally creative concepts as less creative even though they are creative and novel in the context of the experiment . A less experienced rater may judge the same concept as more creative . This may have been the case with the technically oriented problems , where both participants and raters should be familiar with a variety of alignment / insertion and material removal solutions . Raters may also judge concepts to be less creative if the participant explicitly refers to existing designs , even if concepts appear creative . Overall , it would be difﬁcult to control for participant and rater experience . Regarding stimulus - word use , results show that opposite - stimulus concepts incorporated more stimulus words within the concept . This supports that opposite - stimulus participants were better able to use stimuli to introduce and develop new ideas in concept generation , which suggests that opposite - stimulus words are more useful for stimulating creative concepts . A more comprehensive verbal protocol , or talk - out - loud , experiment may provide further insight into how opposite - stimulus words increase concept creativity . The next section describes such an experiment . 4 . Experiment 2 : An expanded verbal protocol experiment Experiment 2 is a verbal protocol experiment involving 14 participants generating concepts for three problems under one of the following experimental conditions : ( 1 ) No stimulus ( control ) ; ( 2 ) Similar stimulus ; ( 3 ) Opposite stimulus . Language use in relation to participant behaviour , as well as concept creativity , is examined in detail in Experiment 2 . 4 . 1 . Method 4 . 1 . 1 . Participants and procedure All 14 participants are ﬂuent English speakers recruited from the Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering at the University of Toronto . Participants consisted of 13 males and one female , ranging from fourth - year undergraduate students to second - year PhD students . In individual sessions , participants ﬁrst completed three training problems to habituate them to verbalising . Then , participants were instructed to verbalise all thoughts as they completed a series of three design problems . Fifteen minutes were allotted for each problem for a total experiment duration of 45 min . Ten participants were provided with stimulus words , either opposite or similar words , whilefourwerenotprovidedwithanystimuli . Ofthe10stimulusparticipants , ﬁveswitched stimulus type between problems . Table 7 details the experimental design . Similar to the previous pen - and - paper experiment , participants in verbal protocol experiments were provided with worksheets presenting the problem statements and stimulus words . In contrast to pen - and - paper experiments , participants in verbal protocol experiments were also instructed to Journal of Engineering Design 283 Table 7 . Experimental design for Experiment 2 . Stimulus participants Control participants Condition subtotals Prob . TH JS VT SW JL DRO DR UG MM DH DL JM AF AP Opp . Sim . None Bushing S S S S S S O O O O N N N N 4 6 4 Snow O O O S S S S O S O N N N N 5 5 4 Coal S S S S S S O O O O N N N N 6 4 4 Notes : Reprinted with permission . CopyrightASME 2010 . S : Similar stimuli ; O : Opposite stimuli ; N : No stimuli . verbalise all thoughts as they worked on the design tasks . The sessions were recorded and fully transcribed for analysis . Verbal protocols are common for studying cognitive processes such as human machine interac - tion ( Bainbridge et al . 1968 ) , medical decision - making ( Lutfey et al . 2008 ) and are considered a relatively objective and appropriate method for studying phenomena in design ( Cross et al . 1996 , Hubka and Eder 1996 , McNeill et al . 1998 , Chakrabarti et al . 2004 , Cross 2006 , Visser 2006 ) . In fact , verbalisation may be the most popular method for studying design cognition ( Coley et al . 2007 ) . However , there are some debates associated with verbal protocol studies . Nisbett and Wil - son ( 1977 ) have questioned the accuracy of the data obtained from verbalisations as they have found that verbal reports do not necessarily match recordings of the reported event . Ericsson and Simon ( 1993 ) , on the other hand , contend that as long as verbalisations are immediate and do not require recall from memory , verbalisations accurately describe events being reported . Addi - tionally , since verbal protocol experiments are a time and resource intensive method , the number of participants involved is usually small . A survey of design studies using this method reveals that the typical number of participants is low , e . g . 4 participants in a design cognition modelling study ( Benami and Jin 2002 ) , 8 participants in a personal creativity and design activities study ( Kim et al . 2011 ) , 10 participants in a design education study ( Atman and Bursic 1996 ) , and 20 participants in a design stimulation study ( Jin and Benami 2010 ) . Our sample size of 14 is reasonable considering the range of sample sizes typical of verbal protocol experiments . 4 . 1 . 2 . Problems and stimuli Participants were provided with three problems and related stimulus sets on worksheets . Specif - ically , the problems were ( 1 ) Bushing - and - pin assembly ( 2 ) Snow insulation of houses and ( 3 ) Coal storage . Again , stimulus sets for the opposite and similar stimulus conditions were verbs in the root form generated by using a combination of a thesaurus ( Merriam - Webster . com 2008 ) and WordNet 3 . 0 ( Princeton University 2008 ) , starting from the original functional keywords . Some keywords do not have antonyms in the resources consulted , e . g . ‘to insulate’from the snow insulation problem , so opposite stimuli were generated based on opposition to the problem itself , e . g . ‘to pack’ , as the problem speciﬁcally stated that ‘packing’ of snow is undesirable . As gen - erating opposite and similar verbs is not possible for all keywords , and oppositely related words are sparse for verbs to start with , this strategy was used for the other problems as well . Problems and stimulus sets are given in Table 8 . 4 . 1 . 3 . Concept identiﬁcation and evaluation Toreducebias , designsessionsweretranscribedbyanindependenttranscriptionistandanindepen - dent concept reviewer was recruited to identify and code concepts from the free - form transcripts and worksheets . The following is a transcript excerpt representing approximately 30 s of one experiment session . Lines are numbered for referencing during analysis . 284 I . Chiu and L . H . Shu Table 8 . Summary of problems and stimulus sets for Experiment 2 . Prob . Problem description Opposite stimulus words Similar stimulus words Bushing - and - pin assembly Parts that are automatically mated , e . g . a bushing and a pin , must be positioned so that their axes coincide . Using chamfers on mating parts does not solve the alignment problem . Develop a concept to centre mating parts that does not require high positioning accuracy ( Kosse 2004 ) Original keywords : Opposite of align and insert Original keywords : align and insert Stimulus words : Change , disorder , disarrange , scramble , randomise , misalign , tumble , skew , move , expel , pull , eject , evict Stimulus words : Inject , transplant , sandwich , connect , skew , mount , misalign , attach , join , reorient , adjust , modify , match Snow In Canada , snow is readily available in winter and has good insulating qualities due to the amount of air in it . However , if the snow is packed to the point , it becomes ice , it is less insulating due to the loss of air . Come up with a concept to enable snow to be used as an additional layer of insulation for houses in the winter Original keywords : pack and compact Original keywords : insulate and surround Stimulus words : Arrange , bundle , change , compress , constrict , contract , force , impact , move , push , squeeze , tighten , wad Stimulus words : Blanket , control , cover , defend , enclose , immerse , pack , preserve , prevent , restrain , restrict , submerge , touch Coal Clean coal and clean coal combustion technologies make it possible to generate cleaner electricity . That , combined with the increasing cost of oil and natural gas , power plant operators may consider converting or reconverting their power plants from oil or natural gas back to coal . However , there may not be enough land area near the plant that can be used for on - the - ground coal storage . Propose alternative solutions to a conventional coal pile ( adapted from Dieter 2000 ) Original keyword : opposite of store Original keyword : store Stimulus words : Abandon , discard , discharge , dispense , disperse , dispose , distribute , export , remove , scatter , spread , waste Stimulus words : Accumulate , collect , displace , distribute , feed , give , heap , keep , place , supply , transfer , withhold Note : Reprinted with permission . CopyrightASME 2010 . ( 1 ) I think the obvious … ( 2 ) the ﬁrst thing that comes to mind is that you’d like blanket the house … uh ( 3 ) essentially blanket the house in a layer , in a thin layer of snow …um ( 4 ) If the snow is packed to the point that it becomes ice … ( 5 ) I guess , you’d obviously try to ﬁgure out what amount of packing you’d have to do ( 6 ) to restrict the snow from becoming ice due to over packing . Finished transcripts were corrected for minor spelling errors , e . g . ‘chamfer’for ‘camphor’ , ‘pedal’ for ‘petal’ , but were otherwise not annotated nor changed . Concepts were identiﬁed by reviewing transcripts and worksheets . Concepts identiﬁed by the independent reviewer were compared with the concepts identiﬁed by the investigators who also Journal of Engineering Design 285 reviewed all worksheets and transcripts . In cases where there was disagreement between the inde - pendent reviewer and investigators , both identiﬁed concepts were added to the set of concepts . For example , in a transcript segment from the Coal problem , both the independent reviewer and the investigators identiﬁed an ‘underground storage concept’in which the coal would be stored under - ground . However , only the independent reviewer also identiﬁed a ‘storage pile’ as a concept . The investigators did not regard the ‘storage pile’ as a concept because the problem statement speciﬁ - cally required concepts other than a ‘conventional coal pile’ . Although the investigators disagreed with the independent reviewer with regard to the identiﬁcation of the ‘storage pile’as a concept , the ‘storage pile’ concept was added to the set of concepts to be evaluated by the raters . This concept identiﬁcation process helped to ensure that all possible concepts were included for evaluation . The independent reviewer also summarised participants’ instances of similar concepts into a single concept type . For example , in one transcript segment for the Coal problem , multiple refer - ences to the ‘tower concept’ or ‘condominium concept’ are in fact only one concept that involved storing coal in a tall structure . A total of 195 concepts were identiﬁed between all participants and problems , 59 , 59 and 77 concepts for the Bushing , Snow and Coal problems , respectively . Concept creativity was evaluated using the anchoring and direct - scaling method developed and described in Experiment 1 . Three raters were recruited and consisted of one female and two males , all with knowledge and interest in engineering design . Raters were not provided with the identity of the designers , nor the stimulus condition under which the concepts were generated . Concepts were presented to the raters in random order . 4 . 1 . 4 . Analysis First , inter - rater agreeability was calculated using Kendall’s W . Then , rater scores for each concept were averaged , and all concept scores for the same participant were aggregated to facilitate analysis . This produces an aggregated novelty , usefulness and cohesiveness score for each of the 14 participants . Aggregated scores were analysed using a mixed - model analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) . As in Experiment 1 , rater scores were averaged to facilitate analysis because our main interest is not in rater behaviour , but in participant behaviour . Because ﬁve participants switched stimulus type between problems during the experiment ( identiﬁed as TH , JS , VT , MM and DR in Table 7 ) , pseudo - replicates were created to model these participants as independently contributing to each stimulus condition , effectively increasing the sample size to 19 from 14 . This is a common technique to deal with scenarios where not all participants contribute independently to only one experimental condition over multiple trials . Generally , the use of pseudo - replicates results in a conservative estimate of differences ( L . Duquette , personal communication , 2009 ) . 4 . 2 . Results 4 . 2 . 1 . Inter - rater agreement Kendall’s W was calculated for each of the problems to examine inter - rater agreement and shown in Table 9 . All values for W show a medium to large agreement between the raters , and are statistically signiﬁcant , p < 0 . 05 . Therefore , there is signiﬁcant agreement between the raters . 4 . 2 . 2 . Creativity results Overall , raters judged opposite - stimulus concepts to be more creative than similar - stimulus con - cepts . This difference was signiﬁcant , or borderline signiﬁcant , for all three creativity metrics . See 286 I . Chiu and L . H . Shu Table 9 . Kendall’s W for Experiment 2 concepts . Problem Novelty Usefulness Cohesiveness Bushing ( N = 59 ) W = 0 . 62 W = 0 . 53 W = 0 . 57 χ 2 ( 58 ) = 143 . 61 χ 2 ( 58 ) = 122 . 76 χ 2 ( 58 ) = 131 . 28 p < 0 . 0001 p < 0 . 0001 p < 0 . 0001 Snow ( N = 59 ) W = 0 . 55 W = 0 . 60 W = 0 . 65 χ 2 ( 58 ) = 127 . 25 χ 2 ( 58 ) = 138 . 49 χ 2 ( 58 ) = 150 . 17 p < 0 . 0001 p < 0 . 0001 p < 0 . 0001 Coal ( N = 77 ) W = 0 . 51 W = 0 . 41 W = 0 . 47 χ 2 ( 76 ) = 153 . 99 χ 2 ( 76 ) = 126 . 13 χ 2 ( 76 ) = 143 . 68 p < 0 . 0001 p = 0 . 0003 p < 0 . 0001 Table 10 . Planned contrast results for concept novelty , usefulness and cohesiveness . Comparison of estimated means Expt . Cond . 1 Expt . Cond . 2 Contrast t - and p - values Nov . Opp : 4 . 09 None : 4 . 26 t ( 28 . 456 ) = 0 . 32 , p = 0 . 378 , p > 0 . 05 Opp : 4 . 09 Sim : 2 . 88 t ( 27 . 65 ) = − 3 . 02 , p = 0 . 0025 , p < 0 . 05 Use . Opp : 3 . 75 None : 3 . 47 t ( 31 . 51 ) = − 0 . 73 , p = 0 . 24 , p > 0 . 05 Opp : 3 . 75 Sim : 3 . 17 t ( 31 . 51 ) = − 1 . 61 , p = 0 . 059 , p ∼ 0 . 05 Coh . Opp : 4 . 09 None : 3 . 74 t ( 30 . 16 ) = − 0 . 92 , p = 0 . 18 a , p > 0 . 05 Opp : 4 . 09 Sim : 3 . 52 t ( 29 . 42 ) = − 1 . 62 , p = 0 . 058 a , p ∼ 0 . 05 Notes : Reprinted with permission . Copyright ASME 2010 . Shaded rows show signiﬁcant or borderline signiﬁcant differences . a Adjusted for effects of problem order . Table 10 and Figure 4 for planned contrasts and interaction graphs of all creativity results . Note the lines in the interaction graph do not signify a relationship , but assist in visualising variable effects and interactions . For novelty , a signiﬁcant main effect was found for Stimulus Type F ( 2 , 27 . 58 ) = 7 . 09 , p = 0 . 003 , p < 0 . 05 . Planned contrasts comparing individual experiment conditions , e . g . opposite - stimulus concepts versus no - stimulus concepts , show a signiﬁcant difference between opposite - stimulus and similar - stimulus concepts , t ( 27 . 65 ) = − 3 . 02 , p = 0 . 0025 , p < 0 . 05 . For usefulness and cohesiveness , planned contrasts show that opposite - stimulus concepts are border - line signiﬁcantly more useful and cohesive than similar - stimulus concepts , t ( 31 . 51 ) = − 1 . 61 , p = 0 . 059 , p ∼ 0 . 05 and t ( 29 . 42 ) = − 1 . 62 , p = 0 . 058 , p ∼ 0 . 05 , respectively . Problem order , the order in which problems were completed , was found to have an effect on cohesiveness and was corrected in the planned contrasts . For novelty , usefulness and cohesiveness , planned contrasts show no signiﬁcant difference between opposite - stimulus and no - stimulus ( control ) concepts . Overall , the ANOVAs and planned contrasts support the original hypothesis that opposite - stimulus concepts are more novel , useful and cohesive than similar - stimulus concepts . However , we also observe two results that contradict much of the literature with regard to design stimulation : ( 1 ) Opposite - stimulus and no - stimulus concepts were found to be equally creative ; ( 2 ) No - stimulus ( control ) concepts were found to be more creative than similar - stimulus concepts . These results will be further discussed in a later section . Journal of Engineering Design 287 Figure 4 . Graphs of concept novelty , usefulness and cohesiveness ratings . Note the lines in the interaction graph do not signify a relationship , but assist in visualising variable effects and interactions . Reprinted with permission . Copyright ASME 2010 . 4 . 2 . 3 . Language results Anexplicitcontentanalysiswasperformedusingexperimenttranscriptstodeterminehowstimulusparticipantsusedstimuluswordsintheconceptgenerationprocess . A parameter of interest is the POS in which the stimulus words were used , and therefore , stimulus words used by participants were categorised as a noun , verb or adjective . Another parameter of interest corresponds to the NWPs introduced by stimulus words . NWPs are of interest because they may indicate that new concept elements were being introduced into the concept generation process . In turn , new concept elements may form the basis of creative concepts . The investigators were able to identify NWPs by comparing words and phrases in the problems and stimulus sets with the words and phrases generated by the participants . In an example from the Snow problem , given the stimulus word ‘constrict’ , sentence A below contains an NWP ( underlined ) , while sentence B does not contain an NWP . ( A ) Constrict the motion of heat [ from leaving the house ] ( B ) … constrict snow . In sentence A , the phrase ‘motion of heat’ , associated with the stimulus word ‘constrict’ , was not given as part of the design problem nor stimulus set . However in sentence B , the word ‘snow’ , also associated with the stimulus word ‘constrict’ , was given as part of the design problem . Overall , results suggest ( 1 ) verbs introduce more NWPs and ( 2 ) opposite - stimulus verbs intro - duce the most NWPs for two of the problems , the Bushing and Snow problems . This can be seen in the interaction graphs in Figures 5 – 7 . For each problem , a two - way ANOVA was used to compare the effect of Stimulus POS ( verb , noun or adjective ) and Stimulus Type ( opposite or similar stimuli ) on NWPs . First , theANOVA is 288 I . Chiu and L . H . Shu Figure 5 . Bushing language results comparing effects of POS and StimulusType on estimated marginal means of NWP . used to determine if there are Stimulus POS effects on NWP introduction . We found that Stimulus POS has a signiﬁcant effect on the introduction of NWPs , F ( 2 , 16 ) = 7 . 28 , p = 0 . 006 , F ( 2 , 16 ) = 40 . 42 , p = 0 . 000 and F ( 2 , 16 ) = 10 . 24 , p = 0 . 001 , for the Bushing , Snow and Coal problems respectively . For all three problems , planned contrasts show that stimuli used as verbs introduce signiﬁcantly more NWPs , or borderline signiﬁcantly more NWPs , as seen in Tables 11 – 13 . Second , the ANOVA is used to determine if there are Stimulus Type and Stimulus Type * POS interaction effects on NWPs . For the Bushing problem , Figure 5 suggests that opposite stimuli introduce the most NWPs . However , there is no signiﬁcant effect of Stimulus Type on NWPs nor Stimulus Type * POS interaction , meaning that one Stimulus Type POS , e . g . opposite - stimulus verbs , does not signiﬁcantly introduce more or fewer NWPs . Figure 6 . Snow language results comparing effects of POS and Stimulus Type on estimated marginal means of NWP . Journal of Engineering Design 289 Figure 7 . Coal language results comparing effects of POS and Stimulus Type on estimated marginal means of NWP . Table 11 . Bushing problem contrast results . Mean NWP introduction F - and p - values Verb : 5 . 10 Noun : 2 . 30 F ( 1 , 8 ) = 4 . 61 , p = 0 . 064 – 0 . 05 Adj : 1 . 10 Noun : 2 . 30 F ( 1 , 8 ) = 2 . 80 , p = 0 . 13 Table 12 . Snow problem contrast results . Mean NWP introduction F - and p - values Verb : 7 . 10 Noun : 2 . 20 F ( 1 , 8 ) = 41 . 76 , p = 0 . 000 < 0 . 05 Adj : 1 . 20 Noun : 2 . 20 F ( 1 , 8 ) = 2 . 90 , p = 0 . 13 Table 13 . Coal problem contrast results . Mean NWP introduction F - and p - values Verb : 7 . 20 Noun : 2 . 70 F ( 1 , 8 ) = 47 . 58 , p = 0 . 000 < 0 . 05 Adj : 2 . 70 Noun : 2 . 70 F ( 1 , 8 ) = 2 . 90 , p = 0 . 13 For the Snow problem , Figure 6 suggests that opposite stimuli introduce the most NWPs . There is a signiﬁcant effect of Stimulus Type on the introduction of NWPs , F ( 1 , 8 ) = 5 . 26 , p = 0 . 051 ∼ 0 . 05 . Additionally , there is a signiﬁcant interaction of Stimulus Type * POS , F ( 2 , 16 ) = 13 . 88 , p = 0 . 000 . Contrasts for Stimulus Type * POS interaction comparing opposite - stimulus verbs to other POS show signiﬁcant differences , F ( 1 , 8 ) = 18 . 94 , p = 0 . 002 , indicating that different stimulus POS have different effects depending on the Stimulus Type . In this case , it indicates that opposite - stimulus verbs introduce signiﬁcantly more NWPs . For the Coal problem , unlike the Bushing and Snow problems , Figure 7 suggests that similar stimuli introduce more NWPs rather than opposite stimuli . TheANOVA shows a signiﬁcant effect 290 I . Chiu and L . H . Shu of Stimulus Type on NWP introduction , F ( 1 , 8 ) = 16 . 76 , p = 0 . 003 , while there is no signiﬁcant interaction of Stimulus Type * POS . These results are discussed in detail in the next section . 4 . 3 . Experiment 2 discussion Experiment 2 shows opposite - stimulus concepts were signiﬁcantly , or borderline signiﬁcantly , more novel , useful and cohesive than similar - stimulus concepts . These results support our original hypothesis that opposite stimuli result in more creative concepts . These results are consistent with previous results obtained from Experiment 1 . However , surprisingly , Experiment 2 also shows that stimulus concepts in general were not more creative than no - stimulus ( control ) concepts . This is contrary to the literature and results of other design stimulation studies . It is unclear why no - stimulus concepts were judged more creative than some stimulus con - cepts , speciﬁcally similar - stimulus concepts . Further work is required to explain the discrepancy between results found in this experiment , and results reported by others . However , we have noted that many other design stimulation experiments were pen - and - paper , e . g . Tseng et al . ( 2008 ) . The discrepancy observed in Experiment 2 may have resulted from a limitation of experimental methodology ; it is possible that the requirement to use stimuli in addition to verbalising and designing increased the cognitive workload of stimulus participants past optimal performance . It is well - known that increased mental workload can decrease human performance ( Wickens and Hollands 2000 , Drews et al . 2009 ) , where human performance is creativity in this case . Table 14 enumerates the tasks performed by no - stimulus participants versus stimulus participants and shows that stimulus participants perform an additional task compared to no - stimulus participants . A cognitive workload assessment , e . g . NASA Task Load Index , can be used to determine if stimulus use in verbal protocol design experiments will increase cognitive workload ( and thus decrease performance in terms of creativity ) . For example , the NASA Task Load Index asks participants to rate perceived workload in several dimensions during or after completion of a task ( Hart and Staveland 1988 ) . Other methods can also be used to determine the cognitive workload associated with design tasks . For example , Tang and Zeng ( 2009 ) investigated the use of body movements to quantify a designer’s mental stress during the design process . As it may not be possible to equalise the workload between the stimulus and control conditions , i . e . comparing designs generated using stimulus versus no stimulus , this may be a serious limitation of verbal protocol experiments as applied to design research . Review of other verbal protocol experiments reveal at least one other reported case in which an experimental manipulation ( which should improve design overall ) did not produce better design concepts despite an increase of other metrics ( Atman and Bursic 1996 ) . In Atman and Bursic’s study , reading a short design text before verbalising and designing improved metrics that should indicate improved design , e . g . time spent on designing , but did not result in better quality designs . More details with respect to potential limitations of verbal protocol design experiments are described by Chiu and Shu ( 2010 ) . Language analyses were conducted to gain insight into how designers used stimulus words in concept generation . First , stimulus words used in concept generation were examined to determine Table 14 . Task comparison between control and stimulus participants . No - stimulus tasks Stimulus tasks 1 . Design 1 . Design 2 . Verbalise 2 . Verbalise – 3 . Use stimuli Note : Reprinted with permission . Copyright ASME 2010 . Journal of Engineering Design 291 Table 15 . Breakdown of average unknown usage of stimulus words . Average Average unknown unknown usage of usage of opposite similar Comparison Problem stimulus words stimulus words t - values p - values Bushing 26 . 0 16 . 3 t ( 8 ) = 1 . 10 0 . 15 Snow 18 . 6 17 . 8 t ( 8 ) = 0 . 12 0 . 45 Coal 31 . 0 17 . 0 t ( 8 ) = 2 . 07 0 . 04 the POS in which they were used , i . e . verb , noun , adjective or unknown , and then any associated NWPs were examined . Language analyses showed that verbs in general introduced more NWPs than nouns or adjectives . Furthermore , results indicate that opposite verbs may introduce the highest number of NWPs , and correspond to increased creativity measures as determined by the independent raters . Combined results of the Bushing and Snow problems suggest that opposite - stimulus verbs may be the mechanism causing participants to introduce more NWPs , thus resulting in more creative concepts . However , the results of the Coal problem were contrary to those of the other two prob - lems , in that similar - stimulus verbs introduced more NWPs than opposite - stimulus verbs . Despite the contradicting NWP introduction results for the Coal problem , opposite - stimulus concepts were still judged as more creative than similar - stimulus concepts . An explanation for this inconsistent result may be found by examining the high rate of unknown stimulus use in the Coal problem . Re - examining stimulus - use frequency for the Coal problem shows that opposite - stimulus partici - pants had signiﬁcantly more instances of unknown stimulus use , e . g . stimulus words listed without context and hence with unknown POS , on average than in any other experimental condition or problem , t ( 8 ) = 2 . 07 , p = 0 . 04 . The average unknown stimulus POS per problem is shown in Table 15 . Stimulus words used as an unknown POS do not introduce NWPs , but frequent instances of recorded unknown stimuli may indicate that the participant frequently looked at speciﬁc stimulus words and likely thought about those words as they designed . It is possible that participants were fatigued during the Coal problem , the last problem in the experiment , and did not verbalise all thoughts related to the task . 5 . Overall discussion Our experiments showed that oppositely related stimuli can increase concept creativity . Results suggest that use of opposite stimuli is most effective for general domain problems , or problems that are novel to the designer , e . g . the Sunﬂower , Egg and Snow problems . Experiment 2 also suggests that stimuli in general may be detrimental to designer performance , but this may be a limitation of the experimental method . Despite any potential methodological limitations , Experiment 2 did allow a comparative study of how language stimuli may support more creative concept generation . Experiment 2 results show that opposite - stimulus words are associated with more NWPs , which further suggests that opposite - stimulus verbs may force introduction of NWPs so that they are correct and consistent in the context of the problem . While participants used stimuli as verbs and nouns often ( and adjectives infrequently ) , verbs may be better at introducing NWPs because verbs are more ﬂexible than nouns ( Gentner and France 1988 ) . Verbs are also known to unconsciously and automatically evoke concepts corresponding to the semantic ﬁller roles typically associated with the event they denote ( Lyons 1977 , McRae et al . 2005 ) . Common semantic ﬁller roles include 292 I . Chiu and L . H . Shu Table 16 . Semanticpropertiesofnounsandverbs , adaptedfrom Croft ( 1991 ) . Property Noun Verb Semantic class Object Action Pragmatic function Reference Predication Stativity State Process Persistence Persistent Transitory Valency / relationality 0 1 + patients ( often direct objects ) , agents ( often subjects ) , instruments and locations . For example , the verb ‘hammer’ will commonly evoke ‘carpenter’ as an agent role , and ‘nail’ as an object role . In the Snow problem , opposite - stimulus participants were provided with the stimulus word ‘constrict’ . Those using it as a verb automatically realised that the verb ‘constrict’had to ‘ constrict something’ . ‘ Constrict snow’ ( to the point where it turns to ice ) was inconsistent with the problem because participants were explicitly instructed not to compress snow to the point of ice . However , introducing an NWP in ‘ constrict the motion of the heat’ , is both new , and consistent . The verb ‘constrict’ implies that something must be constricted , and it is ﬂexible enough to allow for different arguments while still ‘making sense’ . Examining semantic properties of nouns and verbs further explain the relationship between stimulus verbs and NWPs . Table 16 summarises some key properties and differences between nouns and verbs . Table 16 shows verb properties that may beneﬁt conceptual design more than noun properties . First , nouns are used to reference objects , which are usually ﬁxed and static , while verbs represent transitory actions and processes ( Croft 1991 ) . Fixedness is contrary to the purpose of conceptual design , which is to expand the solution space , and not to ﬁx , or limit the space . The abstractness of actions and processes allows verbs to avoid naming an actual design solution , which renders verbs more advantageous for expanding the solution space . Second , nouns have a valency of zero , while verbs have at least a valency of one . The valency , or relationality , of a word refers to the implied entities associated with the use of the word . When a noun is used , there is no other implied entity , e . g . ‘book’does not imply the existence of any other entity . However , when a verb is used , at least one other entity is implied , e . g . ‘hit’ implies the existence of a hitter and the object hit ( Lyons 1977 , Croft 1991 , McRae et al . 2005 ) . For verbs , the implied entities are the semantic ﬁller roles . Figure 8 . Explanatory model of opposite - verb NWP introduction and its effect on concept creativity . Journal of Engineering Design 293 Examining the semantic properties of nouns versus verbs aids the explanation of the empirical results obtained in Experiment 2 . Both linguistic theory and empirical results suggest that verbs used as design stimuli may increase concept creativity . Furthermore , empirical results show that oppositely related verbs may be the most effective at stimulating NWPs , which may lead to more creative concepts . With similarly related verbs , NWP introduction is unnecessary because existing problem - statement words and phrases capture the current problem state , e . g . problem objects like ‘snow’ or ‘bushings’ . Similar stimuli are already consistent with the problem and do not need to be resolved by the introduction of NWPs . Figure 8 models the effect of opposite - stimulus verbs on the generation of creative concepts . 6 . Summary and concluding remarks We investigate the effects of language on design because connections between language and cognition may be used to facilitate creative and successful design . Speciﬁcally , we study oppo - sitely related words because they may stimulate creative concept generation by being unexpected and non - obvious , while being available for systematic retrieval in lexical resources . Through experiments , we observed the effects of oppositely and similarly related stimulus words on con - cept creativity and designer behaviours with respect to the different stimulus types in concept generation . Empiricalresultssupportouroriginalhypothesesandshowthatoppositestimulimayincrease : ( 1 ) Concept novelty as well as other creativity metrics ; ( 2 ) Introduction of NWPs that may form the basis of novel and creative concepts . Empirical results combined with linguistic theory allow us to speculate on the mechanism in which opposite stimuli interacts with the conceptual design process to produce more creative concepts . While similar - stimulus words can be used ‘as - is’ to reason about the problem and concepts consistently , opposite - stimulus words must be used with NWPs to maintain consistency within the problem . These new words or phrases may be key to the formation of more creative concepts . Results also reinforced that problem novelty and designer experience may be a factor ( Exper - iment 1 ) , and that methodological issues with verbal protocols may interfere with results ( Experiment 2 ) . However , overall , our results show that opposite stimuli appear a practical means of stimulating creative design , that is simple to implement , e . g . using ﬂashcards or worksheets . Unlike some creative design methods , e . g . TRIZ , which require training and related materials , e . g . contradiction tables or software , opposite stimuli only require the generation of words that are oppositely related to the problem . These words , which are familiar to most as antonyms , can be obtained from conventional thesauri or WordNet . The ease of obtaining oppositely related words , i . e . in antonyms , increases the ease by which this method can be integrated into engineering practice . While the designer’s previous experience with similar design problems may offset the creative advantages offered by opposite - stimulus words , opposite - stimulus words are suitable for instances of conceptual design where the engineer may not have already gained familiarity with the new domain . It is unlikely that the effects of language on design cognition and creativity can be fully under - stood in the near future . However , insights from our experiments combined with linguistic theory allow us to propose an explanatory model of interaction between language stimuli and design cognition . This knowledge can be used to facilitate more creative and successful design . 294 I . Chiu and L . H . Shu Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada ( NSERC ) for funding support . We would also like to acknowledge the participants and raters who provided their time . References Adams , J . L . , 2001 . Conceptual blockbusting , a guide to better ideas 4 / e . NewYork , NY : Perseus Press . Akin , O . , 1990 . Necessary conditions for design expertise and creativity . Design Studies , 11 ( 2 ) , 107 – 113 . Akin , O . andAkin C . , 1998 . On the process of creativity in puzzles , inventions and designs . Automation in Construction , 7 ( 2 – 3 ) , 123 – 138 . Altshuller , G . S . andShulyak , L . , 1996 . Andsuddenlytheinventorappeared : TRIZ , thetheoryofinventiveproblemsolving , 2 / e . Worcester , MA : Technical Innovation Center . Amabile , T . M . , 1983 . The social psychology of creativity . NewYork : Springer - Verlag . Amabile , T . M . , 1989 . Growing up creative , nurturing a lifetime of creativity . NewYork , NY : Crown Publishers , Inc . Atman , C . J . and Bursic K . , 1996 . Teaching engineering design : can reading a textbook make a difference ? Research in Engineering Design , 8 ( 4 ) , 240 – 250 . Bainbridge , L . , et al . , 1968 . A study of real - time human decision making using a plant simulator . Operational Research Quarterly , Special Conference Issue , 19 , 91 – 106 . Reprinted in E . Edwards and F . P . Lees , eds . ( 1974 ) . The human operator in process control . London : Taylor and Francis . Benami , O . and Jin , Y . , 2002 . Creative stimulation in conceptual design . Proceedings of the ASME DETC / CIE , Montreal , Canada , DETC2002 / DTM - 34023 . Besemer , S . P . andTrefﬁnger , D . J . , 1981 . Analysisofcreativeproducts : reviewandsynthesis . JournalofCreativeBehavior , 15 ( 3 ) , 158 – 178 . de Bono , E . , 1970 . Lateral thinking : creativity step by step . NewYork , NY : Harper & Row . de Bono , E . , 1992 . Serious creativity . NewYork , NY : HarperCollins . Brown , D . C . , 2008 . Guiding computational design creativity research . Proceedings of NSF International Workshop on Studying Design Creativity ‘08 , University of Provence , France . Bruner , J . S . , 1964 . The course of cognitive growth . American Psychologist , 19 ( 1 ) , 1 – 15 . Carroll , D . W . , 1999 . Psychology of language , 2 / e . Paciﬁc Grove , CA : Brooks / Cole Publishing Company . Chakrabarti , A . , Morgenstern , S . , and Knaab , H . , 2004 . Identiﬁcation and application of requirements and their impact on the design process : a protocol study . Research in Engineering Design , 15 ( 1 ) , 22 – 39 . Chiu , I . and Shu , L . H . , 2007 . Biomimetic design through natural language analysis to facilitate cross - domain information retrieval . Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , 21 ( 1 ) , 45 – 59 . Chiu , I . and Shu , L . H . , 2008a . Use of opposite - relation lexical stimuli in concept generation . Annals of the CIRP , 57 ( 1 ) , 149 – 152 . Chiu , I . and Shu , L . H . , 2008b . Effects of dichotomous lexical stimuli in concept generation . Proceedings of ASME international design engineering technical conferences , New York City , NY , USA , 3 – 6 August 2008 . DETC2008 - 49372 ( DTM ) . Chiu , I . andShu , L . H . , 2010 . Potentiallimitationsofverbalprotocolsindesignexperiments . ProceedingsofASMEinterna - tionaldesignengineeringtechnicalconferences , Montreal , Quebec , Canada , 15 – 18August2010 . IDETC2010 - 28675 ( DTM ) . Cheong , H . , et al . , 2011 . Biologically meaningful keywords for functional terms of the functional basis . Journal of Mechanical Design , 133 ( 2 ) , 021007 : 1 – 11 . Chomsky , N . , 1968 . Language and mind . NewYork , NY : Harcourt Brace Jovanovich . Coley , F . , Houseman , O . , and Roy , R . , 2007 . An introduction to capturing and understanding the cognitive behaviour of design engineers . Journal of Engineering Design , 18 ( 4 ) , 311 – 325 . Corremans , J . A . M . , 2011 . Measuring the effectiveness of a design method to generate form alternatives : an experiment performed with freshman students product development . Journal of Engineering Design , 22 ( 4 ) , 259 – 274 . Croft , W . , 1991 . Syntactic categories and grammatical relations : the cognitive organization of information . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Cross , N . , 2006 . Designerly ways of knowing . London : Springer - Verlag . Cross , N . , Christiaans , H . , and Drost , K . , 1996 . Introduction : the Delft protocols workshop . In : N . Cross , H . Christiaans , and K . Drost’s , eds . Analysing design activity . West Sussex : John Wiley & Sons , 1 – 16 . Dieter , G . E . , 2000 . Engineering design : a materials and processing approach . 3rd ed . NewYork , NY : McGraw - Hill . Dong , A . , Hill , A . W . , andAgogino , A . M . , 2003 . A document analysis method for characterizing design team performance . Journal of Mechanical Design , 126 ( 3 ) , 378 – 385 . Dong , A . , 2006 . Concept formation as knowledge accumulation : a computational linguistics study . Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Engineering Design Analysis & Manufacturing , 20 ( 1 ) , 35 – 53 . Drews , F . A . , et al . , 2009 . Text messaging during simulated driving . Human Factors : The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society [ online ] . Available from : http : / / hfs . sagepub . com [ Accessed 17 January 2010 ] . DTM , 2006 . Design that matters design challenge portfolio : shelling machines [ online ] . Available from : http : / / www . designthatmatters . org / [ Accessed 17 October 2006 ] . Journal of Engineering Design 295 Engen , T . , 1972 . Psychophysics II . Scaling methods . In : J . W . Kling , L . A . Rigg , Woodworth & Scholsberg , eds . Experimental psychology . 3rd ed . NewYork , NY : Holt Rinehart & Winston , 47 – 86 . Ericsson , K . A . and Simon , H . A . , 1993 . Protocol analysis : verbal reports as data . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Fantoni , G . , Taviani , C . , and Santoro , R . , 2006 . Design by functional synonyms and antonyms : a structured creative technique based on functional analysis . Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers , Part B , Journal of Engineering Manufacture , 221 ( 4 / 2007 ) , 673 – 683 . Fellbaum , C . , 1993 . English verbs as a semantic net , in ﬁve papers on WordNet , 40 – 61 [ online ] . Available from : ftp : / / ftp . cogsci . princeton . edu / pub / wordnet / 5papers . ps [ Accessed 7 July 2008 ] . Gentner , D . and France , I . , 1988 . The verb mutability effect : studies of the combinatorial semantics of nouns and verbs . In : S . Small , G . Cottrell , and M . Tanenhaus , eds . Lexical ambiguity resolution . Los Altos , CA : Morgan Kaufmann , 343 – 382 . Gero , J . S . , Sushil , J . L . , and Kundu , S . , 1994 . Evolutionary learning of novel grammars for design . Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Engineering Design Analysis & Manufacturing , 8 ( 2 ) , 83 – 94 . Gordon , W . J . J . , 1961 . Synectics , the development of creative capacity . NewYork , NY : Harper & Row . Hacco , E . and Shu , L . , 2002 . Biomimetic concept generation applied to design for remanufacture . Proceedings of ASME design engineering technical conferences , Montreal , DETC2002 / DFM - 341 . Hart , S . G . and Staveland , L . E . , 1988 . Development of NASA - TLX ( task load index ) : results of empirical and theoretical research . In : P . A . HancockandN . Meshkati , eds . Humanmentalworkload . ElsevierScience : NorthHolland , 139 – 183 . Hatchuel , A . and Weil , B . , 2009 . C - K design theory : an advanced formulation . Research in Engineering Design , 19 ( 4 ) , 181 – 192 . Holt , K . , 1993 . Computer - aided creativity in engineering design . Journal of Engineering Design , 4 ( 4 ) , 371 – 376 . Howard , T . J . , Culley , S . J . , andDekoninck , E . , 2008 . Describingthecreativedesignprocessbytheintegrationofengineering design and cognitive psychology literature . Design Studies , 29 ( 2 ) , 160 – 180 . Hubka , V . and Eder , W . E . , 1996 . Design science – introduction to the needs , scope and organization of engineering design knowledge . London : Springer - Verlag . Jackendoff , R . , 1983 . Semantics and cognition . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Jin , Y . andBenami , O . , 2010 . Creativepatternsinconceptualdesign , artiﬁcialintelligenceforengineeringdesign . Analysis and Manufacturing , 24 ( 2 ) , 191 – 209 . Jin , Y . , Geslin , M . , and Lu , S . C . - Y . , 2007 . Impact of argumentative negotiation on collaborative engineering . Annals of the CIRP , 56 ( 1 ) , 181 – 184 . Kalmar , I . and Davidson , D . , 1997 . Anthropological linguistics and semiotics . 2nd ed . Toronto , Canada : Quirk Press . Kan , J . T . W . and Gero , J . S . , 2007 . Using the FBS ontology to capture semantic design information in design protocol studies . In : J . McDonnell and P . Lloyd , eds . DTRS7 . London : University of the Arts , 155 – 165 . Keller , R . , Eckert , C . M . , andClarkson , P . J . , 2009 . Usinganengineeringchangemethodologytosupportconceptualdesign . Journal of Engineering Design , 20 ( 6 ) , 571 – 587 . Kim , Y . S . , Jin , S . T . , and Lee , S . W . , 2011 . Relations between design activities and personal creativity modes . Journal of Engineering Design , 22 ( 4 ) , 235 – 257 . Kosse , V . , 2004 . Solving problems with TRIZ : an exercise handbook . 2nd ed . Southﬁeld , MI . : Ideation Int’l Inc . Kudrowitz , B . M . and Wallace , D . R . , 2010 . Assessing the quality of ideas from proliﬁc , early - stage product ideation . Proceedings of the ASME IDETC / CIE 2010 , Montreal , Quebec , Canada , August 15 – 18 , 2010 ( DETC2010 - 28991 ) . Landis , J . R . and Koch , G . G . , 1977 . The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data . Biometrics , 33 ( 1 ) , 159 – 174 . Levinson , S . , 1996 . Language and space . Annual Review of Anthropology , 25 , 353 – 382 . Li , P . and Gleitman , L . , 2002 . Turning the tables : language and spatial reasoning . Cognition , 83 ( 3 ) , 265 – 294 . Lutfey , K . E . , et al . , 2008 . How are patient characteristics relevant for physicians’ clinical decision making in diabetes ? An analysis of qualitative results from a cross - national factorial experiment . Social Science & Medicine , 67 ( 9 ) , 1391 – 1399 . Lyons , J . , 1977 . Semantics . vol . 2 . Cambridge , NY : Cambridge University Press . McNeill , T . , Gero , J . S . , andWarren , J . , 1998 . Understandingconceptualelectronicdesignusingprotocolanalysis . Research in Engineering Design , 10 ( 3 ) , 129 – 140 . McRae , K . , etal . , 2005 . Abasisforgeneratingexpectanciesforverbsfromnouns . Memory & Cognition , 33 ( 7 ) , 1174 – 1184 . Merriam - Webster . com , 2008 . Merriam - Webster online dictionary [ online ] . Available from : http : / / merriam - webster . com [ Accessed 23 September 2008 ] . Miller , G . , et al . , 1993 . Introduction to WordNet : an on - line lexical database , in Five papers on WordNet , 1 – 25 [ online ] . Available from : ftp : / / ftp . cogsci . princeton . edu / pub / wordnet / 5papers . ps [ Accessed 7 July 2008 ] . Murphy , M . L . , 2003 . Semantic relations and the lexicon : antonymy , synonymy and other paradigms . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Myers , D . G . , 1999 . Social psychology , 6 / e . Boston , MA : McGraw - Hill Publishers . Nagai , Y . and Noguchi , H . , 2003 . An experimental study on the design thinking process started from difﬁcult keywords : modeling the thinking process of creative design . Journal of Engineering Design , 14 ( 4 ) , 429 – 437 . Nagai , Y . and Taura , T . , 2006 . Formal description of concept - synthesizing process for creative design . In : J . S . Gero , ed . Design computing and cognition ’06 . Dordrecht , The Netherlands : Springer , 443 – 460 . Nisbett , R . and Wilson , T . , 1977 . Telling more than we can know : verbal reports on mental processes . Psychological Review , 84 ( 3 ) , 231 – 259 . Nuseibeh , B . and Easterbrook , S . , 2000 . Requirements engineering : a roadmap . In : A . C . W . Finkelstein , ed . The future of software engineering . Limerick , Ireland : IEEE Computer Society Press , 35 – 46 . 296 I . Chiu and L . H . Shu Pahl , G . and Beitz , W . , 1996 . Engineering design , a systematic approach . In : K . Wallace , L . Blessing , and F . Bauert , trans . , K . Wallace , eds . 2 / e . , London : Springer - Verlag London Ltd . Pinker , S . , 2007 . The stuff of thought , language as a window into human nature . NewYork , NY : Viking . Ratner , N . and Gleason , J . , 1993 . An introduction to psycholinguistics . In : J . B . Gleason and N . B . Ratner , eds . Psycholinguistics . Orlando , FL : Harcourt Brace College Publishers , 1 – 40 . Rittel , H . W . J . and Webber , M . M . , 1984 , Planning problems are wicked problems . In : N . Cross’ , ed . Developments in design methodology . Bath : John Wiley & Sons , 135 – 144 . Saeed , J . I . , 2003 , Semantics . 2nd ed . Oxford : Blackwell Publishing . Segers , N . , 2004 . Computational representations of words & representations of words & associations in architectural design , development of a system support creative design . Thesis ( PhD ) . Bouwstenen 78 , Technische Universiteit Eindhoven . Shah , J . , Kulkarni , S . , and Vargas - Hernandez , N . , 2000 . Evaluation of idea generation methods for conceptual design : effectiveness metrics & design of experiments . Journal of Mechanical Design , 122 ( 4 ) , 377 – 384 . Shai , O . , Reich , Y . , and Rubin , D . , 2009 . Creative conceptual design : extending the scope by infused design . Computer Aided Design , 41 ( 4 ) , 117 – 135 . Siegal , S . , 1956 . Non parametric statistics for the behavioral sciences . NewYork , NY . : McGraw - Hill , Inc . Simon , H . , 1969 . The sciences of the artiﬁcial . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Stone , R . B . and Wood , K . L . , 2000 . Development of a functional basis for design . Journal of Mechanical Design , 122 ( 4 ) , 359 – 369 . Tang , Y . , and Zeng . , Y . , 2009 . Quantifying designer’s mental stress in the conceptual design process using kinesics study . ProceedingsofInternationalConferenceonEngineeringDesign , ICED’09 , 24 – 27August2009 , StanfordUniversity , Stanford , CA . Thomas , J . C . and Carroll , J . M . , 1984 . The psychological study of design . In : N . Cross’s , ed . Developments in design methodology . Chichester : John Wiley & Sons , 221 – 235 . Torrance , E . P . , 1974 . Torrance tests of creative thinking . Bensenville , IL : Scholastic Testing Service , Inc . Tseng , I . , et al . , 2008 . Overcoming blocks in conceptual design : the effects of open goals and analogical similarity on idea generation . Proceedings of ASME IDETC / CIE , Brooklyn , NY , August 3 – 6 , DEC2008 - 49276 . Ullman , D . , 2003 . The mechanical design process . 3rd ed . NewYork , NY : McGraw - Hill . Visser , W . , 2006 . The cognitive artifacts of designing . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Publishers . Wickens , C . D . and Hollands , J . G . , 2000 . Engineering psychology and human performance . 3rd ed . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall . Wilson , R . C . , 1951 . An operational deﬁnition of originality . American Psychologist , 6 ( 6 ) , 297 . . Princeton University , 2008 . About WordNet . WordNet . , Princeton University . Available from : http : / / WordNet . Princeton . edu [ Accessed 7 July 2008 ] . Yang , M . C . , 2009 . Observations on concept generation and sketching in engineering design . Research in Engineering Design , 20 ( 1 ) , 1 – 11 .