articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 4 SEPTEMBER 2002 www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 691 Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits Christien J . Merrifield , Morris E . Feldman , Lei Wan and Wolfhard Almers * Vollum Institute L - 474 , Oregon Health and Sciences University , 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Rd . , Portland , OR 97201 , USA * e - mail : almersw @ ohsu . edu Published online : 27 August 2002 ; DOI : 10 . 1038 / ncb837 As a final step in endocytosis , clathrin - coated pits must separate from the plasma membrane and move into the cytosol as a coated vesicle . Because these events involve minute movements that conventional light microscopy cannot resolve , they have not been observed directly and their dynamics remain unexplored . Here , we used evanes - cent field ( EF ) microscopy to observe single clathrin - coated pits or vesicles as they draw inwards from the plasma membrane and finally lose their coats . This inward movement occurred immediately after a brief burst of dynamin recruitment and was accompanied by transient actin assembly . Therefore , dynamin may provide the trigger and actin may provide the force for movement into the cytosol . E ndocytosis involves the interaction of multiple proteins that are presumably recruited and released in sequence from sites where clathrin - coated pits bud off the plasma membrane . To understand the functions of such proteins , it would be useful to delineate the sequence of recruitment during endocytosis . We have examined in vivo how single clathrin - coated pits are drawn into the cytosol until , separated from the plasma membrane by several hun - dred nanometres , they finally uncoat . Both dynamin and actin have been proposed to function as mechano - enzymes during the later stages of endocytosis . Dynamin is a GTPase that is thought to mediate the fission of coated vesicles from the plasma mem - brane . It can constrict lipid tubules 1 , 2 and execute GTP - depend - ent conformational changes that are thought to generate force 3 . However , endocytosis in vivo was found not to require the self - assembly - stimulated GTPase activity of dynamin ; in fact , dynamin mutants with reduced rates of GTP hydrolysis actually accelerate endocytosis 4 ( although see also ref . 5 ) . Rather than being a mechano - enzyme , GTP - dynamin may instead activate a downstream mediator of fission . One such potential mediator is actin , a protein capable of powering motion , either alone or in conjunction with myosin . Several proteins that bind to dynamin in vitro 6 – 8 ( for reviews , see refs 9 , 10 ) can also interact with actin , or proteins that regulate actin assembly . This suggests that actin may be involved in endo - cytosis . Moreover , macropinosomes ( another form of endocytic vesicle ) induce actin polymerization when they separate from the plasma membrane 11 . They then move into the cytosol at the tips of comet tails of polymerizing actin 11 . Similarly , actin tails can propel Golgi - derived clathrin - coated vesicles in HeLa cells 12 , lysosomes and endosomes in prick - activated or phorbol - ester - activated Xenopus laevis oocytes 13 , and endocytic vesicles in cells overex - pressing phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase ( PIPK ) 14 – 16 . However , actin assembly is not an absolute requirement for recep - tor - mediated endocytosis in all mammalian cells 17 , 18 and to date , there is no evidence that actin assembly occurs specifically near clathrin coated pits during endocytosis 18 . In this study , we explore the in vivo recruitment of dynamin - 1 and actin to single clathrin - coated structures during a late step in endocytosis . Results Imaging of clathrin - coated pits . Clathrin - coated structures ( CCSs ) can be imaged while they interact with proteins if the CCS and the protein are labelled with different fluorophores . As most proteins can be labelled with enhanced green fluorescent protein ( EGFP ) , we labelled CCSs with a clathrin - light - chain - a – DsRed fusion protein ( clathrin – DsRed ) and isolated a Swiss 3T3 cell line that stably expresses the construct . Similarly to EGFP – clathrin - light - chain - a 19 and DsRed – clathrin - light - chain - a 20 , clathrin – DsRed had a punctate distribution ( Fig . 1a ) . When we immunolabelled the adaptor pro - tein , AP2 , another marker of CCSs ( Fig . 1b , green ) , AP2 and clathrin – DsRed colocalized precisely ( Fig . 1c ) . When small circles were drawn around all AP2 - positive spots and the circles were trans - ferred into the red image ( data not shown ; also see ref . 21 ) , all but 2 . 1 ± 0 . 9 % of the green spots colocalized with a red spot ( n = 5 cells , > 150 spots each ) . To test whether red - labelled CCSs mediate endo - cytosis , the endocytic uptake of biotinylated transferrin ( Tf ) was measured by enzyme - linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ; Fig . 1d ) . Tf binds to Tf receptors ( TfRs ) , which undergo AP2 - and clathrin - mediated endocytosis 22 , 23 . Endocytosis was unaffected by the pres - ence of clathrin – DsRed ( Fig . 1d ) . As all AP2 - containing coated pits also contained clathrin – DsRed , coated pits labelled with clathrin – DsRed in vivo must mediate normal endocytosis . To visualize the internalization of single coated pits , we acquired video clips in which images taken under epifluorescence illumina - tion alternated with images taken under EF illumination . Whereas epifluorescence floods the entire cell with excitation light , EF illu - mination only reaches an approximately 100 - nm - thick layer imme - diately adjacent to the cover glass . Thus , EF illuminates only the most superficial layer of cytosol where a cell adheres tightly to a coverslip , leaving deeper regions in the dark 24 , 25 . Cells stably expressing EGFP – β - actin were transfected with clathrin – DsRed . Under epifluorescence ( Fig . 2a ) , individual CCSs are clearly distin - guishable in the cell periphery , but populate the perinuclear region so densely that their fluorescence coalesces . Under EF , fewer CCSs are observed , the perinuclear region is not illuminated and clathrin fluorescence is punctate throughout the cell ( Fig . 2b ) . In Fig . 2c , EF images of clathrin – DsRed and EGFP – β - actin are merged . CCSs are © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 4 SEPTEMBER 2002 www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 692 seen sprinkled among short stress fibres . CCSs labelled with clathrin – DsRed behaved similarly to those observed in earlier work 19 , where they were labelled with EGFP – clathrin light chain a . We observed semi - permanent clathrin - coated patches that seemed to function as sites for succes - sive vesicle budding events ( data not shown ) and also smaller and dimmer spots that appeared and then disappeared after 1 – 2 min . As shown previously 19 , several such events could occur in succes - sion at the same endocytic ‘hot spot’ ( data not shown ) . Our aim was to observe single clathrin - coated pits . As the smallest clathrin structures are the most likely to represent single coated pits , they comprise the focus of this study . Detecting internalization of coated pits . Next , we followed a small CCS under both epifluorescence and EF illumination ( Fig . 3a ) . Under epifluorescence , the structure remained stationary for 90 s , then moved laterally and ultimately dimmed . As dimming occurred while the structure was in focus ( Fig . 3a , Epi ) , it presumably indi - cates the loss of a clathrin coat . Under EF illumination , the same structure dimmed 40 s earlier ( Fig . 3a , EF ) . As the early dimming cannot represent a loss of clathrin , the structure must have moved out of the evanescent field , and hence retreated from the coverslip . Because the plasma membrane continued to adhere to the coverslip ( see Fig . 4g ) , dimming under EF represents departure of the CCS from the plasma membrane and its movement into the cytosol . For analysis , background fluorescence was subtracted and the fluorescence intensity of each spot was plotted against time ( Fig . 4 ) . Under epifluorescence illumination ( Fig . 4a ) the spot dimmed later than under EF illumination ( Fig . 4b ) . As the intensity of illumina - tion is highly dependent on the distance from the plasma mem - brane under EF , but not under epifluorescence , changes in the flu - orescence ratio of EF : epifluorescence indicate movement in a direc - tion vertical to the plasma membrane ( Fig . 4c ) . To calibrate changes in the EF : epifluorescence ratio ( right ordinate ) , we recall that the intensity of the evanescent field grows exponentially with proximity to the plasma membrane , changing 2 . 72 - fold for every 50 nm ( see Methods ) . Judged by the decline of the EF : epifluores - cence ratio ( Fig . 4c ) , the structure retreated from the plasma mem - brane at a velocity of approximately 4 nm s − 1 . In a minority of cases ( 11 out of 52 events ) , CCSs vanished simultaneously under both EF and epifluorescence illumination ; evidently , in these cases the clathrin coat was lost before any vertical movement occurred . We needed an objective method to recognize ‘departure events’ , defined as EF recordings in which CCSs disappear abruptly after a period when the fluorescence varies only slowly . Thus , we screened a large number of EF recordings . Fluorescence traces were fitted with a straight - line segment followed by a declining exponential ( Fig . 4b , continuous line ) and the parameters providing the best least - squares fit were determined . In addition to providing objec - tive selection criteria ( see Methods ) , the fit determined the ‘time of departure’ , a time origin where the straight line joined the expo - nential decline . Next , events were aligned to the time of departure . Twenty - four events were averaged ( Fig . 4e , filled circles ) ; all were genuine retreats from the plasma membrane , as judged by the EF : epifluorescence ratio ( Fig . 4e , red line ) . 10 µ m B i o t i n – T f up t a k e ( ab s o r ban c e un i t s ) a b c 0 5 10 15 Time ( min ) 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 d Figure 1 DsRed - labelled clathrin - coated structures mediate endocytosis . a – c , Swiss 3T3 cells stably expressing clathrin – DsRed were fixed and immunola - belled with an antibody against α - adaptin ( green ) , a subunit of the AP2 complex . Confocal images were focused on the bottom surface of the cell where the cell adhered to a glass coverslip . a , clathrin , b , anti - AP2 , c , merged image . d , Uptake of biotinylated Tf as a function of time in normal 3T3 cells ( filled circles ) and in the cell line expressing clathrin – DsRed ( open circles ) . The uptake at 0 min represents background . Experiments were performed in triplicate experiments . Error bars indi - cate the standard error . a b c 10 µ m Figure 2 Three ways to image live 3T3 cells . a , b , A live cell showing clathrin – DsRed fluorescence imaged by epifluorescence ( a ) and 1 s later by EF illu - mination ( b ) . c , Actin fluorescence ( green ) was imaged under EF illumination simul - taneously with clathrin – DsRed fluorescence ( b , see Methods ) before the images were superimposed . The objective lens was focused on the interface between the glass coverslip and the adhering cell . The white box surrounds the coated pit imaged at higher magnification in Fig . 3 . Images were generated from an EGFP – β - actin - expressing cell line transfected with clathrin – DsRed . © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 4 SEPTEMBER 2002 www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 693 Analysis of individual events showed that there was variability in the behaviour of CCSs . In general , CCSs brightened slowly under epifluorescence for some time before departure , suggesting a peri - od of continued clathrin recruitment . In some cases , EF fluores - cence also increased slowly over this period ( for example , Fig . 5b ) , whereas it declined in others . On average , our observations suggest that the EF : epifluorescence ratio declined gently before departure , while the average EF signal did not ( Fig . 4e ) . This behaviour is con - sistent with a planar patch bulging upwards to form a coated pit as clathrin is recruited ( for an example , see ref . 26 ; see also Fig . 7a , b ) . One possible explanation for the data in Fig . 4b , c and e is that the CCS did not actually move relative to the plasma membrane , but instead was raised upwards as the attached plasma membrane lifted off the coverslip . To examine this , cells stably expressing clathrin – DsRed were transfected with EGFP and observed under EF illumination . Under these conditions , red punctae ( as observed in Fig . 2b ) appeared superimposed on a featureless green fluores - cence of free EGFP in the cytosol ( data not shown ) . Departures were identified and the fluorescence of CCSs was plotted against time in conjunction with EGFP fluorescence at the same site . Results were analysed in the same manner as the data in Fig . 4e ( black traces ) , except that no local background was subtracted . If the plasma membrane lifted off the coverslip then it should also raise the cytosol . Therefore , in regions where CCSs dim , EGFP flu - orescence should dim equally . Instead , EGFP fluorescence remained constant ( Fig . 4g ) . We conclude that CCSs retreat from the plasma membrane as they move out of the evanescent field . Actin assembly accompanies internalization . To examine possible changes in the actin cytoskeleton during the internalization of a CCS , we simultaneously observed β - actin and clathrin – DsRed . EGFP – β - actin is widely used as a probe for native β - actin 27 . It inte - grates into known β - actin structures in 3T3 and HeLa cells 27 – 29 , colocalizes with fluorescent phalloidin 27 , 28 and , as is the case with β - actin , can be induced to polymerize and depolymerize repeated - ly 30 . We raised a cell line that stably expresses EGFP – β - actin under the control of the β - actin promoter 27 and examined endocytosis by measuring the endocytic uptake of biotinylated Tf by ELISA ( as in Fig . 1d ) . Endocytosis was diminished 2 . 5 - fold relative to the average wild - type cell , suggesting that a degree of inhibition occurs ( data not shown ) . However , individual fibroblasts differ in their rates of endocytosis . The slowed rate of endocytosis may have been a trait of the single cell that was propogated to make the stable cell line . This trait may not apply to EGFP – β - actin - expressing cells in general . In a further experiment , HeLa cells were transiently transfected with our EGFP – β - actin construct and a fluorescence - activated cell sorter ( FACS ) was used both to identify the cells expressing EGFP – β - actin and to compare their uptake of Cy - 5 - labelled human Tf with that in the non - fluorescent cells . Uptake was equal in both populations , whereas expression of the inhibitory dynamin mutant dynamin 1 K44A – EGFP halved uptake ( L . W . , unpublished observations ) . Thus , we conclude that EGFP – β - actin does not Epi EF – 72 s 2 s 6 s 10 s 18 s 38 s 58 s a b 1 µ m Figure 3 Internalization of a clathrin - coated pit is accompanied by recruit - ment of actin . Expanded views of the white box from Fig . 2 are shown . a , A time - sequence of clathrin – DsRed fluorescence imaged under both epifluorescence ( top ) and EF illumination ( middle ) . b , green fluorescence image of EGFP – actin taken under EF illumination at the same times as the EF images shown in a . Times at the bottom refer to the moment of departure defined in Fig . 4b . The full - image sequence of this event is shown in Supplementary Information , Movie S1 . d – 90 – 60 – 30 0 30 60 0 100 200 300 Time ( s ) – 90 – 60 – 30 0 30 60 Time ( s ) – 90 – 60 – 30 0 30 60 Time ( s ) – 90 – 60 – 30 0 30 60 Time ( s ) 0 50 100 0 50 100 EF : Epi EF Epi EF 0 2 0 50100 Distance ( nm ) 1 a b c f g Time ( s ) P e r c e n t age f l uo r e s c en c e P e r c en t age f l uo r e sc en c e – 60 – 30 0 30 60 Time ( s ) – 60 – 30 0 30 60 Time ( s ) – 60 – 90 – 90 – 90 – 30 0 30 60 406080100 T r a v e l ( n m ) 0 50 100 0 25 50 75 100 125 e 0 25 50 75 100 125 E F : ep i pe r c en t age Figure 4 Actin recruitment and other events during internalization of coated pits . a , b , Fluorescence intensity of a CCS observed under epifluorescence ( a ) and EF ( b ) . The continuous line in b is the best fit of a straight line followed by an expo - nential decline ( see Methods ) . c , The trace in b divided by the trace in a measures the proximity between the CCS and the plasma membrane . The right - hand ordinate gives the distance over which the CCS moved into the cytosol , assuming that its fluorescence intensity under EF is proportional to the intensity of the EF , and that the EF intensity falls e - fold over 50 nm from the coverslip . d , Actin fluorescence at the site of the CCS . A portion of the fluorescence shown is present throughout ; this portion is caused in part , or entirely , by our method of analysis , which systematical - ly underestimates the local background ( see Methods ) . e , An average of 24 events in 12 cells , as in b and d . Filled circles represent clathrin . Results for each event were normalized to the mean fluorescence during the last 20 s before departure , aligned to the time of departure and then averaged . The red trace shows the ratio of EF : epifluorescence calculated from the clathrin signal , normalized , aligned and averaged as above . Open circles represent actin . Results for each event were nor - malized to the mean of three contiguous intensity values , including the peak value , then aligned to the time of departure and finally averaged . Peak fluorescence of actin is less than 100 % because not all actin plumes reach peak fluorescence at the same time . f , Lateral movement during 4 - s intervals . CCSs were observed under epifluorescence and their movements tracked until their fluorescence first fell below 70 % of the average over a reference period ( − 40 s to − 10 s before depar - ture ) . All CCSs used in e and f were included , except for the five most mobile structures with average values > 0 . 8 µ m during the reference period . g , EGFP fluo - rescence ( red circles ) during the departure of CCSs ( black circles ) , observed under EF illumination . Departure events were identified and processed as in the Methods ; green fluorescence was normalized , as described in e for clathrin . The fluores - cence outside each cell was subtracted as background . Because the value thus subtracted is less than the local background , clathrin fluorescence declines less completely than in b and e . Data are from 50 events in 14 cells . Traces in a – f are from an EGFP – β - actin - expressing cell line transfected with clathrin – DsRed ; traces in g are from a clathrin – DsRed - expressing cell line transfected with EGFP . © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 4 SEPTEMBER 2002 www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 694 block , and may not even inhibit , endocytosis in 3T3 fibroblasts . Next , EGFP – β - actin - expressing cells were transfected with clathrin – DsRed . Spots of clathrin – DsRed were scattered among short stress fibres and among spots of actin fluorescence that were not obviously related to clathrin ( Fig . 2c ) . When a single clathrin spot was followed , its dimming under EF illumination coincided with a transient increase in actin fluorescence at the same site ( Fig . 3b ; also see Supplementary Information , Movie S1 ) . Evidently , actin is first recruited and then released while a CCS moves into the cytosol ( Fig . 4d ) . Actin fluorescence was as bright as the adjacent stress fibres representing bundles of actin filaments . Thus , we sug - gest that the actin spots observed in Fig . 3b represent actin fila - ments that polymerized as the spot brightened and depolymerized as it dimmed . Interestingly , the actin signal sometimes seemed to start some 100 – 200 nm off - centre , relative to the clathrin spot ( data not shown ) , and moved towards or even across the spot . The data set used in Figs 2 – 4 included 13 cells , yielding 52 events that qualified as departures . In 41 of these events ( 79 % ) , the epifluorescence reading did not strongly diminish , and hence the dimming under EF represents a genuine retreat from the plasma membrane . Transient recruitment of an actin plume accompanied 80 % of these events . The few departure events that occurred in the absence of an actin plume may be related to previous findings that F - actin is not absolutely required for clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis 17 , 18 . When fluorescence traces from retreating CCSs were aligned to the point of departure and then averaged ( Fig . 4e ) , it appeared that the retreat was generally accompanied by transient actin recruitment . When actin fluorescence traces were aligned to their peak , the average duration of an individual actin transient was about 20 s at half maximal amplitude ( data not shown ) . The retreat of CCSs is also accompanied by an increase in their lateral mobility , measured here as the distance moved laterally in suc - cessive 4 - s segments . After departure , mobility more than doubled ; the effect is underestimated here because the mobility of different vesicles increased at different times . Before departure , CCSs are sta - tionary . The mean squared displacement of the events analysed in Fig . 4f represents a lateral diffusion coefficient of only 70 nm 2 s − 1 , close to the limit of our ability to detect motion . Dynamin recruitment precedes departure . We tested for the recruitment of dynamin - 1 , a neuronal isoform whose only known function is in endocytosis . Cells expressing clathrin – DsRed were transfected with dynamin 1 – EGFP 15 . In a FACS - based assay , expres - sion of dynamin 1 – EGFP did not influence the uptake of Cy - 5 - labelled human Tf in Hela cells ( L . W . , unpublished observations ) . CCSs and dynamin fluorescence were observed under EF illumina - tion ( Fig . 5a ; also see Supplementary Information , Movie S2 ) . Punctate dynamin fluorescence was observed both at sites of CCSs and elsewhere on the cell . Most CCSs continuously showed dim and fluctuating dynamin fluorescence , however the fluorescence brightened strongly and transiently before departure . Dynamin and clathrin fluorescence was plotted against time ( Fig . 5b ) and average results were also plotted ( Fig . 5c ) . In some cases , possibly futile episodes of dynamin recruitment occurred before departure . In others ( 5 of 34 ) , recruitment occurred once departure was underway . Such late recruitment of dynamin was responsible for a second small peak ( Fig . 5c , arrow ) . It seemed possible that once recruited , dynamin was not actual - ly released , but instead dimmed as it was carried into the cytosol by the retreating CCS . If so , the fluorescence ratio of dynamin : clathrin should remain high and constant while dynamin dims . Instead , the fluorescence ratio declined , albeit somewhat less completely than the dynamin signal itself ( Fig . 5d ) . Although some dynamin may have moved into the cytosol together with vesicles , evidently most was released . Fig . 5d also corrects for a distortion introduced in Fig . 5c because dynamin fluorescence peaked at slightly different times in different events . The duration of the dynamin signal was approx - imately 8 s at half maximal amplitude . Finally , we replotted fluorescence traces for the actin ( Figs . 4E ) – 75 – 50 – 25 0 25 50 75 0 100 200 300 F l uo r e sc en c e ( a r b i t r a r y un i t s ) Time ( s ) Clathrin Dynamin Clathrin Dynamin – 74 – 16 – 6 0 30 Time ( s ) a b – 90 – 60 – 30 0 30 60 0 50 100 F l uo r e sc en c e ( pe r c en t age ) P e r c en t age o f m a x i m u m c d Time ( s ) Time ( s ) – 60 0 50 100 – 30 0 30 1 µ m Figure 5 Recruitment of dynamin . a , Images of a CCS ( upper ) and dynamin fluo - rescence ( lower ) under EF illumination . The CCS dims , as in Fig . 3 , and dimming is preceded by transient recruitment of dynamin . The full image - sequence of this event is shown in Supplementary Information , Movie S2 . b , Clathrin ( filled circles ) and dynamin fluorescence ( open circles ) in a plotted against time . c , 34 events in 9 cells were aligned to the time of departure , normalized and averaged , as in Fig . 4e . d , The ratio of dynamin : clathrin fluorescence ( filled circles ) was calculated for pairs of dynamin and clathrin traces , as in b . Calculation of the ratio was stopped when the clathrin fluorescence fell by more than 75 % because the diminishing denomina - tor made later values too noisy . The results for individual events were aligned to the time of peak dynamin fluorescence , normalized to their peak value and averaged . Open circles represent dynamin fluorescence traces aligned as above , normalized to their peak and then averaged . We included all events in c , provided that dynamin fluorescence reached its peak < 30 s before and < 20 s after departure ( 23 events in 8 cells ) . © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 4 SEPTEMBER 2002 www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 695 and dynamin experiments ( Fig . 5c ) on the same abscissa ( Fig . 6a , b ) . The results for clathrin were similar in both sets of experi - ments , but the recruitment of dynamin occurred significantly before that of actin . We wanted to test whether the constructs used in this study slowed departure . In particular , it seemed possible that the simulta - neous presence of two chromophores ( DsRed and EGFP ) at the endocytic site slowed internalization by sterically interfering with the endocytic machinery in the small reaction volume beneath a coated structure . To examine this , cells expressing clathrin – DsRed were transfected with EGFP ( which is unlikely to interact specifi - cally with the endocytic machinery ) and with human TfR attached to EGFP on the extracellular side ( where it cannot interfere with cytosolic reactions ) . Departure events were identified and analysed as in the Methods ( data not shown ) , except that the restriction on the time constant of departure was lifted . The time constants were 19 . 0 ± 1 . 9 s for EGFP ( median 16 s ; n = 62 , 14 cells ) and 14 . 9 ± 2 . 0 s for TfR – EGFP ( median 10 s ; n = 57 , 14 cells ) . Next , we re - examined the data sets in Figs 4 and 5 . When we added events previously excluded because of their long time constants , the aver - age time constants were 16 . 3 ± 2 . 3 s ( median 10 s ; n = 61 , 18 cells ) for EGFP – β - actin and 16 . 0 ± 2 . 0 s ( median 12 s ; n = 58 , 10 cells ) for dynamin 1 – EGFP . Neither value is significantly slower than the value for TfR – EGFP or EGFP alone . Discussion Endocytosis culminates in the separation of a coated pit from the plasma membrane and its movement into the cytosol . Here , we observed single CCSs during endocytosis in fibroblasts . After remaining stationary for tens of seconds , CCSs recruit and rapidly release dynamin before departing and then into the cytosol at a few nanometres per second . This movement is slow , perhaps because it is opposed by a dense cytoskeleton that tends to hold CCSs in place 19 . Nonetheless , in 30 – 60 s , CCSs retreat from the plasma membrane by 100 nm or more , approximately the diameter of a clathrin - coated vesicle in fibroblasts . Subsequently , CCSs uncoat . Because the movement observed here occurs between dynamin recruitment and the uncoating of clathrin - coated vesicles —two key events in clathrin - mediated endocytosis — this movement is almost certainly related to a late step in endocytosis . Fig . 7 relates the signals observed here ( Fig . 6 ) to structures observed in electron micrographs . The figure shows a relatively flat coated patch that changes into a coated pit with a narrow neck ( Fig . 7a , b ) . In electron micrographs , the structure in Fig . 7a is two to three times more abundant than the structure in Fig . 7b 26 , 31 . Although not reliably detected in our assay , the transition between the two structures may have caused the small and gentle decline of the EF : epifluorescence ratio in Fig . 4e before the final and more rapid departure of the CCS . Next , dynamin is recruited transiently ( Fig . 7c ) . This may ( Fig . 7d1 ) or may not ( Fig . 7d2 ) result in fission . Electron micro - graphs show that dynamin assembles in a ring or spiral around the neck of invaginated clathrin - coated pits , but only when the dynamin reaction cycle is arrested , either by treatment with the slowly hydrolysable GTP analogue GTP - γ S 32 or through expression of the defective dynamin mutant shibire 33 . The fact that dynamin fails to appear in electron micrographs taken under more physio - logical conditions suggests that it is only briefly present at an endo - cytic site 33 . Our results confirm this by direct observation . Next , actin is recruited near the vesicle through polymerization into filaments . Actin is most abundant while the CCS moves into the cytosol . The CCS may move either as a coated vesicle ( Fig . 7e1 ) , or as coated pit at the end of a lengthening neck ( Fig . 7e2 ) that ulti - mately snaps ( Fig . 7f ) . The structures represented in Fig . 7e1 are abundant in serial sections of 3T3 cells fixed while the cells resumed endocytosis at 37 ° C after a period of block at 4 ° C ( ref . 34 ) . Long necks are also observed when endocytosis is inhibit - ed by defective dynamin 31 or by other means 32 . Otherwise , they are rarely observed in single - section electron micrographs of normal cells . Finally , vesicles shed their coats ( Fig . 7g ) . Our results do not reveal when the coated pit separates from the plasma membrane to become a coated vesicle . If dynamin func - tions as a mechano - enzyme to mediate fission 3 , 32 , 33 ( reviewed in refs 4 and 35 ) , this step may have occurred during the burst of dynamin recruitment , just before the time of departure . However , it has also been argued that dynamin itself does not mediate fission , but instead triggers another scission - mediating effector 36 , possibly actin . Discussions have frequently invoked a role for actin in endo - cytosis . However , to date , there has been no direct evidence that actin actually appears near CCSs during endocytosis . Our results show that actin is recruited specifically at endocytic sites at precise - ly the time when CCSs begin their movement into the cytosol . These results were obtained under near - physiological conditions and without attempts to stimulate cells in any way . The vast major - ity of coated structures recruited actin as they moved . The fact that actin plumes rarely appear in electron micrographs 34 may be a result of their brief presence and / or because they may be missed in single sections of clathrin - coated structures . An important question concerns the role of actin recruitment . The actin plume may represent a local condensation of the cytoskeleton , but this would tend to suppress motion of CCSs and contrasts with our observations ( Fig . 4 ) . Alternatively , an actin plume may represent the end - on view of a filament bundle grow - ing inward from the plasma membrane ; such bundles could func - tion as tracks along which myosin - VI pulls clathrin - coated pits or vesicles into the cytosol 37 . Another idea recalls the finding that macropinosomes trigger actin polymerization as they separate from the plasma mem - brane 11 , and that macropinosomes and other endocytosis - related vesicles propel themselves through cells by actin polymeriza - tion 12 – 14 . In the most detailed version of this hypothesis 9 , dynamin assembles around the neck of a clathrin - coated pit , from where it ignites local actin polymerization through intermediary proteins , F l uo r e sc en c e ( pe r c en t age ) F l uo r e sc en c e ( pe r c en t age ) – 90 – 60 – 30 0 30 60 0 20 40 60 80 Time ( s ) – 90 – 60 – 30 0 30 60 Time ( s ) 0 40 80 a b Clathrin Actin Dynamin Figure 6 Dynamin and actin are recruited sequentially . a , Traces for clathrin were re - plotted from Fig . 4e ( open circles ) and Fig . 5c ( filled circles ) . b , Traces for dynamin were re - plotted from Fig . 5c ( filled circles ) and for actin from Fig . 4e ( open circles ) . © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 4 SEPTEMBER 2002 www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 696 such as syndapin and NWasp . Actin polymerization pushes the coated pit away from the membrane , thereby stretching the neck until it snaps . Indeed , in one study 34 , coated structures appear at the end of long necks surrounded by filamentous material that may be actin . However , our data are equally consistent with a model in which actin polymerization pushes a vesicle that is already detached through the dense cytocortex and into the cytosol . In this model , actin polymerization may still be coordinated by dynamin . In either case , a relationship between dynamin and actin - based motility is supported by findings that actin comet tails also contain dynamin - 2 when they propel vesicles in cells over - expressing PIPK 15 , 16 . In fact , the second phase of dynamin recruitment that is sometimes observed after departure of a CCS ( Fig . 5c , arrow ) may represent recruitment of dynamin - 1 to regions where actin powers transport . The approach outlined here allows one to determine , at submi - cron resolution , the sequence in which proteins are recruited to dis - crete sites on the plasma membrane . It may be generally useful for exploring events near the plasma membrane that involve cascades of protein interactions . Examples include exocytosis , the function of caveolae , and signal transduction in lipid rafts or other discrete regions of the plasma membrane . Methods Constructs and cells Full - length mouse clathrin light chain ( mLCa ) was amplified from EGFP – mLCa 19 using the Expand High Fidelity PCR system ( Boehringer Mannheim , Mannheim , Germany ) and the following primers : forward 5 ′ GCGCGAATTCTATGGCCGAGTTGGATCCATTCG ( Eco RI site underlined ) , reverse 5 ′ GCGCGGTACCAAGTGCACCAGGGGGGCCTGCT ( Kpn I site underlined ) . The resulting PCR prod - uct was cloned directly into pDsRed - N1 ( Clontech , BD Bioscience , Palo Alto , CA ) using the Eco RI and Kpn I sites to produce mLCa - DsRed ( clathrin – DsRed ) . EGFP – mLCa was a gift from J . Keen 19 . Dynamin 1 – EGFP and dynamin 1 K44A – EGFP were a gift from P . de Camilli 15 . EGFP – β - actin was a gift from B . Imhoff 27 . Human TfR – EGFP was a gift from M . Silverman 38 . Stocks of Swiss 3T3 cells were maintained in 10 - cm Petri dishes ( Nalge Nunc , Rochester , NY ) at 5 % CO 2 in DMEM ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) supplemented with 10 % foetal calf serum ( FCS ) . For trans - fection , cells were grown to 60 % confluence and transfected with 20 µ g plasmid DNA using Lipofectamine ( Invitrogen ) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions . Stable cell lines expressing either EGFP – β - actin or clathrin – DsRed were selected by adding 800 µ gml − 1 geneticin ( Invitrogen ) until colonies had clearly formed . We selected the two cell lines in which the constructs were expressed in the highest proportion of cells ( > 90 % for EGFP – β - actin in clone EGFP – β - actin / 3T3 / number2 and > 90 % for clathrin – DsRed in clone mLCa - DsRed / 3T3 / number9 ) . Cells were maintained in 10 - cm Petri dishes in medium containing 400 µ gml − 1 geneticin . Cells stably expressing EGFP – β - actin were transiently transfected as above with clathrin – DsRed and cells stably expressing clathrin – DsRed were transfected with dynamin 1 – EGFP . Cells were allowed to recover for 2h in DMEM as above and then detached from culture dishes with trypsin - EDTA . They were replated on high - refractive - index coverslips at a density of 1 . 5 × 10 5 cm − 2 . Coverslips were placed in 6 - well plates and allowed to adhere overnight . Next , coverslips were washed three times in imaging buffer ( 135mM sodium chloride , 5mM potassium chloride , 1 . 8mM calcium chloride , 1mM D - ( + ) - glucose , 2 . 5 % FCS and 20mM HEPES at pH7 . 4 ) and then mounted in the imaging chamber in 1 . 5ml of buffer . A single coverslip was imaged for up to 45 – 60min . To prevent evaporation , the imaging chamber was enclosed beneath a sealed cover . All imaging was performed at 27 – 28 ° C . Endocytosis proceeds efficientlyat this temperature , albeit at a reduced rate 39 . Fluorescence microscopy Cells plated on glass coverslips of high refractive index ( n 488 = 1 . 80 ; Plan Optik , Elsoff , Germany ) were viewed with an inverted microscope ( IX - 70 ; Olympus America , Melville , NY ) through a 1 . 65NA objective ( Apo × 100 O HR , Olympus ) . The objective was coupled to the coverslip using a high refrac - tive index immersion fluid of di - idomethane doped with sulphur ( n 488 = 1 . 81 ; Cargille Laboratories , Cedar Grove , NJ ) . The microscope was modified to allow both epifluorescence and through - the - objec - tive EF illumination 24 , 25 . For EF illumination , the expanded beam ( 488nm ) of an argon krypton laser was filtered ( 488 / 568 DBX ; Chroma , Brattelboro , VT ) and used to excite both EGFP and DsRed . The beam was focused at an off - axis position in the back focal plane of the objective . After entering the coverslip , light underwent total internal reflection as it struck the interface between the glass and the solution or cell at a glancing angle . Total internal reflection generates an evanescent field that declines exponentially with increasing distance from the interface , depending on the angle at which light strikes the interface . To measure this angle , a hemicylinder ( length 10mm , diameter 10mm ) was placed flat - side - down atop the objective , centred and coupled with immersion fluid , as above . The hemicylinder had the same refractive index as the coverslip so that light passed into it at the same angle . Light left the prism at an angle of 59 ° . Given the refractive indices of cytosol ( n = 1 . 37 ) and glass ( n = 1 . 80 ) , and the measured angle , the evanescent field is expected to decline by a factor e = 2 . 72 over a distance of 50 nm . For epifluorescence illumination , light from a xenon arc - lamp ( Polychrome II monochromator , TILL Photonics , Grafelfing , Germany ) was coupled into the microscope through an 80 : 20 silvered mir - ror set at a 45 ° angle in the laser beam . The mirror passed 20 % of the laser light and 80 % of the monochromator light into the microscope . Laser and monochromatic light were applied through independent electronic shutters ( Vincent Associates , Rochester , NY ) that were driven by the camera TTL output with custom - built circuitry . Light was directed to the objective by a custom dichroic mir - ror ( Chroma ) with reflection bands at 488 and 568nm that transmit at 502 – 557nm and again at wavelengths > 595nm . For simultaneous imaging of red and green fluorescence , an image splitter ( Multispec Micro - Imager ; Optical Insights , Santa Fe , NM ) divided the red and green components of the images with a 565 - nm dichroic mirror ( Q565 ; Chroma ) and passed the red component through a 585 - nm longpass Time a b c d1 d2 e1 e2 f g Figure 7 Fluorescence changes and endocytic structures . Arrows indicate the relationship between possible intermediates in endocytosis and the fluorescence changes shown schematically below . Schematic representations of the structures seen in electron micrographs are shown ( top ) . The continuous black line represents the plasma membrane , light blue represents the cytosol and the thick red line rep - resents the clathrin coat . The dark blue dot in c represents dynamin , green crosses in d – f represent short actin filaments . d1 , d2 and e1 , e2 represent alternative sce - narios that are not distinguished in our experiments . The bottom panel is a schematic representation of the results in Figs 4e and 6 , showing fluorescence of clathrin ( red line ) , clathrin EF : epifluorescence ratio ( dashed red line ) , dynamin ( blue line ) and actin ( green line ) . The vertical dashed line indicates the time of departure . © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 4 SEPTEMBER 2002 www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 697 filter ( 585 - nm AELP ; Omega Optical , Bratellboro , VT ) and the green component through a 525 – 575 - nm bandpass filter ( HQ525 / 50 ; Chroma ) . The images were then projected side - by - side onto a back - illuminated CCD camera ( Roper Scientific , Trenton , NJ ) . Each cell was imaged using MetaMorph ( Universal Imaging , Downingtown , PA ) for up to 13min with 0 . 5 - s exposures at 0 . 5Hz when illumi - nated under EF only , or 7min at 1Hz when EF - and epifluorescence - illumination alternated . Up to five cells were imaged on each cover glass . At the end of each acquisition session , we took an alignment image showing densely scattered 0 . 2 - µ m fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) - conjugated beads ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) . They were visible in both the green and red channels , and thus pro - vided markers in the x – y plane . Image analysis Stacks of alternating EF and epifluorescence images were de - interleaved into separate stacks . EF stacks were analysed for candidate clathrin CCSs that disappeared and seemed likely to represent single clathrin - coated pits . Structures were excluded if they were large ( > 0 . 5 µ m ) , if they became oblong at any time , if they arose through a merge of structures or gave rise to budding structures , or if they showed extensive lateral movement . We marked the position of each candidate and selected a 5 µ m × 5 µ m region in the alignment image that was approximately centred on the CCS . The conju - gate green region in the alignment image was identified and shifted in x and y directions until the red and green bead images were superimposed . This procedure yielded the coordinates of the CCS in both the red and green channels , so that red and green regions ( 5 µ m × 5 µ m ) precisely centred on the CCS could be excised and stored as ministacks for analysis . Although we selected CCSs with little lateral movement , the CCSs were not completely stationary , especially while they dimmed . To allow for this , we tracked their position under EF illumination using Metamorph software , and obtained a list of x and y coordinates as a function of time . In experiments with EGFP – β - actin - expressing cells , we based the last coordinates on epifluorescence images . We switched to epifluorescence images two frames before either the CCS under EF had dimmed to less than about a quarter of its initial value , or the tracking algorithm failed , whichever occurred first . The coordinates were used by a program written in Matlab to excise another ministack showing 5 µ m × 5 µ m regions ( for both red and green channels ) that remained centred on the CCS , even while the CCS moved . A circle of 0 . 9 - µ m diameter was drawn around the CCS and the average fluorescence intensity within was calculated . This was also performed for the corresponding region in the green image . The intensities in the 0 . 9 - µ m circles were corrected for background and plotted against time for both red and green channels . To estimate the local background , we calculated the mean fluorescence in concen - tric annuli of 3 . 5 - µ m outer diameter for both red and green channels . Fluorescence thresholds were selected by eye — one for red , the other for green — to identify other CCS ( red ) , or other actin and dynamin structures ( green ) . Regions containing such structures were excluded from the background measurement if they exceeded the threshold . Because the method selects against areas with high fluo - rescence , it systematically underestimates the local background . However , it was the only practical method in which the background remained bright and structured , as in images of actin . For the red image , the resulting graph plotted the brightness of the candidate CCS as it dimmed with time . An initial estimate for the time of dimming was made by searching for the smallest time - derivative . We then fitted a straight line to the section of the trace that preceded dimming and a declining exponential to the remainder . The fit was optimized by varying the slope and vertical posi - tion of the line , the amplitude , time constant and asymptote of the exponential function , and the time when the line met the exponential ( for example , see Fig . 4 ) . This time was taken as the ‘moment of departure’ and used for aligning traces from different CCSs . The fitting procedure also yielded an objective basis for selecting candidate events . We accepted events if : first , they were visible at least 90s before departure ; second , their fluorescence in that time varied by < 50 % ; third , the exponential declined to less than 25 % of its maximal value ; fourth , the decline had a time - constant of < 30s ; fifth , the variance of the fluorescence intensity around the fitted curves was < 20 % of the amplitude of the exponential . When the CCS was imaged with both EF and epifluorescence , we ensured that the CCS remained distinctly visible under both illumination methods for the duration examined . Immunocytochemistry Cells expressing clathrin – DsRed grown on coverslips were fixed in 2 % formaldehyde at room tempera - ture for 40min and then washed three times in PBS . They were then permeabilized in blocking buffer ( 3 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) , 10 % normal goat serum ( NGS ) and 0 . 5 % Triton - X100 in PBS ) at room temperature for 15min . Samples were incubated overnight at 4 ° C with a monoclonal antibody against α - adaptin ( MA1 - 064 ; Affinity BioReagents , Golden , CO ) at 1 : 200 dilution in blocking buffer . Cells were washed four times for 10min each in PBS containing 0 . 2 % BSA and 0 . 1 % Triton - X100and then incubated for 30min at room temperature with Alexa - 488 - conjugated goat anti - rabbit IgG ( H + L ) , F ( Ab ′ ) 2 fragment ( A - 11070 ; Molecular Probes ) diluted 1 : 1000 in blocking buffer . Cell samples were washed again and mounted on a glass slide for observation under a Biorad MRC 1000 confocal microscope . A Nikon PlanApo 60 × , NA 1 . 4 objectivewas used to focus on the interface between the cell and the coverslip . Five cells were excited at 568nm to image clathrin – DsRed , and at 488nm to image adaptin . Images were analysed in Metamorph . Adaptin - positive dots in the cell periphery were enclosed by 0 . 85 - µ m diameter circles and counted . The circles were then transferred to the red image to determine the proportion that contained a spot of clathrin – DsRed . Measuring endocytosis by ELISA The endocytic uptake of Tf was measured as described 22 with the modifications described below . Wild - type and stably transfected Swiss 3T3 cells were plated on 12 - well culture plates at a density of 4 . 4 × 10 5 cells per well . To remove cell - surface - bound transferrin , cells were incubated with serum - free DMEM ( SFM ) containing 1 % BSA and 20mM HEPES at pH7 . 4 . Next , 0 . 2ml of cold SFM containing 10mgml − 1 biotin – mouse Tf ( bio – mTf ) was added to each well for 40min on ice to allow binding . Endocytosis was started by warming to 37 ° C and stopped by cooling on ice . To remove extracellular bio – mTf , cells were treated with avidin ( Sigma , St Louis , MO ) and then with biocytin ( Sigma ) . Cells in each well were lysed in 0 . 3ml blocking buffer ( 1 % BSA , 1 % Triton - X100 , 0 . 1 % SDS , 1mM EDTA , 50 mM sodium chloride and 10mM Tris - HCl at pH7 . 5 ) . To measure levels of intracellular bio – mTf , cell lysate was loaded into a 96 - well ELISA plate ( Fisher Scientific , Pittsburgh , PA ) coated with an anti - Tf antibody ( 0 . 2 µ g per well ; ICN , Costa Mesa , CA ) and incubated overnight at 4 ° C . In addition , 100 µ l streptavidin – horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) conjugate ( 1 : 50 , 000 ; Roche , Nutley , NJ ) was applied to each well to recognize captured bio - mTf . Then , 100 µ l of BM blue ( Roche ) substrate was added to each well . The enzymatic reaction was stopped with 1M sulphuric acid . Light absorption at 450nm was determined with an MRX microplate reader ( Dynex , Chantilly , VA ) to quantify the reaction prod - uct . Using standards , we determined that the absorbance is a linear indicator of bio – mTf between 0 . 01 and 1ng . RECEIVED 8 MARCH 2002 ; REVISED 22 MAY 2002 ; ACCEPTED 28 JUNE 2002 ; PUBLISHED 27 AUGUST 2002 . 1 . Sweitzer , S . M . & Hinshaw , J . E . Dynamin undergoes a GTP - dependent conformational change causing vesiculation . Cell 93 , 1021 – 1029 ( 1998 ) . 2 . Takei , K . et al . Generation of coated intermediates of clathrin - mediated endocytosis on protein - free liposomes . Cell 94 , 131 – 141 ( 1998 ) . 3 . Stowell , M . H . , Marks , B . , Wigge , P . & McMahon , H . T . Nucleotide - dependent conformational changes in dynamin : evidence for a mechanochemical molecular spring . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 27 – 32 ( 1999 ) . 4 . Sever , S . , Damke , H . & Schmid , S . L . Garrotes , springs , ratchets , and whips : putting dynamin mod - els to the test . Traffic 1 , 385 – 392 ( 2000 ) . 5 . Marks , B . et al . GTPase activity of dynamin and resulting conformation change are essential for endocytosis . Nature 410 , 231 – 235 ( 2001 ) . 6 . Qualmann , B . , Roos , J . , DiGregorio , P . J . & Kelly , R . B . Syndapin I , a synaptic dynamin - binding pro - tein that associates with the neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 501 – 513 ( 1999 ) . 7 . Kessels , M . M . , Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Drubin , D . G . & Qualmann , B . Mammalian Abp1 , a sig - nal - responsive F - actin - binding protein , links the actin cytoskeleton to endocytosis via the GTPase dynamin . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 351 – 366 ( 2001 ) . 8 . Witke , W . et al . In mouse brain profilin I and profilin II associate with regulators of the endocytic pathway and actin assembly . EMBO J . 17 , 967 – 976 ( 1998 ) . 9 . Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . & Kelly , R . B . Molecular links between endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 150 , F111 – F116 ( 2000 ) . 10 . Slepnev , V . I . & De Camilli , P . Accessory factors in clathrin - dependent synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 1 , 161 – 172 ( 2000 ) . 11 . Merrifield , C . J . et al . Endocytic vesicles move at the tips of actin tails in cultured mast cells . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 72 – 74 ( 1999 ) . 12 . Frischknecht , F . et al . Tyrosine phosphorylation is required for actin - based motility of vaccinia but not Listeria or Shigella . Curr . Biol . 9 , 89 – 92 ( 1999 ) . 13 . Taunton , J . et al . Actin - dependent propulsion of endosomes and lysosomes by recruitment of N - WASP . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 519 – 530 ( 2000 ) . 14 . Rozelle , A . L . et al . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate induces actin - based movement of raft - enriched vesicles through WASP – Arp2 / 3 . Curr . Biol . 10 , 311 – 320 ( 2000 ) . 15 . Lee , E . & De Camilli , P . From the Cover : Dynamin at actin tails . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 161 – 166 ( 2002 ) . 16 . Orth , J . D . , Krueger , E . W . , Cao , H . & McNiven , M . A . From the Cover : The large GTPase dynamin regulates actin comet formation and movement in living cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 167 – 172 ( 2002 ) . 17 . Gottlieb , T . A . , Ivanov , I . E . , Adesnik , M . & Sabatini , D . D . Actin microfilaments play a critical role in endocytosis at the apical but not the basolateral surface of polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 695 – 710 ( 1993 ) . 18 . Fujimoto , L . M . , Roth , R . , Heuser , J . E . & Schmid , S . L . Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . Traffic 1 , 161 – 171 ( 2000 ) . 19 . Gaidarov , I . , Santini , F . , Warren , R . A . & Keen , J . H . Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 1 – 7 ( 1999 ) . 20 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . et al . The actin - binding protein Hip1R associates with clathrin during early stages of endocytosis and promotes clathrin assembly in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 1209 – 1223 ( 2001 ) . 21 . Lang , T . et al . Ca2 + - triggered peptide secretion in single cells imaged with green fluorescent protein and evanescent - wave microscopy . Neuron 18 , 857 – 863 ( 1997 ) . 22 . Smythe , E . , Carter , L . L . & Schmid , S . L . Cytosol - and clathrin - dependent stimulation of endocyto - sis in vitro by purified adaptors . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 1163 – 1171 ( 1992 ) . 23 . Nesterov , A . , Carter , R . E . , Sorkina , T . , Gill , G . N . & Sorkin , A . Inhibition of the receptor - binding function of clathrin adaptor protein AP - 2 by dominant - negative mutant µ 2 subunit and its effects on endocytosis . EMBO J . 18 , 2489 – 2499 ( 1999 ) . 24 . Axelrod , D . Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy in cell biology . Traffic 2 , 764 – 774 ( 2001 ) . 25 . Steyer , J . A . & Almers , W . A real - time view of life within 100nm of the plasma membrane . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 268 – 275 ( 2001 ) . 26 . Heuser , J . E . & Anderson , R . G . Hypertonic media inhibit receptor - mediated endocytosis by block - ing clathrin - coated pit formation . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 389 – 400 ( 1989 ) . 27 . Ballestrem , C . , Wehrle - Haller , B . & Imhof , B . A . Actin dynamics in living mammalian cells . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 1649 – 1658 ( 1998 ) . 28 . Choidas , A . et al . The suitability and application of a GFP – actin fusion protein for long - term imag - ing of the organization and dynamics of the cytoskeleton in mammalian cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 77 , 81 – 90 ( 1998 ) . 29 . Ochoa , G . C . et al . A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 377 – 389 ( 2000 ) . 30 . Aizawa , H . , Sameshima , M . & Yahara , I . A green fluorescent protein – actin fusion protein domi - nantly inhibits cytokinesis , cell spreading , and locomotion in Dictyostelium . Cell Struct . Funct . 22 , 335 – 345 ( 1997 ) . 31 . Damke , H . , Binns , D . D . , Ueda , H . , Schmid , S . L . & Baba , T . Dynamin GTPase domain mutants block endocytic vesicle formation at morphologically distinct stages . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2578 – 2589 ( 2001 ) . 32 . Takei , K . , McPherson , P . S . , Schmid , S . L . & De Camilli , P . Tubular membrane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP - γ S in nerve terminals . Nature 374 , 186 – 190 ( 1995 ) . © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup articles NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 4 SEPTEMBER 2002 www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 698 33 . Hinshaw , J . E . & Schmid , S . L . Dynamin self - assembles into rings suggesting a mechanism for coat - ed vesicle budding . Nature 374 , 190 – 192 ( 1995 ) . 34 . Willingham , M . C . & Pastan , I . Formation of receptosomes from plasma membrane coated pits during endocytosis : analysis by serial sections with improved membrane labeling and preservation techniques . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 80 , 5617 – 5621 ( 1983 ) . 35 . Hinshaw , J . E . Dynamin and its role in membrane fission . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 16 , 483 – 519 ( 2000 ) . 36 . Sever , S . , Muhlberg , A . B . & Schmid , S . L . Impairment of dynamin’s GAP domain stimulates recep - tor - mediated endocytosis . Nature 398 , 481 – 486 ( 1999 ) . 37 . Buss , F . , Arden , S . D . , Lindsay , M . , Luzio , J . P . & Kendrick - Jones , J . Myosin VI isoform localized to clathrin - coated vesicles with a role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . EMBO J . 20 , 3676 – 3684 ( 2001 ) . 38 . Burack , M . A . , Silverman , M . A . & Banker , G . The role of selective transport in neuronal protein sorting . Neuron 26 , 465 – 472 ( 2000 ) . 39 . Oshiro , S . et al . Redox , transferrin - independent , and receptor - mediated endocytosis iron uptake systems in cultured human fibroblasts . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 21586 – 21591 ( 1993 ) . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSWe thank P . de Camilli and S . Schmid for helpful discussions , and D . Zenisek , J . Taraska and T . Blackmer for their helpful comments on the manuscript . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants MH60600 and DK44239 . Correspondence and requests for material should be addressed to W . A . Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on www . nature . com / naturecellbiology . COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests . © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup supplementary infomation 1 Movie 1 Internalization of a clathrin - coated pit is accompanied by actin recruitment . Upper left , ccs labeled with clathrin - DsRed imaged under EF illumina - tion . Lower left , the same red ccs imaged under epi illumination . Upper right , green fluorescence of EGFP - β - actin imaged under EF illumination . As the red ccs disap - pears from the EF image ( upper left ) it is still visible under epi illumination ( lower left ) indicating movement away from the cell surface . Movement is accompanied by formation of an actin plume ( upper right ) . Movie is 16 fold time lapse . Movie 2 Transient dynamin recruitment precedes clathrin dimming . Left , ccs labeled with clathrin - DsRed . Right , green fluorescence of Dynamin I - EGFP . Shortly before the red ccs disappears ( left ) dynamin is transiently recruited ( right ) . EF illumi - nation throughout . Movie is 16 fold time lapse . © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup