Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) 1 3 Sustainability Science ( 2021 ) 16 : 37 – 52 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11625 - 020 - 00860 - 4 ORIGINAL ARTICLE Collective and individual interdisciplinarity in a sustainability research group : A social network analysis Bruno Locatelli 1 , 2 · Améline Vallet 3 , 4 · Jacques Tassin 1 · Denis Gautier 1 · Aurélie Chamaret 5 · Plinio Sist 1 Received : 20 April 2020 / Accepted : 21 August 2020 / Published online : 2 September 2020 © Springer Japan KK , part of Springer Nature 2020 Abstract In sustainability science , interdisciplinarity , i . e . , the integration of perspectives from different disciplines , is built collec - tively from interactions among researchers of various disciplines ( “collective interdisciplinarity” ) but also results from the fact that researchers have backgrounds in multiple disciplines ( “individual interdisciplinarity” ) . We applied social network analysis tools to analyze how individual interdisciplinarity influences collective interdisciplinarity , using the case of a forest sustainability science group . We hypothesized that researchers with higher individual interdisciplinarity had more interdisciplinary interactions and were interdisciplinary brokers within the group . We first analyzed individual interdisci - plinarity using a bipartite network of researchers and disciplines . We then analyzed networks of management , research , and publication interactions among researchers in the research group . This showed how disciplines influenced interactions and how researchers contributed to interdisciplinary interactions and brokerage . Results of the first analysis identified large dis - ciplinary communities in the center of the bipartite network , whereas smaller ones were more distant . The second analysis highlighted disciplinary homophily in interaction networks , as two researchers interacted more if they were from the same disciplinary community . Results also showed that the interactions among researchers were structured not only by disciplinary homophily , but also by other forms of homophily related to location or region of work . The key brokers of interactions across disciplinary communities were distributed across several communities , showing that brokerage was not controlled by the large , dominant communities . Analysis of correlations between individual interdisciplinarity and contributions to collective interdisciplinarity did not support our hypothesis but rather hinted at the alternative hypothesis that researchers with high individual interdisciplinarity interacted less with other disciplinary communities . Keywords Interdisciplinarity · Science · Collaboration · Social network analysis · ERGM · Homophily · Broker Introduction Emily is a researcher trained in forest ecology who often interacts with other forest ecologists in her research on sus - tainable forest management . During her studies , she was also trained in geography , which has facilitated her scientific interactions with geographers . In recent years , while work - ing on a large research project on forests and water , she has created strong working relationships with hydrologists and facilitated common work between hydrologists and geog - raphers . Through this fictitious example , we can question how Emily’s disciplines have influenced her interactions with other researchers in an interdisciplinary setting and whether Emily or other researchers with multiple discipli - nary backgrounds play a special role in connecting scientists from other disciplines . Handled by Ram Avtar , Hokkaido University , Japan . Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article ( https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s1162 5 - 020 - 00860 - 4 ) contains supplementary material , which is available to authorized users . * Bruno Locatelli bruno . locatelli @ cirad . fr 1 Cirad , Univ Montpellier , 34398 Montpellier , France 2 Cifor , Lima , Peru 3 Ecologie Systématique Evolution , AgroParisTech , CNRS , Université Paris - Sud , Université Paris - Saclay , Orsay , France 4 CIRED , AgroParisTech , Cirad , CNRS , EHESS , Ecole Des Ponts ParisTech , Université Paris - Saclay , Nogent - Sur - Marne , France 5 Pacte , Univ Grenoble - Alpes , Grenoble , France 38 Sustainability Science ( 2021 ) 16 : 37 – 52 1 3 Science has become increasingly interdisciplinary ( Jung et al . 2019 ; Porter and Rafols 2009 ) . Interdisciplinary research is generally defined by the integration of perspec - tives from different disciplines ( including theoretical frame - works , approaches , and methods ) into the study of a com - mon problem ( Aboelela et al . 2007a ; Wagner et al . 2011 ) . In addition to this general definition , different interpreta - tions of interdisciplinarity have been proposed , depending on what is integrated , how it is done , and why ( Huutoniemi et al . 2010 ) . An interdisciplinary research group is made up of researchers who bring knowledge and perspectives from different disciplines and interact among themselves , as well as with other researchers and non - researchers outside the group . The degree of interactions among disciplines makes interdisciplinarity different from multidisciplinarity ( where a common question is studied by different disciplines , but without interactions ) and transdisciplinarity ( where interac - tions overcome disciplinary boundaries to create an over - arching synthesis ) ( Blanchard and Vanderlinden 2010 ) . Interdisciplinarity is an important feature of sustainability research , an emerging field of problem - oriented research that analyzes the interactions between natural and social systems to contribute to a sustainable society ( Kates 2011 ; Komiy - ama and Takeuchi 2006 ) . Sustainability research is problem oriented and addresses complex issues that must be explored from multiple perspectives sourced from the natural and social sciences ( Blanchard and Vanderlinden 2010 ; School - man et al . 2012 ; van Leeuwen and Tijssen 2000 ) . Examples include research to understand the intertwined ecological , economic , and social dimensions of biodiversity conserva - tion ( Bennett et al . 2017 ) and adaptation to climate change ( Fraser et al . 2011 ) . Interdisciplinary collaborations in sus - tainability research often lead to the transfer of questions or responses from one discipline to another , a phenomenon called interdisciplinarity “problem feeding” ( Schoolman et al . 2012 ) . Most discussions on interdisciplinarity rely on the idea that interdisciplinarity is collective ( Calvert 2010 ) . How - ever , this perspective of interdisciplinarity as a collabora - tion between disciplinary individuals has been called one of the myths of interdisciplinarity ( Molteberg et al . 2000 ) . A different and more marginal perspective considers inter - disciplinarity at the individual level , with the notion of researchers possessing several disciplinary skills and integrating perspectives from different disciplines in their work ( Wagner et al . 2011 ) . An individual interdiscipli - narity can result from an academic education in multiple disciplines or from the experience gained over the course of a career . Future sustainability researchers increasingly follow diversified academic paths , either because they proactively combine different disciplines or because their universities offer courses based on problem - solving rather than on disciplines ( Haider et al . 2018 ; Hein et al . 2018 ) . The outcome of multidisciplinary trainings could be called “individual multidisciplinarity” but we prefer the term “individual interdisciplinarity” because it reflects that the different disciplinary perspectives interact within the mind of a researcher . The two types of interdisciplinarity , individual and collec - tive , may be dependent on each other . Over time , a research group that is initially interdisciplinary in a collective sense only ( with interactions between mono - disciplinary individu - als ) may influence the behavior of researchers , who may tend to become interdisciplinary at their individual levels after discovering new disciplinary perspectives ( Calvert 2010 ) . In addition , at a given moment in time , individual and col - lective interdisciplinarity may also be related , as researchers with several disciplinary perspectives may contribute more to collective interdisciplinarity within a group : They may have more interactions with other disciplines or may facili - tate the interactions of researchers of different disciplines ( thus playing a broker role ) ( Molteberg et al . 2000 ) . In addi - tion to the fact that “individual interdisciplinarity is almost never appreciated in academic discussions of interdiscipli - narity” ( Vojak et al . 2010 , p . 546 ) , the relationships between individual interdisciplinarity and collective interdisciplinar - ity have not been studied in research groups . Social network analysis ( SNA ) is a promising approach for studying scientific interactions or interdisciplinarity ( Qin et al . 1997 ; Yang et al . 2010 ) . Over the past 30 years , SNA has grown from a specialized social science method to a series of techniques applied to multiple fields ( Knoke and Yang 2008 ) . The ties analyzed with SNA can repre - sent the fact that researchers work on the same projects , exchange information , or publish together . They can also be ties between research projects or collaborating universi - ties , between journals and disciplines that cite each other , or between entities of a nature different ( e . g . , a researcher and a group ) ( Biancani and McFarland 2013 ) . Most of the work on SNA applied to research is based on large bibliographic databases , for example , to measure the intensity of inter - disciplinarity through citation analysis ( Rafols and Meyer 2010 ) or to analyze how the centrality of researchers in a network influences the number of citations of their publica - tions and the formation of new collaborations ( Uddin et al . 2013 ) . SNAs within small research groups are less common than those based on large bibliographic databases . Some studies analyzed survey data from small research groups to highlight the barriers to interdisciplinary science within a university ( Aboelela et al . 2007b ) and between universities ( Cummings and Kiesler 2005 ) . Survey data on small research groups generally provide detailed information on multiple relation - ships among researchers , for example , whether a researcher is aware of what another researcher is doing , has met the other , has written a project or a publication with the other , 39 Sustainability Science ( 2021 ) 16 : 37 – 52 1 3 has co - organized an event , or has co - supervised a student ( Godley et al . 2013 ) . In this paper , we apply SNA to a case study of a research group , whose members study forest sustainability science , to test the hypothesis that researchers with high individual interdisciplinarity have more interdisciplinary interactions than those with one discipline and that they play the role of interdisciplinary brokers within a research group . We address the following questions : What disciplinary com - munities emerge from the analysis of individual interdis - ciplinarity ? Are there more interactions within disciplinary communities or outside them ? How do disciplinary com - munities and other factors explain the existence of interac - tions between two scientists ? Do brokers connect research - ers within their disciplinary communities or across other communities ? Do key interdisciplinary brokers in the group belong to specific disciplinary communities ? Do researchers with higher individual interdisciplinarity contribute more to interdisciplinary interactions and brokerage ? The next two sections first present an analytical framework based on SNA before introducing the studied research group and the detailed methods . The framework is not specifically about sustainability science and could apply to other scientific fields . A framework for analyzing interdisciplinarity using social network analysis We propose two applications of SNA to explore individual and collective interdisciplinarity in small research groups . First , individual interdisciplinarity can be explored with two - mode networks ( also called bipartite networks ) that represent how researchers identify themselves with differ - ent disciplines . Second , one - mode networks can be used to analyze interactions among researchers and to understand how disciplines influence interactions and how researchers contribute to interdisciplinary interactions and brokerage . The first application uses a bipartite network ( i . e . , net - work where ties occur between nodes of different natures ) of researchers and disciplines , with ties representing the attach - ment of researchers to disciplines . Analyzing this network can have three purposes . First , we can identify the proximity or distances between disciplines in a research group . For example , if many researchers are attached to both ecology and forestry , these two disciplines can be considered close to each other . Conversely , if almost no one is attached to ecol - ogy and sociology at the same time , these disciplines may be considered distant . This idea has been applied previously to large datasets of cross - disciplinary citations to assess the dis - similarities ( Wang et al . 2015 ) or the “intellectual distances” between disciplines ( Van Noorden 2015 , p . 306 ) . Second , the distance between disciplines ( quantifiable by different network measures ) can help in assessing the individual inter - disciplinarity of researcher . For example , a researcher who combines sociology and ecology could be considered more interdisciplinary than a researcher who combines ecology and forestry . Several measures can be used to assess this individual interdisciplinarity ( see “Methods” section ) . Third , the bipartite network can be used to identify disciplinary communities , i . e . , sets of disciplines and researchers having stronger attachment ties within a community than between communities . The second application uses interaction networks , which represent how researchers share information , conduct field - work or management tasks together , or co - author publica - tions for example . Analysis of interaction networks has three objectives . We can first analyze whether interactions occur within or across disciplinary communities , which sheds light on the proneness to disciplinary homophily . Homophily is an important topic of SNA that relates to the fact that people who are alike interact more easily ( McPherson et al . 2001 ) . Disciplinary homophily can drive the exchange of informa - tion between researchers and constrain interdisciplinarity ( McPherson et al . 2001 ) . For example , one study showed that during coffee breaks at research retreats , the interac - tions between doctoral students reflected a high degree of homophily of institutions and research subjects ( Kibanov et al . 2019 ) . Second , the analysis of interaction networks can go beyond disciplinary homophily and analyze other factors that explain the occurrence of an interaction between a pair of researchers ; such homophily can be related to geographic location or social status . For example , a study found that collaborations were more frequent between two researchers located in the same geographic region , but not between two researchers at the same hierarchical level in their institutions or with the same level of prestige ( Binz - Scharf et al . 2015 ) . In addition , individual factors can also explain the exist - ence of interactions , for example , scientific reputation and research seniority ( Van Rijnsoever and Hessels 2011 ) . It is thus important to factor out the effect of individual factors or other forms of homophily before concluding on disciplinary homophily . Third , the analysis of interaction networks can identify the key researchers with interdisciplinarity in the group , i . e . , those who work the most with researchers from other dis - ciplinary communities and those who connect researchers from other disciplinary communities ( the so - called brokers ) . Broker analysis is important in SNA ; for example , it helps identify how to better coordinate policy actions ( Locatelli et al . 2020 ) or how to fill gaps in the interfaces between sci - ence and society ( Neal et al . 2019 ) . To better understand the role of brokers in interdisciplinarity , we propose to adjust and simplify Gould and Fernandez’ ( 1989 ) typology , as it was not initially developed for interdisciplinarity ( Fig . 1a ) . 40 Sustainability Science ( 2021 ) 16 : 37 – 52 1 3 The adjusted typology used in our study distinguishes differ - ent brokerage roles depending on whether brokers connect researchers from their disciplinary community or from other communities ( Fig . 1b ) : Brokers can be disciplinary coor - dinators ( between researchers from their own disciplinary community ) , interdisciplinary boundary spanners ( between members of their disciplinary community and members outside their community ) , and interdisciplinary bridges ( between members of other communities ) . Materials and methods The research group A SNA was applied to the “Forests and Societies” research group of the French Agricultural Research Centre for International Development ( CIRAD ) . The research group works on the sustainable management of tropical for - est ecosystems and the contributions of tropical forests to human well - being . Researchers study tropical forests as social – ecological systems and aim to understand the adaptation of these systems to global changes and the sus - tainability of the ecosystem services provided by tropical forests at local , regional , and global scales . Like in other sustainability science groups , the scientists of the group are interested in multiple interdisciplinary items , such as ecosystems , social groups , or policies , and apply diverse disciplinary approaches ( from ecology , geography , and the social , economic , or political sciences , among others ) . One of the characteristics of this group is that staff are multi - localized , with scientists based at the headquarters in Montpellier ( France ) or out - posted in Africa , Asia , Latin America , and Europe ( outside of Montpellier ) . The target population for this analysis was the 41 research - ers with permanent positions on November 1 , 2018 , who had been in the group for more than a year . This one - year threshold was chosen as the time necessary for newcomers to integrate and build interactions . The sample analyzed Fig . 1 Our proposed typology of disciplinary brokerage roles . The circles represent researchers identified by their disciplinary commu - nities ( A , B , C ) . Broker typology at the left is from Gould and Fer - nandez ( 1989 ) and applies to a directed network ( for undirected ones , gatekeeper and representative are identical ) . “Boundary spanner” and “bridge” are terms taken from Long et al . ( 2013 ) 41 Sustainability Science ( 2021 ) 16 : 37 – 52 1 3 was made up of the 39 researchers from this population who answered a survey ( i . e . , 95 % of the population ) . Data collection Basic data on the researchers were collected from exist - ing sources ( CIRAD Human Resources database , Google Scholar ) and a key informant in the group ( its director ) and by asking all researchers to complete an online survey ( Table 1 ) . The data related to the activities over approxi - mately four years ( 2015 – 2018 , which corresponds to the four - year planning and evaluation phase of the group ) , except for seniority or citation indices which were measured at the end of 2018 . For the disciplines , we consulted the Human Resources database and asked each researcher individually to verify and correct their personal data . The database included the main discipline that a researcher felt attached to , and optionally , a secondary or tertiary discipline that the researcher could select ( see full list in Fig . 2 ) . The following disciplines were grouped or renamed for the analysis : anthropology ( renamed from “anthropology – ethnology” in the database ) , statistics and applied mathematics ( merging three disciplines of the database : statistics , scientific calculus and simulation , math - ematical modeling of complex systems ) , ecology ( merging community ecology , population ecology , functional ecol - ogy ) , computing ( merging information systems , computing and software engineering ) , and economics ( merging macro - economics , mesoeconomics , microeconomics ) . For the interactions within the group , we asked research - ers to nominate who they had interacted with during the last four years . We considered three forms of interactions : man - agement ( e . g . , interactions to promote internal exchanges , seek funding , set up new projects , manage projects , create new partnerships outside the group , manage collective activ - ities , or implement an item of collective research infrastruc - ture such as a shared database ) , research ( e . g . , interactions to develop research questions , discuss literature , exchange data , discuss methods , apply tools , collect data , do fieldwork together , analyze data , and supervise students ) , and publica - tion ( in the broad sense of disseminating research results , e . g . , interactions to co - author papers , prepare or present a communication at a conference , or organize an outward - looking scientific event ) . Data analysis The first step of the analysis dealt with researchers’ disci - plinary attachments . We built a bipartite network , in which researchers and disciplines were connected through weighted ties representing the strength of the disciplinary attachment . The attachment strength came from the data provided by researchers : We attributed a strength of 1 , 0 . 7 , and 0 . 4 to the attachment between a researcher and his or her main , Table 1 Variables describing researchers and potentially predicting interactions among researchers Variable Values Data source Seniority ( measured with the number of years in the group ) Min 6 , Median 19 , Max 40 ( 0 – 1 normalized for the analysis ) Human Resources database Recognition ( measured with the H - index , a citation index ) Min 1 , Median 13 , Max 33 ( 0 – 1 normalized for the analysis ) Individual profiles in Google Scholar or in the software “Publish or Perish” based on Google Scholar data Leadership ( of a large research project in the group ) Yes ( n = 15 ) , No ( n = 24 ) Key informant in the group Committee member ( the management commit - tee is a rotating group of four people , includ - ing the group director , making managerial decisions ) Yes ( n = 8 ) , No ( n = 31 ) Location at headquarters in Montpellier ( France ) during part or all the period of analysis Yes ( n = 24 ) , No ( n = 15 ) Regions of work Central Africa ( n = 28 ) , Amazon Basin ( 17 ) , West Africa ( n = 16 ) , Southeast Asia ( n = 15 ) , Indian Ocean ( n = 11 ) , Central America and Mexico ( n = 9 ) , East Africa ( n = 9 ) , Southern Africa ( n = 8 ) , South Asia ( n = 5 ) , Caribbean ( n = 5 ) , Europe ( n = 3 ) , Central Asia ( n = 3 ) , Andes ( n = 2 ) , Oceania ( n = 1 ) Online survey to researchers Disciplines Disciplines to which the researcher feels attached ( main discipline , and optionally , secondary or tertiary discipline ) ( see details in the text ) 42 Sustainability Science ( 2021 ) 16 : 37 – 52 1 3 secondary , and tertiary disciplines , respectively , and because researchers reported different numbers of disciplines with different attachment strengths , weights were normalized so that the total of the weights was 1 for each researcher . The bipartite network ( as well as the interaction net - work later ) was graphically represented using the Fruchter - man – Reingold algorithm , which ensures that nodes with strong ties are located close to each other ( layout _ with _ fr with the igraph package in R ) ( Csardi 2018 ) . An algorithm called Fast Greedy was applied to the bipartite network to automatically detect communities , i . e . , sets of researchers and disciplines that have more ties with each other than with the rest of the network ( Csardi 2018 ) . This method helped identify disciplinary communities of researchers , easily named from the disciplines included in the communities . For each researcher , we also calculated the values of three indicators of individual interdisciplinarity ( Table 2 ) . In a second step , we built four unweighted networks rep - resenting the interactions between researchers regarding management , research , publication , and all forms of interac - tions ( i . e . , the union of the first three networks ) . For this , we first symmetrized the data on interactions , considering that Fig . 2 Bipartite network showing researchers ( circles ) , disciplines ( squares ) , and ties between them ( i . e . , disciplinary attachment reported by researchers ) . The width of a square depends on the num - ber of researchers attached to the discipline . The width of a circle depends on the interdisciplinarity index of the researcher ( defined in the text ) . The width of a tie represents the strength of the attachment of a researcher to a discipline . The colors show the disciplinary com - munities identified by a community detection algorithm 43 Sustainability Science ( 2021 ) 16 : 37 – 52 1 3 two researchers interacted if at least one of them mentioned their interaction . To analyze disciplinary homophily , we calculated an interdisciplinarity index for each disciplinary community , an approach related to the E - I index ( Krackhardt and Stern 1988 ) . Our index was simply the ratio of interac - tions of this community that occur with other communities . To assess whether the interdisciplinarity index of a commu - nity was unexpectedly low or high , we compared it with the values of this index after randomly permuting disciplinary communities . We simulated 100 , 000 networks by permuting the disciplinary communities and obtained a distribution of the expected values of the index for each community and the probability that the observed value was lower or higher than the expected value . In a third step , we analyzed the factors influencing the existence of interactions between researchers using expo - nential random graph models ( ERGMs ) , developed specifi - cally for this purpose ( Robins and Lusher 2013b ) . The exist - ence of ties could have been explained by simpler statistical models , for example , log - linear models that relate the exist - ence of a tie between two actors to the characteristics of the actors . However , such models assume that observations are independent , which is not the case for the ties within a social network . For example , because of transitivity , a common feature of real - life social relationships , the existence of a tie from A to B depends on whether A and B have a tie to a third actor C ( Lusher and Robins 2013 ) . These structural effects are a strength of ERGMs , and they prevent the misestimation of other effects ( Cranmer and Desmarais 2011 ) . Ties in an ERGM can be explained by different kinds of effects , includ - ing structural ( e . g . , transitivity ) , actor level ( e . g . , the age of an actor ) , dyadic level ( e . g . , the fact that the two actors on either side of the tie are similar , i . e . , they exhibit homophily ) , and relational ( e . g . , the fact that the two actors on either side of the tie are also tied in other networks ) ( Robins and Lusher 2013a ) . Variables at actor level included seniority , recogni - tion , project leadership , and participation in management com - mittee ( gender was also tested but discarded because it had no significant effects in any analysis ) . We fitted the ERGMs using a Markov chain Monte Carlo simulation and applied diagnostic tools and goodness - of - fit analysis to check whether the models were good representations of the observed network ( Butts et al . 2015 ) ( details in Supplementary Material SM2 ) . All calculations were made in R ( R Core Team 2018 ) with the ergm package , part of the statnet suite ( Handcock et al . 2016 ) . In a fourth step , we identified key brokers in the four interaction networks and their brokerage roles ( coordina - tor , spanner , bridge , see Fig . 2 ) . Using the brokerage func - tion in the sna package in R ( Butts 2016 ) , we calculated the brokerage scores of all researchers , that is , the numbers of pairs that a particular researcher has ties to that are not directly connected . The scores were computed separately for each brokerage role and compared to the expected values to assess whether observed values differed significantly from expected ones . ( The brokerage function estimates expecta - tions and variances of the scores , as well as approximate z - test results . ) In a final fifth step , we explored the Pearson correlations between the three indicators of individual interdisciplinarity previously calculated and eight indicators of contribution to collective interdisciplinarity . This highlighted interdis - ciplinary interactions ( percentage of relationships that the researcher had with researchers from other disciplinary communities ) and interdisciplinary brokerage ( total bro - kerage score for interdisciplinary broker role ) for the four interaction networks ( management , research , publication , and all ) . The indicators of contribution to collective inter - disciplinarity were used in a standardized form ( difference between observed and expected values , divided by the stand - ard deviation ) . We also observed the correlations between researcher characteristics and individual interdisciplinarity or contributions to collective interdisciplinarity . Results Researchers’ disciplinary attachments Surveyed researchers reported their attachments to 17 disci - plines , with most reporting more than one discipline ( n = 3 Table 2 Indicators of individual interdisciplinarity , inspired by Rafols and Meyer ( 2010 ) Name Meaning Measure Equation Variety Number of distinct disciplines of a researcher Count ∑ i ∈ E r 1 Balance Evenness of the attachment of a researcher to his / her disciplines Shannon index − ∑ i ∈ E r p ri ln p ri Disparity Degree to which the disciplines of a researcher are distant Stirling index ∑ i , j ∈ E r d ij p ri p rj p ri : Weight of the attachment of researcher r to discipline i ( between 0 and 1 ) E r : Set of disciplines for which the attachment of researcher r is non - null d ij : Distance between disciplines i and j ( inverse of the number of researchers with an attachment to both disciplines if i≠j or 0 if i = j ) 44 Sustainability Science ( 2021 ) 16 : 37 – 52 1 3 for one discipline , n = 19 for two disciplines , n = 17 for three disciplines ) . The most frequent disciplines were for - estry , ecology , and geography with 12 or more researchers . The community detection algorithm found six disciplinary communities in the bipartite network of researchers tied to disciplines ( see colors in Fig . 2 ) . Three large disciplinary communities ( forest sciences , ecological sciences , and spa - tial sciences , with eight or more researchers ) occupied the core of the network , while there were three smaller ones in the periphery ( computer sciences , economic and political sciences , and social sciences , with four or fewer research - ers , Fig . 2 ) . Homophily within disciplinary communities Some disciplinary homophily was suggested by the rep - resentation of the network of all interactions ( Fig . 3 ) ( see basic descriptors of the four networks in Supplementary Material SM1 ) . Indeed , the algorithm used to display the network layout positions researchers close together if they have strong ties between them ( Fig . 3 ) . Thus , the clustering of researchers according to colors ( i . e . , disciplinary com - munities ) suggested strong interactions within communities ( e . g . , the ecological sciences occupy one part of the figure , and the forest sciences occupy another ) . This suggested disciplinary homophily was confirmed by statistical analyses ( Table 3 ) : For most disciplinary com - munities and forms of interactions , there were significantly fewer interactions outside the community than expected , which meant that disciplinary communities facilitated inter - actions within them . This was particularly true for publica - tion interactions , which were stronger than expected within all disciplinary communities . Factors explaining interactions between researchers Disciplinary homophily was confirmed at the level of inter - actions between pairs of researchers by the ERGMs ( Fig . 4 ) : Two researchers in the same disciplinary community were more likely to interact than others , particularly for research and publication interactions . There were , however , other forms of homophily : Whereas the strongest homophily in publication was disciplinary , the strongest homophily in research and management came from work regions , such that sharing the same region of work increased these forms of interactions . Another form of homophily was related to researcher locations : Two researchers based at headquarters were more likely to interact , particularly for management , which is mostly centralized at headquarters . The interac - tions were also influenced by individual characteristics ( e . g . , Fig . 3 Network representation of the interactions ( of any form ) among researchers . Research - ers are represented by circles ( color indicates the disciplinary community and size indicates the total standardized brokerage score ) . Interactions between researchers are represented by colored ties if they occur within disciplinary communities ( and are gray otherwise ) . The key brokers are identified by a label describing their role 45 Sustainability Science ( 2021 ) 16 : 37 – 52 1 3 recognized researchers had more research and publication interactions , or researchers who had led large projects had more management and research interactions ) but to a lesser extent than the various forms of homophily ( Fig . 4 ) . Brokers across disciplinary communities Eight researchers had particularly high brokerage scores , which were significantly higher than the expected scores in the network of all interactions . It meant that they interacted with many pairs of researchers who were not directly interacting . These key brokers ( who appear in the center of the network representation in Fig . 3 ) belonged to disciplinary communities of any size ( five belonged to large communities and three to small ) . The key bro - kers played mostly interdisciplinary roles : Seven were interdisciplinary bridges and five were interdisciplinary boundary spanners , while only two were disciplinary coordinators . Two key brokers played the three roles , one from a small disciplinary community ( social sciences ) and the other from a large one ( ecological sciences ) . Table 3 Ratio of interactions that take place outside of the discipli - nary community ( as a measure of interdisciplinary interactions ) . The observed values are compared with the distribution of expected val - ues calculated with a random permutation of disciplinary communi - ties ( * * * for p < 0 . 001 , * * for p < 0 . 01 , and * for p < 0 . 05 ; “ns” for not significant at p = 0 . 05 ) . Here , for all significant differences , the observed values were lower than expected Disciplinary community Expected ratio Observed ratio ( and statistical significance ) Management interactions Research interactions Publication interactions All interactions Forest sciences 0 . 765 ( ± 0 . 026 ) 0 . 695 ( * * * ) 0 . 660 ( * * * ) 0 . 629 ( * * * ) 0 . 692 ( * * * ) Spatial sciences 0 . 817 ( ± 0 . 026 ) 0 . 763 ( * * ) 0 . 787 0 . 696 ( * * * ) 0 . 784 Ecological sciences 0 . 765 ( ± 0 . 026 ) 0 . 725 ( * ) 0 . 733 0 . 648 ( * * * ) 0 . 728 Computer sciences 0 . 923 ( ± 0 . 023 ) 0 . 914 0 . 850 ( * * * ) 0 . 875 ( * * ) 0 . 879 ( * * ) Economic and political sciences 0 . 923 ( ± 0 . 023 ) 0 . 910 0 . 888 ( * ) 0 . 875 ( * * ) 0 . 907 Social sciences 0 . 949 ( ± 0 . 022 ) 0 . 938 0 . 90 ( * * ) 0 . 895 ( * * * ) 0 . 946 Fig . 4 Results of the four ERGMs explaining four forms of interac - tions ( which can be interpreted similarly to the results of a linear model ) . Effect estimates and standard errors are represented by bar plots ( blue for a positive effect , red for a negative ) , and error bars for the dyadic and researcher levels ( significance : * * * for p < 0 . 001 , * * for p < 0 . 01 , and * for p < 0 . 05 ) 46 Sustainability Science ( 2021 ) 16 : 37 – 52 1 3 Correlations between individual interdisciplinarity and collective interdisciplinarity People with more individual interdisciplinarity contrib - uted less to collective interdisciplinarity . All three indi - cators of individual interdisciplinarity were negatively corrected to the contribution to interdisciplinary interac - tions in management and research , but not in publication ( Fig . 5 ) . Indicators of individual interdisciplinarity were not significantly correlated with indicators of contribu - tion to interdisciplinary brokerage or the total number of interactions in any network . Effect of researcher characteristics Some researcher characteristics were correlated with their role in interdisciplinarity . Researchers with more recog - nition contributed more to interdisciplinary brokerage in publications . Leaders of large projects contributed more to interdisciplinary brokerage in research . Members of the management committee contributed more to interdiscipli - nary brokerage in all types of interactions . The seniority of researchers had no significant effect on the contribu - tion to collective interdisciplinarity . No characteristic of the researchers influenced individual interdisciplinarity ( Fig . 6 ) . Discussion We have analyzed individual and collective interdiscipli - narity in a research group using SNA tools . We tested the hypothesis that researchers with high individual interdis - ciplinarity had more interdisciplinary interactions or were interdisciplinary brokers in the group . With a bipartite net - work tying researchers to disciplines , we identified discipli - nary communities and calculated indicators of individual interdisciplinarity . The networks of interactions between researchers showed clear disciplinary homophily , along with other forms of homophily . Key brokers of interactions across disciplinary communities came from different dis - ciplinary communities , either small or large . The analysis of correlations between individual interdisciplinarity and contribution to collective interdisciplinarity did not support our hypothesis , but rather hinted at the alternative hypothesis that researchers with high individual interdisciplinarity had fewer interdisciplinary interactions . Individual attachments to disciplines The bipartite network tying researchers to disciplines clearly revealed the disciplinary diversity of the research group studied . The presence of three large disciplinary communi - ties at the core of the network representation comes from the fact that many members of the research group are attached to the disciplines included in these communities . The network Fig . 5 Pearson’s correlations among three indicators of individual interdisciplinarity ( variety , balance , and disparity ) and two indica - tors of contribution to collective interdisciplinarity ( interdisciplinary interactions and brokerage ) , and the total number of interactions in the four forms of interactions . The diameters of the circles are pro - portional to the absolute correlations , their colors depend on the signs ( blue for positive , red for negative ) , and the significance levels are shown inside the circles ( * p < 0 . 05 ) 47 Sustainability Science ( 2021 ) 16 : 37 – 52 1 3 representation questions the place of the three small discipli - nary communities and the way in which these communities are inserted into the group , even though the positions of the disciplinary communities in the core or the periphery do not presume interactions between researchers but only reflect the proximity between disciplines . We see disciplinary commu - nities that are isolated and probably have little commonality with many researchers in the group . The observed distances between disciplines in the net - work representation are generally aligned with common sense or the global maps of science that represent disciplines as networks ( Leydesdorff and Rafols 2009 ) ; for example , law and botany or sociology and soil science appear distant in this specific research group , whereas forestry and ecology are close . However , some proximities ( e . g . , between animal sciences and computing ) are peculiarities of this small group analysis and would not appear in an analysis over a broader group . To avoid these peculiarities , large datasets of cita - tions could be used for a better analysis of distances between disciplines ( Boyack and Klavans 2014 ) . In our analysis , the vast majority of researchers felt attached to more than one discipline . This result can be explained by the research carried out by this group , because problem - oriented sustainability research attracts scientists with multidisciplinary training or incentivizes researchers to adopt new disciplinary perspectives ( Hackenburg et al . 2019 ) . The attachment of researchers to multiple disci - plines can also be a bias of the data collection method , as researchers were explicitly invited to identify more than one discipline , which may have exaggerated their multi - disciplinarity . Another bias may have originated from how researchers interpreted the idea of an attachment to a disci - pline , as attachment may correspond to diverse realities , for example , a degree received after several years of studies in the discipline , a minor ( i . e . , a secondary set of courses in a discipline that differs from the main discipline ) , an autodi - dactic learning of a new discipline , or perhaps only a special interest in a discipline . In addition , disciplinary affiliations may sometimes blur for researchers who have spent years studying subjects that are very interdisciplinary in nature ( Schummer 2004 ) . Finally , another explanation can be that some disciplines have fuzzy boundaries ( e . g . , forestry ) and that researchers from these disciplines may feel also attached to neighbor disciplines . It has been suggested that this fuzzi - ness may benefit interdisciplinarity , as disciplines with fuzzy boundaries “appear to be hospitable to extensive grow that the edges of their territory” ( Davis 1992 , p . 178 ) . This analysis of the disciplinary structure can only work if the majority of researchers identify themselves with several disciplines . In the extreme case in which all researchers feel Fig . 6 Pearson’s correlations between four researcher characteris - tics and two indicators of contribution to collective interdisciplinar - ity ( interdisciplinary interactions and brokerage ) in the four forms of interactions ( research , management , publication , and all , counter - clockwise from the bottom left in each cell ) , and three indicators of individual interdisciplinarity ( variety , balance , and disparity ) . The diameters of the circles are proportional to the absolute correlations , their colors depend on the signs ( blue for positive , red for negative ) , and the significance levels are shown inside the circles ( * : p < 0 . 05 ) 48 Sustainability Science ( 2021 ) 16 : 37 – 52 1 3 attached to single disciplines , the bipartite network would include several subgraphs disconnected from each other , each one grouping together a discipline and the research - ers within this discipline . Therefore , analyzing disciplinary communities would not make sense as it would only return a list of individual disciplines . This is why the bipartite network analysis works only with a research group where interdisciplinarity exists at the individual level . The list of disciplines and the grain of disciplinary detail influence the results of the analysis . For example , a finer grain that distinguishes between community ecology , popu - lation ecology , and functional ecology would have resulted in different disciplinary communities . The distinction between these three ecology disciplines would be relevant in the case of a group specializing in ecology , but less relevant in our case study . It is therefore recommended to adjust the disciplinary grain to the diversity of the disciplines of the group studied . Interdisciplinary interactions Analysis of the interaction networks showed that scientific interactions ( research and publication ) in the group were stronger between researchers from the same disciplinary communities . Indeed , we observed that all disciplinary com - munities showed homophily for their publication interac - tions , which can be explained by the fact that mono - discipli - nary papers may be easier to publish than interdisciplinary ones , as referees may lack the expertise needed to review manuscripts with multiple disciplinary backgrounds ( Bruce et al . 2004 ) . The three small disciplinary communities ( com - puter sciences , economic and political sciences , and social sciences ) showed homophily in the research interactions , which confirms that these small communities were isolated from other researchers in the group , as indicated by our ini - tial analysis of researchers’ disciplinary attachments . The interaction analysis showed that members of these commu - nities tend to work among themselves , despite their small community size . Disciplines influenced not only scientific interactions but also management interactions : Disciplinary homophily was observed for the management interactions in three large dis - ciplinary communities . This may be because members of the three large disciplinary communities are more often leaders of large projects and interact among themselves to manage projects ( 50 % of the members of the large disciplinary com - munities had led a large project , but only 9 % of the members of the small disciplinary communities had done so ) . Homophily is a clear driver of interactions , and it can take several forms beyond disciplinary homophily . After factor - ing out the effects of researchers’ individual characteristics , our ERGMs confirmed that two researchers are more likely to interact if they are in the same disciplinary community , located at headquarters , or work in at least one region in common . For publication interactions , the strongest homo - phily is disciplinary , probably because publications tend to gather authors from the same disciplines . For management and research , the strongest homophily comes from working in the same world regions , as two people working in the same region are often involved in the same projects , share similar interests about their place - based research activities , and sometimes do fieldwork together . In the studied group , place - based activities facilitate interactions or play the role of “boundary objects , ” a term coined by Star ( 1989 ) to describe “those objects that are plastic enough to be adaptable across multiple viewpoints” ( p . 37 ) . Boundary objects are often conceptual , but can also be concrete ( Becker 2012 ) . For example , “a forest can be a boundary object around which hikers , logging interests , conservationists , biologists , and owners organize their per - spectives and seeks ways of coordinating them” ( Wenger 1999 , p . 107 ) . The practice of field work in the same places can foster discussions across disciplines about diverging or shared visions of the studied place and can lead to the rede - fining of research questions or approaches and build inter - disciplinary research ( Riaux and Massuel 2014 ) . A powerful way to strengthen interdisciplinarity is by designing research projects that involve joint fieldwork by researchers of differ - ent disciplines ( Marzano et al . 2006 ) . One limit of our analysis is that we chose to focus on the interactions inside the group and to exclude external interactions , because our analysis cannot be applied easily to the group of external collaborators , possibly very large . Some researchers can appear in our analysis with a low level of interdisciplinarity in their interactions within the group , while they may have a higher level of interdisciplinarity in their external interactions . Another limit is that we focus on the existence of management , research , and publication interactions between researchers rather than on their con - tent . It would be interesting to complement the analysis with qualitative information on how the interactions contribute to interdisciplinarity : Do interactions between two research - ers from different disciplinary communities always lead to integrating different concepts and methods or contrasting and mutually enriching disciplinary perspectives ? We could explore the degree of interaction , from simple notice - taking ( i . e . , one researcher notices the existence of other perspec - tives ) to joint efforts ( i . e . , researchers share concepts from different disciplines and build on them ) ( Paxson 1996 ) . We could also identify the outcomes of the interactions , such as new knowledge or new perspectives ( Aram 2004 ) . Another limit of our analysis is that we have not tried to explain pro - fessional interactions alongside personal relationships , such as friendship , despite the importance friendship between researchers may have for collaborative ties ( Maldonado et al . 2009 ; Tse and Dasborough 2008 ) . 49 Sustainability Science ( 2021 ) 16 : 37 – 52 1 3 Interdisciplinary brokerage Some researchers occupy key positions in interaction networks , which gives them the power to create bridges between other researchers . When this brokerage role occurs across disciplinary communities , these brokers play the roles of “academic translators , conveyors of messages between representatives and audiences of different disciplines” ( Molteberg et al . 2000 , p . 329 ) or are crossers of disciplinary borders in the sense given by Jollivet ( 1992 ) . Our analysis shows that brokers in the studied group are not from a par - ticular disciplinary community and do not only come from large communities . For example , a researcher from a small disciplinary community is a key broker within and across disciplines . This result can be explained by the size of the small disciplinary communities , which incentivizes build - ing interactions with other communities . However , this is not the case for all members of small communities : Some interact intensively as key interdisciplinary brokers , while others do not . Thus , the brokerage roles are not explained by disciplines , but rather by personal situations or motivations . The broker analysis suggests that the research group functions in an “integrative – synthesis” mode as defined by Barry et al . ( 2008 ) . In this mode , the different disciplines in a group are at the same level , whereas in the “subordi - nation – service” mode , one discipline ( or a few ) dominates the others , and the others serve the dominant . In the sub - ordination – service mode , we expect that the exchanges between researchers are channeled through researchers of the dominant discipline and , consequently , the brokers are predominantly from this discipline . The analysis of broker - age by discipline therefore makes it possible to reflect on the distribution of power in a research group . Brokers hold a centrality ( also called “betweenness centrality” ) , which is a form of power—that of transmitting information , facilitating collaborations , or blocking them ( Di Gregorio et al . 2019 ; Ingold 2011 ) . The integrative – synthesis mode , suggested by our analysis , reflects equity in the distribution of power between disciplines , while the subordination – service mode highlights power relationships between disciplines . Individual and collective interdisciplinarity In the studied group , researchers with high individual inter - disciplinarity are less interdisciplinary in their interactions ( without having fewer interactions in general ) . As we have expected that researchers with different disciplines interact more across disciplines , this result is surprising . One reason may be that we have not analyzed interactions outside the group : Researchers with high individual interdisciplinar - ity may have interdisciplinary interactions with researchers from other groups , uncaptured in our study . Another reason for this result may be that researchers with a high individual interdisciplinarity feel less need to work with researchers from other disciplines . For example , a forest scientist super - vising a thesis on the role of forests in water regulation may invite a hydrologist to co - supervise , whereas a researcher trained in both forest sciences and hydrology may not . Inter - disciplinary collaboration may not be best developed by “jacks of all trades” ( Nash et al . 2003 ) , i . e . , researchers who have gained many disciplinary skills . As interdisciplinarity is sometimes defined as being an attribute of researchers who learn to understand each other without losing their own identities ( Hunt 1994 ) , interdisciplinarity may be better fos - tered by “jacks of a few trades , master of one . ” Given the small size of the study in terms of the num - ber of researchers investigated , the negative correlations between individual interdisciplinarity and the contribution to collective interdisciplinarity should not be generalized . Findings may differ in other research groups focusing on the same topics or other sustainability domains such as ocean ecosystems , soil sustainability , or climate change . The pecu - liarities of the studied group are shown for example by the effect of seniority ( which does not influence the contribution of researchers to interdisciplinarity or decrease interactions in management ) . This result can seem counterintuitive , as we could expect that more established or senior researchers are more capable of connecting people from diverse disci - plines and interact more with other group members . Indeed , in many research groups , senior researchers are central in management and have their names on most papers , but it is not the case of the studied group . This group does not have a hierarchical structure and is composed of researchers with diverse personal trajectories , having alternated between field action research and more academic research , or between management , teaching , and research . For example , some senior researchers of this group conduct an applied research with limited involvement in publications or management . The reward system in place in the group may explain that these trajectories are different from typical academic careers , because it assesses the performance of researchers not only on publications but also on consulting activities , fundrais - ing , and policy or societal impacts , among others . Reward systems in academia have been identified as important bar - riers or incentives to interdisciplinarity ( Bruce et al . 2004 ; Haider et al . 2018 ) . Researcher characteristics The propensity of researchers to act as interdisciplinary bro - kers cannot be explained by their disciplines or individual interdisciplinarity but partially by their individual charac - teristics . Surprisingly , no characteristic explains the levels of individual interdisciplinarity ( Fig . 6 ) . For example , indi - vidual interdisciplinarity is not correlated with seniority : On the one hand , the youngest researchers might have received 50 Sustainability Science ( 2021 ) 16 : 37 – 52 1 3 more interdisciplinary training , but , on the other side , more senior researchers might have learned new disciplinary per - spectives over the course of their careers . Researcher characteristics are good descriptors of the role of researchers in interdisciplinary brokerage : Leaders of large projects are interdisciplinary brokers for research interactions , recognized researchers for publication interac - tions , and management committee members for all types of interactions . As seniority has no effect on interdiscipli - nary brokerage , we can conclude that in the studied research group , seniority is a bad descriptor of the role of researchers in interdisciplinarity . Because of the diversity of personal trajectories in the group , recognition , project leadership , and participation in management committee matter more than seniority . Because both social and cognitive phenomena drive inter - disciplinary research , individual capacities or motivations matter in explaining individual and collective interdiscipli - narity ( Wagner et al . 2011 ) . Cognitive analyses of interdis - ciplinarity could be applied to explore how the mind of a single person can integrate different disciplinary perspec - tives or be confronted with different perspectives ( Bromme 2000 ; Repko et al . 2007 ) . Such analyses would be relevant for identifying strategies around improving how interdisci - plinary groups function ( O’Donnell and Derry 1997 ) . Conclusion Interdisciplinary research is needed to build knowledge in sustainability science . In this paper , we have explored how individual interdisciplinarity at the level of research - ers interacts with collective interdisciplinarity in a research group on sustainability science . We applied social network analysis tools to the case of a group working in the field of forest sustainability science in order to test the hypoth - esis that researchers with high individual interdisciplinarity have more interdisciplinary interactions or play a role as interdisciplinary brokers . Our results rejected the hypoth - esis : Researchers with high individual interdisciplinarity had fewer interdisciplinary interactions than others . They also showed that disciplines or interdisciplinarity did not explain brokerage roles , which were better explained by the personal characteristics of researchers . These findings , spe - cific to the studied research group , call more research on the interactions between individual interdisciplinarity and collective interdisciplinarity . Further research is also needed to understand how social and cognitive factors drive inter - disciplinary research . Our analysis also highlighted the role of place - based activities as boundary objects in facilitating interactions . The design of place - based research projects with researchers of different disciplines is a promising way of strengthening interdisciplinarity . Acknowledgements This study was funded by the French funding agency for research ( project TRASSE ANR - 17 - CE32 - 0012 ) . The authors thank participants for their responses to the survey . Authors’ contributions BL , JT , and PS were involved in conceptualiza - tion and methodology ; BL was involved in data collection and analysis and writing—original draft preparation ; and all authors were involved in result interpretation and writing—review and editing . Compliance with ethical standards Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest . References Aboelela SW , Larson E , Bakken S , Carrasquillo O , Formicola A , Glied SA , Haas J , Gebbie KM ( 2007a ) Defining interdisciplinary research : conclusions from a critical review of the literature . Health Serv Res 42 : 329 – 346 Aboelela SW , Merrill JA , Carley KM , Larson E ( 2007b ) Social network analysis to evaluate an interdisciplinary research center . J Res Administr 38 : 61 – 75 Aram JD ( 2004 ) Concepts of interdisciplinarity : configurations of knowledge and action . Human Relat 57 : 379 – 412 Barry A , Born G , Weszkalnys G ( 2008 ) Logics of interdisciplinarity . Econ Soc 37 : 20 – 49 Becker E ( 2012 ) Social - ecological systems as epistemic objects . In : Glaser M ( ed ) Human - Nature Interactions in the Anthropocene . Routledge , New York , pp 55 – 77 Bennett NJ , Roth R , Klain SC , Chan KM , Clark DA , Cullman G , Epstein G , Nelson MP , Stedman R , Teel TL ( 2017 ) Mainstream - ing the social sciences in conservation . Conserv Biol 31 : 56 – 66 Biancani S , McFarland DA ( 2013 ) Social networks research in higher education . Higher education : handbook of theory and research . Springer , Berlin , pp 151 – 215 Binz - Scharf MC , Kalish Y , Paik L ( 2015 ) Making science : new gen - erations of collaborative knowledge production . Am Behav Sci 59 : 531 – 547 Blanchard A , Vanderlinden J - P ( 2010 ) Dissipating the fuzziness around interdisciplinarity : the case of climate change research . SAPIENS Surv Perspect Integr Environ Soc 16 : 1 – 22 Boyack KW , Klavans R ( 2014 ) Creation of a highly detailed , dynamic , global model and map of science . J Assoc Inform Sci Technol 65 : 670 – 685 Bromme R ( 2000 ) Beyond one’s own perspective : the psychology of cognitive interdisciplinarity . In : Weingart P , Stehr N ( eds ) Prac - ticing interdisciplinarity . University of Toronto Press , Toronto , pp 115 – 133 Bruce A , Lyall C , Tait J , Williams R ( 2004 ) Interdisciplinary inte - gration in Europe : the case of the Fifth Framework programme . Futures 36 : 457 – 470 Butts CT ( 2016 ) sna : Tools for Social Network Analysis . R package version 2 . 4 . https : / / CRAN . R - proje ct . org / packa ge = sna Butts CT , Morris M , Krivitsky PN , Almquist Z , Handcock MS , Hunter DR , Goodreau SM , de - Moll SB ( 2015 ) Introduction to Exponen - tial - family Random Graph ( ERG or p * ) modeling with ergm . CRAN project , http : / / cran . r - proje ct . org / web / packa ges / ergm / vigne ttes / ergm . pdf , Calvert J ( 2010 ) Systems biology , interdisciplinarity and disciplinary identity . In : Vermeulen N , Penders B , Parker J ( eds ) Collabora - tion in the new life sciences . Ashgate Publishing , Farnham , pp 201 – 218 51 Sustainability Science ( 2021 ) 16 : 37 – 52 1 3 Cranmer SJ , Desmarais BA ( 2011 ) Inferential network analysis with exponential random graph models . Polit Anal 19 : 66 – 86 Csardi G ( 2018 ) igraph : Routines for simple graphs and network analy - sis , version 1 . 2 . 2 . https : / / cran . r - proje ct . org / packa ge = igrap h , Cummings JN , Kiesler S ( 2005 ) Collaborative research across disci - plinary and organizational boundaries . Soc Stud Sci 35 : 703 – 722 Davis M ( 1992 ) Disciplines , interdisciplinarity and migration in family research . Res Evaluat 2 : 177 – 187 Di Gregorio M , Fatorelli L , Paavola J , Locatelli B , Pramova E , Nur - rochmat DR , May PH , Brockhaus M , Sari IM , Kusumadewi SD ( 2019 ) Multi - level governance and power in climate change policy networks . Glob Environ Change 54 : 64 – 77 Fraser ED , Dougill AJ , Hubacek K , Quinn CH , Sendzimir J , Ter - mansen M ( 2011 ) Assessing vulnerability to climate change in dryland livelihood systems : conceptual challenges and interdis - ciplinary solutions . Ecology and Society 16 ( 3 ) : 3 Gould RV , Fernandez RM ( 1989 ) Structures of mediation : a formal approach to brokerage in transaction networks . Sociol Methodol 19 : 89 – 126 Hackenburg DM , Adams A , Brownson K , Borokini IT , Gladkikh TM , Herd - Hoare SC , Jolly H , Kadykalo AN , Kraus EB , McDonough KR ( 2019 ) Meaningfully engaging the next generation of ecosys - tem services specialists . Ecosyst Services 40 : 101041 Haider LJ , Hentati - Sundberg J , Giusti M , Goodness J , Hamann M , Masterson VA , Meacham M , Merrie A , Ospina D , Schill C , Sinare H ( 2018 ) The undisciplinary journey : early - career perspectives in sustainability science . Sustain Sci 13 : 191 – 204 Handcock MS , Hunter DR , Butts CT , Goodreau SM , Krivitsky PN , Bender - deMoll S , Morris M ( 2016 ) Package ‘statnet’ : Software Tools for the Statistical Analysis of Network Data , version 2016 . 9 . https : / / cran . r - proje ct . org / packa ge = statn et , Hein CJ , Ten Hoeve JE , Gopalakrishnan S , Livneh B , Adams HD , Marino EK , Susan Weiler C ( 2018 ) Overcoming early career bar - riers to interdisciplinary climate change research . Wiley Interdis - cipl Rev 9 : e530 Hunt L ( 1994 ) The virtues of disciplinarity . Eighteenth Centur Stud 28 : 1 – 7 Huutoniemi K , Klein JT , Bruun H , Hukkinen J ( 2010 ) Analyzing inter - disciplinarity : typology and indicators . Res Policy 39 : 79 – 88 Ingold K ( 2011 ) Network structures within policy processes : coali - tions , power , and brokerage in Swiss climate policy . Policy studies journal 39 : 435 – 459 Jollivet M ( ed ) ( 1992 ) Sciences de la nature , sciences de la société : Les passeurs de frontières . CNRS Editions , Paris , p 589 Jung Y , Kim E , Kim W ( 2019 ) The scientific and technological inter - disciplinary research of government research institutes : network analysis of the innovation cluster in South Korea . Policy Stud . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01442 872 . 2019 . 15933 43 Kates RW ( 2011 ) What kind of a science is sustainability science ? Proc Natl Acad Sci 108 : 19449 Kibanov M , Heiberger RH , Rödder S , Atzmueller M , Stumme G ( 2019 ) Social studies of scholarly life with sensor - based ethnographic observations . Scientometrics 119 : 1387 – 1428 Knoke D , Yang S ( 2008 ) Social network analysis . Sage , Thousand Oaks Komiyama H , Takeuchi K ( 2006 ) Sustainability science : building a new discipline . Sustain Sci 1 : 1 – 6 Krackhardt D , Stern RN ( 1988 ) Informal networks and organiza - tional crises : an experimental simulation . Social Psychol Quart 51 ( 2 ) : 123 – 140 Leydesdorff L , Rafols I ( 2009 ) A global map of science based on the ISI subject categories . J Am Soc Inform Sci Technol 60 : 348 – 362 Locatelli B , Pramova E , Di Gregorio M , Brockhaus M , Armas Chávez D , Tubbeh R , Sotés J , Perla J ( 2020 ) Climate change policy net - works : connecting adaptation and mitigation in multiplex net - works . Clim Policy 20 : 354 – 372 Long JC , Cunningham FC , Braithwaite J ( 2013 ) Bridges , brokers and boundary spanners in collaborative networks : a systematic review . BMC Health Services Research 13 : 158 Lusher D , Robins G ( 2013 ) Formation of Social Network Structure . In : Lusher D , Robins G , Koskinen J ( eds ) Exponential random graph models for social networks : theory , methods , and applica - tions . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , pp 16 – 28 Maldonado H , Klemmer SR , Pea RD ( 2009 ) When is collaborating with friends a good idea ? insights from design education . Proc 29th Int Conf Comput Support Collaborat Learn 1 : 227 – 231 Marzano M , Carss DN , Bell S ( 2006 ) Working to make interdisci - plinarity work : investing in communication and interpersonal relationships . J Agric Econ 57 : 185 – 197 McPherson M , Smith - Lovin L , Cook JM ( 2001 ) Birds of a feather : homophily in social networks . Ann Rev Sociol 27 : 415 – 444 Molteberg E , Bergstrøm C , Haug R ( 2000 ) Interdisciplinarity in development studies : Myths and realities . Forum for Develop - ment Studies . London , Taylor & Francis , pp 317 – 330 Nash JM , Collins BN , Loughlin SE , Solbrig M , Harvey R , Krishnan - Sarin S , Unger J , Miner C , Rukstalis M , Shenassa E ( 2003 ) Training the transdisciplinary scientist : a general framework applied to tobacco use behavior . Nicotine Tob Res 5 : S41 – S53 Neal JW , Neal ZP , Mills KJ , Lawlor JA , McAlindon K ( 2019 ) What types of brokerage bridge the research - practice gap ? The case of public school educators . Social Netw 59 : 41 – 49 O’Donnell AM , Derry SJ ( 1997 ) Cognitive processes in interdisci - plinary groups : problems and possibilities . In : Derry SJ , Schunn CD , Gernsbacher MA ( eds ) Interdisciplinary collaboration : an emerging cognitive science . Lawrence Erlbaum Publishers , Mahwah , pp 51 – 82 Paxson TD ( 1996 ) Modes of interaction between disciplines . The Journal of General Education 45 : 79 – 94 Porter A , Rafols I ( 2009 ) Is science becoming more interdiscipli - nary ? Measuring and mapping six research fields over time . Scientometrics 81 : 719 – 745 Qin J , Lancaster FW , Allen B ( 1997 ) Types and levels of collabo - ration in interdisciplinary research in the sciences . J Am Soc Inform Sci 48 : 893 – 916 Rafols I , Meyer M ( 2010 ) Diversity and network coherence as indi - cators of interdisciplinarity : case studies in bionanoscience . Scientometrics 82 : 263 – 287 Repko A , Navakas F , Fiscella J ( 2007 ) Integrating interdisciplinarity : how the theories of common ground and cognitive interdiscipli - narity are informing the debate on interdisciplinary integration . Issues in Interdisciplinary Studies 25 : 1 – 31 Riaux J , Massuel S ( 2014 ) Building a sociohydrological perspective ( 2 ) . sharing fieldwork to develop scientific convergences . Nat Sci Soc 22 : 329 – 339 Robins G , Lusher D ( 2013a ) Illustrations : Simulation , Estimation , and Goodness of Fit . In : Lusher D , Robins G , Koskinen J ( eds ) Exponential Random graph models for social networks : theory , methods , and applications . Cambridge University Press , Cam - bridge , pp 167 – 186 Robins G , Lusher D ( 2013b ) What Are Exponential Random Graph Models ? In : Lusher D , Robins G , Koskinen J ( eds ) Exponential random graph models for social networks : theory , methods , and applications . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , pp 9 – 15 Schoolman ED , Guest JS , Bush KF , Bell AR ( 2012 ) How interdis - ciplinary is sustainability research ? Analyzing the structure of an emerging scientific field . Sustain Sci 7 : 67 – 80 Schummer J ( 2004 ) Multidisciplinarity , interdisciplinarity , and pat - terns of research collaboration in nanoscience and nanotechnol - ogy . Scientometrics 59 : 425 – 465 Star SL ( 1989 ) The structure of ill - structured solutions : Boundary objects and heterogeneous distributed problem solving . In : 52 Sustainability Science ( 2021 ) 16 : 37 – 52 1 3 Gasser L , Huhns MN ( eds ) Distributed artificial intelligence . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , San Mateo , pp 37 – 54 R Core Team ( 2018 ) R : A language and environment for statistical computing . R version 3 . 5 . 1 ( 2018 - 07 - 02 ) . R Foundation for Sta - tistical Computing , Vienna , Austria , https : / / www . r - proje ct . org / , Tse HH , Dasborough MT ( 2008 ) A study of exchange and emotions in team member relationships . Group Organiz Manag 33 : 194 – 215 Uddin S , Hossain L , Rasmussen K ( 2013 ) Network effects on scientific collaborations . PLoS ONE 8 : e57546 van Leeuwen T , Tijssen R ( 2000 ) Interdisciplinary dynamics of modern science : analysis of cross - disciplinary citation flows . Res Eval 9 : 183 – 187 Van Noorden R ( 2015 ) Interdisciplinary research by the numbers . Nature 525 : 306 – 307 Van Rijnsoever FJ , Hessels LK ( 2011 ) Factors associated with disci - plinary and interdisciplinary research collaboration . Res Policy 40 : 463 – 472 Vojak BA , Price RL , Griffin A ( 2010 ) Corporate innovation . In : Frode - man R ( ed ) The Oxford handbook of interdisciplinarity . Oxford University Press , Oxford , pp 546 – 559 Wagner CS , Roessner JD , Bobb K , Klein JT , Boyack KW , Keyton J , Rafols I , Börner K ( 2011 ) Approaches to understanding and measuring interdisciplinary scientific research ( IDR ) : a review of the literature . Journal of informetrics 5 : 14 – 26 Wang J , Thijs B , Glänzel W ( 2015 ) Interdisciplinarity and impact : distinct effects of variety , balance , and disparity . PLoS ONE 10 : e0127298 Wenger E ( 1999 ) Communities of practice : learning , meaning , and identity . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge Yang C , Park H , Heo J ( 2010 ) A network analysis of interdisciplinary research relationships : the Korean government’s R & D grant pro - gram . Scientometrics 83 : 77 – 92 Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations .