COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM January 2005 / Vol . 48 , No . 1 39 Working with Young Children as TECHNOLOGY DESIGN PARTNERS How children’s technology is developed , and who is involved in the process , can vary greatly . While there are many roles children can play in the design of new technology , at the University of Maryland we have focused on partnering with children ages 7 – 11 . We have found these intergenerational partnerships can lead to unexpected technology innovations , as well as establishing design methods for working with children . Influenced by the cooperative design practices of the Scandinavian countries , and participatory design and contextual inquiry in the U . S . , we have developed design methods for working with children called Cooperative Inquiry [ 3 , 4 ] . A case study illustrates how even young children can contribute to the technology design process . By MONA LEIGH GUHA , ALLISON DRUIN , GENE CHIPMAN , JERRY ALAN FAILS , SANTE SIMMS , and ALLISON FARBER 40 January 2005 / Vol . 48 , No . 1 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM The techniques of Cooperative Inquiry enable children and adults to work together to create innovative tech - nology for children , and grew out of work with children ages 7 – 11 who meet in a lab twice a week after school and two weeks over the sum - mer [ 3 ] . There are many techniques that can be used by a team develop - ing technology through Cooperative Inquiry . One such method is a modified form of participatory design that involves sketching ideas with art supplies such as paper , cardboard , and glue to create low - tech prototypes during the brain - storming process [ 3 , 4 ] . Another technique enables both children and adults to do observational research ; all members of a design team ( both children and adults ) observe other children ( not involved in the design process ) using technology and capture activity patterns through an adapted form of contextual inquiry . Often , these observations are written on sticky notes , with children drawing their thoughts in pictures and adults writing their ideas with words [ 3 , 4 ] . Over the past six years , Cooperative Inquiry has been extended and refined through a variety of proj - ects conducted by ourselves and other researchers in Europe , Canada , and the U . S . [ 2 , 5 , 7 , 9 – 12 ] . We have found that Cooperative Inquiry can work for diverse age groups such as 4 – 6 year olds [ 6 ] and 10 – 13 year olds [ 8 ] , but that modifications are needed due to children’s varying cognitive and social abilities [ 6 , 8 ] . The mixing ideas technique , a framework for merging individual ideas in design collaboration , was developed through research concerning the Class - room of the Future . This five - year project , funded by the National Science Foundation ( NSF ) , is focused on developing tangible , ubiquitous technologies for the preschool classroom [ 6 ] . Over the years , we have found that our youngest design partners ( ages 4 – 6 ) are challenged by truly collaborating and elaborating on one another’s ideas . Children can become visibly upset , withdraw from the design experience , or dis - rupt design activities if they feel they are not being lis - tened to , or the team is modifying their idea . Children at this age can have a difficult time “letting go” of their own personal idea , yet their ideas con - tribute to the design process . Mixing Ideas Here , we describe a case study of how the mixing ideas technique can work with young design partners . Our work took place with 11 eth - nically diverse children , ages 5 – 6 . There were five boys and six girls who worked with five adults over a four - week period , in hour - long sessions held twice a week . Our research focused on developing new technologies for center time : an experi - ence in the U . S . preschool classroom where young children are able to choose what to explore , play with , and learn . Typical centers may include build - ing with blocks , playing computer games , reading books , and so on . Our central question to our young design partners was “How would you change the centers in your classroom if you could ? ” Stage One : Each child generates ideas . We began our research by having each child observe their peers working at centers . During this stage , each child worked one - on - one with an adult . The children left their classrooms , and were brought into an observa - tion booth in groups of two or three children . The children observed their classmates and drew what they saw in their research journals . The adults anno - tated the journal drawings with the children’s words . Examples from the children’s journals at this stage included such observations as “Alan and Peter are playing Candyland . ” 1 After the children drew what they saw , we asked them to draw ways to make these centers “better . ” The children suggested such ideas as “I want to be able to dress up at dramatic play . The clothes will walk by themselves and make noises when you push on a button ( ‘woof’ ) . ” Stage Two : Initial mixing of ideas . After generat - ing individual ideas we then began mixing them . At this stage , two or three children met with the five adults on the team , forming four groups . We began each session by having children explain their personal ideas and show their journal drawings . We then explained why we needed to mix ideas by using the analogy of baking cookies . Each ingredient by itself may not taste very good , but once all of the ingredi - ents are combined , you get a tasty treat that is better Figure 1 . A small group idea for a Center of the Future : Storytelling Legos . 1 Children’s names have been changed to protect their privacy . than each individual ingredient . We asked the children to close their eyes and put all of their ideas into a “mixing bowl” and stir them up to see what came out . The children and adults then began talking about pos - sible ways to mix ideas . Once the group had an initial consensus , they created a name for the center and drew their ideas on a piece of table - sized paper . The results of these four groups were : Magic Funhouse , Magic Holiday Game , Storytelling Legos , and Zoo Center ( as illustrated in Figure 1 ) . At this point , it was our intention to jump directly to mixing the ideas of all four centers . However , in looking at how different the ideas were from each group and that the children still needed a great deal of structure in order to collaborate , we decided to add another step . Therefore , the four groups were grouped into two groups and The Magic Holiday Game and the Zoo Center combined to make Animal Holiday Games and the Sto - rytelling Legos plus the Magic Fun - house combined to make Storytelling Funhouse . Stage Three : Mixing the big idea . After these intermediate steps , it was time to mix the big idea . Before we had the 11 children meet together , the adults discussed possi - ble ways in which the two ideas could become one , which offered us possible roadmaps in preparation , for our final mixing session . In prepara - tion , we cut up the ideas from the previous stage into little pictures . During this last mixing session , the children rearranged the cutouts and put them together with tape as a way to begin thinking of how their ideas could fit together ( see Figure 2 ) . Then we used a large piece of paper and drew the big , final idea called the Story Game Fun House ( see Figure 3 ) —an outdoor structure with many connected rooms . Many of the more specific ideas from earlier stages in mixing ideas may appear to be lost in the final big idea . Although an individual idea may not be immediately apparent in the final concept , the mixing and elabora - tion process sparks imagination and innovation and each child and adult can feel they influenced the final outcome . In our research , it is always our intent to push the frontiers of both the methodology used in creating technology for young children and the technology itself . To this end , we are currently developing technology that reflects concepts that emerged from the mixing ideas process . For example , children often visited other team mem - bers’ creations leading to collaborative play , connecting ideas , and collaborative construction of new ideas . Additionally , the children were interested in outdoor environments . By combin - ing these observations , we are explor - ing ideas involving collaborative environments that can support con - nectedness between young children in outdoor settings . We are currently developing technology to enable chil - dren to play and learn in outdoor environments while sharing informa - tion with one another . What Children Thought of Mixing Ideas We concluded the mixing ideas process by asking the children what they liked the best and what they felt was the “hardest” part of being a design partner . The children drew their thoughts in their journals and had an adult annotate their draw - ings . The most frequent answers included : Likes : Drawing , mixing ideas , and observing . The aspect that emerged most frequently was the chil - dren liked drawing . Since most children at this age are not yet able to fully express their ideas clearly in writ - ing , drawing gives them a way to do so . Allowing an adult to annotate their drawings enables more com - plete expression of their ideas . Another aspect the chil - dren liked was simply mixing ideas . One child mentioned combining ideas as his favorite part , while another mentioned his work on a center that grew out of mixing ideas as his favorite . Two children also men - tioned they liked observing their classmates in class - room centers . Hardest : Individual idea generation , physically COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM January 2005 / Vol . 48 , No . 1 41 Figure 2 . The cut up and remixed big idea . Figure 3 . The final big idea : Story Game Fun House . mixing ideas , and nothing . When children spoke of drawing as the most difficult part of mixing ideas , they referred to individually sketching ideas in their journals . Upon further discussion with them , we believe they were not necessarily referring to the act of drawing , but the individual idea - generation process before drawing . Some children also identified mixing ideas as the most difficult part of the process . One child found it difficult to tape ideas together ; another had a difficult time drawing in the middle of the large paper . We have begun refining our methods to make the physical act of mixing ideas easier for young chil - dren . Finally , some children were at a loss for what the most difficult thing was about mixing ideas . These children seemed genuinely perplexed that any part of the process could be perceived as difficult . Lessons Learned Through the process of mixing ideas , we learned that young children need more structure to collabo - rate during the brainstorming process . By encourag - ing idea generation in smaller steps , and establishing parameters for collaboration with others , these young children were less frustrated and more pro - ductive in the brainstorming process . However , the challenge of this process is the amount of time it takes to get to the “big idea . ” This is not necessarily a process that can be navigated quickly . On the other hand , this process has taught us the importance of valuing teammates’ ideas . Past partici - patory design research confirms that to be successful , the participants must believe their ideas are important [ 1 ] . By beginning the mixing ideas process with time for individual brainstorming and sharing personal ideas , children feel they have been heard when it is time to mix ideas . In addition , one - on - one work between adults and children can ensure the children’s ideas are communicated and well documented . The method of children’s drawing with adult annotation can also help with young children who may have challenges expressing their ideas with words . Using some physical mixing of ideas , such as cutting and taping , helped to alleviate any possible tiring the chil - dren may have experienced from continually drawing . Finally , as with all Cooperative Inquiry techniques , adults must remember their ideas are as valuable as the children’s . Adults must learn when working with young children , with as much tact as possible , to gen - tly elaborate ideas . Conclusion The case study presented here offers a roadmap for others to try with their own research teams . We believe that mixing ideas can be a powerful part of Cooperative Inquiry with young children . The process of mixing ideas with these younger children enhanced the effectiveness of other Cooperative Inquiry techniques designed for use with older chil - dren . Through technology implementation and fur - ther empirical study we expect to better understand the benefits of mixing ideas with young children . References 1 . Ackoff , R . L . Redesigning the Future . Wiley , New York , NY , 1974 . 2 . Bekker , M . , Beusmans , J . , Keyson , D . , Lloyd , P . KidReporter : A method for engaging children in making a newspaper to gather user require - ments . In Proceedings of the International Workshop Interaction Design and Children ( Eindhoven , The Netherlands , Aug . 2002 ) , 138 – 143 . 3 . Druin , A . Cooperative Inquiry : Developing new technologies for chil - dren with children . In Proceedings of CHI ‘99 ( Pittsburgh , PA , May 1999 ) , ACM Press , New York , NY , 592 – 599 . 4 . Druin , A . The role of children in the design of new technology . Behav - iour and IT 21 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 1 – 25 . 5 . Druin , A . Bederson , B . , Hourcade , J . P . , Sherman , L . , Revelle , G . , Plat - ner , M . , and Weng , S . Designing a digital library for young children : An intergenerational partnership . In Proceedings of ACM / IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries , ( June 2001 ) , 398 – 405 . 6 . Farber , A . , Druin , A . , Chipman , G . , Julian , D . , Shomashekar , S . How young can our design partners be ? In Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference , ( Malmo , Sweden , June 2002 ) , 272 – 276 . 7 . Gibson , L . , Newall , F . , and Gregor , P . Developing a Web authoring tool that promotes accessibility in children’s designs . In Small Users , Big Ideas Proceedings of Interaction Design and Children ( Preston , U . K . , July 2003 ) , 23 – 30 8 . Knudtzon , K . , Drun , A . , Kaplan , N . , Chisik , Y . , Kulkarni , R . , Moulthrop , S . , Weeks , H . , Bederson , B . Starting an intergenerational technology design team : A case study . In Small Users , Big Ideas Proceed - ings of Interaction Design and Children ( Preston , U . K . , July 2003 ) , 51 – 58 . 9 . Nesset , V . and Large , A . Children in the Informational Technology Design Process : A Review of Theories and their Applications . 10 . Rhode , J . A . , Stringer , M . , Toye , E . F . , Simpson , A . R . and Blackwell , A . F Curriculum - focused design . In S mall Users , Big Ideas—Proceedings of Interaction Design and Children ( Preston , England , June 2003 ) , 119 – 126 . 11 . Robertson , J . Experiences of designing with children and teachers in the StoryStation Project . In Proceedings of the International Workshop Interaction Design and Children ( Eindhoven , The Netherlands , Aug . 2002 ) , 29 – 41 . 12 . Taxen , G . , Druin , A . , Fast , C . , Kjellin , M . KidStory : A technology design partnership with children . Behaviour and IT 20 , 2 ( 2001 ) , 119 – 125 . Mona Leigh Guha ( mona @ cs . umd . edu ) is a doctoral student at the University of Maryland’s College of Education , College Park , MD . Allison Druin ( allisond @ umiacs . umd . edu ) is an assistant professor at the University of Maryland’s College of Information Studies and Human - Computer Interaction Lab ( HCIL ) , College Park , MD . Gene Chipman is a doctoral student at the University of Maryland’s Department of Computer Science , College Park , MD . Jerry Alan Fails is a doctoral student at the University of Maryland’s Department of Computer Science , College Park , MD . Sante Simms is a faculty research assistant at the University of Maryland’s Human - Computer Interaction Lab ( HCIL ) , College Park , MD . Allison Farber is a faculty research assistant at the University of Maryland’s Human - Computer Interaction Lab ( HCIL ) , College Park , MD . © 2005 ACM 0001 - 0782 / 05 / 0100 $ 5 . 00 c 42 January 2005 / Vol . 48 , No . 1 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM