AI as an Active Writer : Interaction strategies with generated text in human - AI collaborative fiction writing Daijin Yang 1 , Yanpeng Zhou 2 , Zhiyuan Zhang 3 , Toby Jia - Jun Li 4 and Ray LC 3 1 Northeastern University , 360 Huntington Ave , Boston , MA 02115 , USA 2 Nanyang Technological University , 50 Nanyang Ave , 639798 , Singapore 3 City University of Hong Kong , Tat Chee Avenue , Kowloon Tong , 518057 , Hong Kong 4 University of Notre Dame , Notre Dame , IN 46556 , USA Abstract Machine Learning ( ML ) has become an important part of the creative process for human fiction writers , allowing them to utilize various sources of information and be inspired by strategies and data previously seldom explored . To investigate how human writers collaborate with ML systems in fiction writing , we prototyped a web - based human - AI collaborative writing tool that allows writers to shorten , edit , summarize , and regenerate text produced by AI . To investigate the dynamics of human - AI interaction in fiction co - writing , we used a " finish each other’s story " approach where humans and machines took turns writing collaborative fiction . In results from a preliminary study with 9 users , we found that users took inspiration from unexpected text generated by the machine , that users expected reduced fluency and coherence in the machine text when allowed to edit the output , and that they perceived a mental model of the AI as an active writer in the collaborative process rather than simply as a passive AI writing assistant . This study provides design implications on supporting co - creative writing of humans and machines . Keywords Applications of intelligent user interfaces , Collaborative interfaces , User Modelling for Intelligent Interfaces , Evaluations of intelligent user interfaces - Reproducibility 1 . Introduction The rapid development of machine learning has made it possible for artificial intelligence ( AI ) to collaborate with humans to generate creative content [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 ] . Human - AI collaborative creative systems based on ma - chine learning have been gradually entering people’s creative artistic life such as music composition [ 6 , 7 , 8 ] , creative illustration [ 1 , 9 ] , and co - writing [ 10 , 11 ] . These human - AI collaborative creation systems can assist expe - rienced creators by inspiring them with new ideas and providing suggestions [ 12 , 13 ] . They can also bring a novel creative experience to users who have no or little creative experience , such as completing the drawing that the user has started or automatically filling in the user’s unfinished sentence [ 1 , 10 ] . In this article , we focus on the needs of users when they collaborate with AI for creative writing . Recent work is focused on improving the algorith - mic performance of natural language generation models , such as improving the logic of generated text [ 14 , 15 ] or making the generated text closer to the natural lan - guage [ 16 , 17 ] . However , little work focuses on explor - Joint Proceedings of the ACM IUI Workshops 2022 , March 2022 , Helsinki , Finland $ yang . dai @ northeastern . edu ( D . Yang ) ; zydstd @ gmail . com ( Y . Zhou ) ; zzhang452 - c @ my . cityu . edu . hk ( Z . Zhang ) ; toby . j . li @ nd . edu ( T . J . Li ) ; LC @ raylc . org ( R . LC ) ©2022Copyrightforthispaperbyitsauthors . UsepermittedunderCreative CommonsLicenseAttribution4 . 0International ( CCBY4 . 0 ) . CEUR WorkshopProceedings http : / / ceur - ws . org ISSN 1613 - 0073 CEUR Workshop Proceedings ( CEUR - WS . org ) ing how users perceive the AI used for text generation and how users interact with AI in the creative writing process [ 18 , 19 , 20 ] . Most designs consider collaborative creative writing systems with AI as the user’s assistant , such as supplementing the user’s unfinished sentences or providing users with suggestions for writing [ 10 , 11 , 13 ] . We seek to explore how an AI system may play a more active role in co - creative writing . Specifically , we explore what interactive capabilities users actually need when co - creative writing with AI , and how these capabilities affect the writing co - creation experience . To ground our study , we prototyped a collaborative writing system with a web interface for human - AI co - writing . In this system , users and the machine take turns writing paragraphs for each other to continue with . The system has two different modes , the " Edit Mode " and the " No Edit Mode " . In our preliminary study with 9 users , each user was first asked to write the beginning of a sci - fi story about human beings finding new homes . A GPT - 2 - based language model fine - tuned to a sci - fi theme generates follow - up paragraphs of the story based on what users have written . Before continuing writing , users could choose to regenerate or select from multiple ver - sions of machine - generated texts . The machine would consider changes made by users into account for its next generation . In each study sessions , the user and the AI tool finished a 5 paragraph sci - fi story together , with 2 paragraphs generated by the AI , and 3 paragraphs written by the user . Figure 1 : The architecture of the prototype human - AI co - writing tool used in this study . First , the story head is written by humans and entered into the fine - tuned GPT - 2 . The user then judges the text generated by the machine and decides whether to regenerate it . After that , the text generated by the machine is modified by the user as the final machine text . The user follows the story development of machine text to write . Finally , both machine text and human text are used as input for the next machine generation . By observing 9 users’ writing process in two modes , in - terviewing about their experiences in the co - writing pro - cess , and analyzing their written stories , we concluded our main findings as follows : 1 ) We find the patterns of texts in Human - AI col - laboratively written stories : The AI - enabled tool served as a good unexpected twist provider but not a fully competent writer . 2 ) We discover users with different writing inten - tion and in different interactive modes ( allowing editing versus not allowing editing ) had different mental expectation on text coherence and fluency . 3 ) We describe users perceptions of machine’s role in the co - writing process and discuss future pos - sibility of writing machine . Taken together , these findings guide the design of fu - ture Human - AI co - writing interfaces . 2 . Related Work The recent development of AI enabled extensive applica - tions that explored the creation of cooperation between humans and AI , including drawing creation [ 1 , 9 , 2 ] , cre - ative writing [ 10 , 11 , 3 ] , dance [ 21 ] and other fields [ 22 , 23 ] . For example , Clark et al . conducted a study that explore the use of AI to complete sentences and provide suggestions [ 13 ] and Louie et al . built an AI - enabled tool for creating music [ 6 ] . In this line of works , the AI acts as the user’s collaborator . It can adjust its out - put according to the goals and actions proposed by the user and then makes corresponding recommendations . In these systems , AI collects the user’s input information as to its output condition or predicts the user’s true in - tention based on the user’s feedback . The output of our human - machine collaborative innovative writing system is influenced by users’ input , which is consistent with previous works . However , our system comes with its own consideration of the plot , while following the user’s writing wishes . Compared with the difficulty of human innovation in story writing , machines cannot fully understand the in - tentions of human writing , so they are more likely to create unexpected plots and drive the development of the story [ 24 ] . Since the self - attention mechanism is mainly used in the current machine language model , the word vector sometimes notices itself thus falls into the looping state of the text [ 10 , 13 , 24 ] , especially in the process of generating long text . In addition , the training dataset of the machine is quite larger than the related knowledge in the human brain , so it has the potential to generate interesting story text [ 25 , 26 , 27 , 24 ] . Human’s logic is stronger than machine’s , which is necessary for coher - ence in creative writing [ 24 ] . Especially , Humans have a much better common sense world understanding than language models [ 20 ] . Hence , combining text generation language models and human writing for innovative writ - ing , including text interactive games , writing assistants and so on , might be a potential way of human - computer interaction . In a text interactive game [ 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 ] , the user controls the character through natural language , and the AI agent recognizes the user’s input , intelligently manipulates the character’s actions in a text - described environment , and feeds the results back to the user . AI writing assistant is also an important research field of human - AI creative writing . The AI writing assistant can correct users’ spelling and grammatical errors [ 10 ] , com - plete users’ unfinished sentences or supplement full - text paragraphs [ 32 ] , and provide inspiration and suggestions for users’ creative writing [ 13 ] . 3 . The Collaborative Writing Tool For our study , we prototyped a web - based collaborative writing tool where the user can co - write a short sci - fi story with a GPT - 2 - based text generation model . The tool uses a “turn - taking” approach ( Figure 1 ) where the user starts with writing the beginning the story . The model then continues the story by generating a section that follows the user’s previous one . The user and the model continue each writing a section in turns until the end of the story . The user may also edit the AI - generated section or regenerate a section when they are not satisfied with the AI - generated result . 3 . 1 . The Web Interface The web interface of our tool was implemented using the Django framework . As shown in2 , two different inter - faces are designed for two modes . " Edit Mode " and " No Edit Mode " both have a " Submit " button for the human user to submit their written text , a " Regenerate " button for the AI model to regenerate sentences , and an " End " button to end the story . There is also an " Edit " button for the user to edit the text generated by the AI model ( the Edit button was disabled in the “No Edit” condition in the study ) . All history texts will be shown at the top of the page , with human - written texts in black and machine - generated texts in red . The back button allows the user to go back to their last operation . When the user clicks on the “Regenerate” button , the model re - selects a random seed , and uses the model to generate its last paragraph . This feature allows the user to quickly get a new AI - generated paragraph when the previous one was not desirable , such as when the model fails to generate readable text , generates repetitive text , or switches topics abruptly . 3 . 2 . The Text - Generation Model Our prototype tool uses a GPT - 2 language model that was fine - tuned to a sci - fi theme . GPT - 2 is a super - large - scale language model proposed by OpenAI in 2019 [ 33 , 34 ] . We used the “medium” version of GPT - 2 with 355M parameters . In order to adapt the style of generated text to the sci - fi domain used in the study , we fine - tuned GPT - 2 - medium to the field of science fiction . We used the Sci - Fi Stories Text Corpus [ 12 ] collected by Robin Sloan as the dataset for fine - tuning GPT - 2 - medium . The GPT - 2’s finetune function was called . The step and the learning rate was set as 1500 and 1e - 5 , respectively . Most of the science fiction story data in it come from Pulp Magazine Archive . 4 . Preliminary User Study In this study , we ask the three research questions ( RQs ) below : RQ1 : What patterns of interactions are taken up by humans when they interact with machines in col - laborative writing ? RQ2 : How does the ability to select , edit , and cut out machine - generated text affect the human - machine co - writing process ? RQ3 : How do humans perceive the role of the ma - chine in the editable vs . non - editable interaction modes ? 4 . 1 . Procedure To answer these RQs , with the tool described in Section 3 , we conducted a user study to investigate the dynamics of human - AI interaction in fiction co - writing . The study uses a within - subject design , where each user had to use both the " Edit Mode " ( where editing the AI - generated text was enabled ) and the " No Edit Mode " ( where editing the AI - generated text was disabled ) when writing with the tool . The order of the two conditions was random . In each study session , following a short demonstration of the user interface and the theme that they would write about , the user was asked to write the beginning of a sci - fi story about humans finding a new home in space . Using this beginning , the user then wrote a 5 - paragraph story with our tool in the first condition . After this , the user filled out a usability questionnaire and had a 5 – 10 - min semi - structured interview about their experience in the first condition . Similarly , the user then wrote another story , filled out the questionnaire , and had an interview in the second condition . We post advertisement on the university’s bulletin and recruited nine participants ( n = 9 ) for our study , later referred to U1 to U9 in this paper . Participants were all graduate students who were interested in human - machine co - writing . 5 of them were 18 – 25 years old , and 4 of them were 26 – 35 years old . 5 of them used English as their first language , and 4 of them used Chinese as their first language . 8 of them were males , and 1 of them was female . All users had some creative writing experiences . 2 were novices , 3 had intermediate - level of experiences , and 4 were experienced fiction writers . Each user’s screen recording of their writing process , questionnaire , and interview was recorded and tran - Figure 2 : The user interface of our collaborative creative writing tool used in the study . Top Left : The initial interface includes writing prompts , mode selection , theme selection , input box , and submit button . Top Right : In the upper interface , the black font represents the text entered by the user , while the red font represents the text generated by the AI model . After the AI model generates the text , the user can choose to modify , to regenerate , to skip the modification to continue generating , or to end the interaction . Bottom : The user can modify the text generated by the AI model . scribed . Users were asked to think aloud while writ - ing . One of the experimenters conducted open coding analysis [ 35 ] of the written contents , think - aloud , and interview transcripts for the qualitative results . 5 . Descriptive Statistics of the Stories In the “Edit Mode” , users usually spent 4 – 10 minutes writing a beginning of a sci - fi story that had an aver - age length of 117 words [ M = 117 , SD = 56 ] . After 20 – 30 minutes’ writing , the users would finish the story that had an average length of 622 words [ M = 622 , SD = 109 ] , in which 320 words were written by the user [ M = 320 , SD = 106 ] , and 302 words were written by the machine [ M = 302 , SD = 28 ] . In the “No Edit Mode” , it took 4 – 10 min - utes for users to write another beginning of a sci - fi story that had an average length of 117 words [ M = 106 , SD = 51 ] . After that , users spent 20 – 40 minutes completing the the story with an average length of 599 words [ M = 599 , SD = 127 ] , where 282 words were written by users [ M = 282 , SD = 125 ] , and 317 words were written by the machine [ M = 317 , SD = 31 ] . Figure 3 : The Task flow of our study . The user and the AI takes turns to co - write a short science - fiction story . The user starts with writing the beginning ( Paragraph 1 ) of a sci - fi story of human beings finding new homes . The AI model generates the Paragraph 2 , which the user can regenerate , select , or edit the texts ( in the “Edit Mode” condition ) . The user and the AI repeats this process to write Paragraphs 3 and 4 and finally the user ends the story with the Paragraph 5 . Figure 4 : Screenshot of the experiment . Left : The user shares his screen . At this time the user is editing the text generated by the machine . Right : The user is in the upper left corner and the other three are researchers . 6 . Qualitative Findings In this section , we describe the properties of the co - written story and user’s strategies for co - writing with the AI - enabled tool . Specifically , we investigated what was their reaction towards the AI - generated texts in two different modes , how AI - generated texts affected their creative writing process , and how they perceived the partnership between them and the AI - enabled tool in two different modes of writing . 6 . 1 . Story Content By coding the stories , we found that new twists , includ - ing new characters , new scenes , and new events were more frequently found in AI - generated texts ( after re - generation , if any ) than user - written texts . For example , in U4’s " Edit Mode " story . U4 only mentioned " We " as a new character , " uncertain terrain " as a new scene , " We are currently approaching a new solar system with a planet that seems inhabitable . " as a new event in paragraph 1 . However , the machine wrote in both paragraph 2 and " a man " , " Icter " as additional characters , " winding corridor " , " a tunnel " , " a dimly lit room " as new scenes , and " walking down " , " a man stood in front of me " , and " should walk back and tell the others " as new events . Surprisingly , users considered the unexpectedness as the core inspiration or reason of continuing their writing , and took good use of the new elements to continue the story , such as U4 wrote " The others look at me inquisitively , wondering what was in the structure , and glad that I had made it out alright . I said ’there was a man . ’ " in paragraph 3 after reading machine texts " should walk back and tell the others " in paragraph 2 . Notably , the AI model would sometimes suddenly change the positive atmosphere in previous paragraphs into a negative atmosphere , or the other way around . For example , U2 wrote an optimistic beginning that " As Commander Barone’s shuttle hummed along , he couldn’t help but feel a sense of optimism about humanity’s future . He had successfully surveyed Planet T74 and was returning back to Space Station Endurance with a cargo hold full of samples of rocks , plants , and even some animal life . " , but the machine suddenly turned the story into a negative de - scription that " He had been told that there were no known diseases or parasites on the planet . " ( U2 " Edit Mode " , user and machine wrote in paragraph 1 and 2 ) . Despite having many unexpected elements , user - written texts and the selected AI - generated texts were coherent with each other . The selected AI - generated texts often use events , characters , and scenes that were men - tioned in user - written paragraphs . For instance , since U2 had written " However , one day an accident at the factory would force AB67 to do something extraordinary . " , the ma - chine continued the plot with " And the result is this : a new robot , the first fully - autonomous , self - repairing , self - replenishing , fully - reactive , self - repairing robot . " , and men - tioned the user - made entity " AB67 " in " AB67 had been the first fully self - repairing robot . " ( U2 " No Edit Mode " , user and machine wrote in paragraph 1 and 2 ) . 6 . 2 . Strategies for Interaction with AI - generated Texts By coding the think - aloud scripts and interview tran - scripts , we found that users’ reactions to the text gen - erated by the AI model and their strategies of utilizing them can be classified into two different groups by their expectation of the story : having clear and explicit intent about what they wanted to write ( referred to as DI group ) and having only implicit implied intent about what they wanted to write ( referred to as II group ) . Most users had concrete ideas about the story , say - ing like " As in my mind . Earth is destroyed . " ( U2 in " Edit Mode " ) . By contrast , the users who had only implied intent would say like " I don’t think about the ending " ( U1 in " Edit Mode " ) . Users who had different expectations performed differently in the same condition , and users who had similar expectations also performed differently in two conditions . 6 . 2 . 1 . Reaction to the Coherence of AI - generated Texts Users in the II group had lower coherence expectation of the AI - generated texts than users in the DI group . And they all had higher expectation of coherence when they were in the " No Edit Mode " . Users in the II group prefer the model to generate texts that contain some new entities that they could work on . For example , any new characters , events , or locations could be good for them : " I don’t think I said anything about a name so I guess it named somebody , which is cool . " ( U4 in " Edit Mode " ) . However , users in the DI group were trying to find something that logically fitted into their story in the AI - generated texts . For example , some expected subjects to have logical continuations such as " I guess it depends first on what I wrote and then if I think it’s a logical con - tinuation . " ( U1 " No Edit Mode " ) , and refused illogical characters such as " Machine starts spitting out more and more characters that were not mentioned in the scene which made it really wonky later on . " ( U5 " Edit Mode " ) . Addi - tionally , they wanted the AI model to continue the story as they expected , such as " Well I expected the machine to basically take , you know , to see what I wrote and can expand upon it or relate to it in some way that’s what I ex - pected . " ( U5 " Edit Mode " ) . However , they would be more excited if some unexpected items that logically fitted to their story were found in the generated text , like meeting with an unexpected plot : " And they took it even one step further with like , Okay , what if you peel off his skin . " ( U2 " No Edit Mode " ) . In the " Edit Mode " , users in both groups would accept text that contained parts that they could use , like " And if there are some sentences can use , you will definitely work , work , work on it . " ( U1 " Edit Mode " ) , or " But I can work with these first three sentences . " ( U2 " Edit Mode " ) . However , in the " No Edit Mode " , users would expect the text to fully meet their expectations on coherence , like " I think I definitely wanted something that flowed a bit better with a story , but with the first one , I was more okay with giving me something that perhaps added new ideas . " ( U3 ) . 6 . 2 . 2 . Reaction to the Unexpectedness of AI - generated Texts Users were amused when unexpected texts appeared , even if they presented random events or characters that had no relationship to what users had written . For ex - ample , U2 laughed when he saw his story turned into a Christmas story , but regenerated it by saying " This is not a Christmas story . " ( U2 " No Edit Mode " ) . The unex - pectedly redundant texts also amused users . For example , U4 laughed when encountering sentences like " I was a human with a human face . " in the story , and U5 laughed when saying " That’s a very odd sentence ’the man in the open suit it wasn’t a woman’ , very weird . " ( U5 " Edit Mode " ) . Meeting with unexpectedness , users applied some of the AI - generated texts that was easy to work with . In most situations , redundant texts were too hard to work with : " I’m trying to like get some notes that fit a little bit more and gives the idea about how to drive the plot forward but it seems to like to be redundant . " ( U5 " Edit Mode " ) . But there was one exception in U4’s writing : " I guess like the only way to make that sentence makes sense ( ’I was a human with a human face’ ) , is if it wasn’t redundant , the story could be that he didn’t always have a human face . " ( U4 " Edit Mode " ) . Even when the text was not redundant , it could still be hard to work on when the plot was being driven forward too quickly : " I’m going to regenerate it because it focuses so much on death and yet I don’t want it to be like at the start of the story . " ( U2 " Edit Mode " ) . However , this situation could be mitigated or even be useful if the machine wrote the ending : " I feel like it wrote a decent ending on its own and didn’t really want to add anything to it . " ( U5 " No Edit Mode " , in delight tone ) . 6 . 2 . 3 . Reaction to the Fluency of AI - generated Texts Fluency of machine texts was more important in the " No Edit Mode " than the " Edit Mode " . In the " Edit Mode " , for most of the users , partial readability would be sufficient for the requirement on fluency because " if you’re able to edit it and then it’s less important because you can just fix it up a little bit of it . " ( U1 ) . In " No Edit Mode " , the expec - tation on fluency becomes as important as the coherence for most users , such as " But if you can’t ( edit ) , then it’s kind of more important that it is fluent . " ( U1 ) . 6 . 2 . 4 . Reaction to Editing All users agreed that at least some basic edits of AI - generatedtextsshouldbeallowedtomakethemmoreuse - ful . The most common reason is along the lines of : " This one is definitely harder because oftentimes there would be a good amount of it that would be useful and like I would want to keep writing off of . But then there’s also be sections like a piece of sentences that were not greatly helpful . " ( U3 " No Edit Mode " ) . Even if some of the texts in " No Edit Mode " had high quality and met the basic expectations of users , most users still felt editing was necessary , like " I think some editing would be required because , You know , there’s still some consistencies but not as glaring as that in first mode texts . " ( U5 " No Edit Mode " ) . U4 and U8 preferred edits that do not affect the contin - uation of the story . In the interaction flow , they preferred to refine on the fluency of the writing after the whole story has been generated . U4 said , " I wouldn’t really change the story it comes up with but I would just change or delete a few sentences or something . " ( U4 " Edit Mode " ) . Although all users agreed that editing was essential , U6 preferred not to edit the text because editing was a burden : " In the first mode ( ’Edit Mode’ ) , I must understand the machine texts and then edit them . But in the second mode ( ’No Edit Mode’ ) , I don’t need to understand them and just choose one of my favorite and continue the story . " ( U6 ) . 7 . Discussion The language model’s limitation made it unpredictable . It sometimes provides low - quality texts full of words that could hardly make sense . At other times , it pro - vides high - quality inspirations that move the plot for - ward beyond humans’ expectation . Such unexpectedness accounted for the unique interaction pattern of human - AI co - writing in this study . Corresponding to previous quantitative findings [ 36 ] , the qualitative results in this paper showed that users considered the coherence of the machine - generated texts as a priority . The users’ attitudes towards unexpected but coherent elements gen - erated by the AI model further suggested that users ex - pected the model to provide them with surprising inspi - rations . However , due to the repetition caused by the model over - confidence problems [ 24 ] , users could only get such paragraphs occasionally by chance . The AI gen - erating process was not transparent and there was a lack of user control , and thus users could not expect the next batch of generated text to be better than the previous one . The low probability of getting useful pieces from the model would frustrate users and make them compromise on the incoherent and tenuous text that conveyed merely inspiration . Nevertheless , the unexpectedness of machine - generated texts should be highlighted in an ideal human - AI co - writing tool . After being selected and refined by human writers , such unexpected but logical elements could make the story more exciting than writers’ previous intention . From findings in our study , this could not only serve as a dramatic contradiction in the story but also as motivations for users to keep writing . In the design of the tool , it would be useful to facilitate the user’s utilization of the unexpected elements as their wish ( e . g . provide users with options of editing machine - generated texts in the system ) . This could help to reduce the frustration brought by unpredictable repetitions and occasional bad fluency . However , even the design of the interaction modes could mitigate such frustration , the algorithm should also be improved . Better quality in AI - generated texts could allow users to focus more on the ideas conveyed by AI - generated texts rather than spending most of the time on regenerating and fixing the coherence and fluency of AI - generated texts . The users’ different perceptions of AI’s roles in the co - writing process suggested different interaction pat - terns . In the study , most users perceived the machine as an active idea generator . They preferred the " Edit Mode " more since they could pick what they liked regardless of the fluency and coherence of the texts . Thus , it was important to make them able to edit both machine texts and their texts at any time in the writing process . Fur - thermore , more user - controllable variables can be added into the tool for them to allow finer - grained user control of the generation process . For example , the tool could allow users to control the ideal length of the generated text , the scenes , the atmosphere of the plot , or some weights that could help the model focus more on certain important parts of the user texts . Some users , on the other hand , wished the machine to be a human writing assistant . In this case , the machine should be able to ac - cept both previous paragraphs and following paragraphs as inputs to connect the user - defined milestones in the story for them . Several works were focused on short sentence infilling [ 37 , 38 ] , but long paragraphs infilling still remains to be explored . Besides , some users regarded the AI - enabled tool as an active co - writer or a writing exerciser . They tried to keep the initial output of the machine texts regardless of its coherence and fluency . They enjoyed all the un - expectedness of the machine - generated texts and wish not to intervene in the generating process . In this case , the texts were expected to be uncontrollable . However , the definition of good quality of texts could be vague in this mode of interaction , since even the redundancy could be interpreted as metaphors . More research should be conducted to develop a good co - writing or writing exercise machine . In summary , the future active AI writing tools should strengthen AI’s strong ability of producing high quality unexpectedness . And they should allow users to utilize such unexpectedness efficiently . The " Regenerate " and the " Edit " function mentioned in this paper should be the core . The goal of the " Regenerate " is to ensure users to find what they want as they wish as fast as possible ( reduce the compromises ) . To accomplish this goal , for example , the future interface can display multiple outputs simultaneously [ 13 , 10 ] and enable users to control more parameters to regenerate the texts . It could also ask users to grade the outputs and learn from their writing ( use users’ inputs as fine - tune datasets ) [ 36 ] . For the " Edit " function , the tool should be integrated into a text editor such as Microsoft Word for users to both edit and save their work in a professional way . The AI should act as an writing assistant with a customized avatar on call who eventually become essential in users’ writing process . 8 . Conclusion In this paper , we reported preliminary findings on how 9 users interacted with a “turn - taking” style human - AI co - writing tool to write short science - fiction stories . We dis - covered that different mental expectation of users could affect their strategies and their perception of the ma - chine’s role in the co - writing process . The AI - enabled tool was used as an active idea generator , a co - writer , or a writing assistant in different scenarios by different users . We discussed the challenges in managing the trade - offs in the desired level of unexpectedness in generated story plots , the coherence and fluency of AI - generated texts , the appropriate level of user - control , and the future interface design . Acknowledgements This research was supported in part by a Google Cloud Research Credit Grant , a Hong Kong Arts Development Grant , and an Asia Research Collaboration Grant from Notre Dame International . References [ 1 ] C . Oh , J . Song , J . Choi , S . Kim , S . Lee , B . Suh , I lead , you help but only with enough details : Understand - ing user experience of co - creation with artificial intelligence , in : Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2018 , pp . 1 – 13 . [ 2 ] N . Davis , C . - P . Hsiao , K . Yashraj Singh , L . Li , B . Magerko , Empirically studying participa - tory sense - making in abstract drawing with a co - creative cognitive agent , in : Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , 2016 , pp . 196 – 207 . [ 3 ] K . I . Gero , L . B . Chilton , Metaphoria : An algorith - mic companion for metaphor creation , in : Proceed - ings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2019 , pp . 1 – 12 . [ 4 ] M . Guzdial , N . Liao , J . Chen , S . - Y . Chen , S . Shah , V . Shah , J . Reno , G . Smith , M . O . Riedl , Friend , collaborator , student , manager : How design of an ai - driven game level editor affects creators , in : Pro - ceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems , 2019 , pp . 1 – 13 . [ 5 ] J . Koch , A . Lucero , L . Hegemann , A . Oulasvirta , May ai ? design ideation with cooperative contex - tual bandits , in : Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2019 , pp . 1 – 12 . [ 6 ] R . Louie , A . Coenen , C . Z . Huang , M . Terry , C . J . Cai , Novice - ai music co - creation via ai - steering tools for deep generative models , in : Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2020 , pp . 1 – 13 . [ 7 ] M . Suh , E . Youngblom , M . Terry , C . J . Cai , Ai as social glue : Uncovering the roles of deep generative ai during social music composition , in : Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2021 , pp . 1 – 11 . [ 8 ] C . - Z . A . Huang , H . V . Koops , E . Newton - Rex , M . Din - culescu , C . J . Cai , Ai song contest : Human - ai co - creation in songwriting , arXiv preprint arXiv : 2010 . 05388 ( 2020 ) . [ 9 ] P . Karimi , J . Rezwana , S . Siddiqui , M . L . Maher , N . Dehbozorgi , Creative sketching partner : an anal - ysis of human - ai co - creativity , in : Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , 2020 , pp . 221 – 230 . [ 10 ] A . Coenen , L . Davis , D . Ippolito , E . Reif , A . Yuan , Wordcraft : a human - ai collaborative editor for story writing , arXiv preprint arXiv : 2107 . 07430 ( 2021 ) . [ 11 ] M . Kreminski , M . Dickinson , M . Mateas , N . Wardrip - Fruin , Why are we like this ? : The ai architecture of a co - creative storytelling game , in : International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games , 2020 , pp . 1 – 4 . [ 12 ] R . slogan , Writing with the machine , https : / / www . robinsloan . com / notes / writing - with - the - machine / ( 2016 ) . [ 13 ] E . Clark , A . S . Ross , C . Tan , Y . Ji , N . A . Smith , Cre - ative writing with a machine in the loop : Case stud - ies on slogans and stories , in : 23rd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , 2018 , pp . 329 – 340 . [ 14 ] C . Shu , Y . Zhang , X . Dong , P . Shi , T . Yu , R . Zhang , Logic - consistency text generation from semantic parses , arXiv preprint arXiv : 2108 . 00577 ( 2021 ) . [ 15 ] A . Krishna , S . Riedel , A . Vlachos , Proofver : Natural logic theorem proving for fact verification , arXiv preprint arXiv : 2108 . 11357 ( 2021 ) . [ 16 ] W . Fedus , I . Goodfellow , A . M . Dai , Maskgan : better text generation via filling in the _ , arXiv preprint arXiv : 1801 . 07736 ( 2018 ) . [ 17 ] Y . Zhang , Z . Gan , K . Fan , Z . Chen , R . Henao , D . Shen , L . Carin , Adversarial feature matching for text gen - eration , in : International Conference on Machine Learning , PMLR , 2017 , pp . 4006 – 4015 . [ 18 ] D . Buschek , M . Zürn , M . Eiband , The impact of mul - tiple parallel phrase suggestions on email input and composition behaviour of native and non - native english writers , in : Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems , 2021 , pp . 1 – 13 . [ 19 ] O . Schmitt , D . Buschek , Characterchat : Supporting the creation of fictional characters through conver - sation and progressive manifestation with a chatbot , in : Creativity and Cognition , 2021 , pp . 1 – 10 . [ 20 ] M . Guzdial , M . Riedl , An interaction frame - work for studying co - creative ai , arXiv preprint arXiv : 1903 . 09709 ( 2019 ) . [ 21 ] M . Jacob , B . Magerko , Interaction - based authoring for scalable co - creative agents . , in : ICCC , 2015 , pp . 236 – 243 . [ 22 ] Y . Lin , J . Guo , Y . Chen , C . Yao , F . Ying , It is your turn : collaborative ideation with a co - creative robot through sketch , in : Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems , 2020 , pp . 1 – 14 . [ 23 ] A . Elton - Pym , Principles for ai co - creative game design assistants , in : Proceedings of the AAAI Con - ference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment , volume 16 , 2020 , pp . 335 – 336 . [ 24 ] A . See , A . Pappu , R . Saxena , A . Yerukola , C . D . Manning , Do massively pretrained lan - guage models make better storytellers ? , 2019 . arXiv : 1909 . 10705 . [ 25 ] T . Liu , K . Wang , L . Sha , B . Chang , Z . Sui , Table - to - text generation by structure - aware seq2seq learn - ing , in : Thirty - Second AAAI Conference on Artifi - cial Intelligence , 2018 . [ 26 ] A . Fan , M . Lewis , Y . Dauphin , Hierarchical neural story generation , arXiv preprint arXiv : 1805 . 04833 ( 2018 ) . [ 27 ] M . Rose , Rigid rules , inflexible plans , and the stifling of language : A cognitivist analysis of writer’s block , College composition and communication 31 ( 1980 ) 389 – 401 . [ 28 ] B . Kostka , J . Kwiecieli , J . Kowalski , P . Rychlikowski , Text - based adventures of the golovin ai agent , in : 2017 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelli - gence and Games ( CIG ) , IEEE , 2017 , pp . 181 – 188 . [ 29 ] T . Atkinson , H . Baier , T . Copplestone , S . Devlin , J . Swan , The text - based adventure ai competition , IEEE Transactions on Games 11 ( 2019 ) 260 – 266 . [ 30 ] N . Fulda , D . Ricks , B . Murdoch , D . Wingate , What can you do with a rock ? affordance extraction via word embeddings , arXiv preprint arXiv : 1703 . 03429 ( 2017 ) . [ 31 ] M . Hausknecht , R . Loynd , G . Yang , A . Swaminathan , J . D . Williams , Nail : A general interactive fiction agent , arXiv preprint arXiv : 1902 . 04259 ( 2019 ) . [ 32 ] A . Calderwood , V . Qiu , K . I . Gero , L . B . Chilton , How novelists use generative language models : An ex - ploratory user study . , in : HAI - GEN + user2agent @ IUI , 2020 . [ 33 ] A . Radford , J . Wu , R . Child , D . Luan , D . Amodei , I . Sutskever , et al . , Language models are unsuper - vised multitask learners , OpenAI blog 1 ( 2019 ) 9 . [ 34 ] S . Dathathri , A . Madotto , J . Lan , J . Hung , E . Frank , P . Molino , J . Yosinski , R . Liu , Plug and play lan - guage models : A simple approach to controlled text generation , arXiv preprint arXiv : 1912 . 02164 ( 2019 ) . [ 35 ] S . H . Khandkar , Open coding , University of Calgary 23 ( 2009 ) 2009 . [ 36 ] N . Akoury , S . Wang , J . Whiting , S . Hood , N . Peng , M . Iyyer , Storium : A dataset and evaluation plat - form for machine - in - the - loop story generation , 2020 . arXiv : 2010 . 01717 . [ 37 ] C . Donahue , M . Lee , P . Liang , Enabling lan - guage models to fill in the blanks , 2020 . arXiv : 2005 . 05339 . [ 38 ] D . Ippolito , D . Grangier , C . Callison - Burch , D . Eck , Unsupervised hierarchical story infilling , in : Pro - ceedings of the First Workshop on Narrative Un - derstanding , 2019 , pp . 37 – 43 .