The neurobiology of semantic memory Jeffrey R . Binder and Rutvik H . Desai Department of Neurology , Medical College of Wisconsin , 9200 W . Wisconsin Ave . , Milwaukee , WI 53226 , USA Semantic memory includes all acquired knowledge about the world and is the basis for nearly all human activity , yet its neurobiological foundation is only now becoming clear . Recent neuroimaging studies demonstrate two striking results : the participation of modality - speciﬁc sen - sory , motor , and emotion systems in language compre - hension , and the existence of large brain regions that participate in comprehension tasks but are not modality - speciﬁc . These latter regions , which include the inferior parietal lobe and much of the temporal lobe , lie at convergences of multiple perceptual processing streams . These convergences enable increasingly ab - stract , supramodal representations of perceptual experi - ence that support a variety of conceptual functions including object recognition , social cognition , language , and the remarkable human capacity to remember the past and imagine the future . The centrality of semantic memory in human behavior Human brains acquire and use concepts with such appar - ent ease that the neurobiology of this complex process seems almost to have been taken for granted . Although philosophers have puzzled for centuries over the nature of concepts [ 1 ] , semantic memory ( see Glossary ) became a topic of formal study in cognitive science only relatively recently [ 2 ] . This history is remarkable , given that seman - tic memory is one of our most deﬁning human traits , encompassing all the declarative knowledge we acquire about the world . A short list of examples includes the names and physical attributes of all objects , the origin and history of objects , the names and attributes of actions , all abstract concepts and their names , knowledge of how people behave and why , opinions and beliefs , knowledge of historical events , knowledge of causes and effects , associa - tions between concepts , categories and their bases , and on and on . Also remarkable is the variety of everyday cognitive activities that depend on this extensive store of knowl - edge . A common example is the recognition and use of objects , which has been the focus of much theoretical and empirical work on semantic memory [ 3 – 7 ] . Recognition and use of objects , however , is a capacity shared by many non - human animals that interact with food sources , build simple structures , or use simple tools . More uniquely human is the ability to represent concepts in the form of language , which allows not only the spread of concep - tual knowledge in an abstract symbolic form , but also a cognitive mechanism for the ﬂuid and ﬂexible manipula - tion , association , and combination of concepts [ 8 , 9 ] . Thus humans use conceptual knowledge for much more than merely interacting with objects . All of human culture , including science , literature , social institutions , religion , and art , is constructed from conceptual knowledge . We do not reason , plan the future or remember the past without conceptual content – all of these activities depend on activation of concepts stored in semantic memory . Scientiﬁc study of human semantic memory processes has been limited in the past both by a relatively restricted focus on object knowledge and by an experimental tradi - tion emphasizing stimulus - driven brain activity . Human Review Glossary Embodied cognition : in cognitive neuroscience , the general theory that perceptual and motor systems support conceptual knowledge , that is , that understanding or retrieving a concept involves some degree of sensory or motor simulation of the concept . A related term , situated cognition , refers to a more general perspective that emphasizes a central role of perception and action in cognition , rather than memory and memory retrieval . Heteromodal cortex : cortex that receives highly processed , multimodal input not dominated by any single modality ; also called supramodal , multimodal , or polymodal . Modality - specific representations : information pertaining to a specific mod - ality of experience and processed within the corresponding sensory , motor , or affective system . Modality - specific representations can include primary perceptual or motor information , as well as more complex or abstract representations that are nonetheless modal ( e . g . , extrastriate visual cortex , parabelt auditory cortex ) . Modal specificity refers to the representational format of the information . For example , knowledge about the sound a piano makes is modally auditory , whereas knowledge about the appearance of a piano is modally visual , and knowledge of the feeling of playing a piano is modally kinesthetic . Modal representations reflect relevant perceptual dimen - sions of the input , that is , they are analogs of the input . An auditory representation , for example , captures the spectrotemporal form and loudness of an input , whereas a visual representation codes visual dimensions such as visual form , size and color . Semantic memory : an individual’s store of knowledge about the world . The content of semantic memory is abstracted from actual experience and is therefore said to be conceptual , that is , generalized and without reference to any specific experience . Memory for specific experiences is called episodic memory , although the content of episodic memory depends heavily on retrieval of conceptual knowledge . Remembering , for example , that one had coffee and eggs for breakfast requires retrieval of the concepts of coffee , eggs and breakfast . Episodic memory might be more properly seen as a particular kind of knowledge manipulation that creates spatial - temporal configurations of object and event concepts . Simulation : in cognitive neuroscience , the partial re - creation of a perceptual / motor / affective experience or concept through partial reactivation of the neural ensembles originally activated by the experience or concept . Explicit mental imagery may require relatively detailed simulation of a particular experience , whereas tasks such as word comprehension may require only schematic simulations . Supramodal representations : information that does not pertain to a single modality of experience . Supramodal representations store information about cross - modal conjunctions , such as a particular combination of auditory and visual object attributes . Their existence is sometimes disputed , yet they provide a simple mechanism for a wide range of inferential capacities , such as knowing the visual appearance of a piano given only its sound and knowing about the conceptual similarity structures that define categories . Supramodal representations may also enable the rapid , schematic retrieval of semantic knowledge that characterizes natural language . Corresponding author : Binder , J . R . ( jbinder @ mcw . edu ) . TICS - 1008 ; No . of Pages 10 1364 - 6613 / $ – see front matter (cid:2) 2011 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tics . 2011 . 10 . 001 Trends in Cognitive Sciences xx ( 2011 ) 1 – 10 1 brains are occupied much of the day with reasoning , planning , and remembering . This highly conceptual activity need not be triggered by stimuli in the immediate environment – all of it can be done , and usually is , in the privacy of one’s own mind . Together with recent insights gained from studies of patients with semantic memory loss , functional imaging data are rapidly converging on a new anatomical model of the brain systems involved in these processes . Given the centrality of semantic memory to human behavior and human culture , the signiﬁcance of these discoveries can hardly be overstated . In this article we propose a large - scale neural model of semantic processing that synthesizes multiple lines of empirical and theoretical work . Our core argument is that semantic memory consists of both modality - speciﬁc and supramodal representations , the latter supported by the gradual convergence of information throughout large regions of temporal and inferior parietal association cortex . These supramodal convergences support a variety of con - ceptual functions including object recognition , social cog - nition , language and the uniquely human capacity to construct mental simulations of the past and future . Central issues in semantic processing A major issue in the study of semantic memory concerns the nature of concept representations . Efforts in the last century to develop artiﬁcial intelligence focused on knowl - edge representation in the form of abstract symbols [ 10 ] . This approach led to powerful new techniques for informa - tion representation and manipulation ( e . g . , semantic nets , feature lists , ontologies , schemata ) . Recent advances in this area used machine learning techniques together with massive verbal inputs to create a highly ﬂexible , probabi - listic symbolic network that can respond to general ques - tions in a natural language format [ 11 ] . Scientists interested in human brains , on the other hand , have long assumed that the brain represents concepts at least partly in the form of sensory and motor experiences . Nineteenth - century neurologists , for example , pictured a widely dis - tributed ‘concept ﬁeld’ in the brain where visual , auditory , tactile , and motor ‘images’ associated with a concept were activated in the process of word comprehension [ 12 , 13 ] . A major advantage of such a theory over a purely symbolic representation is that it provides a parsimonious and biologically plausible mechanism for conceptual learning . Over the course of many similar experiences with entities from the same category , an idealized sensory or motor representation of the entity develops by generalization across unique exemplars , and reactivation or ‘simulation’ of these modality - speciﬁc representations forms the basis of concept retrieval [ 14 ] . In addition to these issues concerning representation of information , questions arise about the mechanisms that control semantic information retrieval . Clearly not all knowledge associated with a concept is relevant in all contexts , thus mechanisms are needed for selecting or attending to task - relevant information [ 15 , 16 ] . Some con - ceptual tasks also place strong demands on creativity , a term we use here to refer to ﬂexible problem solving in the absence of strong constraining cues . Creative invention through technological innovation , art , and ‘brainstorming’ are uniquely human endeavors that require ﬂuent concep - tual retrieval and ﬂexible association of ideas . Even ev - eryday conversation requires a logical but relatively unconstrained ﬂow of ideas , in which one topic leads to another through a series of associated concepts . This type of ﬂexible association and combining of concepts , though ubiquitous in everyday life , has largely been overlooked in functional imaging studies , which tend to focus on highly constrained retrieval tasks involving recognition of words and objects . Evidence for modality - speciﬁc simulation in comprehension The idea that sensory and motor experiences form the basis of conceptual knowledge has a long history in philosophy , psychology , and neuroscience [ 1 , 3 , 12 , 13 ] . In recent years , this proposal has gained new steam under the rubric of ‘embodied’ or ‘situated’ cognition , supported by numerous neuroimaging and behavioral studies . Some of the imaging studies showing modality - speciﬁc activations during lan - guage processing are summarized in Figure 1 . A number of these address action concepts and show that processing action - related language activates brain regions involved in executing and planning actions . Motion , sound , color , ol - faction , and gustatory concept processing have also been addressed , and also tend to show activation in or near regions that process these perceptual modalities ( see leg - end , Figure 1 ) . Challenges to the embodiment view have also arisen . One objection is that activations observed in imaging experiments could be epiphenomenal and not causally related to comprehension [ 17 ] . This hypothesis has been tested in patients with various forms of motor system damage . Initial results indicate a selective impairment for comprehending action verbs in patients with Parkin - son’s disease [ 18 ] , progressive supranuclear palsy [ 19 ] , apraxia [ 20 ] , and motor neuron disease [ 21 , 22 ] . Several studies employing transcranial magnetic stimulation to induce transient lesions in the primary motor cortex or inferior parietal lobe provide converging results [ 23 – 28 ] . Thus , involvement of the motor system during action word processing contributes to comprehension and is not a mere by - product . A related argument is that the activations represent post - comprehension imagery . In studies using imaging methods with high temporal resolution , however , the activation of motor regions during action word proces - sing appear to be rapid , approximately 150 - 200 ms from word onset [ 29 – 32 ] , suggesting that it is part of early semantic access rather than a result of post - comprehen - sion processes . These converging results provide compel - ling evidence that sensory - motor cortices play an essential role in conceptual representation . Although it is often overlooked in reviews of embodied cognition , emotion is as much a modality of experience as sensory and motor processing [ 33 ] . Words and concepts vary in the magnitude and speciﬁc type of emotional response they evoke , and these emotional responses are a large part of the meaning of many concepts . Purple dots in Figure 1 represent activation peaks from 14 imaging studies that examined activation as a function of the emotional content of words or phrases . There is a clear Review Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1008 ; No . of Pages 10 2 preponderance of activations in the temporal pole ( 13 studies ) and ventromedial prefrontal cortex ( 10 studies ) , both of which play a central role in emotion [ 34 , 35 ] . In - volvement of the temporal pole in high - level representation of emotion may also explain activation in this region associ - ated with social concepts [ 36 , 37 ] , which tend to have strong emotional valence . Evidence for high level convergence zones In addition to modality - speciﬁc simulations , we propose that the brain uses abstract , supramodal representations during conceptual tasks . One compelling argument for this view is that the human brain possesses large areas of cortex that are situated between modal sensory - motor systems and thus appear to function as information ‘con - vergence zones’ [ 14 ] . These heteromodal areas include the inferior parietal cortex ( angular and supramarginal gyri ) , large parts of the middle and inferior temporal gyri , and anterior portions of the fusiform gyrus [ 38 ] . These areas have expanded disproportionately in the human brain relative to the monkey brain , ‘taking over’ much of the temporal lobe from the visual system [ 39 ] . Advocates of a strictly embodied theory of conceptual processing have largely ignored these brain regions , yet they occupy a substantial proportion of the posterior cortex in humans . A second body of evidence comes from patients with damage in the inferior and lateral temporal lobe , particu - larly patients with semantic dementia , a syndrome char - acterized by progressive temporal lobe atrophy and multimodal loss of semantic memory [ 40 , 41 ] . These patients are unable to retrieve names of objects , categorize objects or judge their relative similarity , identify the cor - rect color or sound of objects , or retrieve knowledge about actions associated with objects [ 42 – 45 ] . Critically , the deﬁcits do not appear to be category - speciﬁc [ 46 ] – further evidence that the semantic impairment does not involve strongly modal representations . A third large body of evidence comes from functional imaging studies that target general semantic rather than modality - speciﬁc semantic processes . For example , many imaging experiments have contrasted words against pseudowords , related against unrelated word pairs , meaningful against nonsensical sentences , and sen - tences against random word strings . In another type of general semantic contrast , a semantic task ( e . g . , a se - mantic decision ) is contrasted with a phonological control task ( e . g . , rhyme decision ) . What is important to under - stand about all of these ‘general’ contrasts is that al - though they elicit differences in the degree of access to semantic information , they include no manipulation of modality - speciﬁc information . In the absence of system - atic biases affecting stimulus selection , the activations resulting from these contrasts are unlikely to reﬂect modality - speciﬁc representations . A quantitative meta - analysis of 120 of these studies was recently performed [ 47 ] . Studies were included only if they satisﬁed strict criteria for a semantic contrast . Studies were excluded if the stimuli in the contrasting conditions TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences L R R L Figure 1 . Modality - specific activation peaks during language comprehension . This figure displays sites of peak activation from 38 imaging studies that examined modality - specific knowledge processing during language comprehension tasks . Peaks were mapped to a common spatial coordinate system and then to a representative brain surface . Action knowledge peaks ( red ) cluster in primary and secondary sensorimotor regions in the posterior frontal and anterior parietal lobes . Motion peaks ( green ) cluster in posterior inferolateral temporal regions near the visual motion processing pathway . Note that motion concepts , especially when elicited by action verbs , are difficult to distinguish from action concepts . Peaks near motion processing area MT / MST in four of the studies of action language are interpreted here as reflecting motion knowledge . Auditory peaks ( yellow ) occur in superior temporal and temporoparietal regions adjacent to auditory association cortex . Color peaks ( blue ) cluster in the fusiform gyrus just anterior to color - selective regions of extrastriate visual cortex . Olfactory peaks ( pink ) observed in one study were in olfactory areas ( prepiriform cortex and amygdala ) . Gustatory peaks ( orange ) were observed in one study in the anterior orbital frontal cortex . Emotion peaks ( purple ) involve primarily anterior temporal , medial and orbital prefrontal , and posterior cingulate regions . Details regarding study selection and a list of the included studies are provided in supplementary material online . Review Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1008 ; No . of Pages 10 3 were not matched on orthographic or phonological proper - ties , or if the activations could be explained by differences in attention or working memory demands . Reliability of the activation sites reported in the studies was analyzed using a volume - based technique called activation likeli - hood estimation [ 48 ] . The results showed remarkable consistency across stud - ies , with reliable activation throughout the left temporal and parietal heteromodal cortex ( Figure 2 ) . These locations are consistent with the location of pathological changes in semantic dementia , as well as with temporal and parietal vascular lesions causing semantic impairments [ 49 – 53 ] . Other consistent sites of activation included the dorsome - dial prefrontal cortex ( superior frontal gyrus ) , ventromedial prefrontal cortex , inferior frontal gyrus , and the posterior cingulate gyrus and precuneus . The results offer compelling evidence for high - level convergence zones in the inferior parietal , lateral temporal , and ventral temporal cortex . These regions are far from primary sensory and motor cortices and appear to be involved in processing general rather than modality - speciﬁc semantic information . Embodied abstraction in conceptual representation Figure 3 illustrates several prominent theories that differ in the proposed level of separation between conceptual and perceptual representations . Models based on disembodied , symbolic conceptual representations [ 9 , 10 ] are often criti - cized on the grounds that such symbols are ultimately devoid of content [ 54 ] . From an empirical standpoint , the extensive evidence for involvement of modality - speciﬁc sensory , action , and emotion systems during language comprehension is also inconsistent with such a model . TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences SMG AG SFG MTG IFG FG PC SFG VMPFC Figure 2 . Meta - analysis of functional imaging studies of semantic processing . This figure displays brain regions reliably activated by general semantic processes , based on reported activation peaks from 120 independent functional imaging studies ( p < . 05 corrected for family - wise error ) . The analysis method assigns a significance value to the degree of spatial overlap between the reported activation coordinates in a standard volume space . The figure shows selected sagittal sections in the left hemisphere ; right hemisphere activations occurred in similar locations but were less extensive . AG = angular gyrus , FG = fusiform gyrus , IFG = inferior frontal gyrus , MTG = middle temporal gyrus , PC = posterior cingulate gyrus , SFG = superior frontal gyrus , SMG = supramarginal gyrus , VMPFC = ventromedial prefrontal cortex . Green lines indicate the Y and Z axes in standard space . Adapted from [ 47 ] . Perception / Action Cognition Disembodied Perception / Action Cognition Grounding by interaction Perception / Action Cognition Embodied abstraction Perception / Action / Cognition Strong embodiment TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences Figure 3 . Possible relationships between perceptual and conceptual representation . Theories of perception and cognition vary in terms of the degree of separation between these processes . Disembodied models propose a complete separation , in which conceptual processing is based entirely on amodal , symbolic representations [ 9 , 10 , 17 ] . Other theories propose that conceptual and perceptual representations are distinct and separate but interact closely so that amodal symbols can derive content from perceptual knowledge [ 7 , 14 ] . In contrast to both of these theories , strong embodiment models posit that perceptual and conceptual processes are carried out by a single system [ 55 , 56 ] . In contrast to all of these theories , the neuroanatomical evidence for multiple modality - specific systems gradually converging on a common semantic network suggests a process of ‘embodied abstraction , ’ in which conceptual representation is embodied in multiple levels of abstraction from sensory , motor and affective input . The extent to which modality - specific perceptual representations are activated during semantic tasks varies with concept familiarity , demand for perceptual information and degree of contextual support ( see Box 1 ) . Review Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1008 ; No . of Pages 10 4 At the other end of the spectrum are ‘strong embodi - ment’ models in which perceptual and conceptual processes are carried out by the same ( perceptual ) sys - tem [ 55 , 56 ] . These models are inconsistent with the evidence for modality - independent semantic networks reviewed above . Furthermore , conceptual deﬁcits in patients with sensory - motor impairments , when present , tend to be subtle rather than catastrophic . In a recent study of aphasic patients [ 57 ] , lesions in both sensory - motor and temporal regions were correlated with im - pairment in a picture - word matching task involving action words . This evidence is incompatible with a strong version of the embodiment account , in which sensory - motor regions are necessary and sufﬁcient for conceptual representation . Other theories propose that amodal representations derive their content from close interactions with modal perceptual systems [ 7 , 14 ] . The purpose of amodal repre - sentations in these latter models is to bind and efﬁciently access information across modalities rather than to repre - sent the information itself [ 58 ] . The need for distinct amodal representations in such a model has been sharply questioned , however , as multimodal perceptual represen - tations could fulﬁll the same role [ 55 , 56 ] . We suggest that the current evidence is most compatible with a view we term ‘embodied abstraction , ’ brieﬂy sketched here ( see [ 59 , 60 ] for similar proposals ) . In this view , conceptual representation consists of multiple levels of abstraction from sensory , motor , and affective input . All levels are not automatically accessed or activated under all conditions . Rather , this access is subject to factors such as context , frequency , familiarity , and task demands . The top level contains schematic representations that are highly abstracted from detailed representations in the primary perceptual - motor systems . These representations are ‘ﬂeshed out’ to varying degrees by sensory - motor - affective contributions in accordance with task demands . In highly familiar contexts , the schematic representations are sufﬁ - cient for adequate and rapid processing . In novel contexts or when the task requires deeper processing , sensory - motor - affective systems make a greater contribution in ﬂeshing out the representations ( Box 1 ) . A neuroanatomical model of semantic processing Figure 4 outlines a neuroanatomical model of semantic memory consistent with a broad range of available data . Modality - speciﬁc representations ( yellow areas in Figure 4 ) , located near corresponding sensory , motor , and emotion networks , develop as a result of experience with entities and events in the external and internal Box 1 . Variability in sensory - motor embodiment Modality - specific simulation provides a plausible mechanism for retrieval of concrete object concepts , but difficulties arise in considering abstract concepts . What sensory , motor , or emotional experience is reactivated in comprehending words such as ‘abstract’ , ‘concept’ , ‘modality’ , and ‘theory’ ? Another potential difficulty arises from the speed of spoken language , which is easily understood at rates of 3 - 4 words per second [ 82 ] . It is far from clear that an extended sensory , motor , or emotional simulation of each word is possible at such speeds , or even necessary . Thus there is a strong rationale for considering theories that allow both sensory - motor - emotional simulation and manipulation of more abstract representations as a basis for conceptual processing , depending on the exigencies of a given task [ 59 , 60 ] . At one end of this continuum are tasks that encourage simulation by explicitly requiring mental imagery of an object or event . At the other end are tasks requiring comprehension of rapidly presented , abstract verbal materials that evoke little or no mental simulation . Imagine , for example , that you are deciding which of two cars to buy . This task is likely to engage extended mental simulation of the sensory and motor experiences of examining and test - driving each car . In contrast , imagine hearing someone say , ‘‘I don’t really have any need or money for a car right now , so it’s low on my priority list’’ . This statement is perfectly understandable and full of meaning , but how extensively must the sensory attributes of ‘car’ be simulated for full comprehension to occur , or simulation of words such as ‘need’ , ‘now’ , ‘low’ , and ‘priority’ ? Another factor that likely modulates ‘depth’ of simulation during language comprehension is the familiarity of an expression . Imagine that instead of the statement about a car , you hear , ‘‘I don’t really have any need or money for a llama right now , so it’s low on my priority list’’ . Comprehending the word ‘llama’ is likely to require an extended visual simulation , and the unfamiliarity of the statement itself is likely to elicit a range of simulations involving possible uses for a llama . In general , the involvement of sensory - motor systems in language comprehension seems to change through a gradual abstraction process whereby relatively detailed simulations are needed for unfamiliar or infrequent concepts and these simulations become less detailed as familiarity and con - textual support increases [ 83 ] . Action Sound Visualmotion Color Emotion TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences Figure 4 . A neuroanatomical model of semantic processing . A model of semantic processing in the human brain is shown , based on a broad range of pathological and functional neuroimaging data . Modality - specific sensory , action , and emotion systems ( yellow regions ) provide experiential input to high - level temporal and inferior parietal convergence zones ( red regions ) that store increasingly abstract representations of entity and event knowledge . Dorsomedial and inferior prefrontal cortices ( blue regions ) control the goal - directed activation and selection of the information stored in temporoparietal cortices . The posterior cingulate gyrus and adjacent precuneus ( green region ) may function as an interface between the semantic network and the hippocampal memory system , helping to encode meaningful events into episodic memory . A similar , somewhat less extensive semantic network exists in the right hemisphere , although the functional and anatomical differences between left and right brain semantic systems are still unclear . Review Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1008 ; No . of Pages 10 5 environment . These representations code recurring spatial and temporal conﬁgurations of lower - level modal repre - sentations . Although depicted as somewhat modular , we view these systems as an interactive continuum of hierar - chically ordered neural ensembles , supporting progressive - ly more combinatorial and idealized representations . These systems correspond to Damasio’s local convergence zones [ 14 ] and to Barsalou’s unimodal perceptual symbol systems [ 55 ] . In addition to bottom - up input in their associated modality , they receive a range of top - down input from other modal systems and from attention . They are modal in the sense that the information they represent is an analog of ( i . e . , isomorphic with ) their bottom - up input [ 55 ] . These modal convergence zones then converge with each other in higher - level cortices located in the inferior parietal lobe and much of the ventral and lateral temporal lobe ( red areas in Figure 4 ) . One function of these high - level con - vergences is to bind representations from two or more modalities , such as the sound and visual appearance of an animal , or the visual representation and action knowl - edge associated with a hand tool [ 7 , 12 , 14 , 55 ] . Such supra - modal representations capture similarity structures that deﬁne categories , such as the collection of attributes that place ‘pear’ and ‘light bulb’ in different categories despite a superﬁcial similarity of appearance , and ‘pear’ and ‘pine - apple’ in the same category despite very different appear - ances [ 58 ] . More generally , supramodal representations allow the efﬁcient manipulation of abstract , schematic conceptual knowledge that characterizes natural lan - guage , social cognition , and other forms of highly creative thinking [ 59 , 60 ] . These modal and supramodal convergence zones store the actual content of semantic knowledge , whereas the prefrontal regions colored blue in Figure 4 control top - down activation and selection of the content in posterior stores ( Box 2 ) . The posterior cingulate gyrus and adjacent precuneus ( green area in Figure 4 ) consistently show semantic effects in imaging experiments and have also been implicated in a wide variety of other processes , as discussed below . Given the strong reciprocal connections this region has with the hippocampal formation , it likely plays a role in encoding semantically and emotionally meaningful events in episodic memory [ 61 ] , though its precise function remains a topic for future research . Our view of semantic processing in posterior cortical regions is similar to the ‘hub and spoke’ model of Patterson , Rogers , Lambon Ralph , and colleagues [ 7 , 46 , 58 ] and to the convergence zone model of Damasio [ 14 ] , but differs in two important respects . First , we do not believe the data support a central role for the temporal pole as the highest level in the convergence zone hierarchy ( Box 3 ) . As shown in Figures 2 and 4 , multimodal convergence of information processing streams occurs throughout much of the lateral and ventral temporal cortex , as well as in the inferior parietal lobe , whereas the temporal pole receives strong affective input from the ventral frontal lobe and amygdala and is better characterized as a modal region for processing emotion and social concepts [ 34 , 36 , 37 ] . Second , proponents of the hub and spoke model explicitly deny a role for the inferior parietal lobe in representation of semantic infor - mation [ 62 ] . We believe that the anatomical and functional imaging evidence for semantic memory storage in the inferior parietal lobe is difﬁcult to deny , even though the nature of the information represented in this region is still unclear ( Box 4 ) . Social cognition , declarative memory retrieval , prospection , and the default mode The network of brain regions we associate here with semantic processing has also been linked with more speciﬁc functions . Nearly all parts of the network have been implicated in aspects of social cognition , including theory - of - mind ( processing of knowledge pertaining to mental states of other people ) , emotion processing , and knowledge of social concepts [ 36 , 37 , 63 – 67 ] . Much of the network has been implicated in retrieval of episodic and particularly autobiographical memories [ 68 , 69 ] , leading to the hypothesis that these regions function to retrieve event memories through a process of ‘scene construction’ Box 2 . The role of the prefrontal cortex Imaging studies identify reliable semantic processing effects in the left inferior frontal gyrus ( IFG ) and in a larger dorsomedial prefrontal region extending from the posterior middle frontal gyrus laterally to the superior frontal gyrus ( SFG ) medially ( see blue areas in Figure 4 ) . Numerous experiments indicate that the IFG is engaged when tasks require effortful selection of semantic information , as when many alternative responses are possible or lexical ambiguity gives rise to competing semantic representations [ 15 , 16 , 93 , 94 ] . Consistent with prior reviews [ 95 , 96 ] , the meta - analytical data presented here show more reliable activation of anterior and ventral aspects of the IFG ( pars orbitalis and triangularis ) in semantic studies compared to posterior IFG . The role of dorsomedial prefrontal cortex in semantic processing has been much less studied , although this region has been a focus of attention in research on emotion processes , social cognition , self - referential processing and the default mode [ 67 , 73 , 74 , 97 – 99 ] . Is - chemic lesions to the left SFG cause transcortical motor aphasia , a syndrome characterized by sparse speech output [ 100 , 101 ] . There is typically a striking disparity between cued and uncued speech production , in that patients can repeat words and name objects relatively normally , but are unable to generate lists of words within a category or invent non - formulaic responses in conversation . That is , patients perform well when a simple response is fully specified ( a word to be repeated or object to be named ) but poorly when a plan must be created for generating a response [ 102 ] . This pattern suggests a specific deficit of self - initiated , self - guided retrieval of semantic information . The SFG lies between ventromedial prefrontal areas ( rostral cingulate gyrus and medial orbitofrontal cortex ) involved in emotion and reward and lateral prefrontal networks involved in cognitive control , and may act as an intermediary link between these processing systems . We propose that a key role of this region in semantic processing is to translate affective drive states into a coordinated plan for knowledge retrieval , that is , a plan for top - down activation of semantic fields relevant to the problem at hand . Damage to this region causes no loss of stored knowledge per se , but impairs the ability to access this knowledge for creative problem solving . As noted earlier , generating creative solutions in open - ended situations – including interpersonal conflicts , mechanical problems , future plans , even trivial conversational exchanges – is a relatively common task in daily life and also appears to be a large component of the conscious ‘resting’ state . Review Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1008 ; No . of Pages 10 6 [ 70 ] . The same scene construction processes have been proposed as the basis for ‘prospection , ’ i . e . , imagining future scenarios for the purpose of planning and goal attainment [ 71 , 72 ] . Finally , the association of these regions with autobiographical , ‘self - projection , ’ and self - referential processes has led to suggestions that they are speciﬁcally involved in processing self knowledge [ 73 , 74 ] . Several recent reviews and meta - analyses attest to the high degree of neuroanatomical overlap between the net - works supporting these purportedly distinct processes [ 67 , 75 – 77 ] . Given this overlap , it is logical to ask whether there is a process common to all of these cognitive functions . A model based on self - referential processing cannot easily explain activation of the same regions by theory - of - mind tasks , which by deﬁnition emphasize knowledge pertaining to others . The general process of mental scene construction is common to episodic memory retrieval , prospection , and many theory - of - mind tasks , but this model cannot explain the consistent activation of these regions by single word comprehension tasks , as shown above in Figure 2 . Indeed , the contrasts analyzed in Figure 2 focused on general semantic knowledge ( especially knowledge about object concepts ) and did not emphasize episodic , autobiographi - cal , social , emotional , self , or any other speciﬁc knowledge domain . One process shared across semantic , social cognition , episodic memory , scene construction , and self - knowledge tasks is the retrieval of conceptual knowledge . The scene construction posited to underlie episodic memory retriev - al and prospection refers to a partial , internal simulation of prior experience . But the construction of a scene requires content . The content of such a simulation is conceptual knowledge about particular entities , events , and relationships . The variety of this content is impres - sive , encompassing object , action , social , self , spatial , and Box 4 . The role of the inferior parietal cortex The inferior parietal cortex lies at a confluence of visual , spatial , somatosensory and auditory processing streams . Human functional imaging studies implicate this region specifically in representational aspects of semantic memory . For example , the AG responds more strongly to words than to matched pseudowords [ 47 ] , more to high - frequency than low - frequency words [ 103 ] , more to concrete than abstract words [ 104 ] and more to meaningful than meaningless sentences [ 105 ] . Thus the level of AG activation seems to reflect the amount of semantic information that can be successfully retrieved from a given input . Whether the parietal and temporal convergence zones play distinct roles in representing meaning remains a topic for future research , although available evidence offers some intriguing clues . One clue comes from differences in the location and anatomical connectivity of these regions , which to some degree parallel well - established differences between the ventral and dorsal visual networks . The temporal lobe convergence zone receives heavy input from the ventral visual object identification network and from the auditory ‘what’ pathway [ 106 ] , suggesting that its main role in semantic memory concerns conceptual representation of concrete objects . In contrast , the AG is bounded by dorsal attention networks that play a central role in spatial cognition , anterior parietal regions concerned with representation of action and posterior temporal regions supporting movement perception [ 107 ] . This suggests that the AG may play a unique role in representation of event concepts . Semantic memory research has focused overwhelmingly on knowledge about static concrete entities ( i . e . , objects , object features , categories ) , yet much of human knowledge concerns events in which entities interact in space and time . For example , the concept ‘birthday party’ does not refer to a static entity but is instead defined by a configuration of entities ( people , cake , candles , presents ) and a series of events unfolding in time and space ( lighting candles , singing , eating , opening presents ) . These spatial and temporal configurations define ‘birthday party’ and distinguish it from similar concepts like ‘picnic’ or ‘office party’ in the same way that sets of sensory and motor features distinguish one object from another . This hypothesis is consistent with recent evidence showing involvement of the AG in retrieval of episodic memories and in understanding theory - of - mind stories . The content of both episodic memory and socially complex stories consists largely of events . Several other studies show specific involvement of the AG in processing temporal and spatial information in stories [ 108 , 109 ] . Box 3 . The role of the temporal poles Studies of patients with semantic dementia have drawn attention to the temporal pole ( TP ) and the proposal that it functions as a central ‘hub’ housing amodal semantic representations [ 7 ] . Emphasis on the TP is also consistent with a longstanding view of this region as the zenith of a caudal - to - rostral convergence of information in the temporal lobe [ 14 ] . There are , however , several reasons to question claims that the TP is the sole or principal focus of high - level information convergence . The concept of the TP as an anatomical convergence zone is based mainly on two sources of information : the caudal - rostral progression of information processing in the primate ventral visual system [ 84 ] and the convergence of massive multi - modal inputs on anterior medial temporal regions , particularly perirhinal cortex [ 85 , 86 ] . Although a caudal - rostral hierarchy of information complexity in the primate visual system is undeniable , the proportion of the temporal lobe devoted to unimodal visual processing is considerably less in the human than in the monkey brain [ 39 ] . In contrast to the monkey visual system , which occupies ventral and lateral temporal cortex all the way to the temporal pole , the human visual system is largely confined to occipital cortex and posterior ventral temporal lobe . Apart from modal auditory cortex in the superior temporal gyrus , remaining regions in the human temporal lobe are not clearly modality - specific , therefore multimodal convergences are likely to occur along the entire length of the temporal lobe . The convergence of inputs on the anterior medial temporal lobe , though sometimes construed as serving a conceptual function [ 14 ] , are more likely to represent input to the hippocampal system for the purpose of episodic memory encoding [ 87 ] . Pathological evidence regarding the TP is also somewhat ambig - uous . Although atrophy in semantic dementia is typically most severe in the TP , the total area involved is usually much larger , including most of the ventral temporal cortex [ 88 – 90 ] . Regions showing the strongest correlation between atrophy and semantic deficits are actually closer to the mid - temporal lobe than the TP [ 90 , 91 ] . Finally , the TP , ventromedial prefrontal cortex and lateral orbitofrontal cortex constitute a tightly interconnected network [ 34 , 92 ] implicated in processing modality - specific emotional aspects of word meaning ( see Figure 1 ) . Considered together , these data suggest that the most anterior parts of the temporal lobe , including the TP and anteromedial temporal regions , are unlikely to be a critical hub for retrieval of multimodal semantic knowledge . Review Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1008 ; No . of Pages 10 7 other domains , yet these types of content all share a common basis in sensory - motor experience , learning through generalization across individual exemplars , and progressive abstraction from perceptual detail . We propose that the essential function of the high - level con - vergence zone network is to store and retrieve this con - ceptual content , which is employed over a variety of domain - speciﬁc tasks . This network of high - level convergence zones also over - laps extensively with the ‘default mode network’ of regions that show higher levels of activity during passive and ‘resting’ states than during attentional tasks [ 47 , 74 – 76 , 78 ] . The similarity between all of these networks lends strong support to proposals that ‘resting’ is a cognitively complex condition characterized by episodic and autobio - graphical memory retrieval , manipulation of semantic and social knowledge , creativity , problem solving , prospection , and planning [ 75 , 78 – 81 ] . Several authors have empha - sized the profound adaptive value of these processes , which not only enable the attainment of personal goals but are also responsible for all of human cultural and technological development [ 78 , 80 , 81 ] . Concluding remarks This review proposes a large - scale brain model of semantic memory organization in the human brain based on syn - thesis of a large body of empirical imaging data with a modiﬁed embodiment theory of knowledge representation . In contrast to strong versions of embodiment theory , the data show that large areas of heteromodal cortex partici - pate in semantic memory processes . The multimodal con - vergence of information toward these brain areas enables progressive abstraction of conceptual knowledge from per - ceptual experience , enabling rapid and ﬂexible manipula - tion of this knowledge for language and other highly creative tasks . In contrast to models that identify the temporal pole as the principal site of this information convergence , the evidence suggests involvement of hetero - modal regions throughout the temporal and the inferior parietal lobes . We hope this anatomical - functional model provides a useful framework for several future lines of research ( Box 5 ) . Acknowledgements Supported by NIH grants R01 NS33576 and R01 DC010783 . Thanks to Lisa Conant , Will Graves , Colin Humphries , Tim Rogers , and Mark Seidenberg for helpful discussions . Appendix A . Supplementary data Supplementary data associated with this article can be found , in the online version , at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tics . 2011 . 10 . 001 . References 1 Locke , J . ( 1690 / 1959 ) An essay concerning human understanding , Dover 2 Tulving , E . ( 1972 ) Episodic and semantic memory . In Organization of Memory ( Tulving , E . and Donaldson , W . , eds ) , pp . 381 – 403 , Academic Press 3 Allport , D . A . and Funnell , E . ( 1981 ) Components of the mental lexicon . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B 295 , 379 – 410 4 Barsalou , L . W . ( 2003 ) Situated simulation in the human conceptual system . Lang . Cogn . Process . 18 , 513 – 562 5 Martin , A . and Caramazza , A . ( 2003 ) Neuropsychological and neuroimaging perspectives on conceptual knowledge : an introduction . Cogn . Neuropsychol . 20 , 195 – 212 6 Damasio , H . et al . ( 2004 ) Neural systems behind word and concept retrieval . Cognition 92 , 179 – 229 7 Patterson , K . et al . ( 2007 ) Where do you know what you know ? The representation of semantic knowledge in the human brain . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 8 , 976 – 987 8 Vygotsky , L . S . ( 1962 ) Thought and language , Wiley 9 Fodor , J . ( 1975 ) The language of thought , Harvard University Press 10 Pylyshyn , Z . W . ( 1984 ) Computation and cognition : toward a foundation for cognitive science , MIT Press 11 Ferrucci , D . et al . ( 2010 ) Building Watson : an overview of the DeepQA project . AI Mag . 31 , 59 – 79 12 Wernicke , C . ( 1874 ) Der aphasische Symptomenkomplex , Cohn & Weigert 13 Freud , S . ( 1891 / 1953 ) On aphasia : a critical study , International Universities Press 14 Damasio , A . R . ( 1989 ) Time - locked multiregional retroactivation : a systems - level proposal for the neural substrates of recall and recognition . Cognition 33 , 25 – 62 15 Thompson - Schill , S . L . et al . ( 1997 ) Role of left inferior prefrontal cortex in retrieval of semantic knowledge : a reevaluation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 94 , 14792 – 14797 16 Wagner , A . D . et al . ( 2001 ) Recovering meaning : left prefrontal cortex guides semantic retrieval . Neuron 31 , 329 – 338 17 Mahon , B . Z . and Caramazza , A . ( 2008 ) A critical look at the embodied cognition hypothesis and a new proposal for grounding conceptual content . J . Physiol . ( Paris ) 102 , 59 – 70 Box 5 . Questions for future research (cid:2) More data are needed to clarify the location of modality - specific conceptual networks . As shown in Figure 1 , most of the work to date has focused on knowledge related to action , visual motion and emotion , with very little data on auditory , olfactory and gustatory concepts . Within the visual domain , more work is needed on the representation of specific types of information such as color , visual form , size and spatial knowledge . (cid:2) We propose here that the degree of activation in modality - specific perceptual systems during conceptual tasks varies with context . This more nuanced version of embodiment theory should be tested in future studies by controlled manipulation of variables such as stimulus familiarity , demands on speed and depth of processing requirements . (cid:2) The necessity of modality - specific systems for conceptual proces - sing is a critical issue . Studies of patient groups with different types and degrees of modality - specific impairments , combined with TMS studies targeting primary and secondary sensory - motor cortices , with varying task demands , are needed to answer this question definitively . (cid:2) Entities and events constitute two ontologically distinct categories of knowledge with distinct types of attributes , yet there has been little research to date exploring the neural correlates of this distinction . Our hypothesis that the temporal lobe is involved mainly in representation of object knowledge and the inferior parietal lobe in representation of event knowledge is both defeasible and testable . (cid:2) The role of posterior medial cortex ( posterior cingulate gyrus and precuneus ) in semantic processing remains unclear . Unraveling this mystery will likely require a combination of functional imaging , focal brain lesion , and nonhuman primate studies . (cid:2) The semantic memory network supports a variety of knowledge domains , including knowledge of self , theory of mind , social concepts , episodic and autobiographical memories , and knowledge of future hypothetical scenarios . Work to date suggests a large degree of overlap in the neural systems supporting these categories of knowledge , thus a major question for future research is whether these types of knowledge retrieval tasks uniquely or preferentially engage distinct components of the semantic network . Review Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1008 ; No . of Pages 10 8 18 Boulenger , V . et al . ( 2008 ) Word processing in Parkinson’s disease is impaired for action verbs but not for concrete nouns . Neuropsychologia 46 , 743 – 756 19 Bak , T . H . et al . ( 2006 ) Clinical , imaging and pathological correlates of a hereditary deﬁcit in verb and action processing . Brain 129 , 321 – 332 20 Buxbaum , L . J . and Saffran , E . M . ( 2002 ) Knowledge of object manipulation and object function : dissociations in apraxic and nonapraxic subjects . Brain Lang . 82 , 179 – 199 21 Bak , T . H . and Hodges , J . R . ( 2004 ) The effects of motor neurone disease on language : further evidence . Brain Lang . 89 , 354 – 361 22 Grossman , M . et al . ( 2008 ) Impaired action knowledge in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis . Neurology 71 , 1396 – 1401 23 Oliveri , M . et al . ( 2004 ) All talk and no action : a transcranial magnetic stimulation study of motor cortex activation during action word production . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 16 , 374 – 381 24 Buccino , G . et al . ( 2005 ) Listening to action - related sentences modulates the activity of the motor system : a combined TMS and behavioral study . Brain Res . Cogn . Brain Res . 24 , 355 – 363 25 Pulvermuller , F . et al . ( 2005 ) Functional links between motor and language systems . Eur . J . Neurosci . 21 , 793 – 797 26 Glenberg , A . M . et al . ( 2008 ) Processing abstract language modulates motor system activity . Q . J . Exp . Psychol . 61 , 905 – 919 27 Pobric , G . et al . ( 2010 ) Category - speciﬁc versus category - general semantic impairment induced by transcranial magnetic stimulation . Curr . Biol . 20 , 964 – 968 28 Ishibashi , R . et al . ( 2011 ) Different roles of lateral anterior temporal lobe and inferior parietal lobule in coding function and manipulation tool knowledge : evidence from an rTMS study . Neuropsychologia 49 , 1128 – 1135 29 Pulvermuller , F . et al . ( 2005 ) Brain signatures of meaning access in action word recognition . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 17 , 884 – 892 30 Boulenger , V . et al . ( 2006 ) Cross - talk between language processes and overt motor behavior in the ﬁrst 200 msec of processing . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 18 , 1607 – 1615 31 Revill , K . P . et al . ( 2008 ) Neural correlates of partial lexical activation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 105 , 13111 – 13115 32 Hoenig , K . et al . ( 2008 ) Conceptual ﬂexibility in the human brain : dynamic recruitment of semantic maps from visual , motor , and motion - related areas . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 20 , 1799 – 1814 33 Vigliocco , G . et al . ( 2009 ) Toward a theory of semantic representation . Lang . Cogn . 1 , 219 – 248 34 Olson , I . R . et al . ( 2007 ) The enigmatic temporal pole : a review of ﬁndings on social and emotional processing . Brain 130 , 1718 – 1731 35 Etkin , A . et al . ( 2011 ) Emotional processing in anterior cingulate and medial prefrontal cortex . Trends Cogn . Sci . 15 , 85 – 93 36 Ross , L . A . and Olson , I . R . ( 2010 ) Social cognition and the anterior temporal lobes . Neuroimage 49 , 3452 – 3462 37 Zahn , R . et al . ( 2007 ) Social concepts are represented in the superior anterior temporal cortex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 104 , 6430 – 6435 38 Mesulam , M . ( 1985 ) Patterns in behavioral neuroanatomy : association areas , the limbic system , and hemispheric specialization . In Principles of Behavioral Neurology ( Mesulam , M . , ed . ) , pp . 1 – 70 , F . A . Davis 39 Orban , G . A . et al . ( 2004 ) Comparative mapping of higher visual areas in monkeys and humans . Trends Cogn . Sci . 8 , 315 – 324 40 Hodges , J . R . et al . ( 1992 ) Semantic dementia : progressive ﬂuent aphasia with temporal lobe atrophy . Brain 115 , 1783 – 1806 41 Mummery , C . J . et al . ( 2000 ) A voxel - based morphometry study of semantic dementia : Relationship between temporal lobe atrophy and semantic memory . Ann . Neurol . 47 , 36 – 45 42 Bozeat , S . et al . ( 2000 ) Nonverbal semantic impairment in semantic dementia . Neuropsychologia 38 , 1207 – 1215 43 Hodges , J . R . et al . ( 2000 ) The role of conceptual knowledge in object use : evidence from semantic dementia . Brain 123 , 1913 – 1925 44 Bozeat , S . et al . ( 2002 ) When objects lose their meaning : what happens to their use ? Cogn . Affect . Behav . Neurosci . 2 , 236 – 251 45 Rogers , T . T . et al . ( 2007 ) Colour knowledge in semantic dementia : it is not all black and white . Neuropsychologia 45 , 3285 – 3298 46 Lambon Ralph , M . A . et al . ( 2007 ) Neural basis of category - speciﬁc semantic deﬁcits for living things : evidence from semantic dementia , HSVE and a neural network model . Brain 130 , 1127 – 1137 47 Binder , J . R . et al . ( 2009 ) Where is the semantic system ? A critical review and meta - analysis of 120 functional neuroimaging studies . Cereb . Cortex 19 , 2767 – 2796 48 Turkeltaub , P . E . et al . ( 2002 ) Meta - analysis of the functional neuroanatomy of single - word reading : method and validation . Neuroimage 16 , 765 – 780 49 Alexander , M . P . et al . ( 1989 ) Distributed anatomy of transcortical sensory aphasia . Arch . Neurol . 46 , 885 – 892 50 Damasio , H . ( 1989 ) Neuroimaging contributions to the understanding of aphasia . In Handbook of neuropsychology ( Boller , F . and Grafman , J . , eds ) , pp . 3 – 46 , Elsevier 51 Hart , J . and Gordon , B . ( 1990 ) Delineation of single - word semantic comprehension deﬁcits in aphasia , with anatomic correlation . Ann . Neurol . 27 , 226 – 231 52 Chertkow , H . et al . ( 1997 ) On the status of object concepts in aphasia . Brain Lang . 58 , 203 – 232 53 Dronkers , N . F . et al . ( 2004 ) Lesion analysis of the brain areas involved in language comprehension . Cognition 92 , 145 – 177 54 Harnad , S . ( 1990 ) The symbol grounding problem . Phys . D 42 , 335 – 346 55 Barsalou , L . W . ( 1999 ) Perceptual symbol systems . Behav . Brain Sci . 22 , 577 – 660 56 Gallese , V . and Lakoff , G . ( 2005 ) The brain’s concepts : the role of the sensory - motor system in conceptual knowledge . Cogn . Neuropsychol . 22 , 455 – 479 57 Are´valo , A . L . et al . ( in press ) What do brain lesions tell us about theories of embodied semantics and the human mirror neuron system ? Cortex , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cortex . 2010 . 06 . 001 58 Rogers , T . T . and McClelland , J . L . ( 2004 ) Semantic cognition : a parallel distributed processing approach , MIT Press 59 Dove , G . ( 2011 ) On the need for embodied and dis - embodied cognition . Front . Psychol . 1 ( article 242 ) 60 Taylor , L . J . and Zwaan , R . A . ( 2009 ) Action in cognition : the case for language . Lang . Cogn . 1 , 45 – 58 61 Valenstein , E . et al . ( 1987 ) Retrosplenial amnesia . Brain 110 , 1631 – 1646 62 Jefferies , E . and Lambon Ralph , M . A . ( 2006 ) Semantic impairment in stroke aphasia versus semantic dementia : a case - series comparison . Brain 129 , 2132 – 2147 63 Fletcher , P . C . et al . ( 1995 ) Other minds in the brain : a functional imaging study of ‘theory of mind’ in story comprehension . Cognition 57 , 109 – 128 64 Saxe , R . and Kanwisher , N . ( 2003 ) People thinking about thinking people : the role of the temporo - parietal junction in ‘theory of mind’ . Neuroimage 19 , 1835 – 1842 65 Amodio , D . M . and Frith , C . D . ( 2006 ) Meeting of minds : the medial frontal cortex and social cognition . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 7 , 268 – 277 66 Aichhorn , M . et al . ( 2009 ) Temporo - parietal junction activity in Theory - of - Mind tasks : falseness , beliefs , or attention . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 21 , 1179 – 1192 67 Van Overwalle , F . ( 2009 ) Social cognition and the brain : a meta - analysis . Hum . Brain Mapp . 30 , 829 – 858 68 Svoboda , E . et al . ( 2006 ) The functional neuroanatomy of autobiographical memory : A meta - analysis . Neuropsychologia 44 , 2189 – 2208 69 Vilberg , K . L . and Rugg , M . D . ( 2008 ) Memory retrieval and the parietal cortex : a review of evidence from a dual - process perspective . Neuropsychologia 46 , 1787 – 1799 70 Hassabis , D . and Maguire , E . A . ( 2007 ) Deconstructing episodic memory with construction . Trends Cogn . Sci . 11 , 299 – 306 71 Addis , D . R . et al . ( 2007 ) Remembering the past and imagining the future : common and distinct neural substrates during event construction and elaboration . Neuropsychologia 45 , 1363 – 1377 72 Gerlach , K . D . et al . ( 2011 ) Solving future problems : default network and executive activity associated with goal - directed mental simulations . Neuroimage 55 , 1816 – 1824 73 Gusnard , D . A . et al . ( 2001 ) Medial prefrontal cortex and self - referential mental activity : relation to a default mode of brain function . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 , 4259 – 4264 74 Whitﬁeld - Gabrieli , S . et al . ( 2011 ) Associations and dissociations between default and self - reference networks in the human brain . Neuroimage 55 , 225 – 232 75 Buckner , R . L . et al . ( 2008 ) The brain’s default network : anatomy , function , and relevance to disease . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1124 , 1 – 38 76 Spreng , R . N . et al . ( 2009 ) The common neural basis of autobiographical memory , prospection , navigation , theory of mind , and the default mode : a quantitative meta - analysis . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 21 , 489 – 510 Review Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1008 ; No . of Pages 10 9 77 Spreng , R . N . and Grady , C . L . ( 2009 ) Patterns of brain activity supporting autobiographical memory , prospection , and theory of mind , and their relationship to the default mode network . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 22 , 1112 – 1123 78 Binder , J . R . et al . ( 1999 ) Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state : a functional MRI study . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 11 , 80 – 93 79 Ingvar , D . H . ( 1985 ) Memory of the future : an essay on the temporal organization of conscious awareness . Hum . Neurobiol . 4 , 127 – 136 80 Andreasen , N . C . et al . ( 1995 ) Remembering the past : two facets of episodic memory explored with positron emission tomography . Am . J . Psychiatry 152 , 1576 – 1585 81 Andrews - Hanna , J . R . ( 2011 ) The brain’s default network and its adaptive role in internal mentation . Neuroscientist , DOI : 10 . 1177 / 1073858411403316 82 Fairbanks , G . ( 1966 ) Experimental phonetics : selected articles , University of Illinois Press 83 Desai , R . H . et al . ( 2011 ) The neural career of sensorimotor metaphors . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 23 , 2376 – 2386 84 Felleman , D . J . and Van Essen , D . C . ( 1991 ) Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate cerebral cortex . Cereb . Cortex 1 , 1 – 47 85 Jones , E . G . and Powell , T . S . P . ( 1970 ) An anatomical study of converging sensory pathways within the cerebral cortex of the monkey . Brain 93 , 793 – 820 86 Van Hoesen , G . W . ( 1982 ) The parahippocampal gyrus : new observations regarding its cortical connections in the monkey . Trends Neurosci . 5 , 345 – 350 87 Squire , L . R . ( 1992 ) Memory and the hippocampus : a synthesis from ﬁndings with rats , monkeys , and humans . Psychol . Rev . 99 , 195 – 231 88 Gorno - Tempini , M . L . et al . ( 2004 ) Cognition and anatomy in three variants of primary progressive aphasia . Ann . Neurol . 55 , 335 – 346 89 Rohrer , J . D . et al . ( 2009 ) Patterns of cortical thinning in the language variants of frontotemporal lobar degeneration . Neurology 72 , 1562 – 1569 90 Mion , M . et al . ( 2010 ) What the left and right anterior fusiform gyri tell us about semantic memory . Brain 133 , 3256 – 3268 91 Binney , R . J . et al . ( 2010 ) The ventral and inferolateral aspects of the anterior temporal lobe are crucial in semantic memory : evidence from a novel direct comparison of distortion - corrected fMRI , rTMS , and semantic dementia . Cereb . Cortex 20 , 2728 – 2738 92 Kondo , H . et al . ( 2003 ) Differential connections of the temporal pole with the orbital and medial prefrontal networks in macaque monkeys . J . Comp . Neurol . 465 , 499 – 523 93 Badre , D . et al . ( 2005 ) Dissociable controlled retrieval and generalized selection mechanisms in ventrolateral prefrontal cortex . Neuron 47 , 907 – 918 94 Rodd , J . M . et al . ( 2005 ) The neural mechanisms of speech comprehension : fMRI studies of semantic ambiguity . Cereb . Cortex 15 , 1261 – 1269 95 Fiez , J . A . ( 1997 ) Phonology , semantics and the role of the left inferior prefrontal cortex . Hum . Brain Mapp . 5 , 79 – 83 96 Bookheimer , S . Y . ( 2002 ) Functional MRI of language : new approaches to understanding the cortical organization of semantic processing . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 25 , 151 – 188 97 Zysset , S . et al . ( 2003 ) Functional specialization within the anterior medial prefrontal cortex : a functional magnetic resonance imaging study with human subjects . Neurosci . Lett . 335 , 183 – 186 98 Heatherton , T . F . et al . ( 2006 ) Medial prefrontal activity differentiates self from close others . Soc . Cogn . Affect . Neurosci . 1 , 18 – 25 99 Mitchell , J . P . et al . ( 2006 ) Dissociable medial prefrontal contributions to judgments of similar and dissimilar others . Neuron 50 , 655 – 663 100 Luria , A . R . and Tsvetkova , L . S . ( 1968 ) The mechanism of ‘dynamic aphasia’ . Found . Lang . 4 , 296 – 307 101 Alexander , M . P . et al . ( 1989 ) Frontal lobes and language . Brain Lang . 37 , 656 – 691 102 Robinson , G . et al . ( 1998 ) Dynamic aphasia : an inability to select between competing verbal responses ? Brain 121 , 77 – 89 103 Graves , W . W . et al . ( 2010 ) Neural systems for reading aloud : A multiparametric approach . Cereb . Cortex 20 , 1799 – 1815 104 Binder , J . R . et al . ( 2005 ) Distinct brain systems for processing concrete and abstract concepts . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 17 , 905 – 917 105 Humphries , C . et al . ( 2007 ) Time course of semantic processes during sentence comprehension : an fMRI study . Neuroimage 36 , 924 – 932 106 Rauschecker , J . P . and Tian , B . ( 2000 ) Mechanisms and streams for processing of ‘what’ and ‘where’ in auditory cortex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 97 , 11800 – 11806 107 Kravitz , D . J . et al . ( 2011 ) A new neural framework for visuospatial processing . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 12 , 217 – 230 108 Ferstl , E . C . et al . ( 2005 ) Emotional and temporal aspects of situation model processing during text comprehension : An event - related fMRI study . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 17 , 724 – 739 109 Ferstl , E . C . and von Cramon , D . Y . ( 2007 ) Time , space and emotion : fMRI reveals content - speciﬁc activation during text comprehension . Neurosci . Lett . 427 , 159 – 164 Review Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1008 ; No . of Pages 10 10