This article was downloaded by : [ University of Toronto Libraries ] On : 05 March 2014 , At : 09 : 00 Publisher : Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number : 1072954 Registered office : Mortimer House , 37 - 41 Mortimer Street , London W1T 3JH , UK The Information Society : An International Journal Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / loi / utis20 Institutions for Civic Technoscience : How Critical Making is Transforming Environmental Research Sara Ann Wylie a , Kirk Jalbert b , Shannon Dosemagen c & Matt Ratto d a Social Science and Environmental Health Research Institute , Northeastern University , Boston , Massachusetts , USA b Department of Science and Technology Studies , Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute , Troy , New York , USA c Public Laboratory for Open Technology and Science , New Orleans , Louisiana , USA d Critical Making Lab , Faculty of Information , University of Toronto , Toronto , Canada Published online : 04 Mar 2014 . To cite this article : Sara Ann Wylie , Kirk Jalbert , Shannon Dosemagen & Matt Ratto ( 2014 ) Institutions for Civic Technoscience : How Critical Making is Transforming Environmental Research , The Information Society : An International Journal , 30 : 2 , 116 - 126 , DOI : 10 . 1080 / 01972243 . 2014 . 875783 To link to this article : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01972243 . 2014 . 875783 PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information ( the “Content” ) contained in the publications on our platform . However , Taylor & Francis , our agents , and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy , completeness , or suitability for any purpose of the Content . Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors , and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis . The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information . Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses , actions , claims , proceedings , demands , costs , expenses , damages , and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with , in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content . This article may be used for research , teaching , and private study purposes . Any substantial or systematic reproduction , redistribution , reselling , loan , sub - licensing , systematic supply , or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden . Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http : / / www . tandfonline . com / page / terms - and - conditions The Information Society , 30 : 116 – 126 , 2014 Published with license by Taylor & Francis ISSN : 0197 - 2243 print / 1087 - 6537 online DOI : 10 . 1080 / 01972243 . 2014 . 875783 FORUM Institutions for Civic Technoscience : How Critical Making is Transforming Environmental Research Sara Ann Wylie Social Science and Environmental Health Research Institute , Northeastern University , Boston , Massachusetts , USA Kirk Jalbert Department of Science and Technology Studies , Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute , Troy , New York , USA Shannon Dosemagen Public Laboratory for Open Technology and Science , New Orleans , Louisiana , USA Matt Ratto Critical Making Lab , Faculty of Information , University of Toronto , Toronto , Canada This article explores the changing relationship between the academy and new public formations of scientiﬁc research , which we term “civic technoscience . ” Civic technoscience leverages tac - tics seen in critical making communities to question and transform how and who can make credible and actionable knowledge . A com - parison of two case studies is used . The ﬁrst is a grassroots mapping process that allows communities to generate high - quality aerial im - agery . The second is an academic - led project using environmental sensors to engage disparate audiences in scientiﬁc practice . These two projects were found to differ in their ability to form strate - gic spaces for community - based science , and suggest pathways to foster more robust relationships across the public – academic di - vide . By altering power dynamics in material , literary , and social c ⃝ Sara Ann Wylie , Kirk Jalbert , Shannon Dosemagen , and Matt RattoReceived 3 September 2012 ; accepted 5 September 2013 . Address correspondence to Sara Ann Wylie , Assistant Pro - fessor of Sociology / Anthropology and Health Science , Social Science and Environmental Health Research Institute , North - eastern University , 360 Huntington Ave , Boston , MA 02115 , USA . Web : http : / / www . northeastern . edu / socant / ? page id = 2074 ; E - mail : s . wylie @ neu . edu technologies used for scientiﬁc research , we argue that civic techno - science enables citizens to question expert knowledge production through critical making tactics , and creates opportunities to gen - erate credible public science . Keywords critical making , technoscience , environmental justice , so - cial movements , Public Lab , civic science FROM TACTICAL INTERVENTIONS TO STRATEGIC SPACES Emerging forms of critical making within art and design , such as tactical media , tactical biopolitics , and interven - tionist artwork , have stressed the importance of tactical interventions ( Garcia and Lovink 1997 ; Bholer 2008 ; Da Coasta and Kavita 2008 ; Thompson and Sholette 2004 ) . Tactics according to Certeau are weapons of the weak , as they are employed by those with no physical or social space to form long - standing strategies ( Certeau 1984 ) . This focus on tactics has been particularly important in biopolitical artwork like that of Critical Art Ensemble ( CAE ) , which has formulated spaces outside of traditional 116 D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f T o r on t o L i b r a r i e s ] a t 09 : 00 05 M a r c h 2014 INSTITUTIONS FOR CIVIC TECHNOSCIENCE 117 laboratories to query science ( Da Coasta and Kavita 2008 ; CAE 1996 ) . However , these interventions have purpose - fully been short - lived , designed as one - time experiments , such as Jermjienko’s feral robotic dogs project . 1 This arti - cle points to a shift occurring in the terrain of critical mak - ing , that is , the formation of institutions that aim to normal - ize and formalize spaces for nontraditional science . New spaces for scientiﬁc research are emerging that speciﬁ - cally seek to establish and maintain a presence external to the traditional academy : genspace , X - Clinic , Public Lab - oratory for Open Technology and Science ( Public Labo - ratory or Public Lab ) . 2 This formalization of alternative spaces for scientiﬁc research and technology development is particularly prominent in ﬁelds such as environmental health and justice research , where communities have been struggling to transform the process of scientiﬁc knowl - edge making to better study , redress , and remediate press - ing environmental health questions ( Corburn 2005 ; Brown 1997 / 2006 ; Frickel 2004 ; Morello - Frosch 2005 / 2006 ; Ot - tinger 2011 ) . Rather than being short - lived , these com - munities that blend citizen science with critical making are attempting to establish a formal and lasting presence within domains of scientiﬁc research and interface with formal experts . This article explores the changing relationship between the academy and these new spaces for scientiﬁc work . This is done by comparing two examples of such work : ﬁrst , Public Laboratory’s grassroots mapping process , a do - it - yourself ( DIY ) research tool and methodology that allows communities to generate satellite like images of higher quality than those produced by actual satellites ( Dosemagen et al . 2011 ; Long and Warren 2010 ) ; and second , a tactical project initiated at Rensselaer Polytech - nic Institute ( RPI ) aimed at using microcontroller - based sensor projects as a way of engaging disparate audiences in scientiﬁc practice . These two projects differ in their ability to form strategic spaces for community - based science . Encountering problems of institutionally man - dated intellectual property agreements and adherence to entrenched disciplinary conventions , the RPI microcon - troller projects stalled . On the other hand , Public Lab’s community - made maps are being served alongside raster maps produced by satellites in “authoritative” formats such as Google Maps and Google Earth . 3 In the case of Public Lab as a strategic space for community - based science external to the academy , we argue that the shift in material technologies for science is supported by changes in the literary and social technolo - gies for science . These material technologies , which are typically low - cost tools that can be built by nonexperts with household materials , are supported by literary and social technologies : open - source hardware and software licenses , as well as public - access websites , listservs , and face - to - face meetups , to build alternative institutions for civically engaged science . We term do - it - yourself ( DIY ) research tools initiated by groups like Public Lab as meth - ods for “civic technoscience , ” 4 and view this as a strategy driven by values - based research . In relationship to this fo - rum’s focus on critical making , projects like Public Lab exemplify how creation of a strategic space to enact civic technoscience requires transformation of material , liter - ary , and social technologies for science ( Ratto , Wylie , and Jalbert 2014 ) . CIVIC TECHNOSCIENCE : QUESTIONING THE STATE OF INSTITUTIONAL SCIENCE Practices of critical making , community - based environ - mental health and justice research , science and technol - ogy studies ( STS ) , and participatory design are coming together in the present milieu of open - source software and hardware to generate new alternate spaces and tools for scientiﬁc research . 5 The material focus of tactical me - dia , the social critique of laboratory science from STS , and the stress on community knowledge generation , we argue , come together to stabilize novel material , literary , and social technologies for civic technoscience . Historians of science Shapin and Schaffer , based on their analyses of Boyle’s description of the emergence of the experimental program in the 17th century , identify three different “technologies” that enabled the emergence of experimental or laboratory - based sciences as we have come to know them : material , social , and literary technolo - gies ( Shapin and Schaffer 1985 ; Shapin 2010 ) . Material technologies refer to the apparatus within laboratories , which is used in the generation and validation ( via repli - cation ) of “matters of fact . ” Social technologies include social structures like Royal Societies , composed initially by landed gentry , which acted as authoritative witnesses to matters of fact . The literary technologies refer to the publishing of detailed and methodologically rich papers within peer - reviewed journals as the means of communi - cating “matters of fact” and building scientiﬁc consensus . The literary technology Boyle invented—the research paper—carried the testimony of the authors , who as “mod - est witnesses” reported on their observations in a detached fashion that was directed at creating for the reader the experience of watching the experiment . Through mod - est witnesses “nature” could be presented as speaking for itself , without the interference of the scientist’s agenda or worldview . STS research has critiqued the notion that humans can serve as neutral witnesses . It has also spot - lighted the cultural consequences of creating a privi - leged community that speaks for “nature , ” given the so - cial construction of science’s material , social , and liter - ary technologies . The reality is that modest witnessing helped to afﬁrm the authority of the author by creating a conventional method through which results , positive D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f T o r on t o L i b r a r i e s ] a t 09 : 00 05 M a r c h 2014 118 S . A . WYLIE ET AL . and negative , could be reported seemingly without value judgments ( Haraway 1997 ; Galison 1999 ; Daston and Lunbeck 2011 ) . The process of fortifying scientiﬁc au - thority via the modest witness and the subsequent estab - lishment of the academy served the secondary purpose of excluding the nonprofessional , nonpatriarchal participants from the scientiﬁc agenda . That access to scientiﬁc research tools and agendas is limited to formal experts is a foundational problem for communities managing environmental health and justice issues ( Bullard 1990 ; Brown 2006 ; Ottinger 2011 ) . How - ever , research has shown that communities are capable of innovating novel approaches to research and can ef - fectively reframe larger expert - driven research agendas ( Brown and Zavestoski 2005 ; Corburn 2005 ; Morello - Frosch 2005 ; Minkler and Wallerstein 2003 / 2009 ; Mc - Cormick 2009 ) . One example is the fusion of activism and community environmental monitoring by Bucket Brigades , which emerged from the practical need , for lawyers working on an environmental justice case , to get air quality data . At the time there were no tools available for nonscientists to participate in air monitoring . To solve that problem , a technical consultant was hired to develop a bucket grab sampling method mimicking the U . S . Envi - ronmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) standard summa can - ister ( O’Rourke and Macey 2003 ; Overdevest and Mayer 2008 ; Ottinger 2009 / 2010 ) . Analysis of bucket data still requires that the bucket travel to a research lab , so that the sample studied by experts , and the data’s efﬁcacy in advo - cacy , depend on the ability of the community organization to interpret and frame the data ( Ottinger 2010 ) . Similarly , STS research has spotlighted the inadequacy of lab - based research methods for setting health standards around toxics ( Murphy 2004 / 2006 ) and has described how social paradigms of disease have made environmental health problems hard to study ( Nash 2006 ; Murphy 2006 ; Allen 2003 ; Frickel 2010 ) . However , there has been rel - atively little focus on how the technical infrastructure of environmental science might be reorganized to address these problems beyond engaging communities in research ( Ottinger 2011 ) . Indeed , Ottinger points out that the suc - cess of citizen environmental monitoring programs often depends on their ability to interface with formal experts’ epistemic frameworks ( Ottinger 2009 ) . Citizen science , with the exception of initiatives like the Bucket Brigades , often turns citizens into data harvesters who assist sci - entists in acquiring data , such as with the century - long Audubon Christmas bird count . They rarely engage par - ticipants in shaping the research agenda . Fortun and Fortun ( 2005 ) , troubled by the distinction between “citizen” and “scientists” suggested by citizen science , invoke the term “civic science” and call for an in - vestigative relationship that “questions the state of things , rather than a science that simply serves the state” ( 50 ) . To broaden the framework to material , social , and liter - ary technologies , we propose a new model : civic techno - science , wherein new material technologies in combina - tion with new social and literary technologies can sustain a civic research space external to the academy and where nonacademics can credibly question the state of things . MATERIAL , SOCIAL , AND LITERARY TECHNOLOGIES FOR CIVIC TECHNOSCIENCE : GRASSROOTS MAPPING AND PUBLIC LAB Critical making , the practice of generating tools with alternative politics and embedded sociotechnical sys - tems , opens the door to new approaches to scientiﬁc instrumentation ( Ratto 2011 ) . For instance , within the ﬁelds of critical geography , anthropology , and STS , many have critiqued the historical trajectory of map making ( Brody 1981 ; Burnett 2000 ; Harley 1988 / 1992 / 2001 ; Pa - glen 2009 ) . Latour argues that maps are tools of empires , used to transfer knowledge from the periphery to the metropole so that the centers of power may make plans for action at a distance . Closely tied to both the colo - nial enterprise and then the formation of nation - states , the preeminent mapmakers historically are governments and corporations ( Burnett 2000 ; Latour 1990 ; Harley 2001 ; Monmonier 2002 ; Soja 1989 ) . Given the politics of these two groups , and the process and technologies of map - making in postindustrial , postcolonial nations and major corporations , data are proprietarily owned ( Farman 2010 ; Helmreich 2011 ; Monmonier 2002 ) . Herein the material technologies for satellite imaging preclude the engage - ment of people inhabiting the sites they map ; communities cannot direct the path of satellites or opt not to be imaged ( Farman 2010 ; Monmonier 2002 ) . While critical geog - raphers , STS scholars , and other academics have written about such concerns , grassroots mapping activists trans - late such critiques into practice by creating a low - cost do - it - yourself methods that enable noncorporate , nonstate ac - tors to rapidly create and share aerial maps ( Warren 2010 ) . Moreover , grassroots mapping creates maps of a quality such that formal data archives ﬁnd the maps attractive to curate and integrate with their collections . In 2011 Google began integrating Grassroots Maps , served through Public Lab’s online archive , into both Google Maps and Google Earth ( Adams 2012 ) . The superior resolution of Public Lab images makes them readily distinguishable from sur - rounding satellite images in Google Earth and Maps . The Mapper Is Embedded in the Map ; The Maps Reveal How They Are Made Mapmaking , as balloon mapping described in the follow - ing demonstrates , need not depend upon capital - intensive systems . Jeff Warren pioneered the development of grass - roots mapping in 2010 as part of his master’s thesis D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f T o r on t o L i b r a r i e s ] a t 09 : 00 05 M a r c h 2014 INSTITUTIONS FOR CIVIC TECHNOSCIENCE 119 work at MIT’s Center for Future Civic Media , which interestingly required that any resulting software or hardware be open source ( Warren 2010 ) . This require - ment imposed by the Knight Foundation , which funded the center , enabled Warren to focus his design work on a different constituency : community organizations . Public Lab started from a collaborative project between War - ren and the Louisiana Bucket Brigade , lead by Shannon Dosemagen , to organize gulf communities to map the 2010 Gulf of Mexico ( Gulf ) Oil Spill using grassroots mapping . A group that participated in the Gulf mapping effort , including authors Wylie and Dosemagen , founded Public Lab as a nonproﬁt to further develop the idea of do - it - yourself research tools . 6 The Public Lab tools exempliﬁed here by balloon map - ping have a very different approach to material technolo - gies for science both in how they are built and in their attention to politics of knowledge making . Warren de - scribes the goals of the project as “seeking to invert the traditional power structures of cartography . ” 7 Grassroots maps are made by attaching a cheap , approximately $ 60 digital camera to a balloon ﬁlled with helium or a kite . The camera is contained inside a homemade housing that is built on site , generally using plastic soda or juice bottles . The tethered balloon is then ﬂown at between 1000 and 2000 feet in the air , with the camera snapping pictures as it travels . The resultant images are thereafter stitched into large - scale maps with the help of Photoshop or free and open - source software developed by Public Lab . 8 These maps outstrip Google Maps in terms of resolution . While covering at most a few square kilometers , grassroots maps tend to have much higher spatial resolution than com - mercial or government satellite imagery : typically 2 – 7 cm resolution , as opposed to 0 . 5 – 3 m resolution for com - mercial imagery ( Warren 2010 ) . Balloon maps also often have richer colors , and grassroots mappers have remapped sites multiple times to assess change over time , increasing temporal resolution ( Warren 2010 ) . The bird’s - eye view from satellites has been equated with the view from no - where—a “god’s - eye” perspective that sees everywhere and everything at once ( Helmreich 2011 ; Farmen 2010 ) . The god’s - eye view from nowhere has been characterized as the scientiﬁc ideal in laboratory science , wherein the scientist is not an actor in the creation of data but is merely a witness ( Haraway 1991 ) . Balloon mapping is by comparison tied to a hyperlocal view . The ground and mapper are literally connected to the mapping equipment by a very long string . One must hike through marsh , go up hills , spot power lines , navigate boats to access a vantage point from which to balloon map sites of interest . This is not an easy process , as one must travel the ground imaged in order to generate the images in the ﬁrst place . In effect , this process reconnects satellite - like imaging to place . The intimate connection between the mappers and the local context is particularly evident in balloon mapping pictures where both the tether and the mappers on the ground are visible . Such pictures are not rare occurrences , nor do they bother the grassroots mappers , as they reveal , in the map itself , how the map was made and who made it . These contextual details provide grassroots maps an alternative form of validity by showing that they are taken at a particular time , by particular people , and caught by the conditions of the ﬁeld at that time . Kholer , in his study of ﬁeld science versus laboratory science in the 20th century , argues that ﬁeld sciences , in order to garner legitimacy , often attempted to remake the ﬁeld into a lab , using ordered grids and evacuating hu - man inhabitants to create “natural” spaces outside of hu - man inﬂuence . Practices like those of grassroots mapping open up the question of whether , through critical making , this dynamic can be reversed ( Kholer 2002 ) . In grass - roots mapping , the tools themselves become vectors for analyzing local conditions , but also provoke unexpected connections in the ﬁeld . For instance , on a balloon map - ping expedition in Louisiana , Wylie noticed spider webs that had caught all the way up the line connected to the balloon , forming a shimmering silk ladder as far as the eye could see . Without the line in the air above them , the mappers would never have noticed the spider webs ﬂying around them . This experience provoked new ques - tions about the surrounding ecosystem and reemphasized that these are dynamic inhabited spaces . In this case the mapping apparatus became a tool for learning something surprising about the environment , as it made possible a new connection to the space rather than acting as a con - trolled experimental condition ( Rheinberger 1998 ) . Unlike seamless satellite maps , how a balloon map was made can be discerned from the constituent images . Bal - loon making is a not black - boxed inscription technology that seems to magically produce data without reference to how and who made it ( Latour 1987 / 1979 ) . It carries information on the production process in the map itself . On inspecting a balloon map , the viewer can see separate images that comprise it , and the resulting insight into the bricolage approach encourages the viewer to imagine how the map might have been differently made . Maps made in open - source Mapknitter can be exported to Public Lab’s archive , which is publicly available , with mapper’s notes on the expedition and the purpose of the map . Public Lab facilitates this described mode of map making by pro - viding literary technologies such as how - to guides , video tutorials , community’s listserv , and trainers . Situated Tools Are Lively , Produce Unpredictable Results , and Encourage Adaptive Uses Through Social Media and “Share - Alike” Provisions Solving technical problems in balloon maps , like ra - dial blurring due to the rig spinning , leads to iterative local improvements to camera rigging , stabilizing , and D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f T o r on t o L i b r a r i e s ] a t 09 : 00 05 M a r c h 2014 120 S . A . WYLIE ET AL . triggering systems . Different communities have evolved different solutions to these problems . These solutions are shared between communities online through “research notes” wiki - pages published under creative commons li - censes at Publiclab . org . In Louisiana ﬁshbones are being used to depress camera buttons . In New York , program - mers utilize a software solution wherein internal memory cards are used to reprogram the camera , thus allowing it to take pictures continuously . Both produce equal re - sults . Balloon mapping rigs developed in Boston used cardboard wings as stabilizers . These wilted in the humid - ity of Louisiana and that spurred the use of plastic sta - bilizers made from soda bottles . The modiﬁcations made and shared by different users and communities speak to the local conditions where they are used . These tools are unlike standard laboratory research tools , which stay the same from place to place . They are locally modiﬁed and transformed . But these local modi - ﬁcations can also be shared through social technologies like the Public Lab website , which encourages users to write and share notes describing their work . This shar - ing back to the community is encouraged through the literary technology of open source hardware and software licenses that have “share alike” provisions . 9 These provi - sions require that changes or modiﬁcations to the existing software or hardware also be open source so that they can contribute back to the knowledge base of the larger com - munity . This legal structure is supported by sociotechnical infrastructures like the research note , community archive , and mailing list . Unlike traditional expert scientiﬁc soci - eties , membership in Public Lab is free and the research notes can be read by anyone with Web access . The literary technology of open source licensing encourages active recognition of the role of individual contributors to re - search results and technology developments . Contributors to projects are identiﬁed individually on the Public Lab website by the number of research notes they’ve offered to a project . On another level , communities can openly trace their research collectively through “Place” pages that document their efforts and local uses of Public Lab tools . Balloon mapping is a means for local inhabitants to generate knowledge about and “make sense” of what is important to them . The social architecture of Public Lab and the literary technology of open source licensing enable Public Lab members to share that collective representa - tion with broader communities . This generates a location - ally and temporally speciﬁc record that allows mappers to chart changes over time , capture vital moments , and shed light on sites that are usually ignored . This process is well demonstrated in the balloon mapping work of the Gowanus Canal Conservancy . This community organiza - tion aims to become involved in the U . S . EPA cleanup of the Gowanus Canal Superfund site . The canal , historically the site of coal yards , foundries , and paint and ink manu - facturers , has high loads of polycyclic aromatic hydrocar - bons . Over the last year the Gowanus Canal Conservancy has mapped the canal seasonally to examine for instance health of bioswales , landscape elements that absorb pol - lutants and runoff , that conservancy members planted to aid the remediation . Their winter ﬂights revealed areas of melted ice in the canal . Returning after the ice thawed , they conﬁrmed their suspicions from the images that un - marked inﬂows were coming into the canal at those loca - tions . Some of these inﬂows were not mapped by the U . S . EPA . Grassroots Mapper , Eymund Diegel reports that : “The high resolution of the balloon and kite pictures , cou - pled with my interest in historical maps of the Canal have allowed us to use Grassroots Mapping images as credi - ble evidence of historic streams that will affect decisions about how the Superfund cleanup program will have to proceed” ( Dosemagen and Wylie 2012 ) . Grassroots Mapping Generates New Potential for Action and Change Grassroots maps do more than just offer a critique to how mapping has traditionally been practiced . As was the case with the Gowanus maps , they offer up new opportunities for action—and the ability to correct and transform “of - ﬁcial” maps with local ﬁndings . Many communities are taking up the balloon mapping platform and applying it to matters of local concern ( e . g . , imaging natural gas de - velopment around homes in Colorado , logging activities , informal settlements for land claims in Peru , and landﬁlls in Massachusetts ) , as the familiar modernist framework of surveillance can be inverted with balloon mapping ( Mann 2003 ) . Balloon mapping expeditions frequently become com - munity events . People spot a balloon and come out to ask what is going on , and often they ﬁnd themselves joining in . Public Lab has encouraged this practice by recommend - ing that balloon mappers turn mapmaking into community events . This communal approach is also seen in the prac - tice of protest mapping—where protesters use balloons and digital cameras to map their events . Started in Chile by an organization interested in mapping education re - form protests , protest maps and live streaming footage from the balloons were used to demonstrate that protests were peaceful and to correct ofﬁcial ﬁgures underestimat - ing attendance . 10 This spread to the United States with the Occupy movement . 11 One interesting innovation de - veloped by Chilean protest balloon mappers is the use of clusters of party balloons rather than a single red balloon , to blend into the carnivalesque environment of protests and to appear less threatening . An activist artist in New York turned the making of the cluster of balloons into a social event at protests , when he began organizing teams of strangers to each tie a balloon into the collective bunch D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f T o r on t o L i b r a r i e s ] a t 09 : 00 05 M a r c h 2014 INSTITUTIONS FOR CIVIC TECHNOSCIENCE 121 ( Kopstein 2012 ) . Fanning out , as if around a Maypole , par - ticipants tether their balloons together to carry the camera aloft . Operating in a densely crowded protest environment has helped evolve a practice of using multiple tethers to steady the balloon . At the 2012 May Day protests in New York City the whole crowd participated in helping keep the balloons aloft—from people climbing up lampposts to free the tethers , to holding the strings above their heads to help the balloons climb . Using this balloon mapping technique , live stream and HD video footage of the protest was recorded . However , these technologies are not witnessed by a group of passive observers . They absorb the observers into the process of making a “matter of fact”—the digital images . The struc - ture of observation and participation is transformed with this tool , creating new possibilities for action , data gath - ering , and analysis . These possibilities depend upon and draw from the local context , in marked contrast to ex - perimental science that has sought to create a controlled separable space for research . Public Lab has been study - ing and learning from this model to generate other re - search tools that similarly embrace core characteristics of civic technoscience : ( 1 ) creatively misusing or adapting existing consumer technology such as cameras and cell phone , ( 2 ) engaging communities as researchers not re - search subjects to focus on problems of civic importance , ( 3 ) building in openness and accountability , ( 4 ) enabling and encouraging local variations , ( 5 ) creating social plat - forms for sharing information and asking questions and thereby aiding collective research , and ( 6 ) creating le - gal and social structures such as open - source licenses for recursively sharing back technology developments to the rest of the community . Described as Trojan images , Public Lab’s maps appear alongside images produced by satellite but sneak in an entirely different process for making maps that depends on alternative material , social , and literary technologies for research . By analyzing the evolution of initiatives like Public Lab’s balloon mapping process , civic technoscience , with its roots in tactical media , can be understood as the devel - opment of a scientiﬁc research agenda that borrows from and transforms science as it is presently understood . Tac - tical media , open - source licensing , place - based research , and Web platforms can be leveraged to change science’s material , social , and literary technologies in a way that stabilizes new strategic spaces for critique of science . As opposed to rejecting vast resources and skills available in the academy , we believe it is crucial to enlist institutional players in the drive for more effective civic technoscience . At the same time , traditional practices for conducting sci - ence in those spaces must be altered signiﬁcantly in order to be of greater service to science conducted in the public domain , as the next case investigates . CONSTRAINING CIVIC TECHNOSCIENCE IN THE ACADEMY : CULTURALLY SITUATED SENSING Promotion of the development of alternative material , so - cial , and literary technologies for civic technoscience faces many challenges when initiated from within the academy . Grassroots efforts are free to utilize open - source tech - nologies without the constraints of university - imposed in - tellectual property agreements . On the other hand , the ability to rapidly maneuver and use developing technolo - gies , and to freely engage problems of interest to commu - nity participants rather than those of the research team , is limited by long - standing disciplinary norms and con - ventions , especially those related to accepted research methodologies . In order to operate within this climate , researchers sym - pathetic to civic technoscience must enact different tac - tics like those de Certeau ascribed to the weak . Strate - gies for doing this are forged not as acts of political resistance , but in what George Marcus calls para - sites or “spaces , sites , and even objects that facilitate alterna - tive thinking by subjects who are deeply complicit with and implicated in powerful institutional processes . ” But they are forged also by researchers “who are attempt - ing to come to terms with changing practices , opportu - nities , and self - deﬁnitions” ( Marcus 2000 , 5 ) . 12 Efforts for developing alternative modes of material , social , and literary technologies , consciously or unconsciously , must create a kind of double agency under the umbrella of accepted practices . Advocates must bridge divides and create novel third spaces ( Bhabha 1994 ) , and create cen - ters of research that proactively stabilize environments for civic technoscience across broader communities of stake - holders ( Fischer 2003 ) . Nevertheless , the current state of accepted practices within the academy remains strongly opposed to embracing exemplary civic technoscience infrastructures . Institutions Are Ripe With Potential Resources to Support Civic Technoscience An interesting example of this is demonstrated by a re - search project led by one of the authors , Kirk Jalbert , at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute . On paper this project tried many of the same tactics for enabling civic techno - science as Public Lab : the tools were meant to be open source , advantage was taken of modiﬁable technologies , the research agenda was co - developed with the com - munity , and the material technologies aimed to enable community - based sensing and mapping . In the fall of 2010 , an interdisciplinary research group spanning the social sciences , engineering , and computer science came together to design modular , open - source environmental sensing devices that could be easily appropriated by local D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f T o r on t o L i b r a r i e s ] a t 09 : 00 05 M a r c h 2014 122 S . A . WYLIE ET AL . communities . Building on successful community - driven design approaches in Ron Eglash’s culturally situated de - sign tools for collaborative STEM education ( Eglash et al . 2004 ; Eglash , Bennet , et al . 2006 ) , the group developed a sensor platform and geospatial mapping software for participatory environmental monitoring . 13 They soon found interested partner organizations on the Navajo Nation . One partner , the Din´e Environmental Institute ( DEI ) at Din´e College , had developed a success - ful National Science Foundation ( NSF ) - funded program for environmental monitoring using relatively expensive equipment that necessitating advanced training . DEI’s par - ticipation was generated by their interest in expanding their program to a larger community using low - cost tools . A second partner , the Environmental Education Outreach Program ( EEOP ) at Northern Arizona University , oper - ated environmental education summer workshops with youth groups from across the Navajo Nation . A com - ponent of their work tracked sand dune erosion due to climate change , and could beneﬁt from adaptable and ex - pandable monitoring devices left in the ﬁeld to document site - speciﬁc weather events . The RPI research team developed the concept of cul - turally situated sensing , where civic technoscience and participatory design could be deployed at ﬁeld sites on the Navajo Nation to encourage community investments in environmental awareness and also to reconnect with envi - ronmental narratives in traditional Navajo culture ( Jalbert 2011 ) . For example , at one EEOP ﬁeld site , the sensors were deployed with the assistance of a Navajo ethnob - otanist . In the process of collecting data on soil moisture , participants were also exposed to Navajo nomenclatures and to methods practiced by traditional healers for collect - ing specimens without damaging living plants . Together , the collective developed a statement of work ( SOW ) outlining the goals and deliverables for the project : All software and hardware must remain open source for free sharing , off - the - shelf components should be utilized to reduce material complexity and encourage adaptabil - ity , and , most importantly , there should be a recursive social structure that allowed the research team , designers , and community collaborators to steer the project collec - tively . In the spring of 2011 , the collective was offered the opportunity to utilize the university’s Multi - Disciplinary Research Lab ( MDL ) —an incubator space typically out - sourced to major commercial industrial partners . 14 Seem - ingly a windfall for the project , this collaboration af - forded in - house teams of senior engineering students to develop the sensor platform . Perhaps the most remark - able aspect of this arrangement was that in agreeing to the terms of the SOW , the sensor project became MDL’s ﬁrst real encounter with open - source design requirements in its 6 years of operation . In effect , this new partnership established a potential site of legitimation for alternate ma - terial , social , and literary technologies . It also created an opportunity for challenging entrenched engineering and design practices to open pathways for developing socially conscious critical making from within the academy . However , as the material output of the collaboration became realized in the ensuing year , a number of prob - lems emblematic of conventional academic technoscien - tiﬁc practice emerged . First , despite encouragements to take advantage of readily available and adaptable tech - nologies such as the Arduino microcontroller platform , the MDL team quickly locked into a classic pathology of en - gineering customized platforms . The secondary effects of this decision shifted the site of material development away from inclusions by Navajo ﬁeld collaborators—languages and processes of conventional engineering create high bar - riers of entry for civic participants . A third and more seri - ous problem threatened the project’s public accountability . While the SOW mandated adherence to open - source hard - ware and software designs , MDL students were instructed by lab administrators to stamp “copyright MDL , all rights reserved” on all components and documentation . After a series of increasingly high - proﬁle appeals , the university’s Ofﬁce of Technology Commercialization—the ﬁnal arbi - trator for intellectual property disputes on campus—ruled the SOW was in fact a binding contract and all directives therein must be honored . Despite this favorable ruling , the research team was left with half - working technology reluctantly backed by a now cautious MDL and increasingly unsupported as stu - dents from the design team graduated from the university . The discouraging details of the culturally situated sensing project illustrate the consequences of working within ex - isting academic infrastructures unable to fully sustain civic technoscience research . Even with the best intentions of a research collective , engineering practices embedded in the sensor platform became inherently misaligned to pro - ducing scientiﬁc knowledge in public laboratories . What could have been a long - term research design capable of taking advantage of a rich diversity of resources across the university instead remained severely restricted by asser - tions of how science and technology development “ought” to be done . Communities of Varying Practice Are Eager to Rally Around Tools for Action and Change It is worth noting that the sensor project did partially suc - ceed in promoting environmental awareness with Navajo collaborators . Changes to material technologies were made by the research collective , such as later stage in - tegrations of open - source components for a “lite” ver - sion of the sensor platform . Recognizing successful as - pects of similar projects ( DiSalvo et al . 2008 ; DiSalvo 2014 ) , organized workshops were also added to rally D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f T o r on t o L i b r a r i e s ] a t 09 : 00 05 M a r c h 2014 INSTITUTIONS FOR CIVIC TECHNOSCIENCE 123 participation and to culturally situate the sensors in the ﬁeld . While the actual sensor platform remained wholly unqualiﬁed to produce useful scientiﬁc data , ﬁeld site visits became powerful locations of community - driven knowledge articulation . With both DEI and EEOP , partici - pants outlined potential use - cases scenarios for deploying environmental sensors in their community . These scenar - ios provoked conversations questioning how to share sen - sitive data when Navajo culture has not historically bene - ﬁted from working with outside stakeholders . Additional discussions focused on how to protect environmentally endangered ceremonial sites , which would otherwise not be made public . Even with all its faults , the sensor project shows how academic practices can be challenged internally , and il - lustrates that these practices are open to evolving cir - cumstances as critical making enters the university . For example , the collective was surprised to learn that the Of - ﬁce of Technology Commercialization’s intellectual prop - erty guidelines had no explicit language for how to deal with open - source research . 15 Indeed , forgotten proprietary technology agreements , carried over from a former incar - nation of the MDL , were brought to light in the struggle to deﬁne who could arbitrate the decision over open - source licensing . The debates became an opportunity for self - reﬂection in which the university and the lab realized the historical contingency of their prior agreements and a need to adapt to open - source research in the future . Following the sensor project , the MDL now teaches open - source li - censing as part of its training on contemporary engineering practices and project management . In a second example , an electrical engineering professor who advised students on the project altered her research after being inspired by the adaptable features expressed in the sensor platform . Her designs for ultraviolet ( UV ) - radiation biological de - tectors shifted from a single application to a collection of less expensive , modular designs that could be used in multiple contexts by different types of users . The pitfalls of the culturally situated sensor project are an interesting contrast to processes developed by Public Lab for community - based grassroots mapping , and under - score the need to shift academic practices to better support civic technoscience research . If the RPI research collective had managed to produce a viable sensor platform backed by university resources like MDL but also adaptable , re - cursive , and open to use in public laboratories , we can only imagine its potential successes . All of the research part - ners who worked to develop the sensor platform , including the MDL , played out their respective roles according to disciplinary standards for producing “good science . ” Even within the core research team there were epistemological differences on how one might go about developing use - ful technologies , such as where on the spectrum—stable platforms to modiﬁable lo - ﬁ devices—they should be built . These differences could be traced to perceptions within different research ﬁelds on what counts as viable research . Accounting for the presence of academic partic - ipants in civic technoscience requires a better understand - ing of how critical making might shift these disciplinary traditions . This includes questioning perceptions of how civic technoscience ought to be conducted , where to locate effective sites of research , and being open to acknowl - edging and changing glaring deﬁciencies in these hybrid arrangements . CONCLUSION : NEW INSTITUTIONS FOR CRITICAL MAKING AND CIVIC TECHNOSCIENCE Already , institutional encounters with organizations like Public Lab , community - based citizen science efforts , and open - source critical making projects are changing aca - demic and regulatory practices in ways similar to those described in the RPI case study . The U . S . Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) held its ﬁrst citizen science con - ference in 2012 , and Public Lab and Global Community Monitor were invited to demonstrate their civic techno - science tools . The U . S . EPA is piloting a program to test and calibrate open - source citizen science tools alongside proprietary tools it has historically approved . 16 The U . S . EPA has historically developed it own standards for val - idating evidence internally and testing methods , and re - sisted the viability and authority of citizen science data . That the U . S . EPA should participate in the legitimiza - tion of civic technoscience tools perhaps reﬂects a radi - cal shift in the model of U . S . EPA – community interac - tions . We challenge the academy to similarly adapt , and to open its doors to supporting civic technoscience . Imagine networks of skilled technicians in chemistry labs—also citizens of technoscience—volunteering their knowledge . The academy could also open doors to facilities such as photographic darkrooms , and could give public access to tools such as spectrometers during off - peak hours . The majority of laboratory equipment is after all often pur - chased with public money through government grants . Some universities , such as the University of California at Davis , Parsons The New School for Design , Rhode Is - land School of Design , and Northeastern University , are already opening their doors to Public Lab research groups and classes . 17 In these cases , the viral nature of open - source licensing may directly challenge institutional in - tellectual property policies . It will be interesting to see over time how these disjunctures are managed , and how these university - based groups interact with the groups not institutionally afﬁliated . We are excited by the emergence of scholarship that recognizes the everyday complexities of how knowledge and power are co - produced and con - ﬁgured by available science and technology . Producing reﬂexive scholarship that actively seeks engagement in D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f T o r on t o L i b r a r i e s ] a t 09 : 00 05 M a r c h 2014 124 S . A . WYLIE ET AL . reforming how knowledge and power are produced and by whom should be further encouraged . To reach these goals and to understand how technoscience has already transformed the possibilities for life on Earth requires , we suggest , a civic technoscience : a practice , research , and design space that enables each of us to question the state of the things around us and to share that informa - tion for public good . Ultimately , we believe civic techno - science results in collaboratively generated knowledge of our shared conditions previously unmet by existing scien - tiﬁc institutions . NOTES 1 . See http : / / www . nyu . edu / projects / xdesign / feralrobots 2 . See http : / / www . publiclab . org , http : / / www . environmentalhealth clinic . net , and http : / / genspace . org 3 . See http : / / www . knightfoundation . org / blogs / knightblog / 2012 / 4 / 18 / ﬁrst - aerial - maps - produced - citizens - featured - google - earth - and - google - maps 4 . Civic technoscience questions and transforms how and who can make credible and actionable scientiﬁc knowledge by changing the material technologies used for scientiﬁc research ( Shapin and Schaffer 1985 ) . 5 . Examples include DIY biospaces such as genspace http : / / genspace . org and http : / / diybio . org . There are also organizations focused on improving environmental sensing , such as X - Clinic , http : / / www . environmentalhealthclinic . net , and Sensemakers , http : / / sensemake . rs , and individual projects like MIT’s Safecast tracking of radiation sensor data , http : / / blog . safecast . org / worldmap , and University College London’s ExCites , http : / / www . ucl . ac . uk / excites . All of these groups are designing and developing alternative tools for scientiﬁc research . With the exception of Public Lab’s focus on environmental justice , few of these organizations self - consciously work with traditional environmental justice communities . There is a strong academic lineage of community - based participatory research , however ; see Corburn ( 2005 ) , Brown ( 1997 / 2006 ) , Frickel ( 2004 ) , Morello - Frosch ( 2005 / 2006 ) , Ottinger ( 2011 ) , and Minkler and Wallerstein ( 2003 ) , much of which focuses on the development of research tools by communities . 6 . Public Lab’s founders include Liz Barry , Shannon Dosemagen ( author ) , Adam Grifﬁth , Stewart Long , Jeff Warren , and Sara Wylie ( author ) ; the group came together to found Public Lab and apply for a Knight Foundation grant to support the development of an online , open - source public research and development community . 7 . http : / / www . media . mit . edu / research / groups / 1950 / grassroots - mapping - balloons - and - kites 8 . Mapknitter . org 9 . This page describes the Creative Commons and CERN open hardware licenses used by Public Lab : http : / / publiclaboratory . org / licenses10 . For more on this case see Public Lab research note : http : / / publiclab . org / wiki / santiago - chile 11 . Public Lab curates maps developed during the occupy protests : http : / / publiclab . org / wiki / occupy - maps . Stewart Long , a Public Lab co - founder , helped support California based grassroots mapping during the Occupy protests : http : / / publiclab . org / map / occupy - uc - davis - nov - 21 - 2011 / 2011 - 11 - 21 12 . See also articles by G . Marcus and K . Fortun in Cultural An - thropology’s 2012 issue , “ Writing Culture at 25 . ” 13 . This project was sponsored by Eglash’s National Science Foun - dation ( NSF ) - funded Triple Helix . See http : / / www . 3helix . rpi . edu / ? p = 279914 . See MDL : http : / / rpi . edu / academics / engineering / mdl 15 . See http : / / www . rpitechnology . com 16 . See http : / / www . epa . gov / airscience 17 . See http : / / publiclaboratory . org / places REFERENCES Adams , C . 2012 . Balloon and kite imagery in Google Earth . Google Blog , April 17 . http : / / google - latlong . blogspot . co . uk / 2012 / 04 / balloon - and - kite - imagery - in - google . html ( accessed December 3 , 2013 ) . Allen , B . L . 2003 . Uneasy alchemy : Citizens and experts in Louisiana’s chemical corridor disputes . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Allen , B . L . 2004 . Shifting boundary work : Issues and tensions in environmental health science in the case of Grand Bois , Louisiana . Science as Culture 13 ( 4 ) : 429 – 48 . Bhabha , H . K . 1994 . The location of culture . London , UK : Routledge . Bholer , M . 2008 . Digital media and democracy . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Brody , H . 1981 . Maps and dreams . New York , NY : Pantheon . Brown , P . , and E . Mikkelson . 1997 . No safe place : Toxic waste , leukemia , & community action . Berkeley , CA : University of Cal - ifornia Press . Brown , P . , and S . Zavestoski ( Eds . ) . 2005 . Social movements in health . Malden , MA : Blackwell . Brown , P . , S . McCormick , B . Mayer , S . Zavestoski , R . Morello - Frosch , R . G . Altman , and L . Senier . 2006 . “A lab of our own” : Environ - mental causation of breast cancer and challenges to the dominant epidemiological paradigm . Science Technology and Human Values 31 ( 5 ) : 499 – 536 . Bullard , R . 1990 . Dumping in Dixie : Race , class and environmental quality . Boulder , CO : Westview Press . Burnett , G . 2000 . Masters of all they surveyed : Exploration , geography and a British El Dorado . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Certeau , M . 1984 . The practice of everyday life . Berkeley , CA : Univer - sity of California Press . Corburn , J . 2005 . Street science community knowledge and environ - mental health justice . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Critical Art Ensemble . 2001 . Digital resistance : Explorations in tacti - cal media . New York , NY : Autonomedia . da Costa , Beatriz , and P . Kavita ( Eds . ) . 2008 . Tactical biopolitics : Art , activism , and technoscience . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . DiSalvo , C . , I . Nourbakhsh , D . Holstius , A . Akin , and M . Louw . 2008 . The Neighborhood Networks project : A case study of critical en - gagement and creative expression through participatory design . In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 ( PDC ‘08 ) , 41 – 50 . New York , NY : ACM . Dosemagen , S . , and S . Wylie . 2012 . The Faces Behind Pub - lic Lab’s Grassroots Research Community . PBS Idea Lab , March 12 . http : / / www . pbs . org / idealab / 2012 / 03 / the - faces - behind - public - labs - grassroots - research - community - 070 / Dosemagen , S . , J . Warren , and S . Wylie . 2011 . Grassroots map - ping : Creating a participatory map - making process centered on D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f T o r on t o L i b r a r i e s ] a t 09 : 00 05 M a r c h 2014 INSTITUTIONS FOR CIVIC TECHNOSCIENCE 125 discourse . Journal of Aesthetics and Protest 8 . http : / / www . joaap . org / issue8 / GrassrootsMapping . htm . Eglash , R . , J . Croissant , G . Di Chiro , and R . Fouch´e . 2004 . Appropriat - ing technology : Vernacular science and social power . Minneapolis , MN : University of Minnesota Press . Eglash , R . , A . Bennett , C . O’Donnell , S . Jennings , and M . Cintorino . 2006 . Culturally situated design tools : Ethnocomputing from ﬁeld site to classroom . American Anthropologist 108 ( 2 ) : 347 – 62 . Farman , J . 2010 . Mapping the digital empire : Google Earth and the process of postmodern cartography . New Media and Society 12 ( 6 ) : 869 – 88 . Fischer , M . J . 2003 . Emergent forms of life and the anthropological voice . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . Kopstein , J . 2012 . Occupy maps the sky over May Day protests with DIY balloon cameras . The Verge , May 2 . http : / / www . theverge . com / 2012 / 5 / 2 / 2994140 / occupy - grassroots - mappingaerial - photography ( accessed December 3 , 2013 ) . Fortun , K . , and M . Fortun . 2005 . Scientiﬁc imaginaries and ethical plateaus in contemporary U . S . toxicology . American Anthropologist 107 ( 1 ) : 43 – 54 . Fortun , K . 2012 . Ethnography in late industrialism . Cultural Anthro - pology 27 : 446 – 64 . Frickel , S . 2004 . Just science ? Organizing scientist activism in the US environmental justice movement . Science as Culture 13 ( 4 ) : 449 – 69 . Frickel , S . , S . Gibbon , J . Howard , J . Kempner , G . Ottinger , and D . J . Hess . 2010 . Undone science : Charting social movement and civil society challenges to research agenda setting . Science , Technology , & Human Values 35 ( 4 ) : 444 – 73 . Garcia , D . , and G . Lovink . 1997 . The ABC of tactical media . Nettime . http : / / www . nettime . org / Lists - Archives / nettime - l - 9705 / msg00096 . html ( accessed November 21 , 2013 ) . Graham , M . 2010 . Neogeographyandthepalimpsestsofplace : Web2 . 0 and the construction of a virtual Earth . Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geograﬁe 101 ( 4 ) : 422 – 36 . Hadden , S . 1994 . Citizen participation in environmental policy mak - ing . In Learning from disaster : Risk management after Bhopal , ed . S . Jasanoff , 179 – 91 , Philadelphia , PA : University of Pennsylvania Press . Haraway , D . 1991 . Simians , cyborgs , and women : The reinvention of nature . New York , NY : Routledge . Haraway , D . 1997 . Modest Witness @ SecondMillennium . New York , NY : Routledge . Harley , J . B . 1988 . Maps , knowledge , and power . In The iconography of landscape : Essays on the symbolic representation , design and use of past environments , ed . D . Cosgrove and S . Daniels , 277 – 312 , New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Harley , J . B . 1992 . Deconstructing the map . In Writing worlds : Dis - course , text & metaphor in the representation of landscape , ed . T . J . Barnes and J . S . Duncan , 231 – 47 . New York , NY : Routledge . Harley , J . B . 2001 . Text and contexts in the interpretation of early maps . In The new nature of maps : Essays in the history of cartography , ed . J . H . Andrews , 31 – 49 . Baltimore , MD : Johns Hopkins University Press . Harpold , T . 1999 . Dark continents : A critique of Internet metageogra - phies , Postmodern Culture 9 ( 2 ) . http : / / www . directionsmag . com / articles / neogeographic - approach - to - inexpensive - oil - spil - mapping / 131048 . Helmreich , S . 2011 . From Spaceship Earth to Google Ocean : Planetary icons , indexes , and infrastructures . Social Research 78 ( 4 ) : 1211 – 42 . Jalbert , K . ( 2011 ) . Culturally situated sensing : Peer innovation and citizen sensing in Native American communities ( Submitted by Commission to the Intel Corporation , Experience Insight Lab ) . http : / / www . kirkjalbert . com / wp - content / uploads / 2013 / 02 / Jalbert Culturally Situated Sensing 2011 . pdf ( accessed September 5 , 2013 ) . Kohler , R . E . 2002 . Landscapes and labscapes : Exploring the lab – ﬁeld border in biology . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Kroll - Smith , S . 2000 . Illness and the environment : A reader in con - tested medicine . New York , NY : NYU Press . Kuklick , H . , and R . E . Kohler ( Eds . ) . 1996 . Osiris vol . 11 : Science in the ﬁeld . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Langston , N . 2010 . Toxic bodies : Endocrine disruptors and the lessons of history . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Latour , B . 1987 . Science in action : How to follow scientists and engi - neers through society . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Latour , B . 1990 . Drawing things together . In Representation in Sci - entiﬁc Practice , ed . M . Lynch and S . Woolgar , 19 – 68 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Lerner , S . 2005 . Diamond : A struggle for environmental justice in Louisiana’s chemical corridor . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Long , S . , and J . Warren . 2010 . “Neogeographic” approach to inexpen - sive oil spill mapping . Directions Magazine , September 1 , http : / / muse . jhu . edu / journals / postmodern culture / v009 / 9 . 2harpold . html . Mann , S . , J . Nolan , andB . Wellman . 2003 . Sousveillance : Inventingand using wearable computing devices for data collection in surveillance environments . Surveillance & Society 1 : 331 – 55 . Marcus , G . E . 2000 . Introduction . In Para - sites : A casebook against cynical reasoning , ed . G . Marcus , 1 – 14 . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Marcus , G . E . 2012 . The legacies of writing culture and the near fu - ture of the ethnographic form : A sketch . Cultural Anthropology 27 : 427 – 45 . McCormick , S . 2007 . Democratizing science movements : A new framework for contestation . Social Studies of Science 37 : 609 – 23 . Minkler , M . , and N . Wallerstein ( Eds . ) . 2003 . Community - based par - ticipatory research for health . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass Minkler , M . , V . V . Breckwich , C . Chang , and J . Miller . 2009 . Promoting healthy public policy through community - based par - ticipatory research ten case studies . Oakland , CA : Poli - cyLink . http : / / depts . washington . edu / ccph / pdf ﬁles / CBPR ﬁnal . pdf ( accessed September 5 , 2013 ) . Monmonier , M . 1997 . Cartographies of danger : Mapping hazards in America . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago . Monmonier , M . 2002 . Spying with maps : Surveillance technologies and the future of privacy . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago . Morello - Frosch R , S . Zavestoski , P . Brown , S . McCormick , B . Mayer , and R . Gasior . 2006 . Embodied health social movement : Responses to a “scientized world . ” In The new political sociology of science : Institutions , networks , and power , ed . K . Moore and S . Frickel , 244 – 71 . Madison , WI : University of Wisconsin Press . Morello - Frosch R . S . , M . Pastor , J . Sadd , C . Porras , and M . Prichard . 2005 . Citizens , science , and data judo : Leveraging community - based participatory research to build a regional collaborative for envi - ronmental justice in Southern California . In Methods for conduct - ing community - based participatory research in public health , ed . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f T o r on t o L i b r a r i e s ] a t 09 : 00 05 M a r c h 2014 126 S . A . WYLIE ET AL . B . Israel , E . Eng , A . Shultz , E . Parker , 371 – 72 . Ann Arbor , MI : University of Michigan , Jossey - Bass Press . Murphy , M . 2006 . Sick building syndrome and the politics of uncer - tainty : Environmental politics , technoscience and women workers . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . Nash , L . 2006 . Inescapableecologies : Ahistoryofenvironment , disease and knowledge . Berkeley , CA : University of California . Noble , D . F . 1977 . America by design : Science , technology and the rise of corporate capitalism . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . O’Rourke , D . , and G . P . Macey . 2003 . Community environmental policing : Assessing new strategies of public participation in envi - ronmental regulation . Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 22 : 383 – 414 . Ottinger , G . 2010 . Epistemic fencelines : Air monitoring instruments and expert – resident boundaries . Spontaneous Generations : A Jour - nal for the History and Philosophy of Science . 3 ( 1 ) : 55 – 67 . Ottinger , G . 2010 . Buckets of resistance : Standards and the effective - ness of citizen science . Science , Technology , and Human Values 35 ( 2 ) : 244 – 70 . Ottinger , G . , and B . R . Cohen . 2011 . Technoscience and environmental justice : Expert cultures in a grassroots movement . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Overdevest , C . , and B . Mayer . 2008 . Harnessing the power of informa - tion through community monitoring : Insights from social science . Texas Law Review 86 : 1493 – 526 . Paglen , T . 2009 . Experimental geography : Radical approaches to land - scape , cartography , and urbanism . New York , NY : Melville House . Paglen , T . 2009 . Blank spots on the map . New York , NY : Penguin . Ratto , M . 2011 . Critical making : Conceptual and material studies in technology and social life . The Information Society 27 ( 4 ) : 252 – 60 . Rheinberger H . J . 1997 . Toward a history of epistemic things : Synthe - sizing proteins in the test tube . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . Robinson , A . , and B . Petchenik . 1976 . The nature of maps : Essays toward understanding maps and mapping . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Scott , J . C . 1985 . Weapons of the weak : Everyday forms of peasant resistance . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Scott , J . C . 1998 . Seeing like a state : How certain schemes to improve the human condition have failed . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Shapin , S . , and S . Schaffer . 1985 . Leviathan and the air pump . Prince - ton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Shapin , S . 2010 . Never pure : Historical studies of science as if it was produced by people with bodies , situated in time , space , culture , and society , and struggling for credibility and authority . Baltimore , MD : Johns Hopkins University Press . Soja , E . W . 1989 . Postmodern geographies : The reassertion of space in critical social theory ? London , UK : Verso . Tesh , S . N . 2000 . Uncertain hazards : Environmental activists and sci - entiﬁc proof . Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press . Thompson , N . , and G . Sholette . 2004 . The interventionists : Users’ manual for the creative disruption of everyday life . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Timmons , R . J . , and M . M . Toffolon - Weiss . 2001 . Chronicles from the environmental justice frontline . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univer - sity Press . Winner , L . 1980 . Do artifacts have politics ? Daedalus 109 ( 1 ) : 121 – 36 . Warren , J . 2010 . Grassroots mapping : Tools for participatory activist cartography . Master’s thesis , MIT . http : / / unterbahn . com / thesis D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f T o r on t o L i b r a r i e s ] a t 09 : 00 05 M a r c h 2014