1 Sun G , et al . J Immunother Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 Open access Macrophage GSK3 β - deficiency inhibits the progression of hepatocellular carcinoma and enhances the sensitivity of anti - PD1 immunotherapy Guangshun Sun , 1 , 2 Hanyuan Liu , 2 Jie Zhao , 1 Jinyu Zhang , 3 Tian Huang , 1 Guoqiang Sun , 2 Siqi Zhao , 2 Zihao Zhang , 1 Hengsong Cao , 1 Dawei Rong , 1 Xiangyi Kong , 1 Qinghua Ji , 4 Li Liu , 5 , 6 Xuehao Wang , 1 Weiwei Tang , 1 Yongxiang Xia 1 To cite : Sun G , Liu H , Zhao J , et al . Macrophage GSK3 β - deficiency inhibits the progression of hepatocellular carcinoma and enhances the sensitivity of anti - PD1 immunotherapy . Journal for ImmunoTherapy of Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 ► Additional supplemental material is published online only . To view , please visit the journal online ( http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 ) . GS , HL , JZ and JZ are joint first authors . Accepted 01 December 2022 For numbered affiliations see end of article . Correspondence to Yongxiang Xia ; yx _ xia @ njmu . edu . cn Weiwei Tang ; 1243773473twww @ sina . com Xuehao Wang ; wangxh @ njmu . edu . cn Li Liu ; jewtou @ gmail . com Original research © Author ( s ) ( or their employer ( s ) ) 2022 . Re - use permitted under CC BY - NC . No commercial re - use . See rights and permissions . Published by BMJ . ABSTRACT Background Glycogen synthase kinase 3 β ( GSK3 β ) was originally discovered to regulate glycogen synthesis and show a relationship to tumors . However , the biological functions of GSK3 β in tumor - associated macrophages ( TAMs ) in cancers including hepatocellular carcinoma ( HCC ) remain unclear . Methods The enrichment of GSK3 β in tumor tissues was assessed by Gene Expression Omnibus ( GEO ) database . The in vitro and in vivo assays assisted in evaluating how GSK3 β in TAMs affected HCC in terms of proliferation , invasion and migration . Immunofluorescence was used to assess GSK3 β expression in TAMs in the anti - PD1 therapy non - responsive HCC group and the responsive group . Western blot and coimmunoprecipitation were performed to demonstrate the interaction between GSK3 β and PD - L1 . We carried out in vivo experiments in a C57BL / 6 mouse model of HCC established through subcutaneous injection . Results GEO single - cell RNA sequencing data suggested that GSK3 β was highly enriched in TAMs of HCC . According to in vitro and in vivo experiments , reducing GSK3 β in TAMs inhibits the cancer cell proliferation , invasion , and migration . The immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry results confirmed that the GSK3 β is significantly upregulated in TAMs of the anti - PD1 therapy non - responsive group in comparison with the responsive group . In vitro and in vivo experiments confirmed that reduced GSK3 β in TAMs are capable of enhancing the sensitivity of anti - PD1 immunotherapy for HCC by decreasing PD - L1 ubiquitination . Mass spectrometry results suggested that high expression of CD14 + GSK3 β + in the peripheral blood mononuclear cell ( PBMC ) can predict non - responsive to anti - PD1 treatment . Moreover , escitalopram is confirmed to act as GSK3 β inhibitor that can increase the sensitivity of anti - PD1 immunotherapy for HCC . Conclusions This study revealed that macrophage GSK3 β deficiency can inhibit the development of HCC by inhibiting the M2 phenotype and enhance the sensitivity of anti - PD1 immunotherapy for HCC by decreasing PD - L1 ubiquitination . The expression of CD14 + GSK3 β + in PBMC can noninvasively predict anti - PD1 sensitivity in HCC patients , which provides novel strategies to predict anti - PD1 sensitivity , increase anti - PD1 therapeutic effect , and bring new hope for HCC patients . INTRODUCTION Hepatocellular carcinoma ( HCC ) takes up 90 % of liver cancers , and it is the third major cause of death related to cancer . Nearly 80 % of HCC patients do not conform to the indi - cations for surgical resection because of late detection , distant metastasis , or poor organ function , and they can only be treated with drugs . The US Food and Drug Adminis - tration has identified two drugs , including multikinase and immune checkpoint inhibitors ( ICIs ) , which can be adopted to treat advanced HCC . Existing studies have suggested that patients taking multikinase by oral only extended their median overall WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC ⇒ GSK3 β was originally discovered to regulate glyco - gen synthesis and show a relationship to tumors . But the biological functions of GSK3 β in tumor - associated macrophages ( TAMs ) in hepatocellular carcinoma ( HCC ) remain unclear . WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS ⇒ This study revealed that macrophage GSK3 β defi - ciency can inhibit the HCC development , meanwhile enhancing the sensitivity exhibited by anti - PD1 immunotherapy for HCC . The CD14 + GSK3 β + ex - pression in peripheral blood mononuclear cell can non - invasively predict anti - PD1 sensitivity in HCC patients . HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH , PRACTICE OR POLICY ⇒ The study contributes to novel strategies to predict anti - PD1 sensitivity , increase anti - PD1 therapeutic effect , and bring new hope for HCC patients . 2 Sun G , et al . J Immunother Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 Open access survival by nearly 4 months . 1 – 3 However , the advent of ICIs has opened new horizons for HCC treatment . Cancer immunotherapy is that patients reactivate or strengthen their own immune system through a series of ways to precisely attack cancer cells for the treatment of cancer . Two of the first inhibitory immune checkpoints identified in the world are the cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4 ( CTLA4 ) and the programmed death 1 ( PD1 ) . Immune checkpoints including the above two can reduce T cell function or even turn off T cells through a series of cascade effects . The ICIs that have been developed so far , such as PD1 monoclonal antibody ( mAb ) , can block the function of the above immune checkpoints , reactivate the antitumor effect of tumor - infiltrating T cells , and ultimately reshape immune function . Studies have demonstrated that approximately 50 % of cancer patients ( eg , melanoma , lung cancer , and clear cell renal cell carcinoma ) benefit from ICIs such as ipilimumab ( anti - CTLA4 ) and nivolumab ( anti - PD1 ) . 4 – 6 It is encour - aging that ICIs ( eg , PD1 mAb ) show therapeutic hope for patients with multiple malignancies ( eg , HCC ) . Neverthe - less , a small part of HCC patients significantly and durably respond to PD1 blockade . 7 Accordingly , it is imperative to explore the mechanisms of primary resistance to anti - PD1 therapy in HCC patients . Single - cell RNA - sequencing ( scRNA - seq ) deepens the understanding of cells - related behavior in a complicated tumor microenvironment , particularly analyzing cell populations at individual cell level . 8 9 Glycogen synthase kinase 3 β ( GSK3 β ) was found to be highly enriched in tumor - associated macrophages ( TAMs ) based on Gene Expression Omnibus ( GEO ) scRNA - seq data . HCC biopsy specimens of responsive and non - responsive to anti - PD1 treatment were validated using immunofluorescence . We were fortunate to find that the GSK3 β was significantly upregulated in TAMs from the non - responsive group in comparison with the responsive group . GSK3 β is a rela - tively traditional protein kinase . It is widely expressed in various tissues of the body and can remarkably help to regulate various cellular functions . GSK3 β is inhibited under normal conditions , whereas it can be abnormally activated under abnormal stress conditions to partici - pate in processes ( eg , cell death or proliferation ) , which is dependent on its subcellular localization and specific partners . Existing research has suggested that GSK3 β can be abnormally activated in inflammation and tumors , and it plays a certain role in the dysregulation of adult stem cells . 10 11 However , GSK3 β in TAMs from HCC has been rarely investigated . Thus , this study will focus on clarifying the function and mechanism of GSK3 β in TAMs of HCC and how it mediates anti - PD1 primary resistance . Materials and methods GEO data analysis We acquire data from GEO database ( GSE151530 and GSE164522 ) and studied the difference of GSK3 β mRNA expressing in TAMs . We screened single cells for conducting downstream analysis in accordance with the criteria of unique molecular identifier ( UMI ) counts in the range of 3000 and 40 , 000 ; and mitochondrial percentages < 10 % of the total UMI count . The standard - ized gene expression scale ( in UMI ) was converted to LOG2 ( UMI + 1 ) . Cases and tissue specimen collection After the removal from the body , the overall samples were acquired . Authoritative clinicians took charge of confirming and classifying the tumor specimens involved in the article . Cancer cell culture The THP - 1 cells , mice HCC cells ( Hep1 - 6 ) as well as human HCC cells ( LM3 and YY8103 ) were offered by the Cell Bank of Type Culture Collection . RPMI 1640 medium ( BI , USA ) was added with 10 % FBS ( Fetal Bovine Serum ) , which was used to culture the THP - 1 cells , Hep1 - 6 cells , LM3 cells and YY8103 cells . 1 . 8 µL / 500 mL β - Mercap - toethanol ( Gibco , USA ) was added in the process of culti - vation of THP - 1 . The culture conditions were 37 ℃ , 5 % CO2 chamber . Induction of TAMs in HCC The 100 nM Phorbol - 12 - myristate - 13 - acetate were employed for inducing THP - 1 differentiation into M0 macrophages after 2 days , during which the cells changed from a suspended state to an adherent state . In the process of culturing M0 macrophages , the medium super - natant of LM3 or YY8103 cells was added to mimic the HCC tumor microenvironment to stimulate the differen - tiation of M0 cells into TAMs . After 48 – 72 hours , when the cells grow antennae , it means that we have obtained the key cells of this experiment : HCC tumor - associated - macrophages . In the process of differentiation from M0 cells to TAM cells , we divided them into different groups , adding PBS ( Phosphate Buffered Saline ) , GSK3 β inhib - itor ( MCE , USA ) and escitalopram ( GLPBIO , USA ) respectively , to observe the difference of TAMs obtained in different groups . After obtaining different groups of TAMs , continue to culture cells and collect TAM medium supernatant from different groups ( PBS group , GSK3 β inhibitor group , escitalopram group ) for following exper - iments ( online supplemental figure S1E ) . Cell proliferation assay Fifty per cent TAM - conditioned medium was used to culture LM3 and YY8103 cells for 24 hours before following experiments with cancer cells . The 50 % TAM - conditioned medium contains 50 % normal cancer cell culture medium ( RPMI 1640 medium with 10 % FBS ) and 50 % TAM culture supernatant from different groups collected in the above TAMs culture process , which were PBS group , GSK3 β inhibitor group , and escitalopram group . For detecting CCK - 8 , we seeded 10 3 tumor cells into 96 - well plates . Next , the above cells were admin - istrated with 10 µL of CCK - 8 solution for 0 , 24 , 48 , and 72 hours , respectively . Using a microplate reading 3 Sun G , et al . J Immunother Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 Open access element as per the manufacturer’s protocol , we exam - ined the cell absorbance at the respective time points of 450 nm . A 5 - ethynyl - 2 ' - deoxyuridine ( EdU ) assay served for evaluating cell proliferation based on the Cell - Light EdU DNA Cell Proliferation Kit . 5×10 4 cancer cells were placed in 24 - well plates and cells underwent the incuba - tion of fixed cell lines and 4 % paraformaldehyde and 50 Easy for 2 H / L EdU solution for 24 hours . We have kept Apollo Stain and Hearst Stamps separate with the manu - facturer’s approval . An Olympus FSX100 microscope assisted in obtaining as well as calculating EdU cell lines . TRANSWELL ASSAY LM3 and YY8103 cells were cultured with 50 % TAM - conditioned medium for 48 hours . The 50 % TAM - conditioned medium contains 50 % normal cancer cell culture medium ( RPMI 1640 medium with 10 % FBS ) and 50 % TAM culture supernatant from different groups collected in the above TAM culture process , which were PBS group , GSK3 β inhibitor group , and escitalopram group . Next , we seeded YY8103 and LM3 cells in the chamber and 200 µL of RPMI 1640 medium free of serum was added for their survival . For the invasion efficiency test , we scattered the matrigel mixture in the transwell chamber . Matrigel mixtures are not used for migration efficiency measurements . Both cells were induced into the bottom chamber with RPMI 1640 medium and 10 % FBS as inducers . Following 48 hours of incubation , the upper chamber underwent fixing treatment in formal - dehyde together with 15 min of crystal violet staining . The cells were photographed in three fields of view for visualization . Scratch wound experiment LM3 and YY8103 cells were cultured with 50 % TAM - conditioned medium for 48 hours . The 50 % TAM - conditioned medium contains 50 % normal cancer cell culture medium with 10 % FBS and 50 % TAM culture supernatant from different groups collected in the above TAM culture process , which were PBS group , GSK3 β inhib - itor group , and escitalopram group . Each well of a six - well plate was inoculated with 200 , 000 – 300 , 000 cells and thoroughly mixed during inoculation . When the conflu - ence of cells reached 100 % , the cell culture medium was aspirated . Floating cells were carefully washed twice with 1×PBS ( Gibco , USA ) . Using a 20 uL pipetting gun tip , make three horizontal lines for each hole . The floating cells were carefully cleaned with 1×PBS . After the back - ground was clean , 1 mL of 1×PBS was added to each well and the scratches were photographed under a microscope at 4×low power . On day 0 , day 1 , and day 2 , the scratches in each well were photographed under a microscope at 4×low power . Record and analyze pictures . Quantitative reverse transcription PCR TRIzol reagent assisted in isolating total RNA of TAM cells as per the manufacturer’s instruction . The reverse transcription kit helped to synthesize cDNA into mRNA . Online supplemental table S1 shows all primer sequences . GAPDH served for normalizing mRNA expression levels . Immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry For the immunofluorescence assay , in the first step , we fixed cells using 4 % paraformaldehyde for 20 min at room temperature , followed by 5 min of permeation using 0 . 05 % Triton X - 100 at room temperature . The samples were then blocked overnight in 2 % BSA in PBS at room temperature and incubated with CD163 ( Abcam , UK ) and GSK3 β ( Abcam , UK ) specific antibodies at 4°C , followed by conjugation with Alexa Fluorite or HRP at room temperature . The combined secondary antibody ( Abcam , UK ) was incubated with temperature for 1 hour . Nuclei were restained using DAPI ( Sigma - Aldrich , USA ) . A laser scanning confocal microscope ( Zeiss , Germany ) was employed for obtaining images . For immunohistochemistry , the paraffin - embedded sections underwent dewaxing and rehydration treat - ment . Three per cent hydrogen peroxide blocked the peroxidase activity . Sections received one night of incu - bation using primary antibodies ( PD1 , CD8 , Ki67 , PD1 , and PD - L1 ; Abcam , UK ) at 4°C . Next , the biotinylated secondary antibody was employed for treating tissue sections . Subsequently , Finally , streptavidin - horseradish peroxidase complex was selected to incubate the sections . Western blotting and coimmunoprecipitation We extracted proteins from cells using RIPA buffer solu - tion ( Sigma - Aldrich , USA ) , and the extracted proteins were lysed by using SDS - polyacrylamide gels , followed by being transferred to PVDF membranes . Primary antibodies against GSK3 β , GSK3 β ( ser9 ) , PD - L1 were employed ( Abcam , UK ) . GAPDH was assigned into the control . A peroxidase - conjugated secondary antibody employed used with enhanced chemiluminescence . The HA - ubiquitin was incubated with the total protein , and the western blotting assisted in analyzing the products after incubation . The 293 T cells were cotransfected with corre - sponding plasmids . After 48 hours , the transfected cells were collected , added with 0 . 4 mL RIPA lysis buffer , and the cells were thoroughly mixed . Lysis was carried out at 4°C for half an hour . After lysis , centrifugation was performed at 12 000 rpm for half an hour at 4°C . The supernatant after centrifugation was collected for the next step . The supernatant was incubated with anti - FLAG or anti - HA magnetic beads . After completion of incubation , it was washed three times , followed by one night of incubation at 4°C . Before immunoprecipitation , the samples were washed three times and boiled in 5×SDS loading buffer . The buffer contained 0 . 2 % ( w / v ) bromophenol blue , 20 % ( v / v ) glycerol , 100 mM Tris - HCl ( pH 6 . 8 ) , 10 % ( w / v ) SDS , and 1 % ( v / v ) 2 - mercaptoethanol . Then routine elec - trophoresis , membrane transformation , blocking and 4 Sun G , et al . J Immunother Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 Open access corresponding antibody incubation were performed . Finally , the membrane was visualized and the data were analyzed . Mice model The animal experiment gained approval of the animal management committee of The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University and the approved ID number is 2021 - SRFA - 197 . All experiment procedures and animal caring were following the institutional ethics directions for animals - relevant experimental processes . C57BL / 6 , GSK3 β fl / fl and Lyz2 - Cre mice came from Gem Pharmatech Co . , Ltd . Hybridization of GSK3 β fl / fl mice and Lyz2 - Cre mice produced myeloid - specific knockout mice . We set mice that possessed Lyz2 - specific deletion of GSK3 β as CKO mice , and GSK3 β fl / fl mice as the controls . PCR helped to analyze the genomic DNA from mouse tails . Myeloid - specific knockout mice : The subcutaneous injection of Hep1 - 6 cells was made into GSK3 β fl / fl C57BL / 6 mice ( n = 5 ) and GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + C57BL / 6 mice ( n = 5 ) , respectively . Tumor model mice with carci - noma transplantation fell into four groups , GSK3 β fl / fl , GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + , GSK3 β fl / fl + anti - PD1 ( bioxcell , USA ) , GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + + anti - PD1 , and each group had five mice . Specifically , 6 . 6 mg / kg anti - PD1 were intraperitone - ally injected into mice on the eighth day , and once every 4 days subsequently . Wild - type mice experiment ( GSK3 β inhibitor ) : The subcutaneous injection of Hep1 - 6 cells was made into C57BL / 6 mice . Tumor model mice with carcinoma trans - plantation fell into four groups , PBS , GSK3 β inhibitor , anti - PD1 , GSK3 β inhibitor + anti - PD1 , and each group had five mice . Specifically , GSK3 β inhibitor was intraper - itoneal injected with 10 mg / kg on the first day and once per 4 days later ; 6 . 6 mg / kg anti - PD1 were intraperitone - ally injected into mice on the eighth day , and once every 4 days subsequently . Wild - type mice experiment ( escitalopram ) : The subcutaneous injection of Hep1 - 6 cells was made into C57BL / 6 mice . Tumor model mice with carcinoma transplantation fell into four groups , PBS , escitalopram , anti - PD1 , escitalopram + anti - PD1 , and each group had five mice . To be Specifically , escitalopram was intraperi - toneal injected with 10 mg / kg on the first day and once per 4 days thereafter ; 6 . 6 mg / kg anti - PD1 were intraper - itoneally injected into mice on the eighth day , and once every 4 days later . The basic condition of the mice was observed every day prior to and following the experiment . Vernier calipers served for measuring the long diameters a ( mm ) and short diameters b ( mm ) of tumors on the body surface , and the tumor volume was calculated according to V = ab 2 / 2 . The tumor growth curve was finally generated by measuring the tumor volume every 4 days . At day 20 , mice were sacrificed and tumor mass data were obtained for further analysis . Mass spectrometry The tissue samples were from GSK3 β fl / fl , GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + C57BL / 6 mice . Nine anti - PD1 pretreatment periph - eral blood mononuclear cell ( PBMC ) samples from HCC patients’ blood samples were examined through mass spectrometry . CyTOF staining steps comprised 194Pt staining → Fc block → surface antibody staining → over - night DNA staining ( 191 / 193Ir ) → intracellular antibody staining → collecting data on the computer . A two - step method was used for data analysis . First , single , viable and intact CD45 + immune cells were obtained by FlowJo pretreatment . Then , the X - shift algorithm was used to cluster cell subpopulations , manually annotate cell subpopulations , visualize TSNE dimensionality reduc - tion , and perform statistical analysis . FLOW CYTOMETRY Isolated PBMCs from 19 HCC patients received staining treatment by using the antibodies including PE anti - human CD14 and AF647 anti - human GSK3 β . The flow cytometry ( BD FACS Canto II , USA ) helped to analyze the molecular phenotypes regarding the peripheral blood leucocytes . The FlowJo V . 10 ( Tree Star , USA ) software analyzed the samples . Statistical analysis GraphPad Prism V . 8 . 0 assisted in the statistical analysis , and a p < 0 . 05 indicated a difference achieving statistical significance . Independent t - tests were used for comparing continuous variables between the two groups , whereas one - way analysis of variance served for comparing multiple groups . RESULTSGSK3 β was enriched in TAMs of tumors based on scRNA - seq The data originated from GEO database ( GSE151530 and GSE164522 ) , and the difference of GSK3 β mRNA expressing in TAMs was examined . GSE151530 results indicated that 46 HCC tumor samples were enrolled in scRNA - seq . A total of 6 cell clusters , comprizing B lympho - cytes ( B cells ) , tumor - associated fibroblasts ( CAFs ) , malignant cells , T cells , and TAM , thymic epithelial cells , were found according to the classification definition of specific gene markers ( figure 1A , B ) . For example , the TAM cluster is capable of specifically expressing GSK3 β ( figure 1B ) . The point diagram showed that GSK3 β was highly enriched in TAMs ( figure 1C ) . In addition , GSE164522 comprised 10 colorectal cancer liver metas - tasize patients for scRNA - seq . The results showed that 12 cell clusters were confirmed , which comprised B cells , CD4 + T cells , CD8 + T cell , DC , natural killer ( NK ) cells , macrophages , ILC3 , MAST , Monocyte , gdT , NKT , CD45 - cells based on specific gene markers ( figure 1D , E ) . The violin plot showed that GSK3 β was highly enriched in TAMs ( figure 1F ) . All the above outcomes suggested that GSK3 β may play a vital role in TAMs of HCC . 5 Sun G , et al . J Immunother Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 Open access Figure 1 GSK3 β was enriched in TAMs of tumors based on scRNA - seq . ( A , B ) UMAP map identifies 6 cell clusters that define the classification of specific gene signatures , including B cells , CAFs , malignant cells , T cells , TAMs , TECs based on GSE151530 . ( C ) The point diagram showing expression of GSK3 β in TAMs . Baselines , first , second indicates specimens collected at different time points . ( D , E ) UMAP map identifies 12 cell clusters based on GSE164522 . ( F ) The violin plot showing expression of GSK3 β in TAMs . TAMs , tumor - associated macrophages ; TECs , thymic epithelial cells . 6 Sun G , et al . J Immunother Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 Open access Macrophage GSK3 β deficiency inhibited the progression of HCC Based on the above results , the role played by GSK3 β expression changes in TAMs in HCC tumors was inves - tigated . Hep1 - 6 cells were injected in GSK3 β fl / fl and GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + C57BL / 6 mice to investigate the role played by GSK3 β in TAM on tumors . GSK3 β fl / fl mice and GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + mice presented more rapid and slower subcutaneous tumor growth , respectively ( figure 2A ) . On the 20th day , we sacrificed the mice , obtaining their subcutaneous tumors . The volume and weight of subcu - taneous tumors in GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + mice were signifi - cantly smaller than those in GSK3 β fl / fl mice ( figure 2B , C ) , suggesting that GSK3 β knockout in TAMs remarkably Figure 2 Macrophage GSK3 β deficiency inhibited the progression of HCC . ( A ) Images of subcutaneous tumors in each group ( GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + , GSK3 β fl / fl ) . ( B , C ) Weight and volume analysis of subcutaneous tumors in the respective groups . ( D , E ) Immunohistochemistry results of CD8 , Ki67 , PD - L1 and PD1 expression in the respective groups . ( F ) The growth curves of HCC cells were plotted after cultured with TAMs added GSK3 β inhibitor based on CCK - 8 assays . ( G ) EdU assays were performed to assess cell proliferation of LM3 and YY8103 cell lines cultured with TAM added GSK3 β inhibitor . ( H ) Transwell experiment was adopted to assess cell invasion and migration of HCC cells incubated with TAM added GSK3 β inhibitor . ( I ) Wound healing assays were used to assess cell migration of HCC cells after cultured with TAM added GSK3 β inhibitor . * p ＜ 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * * p < 0 . 001 . HCC , hepatocellular carcinoma ; TAM , tumor - associated macrophage . 7 Sun G , et al . J Immunother Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 Open access suppresses HC tumor occurrence and development . According to immunohistochemistry results , compared with the GSK3 β fl / fl mice group , GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + group exhibited obviously upregulated PD1 , PD - L1 and CD8 expressions , and downregulated Ki67 expression ( figure 2D , E ) . For further confirming the anticancer role played by GSK3 β in TAMs in HCC , we attempted to induced normal TAM and inhibited GSK3 β activity in TAMs . We stimulated HCC cells with 50 % TAM - conditioned medium from different groups and found that GSK3 β inhibitor group in TAMs significantly reduced the proliferation of LM3 and YY8103 cells than the PBS group ( figure 2F , G ) . Transwell assay and scratch assay indicated that GSK3 β inhibitor group could obviously hinder the invasion and migra - tion functions of LM3 and YY8103 cells ( figure 2H , I ) . The above results demonstrated that inhibiting GSK3 β in TAMs can inhibit human HCC cells in terms of the prolif - eration , the invasion , and the migration . GSK3 β deficiency in TAMs inhibited NF - κ B pathway to mediate antitumor activity Quantitative reverse transcription PCR ( qRT - PCR ) served for detecting the expression of makers related to TAMs after treatment with GSK3 β inhibitor or PBS . The results indicated the considerably lower CD206 , CD163 and ARG1 expressions in GSK3 β inhibitor group relative to the control group ( online supplemental figure S1A , B ) . For confirming the mechanism of GSK3 β in cancer promotion mediated by TAM , we reviewed the literature and guessed that it may be related to NF - κ B signaling pathway . 12 We found that P - P65 was substantially reduced in the GSK3 β inhibitor TAMs while P65 showed no differ - ence ( online supplemental figure S1C , D ) . To examine the function of GSK3 β / NF - κ B pathway in TAMs , we paid attention to examining the underlying regulatory impact of GSK3 β on the direct NF - κ B - targeted genes including STAT1 , CCL5 , IL6 , CSF2 by qRT - PCR array in vitro . 12 The result revealed that the STAT1 , CCL5 , IL6 , CSF2 decreased in GSK3 β inhibitor group ( online supplemental figure S1A , B ) . In addition , we added the NF - κ B inhibitor , mean - while examining the potential expression of the markers . The result revealed the considerably lower CD206 , CD163 and ARG1 expressions relative to the control group , which was consistent with GSK3 β inhibitor results ( online supplemental figure S1A , B ) . The above evidence suggested GSK3 β deficiency in TAMs inhibited NF - κ B pathway to mediate antitumor activity . GSK3 β was enriched in TAMs of tumors in the primary resistance of anti - PD1 immunotherapy for HCC Based on our group’s previous studies on GSK3 β and liver immune activation , 13 – 16 we wondered if GSK3 β mediated primary resistance to the anti - PD1 treatment in HCC . We took six puncture samples non - responsive to the anti - PD1 treatment and five puncture samples responsive to the anti - PD1 treatment for immunofluorescence detection , and the results showed that CD163 + GSK3 β + expression was higher in anti - PD1 non - responder group in compar - ison with responder group ( figure 3A – C ) . The above evidence indicated that GSK3 β in TAMs was upregu - lated in non - responders of anti - PD1 therapy in HCC . For more deeply verifying as well as analyzing the conclusions obtained so far . We collected five human HCC tumor specimens and performed immunohistochemical exper - iments to analyze the expression of GSK3 β and PD - L1 proteins in these specimens . As revealed from the results , the GSK3 β expression was negatively related to PD - L1 in HCC tissues . Patients with relatively high GSK3 β expres - sion possessed a lower PD - L1 expression ( figure 3D – F ) . Above experiments revealed that increased GSK3 β expression in TAM was associated with the primary resis - tance of anti - PD1 immunotherapy for HCC . Macrophage GSK3 β deficiency enhanced the sensitivity of anti - PD1 immunotherapy for HCC by decreasing PD - L1 ubiquitination Since GSK3 β mediates primary anti - PD1 resistance , what is the relationship between GSK3 β and PD - L1 ? GSK3 β induces the PD - L1 proteasomal degradation dependent of phosphorylation in cancer cells , thereby primarily regu - lating the tumor immunity . 17 On that basis , a hypothesis was proposed that GSK3 β might play a similar regulatory role on PD - L1 ascent in TAM cells . Western blot verified that the GSK3 β inhibitor in TAMs elevated PD - L1 expres - sion ( online supplemental figure S2A ) . For verifying the association of GSK3 β with PD - L1 , we performed co - immu - noprecipitation ( Co - IP ) experiments . After transfection with GSK3 β plasmid , the ubiquitination level of PD - L1 was on the rise , while the expression of PD - L1 decreased ( figure 4A , online supplemental figure S2B ) . Also , GSK3 β and PD - L1 interacted with each other through Co - IP ( figure 4B ) . Finally , we observed colocalization of GSK3 β and PD - L1 through immunofluorescence experiments ( figure 4C ) . These results verified the interaction of GSK3 β and PD - L1 . In addition , TISIDB database demon - strated the negative relevance of GSK3 β expression to the expressions of CD8 + T cells , PD1 , TIGIT , and CTLA4 in 373 HCC samples ( online supplemental figure S3 ) . All the above evidence suggested that increased GSK3 β may inhibit PD - L1 expression in HCC , thereby causing primary resistance of anti - PD1 therapy . To explore the changes of the tumor immune micro - environment of HCC in GSK3 β deficiency from macro - phages , we detected two tumor samples from GSK3 β fl / fl and GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + mice through mass spectrometry , respectively . We dissociated tumor specimens from both groups , meanwhile recycling single intact CD45 + immune cells with normal activity from the cell masses . All samples showed clustering and subgroup annotation of CD45 + im - mune cells . A total of 31 cell clusters were obtained , with each defined by its specific marker ( online supplemental figure S4 , figure 4D , F ) . After comparing the numbers of the two groups , we found that the relative proportions of some cell clusters , such as M2 macrophages , MDSC and treg , showed a downward trend in the GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 8 Sun G , et al . J Immunother Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 Open access Figure 3 GSK3 β was enriched in TAMs of tumors in the primary resistance of anti - PD1 immunotherapy for HCC . ( A – C ) The immunofluorescence was used to verify the different CD163 + GSK3 β + expression in TAMs between non - responder to anti - PD1 treatment group and responder group . ( D – F ) Immunohistochemistry results of GSK3 β and PD - L1 expression in the non - responder to anti - PD1 treatment group and responder group . * * p < 0 . 01 . HCC , hepatocellular carcinoma ; TAMs , tumor - associated macrophages . 9 Sun G , et al . J Immunother Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 Open access Figure 4 Macrophage GSK3 β deficiency enhanced the sensitivity of anti - PD1 immunotherapy for HCC by decreasing PD - L1 ubiquitination . ( A ) The ubiquitination expression of PD - L1 via co - immunoprecipitation . ( B ) Coimmunoprecipitation assays showed an interaction between GSK3 β and PD - L1 in 293 T cell . ( C ) Immunoﬂuorescence staining assays of GSK3 β and PD - L1 in 293 T cells observed by confocal microscopy . ( D ) There were 31 cell clusters in total , which were defined in the respective groups . ( E ) The histogram showing the number of the respective cell clusters in different groups by mass cytometry . ( F ) TSNE plot showing distribution of 31 cell clusters . ( G ) TSNE plot showing distribution of PD1 , TIGIT and CTLA4 in two groups . The histogram showing the number of PD1 + , TIGIT + and CTLA4 + cell clusters in different groups . HCC , hepatocellular carcinoma ; TSNE : t - distributed stochastic neighbor embedding ; TIGIT : T cell immunoreceptor with Ig and ITIM domains . 10 Sun G , et al . J Immunother Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 Open access cre / + group compared with the GSK3 β fl / fl group . On the contrary , NK and DC cells presented an upward trend ( - figure 4E ) . CD8 + T cells failed to exhibit clear change ( figure 4E ) . In addition , it was revealed that PD1 , TIGIT , CTLA4 expressions elevated in GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + mice ( figure 4G ) . Hence , GSK3 β deficiency in macrophages contributed to immune activation of HCC . The sensitivity of anti - PD1 immunotherapy in HCC increased in GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + mice The above experiments confirmed the relationship between GSK3 β and the primary resistance of anti - PD1 immunotherapy for HCC . Then , we further verify our result in GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + mice that knockdown the expression of GSK3 β in TAMs can enhance the sensitivity of anti - PD1 immunotherapy . We injected Hep1 - 6 cells in GSK3 β fl / fl and GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + mice and treated the mice with PBS and anti - PD1 ( figure 5A ) . Hep1 - 6 cells with anti - PD1 in GSK3 β fl / fl grew faster in mice , which , however , slowed down in GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + + anti - PD1 group ( figure 5B ) . With the addition of anti - PD1 on the eighth day in GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + + anti - PD1 group , the tumors tended to grow more slowly ( figure 5B ) . After the mice were killed on day 20 , GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + + anti - PD1 group presented smaller tumor volume and weight relative to GSK3 β fl / fl + anti - PD1 group ( figure 5C , D ) . According to the immunohistochemistry results , compared with the GSK3 β fl / fl group , the PD1 , PD - L1 and CD8 expressions elevated in GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + group , but Ki67 expres - sion decreased ( figure 5E , F ) . In the GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + + anti - PD1 group , CD8 presented a higher expres - sion but Ki67 , PD - L1 and PD1 presented downregulation ( figure 5E , F ) . The above evidence indicated that expres - sion knockdown of GSK3 β in TAM assisted in enhancing the anti - HCC effect in combination with the anti - PD1 therapy in vivo . The expression of CD14 + GSK3 β + cells from PBMC can noninvasively predict anti - PD1 sensitivity in HCC patients After summarizing the above experimental results , we considered whether the sensitivity to anti - PD1 immuno - therapy of HCC patients can be predicted by detecting the content of GSK3 β in PBMCs . On that basis , nine blood samples with anti - PD1 pre - treatment were examined through mass spectrometry ( three sensi - tive , six non - sensitive ) . We focused on cycling single intact CD45 + immune cells with normal activity from selected cell masses ( online supplemental figure S5 ) . All samples presented clustering as well as subgroup annotation of CD45 + immune cells . We obtained 32 cell clusters , and each cell cluster was defined by its specific marker ( figure 6A , B , online supplemental figure S6 ) . We analyzed the cell populations of anti - PD1 pretreat - ment sensitive ( S , n = 3 samples ) and non - sensitive ( NS , n = 6 samples ) patients and found that monocyte populations were significantly elevated in the insensi - tive group ( figure 6C , D ) . In addition , we found that one monocyte cluster named CD14 + GSK3 β + cells were upregulated in NS group compared with S group ( figure 6E ) . We expanded the sample size to further verify this conclusion . We extracted PBMCs from 10 sensitive and 9 insensitive anti - PD1 HCC patients for flow cytometry and found that the insensitive group had a higher percentage of CD14 + GSK3 β + than the sensitive group ( figure 6F , G ) . The above results suggested that CD14 + GSK3 β + cell clusters in PBMC can predict anti - PD1 sensitivity of HCC patients . Escitalopram added in TAMs upregulated PD - L1 expression by reducing GSK3 β and improved the anti - PD1 therapy sensitivity in HCC We aimed at further translating above results into clinical practice . Our experiment in GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + mice proved that knockout of GSK3 β in TAMs can effectively inhibit HCC and sensitize anti - PD1 immunotherapy . Then can intraperitoneal injection of GSK3 β inhibitor in WT mice have the same effect ? For addressing the possible effect exerted by GSK3 β inhibitor in HCC in vivo , Hep1 - 6 cells were subcutaneous injected in C57BL / 6 mice that were treated with PBS , GSK3 β inhibitor , anti - PD1 , as well as GSK3 β inhibitor + anti - PD1 , respectively . Hep1 - 6 cells with PBS grew faster in mice , however , such trend was slowed down in GSK3 β inhibitor or anti - PD1 group ( figure 7A ) . With the addition of anti - PD1 on the eighth day in GSK3 β inhibitor + anti - PD1 group , the tumors tended to grow more slowly ( figure 7A ) . We sacrificed the mice on day 20 , and found smaller tumor volume and weight in GSK3 β inhibitor or anti - PD1 group relative to PBS group , and smaller tumor volume and weight in GSK3 β inhibitor + an - ti - PD1 relative to GSK3 β inhibitor or anti - PD1 group ( figure 7B , C ) . According to the immunohistochemistry results , relative to the PBS group , the injection of GSK3 β inhibitor led to increased PD1 , PD - L1 and CD8 expres - sions , but decreased Ki67 expression ( figure 7D , E ) . The GSK3 β inhibitor + anti - PD1 group presented a higher CD8 expression , but lower Ki67 , PD - L1 and PD1 expressions ( figure 7D , E ) . The above exciting results suggested that intraperitoneal injection of GSK3 β inhibitors can also inhibit HCC and sensitize anti - PD1 immunotherapy . We have to investigate which drugs can play a role like GSK3 β inhibitors in the clinic since GSK3 β inhibitors have not been used in the clinic . Li et al pointed out that stim - ulating the release of 5 - hydroxytryptamine ( 5 - HT ) and reducing its reuptake can increase phospho - Ser9 - GSK3 β levels . While looking for the target transformation drug , we found that escitalopram could enhance the effect of 5 - HT energy in the central nervous system , meanwhile inhibiting the reuptake of 5 - HT . 18 After further literature review , we found that escitalopram ameliorated cogni - tive impairments , selectively attenuating the phosphory - lated tau accumulation in the stressed rats by adjusting hypothalamic – pituitary – adrenal axis activity as well as the insulin receptor substrate / GSK3 β signaling pathway . 19 Accordingly , we aimed to explore whether escitalopram can be adopted to replace the effects of GSK3 β inhibi - tors given that escitalopram is already well - established 11 Sun G , et al . J Immunother Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 Open access clinical drugs . We attempted to use escitalopram to test its therapeutic potential against HCC ( online supple - mental figure S7A ) . The western blotting assisted in vali - dating the expression of proteins and results revealed that when escitalopram was added in TAMs , GSK3 β was downregulated while GSK3 β ser9 was upregulated , indi - cating the activity of GSK3 β was significantly inhibited , and PD - L1 was upregulated ( online supplemental figure S7B ) . qRT - PCR results showed that escitalopram group exhibited considerably lower CD206 , CD163 , ARG1 of M2 phenotype expressions relative to the control group ( online supplemental figure S7C ) . We also explored the effect of escitalopram treated TAM on tumorigenesis and development through a series of experiments . The results Figure 5 The sensitivity of anti - PD1 immunotherapy in HCC was increased in GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + mice . ( A ) Schematic diagram of establishment of mouse subcutaneous tumor model in each group . ( B ) Images of subcutaneous tumors in each group . ( C , D ) Analysis of subcutaneous tumors in the respective groups . ( E , F ) Immunohistochemistry results of CD8 , Ki67 , PD - L1 and PD1 expression in the respective groups . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . ns indicated no significant different . HCC , hepatocellular carcinoma . 12 Sun G , et al . J Immunother Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 Open access showed that TAMs significantly inhibited HCC cells in escitalopram group compared with control group ( online supplemental figure S7D – G ) . Whether escitalopram is capable of inhibiting tumor as well as enhancing anti - PD1 sensitivity in vivo shall be investigated in depth . Hence , we injected Hep1 - 6 cells in C57BL / 6 mice , and treated the mice with PBS , escit - alopram , anti - PD1 , and escitalopram + anti - PD1 . Hep1 - 6 cells with PBS grew faster in mice , while the trend slowed down in escitalopram or anti - PD1 group ( figure 7F ) . After adding anti - PD1 on the eighth day in escitalo - pram + anti - PD1 group , the tumors tended to grow more slowly ( figure 7F ) . We killed the mice on day 20 , finding smaller tumor volume and weight in escitalopram or anti - PD1 group relative to PBS group , and smaller tumor volume and weight in escitalopram + anti - PD1 relative Figure 6 The expression of CD14 + GSK3 β + cells from PBMC could noninvasively predict anti - PD1 sensitivity in HCC patients . ( A ) There were 32 cell clusters in total , which were defined in the respective groups . ( B ) TSNE plot showing distribution of 32 cell clusters . ( C ) TSNE diagram showing distribution of cell clusters in the anti - PD1 sensitive and non - sensitive group samples . ( D ) The histogram showing the number of the respective cell clusters in the anti - PD1 sensitive and non - sensitive groups by mass cytometry . ( E ) The histogram showing the expression of CD14 + GSK3 β + cell in the anti - PD1 sensitive and non - sensitive groups . ( F – G ) PBMCs were collected from 10 sensitive and 9 insensitive anti - PD1 HCC patients , and the expression of CD14 and GSK3 β was measured by flow cytometry . * p ＜ 0 . 05 . HCC , hepatocellular carcinoma ; PBMC , peripheral blood mononuclear cell . 13 Sun G , et al . J Immunother Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 Open access to escitalopram or anti - PD1 group ( figure 7G , H ) . The above evidence suggested that escitalopram , in combina - tion with the anti - PD1 treatment in vivo , was capable of enhancing the anti - HCC effect . DISCUSSION Tumor immunotherapy , such as PD1 / PD - L1 mAbs , has brought new light to the treatment of tumor patients . Compared with traditional molecular targeted therapy and chemotherapy , immunotherapy has a high incidence of drug resistance , preventing a huge group of tumor patients from benefiting from it , and becoming the most severe test for immunotherapy . 20 Resistance to PD1 / PD - L1 antibodies is related to a variety of tumor cytokines , tumor metabolic pathways , etc . 21 In existing research , resistance was separated into secondary resistance and Figure 7 Escitalopram reduced tumor growth in mice and increased the efficacy of anti - PD1 treatment against HCC . ( A ) Images of subcutaneous tumors in each group ( PBS , GSK3 β inhibitor , anti - PD1 , GSK3 β inhibitor + anti - PD1 ) . ( B , C ) Analysis of subcutaneous tumors in the respective groups . ( D , E ) Immunohistochemistry results of CD8 , Ki67 , PD - L1 and PD1 expression in the respective groups . ( F ) Images of subcutaneous tumors in each group ( PBS , escitalopram , anti - PD1 , and escitalopram + anti - PD1 ) . ( G , H ) Analysis of subcutaneous tumors in the respective groups . ( I ) Pattern diagram showing that macrophage GSK3 β deficiency inhibits the development of HCC and enhances the sensitivity of anti - PD1 immunotherapy . * p ＜ 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . ns indicated no significant different . HCC , hepatocellular carcinoma ; PBS , phosphate buffered saline ; TAM , tumor - associated macrophage . 14 Sun G , et al . J Immunother Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 Open access primary resistance in accordance with the emergence of resistance . Secondary resistance is the initial use of PD1 / PD - L1 mAb with significant effect , and then with the deepening of treatment , drug resistance appears . Primary resistance , on the other hand , is the ineffective treatment of initial immunotherapy . 22 Existing research has confirmed that the emergence of related drug resis - tance is most directly related to the PD1 / PD - L1 expres - sion on the cell surface , and other related factors include loss of primary and costimulatory signals , tumor micro - environment as well as epigenetic modifications . 20 The study found that TAM - GSK3 β cell cluster was upregulated in non - responders of anti - PD1 therapy in HCC based on scRNA - seq and immunofluorescence , thus finding new therapeutic targets for the anti - PD1 treatment in HCC . GSK3 β , a kinase that regulates multiple metabolic path - ways and cell growth signals , has been considered a prom - ising target for cancer therapy . The role played by GSK3 β in the regulation of metastasis , invasion , tumor growth , DNA repair , cell cycle , and apoptosis reveals the thera - peutic relationship of such target , meanwhile providing the basic principle for drug combinations . Moreover , new data about GSK3 β serving for mediating the anticancer immune response emphasize the possible clinical uses of new selective GSK3 β inhibitors involved in clinical research . 23 The publications over the past few years have stressed the role played by GSK3 β in the regulation of the immune response . Taylor et al investigated the way GSK3 β inhibition downregulated PD1 on T cells . GSK3 β inhibi - tion reduced tumor growth as well as metastasis through the downregulation of PD1 on CD8 + T cells in the mela - noma model , but minimally affecting NK cells without significantly impacting CD4 + T cells . GSK - 3 α / β inhibitor can reduce the transcription and expression levels of PD1 , and can achieve similar antitumor effects as anti - PD1 and PD - L1 blocking antibodies , including B16 melanoma or EL4 lymphoma . In addition , genetic defects of GSK3 α / β can inhibit PD1 expression on CD8 + T cells , thereby limiting tumor metastasis . 24 Besides its critical role in PD1 pathway , a breast cancer study proved the possible role played by GSK3 β in PD - L1 pathway . 25 Specific as follows : PARP inhibitors are capable of upregulating the PD - L1 expression in BC cell lines and animal models . Mechanis - tically , PARP inhibitors attenuate GSK3 β activity , thereby enhancing PARP inhibitor - mediated upregulation of PD - L1 . This series of reactions re - sensitizes cancer cells to T - cell killing , thereby weakening anticancer immu - nity . The efficacy of PARP inhibitor combined with anti - PD - L1 therapy showed an obvious improvement in vivo relative to drug alone . The above published studies fully demonstrate that GSK3 β greatly regulates PD1 / PD - L1 - related pathways . This undoubtedly provides inspiration for our experimental design . In our study , when GSK3 β was knocked out in myeloid , PD1 and PD - L1 increased simultaneously . This is inconsistent with the conclusion drawn in previous studies , that is , previous studies have proved that when GSK3 β is down regulated , the expres - sion level of PD1 decreases . We have to think about the reasons for this result . First , we measured the expression of PD1 on the whole sample , not on the surface of CD8 T cells involved in other articles . Second , the total number of CD8 T cells increases after the myeloidknocks out GSK3 β , so the number of PD1 positive CD8 T cells also elevates , leading to this result . But this does not affect the effect of anti immunotherapy . In addition , GSK3 β over - expression weakened NK cell ability to eliminate acute myelocytic leukemia ( AML ) cells , but GSK3 β inhibition strengthened NK cell cytotoxic activity in human AML mouse models . 26 Our experiment innovatively focused on the differential expression of GSK3 β in HCC TAM , illus - trating the role of GSK3 β in fighting HCC from a new perspective . We found for the first time that inhibition of GSK3 β upregulated PD - L1 expression by inhibiting its ubiquitination . GSK3 β inhibitor enhanced the anti - PD1 immunotherapy sensitivity in HCC in vivo , thus making the study on GSK3 β and tumor immunity take on a greater significance . Mass spectrometry enables precise immunotyping of cell populations , all - sided analysis of intracellular signaling networks , analysis of functional connec - tions between cell subpopulations , as well as the high - throughput multiparameter detection of large numbers of samples . 27 28 The study detected two tumor samples from GSK3 β fl / fl and GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + mice through mass spectrometry , respectively . As found , the relative proportion of M2 macrophages , macrophages , MDSC , Tregs in GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + group declined continu - ously relative to the GSK3 β fl / fl group , whereas DC and NK cells elevated . CD8 + T cells did not change signifi - cantly , perhaps because the sample size was too small or CD8 + T groups were not classified in detail , but immuno - histochemical results confirmed that CD8 + T increased in GSK3 β fl / fl Lyz2 cre / + group . The comprehensive anal - ysis of how GSK3 β knockout in macrophages affects tumor immune microenvironment is reported for the first time in the world . In general , GSK3 β knockout in macrophages can inhibit immunosuppressive cells , espe - cially myeloid cells . In addition , nine blood samples with anti - PD1 pretreatment were examined through mass spectrometry ( three sensitive , six non - sensitive ) . The result showed that the insensitive group possessed higher proportion of monocytes from PBMC relative to the sensitive group , while other cells , such as CD8 + T cells , showed no significant difference . Based on the flow validation with an enlarged sample size , we found that the insensitive group had a higher percentage of CD14 + GSK3 β + than the sensitive group . Based on existing research , accumulated immature myeloid cells in tumor microenvironment are capable of suppressing antitumor immune responses as well as promoting tumor growth . MDSCs from human PBMCs cocultured with SK - MEL - 5 cancer cells in vitro can significantly inhibit CD8 + T cell proliferation as well as IFN secretion , and ILT3 antibody can reverse the above process . 29 Thus , it may be neces - sary to use a significantly larger sample size to verify more accurate results . 15 Sun G , et al . J Immunother Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 Open access The anti - HCC effect of the antidepressant escitalo - pram and its ability to enhance the sensitivity of anti - PD1 therapy make us a bright sight . Wang et al confirmed that Monoamine oxidase A ( MAO - A ) , a kind of enzyme with an excellent function in the brain , can break down neurotransmitters and then have an effect on mood and behavior , restraining antitumor T cell immu - nity by adjusting intratumoral T cell autocrine sero - tonin signaling . In general , the above data suggested MAO - A as an immune checkpoint and recommended to repurpose MAO antidepressants in the cancer immu - notherapy . 30 This result was consistent with ours . We suggest that antidepressant escitalopram can be used as anti - PD1 sensitizers , especially in HCC patients with cold tumors , which needs to be verified by further clin - ical trials . There are some limitations in this study . In our study , we were surprised to find out that the GSK3 β inhibitor had much stronger anticancer effect than GSK3 β deficiency in macrophage in mouse experiment . This surprizing and exciting result got us thinking . We discussed and analyzed the possible causes . The dose of GSK3 β inhibitor injected intraperitoneally , drug toxicity , and individual differences in mice may be the underlying reasons . Second , GSK3 β expression on other cells , such as immune cells or cancer cells , may be associated with cancer suppression . In future further studies , this will serve as a new entry point to explore the potential of this target against HCC . In addi - tion , there are other shortcomings in this study . First , we clarified reduction of GSK3 β in TAMs significantly upreg - ulated PD - L1 expression by inhibiting its ubiquitination in HCC , but did not clarify the specific site . Li et al reported that MET phosphorylated and activated GSK3 β at tyrosine 56 , thus downregulating PD - L1 expression by liver cancer cells . 31 Wu et al suggested that WSX1 could suppress tumor without relying on IL - 27 , primarily dependent on CD8 T - cell immune surveillance through the downreg - ulation of neoplastic PD - L1 expression and the relevant CD8 T - cell exhaustion in HCC . From the mechanistical perspective , WSX1 reduces an isoform of PI3K - PI3K δ tran - scriptionally and then makes AKT inactive , which limits the GSK3 β inhibition induced by AKT . Subsequently , acti - vated GSK3 β promotes PD - L1 to be degraded and reduces PD - L1 . 32 In - depth studies shall be conducted to investigate the regulation function possessed by GSK3 β and PD - L1 in TAMs . Second , the number of clinical samples in this study was small due to the high risk of massive bleeding in the puncture operation of HCC patients before anti - PD1 treat - ment . We look forward to more data before and after anti - PD1 treatment in HCC to support the view of this study . Third , we did not use more models ( eg , patient - derived xenografts ( PDX ) model ) for verifying the conclusions of this study due to limited scientific research funds . Finally , this study didn ' t identify the site where escitalopram inhib - ited the activity of GSK3 β , but only preliminarily verified its function , which will be futher explored in our future study . CONCLUSION Briefly , macrophage GSK3 β deficiency inhibits the devel - opment of HCC by inhibiting the M2 phenotype of TAMs as well as strengthens the anti - PD1 immunotherapy sensitivity for HCC by decreasing PD - L1 ubiquitination ( figure 7I ) . The expression of CD14 + GSK3 β + cell cluster in peripheral blood can noninvasively predict anti - PD1 sensitivity in HCC patients . This study provides novel strategies and methods to predict anti - PD1 sensitivity and increase anti - PD1 therapeutic effect , and brings new hope for HCC patients . Author affiliations 1 Hepatobiliary / Liver Transplantation Center , The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University , Key Laboratory of Living Donor Transplantation , Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences , Nanjing , Jiangsu , China 2 Department of General Surgery , Nanjing First Hospital , Nanjing Medical University , Nanjing , Jiangsu , China 3 Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity , Institute of Biology and Medical Sciences , Soochow University , Suzhou , Jiangsu , China , Suzhou , Jiangsu , China 4 Zhejiang Puluoting Health Technology Co . , Ltd , Hangzhou , Zhejiang , China 5 First Teaching Hospital of Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine , Tianjin , China 6 State Key Laboratory of Modern Chinese Medicine , Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine , Tianjin , China Acknowledgements We express our sincere appreciation to the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( No . 82070676 ) and the National Natural Science Key Foundation of China ( No . 31930020 ) for the grants . Contributors There are four first authors in the manuscript who made equal contribution to the project . WW T is responsible for the overall content as the guarantor . GS S , HY L , J Z and JY Z took charge of experiment design and performance . T H , GQ S , HS C , DW R , XY K , ZH Z and QH J carried out part of experiment . Besides , we have four corresponding authors . L L , WW T , XH W and YX X completed the data interpretation , and the manuscript editing and revision . WW T , XH W , and YX X designed the study and critically revised the manuscript . The final manuscript has been read by and obtained the approval of all authors . Competing interests None declared . Patient consent for publication Not applicable . Ethics approval Patients were informed about the information with respect to the study following Declaration of Helsinki . We collected HCC cancer tissues and blood from HCC patients undergoing surgical treatment from the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University , as well as obtained participants’ informed consent . This study involves human participants and has obtained the approval of the Ethics Committee of above university . The approved ID number is 2019 - SRFA - 238 . Provenance and peer review Not commissioned ; externally peer reviewed . Data availability statement All data relevant to the study are included in the article or uploaded as online supplemental information . Supplemental material This content has been supplied by the author ( s ) . It has not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited ( BMJ ) and may not have been peer - reviewed . Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those of the author ( s ) and are not endorsed by BMJ . BMJ disclaims all liability and responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content . Where the content includes any translated material , BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability of the translations ( including but not limited to local regulations , clinical guidelines , terminology , drug names and drug dosages ) , and is not responsible for any error and / or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise . Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial ( CC BY - NC 4 . 0 ) license , which permits others to distribute , remix , adapt , build upon this work non - commercially , and license their derivative works on different terms , provided the original work is properly cited , appropriate credit is given , any changes made indicated , and the use is non - commercial . See http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc / 4 . 0 / . 16 Sun G , et al . J Immunother Cancer 2022 ; 10 : e005655 . doi : 10 . 1136 / jitc - 2022 - 005655 Open access ORCID iDs Siqi Zhao http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 3678 - 7912 Weiwei Tang http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 8516 - 819X Yongxiang Xia http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0001 - 6589 - 797X REFERENCES 1 Bruix J , Qin S , Merle P , et al . Regorafenib for patients with hepatocellular carcinoma who progressed on sorafenib treatment ( RESORCE ) : a randomised , double - blind , placebo - controlled , phase 3 trial . Lancet 2017 ; 389 : 56 – 66 . 2 Kudo M , Finn RS , Qin S , et al . Lenvatinib versus sorafenib in first - line treatment of patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma : a randomised phase 3 non - inferiority trial . Lancet 2018 ; 391 : 1163 – 73 . 3 Lencioni R , Chen X - P , Dagher L , et al . Treatment of intermediate / advanced hepatocellular carcinoma in the clinic : how can outcomes be improved ? Oncologist 2010 ; 15 Suppl 4 : 42 – 52 . 4 Motzer RJ , Escudier B , McDermott DF , et al . Nivolumab versus everolimus in advanced renal - cell carcinoma . N Engl J Med 2015 ; 373 : 1803 – 13 . 5 Herbst RS , Baas P , Kim D - W , et al . Pembrolizumab versus docetaxel for previously treated , PD - L1 - positive , advanced non - small - cell lung cancer ( KEYNOTE - 010 ) : a randomised controlled trial . Lancet 2016 ; 387 : 1540 – 50 . 6 Postow MA , Chesney J , Pavlick AC , et al . Nivolumab and ipilimumab versus ipilimumab in untreated melanoma . N Engl J Med 2015 ; 372 : 2006 – 17 . 7 El - Khoueiry AB , Sangro B , Yau T , et al . Nivolumab in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma ( CheckMate 040 ) : an open - label , non - comparative , phase 1 / 2 dose escalation and expansion trial . Lancet 2017 ; 389 : 2492 – 502 . 8 Bartoschek M , Oskolkov N , Bocci M , et al . Spatially and functionally distinct subclasses of breast cancer - associated fibroblasts revealed by single cell RNA sequencing . Nat Commun 2018 ; 9 : 1 – 13 . 9 Savas P , Virassamy B , Ye C , et al . Single - Cell profiling of breast cancer T cells reveals a tissue - resident memory subset associated with improved prognosis . Nat Med 2018 ; 24 : 986 – 93 . 10 Beurel E , Grieco SF , Jope RS . Glycogen synthase kinase - 3 ( GSK3 ) : regulation , actions , and diseases . Pharmacol Ther 2015 ; 148 : 114 – 31 . 11 Murata M . Inflammation and cancer . Environ Health Prev Med 2018 ; 23 : 1 – 8 . 12 Li C , Xue VW , Wang Q - M , et al . The Mincle / Syk / NF - κ B signaling circuit is essential for maintaining the Protumoral activities of tumor - associated macrophages . Cancer Immunol Res 2020 ; 8 : 1004 – 17 . 13 Zhou H , Wang H , Ni M , et al . Glycogen synthase kinase 3 β promotes liver innate immune activation by restraining AMP - activated protein kinase activation . J Hepatol 2018 ; 69 : 99 – 109 . 14 Xia Y , Zhuo H , Lu Y , et al . Glycogen synthase kinase 3 β inhibition promotes human iTreg differentiation and suppressive function . Immunol Res 2015 ; 62 : 60 – 70 . 15 Li J , Gao J , Zhou H , et al . Inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase 3 β increases the proportion and suppressive function of CD19 + CD24hiCD27 + Breg cells . Front Immunol 2020 ; 11 : 3119 . 16 Xia Y , Rao J , Yao A , et al . Lithium exacerbates hepatic ischemia / reperfusion injury by inhibiting GSK - 3 β / NF - κ B - mediated protective signaling in mice . Eur J Pharmacol 2012 ; 697 : 117 – 25 . 17 Li C - W , Lim S - O , Xia W , et al . Glycosylation and stabilization of programmed death ligand - 1 suppresses T - cell activity . Nat Commun 2016 ; 7 : 1 – 11 . 18 Li X , Zhu W , Roh M - S , et al . In vivo regulation of glycogen synthase kinase - 3beta ( GSK3 β eta ) by serotonergic activity in mouse brain . Neuropsychopharmacology 2004 ; 29 : 1426 – 31 . 19 Wu C , Gong W - G , Wang Y - J , et al . Escitalopram alleviates stress - induced Alzheimer ' s disease - like tau pathologies and cognitive deficits by reducing hypothalamic - pituitary - adrenal axis reactivity and insulin / GSK - 3 β signal pathway activity . Neurobiol Aging 2018 ; 67 : 137 – 47 . 20 Sharma P , Allison JP . The future of immune checkpoint therapy . Science 2015 ; 348 : 56 – 61 . 21 Li Z , Sun G , Sun G , et al . Various uses of PD1 / PD - L1 inhibitor in oncology : opportunities and challenges . Front Oncol 2021 ; 11 : 771335 . 22 Kreiter S , Vormehr M , van de Roemer N , et al . Mutant MHC class II epitopes drive therapeutic immune responses to cancer . Nature 2015 ; 520 : 692 – 6 . 23 Sahin I , Eturi A , De Souza A , et al . Glycogen synthase kinase - 3 beta inhibitors as novel cancer treatments and modulators of antitumor immune responses . Cancer Biol Ther 2019 ; 20 : 1047 – 56 . 24 Taylor A , Rothstein D , Rudd CE . Small - molecule inhibition of PD - 1 transcription is an effective alternative to antibody blockade in cancer therapy . Cancer Res 2018 ; 78 : 706 – 17 . 25 Jiao S , Xia W , Yamaguchi H , et al . PARP inhibitor upregulates PD - L1 expression and enhances cancer - associated immunosuppression . Clin Cancer Res 2017 ; 23 : 3711 – 20 . 26 Parameswaran R , Ramakrishnan P , Moreton SA , et al . Repression of GSK3 restores NK cell cytotoxicity in AML patients . Nat Commun 2016 ; 7 : 1 – 11 . 27 Devine RD , Behbehani GK . Mass cytometry , imaging mass cytometry , and multiplexed ion beam imaging use in a clinical setting . Clin Lab Med 2021 ; 41 : 297 – 308 . 28 Maby P , Corneau A , Galon J . Phenotyping of tumor infiltrating immune cells using mass - cytometry ( CyTOF ) . Methods Enzymol 2020 ; 632 : 339 – 68 . 29 Singh L , Muise ES , Bhattacharya A , et al . ILT3 ( LILRB4 ) promotes the immunosuppressive function of tumor - educated human monocytic myeloid - derived suppressor cells . Mol Cancer Res 2021 ; 19 : 702 – 16 . 30 Wang X , Li B , Kim YJ , et al . Targeting monoamine oxidase A for T cell – based cancer immunotherapy . Sci Immunol 2021 ; 6 : p . eabh2383 . 31 Li H , Li C - W , Li X , et al . MET inhibitors promote liver tumor evasion of the immune response by stabilizing PDL1 . Gastroenterology 2019 ; 156 : 1849 – 61 . 32 Wu M , Xia X , Hu J , et al . WSX1 act as a tumor suppressor in hepatocellular carcinoma by downregulating neoplastic PD - L1 expression . Nat Commun 2021 ; 12 : 1 – 16 .