Received 23 May 2003 Accepted 4 June 2003 Published online 30 July 2003 Curtailing transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome within a community and its hospital † James O . Lloyd - Smith 1 * , Alison P . Galvani 2 and Wayne M . Getz 3 1 Biophysics Graduate Group , 2 Department of Integrative Biology , and 3 Department of Environmental Science , Policy and Management , University of California , Berkeley , CA 94720 , USA Severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) has been transmitted extensively within hospitals , and healthcare workers ( HCWs ) have comprised a large proportion of SARS cases worldwide . We present a stochastic model of a SARS outbreak in a community and its hospital . For a range of basic reproductive numbers ( R 0 ) corresponding to conditions in different cities ( but with emphasis on R 0 ~ 3 as reported for Hong Kong and Singapore ) , we evaluate contact precautions and case management ( quarantine and isolation ) as containment measures . Hospital - based contact precautions emerge as the most potent meas - ures , with hospital - wide measures being particularly important if screening of HCWs is inadequate . For R 0 = 3 , case isolation alone can control a SARS outbreak only if isolation reduces transmission by at least a factor of four and the mean symptom - onset - to - isolation time is less than 3 days . Delays of a few days in contact tracing and case identification severely degrade the utility of quarantine and isolation , parti - cularly in high - transmission settings . Still more detrimental are delays between the onset of an outbreak and the implementation of control measures ; for given control scenarios , our model identifies windows of opportunity beyond which the efficacy of containment efforts is reduced greatly . By considering path - ways of transmission in our system , we show that if hospital - based transmission is not halted , measures that reduce community – HCW contact are vital to preventing a widespread epidemic . The implications of our results for future emerging pathogens are discussed . Keywords : contact precautions ; epidemic models ; hospital transmission ; isolation ; quarantine ; severe acute respiratory syndrome 1 . INTRODUCTION When a previously unknown infectious disease emerges , the initial options for control are limited . In the absence of an effective treatment or vaccine , policies are restricted to case management ( such as the isolation of known cases and quarantine of their contacts ) and contact precautions for identifiable high - risk groups . Owing to limitations in public health resources and concern about personal free - doms and economic impacts , policy - makers face decisions regarding the relative importance of such efforts . This paper identifies priorities and trade - offs for the control of the newly identified coronavirus that has caused an epi - demic of severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) worldwide , particularly in parts of Asia . Our analysis focuses on the role of hospitals and healthcare workers ( HCWs ) in disease transmission by dividing the threat - ened population ( city or region ) into two groups : a hospi - tal community and the community - at - large . Hospitals have been widely recognized as the highest - risk settings for SARS transmission ( Drazen 2003 ; Lee et al . 2003 ) . As of early June 2003 , HCWs have comprised ca . 63 % of SARS cases in Hanoi , 51 % in Toronto , 42 % in Singapore , 22 % in Hong Kong and 18 % in mainland China ( Booth et al . 2003 ; Hong Kong Department of Health 2003 ; Leo et al . 2003 ; Twu et al . 2003 ; World Health Organization 2003 ) . Healthcare settings and HCWs are thus an obvious focus for SARS control efforts , with particular concern for preventing leakage of the dis - * Author for correspondence ( jls @ nature . berkeley . edu ) . † The first two authors contributed in equal part to this work . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B ( 2003 ) 270 , 1979 – 1989 1979 Ó 2003 The Royal Society DOI 10 . 1098 / rspb . 2003 . 2481 ease from hospitals back into the surrounding communi - ties . We present a model of a nascent SARS outbreak in a community and its hospital , addressing the relative bene - fits of case management and contact precautions for con - taining the disease . At the time of writing , this situation holds great relevance because travel from regions with on - going epidemics has the potential to seed new outbreaks worldwide ( Twu et al . 2003 ) . Of greatest concern are countries with poor health infrastructure , and the possi - bility of a seasonal re - emergence of SARS in the Northern Hemisphere’s next winter . Furthermore , although our model is parameterized for SARS , the lessons learned will be useful in future outbreaks of novel infectious diseases or pandemic influenza strains . Our analysis is based on a stochastic model , because chance events can greatly influence the early progression of an outbreak . We pay particular attention to capturing realistic distributions for the incubation and symptomatic periods associated with SARS , because the natural history of disease progression is less likely to vary between epi - demics than are the mixing and transmission patterns . Disease control measures are described by explicit para - meters , so their respective contributions to containment can be teased apart ( see table 1 ) . The hospitalization rates of infected community members and HCWs are denoted by h c and h h , respectively , and q is the rate of quarantining exposed individuals in the community following contact tracing . The transmission rate for case - isolated individuals is modified by a factor k , reflecting measures such as res - piratory isolation and negative pressure rooms , and trans - mission by quarantined individuals is modified by g . 1980 J . O . Lloyd - Smith and others SARS transmission in a community and hospital Table 1 . Summary of transmission and case - management parameters , including the range of values used throughout the study and the three control strategies depicted in figure 3 . range figure 3 figure 3 figure 3 parameter symbol examined ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) baseline transmission rate ( day 2 1 ) b 0 . 08 – 0 . 26 0 . 15 0 . 15 0 . 15 ( R 0 = 1 . 5 – 5 ) ( R 0 = 3 ) ( R 0 = 3 ) ( R 0 = 3 ) factors modifying transmission rate , owing to : pre - symptomatic transmission « 0 – 0 . 1 0 . 1 0 . 1 0 . 1 hospital - wide contact precautions h 0 – 1 0 . 5 0 . 9 0 . 5 reduced HCW – community mixing r 0 – 1 0 . 5 1 0 . 5 case isolation k 0 – 1 1 0 . 5 0 . 5 quarantine g 0 – 1 0 . 5 0 . 5 0 . 5 daily probability of : quarantining of incubating individuals in the community q 0 – 1 0 0 . 5 0 . 5 ( E c ) isolation of symptomatic individuals in the community h c 0 – 1 0 . 3 0 . 9 0 . 9 ( I c ) isolation of symptomatic HCWs ( I h ) h h 0 . 9 0 . 9 0 . 9 0 . 9 Hospital - wide contact precautions , such as the use at all times of sterile gowns , filtration masks and gloves , modify within - hospital transmission by a factor h . A final para - meter r describes efforts to reduce contact between off - duty HCWs and the community . Control parameters are thus divided into those describing case - management mea - sures ( h c , h h , q , g , k ) and those describing contact pre - cautions ( h and r ) . The most difficult process to characterize in any epi - demic is disease transmission . This can be divided into a contact process and the probability of transmission given contact . The former varies dramatically between com - munities ( owing to , for example , usage patterns of public transport or housing density ) and between diseases ( owing to different modes of transmission ) ; the latter also depends on both the disease ( the proximity required for transmission ) and the community ( cultural mores relating to intimacy of contact and hygiene ) . Thus , transmission rates are both disease - and community - dependent and will vary from country to country , as well as between cities within a region ( Galvani et al . 2003 ) . This geographical variation translates directly into variations in the basic reproductive number R 0 of the epidemic , which is the average number of secondary cases generated by a ‘typical’ infectious individual in a completely susceptible popu - lation , in the absence of control measures ( Diekmann & Heesterbeek 2000 ) . For instance , SARS is likely to have different R 0 values in Beijing and Toronto , owing to differ - ences in cultural practices , environmental conditions and population density . Such differences are confirmed by Galvani et al . ( 2003 ) , who report widely varying doubling times for SARS outbreaks in six affected regions . Recent analyses of SARS incidence data from Hong Kong ( Riley et al . 2003 ) and Singapore and other settings ( Lipsitch et al . 2003 ) report R 0 to be 2 . 7 ( 95 % confidence interval ( CI ) : 2 . 2 – 3 . 7 ) and ca . 3 ( 90 % CI : 1 . 5 – 7 . 7 ) , respectively . As acknowledged by these authors , the esti - mation of R 0 is complicated by healthcare practices in place before outbreaks are recognized—measuring a dis - ease’s rate of spread in the true absence of control is rarely Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B ( 2003 ) possible . In the case of SARS , non - specific control meas - ures may have helped or hindered early epidemic growth : hospitalization of symptomatic cases reduced transmission to the general community , but put HCWs at risk owing to unprotected medical procedures , possibly contributing to so - called super - spreading events . ( Note that the R 0 reported by Riley et al . ( 2003 ) excludes such events . ) Esti - mates of R 0 from data including non - specific control mea - sures therefore could be biased in either direction . Taking note of the confidence intervals cited above , R 0 values associated with SARS in different parts of the world could easily vary from 1 . 5 to 5—roughly the same range as has been estimated for influenza ( Hethcote 2000 ; Ferguson et al . 2003 ) . SARS is thought to be primarily transmitted via large - droplet contact , compared with airborne trans - mission via droplet nuclei for influenza , but faecal – oral and fomite transmission are suspected in some circum - stances ( Riley et al . 2003 ; Seto et al . 2003 ; Wenzel & Edmond 2003 ) . To obtain some general results we evaluate control stra - tegies for scenarios reflecting R 0 values from 1 . 5 to 5 , with particular emphasis on R 0 ~ 3 , which is the current most likely estimate for Hong Kong and Singapore . Because the feasibility of implementing different control measures var - ies from country to country ( owing to public health infra - structure , for instance , or concerns about civil liberties ) , we evaluate the extent to which one control measure can compensate for another . We distinguish the impact of two types of delay in the control response : the delay in isolat - ing ( or quarantining ) particular individuals , and the delay in implementing a systemic control policy after the first case arises . Finally , we consider the pathways of trans - mission in our model , to obtain direct insight into the role played by HCWs in containing the epidemic . 2 . MODEL DESCRIPTION Our model divides the population into an HCW core group and the general community ( denoted by subscripts ‘h’ and ‘c’ , respectively ) ; infected individuals may enter SARS transmission in a community and hospital J . O . Lloyd - Smith and others 1981 ( a ) overall structure ( b ) incubating substructure ( c ) symptomatic substructure ( d ) transmission substructure 1 – p 1 1 – r r r r p 1 p 2 p 3 p 9 p 10 = 1 1 – p 2 1 – p 3 1 – p 9 communitypopulation casemanagement HCWs ( d ) ( b ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( b ) ( c ) ( c ) S c E c h c h h q E m I m I c R c S h E x1 E x2 E x3 E x9 E x10 I x1 I m I x2 I x3 I x4 I x5 E h I h R h 1 I h + E h e I c + E c e E m e h b k h b r b b l l b g r 1 h c 1 – r 1 – r case management ( subscript ‘m’ ) , representing quarantine or case isolation . We categorized disease classes as suscep - tible ( S c , S h ) , incubating ( E c , E h , E m ) , symptomatic ( I c , I h , I m ) and removed owing to recovery or death ( R c , R h ) . The model updates in 1 - day timesteps , representing the small - est interval for which people’s activities can be thought to be equivalent . Substructures associated with daily move - ments are summarized in figure 1 , with details given in the caption . Stochastic transitions of individuals between classes , based on the probabilities shown in figure 1 , were implemented by Monte Carlo simulation . The baseline transmission rate of symptomatic individ - uals in the community , b , was chosen to produce the range of R 0 values used in our different scenarios ( see next paragraph ) . Given the possibility of pre - symptomatic transmission of SARS ( Cyranoski & Abbott 2003 ; Don - nelly et al . 2003 ) , our model allows transmission at a reduced rate « b by incubating individuals . Disease trans - mission occurs via the following pathways , with contri - butions weighted as shown in figure 1 d . The hazard rate of infection for susceptibles in the community , rep - resented by l c , contains contributions from unmanaged incubating and symptomatic community members ( E c and I c ) , as well as off - duty HCWs ( E h and I h ) . Quarantined individuals ( E m ) transmit to S c at a reduced rate , reflecting household contacts and breaches of quarantine . The infection hazard rate for HCWs , l h , contains contri - butions from workplace transmission risks , from isolated patients ( I m ) and unmanaged incubating and symptomatic Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B ( 2003 ) Figure 1 . Flow diagram of the transmission dynamics of a SARS epidemic within a hospital coupled to that in a community . ( a ) We modelled SARS transmission as an SEIR process ( S , susceptible ; E , incubating ; I , symptomatic ; R , removed ) structured into an HCW core group ( subscript h ) , a community - at - large ( subscript c ) , and a case - managed group ( subscript m ) of quarantined ( E m ) and isolated ( I m ) individuals . ( b ) Incubating individuals in all three groups ( E x , where x = c , h , m ) were further structured into 10 disease - age classes , with daily probabilities p i of progressing to the symptomatic phase . Values of p i were interpolated linearly between p 1 = 0 and p 10 = 1 , yielding a distribution of incubation periods consistent with data ( see electronic Appendix A , available on The Royal Society’s Publications Web site ) . ( c ) Symptomatic individuals in all three groups ( I x , where x = c , h , m ) were structured into two initial disease - age and three subsequent disease - stage classes ( in which individuals have a probability r of moving to the next stage each day ) . Individuals leaving the final symptomatic class ( I x5 ) go to R c or R h , depending on whether they originated in S c or S h . Details of the incubating and symptomatic substructures are discussed in electronic Appendix A . Independent of the disease progression described in ( b ) and ( c ) , individuals can enter case management with daily probabilities q for quarantine , or h c and h h for isolation ( in the community and HCW groups , respectively ) . Individuals must already be in class I c or I h to be isolated , so the soonest that an un - quarantined individual can be isolated is after the first day of symptoms ; individuals in quarantine are assumed to move directly into isolation when symptoms develop . ( d ) The transmission hazard rates for susceptible individuals S j are denoted by l j ( j = c , h ) and depend on weighted contributions from community and HCW sources as described in § 2 ( and table 1 ) . The discrete - time stochastic formulation of our model allows for the possibility of multiple infectious contacts within a timestep , so for a susceptible individual subject to total hazard rate l j the probability of infection on a given day is 1 2 exp ( 2 l j ) . ( Note that the units of b are day 2 1 . ) We assume density - independent contact rates and random mixing within each pool , so hazard rates of infection are dependent on the transmission rate for each infectious class multiplied by the proportion of the population in that class . Specifically , defining the effective number of individuals in the hospital mixing pool as N h = S h 1 E h 1 I h 1 R h 1 I m and in the community mixing pool as N c = S c 1 E c 1 I c 1 R c 1 r ( S h 1 E h 1 I h 1 R h ) , the total hazard rates are l c = [ b ( I c 1 « E c ) 1 rb ( I h 1 « E h ) 1 gb « E m ] / N c and l h = rl c 1 hb ( I h 1 « E h 1 k I m ) / N h . In simulations , the number of infection events in each timestep is determined by random draws from binomial ( S j , 1 – exp ( 2 l j ) ) distributions ( j = c , h ) . Equations describing the model are given in electronic Appendix A . co - workers ( E h and I h ) , as well as from off - duty time in the community . To describe case management and control of the epidemic , we further modified transmission ( figure 1 d ) in terms of the parameters g , k , h and r introduced earlier ( see table 1 ) . Specifically , in the healthcare environment , transmission occurs at a rate of hb owing to hospital - wide precautions , and transmission by isolated patients ( I m ) is further modified by the factor k . Transmission rates between HCWs and community members are modified by the factor r . Quarantine reduces contact rates by a factor g , such that the net transmission rate of quarantined incu - bating individuals ( E m ) is g « b . 1982 J . O . Lloyd - Smith and others SARS transmission in a community and hospital When all other parameters are fixed at values rep - resenting no control measures , each R 0 from our assumed range of 1 . 5 to 5 uniquely determines a value of b to be used in our simulations . Throughout this paper , unless otherwise stated , we assume that incubating individuals transmit at one - tenth of the rate of symptomatic individ - uals ( i . e . « = 0 . 1 ) . The effects of control are explored by calculating the values of the case - management rates ( h c , h h , q ) and transmission - reduction parameters ( r , k , g , h ) required to reduce the effective reproductive number R to below 1 , where R is the expected number of secondary cases generated from an average infection when a given control policy is in place . Calculation of reproductive numbers R 0 and R for our model is described in electronic Appendix A available on The Royal Society’s Publications Web site . For a two - pool model such as this , the system - wide reproductive number is the dominant eigenvalue of a 2 ´ 2 next - generation matrix ( Diekmann & Heesterbeek 2000 ) ; individual elements of this matrix ( R ij , where i , j = c or h ) give insight into the potential for disease spread within and between the c and h pools . Each simulation is initiated with a single infection in the community . Unless otherwise stated , we model the spread and control of SARS in a population of 100 000 individ - uals and a hospital of 3000 individuals ( cf . Dwosh et al . 2003 ) . In electronic Appendix A we assess sensitivity of our results to absolute population size , and also to the relative size of the two pools . 3 . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION ( a ) Stochastic epidemics and the reproductive number Epidemics with reproductive number R , 1 tend to fade out , because on average each infection does not replace itself . When R . 1 , the epidemic is expected to grow , although if the number of cases is small then ran - dom events can lead to fadeout of the disease , particularly if R is close to 1 . ( Note that these statements apply equally to the basic reproductive number , R 0 , and the effective reproductive number under a control strategy , R ) . Sample simulations of our model exhibit this basic trend ( figure 2 a ) , as we see fadeout for four out of five simulations cor - responding to R = 1 . 2 , two out of five for R = 1 . 6 and one out of five for R = 2 . In addition , note the variability in epidemic timing and rate of growth between realizations of our stochastic model . As fadeout is an imprecise concept , we frame our results in terms of ‘epidemic containment’ , which we define as the eradication of the disease within 200 days of the first case , subject to the additional criterion that less than 1 % of the population ever become infected . ( This criterion is needed because a highly virulent disease can pass through a population within 200 days and still infect a large pro - portion of individuals before extinguishing itself . ) The probability of containment in our model decreases with increasing R ( figure 2 b ) , but is still significantly larger than zero for R ~ 5 . ( This relationship can be defined precisely for stochastic models simpler than ours—see Diekmann & Heesterbeek ( 2000 ) . ) We note from figure 2 b that even control measures that do not reduce R to below 1 can have a substantial probability of succeeding , provided that they are imposed when the number of cases is small . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B ( 2003 ) ( b ) Effect of case isolation To identify control strategies sufficient to contain a SARS outbreak , we consider parameter combinations that reduce the effective reproductive number to 1 . We plot R = 1 contours for a range of R 0 values in two - dimensional parameter spaces ( figures 2 c – e ) ; parameter regions to the left of the lines give R , 1 . First we explore whether case isolation alone can control a SARS outbreak in a com - munity and its hospital , as a function of the daily prob - ability that a symptomatic individual in the community will be identified and isolated ( h c ) , and the factor by which isolation modifies the transmission rate ( k ) . We compare scenarios where hospital - wide transmission occurs at the same rate ( h = 1 , figure 2 c ) versus half the rate ( h = 0 . 5 , figure 2 d ) , as in the general community . Unsurprisingly , the extent of measures required to control an outbreak is strongly dependent on R 0 . If R 0 ~ 3 ( as reported for SARS in Hong Kong and Singapore ) and no general contact pre - cautions are taken in the hospital ( figure 2 c , black curves ) , we see that an outbreak can be controlled only if case iso - lation reduces transmission by at least a factor of four ( k , 0 . 25 ) , and the mean onset - to - hospitalization time is less than 3 days ( h c . 0 . 3 ) . More stringent infection con - trol ( lower values of k ) allows slightly slower hospitaliz - ation to be effective . When general contact precautions cut hospital transmission by half ( figure 2 d ) , case isolation has a considerably greater chance of success , although rapid hospitalization is still imperative . These results agree qualitatively with Riley et al . ( 2003 ) , who conclude that the observed reduction of mean onset - to - hospitalization time from 4 . 84 days to 3 . 67 days was not sufficient to control the Hong Kong outbreak ( with their assumed value of k = 0 . 2 ) . Different model structures complicate quantitative comparisons ( we model HCWs explicitly , whereas Riley et al . ( 2003 ) consider spatial coupling ) , but to test changes in R that were owing to case isolation we approximate their model by setting h h = h c and r = h = 1 . Increasing h c from 1 / 4 . 84 to 1 / 3 . 67 then reduces R by 11 % , in precise agreement with the result obtained in the Hong Kong study . Delays in initiating isolation of symptomatic individuals are shown by three contours of each colour ( figure 2 c , d ; delays increase from right to left ) . Such delays are rela - tively unimportant when R 0 is low but become critical as R 0 increases , since in higher transmission settings sympto - matic individuals are more likely to reproduce their infec - tion in just a few days of unrestricted mixing , requiring disproportionate efforts on other control measures if iso - lation is delayed . For example , when R 0 = 5 and h = 0 . 5 ( figure 2 d , purple lines ) , if case isolation is initiated after the first day of symptoms then a sixfold reduction in trans - mission ( k ~ 0 . 17 ) and 40 % daily isolation probability ( h c = 0 . 4 ) is sufficient to contain the outbreak ( point marked ¤ ) , whereas delaying isolation for 2 more days requires near - perfect isolation practices ( k , 0 . 1 , h c . 0 . 7 ) to assure containment . Note that preliminary evi - dence suggests a variation in viral load throughout the symptomatic period of SARS ( Peiris et al . 2003 ) , which if correlated with infectiousness could affect our conclusions regarding the importance of immediate case isolation . In all cases ( figure 2 c , d ) , we identify a marked threshold in the interaction between k and h c . For example , in an SARS transmission in a community and hospital J . O . Lloyd - Smith and others 1983 outbreak with R 0 = 2 . 5 and h = 0 . 5 ( figure 2 d , red lines ) , making improvements in isolation practices ( decreasing k value ) has little effect on R if current control measures place the system at point A , but shows dramatic benefits if the system is at point B . Conversely , increasing h c sig - nificantly boosts control from point A but has negligible effects from point B . This threshold arises because even if all cases are isolated immediately ( h c = 1 ) the epidemic will not be contained unless k is sufficiently low . Conversely , even if isolation stops transmission entirely ( k = 0 ) , the outbreak will not be contained unless a suf - ficient proportion of cases are isolated soon enough . The sharpness of this threshold arises in part because the proportion of individuals not isolated by the n th day is ( 1 2 h c ) n , where values of n ~ 10 2 20 are pertinent because individuals with SARS often remain symptomatic for an extended period . The threshold softens as R 0 increases , since when transmission rates are higher the critical values of n are smaller ( i . e . individuals must be isolated sooner , on average , to keep R , 1 ) . These find - ings highlight that pushing blindly to upgrade any given control measure may not advance the fight against SARS ; with limited resources , the best approach is to identify where the current policy is failing ( e . g . inadequate case identification versus ineffective isolation practices ) and make targeted improvements . ( c ) Contact tracing and quarantine For situations where modern case isolation facilities are not available , we explore the extent to which quarantine can compensate as a control measure ( figure 2 e ) . For fixed case isolation probabilities , we investigate the trade - off between q , the daily probability that an incubating individ - ual will be traced and quarantined , and k , the degree to which case isolation reduces transmission . We assume that transmission in quarantine is reduced by half , on average , because experiences in Singapore and elsewhere have indi - cated that many people are not compliant ( Mandavilli 2003 ) . For each value of R 0 in figure 2 e , we plot R = 1 contours for two speeds of contact tracing ( i . e . delays before quarantining begins ) . The potential for quarantining to aid SARS contain - ment increases markedly with R 0 . In low - transmission set - tings ( figure 2 e , dark blue lines ) there is little difference between immediate quarantine and none at all—a small change in k or h would be more effective than instituting a quarantine policy . By contrast , for higher R 0 quarantin - ing can aid control substantially . In a setting with R 0 = 5 ( figure 2 e , purple lines ) , in the absence of quarantining a value of k , 0 . 06 is required to contain an outbreak . If daily quarantining probabilities are at least 0 . 3 , however , then k ~ 0 . 25 is sufficient to achieve containment . Thus , even a partly effective quarantine policy creates a signifi - cant opportunity to assure containment ( i . e . to bring R below 1 ) where little existed before . In developing world settings , implementing moderate quarantine programmes may be far more tractable than attaining near - perfect case isolation . Quarantining aids disease containment in two ways in our model . First , individuals in quarantine ( E m ) are assumed to proceed immediately to case isolation ( I m ) when they develop symptoms . Second , lower contact rates of quarantined individuals reduce transmission during the Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B ( 2003 ) incubation period ( only relevant when « Þ 0 ) . The dotted lines in figure 2 e show cases where no transmission occurs during incubation ( i . e . « = 0 ) ; the lines are shifted right - wards because this decreases R 0 by a small amount . Sensi - tivity to quarantining rate ( shown by the curvature of the lines ) is only slightly diminished , though , indicating that the effect of quarantine is due primarily to rapid isolation once symptoms develop . The maximum benefit of quarantining is realized when contact tracing begins on the first day following exposure ( rightmost solid line of each colour in figure 2 e ) . Rapid gains are made as q increases from zero , but this effect saturates at relatively low daily probabilities . This satu - ration occurs because the effect of quarantine is due prim - arily to faster case isolation , so the important quantity is the proportion of cases that are traced before they progress to symptoms . The proportion traced by the n th day is 1 2 ( 1 2 q ) n , which , for n ~ 5 ( the median incubation per - iod for SARS ) , approaches 1 quickly as q increases . If con - tact tracing is delayed such that no individuals are quarantined until 5 days following exposure ( leftmost lines in figure 2 e ) , the contribution of quarantine is consider - ably reduced even if q is high . This follows because 5 days is the median incubation period , so that half of the cases will already have developed symptoms before quarantining begins . Thus , it is essential for contact tracing to begin quickly , even if coverage is initially low : tracing just a few exposed contacts quickly can have a large effect . As for case isolation , the impact of delays is greater for higher transmission settings because unmanaged cases ( in this case , the untraced individuals who become symptomatic ) can do greater damage . Note that in settings where individuals remain quaran - tined for some portion of the symptomatic period instead of entering isolation immediately , quarantining aids con - trol efforts by reducing mixing rates during the early phase of the highly infectious period . This contribution to con - tainment is not included in our model , and would increase the impact of quarantine measures on epidemic growth . ( d ) Contact precautions Comparison of figure 2 c and 2 d shows the dramatic impact of hospital - wide contact precautions ( h ) , suggest - ing that measures to reduce transmission among the high - risk HCW population may be a powerful complement to case management . In figure 2 f , we directly compare the individual influence of all four transmission - reduction parameters ( k , g , r and h ) on R , under fixed probabilities of quarantine and isolation . Hospital - oriented measures ( h and k ) are the most potent by far . Hospital - wide pre - cautions ( h ) will always be stronger than specific case iso - lation measures ( k ) , since both factors contribute equally to reducing transmission by isolated patients whereas only h affects transmission by not - yet - identified HCW cases ( see figure 1 d ) . Reduction in HCW contact with the com - munity ( r ) has a weaker effect on R , and the effectiveness of quarantine ( g ) plays a minimal part ( though this will increase if transmission during incubation is higher , or in settings where individuals remain in quarantine through some of the highly infectious period ) . Contact precautions in the hospital setting ( h and k ) are thus critical to controlling a SARS outbreak successfully , 1984 J . O . Lloyd - Smith and others SARS transmission in a community and hospital 0 50 100 150 200 0 20 40 60 80 100 ( a ) ( c ) ( e ) ( d ) ( f ) ( b ) c u m u l a ti v e ca s e s days since initial case R = 2 . 0 R = 1 . 6 R = 1 . 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 p r ob a b ilit y o f c on t a i n m e n t reproductive number , R 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 . 0 P r ( c on t a i n m e n t ) R 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 0 transmission in isolation , d a il y p r ob a b ilit y o f i s o l a ti on , h c d a il y p r ob a b ilit y o f i s o l a ti on , h c = 1 h h k transmission in isolation , k k h g r transmission in isolation , k 4 . 0 3 . 0 2 . 5 2 . 0 R 0 = 1 . 5 R 0 = 5 . 0 R 0 = 5 . 0 5 . 0 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 = 0 . 5 B A 4 . 0 3 . 0 2 . 5 2 . 0 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 d a il y p r ob a b ilit y o f qu a r a n ti n e , q 4 . 0 3 . 0 2 . 5 2 . 0 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 varying parameter r e p r odu c ti v e nu m b e r , R Figure 2 . ( Caption opposite . ) owing to the deliberate importation of highly infectious symptomatic cases into hospitals . In electronic Appendix A , we test the robustness of this conclusion to changes in case - management scenarios and R 0 . As expected , the role of h and k in reducing R is diminished as hospitalization rates become very low . However , in every scenario con - Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B ( 2003 ) sidered the contribution to R owing to poor contact pre - cautions in the hospital ( h ! 1 ) is higher than that for any other failure of transmission control , particularly if screen - ing of HCWs for symptoms is poor . Some degree of hospital - wide contact precautions is thus essential to com - bating a SARS outbreak . SARS transmission in a community and hospital J . O . Lloyd - Smith and others 1985 Figure 2 . ( a ) Sample output from the model , showing cumulative numbers of cases . Five realizations of the stochastic model are shown for three values of R , to highlight variability in outcomes and the increased probability of fadeout for lower R . Several epidemics died out immediately and cannot be resolved from one another ( one for R = 2 , and two each for R = 1 . 6 and R = 1 . 2 ) . ( b ) The probability of epidemic containment ( as defined in the text ) as a function of R , for a population of 100 000 with a single initial case . We set « = 0 . 1 , and b was varied to give the desired R values , with no control measures imposed . Probabilities were calculated from 100 runs per R - value . ( c 2 e ) Threshold control policies for containment of the epidemic . Lines show R = 1 contours for scenarios where R 0 = 1 . 5 ( green ) , 2 ( blue ) , 2 . 5 ( red ) , 3 ( black ) , 4 ( light blue ) and 5 ( purple ) ; parameter regions to the left of the lines give R , 1 . Not all cases appear because some are off the scale . ( c , d ) The effect of varying h c ( the daily probability that symptomatic SARS cases in the community will be isolated ) and k ( the modification to transmission owing to case isolation procedures ) for h = 1 and h = 0 . 5 , respectively , on the threshold where R = 1 . From right to left , three lines of each colour show the effects of increasing delays in case isolation ( i . e . each symptomatic individual has no possibility of being isolated for 1 , 2 or 3 days , respectively , but a constant daily probability ( h c ) thereafter ) . Points in ( d ) marked A , B and ¤ are described in § 3b . We assume no quarantining ( q = 0 ) and a fixed strategy of case isolation of symptomatic hospital workers ( h h = 0 . 9 ) starting after their first day of symptoms . Other parameter values : r = 1 , « = 0 . 1 . ( e ) The extent to which contact tracing and quarantine can substitute for imperfect case isolation . Here , h = 0 . 5 , r = 1 , g = 0 . 5 , h c = 0 . 3 and h h = 0 . 9 , so the case isolation strategy is fixed ( and assumed to commence after the first day of symptoms ) , but the degree to which transmission is reduced by isolation ( k ) varies . From right to left , two solid lines of each colour represent 1 - day and 5 - day delays in contact tracing before quarantining begins . Solid lines show the case « = 0 . 1 , when transmission can occur during the incubation period . The dotted lines show the case « = 0 ( please note that in this case R 0 = 2 . 44 , 2 . 92 and 3 . 90 , rather than 2 . 5 , 3 and 4 ) . ( f ) Sensitivity of effective reproductive number R to the four transmission - control parameters . In all cases R 0 = 3 , « = 0 . 1 , q = 0 . 5 , h c = 0 . 3 and h h = 0 . 9 ; all parameters k , g , r , h were set to 0 . 5 , then varied one at a time . ( e ) Control strategies and delays in implementation Having assessed the importance of various control mea - sures alone or in pairs , we now consider the effects of inte - grated control strategies on SARS outbreaks . We treat a scenario with R 0 = 3 , similar to outbreaks in Hong Kong and Singapore . The median and 50 % confidence intervals ( i . e . the 25th and 75th percentile values ) of cumulative incidence indicate that such an epidemic is likely to spread rapidly through the population if uncontrolled ( figure 3 a , black lines ) . Control strategies emphasizing contact pre - cautions ( figure 3 a , green lines ) or quarantine and iso - lation ( figure 3 a , red lines ) both reduce the effective reproductive number to R = 1 . 5 , thereby substantially slowing the epidemic’s rate of growth and increasing the probability of containment . A combined strategy of con - tact precautions and case - management measures reduces R to below 1 ( R = 0 . 84 in this case—blue lines in figure 3 a ) , thereby leading to rapid containment of the outbreak Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B ( 2003 ) 0 50 100 150 200 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) time ( days ) c u m u l a ti v e nu m b e r o f ca s e s no control Pr ( cont . ) = 16 % ( 13 , 19 ) 1 : contact precautions = 21 % ( 17 , 24 ) 2 : quarantine and isolation = 23 % ( 19 , 26 ) 3 : combined measures = 85 % ( 82 , 88 ) c on t r o l i m p l e m e n t e d 0 50 100 150 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 delay in implementation ( days ) p r ob a b ilit y o f c on t a i n m e n t control precautions quarantine and isolation combined measures 0 50 100 150 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 delay in implementation ( days ) p r ob a b ilit y o f c on t a i n m e n t R 0 = 2 R 0 = 3 R 0 = 4 Figure 3 . ( Caption overleaf . ) in 85 % of simulations . Considering the elements of the next - generation matrix ( see figure 3 caption ) , we see that control is finally achieved because simultaneous lowering of k and h brought R ch and R hh below 1 . In all cases R cc , 1 , thus transmission involving the high - risk HCW pool is required to sustain the uncontrolled outbreaks . 1986 J . O . Lloyd - Smith and others SARS transmission in a community and hospital Figure 3 . ( a ) Increase in cumulative cases over 200 days , for an uncontrolled outbreak compared with three control strategies . For each day we plot the median value ( solid line ) and 25th and 75th percentiles ( dashed lines ) of 500 simulations . Probabilities of containment ( and 95 % confidence intervals ) for each scenario are shown in the legend . Control strategies are implemented 28 days after the first symptomatic case . In all instances « = 0 . 1 and R 0 = 3 . Strategy 1 ( contact precautions ) : h c = 0 . 3 , h h = 0 . 9 , h = 0 . 5 , r = 0 . 5 , k = 1 , g = 1 , q = 0 , yielding R = 1 . 5 once implemented ( { R cc , R ch , R hc , R hh } = ( 0 . 56 , 1 . 04 , 0 . 12 , 1 . 36 ) ) . Strategy 2 ( quarantine and isolation ) : h c = 0 . 9 , h h = 0 . 9 , h = 0 . 9 , r = 1 , k = 0 . 5 , g = 0 . 5 , q = 0 . 5 , yielding R = 1 . 5 ( { R cc , R ch , R hc , R hh } = ( 0 . 06 , 1 . 12 , 0 . 23 , 1 . 34 ) ) . Strategy 3 ( combined measures ) : h c = 0 . 9 , h h = 0 . 9 , h = 0 . 5 , r = 0 . 5 , k = 0 . 5 , g = 0 . 5 , q = 0 . 5 , yielding R = 0 . 84 ( { R cc , R ch , R hc , R hh } = ( 0 . 06 , 0 . 63 , 0 . 12 , 0 . 74 ) ) . ( b ) Probability of containing the outbreak as a function of increasing delay in implementing the control strategies , for the three strategies from figure 3 a . ( c ) Probability of containment versus delay in implementation for strategy 3 from figure 3 a , for R 0 values of 2 , 3 and 4 , which yield effective R values of 0 . 56 , 0 . 84 and 1 . 12 after control is implemented . Horizontal lines correspond to the probability of fadeout in the absence of control ( determined through simulation ) . In ( b ) and ( c ) , each probability ( p est ) is estimated from 500 simulations ; error bars represent 95 % confidence intervals on p est , given by 1 . 96 ´ [ p est ( 1 2 p est ) / 500 ] 1 / 2 . We consider the repercussions of delaying implemen - tation of these three control strategies ( figure 3 b ) . In all cases , a prompt public health response is critical to con - taining a SARS outbreak . This is the case particularly for strategies that do not reduce R to below 1 , as the possi - bility of stochastic fadeout ( see figure 2 b ) falls drastically if the disease has time to spread beyond the initial few cases . We also considered the impact of implementation delays on the most effective , combined strategy from fig - ure 3 a , in scenarios where R 0 equals 2 , 3 and 4 ( figure 3 c ) . Again , timing is critical , especially for the most - transmissible case when the effective R after control is greater than 1 . In all cases in figure 3 b , c , a window of opportunity exists at the beginning of a SARS epidemic when a given control strategy has the greatest chance of success . This critical period is lengthened by more effec - tive control strategies , lower - transmission settings , and , potentially , by a smaller hospital pool ( see electronic Appendix A ) . As implementation is delayed , the prob - ability of containing the epidemic is reduced to levels obtained in the absence of control ; for instance if R 0 = 3 , the weaker strategies lose their possible impact on contain - ment within a few weeks , and even the highly effective combined strategy must be implemented within two months to show any gains over doing nothing . Note that this result pertains strictly to epidemic containment ( as we define it ) , and is oriented toward minimizing overall morbidity and mortality . We emphasize that implemen - tation of stringent control measures is all the more essen - tial if containment has already been lost and a full - scale epidemic is in progress . ( f ) Preventing generalized community transmission The preceding discussion has focused on reducing R and containing the outbreak without regard to the distri - Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B ( 2003 ) bution of cases between the hospital and community . Pre - venting SARS from entering general circulation in the community is an important goal for at least two reasons . First , restricting the outbreak to close contacts of known cases and hospitals facilitates contact tracing and surveil - lance , and greatly reduces the probability of an uncon - trolled epidemic . Second , as evidenced by the recent furore in Toronto , reports of generalized community transmission can have dire economic impacts . We now consider measures directed at restricting trans - mission of SARS from the hospital back to the com - munity , in particular the effect of precautions taken by HCWs to reduce their community contacts during off - duty time , as measured by the parameter r . In figure 4 a we plot the daily incidence of new cases , broken down by the pathway of transmission , for one realization of a stochastic epidemic in which HCWs behave normally when off - duty ( r = 1 ) . The pie - chart inset shows the aver - age proportions of infections along each pathway for 500 such epidemics . Note that h - to - c transmission—describ - ing infections in the community caused by off - duty HCWs—accounts for 15 % of all infections in this scen - ario , and that a significant number of cases arise in the community each day . In figure 4 b we plot results for an identical scenario , except that the contact of HCWs with community members is reduced tenfold ( i . e . r = 0 . 1 ) . This control measure notably decreases the growth rate of the epidemic ( R = 1 . 4 instead of 1 . 6 , as in figure 4 a ) , and even more dramatically alters the patterns of spread : h - to - c transmission drops from 15 % to just 2 % of all infections . Furthermore , there is minimal ongoing trans - mission between community members—as R cc is virtually unchanged from figure 4 a ( see figure caption ) , we attri - bute this to the reduction in re - seeding from the HCW pool ( note that R hc drops from 0 . 23 to 0 . 02 owing to the decrease in r ) . Despite the relatively small contribution of r to the effective reproductive number ( figure 2 f ) , our results indi - cate that reducing HCW – community mixing can play a critical part in preventing the escape of SARS into the gen - eral population via the next - generation matrix element R hc . These results are obtained despite high case isolation probabilities for HCWs ( h c = 0 . 9 ) , which act indepen - dently of r to limit h - to - c transmission ( as case - isolated HCWs no longer contact the community ) . Within - hospital contact precautions , however , were not assumed to be highly effective ( h = 0 . 5 , k = 1 ) . Clearly , the importance of r diminishes when hospital conditions minimize infection of HCWs . 4 . GENERAL DISCUSSION Hospitals have been focal points of SARS transmission in all affected areas for which data are available . Our model examines a SARS outbreak in a community and its hospital , to identify trade - offs and interactions between the limited suite of control measures available for a novel viral disease transmitted by casual contact . We consider a range of R 0 values , reflecting variation between cultural settings , but focus on scenarios with R 0 ~ 3 in keeping with best estimates for the Hong Kong ( Riley et al . 2003 ) and Singapore ( Lipsitch et al . 2003 ) outbreaks . Certain results hold true regardless of the precise value of R 0 , and hence SARS transmission in a community and hospital J . O . Lloyd - Smith and others 1987 are relevant to SARS containment efforts everywhere . These robust conclusions also provide guidance for future outbreaks of emerging pathogens , particularly those exhib - iting a tendency for nosocomial spread . Our analysis identifies HCWs as critical targets for con - trol efforts . Their status is analogous to high - activity ‘core groups’ in sexually transmitted disease epidemics , but the deliberate importation of SARS cases from the back - ground community adds a twist to this established para - digm . HCWs are thus exposed to a local prevalence of much higher than that in the community - at - large , and as a result measures that reduce transmission within the hos - pital have the greatest impact on the reproductive number ( R ) of the epidemic . Hospital - wide precautions ( h ) have the strongest effect on R , followed by specific precautions for isolating SARS patients ( k ) . This finding is bolstered by the detailed account of Dwosh et al . ( 2003 ) of a comprehensive and effective response by a community hospital near Toronto . A dedi - cated SARS ward was established ( under negative air pressure to prevent aerosol spread to other parts of the hospital ) and private rooms were provided for each SARS patient ( also under negative pressure ) ; these measures cor - respond to reduced k in our model . Intensive barrier and contact precautions were practised by all hospital staff at all times ( corresponding to h ¿ 1 ) . Hospital staff were screened at least twice daily for SARS symptoms , increas - ing h h . Further measures included voluntary quarantine of all staff presumed exposed , restriction of visitor and patient numbers , and prevention of patient or staff trans - fers to other institutions . The hospital outbreak was con - tained , without a single further infection after contact precautions were imposed . Such a thorough response is unattainable in many regions , particularly when facilities for respiratory isolation are not available . Fortunately , measures that reduce h are simple and inexpensive—masks , gowns and hand - washing significantly reduced transmission of SARS to HCWs in Hong Kong ( Seto et al . 2003 ) . For a broad range of scen - arios our model indicates that high values of h ( i . e . poor precautions ) contribute more to epidemic growth than any other parameter , thus some degree of hospital - wide con - tact precautions is essential to combating a SARS out - break . Whenever within - hospital measures are insufficient to stop infection of HCWs , however , it becomes critical to reduce leakage of the infection back into the community . Reducing contacts of off - duty HCWs with community members can accomplish this goal , but can produce the perverse effect that good HCW precautions lead to a higher proportion of SARS cases being HCWs . This results not from a higher incidence among HCWs , but from preventing infection from escaping back into the general community . HCWs in Hanoi effectively sealed themselves off from the outside world , resulting in the fastest containment of any significant SARS outbreak but also one in which 63 % of cases were HCWs ( Reilley et al . 2003 ; Twu et al . 2003 ) . Our model identifies the minimum case - management measures required to contain SARS outbreaks in different settings . For R 0 values reported for Hong Kong and Sin - gapore we show that control is assured only if case iso - lation reduces transmission by at least a factor of four and the mean onset - to - hospitalization time is less than 3 days . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B ( 2003 ) There is a threshold in the interaction between hospitaliz - ation rates and isolation efficacy , beyond which further improvements contributed virtually nothing to contain - ment . This highlights the need to understand the reasons why particular control strategies are failing before rushing to improve control in any way possible . Contact tracing and quarantine can compensate to some extent for inad - equate isolation facilities , making an increasingly signifi - cant contribution as R 0 rises . The impact of quarantine is due primarily to rapid isolation of cases once symptoms develop , and we show that it is essential for contact tracing to begin immediately , even if coverage is initially low , since tracing just a few exposed contacts quickly can have a large effect . In general , our results indicate that delays in initiating quarantine or isolation undermine the effectiveness of other control measures , with increasing impact for greater R 0 . More harmful still is delaying the implementation of control after emergence of the first case ; this is an acknowledged hazard from earlier disease outbreaks ( Keeling et al . 2001 ) . For particular control strategies , our model identifies critical windows of opportunity beyond which measures lose almost all ability to contribute to con - tainment . The original SARS outbreak in Guangdong province , not officially acknowledged for over five months , serves as a tragic example of the hazards of delaying dis - ease control efforts . Epidemic modellers must always approximate the social structures of interest , and as with all models the approach presented here has potential shortcomings . First , within the hospital and community pools mixing is assumed to be random . This assumption ignores pockets of the popu - lation that do not share common contacts , but is reason - able if attention is restricted to low prevalence levels such as below 1 % , as in our analysis . Models with network structure tend to predict lower initial rates of spread , owing to correlations in infection status that develop between neighbours , but they are better suited to diseases transmitted by intimate contact ( such as needle - sharing or sex ) or static hosts . When contacts are dynamic and transmission more casual , these correlations decay and system behaviour approaches the random - mixing case ( Keeling 1999 ) . Household or network - structured models allow a direct treatment of contact tracing , rather than the ad hoc approach used here , but at the cost of additional parameters that are difficult to estimate . Second , the observed number of secondary cases per index case of SARS has been very heterogeneous , and alternative modes of transmission have been postulated ( including airborne , fomite and faecal – oral spread ( Wenzel & Edmond 2003 ; Riley et al . 2003 ) ) . So - called superspreading events ( SSEs ) , in which single individuals generated an extraordinary number of secondary cases , played an important part in the early evolution of several SARS outbreaks ( Riley et al . 2003 ; Leo et al . 2003 ; Lipsitch et al . 2003 ) . Whether SSEs are rare epidemiolog - ical exceptions or represent the tail of a highly overdis - persed distribution is subject to debate ( Dye & Gay 2003 ) . In our model , heterogeneity in secondary cases arises owing to stochastic effects , but SARS transmission is assumed to be a homogeneous process ( in that the base - line transmission rate is represented by a single parameter , b ) . Lipsitch et al . ( 2003 ) found that increasing variance 1988 J . O . Lloyd - Smith and others SARS transmission in a community and hospital 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 5 10 15 20 25 ( a ) ( b ) time ( days ) nu m b e r o f i n f ec ti on s c – to – c c – to – c c – to – h c – to – h h – to – h h – to – h h – to – c h – to – c 13 % 15 % 15 % 57 % = 1 r = 0 . 1 r 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 5 10 15 20 25 time ( days ) nu m b e r o f i n f ec ti on s 4 % 4 % 2 % 90 % Figure 4 . Importance of HCW mixing restrictions in preventing SARS spread to the community . ( a ) and ( b ) show two stochastic epidemics with identical disease parameters and control measures , differing only in HCW - community mixing precautions ( r = 1 in ( a ) and r = 0 . 1 in ( b ) ) . Daily incidence is shown , broken down by route of transmission within or between the hospital and community pools . Inset , pie - charts show average contributions of the different routes of infection for 500 stochastic simulations of each epidemic ( standard errors for these proportions were estimated by jack - knifing the simulation results , but in all cases were less than one percentage point ) . Note that c - to - h transmission includes hospitalized community members infecting the HCWs caring for them . R 0 = 3 in both cases , and other parameters are from Scenario 1 of figure 3 : « = 0 . 1 , k = 1 , h = 0 . 5 . q = 0 , h c = 0 . 3 , h h = 0 . 9 , yielding R = 1 . 60 in ( a ) ( { R cc , R ch , R hc , R hh } = ( 0 . 55 , 1 . 05 , 0 . 23 , 1 . 37 ) ) and R = 1 . 39 in ( b ) ( { R cc , R ch , R hc , R hh } = ( 0 . 57 , 1 . 04 , 0 . 02 , 1 . 36 ) ) . The control policy is implemented 14 days into the outbreak . in the distribution of secondary cases leads to a reduced probability of disease invasion . As we have not explicitly incorporated such heterogeneity in our model , our assess - ments of containment probabilities will be conservative to the extent that SSEs are a normal part of SARS epidemi - ology . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B ( 2003 ) Third , the hospital pool is considered to include HCWs and SARS cases , but other patients are not modelled explicitly . Infection of other patients has played a signifi - cant part in some outbreaks , though it will be less important in hospitals that eliminate non - essential pro - cedures while SARS remains a significant risk ( Dwosh et al . 2003 ; Maunder et al . 2003 ) , and for regions that have opened dedicated SARS hospitals or wards . Future work on hospital - community SARS outbreaks could incorpor - ate patient dynamics , and could also evaluate the effect of staff reductions ( Maunder et al . 2003 ) or of mass quaran - tine of hospital staff following diagnosis of the first case ( as reported by Dwosh et al . 2003 ) . Some caution is required in identifying R 0 in our model with that obtained from incidence data for particular out - breaks . As discussed already , reproductive numbers derived from data inevitably incorporate some degree of control owing to routine healthcare practices . We calcu - late R 0 from its formal definition , however , as the expected number of secondary cases in the absence of control measures ( i . e . without hospitalization or any contact precautions ) . While it is uncertain whether routine health practices help or hinder the spread of SARS , we suspect that estimates of R 0 under our strict definition would be somewhat higher than those reported for Hong Kong and Singapore ( which incorporate some measures , such as hospitalization , from the outset ) . Of course this will depend on the details of non - specific healthcare practices in each setting , on assumptions regarding their effect on SARS spread , and on how R 0 is calculated ( particularly the treatment of SSEs ) . The most successful examples of quickly controlling SARS outbreaks ( e . g . Hanoi and Singapore ) show com - mon features of stringent within - hospital contact pre - cautions , and success in preventing leakage of infection from hospitals back to the general community . The dif - ficulty that Toronto health officials faced in containing their SARS outbreak , meanwhile , testifies to the disease’s potential for spread despite the implementation of inten - sive control strategies . Unprecedented human mobility means that emerging infectious diseases can rapidly impact public health around the world . To contain out - breaks of SARS , or other pathogens for which vaccines or treatment are not available , requires aggressive case man - agement measures complemented by contact precautions to reduce transmission in healthcare settings . The authors acknowledge discussions with A . Reingold , M . Coffee , and C . Bauch , and useful comments from C . Dye , B . Williams and an anonymous reviewer . Financial support was provided by a Berkeley Fellowship ( J . L . - S . ) , the Miller Insti - tute for Basic Sciences at U . C . Berkeley ( A . P . G . ) , and NIH - NIDA grant no . R01 - DA10135 ( W . M . G . ) . REFERENCES Booth , C . M . ( and 20 others ) 2003 Clinical features and short - term outcomes of 144 patients with SARS in the greater Toronto area . J . Am . Med . Assoc . 289 , 1 – 9 . Cyranoski , D . & Abbott , A . 2003 Apartment complex holds clues to pandemic potential of SARS . Nature 423 , 3 – 4 . Diekmann , O . & Heesterbeek , J . A . P . 2000 Mathematical epi - demiology of infectious diseases . New York : Wiley . SARS transmission in a community and hospital J . O . Lloyd - Smith and others 1989 Donnelly , C . A . ( and 18 others ) 2003 Epidemiological deter - minants of spread of causal agent of severe acute respiratory syndrome in Hong Kong . The Lancet 361 , 1761 – 1766 . Drazen , J . M . 2003 Case clusters of the severe acute respiratory syndrome . N . Engl . J . Med . 348 , e6 – 7 , May 15 2003 . Online publication date at www . nejm . org 31 June 2003 . ( DOI 10 . 1056 / NEJMe030062 . ) Dwosh , H . A . , Hong , H . H . , Austgarden , D . , Herman , S . & Schabas , R . 2003 Identification and containment of an out - break of SARS in a community hospital . Can . Med . Assoc . J . 16811 , Online 1 – 6 . Dye , C . & Gay , N . 2003 Modeling the SARS epidemic . Science 300 , 1884 – 1885 . Ferguson , N . M . , Galvani , A . P . & Bush , R . M . 2003 Ecologi - cal and immunological determinants of influenza evolution . Nature 422 , 428 – 433 . Galvani , A . P . , Lei , X . & Jewell , N . P . 2003 Severe acute res - piratory syndrome : temporal stability and geographic vari - ation in case - fatality rates and doubling times . Emerg . Infect . Dis . See http : / / www . cdc . gov / ncidod / EID / vol9no8 / 03 - 0334 . htm . Hethcote , H . W . 2000 The mathematics of infectious diseases . SIAM Rev . 42 , 599 – 653 . Hong Kong Department of Health 2003 Situation report on severe acute respiratory syndrome , 9 June 2003 . See http : / / www . info . gov . hk / dh / new / 2003 / 03 - 06 - 09e . htm . Keeling , M . J . 1999 The effects of local spatial structure on epidemiological invasions . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B 266 , 859 – 867 . ( DOI 10 . 1098 / rspb . 1999 . 0716 . ) Keeling , M . J . , Woolhouse , M . E . J . , Shaw , D . J . , Matthews , L . , Chase - Topping , M . , Haydon , D . T . , Cornell , S . J . , Kap - pey , J . , Wilesmith , J . & Grenfell , B . T . 2001 Dynamics of the 2001 UK foot and mouth epidemic : stochastic dispersal in a heterogeneous landscape . Science 294 , 813 – 817 . Lee , N . ( and 13 others ) 2003 A major outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome in Hong Kong . New Eng . J . Med . 348 , 1986 – 1994 . Leo , Y . S . ( and 20 others ) 2003 Severe acute respiratory syn - drome—Singapore , 2003 . Morbidity Mortality Wkly Rep . 52 , 405 – 411 . Lipsitch , M . ( and 11 others ) 2003 Transmission dynamics and Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B ( 2003 ) control of severe acute respiratory syndrome . Science 300 , 1966 – 1970 . Mandavilli , A . 2003 SARS epidemic unmasks age - old quaran - tine conundrum . Nature Med . 9 , 487 . Maunder , R . , Hunter , J . , Vincent , L . , Bennett , J . , Peladean , N . , Leszcz , M . , Sadavoy , J . , Verhaeghe , L . M . , Steinberg , R . & Mazzulli , T . 2003 The immediate psychological and occupational impact of the 2003 SARS outbreak in a teach - ing hospital . Can . Med . Assoc . J . 168 , 1245 – 1251 . Peiris , J . S . M . ( and 15 others ) 2003 Clinical progression and viral load in a community outbreak of coronavrius - associated SARS pneumonia : a prospective study . The Lancet 361 , 1767 – 1772 . Reilley , B . , Van Herp , M . , Sermand , D . & Dentico , N . 2003 SARS and Carlo Urbani . New Eng . J . Med . 348 , 1951 – 1952 . Riley , S . ( and 19 others ) 2003 Transmission dynamics of the aetiological agent of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome SARS in Hong Kong : the impact of public health inter - ventions . Science 300 , 1961 – 1966 . Seto , W . H . , Tsang , D . , Yung , R . W . , Ching , T . Y . , Ng , T . K . , Ho , M . , Ho , L . M . & Peiris , J . S . 2003 Effectiveness of pre - cautions against droplets and contact in prevention of noso - comial transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome SARS . The Lancet 361 , 1519 – 1520 . Twu , S . - J . ( and 12 others ) 2003 Control measures for severe acute respiratory syndrome SARS in Taiwan . Emerg . Infect Dis . See http : / / www . cdc . gov / ncidod / eid / vol9no6 / 03 - 0283 . htm . Wenzel , R . P . & Edmond , M . B . 2003 Managing SARS amidst uncertainty . New Eng . J . Med . 348 , 1947 – 1948 . World Health Organization 2003 China daily report of SARS cases . Report prepared by the Department of International Cooperation of the Ministry of Health , China : World Health Organization . See http : / / www . who . int / csr / sars / china2003 _ 06 _ 11 . pdf . As this paper exceeds the maximum length normally permitted , the authors have agreed to contribute to production costs . Visit http : / / www . pubs . royalsoc . ac . uk to see an electronic appendix to this paper . This is an electronic appendix to the paper by Lloyd - Smith et al . 2003 Curtailing transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome within a community and its hospital . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B 270 , 1979 – 1989 . ( DOI 10 . 1098 / rspb . 2003 . 2481 . ) Electronic appendices are refereed with the text . However , no attempt has been made to impose a uniform editorial style on the electronic appendices . Electronic appendix A Sensitivity to population size We tested the sensitivity of key model results to both absolute and relative changes in pool sizes . Figure S1 shows results obtained when both pools are reduced ten - fold in size ( i . e . for a HCW pool of 300 individuals , and community pool of 10 , 000 ) . Comparing these figures to those in the main text , we see that changes in system scale do not qualitatively alter our findings . This is not surprising , since we treat contact rates as density - independent and restrict our attention to the invasion phase when overall prevalence is less than 1 % . It is less clear whether our results will be sensitive to changes in the relative size of the two pools , since this will alter the weighting of different transmission pathways . In Figure S2 we present the same analyses when the HCW pool contains 1000 individuals ( compared to 3000 throughout the main text ) , and community pool is still 100 , 000 individuals . Results pertaining to the reproductive number ( Figs S2A - B ) are not significantly changed , again due to our assumption of density - independent contact rates . When the evolving epidemic is simulated , though , slight differences emerge . A smaller HCW pool seems to slightly extend the window of time within which the combined control strategy contributes to outbreak containment ( Fig . S2C ) , perhaps due to slower initial spread . This effect is subtle but persists in all our simulations . The possibility that smaller hospital size reduces the risk of outbreaks is intriguing and has implications for health policy , and merits further investigation . In Figure S2D we see some changes in proportional routes of transmission , but the essential result remains that reducing HCW - community contacts can prevent leakage of the infection from the hospital . Robustness of transmission - reduction results A major finding of this study is that hospital - oriented contact precautions , such as wearing masks and gowns at all times and respiratory isolation of identified patients , are the most potent measures for combating an incipient SARS outbreak . Figures S1B and S2B show that this conclusion is robust to absolute and relative changes in pool sizes . We now explore the sensitivity of this result to different case management scenarios and R 0 values , by plotting analogues of Figure 2F to show the effect of each transmission - reduction parameter on R . We first consider a scenario with no quarantining ( Fig . S3A ) , which leads to a greater proportion of symptomatic individuals spending their initial days of symptoms mixing freely with the community . This reduces the contribution of hospital - based transmission to R , and accordingly we see a smaller relative contribution of η and κ to determining the effective reproductive number . Reinforcing this point , a scenario with less efficient case isolation and no quarantining ( Fig . S3B ) exhibits still weaker dependence of R on the values of η and κ , and thus greater relative sensitivity to ρ . The three measures are almost equivalent as the parameters approach zero—we see that stopping HCW - community transmission ( ρ→ 0 ) has a roughly equal effect to perfect case isolation ( κ→ 0 ) and almost as great an effect as eliminating within - hospital transmission entirely ( η→ 0 ) . Strikingly , though , note that the cost of poor hospital - wide contact precautions ( η→ 1 ) is much greater now that the rate of isolating symptomatic HCWs is low . Indeed , the adverse effect of η→ 1 is always higher than any other failure of transmission - control measures . Some degree of hospital - wide contact precautions is thus essential to combating a SARS outbreak . Finally , considerating the original case management strategy but raising R 0 to 5 ( Fig . S3C ) shows that the overall transmissibility acts only to scale the lines from Figure 2F , but does not alter their relation to one another . Model equations For ease of presentation , the following equations show a deterministic analogue of our model . All terms shown here as products of a probability and a state variable are generated in our simulations by drawing binomial random variables . The community pool is described as follows , where all variables and parameters are as described in Figure 1 of the main text : ( ) ( ) [ ] [ ] * 5 , 5 , , , 1 , 1 , , 3 , 3 , 2 , 2 , 3 , 1 , 1 , 2 , , 10 1 1 , 1 , 1 1 , 1 , ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 ( 5 , 4 ) ( ) 1 ) ( 1 ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) 1 ( ) ( ) 1 ) ( 1 ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) 1 ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) 1 ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) 1 ( 10 , . . . , 2 ) ( ) 1 ) ( 1 ( ) 1 ( ) ( ) ( exp 1 ) 1 ( ) ( ) ( exp ) 1 ( t rI t Ir t R t R j t I h r t I h r t I t I h r t I h t I t I h t I t E q p t I i t E q p t E t S t t E t S t t S m c c c j c j c j c j c j c c c c c c c c c i c i i i c i c i i i c c c c c c c + + = + = − − + − = + − − + − = + − = + − = + = − − = + − − = + − = + − − = − − − ∑ λ λ Daily probabilities of quarantine ( q i ) or hospitalization ( h c , i ) are subscripted by i because they can vary between subcompartments ( in the analysis presented here they vary only between 0 and a fixed value , to describe delays in contact tracing or case identification ) . The final term in the R c ( t + 1 ) equation is marked with an asterisk because only those individuals in I m , 5 who were originally from the community pool ( i . e . community members who have been hospitalized ) move to the R c pool upon their recovery . Individuals in I m , 5 who began in the HCW pool progress to R h upon recovery ( indicated below with another asterisk ) . The equations for the HCW pool are : ( ) ( ) [ ] [ ] * 5 , 5 , , , 1 , 1 , , 3 , 3 , 2 , 2 , 3 , 1 , 1 , 2 , , 10 1 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 , ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 ( 5 , 4 ) ( ) 1 ) ( 1 ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) 1 ( ) ( ) 1 ) ( 1 ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) 1 ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) 1 ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) 1 ( 10 , . . . , 2 ) ( ) 1 ( ) 1 ( ) ( ) ( exp 1 ) 1 ( ) ( ) ( exp ) 1 ( t rI t Ir t R t R j t I h r t I h r t I t I h r t I h t I t I h t I t E q p t I i t E p t E t S t t E t S t t S m h h h j h j h j h j h j h h h h h h h h h i h i i i h i h i i h h h h h h h + + = + = − − + − = + − − + − = + − = + − = + = − = + − − = + − = + − − = − − ∑ λ λ As described in the caption of Figure 1 ( main text ) , the total hazard rates are λ c = [ β ( I c + ε E c ) + ρβ ( I h + ε E h ) + γβε E m ] / N c and λ h = ρλ c + ηβ ( I h + ε E h + κ I m ) / N h , where E j and I j represent sums over all sub - compartments in the incubating and symptomatic classes for pool j . The effective number of individuals in the hospital mixing pool is N h = S h + E h + I h + R h + I m , and in the community mixing pool is N c = S c + E c + I c + R c + ρ ( S h + E h + I h + R h ) . In simulations , the number of infection events in each timestep is determined by random draws from binomial ( S j , 1 − exp ( −λ j ) ) distributions ( j = c , h ) . Finally , the equations describing the case - managed pool ( quarantined and case - isolated individuals ) are as follows : [ ] [ ] [ ] [ ] [ 5 , 4 ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) ( ) ( ) 1 ( 10 , . . . , 2 ) ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) 1 ( , , , , , 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 , , 1 , 3 , 3 , 3 , 3 , 2 , 2 , 2 , 2 , 2 , 3 , 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 , 2 , , , 10 1 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 1 , = + + − + + + = + + + − + + + = + + + = + + = + ] = + − = + − − − − − = − − − − ∑ j t I t I h t I h r t I t I h t I h r t I t I t I h t I h r t I t I h t I h t I t I t I h t I h t I t E t E q p t I i t E t E q p t E j m j h j h j c j c j m j h j h j c j c j m m h h c c m h h c c m m h h c c m i m i c i i i m i m i c i i i m Calculation of the reproductive number The progression of each infected individual through incubating and symptomatic stages of the disease , and possibly through case management stages , can be described by a stochastic transition matrix . When the removed state is included , the infectious lifetime of each individual can be represented as an absorbing Markov chain ( where “absorption” corresponds to the end of the infectious period ) . For a given set of transition probabilities ( i . e . disease progression parameters and probabilities of entering case management from each disease stage ) , the expected residence time in each pre - absorption stage can be calculated from the fundamental matrix of the Markov chain ( Caswell 2000 ) . Since case management probabilities may vary between the community and hospital pools , we define d j ( for j = c or h ) as a vector of expected residence times in the states ( E j , I j , E m , I m ) , i . e . the length of time a “typical” individual infected in pool j will spend in each of those disease classes . We the define b jk as vectors of transmission rates from pool j to pool k for each disease state . In particular , from the above description we have b cc = ( εβ / N c , β / N c , γεβ / N c , 0 ) , b ch = ( ρεβ / N c , ρβ / N c , ργεβ / N c , κηβ / N h ) , b hc = ( ρεβ / N c , ρβ / N c , γεβ / N c , 0 ) , and b hh = ( ρ 2 εβ / N c + ηεβ / N h , ρ 2 β / N c + ηβ / N h , ργεβ / N c , κηβ / N h ) . The two terms in the first two elements of b hh represent community and workplace exposure risks for healthcare workers , respectively . The factors of ρ 2 reflect that community transmission between HCWs depends on the community - contact precautions of both HCWs . For a susceptible individual in pool k , the total hazard of infection due to the index case is thus λ jk = d j ⋅ b jk , so the probability of exposure is 1 − exp ( − λ jk ) . If there are S k susceptibles in pool k , then the expected number of secondary infections in pool k due to an index case who is infected in pool j is R jk = [ 1 − exp ( − λ jk ) ] S k . We then define the next - generation matrix :   = hh hc ch cc R R R R R where the individual elements R ij give insight into the potential for disease spread within and between the two pools . If R is primitive , then its dominant eigenvalue is the reproductive number for the entire system ( Diekmann & Heesterbeek 2000 ) . When the population is entirely susceptible and no control measures are in place this is the basic reproductive number , R 0 ; otherwise it is the effective reproductive number R . Figure 2A of the main text shows the probability of epidemic containment as a function of the reproductive number , which displays the qualitative behaviour expected for a stochastic epidemic : the probability is nearly one for R < 1 , then diminishes as R increases ( but remains significantly greater than zero up to R ~ 5 ) . Incubation and symptomatic periods The incubation period is modeled with ten subcompartments as shown in Figure 1B of the main text . Each sub - compartment represents one day , and an individual in their i th day since infection has a probability p i of progressing to the symptomatic phase of the disease . The number of sub - compartments and values of p i were chosen to be consistent with clinical data from 42 patients in Toronto with a single known contact with a SARS case . For these cases , the mean incubation period was 5 days , with a median of 4 days and a range from 2 to 10 days ( Health Canada 2003 ) ; similar numbers are reported for 21 point - exposure cases in Singapore ( Leo et al . 2003 ) . We selected the most parsimonious model which was consistent with these data : 10 subcompartments with p i interpolated linearly from p 1 = 0 to p 10 = 1 . Figure S4A shows the distribution of incubation periods obtained from this model , which has a mean period of 4 . 5 days , a median period of 4 days , and a range from 2 to 10 days . Other researchers have presented a distribution of incubation periods which includes longer durations ( Donnelly et al . 2003 ) , but experts assembled by the World Health Organization continue to assert a maximum incubation period of 10 days ( World Health Organization 2003b ) . The symptomatic period is modeled with two disease - age subcompartments and three disease - stage subcompartments . After each day individuals automatically progress through the age sub - compartments , and progress through the stage subcompartments with probability r . We include the initial disease - age subcompartments to allow assessment of the importance of beginning case isolation following day 1 , 2 or 3 of symptoms . We assume that individuals are symptomatic for at least 5 days . From clinical reports of 23 patient histories we estimated that the distribution of symptomatic period has a mean of 16 . 2 days ( with standard deviation of 7 . 9 days ) and a median 16 days ( Poutanen et al . 2003 , Tsang et al . 2003 ) . Figure S4B shows the distribution of symptomatic periods obtained from our model ( with r = 0 . 21 ) , which has a mean period of 16 . 3 days , a median period of 15 days , and a standard deviation of 7 . 3 days . While our modelled distribution is roughly consistent with data , we note that estimation of the symptomatic period poses a difficult challenge . We are seeking to capture the period of high infectiousness ( which we call the symptomatic period to distinguish it from the incubation period , during which we assume individuals may be slightly infectious ) , but this is difficult to gauge because infectiousness is not readily observable . Our estimated symptomatic period—or highly infectious period—falls between those used in the two first modelling analyses of SARS outbreaks . Riley et al ( 2003 ) use hospitalization periods as a surrogate , and present a range of mean symptomatic periods from 27 to 41 days . ( These include a symptomatic , not - yet - hospitalized period with mean duration of 3 . 67 - 4 . 84 days , and a symptomatic , hospitalized period with mean duration of 23 . 5 or 35 . 9 days depending on clinical outcome . Transmission by hospitalized individuals is reduced by a factor of 0 . 2 , analogous to our κ . ) Lipsitch et al ( 2003 ) do not model the symptomatic period directly but instead assume an “average duration of infectiousness” of 5 days ( range : 1 - 5 days ) . This is markedly shorter than the symptomatic periods used in our model ( and that of Riley et al ) , but the difference results from their assumption that case isolation is absolutely effective , so an individual’s “infectious period” lasts only until he or she is hospitalized . In contrast , our approach is to keep the biological phenomenon of infectiousness separate from the control - mediated phenomenon of transmission , leading to a longer total symptomatic period with transmission weighted by control parameters depending on case management practices . Our model can still be consistent with the serial interval data presented by Lipsitch et al . ( The serial interval is the time from onset of symptoms in an index case to onset of symptoms in a subsequent case infected by the index case . If the transmission rate is constant and the population is well - mixed , this equals the sum of the mean incubation period and the mean infectious period . The serial interval for SARS in Singapore before full - scale control policies were implemented was 10 days—subtracting the mean incubation period of 5 days yields the estimated 5 - day infectious period . ) Most simply , an exponentially - distributed period of uniform infectiousness with a mean duration of 5 days ( as modelled by Lipsitch et al ) could be approximated in our model by setting h c = 0 . 2 and κ = 0 , though in our model the tail of the distribution would be truncated by disease recovery . A more likely depiction of events in Singapore would be a higher hospitalization rate and non - zero κ , such that the weighted mean of all infectious periods ( before and after case isolation ) was 5 days . By separating the biological and control - mediated aspects of transmission , our model naturally portrays this or any other control scenario . We therefore wish to characterize the natural history of the disease accurately . The duration of hospitalization is a plausible surrogate for the symptomatic period , but for a disease as pathogenic as SARS it is likely to be an overestimate , since patients must recover from severe lung damage and are not discharged from hospital until several days after all symptoms are resolved ( Lee et al 2003 ) . The most direct measurement of SARS infectious periods are the viral load measurements of Peiris et al ( 2003 ) , which show that mean viremia ( for 75 patients ) peaks roughly 10 days after onset of symptoms , and after 15 days has dropped below its level after 5 days of symptoms . This is attributed to onset of IgG seroconversion , which begins as early as 10 days after onset of symptoms ( with mean of 20 days ) . These results indicate that symptomatic periods in our model , as shown in Figure S4B , probably characterize the period of high infectiousness quite adequately . Should there be any inaccuracies , our strategy of considering scenarios with different values of R 0 would largely buffer the impact on our results , since reproductive numbers estimated for particular outbreaks can be compared to model epidemics with the same net growth rate . This would entail a slight skew in parameter values : for instance , if we had underestimated the duration of infectiousness , for each R 0 scenario we would overestimate the baseline transmission rate , β . Simulations would show slightly faster epidemic growth than is justified , and hence slightly greater reductions in efficacy due to delaying control measures . A change in β has no effect on the relative importance of different routes of transmission , however , or on the impacts of control measures focused on contact precautions versus case management . The major findings of this study therefore should be robust to misestimation of the distribution of symptomatic periods . References not found in main text Caswell , H . ( 2001 ) Matrix Population Models , 2 nd ed . Sinauer , Sunderland MA . Health Canada ( 2003 ) Summary of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome ( SARS ) Cases : Canada and International : April 29 , 2003 . Accessed online at http : / / www . hc - sc . gc . ca / pphb - dgspsp / sars - sras / eu - ae / sars20030429 _ e . html Poutanen , S . M ( and 19 others ) ( 2003 ) Identification of severe acute respiratory syndrome in Canada . N Engl J Med 348 : 1995 - 2005 . Tsang , K . W . ( and 15 others ) ( 2003 ) A cluster of cases of severe acute respiratory syndrome in Hong Kong . N Engl J Med 348 : 1977 - 1985 . World Health Organization ( 2003b ) Update 58 - First global consultation on SARS epidemiology , travel recommendations for Hebei Province ( China ) , situation in Singapore . Accessed online at http : / / www . who . int / csr / sars / archive / 2003 _ 05 _ 17 / en / Figure captions – Supplementary Information Figure 5 Testing sensitivity to the absolute size of the system . Selected results are presented for both HCW and community pools ten - fold smaller than in the main text ( HCW pool has 300 individuals and community pool has 10 , 000 individuals ) . For each figure , all parameter values other than population sizes are as described in the main text . ( A ) Analogue of Fig . 2D . ( B ) Analogue of Fig . 2F . ( C ) Analogue of Fig . 3B . ( D ) Analogues of pie - charts from Figs . 4A - B . Figure 6 Testing sensitivity to the relative size of the HCW pool . Results are presented for a HCW pool of 1000 individuals ( compared to 3000 throughout the main text ) , and community pool of 100 , 000 individuals . Again , all other parameters are as given in the main text . ( A ) Analogue of Fig . 2D . ( B ) Analogue of Fig . 2F . ( C ) Analogue of Fig . 3B . ( D ) Analogues of pie - charts from Figs . 4A - B . Figure 7 Robustness of conclusions regarding sensitivity of R to transmission - reduction parameters . All details are as given in Fig . 2F except as noted . ( A ) No quarantine : q = 0 . ( B ) No quarantine , and limited case isolation : h c = 0 . 1 , h h = 0 . 1 , q = 0 . ( C ) Case management as in Fig . 2F , but R 0 = 5 . Also note Figs . S1B and S2B , which show the insensitivity of these results to absolute and relative size of the two pools . Figure 8 Distribution of ( A ) incubation periods and ( B ) symptomatic periods used in the model , each generated from 10 , 000 Monte Carlo simulations using the stage progression rules outlined in the text . Figure 5 ( A ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 Transmission in isolation , κ D a il y p r obab ili t y o f i s o l a t i on , h c η = 0 . 5 ( B ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 Varying parameter R ep r odu c t i v e nu m be r , R γ ρ κ η ( C ) 0 50 100 150 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 Delay in implementation ( days ) P r obab ili t y o f c on t a i n m en t Control precautions Quarantine and isolation Combined measures ( D ) c −to− c 18 % c −to− h 17 % h −to− c 15 % h −to− h 50 % c −to− c 5 % c −to− h 5 % h −to− c 2 % h −to− h 88 % ρ = 1 ρ = 0 . 1 Figure 6 ( A ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 Transmission in isolation , κ D a il y p r obab ili t y o f i s o l a t i on , h c η = 0 . 5 ( B ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 Varying parameter R ep r odu c t i v e nu m be r , R γ ρ κ η ( C ) 0 50 100 150 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 Delay in implementation ( days ) P r obab ili t y o f c on t a i n m en t Control precautions Quarantine and isolation Combined measures ( D ) c −to− c 17 % c −to− h 19 % h −to− c 14 % h −to− h 50 % c −to− c 10 % c −to− h 10 % h −to− c 2 % h −to− h 78 % ρ = 1 ρ = 0 . 1 Figure 7 ( A ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 8 Varying parameter R ep r odu c t i v e nu m be r , R γ ρ κ η ( B ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 8 2 2 . 2 2 . 4 2 . 6 Varying parameter R ep r odu c t i v e nu m be r , R κ γ ρ η ( C ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 Varying parameter R ep r odu c t i v e nu m be r , R γ ρ κ η Figure 8 ( A ) 2 4 6 8 10 0 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 Incubation period ( days ) P r opo r t i on o f c a s e s ( B ) 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 0 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 Symptomatic period ( days ) P r opo r t i on o f c a s e s