Design Research by Proxy : using Children as Researchers to gain Contextual Knowledge about User Experience . Fenne van Doorn TU Delft - Studiolab Landbergstraat 15 , 2618 CE Delft , the Netherlands f . a . p . vandoorn @ tudelft . nl + 31 ( 0 ) 15 - 2781685 Pieter Jan Stappers TU Delft - Studiolab Landbergstraat 15 , 2618 CE Delft , the Netherlands P . J . Stappers @ tudelft . nl Mathieu Gielen TU Delft - Studiolab Landbergstraat 15 , 2618 CE Delft , the Netherlands M . A . Gielen @ tudelft . nl ABSTRACT This paper explores the use of participants as research collaborators in the domain of contextual user research . In participatory - and co - design , users participate increasingly early in the design process . When conducting user research in order to gain contextual knowledge about the lives , experiences and wishes of users , collaborators can be of help in setting up , conducting research and analyzing the data . A case study was conducted to investigate if and how children are able to perform as research collaborators . Children conducted interviews with other participants , and in doing increased their knowledge about people close to them , and about themselves . The gained insights were personal and the used personas proved to be a valuable tool . In the role of researcher , the children discovered similarities and differences between themselves and others . Besides gaining valuable insights from their participants , they accessed and shared their own experiences , so while listening to others , the children got sensitized themselves . In other words , the current study found that next to gathering more data , “super - sources” are created when children become research collaborators . Author Keywords Design research ; research collaborators ; contextual user research ; co - research ; children ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 2 User - centered design INTRODUCTION In contemporary design projects , experts from different fields contribute to the design process from their own expertise . One important expert is the ( end - ) user who , as ‘expert of his / her experience’ [ 14 ] , gives insight in what would serve his / her needs best . In participatory forms of Human Centered Design ( HCD ) , researchers and designers cooperate with users from the start of a project . Within the Computer Human Interaction ( CHI ) and Child Computer Interaction ( CCI ) communities , design methods have been developed to support more active roles for users [ 14 , 10 , 11 ] . In this paper we focus on Contextual User Research , which is conducted early in the design process to support designers with creative understanding [ 16 ] , by enhancing empathy , information , and inspiration . Techniques used in this field include on - site interviews as in Contextual Inquiry [ 1 ] , homework and diary exercises as in Cultural Probes [ 5 ] , and generative techniques , as in the Contextmapping method [ 14 ] . The current work is largely based on the latter method . With these techniques , participants observe their everyday experience , reflect on their needs , wishes and dreams , and share these insights in order to inspire and inform designers . The present study investigates opportunities to put users ( in particular : children ) in the role of researcher in order to gain rich contextual insights . Employing a collaborator who him / herself is part of the intended target group , can have several benefits . Relation to earlier work Participants have worked as research collaborators in earlier studies for a variety of reasons , e . g . , because they have easier access , or provide a cost - effective workforce for the intensive work needed in contextual research . Participatory Design with Children In Participatory Design ( PD ) , users are actively involved in the design process , working together with designers . One example from Read , an established researcher in this field , is the WEDD ( Web Site Design Day ) Project [ 12 ] which brought university staff , parent helpers and school children together to design a school web site . Several methods were used to enhance the PD process for participants , e . g . , comicboarding to generate productive brainstorm sessions with children [ 8 ] . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . CHI’13 , April 27 – May 2 , 2013 , Paris , France . Copyright 2013 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1899 - 0 / 13 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 . Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2883 Cooperative inquiry Druin developed a design approach called cooperative inquiry [ 3 ] , building on participatory design and contextual inquiry , to give children a voice in the development of technology . Children participated as researchers , together with adults in intergenerational teams , and visited other participants in their own environment , conducting interviews and leading discussions . Druin distinguishes four roles children can play in the design of new technologies : user , tester , informant and design partner [ 4 ] . Druin [ 4 ] points out that between children and adults , traditional “power structures” can emerge in which adults steer children . Benefits of our proposed way of employing users as research collaborators might be that they are closer to members of the intended target group , both geographically and socially . Within the same target group , people speak the same language and share a contextual world and within the relational sphere , there is trust and a shared history . In general , people can have different interactions with their peers than with a researcher . Research Collaborators in Design Research Pries et al [ 9 ] , used research collaborators in the design of a new on - board resting - place for flight attendants . The research team used remote researchers in the form of passengers , who conducted research with the flight attendants during flights about their wishes and needs . This approach enabled them to conduct in - flight research without having to be on the flights themselves . Van der Lugt [ 15 ] similarly describes a design project where limitations of the budget posed the challenge : how to reach a wide variety of people without having direct contact with every one and still end up with rich information and insights . The participant collaborators received research - packages , which helped them to conduct three interviews with peers . Next to helping the collaborators to conduct interviews , the packages encouraged them to reflect on their own experience , because they were part of the target group themselves . Participatory Action Research Participant collaborators have also appeared in Action Research ( AR ) [ 6 ] and especially Participatory Action Research ( PAR ) [ 7 ] . Action Research focuses on bridging the gap between the researcher and the researched by engaging the participants in the research . PAR is a methodology for intervention , development and change within communities and groups . Participatory Action Research typically sets out to improve the lives of the participants through research . Singh [ 13 ] conducted Participatory Action Research in the slums of India were he did not speak the language and the people of the slums distrusted him ; they did not want to talk or be seen with him . He came across a group of young local people who run a computer center . When he visited them and brought his video camera and photo camera , they were very interested in these tools and he taught them their usage . Letting the young people interact with the camera made him trustworthy for the rest of the community . The young people were very interested and enthusiastic and brought people over to be interviewed . They were collaborators in the sense that they identified important participants , contacted them , translated and made photos and videos to be discussed in the group . This connects to a returning issue within qualitative research : the development of rapport , or mutual understanding and fellowship [ 2 ] . By using people who are close to each other to conduct a research , rapport is already there . Aim of this study This paper aims to contribute to the research methodology within user research through exploring the use of children as research collaborators . As the preceding examples illustrate , we envisaged that doing so could have several benefits . Participant researchers from the target group have easier access to their peers and family members , may be able to select and motivate participants better , can speak their language , and make comparisons to their own experiences . In addition , the collaborator might be able to provide contextual knowledge for the research set - up , conduction and analysis . He / she is closer to other users , both geographically and socially , making it easier to access them . Collaborators might even become “super sources” who deliver other insights than ‘normal’ participants , possibly because they feel more connected and think about the research and themselves in another way than normal participants . But there are risks involved : they have no formal training in research techniques , may lose focus , or may not spot important things because their context might be so obvious to them that they don’t talk about it . Also the translation of the data from the collaborator to the researcher might be a challenging step ; will the collaborating researcher understand what kind of information the researcher is looking for ? CASE STUDY In a case study , we explored if children ( age 9 - 12 ) are able to do interviews and extract valuable insights as co - researchers and the merits and constraints of using this approach . Children became collaborators , researching their peers and grandparents . Basic models The models shown in Figure 1 and 2 serve as the basis for this case study . The models display from left to right : a designer and a researcher , followed by a collaborator and his / her participants . Figure 1 shows a collaborator who is Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2884 from the same target group as the participants ( children and peers ) . In Figure 2 the collaborator is a key - person who is not part of the intended target group but knows somebody who is ( the child is the key - person to his / her grandparents who belong to the elderly target group ) . The main difference between the models is that the collaborators from the same target group can reflect on the other as well as on themselves ( Figure 1 ) , in contrast to the key - person who only reflects on the data from the source ( Figure 2 ) . Designer Girl Boy Researcher Designer Same Target Group Figure 1 . Children doing research with their peers Boy Designer Grandma Designer Researcher Designer Key Person Figure 2 . Children doing research with their grandparents Procedure Twenty children , aged 9 to 12 , from a primary school in Delft , the Netherlands , participated in this project . For the children the goal of this project was to come up with ideas for a new playground in which children and elderly can be active together . This research is part of the ProFit project , which is funded by the European Union , under the Interreg IVB North West Europe program . The project consisted of four meetings with the children and their individual conduction of two interviews . In the first meeting , all children sketched ideas for new playground equipment , to be used by children and elderly together . They found out that it is hard to think of ideas that are not just for themselves but also for other people . The next step was to find out what the needs and wishes of the intended target groups are . The children were divided into groups of four or five , focusing either on peers or on elderly . Within these small groups they thought of questions to ask their target group and gave input for the development of a research booklet . With the input from the children , the researcher developed two different research booklets ( one for interviewing peers , one for interviewing grandparents ) . These booklets are a mix of creative assignments and interview - questions the children came up with and are meant as conversation starters and a way to structure the interviews . Druin [ 3 ] found out that children have a difficult time taking notes and they prefer to combine drawings with small amounts of text . In the research booklets that are used in this study there is room for text and visualizations . In order to make sure that reporting problems will not cause a loss of data , the children used audio recorders to record their interviews as well . During the second meeting with the researcher , each small group of children was briefly trained in interviewing skills and practiced the use of the research booklet by interviewing each other ( Figure 3 ) . After this meeting some final adjustments were made to the booklets . With their booklets and an audio - recorder , the children went to interview their peers or their grandparents individually . They had two weeks to perform this task . Subsequently to conducting the interviews , the small groups came together for a feedback session in which they discussed their results . They explained and compared the notes in their research booklets and , led by questions from the researcher , shared their experiences . After this discussion the children filled in templates of personas as a kind of summary of different kinds of participants that they had encountered . By making the personas , the pupils integrated information from the different interviews into one story . The process of filling in the persona was done within the small groups and every group was lead by the researcher . Together they started with an empty template and the first step was to come up with a name and age for this new fictive character . By asking the pupils for the ages of their participants and choosing one in the middle , the children got the idea of combining real data into one coherent story . After giving this persona a basic identity ( where he lives , what he looks like , etc . ) , they started thinking about his activities , wishes , thoughts and stories . Somewhere during this process , the pupils thought of a title to give to this persona , summarizing the most important characteristics , for example ‘somebody who is active and loves nature’ or ‘a make - up lover’ . This step led to contextual knowledge about the participants and also about the collaborating children themselves because they shared a lot about themselves during the discussion as well . Figure 3 . Children practicing their interview on each other In a final creative session , the children thought again of ideas to place in the new playground , but now with the use of their personas and their gained knowledge about the target group . The whole class participated in this session at Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2885 the same time and new groups were formed to generate ideas together , each group included pupils with knowledge from the two different target groups . Analysis All the group sessions and the interviews the children conducted were audio - recorded and transcribed . The data from the research booklets and transcripts was analyzed using methods . First interesting quotes were highlighted and turned into statement cards by adding an interpretation of their meaning . Then these statement cards were clustered into different topics , resulting into insights for each topic and stage of the procedure . Although the research topic of the children was “being active” , this paper is about the use of collaborators in research . In this section the main insights from every step of the process will be given . MAIN INSIGHTS Overall the children were enthusiastic and motivated throughout the whole process . They felt connected to the project , felt ownership and wanted to stay in touch . Girl : “If the playground is opened , can we be the first to get in ? ” Research materials During the first session the children gave input for the development of the research booklets , which would guide the children during the conduct of their interviews . It turned out to be hard for them to come up with questions individually . By making it into a group process and challenging the group to come up with a certain amount of questions , they let loose of their hesitations , inspired each other and came up with many more questions . Another way to speed up the process was to let the researcher do the writing , steered by the children’s input , this went much faster than when the children wrote themselves . With the input from the children , the researcher developed two different research booklets ( one for interviewing children , one for interviewing grandparents ) . In the second session the children came together to give their feedback on these research booklets . They were mostly concerned with the appearance of the booklets . Boy : “This booklet looks really cool… . I’m already looking forward to doing the interviews ! ” They did not look at the content of the questions very carefully ; there was an overall attitude of just diving in , experiencing en seeing what would come out . The main improvements the children came up with were on readability , word choice and practical use , like how much space is left to write an answer . Boy : “I don’t really have adjustments , we are just going to do it , just give it to them ! ” One content adjustment the children suggested was the addition of a blank space for a question of their own choice , which they could come up with during the interview . Although not all children used this question during their interview , it added to the feeling of ownership and occasionally gave an interesting insight . Training The training session , to prepare the children to conduct interviews on their own , consisted of three parts : discussing the interview booklets , giving some interview tips and a rehearsal of the interview on group members . This last part was the most useful ; they learned by experience and only when practicing did the children show if they really understood what to do . During the rehearsals , some children started to appreciate the research booklets : Boy : “This booklet has enough in it to discover a lot . Some people need a lot of questions to get to know one thing . With this booklet… after two , three questions you know something already . ” Girl : “I think sometimes you can spend an hour on only this first question . ” One of the interview tips during the training was to ask the participants to think aloud . The children picked up this skill very quickly and used it during the training as well as during the actual interview . Another tip was to use a pause every now and then to challenge participants to share even more . This tip was recognizable for several children . “Sometimes when somebody asks me a question , I don’t know the answer . But then a few moments later I remember again ! ” It is valuable to relate the interview skills to the children’s own experience and then practice them on each other . Half of the groups interviewed friends their own age and the other half interviewed their grandparents . The interviews with friends were easier to practice , because the children answered the questions as themselves . So , these answers were already valuable for the actual research subject . When rehearsing the interview with grandparents , the children pretended to be elderly . At first there was much giggling and funny acting but along the way it was striking to see that they realized how little they actually knew about their grandparents and started to become curious about what the real answers would be . Social group Working with small groups of 4 or 5 children had advantages . During the training they gave each other tips on how to improve their interviewing skills . The groups worked very seriously and when one of the children misbehaved within the group , the rest of the group reprimanded him / her . There was a lot of discussion within the groups about the research subject ( being active ) , so the first data can already be collected during these group sessions . Because of the secure environment the children even discussed sensitive subjects , such as mischiefs . Some of the children knew each other well , which gave another Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2886 dimension to the practicing of the interviews ; they could add to each other’s answers and dive deeper into some of the subjects . - Question from booklet : Whom do you play with and what do you do ? Girl answers the question - Boy to girl : “I thought you also play most with Bobby right ? Isn’t that true ? ” - Girl : “Yes that is right , I play a lot with Bobby , my sister , I didn’t think about that , I thought you meant friends not family . ” During the training the children were asked to indicate how many interviews they were committed to do . By asking this within the group , they motivated each other to do more than they might have done when they were alone . Interview When conducting the interviews , sometimes a question was perceived as more important than the actual answer . For example in one interview , between a grandfather and a granddaughter , the grandfather attempts an elaborated and interesting story in an answer to the granddaughter’s question about which places on a shared map the grandfather visits , but the granddaughter interrupts the story several times asking : “Yes ok , but how far is it from your house ? How many metres ? Where shall I place it on the map ? ” Role Most children take their role as researcher very seriously . The use of a voice recorder emphasizes this role and adds to the feeling of professionalism . Getting children in this serious “mode” is useful for research purposes . Some of their participants on the other hand , are not that serious and have to get used to their friend or relative in this new role . An example of a participant who uses this change of roles to critique his friend is the following ; on the question : “What do you do when you come home from school ? ” he answers : “I would like to play with Jasper ( interviewer ) , but he almost never has time . ” On a few occasions a child fell back into an old role , for example when a grandmother was supposed to make a small collage about the meaning of movement during her life . In the end the granddaughter was making the creative assignment , with some suggestions from her grandmother , just as they would tinker normally . Skills A lot of follow - up questions were asked by means of examples , like : “What do you do when you get up in the morning ? Shower ? Put on clothes ? Have breakfast ? ” These questions seem leading , but this was their way of discussing ; the children felt comfortable to reject examples from peers . Although not all follow - up questions were relevant ( “What do you put on your bread during lunch ? ” ) some expressed a lot of insight in the research topic ( “What’s the difference in moving in your life in summer and winter ? If football wouldn’t exist , what would you do ? ” ) . Most of the times the questions the children asked were related to activities . It would be nice to elicit more storytelling by follow - up questions instead of sums of activities . The skills that developed during the practice interview in the training session were not always present in the actual interview . In situations in which the children forgot the information from the training two things occurred : some children gave their own interpretation to questions they did not understand anymore which was really insightful in their way of thinking and lead to interesting conversations . But some children just skipped questions they had trouble with , ending up with no data . The other way round something similar happened , when explaining the answers of participants in the feedback session , the children sometimes didn’t remember what their participants said or meant by certain drawings . External factors Some of the interviews performed by the children were under time pressure . To attend an interview , children usually depend on their parents . Interviews are often combined with a visit to their grandparents or when friends come to visit them . This makes the interview controlled by plans of others . In some cases the child started the interview close to bedtime and had to rush in order to obey his / her parents , a few children tried to do all interviews on the night before the feedback session . Another external factor is other people who are present in the room were the interview is conducted . They are sometimes helpful , for example one mother gave suggestions in the background . But they can be a burden as well ; one interview took place in a room with several people and because of the voice recorder , everybody in the room had to be quiet . When the interview was over , the child pushed the stop button a bit too late and on the recording you could hear everybody laughing and talking , glad that it was over and they could have their normal conversations again . These kinds of situations can put pressure on the interview . Official / unofficial interview As said before , the voice recorders added a level of professionalism to the interview . It also had another effect : Next to the “official” interview , during which people talked into the voice recorder loud and clear , there was an “unofficial” interview , in which the interviewer whispers comments or instructions to the participant . These comments are sometimes interesting and give insight into the relation between interviewer and participant . In the official interview the role of interviewer is kept high , in the unofficial interview the old roles pop up again . Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2887 Reporting Because , for children , writing and drawing takes a lot of time and effort , an elaborated answer from a participant is put down in the research booklet in only a few keywords . When looking back at these keywords a few days later it is hard to come up with the original story again . Girl : “I’m not very good in writing , I will ask the participant to write . But can I do it with my mother then ? Because I can not write very clear . ” Boy : “I did one with my two neighbors together , that went well , but I did not write down a lot . ” Feedback When asking the children how the interview went they all answer : “It went well” . Only when asking further questions , a more elaborated explanation about their experience is given . Some insights about the personal life of the participants , reported by the children , were very meaningful or personal . An example from a boy who interviewed his friend : “Usually he had very quiet , calm thoughts . But sometimes , when it comes to being active , he panics ; he does not know what to do . When we were playing tag he was captured , he was just standing there . Then we freed him and said what he was supposed to do , but he just stood there , panicking , not knowing what to do . ” We can speculate whether the boy from this story would tell this anecdote to a “normal” researcher . Although the collaborator shared this knowledge during the feedback session , it was not obtained during the interview with this particular participant but during earlier experiences . Doing the interview made it easier for the collaborator to access and share other relevant memories about his participant . Parents and grandparents took the children , in the role of researcher , serious enough to share their concerns with them . One grandparent told his grandson that he moves a lot because he is scared of not being able to do so in the future . He wants to stay fit in order to make sure that he will be able to live independently for as long as possible . One father confessed to his daughter that he actually hates running , but he does it because he thinks he is fat . By having the design as end goal , it is hard for some children to separate what they want themselves from what the participants want . One boy for example reported that his participants really wanted a swimming pool , which was very convenient for him , because the last couple of sessions he mentioned that he wanted a swimming pool over and over again . Not all children thought this way ; one boy reported for example that his participant wanted a quiet place to read . Which was unfortunate for him , because he hated reading . Personas The personas elicited useful information , the children thought the templates were inviting and wanted to start right away . An example of a filled in persona can be seen in Figure 4 . When making the personas and combining several participants into one character , some children were more comfortable to share their experiences than without the personas . Some children feel responsible for their participants ; sometimes friends or siblings were not very serious during the interview and the children feel like apologizing for that , but on the other hand they don’t want to betray their participant or put them in bad daylight . When using personas they didn’t have to talk about a specific participant so they didn’t feel like betraying this person and the insights were more anonymous . One example is when the children were making a persona about an old grandfather and one boy added : “He moves in order to meet people , he is kind of lonely . ” It is easier to say something like that about a fictive character than about your own grandfather . Mijn loensen : Interessante verhalen : Mijn gedachtes : re . Andere mensen : É V 0 0 Dingen die ik doe : 2o beweeg ik : t dagboek jewegen Lief nd ik : UP 1 lt . Hier sa ik heen : Figure 4 . Examples of a filled in persona template By making the personas within small groups , everyone could add to the discussion in their own time , this gave an energetic and positive atmosphere . It was also more efficient when the researcher facilitated the discussion and did the writing / drawing . It turned out that the children were capable of comparing persons very well ; they are able to see the differences and similarities between people and to make a short description of a certain character . This relates to a note in the paper of Druin [ 3 ] , mentioning that a quality of having children in the intergenerational research teams was that they were good at summarizing data in a way that enabled adult Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2888 researchers to see something they had originally missed . In the end , the descriptions of the personas were much more elaborate than the description of the individual participants . Overall some strong benefits of using personas were that they create the opportunity to use input from the research and earlier experiences and they create distance from the actual participants . The title of the persona was a better way to talk about the character than the real name of the participant . Finishing the personas marked the end of the research phase . At the end , one girl wanted to fill in a persona about her own grandparents to keep at home . Like a memorabilia from the research , feeling proud of what she had achieved . Difference in skills and quality The level of skills of the children in this study varied , mainly because of age difference . This difference was partly overcome by mixing the ages within the groups , so younger children learned from the older ones . One example of the difference in thinking level can be seen in the following answers from two different children : Researcher : “Ok , what would this person write , dear diary , I think moving is…” . Boy ( 9 ) : “Super cool ! Supersonically cool ! ” Girl ( 12 ) : “A lot of fun because you can see everything around you . When you sit alone and still in your room you don’t experience much . ” DISCUSSION AND GUIDELINES The case study resulted in a number of insights on merits and constraints of working with children as collaborators . In this section we draw them together , and provide guidelines for using children as research partners . Children as research partners This current study only focuses on the first part of the design process , namely user research . In this small part children act as research partners when adjusting the research booklets , finding participants , conducting the interviews and reporting about the results . This way of doing user research can be used in bigger projects in which children are design partners . Design assignment The children got the assignment to conduct research with friends and grandparents in order to come up with suitable ideas for a playground in the end . The design of playground equipment is a motivating and understandable goal for them ; but giving this practical goal makes them constantly think of ideas . It is sometimes hard for the collaborating children to open up to their participants and build awareness of their needs before thinking of solutions and ideas . Participants By using this way of collaborative research there is a natural selection of participants : children choose participants they like , with whom they feel comfortable . This way you will only have nice participants , the grumpy old man living on the corner of the street is not likely to be interviewed . That is something to take into consideration when setting up such a research . On the other hand , the affection between the interviewer and his / her participant can have a positive influence on the research . An example from the case study is when a grandmother thinks the interview is taking too long but she sticks with it because of her grandson who is conducting it ; she stays patient and motivated because of him . Planning When using children , aged 9 - 12 , as collaborators in research it must be kept in mind that they are very dependent on their parents . They are often not aware of time or planning ; their parents decide what to do . They are living in the now , they know what they are going to do today , but it is hard for them to think about next week or even further ahead . That makes it hard to plan or make agreements . The best way to cope with this might be to let them conduct the research quickly after the training . Another reason to plan the sessions close to each other is to make sure that the training or an answer from a participant is still in their minds . New knowledge Some children were missing basic knowledge about their participants before the interview . For example the name of a grandfather or what kind of job the child’s father has . A lot of them learned something new about their participants , bringing them closer to their friends / family . This was not the main focus of this research , but is a positive side effect . Boy : “My grandfather told me that he used to play soccer a lot , and all kind of things he did when he was a child , building huts for example ! Usually he doesn’t share these kind of things . ” After conducting this project with a primary school in Delft , other schools became interested in using this process with their own pupils as well , because they saw educational benefits for the children . This relates to the vision of Druin [ 3 ] who thinks of design - centered learning as a relevant outcome of a cooperative design or research process . Obvious information As said before , the collaborating children knew their participants well . A concern beforehand was that because they share a lot of context they might talk about things the researcher does not understand . During this case study that happened only once : two children were discussing about going to the “lighthouse” , the researcher didn’t know what that was . Luckily this conversation took place within the group session and the researcher was there to ask about it , Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2889 but if it happened during the real interview he might not be able to ask . There might be topics that are not discussed , which are unnoticed by the researcher because they seem obvious to the participants although they are relevant . Super source At the beginning of this paper the question was raised if using collaborators to conduct research would turn these collaborators into “super sources” , who know more about their own needs , wishes , desires and activities by studying others . During the case study some indications for this were found : the discussions during the first session , while thinking of appropriate questions , were surprisingly insightful ; as a sidetrack some children talked about their own experiences related to the topic in an informal way . Some interesting insights about “being active” came already from this . Taking on the role of researcher changed their mindset ; they were very serious , which made them useful sources themselves . Conducting the interviews made it easier for the children to access knowledge they already had about their participants and the research subject . Next to gaining new knowledge the children were able to access existing knowledge . Improvements When using this method in applying children as researchers , a few things can be improved : The research booklet should provide more guidance on subjects like explaining the research and getting the consent of the participant . The booklet should also be clearer on what the collaborators should fill in together with the participant and what they should fill in on their own . Overall , it must be easy to understand how to complete an assignment and what kind of answer is expected . If there are any doubts , some children don’t fill it in at all . Writing is hard for most children , during the interviews most of them only wrote down a few keywords . Maybe another way of reporting would work better , like audio reporting . The children had a clear goal in mind while going through each step of the process : thinking of ideas for the new playground . This goal oriented view made the children very idea driven . Overall the process can be less idea minded and more about storytelling , about getting a closer look at others . A first step to reach this goal could be to eliminate design - oriented assignments from the research booklet . Most of the available time in the training session should be dedicated to practicing the interviews on each other ; this is when the children really grow and develop their skills . Next time the rehearsal can be more complete : from the beginning of the interview , with explaining the interview and getting the participants’ consent , to the closing off . They should also practice with the actual voice recorders . During the training the children were very motivated by encouragements , positive stimulation and compliments . These made them feel confident . During the interview itself some of the children were a bit insecure , maybe the interview materials should help them in the same positive way the training supports them . The most important part of this collaboration process was the way the children adopted the role of researcher . They developed another attitude , felt ownership and became more serious . In a next study this role could be more enhanced . Opportunities to do so could be : giving them more professional tools or rewarding them at the end of the process with for example a certificate . Output This study did not compare the gathered insights to the outcomes of other contextual user research methods . However , we did see a positive development of the collaborators during the process ; we feel that the ideas from the final creative session were more empathic towards the target group than the ideas from the first session . One signal for that is that the drawings from the first session often didn’t include any persons . In the final session almost all groups draw persons and they explained more about the roles and wishes of these different persons . Design Although this paper focused on contextual user research and ended with a creative session with the children , the gathered user insights could serve as the basis for an actual design project , since ‘knowing the user’ is a vital starting point . This approach might also be applied in other design projects and other contexts , for example that of digital technologies to support ( for example ) cross - generational engagement , were it could serve as a first step in contextual research . Non - children We think this method can be used to collaborate with other target groups as well . Also for adults , the training will be important and the role of researcher will add professionalism . We expect the main difference from working with children in the motivational aspect . The children were very enthusiastic and wanted to start right away , this might differ with other target groups . Reporting will be easier for adults than for children , since writing is more natural to them . CONCLUSION This study has shown that children are able to work as collaborators in research and has yielded insights in the merits and constrains of using this approach . The training is important for improving the interview skills and to get to know the children and their point of view . Because the children were responsible as researchers , they were focused and worked seriously . The shared context between the Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2890 collaborator and the participant was noticeable during the interviews . The gained insights were personal and the personas proved to be a useful tool . During the assignment of creating personas different kinds of knowledge came together and were shared in an informal way that led to rich characters and insights . Some children were more at ease sharing experiences about and from others than about sharing their own . However , while doing research activities they thought about the research subject , discussed it and gave insights in both their own and their participants’ life in an informal way . When using this method in a next study the guidelines can help . It would also be valuable to see how other target groups differ from working with children as collaborators . The experiences and guidelines from this study will help us to develop a toolkit to work with collaborators in future research . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We want to thank the “Wetenschapsknooppunt Delft” for facilitating this project . This research is part of the ProFit project , which is funded by the European Union , under the Interreg IVB North West Europe program . REFERENCES 1 . Beyer , H . , and Holzblatt , K . , Contextual Design : Defining Customer Centered Systems , San Francisco , Moran Kaufman , 1998 . 2 . DiCicco - Bloom , B . , and Crabtree , B . , F , . The qualitative research interview , Medical Education , 40 ( 2006 ) , 314 - 321 . 3 . Druin , A . , Cooperative Inquiry : Developing New Technologies for Children with Children , CHI 99 , 1999 . 4 . Druin , A . , The Role of Children in the Design of New Technology , Behaviour & Information Technology , 21 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 1 - 25 . 5 . Gaver , W . , Dunne , T . , and Pacenti , E . , Cultural Probes . Interactions , 6 , 1 ( 1999 ) , 21 - 29 . 6 . Lewin , K . , Action Research and Minority Problems , Journal of Social Issues , 2 ( 1946 ) , 35 - 46 . 7 . McTaggart , R . , Principles for Participatory Action Research , Adult Education Quarterly , 41 , 3 ( 1991 ) , 168 - 187 . 8 . Moraveij , N . , et al , Comicboarding : Using Comics as Proxies for Participatory Design with Children , CHI’07 , 2007 9 . Pries , J . F . F . , van Boeijen , A . , and van der Lugt , R . , Deep inside friendly territory , ServDes , 2012 . 10 . Read , J . C . , and MacFarlane , S . , Using the Fun Toolkit and other Survey methods to Gather Opinions in Child Computer Interaction , IDC’06 , 2006 . 11 . Read , J . C . , and Bekker , M . M . , The Nature of Child Computer Interaction , British HCI , 2011 . 12 . Read , J . , et al , An Investigation of Participatory Design with Children – Informant , Balanced and Facilitated Design , Interaction design and Children , 2002 , 53 - 64 . 13 . Singh , A . , Collaborative Videoing – A Reflective Account , IASDR , 2011 . 14 . Sleeswijk Visser , F . , Stappers , P . , van der Lugt , R . , and Sanders , E . B . N . Contextmapping : experiences from practice . Codesign , 1 , 2 ( 2005 ) , 119 - 149 . 15 . Van der Lugt , R . , Involving users as Co - researchers , CHI - NED 2007 . 16 . Wright , P . , and McCarthy , J . , Empathy and Experience in HCI , CHI’08 , 2008 . Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2891