DOI : 10 . 4018 / JOEUC . 2016040107 Copyright © 2016 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . Journal of Organizational and End User Computing Volume 28 • Issue 2 • April - June 2016 Social Media and Value Creation : Exploring the Perception of Generation Y toward Corporate Social Networking Applications Use Imed Boughzala , Telecom Ecole de Management , Evry , France ABSTRACT Organizations increasingly rely on corporate social networks and online communities , under what is called today Enterprise 2 . 0 , to enhance socialization and favor information / knowledge sharing , collaboration and value creation among coworkers . Researchers and practitioners to date have mostly assumed that people from this generation Y , because of their massive use of social media in the private arena , would be willing to accept and use them more easily and quickly in corporate environment . However , to the best of our knowledge , there is no empirical work which has been reported on this issue confirming this assumption . KEYwORdS Generation Y , Social Networking Applications , Social Networks , Use , Value Creation INTROdUCTION In 2005 , the social aspect of the Web was emphasized by Tim O’Reilly ( 2005 ) to highlight the value of socialization related to people connections , content sharing and co - creation through social networks . Internet user is no longer considered as an information consumer but more as a content producer . To the point that in 2006 Time magazine titled its coverage “You . ” ( Yes , you . You control the Information Age . Welcome to your world ) . Indeed , this magazine used to devote coverage to the person of the year since the late 1920s . The idea of this study lets internet user , by expressing themselves freely on the web and interacting directly with others , to control the information entirely ( by support of the Social Web 2 . 0 ) which makes , in somewhat , a break with the traditional web . Today , integrating Web 2 . 0 applications ( i . e . social media ) in businesses provides many opportunities to improve interaction , information / knowledge sharing and collaboration among employees , also with customers and partners . These applications have been a popular medium for people interaction , content sharing ( Constant et al . , 1994 ; Davenport and Prusak , 1998 ; Cramton , 2001 ; Shi et al . , 2014 ) and open collaboration ( Coleman & Levine , 2008 ) . To date , companies increasingly rely on corporate social networking ( CSN ) applications ( in the continuum of Intranet efforts ) to enhance interactions , increase the density of connections and share information among coworkers for driving business value ( Culnan et al . , 2010 ) and innovation ( Chesbrough & Appleyard , 2007 ; Sena & Sena , 2008 ) . According to many authors ( Dudezer t et al . , 2009 ; Hershatter & Epstein , 2010 ; Boughzala , 2007 - 2012a ; Deal et al . , 2010 ; Gorman et al . , 2004 ) , the new generation of hypermodern employees ( i . e . Generation Y ) has developed new habits and behaviors at work . They use , on a daily basis , Web 2 . 0 applications ( blogs , wikis , Really Simple Syndication ( RSS ) feeds , SN applications / services , 107 Journal of Organizational and End User Computing Volume 28 • Issue 2 • April - June 2016 108 folksonomy , podcasting , tagging , mashups , etc ) in the private arena and , therefore , consider that such applications for self - organizing , sharing and collaboration are the best tools to work . Social networks and online communities are for them the best resources to solve problems collectively , to get connections and partnerships and thus to take advantage of the collective intelligence ( Smith & Duin , 1994 ; Malone et al . , 2009 ; Beck et al . , 2014 ) . This generation is used to choose by it - self the tools and devices it deems fit to use ( notion of self - care , Bitner et al . , 2002 ) . This is part of larger organizational issues , called BYOD ( aka Bring Your Own Device ) , BYOA ( aka Bring Your Own Application , Ballagas et al . , 2004 ) or more BYOB ( aka Bring Your Own Behavior , Gunnarsson , 2012 ) . Scholars and practitioners to date have mostly assumed that people from this generation Y ( Dudezert et al . , 2009 ; Hershatter & Epstein , 2010 ) , because of their massive use of social media in the private arena , would be willing to accept and use them more easily and quickly in corporate environment under what we call Enterprise 2 . 0 ( Crumpacker & Crumpacker , 2007 ; Deal et al . , 2010 ) . However , to the best of our knowledge , there is no empirical work which has been reported on this issue confirming this assumption on the ground . Nobody can affirm today that generation Y would be the driver of this technology adoption in corporate environment considering their technology readiness ( Parasuraman , 2000 ) . This paper tries to address this gap by answering the following research questions : RQ1 . How is the use of CSN applications perceived by the generation Y ? RQ2 . To what extent people from this generation are willing to accept and use them within a corporate environment ? And , RQ3 . What should be the best and worst use according to them ? A qualitative exploratory study through an enriched Delphi method ( Briggs et al . , 2003 ) is applied for answering research questions . Twenty four graduate management students from a French business school were invited to participate voluntarily to a directed brainstorming session , using a Group Support System ( GSS ) , in order to gather their statements and opinions . This study provided an ordered list of important adoption issues to consider when implementing and using CSN applications in businesses . The purpose of this study is to contribute to a better understanding of the perception of generation Y with regard to CSN applications by drawing up a list of dos and don’ts . It provides important expectations and precautions to take into account by stakeholders for a best use , compared to users ( coworkers ) , managers and the enterprise at whole . The rest of this paper is structured as follows : Section 2 presents the research background related to Web 2 . 0 , generation Y and SN applications , and some related works and theories . Section 3 describes the research method that has been used in this exploratory study . Results are presented in section 4 . Based on our findings , we discuss in section 5 their accordance with the technology acceptance and adoption models and theories ; and present some guidelines associated with best CSN applications deployment and use . The conclusion discusses contributions , limitations and future research directions . BACKGROUNd web 2 . 0 Web 2 . 0 ( O’Reilly , 2005 ) is one major technical change that is being transforming work practices and more widely the enterprise at whole . In fact , new usages for information and knowledge sharing have emerged with the advent of Web 2 . 0 applications , giving rise to the Enterprise 2 . 0 concept ( Anderson , 2007 ) . Enterprise 2 . 0 - a new culture of technology usage here - refers to “the use of Web 2 . 0 , emergent social software platforms within companies , or between companies and their partners or customers” as defined initially by McAfee ( 2006 ) . Web 2 . 0 is a combination of applications ( Blog , Wiki , Podcast , RSS feeds , Tagging , Social networks… ) ; new values related to the use of these applications ( user as producer , collective intelligence , perpetual beta , extreme ease of use ) and standardized technology behind these applications ( Ajax , XML , Open API , Microformats , Flash / Flex ) ( O’Reilly , 2005 ; Anderson , 2007 ) . 15 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / article / social - media - and - value - creation / 148149 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Journals , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Communications and Social Science , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Technology Adoption , Ethics , and Human Computer Interaction eJournal Collection , InfoSci - Management Science and Organizational Research eJournal Collection , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Business , Administration , and Management . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 2 Related Content Personal and Situational Factors as Predictors of End User Performance I . M . Jawahar ( 2003 ) . Advanced Topics in End User Computing , Volume 2 ( pp . 64 - 84 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / personal - situational - factors - predictors - end / 4444 ? camid = 4v1a The Misuse of Spreadsheets in the Nuclear Fuel Industry : The Falsification of Safety Critical Data Using Spreadsheets at British Nuclear Fuels Limited ( BNFL ) Simon Thorne ( 2013 ) . Journal of Organizational and End User Computing ( pp . 20 - 31 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / the - misuse - of - spreadsheets - in - the - nuclear - fuel - industry / 81296 ? camid = 4v1a Experiences from Health Information System Implementation Projects Reported in Canada Between 1991 and 1997 Francis Lau and Marilynne Hebert ( 2001 ) . Journal of Organizational and End User Computing ( pp . 17 - 25 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / experiences - health - information - system - implementation / 3743 ? camid = 4v1a A Methodology for Evaluating EIS Software Packages Dae - Ho Byun and Eui - Ho Suh ( 1996 ) . Journal of End User Computing ( pp . 21 - 31 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / methodology - evaluating - eis - software - packages / 55728 ? camid = 4v1a