Capping protein modulates the dynamic behavior of actin ﬁlaments in response to phosphatidic Acid in Arabidopsis . Jiejie Li , Jessica L Henty - Ridilla , Shanjin Huang , Xia Wang , Laurent Blanchoin , Christopher J Staiger To cite this version : Jiejie Li , Jessica L Henty - Ridilla , Shanjin Huang , Xia Wang , Laurent Blanchoin , et al . . Capping protein modulates the dynamic behavior of actin ﬁlaments in response to phosphatidic Acid in Arabidopsis . . Plant Cell , American Society of Plant Biologists , 2012 , 24 ( 9 ) , pp . 3742 - 54 . . HAL Id : hal - 00747069 https : / / hal . archives - ouvertes . fr / hal - 00747069 Submitted on 31 Oct 2012 HAL is a multi - disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci - entiﬁc research documents , whether they are pub - lished or not . The documents may come from teaching and research institutions in France or abroad , or from public or private research centers . L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est destin´ee au d´epˆot et ` a la diﬀusion de documents scientiﬁques de niveau recherche , publi´es ou non , ´emanant des ´etablissements d’enseignement et de recherche fran¸cais ou ´etrangers , des laboratoires publics ou priv´es . Capping Protein Modulates the Dynamic Behavior of Actin Filaments in Response to Phosphatidic Acid in Arabidopsis C W Jiejie Li , a Jessica L . Henty - Ridilla , a Shanjin Huang , a Xia Wang , a Laurent Blanchoin , b and Christopher J . Staiger a , c , 1 a Department of Biological Sciences , Purdue University , West Lafayette , Indiana 47907 - 2064 b Institut de Recherches en Technologie et Sciences pour le Vivant , Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire and Végétale , Commissariat á l ’ Energie Atomique / Centre National de la Recherche Scienti ﬁ que / Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique / Université Joseph Fourier , F38054 Grenoble , France c Bindley Bioscience Center , Purdue University , West Lafayette , Indiana 47907 Remodeling of actin ﬁ lament arrays in response to biotic and abiotic stimuli is thought to require precise control over the generation and availability of ﬁ lament ends . Heterodimeric capping protein ( CP ) is an abundant ﬁ lament capper , and its activity is inhibited by membrane signaling phospholipids in vitro . How exactly CP modulates the properties of ﬁ lament ends in cells and whether its activity is coordinated by phospholipids in vivo is not well understood . By observing directly the dynamic behavior of individual ﬁ lament ends in the cortical array of living Arabidopsis thaliana epidermal cells , we dissected the contribution of CP to actin organization and dynamics in response to the signaling phospholipid , phosphatidic acid ( PA ) . Here , we examined three cp knockdown mutants and found that reduced CP levels resulted in more dynamic activity at ﬁ lament ends , and this signi ﬁ cantly enhanced ﬁ lament - ﬁ lament annealing and ﬁ lament elongation from free ends . The cp mutants also exhibited more dense actin ﬁ lament arrays . Treatment of wild - type cells with exogenous PA phenocopied the actin - based defects in cp mutants , with an increase in the density of ﬁ lament arrays and enhanced annealing frequency . These cytoskeletal responses to exogenous PA were completely abrogated in cp mutants . Our data provide compelling genetic evidence that the end - capping activity of CP is inhibited by membrane signaling lipids in eukaryotic cells . Speci ﬁ cally , CP acts as a PA biosensor and key transducer of ﬂ uxes in membrane signaling phospholipids into changes in actin cytoskeleton dynamics . INTRODUCTION A dynamic network of actin ﬁ laments is critical for a wide variety of cellular processes , including vesicle traf ﬁ cking , cell morpho - genesis , and rapid cytoplasmic remodeling in response to biotic and abiotic stimuli . Actin ﬁ lament organization and turnover are governed by dozens of actin binding proteins . However , there remains a knowledge gap between the biochemical properties of actin binding proteins and how they participate in the regu - lation of actin dynamics and response to stimuli in vivo . Phos - phoinositide lipids ( PPIs ) are thought to play a central role in regulating the actin cytoskeleton during signal transduction and membrane traf ﬁ cking . Many actin binding proteins directly in - teract with and are regulated by PPIs in vitro ( Saarikangas et al . , 2010 ) , but whether this occurs in cells requires further analysis . The barbed end of an actin ﬁ lament is the favored site for actin polymerization in vitro and is therefore the presumed end where rapid actin ﬁ lament elongation occurs in vivo . Capping protein ( CP ) is a conserved heterodimeric complex composed of a - and b - subunits . At a biochemical level , CP binds to ﬁ lament barbed ends with high af ﬁ nity and dissociates slowly , thereby blocking actin assembly and disassembly ( Cooper and Sept , 2008 ) . CP also binds to and is negatively regulated by signaling PPIs in vitro ( Schafer et al . , 1996 ; Kim et al . , 2007 ; Kuhn and Pollard , 2007 ) . Genetic evidence demonstrates that loss - of - function or null mutants for CP result in defective cell and developmental phenotypes in mammals , ﬂ ies , and microbes ( Amatruda et al . , 1992 ; Hug et al . , 1995 ; Hopmann et al . , 1996 ; Kovar et al . , 2005 ; Kim et al . , 2006 ) . Based on its biochemical features and cellular abundance , CP is considered to be the major ﬁ lament barbed - end capper in vivo ( Cooper and Sept , 2008 ) . In support of this , the population of available barbed ends in Dictyostelium and yeast cells is inversely correlated with the amount of cellular CP ( Hug et al . , 1995 ; Kim et al . , 2004 ) , and loss of CP results in a 10 to 35 % increase in ﬁ lamentous F - actin levels , presumably due to polymerization onto free ﬁ lament barbed ends ( Hug et al . , 1995 ; Hopmann et al . , 1996 ; Kim et al . , 2004 ; Kovar et al . , 2005 ) . CP is also essential for generating speci ﬁ c actin - based struc - tures . Yeast null mutants have fewer actin cables and an in - creased number of actin patches ( Amatruda et al . , 1992 ; Kovar et al . , 2005 ) . However , cp knockdowns in mammalian cells result in proliferation of bundled actin in ﬁ lopodia and loss of lamelli - podial arrays at the leading edge of crawling cells ( Hug et al . , 1995 ; Rogers et al . , 2003 ; Mejillano et al . , 2004 ) . Collectively , these data have been used to infer that CP binds ﬁ lament barbed ends to keep ﬁ laments short and to focus polymerization at free ﬁ lament ends ( Pollard and Cooper , 2009 ) . However , the 1 Address correspondence to staiger @ purdue . edu . The author responsible for distribution of materials integral to the ﬁ ndings presented in this article in accordance with the policy described in the Instructions for Authors ( www . plantcell . org ) is : Christopher J . Staiger ( staiger @ purdue . edu ) . C Some ﬁ gures in this article are displayed in color online but in black and white in the print edition . W Online version contains Web - only data . www . plantcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1105 / tpc . 112 . 103945 The Plant Cell , Vol . 24 : 3742 – 3754 , September 2012 , www . plantcell . org ã 2012 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . consequence for actin organization caused by loss of CP is variable in different organisms , suggesting that the mechanism of actin turnover differs between cell types . Furthermore , whether and how exactly CP regulates the availability of barbed ends in vivo remains to be further addressed . CP from Arabidopsis thaliana ( At CP ) is well characterized in vitro ; it binds to ﬁ lament barbed ends , prevents pro ﬁ lin - actin addition to ﬁ laments , and inhibits ﬁ lament - ﬁ lament annealing ( Huang et al . , 2003 ) . In addition , At CP binds to the signaling lipids , phosphatidic acid ( PA ) , and phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) in vitro , and this inhibits its barbed end capping activity and causes ﬁ lament uncapping ( Huang et al . , 2006 ) . PA is an abundant membrane phospholipid increasingly recognized as an important signaling intermediate in plant cells , especially in response to extrinsic stresses like cold , wounding , and attack by pathogens ( Li et al . , 2009 ; Testerink and Munnik , 2011 ) . It is also important for normal development by regulating the actin cytoskeleton and vesicle traf ﬁ cking , among other pro - cesses ( Li et al . , 2009 ; Testerink and Munnik , 2011 ) . For example , organization of the actin cytoskeleton responds to altered PA levels and phospholipase D ( PLD ) activity ( Motes et al . , 2005 ; Pleskot et al . , 2010 ) , and applying exogenous PA to suspension - cultured cells and pollen tubes leads to an increase in actin ﬁ la - ment levels ( Lee et al . , 2003 ; Huang et al . , 2006 ; Pleskot et al . , 2010 ) . At CP is the only plant actin binding protein reported to bind PA ( Huang et al . , 2006 ) and could therefore act as a direct regulator of phospholipid - mediated changes in cytoarchitecture . However , whether CP is negatively regulated by PPIs or PA in eukaryotic cells is still an open question . The ability to visualize individual actin ﬁ laments in Arabidopsis epidermal cells at high temporal and spatial resolution ( Staiger et al . , 2009 ; Smertenko et al . , 2010 ; Henty et al . , 2011 ; Tóth et al . , 2012 ) makes this an ideal system to dissect genetically the role of barbed - end ﬁ lament regulation . Previous observations demonstrate that most of the newly created ﬁ lament ends gen - erated by severing activity fail to regrow ( Staiger et al . , 2009 ; Smertenko et al . , 2010 ) , suggesting that the majority of barbed ends are capped at or soon after their creation . New ﬁ laments elongate rapidly at their barbed ends , reaching lengths of several microns before suffering the ﬁ rst severing events or ceasing growth . In addition , new ﬁ laments can be constructed by ﬁ lament - ﬁ lament annealing in vivo ( Smertenko et al . , 2010 ) . These data imply that the end - capping activity is important for the control of actin ﬁ lament assembly in plant cells ( Blanchoin et al . , 2010 ; Staiger et al . , 2010 ) . Based on its biochemical features , we hypothesize that CP regulates the properties of ﬁ lament barbed ends in plant cells ( Huang et al . , 2006 ; Blanchoin et al . , 2010 ) . Moreover , we predict that CP is a sensor of cellular PA levels and translates ﬂ uxes in membrane phospholipids into altered actin dynamics ( Huang et al . , 2006 ) . Here , we use live - cell imaging to dissect the contri - bution of CP to actin ﬁ lament dynamics and response to ﬂ uxes in PA . Three cp knockdown mutants have more available ﬁ lament ends , resulting in up to a sixfold increased ﬁ lament - ﬁ lament an - nealing frequency and a greater proportion of elongating ﬁ laments that originate from preexisting plus ends . If CP is negatively reg - ulated by phospholipids in vivo , then we predict that elevated PA should block CP activity and result in more available ﬁ lament ends , mimicking the cp knockdown mutants . Signi ﬁ cantly , treat - ment of wild - type cells with exogenous PA phenocopies the dynamic behaviors of ﬁ lament ends observed in cp mutant cells , with annealing frequency increased up to threefold . By contrast , reducing PA levels by inhibition of PLD activity with 1 - butanol results in reduced actin ﬁ lament density in wild - type cells . Finally , the increased ﬁ lament levels and end dynamics in a cp mutant are completely abrogated by exogenous PA treatment . Thus , we demonstrate that the signaling phospholipid PA negatively reg - ulates CP activity in eukaryotic cells . RESULTS Arabidopsis CP Mutants Show Abnormal Cell and Organ Growth To analyze the function of CP in Arabidopsis , three T - DNA insertion mutants were characterized . The homozygous CP a - subunit ( CPA ) mutant , cpa - 1 , contained a T - DNA in the ﬁ rst intron , whereas two CP b - subunit ( CPB ) mutant alleles had in - sertions in the seventh intron ( cpb - 1 ) and in the last exon ( cpb - 3 ) , respectively ( see Supplemental Figures 1A and 1B online ) . The levels of CPA and CPB transcripts were evaluated by quantitative real - time PCR ( qRT - PCR ) on 10 - d - old dark - grown cp mutant seedlings ( see Supplemental Figure 1C online ) . The full - length CPA transcript was markedly reduced but not eliminated in the cpa - 1 mutant . Considering the T - DNA insertion sites in cpb mutants , we used two sets of primers to detect the existence of CPB full - length transcripts . One pair of primers resides up - stream of the T - DNA insertion sites , whereas the other ﬂ anks both insertions . The full - length CPB transcripts were decreased approximately twofold in the cpb - 1 mutant , whereas in the cpb - 3 mutant , no products were detected using ﬂ anking primers , suggesting that the remaining mRNA was truncated ( see Supplemental Figure 1C online ) . In yeast , CP a - and b - subunit expression is interdependent ; deletion of the gene for one sub - unit leads to a loss of protein for the other subunit ( Amatruda et al . , 1992 ) . Arabidopsis CP behaves similarly ; reduction of CPA expression caused a decrease in CPB transcript level and vice versa ( see Supplemental Figure 1C online ) . To investigate whether the reduction of CP results in cell and organ growth phenotypes , cp seedlings were evaluated under dark - or light - grown conditions . In the dark , hypocotyls from cp seedlings were noticeably longer than the wild type ( Figure 1A ) , and these differences were signi ﬁ cant over a developmental time series ( Figure 1B ) . The growth of hypocotyl epidermal cells occurs along an acropetal gradient in Arabidopsis ( Gendreau et al . , 1997 ) , with cells at the base ﬁ nishing expansion prior to those at the apex . To examine the correlation between organ elongation phenotype and axial cell expansion , epidermal cell lengths from 5 - d - old hypocotyls were measured and binned into thirds : top ( located directly below the apical hook ) , middle , and bottom ( basal cells adjacent to roots ) . When compared with the wild type , cp mutants have signi ﬁ cantly longer cells in all three regions of the hypocotyl ( Figure 1C ) . However , cell widths in cp mutants were not signi ﬁ cantly altered . Under light - grown conditions , cp seedlings had signi ﬁ cantly shorter root lengths Capping Protein Is Regulated by Phosphatidic Acid 3743 compared with wild - type roots ( Figure 1D ) . At later developmental stages , however , cp mutants did not show any clearly visible cell or organ growth phenotypes . Collectively , these data demonstrate that reduced CP levels affect cell and organ growth early in development . In addition , CP plays different roles or has varying levels of importance depending on the tissue type or developmental stage . In other species , CP is an obligate heterodimer , and neither subunit alone is suf ﬁ cient to bind actin ( Amatruda et al . , 1992 ; Sizonenko et al . , 1996 ; Wear et al . , 2003 ; Kim et al . , 2004 ) . To disrupt both subunits and further reduce functional CP protein levels , two homozygous double mutants ( cpa - 1 cpb - 1 and cpa - 1 cpb - 3 ) were generated . The levels of CPA and CPB transcripts in double mutants were not much further reduced compared with the single mutants ( see Supplemental Figure 1C online ) . Moreover , the double mutants did not have a stronger etiolated hypocotyl length phenotype than the single mutants ( see Supplemental Figure 2 online ) . For example , single cpa and cpb mutants had 10 to 20 % longer hypocotyls than the wild type on day 12 ( Figure 1B ) , and the double mutants were also ; 10 to 20 % longer compared with wild - type hypocotyls ( see Supplemental Figure 2 online ) . The similar transcription levels for CP genes and hypocotyl growth phenotypes in single and double mutants sug - gest that knocking down a single subunit is suf ﬁ cient to reduce functional CP protein levels in Arabidopsis . In this case , studying the three single cp mutant alleles should provide strong genetic evidence for CP function in Arabidopsis . Cortical Actin Arrays in Epidermal Cells of cp Mutants Have More Actin Filaments In hypocotyl epidermal cells , the abundance of actin ﬁ laments in the cortical array and the extent of actin ﬁ lament bundling are correlated with the gradient of axial cell expansion ( Henty et al . , 2011 ) . As one moves from cells undergoing fast axial expansion ( near the cotyledons ) toward the root where cell growth has ceased , actin arrays in the cortical cytoplasm of 5 - d - old hypo - cotyl epidermal cells display decreased ﬁ lament density and increased bundling ( Henty et al . , 2011 ) . To examine whether reduced CP levels cause changes in overall cytoskeletal archi - tecture , we observed the cortical actin array in hypocotyl epi - dermal cells from cp mutants and wild - type cells expressing the Figure 1 . Loss of CP Alters Organ and Epidermal Cell Length . ( A ) Representative images of 11 - d - old cp ( cpa - 1 , cpb - 1 , and cpb - 3 ) homozygous mutants and wild - type ( WT ) seedlings grown in continuous darkness . Bar = 5 mm . ( B ) Etiolated hypocotyls from 4 - to 12 - d - old cpa - 1 , cpb - 1 , and cpb - 3 mutant seedlings are signi ﬁ cantly longer than the wild type ( * * P < 0 . 005 ; ND , no signi ﬁ cant difference ; t test ) . Measurements were taken from at least 50 seedlings per genotype on every other day . Values represent means 6 SE . ( C ) Epidermal cell lengths were measured on 5 - d - old dark - grown hypocotyls . Cell lengths from cp mutants are signi ﬁ cantly longer compared with the wild type in the top ( * * P < 0 . 001 , t test ) , middle ( * * P < 0 . 001 , t test ) , and bottom ( * P < 0 . 05 , t test ) thirds of hypocotyls . Values are means 6 SE ( n > 50 cells from at least 10 hypocotyls per genotype ) . ( D ) Light - grown roots from cpa - 1 , cpb - 1 , and cpb - 3 mutant seedlings are signi ﬁ cantly shorter than wild - type roots ( * * P < 0 . 005 , t test ) . Values are means 6 SE from at least 50 seedlings per genotype taken on alternating days between 2 and 12 d postgermination . 3744 The Plant Cell reporter gene GFP - fABD2 ( for second actin binding domain of Arabidopsis FIMBRIN1 ) ( Sheahan et al . , 2004 ; Staiger et al . , 2009 ) . Representative epidermal cell images along individual hypocotyls from cp mutants showed a similar trend of actin architecture along the gradient compared with wild - type cells . However , the overall actin arrays appeared to be somewhat more dense than in com - parable wild - type cells ( Figures 2A to 2D ) . Two parameters , skewness and density , were previously established to measure the extent of actin ﬁ lament bundling and the percentage of occupancy of actin ﬁ laments in epidermal cells , respectively ( Higaki et al . , 2010 ; Henty et al . , 2011 ) . As shown in Figure 2 , cp mutants have a signi ﬁ cantly increased percentage of occupancy of actin ﬁ laments in all three regions of the hypocotyl compared with the wild type ( Figures 2E , 2G , and 2I ) . Additionally , cp cells were somewhat less bundled than comparable wild - type cells ( Figures 2F , 2H , and 2J ) . To determine whether actin architecture is altered in other organs , we examined epidermal cells from the root elongation zone of light - grown seedlings ( Figure 3A ) . The percentage of occupancy of actin ﬁ laments was signi ﬁ cantly increased in cp mutant cells ( Figures 3B to 3D ) and nearly doubled in cpb - 1 cells ( Figure 3B ) , whereas bundling was slightly decreased compared with wild - type cells ( Figures 3E to 3G ) . These results con ﬁ rm that reduced CP levels in plants caused an increase in the density of actin ﬁ lament arrays , consistent with higher F - actin levels . CP Contributes to Actin Stochastic Dynamics by Modulating the Properties of Filament Ends Actin ﬁ lament turnover in Arabidopsis epidermal cells has been described as “ stochastic dynamics , ” which has two major com - ponents : rapid ﬁ lament elongation at barbed ends and ﬁ lament disassembly by severing activity ( Staiger et al . , 2009 ; Smertenko et al . , 2010 ; Henty et al . , 2011 ) . New ﬁ lament growth originates from three locations : de novo in the cytoplasm , the side of existing ﬁ laments or bundles , and the ends of preexisting fragments ( Figures 4A to 4C ; see also Supplemental Movies 1 to 3 and Supplemental Movie Legends 1 online ) . Numerous small frag - ments are generated by the severing of existing ﬁ laments ; how - ever , only occasionally do the newly created barbed ends regrow ( Figure 5A ; see Supplemental Movie 4 online ) . This suggests that the majority of barbed ends are capped at or soon after their creation ( Staiger et al . , 2009 ) . Smertenko et al . ( 2010 ) recently reported new ﬁ lament construction by the annealing of sev - ered ends , and we have observed similar events in hypocotyl epidermal cells ( Figure 5B ; see Supplemental Movie 5 online ) . Given that CP blocks ﬁ lament - ﬁ lament annealing in vitro ( Huang et al . , 2003 ) , this and other properties of ﬁ lament ends could be regulated by CP in live cells . To better understand and quantify the behavior of ﬁ lament ends , we developed several parameters to analyze this further by time - lapse imaging of axially expanding epidermal cells . We tracked > 50 ﬁ laments from their ﬁ rst appearance to complete disappearance and examined the behavior of every severed end from each of these ﬁ laments . The regrowth and annealing fre - quencies were de ﬁ ned as the percentage of presumed barbed ends undergoing regrowth or annealing from the total number of severed ends per ﬁ lament , respectively . As shown in Table 1 and Supplemental Table 1 online , regrowth frequency in wild - type cells was ; 3 % , which is close to previously reported values ( 4 . 4 % ; Staiger et al . , 2009 ) . Values for regrowth frequency in cp mutants were not signi ﬁ cantly different from the wild type . Annealing events also occurred infrequently ; from ; 200 newly created barbed ends , only ; 2 % were observed to anneal in wild - type epidermal cells ( Table 1 ; see Supplemental Table 1 online ) . Signi ﬁ cantly , the annealing frequency in cp mutants increased up to fourfold compared with the wild type ( Table 1 ; see Supplemental Table 1 online ) . Time - lapse images from a cpb - 1 cell show an extreme example of annealing , where three events occurred within one ﬁ lament ( Figure 5B ; see Supplemental Movie 5 online ) . Finally , we quanti ﬁ ed the percentage of ﬁ lament origins from three different locations in wild - type epidermal cells and cp mutants . All three cp mutants have a signi ﬁ cantly increased pro - portion of ﬁ laments that originate from ends ( ; 30 % ) when com - pared with the wild type ( ; 20 % ; Table 1 ; see Supplemental Table 1 online ) . We also quanti ﬁ ed several other stochastic dynamics param - eters to see whether CP contributes to actin turnover in addition to regulating ﬁ lament - end dynamics ( Table 1 ; see Supplemental Table 1 online ) . The maximum actin ﬁ lament length and lifetime were signi ﬁ cantly increased in cp mutants , and the severing frequency was modestly reduced compared with the wild type . However , the ﬁ lament elongation rate in cp mutants showed no substantial difference compared with the wild type . When nonelongating cells from the base of 5 - d - old hypocotyls were examined , the trends for most parameters were consistent with data for the fast - growing cells at the top of hypocotyls . It is noteworthy that the annealing frequency in the cpb - 1 mutant was even higher ( 13 . 3 % ) , with an increase of sixfold compared with the wild type ( see Supplemental Table 2 online ) . These data demonstrate that CP modulates the properties of ﬁ lament ends in plant cells ; its loss increases annealing frequency , as well as the proportion of ﬁ laments that originate from ends . In addition , CP contributes to actin ﬁ lament turnover by decreasing maximum ﬁ lament lengths and lifetimes . cpb - 1 Is Insensitive to the Variation of Cellular PA Levels Previous studies show that applying exogenous PA to suspension - cultured cells and pollen tubes causes an increase in actin ﬁ la - ment levels ( Lee et al . , 2003 ; Huang et al . , 2006 ; Pleskot et al . , 2010 ) , and this was inferred to be due to inhibition of CP activity ( Huang et al . , 2006 ) . We extended these ﬁ ndings by applying PA for 30 min at various concentrations to dark - grown hypocotyls and observed the overall organization of the cortical actin array in epidermal cells . Typically , the actin cytoskeleton appeared somewhat more dense in wild - type cells treated with PA ( see Supplemental Figure 3 online ) . We con ﬁ rmed these changes by measuring density in wild - type epidermal cells treated with PA . As shown in Figure 6A , treatment with PA ( 10 to 100 µ M ) re - sulted in a 10 to 20 % increase in percentage of occupancy , especially in the middle and bottom regions of the hypocotyl . These differences are speci ﬁ c because treatment with another acidic phospholipid , phosphatidlyserine ( PS ) , had no signi ﬁ cant effect on percentage of occupancy ( Figure 6A ) . If PA treatments prevent CP interaction with ﬁ lament ends in wild - type cells , then Capping Protein Is Regulated by Phosphatidic Acid 3745 cp mutants should be insensitive to exogenous lipid . To test this hypothesis , we performed the same treatments on cpb - 1 , as shown in Figure 6B . There was no signi ﬁ cant increase in the percentage of occupancy of actin arrays in cpb - 1 cells at any concentration tested and ; in fact , ﬁ lament density actually de - creased modestly at all PA concentrations ( Figure 6B ) . To further evaluate whether PA inhibits CP binding to ﬁ lament ends , we measured single ﬁ lament parameters after a modest PA treatment ( 10 µ M for 30 min ; see Supplemental Table 2 online ) . Single ﬁ laments , especially the ﬁ lament ends , in wild - type epidermal cells treated with PA had dynamic behaviors similar to those in cpb - 1 cells . The most convincing evidence was that the annealing frequency in PA - treated wild - type cells increased threefold compared with untreated cells ( Figure 7A ; see Supplemental Table 2 online ) . In addition , the proportion of ﬁ laments that originated from ends increased almost twofold after PA treatment of wild - type cells ( Figure 7B ; see Supplemental Table 2 online ) . On the other hand , annealing frequency and ﬁ l - ament origins in cpb - 1 mutant cells were insensitive to PA treatment ( Figures 7A and 7C ; see Supplemental Table 2 on - line ) . Single ﬁ lament dynamics in cells treated with 100 µ M PS showed no signi ﬁ cant difference from untreated cells ( Figure 7 ; see Supplemental Table 2 online ) . These data con ﬁ rm that PA prevents CP binding to ﬁ lament ends and , as a result , causes the increased percentage of occupancy of actin and enhanced ﬁ lament - ﬁ lament annealing in plant cells . Importantly , cp mutant cells are insensitive to PA treatments , providing genetic evi - dence that the signaling lipid regulates actin dynamics by neg - atively regulating CP activities . An alcohol isomer that inhibits PLD - dependent PA production ( Munnik et al . , 1995 ) , 1 - butanol , can effectively reduce cellular PA levels in plant cells ( Motes et al . , 2005 ; Pleskot et al . , 2012 ) . Applying 1 - butanol to Arabidopsis seedlings causes actin cyto - skeleton defects in different cell types , including hypocotyl epi - dermal cells ( Motes et al . , 2005 ) . To quantitatively describe these defects , we treated dark - grown hypocotyls with 1 - butanol at concentrations of between 0 . 1 and 1 % ( v / v ) for 15 min and measured density in wild - type epidermal cells . As shown in Figure 8A , wild - type cells treated with 1 - butanol had a signi ﬁ - cantly decreased percentage of occupancy of actin ﬁ laments . By contrast , treatment with the inactive secondary alcohol , 2 - butanol at 1 % ( v / v ) , had no signi ﬁ cant effect on percentage of occupancy ( Figure 8A ) . Not surprisingly , reduction of CP abrogated the effect of 1 - butanol treatments compared with wild - type cells ( Figure 8B ) . Figure 2 . The Architecture of Cortical Actin Arrays in Epidermal Cells of cp Mutants Is Altered . ( A ) to ( D ) Montages of VAEM micrographs of epidermal cells taken from representative hypocotyls of wild - type ( WT ) ( A ) , cpb - 1 ( B ) , cpb - 3 ( C ) , and cpa - 1 ( D ) seedlings expressing GFP - fABD2 . Seedlings were grown in continuous darkness for 5 d and images collected to display cells near the cotyledon at left and cells near the root at right . Bar = 10 µ m . ( E ) , ( G ) , and ( I ) Average ﬁ lament density or percentage of occupancy was measured along the axial gradient of cell expansion in hypocotyls and binned into three regions . The hypocotyls of 5 - d - old dark - grown seedlings for all three mutants , cpb - 1 ( E ) , cpb - 3 ( G ) , and cpa - 1 ( I ) , have signi ﬁ cantly increased ﬁ lament density in the top , middle , and bottom thirds of 5 - d - old dark - grown seedlings when compared with their respective wild - type siblings . Values given are means 6 SE ( n $ 300 images from $ 150 cells per region , 30 hypocotyls were measured ; t test : * P < 0 . 05 and * * P < 0 . 01 ) . ( F ) , ( H ) , and ( J ) The extent of ﬁ lament bundling ( skewness ) was mea - sured and binned for the same regions as in density measurements . Epidermal cells from cpb - 1 ( F ) , cpb - 3 ( H ) , and cpa - 1 ( J ) mutant seed - lings have less ﬁ lament bundling in different regions of the 5 - d - old dark - grown seedlings when compared with their respective wild - type siblings . The same images used for ( E ) , ( G ) , and ( I ) were analyzed for skewness ( * P < 0 . 05 ; ND , no signi ﬁ cant difference ; t test ) . [ See online article for color version of this ﬁ gure . ] 3746 The Plant Cell Collectively , the variation of cellular PA levels causes actin cytoskeleton defects in wild - type cells . Increasing PA levels stimulates actin polymerization ( Figure 6A ) , whereas reducing PA results in a decreased percentage of occupancy of actin ﬁ la - ments ( Figure 8A ) . Actin architecture in the cpb - 1 mutant is in - sensitive to both the elevation and reduction of PA ( Figures 6B and 8B ) . These data indicate that CP can sense cellular PA levels and functions as a downstream target of PA that transduces the PA signal into changes in actin cytoskeleton organization and dynamics . DISCUSSION By observing directly the dynamic behaviors of individual actin ﬁ laments with live - cell imaging techniques , we dissected the con - tribution of CP to actin organization and stochastic dynamics . Figure 3 . Actin Architecture in Epidermal Cells from the Root Elongation Zone of cp Mutants Is Altered . ( A ) Montages of VAEM micrographs from representative epidermal cells taken from the elongation zone of roots from light - grown wild - type ( WT ) and cpb - 1 seedlings . Bar = 10 µ m . ( B ) to ( D ) Average ﬁ lament density or percentage of occupancy was measured for epidermal cells within the root elongation zone . cpb - 1 ( B ) , cpa - 1 ( C ) , and cpb - 3 ( D ) seedlings had signi ﬁ cantly increased ﬁ lament density in 7 - d - old light - grown seedlings when compared with wild - type sibling seedlings . ( E ) to ( G ) Filament bundling ( skewness ) was measured on the same images as for density measurements . Filaments in cpb - 1 ( E ) , cpa - 1 ( F ) , and cpb - 3 ( G ) seedlings had less bundling when compared with wild - type sibling seedlings . Values given are means 6 SE ( n > 60 images per seedling from 25 seedlings per genotype ; * P < 0 . 05 , t test ) . [ See online article for color version of this ﬁ gure . ] Figure 4 . Growing Actin Filaments Originate from Three Locations in Wild - Type Epidermal Cells . Time - lapse VAEM series show examples of actin ﬁ laments originating and growing rapidly from three different cellular locations : de novo ( A ) , the side of a bundle ( B ) , and the end of a preexisting fragment ( C ) ( see Supplemental Movies 1 to 3 online ) . Representative actin ﬁ laments are highlighted with green dots . Images were recorded from epidermal cells in the actively growing region ( top third ) of 5 - d - old dark - grown wild - type hypocotyls . Bars = 5 µ m in ( A ) and ( C ) and 10 µ m in ( B ) . Capping Protein Is Regulated by Phosphatidic Acid 3747 Furthermore , we tested the hypothesis that the ﬁ lament end - cap - ping activity of CP is negatively regulated by membrane phospholipids in vivo . Reduced CP levels in Arabidopsis caused signi ﬁ cantly enhanced hypocotyl and epidermal cell lengths , whereas roots were markedly shorter . All three cp mutants had more dense actin ﬁ lament arrays than the wild type . CP was partially responsible for the availability of ﬁ lament ends in live cells . For example , reduced CP levels resulted in more free ends , with an up to sixfold increase in annealing frequency and doubling of the number of growing ﬁ laments that originated from ends . In addition , CP contributes to actin turnover by keeping ﬁ la - ments short and short - lived , rather than regulating ﬁ lament elongation rates . Increased actin ﬁ lament levels and ﬁ lament end dynamics following exogenous PA treatments mimicked those in cp mutants . These speci ﬁ c actin responses to exog - enous PA were completely abrogated in cp mutants . Moreover , reducing PA levels in wild - type epidermal cells had the oppo - site effect to elevated PA , it reduced actin ﬁ lament density . The cpb - 1 mutant was also insensitive to reduced PA levels . Thus , we provide genetic evidence that the end - capping activity of CP is inhibited by a membrane signaling lipid in eukaryotic cells . Previous data from diverse eukaryotic cells demonstrate that loss of CP increases the population of free barbed ends and elevates ﬁ lamentous actin levels ( Hug et al . , 1995 ; Hopmann et al . , 1996 ; Kim et al . , 2004 ; Kovar et al . , 2005 ) . Here , we con ﬁ rmed these results in plant cells and tracked the dynamic behaviors of individual ﬁ lament ends . Three independent cp knockdown alleles had a greater number of available ﬁ lament ends in cells , allowing more newly growing ﬁ laments to origi - nate from barbed ends . As a result , reduced CP levels caused a signi ﬁ cantly increased abundance of actin ﬁ laments in the cortical array of epidermal cells . Filament - ﬁ lament annealing has long been recognized in vitro and is inhibited by CP binding to barbed ends ( Andrianantoandro et al . , 2001 ; Huang et al . , 2003 ) . Recent data indicate that an - nealing also occurs in vivo ( Okreglak and Drubin , 2007 ; Smertenko et al . , 2010 ) ; this could be a favorable mechanism to generate a high density of actin ﬁ laments rapidly in response to biotic and abiotic stimuli ( Abraham et al . , 1999 ; Miyoshi et al . , 2006 ) . Con - sidering that actin ﬁ laments elongate at ; 1 . 7 µ m / s , this means a plant cell must add 629 ATP - loaded monomers on to each plus end per second ( Staiger et al . , 2009 ) . The ATP on each subunit is hydrolyzed rapidly after assembly , resulting in the consumption of millions of ATPs per second in each cell for actin polymerization . Compared with this huge energy expenditure from monomer addition , ﬁ lament - ﬁ lament annealing could provide a way to build a dense actin network with much greater ef ﬁ ciency . In this study , we demonstrated that CP prevents annealing events in vivo . Reduced CP levels resulted in an up to sixfold increase in ﬁ lament - ﬁ lament annealing frequency compared with wild - type cells . However , CP is not responsible for all behaviors of ﬁ lament ends in plant cells . The regrowth frequency from recently severed ends was not affected in cp mutants , suggesting that there are multiple ﬁ lament end regulators . Among ; 200 newly created ends tracked , only ; 3 % resumed growth ( Staiger et al . , 2009 ) . Both villin / gelsolin , which caps barbed ends after severing ( Khurana et al . , 2010 ; Bao et al . , 2012 ) , and ACTIN - INTERACTING PROTEIN1 ( AIP1 ) are likely to be partially redundant with CP in Arabidopsis . A recent study demonstrates that loss of AIP1 in moss cells results in fewer severing events , suggesting that ADF / co ﬁ lin activity is reduced in the absence of AIP1 ( Augustine et al . , 2011 ) . PPIs are versatile regulatory molecules in eukaryotic cells and play diverse roles in various cellular events , including intracellular signaling responses , membrane traf ﬁ cking , and modulating Figure 5 . The Dynamic Behavior of Actin Filament Ends in Epidermal Cells Can Be Tracked . ( A ) Time - lapse VAEM series shows an example of an actin ﬁ lament elongating from a newly created barbed end . The highlighted ﬁ lament ( green dots ) stops growing and is severed ( red arrows ) into several fragments . One ﬁ lament end ( white arrowheads ) resumes growth within 5 s after severing ( see Supplemental Movie 4 online ) . ( B ) New ﬁ laments can be constructed by ﬁ lament - ﬁ lament annealing of severed fragments . The highlighted growing ﬁ lament gets severed ( red arrows ) . Newly created ends join together within ; 1 . 5 s to form a new ﬁ lament ( yellow arrowheads ) . Three annealing events occur in the sequential time - lapse frames ( see Supplemental Movie 5 online ) . Images were taken by time - lapse VAEM from cpb - 1 epidermal cells . Bars = 5 µ m . 3748 The Plant Cell cytoskeletal organization ( Saarikangas et al . , 2010 ) . Disrup - tion of cellular PPI levels produces actin cytoskeletal defects ( Tolias et al . , 2000 ; Yamamoto et al . , 2001 ; El Sayegh et al . , 2007 ) . For example , increasing cellular PIP 2 in mammalian cells induces actin stress ﬁ ber formation and inhibits mem - brane ruf ﬂ ing , which is induced by actin polymerization under the plasma membrane ( Yamamoto et al . , 2001 ) . Overexpression of type I phosphatidylinositol phosphate 5 - kinase a ( PIP5KI ) , which synthesizes PIP 2 , stimulates actin comet tail formation during vesicle traf ﬁ cking ( Rozelle et al . , 2000 ) . These and other data implicate that the actin cytoskeleton responds to various signaling cascades triggered by PPI ﬂ uxes in vivo . Although numerous actin binding proteins are regulated by PPIs in vitro ( Saarikangas et al . , 2010 ) , few studies provide evidence for the interaction of actin binding proteins and PPIs in vivo . Elevation of PIP 2 in monkey kidney cells results in the in - hibition of several conserved actin binding proteins ( Yamamoto et al . , 2001 ) . Reduction of PIP 2 levels in rat cells switches the subcellular localization of co ﬁ lin from plasma membrane to F - actin and activates its severing activity ( van Rheenen et al . , 2007 ) . In addition , yeast cells expressing a co ﬁ lin with mutated PIP 2 binding site have longer cytoplasmic actin cables than wild - type cells ( Ojala et al . , 2001 ) . Disrupting the interaction of gelsolin and PIP 2 in vivo results in aberrant actin organization , including increased ﬁ lament lengths and fewer ﬁ lament branches ( El Sayegh et al . , 2007 ) . However , the exact mechanisms by which the activities of these actin binding proteins are regulated by PPIs and what the consequences for actin dynamics are remain unclear . The interaction of CP and PPIs has been well studied in vitro . PIP 2 can bind to CP , and this interaction inhibits capping activity ( Schafer et al . , 1996 ; Huang et al . , 2003 , 2006 ) . By directly ob - serving capping and uncapping of actin ﬁ lament ends with total internal re ﬂ ection ﬂ uorescence microscopy , one study reported that PIP 2 can ef ﬁ ciently remove CP from ﬁ lament barbed ends ( Kim et al . , 2007 ) . On the contrary , another study provides Table 1 . Actin Dynamics Parameters for cpb - 1 and Wild - type Epidermal Cells Stochastic Dynamics Parameters Wild Type cpb - 1 Elongation rate ; µ m / s 1 . 64 6 0 . 45 1 . 67 6 0 . 54 ND Severing frequency ; breaks / µ m / s 0 . 012 6 0 . 006 0 . 009 6 0 . 005 * Max . ﬁ lament length ; µ m 11 . 9 6 3 . 5 15 . 0 6 5 . 0 * Max . ﬁ lament lifetime ; s 21 . 4 6 7 . 1 26 . 5 6 9 . 8 * Regrowth of severed ends ; % 2 . 9 6 1 . 4 3 . 5 6 1 . 4 ND Annealing of severed ends ; % 2 . 1 6 1 . 0 9 . 3 6 3 . 0 * Filament origin ; % per cell de novo 27 . 9 6 12 . 7 27 . 6 6 15 . 9 ends 21 . 8 6 8 . 7 28 . 2 6 11 . 3 † side 50 . 3 6 14 . 7 44 . 2 6 15 . 4 Measurements taken from epidermal cells in the top third of 5 - d - old hypocotyls of the cpb - 1 mutant and corresponding wild - type sibling plants . Values given are means 6 SE , with n > 50 ﬁ laments from n > 10 epidermal cells and at least 10 hypocotyls per line . For ﬁ lament origin : n > 30 cells from at least 10 hypocotyls per line . ND , not signi ﬁ cantly different from the wild - type control value by Student ’ s t test ; P value > 0 . 05 . * Signi ﬁ cantly different from the wild - type control value by Student ’ s t test ; P value # 0 . 05 . † Signi ﬁ cantly different from wild - type control group value by analysis of variance ; P value < 0 . 0001 . Figure 6 . Density of the Actin Array in cpb - 1 Hypocotyl Epidermal Cells Is Insensitive to Exogenous PA Treatment . Percentage of occupancy or density was measured and binned into three regions along the axial gradient of cell expansion in 5 - d - old etiolated wild - type ( WT ) ( A ) or cpb - 1 ( B ) hypocotyls after incubation with 0 , 10 , 50 , or 100 µ M PA or with 100 µ M PS for 30 min . Wild - type seedlings treated with PA have signi ﬁ cantly increased ﬁ lament density in the middle and bottom thirds of hypocotyls in a dose - dependent manner ( A ) . By contrast , PA treatments of cpb - 1 seedlings did not increase the density , but rather led to a modest decline in density at all concentrations tested ( B ) . Treatments with another acidic phospholipid , PS , had no measurable effect on actin ﬁ lament levels in either wild - type or cpb - 1 seedlings . Values given are means 6 SE ( n = 300 images from 150 cells per region ; 10 hypocotyls were measured for each treatment per genotype ; * P < 0 . 05 and * * P < 0 . 001 , analysis of variance ) . Capping Protein Is Regulated by Phosphatidic Acid 3749 evidence that although PIP 2 prevents CP binding to ﬁ lament barbed ends , it does not ef ﬁ ciently dissociate CP from ends ( Kuhn and Pollard , 2007 ) , indicating that the exact mechanism by which PIP 2 regulates CP is still controversial ( Cooper and Sept , 2008 ) . Despite the uncapping and anticapping activities of PIP 2 in vitro , little is known about the physiological signi ﬁ cance of PIP 2 – CP interactions . Increasing PIP 2 concentration at the plasma membrane in CV1 cells through PIP5KI overexpression results in loss of CP from detergent - resistant cytoskeleton fractions ( Yamamoto et al . , 2001 ) . Several older studies report that the activation of actin assembly in permeabilized human platelets results from uncapping of actin ﬁ lament barbed ends by PPIs ( Hartwig et al . , 1995 ; Barkalow et al . , 1996 ) . These data imply that PIP 2 inhibits end - capping activity of CP in vivo , which is important for the robust actin assembly required in diverse cellular processes . CP from Arabidopsis is regulated by both PA and PIP 2 , with a modest preference for PIP 2 ( Huang et al . , 2003 , 2006 ) . Be - cause PA is markedly more abundant in plant membranes than is PIP 2 , the authors speculate that PA binding is physiologically relevant for CP activity . PA is considered a major signaling lipid that mediates many normal cell and developmental functions in plants ( Li et al . , 2009 ; Testerink and Munnik , 2011 ) . Cellular levels of PA also change rapidly in response to biotic and abiotic stresses , such as water de ﬁ cit , wounding , and microbial attack . Evidence for connections between PA signaling , PLD activity , and the cytoskeleton is emerging rapidly ( Li et al . , 2009 ; Testerink and Munnik , 2011 ) . Recombinant plant PLD b isoforms bind to actin ﬁ laments directly , and their activity is modulated by actin in a polymerization - dependent manner ; speci ﬁ cally , monomeric actin inhibits PLD b activity , whereas ﬁ lamentous actin enhances it ( Kusner et al . , 2002 ; Pleskot et al . , 2010 ) . Hindering PLD activity and PA production with 1 - butanol treatments results in an increase in bundled actin ﬁ laments in multiple plant cells and organs ( Motes et al . , 2005 ; Pleskot et al . , 2010 ) . Moreover , ex - ogenous PA treatments cause an increase in actin ﬁ lament levels ( Lee et al . , 2003 ; Huang et al . , 2006 ; Pleskot et al . , 2010 ) . In this study , we observed an increased density of actin ﬁ la - ments in the cortical array of epidermal cells following exogenous PA treatments . Lowering PA levels by inhibiting its production from PLD by 1 - butanol treatments had the opposite effect . Furthermore , careful examination of actin dynamics after ex - ogenous PA treatments revealed signi ﬁ cant changes in the properties of ﬁ lament ends . An increase in available ends was observed in wild - type cells treated with PA , with up to a threefold enhancement of ﬁ lament - ﬁ lament annealing and more growing ﬁ laments that originated from ends . Importantly , the increased actin ﬁ lament levels and changes in end dynamics in cpb - 1 mutant cells were completely insensitive to PA treatment . These results demonstrate that CP activities are negatively regulated by PA , resulting in the uncapping of ﬁ lament ends , and thereby al - lowing assembly of new F - actin from a large pool of pro ﬁ lin - actin . Considering its concentration in cells ( ; 1 µ M ) , CP is abundant enough to respond to signaling cascades triggered by PA / PLD . Additionally , the activation of actin assembly via the inhibition of CP through the PA / PLD pathway may further enhance PLD activity ( Kusner et al . , 2002 ; Pleskot et al . , 2010 ) . This positive feedback mechanism would facilitate signal ampli ﬁ cation during responses to developmental cues or biotic and abiotic stresses . Collectively , we provide in vivo evidence that the end - capping activity of CP is inhibited by membrane lipids in eukaryotic cells . Thus , CP acts as a PA biosensor and key transducer of ﬂ uxes in membrane signaling lipids into changes in actin cytoskeleton dynamics . To date , At CP is the only plant actin binding protein known to directly bind and be regulated by PA in vitro ( Huang Figure 7 . Annealing Frequency and Filament Origin Are Insensitive to Exogenous PA Treatment in cpb - 1 Epidermal Cells . Annealing frequency and ﬁ lament origins were measured in cpb - 1 and wild - type ( WT ) epidermal cells from the bottom third of hypocotyls following treatments with PA and PS . ( A ) Annealing frequency from wild - type ( WT ) cells treated with PA was approximately threefold higher than untreated cells ( blue ; * P < 0 . 05 , t test ) ; cpb - 1 cells after PA treatment had no obvious increase in annealing frequency compared with control cells ( purple ) . Treatments with PS had no signi ﬁ cant effect on annealing frequency in either cpb - 1 or wild - type cells . Values given are means 6 SE ( n > 50 ﬁ laments from > 10 epidermal cells and at least 10 hypocotyls for each treatment per genotype ) . ( B ) The percentage of ﬁ laments that originate from ends was increased in wild - type cells after PA treatment . ( C ) Filament origins in cpb - 1 cells treated with phospholipids were not signi ﬁ cantly different from untreated cells . Measurements were taken from n = 30 cells from at least 10 hypocotyls for each treatment per genotype ; * * P < 0 . 0001 , analysis of variance . 3750 The Plant Cell et al . , 2006 ) ; however , we cannot exclude the possibility that PA regulates other actin binding proteins in plant cells . In fact , the slight reduction of actin ﬁ lament density after exogenous PA treatments in cpb - 1 mutant cells suggests that there may be other proteins involved in PA - induced actin cytoskeleton changes . The actin cytoskeleton plays a vital role in the regulation of anisotropic cell expansion . Investigations of actin and actin binding proteins in plant cell growth have provided insights into the coordination between F - actin array formation and cell expansion ( Smith and Oppenheimer , 2005 ; Hussey et al . , 2006 ) . Numerous pharmacological and genetic data demon - strate that disrupting actin cytoskeleton arrays results in cell expansion defects ( Smith and Oppenheimer , 2005 ; Hussey et al . , 2006 ) . For example , loss of ADF4 causes excessively bundled actin arrays and enhances the expansion of hypocotyl epidermal cells , which suggests that increased actin bundling is required for cell expansion ( Henty et al . , 2011 ) . It has been hypothesized that actin bundles contribute to the delivery of cell wall – containing vesicles to plasma membrane sites where growth occurs ( Hussey et al . , 2006 ) . It has also been argued that actin ﬁ lament cables are responsible for distributing Golgi around the cell , which then dictates where cellulose synthase – containing vesicles are delivered to cortical microtubules for insertion into the plasma membrane ( Gutierrez et al . , 2009 ) . Our data show that reduced CP levels cause a signi ﬁ cantly more dense but less bundled actin array ; however , these changes in actin array architecture still correlate with excessive elongation of hypocotyl epidermal cells . These ﬁ ndings imply that the extent of ﬁ lament density and / or bundling do not directly correlate with cell elongation . In addition , epidermal cells from petioles of the adf4 mutant are shorter than wild - type petiole cells , which also exhibit enhanced bundling ( Henty et al . , 2011 ) . Moreover , cp mutants have signi ﬁ cantly reduced root length , but cells from the root elongation zone have actin arrays with an increased density of actin ﬁ laments and decreased extent of bundling . These data further suggest that there is no direct correlation between gross actin array architecture and the expansion of cells from different tissues or developmental stages . Previous studies demonstrate that actin ﬁ laments undergo rapid turn - over and incessant rearrangements ( Staiger et al . , 2009 ; Smertenko et al . , 2010 ; Henty et al . , 2011 ) . This raises the ques - tion of why plant cells need the actin network to be extremely dynamic . We hypothesize that there is a close interplay between actin dynamics and delivery of material for cell growth . One po - tential mechanism whereby cells might control their expansion is via precise regulation of actin dynamics . Based on the detailed analysis of stochastic dynamic parameters , the actively expanding hypocotyl epidermal cells from cp mutants have increased ﬁ la - ment lengths and lifetimes as well as reduced severing frequency compared with wild - type cells . Consequently , the mutants have disrupted turnover of actin ﬁ laments ; adf4 mutants also have the similar dynamic properties ( Henty et al . , 2011 ) . Therefore , we predict that perturbation of actin dynamics and the increase in ﬁ lament lengths and lifetimes leads to aberrant subcellular traf ﬁ cking . As a consequence , cp and adf4 mutants with altered actin dynamicity show increased axial expansion of hypocotyl epidermal cells . METHODS Plant Material Arabidopsis thaliana T - DNA insertion lines cpa - 1 ( SALK _ 080009 ) , cpb - 1 ( SALK _ 014783 ) , and cpb - 3 ( SALK _ 101017 ) were obtained from theABRC ( Ohio State University ) . Homozygous mutant plants were identi ﬁ ed by PCR using primers described in Supplemental Table 3 online . These lines were crossed to wild - type Columbia - 0 expressing the GFP - fABD2 Figure 8 . Density of the Actin Array in cpb - 1 Hypocotyl Epidermal Cells Is Insensitive to 1 - Butanol Treatment . Percentage of occupancy or density was measured and binned into three regions along the axial gradient of cell expansion in 5 - d - old etiolated wild - type ( WT ) ( A ) or cpb - 1 ( B ) hypocotyls after incubation with 0 , 0 . 1 , 0 . 5 , or 1 % 1 - butanol or with 1 % 2 - butanol for 15 min . Wild - type seedlings treated with 1 - butanol have signi ﬁ cantly decreased ﬁ lament density in the top , middle , and bottom regions of hypocotyls , and this reduction is dose dependent ( A ) . By contrast , 1 - butanol treatments of cpb - 1 seedlings did not decrease the density ( B ) . Treatments with 2 - butanol had no measurable effect on actin ﬁ lament levels in either wild - type or cpb - 1 seedlings . Values given are means 6 SE ( n = 300 images from 150 cells per region ; 10 hypocotyls were measured for each treatment per genotype ; * P < 0 . 05 and * * P < 0 . 001 , analysis of variance ) . Capping Protein Is Regulated by Phosphatidic Acid 3751 reporter ( Sheahan et al . , 2004 ; Staiger et al . , 2009 ) , and homozygous mutants , as well as wild - type siblings , were recovered from F2 populations . RNA Extraction and qRT - PCR Dark - grown Arabidopsis seedlings were harvested at 10 d after germi - nation , ﬂ ashfrozen , andgroundto powder underliquidnitrogen . RNAwas prepared with TRIzol reagent ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer ’ s protocol . Two - step qRT - PCR was performed using 2 3 SYBR Green mastermix ( AppliedBiosystems ) . Gene - speci ﬁ cprimersfor CPA and CPB ( see Supplemental Figure 1 and Supplemental Table 3 online ) were used , and relative expression levels were compared after normalization to GAPD transcript levels . Three biological and technical replicates were performed per genotype . Results were analyzed using comparative ∆ C T ( for cyclethreshold ) with GAPD controls ( Khuranaetal . , 2010 ; Hentyetal . , 2011 ) . Plant Growth Surface - sterilized seeds were plated onto 0 . 5 3 Murashige and Skoog medium supplemented with 1 % Suc and strati ﬁ ed at 4°C for 3 d . After exposure to white light for 4 h , seedlings were grown in the dark for 5 d at 21°C prior to imaging of hypocotyl epidermal cells . A single - blind ex - perimental design was used for all phenotypic analyses . To analyze root growth , seedlings were grown vertically on 0 . 5 3 Murashige and Skoog mediumwithoutSuc , solidi ﬁ edwith0 . 6 % agar , underlong - dayconditions ( 16 h light / 8 h dark ) at 21°C ( Dyachok et al . , 2011 ) . All image measure - ments were performed with Image J ( http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / ) . Phospholipid Preparation and Plant Treatment The1 , 2 - diacyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphate fromeggyolk ( P9511 ; PA ) andPS ( P7769 ) were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich . Phospholipids were dis - solved in chloroform , and the solvent was evaporated under a stream of N 2 . Before use , phospholipids were mixed with water and sonicated in a water bath for 5 min . For phospholipid or butanol treatments , 5 - d - old dark - grown seedlings were soaked in PA or PS for 30 min or in butanol for 15 min prior to imaging . Water was used for control experiments . Time - Lapse Imaging of Actin Filament Dynamics The cortical actin cytoskeleton in epidermal cells from dark - grown hypocotyls expressing GFP - fABD2 was examined by time - lapse variable - angle epi ﬂ uorescence microscopy ( VAEM ) as described previously ( Staiger etal . , 2009 ; Hentyetal . , 2011 ) . Asingle - blindexperimentaldesignwasused to compare single actin ﬁ lament parameters between homozygous cp mutants and wild - type sibling lines . Maximum ﬁ lament length and lifetime , ﬁ lament severing frequency , and elongation rates were determined as previously ( Staiger et al . , 2009 ; Henty et al . , 2011 ) . Filament origin was de ﬁ ned as a percentage of the ﬁ rst 10 to 15 ﬁ laments observed per cell that originated either de novo , from the side of a bundle or ﬁ lament , or from the end of a preexisting fragment . For this parameter , > 30 cells from at least 10 hypocotyls per genotype were measured . The behavior of all newly created ends following ﬁ lament severing events was also tracked . Regrowth or annealing frequency of the presumed plus ends was determined as apercentage ; thenumberofeventsobservedwasdividedbythetotalnumber of ends for each growing ﬁ lament and multiplied by 100 . Quantitative Analyses of Cytoskeleton Architecture Two parameters , skewness and density , were employed to quantitatively analyze actin cytoskeleton architecture ( Higaki et al . , 2010 ; Khurana et al . , 2010 ; Henty et al . , 2011 ) ; these correlate with the extent of actin ﬁ lament bundling and percentage of occupancy of the GFP signal in an image , respectively . Every epidermal cell in a ﬁ le along the long axis of 5 - d - old etiolated hypocotyls , or the elongation zone of 7 - d - old light - grown root tips , was documented with a series of overlapping VAEM micrographs . A ﬁ xed exposure time and gain setting were selected for cp mutants and their respective controls . Micrographs were analyzed in Image J using the methods described previously ( Higaki et al . , 2010 ; Henty et al . , 2011 ) . For statistical analysis , raw skewness and density values were binned into thirds based on position along the hypocotyl . For these measurements , at least 500 images of hypocotyl epidermal cells per binned section or > 60 images of root epidermal cells were collected from 25 individual seedlings per genotype . Accession Numbers Sequence data from this article can be found in the Arabidopsis Genome Initiative underthefollowing accessionnumbers : At CPA , At3g05520 ; and At CPB , At1g71790 . Supplemental Data The following materials are available in the online version of this article . Supplemental Figure 1 . Physical Maps and Molecular Characterization of the Arabidopsis Capping Protein ( At CP ) T - DNA Insertion Alleles . Supplemental Figure 2 . Two cp Double Mutants Have a Modest Hypocotyl Length Phenotype . Supplemental Figure 3 . Actin Arrays in Wild - type Epidermal Cells Are More Dense after PA Treatments . Supplemental Movie 1 . An Elongating Actin Filament Originates de Novo . Supplemental Movie 2 . An Elongating Actin Filament Originates from the Side of a Bundle . Supplemental Movie 3 . An Elongating Actin Filament Originates from a Preexisting End . Supplemental Movie 4 . An Actin Filament Elongates Rapidly from a Newly Created Barbed End . Supplemental Movie 5 . New Filaments Can Be Constructed by Filament - Filament Annealing of Severed Fragments . Supplemental Movie Legends 1 . Legends for Supplemental Movies 1 to 5 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank our colleagues in the Staiger lab for valuable feedback during these studies as well as David Kovar , Viktor Ž árský , Martin Potocký , and Roman Pleskot for helpful comments on the article . This research was funded by a grant from the Physical Biosciences Program of the Of ﬁ ce of Basic Energy Sciences at the U . S . Department of Energy ( DE - FG02 - 09ER15526 ) to C . J . S . The total internal re ﬂ ection ﬂ uorescence microscopy facility was supported in part by funds from the Bindley Bioscience Center . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS J . L . , S . H . , L . B . , and C . J . S designed the research . J . L . , J . L . H . - R . , S . H . , and X . W performed experiments . J . L . , J . L . H . - R . , S . H . , and C . J . S . analyzed data . J . L . , L . B . , and C . J . S . wrote the article . Received August 7 , 2012 ; revised August 7 , 2012 ; accepted August 16 , 2012 ; published September 7 , 2012 . 3752 The Plant Cell REFERENCES Abraham , V . C . , Krishnamurthi , V . , Taylor , D . L . , and Lanni , F . ( 1999 ) . The actin - based nanomachine at the leading edge of migrating cells . Biophys . J . 77 : 1721 – 1732 . Amatruda , J . F . , Gattermeir , D . J . , Karpova , T . S . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1992 ) . Effects of null mutations and overexpression of capping protein on morphogenesis , actin distribution and polarized secre - tion in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 1151 – 1162 . Andrianantoandro , E . , Blanchoin , L . , Sept , D . , McCammon , J . A . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) . Kinetic mechanism of end - to - end an - nealing of actin ﬁ laments . J . Mol . Biol . 312 : 721 – 730 . Augustine , R . C . , Pattavina , K . A . , Tüzel , E . , Vidali , L . , and Bezanilla , M . ( 2011 ) . Actin interacting protein1 and actin depolymerizing factor drive rapid actin dynamics in Physcomitrella patens . Plant Cell 23 : 3696 – 3710 . Bao , C . , Wang , J . , Zhang , R . , Zhang , B . , Zhang , H . , Zhou , Y . , and Huang , S . ( May 5 , 2012 ) . Arabidopsis VILLIN2 and VILLIN3 act re - dundantly in sclerenchyma development via bundling of actin ﬁ laments . Plant J . http : / / dx . doi . org / . 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 1313X . 2012 . 05044 . x Barkalow , K . , Witke , W . , Kwiatkowski , D . J . , and Hartwig , J . H . ( 1996 ) . Coordinated regulation of platelet actin ﬁ lament barbed ends by gelsolin and capping protein . J . Cell Biol . 134 : 389 – 399 . Blanchoin , L . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Henty , J . L . , Khurana , P . , and Staiger , C . J . ( 2010 ) . Actin dynamics in plant cells : A team effort from multiple proteins orchestrates this very fast - paced game . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 13 : 714 – 723 . Cooper , J . A . , and Sept , D . ( 2008 ) . New insights into mechanism and regulation of actin capping protein . Int . Rev . Cell Mol . Biol . 267 : 183 – 206 . Dyachok , J . , Zhu , L . , Liao , F . , He , J . , Huq , E . , and Blanca ﬂ or , E . B . ( 2011 ) . SCAR mediates light - induced root elongation in Arabidopsis through photoreceptors and proteasomes . Plant Cell 23 : 3610 – 3626 . El Sayegh , T . Y . , Arora , P . D . , Ling , K . , Laschinger , C . , Janmey , P . A . , Anderson , R . A . , and McCulloch , C . A . ( 2007 ) . Phosphatidylinosi - tol - 4 , 5 bisphosphate produced by PIP5KIgamma regulates gelsolin , actin assembly , and adhesion strength of N - cadherin junctions . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 : 3026 – 3038 . Gendreau , E . , Traas , J . , Desnos , T . , Grandjean , O . , Caboche , M . , and Höfte , H . ( 1997 ) . Cellular basis of hypocotyl growth in Arabi - dopsis thaliana . Plant Physiol . 114 : 295 – 305 . Gutierrez , R . , Lindeboom , J . J . , Paredez , A . R . , Emons , A . M . C . , and Ehrhardt , D . W . ( 2009 ) . Arabidopsis cortical microtubules position cellulose synthase delivery to the plasma membrane and interact with cellulose synthase traf ﬁ cking compartments . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 : 797 – 806 . Hartwig , J . H . , Bokoch , G . M . , Carpenter , C . L . , Janmey , P . A . , Taylor , L . A . , Toker , A . , and Stossel , T . P . ( 1995 ) . Thrombin receptor liga - tion and activated Rac uncap actin ﬁ lament barbed ends through phosphoinositide synthesis in permeabilized human platelets . Cell 82 : 643 – 653 . Henty , J . L . , Bledsoe , S . W . , Khurana , P . , Meagher , R . B . , Day , B . , Blanchoin , L . , and Staiger , C . J . ( 2011 ) . Arabidopsis actin depoly - merizing factor4 modulates the stochastic dynamic behavior of actin ﬁ laments in the cortical array of epidermal cells . Plant Cell 23 : 3711 – 3726 . Higaki , T . , Kutsuna , N . , Sano , T . , Kondo , N . , and Hasezawa , S . ( 2010 ) . Quanti ﬁ cation and cluster analysis of actin cytoskeletal structures in plant cells : Role of actin bundling in stomatal movement during diurnal cycles in Arabidopsis guard cells . Plant J . 61 : 156 – 165 . Hopmann , R . , Cooper , J . A . , and Miller , K . G . ( 1996 ) . Actin organi - zation , bristle morphology , and viability are affected by actin cap - ping protein mutations in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 133 : 1293 – 1305 . Huang , S . , Blanchoin , L . , Kovar , D . R . , and Staiger , C . J . ( 2003 ) . Arabidopsis capping protein ( AtCP ) is a heterodimer that regulates assembly at the barbed ends of actin ﬁ laments . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 44832 – 44842 . Huang , S . , Gao , L . , Blanchoin , L . , and Staiger , C . J . ( 2006 ) . Heter - odimeric capping protein from Arabidopsis is regulated by phos - phatidic acid . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 : 1946 – 1958 . Hug , C . , Jay , P . Y . , Reddy , I . , McNally , J . G . , Bridgman , P . C . , Elson , E . L . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1995 ) . Capping protein levels in ﬂ uence actin assembly and cell motility in Dictyostelium . Cell 81 : 591 – 600 . Hussey , P . J . , Ketelaar , T . , and Deeks , M . J . ( 2006 ) . Control of the actin cytoskeleton in plant cell growth . Annu . Rev . Plant Biol . 57 : 109 – 125 . Khurana , P . , Henty , J . L . , Huang , S . , Staiger , A . M . , Blanchoin , L . , and Staiger , C . J . ( 2010 ) . Arabidopsis VILLIN1 and VILLIN3 have overlapping and distinct activities in actin bundle formation and turnover . Plant Cell 22 : 2727 – 2748 . Kim , K . , Galletta , B . J . , Schmidt , K . O . , Chang , F . S . , Blumer , K . J . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2006 ) . Actin - based motility during endocytosis in budding yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 : 1354 – 1363 . Kim , K . , McCully , M . E . , Bhattacharya , N . , Butler , B . , Sept , D . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2007 ) . Structure / function analysis of the interaction of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate with actin - capping pro - tein : Implications for how capping protein binds the actin ﬁ lament . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 5871 – 5879 . Kim , K . , Yamashita , A . , Wear , M . A . , Maéda , Y . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2004 ) . Capping protein binding to actin in yeast : Biochemical mechanism and physiological relevance . J . Cell Biol . 164 : 567 – 580 . Kovar , D . R . , Wu , J . - Q . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2005 ) . Pro ﬁ lin - mediated competition between capping protein and formin Cdc12p during cytokinesis in ﬁ ssion yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 : 2313 – 2324 . Kuhn , J . R . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2007 ) . Single molecule kinetic analysis of actin ﬁ lament capping . Polyphosphoinositides do not dissociate capping proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 28014 – 28024 . Kusner , D . J . , Barton , J . A . , Wen , K . - K . , Wang , X . , Rubenstein , P . A . , and Iyer , S . S . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of phospholipase D activity by actin . Actin exerts bidirectional modulation of mammalian phospholipase D activity in a polymerization - dependent , isoform - speci ﬁ c manner . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 50683 – 50692 . Lee , S . , Park , J . , and Lee , Y . ( 2003 ) . Phosphatidic acid induces actin polymerization by activating protein kinases in soybean cells . Mol . Cells 15 : 313 – 319 . Li , M . , Hong , Y . , and Wang , X . ( 2009 ) . Phospholipase D - and phos - phatidic acid - mediated signaling in plants . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1791 : 927 – 935 . Mejillano , M . R . , Kojima , S . - i . , Applewhite , D . A . , Gertler , F . B . , Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2004 ) . Lamellipodial versus ﬁ lo - podial mode of the actin nanomachinery : Pivotal role of the ﬁ lament barbed end . Cell 118 : 363 – 373 . Miyoshi , T . , Tsuji , T . , Higashida , C . , Hertzog , M . , Fujita , A . , Narumiya , S . , Scita , G . , and Watanabe , N . ( 2006 ) . Actin turnover - dependent fast dissociation of capping protein in the dendritic nu - cleation actin network : Evidence of frequent ﬁ lament severing . J . Cell Biol . 175 : 947 – 955 . Motes , C . M . , Pechter , P . , Yoo , C . M . , Wang , Y . S . , Chapman , K . D . , and Blanca ﬂ or , E . B . ( 2005 ) . Differential effects of two phospholi - pase D inhibitors , 1 - butanol and N - acylethanolamine , on in vivo cytoskeletal organization and Arabidopsis seedling growth . Protoplasma 226 : 109 – 123 . Munnik , T . , Arisz , S . A . , de Vrije , T . , and Musgrave , A . ( 1995 ) . G protein activation stimulates phospholipase D signaling in plants . Plant Cell 7 : 2197 – 2210 . Ojala , P . J . , Paavilainen , V . O . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2001 ) . Identi ﬁ - cation of yeast co ﬁ lin residues speci ﬁ c for actin monomer and PIP 2 binding . Biochemistry 40 : 15562 – 15569 . Capping Protein Is Regulated by Phosphatidic Acid 3753 Okreglak , V . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2007 ) . Co ﬁ lin recruitment and func - tion during actin - mediated endocytosis dictated by actin nucleotide state . J . Cell Biol . 178 : 1251 – 1264 . Pleskot , R . , Potocký , M . , Pejchar , P . , Linek , J . , Bezvoda , R . , Martinec , J . , Valentová , O . , Novotná , Z . , and Zárský , V . ( 2010 ) . Mutual regulation of plant phospholipase D and the actin cyto - skeleton . Plant J . 62 : 494 – 507 . Pleskot , R . , Pejchar , P . , Bezvoda , R . , Lichtscheidl , I . K . , Wolters - arts , M . , Marc , J . , (cid:1) Zárský , V . , and Potocký , M . ( March 19 , 2012 ) . Turnover of phosphatidic acid through distinct signalling pathways affects multiple aspects of tobacco pollen tube tip growth . Front . Physio . 3 : 54 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpls . 2012 . 00054 . Pollard , T . D . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2009 ) . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 : 1208 – 1212 . Rogers , S . L . , Wiedemann , U . , Stuurman , N . , and Vale , R . D . ( 2003 ) . Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Dro - sophila S2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 : 1079 – 1088 . Rozelle , A . L . , Machesky , L . M . , Yamamoto , M . , Driessens , M . H . E . , Insall , R . H . , Roth , M . G . , Luby - Phelps , K . , Marriott , G . , Hall , A . , and Yin , H . L . ( 2000 ) . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in - duces actin - based movement of raft - enriched vesicles through WASP - Arp2 / 3 . Curr . Biol . 10 : 311 – 320 . Saarikangas , J . , Zhao , H . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2010 ) . Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton - plasma membrane interplay by phosphoi - nositides . Physiol . Rev . 90 : 259 – 289 . Schafer , D . A . , Jennings , P . B . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1996 ) . Dynamics of capping protein and actin assembly in vitro : Uncapping barbed ends by polyphosphoinositides . J . Cell Biol . 135 : 169 – 179 . Sheahan , M . B . , Staiger , C . J . , Rose , R . J . , and McCurdy , D . W . ( 2004 ) . A green ﬂ uorescent protein fusion to actin - binding domain 2 of Arabidopsis ﬁ mbrin highlights new features of a dynamic actin cytoskeleton in live plant cells . Plant Physiol . 136 : 3968 – 3978 . Sizonenko , G . I . , Karpova , T . S . , Gattermerir , D . J . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1996 ) . Mutational analysis of capping protein function in Saccha - romyces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell 7 : 1 – 15 . Smertenko , A . P . , Deeks , M . J . , and Hussey , P . J . ( 2010 ) . Strategies of actin reorganisation in plant cells . J . Cell Sci . 123 : 3019 – 3028 . Smith , L . G . , and Oppenheimer , D . G . ( 2005 ) . Spatial control of cell expan - sion by the plant cytoskeleton . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 21 : 271 – 295 . Staiger , C . J . , Poulter , N . S . , Henty , J . L . , Franklin - Tong , V . E . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2010 ) . Regulation of actin dynamics by actin - binding proteins in pollen . J . Exp . Bot . 61 : 1969 – 1986 . Staiger , C . J . , Sheahan , M . B . , Khurana , P . , Wang , X . , McCurdy , D . W . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2009 ) . Actin ﬁ lament dynamics are dom - inated by rapid growth and severing activity in the Arabidopsis cortical array . J . Cell Biol . 184 : 269 – 280 . Testerink , C . , and Munnik , T . ( 2011 ) . Molecular , cellular , and physi - ological responses to phosphatidic acid formation in plants . J . Exp . Bot . 62 : 2349 – 2361 . Tolias , K . F . , Hartwig , J . H . , Ishihara , H . , Shibasaki , Y . , Cantley , L . C . , and Carpenter , C . L . ( 2000 ) . Type Ialpha phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase mediates Rac - dependent actin assembly . Curr . Biol . 10 : 153 – 156 . Tóth , R . , Gerding - Reimers , C . , Deeks , M . J . , Menninger , S . , Gallegos , R . M . , Tonaco , I . A . N . , Hübel , K . , Hussey , P . J . , Waldmann , H . , and Coupland , G . ( 2012 ) . Prieurianin / endosidin 1 is an actin - stabilizing small molecule identi ﬁ ed from a chemical ge - netic screen for circadian clock effectors in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant J . 71 : 338 – 352 . van Rheenen , J . , Song , X . , van Roosmalen , W . , Cammer , M . , Chen , X . , Desmarais , V . , Yip , S . - C . , Backer , J . M . , Eddy , R . J . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2007 ) . EGF - induced PIP 2 hydrolysis releases and activates co ﬁ lin locally in carcinoma cells . J . Cell Biol . 179 : 1247 – 1259 . Wear , M . A . , Yamashita , A . , Kim , K . , Maéda , Y . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2003 ) . How capping protein binds the barbed end of the actin ﬁ l - ament . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1531 – 1537 . Yamamoto , M . , Hilgemann , D . H . , Feng , S . Y . , Bito , H . , Ishihara , H . , Shibasaki , Y . , and Yin , H . L . ( 2001 ) . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate induces actin stress - ﬁ ber formation and inhibits mem - brane ruf ﬂ ing in CV1 cells . J . Cell Biol . 152 : 867 – 876 . 3754 The Plant Cell DOI 10 . 1105 / tpc . 112 . 103945 ; originally published online September 7 , 2012 ; 2012 ; 24 ; 3742 - 3754 Plant Cell Staiger Jiejie Li , Jessica L . Henty - Ridilla , Shanjin Huang , Xia Wang , Laurent Blanchoin and Christopher J . Arabidopsis Acid in Capping Protein Modulates the Dynamic Behavior of Actin Filaments in Response to Phosphatidic This information is current as of October 30 , 2012 Supplemental Data http : / / www . plantcell . org / content / suppl / 2012 / 09 / 11 / tpc . 112 . 103945 . DC1 . html References http : / / www . plantcell . org / content / 24 / 9 / 3742 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 53 articles , 32 of which can be accessed free at : Permissions https : / / www . copyright . com / ccc / openurl . do ? sid = pd _ hw1532298X & issn = 1532298X & WT . mc _ id = pd _ hw1532298X eTOCs http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain Sign up for eTOCs at : CiteTrack Alerts http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain Sign up for CiteTrack Alerts at : Subscription Information http : / / www . aspb . org / publications / subscriptions . cfm is available at : Plant Physiology and The Plant Cell Subscription Information for ADVANCING THE SCIENCE OF PLANT BIOLOGY © American Society of Plant Biologists