The Rockefeller University Press J . Cell Biol . Vol . 202 No . 3 407 – 419 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201304193 JCB 407 JCB : Review Correspondence to Wolfgang Baumeister : baumeist @ biochem . mpg . de Abbreviations used in this paper : cryo - ET , cryo - electron tomography ; EM , elec - tron microscopy ; FIB , focused ion beam ; LM , light microscopy ; SNR , signal - to - noise ratio . Introduction For a long time , scientists have attempted to understand biolog - ical phenomena through studies of the molecules that make up a living cell . This reductionist approach of isolating and purify - ing molecules for structural and functional studies has been enor - mously successful . The atomic resolution structures of DNA and proteins such as myoglobin , hemoglobin , and lysozyme were early triumphs of the emerging discipline of molecular struc - tural biology because these structures provided insights into molecu - lar functions . Despite these achievements , in recent years it has become apparent that discrete biological functions can only rarely be attributed to individual molecules . Nearly every major process in a cell is performed by molecular assemblies that form func - tional modules and many biochemical pathways require a dis - tinctly nonrandom spatial organization of their components to proceed efficiently ( Alberts , 1998 ; Hartwell et al . , 1999 ) . Recent years have witnessed an explosion in the amount of information about the identity of the molecular players involved in cellular processes . Cellular proteomes have been comprehensively ana - lyzed by genomics and mass spectrometry – based proteomics . Putative large - scale interaction networks determined by methods such as two - hybrid screening or affinity purification in con - junction with mass spectrometry ( Aloy and Russell 2004 ) have helped assign proteins to macromolecular complexes and order them into plausible biochemical pathways ( Gavin et al . , 2002 ; Tong et al . , 2004 ; Walther and Mann 2010 ) . However , many of these assignments are tentative and need to be confirmed by structural methods . Some molecular assemblies are held together by inter - actions that are strong enough to withstand the rigors of purifica - tion . Such complexes with stable quaternary structures are often amenable to studies using traditional structural biology methods such as x - ray crystallography and single - particle electron micros - copy . However , many assemblies exist only transiently , or are not stable enough to be studied in vitro . Their structure deter - mination is much more challenging because they disintegrate when subjected to standard isolation methods involving cell disruption and fractionation . Furthermore , it is often difficult to reconstitute molecular assemblies in vitro because the diverse and crowded cellular environment cannot be easily mimicked . In situ structure determination requires the development of methods allowing structural studies to be performed within un - perturbed cells . These methods must be capable of determining the precise spatial relationships between components of unstable and transient molecular assemblies under physiological condi - tions . A “visual proteomics” approach , i . e . , proteomics based on imaging ( Nickell et al . , 2006 ) , adds a new dimension to the es - tablished methods of mass spectrometry – based proteomics . Electron microscopy ( EM ) can bridge the gap between ultra - structural compartmentalization and the structural analysis of molecular inhabitants of the cell , at a nanometer - length scale ( termed “mesobiology” in Ball , 2003 ) by providing high resolution 3D images ( tomograms ) of cellular landscapes . The combina - tion of EM with cryo - techniques , termed cryo - electron tomogra - phy ( cryo - ET , see Box 1 ) , enables the visualization of frozen hydrated biological samples unadulterated by harmful prepara - tion methods . Cryo - ET is based on old ideas , but now the time has come to provide a structural picture of the undisturbed mac - romolecular organization inside cell s ( Robinson et al . , 2007 ) . This review begins with a section that puts the recent developments of sample preparation methods into a historical perspective . Electron microscopy played a key role in establishing cell biology as a discipline , by producing fundamental insights into cellular organization and ultrastructure . Many semi - nal discoveries were made possible by the development of new sample preparation methods and imaging modalities . Recent technical advances include sample vitrification that faithfully preserves molecular structures , three - dimensional imaging by electron tomography , and improved image - processing methods . These new techniques have enabled the extraction of high fidelity structural information and are beginning to reveal the macromolecular organization of unperturbed cellular environments . Cryo - electron tomography : The challenge of doing structural biology in situ Vladan Lu č i ć , Alexander Rigort , and Wolfgang Baumeister Max - Planck - Institute of Biochemistry , Am Klopferspitz 18 , 82152 Martinsried , Germany © 2013 Lu č i ć et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y on A ugu s t 28 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 202 • NUMBER 3 • 2013 408 by osmium tetroxide improved the preservation of cellular fea - tures and additional staining with heavy metals provided strong contrast . The electron irradiation of samples was reduced to tol - erable levels by instrument improvements such as the introduc - tion of the condenser aperture . Subsequent technical advancements led to major discover - ies , but the basic sample preparation workflow comprising chem - ical fixation , heavy - metal staining , dehydration , embedding , and sectioning remained the same . Studies that carefully compared different preparation methods identified artifacts and in doing so stimulated further improvements ( Maunsbach and Afzelius 1999 ; Afzelius and Maunsbach 2004 ) . However , it became evi - dent that these harsh procedures bore the risk of altering the structure of biological samples , which could lead to miscon - ceptions about cellular organization ( Heuser 2002 ) . The lack of external standards and uncertainty about the faithful preser - vation of biological structures remained problematic , and EM was increasingly perceived as an expensive , artifact - prone method requiring long training periods ( Geuze 1999 ) . Nevertheless , this method has been central to our understanding of cellular organization and ultrastructure , and currently new modalities for imaging large volumes are under development ( Denk and Horstmann 2004 ) . Freezing , a well - known method for stabilizing biological material , was used as the initial step in an EM preparation approach that is followed by sample dehydration at low temper - ature ( freeze - drying ) and embedding to allow sectioning at room temperature ( Müller 1957 ) . Artifacts associated with this proce - dure inspired the development of cryo - methods such as freeze - fracture and superficial freeze - drying ( etching ) of samples at The cellular cryo - ET workflow is outlined in Fig . 1 , basic tech - nical details about electron imaging and tomography can be found in Box 1 , and promising technical advances are described in Box 2 . We then discuss the interpretation of tomograms with particular at - tention to molecular identification and highlight developments that will likely be important for the future of cellular cryo - ET of eukaryotic systems ( see Gan and Jensen 2012 for a recent re - view covering other aspects of electron tomography ) . The road to sample preparation in cryo - electron tomography A short history of sample preparation . Electron micros - copy played a fundamental role in establishing the discipline of cell biology , even though the origins of the field and the term “cell biology” date back to the nineteenth century ( Carnoy 1884 ) . The contribution of EM to cell biology is illustrated by the role of eminent electron microscopists , and Keith Porter in par - ticular , in establishing this journal ( Porter and Bennett 1981 ) . The electron microscope was invented by Ernst Ruska in the 1930s , and its resolution soon surpassed that of the light micro - scope ( Ruska 1979 ) . Several technical developments during the following decades helped resolve the basic problems of imag - ing biological materials by EM . The development of the ultramicrotome ( Porter and Blum 1953 ; Sjostrand 1953 ) with glass ( Latta and Hartmann 1950 ) and diamond knives ( Fernandez - Moran 1953 ) was arguably the most important advancement in enabling the preparation of suf - ficiently thin specimens ( Afzelius and Maunsbach 2004 ) . Resin embedding media such as methacrylate ( Newman et al . , 1949 ) gave samples the strength required for sectioning . Sample fixation Figure 1 . Schematic representation of the cryo - ET workflow . Vitrification . The sample type usually dictates the vitrification method . Samples that are thin enough to be directly investigated by EM are commonly vitrified by plunge - freezing into a cryogen ( such as liquid ethane at less than  160°C ) where sufficiently fast cooling speeds are reached ( Dubochet et al . , 1988 ) . High - pressure freezing combines rapid temperature decrease with the application of high pressure , which lowers the melting point of water . This allows vitrification of samples up to 200 µm in thickness , but cryo - protectants are often needed ( Studer et al . , 2008 ) . Thinning . Due to a strong electron – matter interaction , samples thicker than 1 µm are virtually opaque to electrons and require thinning at cryo - conditions . Although vitreous sectioning is currently used more often , focused ion beam milling ( FIB ) is an emerging method with a great promise for the future ( see Box 2 ) . Electron tomography . 3D images of vitrified samples are produced by tomographic imaging ( see Box 1 for more information ) . Data analysis . Computational methods are used to improve the resolution of structures visualized in tomograms and to aid in their molecular identification . Cryo - correlative light microscopy is an optional procedure that facilitates identification and navigation to target features in cryo - ET . on A ugu s t 28 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 409 Cryo - electron tomography : The challenge of doing structural biology in situ • Lu č i ć et al . lower temperatures ( Steere 1957 ; Moor et al . , 1961 ) . The metal replicas obtained subsequently produce strong contrast and allow for limited 3D visualization by EM , but their granularity limits resolu - tion . Freeze - fracture and freeze - etching produced superior structural preservation and at the time were considered to be arti - fact free . These methods provided definite answers about the basic architecture of biological membranes and the mode of interaction between lipids and mem - brane proteins ( Branton 1971 ; Verkleij and Ververgaert 1978 ) . In combination with quick freezing , this method delivered images of fast biological processes , such as synap - tic vesicle release ( Heuser et al . , 1979 ) . Imaging hydrated samples in EM avoids dehydration - induced structural alter - ations such as flattening and collapse . An early approach using a hydration chamber placed inside the column of an electron microscope demonstrated the importance of full sample hydration for the preser - vation of high resolution information ( Matricardi et al . , 1972 ) . Despite serving as a successful proof of concept , this hydra - tion chamber was not developed further because it was cumbersome to operate . Fur - thermore , the movement of proteins in so - lution and subcellular components makes this approach incompatible with imaging modalities such as electron tomography , which require that the sample under scru - tiny does not move during the extended time period required to acquire a tomo - graphic image series . Complete vitrification of aqueous solutions , that is freezing that avoids ice crystal formation , was first achieved by jet - freezing of micrometer - sized droplets ( Bruggeller and Mayer 1980 ) . Currently , vitrification is achieved either by plunge - freezing ( Dubochet et al . , 1988 ) or high - pressure freezing ( Studer et al . , 2008 ) , depending on the sample thickness ( Fig . 1 ) . High - pressure frozen samples may be dehydrated by freeze substitution , embed - ded in resin , sectioned , and imaged at room temperature ( Hurbain and Sachse 2011 ) . This procedure typically provides better preservation than methods based on chemical fixation and can reveal the detailed ultrastructure of large cellular volumes ( Marsh et al . , 2001 ) . The term cryo - EM is sometimes misused ; in our opinion it should be reserved for EM of Box 1 . Principles of electron tomography Electron imaging . Image contrast arises primarily because of variations in the density within a sample . Be - cause unstained biological material essentially consists of atoms of low atomic number , the contrast and consequently the SNR is generally low in cryo - ET . Phase - contrast dominates in images of unstained samples . In cryo - ET it is normally in - duced by slight negative defocusing ( underfocusing ) . Underfocus phase - contrast is caused by an interference effect that modulates both low and high frequencies ( see Reimer and Kohl ( 2008 ) for details ) . It is mathematically described by the contrast transfer function ( CTF ) , an oscillating function in spatial frequencies that has regions of inverted contrast , effectively limit - ing the range of spatial frequencies in tomograms . Increasing underfocus increases apparent contrast but decreases resolution ( see examples in Fig . 2 of Vanhecke et al . , 2011 ) . Electron interaction with matter results in elastic and inelastic electron scattering . Elec - trons that interact with atomic nuclei scatter elastically ; they are used for imaging because they are well localized and contain high resolution information . Inelastically scattered elec - trons have poor localization and coherence and therefore do not contribute to high resolu - tion information . When imaging thick samples ( above 250 – 300 nm in thickness ) it is crucial that most of the inelastically scattered and multiple scattered electrons are removed by an energy filter before they reach the electron detector . Nevertheless , these electrons deposit part of their energy in the sample and can cause sample damage , thus limiting the electron dose available for imaging and the SNR . Increasing sample thickness further decreases the available electron dose , which lowers the achievable resolution and prevents imaging sam - ples thicker than 1 µm . Tomography . In electron tomography , a set of electron micrographs ( tilt series ) is acquired at different an - gular orientations of the sample . Tilting of the sample is accomplished by rotation of a com - puter - controlled specimen stage . Each electron micrograph is a projection through the sample where structural information is superimposed in the direction of the electron beam . This superposition obscures structural details in the individual images . Tilt series images are then aligned and computationally merged into a 3D image ( tomogram ) , thus separating the superimposed structures . In contrast to confocal light microscopy , where images are ac - quired as successive z - slices of a sample , in electron tomography , z - slices can be computa - tionally extracted only after reconstruction of a tomogram . Typically , a specimen is tilted around a fixed axis . Physical restrictions of the instru - ment and sample thickness usually limit the tilt range to ±60 – 70° , resulting in an incomplete set of projections and missing information . The maximum attainable isotropic resolution de - pends on the sample size and the number of projections , and is determined from Crowther’s criterion ( Crowther et al . , 1970 ) . Upon reconstruction , this missing information ( named the “missing wedge” due to its characteristic shape in Fourier space , see Fig . 4 in Luci ć et al . , 2005a ) causes elongation in the electron - beam direction and other distortions . In principle , the commonly used fixed - angular - increment tilting scheme is not the best one ( Saxton et al . , 1984 ) , but it appears to be the most robust in the presence of noise . Cryo - ET has to recon - cile the need to maximize the number of projections with the requirement that all of the im - ages have sufficient contrast to allow alignment , while keeping the cumulative dose low . The development of procedures for automated tilt series acquisition was a decisive step that made cryo - ET of vitrified biological samples practical ( Dierksen et al . , 1992 ; Koster et al . , 1992 , 1997 ) and led to rapid progress of this technique ( Mahamid and Baumeister 2012 ) . These procedures use areas adjacent to the feature of interest to correct for positioning and focusing errors resulting from the mechanical imperfections of the EM stage , and conse - quently ensure that almost all of the allowed electron dose is spent on data acquisition . on A ugu s t 28 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 202 • NUMBER 3 • 2013 410 native ( nonfixed , nonstained , fully hy - drated ) samples that are vitrified and then imaged by EM while still in the vitrified , fully hydrated , state . Vitrification—state of the art of sample preservation . Vitri - fication occurs within microseconds , pre - venting the disruption of lipid membranes and changes in solvent concentration within the sample , artifacts that are usu - ally caused by ice crystal growth . How - ever , the sample has to remain below  140°C at all times to avoid devitrifica - tion . Vitrified prokaryotic and eukary - otic cells are generally characterized by smooth and continuous membranes ( Fig . 2 ) . Their cytosolic material appears dense and well distributed , without signs of rearrangement and aggregation artifacts often associated with chemical fixation and dehydration . Vitrified biological ma - terial is observed directly , avoiding prob - lems of heavy metal staining , where uneven stain distribution and the mixture of positive and negative contrast often complicate image interpretation . Vitrified , fully hydrated in vitro sam - ples show excellent structural preserva - tion that allows reaching near - atomic resolution , as first demonstrated with catalase crystals ( Taylor and Glaeser 1974 ) . Hydrated , unstained samples are sensitive to electron irradiation because higher doses lead to progressive altera - tions of molecular structures ( Glaeser 2008 ) . Consequently , cryo - EM images have to be recorded at low electron ex - posures , limiting their signal - to - noise ratio ( SNR ) . Thus , the high resolution information of images of vitrified samples is often buried in noise . This information can be retrieved by averaging - based noise reduction , which requires images of a large number of identical particles . When particles form 2D crystals , EM crystal - lography ( Glaeser et al . , 2007 ) is the method of choice for the 3D structure determination because it can provide atomic resolution structures ( Fujiyoshi 2011 ) . Alternatively , single - particle EM analysis requires randomly oriented par - ticles and can reach resolutions better than 1 nm even for particles that lack sym - metry ( Henderson 2004 ) . At this reso - lution , it becomes possible to directly detect helices , fit the atomic structures of individual domains or subunits into EM Box 2 . Current technical developments Focused ion beam ( FIB ) milling . In this method , sample thinning is achieved by sputtering the specimen surface with gallium ions ( panel a ) . Vitreous lamellae , cut at a shallow angle to the supporting grid and extend - ing over tens of micrometers ( panels c and d ) were recently prepared from eukaryotic cells by cryo - FIB milling ( Rigort et al . , 2012a , c ) . Current development focuses on improving the reliability of the complete FIB - milling workflow and developing precise 3D targeting of low - copy number structures within large cellular volumes by correlative microscopy . Phase plates . Phase plates , which shift phases of some of the electrons in such a way that the CTF is par - tially corrected are currently under active development . They promise to enhance the con - trast and allow imaging closer to focus , thus improving the high resolution information ( Danev and Nagayama 2010 ) . Several different conceptual types of phase plates have been proposed , but problems related to their manufacturing , durability , and integration into the EM column still await solutions . Direct detection devices ( DDDs ) . In contrast to the charge - coupled device ( CCD ) – based detectors that are currently in wide - spread use , DDDs detect electrons directly and avoid blurring and distortions due to the generation and transfer of photons . Better transfer properties , stronger signal , and faster readout promise to make DDDs superior to steadily improving CCD cameras , albeit at the cost of a reduced lifetime ( McMullan et al . , 2009 ; Milazzo et al . , 2011 ) . Dual - axis tomography . Tilting around two tilt axes perpendicular to each other reduces missing wedge – induced distortions and improves information content . However , dual - axis tomography has rarely been used in cryo - ET due to the need to acquire an increased number of projections and difficulties with alignment . The increased sensitivity of DDDs is expected to alleviate these problems and enable the routine use of dual - axis tomography . density maps , and to integrate this information with other methodologies ( “hybrid methods” ) . This allows obtaining pseudo - atomic structures of complexes that are inac - cessible to x - ray crystallography due to their size or biochemical properties . Currently , single - particle cryo - EM is the imaging method of choice for averaging - based approaches of repetitive structures ( Frank 2002 ) . Whereas in vitro samples are thin (  50 nm ) , most eukaryotic cells exceed the thickness accessible to transmission electron microscopy ( up to 0 . 5 – 1 µm ) , thus necessitating a thinning step under cryo - conditions ( Fig . 1 ) . Vitreous section - ing is a challenging method that yields thin sections of vitrified material , enabling images that contain high levels of detail ( Al - Amoudi et al . , 2004 ) . However , vitre - ous sectioning leaves compression in the cutting direction , an artifact that is diffi - cult to quantify and correct ( McDowall et al . , 1983 ; Al - Amoudi et al . , 2005 ; Hsieh et al . , 2006 ) . A fundamentally different way to thin specimens uses focused ion beam ( FIB ) milling ( see Box 2 ) . Pilot studies have shown that cryo - FIB milling can indeed render regions of vitrified cells transparent enough for EM ( Marko et al . , 2007 ; Hayles et al . , 2010 ; Rigort et al . , 2010 ) , promising to greatly extend the appli - cability of cellular cryo - ET . So far these studies have failed to detect significant artifacts and only subtle ion beam – induced alterations are expected to occur within a layer of 5 – 20 nm within the milled surfaces ( Marko et al . , 2006 ) . Between intact cells and high resolution Sample choice and preparation have a strong influence on the level of detail that can be obtained in cryo - tomograms . Because sample thickness is inversely correlated to the on A ugu s t 28 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 411 Cryo - electron tomography : The challenge of doing structural biology in situ • Lu č i ć et al . Fig . 2 b exemplifies cryo - ET of intact eukaryotic cells im - aged in toto . This comprehensive study of the ultrastructure of the malaria - causing parasite Plasmodium identified the location of all of the major organelles and microtubules as well as nu - merous small filaments linking microtubules to the inner mem - brane ( Kudryashev et al . , 2010b ) . Several subsequent papers built upon this work . Notably , cryo - ET observations of the periph - ery of Plasmodium - infected and uninfected human erythrocytes revealed that the host – parasite interaction induces the reorgani - zation of host actin cytoskeleton and establishment of the se - cretory system ( Cyrklaff et al . , 2011 ) . Interference with actin remodeling and secretory activity was shown to impart pro - tection against malaria ( Cyrklaff et al . , 2012 ) , thus demonstrat - ing the medical relevance of cryo - ET in situ observations . The optimization of growth conditions to make cells suit - able for cellular cryo - ET requires particular attention , especially for adherent cells that need to be grown on EM grids before vit - rification . For example , individual neuronal axons and den - drites are relatively thin , but mature neurons in culture develop a dense network of processes that rapidly becomes prohibitively thick for imaging by cryo - ET . Consequently , neuronal cultures were investigated at early stages ( Garvalov et al . , 2006 ) or grown at low density ( Luci ć et al . , 2007 ) . Very recently , advances in FIB milling have made it possible to overcome this limitation achievable resolution ( Box 1 ) , cryo - tomograms of thick , intact cells are confined to the lower resolution range , whereas thin samples , such as cellular fractions and reconstituted systems , allow reaching higher resolution . Cryo - tomograms of cellular samples contain information about a large number of molecular components in a single image , but this makes the identification of specific structures challeng - ing . Here we review strategies that address these two basic prob - lems : sample thickness and molecular identification . Visual molecular identification in intact cells . The identification of structures in cryo - tomograms of intact cells is often limited to visual recognition of large features that can be clearly distinguished , including membranes , organelles , the cytoskeleton , and large complexes such as ribosomes ( Fig . 2 a ) . Because the thin peripheral regions of cells provide good con - trast , it is not surprising that the visualization of actin in the slime mold Dictyostelium marked the beginning of cellular cryo - tomography ( Medalia et al . , 2002 ) . Further explorations aiming to reach deeper into cells identified several mammalian cell lines that possess extended thin regions accessible to cryo - ET ( Garvalov et al . , 2006 ; Cyrklaff et al . , 2007 ; Sartori et al . , 2007 ; Koning et al . , 2008 ) . Vitreous sectioning has allowed the inves - tigations of structures located in the thickest parts of intact cells , such as the chromatin ( Eltsov et al . , 2008 ) . Figure 2 . Cryo - ET of intact cells . ( a ) Intact E . coli . Top : tomographic slice . Bottom : isosurface representation with positions of template - matched ribosome pairs : om , outer membrane ; im , inner membrane ; inset shows one ribosome pair ( 100S ) . Bar , 200 nm . Modified from Ortiz et al . ( 2010 ) . ( b ) Plasmodium organelles and the associated cytoskeleton . Top : tomographic slice . Bottom : surface rendering showing plasma membrane ( pm , blue ) , inner membrane complex ( imc , yellow ) , density between pm and imc ( red ) , microtubules ( mt , green ) , apical polar ring ( pink ) , rhoptries ( rho , violet ) , and micronemes ( mic , cyan ) . Bar , 100 nm . Reproduced from Kudryashev et al . ( 2010b ) . ( c ) Presynaptic terminal visualized in vitrified dissociated neuronal culture at 15 days in vitro and thinned by FIB milling . Top : tomographic slice ( courtesy of Y . Fukuda ) . Bottom : 3D visualization : plasma membrane ( gray ) , microtubules ( mt , green ) , mitochondrion ( mi , cyan ) , and synaptic vesicles ( sv , yellow ) . Bar , 200 nm . on A ugu s t 28 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 202 • NUMBER 3 • 2013 412 numerical aperture objectives ( Le Gros et al . , 2009 ) require in - strumentation modifications , and that have less flexibility and applicability than the modular approach . Although molecular identification is unambiguous in fluor - escence microscopy , only a few labeled species can be imaged simultaneously while their molecular environment remains invisible . Cryo - ET is complementary to fluorescence microscopy because it is based on the intrinsic modulation of density , provides a compre - hensive picture of cellular components , and currently reaches at least an order of magnitude better resolution . The future adapta - tions of cryo - LM holders to single - molecule and super - resolution fluorescence imaging modes is expected to provide a much more precise localization of fluorescently labeled molecules , aiding in their correlative detection and identification in cryo - tomograms . Linking structure with physiology . Readily avail - able genetic manipulations can help identify molecules involved in the organization of cellular structures that can be visually identified in cryo - tomograms . Examples of this approach in - clude bacterial cell envelopes ( Hoffmann et al . , 2008 ; Zuber et al . , 2008 ; Kudryashev et al . , 2009 ) and bacterial filaments ( Salje et al . , 2009 ) . In the latter case , the precise location and arrangement of filamentous structures decisively implicated them in the movement of bacterial DNA . It was long thought that prokaryotes do not have a cyto - skeleton because it was not seen in chemically fixed and dehy - drated samples . However , filamentous structures were visualized in vitrified bacteria and their molecular composition was identi - fied in a comprehensive series of genetic studies ( Li et al . , 2007 ; Ingerson - Mahar et al . , 2010 ; Pilhofer and Jensen 2013 ) . In other cases , the molecular identification of structures by genetic manipulation was less straightforward . For example , immuno - EM and fluorescent labeling were required to confirm the identity of arrays of bacterial chemotaxis receptors , even though these arrays were absent upon genetic deletion of the re - ceptors ( Zhang et al . , 2007 ; Briegel et al . , 2008 ) . In a similar manner , pharmacological manipulations that induce highly specific functional responses can be used to elu - cidate the composition and function of complexes observed in cryo - tomograms . Such an approach showed that initiating or modulating synaptic vesicle release results in a rearrange - ment of the presynaptic cytomatrix , the quantitative analysis of which led to a structural model of the release ( Fig . 3 ; Fernández - Busnadiego et al . , 2010 ) . The extension of the genetic approach to eukaryotes is bound to be more involved . Compensatory mechanisms acti - vated in knock - out animals and multiple protein isoforms can present difficulties for the unequivocal molecular identifica - tion of structures visualized in cryo - tomograms ( Fernández - Busnadiego et al . , 2013 ) . Nevertheless , structural alterations observed in the synapses of mutant mice led to a prediction about synaptic release deficit , which was subsequently con - firmed by electrophysiological measurements . Uncovering the information of tomograms by image processing Computational approaches aimed at extracting the high resolu - tion information present in cryo - tomograms have been rapidly and image synapses situated within dense networks of mature neuronal cells ( Fig . 2 c ) . The quality of these tomograms indi - cates that they are suitable for a quantitative assessment of syn - aptic complexes in intact cells . Direct labeling and correlative light microscopy assist the identification of molecules by cryo - ET . Im - munolabeling with electron - dense markers suitable for living cells tends to be restricted to proteins with extracellular epitopes because the cell permeabilization methods used to label intracellular pro - teins induce significant structural changes ( Humbel et al . , 1998 ) . Nevertheless , immunolabeling works well for isolated cellular components . For example , spatial distribution of gold - labeled pro - teins undergoing transport through nuclear pores was visualized in cryo - tomograms of isolated nuclei ( Beck et al . , 2007 ) . Clonable labels for electron microscopy might allow the direct localization of proteins within the cell . Metal - binding pro - teins such as metallothionein and ferritin fused to cellular pro - teins act as nucleation sites for heavy atoms taken up from the surrounding medium ( Mercogliano and DeRosier 2007 ; Nishino et al . , 2007 ; Wang et al . , 2011 ) . Despite problems related to metal uptake , specificity , endogenous expression , and high concen - trations of metal salts in the growth medium , initial attempts argue for the feasibility of metallothionein - based labeling ( Diestra et al . , 2009 ) . The widespread use of fluorescence microscopy has greatly advanced our understanding of cellular processes , but has also left many unanswered questions regarding the molecular and supramolecular architecture of cellular complexes . The combi - nation of correlative light microscopy ( LM ) with cryo - ET allows imaging of the same feature over multiple - length scales . Correla - tive LM facilitates the search for features of interest , which other - wise can involve extensive scanning , as the field of view in cryo - ET is quite small in comparison to the size of a typical eu - karyotic cell . Approaches combining LM with conventional EM preparation methods have clearly demonstrated the relevance of such techniques to cell biology ( Koster and Klumperman 2003 ) . Successful applications of correlative LM and cryo - ET on sparse cultures of immature neurons ( Garvalov et al . , 2006 ) and endothelial cells ( Braet et al . , 2007 ) took advantage of strong visual cues provided by large cellular features , which allowed the straightforward orientation of the sample . The lack of dis - tinct morphological features in complex , densely populated cell cultures requires a purely computational , coordinate transfor - mation - based approach in order to determine the positions of fluorescently labeled structures in EM ( Luci ć et al . , 2007 ) . LM imaging of vitrified samples ( cryo - LM ) assures that features of interest are identical during LM and EM imaging , thus overcoming possible alterations arising before and during vitrification . This imaging mode was made possible by the de - velopment of specialized holders mountable on standard light microscopes , ensuring that samples remain vitreous during ex - tensive LM screening ( Sartori et al . , 2007 ; Schwartz et al . , 2007 ; van Driel et al . , 2009 ) . However , current modular cryo - LM holders are only compatible with air objectives with long working distances , limiting the numerical aperture and thus the achiev - able resolution . Approaches facilitating a closer integration of light and electron imaging ( Faas et al . , 2013 ) or the use of higher on A ugu s t 28 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 413 Cryo - electron tomography : The challenge of doing structural biology in situ • Lu č i ć et al . However , quantitative morphological and statistical analy - sis requires objective and reproducible automated segmenta - tion . Slice - by - slice membrane segmentation approaches predict membrane shapes at each slice based on previously segmented slices , local image properties , and external information ( Moussavi et al . , 2010 ; Martinez - Sanchez et al . , 2011 ) . Rigort et al . ( 2012b ) described an actin segmentation procedure that uses template matching ( see next section ) to search for cylindrical structures with the dimensions of generic actin filaments ( Fig . 4 a ) , thus provid - ing a basis for the quantitative description of actin networks . The detection of finer , nonuniform structures , such as membrane - bound complexes requires specialized approaches . The segmentation of synaptic – adhesion complexes was based on thresholding and connectivity ( Luci ć et al . , 2005b ) , while pre - synaptic filaments were detected by combining this approach with some aspects of the watershed transform ( Fig . 3 c ; Fernández - Busnadiego et al . , 2010 ) . Identification of molecular complexes by tem - plate matching . Large molecules and macromolecular com - plexes can be identified in tomograms by searching for a template representing the molecule or complex of interest . Templates are typically based on higher resolution structures obtained from x - ray crystallography or single - particle EM analysis . In an early example of in situ identification , ribosomes were successfully mapped in tomograms of the thin bacterium Spiroplasma mel­ liferum ( Ortiz et al . , 2006 ) . In addition to location , template matching also shows the orientation of target structures . The determination of the relative expanding in recent years and are briefly summarized here ( Fig . 1 ; see Fernandez [ 2012 ] for a more comprehensive review ) . These methods often complement each other , and their selection depends on the sample type and research goals . Image restoration improves the quality of to - mograms . Image denoising improves the SNR by reducing the noise while preserving the features of interest . Nonlinear aniso - tropic diffusion achieves this task by first detecting structures ( edges ) and then smoothing the image while preserving the edges ( Frangakis and Hegerl 2001 ; Fernández and Li 2003 ) . Nonlocal means filtering follows an approach based on the self - similarity of structures , which is particularly suited for filamentous struc - tures ( Rigort et al . , 2012b ) . Contrast - transfer - function correction restores the distorted high resolution information induced by image defocusing ( Box 1 ) . This requires that the defocus level is determined and corrected at each projection image of a tilt series . The defocus gradient present in tilted images and the low SNR make this a challenging task ( Fernández et al . , 2006 ) . So far , the need for CTF correction in tomography has been somewhat underappreciated , but it will become mandatory to further improve the resolution , especially in combination with subtomogram averaging ( discussed later ) . Image segmentation separates structures of interest from the background . Structures of interest can be detected by manual segmentation , allowing their 3D visualiza - tion . The contours of structures are traced by hand on successive slices in the volume , an error - prone and time - consuming proce - dure that can be biased by subjective preferences . Figure 3 . Presynaptic cytomatrix . ( a ) Tomographic slice of a synapse from a high - pressure frozen organotypic hippocampal slice , thinned by vitreous sectioning . Synaptic vesicles are compressed along the cutting direction ( arrow ) . Top inset shows a connector ( black arrowhead ) that links two vesicles . Bottom inset shows tethers ( white arrowheads ) that link a vesicle to the active zone ( AZ ) . ( b ) Tomographic slice of a synapse obtained from the synapto - somal cellular fraction . Top inset : connector linking two vesicles ( black arrowhead ) . Bottom inset : tether linking a vesicle to the AZ ( white arrowhead ; same vesicles as in the top inset at another z - slice ) . ( a and b ) Synaptic vesicle ( sv ) , mitochondrion ( mit ) , synaptic cleft ( sc ) , and postsynaptic density ( psd ) . Bars : ( main panels ) 100 nm ; ( insets ) 50 nm . ( c ) 3D rendering of a synaptosome ; synaptic vesicles ( yellow ) , connectors ( red ) , tethers ( blue ) , mitochondrion ( light blue ) , microtubule ( dark green ) , plasma membrane ( purple ) , cleft complexes ( green ) , and PSD ( orange ) . Proposed structural model of the synaptic vesicle mobilization and release : initial tethering ( 1 ) , primed vesicle ( 2 ) , and release ( 3 ) . Image copyright Fernández - Busnadiego et al . ( 2010 ) . on A ugu s t 28 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 202 • NUMBER 3 • 2013 414 The template - matching examples mentioned above bene - fited from the strong inherent contrast that ribosomes possess in cryo - tomograms . Because most proteins have lower contrast , validation of template matching becomes an important task . The challenge is to convert the template - matching score that is obtained at all positions within a tomogram to one of the two expected outcomes ( hit or miss ) . Beck et al . ( 2009 ) derived a statistical scoring function and assessed its performance for iden - tification of 200 – 2 , 000 kD - sized proteins ( Fig . 4 c ) . The appli - cability of template matching is currently limited to large protein complexes , but it is expected to improve in the near future as the fidelity of cryo - tomograms increases . Increasing resolution by subtomogram aver - aging . In subtomogram averaging , a higher resolution struc - ture of a particle ( protein or a protein complex ) is obtained by averaging 3D volumes extracted from tomograms . The procedure is conceptually similar to single - particle EM analysis ; at each orientations and distances between ribosomes and their nearest neighbors demonstrates the potential of structural biology in situ . Dimers of ribosomes in the hibernating state were unam - biguously identified in intact Escherichia coli cells under con - ditions of nutritional stress ( Fig . 2 a ; Ortiz et al . , 2010 ) . These dimers represent a reversible state of quiescence , as they disap - peared when the growth medium was replenished . In protru - sions of intact glial cells , ribosomes engaged in active translation ( polysomes ) were visualized at the baseline condition , but this organization was lost after a treatment known to stop translation and dissociate polysomes ( Fig . 4 b ; Brandt et al . , 2010 ) . These studies exemplify the power of cryo - ET in situ , as the flexible nature of ribosome assemblies poses a problem for structural methods that rely on repetitive structures , such as single - particle analysis . In both studies , the structural differences between ribo - somes in different functional states were explored by subtomo - gram averaging . Figure 4 . Image processing : segmentation and template matching . ( a ) Automated segmentation of actin filaments in Dictyostelium discoideum : actin filaments ( yellow to red ) ; ribosomes ( blue ) . Reproduced with permission from Rigort et al . ( 2012b ) ; copyright Elsevier , Inc . ( b ) Polyribosomes from intact human glioma cells identified by template matching . Modified with permission from Brandt et al . ( 2010 ) ; copyright Elsevier , Inc . ( c ) Protein identification using multiple template matching in intact Leptospira interrogans . Tomographic slices and 3D visualization of identified proteins of nonstimulated ( left ) and antibiotics - treated cells ( right ) , ribosomes ( red ) , GroEL ( light blue ) , GroEL / ES ( dark blue ) , and RNA polymerase II ( green ) . Bar , 200 nm . Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd : Nature Methods ( Beck et al . , 2009 ) ; copyright 2009 . on A ugu s t 28 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 415 Cryo - electron tomography : The challenge of doing structural biology in situ • Lu č i ć et al . molecules in situ . For example , the nuclear pore complex is a large protein assembly that is difficult to investigate by other structural biology methods . Averaging individual pores from tomograms of intact fibroblast cells yielded the structure of the complex , revealing new higher eukaryote - specific features ( Maimon et al . , 2012 ) . Determining the structure of the Borrelia flagellar motor in situ was quite labor intensive because only a limited number of motors were present in each tomogram , neces - sitating large - scale data acquisition . Two complementing stud - ies determined the precise localization of several proteins within the complex ( Liu et al . , 2009 ; Kudryashev et al . , 2010a ; see Fig . 5 b ) . Other applications of in situ subtomogram averaging have been recently reviewed in Briggs , 2013 . Future developments are expected to continue in different directions . First , the pseudo - atomic structures of larger complexes can be generated by combining subtomogram averaging of the whole complex with x - ray crystallography of its components , as done for bacterial chemoreceptors ( Fig . 5 c ; Briegel et al . , 2012 ; Liu et al . , 2012 ) . Second , distinct functional states of a complex of interest , manifested by its conformational heterogeneity , can be discerned by 3D classification ( Förster et al . , 2008 ) , as pursued for nucleotide binding – induced dynein conformational changes in flagella ( Movassagh et al . , 2010 ) , E . coli chemoreceptors iteration the angular orientation of particle images is determined based on an existing 3D structure ( alignment ) , and then used to generate an improved structure . The alignment step in subtomo - gram averaging is more involved because it is done in 3D and has to account for the missing wedge ( Box 1 ; Förster et al . , 2005 ) . Thin , isolated systems that have periodic features are ideally suited for subtomogram averaging . These include microtubule - based systems , such as the centrioles ( Guichard et al . , 2012 ; Li et al . , 2012 ) and eukaryotic flagella . Cryo - ET of flagella has yielded a series of publications providing detailed struc - tures of flagellar components including the doublet micro - tubules ( Nicastro et al . , 2011 ) , the dynein arms ( Bui et al . , 2009 ) , the dynein regulatory complex ( Heuser et al . , 2009 ) , and the radial spokes ( Fig . 5 a ; Lin et al . , 2011 ; Pigino et al . , 2011 ; Barber et al . , 2012 ) , thus bringing the field significantly closer to a molec - ular understanding of flagellar movement . Vitreous sectioning yields very thin samples , which facil - itates subtomogram averaging . Still , problems associated with the unpredictable degree of sample compression may restrict the usefulness of this preparation technique to rigid complexes such as ribosomes ( Al - Amoudi et al . , 2007 ; Pierson et al . , 2011 ) . There is a great need to extend subtomogram averaging to tomograms of intact cells , in order to obtain 3D structures of Figure 5 . Image processing : subtomogram averaging . ( a ) Isolated C . reinhardtii axoneme . Top row : surface renderings of the density map obtained by averaging radial spokes ( RS ) . Middle row : tomographic slices of the above density map . Bottom : surface renderings of the overall 3D structure : micro - tubule doublet ( gray ) , outer dynein arms ( turquoise ) , inner dynein arms ( IDA , blue ) , the intermediate and light chains of IDAs ( yellow ) , the dynein regulatory complex ( green ) , and the radial spokes ( red ) . RS1 , radial spoke 1 ; RS2 , radial spoke 2 . Image copyright Pigino et al . ( 2011 ) . ( b ) Flagellar motor of intact Borrelia . Left : tomographic slices of the averaged density map . Right : 3D isosurface views of the motor . Bars , 25 nm . Reproduced from Liu et al . ( 2009 ) with permission from the American Society for Microbiology . ( c ) Bacterial chemosensory receptors . Left : superposition of one ring of the crystal structure ( P5 blue , CheW green ) with its six receptor dimers ( TM14 , yellow ) on the EM map ( blue mesh ) with its previously fit 18 receptor dimers ( pink ) . Right : the arrangement of the receptor array produces P6 point symmetry ( red ; the asymmetric unit yellow ) . Image copyright Briegel et al . ( 2012 ) . on A ugu s t 28 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 202 • NUMBER 3 • 2013 416 of the allowed electron exposure , increasing the SNR and the us - able resolution . Phase plates still await the improvements neces - sary for widespread use , but they have the potential to improve both the high resolution information and the contrast of cryo - tomograms ( see Box 2 ) . Cryo - ET is reaching the stage where it can provide compre - hensive in situ molecular identification and attain high resolution information of deeply rooted functional modules that exist only in low - copy number and do not lend themselves to biochemical purification . Having already pushed the limits of imaging the undisturbed cellular interior , cryo - ET aims to bridge the gap between light microscopy and higher resolution methods such as x - ray crystallography and single - particle EM . The emergence of integrative approaches makes it possible to bring atomic res - olution to in situ imaging . We expect that the electron micro - scope will again become a key instrument in cell biology by enabling the integration of structural data acquired at different - length scales . We thank Robert M . Glaeser for many useful comments ; Yoshiyuki Fukuda , Miroslava Schaffer , and Julio Ortiz for preparing some of the images ; and Gabriela J . Greif and Benjamin D . Engel for critical reading of the manuscript . This work was supported by the Exzellenzcluster ( CIPSM ) . Submitted : 29 April 2013 Accepted : 11 July 2013 References Afzelius , B . A . , and A . B . Maunsbach . 2004 . Biological ultrastructure re - search ; the first 50 years . Tissue Cell . 36 : 83 – 94 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tice . 2003 . 11 . 001 Al - Amoudi , A . , L . P . Norlen , and J . Dubochet . 2004 . Cryo - electron microscopy of vitreous sections of native biological cells and tissues . J . Struct . Biol . 148 : 131 – 135 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2004 . 03 . 010 Al - Amoudi , A . , D . Studer , and J . Dubochet . 2005 . Cutting artefacts and cutting process in vitreous sections for cryo - electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 150 : 109 – 121 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2005 . 01 . 003 Al - Amoudi , A . , D . C . Díez , M . J . Betts , and A . S . Frangakis . 2007 . The molecular architecture of cadherins in native epidermal desmosomes . Nature . 450 : 832 – 837 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature05994 Alberts , B . 1998 . The cell as a collection of protein machines : preparing the next generation of molecular biologists . Cell . 92 : 291 – 294 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 80922 - 8 Aloy , P . , and R . B . Russell . 2004 . Ten thousand interactions for the molecular biol - ogist . Nat . Biotechnol . 22 : 1317 – 1321 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nbt1018 Ball , P . 2003 . Portrait of a molecule . Nature . 421 : 421 – 422 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature01404 Barber , C . F . , T . Heuser , B . I . Carbajal - González , V . V . Botchkarev Jr . , and D . Nicastro . 2012 . Three - dimensional structure of the radial spokes reveals heterogeneity and interactions with dyneins in Chlamydomonas flagella . Mol . Biol . Cell . 23 : 111 – 120 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E11 - 08 - 0692 Beck , M . , V . Luci ć , F . Förster , W . Baumeister , and O . Medalia . 2007 . Snapshots of nuclear pore complexes in action captured by cryo - electron tomogra - phy . Nature . 449 : 611 – 615 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature06170 Beck , M . , J . A . Malmström , V . Lange , A . Schmidt , E . W . Deutsch , and R . Aebersold . 2009 . Visual proteomics of the human pathogen Leptospira interrogans . Nat . Methods . 6 : 817 – 823 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1390 Braet , F . , E . Wisse , P . Bomans , P . Frederik , W . Geerts , A . Koster , L . Soon , and S . Ringer . 2007 . Contribution of high - resolution correlative imaging techniques in the study of the liver sieve in three - dimensions . Microsc . Res . Tech . 70 : 230 – 242 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jemt . 20408 Brandt , F . , L . A . Carlson , F . U . Hartl , W . Baumeister , and K . Grünewald . 2010 . The three - dimensional organization of polyribosomes in intact human cells . Mol . Cell . 39 : 560 – 569 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2010 . 08 . 003 Branton , D . 1971 . Freeze - etching studies of membrane structure . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 261 : 133 – 138 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rstb . 1971 . 0043 Briegel , A . , H . J . Ding , Z . Li , J . Werner , Z . Gitai , D . P . Dias , R . B . Jensen , and G . J . Jensen . 2008 . Location and architecture of the Caulobacter crescentus ( Khursigara et al . , 2008 ) , and for ER - bound ribosomes ( Pfeffer et al . , 2012 ) . Finally , physiological changes at the cellular level may be described in detail by performing computer simulations of molecular pathways within a molecular environment that is precisely defined by cryo - ET ( Beck et al . , 2007 ; Khursigara et al . , 2011 ) . Outlook Cryo - ET stands out among imaging and structural biology meth - ods . Because biological material is faithfully preserved by vitri - fication , molecular complexes are imaged in a fully hydrated , close - to - physiological state . Cryo - tomograms of intact cells are essentially snapshots of the entire cellular proteome at molecu - lar resolution , which in principle enables mapping of the spatial relationships between macromolecules within the cell ( Nickell et al . , 2006 ) . This includes the supramolecular architecture of transient complexes that are formed only under certain cellular conditions . In addition , the molecular crowding within cellular subvolumes , known to have profound effects on macromolecu - lar interactions in living systems , can be investigated in a quan - titative manner ( Rigort et al . , 2012a ) . Paradoxically , the ability to visualize the complete mo - lecular content of a system , one of the advantages of cryo - ET , significantly complicates the identification of individual molec - ular components within crowded cellular landscapes . Diverse identification strategies complementing cryo - ET with methods such as genetics and correlative fluorescence imaging are already in use and new approaches are being explored . Sample thickness is a fundamental limitation of EM ; it is a major obstacle to the applicability of EM and the achievable resolution . Because only a few cell types are sufficiently thin to be imaged intact , cellular cryo - ET requires preparative tech - niques that can provide controlled access to the insides of cells . FIB milling opens large windows into the cell’s interior , enabling targeting of structural features within their natural cellular envi - ronments without violating their structural integrity . With vitrifi - cation providing the solution for sample preparation , controlling sample thickness by FIB milling will likely start another EM development cycle analogous to the one that was initiated more than 50 years ago by the development of ultramicrotomy . Image - processing tools for uncovering high resolution information from cryo - tomograms , many of which are based on statistical methods , are becoming available and undergoing con - tinuous development . Template matching aims to identify struc - tures of interest in cryo - tomograms based on their structural signature , and may identify a significant number of molecular complexes in situ . Subtomogram averaging of sufficiently abun - dant larger assemblies reveals the high resolution structural infor - mation by averaging out noise . In conjunction with other methods , subtomogram averaging can provide pseudo - atomic structures of large complexes and discern different conformational and binding states . These image - processing methods will become applicable to medium - sized and nonabundant proteins once the resolution of tomograms is improved . Current advancements in instrumentation may provide decisive steps in this direction . The increased sen - sitivity of new direct electron detectors makes more efficient use on A ugu s t 28 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 417 Cryo - electron tomography : The challenge of doing structural biology in situ • Lu č i ć et al . Förster , F . , O . Medalia , N . Zauberman , W . Baumeister , and D . Fass . 2005 . Retrovirus envelope protein complex structure in situ studied by cryo - electron tomography . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 102 : 4729 – 4734 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0409178102 Förster , F . , S . Pruggnaller , A . Seybert , and A . S . Frangakis . 2008 . Classification of cryo - electron sub - tomograms using constrained correlation . J . Struct . Biol . 161 : 276 – 286 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2007 . 07 . 006 Frangakis , A . S . , and R . Hegerl . 2001 . Noise reduction in electron tomographic reconstructions using nonlinear anisotropic diffusion . J . Struct . Biol . 135 : 239 – 250 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / jsbi . 2001 . 4406 Frank , J . 2002 . Single - particle imaging of macromolecules by cryo - electron microscopy . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 31 : 303 – 319 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . biophys . 31 . 082901 . 134202 Fujiyoshi , Y . 2011 . Electron crystallography for structural and functional studies of membrane proteins . J . Electron Microsc . ( Tokyo ) . 60 ( Suppl 1 ) : S149 – S159 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / jmicro / dfr033 Gan , L . , and G . J . Jensen . 2012 . Electron tomography of cells . Q . Rev . Biophys . 45 : 27 – 56 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0033583511000102 Garvalov , B . K . , B . Zuber , C . Bouchet - Marquis , M . Kudryashev , M . Gruska , M . Beck , A . Leis , F . Frischknecht , F . Bradke , W . Baumeister , et al . 2006 . Luminal particles within cellular microtubules . J . Cell Biol . 174 : 759 – 765 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200606074 Gavin , A . - C . , M . Bösche , R . Krause , P . Grandi , M . Marzioch , A . Bauer , J . Schultz , J . M . Rick , A . - M . Michon , C . - M . Cruciat , et al . 2002 . Functional organization of the yeast proteome by systematic analysis of protein com - plexes . Nature . 415 : 141 – 147 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 415141a Geuze , H . J . 1999 . A future for electron microscopy in cell biology ? Trends Cell Biol . 9 : 92 – 93 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0962 - 8924 ( 98 ) 01493 - 7 Glaeser , R . M . 2008 . Retrospective : radiation damage and its associated “informa - tion limitations” . J . Struct . Biol . 163 : 271 – 276 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2008 . 06 . 001 Glaeser , R . , K . Downing , D . DeRosier , W . Chiu , and J . Frank . 2007 . Electron Crystallography of Biological Macromolecules . Oxford University Press , Oxford , UK . 492 pp . Guichard , P . , A . Desfosses , A . Maheshwari , V . Hachet , C . Dietrich , A . Brune , T . Ishikawa , C . Sachse , and P . Gönczy . 2012 . Cartwheel architecture of Trichonympha basal body . Science . 337 : 553 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1222789 Hartwell , L . H . , J . J . Hopfield , S . Leibler , and A . W . Murray . 1999 . From molecu - lar to modular cell biology . Nature . 402 ) : C47 – C52 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 35011540 Hayles , M . F . , D . A . M . de Winter , C . T . W . M . Schneijdenberg , J . D . Meeldijk , U . Luecken , H . Persoon , J . de Water , F . de Jong , B . M . Humbel , and A . J . Verkleij . 2010 . The making of frozen - hydrated , vitreous lamellas from cells for cryo - electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 172 : 180 – 190 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2010 . 07 . 004 Henderson , R . 2004 . Realizing the potential of electron cryo - microscopy . Q . Rev . Biophys . 37 : 3 – 13 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0033583504003920 Heuser , J . 2002 . Whatever happened to the ‘microtrabecular concept’ ? Biol . Cell . 94 : 561 – 596 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0248 - 4900 ( 02 ) 00013 - 8 Heuser , J . E . , T . S . Reese , M . J . Dennis , Y . Jan , L . Jan , and L . Evans . 1979 . Synaptic vesicle exocytosis captured by quick freezing and correlated with quantal transmitter release . J . Cell Biol . 81 : 275 – 300 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 81 . 2 . 275 Heuser , T . , M . Raytchev , J . Krell , M . E . Porter , and D . Nicastro . 2009 . The dynein regulatory complex is the nexin link and a major regulatory node in cilia and flagella . J . Cell Biol . 187 : 921 – 933 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200908067 Hoffmann , C . , A . Leis , M . Niederweis , J . M . Plitzko , and H . Engelhardt . 2008 . Disclosure of the mycobacterial outer membrane : cryo - electron tomography and vitreous sections reveal the lipid bilayer structure . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 105 : 3963 – 3967 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0709530105 Hsieh , C . - E . , A . Leith , C . A . Mannella , J . Frank , and M . Marko . 2006 . Towards high - resolution three - dimensional imaging of native mammalian tissue : electron tomography of frozen - hydrated rat liver sections . J . Struct . Biol . 153 : 1 – 13 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2005 . 10 . 004 Humbel , B . M . , M . D . de Jong , W . H . Müller , and A . J . Verkleij . 1998 . Pre - embedding immunolabeling for electron microscopy : an evaluation of permeabilization methods and markers . Microsc . Res . Tech . 42 : 43 – 58 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ( SICI ) 1097 - 0029 ( 19980701 ) 42 : 1 < 43 : : AID - JEMT6 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - S Hurbain , I . , and M . Sachse . 2011 . The future is cold : cryo - preparation methods for transmission electron microscopy of cells . Biol . Cell . 103 : 405 – 420 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1042 / BC20110015 Ingerson - Mahar , M . , A . Briegel , J . N . Werner , G . J . Jensen , and Z . Gitai . 2010 . The metabolic enzyme CTP synthase forms cytoskeletal filaments . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 : 739 – 746 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2087 chemoreceptor array . Mol . Microbiol . 69 : 30 – 41 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2958 . 2008 . 06219 . x Briegel , A . , X . Li , A . M . Bilwes , K . T . Hughes , G . J . Jensen , and B . R . Crane . 2012 . Bacterial chemoreceptor arrays are hexagonally packed trimers of receptor dimers networked by rings of kinase and coupling proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 109 : 3766 – 3771 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1115719109 Briggs , J . A . 2013 . Structural biology in situ - the potential of subtomogram aver - aging . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 23 : 261 – 267 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . sbi . 2013 . 02 . 003 Bruggeller , P . , and E . Mayer . 1980 . Complete vitrification in pure liquid water and dilute aqueous solutions . Nature . 288 : 569 – 571 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 288569a0 Bui , K . H . , H . Sakakibara , T . Movassagh , K . Oiwa , and T . Ishikawa . 2009 . Asymmetry of inner dynein arms and inter - doublet links in Chlamydomonas flagella . J . Cell Biol . 186 : 437 – 446 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200903082 Carnoy , J . B . 1884 . La biologie cellulaire : étude comparée de la cellule dans les deux règnes . Joseph Van In & Co . 217 pp . Crowther , R . A . , D . J . DeRosier , and A . Klug . 1970 . The reconstruction of a three - dimensional structure from projections and its application to electron micro - scopy . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . A Math . Phys . Sci . 317 : 319 – 340 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rspa . 1970 . 0119 Cyrklaff , M . , A . Linaroudis , M . Boicu , P . Chlanda , W . Baumeister , G . Griffiths , and J . Krijnse - Locker . 2007 . Whole cell cryo - electron tomography re - veals distinct disassembly intermediates of vaccinia virus . PLoS ONE . 2 : e420 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0000420 Cyrklaff , M . , C . P . Sanchez , N . Kilian , C . Bisseye , J . Simpore , F . Frischknecht , and M . Lanzer . 2011 . Hemoglobins S and C interfere with actin remodel - ing in Plasmodium falciparum - infected erythrocytes . Science . 334 : 1283 – 1286 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1213775 Cyrklaff , M . , C . P . Sanchez , F . Frischknecht , and M . Lanzer . 2012 . Host actin remodeling and protection from malaria by hemoglobinopathies . Trends Parasitol . 28 : 479 – 485 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pt . 2012 . 08 . 003 Danev , R . , and K . Nagayama . 2010 . Phase plates for transmission electron mi - croscopy . Methods Enzymol . 481 : 343 – 369 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0076 - 6879 ( 10 ) 81014 - 6 Denk , W . , and H . Horstmann . 2004 . Serial block - face scanning electron micros - copy to reconstruct three - dimensional tissue nanostructure . PLoS Biol . 2 : e329 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020329 Dierksen , K . , D . Typke , R . Hegerl , A . Koster , and W . Baumeister . 1992 . Towards automatic electron tomography . Ultramicroscopy . 40 : 71 – 87 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0304 - 3991 ( 92 ) 90235 - C Diestra , E . , J . Fontana , P . Guichard , S . Marco , and C . Risco . 2009 . Visualization of proteins in intact cells with a clonable tag for electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 165 : 157 – 168 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2008 . 11 . 009 Dubochet , J . , M . Adrian , J . J . Chang , J . C . Homo , J . Lepault , A . W . McDowall , and P . Schultz . 1988 . Cryo - electron microscopy of vitrified specimens . Q . Rev . Biophys . 21 : 129 – 228 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0033583500004297 Eltsov , M . , K . M . Maclellan , K . Maeshima , A . S . Frangakis , and J . Dubochet . 2008 . Analysis of cryo - electron microscopy images does not support the existence of 30 - nm chromatin fibers in mitotic chromosomes in situ . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 105 : 19732 – 19737 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0810057105 Faas , F . G . A . , M . Bárcena , A . V . Agronskaia , H . C . Gerritsen , K . B . Moscicka , C . A . Diebolder , L . F . van Driel , R . W . A . L . Limpens , E . Bos , R . B . G . Ravelli , et al . 2013 . Localization of fluorescently labeled structures in frozen - hydrated samples using integrated light electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 181 : 283 – 290 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2012 . 12 . 004 Fernandez , J . - J . 2012 . Computational methods for electron tomography . Micron . 43 : 1010 – 1030 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . micron . 2012 . 05 . 003 Fernández , J . J . , and S . Li . 2003 . An improved algorithm for anisotropic nonlin - ear diffusion for denoising cryo - tomograms . J . Struct . Biol . 144 : 152 – 161 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2003 . 09 . 010 Fernández , J . J . , S . Li , and R . A . Crowther . 2006 . CTF determination and correc - tion in electron cryotomography . Ultramicroscopy . 106 : 587 – 596 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ultramic . 2006 . 02 . 004 Fernández - Busnadiego , R . , B . Zuber , U . E . Maurer , M . Cyrklaff , W . Baumeister , and V . Lucic . 2010 . Quantitative analysis of the native presynaptic cyto - matrix by cryoelectron tomography . J . Cell Biol . 188 : 145 – 156 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200908082 Fernández - Busnadiego , R . , S . Asano , A . - M . Oprisoreanu , E . Sakata , M . Doengi , Z . Kochovski , M . Zürner , V . Stein , S . Schoch , W . Baumeister , and V . Luci ć . 2013 . Cryo - electron tomography reveals a critical role of RIM1  in synaptic vesicle tethering . J . Cell Biol . 201 : 725 – 740 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201206063 Fernandez - Moran , H . 1953 . A diamond knife for ultrathin sectioning . Exp . Cell Res . 5 : 255 – 256 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 4827 ( 53 ) 90112 - 8 on A ugu s t 28 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m JCB • VOLUME 202 • NUMBER 3 • 2013 418 Marko , M . , C . Hsieh , R . Schalek , J . Frank , and C . Mannella . 2007 . Focused - ion - beam thinning of frozen - hydrated biological specimens for cryo - electron micros - copy . Nat . Methods . 4 : 215 – 217 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth1014 Marsh , B . J . , D . N . Mastronarde , K . F . Buttle , K . E . Howell , and J . R . McIntosh . 2001 . Organellar relationships in the Golgi region of the pancreatic beta cell line , HIT - T15 , visualized by high resolution electron tomography . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 2399 – 2406 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 051631998 Martinez - Sanchez , A . , I . Garcia , and J . - J . Fernandez . 2011 . A differential structure approach to membrane segmentation in electron tomography . J . Struct . Biol . 175 : 372 – 383 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2011 . 05 . 010 Matricardi , V . R . , R . C . Moretz , and D . F . Parsons . 1972 . Electron diffraction of wet proteins : catalase . Science . 177 : 268 – 270 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 177 . 4045 . 268 Maunsbach , A . B . , and B . A . Afzelius . 1999 . Biomedical Electron Microscopy . Academic Press . 548 pp . McDowall , A . W . , J . J . Chang , R . Freeman , J . Lepault , C . A . Walter , and J . Dubochet . 1983 . Electron microscopy of frozen hydrated sections of vitreous ice and vitrified biological samples . J . Microsc . 131 : 1 – 9 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2818 . 1983 . tb04225 . x McMullan , G . , S . Chen , R . Henderson , and A . R . Faruqi . 2009 . Detective quantum efficiency of electron area detectors in electron microscopy . Ultramicros­ copy . 109 : 1126 – 1143 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ultramic . 2009 . 04 . 002 Medalia , O . , I . Weber , A . S . Frangakis , D . Nicastro , G . Gerisch , and W . Baumeister . 2002 . Macromolecular architecture in eukaryotic cells visualized by cryo - electron tomography . Science . 298 : 1209 – 1213 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1076184 Mercogliano , C . P . , and D . J . DeRosier . 2007 . Concatenated metallothionein as a clonable gold label for electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 160 : 70 – 82 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2007 . 06 . 010 Milazzo , A . C . , A . Cheng , A . Moeller , D . Lyumkis , E . Jacovetty , J . Polukas , M . H . Ellisman , N . H . Xuong , B . Carragher , and C . S . Potter . 2011 . Initial evaluation of a direct detection device detector for single particle cryo - electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 176 : 404 – 408 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2011 . 09 . 002 Moor , H . , K . Muhlethaler , H . Waldner , and A . Frey - Wyssling . 1961 . A new freezing - ultramicrotome . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 10 : 1 – 13 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 10 . 1 . 1 Moussavi , F . , G . Heitz , F . Amat , L . R . Comolli , D . Koller , and M . Horowitz . 2010 . 3D segmentation of cell boundaries from whole cell cryogenic electron tomography volumes . J . Struct . Biol . 170 : 134 – 145 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2009 . 12 . 015 Movassagh , T . , K . H . Bui , H . Sakakibara , K . Oiwa , and T . Ishikawa . 2010 . Nucleotide - induced global conformational changes of flagellar dynein arms revealed by in situ analysis . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 17 : 761 – 767 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nsmb . 1832 Müller , H . R . 1957 . [ Freeze - drying as a fixation technic for plant cells ] . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 1 : 109 – 137 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0022 - 5320 ( 57 ) 80001 - X Newman , S . B . , E . Borysko , and M . Swerdlow . 1949 . New sectioning techniques for light and electron microscopy . Science . 110 : 66 – 68 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 110 . 2846 . 66 Nicastro , D . , X . Fu , T . Heuser , A . Tso , M . E . Porter , and R . W . Linck . 2011 . Cryo - electron tomography reveals conserved features of doublet micro - tubules in flagella . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 108 : E845 – E853 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1106178108 Nickell , S . , C . Kofler , A . P . Leis , and W . Baumeister . 2006 . A visual approach to proteomics . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 : 225 – 230 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm1861 Nishino , Y . , T . Yasunaga , and A . Miyazawa . 2007 . A genetically encoded metallothionein tag enabling efficient protein detection by electron mi - croscopy . J . Electron Microsc . ( Tokyo ) . 56 : 93 – 101 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / jmicro / dfm008 Ortiz , J . O . , F . Förster , J . Kürner , A . A . Linaroudis , and W . Baumeister . 2006 . Mapping 70S ribosomes in intact cells by cryoelectron tomography and pattern recognition . J . Struct . Biol . 156 : 334 – 341 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2006 . 04 . 014 Ortiz , J . O . , F . Brandt , V . R . F . Matias , L . Sennels , J . Rappsilber , S . H . W . Scheres , M . Eibauer , F . U . Hartl , and W . Baumeister . 2010 . Structure of hibernat - ing ribosomes studied by cryoelectron tomography in vitro and in situ . J . Cell Biol . 190 : 613 – 621 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201005007 Pfeffer , S . , F . Brandt , T . Hrabe , S . Lang , M . Eibauer , R . Zimmermann , and F . Förster . 2012 . Structure and 3D arrangement of endoplasmic reticulum membrane - associated ribosomes . Structure . 20 : 1508 – 1518 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2012 . 06 . 010 Pierson , J . , U . Ziese , M . Sani , and P . J . Peters . 2011 . Exploring vitreous cryo - section - induced compression at the macromolecular level using electron cryo - tomography ; 80S yeast ribosomes appear unaffected . J . Struct . Biol . 173 : 345 – 349 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2010 . 09 . 017 Khursigara , C . M . , X . Wu , P . Zhang , J . Lefman , and S . Subramaniam . 2008 . Role of HAMP domains in chemotaxis signaling by bacterial chemore - ceptors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 105 : 16555 – 16560 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0806401105 Khursigara , C . M . , G . Lan , S . Neumann , X . Wu , S . Ravindran , M . J . Borgnia , V . Sourjik , J . Milne , Y . Tu , and S . Subramaniam . 2011 . Lateral density of receptor arrays in the membrane plane influences sensitivity of the E . coli chemotaxis response . EMBO J . 30 : 1719 – 1729 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2011 . 77 Koning , R . I . , S . Zovko , M . Bárcena , G . T . Oostergetel , H . K . Koerten , N . Galjart , A . J . Koster , and A . Mieke Mommaas . 2008 . Cryo electron tomography of vitrified fibroblasts : microtubule plus ends in situ . J . Struct . Biol . 161 : 459 – 468 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2007 . 08 . 011 Koster , A . J . , and J . Klumperman . 2003 . Electron microscopy in cell biology : integrating structure and function . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 ( Suppl ) : SS6 – SS10 . Koster , A . J . , H . Chen , J . W . Sedat , and D . A . Agard . 1992 . Automated micros - copy for electron tomography . Ultramicroscopy . 46 : 207 – 227 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0304 - 3991 ( 92 ) 90016 - D Koster , A . J . , R . Grimm , D . Typke , R . Hegerl , A . Stoschek , J . Walz , and W . Baumeister . 1997 . Perspectives of molecular and cellular electron tomogra - phy . J . Struct . Biol . 120 : 276 – 308 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / jsbi . 1997 . 3933 Kudryashev , M . , M . Cyrklaff , W . Baumeister , M . M . Simon , R . Wallich , and F . Frischknecht . 2009 . Comparative cryo - electron tomography of patho - genic Lyme disease spirochetes . Mol . Microbiol . 71 : 1415 – 1434 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2958 . 2009 . 06613 . x Kudryashev , M . , M . Cyrklaff , R . Wallich , W . Baumeister , and F . Frischknecht . 2010a . Distinct in situ structures of the Borrelia flagellar motor . J . Struct . Biol . 169 : 54 – 61 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2009 . 08 . 008 Kudryashev , M . , S . Lepper , R . Stanway , S . Bohn , W . Baumeister , M . Cyrklaff , and F . Frischknecht . 2010b . Positioning of large organelles by a membrane - associated cytoskeleton in Plasmodium sporozoites . Cell . Microbiol . 12 : 362 – 371 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2009 . 01399 . x Latta , H . , and J . F . Hartmann . 1950 . Use of a glass edge in thin sectioning for electron microscopy . Proc . Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 74 : 436 – 439 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3181 / 00379727 - 74 - 17931 Le Gros , M . A . , G . McDermott , M . Uchida , C . G . Knoechel , and C . A . Larabell . 2009 . High - aperture cryogenic light microscopy . J . Microsc . 235 : 1 – 8 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2818 . 2009 . 03184 . x Li , Z . , M . J . Trimble , Y . V . Brun , and G . J . Jensen . 2007 . The structure of FtsZ filaments in vivo suggests a force - generating role in cell division . EMBO J . 26 : 4694 – 4708 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7601895 Li , S . , J . - J . Fernandez , W . F . Marshall , and D . A . Agard . 2012 . Three - dimensional structure of basal body triplet revealed by electron cryo - tomography . EMBO J . 31 : 552 – 562 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2011 . 460 Lin , J . , D . Tritschler , K . Song , C . F . Barber , J . S . Cobb , M . E . Porter , and D . Nicastro . 2011 . Building blocks of the nexin - dynein regulatory complex in Chlamydomonas flagella . J . Biol . Chem . 286 : 29175 – 29191 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 241760 Liu , J . , T . Lin , D . J . Botkin , E . McCrum , H . Winkler , and S . J . Norris . 2009 . Intact flagellar motor of Borrelia burgdorferi revealed by cryo - electron tomog - raphy : evidence for stator ring curvature and rotor / C - ring assembly flex - ion . J . Bacteriol . 191 : 5026 – 5036 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / JB . 00340 - 09 Liu , J . , B . Hu , D . R . Morado , S . Jani , M . D . Manson , and W . Margolin . 2012 . Molecular architecture of chemoreceptor arrays revealed by cryoelectron tomography of Escherichia coli minicells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 109 : E1481 – E1488 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1200781109 Luci ć , V . , F . Förster , and W . Baumeister . 2005a . Structural studies by electron tomography : from cells to molecules . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 74 : 833 – 865 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . biochem . 73 . 011303 . 074112 Luci ć , V . , T . Yang , G . Schweikert , F . Förster , and W . Baumeister . 2005b . Morphological characterization of molecular complexes present in the synaptic cleft . Structure . 13 : 423 – 434 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2005 . 02 . 005 Luci ć , V . , A . H . Kossel , T . Yang , T . Bonhoeffer , W . Baumeister , and A . Sartori . 2007 . Multiscale imaging of neurons grown in culture : from light micros - copy to cryo - electron tomography . J . Struct . Biol . 160 : 146 – 156 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2007 . 08 . 014 Mahamid , J . , and W . Baumeister . 2012 . Cryo - electron tomography : the realiza - tion of a vision . Microscopy and Analysis . 26 : 45 – 48 . Maimon , T . , N . Elad , I . Dahan , and O . Medalia . 2012 . The human nuclear pore complex as revealed by cryo - electron tomography . Structure . 20 : 998 – 1006 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2012 . 03 . 025 Marko , M . , C . Hsieh , W . Moberlychan , C . A . Mannella , and J . Frank . 2006 . Focused ion beam milling of vitreous water : prospects for an alternative to cryo - ultramicrotomy of frozen - hydrated biological samples . J . Microsc . 222 : 42 – 47 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2818 . 2006 . 01567 . x on A ugu s t 28 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 419 Cryo - electron tomography : The challenge of doing structural biology in situ • Lu č i ć et al . Pigino , G . , K . H . Bui , A . Maheshwari , P . Lupetti , D . Diener , and T . Ishikawa . 2011 . Cryoelectron tomography of radial spokes in cilia and flagella . J . Cell Biol . 195 : 673 – 687 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201106125 Pilhofer , M . , and G . J . Jensen . 2013 . The bacterial cytoskeleton : more than twisted filaments . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 25 : 125 – 133 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2012 . 10 . 019 Porter , K . R . , and H . S . Bennett . 1981 . Introduction : recollections on the begin - nings of the journal of cell biology . J . Cell Biol . 91 : IX – XI . Porter , K . R . , and J . Blum . 1953 . A study in microtomy for electron microscopy . Anat . Rec . 117 : 685 – 710 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ar . 1091170403 Reimer , L . , and H . Kohl . 2008 . Transmission Electron Microscopy . Optical Sciences . Springer , Fifth ed . 590 pp . Rigort , A . , F . J . Bäuerlein , A . Leis , M . Gruska , C . Hoffmann , T . Laugks , U . Böhm , M . Eibauer , H . Gnaegi , W . Baumeister , and J . M . Plitzko . 2010 . Micromachining tools and correlative approaches for cellular cryo - electron tomography . J . Struct . Biol . 172 : 169 – 179 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2010 . 02 . 011 Rigort , A . , F . J . B . Bäuerlein , E . Villa , M . Eibauer , T . Laugks , W . Baumeister , and J . M . Plitzko . 2012a . Focused ion beam micromachining of eukary - otic cells for cryoelectron tomography . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 109 : 4449 – 4454 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1201333109 Rigort , A . , D . Günther , R . Hegerl , D . Baum , B . Weber , S . Prohaska , O . Medalia , W . Baumeister , and H . - C . Hege . 2012b . Automated segmentation of elec - tron tomograms for a quantitative description of actin filament networks . J . Struct . Biol . 177 : 135 – 144 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2011 . 08 . 012 Rigort , A . , E . Villa , F . J . B . Bäuerlein , B . D . Engel , and J . M . Plitzko . 2012c . Integrative approaches for cellular cryo - electron tomography : correla - tive imaging and focused ion beam micromachining . Methods Cell Biol . 111 : 259 – 281 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 416026 - 2 . 00014 - 5 Robinson , C . V . , A . Sali , and W . Baumeister . 2007 . The molecular sociology of the cell . Nature . 450 : 973 – 982 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature06523 Ruska , E . 1979 . Die fruhe Entwicklung der Elektronenlinsen und der Elektronmi - kroskopie , In Acta historica leopoldina , Vol . 12 . Deutsche Akademie der Naturforscher Leopoldina . 136 pp . Salje , J . , B . Zuber , and J . Löwe . 2009 . Electron cryomicroscopy of E . coli re - veals filament bundles involved in plasmid DNA segregation . Science . 323 : 509 – 512 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1164346 Sartori , A . , R . Gatz , F . Beck , A . Rigort , W . Baumeister , and J . Plitzko . 2007 . Correlative microscopy : bridging the gap between light - and cryo - electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 160 : 135 – 145 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2007 . 07 . 011 Saxton , W . O . , W . Baumeister , and M . Hahn . 1984 . Three - dimensional recon - struction of imperfect two - dimensional crystals . Ultramicroscopy . 13 : 57 – 70 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0304 - 3991 ( 84 ) 90057 - 3 Schwartz , C . L . , V . I . Sarbash , F . I . Ataullakhanov , J . R . McIntosh , and D . Nicastro . 2007 . Cryo - fluorescence microscopy facilitates correlations between light and cryo - electron microscopy and reduces the rate of photobleaching . J . Microsc . 227 : 98 – 109 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2818 . 2007 . 01794 . x Sjostrand , F . S . 1953 . The ultrastructure of the innersegments of the retinal rods of the guinea pig eye as revealed by electron microscopy . J . Cell . Physiol . 42 : 45 – 70 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jcp . 1030420104 Steere , R . L . 1957 . Electron microscopy of structural detail in frozen biological specimens . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 3 : 45 – 60 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 3 . 1 . 45 Studer , D . , B . M . Humbel , and M . Chiquet . 2008 . Electron microscopy of high pressure frozen samples : bridging the gap between cellular ultrastructure and atomic resolution . Histochem . Cell Biol . 130 : 877 – 889 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00418 - 008 - 0500 - 1 Taylor , K . A . , and R . M . Glaeser . 1974 . Electron diffraction of frozen , hydrated pro - tein crystals . Science . 186 : 1036 – 1037 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 186 . 4168 . 1036 Tong , A . H . Y . , G . Lesage , G . D . Bader , H . Ding , H . Xu , X . Xin , J . Young , G . F . Berriz , R . L . Brost , M . Chang , et al . 2004 . Global mapping of the yeast genetic interaction network . Science . 303 : 808 – 813 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1091317 van Driel , L . F . , J . A . Valentijn , K . M . Valentijn , R . I . Koning , and A . J . Koster . 2009 . Tools for correlative cryo - fluorescence microscopy and cryo - electron tomography applied to whole mitochondria in human endothe - lial cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 88 : 669 – 684 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2009 . 07 . 002 Vanhecke , D . , S . Asano , Z . Kochovski , R . Fernandez - Busnadiego , N . Schrod , W . Baumeister , and V . Lu č i ć . 2011 . Cryo - electron tomography : methodol - ogy , developments and biological applications . J . Microsc . 242 : 221 – 227 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2818 . 2010 . 03478 . x Verkleij , A . J . , and P . H . Ververgaert . 1978 . Freeze - fracture morphology of bio - logical membranes . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 515 : 303 – 327 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0304 - 4157 ( 78 ) 90017 - 5 Walther , T . C . , and M . Mann . 2010 . Mass spectrometry - based proteomics in cell biology . J . Cell Biol . 190 : 491 – 500 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201004052 Wang , Q . , C . P . Mercogliano , and J . Löwe . 2011 . A ferritin - based label for cellu - lar electron cryotomography . Structure . 19 : 147 – 154 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2010 . 12 . 002 Zhang , P . , C . M . Khursigara , L . M . Hartnell , and S . Subramaniam . 2007 . Direct visualization of Escherichia coli chemotaxis receptor arrays using cryo - electron microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 104 : 3777 – 3781 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0610106104 Zuber , B . , M . Chami , C . Houssin , J . Dubochet , G . Griffiths , and M . Daffé . 2008 . Direct visualization of the outer membrane of mycobacteria and coryne - bacteria in their native state . J . Bacteriol . 190 : 5672 – 5680 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / JB . 01919 - 07 on A ugu s t 28 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m