Understanding the Role of Documents in a Hierarchical Flow of Work Peter Mambrey GMD - German National Research Center for Information Technology FIT - Institute for Applied Information Technology Schloss Birlinghoven D - 53754 Sankt Augustin , Germaxiy mambrey @ gmd . de ABSTRACT Studies of work and document flow in a German Ministry show that when documents cross organisational boundaries their status , and associated responsibilities change . These changes , trajectories , deadlines , are recorded on the document . WorkjZow , in this case , is not abstract , pre - specified , independent , conceptually or physically separated from the artefact whose movement it controls . It is inscribed , developed , and updated on the artefact itself . This empirical fusion of workflow with objects has major advantages . It enables strong bureaucratic rules to be reconciled with local , ad - hoc , fine - grained contingencies and discretionary action . This is an important lesson for the design of organisational CSCW systems . Keywords Workflow , work practice , boundary object , CSCW , organisational processes INTRODUCTION The German Federal Ministry for Family Affairs , Eldeily People , Women , and Youth is situated in BOM with an extension in Berlin . It is responsible for federal policy and aid . It is a small federal ministry , employing about 500 people , and is only 6 years old . It is directed by a ( female ) Minister and two Secretaries of State , one of them a member of parliament . The Ministry has six sections . One is responsible for internal administration ( maintenance , mail , personnel , organisation , security ) , while the others provide services for the Minister , the German Government and the public . The elderly persons section , and its policy subsection , are interested in groupware to assist their communications internally and with the other sections . Anticipating that part ’ Permission to make digital / hard copies of nil or pti ofthis mnterinl for oersonnl or chssroom use is granted without fee provided that tie copies 1 ~ . - - l re not made or distributed fir profit or commercial advantage , the copy - right notice , the title of the publiwtion and its date appear , nod notice is given U ~ nt copyright is by permission oflhe ACM , Inc . To copy henvise . to republish , to post on servers or to redistribote to lists , require specific permission nnd / or fee . GROIIP 97 Phoenix Arizona l & d Copyright 1997 ACM O - 89791 - 897 - 5 / 97 / 1 1 . S3 . 50 Mike Robinson University of Jyvaskyla Department of Computer Science and Information Systems P . O . Box 35 2035 1 Jyvaskyla Finland mike @ jytko . jyu . fi of the Ministry will be moved from Bonn to Berlin , they want support for internal collaboration which will bridge the gap between the two . Our study of the Ministry is part of a larger project at GMD , POLveam , whose objective is to develop and evaluate telecooperation applications ( Hoschka et al . , 1994 ; KlGckner et al . 1995 ; Mambrey , Mark , Pankoke 1996 ) . We believe in the necessity of rich ethnographic knowledge of how the work is actually done , and analytic concepts and metaphors that will mediate between practices and system ( re ) design . The Ministry is , by design and by intention , a very formal and bureaucratic organisation . Nevertheless , as wotild be expected from previous CSCW sociology e . g . ( M & berg , 1979 ; Hutchins , 1990 ; Suchman and Trigg , 1991 ; Button , 1993 ; Egger and Wagner , 1993 ) there is a great deal of flexibility and informality involved in getting the work done . The first section of this paper gives a picture of the meshing that civil servants have achieved between a very formal structure and the ad hoc needs of everyday work . The second section teIls the story of the preparation of a ministerial speech . We use this to try to develop an understanding of activity in terms of the many structures that are both resources for , and constraints on civil servants . In particular , we try to utilise and elaborate on the StailGriesemarlBowker notion of “boundary object” in analysing this latter scerlario . We were also interested in going beyond “small group” studies , and looking at . organisational processes . To this end we tried to identify boundaries between organisations , departments , units , etc . , and to look at what was done to artefacts when they crossed boundaries . Our experience confirms the thesis ( Star , 1989 ; Star and Griesemer , 1989 ; Bowker and Star , 1994 ) that there are artefacts ( in our case , documents , folders , etc . ) that * inhabit several intersecting social worlds and satisfy the informational requirements of each . * are both plastic enough to adapt to local needs and the cons ! raints of the several parties employing them , yet robust 119 enough to maintain a common identity across sites . They are weakly structured in common use , and become strongly structured in individual site use . * have different meanings in different social worlds but their structure is common enough to more than one world to make them recognisable , a means of translation . * The creation and management of boundary objects is a key process in developing and maintaining coherence across intersecting social worlds . ( adapted from ( Star and Griesemer , 1989 ) p . 29U3 ) In addition , we saw that crossing a boundary sometimes involved a log of some sort , but usually involved a change to the artefact itself - which thus became the bearer of its own history . ‘The change to the artefact when it crosses a boundary is , however , more than the accretion of history . It is a change of stutus ( from “incoming mail” to “information to” / “request to”1 “urgent request to” , or from “private work in progress” to “public document” , etc . ) The changed status means the artefact is “read” differently , and different sets of accountabilities are invoked . Once our study of the boundary crossings involved in the preparation of a ministerial speech was complete , we became aware that the artefacts carry more than history . They carry the formal structure and state of their own “workflow” . This is essential to flexibility , dealing with exceptions and special cases , and effective action generally . It is also simple and economical . Interestingly for CSCW , it is inimical to any notion of a workflow specified independently or separately from artefacts , yet attempting to determine their progress through an organisation . The embedding of workflow within the object of work is consistent with other CSCW research ( Heath and Luff , 1991 ; Hughes et al . , 1992 ) but will need more detailed investigation in its own right . SECTION I : TRANSPARENCY & DISCRETION ’ The Underlying Idea of Bureaucracy German Federal and Regional Ministries have written rules and procedures , prescribing how work , work flows , archives , responsibilities , paperwork , etc . have to be organised . Their name is GGO ( Joint Set of Procedures for Ministries ) . This derives from the Prussian organisation of public bodies , and was made obligatory for German Ministries by Bismarck 120 years ago . The main ideas that informed GGO were : a strict hierarchy ; top - down control ; transparency of all processes and artifacts existing in the organisation ; fixed responsibility ; no privacy ; no redundancy or overlap . There is only official work . There are no individuals - only roles , with fixed substitution rules . This is the Weberian ideal of rational organisation , where explicit policy intentions of the Minister or Chancellor will be instrumentally fulfilled . For the benefit of the Minister , who is responsible for every action , the Ministry should be transparent : organised like a glass house or his personal desktop . Communication and correspondence The general procedures specifying how correspondcncc is to be treated ( GGO , IIKapitel , Geschaftsgang ) are laid down on the principle that only official documents exist . This is because the only work allowed is official work , done on behalf of , and by roles that substitute for , the Minister in person . Under this regime , no private documents can exist : private documents would mean private work , and this , by definition , does not happen . The procedures describe in great detail how the incoming mail is to be treated within the Ministry : how it is to bc designated as “official” , and how it is to be internally distributed . There are detailed prescriptions for the document flo ) v , and how the work is to be organiscd around it . These start when an incoming document or lcttcr is opened and registered . These actions make all incoming mail public within the Ministry - and they are irrevcrsiblc , irretrievable , and final . A public document is , and remains public until the end of the designated work flow process , at which point ‘it will be archived ( and therefore remain public ) for a 30 or 100 year period . The Formal Decision Process of Registration Mail All incoming mail is delivered to the Ministry’s central post office . The post is opened , and the documents are date - and time - stamped , and registered . Attachments are checked and registered . The documents are classified as “normal” or “urgent” . Only then are they distributed within tho hierarchy , according to the organisational plan ( Gesch % ftsverteilungsplan ) . On the basis of this plan , it is decided which section , which subsection , which department , and which official within the department should receive the document . The idea of fixed responsibility without redundancy means that only one official is the correct addressee . The hierarchical structure amongst addresses ( roles ) is fixed , and , determines the subsequent stages of work , The first recipient remains responsible ( has a “guiding function” ) for the document . Others may read , report on , or add to it , usually by means of further attachments . In consequence , an incoming letter is registered at least three times : on arrival , it is officially registered by the Ministry , then by the ( secretary to the ) head of the section and then by the head of the subsection . The head of the working unit does not register the incoming mail , but writes a short remark like “call back” or “report” etc . on the mail , which then finally reaches its addressee who is member of the staff of the unit . An answer to the letter goes the same way back through the hierarchies until it reaches the central post office of the ministry , which puts it in the ordinary post . These procedures make the official work flow highly visible ! Fax & Phone Fax and phone both appeared after the formulation of rules governing mail , and sometimes do not live harmoniously 120 with them . There is only one fax - machine in the central post office to ensure proper registration . Fax is treated like incoming mail , because it utilises the same medium : paper and ink . By organisational fiat there is no difference between fax and letter . As there is only one central fax machine , the opportunity to decentralise and deliver directly to the addressee cannot be realised - which is quite annoying to civil servants doing their daily work’ . In contrast to print media , the telephone is treated as a personal informal tool . It is like a face - to - face - meeting without minutes : no registration , no obligation , and any subsequent action is based on personal respect . Phone conversations are considered private . But if an addressee decides to write minutes of a phone call or a short remark , than the minutes become public within the Ministry and , as an attachment , are part of the in - house coordinated work - flow . Thus , civil servants have the freedom to leave a phone call in the private sphere or to bring it into the public sphere . Once made , this decision is irrevocable ! The telephone as medium - no ink , no paper - creates a private sphere which either of the partners can change into a public sphere by changing the medium . ’ Some Remarks There are many positive aspects to this strict form of organisation . It does , as intended , provide transparency . Control , responsibility , manageability , and division of labor are all important aspects of political work in a Ministry . The formal process provides advantages to everyone . It defines the public space in the Ministry . But , of course , this is only one side of the picture . The other is the private space : off’cially ignored ; off’cially non - existent : we once called it “the non - existing nothing” . Despite this , as might be expected , there are procedures for designating mail as non - existent , and these are followed by decisions either to preserve its non - existence , or to make it public to other civil servants as official work . Such decisions are personal , and not organisational . They give freedom of choice and flexibility at the operutioml level . How they really do it . Mail All incoming mail arrives at the central post office . This decides if the mail is official and public ( in house ) or ‘In some ministries , attempts were made to find an alternative . The number of fax machines exploded . Faxes were sent directly to subsections or directly to addressees in units . The hierarchies were losing control over the work flows . The results were orders to withdraw non - central fax machines in some ministries ; in others staff were instructed to send copies of incoming faxes to the central post office for registration and distribution . In these latter cases parallel work was allowed . Civil servants , after receiving a fax , could start working with it , and were not obliged to wait days until the central post office could send the registered and proofed fax back to them . “private” . If and only if the addressees’ name is placed above the address it is treated as personal . i . e . Hr . A . Topper Social Welfare Department Ministry for Family Affairs , Elderly People , Women , and Youth Street address , town , etc . is private , while Ministry for Family Affairs , Elderly People , Women , and Youth Hr . A . Topper Social Welfare Department Street address , town , etc . is not . If the addressee’s name comes first , the central post office doesn’t open the mail , doesn’t register it , doesn’t stamp it , doesn’t archive it : they deliver the mail directly to the addressee . There is no information for the different hierarchical levels : ’ there is also no proof that the mail ever arrived in the ministry . This artefact is a “nonexisting nothing” : it is simply not part of the work - flow . A civil servant may work with the information but the document does not exist . An addressee may personally decide to send it back to the central post office with the remark “GG” , which means “public work - flow” . There the “non - existing nothing” changes its character from private to public . It is treated like a new incoming mail , registered , archived , distributed and so on . Changes are only allowed in one direction - from private to public and not vice versa . This decision is final , but the civil servants have the freedom of choice before committing themselves . Fax & Phone Officially fax is treated like mail . Because there is only one central fax machine , faxes have to be partially read by the post office , and are therefore seldom used for “private” affairs . If it is necessary to exchange urgent information via fax , then the addressees appreciate a private phone call beforehand , hinting that the fax will arrive in a few minutes . Then they go personally to the post office and fetch it as it runs off the machine . Whether such faxes are officially registered or not is situational : sometimes they are , sometimes they aren’t , depending on the addressees . Officially there is no private fax . The envelope makes the difference . Phone , as a voice medium , is considered volatile and non existent - unless the information changes medium and becomes a written paper or memo . Tapes are not used . Dilemmas for CSC W There are two complementary and inseparable spheres of work in the Ministry . The hierarchical , strict formal bureaucracy is entwined with officiahy invisible , informal , “private” , coopertitive work . Accepting both spheres makes 121 this type of organisation mighty and stable . Transparency and responsibility are underpinned by delicate mechanisms to support freedom of choice , cooperation and coordination . The envisaged Groupware system will strain both official definitions and working practices . Evolving a new balance , knowing how to “officialize” and how to work with new electronic media , under conditions of a new division of the Ministry and its staff between Bonn and Berlin , will be necessary but not easy . At least the following questions arise , and will need to be answered . How should electronic documents be theorized from the point of view of the Ministry ? Should they be treated as mail , fax , phone , or as some combination of these ? Are we , as researchers in a position to make suggestions , or will the answer be evolved , ad hoc , in situ ? Is it possible . to anticipate how an electronic , and electronically tagged , document will be treated in practice by officers and by administrators ? Can an electronic system live up to the account given by one civil servant of the existing procedure manual : “It gives freedom of choice” ? The Ministry , and this type of organisation in general , shows a strong resistance to new technologies . It ignores the phone , or only works it into the system when it can be regarded as an ink on paper memo . It uses centralised fax - machines exclusively and treats faxes like letters without envelopes ! Is this conservatism , or an ingenious way of allowing subtlety within a necessary framework of strict accountability ? Can CSCW - systems fulfill the requirements of organi - sational transparency and discretion on the part of civil servants . We believe the next study casts some light on these questions . SECTION 2 : PREPARING A SPEECH FOR THE MINISTER : THE STORY IN BRIEF The Minister of Family Affairs , Elderly People , Women , and Youth receives a letter from a municipal organisation . It asks her to give the opening speech at the reopening of St . Mary , a home for elderly people in Old City . The home is located in the midst of a township with a slum character in the former GDR . St . Mary was renovated with controversial subsidies from the Ministry and will act as a model for similar projects . The Minister agrees to give the speech . She asks her Ministry to write a draft , to last around thirty minutes . This is done . Five days before she is’due to give the speech , it arrives as ten typewritten pages . But the opposition faction schedules a Parliamentary discussion on the situation of the elderly on the same date . She has to stay in Bonn to take part in the debate . She cannot go to Old City . She cancels the appointment and the prepared speech is sent to the archive . Preparing a speech for the Minister : detail of the process 1 . Step : Central Post Office of the Ministry The Ministry central post office receives an incoming lcttcr from the municipal organisation in Old City . Since this letter is directly addressed to the Minister , they don’t open or register it . They date - stamp the envelope ( 185 . 94 ) ant1 send it by messenger to the “Office of the Minister ‘I . ’ 2 . Step : Office of the Minister The registrar in the Office of the Minister records the incoming letter on a card , writes a registration number on the letter and puts it in the incoming post folder ? The Head of the Office of the Minister reads the documents and determines who has to do what and when , To “dctcrminc” in this case means inscribing his decisions on the document in the form of abbreviations . These abbreviations have a fixed sense , are defined and documented as rules in nn official - and obligatory - handbook . They function as orders concerning time , path through the organisation , and work to do . They are written on the document , and remain part of it . Normally abbreviations are written by hand , seldom by typewriter . 3 Because the Head of the Office of the Minister believes the opening speech is of interest to the Minister , he gives it to the Minister’s “first” or “second” secretary . They register their incoming mail in a “mailbook” , which is used to monitor the submission of requested documents . 3 . Step : Minister The Minister is kept personally informed , once or twice daily , by oral reports about what is going on from the Hcnd of her Office . She agrees to give the opening speech4 ( May 18th afternoon ) . 4 . Step : Offrce of the Minister The Head of the Office of the Minister asks his secretary to write a letter . Date : 19 . 5 . 94 . Address : “Herr Abteilungslcitcr 7 a . d . D” , which means to the head of the section 7 . The ‘issue : “Speech of the Minister about reopening the model residence , St . Mary in Old City , for elderly people , date 16 , 6 . 1994” . The text : ‘The current state of planning the ‘In cases where the Minister ‘s decision is not ncccssary , hc distributes incoming documents directly to the designated sections . Uncertain cases and high priority documents nrc always given to the Head of the Office of the Minister . 3The Head of the Office of the Minister can send a document directly to a special unit or to a section if hc wants to deviate from the prescribed route through the hierarchies , e . g . ‘Kopie an PSt” means copy to the parliamentary secretary of state ; “7” means to the head of section 7 ; “71” means to the head of subsection 7 1 ; “7 11” means directly to the unit 711 of subsection 7 1 of section 7 . If he writes “T” this means urgent , and ‘Txx . xx . xx means that the work has to be done by that date . 41f the Minister is traveling , or out of her office for scvcrnl hours , the staff keep her up to date by written documents or memos . These are put in foldersin her document cast , which one of her companions carries . 122 Minister’s activities shows that , at the date mentioned above , she will give the opening speech . We expect members of the Local Government to take part . We suggest foundations and basic strategies from the policy for elderly people with special reference to the new federal states after unification . I request your contribution before Wednesday , 8 . 6 . 1994” . The secretary puts the letter in an empty folder and lays it in the outgoing postbox . 5 . Step : Head of the Section A messenger takes the folder to the incoming postbox of the head of the section . His secretary takes all incoming post and puts it in a special folder . The head of the section reads this folder . He personally inscribes the document by writing down at minimum an abbreviation for his name ( two characters ) , a date , and the next destinations . In this case he writes down “Ba 24 / 5” which stands for Bauer ( his name ) , and when he read the document ( the 24th . of May ) . Then ’ Mr . Bauer writes “‘0 71 b . w . V” which means a copy of this letter goes to subsection 71 , and should be returned to him for approval after the work is done . ’ The secretary registers outgoing documents in a central “mailbook” for the section . In our case , she writes the current date , the issue , and the destination within the sec - tion : “25 . 594 , Opening speech residence St . Mary , 711” . The “mailbook” is not used for control of resubmisisons , but to testify the folder has been received and delegated . It is a sort of doorkeeper , recording the existence and trajectory of the document . She then adds the abbreviation of her name and “er1 . 25 / 5” which means done on such and such a date . The document is put into a folder and then into the outgoing postbox . 6 . Step : Head of the Subsection The folder crosses the boundary to subsection 71 by messenger . The secretary to the head of the subsection takes the document out of the incoming postbox and presents it to her chief . She reads it and sees “711” means that unit 711 in her subsection has to do the preparation . 6 ‘The head of section is free to change any routing that is already specified , if he thinks that another unit can do the work better . But he can only do this for the domain he is responsible for , and such changes must be documented on the original letter . He also can send the letter to another section , but he cannot tell the head of the other section what to do with the letter . If he wants to comment on the content e . g . priorities , emphasis , and so on , he usually writes “b . R . ” which is the abbreviation for “personal report” . This will be done by voice , not as a written document . “She may also add “b . R . ” which means that she wants an oral report or discussion on the task . She may also add another destination within her subsection , e . g . ‘Bitte such 714 beteiligen” meaning unit 714 has to participate . In our case she decides “71 an 711 : Erbitte’ Redeentwurf rechtzeitig vor T” which means : from subsection 71 to unit 711 , please submit the prepared speech in time . The head of the subsection shares a personal secretary with her colleague , the subsection leader 72 . This secretary has a Checklist for incoming mail . The document is registered and inscribed on a renewed submission list . In this case the head of the subsection asks her secretary to make a copy of the document , because she wants it for her personal archive . The document itself is put in the outgoing postbox and crosses the boundary via messenger to the next domain : the head of the unit’s postbox . 7 . Step : Head of the unit The head of the unit reads the document , signs it ( two characters and date ) , It is now May , 26th . 1994 . He notes on the document who in his unit has to write the speech , e . g . “Frau Braun b . R . ” This order designates Mrs . Brown as the writer of the Minister’s opening speech at St . Mary’s , and asks her to come to him immediately for a face - to - face meeting over the subject . He has some ideas he wants to integrate in the speech . ’ After adding the abbreviations by hand to the document , the head of the unit puts the folder in his postbox . The messenger takes it to Mrs . Brown’s room . 8 . Step : Collaborator in a unit Next morning , May 27 , Mrs . Brown finds the folder with the document in her postbox . Because it is destined for the upper hierarchies she gives it a high priority and starts work . She phones the head of the unit for the meeting . After hearing his intentions and ideas , she has to decide whether to write the speech on her own or to ask other units to participate using special deliveriess . In this case she does not need help from other units , she will write the speech herself . Because , as usual , there is only a short time left , she starts at once . She uses press releases , programmes , information over the funding for St . Mary in the folders , discussion with colleagues , and so on . After writing the first version of the speech , she composes a letter in which she mentions the reason for the speech , the relationship to the document from the Head of the Ministry Office , and decides on a “sign tree” - a formal navigation route up to the hierarchies . She signs this letter personally . ‘In the face - to - face meetings ideas are exchanged over what and how to write . This never results in further annotations on the document itself . ‘If she decides that she needs coproduction with other units , she copies the document and send it with a remark ‘Bitte urn Redebeitrag bis zum 1 . 6 . 94 liefem iiber Referatsleiter 711” which means please send me a contribution for the speech with the special topic xx via the head of the unit 711 . She can ask for direct delivery , but using the head of the office as address makes it safer - it becomes more obligatory for other units to deliver on time . 123 There are now three documents : the typed request with its several signatures ; the proposal for the speech ( taped , seldom handwritten ) , and the collaborators letter ( typed , sometimes handwritten ) These come together in one folder which , via her postbox and - messengers , is sent to the chancery clerks’ office . 9 . Step : Chancery Clerks’ Office On the afternoon of June 3 , 1994 , the folder arrives . The head of the chancery clerks’ office gives the documents to a clerk to type into a computer . The first version will noti be printed out in full , and , together with the other documents , sent back ( postbox - messenger - postbox ) to the collaborator in the unit . g 10 . Step : Collaborator in a unit The collaborator revises the new written text . She adds some detail by hand , corrects grammatical mistakes , and a new written version is now necessary . Since she now feels under time pressure , she takes the folder personally to the chancery . 11 . Step : Chancery clerks’ office The clerk takes two hours to make the corrections . The full version ( plus letters ) is sent via folder , postbox and messengers to the collaborator in the unit . 12 . Collaborator in the unit It is now June 6 . 1994 . The collaborator revises the speech once more . Time is running out and she is fairly content with this version . She takes the folder with its documents personally to the head of the unit . She wants to be sure that he reads the proposal immediately so she can react if he wants changes . He can ask for revision cycles or let the proposal pass . This is the first hurdle the speech has to jump in its race back to the upper hierarchies . 13 . Step : Head of the Unit June 7 . In the morning the head of the unit reads the proposed speech . Although he has some slight changes in mind , he let the proposal pass . ” He adds his signature abbreviation and date to the “sign tree” : “Be 7 / 6” . The folder goes to his postbox . A messenger takes it to the subsection leader’s postbox . 14 . Step : Subsection leader Her secretary opens the folder and gives the document to the subsection leader . She repeats the head of unit’s revision ‘Transfer between offices , and transcription of tape to text ( about 10 pages ) , takes from 1 to 5 days , with an average of about 2 days . Usually at least one revision cycle is required , but this is normally faster than the first transcription . “If not the revision cycle goes on - back to collaborator - chancery - collaborator - head of the unit - collaborator - chancery - collaborator . . . . process . ” She is satisfied with the proposal , and signs on the same day : ‘Xl 7 / 6” . Via her secretary , postbox and messenger the folder goes to the section leader . 15 . Step : Section leader His secretary gi ; ves him the documents . He agrees : “Bo 816” . ‘2 The secretary takes the folder to their postbox , A messenger delivers it to the next step in the hierarchy . 16 . Step : Secretary of state The secretary of the secretary of state registers the incoming documents in a check list and gives them to the secretary or his personal staff . No matter who actually reads the documents , the secretary of state has to sign personally , Hc does it : “We g / 6” . The secretary registers the documents once more and they are sent to the parliamentary sccrctary of state . 13 17 . Step : Parliamentary Secretary of state Her secr & ry takes the documents out of the postbox and giveg” it to the personal advisor of the Parliamentary Secretary of State : She reads the speech proposal and signs “Mu 1 O / 6” . ‘4 The documents now travel via postbox and messengers to the Office of the Minister . 18 . Step : Office of the Minister The secretary takes the documents from the postbox and gives to the Head of the Office It is now June 11 th . The speech is back with the initiator five days before its due date . Sometimes the Head of the Office reads the proposals , sometimes the Minister’s personal staff . Proposals are often revised and changed here , because staff know the Minister , the expressions and themes she prefers , and so on . If there are many alterations to the full version they let their secretaries write a new final version , which generally is not seen by the collaborator who wrote the full version . 19 . Step : Public Relations OffIce This office is given copies - of the planned speech to preparc a press release . 20 . Step : Office of the Minister “Normally , she would only ask for a full revision or change if something important were missing or definitively wrong from her point of view . 12Here , as in the last step , full revision cycles do not happen very often . There is always time pressure and a few changes are done personally by hand . 13The secretary of state is always a civil servant , the parliamentary secretary always a member of parliament who acts as a” junior” partner or administrative substitute for the Minister . 14She usually lets documents pass unrevised . She only ask for revisions if there are significant political deviations from her opinion . Or if the speech is written for her . 124 The Minister is unable to travel to Old City to give the opening speech at St . Mary’s . The Opposition forced a discussion on policies for elderly people in Parliament on the same day , so she has to stay in Bonn . Consequently , the Head of her Office does not show her the now useless speech . The final version is archived in the Office of the Minister ; the full version plus the two documents are sent . back with a short remark to the collaborator in the unit . The Head of the Office adds a handwritten note to the ac - companying letter , saying the proposal was ready in time but the Minister could not give the speech because of conflicting dates . He signs it with the abbreviation of his name and date ( June 12 ) . His secretary puts the folder with the three documents in the postbox and the messenger takes it directly to the collaborator . No - one else in the hierarchy is informed about what has happened . 21 , Step : Collaborator of the unit The collaborator takes the folder and adds “Reg 711” ( which means to the archive of unit No . 711 ) with her name and date , now June 18 . The messenger takes the folder from the postbox and delivers it to the general archive . 22 . Step : Registration and Archive The archivist with experience of 711 registers the documents , and puts them into a pre - existing folder about the governmental funding for St . Mary in Old City . COMMENTS This long and sad story of a speech that never was illustrates several points . Artefacts ( in this case the folder and documents ) cross a rather large number of boundaries even in straighforward tasks . At each boundary crossing we see things happen that do not happen within boundaries ( and of course , vice versa ) . The incoming letter becomes an official letter when it arrives in the Minister’s Office ( remember the importance of this from the earlier section ! ) ; once the Minister has agreed , and the Head of her Office made his inscriptions , the official letter becomes a task , with a deadline and a bureaucratic route , destination ; and so on . With each boundary crossing the status of the folder changes , and this is signalled by a change in its inscriptions . Each status change is a change of obligations and responsibilities . Without necessarily changing the content , the folder has become different . Within boundaries , there are no changes to inscriptions , but changes to the content that are sometimes called “doing the work” . In this case it is noticeable that of the four weeks ( 22 working days ) from receiving the request to delivery of the speech , only 6 working days are devoted to the task of researching and writing the speech . The rest of the time is taken by transit , approvals , and minor revisions . It is also noticeable that the folder is only registered , or externally logged , 4 times in the 22 steps , sufficient for accountability , but not for “tracking” the document . Put the other way round , it is relatively easy to determine who is currently responsible , but not where it is , or what is currently happening to it . The incremental inscriptions on the folder / letter that are added as it crosses organisational boundaries mean , in effect , that the workflow is embedded in , created and documented on the artefact itself . LESSONS LEARNED This study aimed at understanding the organisation , its processes and the work practice of the employees . It was used as means in design team meetings to discuss the requirements for a groupware system which had to fulfill the needs of users and organization . The discussion had different direct effects on the designers and their way of shaping the groupware towards the users’ needs . It showed clearly for the designers at a first glance that there were flows of work which could be assisted technically . On a second glance it made obvious how complex the interdependencies were between the actual status of an artefact and its interpretation . , The electronic document was more than a file encoding a certain content , which was sent up and down the hierarchies . Dependent on the steps it provided different information and triggered different actions which could not be foreseen at the beginning . This understanding convinced us to use the metaphor of a medium and not mechanism for the processes and reflect them as multi - perspective groupwork and not prescribed workflow . The scenario made obvious that studying the work practice of small groups of users belonging to one unit is not sufficient to understand the cooperative groupwork of an organisation . It is necessary to analyse and understand work processes which cross boundaries and thereby change their character . This insight was very helpful when we described how archiving and retrieval processes can be technically assisted , processes which were from - the same complex nature and inflict several units . When we reported about the case that the whole process of writing a speech for a minister needs approximately four weeks and 22 steps and that only four days are left for the first version of the speech and the rest of the time is due to transportation , reworking , and control , simple solutions occurred . One solution was to reduce the number of steps especially those of the middle management . Another idea was to replace the hierarchical stepwise top - down - top flow by a concurrent organisation of the process instead of the sequential . He or she who writes the speech should send it simultaneously to all those concerned . They later on have the right to interfere . But the scenario shows that this will reduce the complex information added on the document while crossing different boundaries . The attitudes of the employees towards the groupware system were relaxed , they were not afraid of using new technologies , they felt like being the avant - garde of the ministry . But they used it in a restrictive , careful and not explorative way . It seemed to us that they were resistant to change . This small’ case study showed that a technical groupware system assists only a minor part of the complex social interaction between employees , which is necessary to 125 fulfill a task . Introducing groupware does not automatically augment the social interaction ; depending on the mode of application this can even reduce interaction . This scenario - based requirement analysis was helpful for the designers from a methodological point of view too . It is not so much time and situation dependent as other techniques which often precisely describe requirements of the past . We used it as a “dummy” to approve , whether a solution could fit into existing work practice or not . And it turned out that those colleagues who joined the design team later used the scenario as a teaching guide to understand work and work practice in a ministry . We therefor wrote more scenarios : about the request of a citizen which has to be answered , about archiving and retrieval , and about collecting votes for decision - making . CONCLUSIONS Embedded Worldtow . Even in this highly formal and bureaucratised organisation , the workflow ( destinations , tasks , responsibilities ) are constructed “on the fly” . At each step a determination is made about suitable people , responsibility , next task , additional collaboration , and so on . Greater resolution is achieved on the task structure . The lack of resolution inherent in the first broad ‘brush designation of responsibility matches the inherent uncertainty in any organisation about who will be available at some moment in the future , and how the known or unknown competences of known or unknown individuals may or may not match any given task . The exact course of events and responsibilities can , practically , only be known after the event ( Suchman , 1987 ) , although of course the broad framework of accountability and action is known through experience and through documentation . This points to a notion of workflow as generic and unfolding , as opposed to one that is prespecified and re - usable in terms of exact roles and trajectories . A generic and unfolding workflow fits nicely with the details of the concept of boundary object . Even more , inscribing the workflow on , and embedding it in the moving artefact means that the “workflow” is always available where it is most needed : at the point where the work is being done , and where uncertainties arise . The Boundary Object Our boundary object ( artefact ) is the letter ( formal request ) written by the head of the Office of the Minister . As it crosses boundaries , it accumulates handwritten signs and dates ( has its workflow built ) , until it reaches the collaborator at unit level . Here the proposed speech and an answering letter from the collaborator are added . The compound artefact cycles between chancery clerk and collaborator , before beginning its journey back through the different upward steps . After all the boundary crossings , the letter is loaded with inscriptions . These point to the responsible people at each level , record approvals , navigation paths , date information , and deadlines . In terms of the specific ( Star and Griesemer , 1989 ) theses on boundary objects : * It inhabits several intersecting social worlds within the Ministry . It satisfies the informational requirements of each of them . The formalism of inscriptions informs , inhibits or stimulates different local activities , such as advising , commanding , controlling , overviewing , enabling , registering , researching , requesting , fulfilling , proposing , supervising , timing and so on . * It is plastic enough to adapt to local needs since its schema does not overspecify work , yet further detail , collaboration , etc . can be added as needed . It is robust in the coarse military style of the general abbreviation language This functions like a Lego kit for building accountabilities and task trajectories . * It has ( is ) a simple common structure with different significances in different social worlds where there nrc verbal reports , face - to - face meetings , and other activities that never get inscribed on the artefact , and which renyin invisible to other levels . * The creation and management of boundary objects is a key process in developing and maintaining coherence across intersecting social worlds . More simply , without boundary objects in complex organisations , it is inconceivable that most tasks would get done at all . SUMMARY Our investigation started with an enquiry , with reference to a proposed groupware workflow system , about how formal structure and strong rules were reconciled with discretionary work and contingency management . The practices involved ingeneous and subtle distinctions between Ijublic and private documents . This in turn raised further questions . The second study - of the many boundary crossings implicated in preparing a politically sensitive speech - illuminates some possible answers for CSCW designers . How should electronic documents be theorized ? ( as mail , fax , phone , or some combination ? ) We see that , as usual , this is the wrong question . The point is not the medium , or even the fact of being a document . It is whether the artefact , document or not , crosses organisational , departmental or unit boundaries . If it does , we should ask if , in current practice , it carries its workflow with it ? If so , WC can “theorize” that a CSCW artefact should probably do the same . Is it possible to anticipate how an electronic and electronically tagged document system live up to the account given by one civil servant of the existing procedure manual : “Zt gives freedom of choice” ? The answers suggested to these questions is that electronic tagging may be fine - it accords with some practices of logging in order to identify who is accountable . But the “freedom of choice” necessary for the smooth running of the organisation will not be supported by “tagging” to monitor progress against a separate , pre - existing workflow . “Freedom of choice” , and 126 “subtlety within a necessary framework of strict accountability” will be supported if the workflow is embedded in the artefact , and can be developed within both contexts of local contingency and organisational rules and conventions . We believe these design recommendations respect the achievements of current practice in the civil service , and the necessity of local discretion and a strong formal framework of accountability . At the same time , they avoid the dangers of fetishising existing practice , and - cf . the procedures for fax - of retrofitting new technologies to old techniques . ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are grateful to the CSCW group at GMD , the POLITeam Project funded by the German Federal Ministry for Research & Technology , and to the COMIC ESPRIT Basic Research Project for supporting this work . REFERENCES 1 . Bowker , Geoffrey and Susan Leigh Star . Knowledge and infrastructure in international information management : problems of classification and coding . In Information Acumen : The Understanding and Use of Knowledge in Modem Business , ed . Lisa Budd - Frierman , 186 - 213 . London : Routledge , 1994 . 2 . Button , Graham ( ed . ) . Technology in Working Order : Studies of Work , Interaction , and Technology . London & New York : Routledge , 1993 . 3 . Egger , Edeltraud and Ina Wagner . Negotiating Temporal Orders : The Case of Collaborative Time - Management in a Surgery Clinic . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 1 ( 4 ) : 255 - 276 , 1993 . 4 . Heath , Christian and Paul Luff . Collaborative Activity and Technological Design : Task Coordination in London Underground Control Rooms . In ECSCW ‘91 . Proceedings of the Second European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , ed . Liam Bannon , Mike Robinson , and Kjeld Schmidt , 65 - 80 . Amsterdam : Kluwer Academic Publishers , 1991 . 5 . Hoschka , P . , T . Kreifelts , and W . Prinz . Gruppen - koordination und Vorgangsbearbeitung . In Betrieblicher Einsatz von CSCW - Systemen , ed . S . Kim & K . KlSckner , 91 - 122 . Sankt Augustin , Germany : GMD Studien Nr . 230 , 1994 . 6 . Hughes , John A . , David Randall , and Dan Shapiro . Faltering from Ethnography to Design . In Proceedings of ACM CSCW’92 Conference on Computer - . Supported Cooperative Work , 115 - 122 . ACM , 1992 . 7 . Hutchins , Edwin . The Technology of Team Navigation . In Intellectual Teamwork : Social and Technological Foundations of Cooperative Work , ed . J . Galegher Kraut , R . E . & Egido , C . , 191 - 220 . New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum , 1990 . 8 . Kldckner , Konrad / Peter Mambrey / Markus Sohlenkamp / Wolfgang Prinz / Ludwin Fuchs / Sabine Kolvenbach / Uta Pankoke - Babatz / Anja Syri : POLITeam . Bridging the Gap between Bonn and Berlin for and with the Users . Proceedings of the 4th European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Stockholm 1995 . 9 . Mambrey , Peter / Gloria Mark / Uta Pankoke - Babatz : Integrating user advocacy into participatory desig : The designers’perspective . In : Blomberg , Jeanette / Finn Kensing / Elizabeth Dykstra - Erickson : PDC’ 96 . Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference . Cambridge , Massachusetts , USA , 13 - 15 November 1996 , pp . 251 - 259 . 10 . Mintzberg , Hem - y . The Structuring of Organizations . A Synthesis of the Research . Englewood Cliffs , New Jersey : Prentice - Hall , 1979 . 11 . Star , Susan Leigh . The Structure of Ill - Structured Solutions : Boundary Objects and Heterogeneous Distributed Problem Solving . In Distributed Artificial Intelligence , ed . Les Gasser and Michael Huhns , 37 - 54 . 2 . London : Pitman , 1989 . 12 . Star , Susan Leigh and James R . Griesemer . Institutional Ecology , ‘Translations’ and Boundary Objects : Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 - 39 . Social Studies of Science 19 : 387420 , 1989 . 13 . Suchman , Lucy . Plans and situated actions . The problem of human - machine communication . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1987 . 14 . Suchman , L . A . and R . H . Trigg “Understanding Practice : Video as a Medium for Reflection and Design” . In Design at Work , ed . J . & Kyng . M Greenbaum , 65 - 89 . London and New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum , 1991 . 127