1427 Research Article Introduction Podosomes are dynamic assemblies of actin found on the ventral surfaces of monocytic / haematopoietic cells ( Marchisio et al . , 1984 ; Marchisio et al . , 1987 ; Zallone et al . , 1983 ) . Structurally , podosomes comprise a concentrated core of actin and actin regulatory proteins ( about 1 m m across ) , which turns over continually with a half - life of minutes ( Destaing et al . , 2003 ) . The central mass of actin filaments displays radial connections to neighbouring podosomes or to adjacent stress fibres ( Akisaka et al . , 2008 ; Evans et al . , 2003 ; Luxenburg et al . , 2007 ) . Surrounding the core is a ring region that contains scaffolding , signalling and integrin - binding proteins , including the typical focal adhesion proteins FAK , vinculin and paxillin ( Block et al . , 2008 ) . Non muscle myosins are also associated with podosomes ( Kopp et al . , 2006 ; van Helden et al . , 2008 ) . Together , the core and the ring contain an extraordinary array of molecular components some of which are essential for podosome assembly ( Gimona et al . , 2008 ) . Recent work has provided initial clues to the mechanisms of podosome formation via signalling complexes generated at the plasma membrane ( Oikawa et al . , 2008 ) . The function of podosomes is unclear . They have been proposed as cellular adhesion structures , e . g . RSV - transformed cells ( Tarone et al . , 1985 ) or sealing zones , e . g . osteoclasts ( Luxenburg et al . , 2007 ) . More recently they have been implicated in matrix degradation and , in this regard , display similarities to surface - associated structures found in invasive cancer cells called invadopodia ( Gimona et al . , 2008 ) . Invadopodia degrade the extracellular matrix but also produce cellular protrusions that are proposed to mediate invasion of tissues ( Bowden et al . , 1999 ; Weaver , 2008 ) . Whether podosomes produce similar cellular protrusions is currently unresolved ( Gimona et al . , 2008 ; Linder , 2009 ) , although some data suggest that podosomes could conceivably promote invasion by forming cell extensions ( Carman et al . , 2007 ; Varon et al . , 2006 ) . Dendritic cells ( DCs ) are antigen - presenting cells of the immune system that , when immature , readily form actin - rich podosomes in vitro . The podosome regions of DCs degrade extracellular matrices in vitro ( West et al . , 2008 ) , and in vivo this could play a role in migration of DC through tissues . Degradation appears to start at discrete points immediately below the podosome cores , and is dependent on the matrix metalloproteinase ( MMP ) MMP - 14 ( West et al . , 2008 ) . During their lifetime as functioning antigen - presenting cells , DCs move between their tissues of origin ( bone marrow and spleen ) , peripheral tissues and the lymph nodes , where they interact and activate T cells ( Alvarez et al . , 2008 ) . We reasoned that movement of DCs through tissues cannot occur via degradation alone and some form of cellular protrusion must be involved . To better characterise podosomes of immature DCs and investigate possible podosome protrusion we used correlated light and electron microscopy ( LM and EM , respectively ) , high - resolution LM , and quantitative conventional and immuno - EM . We demonstrate that DC podosomes are preferential sites for the formation of protrusions and degrade matrix that is removed via endocytosis . Degradation and endocytosis of a gelatin matrix are dependent on metalloproteinase MMP - 14 , and podosome protrusion is partially sensitive to the myosin - II inhibitor Blebbistatin . We propose that matrix invasion at podosomes is mediated by Dendritic cell podosomes are protrusive and invade the extracellular matrix using metalloproteinase MMP - 14 Christian Gawden - Bone 1 , Zhongjun Zhou 2 , Emma King 3 , Alan Prescott 1 , Colin Watts 1 and John Lucocq 1 , * 1 Division of Cell Biology and Immunology , College of Life Sciences , University of Dundee , Dundee , DD1 5EH , UK 2 Department of Biochemistry , Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine , the University of Hong Kong , Pokfulam , Hong Kong 3 LM Facility , College of Life Sciences , University of Dundee , Dow Street , Dundee , DD1 5EH , UK * Author for correspondence ( j . m . lucocq @ dundee . ac . uk ) Accepted 3 February 2010 Journal of Cell Science 123 , 1427 - 1437 ©2010 . Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 056515 Summary Podosomes are spot - like actin - rich structures formed at the ventral surface of monocytic and haematopoietic cells . Podosomes degrade extracellular matrix and are proposed to be involved in cell migration . A key question is whether podosomes form protrusions similar to the invadopodia of cancer cells . We characterised podosomes of immature dendritic cells using electron microscopy combined with both conventional and novel high - resolution structured illumination light microscopy . Dendritic cell podosomes are composed of actin foci surrounded by a specialised ring region that is rich in material containing paxillin . We found that podosomes were preferential sites for protrusion into polycarbonate filters impregnated with crosslinked gelatin , degrading up to 2 m m of matrix in 24 hours . Podosome - associated uptake of colloidal gold - labelled gelatin matrix appeared to occur via large phagosome - like structures or narrow tubular invaginations . The motor protein myosin - II was excluded from ring or core regions but was concentrated around them and the myosin - II inhibitor Blebbistatin reduced the length of podosome protrusions . Finally , we found that degradation , protrusion and endocytosis in this system are dependent on the matrix metalloproteinase MMP - 14 . We propose that podosomes mediate migration of dendritic cells through tissues by means of myosin - II - dependent protrusion coupled to MMP - 14 - dependent degradation and endocytosis . Key words : Podosome , Electron microscopy , Quantification J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e JCS ePress online publication date 31 March 2010 1428 coordination of myosin - II - driven actin - based protrusion combined with degradation that is mediated locally by metalloproteinases ( MMP - 14 ) and removal of matrix components via endocytotic mechanisms . Results Correlative LM and EM reveals podosome ultrastructure to be dome shaped There are no quantitative ultrastructural studies of podosomes . On glass coverslips DCs expanded from mouse spleen , precursors produced podosomes that containing actin - rich foci ( Fig . 1A , C , D ; TRITC - phalloidin labelling ) surrounded by a region rich in paxillin ( Fig . 1B , C , F ) and vinculin ( see also Linder and Aepfelbacher , 2003 ; West et al . , 2008 ) . Most of the cells ( ~ 79 % ) generated podosome regions that were composed of 50 - 100 discrete units ( n = 362 ) covering an average 56 m m 2 ( n = 20 ) . To reveal podosome ultrastructure , the same podosomes from the same cell were correlated using confocal microscopy ( paxillin and actin ; Fig . 1A - C , D , F ) and then conventional epoxy resin transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) ( Fig . 1E ) . Cell borders were used as reference structures by each imaging method . In EM sections prepared ‘en - face’ to the substratum TRITC - phalloidin - labelled actin - rich cores ( Fig . 1D , arrows ) appeared as electron lucent patches ( Fig . 1E , arrows ) lacking recognizable cytoplasmic organelles . Surrounding this core was a more electron - dense region , which corresponded to areas of paxillin fluorescence ( asterisks in Fig . 1E , F ) . The electron densities were arranged in patches or reticulated assemblies with electron - lucent spaces in between ( Fig . 1E ) . The border between central and peripheral regions was irregular and electron densities often extended into the core ( Fig . 1E , arrowhead ) . In this report we will refer to the electron - lucent region as the ‘core’ and the electron - dense periphery as the ‘ring’ . 3D topology was revealed using serial TEM sections prepared en - face to the substratum ( Fig . 1G - J ) . In sections situated closer to the plasma membrane ( Fig . 1H ) both core and ring regions were clearly visible . In sections located deeper in the cell ( Fig . 1I ) , the ring region was indistinct and replaced by cytoplasmic vesiculo - tubular structures ( Fig . 1I asterisks ) . The core ( arrowheads in Fig . 1G - I ) extended up to 400 nm from the membrane and appeared dome shaped in serial section reconstructions ( dots in Fig . 1J ) . In orthogonal ( vertical ) sections ( Fig . 2A ) the dome - shaped profiles of podosomes was clearly evident and in HM23 resin sections the core region of these structures was gold labelled for actin using immuno - EM ( Fig . 2B ) . Serial sections were then used to confirm the dome shape and central actin distribution in 3D ( data not shown ; correlative microscopy was not attainable in this orientation using this system ) . The actin - rich core was flanked by zones of puckered plasma membrane ( Fig . 2C ) , which were associated with electron - dense material containing striations that extended perpendicular to the substratum ( Fig . 2C , D and insert ) and were immunogold labelled for paxillin ( Fig . 2D ) . These peripheral densities probably contribute to the patchy electron density of the ring seen in en - face sections . Three - dimensional structured illumination microscopy ( SIM ) ( Schermelleh et al . , 2008 ) is a new approach for higher resolution immunofluorescence microscopy . This confirmed the dome - shaped distribution of actin and revealed a patchy distribution of another ring component , vinculin ( Fig . 2E - H ) . In z - axis projections ( Fig . 2H ) , vinculin staining appeared as linear ‘streaks’ in similar position and orientation to the electron - dense paxillin - rich structures observed by EM ( Figs 1 and 2 ; supplementary material Fig . S1 ) . In en - face view , bundles of actin radiated from the actin - rich cores with vinculin staining interspersed between the bundles ( Fig . 2E , F ; arrowheads in insert in Fig . 2E ) . These features were not visible using conventional LM techniques . Cells cultured on glass coverslips showed no evidence of podosome - related tubules that had been described previously ( Nermut et al . , 1991 ; Nitsch et al . , 1989 ; Ochoa et al . , 2000 ) ; 1100 podosome profiles examined ) . However tubules did form on 2 - m m thick gelatin layers crosslinked using 0 . 5 % Glutaraldehyde ( supplementary material Fig . S1C ) and on porous filters coated with crosslinked gelatin ( see below and Fig . 7 and supplementary material Fig . S7 ) . Podosome protrusion occurs on porous polycarbonate filters impregnated with crosslinked gelatin A central issue in podosome biology is whether podosomes form protrusions ( Gimona et al . , 2008 ; Linder , 2009 ) . To investigate this , we used polycarbonate filters with pores partially or completely filled with gelatin as a degradable matrix ( Fig . 3A ) . DCs seeded onto these filters formed podosomes indistinguishable in form from Journal of Cell Science 123 ( 9 ) Fig . 1 . Correlative LM and EM of the DC podosomes . ( A - C ) Low - magnification fluorescent micrographs of a DC podosome region stained with TRITC - phalloidin ( A ) or paxillin ( B ) ; merged image ( C ) . ( D - F ) The boxed area from C is magnified in ( D ) ( arrows indicate actin - rich foci ) and ( F ) ( asterisks indicate interconnected paxillin - rich rings ) . ( E ) The correlative EM image ( epoxy resin section ) . Discrete electron lucent regions ( arrows ) correlate with the actin - rich cores in E ( arrows ) . The electron lucent areas are surrounded by an interconnected electron - dense reticular profiles ( asterisks in E ) that correlate with paxillin - rich ring ( asterisks in F ) . Arrowhead in E shows irregular border between core and ring regions . ( G - I ) Micrographs are alternate epoxy resin sections ( 90 nm thick ) through correlated podosome regions ( LM not shown ) . Image G is closest to the membrane and I furthest inside the cell . Dots in G - I indicate positions of actin - rich cores and asterisks electron - dense rings . ( J ) Reconstruction of podosomes using six successive 90 - nm sections from series G - I ( see Materials and Methods ) . Darkest green is closest to the membrane and lightest green furthest inside the cell . The reconstructed podosome cores ( dots ) are dome shaped and , here , extend at least 450 nm into the cell . Bars ( A - C ) 2 m m ; ( D - J ) 1 m m . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1429 Protrusive podosomes in dendritic cells those found on plastic or ‘thick’ gelatin ( Fig . 2 , supplementary material Figs S1 and S2 ) . Accordingly , on non - porous regions of the filters coated with gelatin , podosomes showed dome - shaped cores ( actin - rich by immuno - EM ; Fig . 3A , B ) , peripheral membrane puckering ( Fig . 3C ) and associated striations ( arrowheads in Fig . 3B - D ) labelled for paxillin ( Fig . 3D ) . Remarkably , where a podosome region covered a filter pore , protrusions were frequently observed extending into the pores and these filled the width of each pore completely , whether the pore diameter was 1 m m or 2 m m ( data not shown ) . By TEM the protrusions appeared homogeneous and were continuous with podosome cores situated above the filter ( Fig . 3A asterisks ) . Immunogold labelling showed actin distributed throughout the protrusion ( Fig . 3B ) and at the pore - aperture electron - dense striations labelled for paxillin ( Fig . 3B - D ) , and these striations extended away from the membrane . Protrusions emanating from podosomes consistently penetrated deep into the pore , making contact with the gelatin matrix ( Fig . 3B - D ) . The interface often appeared irregular ( Fig . 3C ) , consistent with localised degradation ( gelatin was reproducibly smooth in the absence of protrusions ) . By contrast , pores below regions of the cell that lacked podosomes ( see Fig . 5B ) were not filled with protrusions and the cell membrane failed to make contact with gelatin in the pore . When cells were seeded onto filters whose pores had been completely filled with gelatin , podosome protrusions still entered the pores ( supplementary material Fig . S3A , B ) , whereas non - podosomal cell regions did not ( supplementary material Fig . S3A , C ) . Taken together , these data indicated that podosome regions preferentially generate protrusions in regions where extracellular matrix degradation takes place . We next used rigorous quantitative EM techniques to test these possibilities . Immuno - EM reveals podosome components in podosome - related protrusions To investigate the relationship between protrusions and podosomes further , we mapped characteristic proteins on podosomes using quantitative immuno - EM as illustrated in ( Fig . 4 and supplementary material Fig . S4 ) . In podosomes formed on plastic , actin labelling was most concentrated within an electron - dense sub - region of the core ( see Fig . 2B ) . Paxillin labelling was most concentrated in the ring region ( Fig . 4B , see supplementary material Fig . S4B for quantification ) , which contained the electron - dense striations Fig . 2 . EM and SIM of DC podosomes . ( A - D ) EM sections of DC podosomes orientated orthogonal to the substratum . ( A ) Epoxy resin section in which the dome shape is evident ( arrows ) and the peripheral ring regions ( asterisks ) lie adjacent to dome - shaped core . ( B ) HM23 resin section in which gold labelling for actin is most intense towards the core centre . The matrix has slightly greater electron density compared with the less intensely labelled periphery ( arrows ) . ( C ) Epoxy resin section . The core regions of three dome - shaped podosomes ( arrowed ) are flanked by adjacent ring regions ( bars ) . The ring regions display puckered membrane profiles , and in HM23 section displayed in D the gold labelling for paxillin is located along striations extending orthogonally from the plasma membrane ( arrows ) . The insert illustrates the striations as they appear in optimally contrasted epoxy resin sections extending from puckered membrane regions of the ring . In these orthogonal sections , podosome height was 685 nm and width at the membrane was 1245 nm ( see Materials and Methods ; n = 96 , s . d . = 0 . 22 m m for each , respectively ) . ( E - H ) SIM . Image E shows actin ( phalloidin labelling ; red ) concentrated in the core regions that have irregular borders , whereas ring regions contain actin filaments ( insert ; arrowheads ) . In F the vinculin ring ( using Alexa - Flour 488 secondary antibody ; green ) is distributed in patches often situated between the actin filaments ( arrows in E and F ) . Image H is a Z - projection through the same podosome region as in E - G , taken along the white line in G . Arrows in G and H indicate corresponding actin - rich podosome cores , and white arrowheads in H indicates vinculin staining in linear arrays extending away from the membrane . Bars ( A - D ) 200 nm , insert in ( D ) 100 nm . ( E - H ) 2 m m and insert in ( E ) 1 m m . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1430 extending from the membrane indentations ( arrows in Fig . 2D ) . The quantitative distribution map of these core and ring components therefore appears very similar to the qualitative data obtained using SIM . Two additional podosome components , namely phosphorylated tyrosine ( Tyr - P ) residues ( Linder , 2007 ) and gelsolin ( Chellaiah et al . , 2000 ; Marchisio et al . , 1987 ; West et al . , 1999 ) were also mapped using this method . Tyr - P labelling was concentrated centrally adjacent to the plasma membrane at the podosome core ( Fig . 4C - E ) and was reduced by 96 % after incubation of sections with phosphatase 1B catalytic domains , indicating specificity ( Fig . 4E ) . Without affecting podosome numbers , podosome labelling for gelsolin ( Fig . 4F - H ) was reduced by 75 % in gelsolin - knockout cells compared with wild type , and was concentrated in two distinct domains : one near the peak of the podosome core and the other over the centre of the core , close to the plasma membrane ( Fig . 4F ) . The lack of effect on podosome number is consistent with our previous data in DCs ( West et al . , 1999 ) . Distributions of actin , paxillin , Tyr - P and gelsolin labelling are summarised in Fig . 4N . In protrusions , quantification of labelling for podosome components ( Fig . 4I - M ; supplementary material Fig . S5 ) revealed the focus of actin labelling being now close to the protrusion tip ( compare Fig . 4A with 4I ) . Paxillin labelling was most concentrated in the peripheral zone close to the pore aperture , in which electron - dense striations were found ( Fig . 4B and Fig . 3D ) . Interestingly , labelling for Tyr - P was found at the protrusion tip ( Fig . 4K , L ) and also over the paxillin - rich electron - dense ring regions ( arrowheads Fig . 4M ) surrounding at the pore - aperture . These distributions are summarised in Fig . 4N . From these data we conclude that the protrusions possess typical podosome core and ring components in similar distributions to those found in podosomes . In addition , structural similarities , such as electron - dense striations found at similar locations , strongly suggest that protrusions derive from podosomes . Quantitative evidence of matrix degradation at podosome protrusions 95 % of pores beneath podosomes were filled with protrusions ( Fig . 5A ) , compared with 29 % in non - podosomal areas , confirming that podosome regions are hot - spots for protrusion into the pores . None of the protrusions found in the non - podosome areas resembled the large homogeneous actin - rich protrusions associated with podosomes . Rather , they were thinner and more irregular , containing a variety of cytosolic components ( not shown ) . Since protrusions formed from podosomes ( Fig . 5C ) and were 3 . 67 times longer than those formed in non - podosome regions ( 2 . 72 m m and 0 . 74 m m , respectively ) , we calculated that 100 m m 2 of podosome region produces 70 . 72 m m of protrusion , compared with 5 . 92 m m in the non - podosome region ( Fig . 7A ; see footnote 1 ) . Therefore , podosomes are 11 . 95 times more active in producing protrusions compared with the rest of the cell . Protrusions were only rarely observed over gelatin layers found above the filter ( up to 300 nm thick ; supplementary material Fig . S3D - G ) . These protrusions were broad ( up to 2 m m across ) and only occasionally penetrated the gelatin to make contact with the filter surface ( supplementary material Fig . S3D - G ) . Therefore , podosome protrusions form preferentially at filter - pore apertures . The data in Fig . 5A and C formed the basis of a model shown in Fig . 8A , which illustrates to - scale the increased frequency of filled pores and increased process length over the podosomes compared with non - podosomal areas , and preferential formation at pores versus the filter surface . To analyse degradation at protrusive podosomes we measured the distance from pore - aperture to gelatin within the pore ( 1 ) below podosomes ( 3 . 17 m m ) , ( 2 ) over non - podosomal areas ( 1 . 62 m m ) or ( 3 ) over filter - regions where no cell was found ( 1 . 61 m m ; n = 3 independent experiments ) ( see Fig . 5C and D ) . The extent of gelatin removal compared with areas where no cell was found was 1 . 55 m m ( 3 . 17 - 1 . 61 ; over 24 hours ) at podosomes and only 0 . 01 m m ( 1 . 62 - 1 . 61 ) over non - podosomal cell regions . Knockout of MMP - 14 abrogates degradation and limits protrusion Our previous work indicated that MMP - 14 is required for the degradation of crosslinked gelatin by podosomes ( West et al . , 2008 ) . This raised the question of whether podosome protrusion depends on MMP - 14 . DCs from MMP - knockout ( MMP - 14 – / – ) mice were cultured on filters in parallel to DCs from paired wild - type littermates and fixed for EM analysis 24 hours later . Podosome protrusions from MMP - 14 – / – DCs were similar to those in wild type cells . They occupied a similar fraction of pore apertures ( Fig . 5A ) and showed Journal of Cell Science 123 ( 9 ) Fig . 3 . Protrusion and matrix degradation in polycarbonate filters impregnated with crosslinked gelatin . ( A ) Protrusion from a DC podosome region ( * ) into pores of a polycarbonate filter in collage of EM micrographs . ( B ) Detail of protrusion in A . The protrusion contacts gelatin in the pore ( pale green ) and is immunogold labelled for actin along its length . The protrusion base is continuous with podosomes above and is also labelled for actin . At the pore rim , striations extend into the podosome ( arrow ) . ( C ) Pore protrusion shows irregular close contact with gelatin . Electron - dense striations ( arrows ) extend into the podosome close to the pore - aperture and extend from puckered plasma membrane profiles typical of a podosome ring region ( line ) . ( D ) Representative paxillin distribution ( HM23 section ) . Gold particles label electron - dense areas ( arrows ) that flank the protrusion base and a striation is indicated ( arrowhead ) . Gelatin is coloured pale green in A - D . Bars in ( A ) 1 m m , ( B - D ) 500 nm . 1 By stereology pores covered 21 . 6 µm 2 . 100 µm 2 podosome region had 21 . 6÷0 . 785 µm 2 = 27 . 5 pores ( 0 . 785 µm 2 is the cross sectional area of a 1 µm diameter pore ) . The fraction of pores occupied by protrusion under podosomes was 0 . 95 ( Fig . 5A ) . 100 µm 2 podosome region produce 27 . 5 (cid:2) 0 . 95 = 26 protrusions with average length 26 (cid:2) 2 . 72 = 70 . 72 µm . In 100 µm 2 of non - podosome region the number of protrusions was 27 . 5 (cid:2) 0 . 29 = 8 with length of 8 (cid:2) 0 . 74 = 5 . 92 µm . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1431 Protrusive podosomes in dendritic cells no reduction in the frequency of contact with gelatin ( Fig . 5E ) , indicating that the biogenesis of individual protrusions is not affected in MMP - 14 – / – cells . However , in MMP - 14 – / – DCs the length of podosome protrusions was substantially reduced to levels found at non - podosomal cell regions in the wild - type cells ( Fig . 5C ) . In addition , the distance from the pore aperture to the gelatin was also substantially reduced compared with wild type ( Fig . 5D ) , indicating that MMP14 – / – cells were unable to degrade gelatin within the pores . The myosin - II inhibitor Blebbistatin decreases the length of podosome protrusions Non - muscle myosin - II has been shown to localise to podosome regions ( Chabadel et al . , 2007 ; van Helden et al . , 2008 ) . Myosin - IIa was localised using confocal microscopy to determine whether it was associated with DC podosomes . Myosin - IIa staining was distributed on stress fibres and in cortical actin close to the plasma membrane ( supplementary material Fig . S6 ) , and was also concentrated in a region juxtaposed to podosomes in a peripheral ring - like distribution ( Fig . 6A ) . The staining was clearly distinct from , and did not overlap with , the podosome core ( phalloidin ) or the ring ( vinculin staining ; 1381 podosome regions observed ; Fig . 6A lower panel ) . This indicated that myosin - II is not an integral DC podosome component . To assess the role of myosin - II in podosome - based protrusion we used the myosin - II inhibitor Blebbistatin ( Straight et al . , 2003 ) . Over an 8 - hour exposure , Blebbistatin ( 10 m M ) almost completely inhibited migration through 3 - m m pores in a transwell filter assay ( see Materials and Methods ; Fig . 6B ) . We next investigated whether Blebbistatin treatment affected podosome formation or protrusion in DCs cultured on gelatin impregnated porous filters . Addition of Blebbistatin to DCs seeded on filters for either 0 . 5 or 7 . 5 hours did not change the average number of podosomes per cell [ podosomes per cell for control 15 ( s . e . m . ±0 . 8 ) , for 0 . 5 hours 14 ( s . e . m . ±2 . 0 ) and 7 . 5 hours 18 ( s . e . m . ±2 . 2 ) , n = 3 in each case ] . Additionally , there was only a minor increase in the percentage of cells lacking podosomes ( means 25 % and 29 % at 0 . 5 hours and 7 . 5 hours , respectively , n = 3 ) indicating that Blebbistatin does not grossly affect podosome levels . Crucially , we found a reduction in mean podosome protrusion length of 0 . 9 m m and 1 . 28 m m at 0 . 5 hours and 7 . 5 hours , respectively ( Fig . 6C ) , whereas a more detailed analysis showed that the reduction in length occurred over the whole population of protrusions rather than in a subset of these structures ( Fig . 6D ) . The shortening of the podosome protrusions was not due to cells lifting from the substratum as these remained closely associated with it . These data suggest that protrusion of podosomes into filter pores is regulated by myosin - II . Fig . 4 . Mapping of podosome components using quantitative immuno - EM . ( A - H ) Immunogold labelling over podosomes . ( A - C , F ) Gold labelling quantified in standardised fractions of the total podosome profile ( s ) as described in Materials and Methods . Black outlines represent the average location of the cytoplasmic border and the grey line the plasma membrane . Examples of labelling for actin and paxillin are shown in Fig . 2 , and here for Tyr - P in panel D and gelsolin in panel G . Bar charts in panels E ( Tyr - P ) and H ( gelsolin ) show the fraction of specific label over different compartments estimated from control experiments . Cyt , cytosol ; Nuc , Nucleus ; ER , endoplasmic reticulum ; End , endosome ; Ruff , ruffles ; PM , plasma membrane ; Pod , podosome . See Materials and Methods for further details . For each protein n = 5 - 28 podosomes , > 200 total gold particles from three spleen preparations were analysed . ( I - K ) Immunogold labelling over protrusions ; quantification as described in Materials and Methods . Black dashed line represents the average location of the podosome - cytoplasm junction ; grey line represents the average location of plasma membrane . For each protein n = 5 - 32 podosomes , 200 gold particles and three spleen preparations were analysed . ( L , M ) Localisation of Tyr - P ( arrows ) in the tip ( L ) and ring region at the base of a protrusion ( M ) . Bars in density maps ( A - C and F ; I - K ) represent 200 nm , in D and G 200 nm , in L and M 500 nm . ( N ) Overlay of peak intensities from distributions shown in ( A - C , F ) and ( I - K ) in podosomes and protrusions . The actin - rich core is partially obscured by the paxillin and Tyr - P peak intensities . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1432 Podosome - and / or protrusion - associated degradation and endocytosis of a gelatin - gold matrix We sought more direct evidence for degradation and removal of the matrix using a gelatin - labelled colloidal gold complex . After injection into the filter , these preparations were characterised by patches of gold - labelled gelatin covered by more superficial areas of gold - free gelatin ( Fig . 7A ) . After 24 hours of culture , the appearance of cell regions in contact with the gelatin surface ( observed by TEM ) was of two types . When podosomes were absent , a smooth superficial layer of gold - free gelatin was invariably present ( Fig . 7A , arrowhead ) with accumulations of gold deeper in the gelatin . When podosomes were present , the superficial gelatin layer was now absent and the plasma membrane was in contact with gold - labelled gelatin , forming irregular profiles associated with invaginations containing m m - sized gold - gelatin spurs ( Fig . 7B ) . These effects were also observed within the pores and were consistent with matrix degradation at both the filter surface and within the pores themselves ( Fig . 7C , D ) . The invaginations were putative sites of matrix internalisation , and where podosomes were in contact with gold - gelatin , gold Journal of Cell Science 123 ( 9 ) Fig . 5 . Quantitative analysis of podosome protrusion and degradation in wild - type and MMP - 14 – / – DCs . ( A ) Fractional area of pore occupied by protrusions , quantified using intersection counting of podosome and non - podosome regions ( see Materials and Methods ) ; Wt , wild - type ; MMP - 14 – / – , MMP - 14 knockout in ( A , C - E ) . ( B ) Representative diagram of the measurements and terminology used in text and ( C - E ) . ( C ) Measurement of processes extending into pores beneath podosome and non - podosome regions ( Non - podo ) . ( D ) The pore - aperture to gelatin distance ( Pore depth ) was measured at podosome regions , non - podosome areas ( Non - podo ) and cell free areas of the filter ( Non - cell ) . ( E ) The fraction of protrusions contacting gelatin directly ( defined in Materials and Methods ) as counted in podosome and non - podosome regions . Data in A , C - E were obtained from three independent experiments . Error bars represent ± s . e . m . Fig . 6 . Myosin - IIa distribution and quantitative effects of Blebbistatin on DC podosomes . ( A ) Myosin - IIa distribution in podosome regions . Upper panels show overviews of a podosome region stained for vinculin , myosin - IIa and actin . Lower panels show Z - reconstructions from the same cell . Podosomes in lower panels are from the white line of the merged image in the upper panel . Myosin - IIa is distributed to the periphery of the actin staining of the podosome ( see upper panel ) but does not overlap with actin ( core ) or vinculin staining ( ring ) ( B ) Migration of SDCs through a 3 - m m filter pore in the absence ( Control ) and presence of 10 m M Blebbistatin over 8 hours . ( C ) Podosome protrusion length in the control after 7 . 5 hours or 0 . 5 hours of treatment with 10 m M Blebbistatin . ( D ) Frequency distribution of podosome protrusion lengths . For clarity , categories ( 0 . 39 m m ) are labelled alternately with only the lower size limit included . Data in B and C were obtained from from three independent experiments ; data in D were obtained from 300 measurements per experimental condition . Error bars represent ± s . e . m . Bars ( A ) upper panels 5 m m ; lower panels 1 m m . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1433 Protrusive podosomes in dendritic cells particles were found within membrane - bound organelles resembling endosomes or lysosomes ( Fig . 7B , insert ) . In fact such cells contained nearly tenfold ( 9 . 96 times ) more gold in their endosomes or lysosomes ( 0 . 184 gold particles per lysosome , s . e . m . ±0 . 0066 ; n = 3 ) compared with cells lacking podosome profiles ( 0 . 0185 gold particles / lysosome , s . e . m . = 0 . 0084 ; n = 3 ) . Uptake of gold particles was , therefore , strongly associated with the presence of podosomes . Serial reconstructions of podosomes further indicated that protrusions and podosomes are sites where uptake occurs ( supplementary material Fig . S7A - H ) . In these preparations , we also observed narrow 20 - 30 nm tubules ( arrows in Fig . 7E , F ; average neck width 30 . 79 nm , s . e . m . ±2 . 96 nm , n = 31 ) , which formed at sites of clustered gold particles , representing another potential conduit of internalisation ( supplementary material Fig . S7B , C , H ) . Critical examination of gold aggregates adjacent to plasma membrane showed that the component particles were more closely packed than further away from the membrane ( supplementary material Fig . S7J ) , which is consistent with membrane - associated degradation ( see Discussion ) . This effect was most striking close to the mouth of narrow tubules and within larger invaginations ( arrows Fig . 7C and D ; supplementary material Fig . S7B , C ) . MMP - 14 – / – cells appeared incapable of degrading gelatin - gold matrices and lacked gold particles in their lysosomes , clearly linking matrix endocytosis to MMP - 14 - dependant matrix degradation . There were ninefold more gold particles per endosome or lysosome profile in wild type compared with MMP - 14 – / – cells ( 0 . 097 per profile and 0 . 011 gold particles per profile , respectively ; n = 200 cells counted in each case ) . Discussion Our results reveal new structural , molecular and functional features of podosomes . They show that , at high resolution , podosomes are dome - shaped accumulations of actin – as was previously indicated using LM ( Kaverina et al . , 2003 ) . An actin - rich core is surrounded by an electron - dense region , containing ring - associated proteins . Within the podosome ring novel striations are associated with localised membrane puckering ( Nermut et al . , 1991 ; Nitsch et al . , 1989 ; Ochoa et al . , 2000 ) . The striated material had no clear membrane profiles and was , therefore , distinct from tubules found at the base of podosome protrusions ( Fig . 7 ; supplementary material Fig . S7 ) . The striations contained paxillin and corresponded to elongated structures visualised by vinculin staining in SIM . Thus vinculin and paxillin appear to be concentrated in the same elongated structures , revealed as a discontinuous sheath around the podosome core by SIM . Up to now vinculin and paxillin have not been described in linear structures but are known to bind actin and a number of podosome proteins ( Gimona et al . , 2008 ; Harburger and Calderwood , 2009 ) . Vinculin appears to contribute to force transfer between integrins and actin , and may stabilise focal adhesions ( Ziegler et al . , 2006 ) , paxillin could cooperate with vinculin in this force - transfer process through its ability to bind the tail region of vinculin and to transmit signals through FAK / Pyk2 to the actomyosin complex ( Mierke et al . , 2008 ) . Interestingly , the ring region has a distinct similarity to focal adhesions ( Block et al . , 2008 ) . We propose that the striated electron densities of the ring represent actin filaments ‘decorated’ with vinculin - paxillin complexes that link integrin function to actin of the podosome ( see Fig . 8B ) . We observed puckered membrane at the periphery of podosome in our TEM investigations ( modelled in Fig . 8B ) . This membrane curvature is suggestive of mechanical force occurring at the ring region . The force - generating protein myosin - IIa was not localised to the ring region directly but was concentrated close to the core and the ring ( see below ) . An open question is whether podosomes are protrusive structures ( Linder , 2009 ) . This is supported by a number of our observations . First , we found that protrusions had a very similar structural and molecular organisation to podosomes formed on gelatin and glass ( i . e . had an actin - rich core , a ring region containing vinculin - paxillin - rich striations , around the rim of the pore and a central focus of phosphotyrosine ) . Second , we observed that pore - filling actin - rich protrusions only formed at podosomes and were continuous with them – again indicating that protrusions were derived directly from podosome structures . The few protrusion that entered pores in non - podosome regions were not filled with actin and appear to contain various cytosolic structures . Previous studies described cellular protrusions extending from lymphocytes and / or Fig . 7 . Gold - particle uptake is associated with podosomes . DCs grown on crosslinked gelatin - containing colloidal gold - gelatin complexes were processed for epoxy resin TEM . ( A , B ) Low - power micrographs . Non - podosome containing cells ( A ) lie on a smooth - surfaced unlabelled gelatin layer that is superficial to a gold - labelled zone lying on the filter surface ( arrowhead ) . In podosome - containing ( B , asterisk ) cells , the smooth unlabelled gelatin surface is absent and the podosome displays an irregular plasma membrane inside the gold - labelled gelatin . Insets show lysosome - like profiles that are label free in A ( non - podosome cell profiles ) and gold - labelled in B ( podosome cell profiles ) . ( C , D ) Higher magnification views of podosome regions ( C ) and podosome processes ( D ) show invagination of cell surface ( arrowheads ) and compaction of gold - gelatin complexes close to the membrane ( arrows ) . ( E ) Canaliculus ( arrowhead ) in a podosome region that contains gold particles ( arrows ) . ( F ) Canaliculi ( arrows ) extend into a podosome ring region from groups of compacted gelatin - gold particles that were surrounded by plasma membrane invaginations . Bars , ( A , B ) 1 m m , inserts 200 nm ; ( C , D ) 500 nm ; ( E , F ) 300 nm . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1434 myelocytes into underlying endothelial cells ( Carman et al . , 2007 ) . However , clear evidence for podosome components was not provided since the structures illustrated in their figures ( by EM ) were not filled completely with actin filaments , were not associated with adjacent actin - rich podosomes and appeared to contain cytoplasmic components . In addition ( Varon et al . , 2006 ) reported actin - rich protrusions from aortic endothelial cells , extending into pores of a transwell filter . It is unclear whether these protrusions were preferentially formed at podosome regions , and whether they penetrated the underlying substratum . In the case of DCs , rigorous quantitative EM techniques have been invaluable in characterising the relationship of protrusive structures to podosomes . The precise relationship between podosome protrusions and invadopodia is still unclear . Invadopodia clearly protrude into and degrade extracellular matrix by a metalloproteinase - dependent mechanism ( Buccione et al . , 2004 ) as we have described for podosome protrusions ( see below ) . There are very few published transverse EM - views of invadopodia and they measure significantly less than 200 nm in diameter ( Bowden et al . , 1999 ; Mueller and Chen , 1991 ) . Furthermore they appear actin - poor when compared with DC podosome - protrusions . Actin - rich structures described in A375 MM cells ( Baldassarre et al . , 2006 ; Baldassarre et al . , 2003 ) in published micrographs do not give exact morphology of protrusions within the matrix and the precise relationship to protrusive podosomes remains unclear . Our data suggest closer parallels between podosomes and invadopodia , and further rigorous correlative and immuno - EM analysis of these structures are now required . We show that DC podosome protrusions degrade substantial gelatin barriers , a process more marked and frequent within the pores compared with the gelatin surface . Degradation was dependent on the membrane - anchored metalloproteinase MMP - 14 . This protein activates the soluble metalloproteinases MMP - 2 , MMP - 8 and MMP - 13 , which can also degrade gelatin ( Poincloux et al . , 2009 ) ; previous studies ruled out a requirement for MMP - 2 and MMP - 9 in degradation of thin gelatin films by DCs ( West et al . , 2008 ) . Our data are indicative of membrane - based degradation because degradation was only seen when protrusions contacted gelatin and compaction of gelatin - gold was most marked near to the plasma membrane and / or invaginations . This suggests podosome related domains containing MMP - 14 . Interestingly , in endothelial cells MMP - 14 generates guidance tunnels within collagen gels , and cancer cells use a similar mechanism to protrude and degrade as they move through matrices ( Poincloux et al . , 2009 ; Stratman et al . , 2009 ) . Thus , MMP - 14 domains might enable DC protrusions to tunnel through extracellular matrices as cells move through tissues . This issue awaits high - resolution localisation of MMP - 14 to podosomes using immunofluorescence or immuno - EM – so far unsuccessful in our hands by using an array of available antibodies . How is matrix removed ? There are at least two possibilities , namely diffusion and bulk removal via endocytosis . We have not investigated solubilisation of gelatin in our system but our data do indicate that podosome protrusions remove matrix via endocytotic mechanisms . Previously , a number of proteins associated with endocytic functions had been found in podosomes , e . g . dynamin and endophilin 2 ( Ochoa et al . , 2000 ) , but there was no direct evidence for internalisation at these structures . Here , we observed large invaginations containing fragments of gold - labelled matrix suggesting DCs can phagocytose fragments of collagenous Journal of Cell Science 123 ( 9 ) Fig . 8 . Models of protrusive podosomes from quantitative EM data . ( A ) Representative model drawn to scale to illustrate the data shown in Fig . 5 . The podosome region is 50 m m 2 and pores measure 1 m m across . The panel illustrates the increased frequency of pore occupancy and increased length of protrusions below podosomes . ( B ) Model of protruding podosome proposed from the data shown in Figs 1 - 7 . In the periphery , recruitment of paxillin and vinculin at sites of integrin binding ( not shown ) promotes assembly of the ring structure , which has a fibrillar composition . The inner surfaces of the ring provides an interaction domain for actin filaments , vinculin and paxillin , allowing for stabilisation of the interaction , possible force generation and membrane puckering . Centrally , close to the plasma membrane , podosome assembly occurs via phosphotyrosine signalling and the phosphorylation of actin regulatory proteins . Protrusion at the membrane is driven by actin treadmilling activity that is associated with gelsolin capping and cleavage . Without progressive protrusion the podosome rapidly disassembles . Actin assembly , therefore , occurs centrally in the developing protrusion while mechanical tension is generated in the more stable periphery . ( C ) Protrusion is coupled to degradation by membrane located MMP - 14 and protrusion extends into space generated by the degradation . Degraded matrix is removed at the periphery of the protrusion by tubules or larger endocytic carriers ( not shown ) . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1435 Protrusive podosomes in dendritic cells extracellular matrix by phagocytic mechanisms ( Jiang and Grinnell , 2005 ) . We also observed gold - labelled tubules of 20 - 30 nm in diameter emanating from puckered membrane in the ring - like regions close to the pore aperture ( Fig . 8C ) . Canaliculi have been observed previously in podosomes of Src - transformed cells and osteoclasts ( Nermut et al . , 1991 ; Nitsch et al . , 1989 ; Ochoa et al . , 2000 ) . The close association of the membrane bending and / or sensing proteins CIP - 4 , ASAP - 1 and FBP - 17 ( Albiges - Rizo et al . , 2009 ) could be relevant to the formation of the membrane curvature seen in podosomes on glass and thick gelatin . Irrespective of the mode of uptake , we found evidence for matrix internalisation in cells possessing podosomes . Future studies will determine which of these structures mediates podosome - associated endocytosis . How might protrusions form at podosomes ? We have not studied the detailed dynamics of protrusion formation in real time but we believe our data are consistent with the following model ( see Fig . 8C ) . We suggest that podosomes represent transient probes of the extracellular space anchored by a focal adhesion - like rim ( the ring ) . Myosin - II interaction at the ring and / or core periphery could then exert a traction force on the core , which manifests as the bulge in non - protrusive podosomes , with the consequent tension at the ring inducing membrane puckering . These forces would rely on the presence of anti - parallel actin filaments inserting into a vinculin - paxillin - rich ring in a similar fashion to focal adhesions ( Block et al . , 2008 ) . In the case that no protrusion ensues , podosome disassembly would occur , consistent with the rapid podosome turnover of DC podosomes observed on non - degradable substrates such as glass ( West et al . , 2008 ) . If , however , protrusion is allowed by means of matrix degradation or the availability of a pore , the developing podosome protrusions and / or ring interactions might become more stable , with active actin assembly occurring at the protrusion tip ( this is consistent with our observations of foci of actin and tyrosine phosphorylation , which are necessary for correct podosome dynamics ) ( Dovas et al . , 2009 ; Luxenburg et al . , 2006 ) . We suggest that protrusion is coupled to degradation and removal of substrate by means of membrane - localised proteases , such as MMP - 14 , and endocytosis . Proteases and membrane would be delivered to the growing process by as - yet - uncharacterised exocytic vesicles . In conclusion , our observations indicate DCs can remodel and invade extracellular matrix using podosomes and podosome protrusions . DC podosomes might form as transient degradative ‘probes’ for areas of weakness in the extracellular matrix , which then mature into penetrative protrusions that function as pathfinders for cells as they progress on their way through the extracellular matrix toward the target tissue . Materials and Methods Chemicals , antibodies , cell culture Mouse anti - phosphotyrosine and mouse anti - paxillin antibodies ( for LM ) were from ( Millipore , Hertfordshire , UK ) , mouse anti - paxillin ( for EM ) was from ( BD Biosciences , Erembodegem , Belgium ) , mouse anti - vinculin was from ( Sigma , Poole , UK ) Rabbit anti - myosin IIa antibody was from ( Biomedical Technologies , Stoughton , MA ) , rabbit anti - actin antibody was kindly provided by Giuilo Gabbiani ( The University of Geneva , Geneva , Switzerland ) , rabbit anti - gelsolin was a kind gift from David J . Kwiatkowski ( Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA ) . Eight and 10 nm Protein - A – gold was prepared according to ( Lucocq , 1993 ) . Spleens from B6 mice and paired littermates of MMP - 14 wild - type and MMP - 14 – / – mice ( Zhou et al . , 2000 ) were processed and DCs prepared , cultured and immunofluorescence carried out as described by West et al . ( West et al . , 2008 ) . Structured illumination protocol for image acquisition The protocol was essentially as described previously ( Schermelleh et al . , 2008 ) . Images were acquired using the OMX Version 2 ( Applied Precision , Issaquah , WA ) . Samples were illuminated by a coherent scrambled laser to generate structured illumination ( SIM ) with lateral stripes approximately 0 . 2 m m apart . The pattern was shifted laterally through five phases and through three angular rotations of 60° for each z - section , separated by 0 . 125 m m . Exposure times were 200 - 500 mseconds and laser power and / or intensities were selected to minimise photo bleaching . Frame acquisitions were separated by a 300 - msecond pause . Raw images were processed and reconstructed to reveal structures with greater resolution ( Gustafsson et al . , 2008 ) . The channels were then aligned in x , y and rotationally by using predetermined shifts as measured using a target lens and the Softworx alignment tool ( Applied Precision ) . After correction for image shifts due to differences in emission wavelengths , data sets were transferred to Imaris ( Bitplane , Zurich , Switzerland ) for visualisation and generation of xz plane images . For comparison wide - field image stacks of the same regions were also collected and subjected to constrained iterative deconvolution to remove out - of - focus blur ( Schermelleh et al . , 2008 ) . Correlated LM and EM Cells were plated onto photo - etched coverslips ( Bellco Glass , SciQuip , Shropshire , UK ) and fixed for paxillin immunofluorescence ( see West et al . , 2008 ) . Labelled cells were located using differential interference contrast , then post - fixed and embedded in epoxy resin as described in ( Lucocq et al . , 1989 ) . Cells were sectioned serially ( 90 nm ) en - face to the monolayer and stained with lead citrate . Images were recorded on a JEOL 1200 EX ( 80 kV ) with phospho - imaging plates ( DITABIS , Pforzheim , Germany ) and viewed in Photoshop ( Adobe Systems ) . Reconstructions of serial sections were generated in Photoshop by aligning sequential images of membrane - bound structures , and then drawing around the core and superimposing images from each section colour coded according to the position in the z - direction . Conventional and immuno - EM Conventional EM was carried out according to Lucocq et al . ( Lucocq et al . , 1989 ) . For immuno - EM , SDCs were embedded in Lowicryl HM23 resin by progressively lowering the temperature ( see Lucocq , 2003 ) . 80 - nm sections were incubated on 2 % BSA / PBS , followed by antibodies in 2 % BSA / PBS . Rabbit primary antibodies were located using 8 - nm protein - A – gold followed by washes in PBS ( (cid:2) 5 ) and distilled water ( (cid:2) 3 ) . For mouse primary antibodies , an intermediate rabbit anti - mouse secondary antibody was used for 30 minutes ( Southern Biotech , Birmingham , AL ) . Sections were contrasted using 3 % uranyl acetate and lead citrate , and viewed in a Tecnai 12 transmission electron microscope ( FEI , Eindhoven , The Netherlands ) . Quantification of immunolabeling Cell profiles were selected using systematic random scans ( 1 , 050 (cid:2) ) . Near orthogonal podosome profiles ( dome - shaped peak and clearly imaged plasma membrane ) were recorded ( see Fig . 2 ) . Because of profile size variation , we located gold particles on a normalised podosome map . Images of podosomes ( 20 , 500 (cid:2) ) were displayed in Adobe Photoshop C2 and a line drawn to bisect the podosome from the peak of the dome to the membrane ( Z direction ) . The length from podosome centre ( at the membrane ) to the point at which the domed profile flattened off laterally was designated Y (cid:3) on one side and Y (cid:4) on the other . The location of gold particles was recorded as a fraction of the distance along each z and y axis ( at least 200 gold particles were counted per experiment ) . The mean height ( Z ) was 0 . 685 m m and the standard deviation ( s . d . ) was 0 . 21 m m . For Y (cid:3) and Y (cid:4) combined , the mean length was 0 . 690 m m and s . d . 0 . 22 m m ( n = 96 podosomes ) . The distribution of gold particles over the podosome was plotted on a scatter graph using Excel ( Microsoft ) and the frequency over normalized areas of 0 . 1 m m 2 counted ( applying unbiased counting rules to the quadrats ( Lucocq , 1994 ) . Densities were represented using the Excel surface contour function . Specific label was estimated as follows : Raw counts over organelles and / or compartments were converted to a ‘density’ by dividing by the number of intersection counts of a scanning line with the plasma membrane . Gelsolin - knockout cells and sections pre - incubated with commercial tyrosine phosphatase were used as controls . For each condition > 200 gold particles were counted ( n = 3 ) . The fractional reduction in gold - labelling density over cell compartments of interest was then calculated . Gelatin filters Polycarbonate filters ( Sterlitech , Kent , WA ) were washed in acetic acid ( 80 mM ) at 50°C ( Sigma , Paisley , UK ) for 20 minutes . 2 . 5 % pigskin gelatin ( Sigma , Paisley , UK ) was dissolved in 2 . 5 % w / v sucrose in RPMI ‘complete’ at 50°C . Filters were placed in a 25 - mm filter holder ( Millipore , Herts , UK ) and gelatin was injected through the filter at 37°C . Further steps were as described in Chen et al . ( Chen et al . , 1984 ) . Cells were cultured on filters at approximately 2 (cid:2) 10 5 cells for 24 hours and fixed in either 4 % PFA or 4 % PFA / 0 . 1 % GA for 1 hour at 37°C . Filters were either labelled with phalloidin as described above or prepared for epoxy resin embedding avoiding propylene oxide ( see Lucocq , 2003 ) . Gold - gelatin conjugation 20 - nm gold particles ( British Biocell Int . , Cardiff , UK ) were conjugated to gelatin dissolved in pyrogen free water ( Sigma , Poole , UK ) at a final concentration of 0 . 12 mg / ml as described ( Lucocq , 1993 ) . Conjugates were centrifuged for 1 hour at 8000 g . Pellets were resuspended in pyrogen - free water at 1 mg / ml and mixed with a gelatin / sucrose solution [ final concentration 2 . 5 % gelatin ( w / v ) , 2 . 5 % sucrose ( w / v ) ] and injected into filters . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1436 Quantification Filters were embedded flat or rolled for sectioning vertical to the filter surface . 90 - nm sections were mounted on pioloform - coated slot - grids ( Agar Scientific , Essex , UK ) . DC profiles were recorded at a magnification of 1250 (cid:2) and protrusions recorded at 4000 (cid:2) . Podosomes were defined as an exclusion zone for organelles close to the plasma membrane . Individual podosomes had a dome shape with a diameter of up to ~ 1 m m , whereas podosome regions were more extensive with irregular borders on their cytoplasmic aspect . Protrusions were defined as any membrane - bound structure that encroached below the filter - pore aperture . Gelatin appeared as non - cellular electron - dense material that either partially or completely filled each pore . The fractional area of structures at the filter or pore aperture was estimated using line intersection counting ( Lucocq , 2008 ; Weibel , 1979 ) . Quantitative analysis showed the fraction of filter occupied by pores was 0 . 216 ( n = 4692 , total intersections ) . Random position and orientation around the vertical axis was assumed . The length of protrusions was measured from the central point of the pore aperture to the central point of the protrusion tip ( Fig . 6B ) . Contact between gelatin and protrusion was defined as lack of electron - lucent space between the protrusion membrane and gelatin across the protrusion tip . Blebbistatin experiments Transwell migration was assessed essentially as described by West et al . with a few changes ( West et al . , 2008 ) . Cells were not mixed or stained with cell trackers or CD11c and 3 - m m - pore transwell inserts ( Costar , Corning , NY ) were used . Wells contained MIP1 a at 50 ng / ml ( Peprotech , London , UK ) in 2 % FCS , RPMI ( controls ) or MIP1 a 10 m M Blebbistatin in 2 % FCS . The migration time was 8 hours at 37°C . To analyse podosome and podosome protrusions cells were allowed to attach to gelatin filters for 30 minutes . Cells were treated with 10 m M Blebbistatin ( Merck , Nottingham , UK ) for 7 . 5 hours or remained on the filters for 7 . 5 hours before adding 10 m M Blebbistatin for 30 minutes . An 8 - hour untreated control was also generated . Samples were processed for fluorescent microscopy then Z - stacks were taken from ten discrete locations for each sample using a Zeiss 700 LSM microscope ( Carl Zeiss Ltd , UK ) . One - hundred protrusions , selected by systematic scanning were evaluated per repeat . Measurements of protrusion lengths were made from the top of the podosome to the protrusion tip using the Zen software ( Carl Zeiss Ltd , UK ; minimum length was 0 . 6 m m ) . Nearest - neighbour gold particle quantification Particles were from randomly selected quadrats ( square grid ) , using the unbiased forbidden - line counting rule ( Gundersen , 1977 ) and categorised as ( 1 ) particles within three gold - particle widths of the podosome - related membrane and ( 2 ) particles more distant from the membrane . Nearest neighbour centre - centre distances between gold particles were measured in Adobe Photoshop ( n = 566 gold particles from three separate cultures ) . We thank John James ( University of Dundee , UK ) for EM advice , Michele West ( University of Dundee , UK ) for discussions and Andreas Elkeries ( DITABIS , Pforzheim , Germany ) for technical advice . Giuilo Gabbiani , David J . Kwiatkowski and Robert Wallin ( Karolinska Institutet , Stockholm , Sweden ) kindly provided gelsolin - knockout cells . This research was funded by the MRC capacity studentship grant , MRC programme grant MRC ( to C . W . ) , Hong Kong Research Grant Council GRF HKU 781808M ( to Z . Z . ) . Deposited in PMC for release after 6 months . Supplementary material available online at http : / / jcs . biologists . org / cgi / content / full / 123 / 9 / 1427 / DC1 References Akisaka , T . , Yoshida , H . , Suzuki , R . and Takama , K . ( 2008 ) . Adhesion structures and their cytoskeleton - membrane interactions at podosomes of osteoclasts in culture . Cell Tissue Res . 331 , 625 - 641 . Albiges - Rizo , C . , Destaing , O . , Fourcade , B . , Planus , E . and Block , M . R . ( 2009 ) . Actin machinery and mechanosensitivity in invadopodia , podosomes and focal adhesions . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 3037 - 3049 . Alvarez , D . , Vollmann , E . H . and von Andrian , U . H . ( 2008 ) . Mechanisms and consequences of dendritic cell migration . Immunity 29 , 325 - 342 . Baldassarre , M . , Pompeo , A . , Beznoussenko , G . , Castaldi , C . , Cortellino , S . , McNiven , M . A . , Luini , A . and Buccione , R . ( 2003 ) . Dynamin participates in focal extracellular matrix degradation by invasive cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1074 - 1084 . Baldassarre , M . , Ayala , I . , Beznoussenko , G . , Giacchetti , G . , Machesky , L . M . , Luini , A . and Buccione , R . ( 2006 ) . Actin dynamics at sites of extracellular matrix degradation . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 85 , 1217 - 1231 . Block , M . R . , Badowski , C . , Millon - Fremillon , A . , Bouvard , D . , Bouin , A . P . , Faurobert , E . , Gerber - Scokaert , D . , Planus , E . and Albiges - Rizo , C . ( 2008 ) . Podosome - type adhesions and focal adhesions , so alike yet so different . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 87 , 491 - 506 . Bowden , E . T . , Barth , M . , Thomas , D . , Glazer , R . I . and Mueller , S . C . ( 1999 ) . An invasion - related complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKCmu associates with invadopodia at sites of extracellular matrix degradation . Oncogene 18 , 4440 - 4449 . Buccione , R . , Orth , J . D . and McNiven , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Foot and mouth : podosomes , invadopodia and circular dorsal ruffles . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 647 - 657 . Carman , C . V . , Sage , P . T . , Sciuto , T . E . , de la Fuente , M . A . , Geha , R . S . , Ochs , H . D . , Dvorak , H . F . , Dvorak , A . M . and Springer , T . A . ( 2007 ) . Transcellular diapedesis is initiated by invasive podosomes . Immunity 26 , 784 - 797 . Chabadel , A . , Banon - Rodriguez , I . , Cluet , D . , Rudkin , B . B . , Wehrle - Haller , B . , Genot , E . , Jurdic , P . , Anton , I . M . and Saltel , F . ( 2007 ) . CD44 and beta3 integrin organize two functionally distinct actin - based domains in osteoclasts . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 4899 - 4910 . Chellaiah , M . , Kizer , N . , Silva , M . , Alvarez , U . , Kwiatkowski , D . and Hruska , K . A . ( 2000 ) . Gelsolin deficiency blocks podosome assembly and produces increased bone mass and strength . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 665 - 678 . Chen , W . T . , Olden , K . , Bernard , B . A . and Chu , F . F . ( 1984 ) . Expression of transformation - associated protease ( s ) that degrade fibronectin at cell contact sites . J . Cell Biol . 98 , 1546 - 1555 . Destaing , O . , Saltel , F . , Geminard , J . C . , Jurdic , P . and Bard , F . ( 2003 ) . Podosomes display actin turnover and dynamic self - organization in osteoclasts expressing actin - green fluorescent protein . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 407 - 416 . Dovas , A . , Gevrey , J . C . , Grossi , A . , Park , H . , Abou - Kheir , W . and Cox , D . ( 2009 ) . Regulation of podosome dynamics by WASp phosphorylation : implication in matrix degradation and chemotaxis in macrophages . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 3873 - 3882 . Evans , J . G . , Correia , I . , Krasavina , O . , Watson , N . and Matsudaira , P . ( 2003 ) . Macrophage podosomes assemble at the leading lamella by growth and fragmentation . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 697 - 705 . Gimona , M . , Buccione , R . , Courtneidge , S . A . and Linder , S . ( 2008 ) . Assembly and biological role of podosomes and invadopodia . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 235 - 241 . Gundersen , H . J . G . ( 1977 ) . Notes on the estimation of the numerical density of arbitrary profiles : The edge effect . J . Microsc . 111 , 21 - 23 . Gustafsson , M . G . , Shao , L . , Carlton , P . M . , Wang , C . J . , Golubovskaya , I . N . , Cande , W . Z . , Agard , D . A . and Sedat , J . W . ( 2008 ) . Three - dimensional resolution doubling in wide - field fluorescence microscopy by structured illumination . Biophys . J . 94 , 4957 - 4970 . Harburger , D . S . and Calderwood , D . A . ( 2009 ) . Integrin signalling at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 159 - 163 . Jiang , H . and Grinnell , F . ( 2005 ) . Cell - matrix entanglement and mechanical anchorage of fibroblasts in three - dimensional collagen matrices . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 5070 - 5076 . Kaverina , I . , Stradal , T . E . and Gimona , M . ( 2003 ) . Podosome formation in cultured A7r5 vascular smooth muscle cells requires Arp2 / 3 - dependent de - novo actin polymerization at discrete microdomains . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 4915 - 4924 . Kopp , P . , Lammers , R . , Aepfelbacher , M . , Woehlke , G . , Rudel , T . , Machuy , N . , Steffen , W . and Linder , S . ( 2006 ) . The kinesin KIF1C and microtubule plus ends regulate podosome dynamics in macrophages . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 2811 - 2823 . Linder , S . ( 2007 ) . The matrix corroded : podosomes and invadopodia in extracellular matrix degradation . Trends Cell . Biol . 17 , 107 - 117 . Linder , S . ( 2009 ) . Invadosomes at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 3009 - 3013 . Linder , S . and Aepfelbacher , M . ( 2003 ) . Podosomes : adhesion hot - spots of invasive cells . Trends Cell . Biol . 13 , 376 - 385 . Lucocq , J . ( 1993 ) . Particulate markers for immunoelectron microscopy . In Fine Structure Immunocytochemistry ( ed . G . Griffiths ) , pp . 279 - 302 . Berlin : Springer - Verlag . Lucocq , J . ( 1994 ) . Quantitation of gold labelling and antigens in immunolabelled ultrathin sections . J . Anat . 184 , 1 - 13 . Lucocq , J . ( 2003 ) . Electron microscopy in cell biology . In Essential Cell Biology – A Practical Approach ( ed . J . Davey and M . Lord ) , pp . 53 - 112 Oxford : Oxford University Press . Lucocq , J . ( 2008 ) . Quantification of structures and gold labeling in transmission electron microscopy . Methods Cell Biol . 88 , 59 - 82 . Lucocq , J . M . , Berger , E . G . and Warren , G . ( 1989 ) . Mitotic Golgi fragments in HeLa cells and their role in the reassembly pathway . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 463 - 474 . Luxenburg , C . , Parsons , J . T . , Addadi , L . and Geiger , B . ( 2006 ) . Involvement of the Src - cortactin pathway in podosome formation and turnover during polarization of cultured osteoclasts . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 4878 - 4888 . Luxenburg , C . , Geblinger , D . , Klein , E . , Anderson , K . , Hanein , D . , Geiger , B . and Addadi , L . ( 2007 ) . The architecture of the adhesive apparatus of cultured osteoclasts : from podosome formation to sealing zone assembly . PLoS One 2 , e179 . Marchisio , P . C . , Cirillo , D . , Naldini , L . , Primavera , M . V . , Teti , A . and Zambonin - Zallone , A . ( 1984 ) . Cell - substratum interaction of cultured avian osteoclasts is mediated by specific adhesion structures . J . Cell Biol . 99 , 1696 - 1705 . Marchisio , P . C . , Cirillo , D . , Teti , A . , Zambonin - Zallone , A . and Tarone , G . ( 1987 ) . Rous sarcoma virus - transformed fibroblasts and cells of monocytic origin display a peculiar dot - like organization of cytoskeletal proteins involved in microfilament - membrane interactions . Exp . Cell Res . 169 , 202 - 214 . Mierke , C . T . , Kollmannsberger , P . , Zitterbart , D . P . , Smith , J . , Fabry , B . and Goldmann , W . H . ( 2008 ) . Mechano - coupling and regulation of contractility by the vinculin tail domain . Biophys . J . 94 , 661 - 670 . Mueller , S . C . and Chen , W . T . ( 1991 ) . Cellular invasion into matrix beads : localization of beta 1 integrins and fibronectin to the invadopodia . J . Cell Sci . 99 , 213 - 225 . Nermut , M . V . , Eason , P . , Hirst , E . M . and Kellie , S . ( 1991 ) . Cell / substratum adhesions in RSV - transformed rat fibroblasts . Exp . Cell Res . 193 , 382 - 397 . Nitsch , L . , Gionti , E . , Cancedda , R . and Marchisio , P . C . ( 1989 ) . The podosomes of Rous sarcoma virus transformed chondrocytes show a peculiar ultrastructural organization . Cell Biol . Int . Rep . 13 , 919 - 926 . Ochoa , G . C . , Slepnev , V . I . , Neff , L . , Ringstad , N . , Takei , K . , Daniell , L . , Kim , W . , Cao , H . , McNiven , M . , Baron , R . et al . ( 2000 ) . A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 377 - 389 . Journal of Cell Science 123 ( 9 ) J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1437 Protrusive podosomes in dendritic cells Oikawa , T . , Itoh , T . and Takenawa , T . ( 2008 ) . Sequential signals toward podosome formation in NIH - src cells . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 157 - 169 . Poincloux , R . , Lizarraga , F . and Chavrier , P . ( 2009 ) . Matrix invasion by tumour cells : a focus on MT1 - MMP trafficking to invadopodia . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 3015 - 3024 . Schermelleh , L . , Carlton , P . M . , Haase , S . , Shao , L . , Winoto , L . , Kner , P . , Burke , B . , Cardoso , M . C . , Agard , D . A . , Gustafsson , M . G . et al . ( 2008 ) . Subdiffraction multicolor imaging of the nuclear periphery with 3D structured illumination microscopy . Science 320 , 1332 - 1336 . Straight , A . F . , Cheung , A . , Limouze , J . , Chen , I . , Westwood , N . J . , Sellers , J . R . and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2003 ) . Dissecting temporal and spatial control of cytokinesis with a myosin II Inhibitor . Science 299 , 1743 - 1747 . Stratman , A . N . , Saunders , W . B . , Sacharidou , A . , Koh , W . , Fisher , K . E . , Zawieja , D . C . , Davis , M . J . and Davis , G . E . ( 2009 ) . Endothelial cell lumen and vascular guidance tunnel formation requires MT1 - MMP - dependent proteolysis in 3 - dimensional collagen matrices . Blood 114 , 237 - 247 . Tarone , G . , Cirillo , D . , Giancotti , F . G . , Comoglio , P . M . and Marchisio , P . C . ( 1985 ) . Rous sarcoma virus - transformed fibroblasts adhere primarily at discrete protrusions of the ventral membrane called podosomes . Exp . Cell Res . 159 , 141 - 157 . van Helden , S . F . , Oud , M . M . , Joosten , B . , Peterse , N . , Figdor , C . G . and van Leeuwen , F . N . ( 2008 ) . PGE2 - mediated podosome loss in dendritic cells is dependent on actomyosin contraction downstream of the RhoA - Rho - kinase axis . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 1096 - 1106 . V a r o n , C . , T a t i n , F . , M o re a u , V . , V a n O bb er g h e n - S c h illi n g , E . , F er n a nd ez - S a u ze , S . , R e u ze a u , E . , K r a m er , I . a nd G e n o t , E . ( 2006 ) . T r a n s f o r m i ng g r o w t h f ac t o r b e t a i ndu ce s r o s e tt e s o f podo s o m e s i n p r i m a r y a o r ti c e ndo t h e li a l ce ll s . M o l . C e ll . B i o l . 26 , 3582 - 3594 . W e av er , A . M . ( 2008 ) . I nv a dopod i a . C u rr . B i o l . 18 , R 362 - R 364 . W e i b e l , E . R . ( 1979 ) . S t e r e o l og i c a l M e t hod s . L ondon , N e w Y o r k , T o r on t o : A ca d e m i c P r e ss . W e s t , M . A . , A n t o n i o u , A . N . , P re s c o tt , A . R . , A z u m a , T . , K w i a t k o w s k i , D . J . a nd W a tt s , C . ( 1999 ) . M e m b r a n e r u ff li ng , m ac r op i no c y t o s i s a nd a n ti g e n p r e s e n t a ti on i n t h e a b s e n ce o f g e l s o li n i n m u r i n e d e nd r iti c ce ll s . E u r J . I mm uno l . 29 , 3450 - 3455 . W e s t , M . A . , P re s c o tt , A . R . , C h a n , K . M . , Z h o u , Z . , R o s e - Jo hn , S . , S c h e ll er , J . a nd W a tt s , C . ( 2008 ) . TL R li g a nd - i ndu ce d podo s o m e d i s a ss e m b l y i n d e nd r iti c ce ll s i s ADA M 17 d e p e nd e n t . J . C e ll B i o l . 182 , 993 - 1005 . Z a ll o n e , A . Z . , T e t i , A . , P r i m av er a , M . V . , N a l d i n i , L . a nd M a rc h i s i o , P . C . ( 1983 ) . O s t e o c l a s t s a nd m ono c y t e s h a v e s i m il a r c y t o s k e l e t a l s t r u c t u r e s a nd a dh e s i on p r op e r t y i n v it r o . J . A na t . 137 , 57 - 70 . Z h o u , Z . , A p t e , S . S . , S o i n i n e n , R . , C ao , R . , B aa k li n i , G . Y . , R a u s er , R . W . , W a n g , J . , C ao , Y . a nd T r yggva s o n , K . ( 2000 ) . I m p a i r e d e ndo c hond r a l o ss i f i ca ti on a nd a ng i og e n e s i s i n m i ce d e f i c i e n t i n m e m b r a n e - t yp e m a t r i x m e t a ll op r o t e i n a s e I . P r o c . N a tl . A c ad . S c i . U S A 97 , 4052 - 4057 . Z i e g l er , W . H . , L i dd i n g t o n , R . C . a nd C r i t c h l e y , D . R . ( 2006 ) . T h e s t r u c t u r e a nd r e gu l a ti on o f v i n c u li n . T r e nd s C e ll . B i o l . 16 , 453 - 460 . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e