1 Efficient generation of marmoset primordial germ cell - like cells using induced pluripotent stem cells Yasunari Seita 1 , 2 , 3 * , Keren Cheng 1 , 2 * , John R . McCarrey 4 , Nomesh Yadu 4 , Ian Cheeseman 5 , Alec Bagwell 5 , Corinna N . Ross 5 , Isamar Santana - Toro 4 , Li - Hua Yen 4 , Sean Vargas 5 , Christopher S . Navara 4† , Brian P . Hermann 4† , Kotaro Sasaki 1 , 2 , 6† 1 Department of Biomedical Sciences , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA 2 Institute for Regenerative Medicine , University of Pennsylvania ; Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA 3 Bell Research Center for Reproductive Health and Cancer , Nagoya 460 - 0003 , Japan 4 Department of Neuroscience , Developmental and Regenerative Biology , The University of Texas at San Antonio , San Antonio , TX 78249 , USA 5 Genomics Core , The University of Texas at San Antonio , San Antonio , TX 78249 , USA 6 Texas Biomedical Research Institute , San Antonio , TX 78245 , USA 7 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA † Correspondence should be addressed to : Christopher Navara , Ph . D . Email : christopher . navara @ utsa . edu Tel : + 1 - 210 - 458 - 6497 ; FAX : + 1 - 210 - 458 - 5658 Brian P . Hermann , Ph . D . Email : brian . hermann @ utsa . edu Tel : + 1 - 210 - 458 - 8047 ; Fax : + 1 - 210 - 458 - 5658 Kotaro Sasaki , M . D . , Ph . D . 2 Email : ksasaki @ upenn . edu Tel : + 1 - 215 - 573 - 3764 ; Fax : + 1 - 215 - 573 - 6810 3 ABSTRACT Reconstitution of germ cell fate from pluripotent stem cells provides an opportunity to understand the molecular underpinnings of germ cell development . Here , we established robust methods for pluripotent stem cells ( iPSCs ) culture in the common marmoset ( Callithrix jacchus , cj ) , which stably propagate in an undifferentiated state . Notably , iPSCs cultured on a feeder layer in the presence of a WNT signaling inhibitor upregulated genes related to ubiquitin - dependent protein catabolic processes and enter a permissive state that enables differentiation into primordial germ cell - like cells ( PGCLCs ) bearing immunophenotypic and transcriptomic similarities to pre - migratory cjPGCs in vivo . Induction of cjPGCLCs is accompanied by transient upregulation of mesodermal genes culminating in the establishment of a primate specific germline transcriptional network . Moreover , cjPGCLCs can be expanded in monolayer while retaining the germline state . Upon co - culture with mouse testicular somatic cells , these cells acquire an early prospermatogonia - like phenotype . Our findings provide a framework for understanding and reconstituting marmoset germ cell development in vitro , thus providing a comparative tool and foundation for a preclinical modeling of human in vitro gametogenesis . INTRODUCTION The germline , a lineage that ultimately form the gametes , is the fundamental component of the life cycle in metazoan species , ensuring perpetuation and diversification of the genome across generations . In addition , the germline is the foundation of totipotency , since combination of the gametes at fertilization gives rise to totipotent zygotes that establish all embryonic and extraembryonic lineages necessary for production of a new organism . The germline first arises during early embryonic development as primordial germ cells ( PGCs ) , which subsequently migrate to the developing gonads and ultimately produce either spermatozoa or oocytes through complex and sex - specific developmental pathways 1 . Accordingly , aberrancies associated with PGC development can lead to infertility and a variety of genetic and epigenetic disorders in offspring . Therefore , a precise understanding of how PGCs develop bears significant implications not only for reproductive medicine but also towards a better understanding of a breadth of human diseases . 4 Although much has been learned from murine genetic studies regarding the cellular dynamics , signaling , genetic and epigenetic requirements accompanying PGC specification 1 , 2 , the scarcity of germ cells and complexity of their development and cellular interactions has limited deep understanding of transcriptional regulatory networks and epigenetic bases of germ cell development . The last decade , however , has witnessed remarkable progress towards establishing in vitro gametogenesis ( IVG ) technologies as an alternative approach to study germ cell development . Remarkably , through the stepwise recapitulation and validation of developmental milestones starting with pluripotent stem cells [ embryonic stem cells ( ESCs ) or induced pluripotent stem cells ( iPSCs ) ] , the entirety of mouse germline development has been reconstituted in vitro , culminating in the successful generation of fertilization - competent oocytes and spermatozoa , and healthy offspring 3 , 4 . These landmark studies have been followed by successful development of human induced pluripotent stem cell ( iPSC ) - based germline reconstitution methods , in which pre - meiotic oogonia and prospermatogonia - like cells generated through PGC - like cells ( PGCLCs ) bear remarkable transcriptional similarities to in vivo counterparts 5 – 7 . IVG platforms have provided valuable tools to dissect the transcriptional and epigenetic mechanisms underlying germline specification and subsequent gametogenesis . Recent studies using IVG - derived germ cells or primate embryos in vivo have revealed a substantial divergence in the origin of germ cells and transcriptional networks governing germ cell specification between mice and humans 1 . For example , in mice , core germ cell transcription factors , Prdm14 , Blimp1 and Tfap2c , that are deployed by BMP4 - induced TBXT , sufficiently establish germ cell fate 8 , 9 , whereas SOX17 and TFAP2C , deployed by EOMES and GATA2 / 3 make up the analogous transcriptional network and fate in humans 10 , 11 . Such divergence between mice and humans necessitates additional layers of caution in direct translation of IVG technologies to human infertility treatment and warrants careful scrutinization and functional validation of IVG - derived gametes in comparison to those developing naturally in vivo . Since ethical and legal constraints make research with human embryos difficult to impossible , IVG studies using model organisms that are phylogenetically close to humans is an important next step . The common marmoset ( Callithrix Jacchus ) is a new - world monkey that shares many biological characteristics with humans , and thus , has been widely used for biomedical research to bridge the gap between rodent models and clinical translation 12 . Marmoset 5 embryo development , including implantation and formation of fetal membranes , is well conserved with that in humans , serving as a powerful surrogate model for human post - implantation development 13 . Moreover , the relatively short reproductive lifespan , small body size , and reasonable cost for breeding compared to other primates render the marmoset a tractable preclinical model for IVG . In particular , use of marmosets may enable functional validation of resultant IVG - derived gametes by fertilization and embryo transfer as well as vigorous validation of intermediary cellular derivatives by comparing them with their in vivo counterparts 12 . In this study , we provide a highly efficient method to generate , expand and maintain Callithrix jacchus ( cj ) PGCLCs from cjiPSCs , which bear immunophenotypic and transcriptional similarities with pre - migratory stage cjPGCs . RESULTS Immunohistochemical characterization of pre - migratory cjPGCs To validate germ cell generation in vitro , we must first have a precise understanding of the molecular features of cjPGCs in vivo . In particular , molecular characterization of early stage endogenous PGCs will be critical to guide the induction of PGCLCs , the first step of IVG , which appears to represent the pre - migratory PGCs in humans 7 , 14 . However , there is a dearth of information describing primate PGCs at stages before gonad colonization , primarily due to their scarcity . Therefore , we collected marmoset embryos from a triplet pregnancy at embryonic day ( E ) 50 for immunofluorescence ( IF ) analyses and molecular analyses ( Carnegie stage [ CS ] 11 , 19 somites , corresponding to ~ E8 . 5 - 9 . 0 in mice ) ( Fig . 1A , S1A ) . At this stage , TFAP2C + SOX17 + PDPN + cjPGCs were predominantly localized within the ventral portion of the hindgut endoderm and exhibited round nuclei with generally lower DAPI intensity ( Fig . 1B , C ) . A few scattered cjPGCs were also seen in the adjacent hindgut mesenchyme outside of the basement membranes , suggestive of the initiation of active migration ( Fig . 1B ) . Additional IF analyses revealed that cjPGCs were mostly non - proliferative ( i . e . , MKI67 - ) and co - expressed pluripotency associated markers ( e . g . , POU5F1 , NANOG ) , but were negative for SOX2 ( Fig . 1D , E , S1B ) . Notably , cjPGCs did not express later germ cell markers ( e . g . , DDX4 and DAZL ) , that are typically strongly observed in testicular germ cells ( i . e . , prospermatogonia ) ( Fig . S1C ) . IF analysis on cjPGCs showed increased global levels of histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation ( H3K27me3 ) and reduced global levels of histone H3 lysine 9 6 dimethylation ( H3K9me2 ) , consistent with germline epigenetic reprogramming that occurs in mice , cynomolgus monkeys and humans 14 – 16 ( Fig . 1F ) . Transcriptomes of pre - migratory cjPGCs Having identified cjPGCs residing in the hindgut endoderm by IF studies , we next set out to determine the transcriptome of endogenous cjPGCs . Given the scarcity of cjPGCs and the lack of reliable surface markers to isolate them , we first enriched cjPGCs by dissecting the posterior portions from two marmoset embryos at E50 , followed by trimming of the amnion and yolk sac ( Fig . 1A ) . These tissues were dissociated into single cell suspensions and subjected to high - throughput single - cell RNA - sequencing using 10x Genomics platform . In total , 34 , 458 cells ( 6 libraries comprising 12 , 665 and 21 , 793 cells from embryos A and B , respectively ) were captured for downstream analyses ( Fig . S1D - I ) . These cells contained a median of 2 , 224 - 4 , 198 genes / cell at a mean sequencing depth of 46 - 102k reads / well and 27 - 45 % sequence saturation . To determine the cell types , we conducted hierarchical clustering and uniform manifold approximation and projection ( UMAP ) mapping on the combined single - cell transcriptomes from both embryos . Using known markers and differentially expressed genes ( DEGs ) , we identified a cluster representing cjPGCs ( cluster 11 marked by TFAP2C , SOX17 and PDPN ) along with other clusters including CLDN5 + endothelium ( cluster 3 ) , OSR1 + PAX8 + intermediate mesoderm ( cluster 4 ) , FOXF1 + lateral plate mesoderm ( cluster 5 ) , and SOX2 + neutral tube ( cluster 9 ) ( Fig . 2A - C ) . A full listing of all cell types that we identified their DEGs are shown in Fig . 2B and Table 1 . Analysis of differentially expressed genes ( DEGs ) in the cjPGC cluster revealed upregulated expression of potential germ cell specifier / regulator genes ( e . g . , DND1 , KIT , PRDM1 , SOX15 , SOX17 , TFAP2C ) , pluripotency associated genes ( e . g . , DPPA3 , KLF4 , NANOG , POU5F1 , TFCP2L1 , UTF1 , ZFP42 ) , mesoderm / endoderm associated genes ( e . g . , GATA4 , TBXT ) and other germ cell related markers ( Fig . 2B - E ) . Accordingly , these genes were enriched with those bearing GO terms such as “germ cell development” ( Fig . 2D ) . Among pluripotency - associated genes , SOX2 was not expressed by cjPGCs , and PRDM14 was expressed only weakly , a feature conserved with other primates ( i . e . , humans , cynomolgus monkeys ; Fig . 2E ) 7 , 14 , 15 , 17 . Expression of key proliferation markers was low , in agreement with MKI7 labeling ( Fig . 1D ) , suggesting that cjPGCs are largely quiescent ( Fig . S1J ) . Germ cell markers known to be activated 7 upon arrival at the gonads were not expressed ( e . g . , DAZL , DDX4 , RNF17 ) ( Fig . 2E ) , consistent with the pre - migratory state of these cells 14 , 17 . In agreement with globally low H3K9me2 levels ( Fig . 1F ) , cjPGCs repressed enzymes for the deposition of H3K9me2 ( e . g . , EHMT2 , SUV39H1 , SUV39H2 ) , and instead , expressed several H3K9 demethylases ( e . g . , KDM1A / 3A / 3B / 4A ) ( Fig . 2E ) . Among enzymes involved in the deposition of H3K27me3 , cjPGCs expressed EED , EZH2 , SUZ12 , whereas EZH1 expression was low ( Fig . 2E ) . These findings are consistent with PGCLCs / PGCs in humans and cynomolgus monkeys 7 , 14 , 15 . Among genes related to DNA demethylation , TET1 was expressed at high levels , whereas TET2 and TET3 were expressed at low levels ( Fig . 2E ) . DNMT1 and DNMT3A were expressed at modest levels whereas , UHRF1 , DNMT3L , DNMT3B were markedly repressed , suggesting that passive demethylation might be operative due to diminished UHRF1 activity required for maintenance DNA methylation , as suggested in other species 14 , 15 , 18 – 20 . Derivation of cjiPSCs through PBMC reprogramming Our next goal was to derive cjiPSCs , from which germ cells could potentially be induced . Three cell lines , 20201 _ 6 , 20201 _ 7 , and 20201 _ 10 were established by reprogramming of peripheral blood mononuclear cells ( METHODS ) . Although hematological chimerism is frequently observed in marmosets 21 , 22 , whole - exome sequencing confirmed that the established cjiPSCs originated from the intended PBMC donor ( ID number , 38189 ) ( Fig . S2A , B ) . CjiPSCs were initially established using conventional on - feeder ( OF ) culture conditions ( see below ) , but were subsequently switched to feeder - free ( FF ) culture conditions ( PluriSTEM for basal medium and iMatrix - silk for a substrate ) for its ease of maintenance . Under these conditions , FF cjiPSCs could be stably maintained over multiple passages ( more than 20 passages ) when passaged every 4 - 6 days in the presence of Y27632 , a ROCK inhibitor . FF cjiPSCs bore a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratios , were tightly packed colonies with sharp borders and exhibited flat morphology , each of which are characteristic features of primate primed - state pluripotent cells ( Fig . S2C ) . These cells were mycoplasma - free , exhibited normal 46 , XY karyotypes , and uniformly expressed key pluripotency - associated genes ( Fig . S2D - G ) . Notably , similar to FF culture , conventional OF cultures also allowed long - term propagation of cjiPSCs . However , OF cjiPSCs tended to differentiate at the 8 center or periphery of colonies 4 - 5 days after passaging ( Fig . S3A , B ) . Moreover , OF cjiPSCs required clump passaging because single - cell passaging led to inefficient colony formation to be maintained for more than 2 passages ( Fig . S3C ) . Accordingly , OF cjiPSCs exhibited modest upregulation of mesodermal ( e . g . , T , EOMES , MIXL1 ) and endodermal genes ( e . g . , FOXA2 , SOX17 ) compared to those maintained under FF conditions ( Fig . S3D ) . Previous studies showed that inhibition of WNT signaling stabilizes primate iPSC / ESC cultures 23 – 25 . Consequently , we compared our conventional OF culture to cultures containing a WNT signaling inhibitor ( IWR1 ) . Notably , OF cjiPSCs cultured with PluriSTEM containing IWR1 ( OF / IWR1 ) maintained an undifferentiated morphology and pluripotency - associated gene expression ( Fig . S3E , F ) . Under this condition , mesoderm / endoderm genes were suppressed compared with conventional OF culture . Moreover , OF / IWR1 culture conditions allowed efficient single - cell passaging ( Fig . S3C ) . While we also found that addition of IWR1 to OF culture conditions previously utilized to grow cynomolgus monkey ESCs ( AITS + IF20 : advancedRPMI1640 and Neurobasal [ 1 : 1 ] supplemented with AllbuMax [ 1 . 6 % ] , 1X ITS [ Insulin , Transferrin , Selenium ] , IWR1 [ 2 . 5 μ M ] and bFGF [ 20ng / mL ] ) suppressed spontaneous differentiation , the effects were not as great as when PluriSTEM was used as a basal medium ( Fig . S3B , F ) . Together , our findings reveal that we have identified an optimal culture protocol in both FF and OF conditions that allows stable propagation of cjiPSCs in an undifferentiated state and with a normal karyotype , thus serving as a foundation for directed differentiation towards the germline . Generation of primordial germ cell - like cells from cjiPSCs Our next goal was to derive cjPGCLCs directly from cjiPSCs following the protocol established in humans and cynomolgus monkeys 7 , 23 . For this , we first treated FF cjiPSCs with a PGCLC induction cocktail ( i . e . , BMP4 , LIF , SCF , EGF , Y27632 ) in GK15 [ GMEM supplemented with 15 % KSR ] or aRB27 [ advanced RPMI1640 and supplemented with 1 % B27 ] ) basal medium . Under these conditions , cjiPSCs formed aggregates with a markedly cystic appearance and did not generate SOX17 + TFAP2C + cjPGCLCs ( Fig . S4A , B ) , suggesting that they may not have germline competency . Thus , we next turned our attention to OF cjiPSCs without WNT inhibition given prior success in humans 7 . Remarkably , upon floating culture with a PGCLC induction cocktail in GK15 or aRB27 , ~ 3 - 4 % PDPN + ITGA6 weak + cells emerged as a distinct population 9 starting at d4 of induction , although the frequency of such cells generally declined after d4 ( Fig . S4B - D ) . Sectioning of these aggregates at d4 revealed small clusters of PDPN + cells uniformly expressing cjPGC markers ( TFAP2C , SOX17 , PRDM1 , NANOG and POU5F1 ) , which was further confirmed by qPCR ( Fig . S4B , E , F ) . We posited that the relatively low induction efficiency of cjPGCLCs might be due to their tendency to differentiate under OF conditions . Therefore , we next utilized OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs for cjPGCLCs induction . Upon induction in floating culture , cjiPSCs readily formed tighter and more uniform size / shape aggregates compared to those induced from OF cjiPSCs ( Fig . 3A , B ) . Moreover , under this condition , the induction efficiency of cjPGCLCs was significantly improved , with ~ 15 - 40 % cells becoming PDPN + ITGA6 weak + at d4 and d6 of induction ( Fig . 3C , S4G , H ) . Although variable across experiments , the median yield of PDPN + cells per aggregate was ~ 600 at d4 and d6 , but declined thereafter ( Fig . 3C ) . IF on sections of aggregates at d4 revealed multifocal large clusters of PDPN + cells uniformly expressing key early germ cell markers ( e . g . , SOX17 , TFAP2C , PRDM1 , POU5F1 , NANOG ) ( Fig . 3D ) . Notably , this finding suggests that PDPN can serve as highly specific surface marker of cjPGCLCs that will allow for isolation of cjPGCLCs for downstream analyses . In support , qPCR of isolated PDPN + cjPGCLCs also expressed pluripotency - associated genes ( i . e . , POU5F1 , NANOG ) , PGC specifier / early marker genes ( i . e . , SOX17 , TFAP2C , PRDM1 and NANOS3 ) and lacked detectable SOX2 and late germ cell marker ( i . e . , DDX4 , DAZL ) ( Fig . 3E ) , features similar to pre - migratory PGCs ( Fig . 1D , 2E ) 14 . Together these results indicate that our in vitro platform enables highly efficient and reproducible generation of cjPGCLCs . 2D cjPGCLCs expansion culture We noted that cjPGCLCs induction from cjiPSCs via floating aggregates is somewhat time - consuming and limited in scalability . However , 2D expansion of PGCLCs that retain the cellular and molecular characteristics of PGCs would greatly enhance our ability to generate PGCLCs in a scalable manner that can be utilized , off - the - shelf , for downstream molecular and functional characterization . To accomplish this , we modified a culture method previously utilized to expand human ( h ) PGCLCs ( Fig . 4A ) 26 . Specifically , we cultured sorted d6 PDPN + cjPGCLCs on a STO - feeder layer in DK15 medium containing 2 . 5 % FBS , SCF , FGF2 and Forskolin . Plated cjPGCLCs formed loosely arranged clusters , which increased in size and became confluent by expansion culture day ( c ) 10 10 ( Fig . 4B ) . These cells expressed markers of early cjPGC / PGCLCs but did not possess late germ cell markers ( i . e . , DDX4 , DAZL ) , suggesting that they retain the cellular state of cjPGCLCs ( Fig . 4C - E ) . Moreover , these cells could be passaged approximately every 10 days by dissociation and FACS - sorting of PDPN + cells and exhibited exponential growth at least until at c30 ( Fig . 4F , G ) . Although marker expression pattern was largely unchanged during 30 days of expansion culture , DPPA3 showed modest upregulation , similar to hPGCLCs under expansion culture ( Fig . 4H ) . ITGA6 , which is a surface marker weakly expressed on cjPGCLCs also exhibited modest upregulation along the time course ( Fig . 4H ) . These findings highlight the feasibility of 2D expansion culture of cjPGCLCs analogous to hPGCLCs . Maturation of cjPGCLCs into early prospermatogonia - like state One of the functional features of PGCLCs is their capacity to further develop into more advanced germ cells 5 , 6 , 27 , 28 . Therefore , we next utilized a xenogeneic reconstituted testis culture that allows hPGCLCs to mature into prospermatogonia to determine if cjPGCLCs could similarly differentiate 5 . After expansion of cjPGCLCs for 30 days by 2D culture , we initiated an xrTestis culture by mixing sorted PDPN + cjPGCLCs with mouse fetal testicular somatic cells depleted of endogenous germ cells ( Fig . 5A ) . After two days of floating culture , xrTestes formed tight aggregates , which were subsequently maintained by air - liquid interface ( ALI ) cultures ( Fig . 5A , B ) . At day 15 of ALI culture , we observed reconstituted testicular cords surrounded by NR2F2 + interstitial cells in xrTestis cultures ( Fig . 5C ) . Notably , there were a number of TFAP2C + POU5F1 + NANOG + cjPGCLCs , which primarily localized peripheral to SOX9 + mouse - derived Sertoli cell nuclei ( Fig . 5C ) . In addition , xrTestes maintained until day 30 of ALI culture revealed prominent proliferation of TFAP2C + germ cells , which forced SOX9 + Sertoli cells towards the center of the testicular cords ( Fig . 5C ) . Remarkably , we found a few scattered DAZL + DDX4 + SOX17 + TFAP2C + SOX2 - cells , suggesting progression into early prospermatogonia ( Fig . 5C ) 5 . Together , these data indicate that cjPGCLCs can be integrated in the testicular niche and are capable of further expansion and differentiation . Transcriptome accompanying formation of cjPGCLCs We next sought to define gene expression dynamics accompanying specification of cjPGCLCs by bulk RNA - sequencing ( Fig . S5A ) . Unsupervised hierarchical clustering 11 ( UHC ) classified the cells during cjPGCLCs induction largely into two clusters , one with FF , FF / IWR1 and OF cjiPSCs and the other with cjPGCLCs and OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs , which was also supported by Pierson correlation among clusters ( Fig . 6A , B ) . The relative positioning of cjPGCLC samples in principal component ( PC ) space supports a step - wise developmental progression during the in vitro culture period ( Fig . 6C ) . First , FF and FF / IWR1 cjiPSCs were intermingled and formed a discrete cluster that was most distinct from cjPGCLCs . There were no significant differences in gene expression between FF and FF / IWR1 cjiPSCs , suggesting that IWR1 does not significantly alter the cellular properties of FF cjiPSCs ( Fig . 6C , S5B ) . Notably , OF and OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs were positioned closer to cjPGCLCs in PC space , with OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs being closest to d2 cjPGCLCs , consistent with their higher competency to differentiate into cjPGCLCs ( Fig . 6C ) . OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs bore gene expression signatures characteristic of primed - state pluripotency , similar to that seen in FF or OF cjiPSCs ( Fig . S5C ) . Notably , while most key germ cell genes were not significantly upregulated , there is a modest upregulation of TFAP2C and PRDM14 in OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs , which might predispose their high germline competency ( Fig . S5C ) . Pair - wise comparison of gene expression revealed that genes were primarily upregulated as FF cjiPSCs transitioned to OF and OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs ( Fig . S5D ) . GO terms among the enriched genes in OF and OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs included “protein destabilization” or “ubiquitin - dependent protein catabolic process” ( Fig . S5D ) . Expression of most of these genes was sustained until d2 cjPGCLCs , suggesting that changes associated with Ubiquitin - Proteasome System ( UPS ) - mediated protein turnover might confer a permissive cellular environment for cjPGCLCs specification ( Fig . S5E , F ) . Clustering analysis of variably expressed genes across the developmental trajectory revealed 4 large clusters ( Fig . 6D ) . Genes in cluster 1 represented those whose expression is overall high in cjiPSCs and downregulated as they differentiate into cjPGCLCs . Those genes were enriched with GO terms such as “inner cell mass cell proliferation” or “stem cell population maintenance , ” consistent with their pluripotent nature ( Fig . 6D ) . Genes in cluster 2 were those upregulated along the trajectory and included key germ cell genes ( e . g . , DND1 , NANOS3 , PRDM1 , SOX17 , TFAP2C ) and GO terms included “germ cell development . ” Moreover , GO terms such as “DNA methylation” or “histone methylation” were also seen , consistent with the dynamic epigenetic remodeling observed in developing PGCs . Genes in cluster 3 were those primary upregulated in 2D 12 expansion culture cjPGCLCs and included an enriched GO term , “response to oxidative stress , ” which might suggest changes associated with culture adaptation . Finally , genes in cluster 4 were those transiently upregulated in d2 cjPGCLCs . Those genes included endoderm and mesoderm markers ( e . g . , EOMES , HAND1 , MESP1 , MIXL1 , NODAL , SNAL1 ) and were enriched with GO terms such as “mesoderm formation” and “cellular response to BMP stimulus , ” suggesting that cjPGCLC induction may accompany transient somatic programs , as previously observed following PGCLC induction in other primates ( Fig . 6D - F ) 7 , 23 , 29 , 30 . We next evaluated the dynamics of gene expression associated with germ cell specification and development . We noted that key germ cell specifier genes ( e . g . , SOX17 , TFAP2C , PRDM1 , NANOS3 ) started to activate and SOX2 was swiftly extinguished in d2 cjPGCLCs ( Fig . 6G , S5D , S6 ) . TBXT , which is only transiently activated in mPGCLCs , continued to be expressed after d2 , similar to hPGCLCs ( Fig . 6G ) 7 , 23 . Notably , DDX4 and DAZL , germ cell markers expressed upon entry into the gonad were not expressed ( Fig . 6G ) , consistent with their lack of expression in pre - migratory cjPGCs at E50 ( Fig . 1E , 2E ) . Finally , comparison of bulk transcriptomes of in vitro derived cells with pseudobulk transcriptomes of E50 pre - migratory cjPGCs by Pierson correlation analysis revealed the high degree of correlation between d4 / 6 cjPGCLCs and cjPGCs , further supporting the notion that cjPGCLCs resemble the pre - migratory stage cjPGCs ( Fig . 6H ) . Global DNA methylation in cjPGCLCs Previous studies suggested that hPGCLCs showed only modest reduction in global 5mC levels with or without expansion culture , suggesting that these hPGCLCs represent germ cells immediately after specification that have not yet completed global DNA demethylation , a hallmark of mammalian PGC development 1 . Therefore , we next evaluated global 5mC levels in cjPGCLCs by whole genome bisulfite sequencing ( WGBS ) . Similar to hPGCLCs 7 , 26 , d4 PGCLCs showed a slight but significant reduction in 5mC levels ( mean , ~ 63 % ) compared with OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs ( mean , ~ 75 % ) ( Fig . 7A , B ) . Notably , cjPGCLCs in expansion culture exhibited further reduction in 5mC levels , bearing a 5mC level of ~ 50 % at c30 ( Fig . 7A , C ) . Thus , the dynamics of global 5mC levels during cjPGCLC induction and expansion is similar to that of humans 7 , 26 . To gain further insight into the regulation of global DNA methylation profiles in cjPGCLCs , we evaluated expression dynamics of genes related to DNA methylation . Among de novo 13 DNA methyl transferases , DNMT3B , was highly expressed in cjiPSCs , but exhibited a sharp downregulation upon cjPGCLC induction ( Fig . 7D ) . On the other hand , DNMT3A showed modest downregulation upon cjPGCLC induction , and DNMT3L was expressed only at low levels in all cells examined . Among the genes related to maintenance of DNA methylation , DNMT1 was expressed at a significant level in any of the cells analyzed , whereas UHRF1 , which is responsible for the recruitment of DNMT1 into replication foci 18 , 31 , 32 , showed a marked reduction upon cjPGCLC induction ( Fig . 7D ) . In cjPGCLC expansion cultures , DNMT3B expression was further downregulated whereas UHRF1 showed slightly higher expression than d4 / 6 cjPGCLCs ( Fig . 7D ) . Among genes related to active DNA demethylation , TET1 was highly expressed in all cells whereas expression of TET2 and TET3 were very low . Thus , compared to cjiPSCs , cjPGCLCs at d6 or in expansion culture showed reduced but detectable levels of DNMT3B and UHRF1 , which might serve as a basis for the modest reduction of global DNA methylation of these cells . Overall , the expression pattern of epigenetic modifiers , including those related to DNA methylation , is similar to those observed in endogenous cjPGCs at E50 ( Fig . 2E ) , further supporting the notion that cjPGCLCs derived by our protocol accurately resemble endogenous pre - migratory cjPGCs . DISCUSSION In contrast to relatively well characterized cj germ cell development at postnatal stage , there is a paucity of information regarding the transcriptomic and epigenomic properties of the early marmoset germline cells , primarily due to the inherent difficulty in recovering marmoset embryos . Previous studies demonstrated the presence of POU5F1 + NANOG + cjPGCs localized within the hindgut endoderm in an E50 embryo , similar to that observed in human and monkey embryos at equivalent stages 33 . We extended this study and further provided the first comprehensive immunophenotypic and transcriptomic profile of cjPGCs from E50 embryos ( CS11 ) ( Fig . 1 , 2 ) . We discovered that cjPGCs displayed immunophenotypic and transcriptomic features characteristic of endogenous PGCs of humans and old - world monkeys . For example , they expressed key primate germ cell specifier genes ( SOX17 , SOX15 , TFAP2C PRDM1 , PRDM14 [ at low levels ] ) , and lacked SOX2 . In contrast , mouse germ cells highly express SOX2 but only transient express SOX17 immediately after specification 34 , 35 . Recent studies suggest that these features are also shared in rabbits and pigs , suggesting that the germline gene 14 regulatory networks functioning in primates are more widespread evolutionary than that of rodents 36 , 37 . Importantly , cjPGCs at E50 ( CS11 ) embryos are primarily pre - migratory ( i . e . , localized within the hindgut endoderm ) , and exhibited features of early PGCs ( i . e . , lack of DDX4 or DAZL expression ) similar to PGCs of cynomolgus monkeys at the corresponding developmental stage ( Fig . 1E , 2E ) 14 . Interestingly , human / cynomolgus PGCs at the same chronologic age ( E50 ) already colonize the gonads and upregulate DDX4 / DAZL 14 , 38 . This finding is likely due to the overall delay in early post - implantation embryo development in marmoset and suggest that germ cell development is synchronized with overall embryo development rather than chronologic age 39 . With immunophenotypic and transcriptomic characterization of cjPGCs in hand , we were now able to validate methods required to generate cjiPSCs that could subsequently be used to assess molecular events associated with germline induction . To this end , we first established various culture methods for cjiPSCs ( Fig . S2 , S3 ) . Previous studies suggested that cynomolgus ESCs cultured in DK20 on MEF were prone to differentiate , but that inhibition of WNT signaling in these cultures stabilized the undifferentiated state 23 . Consistently , we found that the inhibition of WNT signaling by IWR1 stabilized the undifferentiated state of cjiPSC cultured on MEF ( Fig . S3 ) . In contrast , our newly established PluriSTEM - based FF cjiPSC culture method facilitated stable maintenance of an undifferentiated state , regardless of the presence or absence of IWR1 ( Fig . S2C , S3D , S5B , C ) . This might be due to the inclusion of proprietary factors in the PluriSTEM base medium that support the undifferentiated state . Nonetheless , despite differential propensity towards differentiation , the cjiPSCs used in this study exhibited gene expression characteristics of primed - state pluripotency and could be maintained across multiple passages in all of above culture conditions . Our successful identification of culture conditions capable of generating and maintaining cjiPSCs allowed us to next compare their competency to differentiate into cjPGCLCs . Remarkably , we noted that FF cjiPSCs ( with or without IWR1 ) had no germline competency whereas OF and OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs had modest and high germline competency , respectively ( Fig . 3 , S4 ) . Transcriptomes of FF , OF , OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs aligned accordingly on the PC space , where FF cjiPSCs were the most distant from and OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs were the closest to cjPGCLCs . As FF cjiPSCs can be cultured stably without overt meso / endodermal differentiation despite their complete lack of germline 15 competency ( Fig . S3D ) , these findings suggest that the inhibition of precocious meso / endodermal differentiation by IWR1 is not the primary reason why OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs are superior to OF cijPSCs in cjPGCLCs induction . In support , transcriptome comparison across cjiPSCs cultured under different conditions revealed that meso / endodermal differentiation did not differ substantially between these conditions . Rather , a comparison of OF / IWR1 ( vs OF ) and OF ( vs FF cjiPSCs ) revealed that upregulation of a number of genes related to UPS protein catabolism , particularly those with E3 ubiquitin ligase complex known as Skp , Cullin , F - box containing ( SCF ) complex ( e . g . , UBE3A , FBXW7 ) , correlated with increased germline competency ( Fig . S5D ) . The vast majority of these genes continued to be expressed in d2 cjPGCLCs , which suggests their potential role in germ cell specification ( Fig . S5E , F ) . In line with this , recent studies highlighted the critical role of the UPS system , and in particular FBXW7 , in regulation of pluripotency and germ cell development 40 – 42 . Further mechanistic studies investigating the role of UPS and protein catabolism in germline competency and cjPGCLCs specification are warranted . In this study , we provide evidence that cjPGCLCs can be derived from cjiPSCs through direct floating culture of OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs in the presence of PGCLC induction cocktail ( Fig . 3 ) 7 , 23 . Under this condition , cjPGCLCs were induced in a highly efficient manner , with the number of PDPN + cjPGCLCs peaking at d4 ( ~ 600 cells / aggregate ) . The marmoset germline induction efficiency is higher than that of hPGCLCs induced under direct floating culture and similar to those induced through step - wise method ( 2D induction of incipient mesoderm - like cells [ iMeLCs ] by ACTIVIN A and WNT agonist , CHIR99021 , followed by floating culture with PGCLC induction factors ) ( Fig . 3 ) 7 . Since the iMeLC induction step is not essential for robust PGCLC induction in cynomolgus monkeys , these results highlight differential requirements for WNT / NODAL / ACTIVIN signaling to prime PGCLC specification , or differential endogenous production by the aggregates themselves 23 . Regardless , transcriptomic and epigenetic features of cjPGCLCs are highly similar to those from humans and cynomolgus / rhesus monkeys and divergent from rodent PGCLCs 28 , 43 , suggesting conservation of the germ cell specification program among primates . Interestingly , a previous study by Okano and colleagues failed to produce cjPGCLCs from cjiPSCs by floating culture using a PGCLC induction cocktail similar to ours 44 . This may in part be due to the relatively poor germline competency of 16 cjiPSCs / ESCs used in the study , which were cultured under conventional OF condition without IWR1 . To overcome the lack of induction , these authors employed an alternative approach in which cytokine - based induction was combined with over - expression of key PGC specifier transcription factors , PRDM1 and SOX17 44 . Although this approach allowed induction of PRDM1 - Venus + cjPGCLCs , the efficiency was variable , with two cjESC lines showing 30 - 40 % induction while cjiPSCs only induced PGCLCs at 1 . 7 % efficiency . Moreover , DDX4 was upregulated in some of PRDM1 : : Venus + cells as early as d9 - 10 . In humans and primates including marmoset , DDX4 is not expressed in pre - migratory PGCs in vivo ( Fig . 1E , S2E ) and is upregulated only after prolonged xrTestis / xrOvary culture in vitro , 5 , 6 suggesting that the induction method utilized in this study might not fully recapitulate the physiological germ cell developmental trajectory . Whether over - expression of transcription factors can drive cjPGCLC formation from the OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs with high germ cell competency that we established in this study remains to be determined . In summary , the in vitro platform described here enables efficient induction of cjPGCLCs from cjiPSCs , which will serve as a foundation for analyzing mechanisms of PGC specification in marmoset monkeys . Although the road ahead will likely be long , efforts to develop in vitro gametogenesis in marmosets , which allows functional validation by fertilization and creation of offspring , may ultimately provide a suitable preclinical model of human in vitro gametogenesis ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank L . King for carefully reviewing the manuscript and providing insightful comments . We thank J . Marty and D . Layne - Colon at Texas Biomedical Research Institute for marmoset embryo preparation . We appreciate Comparative Pathology Core at the University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine for making paraffin blocks and T . Moriwaki at the Sasaki lab for sectioning of the paraffin blocks . We thank C . Malekshahi and D . Beiting at the Center for Host - Microbial Interactions at the University of Pennsylvania School of veterinary Medicine for cDNA library preparation and sequencing for bulk RNA - seq and whole - genome bisulfite sequencing . We thank members of the Sasaki lab and members of the NIDA Brain Initiative for marmoset transgenesis . This work was supported in part by NIH grants U01 DA054170 ( K . S . , B . H . , C . N , J . M , 17 C . R . ) , R01 HD090007 ( B . H . ) and P51 OD011133 ( C . R . ) , the Open Philanthropy funds from Silicon Valley Community Foundation ( 2019 - 197906 ) and Good Ventures Foundation ( 10080664 ) to K . S . Results were generated in part with help from the UTSA Genomics Core which receives support from NIH grant G12 - MD007591 , NSF grants DBI - 1337513 , DBI - 2018408 . DATA AVAILABILITY The datasets generated in this study are available as SRA BioProject PRJNA856282 : https : / / dataview . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / object / PRJNA856282 ? reviewer = 92p5fr1vbt5klu8k11 qjgjoahe AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS K . S . conceived the project . K . S . Y . S . designed the overall experiments . K . S . , Y . S . , K . C . J . R . M . , B . P . H , C . S . N . wrote the manuscript . Y . S . , K . C . conducted the overall experiments and analyzed the data . Y . S . , N . Y . , K . C . , S . V . contributed to the processing and analyses of scRNA - seq data . I . C . , A . B . contributed to whole exome sequencing . C . N . R . contributed to embryo preparation . I . S . T . , L . H . Y , C . S . N contributed to establishing marmoset iPSC lines . DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no competing interests . FIG . LEGENDS Fig . 1 . Immunophenotypic characterization of pre - migratory cjPGCs at E50 ( A ) Bright field images of a cj embryo at E50 ( Carnegie stage [ CS ] 11 ) . Scale bar , 1 mm . ( B ) ( left ) IF images of the hindgut in the cj embryo as in ( A ) ( transverse section ) , stained as indicated . Laminin outlines the basement membranes of the hindgut endoderm . The white dashed line highlights the hindgut endoderm . Scale bars , 50 μm . ( right ) Pie chart showing the number and location of cjPGCs present in representative cross sections . ( C ) IF of the same cj embryo for TFAP2C ( green ) , SOX17 ( red ) , PDPN ( cyan ) and DAPI ( white ) . Magnified images of hindgut endoderm are shown at the bottom . Arrows denote nuclei of cjPGCs with lower DAPI intensity than that of surrounding endodermal cells . 18 Scale bar , 50 μ m . ( D ) ( top ) IF of the cj embryo stained for MKI67 ( green ) , NANOG ( red ) and PDPN ( cyan ) , merged with DAPI ( white ) . An arrowhead indicates MKI67 + cjPGC . ( bottom ) Pie chart showing the number of MKI67 + cells in PGCs . Scale bars , 50 μm . ( E ) IF of the cj embryo for pre - migratory PGC markers ( POU5F1 [ green ] , SOX17 [ red ] and NANOG [ red ] ) or gonadal stage PGC markers ( DDX4 [ red ] and DAZL [ green ] ) , co - stained for PDPN ( cyan ) . Merged images with DAPI ( white ) are shown on the left of each panel . Scale bars , 50 μm . ( F ) IF of the cj embryo for PDPN ( cyan ) , co - stained for H3K27me3 or H3K9me2 ( green ) . Scale bars , 50 μm . Relative fluorescence intensities of H3K27me3 and H3K9me2 in PDPN + cjPGCs in comparison to those of surrounding somatic cells are shown on the left of each IF panel . Fig 2 . Single cell transcriptome analyses of cjPGCs at E50 ( CS11 ) ( A ) Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection ( UMAP ) , showing different cell types in cj embryos at E50 . Cell clusters are annotated on the basis of marker genes . A cluster representing cjPGCs is encircled . ( B ) Heatmap showing differentially expressed genes identified among cell types . DEGs are defined as log 2 - fold change > 0 . 25 , p - value < 0 . 01 and adjusted p - value < 0 . 01 . Representative top ranked genes are shown . ( C ) Key marker genes used for cell type annotation , shown as violin plots with log normalized expression . Violin plots for PGC marker genes are outlined by red dotted lines . ( D ) Gene ontology enrichment analysis of genes with significantly higher expression in cjPGCs . Bar color denotes enrichment fold changes over background . ( E ) Boxplot showing expression of key pluripotency - associated genes ; germ cell , mesoderm / endoderm and ectoderm marker genes ; and DNA methylation and histone modification - associated genes . Fig 3 . Generation of cjPGCLCs from cjiPSCs ( A ) Scheme for cjPGCLC induction . ( B ) BF images ( top ) and FACS plots ( bottom ) for the floating aggregates of cjiPSCs induced to differentiate into cjPGCLCs . The percentages of PDPN + ITGA6 weak + cells are 19 shown . Scale bars , 200 μm . ( C ) Boxplot representations of the induction kinetics of PDPN + ITGA6 weak + cells ( left , percentages ; right , number of cells / aggregate ) during PGCLC induction in aRB27 . ( D ) IF images of floating aggregates after 6 days of PGCLC induction , stained as indicated . Scale bars , 50 μm ( E ) Gene expression of cjiPSCs and cjPGCLCs at days 2 , 4 , 6 and 8 , as measured by qPCR . For each gene examined , the ΔCt values were derived using the average Ct values of the two housekeeping genes GAPDH and PPIA ( set as 0 ) calculated and plotted for two independent experiments . * Not detected . Fig 4 . 2D expansion culture of cjPGCLCs ( A ) Scheme for expansion culture of cjPGCLCs . ( B ) BF images of c2 , c4 , c6 , c8 and c10 colonies of cjPGCLCs . The white dashed lines highlight colonies of cjPGCLCs . Scale bars , 200 μm . ( C ) FACS analysis of c10 expansion cultures of cjPGCLCs . The percentage of PDPN + ITGA6 + cells is shown . ( D ) IF images of expansion culture day 10 ( c10 ) cjPGCLCs for DAPI ( white ) , TFAP2C ( green ) and SOX17 ( red ) , and the merged image . Scale bars , 50 μm . ( E ) Gene expression of d6 cjPGCLCs and c10 cjPGCLCs , as measured by qPCR . For each gene examined , the ΔCt values from the average Ct values of the two housekeeping genes GAPDH and PPIA ( set as 0 ) were calculated and plotted for two independent experiments . * Not detected . ( F ) FACS analyses of c0 ( d6 cjPGCLCs ) , c10 , c20 , c30 and c40 cjPGCLCs . The percentages and mean fluorescence intensity ( MFI ) of PDPN + ITGA6 + cells is shown . ( G ) Growth curve of PDPN + ITGA6 + cells during cjPGCLC expansion culture until c30 . A total of 10 , 000 PDPN + ITGA6 weak + d6 PGCLCs were used as a starting cell population . ( H ) qPCR analyses of the expression of the indicated genes during cjPGCLC expansion culture . Mean values are connected by a line . * Not detected . Fig . 5 . Maturation of cjPGCLCs into a DDX4 + prospermatogonia - like state ( A ) Scheme for xrTestis culture . ALI , air - liquid interphase ; xrTestis , xenogeneic reconstituted testis ; mGSOs , mouse gonadal somatic cells derived from E12 . 5 mouse embryonic testes depleted of endogenous germ cells . 20 ( B ) Bright field images of d15 and d30 xrTestes ALI culture . ( C ) ( left ) IF images of d15 ( left ) xrTestes , showing expression of the indicated key PGC markers ( TFAP2C , POU5F1 and NANOG [ green ] ) , somatic cell markers ( SOX9 , Sertoli cell marker [ red ] ; NR2F2 , interstitial cell marker [ green ] ) or a gonadal stage germ cell marker , DDX4 ( cyan ) . ( right ) IF images of d30 xrTestes , indicating expression of the key PGC marker ( TFAP2C , green ) and a mouse PGC marker ( SOX2 , red ) , with co - staining for somatic cell markers ( red ; NR2F2 or green ; SOX9 ) or a gonadal stage germ cell marker ( cyan ; DDX4 ) . Merged images are shown on the right . Scale bars , 50 μm . Fig . 6 . Transcriptome accompanying formation of cjPGCLCs ( A ) Unsupervised hierarchy clustering ( UHC ) of the transcriptomes of all samples by using ward . D2 . ( B ) Pearson correlation of samples as in ( A ) . Highly correlated samples are encircled with red lines . ( C ) Principal component analysis ( PCA ) of the samples used in this study . The gray arrow represents a trajectory for cjPGCLC specification . ( D ) UHC of the top 5000 variably expressed genes among samples . The gene expression level is represented by a heat map . Enriched gene ontology ( GO ) terms are labeled beside the heatmap . Gene expression is row scaled with colors indicating the Z - score . ( E , F ) Expression of endoderm ( E ) or mesoderm ( F ) genes during the transition of OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs to d4 / 6 cjPGCLCs . These genes were selected according to GO terms ( GO : 0001706 , endoderm formation ; GO : 0001707 , mesoderm formation ) . ( G ) Gene expression dynamics during cjPGCLC induction and c30 expansion culture , as measured by qPCR ( top ) . For comparison , gene expression dynamics during human PGCLC induction is also shown ( bottom ) . During induction of cjPGCLCs in vitro , key genes showed expression patterns similar to those seen during human PGCLC induction 7 . Expression is normalized by log 2 ( RPKM + 1 ) . ( H ) Pearson correlation of transcriptomes of in vitro samples and cj PGCs . The average expression values ( psuedobulk ) were used for cjPGCs from embryo A ( PGCs _ A ) or B ( PGCs _ B ) . Fig . 7 . Genome - wide DNA methylation in cjPGCLCs ( A ) Boxplot showing overall CpG DNA methylation levels . Mean DNA methylation is 21 labeled . ( B , C ) DNA methylation levels of 2 kb tiles comparing genomes of OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs and d4 cjPGCLCs ( B ) , or d4 PGCLCs and c30 cjPGCLCs ( C ) . Mean methylation levels are labeled in the axis titles , and boxplots show the 1st and 3rd quartiles and median methylation levels . ( D ) Gene expression dynamics during cjPGCLC induction and c30 expansion culture for genes associated with DNA methylation and histone modifications . Expression is shown as log 2 ( RPKM + 1 ) . SUPPLEMENTAL TABLES : see separate Excel documents Table S1 . Differentially expressed genes ( DEGs ) among cell clusters in Figure 2B . Table S2 . Top 5000 variably expressed genes among transcriptomes of different types of cells in Figure 6D . Table S3 . DEGs from pairwise comparisons in Figure S5D . Table S4 . Primers used in this study . 22 Supplementary Materials Materials and Methods Collection of marmoset embryo samples Marmosets were housed at the Southwest National Primate Research Center ( SNPRC ) , Texas Biomedical Research Institute , an AAALAC accredited institution . All procedures were reviewed and approved by the Texas Biomedical Research Institute IACUC ( 1772CJ ) . Marmosets at the SNPRC were maintained under standardized husbandry conditions as described previously 45 . For breeding , marmosets were housed in male - female monogamous pairs . Females received an unsedated transabdominal ultrasound monthly until pregnancy was confirmed with a GE Logiq portable ultrasound machine . Females were habituated to manual restraint and received positive reinforcement during the procedure . After a pregnancy was detected ( < 30 days estimated gestational age ) , pregnancy progression was assessed every 14 days . The gestational age of embryos was estimated with crown - rump length , assessed via ultrasound , which has previously been found to reliably estimate gestational age in marmosets to within ±3 days 46 , 47 . Embryos at E50 were recovered from the uteri obtained through hysterectomy performed under full anesthesia . First , the endometrium was exposed by dissection of the serosa and myometrium at the lateral side of the explanted uterus . Then the exposed endometrium was carefully opened along the cervix - to - fundus direction to approach the uterine cavity , from which embryonic sacs were recovered and collected into dishes containing RPMI 1640 medium . Three embryos ( Carnegie stage 11 ) were isolated from embryonic sacs and photographed . After removal of the amnion and yolk sac , the posterior portions of the embryos were dissected and used in histologic analysis or single cell RNA - sequencing . Marmoset peripheral blood mononuclear cell collection and reprogramming to cjiPSCs Marmoset whole blood was collected into Na - heparin vacuum tubes , mixed with an equal volume of wash buffer ( phosphate buffered saline [ PBS ] containing 2 % fetal calf serum [ FCS ] ) and layered onto Lymphoprep density separation medium in Sep - Mate tubes ( both from Stemcell Technologies ) . Cells were spun at 1200 g × 20 min , and the layer 23 containing the PBMCs was collected in a separate tube . Isolated PBMCs were washed twice with wash buffer , with centrifugation at 300 g for 8 minutes . Isolated PBMCs were counted and cryopreserved in FCS with 10 % dimethyl sulfoxide in a Mr . Frosty freezing chamber , first at - 80° C overnight and then for long term storage in a - 150° C cryogenic freezer . Marmoset PBMCs were reprogrammed with a CytoTune - iPS 2 . 0 Sendai Reprogramming Kit ( Thermo Fisher ) according to the manufacturer’s directions . Briefly , PBMCs were cultured in StemPro - 34 medium containing 100 ng / ml SCF , 100 ng / ml FLT - 3 , 20 ng / ml IL - 3 and 20 ng / ml IL - 6 ( PBMC - Medium ) for 4 days . On the fourth day ( day 0 ) Sendai viruses ( KOS , C - Myc and KLF - 4 ) were added to the PBMCs in a 5 : 5 : 3 ratio , and the cells were cultured until day 3 in PBMC - Medium . On day 3 , the cells were plated onto a mouse embryonic fibroblast feeder layer ( 23 , 400 cells / cm 2 ) at a concentration of 50 , 000 – 500 , 000 PBMCs per well of a six well plate in StemPro - 34 medium without cytokines . The medium was changed daily until day 8 , at which point the medium was changed to Pluristem medium ( Millipore Sigma ) . Between 14 and 28 days , individual colonies formed , and each individual colony was handpicked and transferred clonally to a new well containing MEFs . These cjiPSCs were passaged by mechanical dissection of colonies into clumps until cryopreservation in freezing media ( 90 % Fetal Bovine Serum and 10 % DMSO ) . Quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR was used to determine whether the cjiPSCs had cleared the Sendai virus reprogramming factors . cjiPSCs were collected as described above for passaging and pelleted . The cell pellet was resuspended in 0 . 5 ml TRIzol , and total RNA was isolated with a Direct - zol RNA MiniPrep kit ( Zymo Research ) . Two separate assays were performed to ensure that the cjiPSCs were free of mycoplasma contamination . First , the cjiPSC colonies were stained with DAPI to assess the presence of extranuclear DNA characteristic of mycoplasma infection . Second , cjiPSCs were harvested with 0 . 5 mM EDTA in PBS and pelleted at 400 g for 5 minutes . Genomic DNA was isolated from the pellet with a QIAamp DNA mini kit ( Qiagen ) . Genomic DNA was screened with a LookOut® Mycoplasma PCR Detection Kit ( MilliporeSigma ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Only samples and that showed a positive control band after PCR and did not show the mycoplasma band were considered negative . G - band karyotype analyses were performed with Cell Line Genetics ( Madison , WI ) . 24 Culture of cjiPSCs For feeder free cjiPSC culture , the cjiPSCs ( C6 and C10 ) were cultured on xeno - free recombinant Laminin - 511 E8 fragment - coated dishes ( TAKARA , iMatrix - 511silk ) with PluriSTEM Human ES / iPS cell media ( Sigma - Aldrich , SCM130 ) . The cells were passaged approximately every 6 – 7 days as clumps after treatment with 0 . 5 mM EDTA in PBS for 10 min . For on - feeder culture , the cjiPSCs were cultured with DK20F20 [ DMEM / F12 ( Thermo Fisher , 11320 - 033 ) supplemented with 20 % ( vol / vol ) KSR , 1 mM sodium pyruvate ( Thermo Fisher , 11360 - 070 ) , 2 mM GlutaMax ( Thermo Fisher , 35050061 ) , 0 . 1 mM NEAA , 0 . 1 mM 2 - mercaptoethanol ( Thermo Fisher , 21985 - 023 ) , penicillin - streptomycin at 25 U / ml ( Thermo Fisher , 15070063 ) , and recombinant human bFGF ] at 20 ng / ml on MEFs ( 2 . 5×10 5 cells / well of a six - well plate ) . For single cell passage , cells were dissociated into single cell suspension every 6 – 7 days with Accutase ( Sigma - Aldrich , A6964 ) and seeded at a density of 1×10 5 cells / 9 cm 2 . Culture medium was supplemented with 10 µM ROCK inhibitor ( Tocris , 1254 ) until 24 h after passage . Exome sequencing of marmoset DNA We performed exome sequencing of genomic DNA isolated from cjiPSC lines ( 20201 _ 6 , 20201 _ 7 , 20201 _ 10 ) , the PBMC donor of these cjiPSC lines ( 38189 ) , his sibling ( 38574 ) and twin pairs from two unrelated pregnancies ( 38668 / 38667 and 38922 / 38921 ) . The animal genomic DNA was obtained from hair follicles . Isolated gDNA ( 10 ng ) was subjected to exome selection with the Human xGen Exome Hyb Panel v . 2 ( IDT ) probe set , essentially as previously described 48 , and Nextera XT libraries were sequenced with paired - end 150 NovaSeq chemistry ( Illumina ) targeting 20× coverage . Reads were aligned to the v . 3 . 2 . 1 of the C . jacchus genome with BWA - MEM v . 0 . 7 . 17 49 , and called SNP variants with GATK v . 4 . 2 . 6 . 1 50 . GATK best practices were used with minor alterations . Calling of genetic variants in marmosets has been performed only on a small scale , thus providing limited information for recalibration of base qualities . Because we found a substantial decline in base quality scores after recalibration with available data , we omitted BQSR . The average coverage across exons was 12 . 6 – 18 . 5× . After variant quality score recalibration , 26 , 171 biallelic SNPs were retained , with a minimum of 20× coverage in each sample . Relatedness was estimated using pairwise allele sharing across all sites . The chimeric fraction was estimated according to previously published statistical approaches 51 . The within - sample allele frequency across all sites was indicative of the 25 level of chimerism present . For example , at sites where the two individuals composing a sample carried alternative alleles , the chimeric fraction was the frequency of the chimeric allele such that the chimeric fraction was estimated from the distribution of within sample allele frequencies . In a diploid individual , unfixed sites should display a sharp peak in allele frequency at approximately 50 % after exclusion of homozygous sites . This distribution can shift according to the level of chimerism present . We devised a simple model wherein the chimeric fraction was estimated by maximum likelihood . cjPGCLC induction The cjPGCLCs were induced by plating of 3 , 500 cjiPSCs per well of a low cell binding V - bottom 96 - well plate ( Greiner , 651970 ) in GK15 [ Glasgow minimal essential medium ( GMEM ) ( Thermo Fisher , 11710035 ) , 15 % KSR , 0 . 1 mM NEAA , 2 mM L - glutamine , 1 mM sodium pyruvate , 0 . 1 mM 2 - mercaptoethanol and 25 U / ml penicillin - streptomycin ] or aRB27 [ Advanced RPMI 1640 ( Thermo Fisher , 12633 - 012 ) , 2×B27 ( Thermo Fisher , 17504044 ) , 0 . 1 mM NEAA , 2 mM L - glutamine and 25 U / ml penicillin - streptomycin ) ] supplemented with 200 ng / ml of bone morphogenetic protein 4 ( BMP4 ) ( R & D Systems , 314 - BP - 010 ) , human LIF at 1000 U / ml , stem cell factor ( SCF ) ( R & D Systems , 255 - SC - 010 ) at 200 ng / ml , epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) ( R & D Systems , 236 - EG ) at 100 ng / ml and 10 mM ROCK inhibitor ( Y - 27632 ) . The floating aggregates were cultured for as many as 8 days without replacement of the medium . cjPGCLC expansion culture The cjPGCLC expansion culture was as described previously with minor modifications 26 . Briefly , the STO cell line ( American Type Culture Collection , 1503 ) was maintained in DMEM ( Gibco , 11965 - 084 ) containing 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) ( Gibco ) and penicillin - streptomycin at 25 U / ml . STO cells were treated with Mitomycin C ( MMC ) ( Sigma , M0503 ) at 10 μ g / ml for 2 h and then harvested by trypsinization . Day 6 cjPGCLCs were cultured on STO cells treated with MMC in DMEM ( Gibco , 11054 - 001 ) containing 15 % KSR , 2 . 5 % FBS , 0 . 1 mM NEAA , 2 mM L - glutamine , 0 . 1 mM 2 - mercaptoethanol and penicillin - streptomycin at 25 U / ml supplemented with 10 μ M forskolin , SCF at 200 ng / ml , and bFGF at 20 ng / ml , and passaged every 10 days after sorting of PDPN + ITGA6 + cells with a FACSAria Fusion flow cytometer ( BD 26 Biosciences ) . We plated 1 . 0 × 10 4 cells per well of 24 - well plate on the day of passage , including 0 . 5 ml of medium supplemented with 10 μ M Y27632 , and added 0 . 5 ml of medium without Y - 27632 on the next day . From the third day onward , the entire medium was replaced with 0 . 5 ml of fresh medium every 2 days . Antibodies The primary antibodies used in this study included mouse anti - TFAP2C ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , sc - 12762 ) , goat anti - SOX17 ( Neuromics , GT15094 ) , mouse anti - OCT3 / 4 ( R & D Systems , MAB1759 ) , goat anti - NANOG ( R & D Systems , AF1997 ) , goat anti - DDX4 ( R & D Systems , AF2030 ) , rabbit anti - DAZL ( Abcam , ab34139 ) , mouse anti - 5 methylcytosine ( 5mC ) ( Active Motif , 39649 ) , mouse anti - SOX2 ( R & D Systems , MAB2018 ) , rabbit anti - LAMININ ( Abcam , ab11575 ) , rabbit anti - H3K9me2 ( Millipore , 07441 ) , rabbit anti - H3K27me3 ( Millipore , 07449 ) , rabbit anti - SOX9 ( Millipore , AB5535 ) , rabbit anti - PRDM1 ( Abcam , ab198287 ) , Alexa Fluor 647 conjugated anti - human PDPN ( Biolegend , 337007 ) and BV421 conjugated anti - mouse CD49f ( ITGA6 ) ( Biolegend , 313623 ) . The secondary antibodies included Alexa Fluor 488 conjugated donkey anti - rabbit IgG ( Life Technologies , A21206 ) , Alexa Fluor 488 conjugated donkey anti - mouse IgG ( Life Technologies , A32766 ) , Alexa Fluor 568 conjugated donkey anti - mouse IgG ( Life Technologies , A10037 ) , Alexa Fluor 568 conjugated donkey anti - rabbit IgG ( Life Technologies , A10042 ) , Alexa Fluor 647 conjugated donkey anti - goat IgG ( Life Technologies , A21447 ) and Alexa Fluor 647 conjugated donkey anti - rabbit IgG ( Life Technologies , A31573 ) . Immunofluorescence analysis For IF analysis , floating aggregates during cjPGCLC induction and xrTestes were fixed with 2 % paraformaldehyde ( Sigma ) in PBS for 3 h on ice , washed three times with PBS containing 0 . 2 % Tween - 20 ( PBST ) and then successively immersed in 10 % and 30 % sucrose ( Fisher Scientific ) in PBS overnight at 4°C . The fixed tissues were embedded in OCT compound ( Fisher Scientific ) , frozen and sectioned to 10 μm thickness with a −20°C cryostat ( Leica , CM1800 ) . Sections were placed on Superfrost Microscope glass slides ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , which were then air - dried and stored at −80°C until use . Before staining , slides were washed three times with PBS and then incubated with blocking solution ( 5 % normal goat serum in PBST ) for 1 h . Slides were subsequently 27 incubated with primary antibodies in blocking solution for 1 h , then with secondary antibodies and 1 μg / ml DAPI in blocking solution for 50 min . Both incubations were performed at room temperature and followed by four PBS washes . Slides were mounted in Vectashield mounting medium ( Vector Laboratories ) for confocal laser scanning microscopy analysis ( Leica , SP5 - FLIM inverted ) . Confocal images were processed with LeicaLasX ( v . 3 . 7 . 2 ) . For IF analyses , embryo samples were fixed in 10 % buffered formalin ( Fisher Healthcare ) with gentle rocking overnight at room temperature . After dehydration , tissues were embedded in paraffin , serially sectioned at 4 μm thickness with a microtome ( Thermo Scientific Microm™ HM325 ) and placed on Superfrost Microscope glass slides . Paraffin sections were then de - paraffinized with xylene . Antigens were retrieved by treatment of sections with HistoVT One ( Nacalai USA ) for 35 min at 90°C and then for 15 min at room temperature . The staining and incubation procedure for paraffin sections was similar to that for frozen sections , with the following modifications : the blocking solution was 5 % normal donkey serum in PBST ; the primary antibody incubation was performed overnight at 4°C ; and slides were washed with PBS six times after each incubation . Slides were mounted in Vectashield mounting medium for confocal microscopic analysis . IF targeting 5mC was performed on paraffin sections , as described above , with minor modifications . After being stained with primary and secondary antibodies , but not with the anti - 5mC antibody , slides were treated with 4 N HCl in 0 . 1 % Triton X for 10 min at room temperature , then subjected to two brief washes with PBS , one 15 min wash with PBST and another blocking step . Slides were then incubated with primary antibodies ( anti - 5mC and other antibodies ) followed by secondary antibodies . For IF analyses of cjiPSCs , the cells were cultured with DK20F20 on MEFs plated in a 12 well cell culture plate 1 day before cjiPSC passage . At d7 of culture , the cells were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS for 15 min at room temperature , washed three times with PBS for 5 min each and incubated in 0 . 2 % Triton - X100 ( Fisher , BP151 - 100 ) in PBS for 10 min at room temperature . Then the cells were incubated with primary antibodies in blocking solution for 1 h , then with secondary antibodies and 1 μg / ml DAPI in blocking solution for 50 min . Both incubations were performed at room temperature and were followed by four PBS washes . Images were captured and processed with an inverted microscope ( Leica , DMi8 ) . 28 For IF of expansion cultured cjPGCLCs , the cells were cultured on STO plated Glass Bottom Dishes ( Matsunami , D11130H ) . At d10 of culture , the cells were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS for 15 min at room temperature , washed three times with PBS for 5 min each and incubated in 0 . 2 % Triton - X100 in PBS for 10 min at room temperature . The cells were subsequently incubated with primary antibodies in blocking solution for 1 h , then with secondary antibodies and 1 μg / ml DAPI in blocking solution for 50 min . Both incubations were performed at room temperature and were followed by four PBS washes . Images were captured and processed with confocal laser scanning microscopy . Fluorescence - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) Samples of d4 , d6 and d8 cjPGCLCs , and expansion cultured cjPGCLCs were analyzed with FACS . Floating aggregates containing cjPGCLCs were dissociated into single cells with 0 . 1 % trypsin / EDTA treatment for 15 min at 37°C with periodic pipetting . After the reaction was quenched by addition of an equal volume of FBS , cells were resuspended in FACS buffer ( 0 . 1 % BSA in PBS ) and strained through a 70 μm nylon cell strainer ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) to remove cell clumps . For cjPGCLCs , ITGA6 weakly positive and PDPN positive fractions were sorted with a FACSAria Fusion flow cytometer ( BD Biosciences ) . For expansion cultured cjPGCLCs , ITGA6 positive and PDPN positive fractions were sorted with the FACSAria Fusion instrument . All FACS data were collected in FACSDiva Software v . 8 . 0 . 2 ( BD Biosciences ) . For analysis / sorting of cjPGCLCs with cell - surface markers , cells dissociated with trypsin - EDTA / PBS were stained with fluorescence - conjugated antibodies for 15 min at room temperature . After cells were washed twice with FACS buffer , the cell suspension was filtered through a cell strainer and analyzed or sorted with a flow cytometer . Quantitative PCR ( qPCR ) analysis FACS - sorted in vitro cells ( cjPGCLCs and expansion cultured cjPGCLCs ) were collected in CELLO - TION . cjiPSCs and day 2 cjPGCLCs were collected in PBS , without FACS sorting . Total RNAs were extracted from the cells with RNeasy Micro kits ( QIAGEN , 74104 ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . The cDNA synthesis from 1 ng of total RNAs and the amplification of 3 ′ ends were performed as described previously 52 . The quality of the amplified cDNAs was validated on the basis of the Ct values 29 determined by qPCR with the primers listed in Table 4 . Quantitative PCR was performed with Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix ( Thermo Fisher , 4367659 ) and a StepOnePlus real - time qPCR system ( Applied Biosystems ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . 10x Genomics single - cell RNA - seq library preparation The posterior portions of CS11 embryos were dissected , rinsed with PBS twice and dissociated into single cells with 0 . 1 % trypsin / EDTA treatment for 15 min at 37°C with periodic pipetting . After the reaction was quenched by addition of an equal volume of FBS , then strained through a 70 μm nylon cell strainer , cells were resuspended in FACS buffer ( 0 . 1 % BSA in PBS ) . Cells were loaded into chromium microfluidic chips with the Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3 ′ Reagent Kit ( v . 3 . 1 chemistry ) and then used to generate single - cell gel bead emulsions ( GEMs ) with the Chromium Controller ( 10× Genomics ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol . GEM - RT was performed in a C1000 Touch Thermal Cycler with 96 - Deep Well Reaction Module ( Bio - Rad ) . All subsequent cDNA amplification and library construction steps were performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol . Libraries were sequenced with a 2 × 150 paired - end sequencing protocol on an Illumina HiSeq 4000 or NovaSeq 6000 instrument . Mapping reads of 10x Chromium scRNA - seq and data analysis Raw data were demultiplexed with the mkfastq command in Cell Ranger ( v . 6 . 1 . 2 ) to generate Fastq files . Then raw reads were mapped to the Callithrix jacchus ( calJac4 ) reference genome from USCS . Raw gene counts were obtained with Cell Ranger . Secondary data analyses were performed in R ( v . 4 . 1 . 0 ) with Seurat ( v . 4 . 1 . 1 ) . UMI count tables were first loaded into R with the Read10X _ h5 function , and Seurat objects were built from each sample . Of 34 , 458 total cells captured in the library , we detected 2 , 224 – 4 , 760 median genes / cell at a mean sequencing depth of 46 , 964 – 102 , 934 reads / cell ( Fig . S1D ) . Samples were combined , and the effects of library size were regressed out by SCTransform during normalization in Seurat and then converted to log 2 ( CP10 M + 1 ) values . Cells were clustered with a shared nearest neighbor ( SNN ) modularity optimization based clustering algorithm in Seurat . Clusters were annotated on the basis of previously characterized marker gene expression with the FeaturePlot function and the gene expression matrix file , and cluster annotation was generated for downstream 30 analyses . Dimensional reduction was performed with the top 3000 highly variable genes and the first 30 principal components with Seurat . Differentially expressed genes ( DEGs ) in different clusters were calculated with Seurat findallmarkers , with average log 2 FC thresholds of approximately 0 . 25 , and a p - value < 0 . 01 . DEGs between two groups in the scatterplot were identified with edgeR 3 . 34 . 1 through a quasi - likelihood approach ( QLF ) , with the fraction of detected genes per cell as the covariate . The DEGs were defined as the genes with FDR < 0 . 01 , p - value < 0 . 01 , and log 2 - fold change above 1 . The cell cycle was analyzed with CellCycleScoring in Seurat . Data were visualized with R ( v . 4 . 1 . 0 ) . Genes in the heatmap were hierarchically clustered according to the Euclidean distance , scaled by row , and then visualized with pheatmap . Gene ontology enrichment was analyzed with DAVID v . 6 . 8 . Bulk RNA - seq library preparation CjiPSCs cultured in the presence or absence of feeders , and in the presence or absence of IWR1 , were collected . To minimize the contamination with feeder cells , > 30 colonies of cjiPSCs cultured on feeder layer were randomly picked under an inverted microscope and pooled before isolation of total RNA . Total RNA was extracted with an RNeasy Plus Micro Kit ( # 74034 , QIAGEN ) . RNA - seq libraries were made using a SMRT - Seq HT plus kit ( # R400748 , Takara ) according to the manufacturer ' s protocol . Briefly , total RNA was quantified with a Qubit instrument , and RNA integrity was verified with a TapeStation . Then 1 ng RNA was used for cDNA conversion with a one - step first - strand cDNA synthesis and double - stranded cDNA amplification protocol . cDNA was purified with AMPxp beads , its concentration was measured with a Qubit , and its quality was verified with a TapeStation . Next , 2 ng cDNA was used for library construction . Libraries were dual indexed and pooled according at equal molecular concentrations . Subsequently , 100 - base pair reads were sequenced on the Illumina Nextseq 2000 platform . Bulk RNA - seq data analysis Raw fastq files were demultiplexed with bcl2fastq2 ( v . 2 . 20 . 0 . 422 ) . Barcodes and adapters were removed with Trimmomatic ( v . 0 . 32 ) . Fastq files were mapped to the Callithrix jacchus ( calJac4 ) reference genome with STAR ( v . 2 . 7 . 10a ) . The raw gene count table was generated with featurecounts , and weakly expressed genes were filtered with edgeR with the filterByExpr function with default parameters . Briefly , the raw 31 counts were normalized to library size , and then genes with counts per million ( CPM ) above 10 were included in downstream analysis . DEGs were analyzed with edgeR ( v . 3 . 36 . 0 ) with log 2 fold change > 1 , p - value < 0 . 05 and FDR < 0 . 05 . Reads per kilobase per million ( RPKM ) values were calculated in edgeR , and the gene length was obtained from the UCSC table browser . Downstream data analyses and visualization were performed with R ( v . 4 . 1 . 0 ) . Hierarchical clustering was performed with hclust in R ( v . 4 . 1 . 0 ) . Bisulfite - sequencing and analysis For collection of cjiPSCs for methylome analyses , colonies were picked under a microscope , then collected into a 1 . 5 ml tube for lysis . PGCLC aggregates were digested with 400 µl 0 . 25 % trypsin for 15 min . Then 100 µl FBS was used to stop digestion , and the lysates were pipetted well to obtain a single cell suspension . The dissociated cells were stained with APC - conjugated anti - human PDPN and BV421 - conjugated anti - human / mouse CD49f ( ITGA6 ) , and then the PDPN + ITGA6 weak + fraction was sorted for methylome analyses . Cells were collected and lysed in 50 mM Tris ( pH 8 . 0 ) , 10 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 % SDS and 100 µg / ml proteinase K . Then crude DNA was used to build a sequencing library according to the protocol of the Pico Methyl - Seq Library Prep Kit ( Zymo , # D5455 ) . The libraries were sequenced on the Illumina 2200 platform . Raw fastq files were demultiplexed with bcl2fastq2 ( v . 2 . 20 ) . Barcode and index trimming was performed with Trim Galore ( v . 0 . 6 . 5 ) as follows : trim _ galore - - quality 30 - - phred33 - - illumina - - stringency 1 - - cores 4 - e 0 . 1 - - fastqc - - clip _ R1 10 - - three _ prime _ clip _ r1 10 - - length 20 . The trimmed fastq files were then mapped to calJac4 from USCS with Bismark ( v . 0 . 22 . 3 ) as follows : bismark - - parallel 4 - - genome _ folder $ REF - - non _ directional - - score _ min L , 0 , - 0 . 6 . CpG methylation was extracted and analyzed with methylKit ( v . 1 . 22 . 0 ) . Covered CpG loci were included in the analysis . The genome was tiled in 2 kb windows , and DNA methylation levels were summarized with methyKit ( v . 1 . 22 . 0 ) . Data were visualized with R ( v . 4 . 1 . 0 ) . 32 Supplementary Figure Legends Fig . S1 . Immunophenotypic and transcriptomic characterization of marmoset embryos ( A ) Transabdominal ultrasound images of cj embryos at E50 . ( B ) IF images of a cj embryo section ( E50 , CS11 ) stained for TFAP2C ( red ) and SOX2 ( green ) , merged with DAPI ( white ) . The neural tube is immunoreactive for SOX2 . Scale bar , 50 μm . ( C ) ( left ) IF images of a testis section derived from a cj fetus at gestational week 19 ( GW19 ) , showing DDX4 ( red ) merged with DAPI ( white ) . ( right ) IF of a neonatal testis section , showing DDX4 ( red ) , AMH ( green ) merged with DAPI ( white ) . Scale bar , 50 μm . ( D ) Basic description of sequencing results from six libraries derived from two embryos at E50 ( two libraries from embryo A , four libraries from embryo B ) in this study . ( E ) Quality control of the single cell transcriptome data used for Seurat analysis . ( F ) Cell cycle scoring , showing an overall even distribution of different cell cycle phases across cell types . ( G ) Sample source information projected on the same UMAP embedding . ( H , I ) Scatter plot comparison of average gene expression values for all cells in Embryo _ A and Embryo _ B ( H ) or between populations of cjPGCs derived from each of the two embryos ( I ) . ( J ) Violin plot showing expression of key proliferation markers in the indicated cell types . Fig . S2 . Derivation and feeder free culture of cjiPSCs ( A ) UHC of exome - sequenced genomic DNA derived from cjiPSCs ( 20201 _ 6 , 20201 _ 7 , 20201 _ 10 ) , hair follicles from the donor ( 38189 ) , his sibling ( 38574 ) and unrelated twin pairs ( 38921 / 38922 and 38688 / 38687 ) . Each stem cell lineage closely matched the parental sequence , and a mean of 98 . 6 % of sites were identical in state between the parental and stem cell lineages . In contrast DNA from a sibling of the parental sample 33 shared a mean of 68 . 0 % of sites identical in state to the parental and stem cell lineage samples . ( B ) Allele frequency distribution ( left ) and chimeric fractions ( right ) for exome sequenced DNA as in ( A ) . No evidence of chimerism was found in any sample examined , and estimates of the chimeric fraction peaked at 0 . Direct examination of allele frequencies supported this estimation : all samples showed a peak within sample allele frequency at approximately 50 % ( or 0 . 5 ) . ( C ) BF images of FF cjiPSCs . Scale bars , 200 μm . ( D ) ( left ) Confocal images of cjiPSC colonies stained with DAPI . Scale bar , 100 μ m . ( right ) Diagnostic PCR for cjiPSCs , detecting mycoplasma genomic DNA . Positive and negative controls were loaded on the left . Representative cjiPSC karyotyping analysis result , showing a normal karyotype ( 44 , XY ) . ( E ) Representative results of G - band karyotype analysis of cjiPSCs ( 20201 _ 6 , 20201 _ 7 and 20201 _ 10 ) . All three clones displayed a normal karyotype ( 46 , XY ) . ( F ) IF images of 20201 _ 6 ( top ) , 20201 _ 7 ( middle ) and 20201 _ 10 ( bottom ) for NANOG ( red ) , POU5F1 ( green ) or SOX2 ( red ) , merged with DAPI ( blue ) . Bar , 100 μ m . ( G ) Pluripotency - associated gene expression of cjiPSCs , as measured by qPCR . For each gene examined , the ΔCt from the average Ct values of the two independent housekeeping genes GAPDH and PPIA ( set as 0 ) were calculated and plotted for two independent experiments . * Not detected . Fig . S3 . Culture of cjiPSCs on a feeder layer with an inhibitor of WNT signaling ( A ) BF images of iPSCs cultured under OF , OF / IWR1 or OF / AITS conditions . Scale bars , 200 μm . ( B ) AP staining images of the indicated cjiPSCs . Scale bars , 200 μm . Arrows indicate areas of differentiation . ( C ) Colony formation efficiency of cyPSCs cultured under OF , OF / IWR1 or OF / AITS conditions . AP + colonies were counted after 7 days of culture . ( D ) Gene expression of 20201 _ 10 cjiPSCs cultured under FF or OF conditions , as measured by qPCR . * Not detected . ( E ) IF images of cjiPSCs cultured under OF or OF / IWR1 conditions stained for POU5F1 ( green ) , NANOG ( red ) and SOX2 ( green ) , merged with DAPI ( white ) . Scale bars , 100 34 μm . ( F ) Expression of pluripotency - associated , mesoderm , endoderm or ectoderm markers in 20201 _ 10 cjiPSCs cultured under OF , OF / IWR1 or OF / AITS conditions . Fig . S4 . Induction of cjPGCLCs from OF , OF / IWR1 or FF cjiPSCs ( A ) Schematic of cjPGCLC induction . ( B ) BF images ( inlet ) and IF images of d4 aggregates derived from OF or FF cjiPSCs stained for TFAP2C ( red ) and SOX17 ( green ) , merged with DAPI ( white ) . Scale bar , 100 μm . ( C ) BF images ( top ) and FACS analysis ( bottom ) of the floating aggregates during cjPGCLC induction from OF cjiPSCs . The percentages of PDPN + ITGA6 + cells are shown . Scale bars , 100 μm . ( D ) Boxplot representations of the induction kinetics of PDPN + ITGA6 + cells ( left , percentages ; right , number of PDPN + ITGA6 + cells / aggregate ) during PGCLC induction with aRB27 medium . ( E ) IF images of d4 cjPGCLCs , stained as indicated . Scale bars , 50 μm . ( F ) Gene expression of cjiPSCs and d4 cjPGCLCs , as measured by qPCR . * Not detected . ( G ) FACS analysis of d2 and d4 floating aggregates during cjPGCLC induction from 202001 _ 6 OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs . The percentages of PDPN + ITGA6 + cells are shown . ( H ) FACS analysis of d4 and d6 floating aggregates during cjPGCLC induction from OF / IWR1 20201 _ 10 cjiPSCs maintained by single cell passaging . The percentages of PDPN + ITGA6 + cells are shown . Fig . S5 . Transcriptomic dynamics associated with cjPGCLC induction ( A ) Expression levels of bulk RNA - seq for all samples , normalized by log 2 ( RPKM + 1 ) . Highly concordant median and upper / lower quantile values for overall gene expression ensured the quality of the cDNA library . ( B ) Scatter plot comparing average gene expression levels between FF cjiPSCs and FF / IWR1 cjiPSCs . The two samples were highly correlated with no DEGs identified ( r 2 = 0 . 9981 ) . ( C ) ( left ) Heatmap of gene expression data associated with pre - implantation ( 145 genes ) or post - implantation epiblasts ( 210 genes ) previously identified in cynomolgus monkey embryos in the indicated cjiPSCs 53 . ( right ) Expression of representative markers of naïve , 35 primed or core pluripotency genes , isolated from the gene lists on the left , and key PGC markers . Colors indicate log 2 ( RPKM + 1 ) normalized expression . ( D ) Scatter plots showing averaged values of DEGs between the indicated samples . DEGs ( log 2 fold change > 1 , p - value < 0 . 05 , FDR < 0 . 05 ) are highlighted in colors . Key genes are annotated . Representative genes and their GO enrichments for DEGs are shown at right . ( E , F ) Expression of genes upregulated in OF cjiPSCs ( vs FF cjiPSCs ) or in OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs ( vs OF cjiPSCs ) in d2 cjPGCLCs . Scatter plot shows the average values of DEGs between the indicated samples . DEGs upregulated in OF cjiPSCs vs FF cjiPSCs ( red , 759 genes ) ( E ) or upregulated in OF / IWR1 cjiPSCs vs OF cjiPSCs ( green , 1501 genes ) ( F ) are highlighted . Fig . S6 . Dynamics of key marker gene expression associated with cjPGCLC induction Dynamics of the expression of key genes during cjPGCLC induction and expansion culture , as measured by qPCR . REFERENCES 1 . Saitou , M . & Miyauchi , H . Gametogenesis from Pluripotent Stem Cells . Cell Stem Cell 18 , 721 – 735 ( 2016 ) . 2 . Saitou , M . & Yamaji , M . Primordial Germ Cells in Mice . Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 4 , a008375 ( 2012 ) . 3 . Hikabe , O . et al . Reconstitution in vitro of the entire cycle of the mouse female germ line . Nature 2016 539 : 7628 539 , 299 – 303 ( 2016 ) . 4 . Ishikura , Y . et al . In vitro reconstitution of the whole male germ - cell development from mouse pluripotent stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 28 , 2167 - 2179 . e9 ( 2021 ) . 5 . Hwang , Y . S . et al . Reconstitution of prospermatogonial specification in vitro from human induced pluripotent stem cells . Nature Communications 2020 11 : 1 11 , 1 – 17 ( 2020 ) . 6 . Yamashiro , C . et al . Generation of human oogonia from induced pluripotent stem 36 cells in vitro . Science ( 1979 ) 362 , 356 – 360 ( 2018 ) . 7 . Sasaki , K . et al . Robust In Vitro Induction of Human Germ Cell Fate from Pluripotent Stem Cells . Cell Stem Cell 17 , 178 – 194 ( 2015 ) . 8 . Aramaki , S . et al . A mesodermal factor , T , specifies mouse germ cell fate by directly activating germline determinants . Developmental Cell 27 , 516 – 529 ( 2013 ) . 9 . Nakaki , F . et al . Induction of mouse germ - cell fate by transcription factors in vitro . Nature 2013 501 : 7466 501 , 222 – 226 ( 2013 ) . 10 . Kojima , Y . et al . Evolutionarily Distinctive Transcriptional and Signaling Programs Drive Human Germ Cell Lineage Specification from Pluripotent Stem Cells . Cell Stem Cell 21 , 517 - 532 . e5 ( 2017 ) . 11 . Kojima , Y . et al . GATA transcription factors , SOX17 and TFAP2C , drive the human germ - cell specification program . Life Science Alliance 4 , ( 2021 ) . 12 . Kishi , N . , Sato , K . , Sasaki , E . & Okano , H . Common marmoset as a new model animal for neuroscience research and genome editing technology . Development , Growth & Differentiation 56 , 53 – 62 ( 2014 ) . 13 . Moore , H . D . M . , Gems , S . & Hearn , J . P . Early Implantation ( Callithrix jacchus ) Stages in the Marmoset Monkey . THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF ANATOMY 1 , 7 – 9 ( 1985 ) . 14 . Sasaki , K . et al . The Germ Cell Fate of Cynomolgus Monkeys Is Specified in the Nascent Amnion . Developmental Cell 39 , 169 – 185 ( 2016 ) . 15 . Tang , W . W . C . et al . A unique gene regulatory network resets the human germline epigenome for development . Cell 161 , 1453 – 1467 ( 2015 ) . 16 . Sekl , Y . et al . Cellular dynamics associated with the genome - wide epigenetic reprogramming in migrating primordial germ cells in mice . Development 134 , 2627 – 2638 ( 2007 ) . 17 . Li , L . et al . Single - Cell RNA - Seq Analysis Maps Development of Human Germline Cells and Gonadal Niche Interactions . Cell Stem Cell 20 , 858 - 873 . e4 ( 2017 ) . 18 . Kagiwada , S . , Kurimoto , K . , Hirota , T . , Yamaji , M . & Saitou , M . Replication - coupled passive DNA demethylation for the erasure of genome imprints in mice . The EMBO Journal 32 , 340 ( 2013 ) . 19 . Guo , F . et al . The Transcriptome and DNA Methylome Landscapes of Human 37 Primordial Germ Cells . Cell 161 , 1437 – 1452 ( 2015 ) . 20 . Gkountela , S . et al . DNA Demethylation Dynamics in the Human Prenatal Germline . Cell 161 , 1425 – 1436 ( 2015 ) . 21 . Ross , C . N . , French , J . A . & Ortí , G . Germ - line chimerism and paternal care in marmosets ( Callithrix kuhlii ) . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 , 6278 – 6282 ( 2007 ) . 22 . Benirschke , K . , Anderson , J . M . & Brownhill , L . E . Marrow Chimerism in Marmosets . Science ( 1979 ) 138 , 513 – 515 ( 1962 ) . 23 . Sakai , Y . et al . Induction of the germ cell fate from pluripotent stem cells in cynomolgus monkeys . Biology of Reproduction 102 , 620 – 638 ( 2020 ) . 24 . Kim , H . et al . Modulation of β - catenin function maintains mouse epiblast stem cell and human embryonic stem cell self - renewal . Nature Communications 2013 4 : 1 4 , 1 – 11 ( 2013 ) . 25 . Wu , J . et al . An alternative pluripotent state confers interspecies chimaeric competency . Nature 2015 521 : 7552 521 , 316 – 321 ( 2015 ) . 26 . Murase , Y . et al . Long - term expansion with germline potential of human primordial germ cell - like cells in vitro . The EMBO Journal 39 , e104929 ( 2020 ) . 27 . Hayashi , K . et al . Offspring from oocytes derived from in vitro primordial germ cell - like cells in mice . Science ( 1979 ) 338 , 971 – 975 ( 2012 ) . 28 . Hayashi , K . , Ohta , H . , Kurimoto , K . , Aramaki , S . & Saitou , M . Reconstitution of the Mouse Germ Cell Specification Pathway in Culture by Pluripotent Stem Cells . Cell 146 , 519 – 532 ( 2011 ) . 29 . Irie , N . et al . SOX17 is a critical specifier of human primordial germ cell fate . Cell 160 , 253 – 268 ( 2015 ) . 30 . Kobayashi , T . et al . Principles of early human development and germ cell program from conserved model systems . Nature 2017 546 : 7658 546 , 416 – 420 ( 2017 ) . 31 . Sharif , J . et al . The SRA protein Np95 mediates epigenetic inheritance by recruiting Dnmt1 to methylated DNA . Nature 2007 450 : 7171 450 , 908 – 912 ( 2007 ) . 32 . Bostick , M . et al . UHRF1 plays a role in maintaining DNA methylation in mammalian cells . Science ( 1979 ) 317 , 1760 – 1764 ( 2007 ) . 33 . Aeckerle , N . , Drummer , C . , Debowski , K . , Viebahn , C . & Behr , R . Primordial germ cell development in the marmoset monkey as revealed by pluripotency factor expression : suggestion of a novel model of embryonic germ cell translocation . 38 Molecular Human Reproduction 21 , 66 – 80 ( 2015 ) . 34 . Kurimoto , K . et al . Complex genome - wide transcription dynamics orchestrated by Blimp1 for the specification of the germ cell lineage in mice . Genes & Development 22 , 1617 – 1635 ( 2008 ) . 35 . Western , P . et al . Analysis of Esg1 Expression in Pluripotent Cells and the Germline Reveals Similarities with Oct4 and Sox2 and Differences Between Human Pluripotent Cell Lines . Stem Cells 23 , 1436 – 1442 ( 2005 ) . 36 . Kobayashi , T . et al . Tracing the emergence of primordial germ cells from bilaminar disc rabbit embryos and pluripotent stem cells . Cell Reports 37 , 109812 ( 2021 ) . 37 . Zhu , Q . et al . Specification and epigenomic resetting of the pig germline exhibit conservation with the human lineage . Cell Reports 34 , 108735 ( 2021 ) . 38 . Castrillon , D . H . , Quade , B . J . , Wang , T . Y . , Quigley , C . & Crum , C . P . The human VASA gene is specifically expressed in the germ cell lineage . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97 , 9585 – 9590 ( 2000 ) . 39 . Phillips , I . R . The embryology of the common marmoset ( Callithrix jacchus ) . Adv Anat Embryol Cell Biol 52 , 3—47 ( 1976 ) . 40 . Buckley , S . M . et al . Regulation of Pluripotency and Cellular Reprogramming by the Ubiquitin - Proteasome System . Cell Stem Cell 11 , 783 – 798 ( 2012 ) . 41 . Zhou , D . et al . The expression characteristics of FBXW7 in human testis suggest its function is different from that in mice . Tissue Cell 62 , ( 2020 ) . 42 . Kanatsu - Shinohara , M . , Onoyama , I . , Nakayama , K . I . & Shinohara , T . Skp1 - Cullin - F - box ( SCF ) - type ubiquitin ligase FBXW7 negatively regulates spermatogonial stem cell self - renewal . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 , 8826 – 8831 ( 2014 ) . 43 . Oikawa , M . et al . Functional primordial germ cell - like cells from pluripotent stem cells in rats . Science ( 1979 ) 376 , ( 2022 ) . 44 . Yoshimatsu , S . et al . Non - viral Induction of Transgene - free iPSCs from Somatic Fibroblasts of Multiple Mammalian Species . Stem Cell Reports 16 , 754 – 770 ( 2021 ) . 45 . Layne , D . G . & Power , R . A . Husbandry , handling , and nutrition for marmosets . Comp Med 53 , 351 – 9 ( 2003 ) . 46 . Jaquish , C . E . , Toal , R . L . , Tardif , S . D . & Carson , R . L . Use of ultrasound to 39 monitor prenatal growth and development in the common marmoset ( Callithrix jacchus ) . American Journal of Primatology 36 , 259 – 275 ( 1995 ) . 47 . Tardif , S . D . , Jaquish , C . E . , Toal , R . L . , Layne , D . G . & Power , R . A . Estimation of gestational ages in the common marmoset ( Callithrix jacchus ) from published prenatal growth curves . Journal of Medical Primatology 27 , 28 – 32 ( 1998 ) . 48 . Chan , J . et al . Efficiency of whole - exome sequencing in old world and new world primates using human capture reagents . J Med Primatol 50 , 176 – 181 ( 2021 ) . 49 . Li , H . Aligning sequence reads , clone sequences and assembly contigs with BWA - MEM . arXiv ( 2013 ) . 50 . Depristo , M . A . et al . A framework for variation discovery and genotyping using next - generation DNA sequencing data . Nature Genetics 2011 43 : 5 43 , 491 – 498 ( 2011 ) . 51 . Worley , K . C . et al . The common marmoset genome provides insight into primate biology and evolution . Nature Genetics 2014 46 : 8 46 , 850 – 857 ( 2014 ) . 52 . Nakamura , T . et al . SC3 - seq : A method for highly parallel and quantitative measurement of single - cell gene expression . Nucleic Acids Research 43 , e60 – e60 ( 2015 ) . 53 . Nakamura , T . et al . A developmental coordinate of pluripotency among mice , monkeys and humans . Nature 537 , 57 – 62 ( 2016 ) .