Adhesions that are mediated by integrins comprise a diverse family of cellular contacts that have key roles in the assembly of individual cells into functional tissue s and organs 1 . They derive their name from the hetero dimeric integrin receptors that directly mediate the adhesive interactions with the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) or with counter receptors on the membrane of neighbouring cells 2 ( FIG . 1a ) . A common form of such adhesions are focal adhesions , which have been exten­ sively characterized in cultured cells in which they mediat e the interaction of cells with matrix proteins such as fibronectin , vitronectin and collagen ( FIG . 1b , c ) . In intact tissues , integrins mediate cellular adhesion to the basement membrane and to other cells ( FIG . 1d , e ) . Structural and molecular studies have indicated that integrin adhesions are associated with the actin cyto­ skeleton through an elaborate network of proteins that is collectively known as the ‘integrin adhesome’ 3 – 5 ( BOX 1 ) . The interactions between the various adhesome compo­ nents are believed to be responsible for two major func­ tions of the adhesion sites : first , their role as a ‘scaffold’ in supporting the physical integration of the ECM­bound cell and the cytoskeleton , which leads to the assembly of tissue s with a particular structure and mechanical prop­ erties ; second , their ‘signalling’ activity , which enables cells to sense the chemical and mechanical properties of the external environment and to respond by acti­ vating signal ling networks that regulate cell structure , dynamics , behaviour and fate 6 , 7 . How this rather general ‘design principle’ enables specific scaffolding and signalling components of the adhesome to integrate into a chemo­ and mechano­ responsive adhesion site , which , in turn , drives the assembly of complex multicellular systems , is still poorly understood . The main challenges that have been encountered in studying the molecular functionality of the adhesome include the molecular heterogeneity of integrin adhesions within and between different cellu­ lar systems , the large number of adhesome components , the presence of multiple ‘functional switches’ that can turn adhesome components ‘on’ or ‘off’ and the overall dynamic nature and plasticity of the adhesion system as a whole . Recent attempts to explore the molecular mechanisms of adhesome functions at a systems level were based , to a large extent , on a combination of bioinformatic surveys 3 , 4 , immunocytochemistry 8 , proteomic analysis 7 , 9 – 12 and studies that specifically perturbed adhesome compon­ ents 7 , 13 . These studies confirmed that the integrin adhesom e currently consists of 232 molecules , includ­ ing integrins , various actin regulators , adaptor proteins that link cytoskeletal structures to the cyto plasmic tails of integrins and multiple signalling molecules 3 , 4 ( BOX 1 ; Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . Direct attempts to assign specific cellular function s to individual adhesome molecules were primarily based on experiments in which adhesome molecules were pharmacologically or genetically disturbed using 1 Department of Molecular Cell Biology , Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot 76100 , Israel . 2 Department of Molecular Medicine , Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry , 82152 Martinsried , Germany . 3 Center for Nanosciences , Department of Applied Physics , Ludwig - Maximilians University , 80799 Munich , Germany . Correspondence to B . G . e - mail : benny . geiger @ weizmann . ac . il doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3769 Integrins A family of cell adhesion receptors that mediate either cell – cell interactions or cell – extracellular matrix interactions . Integrins are heterodimers with two distinct subunits , the α ‑subunit and the β ‑subunit . The integrin adhesome : from genes and proteins to human disease Sabina E . Winograd - Katz 1 , Reinhard Fässler 2 , Benjamin Geiger 1 and Kyle R . Legate 2 , 3 Abstract | The adhesive interactions of cells with their environment through the integrin family of transmembrane receptors have key roles in regulating multiple aspects of cellular physiology , including cell proliferation , viability , differentiation and migration . Consequently , failure to establish functional cell adhesions , and thus the assembly of associated cytoplasmic scaffolding and signalling networks , can have severe pathological effects . The roles of specific constituents of integrin - mediated adhesions , which are collectively known as the ‘integrin adhesome’ , in diverse pathological states are becoming clear . Indeed , the prominence of mutations in specific adhesome molecules in various human diseases is now appreciated , and experimental as well as in silico approaches provide insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying these pathological conditions . ANALYSIS NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 273 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology GAPs ( 14 ) a PtdIns phosphatases ( 3 ) Actin regulators ( 17 ) Adaptors ( 73 ) Adhesion receptors ( 42 ) Lipid GTPases ( 6 ) Ser / Thr phosphatases ( 4 ) PtdIns kinases ( 2 ) GEFs ( 16 ) Tyr kinases ( 11 ) Ser / Thr kinases ( 11 ) E3 ligases ( 3 ) Proteases ( 4 ) Channels ( 5 ) RNA or DNA regulation ( 4 ) Chaperones ( 3 ) Tyr phosphatases ( 9 ) b d e c Activating interactions Inhibiting interactions Binding interactions 10 μ m 5 μ m 150 μ m 500 nm Figure 1 | Representative scheme of the adhesome and images of focal adhesions . a | Schematic representation of the adhesome . The functional categories of the different adhesome components are shown , with the number of family members in the adhesome given in parenthesis . In addition , the dominant interactions between adhesome component families are depicted , as highlighted in the key . The light brown shading includes all the adhesome components that perform scaffolding function , and they are surrounded by the regulatory ( signalling ) adhesome components . b | WI - 38 fibroblasts in which the focal adhesion - associated adaptor protein paxillin ( shown in green ) and actin ( shown in red ) were immunofluores - cently labelled and detected by fluorescence microscopy . The green patches are focal adhesions located at each end of the red actin fibres . c | A side view of a cultured chicken lens cell , which includes part of a cell – cell adherens junction in the upper left corner ( arrow head ) and an interaction of a focal adhesion with the substrate ( indicated by the square bracket ) , viewed by transmission electron microscopy . d | A transverse semi - thin ( ~ 1 μ m thick ) immunofluorescently labelled section of Guinea pig smooth muscle , in which vinculin ( shown in green ) and dystrophin ( shown in red ) were visualized by fluorescence microscopy . The image demonstrates a clear separation between the vinculin - rich adhesion sites and the actin and dystrophin - rich cytoskeleton . e | Three - dimensional view of a chicken smooth muscle membrane - associate d dense plaque . A tomographic slice , 9 nm in thickness , from a reconstructed volume of chicken gizzard smooth muscle tissue was overlaid with the surface - rendered view of the adhesions to the matrix . The different structural subcellular compartments are shown in the following colours : membrane in blue ; focal adhesion - related dense plaques in transparent red ; actin in yellow ; collagen in light pink ; multi - vesicular compartment in purple ; vesicles inside the multi - vesicular compartment in green . GAP , GTPase - activating proteins ; GEF , guanine nucleotide exchange factor ; PtdIns , phosphatidylinositol . Image in part a is modified , with permission , from REF . 3 © ( 2007 ) Macmillan Publishers Limited . Image in part c is reproduced , with permission , from REF . 181 © ( 2010 ) Elsevier . Image in part d is reproduced , with permission , from REF . 182 © ( 1993 ) The Rockefeller University Press . Image in part e is reproduced , with permission , from REF . 183 © ( 2012 ) Elsevier . A N A LY S I S 274 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Focal adhesions Stable integrin‑mediated , cell – substrate adhesion structures that anchor the termini of actin filaments ( stress fibres ) and mediate strong attachments to substrates . They also function as integrin signalling platforms . Focal complexes Small dot‑like adhesions ( ~ 1 μ m in width ) that are mainly found in lamellipodia . They are transient adhesion sites during cell migration and can mature into more stable focal adhesions . Fibrillar adhesion A form of integrin‑mediated adhesion , which is typically associated with fibronectin fibres and has high levels of tensin and low levels of phosphorylated Tyr residues . These adhesions are less mechanosensitive than focal adhesions . Podosomes Adhesive , ring‑like , actin‑rich structures that are formed on the ventral surface of cells , such as monocytes , osteoclasts and smooth muscle cells . various integrin inhibitors 14 , specific inhibitors of adhesion­associated enzymes and systematic RNAi­ mediated knockdown of genes encoding adhesome components 13 , 15 . These experiments provided valuabl e information on the precise molecular interplay that occurs within the adhesome network ; however , the contribution of this interplay to the overall role of specific adhesome components in tissue homeostasis and in intact organisms , or to the possible involve­ ment of the adhesome in various pathological states , remains unclear . To address the function of adhesome components at the tissue or organism level , different approaches are used . These include the introduction of disease­related gene mutations to these components or the misexpression of adhesome molecules , and specific perturbation experiments ( knockout or knock­in ) in experimental animal models 16 . In this Analysis , we aim to provide a clearer picture of the involvement of adhesome components in disease and to understand which molecular functions of the adhesome are impaired in different diseases . This infor­ mation could provide new insight into the molecular basis of diseases and highlight molecules that could be therapeuticall y targeted . From genes to animal models and disease With the growing interest in personally tailored medica l treatment , the need for new genomic and proteomic tools to identify disease­associated genes has become increas­ ingly apparent ( BOX 2 ) . Once specific candidate genes are identified , experimental validation is necessary to con­ firm that the identified mutation or dysregulated activity does cause the disease . Additional experiments are then required to understand the changes that have occurred to cause the disease with the ultimate aim of developin g ther­ apies to restore health . Culture­based disease model s may be established using RNAi technology or by expressin g mutated genes to mimic the disease ex vivo 17 . Although such approaches are useful to determine the molecular mechanisms that lead to disease , it is necessary to establish animal models to study the consequences of genetic or functional dysregulation at the whole organism level . Indeed , some animal models mimic the intended human genetic disorder well ( see below ) , but often the models are not very informative . This might be explained by the fact that most human genetic diseases arise from point mutations , insertions , small deletions or gene trun­ cations , whereas most mouse models involve the deletion of an entire gene . Therefore , the severity and course of the disorder may differ considerably in the animal model . Moreover , non­functional or truncated gene products expressed in human patients may behave in a dominant­ negative manner and influence cellular function in ways that are not considered in the animal model . It would thus be advantageous , when designing animal models for a particular disease , to introduce specific gene mutations that have been identified in patients to recreate a rele­ vant disorder . Beyond these technical limitations , there are also other considerable differences between humans and mice ( for example , the mode and timing of organ development ) that might complicate the establishment of useful animal models 18 . Box 1 | The integrin adhesome When integrins bind to the extracellular matrix , scaffold , cytoskeletal and signalling proteins are recruited to the nascent adhesion . The micrometre - scale adhesion sites that form can develop into diverse classes of integrin adhesions , such as focal complexes , focal adhesions , fibrillar adhesions , podosomes and invadopodia . All these integrin adhesions have diverse roles in tissue formation , adhesion - mediated signalling , matrix remodelling , cell migration and invasion . The underlying molecular network associated with integrin adhesions is commonly known as the ‘integrin adhesome’ ( FIG . 1a ; Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) , which consists of over 232 components that are divided into 148 intrinsic components ( that is , those that reside mainly in the adhesion site ) and 84 components that transiently associate with the adhesion . Some of the adhesome molecules are involved in the ‘scaffolding function’ of the adhesome ( the physical linking of integrins to the actin cytoskeleton ( for example , actin , actin - associated proteins , adaptor proteins and integrin receptors ) ) , whereas others are involved in adhesion - mediated signalling , which affects the adhesion itself as well as multiple cellular downstream targets ( for example , kinases , phosphatases and G protein regulators ) . Analysis of the adhesome network points to a very high connectivity between the different constituents 3 but suggests that these interactions can be modulated by various post - translational modifications 4 . Cryo - electron tomography 173 and three - dimensional super - resolution microscopy revealed specific particles at the cytoskeleton – membrane interface of integrin adhesions and a ‘laminated organization’ , whereby the different components are located at different distances from the membrane 174 . Further functional proteomic mapping of the adhesome requires the systematic knockdown of adhesome molecules and the analysis of the resulting phenotype together with the characterization of mutations in adhesome genes that are associated with diverse pathologies . Box 2 | Methods for identifying disease - associated genes There are multiple approaches for the identification of disease - associated genes . The traditional procedure is based on cytogenetic linkage analysis , in which small chromosomal alterations in pathological specimens are identified , and the genes residing in the altered locus are mapped 175 . In recent years , multiple technologies were developed that enable high - throughput and high - content searches for disease - related genes and potential therapeutic targets . Among these are quantitative transcriptomic analysis tools 176 , whole genome and whole exome sequencing technologies 177 , and sensitive proteomics that enable the quantification of protein levels and post - translational modifications 178 , 179 . Combined with powerful bioinformatics analyses 180 these advanced ( and rapidly improving ) techniques provide rich databases of potential disease - causing candidates . Genes can be associated with two forms of disease ; monogenic diseases , which display a typical Mendelian inheritance ( for example , sickle cell anaemia , Huntington’s disease , phenylketonuria and cystic fibrosis ) ; and polygenic diseases , which are caused by the combined effects of mutations in more than one gene ( for example , diabetes , hypertension and many forms of cancer ) . Naturally , diseases of the first type are easier to define and diagnose , and potential therapeutic targets are more easily identified ; addressing polygenic diseases necessitates a mechanistic understanding of the hierarchical relationships between the associated genes , which is far more challenging . A N A LY S I S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 275 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Invadopodia Extracellular matrix ( ECM ) contacts that are different from focal complexes and focal adhesions but similar to podosomes , which are associated with the invasion of cells into the ECM . Invadopodia can extend up to several micrometres , associate with ECM‑degrading enzymes and are seen in transformed fibroblasts or malignant cells . The integrin adhesome and disease genes To identify candidate adhesome components that are implicated in disease , which might help to develop more appropriate disease models , we have conducted a litera­ ture­based bioinformatics survey of mutations that occur in the known cohort of adhesome genes ( Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) and their association with human disease . We used two main sources : the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man ( OMIM® ) database to search for sin­ gle adhesome components that are involved in Mendelian genetic disorders ( Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) ; and the Genetic Association Database ( GAD ) 19 to iden­ tify multigeni c disease s that show an association with adhesome components ( Supplementary information S3 ( table ) ) . The informatio n retrieved from both databases is discussed below . Adhesome components involved in inherited diseases . From the 232 adhesome genes queried within the OMIM database , 52 ( 22 % ) were reported to cause specific genetic diseases ( Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) . This represents an enrichment of disease­causing genes Table 1 | Adhesome genes and the involvement of their encoded proteins in OMIM disease Functional category * Adhesome genes ‡ Disease when adhesome gene mutated Actin ACTB Musculoskeletal Actin regulators ACTN1 , CFL1 , CORO1B , CTTN , KEAP1 , LASP1 , ENAH , NEXN , SVIL , VASP , CORO2A , MACF1 § , ARPC2 § , MARCKS § and PFN1 § No disease FLNA Cardiovascular and developmental MYH9 § Renal , haematological and other Adaptors JUB , SORBS2 , BCAR1 , SMPX , SH3KBP1 , CRK , CRKL , EZR , FHL2 , GAB1 , GRB2 , GRB7 , NEDD9 , CASS4 , TGFB1I1 , ITGB1BP1 , FERMT2 , LPXN , PPFIA1 , FBLIM1 , MSN , NCK2 , PARVA , PARVB , PXN , LIMS1 , LIMS2 , GNB2L1 , RDX , OSTF1 , NUDT16L1 , SYNM , SDCBP , TLN1 , TNS1 , TES , TRIP6 , SORBS3 , ZYX , NDEL1 , SH2B1 , TENC1 , ZFYVE21 , ABI2 § , ABI3 § , ANKRD28 § , CSRP1 § , MAPK8IP3 § , SORBS1 § , SHC1 § , MYOM1 § , TSPAN1 § , TUBA1B § , VIM § , SHARPIN § , FABP3 § , NISCH § , CIB1 § and SRCN1 § No disease CAV1 and CIB2 § Developmental HAX1 and FERMT3 Immunological FERMT1 Dermatological LPP Cancer ( and neoplasia ) and other NF2 , PALLD and ABI1 § Cancer ( and neoplasia ) LDB3 and VCL Cardiovascular IRS1 § Metabolic and cardiovascular PLEC § Gastrointestinal , musculoskeletal and dermatological Adhesion receptors SLC3A2 , KTN1 , LRP1 , PVR , SDC4 , ITGA1 , ITGA3 , ITGA4 , ITGA5 , ITGA8 , ITGA9 , ITGA10 , ITGA11 , ITGAD , ITGAE , ITGAL , ITGAM , ITGAV , ITGAW , ITGAX , ITGB1 , ITGB5 , ITGB6 , ITGB7 , ITGB8 , NRP1 , NRP2 , ADAM12 § , CEACAM1 § , CD47 § , LAYN § , SIRPA § , THY1 § and PLAUR § No disease ITGA2 and ITGB3 Haematological ITGA6 and ITGB4 Dermatological and gastrointestinal ITGA7 Musculoskeletal and developmental ITGB2 Immunological CD151 Haematological , renal and dermatological ENG § Cardiovascular INSR § Metabolic , developmental and musculoskeletal Channel proteins SLC16A3 § and SLC9A1 § No disease PKD1 Renal TRPM7 Musculoskeletal and neurological KCNH2 § Cardiovascular Chaperones CALR and HSPA2 § No disease HSPB1 § Musculoskeletal and neurological E3 ligases CBL , RNF5 and RNF185 No disease A N A LY S I S 276 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Mendelian genetic disorders Inherited genetic diseases that are caused by mutations in one gene . Multigenic diseases Diseases that are caused by mutations or alterations in more than one gene . in the adhesome compared with the genomic population , of which only 11 % were found to cause disease . This value was calculated by dividing the number of genes found in the OMIM database that have been described to cause disease ( around 2 , 900 at the time of this Analysis ) by the estimated number of genes in the genome ( about 25 , 000 ) . The 52 adhesome genes reported to cause specific genetic diseases were then sorted according to the type of disease they produce ( Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) . The assignment of a gene to a specific disease group is based on the nature of the disease , the affected organs and the main symptoms the mutation of the gene causes . Genes involved in cancer and neoplasia were assigned to a group of this name irrespective of the organ they affect . Genes were assigned to all disease types they cause . TABLE 1 shows all of the adhesome genes — grouped by their functional categories and divided into groups on the basis of type of disease they cause when mutated . Examination of the adhesome OMIM list indicates that the most abundant Mendelian genetic disease in the adhesome is cancer ( 17 genes ) ( FIG . 2a ; Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) . Cancer is mainly caused by Table 1 Cont . ) | Adhesome genes and the involvement of their encoded proteins in OMIM disease Functional category * Adhesome genes ‡ Disease when adhesome gene mutated GAPs DDEF1 , ASAP3 , GIT1 , GIT2 GRLF1 , ASAP2 , ARHGAP24 , AGAP2 , STARD13 , ARHGAP5 § and ARHGAP32 § No disease ARHGAP26 and DLC1 Cancer ( and neoplasia ) RASA1 Cancer ( and neoplasia ) and developmental GEFs DEF6 , DOCK1 , ELMO1 , ARHGEF7 , BCAR3 § , RAPGEF1 § , TIAM1 § , TRIO § , VAV1 § , VAV2 § , VAV3 § , ARHGEF2 § and CYTH2 § No disease ARHGEF6 Developmental SOS1 Cardiovascular and dermatological ARHGEF12 Cancer ( and neoplasia ) GTPases RHOU , ARF1 § , RAC1 § and RHOA § No disease DNM2 Musculoskeletal and neurological HRAS § Cardiovasular , cancer ( and neoplasia ) and developmental Others PLD1 and PLCG1 No disease PRNP and SPTLC1 Neurological PDE4D Musculoskeletal Proteases CAPN1 , CAPN2 and MMP14 § No disease CASP8 Cancer ( and neoplasia ) and immunological PtdIns kinases PIK3CA Cancer ( and neoplasia ) PIP5K1C Musculoskeletal and developmental PtdIns phosphatases INPP5D and INPPL1 No disease PTEN § Developmental and cancer ( and neoplasia ) RNA or DNA regulation ITGB3BP , RAVER1 and PABPC1 § No disease STAT3 Immunological Ser / Thr kinases ILK , PAK1 , PDPK1 , MAPK1 § , MAPK8 § , LIMK1 § , PRKACA § and ROCK1 § No disease PRKCA and AKT1 § Cancer ( and neoplasia ) Ser / Thr phosphatases PPM1M , PPM1F , PPP2CA , ILKAP § and SSH1 § No disease Tyr kinases ABL1 , CSK , PTK2 , PTK2B , PEAK1 , FYN § , LYN § , SYK § and TESK1 § No disease SRC Cancer ( and neoplasia ) Tyr phosphatases PTPRF , PTPRA , PTPN6 , PTPN1 § , PTPRO § , PTPRH § and PTPN2 § No disease PTPN12 Cancer ( and neoplasia ) PTPN11 Musculoskeletal , cardiovascular , cancer ( and neoplasia ) , dermatological and developmental GAP , GTPase - activating protein ; GEF , guanine nucleotide exchange factor ; OMIM , Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man ; PtdIns , phosphatidylinositol . * The assignment of the different molecules to particular categories is based on the adhesome ( FIG . 1a ; Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . ‡ Gene names are grouped based on the kind of disease they produce when mutated ( for further information and links to OMIM reference see Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) . Most genes mainly reside in the adhesion site ( intrinsic genes ) . § Genes that transiently associate with the adhesion site ( associated genes ) are indicated . A N A LY S I S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 277 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 P e r c e n t a g e o f f un c t i o n a l c a t e g o r y Disease type Disease type 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 a OMIM b GAD I m m u n o l o g i c a l ( 5 ) C a n c e r ( 17 ) C a r d i o v a s c u l a r ( 9 ) H a e m a t o l o g i c a l ( 4 ) N e u r o l o g i c a l ( 5 ) D e v e l o p m e n t a l ( 11 ) R e n a l ( 3 ) G a s t r o i n t e s t i n a l ( 3 ) M e t a bo l i c ( 2 ) M u s c u l o s k e l e t a l ( 11 ) D e r m a t o l o g i c a l ( 7 ) O t h e r ( 3 ) O M I M ( 52 ) A d h e s o m e ( 232 ) I m m u n o l o g i c a l ( 44 ) C a n c e r ( 68 ) C a r d i o v a s c u l a r ( 52 ) H a e m a t o l o g i c a l ( 12 ) N e u r o l o g i c a l ( 39 ) D e v e l o p m e n t a l ( 16 ) R e n a l ( 10 ) M e t a bo l i c ( 43 ) R e p r o d u c t i o n ( 13 ) V i s i o n ( 8 ) O t h e r ( 36 ) T o t a l i n G A D ( 138 ) A d h e s o m e ( 232 ) OthersTyr phosphatase Tyr kinase Ser / Thr phosphatase Ser / Thr kinase RNA or DNA regulation PtdIns phosphatase PtdIns kinase ProteaseGTPaseGEFGAPE3 ligase ChaperoneChannelAdhesion receptor AdaptorActin regulator mutations in genes encoding adhesome signalling pro­ teins , including GTPase­activating proteins ( GAPs ) , guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) , kinases and phosphatases , that are also known to be involved in signalling through growth factor receptors ( FIG . 2 ) . Many of the adhesome protein kinases and three GAPs ( namely deleted in liver cancer 1 ( DLC1 ) , RHOGAP26 ( encoded by the gene ARHGAP26 ) and RASA1 ( also known as RASGAP ) ) are involved in cancer , whereas the involvement of GEFs in hereditary diseases is broader and also includes cardiovascular and developmental dis­ eases ( FIG . 2a ) . Interestingly , gene mutations in adhesion receptors are not implicated in cancer ( FIG . 2a ) , despite the fact that changes in integrin expression and activity are believed to have a role in processes commonly asso­ ciated with malignant transformation and metastasis ( for example , invasion and migration ) . Two other classes of genetic disease that are enriched in adhesome gene mutations are musculoskeletal ( 11 genes ) and cardiovascular ( nine genes ) disorders . This reflects the importance of the adhesome in mediat­ ing force transduction in these tissues ( that is , skeletal and cardiac muscle , bones and the vasculature ) , by which substantial mechanical load is generated and applied . Within the different disease types , when focussing specifically on the genes that have a role in blood cell disorders , the haematopoietic system is highly affected by mutations in adhesome components . Twelve adhe­ some genes are directly involved in haematopoietic diseases ( five of these are immunological , four are haematological and three are types of leukaemia ; see below ) . Intriguingly , the genes causing these diseases consist mainly of structural ( scaffolding ) adhesome components ( for example , adaptors , actin regulators and adhesion receptors ; Supplementary information S4 ( figure ) ) . These findings emphasize the important role of adhesome structure and cytoskeletal maintenance in the development and function of blood cells . Finally , dermatological diseases are caused by muta­ tions in seven adhesome genes , which illustrates a clear need for cell adhesion in maintaining a barrier against invading microorganisms . Interestingly , only two genes encoding adhesome­ associated actin regulators ( filamin A ( FLNA ) and myosin heavy chain 9 ( MYH9 ) ) are listed in the adhe­ some genes from the OMIM database . Mutations in these genes lead to diseases that affect multiple organs . This low prevalence may be attributed to compensa­ tory action by redundant gene products or to early embryonic lethality when actin regulators are mutated , as the pheno type of knockout mice reveals a very mild defect in some cases ( for example , for the gene encoding vasodilator­stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) ) 20 and a lethal phenotype in others ( for example , for the gene encoding cofilin 1 ( REF . 21 ) ) . Interestingly , only two lipid kinases in the adhesome lead to diseases when mutated ; the mutation of the gene PIP5K1C , which encodes PtdIns ( 4 ) P­5­kinase 1γ ( phosphatidylinositol 4­phosphate 5­kinase type­1γ ) , contributes to the lethal congenital contracture Figure 2 | Percentage of genes belonging to the adhesome functional categories that lead to each disease type . a | Diseases caused by mutations in adhesome genes , according to the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man ( OMIM ) database . b | Adhesome genes that are associated with disease , according to the Genetic Association Database ( GAD ) . The graphs show the percentage of genes in each disease type that belongs to the specific adhesome functional category , as highlighted in the key . The number in parentheses shows the total number of adhesome genes related to the particular disease . The percentages of the functional categories in the adhesome as well as in the OMIM database ( part a ) or GAD ( part b ) are shown for comparison . GAP , GTPase - activating protein ; GEF , guanine nucleotide exchange factor , PtdIns , phosphatidylinositol . A N A LY S I S 278 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia A bleeding disorder that arises from mutations in genes either encoding α IIb integrin or β 3 integrin , which together form the fibrinogen receptor on platelets . Leukocyte adhesion deficiency type III ( LAD‑III ) . An autosomal recessive immunodeficiency disorder that is caused by mutations in the gene encoding kindlin 3 , which reduces the activation of most integrins . Leukocyte adhesion deficiency type I ( LAD‑I ) . An autosomal recessive immunodeficiency disorder resulting from mutations in the gene encoding β 2 integrin , which is expressed on several cells of the immune system . syndrome , and the mutation of PIK3CA , which encodes PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2­3­kinase 1α ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) ­bisphosphate 3­kinase , catalytic subunit­α ) , has been implicated in the development of cancer . This is in line with the known role of the phosphoinositide pathway in regulating cytoskel­ etal assembly and function . In general , scaffolding gene mutations ( that is , mutations in genes encoding adaptors , adhesion receptors and channel proteins ) were promi­ nently found to be associated with haematological and dermatological diseases ( Supplementary information S4 ( figure ) ) , whereas cancer , neurological , developmental and musculo skeletal diseases are mainly caused by gene mutations in adhesome signalling proteins . Adhesome genes genetically associated with disease . Searching the GAD 19 revealed the involvement of 138 adhesome components ( 59 . 5 % of all adhesome genes ) , the alteration of which has a role in multiple polygenic diseases . Given that about 40 % of the genes in the genome are genetically associated with disease 22 , it seems that the adhesome is enriched with genes involved in complex human diseases . The most abundant adhesome­ associated diseases are cancers ( 68 genes ) , followed by cardiovascular diseases ( 52 genes ) and immuno logical ( 44 genes ) , metabolic ( 43 genes ) and neurological conditions ( 39 genes ) . Other diseases present in lower abundance are listed in FIGURE 2b and Supplementary information S3 ( table ) . It is worth noting that 63 % of the disease­related genes are associated with haematopoietic disorders , including 20 genes involved in leukaemias or lymphomas , 44 genes in immunological diseases and 12 genes in haematopoiesis . When the adhesome molecules that are associated with disease are genetically classified , we find that genes encoding regulators and adaptor proteins are slightly underrepresented , whereas genes encoding Tyr kinases and phosphatases are enriched ( FIG . 2b ) . In contrast to the OMIM list , adhesion receptors are enriched in the GAD , but no enrichment in channel proteins was observed . Furthermore , in both OMIM and GAD lists , GAPs are less abundant and GTPases are enriched . All the pro­ tein classes found in the adhesome are also present in the GAD . When comparing the involvement of the functional classes of adhesome proteins in the various diseases , we made some remarkable findings . Although adhesion receptors were not indicated in the OMIM database as molecules leading to cancer , in the GAD , they account for 24 % of the genes associated with cancer ( Supplementary information S4 ( figur e ) ) . This suggests that dysregulations in genes encoding adhesion receptors frequently combine with other gene malfunctions to cause cancer . Actin regu­ lators are underrepresented in both databases and only have roles in immunological , cardiovascular , haemato­ logical and developmental diseases . Adaptors are widely associated with all types of disease ( apart from haemato­ logical and renal ailments ) , whereas genes encoding channe l proteins are highly abundant in the OMIM data­ base ( FIG . 2 ; Supplementary information S4 ( figure ) ) . Our results also confirm the known involvement of Tyr kinases in cancer , as these genes are enriched in our analysis . One should keep in mind that although our disease survey is focused on adhesome genes , these genes may have other functions outside adhesion sites , which , when impaired , could lead to disease . Our analysis , however , provides a generic understanding of the kind of adhe­ some molecules that , when mutated , could cause specific diseases . From OMIM and GAD to disease models Disease models are valuable tools that enable us to understand the mechanisms underlying disease and to test possible therapeutic modalities . This approach is particularly powerful in cases in which gene mutations found in humans lead to a similar disease in mice , as discussed in this section . Models of haematological disorders . Mutations in ITGA2B and ITGB3 , which encode the two subunits of platelet integrin αIIbβ3 , lead to the bleeding disorder Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia 23 . Platelets containing this integrin mutation are unable to bind fibrinogen and therefore cannot aggregate . Gene mutations have been identified throughout the entire length of either integrin subunit , all of which lead to a non­functional protein 24 , 25 or , more commonly , an absence of or reduction in inte­ grin cell surface expression due to mRNA instability or aberrant trafficking through the secretory pathway 26 – 28 . In addition to Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia , a mutation in the gene encoding β3 integrin in humans has been associated with a range of cardiac and vascular dis orders , atherosclerosis , autism , an increased risk of fracture and several cancers ( Supplementary information S3 ( table ) ) . Mice deficient in β3 integrin show multi ple defects reflecting the human disorders , including a bleeding disorder that is similar to Glanzmann’s throm­ basthenia 29 , enhanced tumour angiogenesis 30 , 31 , cardiac hypertrophy and atherosclerosis 32 , 33 , cardiovascular defects 34 , age­dependent osteosclerosis 35 , 36 , increased re­epithelializatio n 37 and behavioural disorders 38 . The direct involvement of β3 integrin in vascular disorders is complicated by the compensatory upregulation of vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) receptor in its absence , which increases the sensitivity of cells to VEGF 30 . Certain mutations in the gene encoding β3 inte­ grin may abolish its ability to bind kindlin 3 ( also known as FERMT3 ) , which causes leukocyte adhesion deficiency type III ( LAD­III ) 24 ( see below ) . Gene mutations in ITGB2 ( encodes β2 integrin ) , which is restricted to the haematopoietic system , result in leukocyte adhesion deficiency type I ( LAD­I ) 39 – 41 . A non­functional integrin or a reduction or absence of its surface expression can be caused by gene muta­ tions . Despite marked neutrophilia , patients with LAD­I suffer from recurrent infections and impaired wound healing , due to the loss of function of all four leuko­ cyte integrins — αLβ2 integrin ( also known as LFA1 or CD11A / CD18 ) , αMβ2 integrin ( also known as MAC­1 or CD11B ) , αXβ2 integrin ( also known as CD11C ) and αDβ2 integrin ( also known as CD11D ) . Mice express­ ing a hypo morphic allele of β2 integrin have a reduced inflammatory response to chemically induced peritonitis A N A LY S I S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 279 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Myotendinous junction A specialized region located at the muscle – tendon interface that represents the primary site of force transmission . Intercalated discs Specialized cardiac muscle structures that join adjacent cardiomyocytes , mainly through adherens‑type junctions . Z‑line A region at the boundaries of muscle sarcomeres in which the actin filaments are anchored . It appears as a dark transverse line in electron micrographs . Intermediate filaments Cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins that polymerize into stable filaments of ~ 10 nm in diameter . Their ability to form very stable filaments enables them to confer mechanical strength to the cytoskeleton . and persistent skin inflammation but no evidence of chronic infection 42 , 43 , whereas mice carrying a complete deletion of β2 integrin mimic LAD­I more accurately 44 . In addition to a deficiency in neutrophil rolling , which is also seen in mice expressing the hypomor­ phic allele of β2 integrin , animals that carry a complete deletion of β2 integrin have deficiencies in T cell acti­ vation 44 , 45 or extravasation 46 , and also display aberrant B cell differentiation that results from an increase in interleukin­6 ( IL­6 ) production 47 . The source and rea­ son for an increase in IL­6 expression in β2 i ntegrin­null mice has not been determined . Reduced apoptosis in β2 integrin­null neutrophils in combination with its increased accumulation in the blood , due to a defect in extravasation , probably explains the neutrophilia observed in patients 48 . Furthermore , the delayed wound healing detected in patients with LAD­I may be due to the impaired differentiation of myofibroblasts , which are required for wound closure . Myofibroblast differ­ entiation is dependent on transforming growth factor­β ( TGFβ ) 49 , which is secreted from macrophages as they ingest neutrophils at the wound site 50 . In the absence of β2 integrin , not only are there fewer neutrophils present in the wound , but macrophages can no longer engulf cells or secrete TGFβ 51 . This defective signalling cas­ cade , which leads to prolonged healing times , illustrates that mutating components of the adhesome can have consequences beyond cell autonomous adhesion and signallin g defects . Owing to the restricted expression of kindlin 3 in the haematopoietic system and endothelium 52 , 53 , mutations in the FERMT3 gene that encodes this protein mani­ fest as haematopoietic disorders . FERMT3 mutations lead to the immune disorder LAD­III ( REF . 54 ) , which is characterized by excessive bleeding and frequent infections 55 – 57 . Moreover , some patients exhibit osteo­ petrosis 56 , 58 . Kindlin 3 is involved in the activation of β1 , β2 and β3 integrins , the activity of which is impaired in this disease 56 , 59 – 61 . Deficiency of kindlin 3 in mice causes a considerable bleeding defect , impaired leukocyte adhe­ sion and osteopetrosis owing to defective osteoclast func­ tion 59 , 60 , 62 . Erythrocytes from kindlin 3­null mice display cytoskeletal defects that lead to irregularly shaped cells , which to date have not been described in patients 63 . Models of muscular dystrophies . Although most instances of muscular dystrophies arise from gene mutations in ECM molecules or non­adhesome laminin receptors 64 , a mutation of the gene encoding α7 integri n , which is highly expressed in cardiac and skeletal muscl e , has been implicated in a muscular dystrophy in humans 65 . Likewise , deletion of α7 integrin in mice leads to a mus­ cular dystrophy phenotype 66 , 67 , in addition to vascular smooth muscle defects that have not been reported in humans 68 , possibly because the alterations found in humans are not as severe as those caused by the absence of the protein . As with other muscular dystrophies , dele­ tion of α7 integrin causes muscle degeneration that is characterized by centrally located nuclei and variable fibre size 66 . Detachment from the m yotendinous junctio n is also apparent , due to the inability to resist the force of muscle contraction . Interestingly , in mice that lack α7 integrin , the expression of α5 integrin , which is nor­ mally only expressed in embryonic muscle , persists into adulthood 67 . Although α7 integrin is also expressed in the heart , no defects in heart structure or function have been reported in knockout mice or humans with muta­ tions in the gene encoding α7 integrin . However , owing to their positioning between the ECM and actin cyto­ skeleton , changes in other adhesome components con­ tribute to defects in heart function ( see below ) . Talin 2 , which is mainly expressed in the heart , skeletal muscle and brain 69 , produces a mild muscular dystrophy when deleted in mice 70 , but no human disorde r has so far been reported to involve this molecule . Models of cardiovascular diseases . Mutations in the gene encoding metavinculin ( MV ) , a m uscle­specific splice variant of vinculin ( VCL ) that localizes to intercalated discs and the Z‑line 71 , have been associated with dilated cardiomyopathy ( DCM ) in humans 72 , 73 . Additionally , mutations in the gene that encodes VCL , which also affect its muscle specific splice variant MV , are linked to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy ( HCM ) 73 , 74 . In patients with HCM , VCL localization to intercalated discs was reduced , but it is not clear whether this was due to the mutation or to a secondary feature of the disease 75 . Although constitutive deletion of VCL is embryonic lethal 76 , mice that express a single Vcl allele showed ultrastructural defects and developed cardiomyopathy in response to increased haemodynamic load 77 . Mice that express a cardiac­specific deletion of VCL developed DCM , which is characterized by the dissolution of inter­ calated discs 78 . Interestingly , skeletal muscle weaknes s has not been reported in patients or mice with VCL mutations , which implies a specific cardiac phenotype . In addition to MV , alterations in the Z­line protein LIM domain­binding 3 ( LDB3 ; also known as cypher or ZASP ) 79 , are linked to DCM in humans 80 . In patients that carry mutations in LDB3 , peripheral muscle weak­ ness was also observed , which indicates that this pro­ tein also has a role in skeletal muscle 81 , 82 . Mice in which LDB3 is constitutively deleted exhibit severe myopathy , which confirms the role of this protein in muscle func­ tion 83 . A cardiac­specific ablation of LDB3 in mice leads to severe DCM and premature death before 23 weeks of age 84 ; conversely , mice that express a patient­relevant point mutation in Ldb3 ( S196L ) develop DCM at a slower rate , and therefore might be a useful model for LDB3­linked DCM in humans 85 . Models of skin blistering disorders . Dermatological dis­ eases that are caused by mutations in adhesome genes best highlight the need for cell adhesion in the main­ tenance of organismal homeostasis . The α6β4 integrin , which is encoded by ITGA6 and ITGB4 , is a component of hemidesmosomes — epithelial adhesion structures that interact with laminin 332 within the basement mem­ brane 86 ( FIG . 3a ) . In contrast to other integrins , which form connections with the actin cytoskeleton , α6β4 integrin connects the ECM to i ntermediate filament s 86 . Gene mutations in either of these integrin subunits A N A LY S I S 280 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved in humans leads to a blistering disorder called pyloric atresia associated with junctional epidermo lysis bullosa ( PA­JEB ) , which is characterized by the detachment of basal keratinocytes from the underlying basement mem­ brane ( reviewed in REF . 87 ; FIG . 3b ) . Complete ablation of the β4 or α6 subunit in mice leads to perinatal lethal­ ity with severe skin blistering , which is reminiscent of extreme cases of JEB 88 – 90 . Conditional , inducible deletion of α6 integrin from the mouse epidermis is tolerated , although it produces blistering , alopecia , inflamma­ tion and hyperproliferation of keratinocytes as seen in patients with JEB 91 , 92 ; mosaic deletion of β4 integrin results in blistering and inflammation in areas where it is absent 93 . Homozygous mutations in the gene encoding α3 inte­ grin have been identified in three patients with nephrotic syndrome , pulmonary disease and skin fragility , which resulted in death during infancy 94 , 95 . These findings are in agreement with the phenotype of mice lacking the α3 subunit , which manifests in lung and kidney mal­ formations due to aberrant branching morphogenesis 96 and a skin blistering phenotype 97 . However , blisters from mice and patients contain basement membrane deposits on both the dermal and epidermal sides of the bliste r , which suggests a role for α3 integrin in assem­ bling and remodelling the basement membrane , rather than in anchoring cells to it ; α6β4 integrins anchor cells to this site 98 . Kindler syndrome , which was first described by Theresa Kindler in 1954 ( REF . 99 ) , is caused by muta­ tions in the FERMT1 gene , which encodes kindlin 1 ( REFS 100 , 101 ) ( FIG . 3c ) . This disorder is characterized by skin blistering and atrophy in early life , which is fol­ lowed by poikiloderma and photosensitivity . It is the first skin disorder known to involve a defective actin – ECM linkage 100 . Studies in mice and kindlin 1­deficient keratinocytes have shown that the defect occurs at the level of the interaction between basal keratinocytes and the epidermal basement membrane , which is consistent with the role of kindlin 1 as an integrin activator 18 , 102 . Kindlin 1­deficient skin cells display a loss of polarity and proliferation , and increased apoptosis 102 . Kindlin 1 deficiency in keratinocytes also results in the partial loss of the epithelial pheno type , which underlines the importance of adhesome signalling in maintaining the differentiated state 103 . Intriguingly , patients with Kindler syndrome tend to have a higher incidence of skin cancer 104 . From these and other studies , it is clear that inherited gene mutations in adhesome components are a marked source of disease and disability . However , dysregulated functioning of signalling components and inappropriat e expression of adhesome molecules , independent of genetic mutation , is also an important contributor to disease . Altered functions of the adhesome Changes in the expression pattern and activity of adhesome components have been implicated in variou s diseases . As the physiological consequences of adhesome dysregulation on physiology are often spatiotemporally dependent , only a few animal mod­ els accurately reproduce the same disorders as seen in human patients . Furthermore , the involvement of adhesome­associated kinases and GTPases in disease progression has , in many cases , not been definitively proven to arise from adhesome­specific functions , and adhesion­independen t functions may also be involved . Aberrant expression of adhesome components . Changes in the expression levels of integrins and upregulation of integrins that are not normally expressed on qui­ escent cells are hallmarks of cancer . These changes enable cance r cells to acquire migratory and invasive propertie s , to alter their signalling profile and to survive in a foreign extracellular milieu that would normally trigger apoptosis in the untransformed cell . Moreover , the expression of certain integrins may enable tumour cells to acquire radioresistance 105 . Likewise , patho logical angiogenesis is characterized by the expression of inte­ grins such as αvβ3 on the tumour endothelium , which is absent on the quiescent endothelium 106 . The role of integrins in cancer and pathological angiogenesis is the subject of recent reviews 107 – 109 . The involvement of other adhesome components , including both scaffold­ ing and signalling molecules , in cancer and pathological angiogenesi s has also recently been discussed 110 – 114 . Specific growth factors have been shown to alter the expression of integrins in human chondrosarcoma cells . IL­8 and tumour necrosis factor ( TNF ) increased the transcription of the αv and β3 subunits , which was dependent on the transcription factors activator pro­ tein 1 ( AP1 ) and nuclear factor­κB ( NF­κB ) , respectively ; the α5 and β1 subunits are upregulated by insulin­ like growth factor 1 ( IGF1 ) in an NF­κB­dependent manne r 115 – 117 . The transcription factor ZEB2 ( zinc­finge r E­box binding homeobox 2 ; also known as SIP1 and ZFHX1B ) was shown to increase the transcription of α5 integrin in colorectal cancer cells , in cooperation with the transcription factor SP1 ( REF . 118 ) . The seemingly paradoxical effect of MYC overexpression on suppress­ ing invasion and metastasis has recently been explained by direct downregulation of the expression of αv , α5 , β1 , β3 and β5 integrins in several breast cancer cell lines and in retinal pigment epithelial cells , which is an establishe d model for MYC signalling 119 . MicroRNAs ( mi RNAs ) also regulate integrin expres­ sion in tumours . For example , loss of let­7a and over­ expression of miR­214 led to an increase in β3 and a decrease in α3 integrin , respectively , in malignant mela­ noma 120 , 121 . miR­31 , which is downregulated in many cancers , was shown to regulate the expression of α2 , α5 , αv and β3 integrins 122 . Downregulation of miR­124a in glioblastoma increased the expression of β1 integrin and correlated with increased migration and invasion , and decreased survival 123 . As dysregulated miRNA expression is a hallmark of cancer , direct examination will surely uncover many more examples of integrin regulation by this family of non­coding RNAs . Taken together , the expression profile of integrins on tumour cells is con­ trolled by a complex interplay of growth factor signalling , transcription factor expression and miRNA regulation . A N A LY S I S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 281 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Basement membrane Hemidesmosome Focal contact BP180 Cytokeratin 5 and cytokeratin 14 α β α β Tight junction Adherensjunction Gap junction Cellmembrane Desmosome FAK Talin Integrins α 3 β 1 and α 2 β 1 Integrin α 6 β 4 Kindlin Actin BP230 Plectin • Polarity • Proliferation • Survival Proliferation Laminin 511 Laminin 332 Hemidesmosome Focal contact Collagen IV Collagen IV Hemidesmosome Focal contact BP180 Cytokeratin 5 and cytokeratin 14 α β α β Integrins α 3 β 1 and α 2 β 1 Integrin α 6 β 4 BP230 Plectin Laminin 332 Collagen IV a b c Tight junction Adherensjunction Gap junction Desmosome α β Laminin 511 FAK Talin Integrins α 3 β 1 and α 2 β 1 Kindlin Actin Tight junction Adherensjunction Gap junction Desmosome Stratumcorneum Stratum granulosum Stratum spinosum Stratumbasale Figure 3 | Adhesome - related skin blistering disorders : junctional epidermolysis bullosa and Kindler syndrome . a | Normal epidermis architecture . The epidermis is a stratified epithelium that consists of four distinct layers of keratinocytes ( left panel ) . Only keratinocytes in the stratum basale are in contact with the basement membrane , to which they adhere to through focal contacts that contain α 3 β 1 and α 2 β 1 integrins and hemidesmosomes that contain α 6 β 4 integrin ( right panel ) . Focal contacts link laminin 511 and type IV collagen to the actin cytoskeleton through talin and other actin - binding adhesome components ( not shown ) ; conversely , hemidesmosomes link laminin 332 to cytokeratin 5 and cytokeratin 14 through the structural molecules plectin and bullous pemphigoid 230 ( BP230 ) . BP180 binds to plectin , BP230 and β 4 integrin , and is an essential component of the hemidesmosome . In addition to structural functions , signalling from focal contacts ( for example , through focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) ) contributes to proliferation , survival and the establishment of cell polarity ; signalling from hemidesmosomes is important for proliferation . Cell – cell adhesions through tight junctions , adherens junctions , desmosomes and gap junctions are not considered in this article . b | In junctional epidermolysis bullosa ( JEB ) , mutation in the genes encoding either α 6 or β 4 integrin results in the loss of integrin expression at the cell surface and the absence of hemidesmosomes . Although focal contacts are intact , cells lose contact with the basement membrane , and the hyperproliferation of basal keratinocytes that follows leads to thickening of the epidermis . Although the underlying basis for hyperproliferation is unknown , it may be a secondary effect of inflammatory cell infiltration , as genetic deletion of ITGB4 ( which encodes β 4 integrin ) in mice normally results in hypoproliferation 184 . Despite detachment of the epidermis from the basement membrane , the architecture of the basement membrane seems normal . c | In Kindler syndrome , mutations in the gene encoding kindlin 1 prevent the activation of β 1 - containing integrins , which leads to the detachment of the epidermis from the basement membrane . The structure of the basement membrane is disrupted as basal keratinocytes are unable to remodel it . In the absence of signalling from focal contacts , keratinocytes display a lack of polarity , decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis ( orange cells ) , which leads to thinner and more fragile skin . Although increased apoptosis is a hallmark of the human disease , it is not observed in kindlin 1 - null mice . Disease progression leads to the thickening of the stratum corneum and hyperpigmentation . A N A LY S I S 282 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis ( FSGS ) . A kidney disease that is characterized by gradual disintegration of the glomerular filtration units as a result of a loss of attachment between podocytes and the glomerular basement membrane . Podocytes Cells in the kidney that have a crucial function in the filtration of solutes in the blood to form urine . Furthermore , altered expression of adhesome com­ ponents has been shown to assist in the development of pathological cardiac hypertrophy and focal segmenta l glomerulosclerosis ( FSGS ) . Left ventricular hyper trophy is a compensatory mechanism in response to volume or pressure overload from hypertension or aortic insufficiency . In human biopsy samples , increased expression of integrin­linked kinase ( ILK ) and focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) has been detected 124 , 125 . These molecules probably directly contribute to hypertrophy , as cardiomyocyte­specific transgenic overexpression of ILK in mice phenocopies the human disease 124 , and a siRNA­mediated reduction in FAK expression in vivo attenuates hypertrophy in a mouse model of volume overload 126 . ILK may cause hypertrophy by inducing cardiomyocyte proliferation 127 , 128 , whereas FAK over­ expression is mainly detected in cardiac fibroblasts 125 , and it is possible that these cells may be in the process of differentiating into myofibroblasts 129 . The role of FAK in cardiac hypertrophy seems to be complicated : one study demonstrated that the deletion of FAK in cardiomyocytes prevents hypertrophy 130 , whereas another study showed that hypertrophy was promoted in the absence of FAK 131 . One reason behind the discrepancy may be the age of the organism at which maximal FAK deletion was detected . In the study in which loss of FAK was protective , FAK remained detectable for three months , whereas in the study in which FAK loss promoted hypertrophy , FAK protein was undetectable two weeks after birth . These studies point to a potentially protective role of FAK during the early stages of life , perhaps by regulating the growth or functio n of the heart when the organism is young . FSGS is a progressive renal disease in which the inti­ mate contacts between podocytes and capillaries are lost , in a process known as foot process effacement ( FIG . 4 ) . Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton by RHO­family GTPases ( mainly RHOA , RAC1 and CDC42 ) must be tightly controlled to maintain the delicate foot process . Mouse models showed that disrupting the balance of RHO GTPase activity leads to changes in the actin cytoskeleton and establishment of FSGS in mice 132 , 133 . Recently , a mutation in an adhesome­associated RACGAP gene , ARHGAP24 ( encoding RHOGAP24 ; also known as FILGAP and p73 RHOGAP ) , was identified in humans , establishing RHO GTPase dysregulation as an important mediator of FSGS 133 . The ILK – PINCH ( particularly interesting new Cys­ His ; also known as LIMS1 ) – parvin complex may also be important in podocyte function through its role as an integrin adaptor and a GTPase regulating protein complex 134 – 136 . Biopsy material from patients with FSGS show increased ILK expression 137 , and cultured podo­ cytes show an increase in ILK­related activity when they are exposed to plasma from patients with FSGS 138 . This intriguing finding may help to explain the high rate of recurrent FSGS ( 20 – 30 % ) in patients that receive kidney transplants 139 . In mouse models , the actin adap­ tors tensi n 1 ( TNS1 ) and TNS2 have been implicated in FSGS , but so far no involvement for these proteins in human disease has been reported 140 , 141 . Adhesome - associated infectious diseases . Viruses have developed a number of strategies to infect cells through the involvement of integrins and other adhesome pro­ teins . Although the adhesome is not considered dys­ regulated in this case , a large number of viruses and bacteria exploit integrins to facilitate cell attachment and uptake ( Supplementary information S5 and S6 ( tables ) ) . Integrins that contain αv subunits seem to be favoured by many viruses , accounting for 50 % of described virus – integrin interactions , and whereas αvβ3 integrin recognizes RGD ( Arg­Gly­Asp ) ­ containing ligands , some viruses can bind to this inte­ grin in the absence of an RGD sequence 142 – 144 . In some cases , binding to integrins promotes the cellular uptake of the virus . Kaposi’s sarcoma­associated herpes virus ( KSHV ) , which binds to α3β1 , αvβ5 and αvβ3 integ­ rins , requires the activation of FAK or the FAK­related kinase Pro­rich Tyr kinase 2 ( PYK2 ; also known as PTK2B ) to enter cells , implicating adhesome signal­ ling in virus uptake 145 . Human echo­viru s 1 ( EV1 ) prefers to bind the inactive form of α2β1 integrin , such that signalling pathways specific for ‘activated integrins’ are not involved in its uptake . However , EV1 promotes α2β1 integrin clustering and the acti­ vation of protein kinase Cα ( PKCα ) , both of which are required for viral entry 146 , 147 . In the case of human cytomegalo virus ( HCMV ) , αvβ3 integrin functions as a co­receptor , together with epidermal growth fac­ tor receptor ( EGFR ) , to promote viral uptake by a mechanism dependent on PI3K and SRC activity 148 . Likewise , adenovirus requires the involvement of αvβ3 and αvβ5 integrins to facilitate cell entry through RAC1­mediated reorganization of the actin cytoskel­ eton downstream of PI3K , but neither of these integrins is required for cell attachment ; they functio n only as co­receptors in this case 149 – 152 . Bacteria exploit integrins by directly interacting with them or by binding to the ECM and attaching to cells indirectly 153 , 154 . In contrast to viruses , bacteria show a marked preference for interacting with their hosts through β1 integrins . The reasons for this are unclear , but may be due to the increased resistance to force that β1 integrins exhibit as compared to β3 inte­ grins , which may be important for bacterial uptake 155 . The molecular mechanisms by which bacteria enter cells differ in their details , but all require the manipu­ lation of adhesome components , which results in the dynamic reorganization of the cytoskeleton . The bind­ ing of Staphylococcus aureus to α5β1 integrin stimu­ lates the cytosolic assembly of a fibrillar adhesion­like adhesion , and subsequently the internalization of this bacterium in a FAK­ and cortactin­dependent pro­ cess 156 . Large membrane invaginations were observed around sites of cell attachment , which seemed to be involved in the engulfment process 154 . The molecular details of how these invaginations form are not known but may involve cortactin­mediated regulation of the actin­nucleating actin­related protein 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex 157 . Similar involvement of FAK – SRC signal­ ling and cortactin has been observed in the invasion of Neisseria meningitidis 158 and Shigella spp . 159 . A N A LY S I S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 283 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Foot process Slit diaphragm Podocyte RHOGAP24 α β IPP α β Coﬁlin RAC ↓ CDC42 ↓ RAC ↑ CDC42 ↑ Actin GBM TESK1 α PIX RHOGAP24 NADPHoxidase α β IPP α β RAC ↓ CDC42 ↓ ↑ RAC ↑ CDC42 ↑ RAC ↑↑ CDC42 ↑↑ Actin Sclerosis and ﬁbrosis TESK1 α PIX α PIX ROS GBM Fenestratedendothelium a b P P Coﬁlin A combination of gene knockout , siRNA knock­ down and dominant­negative gene expression has ena­ bled the dissection of the molecular mechanism that underlies Campylobacter jejuni cell invasion . It was revealed that β1 integrin­mediated cell attachment causes the activation of FAK , which leads to the activa­ tion of the RAC GEFs dedicator of cytokinesis protein 1 ( DOCK1 , also known as DOCK180 ) and T lymphoma invasion and metastasis­inducing 1 ( TIAM1 ) , and subsequently RAC­mediated actin rearrangements 160 . In addition , downregulation of ILK expression or activ­ ity was shown to impair the invasion of Staphylococcus pyogenes , S . aureus and Yersinia spp . 161 . The mechanism behind this inhibition is unknown but may involve the prevention of actin rearrangements induced by the ILK – PINCH – Parvin signalling complex 134 . The host defence against bacterial infection involves the rapid shedding of infected epithelia before it can cause severe pathology . Not surprisingly , bacteria have evolved mechanisms to overcome this host defence . Intracellular Shigella spp . secrete a virulence factor , outer surface pro­ tein E ( OspE ) , which has recently been shown to bind ILK and to stabilize its association with the cell mem­ brane 162 . The OspE – ILK complex increased the surface expression and activation of β1 integrin , which reduces cell detachment . As OspE is conserved across many pathogenic bacteria , blocking epithelial exfoliation by strengthening cell adhesion may be a general mechanism by which many bacteria evade this host defence . Neisseria gonorrhoeae adopt a different strategy to prevent epithelial shedding . Through binding carcino­ embryonic antigen­related cell adhesion molecules Figure 4 | Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis . Efficient blood filtration is dependent on intimate contacts between glomerular capillaries and podocytes . Glomerular capillaries are composed of a specialized fenestrated endothelium , which allows the passage of fluids and proteins but not blood cells , and a glomerular basement membrane ( GBM ) . Podocytes bind to the GBM and encapsulate the capillary in a dense network of interdigitating foot processes , between which are slit diaphragms that permit the filtration of small solutes while preventing the loss of large proteins . a | In the normal kidney , the formation and maintenance of foot processes are dependent on balancing actin cytoskeleton dynamics by regulating the activity of the RHO GTPases CDC42 and RAC . The integrin - linked kinase ( ILK ) – PINCH ( particularly interesting new Cys - His ) – parvin ( IPP ) complex promotes the activity of CDC42 and RAC through the guanine nucleotide exchange factor PAK - interacting exchange factor - α ( α PIX ) , which binds to α - parvin . Actin may also be regulated through the phosphorylation of cofilin through the Ser / Thr kinase testis - specific kinase 1 ( TESK1 ) , which also interacts with α - parvin . The GTPase activating protein ( GAP ) RHOGAP24 , which localizes to the adhesome by binding the integrin - and actin - binding protein filamin ( not shown ) , downregulates CDC42 and RAC activity . b | Impaired actin regulation within the podocyte leads to focal segmental glomerulosclerosis ( FSGS ) , which is characterized by the effacement of foot processes and loss of the filtration barrier . Dysregulation of matrix deposition and remodelling , together with the production of reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) by RAC - mediated activation of NADPH oxidase , leads to progressive sclerosis and fibrosis of the capillary basement membrane . Mutations in the GAP domain of ARHGAP24 ( the gene encoding RHOGAP24 ) have been identified in humans with FSGS , which suggests that a failure to downregulate RHO GTPase activity contributes to this disease . Patients with FSGS frequently display increased ILK expression , which may lead to the enhanced activation of CDC42 and RAC with the concomitant dysregulation of actin dynamics . In mice , genetic deletion of IPP components in the podocyte also leads to progressive FSGS . The observation that alterations in molecules that both positively and negatively regulate the activity of RHO GTPases lead to the same outcome highlights the importance of maintaining a fine balance of GTPase activity to retain the delicate structure of the podocyte foot process . A N A LY S I S 284 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ( CEACAMs ) they increase the expression of cluster of differentiation 105 ( CD105 ; also known as endog­ lin ) , a member of the TGFβ1 receptor family 163 . CD105 sequesters zyxin away from integrin attachments , in which CD105 functions as a negative regulator of adhesio n , thus increasing integrin activation 164 , 165 . The adhesome as a therapeutic target As changes in the adhesome are highly represented in human disease , interventions targeting adhesome com­ ponents represent a potentially important therapeutic approach . Due to their surface exposure , compounds tar­ geting integrins are the most developed . Currently , five integrin targeting drugs have been applied in the clinic 166 . These include the antibody natalizumab ( Tysabri ; Biogen Idec / Élan ) , which targets α4 integrin and is used to treat multiple sclerosis and Crohn’s disease 167 , 168 ; the antibody efalizumab ( Raptiva ; Genentech / Merck Serono ) , which is directed against αLβ2 integrin 169 ; and abciximab ( ReoPro ; Janssen Biologics BV / Eli Lilly ) , a Fab fragment ( fragment antigen­binding ) that targets β3 integrin and is used to counter platelet activation in coronary disease and ischaemia 170 . Moreover , eptifibatide ( Integrilin ; Millennium Pharmaceuticals / Schering­Plough ) and tirofiban ( Aggrastat ; Medicure Pharma ) , two small­ molecule integrin antagonists , are in use to treat un stable angina 170 . Natalizumab and efalizumab have been linked to occurrences of progressive multi focal leuko­ encephalopathy ( PML ) , an opportunistic viral infection . As a result , efalizumab was withdrawn from the market in 2009 and natalizumab was withdrawn temporarily before its use was reapproved in 2010 . In addition to these existing integrin antagonists , there are at least 260 additional compounds currently in clinical trials 166 . Among the most promising of these are vedolizumab ( Entyvio ; Millennium Pharmaceuticals ) , an antibody against α4β7 integrin that to date has not been shown to cause PML and could be used to replace natalizumab in the treatment of Crohn’s disease 171 and multiple sclerosis ; and cilengitide ( Impetreve ; Merck ) , a small­molecule that targets αv integrins and is currently in a Phase III clinical trial for glioblastoma treatment and in Phase II trials for other cancers 172 . Conclusions There is ample evidence that components of the integrin adhesome have crucial roles in cell and tissue physiol­ ogy ; hence , gene mutations in key adhesome compo­ nents can induce a disease state . This idea is clearly seen in the monogenetic diseases identified in the OMIM database . For genetically associated genes , the correla­ tion between gene malfunction and the disease itself is far more complex . Further studies are needed to under­ stand the gene – disease connection and the molecular mechanisms underlying the disease state . Our analysis highlights the central role of the adhesome in cancer . It is clear that the adhesive and migratory ability of cancer cells is essential for disease development and should be therapeutically targeted . By combining novel insights obtained in siRNA screens for genes encoding protein products that have a role in adhesion and migration 13 , 15 with relevant animal mod­ els , it is likely that new information on adhesome genes that are involved in cancer development and metas­ tasis will become available . Moreover , our knowledge of adhesome function can help to identify therapeutic targets in signalling pathways known to be important to disease development . It is noteworthy that the identifi­ cation of new disease­related gene mutations in adhe­ some components can also clarify our understanding of the physiological functions of the adhesome in healthy cells and tissues . 1 . Geiger , B . , Bershadsky , A . , Pankov , R . & Yamada , K . M . Transmembrane crosstalk between the extracellular matrix – cytoskeleton crosstalk . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 793 – 805 ( 2001 ) . 2 . Hynes , R . O . Integrins : versatility , modulation , and signaling in cell adhesion . Cell 69 , 11 – 25 ( 1992 ) . 3 . Zaidel‑Bar , R . , Itzkovitz , S . , Ma’ayan , A . , Iyengar , R . & Geiger , B . Functional atlas of the integrin adhesome . Nature Cell Biol . 9 , 858 – 867 ( 2007 ) . 4 . Zaidel‑Bar , R . & Geiger , B . The switchable integrin adhesome . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 1385 – 1388 ( 2010 ) . 5 . Geiger , B . & Yamada , K . M . Molecular architecture and function of matrix adhesions . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 , a0050 ( 2011 ) . 6 . Geiger , B . , Spatz , J . P . & Bershadsky , A . D . Environmental sensing through focal adhesions . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 21 – 33 ( 2009 ) . 7 . Schiller , H . B . et al . beta1‑ and alphav‑class integrins cooperate to regulate myosin II during rigidity sensing of fibronectin‑based microenvironments . Nature Cell Biol . 15 , 625 – 636 ( 2013 ) . 8 . Zamir , E . , Geiger , B . & Kam , Z . Quantitative multicolor compositional imaging resolves molecular domains in cell – matrix adhesions . PLoS ONE 3 , e1901 ( 2008 ) . 9 . Byron , A . , Humphries , J . D . , Bass , M . D . , Knight , D . & Humphries , M . J . Proteomic analysis of integrin adhesion complexes . Sci . Signal 4 , pt2 ( 2011 ) . 10 . Schiller , H . B . , Friedel , C . C . , Boulegue , C . & Fassler , R . Quantitative proteomics of the integrin adhesome show a myosin II‑dependent recruitment of LIM domain proteins . EMBO Rep . 12 , 259 – 266 ( 2011 ) . 11 . Kuo , J . C . et al . Analysis of the myosin‑II‑responsive focal adhesion proteome reveals a role for β ‑Pix in negative regulation of focal adhesion maturation . Nature Cell Biol . 13 , 383 – 393 ( 2011 ) . 12 . Geiger , T . & Zaidel‑Bar , R . Opening the floodgates : proteomics and the integrin adhesome . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 24 , 562 – 568 ( 2012 ) . 13 . Winograd‑Katz , S . E . , Itzkovitz , S . , Kam , Z . & Geiger , B . Multiparametric analysis of focal adhesion formation by RNAi‑mediated gene knockdown . J . Cell Biol . 186 , 423 – 436 ( 2009 ) . 14 . Bollinger , M . et al . Tailoring of integrin ligands : probing the charge capability of the metal ion‑ dependent adhesion site . J . Med . Chem . 55 , 871 – 882 ( 2012 ) . 15 . Simpson , K . J . et al . Identification of genes that regulate epithelial cell migration using an siRNA screening approach . Nature Cell Biol . 10 , 1027 – 1038 ( 2008 ) . 16 . Brakebusch , C . , Bouvard , D . , Stanchi , F . , Sakai , T . & Fassler , R . Integrins in invasive growth . J . Clin . Invest . 109 , 999 – 1006 ( 2002 ) . 17 . Moffat , J . et al . A lentiviral RNAi library for human and mouse genes applied to an arrayed viral high‑ content screen . Cell 124 , 1283 – 1298 ( 2006 ) . 18 . Ussar , S . et al . Loss of Kindlin‑1 causes skin atrophy and lethal neonatal intestinal epithelial dysfunction . PLoS Genet . 4 , e1000289 ( 2008 ) . 19 . Becker , K . G . , Barnes , K . C . , Bright , T . J . & Wang , S . A . The genetic association database . Nature Genet . 36 , 431 – 432 ( 2004 ) . 20 . Hauser , W . et al . Megakaryocyte hyperplasia and enhanced agonist‑induced platelet activation in vasodilator‑stimulated phosphoprotein knockout mice . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 8120 – 8125 ( 1999 ) . 21 . Gurniak , C . B . , Perlas , E . & Witke , W . The actin depolymerizing factor n‑cofilin is essential for neural tube morphogenesis and neural crest cell migration . Dev . Biol . 278 , 231 – 241 ( 2005 ) . 22 . Zhang , Y . et al . Systematic analysis , comparison , and integration of disease based human genetic association data and mouse genetic phenotypic information . BMC Med . Genom . 3 , 1 ( 2010 ) . 23 . Nurden , A . T . , Fiore , M . , Nurden , P . & Pillois , X . Glanzmann thrombasthenia : a review of ITGA2B and ITGB3 defects with emphasis on variants , phenotypic variability , and mouse models . Blood 118 , 5996 – 6005 ( 2011 ) . 24 . Chen , Y . P . et al . Ser‑752‑‑ > Pro mutation in the cytoplasmic domain of integrin β 3 subunit and defective activation of platelet integrin α IIb β 3 ( glycoprotein IIb‑IIIa ) in a variant of Glanzmann thrombasthenia . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 89 , 10169 – 10173 ( 1992 ) . 25 . Wang , R . , Shattil , S . J . , Ambruso , D . R . & Newman , P . J . Truncation of the cytoplasmic domain of β 3 in a variant form of Glanzmann thrombasthenia abrogates signaling through the integrin α IIb β 3 complex . J . Clin . Invest . 100 , 2393 – 2403 ( 1997 ) . 26 . Wilcox , D . A . , Wautier , J . L . , Pidard , D . & Newman , P . J . A single amino acid substitution flanking the fourth calcium binding domain of α IIb prevents maturation of the α IIb β 3 integrin complex . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 4450 – 4457 ( 1994 ) . Fab fragment ( Fragment antigen‑binding ) . The antigen‑binding portion of an antibody , which consists of the light chain and the heavy chain before the hinge region . A N A LY S I S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 285 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 27 . Gonzalez‑Manchon , C . et al . A novel homozygous splice junction mutation in GPIIb associated with alternative splicing , nonsense‑mediated decay of GPIIb‑mRNA , and type II Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia . J . Thromb . Haemost . 1 , 1071 – 1078 ( 2003 ) . 28 . Nelson , E . J . et al . Three novel β ‑propeller mutations causing Glanzmann thrombasthenia result in production of normally stable pro‑ α IIb , but variably impaired progression of pro‑ α IIb β 3 from endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi . J . Thromb . Haemost . 3 , 2773 – 2783 ( 2005 ) . 29 . Hodivala‑Dilke , K . M . et al . β 3 ‑integrin‑deficient mice are a model for Glanzmann thrombasthenia showing placental defects and reduced survival . J . Clin . Invest . 103 , 229 – 238 ( 1999 ) . 30 . Reynolds , L . E . et al . Enhanced pathological angiogenesis in mice lacking β 3 integrin or β 3 and β 5 integrins . Nature Med . 8 , 27 – 34 ( 2002 ) . 31 . Reynolds , A . R . et al . Elevated Flk1 ( vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 ) signaling mediates enhanced angiogenesis in β 3 ‑integrin‑ deficient mice . Cancer Res . 64 , 8643 – 8650 ( 2004 ) . 32 . Weng , S . et al . β 3 integrin deficiency promotes atherosclerosis and pulmonary inflammation in high‑ fat‑fed , hyperlipidemic mice . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 6730 – 6735 ( 2003 ) . 33 . Ren , J . et al . β 3 integrin deficiency promotes cardiac hypertrophy and inflammation . J . Mol . Cell Cardiol 42 , 367 – 377 ( 2007 ) . 34 . Weis , S . M . et al . Cooperation between VEGF and β 3 integrin during cardiac vascular development . Blood 109 , 1962 – 1970 ( 2007 ) . 35 . McHugh , K . P . et al . Mice lacking β 3 integrins are osteosclerotic because of dysfunctional osteoclasts . J . Clin . Invest . 105 , 433 – 440 ( 2000 ) . 36 . Feng , X . et al . A Glanzmann’s mutation in β 3 integrin specifically impairs osteoclast function . J . Clin . Invest . 107 , 1137 – 1144 ( 2001 ) . 37 . Reynolds , L . E . et al . Accelerated re‑epithelialization in β 3 ‑integrin‑deficient‑ mice is associated with enhanced TGF‑ β 1 signaling . Nature Med . 11 , 167 – 174 ( 2005 ) . 38 . Carter , M . D . et al . Absence of preference for social novelty and increased grooming in integrin β 3 knockout mice : initial studies and future directions . Autism Res . 4 , 57 – 67 ( 2011 ) . 39 . Anderson , D . C . & Springer , T . A . Leukocyte adhesion deficiency : an inherited defect in the Mac‑1 , LFA‑1 , and p150 , 95 glycoproteins . Annu . Rev . Med . 38 , 175 – 194 ( 1987 ) . 40 . Kishimoto , T . K . , Hollander , N . , Roberts , T . M . , Anderson , D . C . & Springer , T . A . Heterogeneous mutations in the β subunit common to the LFA‑1 , Mac‑1 , and p150 , 95 glycoproteins cause leukocyte adhesion deficiency . Cell 50 , 193 – 202 ( 1987 ) . 41 . Kuijpers , T . W . et al . Leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 1 ( LAD‑1 ) / variant . A novel immunodeficiency syndrome characterized by dysfunctional β 2 integrins . J . Clin . Invest . 100 , 1725 – 1733 ( 1997 ) . 42 . Wilson , R . W . et al . Gene targeting yields a CD18‑mutant mouse for study of inflammation . J . Immunol . 151 , 1571 – 1578 ( 1993 ) . 43 . Bullard , D . C . et al . A polygenic mouse model of psoriasiform skin disease in CD18‑deficient mice . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 2116 – 2121 ( 1996 ) . 44 . Scharffetter‑Kochanek , K . et al . Spontaneous skin ulceration and defective T cell function in CD18 null mice . J . Exp . Med . 188 , 119 – 131 ( 1998 ) . 45 . Oreshkova , T . et al . β 2 integrin deficiency yields unconventional double‑negative T cells distinct from mature classical natural killer T cells in mice . Immunology 128 , 271 – 286 ( 2009 ) . 46 . Grabbe , S . et al . β 2 integrins are required for skin homing of primed T cells but not for priming naive T cells . J . Clin . Invest . 109 , 183 – 192 ( 2002 ) . 47 . Peters , T . et al . Terminal B cell differentiation is skewed by deregulated interleukin‑6 secretion in β 2 integrin‑deficient mice . J . Leukoc . Biol . 80 , 599 – 607 ( 2006 ) . 48 . Weinmann , P . , Scharffetter‑Kochanek , K . , Forlow , S . B . , Peters , T . & Walzog , B . A role for apoptosis in the control of neutrophil homeostasis in the circulation : insights from CD18‑deficient mice . Blood 101 , 739 – 746 ( 2003 ) . 49 . Desmouliere , A . , Geinoz , A . , Gabbiani , F . & Gabbiani , G . Transforming growth factor‑ β 1 induces α ‑smooth muscle actin expression in granulation tissue myofibroblasts and in quiescent and growing cultured fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 103 – 111 ( 1993 ) . 50 . Werner , S . & Grose , R . Regulation of wound healing by growth factors and cytokines . Physiol . Rev . 83 , 835 – 870 ( 2003 ) . 51 . Peters , T . et al . Wound‑healing defect of CD18 – / – mice due to a decrease in TGF‑ β 1 and myofibroblast differentiation . EMBO J . 24 , 3400 – 3410 ( 2005 ) . 52 . Ussar , S . , Wang , H . V . , Linder , S . , Fassler , R . & Moser , M . The Kindlins : subcellular localization and expression during murine development . Exp . Cell Res . 312 , 3142 – 3151 ( 2006 ) . 53 . Bialkowska , K . et al . The integrin co‑activator Kindlin‑3 is expressed and functional in a non‑hematopoietic cell , the endothelial cell . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 18640 – 18649 ( 2010 ) . 54 . Alon , R . & Etzioni , A . LAD‑III , a novel group of leukocyte integrin activation deficiencies . Trends Immunol . 24 , 561 – 566 ( 2003 ) . 55 . Kuijpers , T . W . et al . LAD‑1 / variant syndrome is caused by mutations in FERMT3 . Blood 113 , 4740 – 4746 ( 2009 ) . 56 . Malinin , N . L . et al . A point mutation in KINDLIN3 ablates activation of three integrin subfamilies in humans . Nature Med . 15 , 313 – 318 ( 2009 ) . 57 . Svensson , L . et al . Leukocyte adhesion deficiency‑III is caused by mutations in KINDLIN3 affecting integrin activation . Nature Med . 15 , 306 – 312 ( 2009 ) . 58 . Sabnis , H . et al . Leukocyte adhesion deficiency‑III in an African‑American patient . Pediatr . Blood Cancer 55 , 180 – 182 ( 2010 ) . 59 . Moser , M . , Nieswandt , B . , Ussar , S . , Pozgajova , M . & Fassler , R . Kindlin‑3 is essential for integrin activation and platelet aggregation . Nature Med . 14 , 325 – 330 ( 2008 ) . 60 . Schmidt , S . et al . Kindlin‑3‑mediated signaling from multiple integrin classes is required for osteoclast‑ mediated bone resorption . J . Cell Biol . 192 , 883 – 897 ( 2011 ) . 61 . Alon , R . et al . A novel genetic leukocyte adhesion deficiency in subsecond triggering of integrin avidity by endothelial chemokines results in impaired leukocyte arrest on vascular endothelium under shear flow . Blood 101 , 4437 – 4445 ( 2003 ) . 62 . Moser , M . et al . Kindlin‑3 is required for β 2 integrin‑ mediated leukocyte adhesion to endothelial cells . Nature Med . 15 , 300 – 305 ( 2009 ) . 63 . Kruger , M . et al . SILAC mouse for quantitative proteomics uncovers kindlin‑3 as an essential factor for red blood cell function . Cell 134 , 353 – 364 ( 2008 ) . 64 . Mercuri , E . & Muntoni , F . The ever‑expanding spectrum of congenital muscular dystrophies . Ann . Neurol . 72 , 9 – 17 ( 2012 ) . 65 . Hayashi , Y . K . et al . Mutations in the integrin alpha7 gene cause congenital myopathy . Nature Genet . 19 , 94 – 97 ( 1998 ) . 66 . Mayer , U . et al . Absence of integrin alpha 7 causes a novel form of muscular dystrophy . Nature Genet . 17 , 318 – 323 ( 1997 ) . 67 . Nawrotzki , R . , Willem , M . , Miosge , N . , Brinkmeier , H . & Mayer , U . Defective integrin switch and matrix composition at alpha 7‑deficient myotendinous junctions precede the onset of muscular dystrophy in mice . Hum . Mol . Genet . 12 , 483 – 495 ( 2003 ) . 68 . Flintoff‑Dye , N . L . et al . Role for the α 7 β 1 integrin in vascular development and integrity . Dev . Dyn . 234 , 11 – 21 ( 2005 ) . 69 . Monkley , S . J . , Pritchard , C . A . & Critchley , D . R . Analysis of the mammalian talin2 gene TLN2 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 286 , 880 – 885 ( 2001 ) . 70 . Debrand , E . et al . Mice carrying a complete deletion of the talin2 coding sequence are viable and fertile . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 426 , 190 – 195 ( 2012 ) . 71 . Belkin , A . M . , Ornatsky , O . I . , Glukhova , M . A . & Koteliansky , V . E . Immunolocalization of meta‑vinculin in human smooth and cardiac muscles . J . Cell Biol . 107 , 545 – 553 ( 1988 ) . 72 . Olson , T . M . et al . Metavinculin mutations alter actin interaction in dilated cardiomyopathy . Circulation 105 , 431 – 437 ( 2002 ) . 73 . Vasile , V . C . et al . Identification of a metavinculin missense mutation , R975W , associated with both hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy . Mol . Genet . Metab . 87 , 169 – 174 ( 2006 ) . 74 . Vasile , V . C . , Ommen , S . R . , Edwards , W . D . & Ackerman , M . J . A missense mutation in a ubiquitously expressed protein , vinculin , confers susceptibility to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 345 , 998 – 1003 ( 2006 ) . 75 . Vasile , V . C . , Edwards , W . D . , Ommen , S . R . & Ackerman , M . J . Obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is associated with reduced expression of vinculin in the intercalated disc . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 349 , 709 – 715 ( 2006 ) . 76 . Xu , W . , Baribault , H . & Adamson , E . D . Vinculin knockout results in heart and brain defects during embryonic development . Development 125 , 327 – 337 ( 1998 ) . 77 . Zemljic‑Harpf , A . E . et al . Heterozygous inactivation of the vinculin gene predisposes to stress‑induced cardiomyopathy . Am . J . Pathol . 165 , 1033 – 1044 ( 2004 ) . 78 . Zemljic‑Harpf , A . E . et al . Cardiac‑myocyte‑specific excision of the vinculin gene disrupts cellular junctions , causing sudden death or dilated cardiomyopathy . Mol . Cell . Biol . 27 , 7522 – 7537 ( 2007 ) . 79 . Faulkner , G . et al . ZASP : a new Z‑band alternatively spliced PDZ‑motif protein . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 465 – 475 ( 1999 ) . 80 . Vatta , M . et al . Mutations in Cypher / ZASP in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and left ventricular non‑ compaction . J . Am . Coll . Cardiol 42 , 2014 – 2027 ( 2003 ) . 81 . Selcen , D . & Engel , A . G . Mutations in ZASP define a novel form of muscular dystrophy in humans . Ann . Neurol . 57 , 269 – 276 ( 2005 ) . 82 . Strach , K . et al . ZASPopathy with childhood‑onset distal myopathy . J . Neurol . 259 , 1494 – 1496 ( 2012 ) . 83 . Zhou , Q . et al . Ablation of Cypher , a PDZ‑LIM domain Z‑line protein , causes a severe form of congenital myopathy . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 605 – 612 ( 2001 ) . 84 . Zheng , M . et al . Cardiac‑specific ablation of Cypher leads to a severe form of dilated cardiomyopathy with premature death . Hum . Mol . Genet . 18 , 701 – 713 ( 2009 ) . 85 . Li , Z . et al . A ZASP missense mutation , S196L , leads to cytoskeletal and electrical abnormalities in a mouse model of cardiomyopathy . Circ . Arrhythm . Electrophysiol . 3 , 646 – 656 ( 2010 ) . 86 . Litjens , S . H . , de Pereda , J . M . & Sonnenberg , A . Current insights into the formation and breakdown of hemidesmosomes . Trends Cell Biol . 16 , 376 – 383 ( 2006 ) . 87 . Sawamura , D . , Nakano , H . & Matsuzaki , Y . Overview of epidermolysis bullosa . J . Dermatol . 37 , 214 – 219 ( 2010 ) . 88 . Georges‑Labouesse , E . et al . Absence of integrin α 6 leads to epidermolysis bullosa and neonatal death in mice . Nature Genet . 13 , 370 – 373 ( 1996 ) . 89 . Dowling , J . , Yu , Q . C . & Fuchs , E . β 4 integrin is required for hemidesmosome formation , cell adhesion and cell survival . J . Cell Biol . 134 , 559 – 572 ( 1996 ) . 90 . van der Neut , R . , Krimpenfort , P . , Calafat , J . , Niessen , C . M . & Sonnenberg , A . Epithelial detachment due to absence of hemidesmosomes in integrin β 4 null mice . Nature Genet . 13 , 366 – 369 ( 1996 ) . 91 . Tosti , A . , Duque‑Estrada , B . & Murrell , D . F . Alopecia in epidermolysis bullosa . Dermatol . Clin . 28 , 165 – 169 ( 2010 ) . 92 . Niculescu , C . et al . Conditional ablation of integrin alpha‑6 in mouse epidermis leads to skin fragility and inflammation . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 90 , 270 – 277 ( 2011 ) . 93 . Raymond , K . , Kreft , M . , Janssen , H . , Calafat , J . & Sonnenberg , A . Keratinocytes display normal proliferation , survival and differentiation in conditional β 4‑integrin knockout mice . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 1045 – 1060 ( 2005 ) . 94 . Has , C . et al . Integrin α 3 mutations with kidney , lung , and skin disease . N . Engl . J . Med . 366 , 1508 – 1514 ( 2012 ) . 95 . Nicolaou , N . et al . Gain of glycosylation in integrin alpha3 causes lung disease and nephrotic syndrome . J . Clin . Invest . 122 , 4375 – 4387 ( 2012 ) . 96 . Kreidberg , J . A . et al . Alpha 3 beta 1 integrin has a crucial role in kidney and lung organogenesis . Development 122 , 3537 – 3547 ( 1996 ) . 97 . DiPersio , C . M . , Hodivala‑Dilke , K . M . , Jaenisch , R . , Kreidberg , J . A . & Hynes , R . O . α 3 β 1 Integrin is required for normal development of the epidermal basement membrane . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 729 – 742 ( 1997 ) . 98 . deHart , G . W . , Healy , K . E . & Jones , J . C . The role of α 3 β 1 integrin in determining the supramolecular organization of laminin‑5 in the extracellular matrix of keratinocytes . Exp . Cell Res . 283 , 67 – 79 ( 2003 ) . 99 . Kindler , T . Congenital poikiloderma with traumatic bulla formation and progressive cutaneous atrophy . Br . J . Dermatol . 66 , 104 – 111 ( 1954 ) . A N A LY S I S 286 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 100 . Siegel , D . H . et al . Loss of kindlin‑1 , a human homolog of the Caenorhabditis elegans actin‑extracellular‑ matrix linker protein UNC‑112 , causes Kindler syndrome . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 73 , 174 – 187 ( 2003 ) . 101 . Ashton , G . H . et al . Recurrent mutations in kindlin‑1 , a novel keratinocyte focal contact protein , in the autosomal recessive skin fragility and photosensitivity disorder , Kindler syndrome . J . Invest . Dermatol . 122 , 78 – 83 ( 2004 ) . 102 . Herz , C . et al . Kindlin‑1 is a phosphoprotein involved in regulation of polarity , proliferation , and mo tility of epidermal keratinocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 36082 – 36090 ( 2006 ) . 103 . Qu , H . , Wen , T . , Pesch , M . & Aumailley , M . Partial loss of epithelial phenotype in kindlin‑1‑deficient keratinocytes . Am . J . Pathol . 180 , 1581 – 1592 ( 2012 ) . 104 . D’Souza , M . A . , Kimble , R . M . & McMillan , J . R . Kindler syndrome pathogenesis and fermitin family homologue 1 ( kindlin‑1 ) function . Dermatol . Clin . 28 , 115 – 118 ( 2010 ) . 105 . Eke , I . , Dickreuter , E . & Cordes , N . Enhanced radiosensitivity of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells by beta1 integrin inhibition . Radiother . Oncol . 104 , 235 – 242 ( 2012 ) . 106 . Brooks , P . C . , Clark , R . A . & Cheresh , D . A . Requirement of vascular integrin alpha v beta 3 for angiogenesis . Science 264 , 569 – 571 ( 1994 ) . 107 . Avraamides , C . J . , Garmy‑Susini , B . & Varner , J . A . Integrins in angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis . Nature Rev . Cancer 8 , 604 – 617 ( 2008 ) . 108 . Desgrosellier , J . S . & Cheresh , D . A . Integrins in cancer : biological implications and therapeutic opportunities . Nature Rev . Cancer 10 , 9 – 22 ( 2010 ) . 109 . Robinson , S . D . & Hodivala‑Dilke , K . M . The role of β 3‑integrins in tumor angiogenesis : context is everything . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 23 , 630 – 637 ( 2011 ) . 110 . Cabodi , S . , del Pilar Camacho‑Leal , M . , Di Stefano , P . & Defilippi , P . Integrin signalling adaptors : not only figurants in the cancer story . Nature Rev . Cancer 10 , 858 – 870 ( 2010 ) . 111 . Provenzano , P . P . & Keely , P . J . The role of focal adhesion kinase in tumor initiation and progression . Cell Adh . Migr . 3 , 347 – 350 ( 2009 ) . 112 . Wary , K . K . , Kohler , E . E . & Chatterjee , I . Focal adhesion kinase regulation of neovascularization . Microvasc . Res . 83 , 64 – 70 ( 2012 ) . 113 . Liao , Y . C . & Lo , S . H . Deleted in liver cancer‑1 ( DLC‑1 ) : a tumor suppressor not just for liver . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 40 , 843 – 847 ( 2008 ) . 114 . Durbin , A . D . , Hannigan , G . E . & Malkin , D . Oncogenic ILK , tumor suppression and all that JNK . Cell Cycle 8 , 4060 – 4066 ( 2009 ) . 115 . Hou , C . H . , Yang , R . S . , Hou , S . M . & Tang , C . H . TNF‑ α increases α v β 3 integrin expression and migration in human chondrosarcoma cells . J . Cell . Physiol . 226 , 792 – 799 ( 2011 ) . 116 . Lee , C . Y . et al . IL‑8 increases integrin expression and cell motility in human chondrosarcoma cells . J . Cell Biochem . 112 , 2549 – 2557 ( 2011 ) . 117 . Wu , C . M . et al . IGF‑I enhances α 5 β 1 integrin expression and cell motility in human chondrosarcoma cells . J . Cell . Physiol . 226 , 3270 – 3277 ( 2011 ) . 118 . Nam , E . H . , Lee , Y . , Park , Y . K . , Lee , J . W . & Kim , S . ZEB2 upregulates integrin α 5 expression through cooperation with Sp1 to induce invasion during epithelial – mesenchymal transition of human cancer cells . Carcinogenesis 33 , 563 – 571 ( 2012 ) . 119 . Liu , H . et al . MYC suppresses cancer metastasis by direct transcriptional silencing of α v and β 3 integrin subunits . Nature Cell Biol . 14 , 567 – 574 ( 2012 ) . 120 . Muller , D . W . & Bosserhoff , A . K . Integrin β 3 expression is regulated by let‑7a miRNA in malignant melanoma . Oncogene 27 , 6698 – 6706 ( 2008 ) . 121 . Penna , E . et al . microRNA‑214 contributes to melanoma tumour progression through suppression of TFAP2C . EMBO J . 30 , 1990 – 2007 ( 2011 ) . 122 . Augoff , K . et al . miR‑31 is a broad regulator of β 1‑integrin expression and function in cancer cells . Mol . Cancer Res . 9 , 1500 – 1508 ( 2011 ) . 123 . Fowler , A . et al . miR‑124a is frequently down‑ regulated in glioblastoma and is involved in migration and invasion . Eur . J . Cancer 47 , 953 – 963 ( 2011 ) . 124 . Lu , H . et al . Integrin‑linked kinase expression is elevated in human cardiac hypertrophy and induces hypertrophy in transgenic mice . Circulation 114 , 2271 – 2279 ( 2006 ) . 125 . Lopes , M . M . et al . Increased expression and phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase correlates with dysfunction in the volume‑overloaded human heart . Clin . Sci . ( Lond . ) 113 , 195 – 204 ( 2007 ) . 126 . Clemente , C . F . et al . Targeting focal adhesion kinase with small interfering RNA prevents and reverses load‑ induced cardiac hypertrophy in mice . Circ . Res . 101 , 1339 – 1348 ( 2007 ) . 127 . Gu , R . et al . Increased expression of integrin‑linked kinase improves cardiac function and decreases mortality in dilated cardiomyopathy model of rats . PLoS ONE 7 , e31279 ( 2012 ) . 128 . Traister , A . et al . ILK induces cardiomyogenesis in the human heart . PLoS ONE 7 , e37802 ( 2012 ) . 129 . Dalla Costa , A . P . et al . FAK mediates the activation of cardiac fibroblasts induced by mechanical stress through regulation of the mTOR complex . Cardiovasc . Res . 86 , 421 – 431 ( 2010 ) . 130 . DiMichele , L . A . et al . Myocyte‑restricted focal adhesion kinase deletion attenuates pressure overload‑induced hypertrophy . Circ . Res . 99 , 636 – 645 ( 2006 ) . 131 . Peng , X . et al . Inactivation of focal adhesion kinase in cardiomyocytes promotes eccentric cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis in mice . J . Clin . Invest . 116 , 217 – 227 ( 2006 ) . 132 . Zhu , L . , Jiang , R . , Aoudjit , L . , Jones , N . & Takano , T . Activation of RhoA in podocytes induces focal segmental glomerulosclerosis . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 22 , 1621 – 1630 ( 2011 ) . 133 . Akilesh , S . et al . Arhgap24 inactivates Rac1 in mouse podocytes , and a mutant form is associated with familial focal segmental glomerulosclerosis . J . Clin . Invest . 121 , 4127 – 4137 ( 2011 ) . 134 . Legate , K . R . , Montanez , E . , Kudlacek , O . & Fassler , R . I . L . K . PINCH and parvin : the tIPP of integrin signalling . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 20 – 31 ( 2006 ) . 135 . El‑Aouni , C . et al . Podocyte‑specific deletion of integrin‑linked kinase results in severe glomerular basement membrane alterations and progressive glomerulosclerosis . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 17 , 1334 – 1344 ( 2006 ) . 136 . Kanasaki , K . et al . Integrin beta1‑mediated matrix assembly and signaling are critical for the normal development and function of the kidney glomerulus . Dev . Biol . 313 , 584 – 593 ( 2008 ) . 137 . Naves , M . A . et al . Podocyte Wnt / ss‑catenin pathway is activated by integrin‑linked kinase in clinical and experimental focal segmental glomerulosclerosis . J . Nephrol . 25 , 401 – 409 ( 2012 ) . 138 . Hattori , M . et al . Increase of integrin‑linked kinase activity in cultured podocytes upon stimulation with plasma from patients with recurrent FSGS . Am . J . Transplant 8 , 1550 – 1556 ( 2008 ) . 139 . Ponticelli , C . Recurrence of focal segmental glomerular sclerosis ( FSGS ) after renal transplantation . Nephrol . Dial Transplant 25 , 25 – 31 ( 2010 ) . 140 . El‑Meanawy , A . et al . Identification of nephropathy candidate genes by comparing sclerosis‑prone and sclerosis‑resistant mouse strain kidney transcriptomes . BMC Nephrol . 13 , 61 ( 2012 ) . 141 . Nishino , T . , Sasaki , N . , Nagasaki , K . , Ahmad , Z . & Agui , T . Genetic background strongly influences the severity of glomerulosclerosis in mice . J . Vet . Med . Sci . 72 , 1313 – 1318 ( 2010 ) . 142 . Triantafilou , M . , Triantafilou , K . , Wilson , K . M . , Takada , Y . & Fernandez , N . High affinity interactions of Coxsackievirus A9 with integrin α v β 3 ( CD51 / 61 ) require the CYDMKTTC sequence of β 3 , but do not require the RGD sequence of the CAV‑9 VP1 protein . Hum . Immunol . 61 , 453 – 459 ( 2000 ) . 143 . Raymond , T . , Gorbunova , E . , Gavrilovskaya , I . N . & Mackow , E . R . Pathogenic hantaviruses bind plexin‑ semaphorin‑integrin domains present at the apex of inactive , bent alphavbeta3 integrin conformers . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 1163 – 1168 ( 2005 ) . 144 . Zarate , S . , Romero , P . , Espinosa , R . , Arias , C . F . & Lopez , S . VP7 mediates the interaction of rotaviruses with integrin α v β 3 through a novel integrin‑binding site . J . Virol . 78 , 10839 – 10847 ( 2004 ) . 145 . Krishnan , H . H . , Sharma‑Walia , N . , Streblow , D . N . , Naranatt , P . P . & Chandran , B . Focal adhesion kinase is critical for entry of Kaposi’s sarcoma‑associated herpesvirus into target cells . J . Virol . 80 , 1167 – 1180 ( 2006 ) . 146 . Upla , P . et al . Clustering induces a lateral redistribution of α 2 β 1 integrin from membrane rafts to caveolae and subsequent protein kinase C‑dependent internalization . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 625 – 636 ( 2004 ) . 147 . Jokinen , J . et al . Molecular mechanism of α 2 β 1 integrin interaction with human echovirus 1 . EMBO J . 29 , 196 – 208 ( 2010 ) . 148 . Wang , X . , Huang , D . Y . , Huong , S . M . & Huang , E . S . Integrin α v β 3 is a coreceptor for human cytomegalovirus . Nature Med . 11 , 515 – 521 ( 2005 ) . 149 . Wickham , T . J . , Mathias , P . , Cheresh , D . A . & Nemerow , G . R . Integrins α v β 3 and α v β 5 promote adenovirus internalization but not virus attachment . Cell 73 , 309 – 319 ( 1993 ) . 150 . Li , E . , Stupack , D . , Klemke , R . , Cheresh , D . A . & Nemerow , G . R . Adenovirus endocytosis via α v integrins requires phosphoinositide‑3‑OH kinase . J . Virol . 72 , 2055 – 2061 ( 1998 ) . 151 . Li , E . , Stupack , D . , Bokoch , G . M . & Nemerow , G . R . Adenovirus endocytosis requires actin cytoskeleton reorganization mediated by Rho family GTPases . J . Virol . 72 , 8806 – 8812 ( 1998 ) . 152 . Amstutz , B . et al . Subversion of CtBP1‑controlled macropinocytosis by human adenovirus serotype 3 . EMBO J . 27 , 956 – 969 ( 2008 ) . 153 . Hauck , C . R . , Agerer , F . , Muenzner , P . & Schmitter , T . Cellular adhesion molecules as targets for bacterial infection . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 85 , 235 – 242 ( 2006 ) . 154 . Hoffmann , C . , Ohlsen , K . & Hauck , C . R . Integrin‑ mediated uptake of fibronectin‑binding bacteria . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 90 , 891 – 896 ( 2011 ) . 155 . Roca‑Cusachs , P . , Gauthier , N . C . , Del Rio , A . & Sheetz , M . P . Clustering of α 5 β 1 integrins determines adhesion strength whereas α V β 3 and talin enable mechanotransduction . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 16245 – 16250 ( 2009 ) . 156 . Agerer , F . et al . Cellular invasion by Staphylococcus aureus reveals a functional link between focal adhesion kinase and cortactin in integrin‑mediated internalisation . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 2189 – 2200 ( 2005 ) . 157 . Kirkbride , K . C . , Sung , B . H . , Sinha , S . & Weaver , A . M . Cortactin : a multifunctional regulator of cellular invasiveness . Cell Adh . Migr 5 , 187 – 198 ( 2011 ) . 158 . Slanina , H . , Hebling , S . , Hauck , C . R . & Schubert‑ Unkmeir , A . Cell invasion by Neisseria meningitidis requires a functional interplay between the focal adhesion kinase Src and cortactin . PLoS ONE 7 , e39613 ( 2012 ) . 159 . Bougneres , L . et al . Cortactin and Crk cooperate to trigger actin polymerization during Shigella invasion of epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 166 , 225 – 235 ( 2004 ) . 160 . Boehm , M . et al . Major host factors involved in epithelial cell invasion of Campylobacter jejuni : role of fibronectin , integrin beta1 , FAK , Tiam‑1 , and DOCK180 in activating Rho GTPase Rac1 . Front . Cell . Infect . Microbiol . 1 , 17 ( 2011 ) . 161 . Wang , B . , Yurecko , R . S . , Dedhar , S . & Cleary , P . P . Integrin‑linked kinase is an essential link between integrins and uptake of bacterial pathogens by epithelial cells . Cell . Microbiol . 8 , 257 – 266 ( 2006 ) . 162 . Kim , M . et al . Bacteria hijack integrin‑linked kinase to stabilize focal adhesions and block cell detachment . Nature 459 , 578 – 582 ( 2009 ) . 163 . Muenzner , P . , Rohde , M . , Kneitz , S . & Hauck , C . R . CEACAM engagement by human pathogens enhances cell adhesion and counteracts bacteria‑induced detachment of epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 825 – 836 ( 2005 ) . 164 . Hoffman , L . M . et al . Genetic ablation of zyxin causes Mena / VASP mislocalization , increased motility , and deficits in actin remodeling . J . Cell Biol . 172 , 771 – 782 ( 2006 ) . 165 . Muenzner , P . , Bachmann , V . , Zimmermann , W . , Hentschel , J . & Hauck , C . R . Human‑restricted bacterial pathogens block shedding of epithelial cells by stimulating integrin activation . Science 329 , 1197 – 1201 ( 2010 ) . 166 . Goodman , S . L . & Picard , M . Integrins as therapeutic targets . Trends Pharmacol . Sci . 33 , 405 – 412 ( 2012 ) . 167 . Kane , S . V . et al . Natalizumab for moderate to severe Crohn’s disease in clinical practice : the Mayo Clinic Rochester experience . Inflamm . Bowel Dis . 18 , 2203 – 2208 ( 2012 ) . 168 . Gensicke , H . et al . Monoclonal antibodies and recombinant immunoglobulins for the treatment of multiple sclerosis . CNS Drugs 26 , 11 – 37 ( 2012 ) . 169 . Frampton , J . E . & Plosker , G . L . Efalizumab : a review of its use in the management of chronic moderate‑ to‑severe plaque psoriasis . Am . J . Clin . Dermatol . 10 , 51 – 72 ( 2009 ) . 170 . Kristensen , S . D . et al . Contemporary use of glycoprotein IIb / IIIa inhibitors . Thromb . Haemost . 107 , 215 – 224 ( 2012 ) . 171 . McLean , L . P . , Shea‑Donohue , T . & Cross , R . K . Vedolizumab for the treatment of ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease . Immunotherapy 4 , 883 – 898 ( 2012 ) . A N A LY S I S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | APRIL 2014 | 287 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 172 . Reardon , D . A . & Cheresh , D . Cilengitide : a prototypic integrin inhibitor for the treatment of glioblastoma and other malignancies . Genes Cancer 2 , 1159 – 1165 ( 2011 ) . 173 . Patla , I . et al . Dissecting the molecular architecture of integrin adhesion sites by cryo‑electron tomography . Nature Cell Biol . 12 , 909 – 915 ( 2010 ) . 174 . Kanchanawong , P . et al . Nanoscale architecture of integrin‑based cell adhesions . Nature 468 , 580 – 584 ( 2010 ) . 175 . Botstein , D . & Risch , N . Discovering genotypes underlying human phenotypes : past successes for mendelian disease , future approaches for complex disease . Nature Genet . 33 , 228 – 237 ( 2003 ) . 176 . Ozsolak , F . & Milos , P . M . RNA sequencing : advances , challenges and opportunities . Nature Rev . Genet . 12 , 87 – 98 ( 2011 ) . 177 . Altshuler , D . , Daly , M . J . & Lander , E . S . Genetic mapping in human disease . Science 322 , 881 – 888 ( 2008 ) . 178 . Choudhary , C . & Mann , M . Decoding signalling networks by mass spectrometry‑based proteomics . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 427 – 439 ( 2010 ) . 179 . Mann , M . & Kelleher , N . L . Precision proteomics : the case for high resolution and high mass accuracy . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 18132 – 18138 ( 2008 ) . 180 . Cox , J . & Mann , M . Quantitative , high‑resolution proteomics for data‑driven systems biology . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 80 , 273 – 299 ( 2011 ) . 181 . Medalia , O . & Geiger , B . Frontiers of microscopy‑ based research into cell‑matrix adhesions . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 659 – 668 ( 2010 ) . 182 . North , A . J . , Galazkiewicz , B . , Byers , T . J . , Glenney , J . R . Jr & Small , J . V . Complementary distributions of vinculin and dystrophin define two distinct sarcolemma domains in smooth muscle . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 1159 – 1167 ( 1993 ) . 183 . Bokstad , M . , Sabanay , H . , Dahan , I . , Geiger , B . & Medalia , O . Reconstructing adhesion structures in tissues by cryo‑electron tomography of vitrified frozen sections . J . Struct . Biol . 178 , 76 – 83 ( 2012 ) . 184 . Nikolopoulos , S . N . et al . Targeted deletion of the integrin β 4 signaling domain suppresses laminin‑5‑dependent nuclear entry of mitogen‑ activated protein kinases and NF‑ κ B , causing defects in epidermal growth and migration . Mol . Cell . Biol . 25 , 6090 – 6102 ( 2005 ) . Acknowledgments The authors thank R . Zaidel‑Bar for providing an updated version of the integrin adhesome . The authors also thank I . Sabanay , M . Bokstad and V . Small for providing the images for FIG . 1 . The authors are grateful for the support of the European Research Council ( ERC ) under the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 / 2007‑2013 ) , Advanced ERC Grant ( ERC Grant Agreement no . 294852 to B . G . and ERC Grant Agreement no . 322652 to R . F . ) . They thank A . Pozzi for helpful discus‑ sions and to B . Morgenstern for expert editorial assistance . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing interests . DATABASES Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man ( OMIM ) : http : / / omim . org Genetic Association Database ( GAD ) : http : / / geneticassociationdb . nih . gov FURTHER INFORMATION A dhesome FA network : www . adhesome . org SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article : S1 ( table ) | S2 ( table ) | S3 ( table ) | S4 ( figure ) | S5 ( table ) | S6 ( table ) ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF A N A LY S I S 288 | APRIL 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved