Computer Supported Cooperative Work 12 : 205 – 219 , 2003 . © 2003 Kluwer Academic Publishers . Printed in the Netherlands . 205 Intermediary Objects as a Means to Foster Co - operation in Engineering Design JEAN - FRANÇOIS BOUJUT & ERIC BLANCO Laboratoire 3S , BP 53 , 38 041 Grenoble cedex 9 , France ( E - mail : Jean - francois . boujut @ inpg . fr ) Abstract . In this paper we argue that co - operation is a particular way to co - ordinate an industrial activity and that it is particularly suited to collaborative design activity . Through a well documented case study of the development of a front truck axle , we point out several key features of co - operation in an industrial setting . We particularly pay attention to the interfaces between the actors involved in the collaborative process . We observed the pre - eminence of the representations and the objects created , manipulated , and ﬁnally we claim that they support knowledge creation and therefore allow the development of a common understanding of the design situation ( i . e . the problem and the solution ) . We propose the concept of “intermediary object” as a conceptual framework for the involvement of objects in the design process . We demonstrate the power of this concept in the analysis and modelling of particular design situations and in the development of speciﬁc objects that foster co - operation in real design situations . Key words : collaborative design , computer aided design , concurrent engineering , empirical studies , intermediary objects 1 . Introduction Today the concept of concurrent engineering is being implemented in an increas - ingly high number of companies . The design process 1 is very deeply impacted by these evolutions and this invites researchers to propose new models , methods and tools . Our research effort is directed towards the understanding of co - operation in design and the development of devices that foster it . Although we think co - operation is a natural way for reaching a goal collectively , it is all but natural in an industrial setting . More precisely this way of co - ordinating is mixed with the traditional modes of co - ordination consisting of planning and task decomposition in an informal way , leading to underestimating the importance of co - operation . However , we often observed that performing joint work on the same product led to the development of speciﬁc types of interactions , speciﬁc knowledge , skills and attitudes . Particularly we want to highlight here the importance of the material involved in co - operative processes . More speciﬁcally we will study the role of different types of objects as mediators in the building of shared representations . It is important here to differentiate between the roles of an object as representation , knowledge support , convention and even participant of the design process as rightly stated in Perry and Sanderson ( 1998 ) . 206 JEAN - FRANÇOIS BOUJUT & ERIC BLANCO Teamwork is a typical situation where interfaces are of prime importance : interfaces between departments , actors , knowledge domains , etc . . At this level the objects are very important traces of the process . But designing is also a knowledge intensive process that involves knowledge building and sharing among the participants . Once again objects are a precious medium that inﬂuences this process . Our research methodology is mainly based on empirical studies using ethno - graphic based observation methods . The researchers , usually PhD students spend long periods of time immersed in design teams as designers . The advantage of this methodology lies in the ﬁne descriptions of actual design practices while giving access to the design process in real world settings . We propose in this paper the concept of intermediary object ( Vinck and Jeantet , 1995 ) as a theoretical framework for analysing design situations . This is both a methodological tool for analysing and modelling the design process and a powerful tool for implementing new objects and particularly developing co - operation . How can a simple representation ( CAD models , plans , sketchs . . . ) becomes a shared representation among the participants of a design team ? We ask this ques - tion as an introductory element to the two case studies we will present in the following . Based on case study drawn from wider ﬁeldwork we carried out in a great truck company , we will show in section 2 how object tracking can produce an original understanding of a design situation , centred on interactions and therefore giving access to what happens at the interfaces ( paraphrasing Finger et al . , 1995 ) . This will give us the opportunity , in section 3 to introduce the concept of intermediary object as a theoretical framework to this objects centred approach . Section 4 will provide a deeper insight within the process of sharing representations , and the status of draft representations ( i . e . sketches ) in the design activity . Finally we will show how speciﬁc objects can become conventions shared by the group . 2 . Analysing the interfaces : The “knuckle case” We present here an excerpt of a design situation observed by a PhD student during his ﬁeldwork in a large truck company . He was in charge of proposing improve - ments in the organisation of the information ﬂow between the forging department , the manufacturing plant , and the design ofﬁce . In the following we will particu - larly focus on the exchanges between the three main actors of this design phase ( i . e . the forging department , the manufacturing engineering department including manufacturing plant , and the design ofﬁce ) . The product considered here is a front axle as shown in Figure 1 . This sub - system is of prime importance in the security of the vehicle as it supports the braking system , front dampers and steering device . This mechanism is composed of numerous forged parts , since this tech - nology gives good results for highly strained parts . Our case study focuses on the knuckle . INTERMEDIARY OBJECTS 207 Figure 1 . Model of a front axle . Figure 2 . Front axle development phases . This part is one of the most difﬁcult to forge and to machine in this sub - system , so the participants pay a particular attention to this part during the development . In the general project schedule of the company , the development of a front axle takes a particular place . It is impossible to obtain proper prototypes of forged parts unless using the ﬁnal tool . In order to validate a design , there is a complex procedure including numerous tests for obvious safety reasons . Therefore the forged parts must be designed , the dies manufactured and tested before the prototyping phase begins . Forged parts must be completely deﬁned at the end of the preliminary design phase requiring the entire axle deﬁnition ( see Figure 2 ) . This represents an anticipation of one and a half year with respect to the other sub - systems . This particularity of the product led the involved participants to develop a speciﬁc methodology , mostly implicit , based on informal exchanges and co - operation . Alongside the product development schedule and the ofﬁcial procedure , people have invented what Mintzberg calls “adhocracy” ( Mintzberg , 1981 ) refer - ring to the ad hoc character of the organisation . The example presented below is an illustration of this adhocracy that shows the incomplete and uncontrolled character of this informal organisation . 208 JEAN - FRANÇOIS BOUJUT & ERIC BLANCO Figure 3 . Two CAD models of the knuckle . The design phase , we will be examining now , starts with the production of a 3D CAD model ( CSG model ) of the knuckle made by the designer . This model is built using previous designs and relies on a 2D plan of the entire new axle repre - senting the solution principle . As shows Figure 3 ( left side ) , the model represents a draft shape of the ﬁnal part ( i . e . the tooled conﬁguration ) . However some forging features are already represented , for example some draft surfaces which are the result of past designs . We are at the ﬁrst step of Figure 4 . The CAD model has been built reusing old models from past designs by adding and modifying the geometry in order to ﬁt to the new design represented on the 2D plan of the new solution . It is a draft representation mainly used by the designer for checking the interference within the mechanism . This model is not suitable for the die manufacturing , neither does it give information about the manufacturing process . However , at this step the designer estimates the forging process , relying on his personal experience and forging knowledge . He asked the forging expert to propose a new ﬂash position and to check the forging orientation . The knowledge involved here is typically an “interface knowledge” , where the designer knows that something might be wrong for the forging expert , but he does not know exactly what . He knows enough about forging to anticipate a problem but not enough to resolve it alone . This kind of knowledge is of prime importance in the development of co - operation . The manufacturing expert at this step was unable to propose something and there were shortcomings in the interface knowledge since neither the designer nor the manu - facturing expert made any remarks on the solution . However , the manufacturing department gave a formal agreement on the solution , without any real possibility of evaluating the solution . This turned out to be the source of problems later on . After the three actors signed the solution of on an ofﬁcial form , the design ofﬁce built a 3D surface model of the knuckle . We are at step 2 of Figure 4 . The construction of such a model , in that CAD system is long and tricky ( this is still true today although the manipulation of surface models is becoming easier with INTERMEDIARY OBJECTS 209 Figure 4 . Objects and product representations along the design process . new CAD systems ) . Before going further on in the description , it is interesting to come back to Figure 3 to compare the two models . If the model on the left is a draft representation of the ﬁnal part ( i . e . the tooled part ) , the model on the right side is an exact representation of the part ( i . e . the forged part ) . To build such a model , the designer needs to know about corner radii values , draft angles , etc . All this knowledge is speciﬁc to the forging trade . In our case , the designer was very experienced and all the participants were relying on his skill . Collective conﬁdence in each other’s expertise is another important characteristic of co - operation and we will come back to this point later . This model is a nominal representation of the draft shape of the part and therefore is suitable for designing and machining the dies . Then , after the surface model was built , the forger could start building a CAD model of the dies and start the machining sequences . The manufacturing expert had still little to do , since the 3D model did not provide sufﬁcient information . However he started to set up a few ﬁxturing alternatives , in order to ﬁgure out how the part could be positioned on the machine tool . At this step however , an important irreversible point was reached . Since the building process of a 3D surface model is time consuming , it is nearly impossible to modify it without dangerously increasing the lead - time . After this step , any backtrack becomes too expensive for the company . However , once more , the manufacturing department gave its agreement on the design . During step 3 , the design department produced a 2D drawing of the knuckle , including dimensions and tolerances . Outside the normal design procedure , the manufacturing expert , relying on his experience , came to the design ofﬁce to consult the 2D plan before it was ﬁnished . Very rapidly , he identiﬁed a problem by looking at the dimensioning . Given his machining sequences scenario , one of the tolerances was obviously outside the machine capabilities . This problem 210 JEAN - FRANÇOIS BOUJUT & ERIC BLANCO could have led to a crisis if it had involved a modiﬁcation of the surface model . Fortunately , negotiation led to a local modiﬁcation of the solution , within the range of the CAD shape . However , we often observed that such crises produced harsh negotiations leading to either time consuming modiﬁcations on the product , or expensive and unplanned investments on the manufacturing process . 3 . The concept of intermediary object This case study shows a typical design situation were people deal with a formal design procedure , with informal and unstructured exchanges , relying on the personal experience of each participant . The observation and analysis of CAD models , plans , sketches , in actual settings gives us an access to different levels of knowledge - in - action : • when and with whom communication occurs , • what information is needed , • what is a suitable medium . In our case , the process of deciding whom to communicate with and when is dictated by the experience of each party . However , here the lack of involvement of the manufacturing participant is striking . The analysis shows that it is not a lack of communication , since every participant was aware of any change to the product and was involved in each of the three steps . Other research in the car industry by Moisdon and Weil ( 1992 ) showed that the amount of communication between designers during the development of a new product does not increase dramatically when shifting from a classical project organisation to concurrent engineering . The major evolution lies in the quality of the exchanges . This study shows that signiﬁ - cant improvements are done in anticipation of situations requiring negotiation . In our case , potentially every actor can communicate with everyone at any time , due to the close location of the actors ( same company , same industrial site ) . We claim that co - operation requires a shared knowledge of the product , of the others’ job and of the design process . It also requires a shared representation of the product . Then we come to the two last items of the list ( i . e . the information content and the medium ) . The case study shows that the manufacturing expert could not participate efﬁciently in the design . The source of the problem is not a lack of knowledge of the manufacturing process or a lack of knowledge of the product , since front axles have been manufactured in the plant for many years . At step 1 and 2 the available product models did not provide sufﬁcient information for the manufacturing expert due to an inappropriate representation ( i . e . a geometric model instead of a plan ) . When an appropriate representation is available ( at step 3 ) the manufacturing expert could participate , but it is too late . We see here that information , knowledge and medium of representation are deeply linked . In order to characterise this interrelation we propose the concept of “intermediary object” , as suggested by Vinck and Jeantet ( 1995 ) . In fact intermediary objects act as boundary objects in the sense of Star ( 1989 ) . But intermediary objects are also INTERMEDIARY OBJECTS 211 intermediate states of the product if we consider the objects as mediators translating and representing the future product . From this point of view we think the concept offers a rich framework for analysing the nature and content of the various objects produced all along the design process . This concept has already proved efﬁcient in the analysis of a large number of case studies providing a good analysis tool of the interfaces between participants , departments , companies , etc . as well as in the development of co - operation within design processes . It provides a theoretical framework to analyse the role of objects ( i . e . artefacts , mock - ups , CAD models , plans , sketches , etc . ) in the design process . Intermediary objects have three main features : • mediation , • transformation or translation , • representation . Traditionally , an object produced by an actor acts as a prescription for the next actor who starts his work from this object . For example the surface model at step 2 that has been built by the designer is used by the forging expert as a description of the forged part shape . This object is “closed” because it is nearly impossible to modify it afterwards . The same applies to the 2D plan at step 3 . If the manufacturing expert had not detected the problem before the drawing was ﬁnished the crisis would have been even bigger . To develop the participation of downstream actors ( typically the manufacturing people ) during the design process and to foster co - operation , the mediating role of the objects is of prime importance . We propose to shift from “closed” objects to “open” objects ( Vinck and Jeantet , 1995 ) , giving access to the various participants . CAD objects are poor in that way , and we propose an improvement to the mediating role of CAD objects in section 6 . Creating an object involves a transformation or a translation process , from a state of the product into another state . This operation involves various sources of knowledge and skills . When creating the surface model , the designer used knowledge from the ﬁeld of forging ( i . e . corner radii , draft angles , etc . ) . In his task he mostly reused past designs ( bits of models ) as a support as well as his personal experience . In a co - operative process this transformation process becomes collective . Consequently the translation process requires shared knowledge among the participants . This process of transforming an object requires from the partici - pant a constant explanation of the choices they make or modiﬁcation they propose . It gradually leads to a common understanding of the design situation and creates a common background for all participants . The objects are the traces as well as the outputs of this process . Intermediary objects are also representations . They are either representations of the product or of the design process ( Gantt charts , planning , etc . ) . Because representations and their forms induce various types of interactions , they provide means but also limitations to the participants’ expression . Objects are also external - isation , so their symbolic and cognitive dimension should not be neglected . The concept of intermediary object integrates the two dimensions and allows the 212 JEAN - FRANÇOIS BOUJUT & ERIC BLANCO Figure 5 . Solution principles . creation of speciﬁc objects dedicated to various design situations . This concept is deﬁnitely oriented towards interaction and knowledge dynamics . 4 . Interacting with and through the representation The case described in this section took place in a company ( that we will call EPS ) that designs and manufactures paint application machines for the car industry . This equipment is essentially an automated cell made of one gantry and three side machines whereon atomisers are positioned . The paint is applied by a longitudinal movement of the car and lateral oscillation of the atomisers . The design review we consider here has been triggered by a need for redesign due to a new offer made by an EPS competitor . The team must redesign the girder of the equipment , because the competitor proposes a solution avoiding dirt particles that sometime spoil the painted surface in the classical solution . The engineer and the draftsman in charge of the project had come up with two alternative solution principles . The meeting was planned for assessing and choosing one of the two solutions . The meeting brought together the project engineer , several draftsmen and the manager of the design ofﬁce . The participants met around plots of CAD drawings and an advertising picture of the competitor’s product . This situation can be viewed as that described by Henderson ( 1999 ) as a mixed use practice , where CAD drawings are printed and used as working drawings by the participants . At the beginning of the meeting , two plots representing the two alternative solutions were presented to the participants . Figure 5 shows the existing solution ( left ) and the two alternative solutions ( right ) . The draftsmen presented the two solutions at the ﬁrst stage of the meeting . They used the drawing to explain their choices . This ﬁrst stage was mainly dedicated to the explanation and assessment of the solutions . The exchanges during this period were mainly about the setting of constraints and criteria in order to evaluate the solutions . The participants classiﬁed the requirements and rapidly the discussion INTERMEDIARY OBJECTS 213 focused on two opposing constraints . The choice made to shift the mobile part up to the girder ( Figure 5 ) implied an increase of the paint pipes length . The longer the pipes are the more paint is wasted during the frequent colour changes . Customers are very aware of this point , therefore minimising the paint loss during colour changes is an important requirement . The team tried to avoid this problem by reducing the pipes’ diameter . But this solution would have implied a new pump to deliver the paint , which would have needed too much redesign . Another possibility was to move the colour blocks closer to the atomiser . Finally , no solution really satisﬁed the group . Among the two alternatives , the twin - girder solution was rapidly rejected by the group , because the manufacturing cost of a twin - girder seemed to be too high and did not offer functional advantages compared to the single girder solution . From then on , the drawing of the twin - girder solution was removed from the table , and only the drawing of the single girder solution remained . From then on the group focussed on the this solution . During this phase the participants used characteristics of the product repre - sented on the drawings to make a judgement . The objects were used as “cognitive artefacts” following Norman ( 1993 ) . The participants did not describe precisely what they were talking about , they pointed with a ﬁnger or a pen to the different elements they wanted to highlight and used deictic words ( e . g . “what about this ? ” , “show me that ” , . . . ) to express themselves . The second stage of the meeting was dedicated to the research of alternative propositions that would meet the main requirements discussed in the ﬁrst period . One of the draftsmen started to sketch ideas out on the remaining plan . From that moment on all the participants started to sketch on the drawing . After half an hour of discussion , the plan was full of sketches ( see Figure 6 ) . From this phase , a new solution principle emerged . It was a compromise between the two main require - ments : minimise the pipe length and shift the mobile part on the top of the girder . The ﬁnal principle is shown in Figure 7 , where a lateral solution is chosen , half way between the existing solution and the two proposed in Figure 5 . In the next sections we will analyse some characteristics of this situation and particularly the use of sketches as speciﬁc intermediary objects . 5 . The role of drafts as intermediary objects in the conjecture - evaluation process 5 . 1 . DRAFTS ARE CONJECTURES THAT ALLOWS FAST EVALUATION We propose to analyse the case just described as a conjecture - evaluation process . A participant proposes a solution or expresses an idea by sketching onto the plan . Following Ullman et al . ( 1996 ) we can say that it is an externalisation of the designer’s mental image of the solution . Then this sketch becomes an intermediary object that mediates the participant’s proposition . In fact this sketch is a conjecture that needs to be evaluated and confronted with the other participants’ constraints . In any case it is a deﬁnite solution that must be validated by the other participants . 214 JEAN - FRANÇOIS BOUJUT & ERIC BLANCO Figure 6 . Single girder solution after the meeting ( ﬁrst proposal of ﬁgure 5 ) . Figure 7 . Final solution ( detail A ) . INTERMEDIARY OBJECTS 215 It is interesting to notice that the ﬁrst proposition of the engineer consisted in two alternative solutions and the initial goal of the meeting was to choose among the two . Eventually it is a third alternative that emerged from that meeting after the group judged the two solutions unsatisfying . Once the sketch was put on the table , the other participants could evaluate the solution principles . Bonnardel ( 1992 ) showed that the process of evaluating a solution involves two cognitive processes : the characterisation of the element to assess and a comparison with a reference . The characterisation process is done using the available material ( i . e . the sketches in our case ) . At another time the participants use criteria to connect the represen - tation ( their perception of the sketch ) with their mental image of this solution . We observed that the form and content of the available material inﬂuenced the two cognitive processes . The concept of intermediary object helps us to characterise this available material . In the EPS case the participants mainly used sketches , but in the knuckle case CAD models were used . We saw that the manufacturing experts was unable to evaluate the manufacturability of the part , because the available intermediary object ( i . e . the CAD model ) didn’t provide the required information . 5 . 2 . SKETCHES CREATE IRREVERSIBILITY IN THE PROCESS The sketches are traces of the emerging process of the solution , however many steps are still invisible . At a ﬁrst glance we notice in Figure 6 that different levels of sketches have been used . Some are related to general principles ( detail A or B ) while others represent details of solutions or address a speciﬁc problem ( details C , D or E ) . If we consider sketches as means to perform evaluations of the solution during co - operation , different levels of representation can be used depending on the problem raised at the moment . These different levels can co - exist on the same sheet with no logical connection with each other . The participants need to have a level of detail of the representation that is coherent with the current problem and solution . The sketches become a synthesis of the work performed by the group . They act in the process of creating a new solution ( and in a way in the decision making process ) as the “crystallisation” of some product features . We can say that sketches create some irreversibility in the design process because once the sketch is on the paper , it become a reference for the participants that implicitly orient the future choices . In EPS case the different participants of the design review made constant reference to the sketches they collectively deﬁned , these sketches became a “cognitive trap” preventing other alternatives from being explored . In that sense , the irreversibility is implicit but real : no other architecture has been discussed in the group once an acceptable one was found . 216 JEAN - FRANÇOIS BOUJUT & ERIC BLANCO 5 . 3 . OBJECT MALLEABILITY As the knowledge involved is very wide and depends on the problems raised during co - operation , it is impossible to anticipate the required knowledge in meetings such as the one described above . Consequently , the material available must be very versatile in order to face this uncertainty . Quick changes , fast evaluation , various level of representations are created during co - operation . Each participant must be able to produce new conjectures about the product rapidly . Sketches present a natural versatility that is very useful to foster the solution evaluation process like the one described in the EPS case . The participants used sketches as elements of their reﬂection . This reﬂection involved the object itself and not the knowledge used to create it , even if the other participants were physically present . We reach here the work of Schön ( 1991 ) on the reﬂective conversation with the situation he observed . On the other hand , this versatility reveals a weakness of sketches as mediums for co - operation . Sketches are mostly unstructured ( even if they refer to formal codes such as industrial drawing ) , raising problems of ambiguity in the process of interpreting or reinterpreting the content of the sketches ( Stacey and Eckert , 2001 ) . For us this highlights a lack of structure and in that way sketches are not a deﬁnite answer . More precisely we think that co - operation can be considered as a process of “disambiguation” if it is properly framed . Negotiation and compromise setting are particular ways for creating speciﬁc shared knowledge . The concept of inter - mediary objects can provide a tool that allows the production of a conceptual frame that formalises and represent this shared knowledge through objects and various representations . A particular advantage of the intermediary objects we observed during our ﬁeldwork was their capacity to crystallising conventions and rules , leading the participants to outline a shared frame for co - operating . Malleability is a fundamental characteristic that the objects must have , but the process of creating and interpreting must be framed in order to create objects that can be shared by a larger number of people . In the next section we will go further in the analysis of this dimension . 6 . Creating shared objects : A process of creating new conventions So far we have presented some results showing the value of analysing interactions through objects . We also show what the concept of intermediary object could lead to an understanding of the nature of the design interactions . In addition to all these observations , we have developed and tested in industry , interactively with the participants , a set of symbols providing a medium for framing co - operation . When creating shared representations , such as sketches or CAD models , partici - pants are involved in a process of creating local conventions that allow them to build a basis for co - operating . Indeed , those conventions widely borrow from existing conventions such as industrial drawings or various standards . In detail A shown in Figure 7 , it is easy to recognise a cross section of the girder if the reader INTERMEDIARY OBJECTS 217 Figure 8 . CAD model enriched with co - operating symbols . is familiar with the industrial drawing convention , but without knowing the context it is difﬁcult to go further in understanding of sketch . However , during the design review of the EPS case , the participants perfectly understood the meaning of the sketch and evaluated it successfully . From this sketch it is impossible , even for the participants themselves , to reconstruct the rationale behind the choices made at a given moment . But before presenting the conclusions , it is interesting come back to the “knuckle case” again . In fact , the underlying idea is directly linked to the obser - vations presented in section 2 . When analysing the situation , it is easy to notice that right from step 1 ( in Figure 4 ) some information is available from the different actors , but it remains mainly implicit . On the other hand , the CAD model is the only shared object among the participants . Consequently , we have proposed the enrichment of this model with other information . This led to the formalisation of a set of symbols which made sense to the participants , and enabled them to partici - pate in the development . Figure 8 shows the CAD model enriched with symbols representing ﬁxturing alternatives . The left conﬁguration corresponds to the ﬁrst solution idea made by the manufacturing participant , whereas the right one shows the result of the negotiation between the forging and the manufacturing expert , mainly concerning ﬁxturing and clamping problems on forged rough surfaces . This example shows the evolution of the object status . From a simple geometric model representing a part , this object has been transformed by the actors into a shared representation . With the new symbols ( Figure 8 right side ) , the representa - tion fully plays a role of intermediary object fostering co - operation . It is important to notice here that these symbols are conventions built by the participants during design . In a way they are externalisation and formalisation of tacit and implicit rules . The process of externalising those rules opens a debate and allows the creation of new conventions and so forth . In the design review case , some local conventions were embedded in the sketches and remained mainly tacit , therefore they carried no memory of the 218 JEAN - FRANÇOIS BOUJUT & ERIC BLANCO knowledge involved in their production . An important issue is the creation of local conventions that are explicit and shared by the group . We believe that the explicit character of those conventions ensures a local and dynamic memory . Moreover , the process of creating local conventions implies a reﬂective process among the partici - pants that leads to the development of the local learning process . Each participant learns how to co - operate with the other participants as well as about on each others’ trade . 7 . Conclusion We focussed our paper on the role of objects and proposed the concept of inter - mediary object as a framework for analysing in - action objects . But this is not the only point of view relevant for studying design , as it is a complex activity , other pertinent levels must be addressed . When co - operation is not a natural way to co - ordinate industrial activity , a reﬂection on the organisational premises for co - operation is necessary . On the other hand , if participants are at the centre of a team - based organisations , the evolution of the required competencies , skills , etc . is an important issue . Finally and closer to the intermediary object’s issue , the question of the tools is still opened . We used existing CAD software for our devel - opments ( see section 6 ) , but many other computer support tools are available today . The implementation of intermediary objects in those environments is an interesting issue for further research . Note 1 . We consider here a wide deﬁnition of the “design process” as the “process of creating a product” from early marketing studies to production . However in our studies we mainly focus on the engineering design phase and particularly on the issue of participation of manufacturing actors in the design teams . References Bonnardel , N . ( 1992 ) : Le rôle de l’évaluation dans les activités de conception . Thèse de psychologie cognitive Université d’Aix en Provence . Bucciarelli , L . L . ( 1994 ) : Designing Engineers . MIT Press . Finger , S . , S . L . Konda and E . Subrahmanian ( 1995 ) : Concurrent Design Happens at the Interfaces . Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Engineering Design Analysis and Manufacturing , vol . 9 , pp . 89 – 99 . Henderson , K . ( 1999 ) : On Line and on Paper . MIT Press . Mintzberg , H . ( 1981 ) : Organization Design : Fashion or Fit ? Harvard Business Review . Moisdon , J . C . and B . Weil ( 1992 ) : L’invention d’une voiture : un exercice de relations sociales ? Anales des Mines , Gérer et comprendre , sept et dec . Norman , D . A . ( 1993 ) : Les artefacts cognitifs . Raisons pratiques , les objets dans l’action , vol . 4 , pp . 15 – 34 . Perry , M . and D . Sanderson ( 1998 ) : Coordinating Joint Design Work : The Role of Communication and Artefacts . Design Studies , vol . 19 , pp . 273 – 288 . INTERMEDIARY OBJECTS 219 Schön , D . ( 1991 ) : The Reﬂexive Practitioner : How Professional Think In Action . Ashgate Publishing . Star , S . L . ( 1989 ) : The Structure of Ill - Structured Solutions : Heterogenous Problem Solving , Boundary Objects and Distributed Artiﬁcial Intelligence . In Huhns and Gasser ( eds . ) : Distributed Artiﬁcial Intelligence . Morgan Kaufmann . Ullman , D . G . , D . Herling and A . Sinton ( 1996 ) : Analysis of Protocol Data to Identify Product Infor - mation Evolution and Decision Making Process . In N . Cross , H . Christiaans and K . Dorst ( eds . ) : Analysing Design Activity . John Wiley & Sons , pp . 168 – 185 . Vinck , D . and A . Jeantet ( 1995 ) : Mediating and Commissioning Objects in the Sociotechnical Process of Product Design : A Conceptual Approach . In D . MacLean , P . Saviotti and D . Vinck ( eds . ) : Management and New Technology : Design , Networks and Strategy . COST Social Science Series , Bruxelles .