Can Videos be Used to Communicate Non - functional Requirements ? An Early Empirical Investigation Sylwia Kopczy´nska Poznan University of Technology Poznan , Poland sylwia . kopczynska @ cs . put . poznan . pl Jianwei Shi Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover Hannover , Germany jianwei . shi @ inf . uni - hannover . de Abstract —Non - functional requirements ( NFRs ) are not easy to elicit and formulate . Technology development and social media platforms made videos one of the primary means to communicate different information . Also , for software products , videos are used to , e . g . , validate the idea of products before development – vision videos , to present them—product videos . Thus , a question arises – can we use videos to communicate NFRs within Requirements Engineering activities ? We designed an empirical study to answer the stated question and conducted an early investigation of 5 vision videos . We found that requirements about interoperability , time behavior , and usability were the most frequently mentioned in vision videos . We identiﬁed also several methods of expressing NFRs , e . g . , by showing end - user reactions , using captions or narrator . Our study is the ﬁrst attempt to investigate the research question . It follows from it that videos seem to be a useful means to communicate NFRs . We identiﬁed several challenges in using this medium and in analyzing videos that allowed us to suggest areas that can be included in the roadmap for further research in this area . Index Terms —non - functional requirements , nfrs , videos , vision videos I . I NTRODUCTION Software requirements are usually categorized into func - tional and non - functional ones . The former describe so - called user - valued transactions ( i . e . , functionality that supports the users ) , and the latter state conditions under which the provided functionality is really useful ( e . g . , maximum response time ) . Non - functional requirements ( NFRs ) are often neglected , especially those that are difﬁcult to write or ostensibly ob - vious . That is an important risk factor , as in many cases a project failure can be traced , amongst others , to inappropriate management of them ( see e . g . , [ 1 ] , [ 2 ] , [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] ) . Thus , many authors look for methods and techniques concerning NFRs , e . g . , elicitation using the NFR method of Fraunhofer IESE [ 5 ] or templates [ 6 ] , using user feedback to analyze NFRs [ 7 ] , modeling using softgoals [ 8 ] , documenting NFRs [ 9 ] . Thanks to recent technological advancements , video as a communication medium has been increasing in popularity . People watch it for entertainment or knowledge acquisition purposes ( e . g . , in the USA every day multiple times 60 % of adults access YouTube and 54 % of adults access TikTok [ 10 ] ) but also to learn more about a product or service ( e . g . , 96 % of Wyzowl respondents watched at least one short 1 - 2 minute video that explains the nuts and bolts of a product or service [ 11 ] ) . Videos about products help to increase user understanding of the product or service ( according to 94 % of video marketers [ 11 ] ) and to make purchase decisions ( e . g . , 78 % of people were convinced to buy or download a piece of software or app by watching a video [ 11 ] ) . Thus , the ques - tion arises how can we use videos to support Requirements Engineering ( RE ) activities ? The potential of the application of videos in RE has been discussed in recent years [ 12 ] , [ 13 ] . There are some works on how videos can be employed , e . g . , Creighton et al . [ 14 ] used videos to document visionary scenarios for different stakeholders , Brukk et al . [ 15 ] to record use cases of a future system to elicit requirements , while Karras et al . [ 12 ] proposed an approach to produce videos documenting vision of a future system . However , up - to - our best knowledge , none investigated whether it is useful to communicate NFRs through videos . Thus , in the paper , we report the ﬁrst empirical investigation concerning the usefulness of videos to communicate NFRs . The most important contributions of our work are as follows : • we show that it is possible to design an empirical study to analyze video content to answer the RE - related issues , • we analyze which NFRs are communicated using videos and identify different ways used for this purpose , • we open the discussion ( 1 ) on further investigation of this topic , and based on our lessons learned ( 2 ) on how to conduct empirical studies concerning RE and videos . The paper is structured as follows . In Section II we discuss related works . The design of our empirical study is docu - mented in Section III while the results are reported in Section IV . Section VI summarizes the ﬁndings and discusses the implications . II . R ELATED WORK Videos have been used in Requirements Engineering ( RE ) for multiple purposes . First group of research constitutes works proposing using videos for various requirements activities , mainly for the elic - itation and validation of requirements . For example Mackay 305 2023 IEEE 31st International Requirements Engineering Conference ( RE ) 2332 - 6441 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 ©2023 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / RE57278 . 2023 . 00040 2023 I EEE 31 s t I n t e r n a t i o n a l R e qu i r e m e n t s E n g i n ee r i n g C o n f e r e n c e ( R E ) | 979 - 8 - 3503 - 2689 - 5 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 © 2023 I EEE | D O I : 10 . 1109 / R E 57 2 78 . 2023 . 00040 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . et al . [ 16 ] created and used videos for ﬁnding and detailing design ideas of a graphical software . In a brainstorming phase , they recommended to collect ideas by creating videos . In a design phase , these videos were reviewed to ﬁnd one design scenario for every design problem . Then a more detailed scenario was proposed by creating additional videos . They recognized that “ video artifacts help bridge the gap between abstraction and detail in the design process ” and enhance communication [ 16 ] . To create a model for a software that is not yet implemented , Creighton et al . [ 17 ] proposed a video - based methodology . Requirements engineers shall edit the video by selecting regions , which are linked to model objects and could determine the ﬂow of events by organizing shots in a graph . Schneider et al . [ 18 ] have proposed an affordable video approach to create videos for elicitation and validation of requirements . As a result a so - called vision video [ 12 ] , [ 18 ] gets produced which consists of the problem , meaningful video clips according to the feedback , and a value that requirements engineers and stakeholders want to convey . Such videos can be used while a workshop with stakeholders which is held ofﬂine or , as Nagel et al . [ 19 ] investigated , remotely . They used vision videos to elicit requirements online . Users could view a video and give opinions in a user group or individually . Second , there are works on assessing the usefulness of videos for the RE practices . For example , Brill et al . [ 15 ] have evaluated videos in comparison with use cases for validating requirements . They found that videos helped to clarify more requirements than use cases did under the same conditions . The mentioned two areas of research provide multiple bene - ﬁts of using videos on RE and general ideas of producing such videos but lack detailed guidelines on how to communicate requirements with videos . Only Karras and Schneider [ 20 ] have proposed guidelines on the production of vision videos for software professionals . They focused on aspects related to videos like preproduction , shooting , and postproduction . However , according to our best knowledge , none analyzed a database of existing videos to learn more about them or to investigate which and how requirements are expressed which we intend to do . Another group of related works constitutes research on practices applied to manage NFRs . Researchers and prac - titioners strive to ﬁnd methods and techniques that would support requirements engineers in communicating NFRs to stakeholders . Researchers , for example , try to ﬁnd the best way to document requirements in certain contexts such as agile environements [ 9 ] , large scale contexts [ 21 ] , use structured text to support expressing NFRs ( e . g . Planguage [ 22 ] ) , investigate templates to help with ambiguity and correctness issues ( e . g . , Eckhardt et al . [ 23 ] ) , use graphical notations like softgoals ( e . g . , [ 8 ] ) . There is a scarcity of works on using videos to commu - nicate NFRs . Within our review , we found only the work by Kopczynska et al . [ 24 ] in which they found that it is valuable to document NFRs during elicitation workshops in the on - the - ﬂy manner . Such documentation combines videos and text . Thus , out paper is the ﬁrst attempt to understand how NFRs can be communicated using videos . III . E MPIRICAL S TUDY The goal of our study is to investigate whether videos can be used to communicate NFRs . To achieve the goal we decided to answer the following research questions : RQ1 . Do videos contain NFRs ? RQ2 . Which NFRs are communicated in videos ? RQ3 . How are NFRs expressed in videos ? Answering RQ1 and RQ2 would allow us to learn if people use videos to express NFRs , and if so , which ones are ad - dressed , e . g . , if usability , security , time behavior are included in videos . We formulated RQ3 to get a better understanding by what means people express NFRs in videos , e . g . , if they use annotation , some actors express the NFRs with mimics , the model of a mobile phone is clearly visible in the video . Since the study is an early empirical investigation and the ﬁrst attempt to analyze videos with the aim to identify frag - ments / scenes communicating requirements , we also decided to gather lessons learned so that they can be used to improve future work and open the discussion about the challenges . In order to reliably and comprehensibly answer the research questions , we need to study different types of videos ( e . g . , product videos used to present some software systems , vision videos used to convey some idea of IT systems , ad videos used in the marketing of IT systems ) and different IT systems ( e . g . , with regard to the type - software , hardware or mix , to the domain - banking , manufacturing , etc . , architecture - web , mobile , desktop systems , etc . ) . In the paper , we decided to fo - cus on vision videos as they are those videos that communicate the idea of IT systems and are used to validate it , and hence , according to our initial impression , shall communicate both functional and non - functional requirements . We decided to analyze the videos that concern IT systems with both hardware and software part and are dedicated to an ordinary person . The latter decision follows from the desire to cover a broad range of systems and from sampling video by convenience . A . Videos While planning the study we started cooperation with the Software Engineering Group at the Leibniz University Han - nover . For the last few years they have conducted research on vision videos and created a database of such videos [ 20 ] . We were granted access to the database for the purpose of conducting the research study . The database consists of the videos prepared by staff as well as by the students . Students create vision videos in a laboratory course called vision video lab . They have ﬁrstly learned how to make a good vision video according to the guidelines from Karras and Schneider [ 20 ] . Then they have developed concrete scenarios of vision videos . After editing the scenarios , they make vision videos and present the vision videos in the course . 306 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . TABLE I D ESCRIPTION OF VIDEOS USED DURING THE STUDY . ID Step Type Description 1 Study Preparation Staff Video about a system incl . a mobile application supporting shopping . 2 Study Preparation Students Video about a system ( a mobile app . plus device ) to support people staying hydrated . 3 Study Preparation Students Video about an intelligent refrigerator supported by a mobile application . 4 Study Preparation External Video about a system of artiﬁcial intelligence aiming to minimize car accidents https : / / vimeo . com / 234685357 5 Study Execution Staff Video about a system incl . a mobile application supporting shopping . A different idea and system than in video 1 . 6 Study Execution Students Video about ( a mobile app . plus device ) to support people staying hydrated . A different idea and system than in video 2 . 7 Study Execution Students Video about an intelligent refrigerator supported by a mobile application . A different idea and system than in video 3 . 8 Study Execution Students Video about a system to support shopping so that products do not get wasted ( a mobile app . plus device ) . 9 Study Execution Students Video about ( a mobile app . plus device ) to support people staying hydrated . A different idea and system than in video 2 and 6 . Before creation of mentioned vision videos above , the staff and the students were given a general vision / idea of the future software product . The staff and the students were not given concrete requirements : they envisioned rough requirements and visualized these requirements through vision videos . A vision video serves as a data source for eliciting further requirements , e . g . NFRs . Hence , in this study , we analyze the existing vision videos and try to elicit NFRs from the videos . In the study preparation step , we used 4 videos : 1 prepared by staff , 2 by students , and 1 external vision video . During the study execution , we used 5 randomly selected vision videos created by students . ( See Table I for short description ) . B . Study procedure Our study constitutes of two steps : preparation and execution . The study preparation step aimed to develop the coding guidelines and select the tool which would allow us to code the videos . Our ﬁrst decision concerned the choice of the deﬁnition of NFRs and their categorization approach . We decided that we will stick to the one by Kopczynska et al . [ 6 ] and the we will categorize NFRs using the subcharacteristics deﬁned in the standard ISO25010 [ 25 ] . Then , the two authors individually using spreadsheets performed a pilot coding of 4 videos . We used the ISO25010 subcharacteristics and identi - ﬁed the ways the NFRs were expressed ( depicted ) in the video . Next , we met and discussed each coding , deﬁned a list of the ways to express NFRs , and created coding guidelines . We also decided to change spreadsheets to the Label Studio application , and to extend the subcharacteristics of the ISO25010 by context - and user characteristic . According to our experience , the two characteristics are often the basis for some NFRs or NFRs themselves . The study execution step requires the following activities : 1 ) Select videos to analyze – in our study , we selected randomly 5 vision videos from the database ( see Sec - tion III - A 2 ) Place the selected videos in the tool that allows perform - ing the coding ( annotation ) – we uploaded the videos to the Label Studio application earlier deployed in our in - ternal infrastructure and conﬁgured ( https : / / labelstud . io ) 3 ) Individual coding – each researcher individually shall perform the coding of each of the selected videos in the following way . A researcher is watching a video and when they identify a requirement being communicated within the video they shall stop watich and : a ) Mark the fragment / scene of the video by selecting the start and end b ) Assign the codes to the marked scene : ( 1 ) code ( s ) stating the category of NFRs the scene commu - nicates ; ( 2 ) code ( s ) stating the way the NFR is communicated c ) Add any remarks to the marked scene 4 ) Result merging – the results shall be merged and compared , in our case we used automated scripts to compare the results of individual coding , some manual analysis , and then we discussed each code to make the ﬁnal decision about each marked scene . In this activ - ity , the measures used to monitor agreement between researchers shall be calculated and communicated . We used Cohen κ and overall positive agreement . As a result , some adjustments to the coding guidelines , which do not threaten the study goal , procedure , and previous results , might be added . Individual coding and Result merging can be executed iteratively to monitor the process and mitigate any identiﬁed risk factors . We ﬁrst executed the two activities for 3 videos , and then for the two remaining ones . C . Threats to validity In the following paragraphs , using the guidelines provided by Wohlin et al . [ 26 ] , we discuss the validity threats that we identiﬁed as having an impact on our study . The main threat to Conclusion validity concerns the reliability of measures that follows from the subjectivity of quality evaluation . The analysis of videos was performed by two researchers with experience in requirements analysis of minimum 4 years . Also , detailed guidelines on how to perform the task were created . To minimize the bias , we monitored the reliability of this evaluation using Cohen κ and overall agreement ( p 0 ) . We obtained the following values : ( 1 ) coding the ﬁrst 3 videos : κ = 0 . 46 and p 0 = 0 . 23 , ( 2 ) coding the next 2 videos κ = 0 . 5 and p 0 = 0 . 31 . The values suggest moderate agreement between reviewers , however since one of the researchers is less experienced in the NFRs area , the increasing values of measures prove the learning process . Additionally , just three codes from the less experienced researchers were excluded after the discussion , the other codes were conﬁrmed by both researchers . Although this action mitigates the risk , it obvi - ously does not eliminate it . 307 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . Sub Characteristic : Operability How does the vision video depict this characteristic ? User using device 03 : 01 03 : 04 Video 9 : Hydra Sub Characteristics : Interoperability , Operability , Time behavior How does the vision video depict these characteristics ? Function execution , Showing screen , User using device 02 : 58 Video 5 : Shopping in the village 02 : 35 Fig . 1 . Selected Coding Results of NFRs ( the pictures are cropped from the original video frames ) Another threat concerns using vision videos prepared by novice software engineers . On one hand , the videos might not be as professional as they would be when created by experienced requirements engineers , on another , those working in industry might also have no or low experience in creating such videos . Moreover , there are no worldwide standards for such videos , and the authors of the vision videos went through the tutorials given by experts and investigators of vision videos to provide them with the best and up - to - date knowledge on this topic which mitigates the risk . Internal validity . In the study we used a tool for labeling multimedia . However , it was difﬁcult to code the whole scene concerning some NFRs due to the operability reasons and the subjectivity of researchers in determining its start and end . Thus , it might inﬂuence the quality of the coding process negatively , and some additional manual analysis had to be introduced to match video scenes and clean the codes . Construct validity . In the study we followed the deﬁni - tion of an NFR by Kopczynska et al . [ 6 ] . Taking other deﬁnitions , from the multiple existing ones , could lead to other conjectures . Moreover , our coding was based on the ISO25010 standard [ 25 ] . Using other standards to determine the categories of NFRs might also result in other conclusions . Another threat is related to the lack of a commonly accepted list of the ways NFRs might be expressed in videos . The list was developed in the study preparation step , however , it might not be complete . External validity . First , the results of some recent studies show that the decision to use artifacts created by students does not seem to threaten the external validity [ 27 ] and many practitioners are not experts in RE , they miss experience and qualiﬁcations [ 28 ] . Finally , the dataset of videos used in the study does not cover all types and domains of IT systems . Therefore , we cannot safely generalize our ﬁndings to other domains , e . g . , web applications or medical domain . TABLE II I DENTIFIED NFR S WITH THEIR NUMBER Characteristic Number of NFRs Operability 23 Context characteristic 15 User characteristic 10 User interface aesthetics 9 Time behavior 8 Interoperability 6 Authenticity 2 User error protection 1 Functional correctness 1 IV . R ESULTS A . NFRs communicated in videos In each of the ﬁve analyzed videos we found on average 15 NFRs ( min . 13 , max . 16 ) . All videos communicated NFRs concerning operability , time behavior as well as user - and context characteristics . In Table II the number of identiﬁed NFRs per characteristic is presented . The top 3 most frequently communicated NFRs concerned operability ( e . g . , showing how to use a device , mechanisms how data is sorted or visualized to effectively display the information ) , context characteristics ( e . g . , showing the place in which hardware is used , showing platform on which an application is used ) , user characteristics ( e . g . , the age of users , the way the users live or work ) . B . Ways to express NFRs in videos We identiﬁed 15 different ways in which NFRs can be expressed in videos that we list in Table III . In Figure 1 we show two examples of codes . In the video 5 ( Shopping in the village ) , we see that the user is pressing a button on a small device that allows him to order a washing powder which was regarded as an operability requirement expressed by showing a user who is using the device . In the video 9 308 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . ( Hydra ) user is paring the bottle with the application to start using it ( user executes the function ) and we could also see what is displayed on the device , and how user uses the bottle and his mobile phone ( device ) . The scene was identiﬁed as one communicating requirements concerning Interoperability ( we could learn that in order to pair the bottle with a mobile phone the NFC communication technology would be used ) , Operability ( we could learn that one needs to place the bottle near a phone and choose proper communication technology ) , and Time behavior ( we could feel that the process happens extremely quickly ) . It shall be noted that one scene can be coded with multiple subcharacteristics – that is can convey multiple NFRs – and with multiple ways to express the NFRs . In the videos , up to 5 different ways per NFR were used to express it , with minimum of 1 and median of 3 . Narrator or captions clarifying a scene are most frequently used to support communicating requirements . V . D ISCUSSION A . Implications for practitioners With the study , we show that videos can be used to communicate NFRs and present which NFRs , for sure , can be expressed using this type of communication medium . Moreover , we provide a list of ways that can be used to express NFRs in videos . The list can support requirements engineers in creating such videos by using it as a checklist to trigger video design decisions or discussions . However , from our lessons learned , it follows that one scene can be coded differently by different coders , e . g . , one coder identiﬁed the same scene in the video Hydra ( see Figure 1 ) as Interoperability related requirement another as Time behavior related one and both identiﬁed same ways to express NFRs . Since videos are rich in ways they stimulate humans ( e . g . , sound , movement , captions ) , it might happen that different people will understand some scenes differently as they are sensitive to different types of stimuli . This risk shall be taken into account and mitigated while using videos ( e . g . , by adding additional scenes focusing on a desired NFR ) . While analyzing the data we identiﬁed a question - is the way we proposed to code the ways to express NFRs , and potentially other requirements , useful for practitioners or do they need more ﬁne - grained knowledge ? B . Implications for researchers Our study reports initial empirical results about communi - cating NFRs using videos , but also opens several discussion areas and areas to investigate in the future . First , it would be interesting to extend the study and analyze more videos , videos of different types ( e . g . , marketing or product videos ) , and videos regarding more types of IT systems ( e . g . , web or desktop apps , banking or game domains ) . Second , we measured the time dedicated to analyze the videos and it follows that for coding a video of duration up to 10 min . 1 - 2 hours per researchers are needed . Looking for the root causes we noticed that it is difﬁcult to identify scenes quickly ( usually one watches and after understating a scene TABLE III W AYS TO COMMUNICATE NFR S WITH THEIR NUMBER . Name Description Number User using device You can see a user who is using the device which is a part of the considered IT system . 28 Showing device You can see the device which is a part of the considered IT system . 26 Showing screen You can see the screen of the device ( e . g . , the screen of a mobile phone ) 19 Showing app - dynami - cally You can see how the app which is part of the considered IT system works ( e . g . , some changes of the screen ) 19 Showing user You can see the user of the considered IT system ( e . g . , they use the system ) 14 Narrator You can hear a voice describing some aspect of the considered IT system . 14 Function execution You can see how a function of a software appli - cation which is a part of IT system is executed ( e . g . , user inputs some data , clicksa button , gets the results and you know what is the use case ) 12 Captions You can read a text concerning the considered system . 10 Showing app - statically You can see the app which is part of the considered IT system ( e . g . , a screen of the app ) 10 Showing func result You can see the result of some function ( e . g . , user demonstrates the result of performing some actions ) 9 Showing product env You can see elements of the environment in which the considered IT system is used . 9 Showing input mean You can see the mean by which the input is provided to the considered IT system ( e . g . , you can see user providing data using voice ) 7 Others Any other not listed 7 User clariﬁes You can see user who explains some aspects of the considered IT system ( e . g . , user showing how to use some device ) 6 Sound info - output You can hear some sound informing about the considered IT system ( e . g . , conﬁrmation that some function has been executed ) 5 Reaction of user You can see the reaction of user regarding the concerned IT system ( e . g . , user gets a notiﬁcation from the IT system and performs some action ) 4 has to go back and forward multiple times to ﬁnd the start and the end and mark it ) . Moreover , since videos are stimulating the senses of humans by different means simultaneously ( e . g . , sight with pictures , movement , and captions together with sound ) , we found that it takes time to understand each fragment of video and realize what it is about . Thus , several questions arise , e . g . , how to make the process of coding videos more efﬁcient and easier ? Can we use some automation to support coding ? Can artiﬁcial intelligence mechanisms support humans in their activity ? Another open issue concerns a tool for co - labeling and anal - ysis of video datasets . We found spreadsheets not well - suited for this purpose and decided to use dedicated software . We found several solutions for video labeling , e . g . , V7 , Labelbox , Label Studio . But most of them are dedicated to labeling objects and tracing them . We could adjust only Label Studio for our purpose to assign a code to a scene / video fragment . The analysis part and merging results remained on our side . Thus , we believe tools that cover the whole coding process and are better suited for such research purposes would be valuable . Since videos can be understood differently by different people due to the richness of different simulation mechanisms the questions arise : what measures shall we use to monitor the 309 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . quality of coding ? are the measures used for coding text like Cohen κ or positive agreement well - suited for the purpose of video coding ? are the interpretations of the values of these measures relevant for video coding ? The last question follows from the issue : in 5 scenes one of the researchers spotted one type of NFR while the other another one . When comparing they agreed that they are the two NFRs communicated but each researcher claimed that at the coding time , the other NFR was not prevalent to him . Next , NFRs are tackling many heterogeneous aspects of IT systems and realizing if and which NFR a given frag - ment / scene is about is difﬁcult and time - consuming . Would a special approach to analyzing videos for NFR - related aspects be possible and valuable ? Another interesting issue would be to investigate the useful - ness of communicating NFRs using videos , e . g . , by conducting an empirical study with end users who use videos to elicit , validate requirements , or decide whether a product presented in the video is worth buying . Additionally , we would like to open the discussion on whether it would be interesting to investigate the usefulness of the identiﬁed ways to express NFRs to other types of requirements or requirement - related aspects such as functional requirements , feature requests , bugs etc . VI . C ONCLUSIONS The paper reports an early empirical investigation on whether videos and be used to communicate non - functional requirements ( NFRs ) . In the study ﬁve vision videos present - ing the ideas of different IT systems were analyzed and is the ﬁrst one investigating in such detail video content concerning requirements engineering . It follows from the analysis that videos can be used to communicate NFRs . Most frequently requirements concerning operability , user interface aesthetics , context and users were included in videos . Moreover , we iden - tiﬁed 15 different ways to express NFRs such as showing user using a device , showing the device , showing how functions are executed , adding captions . Moreover , with this paper , we open the discussion on ( 1 ) further investigation of this topic , and based on our lessons learned ( 2 ) how to conduct empirical studies concerning RE and videos . It would be interesting to extend the analysis using more videos , more types of videos ( e . g . , product or marketing videos ) , and videos on more types of IT systems . However , there are open issues such as effort , assuring quality , the subjectivity of analysis etc . , which might be further studied to make the process more efﬁcient and reliable . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] D . R . Lindstrom , “Five ways to destroy a development project , ” IEEE Softw . , vol . 10 , no . 5 , pp . 55 – 58 , 1993 . [ 2 ] B . Boehm and H . In , “Identifying quality - requirement conﬂicts , ” IEEE software , vol . 13 , no . 2 , pp . 25 – 35 , 1996 . [ 3 ] K . K . Breitman , J . C . S . Leite , and A . Finkelstein , “The world ae stage : a survey on requirements engineering using a real - life case study , ” Journal of the Brazilian Computer Society , vol . 6 , no . 1 , pp . 13 – 37 , 1999 . [ 4 ] B . Nuseibeh , “Ariane 5 : Who dunnit ? ” IEEE Software , vol . 14 , no . 3 , pp . 15 – 16 , 1997 . [ 5 ] J . Doerr , “Elicitation of a Complete Set of Non - Functional Require - ments , ” Ph . D . dissertation , University of Kaiserslautern , 2011 . [ 6 ] S . Kopczy´nska , J . Nawrocki , and M . Ochodek , “An empirical study on catalog of non - functional requirement templates : usefulness and mainte - nance issues , ” Information and software technology , vol . 103 , 2018 . [ 7 ] E . Groen , S . Kopczynska , M . Hauer , T . D . Krafft , and J . Doerr , “Users – the hidden software product quality experts , ” in IEEE Intl Requirements Eng . Conf . , 2017 . [ 8 ] J . Mylopoulos , L . Chung , and B . Nixon , “Representing and using nonfunctional requirements : A process - oriented approach , ” IEEE Trans - actions on software engineering , vol . 18 , no . 6 , pp . 483 – 497 , 1992 . [ 9 ] W . Behutiye , P . Rodr´ıguez , and M . Oivo , “Quality requirement doc - umentation guidelines for agile software development , ” IEEE Access , vol . 10 , pp . 70154 – 70173 , 2022 . [ 10 ] L . Ceci , “Moblie video in the united states - statistics & facts , ” 2023 , last accessed 2023 - 04 - 08 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . statista . com / topics / 2725 / mobile - video - in - the - united - states / # topicOverview [ 11 ] J . Melvin , “The state of video marketing 2023 , ” 2023 , last accessed on 2023 - Mar - 29 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . wyzowl . com / amazing - video - marketing - statistics / [ 12 ] O . Karras , K . Schneider , and S . A . Fricker , “Representing software project vision by means of video : A quality model for vision videos , ” Journal of Systems and Software , vol . 162 , p . 110479 , Apr 2020 . [ 13 ] L . R . Carter and A . Karatsolis , “Lessons from trying to develop a robust documentation exemplar , ” in Proc . of the 27th ACM Intl . Conf . on Design of Communication . ACM , 2009 , p . 199 – 204 . [ 14 ] O . Creighton , M . Ott , and B . Bruegge , “Software cinema - video - based requirements engineering , ” in 14th IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference ( RE’06 ) . IEEE , 2006 , pp . 109 – 118 . [ 15 ] O . Brill , K . Schneider , and E . Knauss , “Videos vs . use cases : Can videos capture more requirements under time pressure ? ” in Requirements Engineering : Foundation for Software Quality . Springer , 2010 . [ 16 ] W . E . Mackay , A . V . Ratzer , and P . Janecek , “Video artifacts for design : bridging the gap between abstraction and detail , ” in Proc . of Conf . on Designing interactive systems processes , practices , methods , and techniques - DIS ’00 . ACM Press , 2000 , p . 72 – 82 . [ 17 ] O . Creighton , M . Ott , and B . Bruegge , “Software cinema - video - based requirements engineering , ” in 14th IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference ( RE’06 ) . IEEE , Sep 2006 , p . 109 – 118 . [ 18 ] K . Schneider , M . Busch , O . Karras , M . Schrapel , and M . Rohs , “Reﬁning vision videos , ” in Requirements Engineering : Foundation for Software Quality , vol . 11412 . Springer , 2019 , p . 135 – 150 . [ 19 ] L . Nagel , J . Shi , and M . Busch , “Viewing vision videos online : Oppor - tunities for distributed stakeholders , ” in IEEE 29th Intl . Requirements Engineering Conference Workshops ( REW ) . IEEE , 2021 , p . 306 – 312 . [ 20 ] O . Karras and K . Schneider , An Interdisciplinary Guideline for the Production of Videos and Vision Videos by Software Professionals , 2021 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2001 . 06675 [ 21 ] W . Alsaqaf , M . Daneva , P . R . Anish , and R . Wieringa , “Analyzing safe practices with respect to quality requirements : Findings from a qualitative study , ” in PROFES . Springer , 2021 . [ 22 ] T . Gilb , Competitive Engineering : A Handbook for Systems and Software Engineering Management using Planguage . Butterworth - Heinemann , 2005 . [ 23 ] J . Eckhardt , A . Vogelsang , H . Femmer , and P . Mager , “Challenging incompleteness of performance requirements by sentence patterns , ” in Intl on Requirements Engineering Conf . IEEE , 2016 , pp . 46 – 55 . [ 24 ] S . Kopczy´nska , M . Mackowiak , and J . Nawrocki , “Structured meetings for non - functional requirements elicitation , ” Foundations of Computing and Decision Sciences , vol . 36 , 2011 . [ 25 ] International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) , ISO / IEC 25010 : 2011 - Systems and software engineering – Systems and software Quality Requirements and Evaluation ( SQuaRE ) , 2011 . [ 26 ] C . Wohlin , P . Runeson , M . H¨ost , M . C . Ohlsson , B . Regnell , and A . Wessl´en , Experimentation in software engineering . Springer Science & Business Media , 2012 . [ 27 ] N . Yusop , D . Zowghi , and D . Lowe , “The impacts of non - functional requirements in web system projects , ” Int . J . Value Chain Manag . , vol . 2 , no . 1 , pp . 18 – 32 , 2007 . [ 28 ] M . Kalinowski , M . Felderer , T . Conte , R . Spinola , R . Prikladnicki , D . Winkler , D . M . Fern´andez , and S . Wagner , “Preventing incom - plete / hidden requirements : reﬂections on survey data from Austria and Brazil , ” in Int . Conf . Softw . Qual . Springer , 2016 , pp . 63 – 78 . 310 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply .