Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1979 , Vol . 37 , No . 11 , 2098 - 2109 Biased Assimilation and Attitude Polarization : The Effects of Prior Theories on Subsequently Considered Evidence Charles G . Lord , Lee Ross , and Mark R . Lepper Stanford University People who hold strong opinions on complex social issues are likely to examine relevant empirical evidence in a biased manner . They are apt to accept " con - firming " evidence at face value while subjecting " discontinuing " evidence to critical evaluation , and as a result to draw undue support for their initial posi - tions from mixed or random empirical findings . Thus , the result of exposing contending factions in a social dispute to an identical body of relevant em - pirical evidence may be not a narrowing of disagreement but rather an in - crease in polarization . To test these assumptions and predictions , subjects supporting and opposing capital punishment were exposed to two purported studies , one seemingly confirming and one seemingly disconfirming their exist - ing beliefs about the deterrent efficacy of the death penalty . As predicted , both proponents and opponents of capital punishment rated those results and procedures that confirmed their own beliefs to be the more convincing and probative ones , and they reported corresponding shifts in their beliefs as the various results and procedures were presented . The net effect of such evalua - tions and opinion shifts was the postulated increase in attitude polarization . The human understanding when it has once adopted an opinion draws all things else to support and agree with it . And though there be a greater number and weight of instances to be found on the other side , yet these it either neglects and despises , or else by some distinction sets aside and rejects , in order that by this great and pernicious predetermination the authority of its former conclusion may remain inviolate . ( Bacon , 1620 / 1960 ) Often , more often than we care to admit , our attitudes on important social issues reflect only our preconceptions , vague impressions , and untested assumptions . We respond to social policies concerning compensatory edu - cation , water fluoridation , or energy conser - This research was supported in part by Research Grants MH - 26736 from the National Institute of Mental Health and BNS - 78 - 01211 from the Na - tional Science Foundation to Mark R . Lepper and Lee Ross . The authors would like to express their appreciation to Daryl Bern , Richard Nisbett , Robert Zajonc , and Mark Zanna for their thoughtful com - ments and suggestions on earlier drafts of this article , and to Lisa Burns for acting as the experi - menter . Requests for reprints should be sent to any of the authors , Department of Psychology , Stanford University , Stanford , California 94305 . vation in terms of the symbols or metaphors they evoke ( Abelson , 1976 ; Kinder & Kiewiet , Note 1 ) or in conformity with views expressed by opinion leaders we like or re - spect ( Katz , 19S7 ) . When " evidence " is brought to bear it is apt to be incomplete , biased , and of marginal probative value— typically , no more than a couple of vivid , concrete , but dubiously representative in - stances or cases ( cf . Abelson , 1972 ; Nisbett & Ross , in press ) . It is unsurprising , therefore , that important social issues and policies generally prompt sharp disagreements , even among highly concerned and intelligent citi - zens , and that such disagreements often sur - vive strenous attempts at resolution through discussion and persuasion . An interesting question , and one that prompts the present research , involves the consequences of introducing the opposing factions to relevant and objective data . This question seems particularly pertinent for con - temporary social scientists , who have fre - quently called for " more empirically based " social decision making ( e . g . , Campbell , 1969 ) . Very likely , data providing consistent and Copyright 1979 by the American Psychological Association , Inc . 0022 - 3514 / 79 / 3711 - 2098 $ 00 . 75 2098 BIASED ASSIMILATION 2099 unequivocal support for one or another posi - tion on a given issue can influence decision makers and , with sufficiently energetic dis - semination , public opinion at large . But what effects can be expected for more mixed or inconclusive evidence of the sort that is bound to arise for most complex social issues , especially where full - fledged experiments yielding decisive and easy - to - generalize results are a rarity ? Logically , one might expect mixed evidence to produce some moderation in the views expressed by opposing factions . At worst , one might expect such inconclusive evidence to be ignored . The present study examines a rather differ - ent thesis—one born in an analysis of the layperson ' s general shortcomings as an intui - tive scientist ( cf . Nisbett & Ross , in press ; Ross , 1977 ) and his more specific short - comings in adjusting unwarranted beliefs in the light of empirical challenges ( cf . Ross , Lepper , & Hubbard , 1975 ) . Our thesis is that belief polarization will increase , rather than decrease or remain unchanged , when mixed or inconclusive findings are assimilated by proponents of opposite viewpoints . This " polarization hypothesis " can be derived from the simple assumption that data relevant to a belief are not processed impartially . In - stead , judgments about the validity , reliability , relevance , and sometimes even the meaning of proffered evidence are biased by the ap - parent consistency of that evidence with the perceiver ' s theories and expectations . Thus individuals will dismiss and discount empirical evidence that contradicts their initial views but will derive support from evidence , of no greater probativeness , that seems consistent with their views . Through such biased assim - ilation even a random set of outcomes or events can appear to lend support for an entrenched position , and both sides in a given debate can have their positions bolstered by the same set of data . As the introductory quotation suggests , the notions of biased assimilation and resulting belief perseverance have a long history . Beyond philosophical speculations and a wealth of anecdotal evidence , considerable research attests to the capacity of preconcep - tions and initial theories to bias the consider - ation of subsequent evidence , including work on classic Einstellung effects ( Luchins , 1942 , 1957 ) , social influence processes ( Asch , 1946 ) , impression formation ( e . g . , Jones & Goethals , 1971 ) , recognition of degraded stimuli ( Bruner & Potter , 1964 ) , resistance to change of social attitudes and stereotypes ( Abelson , 1959 ; Allport , 1954 ) , self - fulfilling prophecies ( Merton , 1948 ; Rosenhan , 1973 ; Snyder , Tanke , & Berscheid , 1977 ) , and the persistence of " illusory correlations " ( Chap - man & Chapman , 1967 , 1969 ) . In a partic - ularly relevant recent demonstration , Ma - honey ( 1977 ) has shown that trained social scientists are not immune to theory - based evaluations . In this study , professional re - viewers ' judgments about experimental pro - cedures and resultant publication recom - mendations varied dramatically with the degree to which the findings of a study under review agreed or disagreed with the reviewers ' own theoretical predilections . Thus , there is considerable evidence that people tend to interpret subsequent evidence so as to maintain their initial beliefs . The biased assimilation processes underlying this effect may include a propensity to remember the strengths of confirming evidence but the weaknesses of disconfirming evidence , to judge confirming evidence as relevant and reliable but disconfirming evidence as irrelevant and unreliable , and to accept confirming evidence at face value while scrutinizing disconfirming evidence hypercritically . With confirming evi - dence , we suspect that both lay and profes - sional scientists rapidly reduce the complexity of the information and remember only a few well - chosen supportive impressions . With dis - confirming evidence , they continue to reflect upon any information that suggests less dam - aging " alternative interpretations . " Indeed , they may even come to regard the ambiguities and conceptual flaws in the data opposing their hypotheses as somehow suggestive of the fundamental correctness of those hypoth - eses . Thus , completely inconsistent or even random data—when " processed " in a suitably biased fashion—can maintain or even rein - force one ' s preconceptions . The present study was designed to examine both the biased assimilation processes that 2100 C . LORD , L . ROSS , AND M . LEPPER may occur when subjects with strong initial attitudes are confronted with empirical data concerning a controversial social issue and the consequent polarization of attitudes hypoth - esized to result when subjects with differing initial attitudes are exposed to a common set of " mixed " experimental results . The social controversy chosen for our investigation was the issue of capital punishment and its effec - tiveness as a deterrent to murder . This choice was made primarily because the issue is the subject of strongly held views that frequently do become the target of public education and media persuasion attempts , and has been the focus of considerable social science research in the last twenty years . Indeed , as our basic hypothesis suggests , contending factions in this debate often cite and derive encourage - ment from the same body of inconclusive correlational research ( Furman v . Georgia , 1972 ; Sarat & Vidmar , 1976 ; Sellin , 1967 ) . In the present experiment , we presented both proponents and opponents of capital punishment first with the results and then with procedural details , critiques , and rebut - tals for two studies dealing with the deterrent efficacy of the death penalty—one study con - firming their initial beliefs and one study dis - confirming their initial beliefs . We anticipated biased assimilation at every stage of this pro - cedure . First , we expected subjects to rate the quality and probative value of studies confirming their beliefs on deterrent efficacy more highly than studies challenging their beliefs . Second , we anticipated corresponding effects on subjects ' attitudes and beliefs such that studies confirming subjects ' views would exert a greater impact than studies discon - firming those views . Finally , as a function of these assimilative biases , we hypothesized that the net result of exposure to the conflicting results of these two studies would be an increased polarization of subjects ' beliefs on deterrent efficacy and attitudes towards capital punishment . Method Subjects A total of 1S1 undergraduates completed an in - class questionnaire that included three items on capital punishment . Two to four weeks later , 48 of these students were recruited to participate in a related experiment as partial fulfillment of a course require - ment . Twenty - four were " proponents " who favored capital punishment , believed it to have a deterrent effect , and thought most of the relevant research supported their own beliefs . Twenty - four were " op - ponents " who opposed capital punishment , doubted its deterrent effect , and thought that the relevant research supported their views . Procedure Upon entering the experiment , mixed groups of proponents and opponents were seated at a large table . The experimenter , blind to subjects ' attitudes , told them that they would each be asked to read 2 of 20 randomly selected studies on the deterrent efficacy of the death penalty and asked them to use their own " evaluative powers " in thinking about what the author ( s ) of the study did , what the critics had to say , and whether the research provided sup - port for one side or the other of this issue . The experimenter next showed subjects a set of 10 index cards , each containing a brief statement of the results of a single study . Each subject was asked to choose one card and read it silently . In reality , all 10 cards in any one session were identical , pro - viding either prodeterrent information , for example : Kroner and Phillips ( 1977 ) compared murder rates for the year before and the year after adoption of capital punishment in 14 states . In 11 of the 14 states , murder rates were lower after adoption of the death penalty . This research supports the deterrent effect of the death penalty . or antideterrent information , for example : Palmer and Crandall ( 1977 ) compared murder rates in 10 pairs of neighboring states with differ - ent capital punishment laws . In 8 of the 10 pairs , murder rates were higher in the state with capital punishment . This research opposes the deterrent effect of the death penalty . To control for order effects , half of the proponents and half of the opponents saw a " prodeterrence " result first , and half saw an " antideterrence " result first . The studies cited , although invented specifically for the present study , were characteristic of research found in the current literature cited in judicial decisions . After reading one of these " result cards , " subjects answered two sets of questions , on 16 - point scales , about changes in their attitudes toward capital punishment ( from —8 = more opposed , to 8 = more in favor ) and their beliefs about the deterrent efficacy of the death penalty ( from —8 = less belief that capital punishment has a deterrent effect , to 8 = more belief in the deterrent effect ) . One set of ques - tions examined change occasioned by the single piece of information they had just finished reading ; a second set of questions assessed the cumulative change BIASED ASSIMILATION 2101 produced by all of the materials read since the start of the experiment . 1 Next the experimenter distributed detailed research descriptions bearing code letters corresponding to those on the result cards . The descriptions gave details of the researchers ' procedure , reiterated the results , mentioned several prominent criticisms of the study " in the literature , " listed the authors ' rebuttals to some of the criticisms and depicted the data both in table form and graphically . After read - ing this more detailed description and critique of the first study , subjects were asked to judge how well or poorly the study had been conducted ( from —8 = very poorly done , to 8 = very well done ) , and how convincing the study seemed as evidence on the deterrent efficacy of capital punishment ( from —8 = completely unconvincing , to 8 = completely convinc - ing ) . " Following this evaluation , subjects were asked to write why they thought the study they had just read did or did not support the argument that capital punishment is a deterrent to murder , and then to answer a second set of attitude and belief change questions on the effects of the description alone and the effects of all experimental materials ( i . e . , the results and subsequent description and critique ) up to that point in time . Following completion of these questions , the entire procedure was repeated , with a second fictitious study reporting results opposite to those of the first . Again , subjects initially received only a brief description of the results of this second study but were then pro - vided with a detailed presentation of the procedure , results , and critiques . As before , subjects were asked to evaluate both the impact of each single piece of evidence and the impact of all experimental materials up to that point in the experiment on their attitudes toward capital punishment and their beliefs concern - ing its deterrent efficacy . To control for possible differences in the inherent plausibility of the two studies , two sets of materials were employed that interchanged the ostensible results of the two invented experiments . The overall design was thus completely counterbalanced with respect to subjects ' initial attitudes , order of confirm - ing vs . discontinuing evidence , and the association of the " before - after " vs . " adjacent states " designs with positive or negative results . 3 At the end of the pro - cedure , subjects were carefully debriefed concerning the fictitious nature of the studies and were asked not to reveal this deception to others . In addition to insuring that subjects understood the fictional nature of the experimental materials , this debriefing included discussion of the processes underlying the assimilation of evidence to previous theories and reassurance that a skeptical reaction to poorly designed research is often a praiseworthy cognitive response . Results Evaluations oj the Two Studies Our first hypothesis was that subjects hold - ing different initial positions would differ - entially evaluate the quality and " convincing - ness " of the same empirical studies and find - ings . The relevant evaluations , presented in Table 1 , revealed strong support for the hypothesized bias in favor of the study that confirmed subjects ' initial attitudes . A two - way analysis of variance ( Initial Attitude X Order of Presentation ) on the differences between ratings of convincingness of the prodeterrence and antideterrence stud - ies yielded only a main effect of initial atti - tude , F ( l , 44 ) = 32 . 07 , p < . 001 . Proponents 1 Since most of our subjects had reported initial positions at , or very close to , the ends of the attitude and belief scales used for selection pur - poses , our initial plan to assess attitude polariza - tion—in terms of difference scores assessing changes in subjects ' attitudes and beliefs on these same scales from these initial measures to the completion of the experiment—proved impossible . As a substi - tute , we employed three sorts of measures to assess attitude change . First , we asked subjects , after each new piece of information , to indicate any changes in their attitudes and beliefs occasioned by that single piece of information . Second , we asked sub - jects , at these same points , to report on " cumula - tive " changes in their attitudes and beliefs since the start of the experiment . Third , subjects were asked to keep " running records " of their attitudes and beliefs on enlarged versions of the scales ini - tially used for selection purposes . Although all of these measures individually raise some problems , the congruence of data across these different mea - surement devices gives us some confidence con - cerning the results reported . Indeed , because the results obtained on the " running record " measure so completely parallel the findings obtained on the cumulative change question depicted in Figures 1 and 2 , in terms of both the array of means and the obtained significance levels , the data from this measure will not be reported separately . 2 Subjects were also asked , at this point , whether they thought the researchers had favored or op - posed the death penalty and whether they thought an unbiased consideration should lead one to treat the study as evidence for or against capital punish - ment . Analyses on the first question showed only that subjects believed the researchers ' attitudes to coincide with their stated results . Analyses on the second question proved wholly redundant with those presented for the " convincingness " and " well done " questions . 3 Preliminary analyses were conducted to see if the particular association of positive versus nega - tive results with either the before - after or ad - jacent - states designs would affect the results ob - tained . There were no significant effects or inter - actions involving this variation in stimulus materials ; hence , the data were collapsed across this factor . 2102 C . LORD , L . ROSS , AND M . LEPPER Table 1 Evaluations of Prodeterrence and Antideterrence Studies by Proponents and Opponents of Capital Punishment Study Proponents Opponents Mean ratings of how well the two studies had been conducted ProdeterrenceAntideterrenceDifference 1 . 5 - 1 . 6 3 . 1 - 2 . 1 - . 3 - 1 . 8 Mean ratings of how convincing the two studies were as evidence on the deterrent efficacy of capital punishment ProdeterrenceAntideterrenceDifference 1 . 4 - 1 . 8 3 . 2 - 2 . 1 . 1 - 2 . 2 Note . Positive numbers indicate a positive evalua - tion of the study ' s convincingness or procedure . Negative numbers indicate a negative evaluation of the study ' s convincingness or procedure . regarded the prodeterrence study as signifi - cantly more convincing than the antideter - rence study , i ( 23 ) = S . I8 , p < . 001 , 4 regard - less of whether it was the " before - after " design that suggested the efficacy of capital punishment and the " adjacent states " design that refuted it , or vice versa . Opponents , by contrast , regarded the prodeterrence study as significantly less convincing than the anti - deterrence study , < ( 23 ) = - 3 . 02 , p < . 01 , again irrespective of which research design was purported to have produced which type of results . The same was true of the difference between ratings of how well done the two studies had been , F ( l , 44 ) = 33 . 52 , p < . 001 . 6 As above , proponents found the pro - deterrence study to have been better con - ducted than the antideterrence study , £ ( 23 ) = S . 37 , p < . 001 , whereas opponents found the prodeterrence study to have been less well conducted , / ( 23 ) = —2 . 80 , p < . 05 . As one might expect , the correlation between the " convincingness " and " well done " questions was substantial , r — . 67 , p < . 001 . These differing opinions of the quality of the two studies were also reflected in subjects ' written comments . At the risk of opening our - selves to a charge of " biased assimilation , " we present a set of subjects ' comments— selected for dramatic effect but not unrepre - sentative in content—in Table 2 . As these comments make clear , the same study can elicit entirely opposite evaluations from people who hold different initial beliefs about a complex social issue . This evidence of bias in subjects ' evaluations of the quality and convincingness of the two studies is consistent with the biased assimilation hypothesis and sets the stage for testing our further predic - tions concerning attitude and belief polariza - tion . Overall Attitude Polarization Given such biased evaluations , our primary hypothesis was that exposure to the " mixed " " data set comprised by the two studies would result in a further polarization of subjects ' attitudes and beliefs rather than the con - vergence that an impartial consideration of these inconclusive data might warrant . To test this hypothesis requires a consideration 4 All p values reported in this article are based on two - tailed tests of significance . 5 In order to examine possible main effects of either study direction or initial attitude on sub - jects ' ratings of how convincing and how well done the studies were—findings that would not be por - trayed in the difference score analysis reported—a three - way analysis of variance ( Initial Attitude X Order of Presentation X Direction of Study ) was also performed . There were no main effects of study direction on either measure . A main effect of initial attitude—indicating that opponents evaluated the total set of evidence more negatively than did pro - ponents—proved significant for the " well done " question , F ( 1 , 44 ) = 4 . 69 , p < . 05 , but not for the " convincing " question , F ( l , 44 ) = 1 . 53 , ns . 6 The term mixed , we should emphasize , refers to the fact that one study yielded evidence confirming the deterrent efficacy of the death penalty , whereas the other study yielded evidence disconfirming such efficacy ( with appropriate counterbalancing of pur - ported procedures and purported results ) . Subjects , regardless of initial position , clearly recognized this discrepancy between results , as will be apparent in our analyses of their responses to the simple state - ments of the study ' s main findings . We do not mean to imply that the subjects " phenomenologi - cally " judged the two studies to be of equal pro - bative value ; indeed , as indicated in the preceding discussion , identical procedures were clearly judged to differ in their probativeness depending on the congruity between the study ' s outcomes and the subject ' s initial beliefs . BIASED ASSIMILATION 2103 Table 2 Selected Comments on Prodeterrence and Antideterrence Studies by Proponents and Opponents of Capital Punishment Comments on Subject Prodeterrence study Antideterrence study Set 1 materials S8 Proponent " It does support capital punishment in that it presents facts showing that there is a deterrent effect and seems to have gathered data properly . " S24 Proponent " The experiment was well thought out , the data collected was valid , and they were able to come up with responses to all criticisms . " 535 Opponent " The study was taken only 1 year before and 1 year after capital punishment was reinstated . To be a more effective study they should have taken data from at least 10 years before and as many years as possible after . " 536 Opponent " I don ' t feel such a straightforward conclusion can be made from the data collected . " " The evidence given is relatively meaningless without data about how the overall crime rate went up in those years . " " There were too many flaws in the picking of the states and too many variables involved in the experi - ment as a whole to change my opinion . " " The states were chosen at random , so the results show the average effect capital punishment has across the nation . The fact that 8 out of 10 states show a rise in murders stands as good evidence . " " There aren ' t as many uncontrolled variables in this experiment as in the other one , so I ' m still willing to believe the conclusion made . " Set 2 materials 514 Proponent " It shows a good direct comparison between contrasting death penalty effectiveness . Using neighboring states helps to make the experi - ment more accurate by using similar locations . " 515 Proponent " It seems that the researchers studied a carefully selected group of states and that they were care - ful in interpreting their results . " S25 Opponent " The data presented are a randomly drawn set of 10 . This fact seems to be the study ' s biggest problem . Also many other factors are not accounted for which are very important to the nature of the results . " S38 Opponent " There might be very different circumstances between the sets of two states , even though they were sharing a border . " " I don ' t think they have complete enough collection of data . Also , as suggested , the murder rates should be expressed as percentages , not as straight figures . " " The research didn ' t cover a long enough period of time to prove that capital punishment is not a deterrent to murder . " " The murder rates climbed in all but two of the states after new laws were passed and no strong evidence to contradict the researchers has been presented . " " These tests were comparing the same state to itself , so I feel it could be a fairly good measure . " of subjects ' final attitudes , after exposure to both studies and related critiques and rebut - tals , relative to the start of the experiment . The relevant data provide strong support for the polarization hypothesis . Asked for their final attitudes relative to the experi - 2104 C . LORD , L . ROSS , AND M . LEPPER Table 3 Mean Attitude and Belief Changes for a Single Piece of Information Issue and study Initial attitudes Proponents Opponents Results only Capital punishment ProdeterrenceAntideterrenceCombined Deterrent efficacy Prodeterrence AntideterrenceCombined 1 . 3 - 0 . 7 0 . 6 1 . 9 - 0 . 9 1 . 0 0 . 4 - 0 . 9 - 0 . 5 0 . 7 - 1 . 6 - 0 . 9 Details , data , critiques , rebuttals Capital punishment Prodeterrence 0 . 8 - 0 . 9 Antideterrence 0 . 7 - 0 . 8 Combined 1 . 5 —1 . 7 Deterrent efficacy Prodeterrence 0 . 7 - 1 . 0 Antideterrence 0 . 7 - 0 . 8 Combined 1 . 4 - 1 . 8 Note . Positive numbers indicate a more positive attitude or belief about capital punishment and its deterrent effect . Negative numbers indicate a more negative attitude or belief about capital punishment and its deterrent effect . ment ' s start , proponents reported that they were more in favor of capital punishment , t ( 23 ) = S . 07 , p < . 001 , whereas opponents reported that they were less in favor of capital punishment , t ( 23 ) = - 3 . 34 , p < . 01 . In a two - way analysis of variance ( Initial Attitude X Order of Presentation ) , the effect of initial attitude was highly significant , F ( 1 , 44 ) = 30 . 06 , p < . 001 , and neither the order effect nor the interaction approached significance . Similar results characterized subjects ' beliefs about deterrent efficacy . Proponents reported greater belief in the deterrent effect of capital punishment , i ( 23 ) = 4 . 26 , p < . 001 , whereas opponents reported less belief in this deterrent effect , < ( 23 ) = - 3 . 79 , p < . OQl . Final attitudes toward capital punishment and beliefs concerning deterrent efficacy were highly correlated , r = . 88 , p < . 001 . Such results provide strong support for the main experimental hypothesis that inconclu - sive or mixed data will lead to increased polarization rather than to uncertainty and moderation . Moreover , the degree of polar - ization shown by individual subjects was pre - dicted by differences in subjects ' willingness to be less critical of procedures yielding sup - portive evidence than of procedures yielding nonsupportive evidence . Significant correla - tions were found between overall attitude change regarding capital punishment and dif - ferences in ratings of both how convincing , r = . 56 , p < . 001 , and how well done , r - . 56 , p < . 001 , the studies were . Overall changes in beliefs in deterrent efficacy pro - duced comparable correlations of . 53 and . 57 , both ps < . 001 . Components 0 } Attitude Polarization In view of this strong evidence of overall attitude polarization , it is worth examining the course of attitude polarization as subjects ' opinions were successively assessed after exposure to the first study , the details and critiques of the first study , the results of the second study , and the details and critiques of the second study . At each stage , it will be recalled , subjects were asked about the impact of the single piece of information they had just considered and the cumulative impact of all information presented to that point . Let us first examine the reported effects of single segments of evidence and then the effects of accumulated evidence over time . Effect oj Exposure to the Results of Each Study Considering the result cards as single pieces of evidence , both proponents and opponents reported shifting their attitudes in the direc - tion of the stated results for both the pro - deterrence , < ( 47 ) = 4 . 67 , p < . 001 , and anti - deterrence , < ( 47 ) = - 5 . 15 , p < . 001 , studies . As shown in the top half of Table 3 , however , subjects ' responses to the two studies alfo varied with initial attitude . Proponents tended to be influenced more by the prodeterrence study and opponents more by the anti - deterrence study . Thus a two - way analysis of variance ( Initial Attitude X Order of Pre - BIASED ASSIMILATION 2105 sentation ) on combined change from the two result cards considered individually yielded only a main effect of initial attitude for both attitudes toward the death penalty , F ( \ , 44 ) = 6 . 3S , p < . 02 , 7 and beliefs about its deter - rent effect , F ( l , 44 ) = 10 . 37 , p < . 01 . Inter - estingly , the analysis of beliefs regarding deterrent efficacy also showed an unantici - pated interaction effect , F ( l , 44 ) = 7 . 48 , p < . 01 , with proponents showing a differential response to results alone regardless of order of presentation but opponents showing a dif - ferential response to results alone only when the confirming study was presented first . Effect oj Exposure to Procedures and Data , Critiques and Rebuttals When provided with a more detailed description of the procedures and data , to - gether with relevant critiques and authors ' rebuttals , subjects seemed to ignore the stated results of the study . As shown in the bottom half of Table 3 , both proponents and oppo - nents interpreted the additional information , relative to the results alone , as strongly sup - porting their own initial attitudes . Detailed descriptions of either the prodeterrence or the antideterrence study , with accompanying critiques , caused proponents to favor capital punishment more and believe in its deterrent efficacy more , but caused opponents to oppose capital punishment more and believe in its deterrent efficacy less . A two - way analysis of variance ( Initial Attitude x Order of Pre - sentation ) on attitude change for the two descriptions combined yielded only a signifi - cant main effect of initial attitude for both the capital punishment issue , F ( l , 44 ) = 28 . 10 , p < . 001 , and the deterrent efficacy question , F ( l , 44 ) = 26 . 93 , p < . 001 . Changes in Attitudes Across Time Subjects ' reported changes in attitudes and beliefs , relative to the start of the experiment , following exposure to each of the four sep - arate pieces of information are depicted in Figure 1 for attitudes concerning capital punishment and in Figure 2 for beliefs con - cerning deterrent efficacy . These data , por - trayed separately for subjects who received first either the prodeterrence study or the antideterrence study , provide a more detailed view of the attitude polarization process . They allow , as well , an examination of the hypothesized " rebound effect , " that the pro - vision of any plausible reason for discounting data that contradict one ' s preconceptions will eliminate the effects that mere knowledge of those data may have produced . The existence of such a " rebound effect " is obvious from examination of these figures . Whether they encountered the discontinuing result first or second , both proponents and opponents seemed to be swayed momentarily by this evidence , only to revert to their former attitudes and beliefs ( and in 23 % of the individual cases , to even more extreme positions ) after inspecting the procedural details and data , and the critiques and rebut - tals found in the literature . Across all sub - jects , this rebound in opinions proved signifi - cant for both the capital punishment , £ ( 47 ) = 4 . 43 , p < . 001 , and deterrent efficacy , / ( 47 ) = 4 . 58 , p < . 001 , issues . By contrast , no compensating rebound effects resulted from reading the descriptions and critiques of stud - ies supporting subjects ' initial attitudes , for either capital punishment , < ( 47 ) = . 60 , ns , or deterrent efficacy , £ ( 47 ) — . 23 , ns . Discussion The results of the present experiment pro - vide strong and consistent support for the attitude polarization hypothesis and for the biased assimilation mechanisms postulated to underlie such polarization . The net effect of exposing proponents and opponents of capital punishment to identical evidence—studies ostensibly offering equivalent levels of sup - port and disconfirmation—was to increase further the gap between their views . The mechanisms responsible for this polarization of subjects ' attitudes and beliefs were clearly 7 In order to rule out the possibility that direc - tion of study interacted with initial attitude , a three - way analysis of variance ( Initial Attitude X Order of Presentation X Direction of Study ) Was also performed on these data . The relevant interac - tion term did not approach significance , F ( l , 44 ) = 1 . 62 , ns . 2106 C . LORD , L . ROSS , AND M . LEPPER MORE IN FAVOR OF CAPITAL PUNISHMENT NO CHANGE MORE OPPOSED TO CAPITAL PUNISHMENT MORE IN FAVOR OF CAPITAL PUNISHMENT NO CHANGE MORE OPPOSED TO CAPITAL PUNISHMENT 1 1 H PROPONENTS Q OPPONENTS - ll i . L _ J 1 1 \ % % u \ - u PRO - DETERRENCE ANTI - DETERRENCE RESULTS DETAILS RESULTS DET 1 1 1 AILS TIME - 1 1 1 1 - B 71 AN n - DETERREf JCE - M B - - PRO - DETERRENCE RESULTS DETAILS RESULTS DETAILS + j + 2 + 1 0 - 1 —2 Figure J . Top panel : Attitude changes on capital punishment relative to start of experiment as reported across time by subjects who received prodeterrence study first . Bottom panel : Attitude changes on capital punishment relative to start of experiment as reported across time by subjects who received antideterrence study first . suggested by correlational analyses . Subjects ' decisions about whether to accept a study ' s findings at face value or to search for flaws and entertain alternative interpretations seemed to depend far less on the particular procedure employed than on whether the study ' s results coincided with their existing beliefs . The Normative Issue It is worth commenting explicitly about the normative status of our subjects ' apparent biases . First , there can be no real quarrel with a willingness to infer that studies supporting one ' s theory - based expectations are more probative than , or methodologically superior to , studies that contradict one ' s expectations . When an " objective truth " is known or strongly assumed , then studies whose out - comes reflect that truth may reasonably be given greater credence than studies whose outcomes fail to reflect that truth . Hence the physicist would be " biased , " but appropri - ately so , if a new procedure for evaluating the speed of light were accepted if it gave the " right answer " but rejected if it gave the " wrong answer . " The same bias leads most of us to be skeptical about reports of mirac - ulous virgin births or herbal cures for cancer , and despite the risk that such theory - based and experience - based skepticism may render us unable to recognize a miraculous event when it occurs , overall we are surely well served by our bias . Our subjects ' willingness to impugn or defend findings as a function of their conformity to expectations can , in part , be similarly defended . Only the strength of BIASED ASSIMILATION 2107 their initial convictions in the face of the existing inconclusive social data and argu - ments can be regarded as " suspect . " Our subjects ' main inferential shortcoming , in other words , did not lie in their inclination to process evidence in a biased manner . Will - ingness to interpret new evidence in the light of past knowledge and experience is essential for any organism to make sense of , and respond adaptively to , its environment . Rather , their sin lay in their readiness to use evidence already processed in a biased man - ner to bolster the very theory or belief that initially " justified " the processing bias . In so doing , subjects exposed themselves to the familiar risk of making their hypotheses un - falsifiable—a serious risk in a domain where it is clear that at least one party in a dispute holds a false hypothesis—and allowing them - selves to be encouraged by patterns of data that they ought to have found troubling . Through such processes laypeople and pro - fessional scientists alike find it all too easy to cling to impressions , beliefs , and theories that have ceased to be compatible with the latest and best evidence available ( Mahoney , 1976 , 1977 ) . Polarization : Real or Merely Reported ? Before further pursuing the broader impli - cations of the present demonstration , it is necessary to consider an important question raised by our procedure : Did our subjects really show change ( i . e . , polarization ) in their private beliefs about the desirability and deterrent efficacy of capital punishment ? Cer - tainly they told us , explicitly , that their MORE BELIEF THAT CAPITAL PUNISHMENT HAS DETERRENT EFFECT NO CHANGE MORE DISBELIEF THAT CAPITAL PUNISHMENT HAS DETERRENT EFFECT MORE BELIEF THAT CAPITAL PUNISHMENT HAS DETERRENT EFFECT NO CHANGE MORE DISBELIEF THAT CAPITAL PUNISHMENT HAS DETERRENT EFFECT 1 1 1 HI PROPONENTS I ] OPPONENTS 1 1 In . I _ L _ J u PRO - DETERRENCE ANTI - DETERRENCE — - « RESULTS DETAILS RESULTS DETAILS 1 1 I - m I ! ! f ! n - E ^ j 1 1 — ' ANTI - DETERRENCE PRO - DETERRENCE - - - - RESULTS DETAILS RESULTS DETAILS 1 1 1 + 3 + 2 + 1 - 1 - 2 + 3 + 2 + 1 _ 1 - 2 - 3 TIME Figure 2 . Top panel : Belief changes on capital punishment ' s deterrent efficacy relative to start of experiment as reported across time by subjects who received prodeterrence study first . Bottom panel : Belief changes on capital punishment ' s deterrent efficacy relative to start of experiment as reported across time by subjects who received antideterrence study first . 2108 C . LORD , L . ROSS , AND M . LEPPER attitudes and beliefs did change after each new piece of evidence was presented , and from the beginning to the end of the experi - ment . Moreover , they did show a willingness to report a shift in their attitudes in the direc - tion of findings that were contrary to their beliefs , at least until those findings were exposed to methodological scrutiny and pos - sible alternative interpretations . Nevertheless , it could be argued that subjects were not reporting real shifts in attitudes but instead were merely reporting what they believed to be a rational or appropriate response to each increment in the available evidence . Although we believe that it remains an impressive demonstration of assimilation biases to show that contending factions both believe the same data to justify their position " objectively , " the potential limitations of the present mea - sures should be kept in mind in evaluating the relationship of this study to prior polarization research . As noted earlier ( see Footnote 1 ) our intended strategy of assessing direct changes from our initial selection measures of attitudes and beliefs , rather than asking sub - jects to report such changes within the experi - ment , was neither feasible nor appropriate , given the necessity of selecting subjects with strong and consistent initial views on this issue . Potentially such methodological prob - lems could be overcome in subsequent re - search through the use of less extreme samples or , perhaps more convincingly , by seeing whether biased assimilation of mixed evidence will make subjects more willing to act on their already extreme beliefs . Belief Perseverance and Attribution Processes The present results importantly extend the growing body of research on the persever - ance of impressions and beliefs . Two of the present authors and their colleagues have now amassed a number of studies showing that , once formed , impressions about the self ( Ross et al . , 1975 ; Jennings , Lepper , & Ross , Note 2 ; Lepper , Ross , & Lau , Note 3 ) , beliefs about other people ( Ross et al . , 1975 ) , or theories about functional relationships be - tween variables ( Anderson , Lepper , & Ross , Note 4 ) can survive the total discrediting of the evidence that first gave rise to such beliefs . In essence , these prior studies demon - strate that beliefs can survive the complete subtraction of the critical formative evidence on which they were initially based . In a com - plementary fashion , the present study shows that strongly entrenched beliefs can also sur - vive the addition of nonsupportive evidence . These findings pose some fundamental ques - tions for traditional attribution models . To the extent that beliefs and impressions can be shown to persevere in the face of subsequent challenging data , we need a " top down " rather than - —or perhaps in conjunction with —a " bottom up " approach ( cf . Bobrow & Norman , 1975 ) to the question of how indi - viduals extract meaning from their social environment . Instead of viewing people as impartial , data - driven processors , the present research suggests our models must take into account the ways in which intuitive scientists assess the relevance , reliability , representative - ness , and implications of any given sample of data or behavior within the framework of the hypotheses or implicit theories they bring to the situation ( Lepper , 1977 ) . In everyday life , as well as in the course of scientific controversies ( cf . Kuhn , 1970 ) , the mere availability of contradictory evidence rarely seems sufficient to cause us to abandon our prior beliefs or theories . Social Science Research and Social Policy We conclude this article , as we began it , by considering the important links between social policy , public attitudes and beliefs about such policy , and the role of the social scientist . If our study demonstrates anything , it surely demonstrates that social scientists can not expect rationality , enlightenment , and consensus about policy to emerge from their attempts to furnish " objective " data about burning social issues . If people of oppos - ing views can each find support for those views in the same body of evidence , it is small wonder that social science research , dealing with complex and emotional social issues and forced to rely upon inconclusive designs , measures , and modes of analysis , will fre - quently fuel rather than calm the fires of debate . BIASED ASSIMILATION 2109 Reference Notes 1 . Kinder , D . R . , & Kiewiet , D . R . Economic griev - ances and political behavior : The role of personal discontents and symbolic judgments . Paper pre - sented at the meeting of the American Psycho - logical Association , San Francisco , August 1977 . 2 . Jennings , D . L . , Lepper , M . R . , & Ross , L . Per - sistence of impressions of personal persuasiveness : Perseverance of erroneous self assessments outside the debriefing paradigm . Unpublished manuscript , Stanford University , 1978 . 3 . Lepper , M . R . , Ross , L . , & Lau , R . R . Persistence of inaccurate and discredited personal impres - sions : A field demonstration of attributional perseverance . Unpublished manuscript , Stanford University , 1979 . 4 . Anderson , C . A . , Lepper , M . R . , & Ross , L . Theory perseverance : The persistent influence of dis - credited information . Unpublished manuscript , Stanford University , 1979 . References Abelson , R . P . Modes of resolution of belief dilemmas . Conflict Resolution , 1959 , 3 , 343 - 352 . Abelson , R . P . Are attitudes necessary ? In B . T . King & E . McGuinnies ( Eds . ) , Attitudes , conflict , and social change . New York : Academic Press , 1972 . Abelson , R . P . Script processing in attitude formation and decision making . In J . S . Carroll and J . W . Payne ( Eds . ) , Cognition and social behavior . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum , 1976 . Allport , G . W . The nature of prejudice . Reading , Mass . : Addison - Wesley , 1954 . Asch , S . Forming impressions of personality . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 1946 , 41 , 258 - 290 . Bacon , F . The new organon and related writings . New York : Liberal Arts Press , 1960 . ( Originally published , 1620 . ) Bobrow , D . G . , & Norman , D . A . Some principles of memory schemata . In D . G . Bobrow & A . Collins ( Eds . ) , Representation and understanding : Studies in cognitive science . New York : Academic Press , 1975 . Bruner , J . S . , & Potter , M . C . Interference in visual recognition . Science , 1964 , 144 , 424 - 425 . Campbell , D . T . On reforms as experiments . Amer - ican Psychologist , 1969 , 24 , 409 - 429 . Chapman , L . , & Chapman , J . The genesis of popular but erroneous psychodiagnostic observations . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 1967 , 72 , 193 - 204 . Chapman , L . , & Chapman , J . Illusory correlation as an obstacle to the use of valid psychodiagnostic signs . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 1969 , 74 , 271 - 280 . Furman v . Georgia , 408 U . S . 238 , 1972 . Jones , E . E . , & Goethals , G . R . Order effects in impression formation . Attribution context and the nature of the entity . In E . E . Jones et al . ( Eds . ) , Attribution : Perceiving the causes of behavior , Morristown , N . J . : General Learning Press , 1971 . Katz , E . The two - step flow of communication : An up - to - date report on an hypothesis . Public Opinion Quarterly , 1957 , 21 , 61 - 68 . Kuhn , T . S . The structure of scientific revolutions ( 2nd ed . ) . Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1970 . Lepper , M . R . Cognition and social behavior . Science , 1977 , 196 , 765 - 766 . Luchins , A . S . Mechanization in problem solving : The effect of Einstellung . Psychological Mono - graphs , 1942 , 54 , 1 - 95 . Luchins , A . S . Experimental attempts to minimize the impact of first impressions . In C . I . Ho viand ( Ed . ) , The order of presentation in persuasion . New Haven , Conn . : Yale University Press , 1957 . Mahoney , M . J . Scientist as subject : The psycho - logical imperative . Cambridge , Mass . : Ballinger , 1976 . Mahoney , M . J . Publication prejudices : An experi - mental study of confirmatory bias in the peer review system . Cognitive Therapy and Research , 1977 , 7 , 161 - 17S . Merton , R . K . The self - fulfilling prophecy . Antioch Review , 1948 , 8 , 193 - 210 . Nisbett , R . , & Ross , L . Human inference : Strategies and shortcomings of social judgment . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall , in press . Rosenhan , D . L . On being sane in insane places . Science , 1973 , 179 , 250 - 258 . Ross , L . The intuitive psychologist and his short - comings : Distortions in the attribution process . In L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psychology ( Vol . 10 ) . New York : Academic Press , 1977 . Ross , L . , Lepper , M . R . , & Hubbard , M . Perseverance in self - perception and social perception : Biased attributional processes in the debriefing paradigm . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1975 , 32 , 880 - 892 . Sarat , A . , & Vidmar , N . Public opinion , the death penalty , and the Eighth Amendment : Testing the Marshall hypothesis . Wisconsin Law Review , 1976 , 171 - 197 . Sellin , T . ( Ed . ) . The death penalty . New York : Harper & Row , 1967 . Snyder , M . , Tanke , E . D . , & Berscheid , E . Social perception and interpersonal behavior : On the self - fulfilling nature of social stereotypes . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1977 , 35 , 656 - 666 . Received February 16 , 1979 •