Creativity Cognitive , Personal , Developmental , and Social Aspects Dean Keith Simonton University of California , Davis Although many psychologists have expressed an interest in the phenomenon of creativity , psychological research on this topic " did not rapidly expand until after J . P . Guilford claimed , in his 1950 APA presidential address , that this topic deserved far more attention than it was then receiv - ing . This article reviews the progress psychologists have made in understanding creativity since Guilford ' s call to arms . Research progress has taken place on 4 fronts : the cognitive processes involved in the creative act , the dis - tinctive characteristics of the creative person , the develop - ment and manifestation of creativity across the individual life span , and the social environments most strongly asso - ciated with creative activity . Although some important questions remain unanswered , psychologists now know more than ever before about how individuals achieve this special and significant form of optimal human functioning . C reativity is certainly among the most important and pervasive of all human activities . Homes and of - rices are filled with furniture , appliances , and other conveniences that are the products of human inventiveness . People amuse themselves with the comics in the daily paper , take novels with them to while away the hours on a plane or at the beach , go to movie theaters to see the latest blockbusters , watch television shows and commercials , play games on the computer , attend concerts from classical and jazz to rock and soul , visit museums that display the artistic artifacts of cultures and civilizations - - again all implicitly bearing ample testimony to the consequences of the creative mind . The buildings people enter , the cars they drive , the clothes they wear - - even the music they hear in elevators - - are all exemplars of some form of creativity . The only way to escape this phenomenon is to walk stark naked deep within some primeval forest , and even then a person must take care not to hum a single tune , not to recall even one line of poetry , or not to even to look up in the sky for fear of seeing some jet or its contrail . Not surprisingly , creativity is seen as a good attribute for people to possess . Teachers expect their students to display some creativity in their science projects and term papers . Executives at high - tech firms expect their research and development units to devise new products and their marketing units to conceive novel strategies to promote those products . At a more personal level , creativity is often seen as a sign of mental health and emotional well - being . In fact , various art and music therapies have emerged that promote psychological adjustment and growth through cre - ative expression . In a nutshell , creativity can be counted among those very special ways that human beings can display optimal functioning . Despite the significant and omnipresent nature of cre - ativity , psychologists have seldom if ever viewed it as a central research topic ( Sternberg & Lubart , 1996 ) . For example , of all the numerous recipients of APA ' s Award for Distinguished Scientific Contributions since 1956 , only one , J . P . Guilford , can be credited with devoting a sub - stantial part of his career to the psychological study of creativity . To be sure , other recipients of this high honor have addressed this topic as a side excursion of their primary investigations . Examples include figures as diverse as Wolfgang Krhler , Carl Rogers , B . F . Skinner , Jerome Bruner , James E . Birren , Herbert A . Simon , Donald T . Campbell , and David C . McClelland . Nevertheless , prob - ably only Guilford can be said to enjoy simultaneous prom - inence in psychological science in general and in the more specialized domain of creativity research . Indeed , in his classic 1950 presidential address before the American Psy - chological Association , Guilford made a plea on behalf of making creativity a more focal point of psychological in - quiry ( Guilford , 1950 ) . Fortunately , many psychologists responded to the call , and creativity research really boomed in the 1960s and early 1970s . Moreover , after a slight lull of a decade or so , psychologists have shown a renewed interest in the phenomenon . Although not yet a mainstream research topic , psychologists now know far more about creativity than ever before . That knowledge reveals a great deal about antecedents , correlates , and consequences of this particular form of optimal human functioning . In fact , this literature has now become so vast and rich that this article can accomplish no more than a review of the mere highlights , Overview The literature on creativity spans several of the core sub - disciplines of psychology . This breadth is immediately apparent ill the four main topics discussed below : cognitive processes , personal characteristics , life span development , and social context . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Dean Keith Simonton , Department of Psychology , One Shields Avenue , University of California , Davis , CA 95616 - 8686 . Electronic mail may be sent to dksimonton ( , ~ ucdavis . edu . January 2000 • American Psychologist Copyright 2000 by the American Psychological Association , Inc . 0003 - 066X / 00 / $ 5 . 00 Vol . 55 , No . 1 , 151 - 158 DOI : 10 . 1037 / / 0003 066X . 55 . 1 . 151 151 Dean Keith Simonton Cognitive Processes The creative act is often portrayed as a mysterious and even mystical process , more akin to divine inspiration than to mundane thought . This view dates back to the ancient Greeks , who believed that creativity required the interven - tion of the muses . One of the principal goals of psycho - logical studies has been to try to remove this mystery , replacing it with a deeper scientific understanding . For example , Sigmund Freud and other psychoanalytic thinkers attempted to accomplish this end by explicating creativity in terms of primary - process thinking ( Gedo , 1997 ) . How - ever , with the advent of contemporary cognitive science , psychology has come much closer to appreciating the men - tal processes that must participate in the creative act . Re - cent developments in four areas of research - - insightful problem solving , creative cognition , expertise acquisition , and computer simulation - - deserve special mention . Insightful problem solving . The Gestalt psy - chologists were the first psychologists to study creativity through the process of insight . Cognitive psychologists have built upon this early tradition by developing new experimental methodologies and theoretical models ( Stern - berg & Davidson , 1995 ) . By manipulating priming stimuli , assessing feeling - of - knowing states , using protocol analy - sis , and applying other techniques , psychologists better understand how creative insights emerge during the incu - bation period . Especially striking is the empirical demon - stration of intuitive information processing as a regular manifestation of the cognitive unconscious ( e . g . , Bowers , Farvolden , & Mermigis , 1995 ; Schooler & Melcher , 1995 ) . The magic behind the sudden , unexpected , and seemingly unprepared inspiration has now been replaced by the law - ful operation of subliminal stimulation and spreading activation . Creative cognition . One of the more significant events in recent cognitive psychology is the emergence of the creative cognition approach ( Smith , Ward , 8 , : Finke , 1995 ) . According to this research program , creativity is a mental phenomenon that results from the application of ordinary cognitive processes ( see also Ward , Smith , & Vaid , 1997 ) . In addition , just as laboratory experiments have provided tremendous insights into human cognition , the same methodology can be applied to the study of creative thought . Particularly provocative are the experi - mental studies showing how visual imagery can function in the origination of creative ideas ( Finke , Ward , & Smith , 1992 ) . Another exciting feature of these experiments is the use of open - ended problems that demand genuine creativ - ity , in contrast to much laboratory research that relies on problems that have fixed solutions . Nevertheless , these investigations concur with those on insightful problem solving in one fundamental message : The optimal function - ing embodied by creativity entails ordinary cognitive pro - cesses , and hence creative thought is accessible to almost anyone . Expertise acquisition . Recent research has am - ply demonstrated that exceptional talents are less born than made ( Ericsson , 1996 ) . Whether the domain is competitive sports , chess , or music performance , it usually requires about a decade of extensive deliberate practice before a person can attain world - class proficiency . Furthermore , evidence increasingly shows that to a certain extent , cre - ativity demands a comparable level of systematic training and practice . Even the creative genius cannot escape this inherently laborious period of apprenticeship ( Hayes , 1989 ; Simonton , 1991b ) . Creative individuals do not produce new ideas de novo , but rather those ideas must arise from a large set of well - developed skills and a rich body of domain - relevant knowledge . Like the work on creative cognition , this conception of creative expertise has rather egalitarian implications regarding the ability of anyone to acquire this form of optimal functioning ( see Howe , Da - vidson , & Sloboda , 1998 ) . Computer simulation . A final development that has great promise is the increased use of computers to test explicit cognitive models of the creative process ( Boden , 1991 ; Johnson - Laird , 1993 ) . For instance , Newell and Simon ' s ( 1972 ) classic theory of human problem solv - ing has inspired the emergence of several " discovery pro - grams " that purport to uncover laws and principles from empirical data - - often using the same raw data to make the same discoveries made by eminent scientists ( Langley , Simon , Bradshaw , & Zythow , 1987 ; Shrager & Langley , 199 / ) ) . Other computer programs have endeavored to re - produce creative behavior in art , literature , and music , sometimes with remarkable success ( Boden , 1991 ) . Addi - tional strategies that have promising futures are genetic algorithms and genetic programming ( Martindale , 1995 ) . Although originally designed by computer scientists to solve practical problems , it is becoming increasingly ap - parent that these programs may eventually provide valuable theoretical models of how the creative process operates in the human mind ( Simonton , 1999b ) . 152 January 2000 * American Psychologist In the long term , as the simulations of these computer models become ever more convincing , psychologists may eventually understand how best to increase the creative potential of all human beings . Personal Characteristics Psychologists have long been interested in the individual attributes that enable some persons to display more creativ - ity than others do . The empirical literature , both classic and current , falls naturally under two headings : intelligence and personality . Intelligence , Many investigators have been inter - ested in the extent to which creativity requires superior intelligence , a tradition that dates back to the pioneer work of Galton ( 1869 ) and Yerman ( 1925 ) . Using performance on standard IQ tests as the gauge of intellectual capacity , the early research indicated that a certain threshold level of intelligence was required for the manifestation of creativity but that beyond that threshold , intelligence bore a minimal relation with creative behavior ( Barron & Harrington , 1981 ) . More critical was the realization that the simplistic , exclusive , and unidimensional concept of intelligence had to be replaced by a more complex , inclusive , and multidi - mensional conception . Examples include Guilford ' s ( 1967 ) structure - of - intellect model , Sternberg ' s ( 1985 ) triarchic theory of intelligence , and Gardner ' s ( 1983 ) theory of multiple intelligences . The last theory is especially provoc - ative insofar as it includes abilities that are not a stan - dard part of psychometric tests ( e . g . , musical , bodily - kinesthetic , interpersonal , and intrapersonal intelligences ) . Moreover , each intelligence is associated with a specific manifestation of creativity , such as painting , choreography , or psychology ( Gardner , 1993 ) . Personali ~ ¢o It has been long recognized that cre - ativity is as much a dispositional as an intellectual phe - nomenon ( e . g . , Dellas & Gaier , 1970 ) . This was made quite apparent , for example , in the early research on the creative personality conducted at the Institute for Personality As - sessment and Research at the University of California , Berkeley ( e . g . , Barron , 1969 ; MacKinnon , 1978 ) . Although interest in the dispositional correlates of creativity waned somewhat with the arrival of the cognitive revolution , personality research has seen a revival in recent years . As a result , researchers have now compiled a fairly secure profile of the creative personality ( e . g . , Martindale , 1989 ; Simonton , 1999a ) . In particular , such persons are disposed to be independent , nonconformist , unconventional , even bohemian , and they are likely to have wide interests , greater openness to new experiences , a more conspicuous behavioral and cognitive flexibility , and more risk - taking boldness . Particularly fascinating is what the research has con - tributed to the long - standing mad - genius controversy . There is now sufficient evidence showing that creativity often tends to be associated with a certain amount of psychopathology ( e . g . , Eysenck , 1995 ; Jamison , 1993 ; Ludwig , 1995 ) . At the same time , this association is not equivalent to the claim that creative individuals must nec - essarily suffer from mental disorders . On the contrary , research has shown that ( a ) numerous creators , even of the highest order , have no apparent tendencies toward psycho - pathology ; ( b ) the incidence rates vary according to the domain of creative activity , with some domains showing rather low rates ; ( c ) those creators who seemingly exhibit symptoms usually possess compensatory characteristics that enable them to control and even channel their procliv - ities into productive activities ; and ( d ) many characteristics that appear abnormal may actually prove quite adaptive to the individual ' s lifelong adjustment ( see , e . g . , Barron , 1969 ; Csikszentmihalyi , 1997 ; Ludwig , 1995 ; Rothenberg , 1990 ) . In fact , the creative personality often provides a fine illustration of how supposed psychological weaknesses can sometimes be converted into a form of optimal functioning . Life Span Development Creativity is more than a cognitive and dispositional attri - bution in which individuals may vary . It is also an activity that develops over the course of the human life span . Researchers into the developmental psychology of creativ - ity have focused on two aspects of this longitudinal trans - formation . First , investigators have examined what child - hood and adolescent experiences appear to be associated with the development of creative potential . Second , re - searchers have scrutinized how that potential is actualized during the course of the creator ' s adulthood and final years . Many of the studies in either category have concentrated on the development of individuals who have attained some acclaim for their creative achievements , albeit there is no shortage of inquiries into the emergence of more everyday forms of creative behavior . The acquisition of creative potential . A very large inventory of developmental antecedents has been documented over the past several decades of research ( Simonton , 1987 ) . A great number of these influences concern the family environments and circumstances that seem to most favor the emergence of creative personalities . These factors include birth order , early parental loss , mar - ginality , and the availability of mentors and role models . Other developmental variables refer to an individual ' s ex - perience and performance in primary , secondary , and higher education . Perhaps the most remarkable generaliza - tion to be drawn from both sets of developmental influ - ences is that exceptional creativity does not always emerge from the most nurturant environments ( e . g . , Eisenstadt , 1978 ; Goertzel , Goertzel , & Goertzel , 1978 ; Simonton , 1984 ) . On the contrary , creative potential seems to require a certain exposure to ( a ) diversifying experiences that help weaken the constraints imposed by conventional socializa - tion and ( b ) challenging experiences that help strengthen a person ' s capacity to persevere in the face of obstacles ( Simonton , 1994 ) . These developmental inputs may be especially important for artistic forms of creative behavior . In any case , it is startling testimony to the adaptive powers of the human being that some of the most adverse child - hoods can give birth to the most creative adulthoods . One other major movement in the recent literature deserves mention . Back in 1869 , Galton first introduced the notion that exceptional creativity might have a genetic January 2000 ° American Psychologist 153 foundation . With the advent of modern behavioral genetics , this possibility has received increased attention ( Lykken , 1998 ; Simonton , 1999c ; Waller , Bouchard , Lykken , Telle - gen , & Blacker , 1993 ) . Although it is still too early to tell exactly how much individual variation in creativity owes its existence to genetic endowment , there is no doubt that certain intellectual and dispositional traits required for cre - ativity display respectable heritability coefficients ( Bou - chard , 1994 ; Eysenck , 1995 ) . It is becoming increasingly clear that the acquisition of creative potential requires the simultaneous contribution of both nature and nurture . The actualization of creative potential . Many investigators have been fascinated with how creativ - ity is manifested during the course of a person ' s career ( e . g . , Gardner , 1993 ; Root - Bernstein , Bernstein , & Gamier , 1993 ) . Especially notable is the evolving systems approach of Howard Gruber ( 1989 ) and his colleagues . Taking ad - vantage of laboratory notebooks , sketchbooks , diaries , and other archival sources , these researchers have examined how creative ideas emerge and develop in a complex and dynamic interaction between the creator ' s personal vision and the sociocultural milieu in which that creativity must take place ( see Wallace & Gruber , 1989 ) . A distinctive feature of these inquiries is their emphasis on the qualita - tive and idiographic case - study method , an approach that permits an in - depth understanding of how creativity works in individual lives . However , large - sample quantitative and nomothetic investigations on this topic are also abundant . The question that has received the most attention has been the relation between creativity and age ( Simonton , 1988 ) . Sometimes this issue is addressed by gauging how performance on psychometric measures of creativity changes across the adult life span ( e . g . , McCrae , Arenberg , & Costa , 1987 ) , but the more common approach is to assess how the output of creative products changes as a function of age ( e . g . , Lehman , 1953 ; Lindauer , 1993b ) . Because this research has consistently found that creativity is a curvilinear ( in - verted backward J ) function of age , one might conclude that older individuals would not be creative . However , the empirical and theoretical literature shows that such a pes - simistic conclusion is unjustified ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1997 ; Dennis , 1966 ; Simonton , 1991a , 1997a ) . Numerous factors operate that help maintain creative output throughout the life span . Indeed , it is actually possible for creators to display a qualitative and quantitative resurgence of creativ - ity in their final years ( Lindauer , 1993a ; Simonton , 1989 ) . Considering these findings , the picture for creativity in the later years of life is optimistic rather than pessimistic . Given that the 21st century will see a huge generation of " baby boomers " entering their golden years , this particular generalization about optimal functioning will acquire even more importance . Social Context The original research on creativity tended to adopt an excessively individualistic perspective . Creativity was viewed as a process that took place in the mind of a single individual who possessed the appropriate personal charac - teristics and developmental experiences . Beginning in the late 1970s , however , more psychologists began to recog - nize that creativity takes place in a social context ( e . g . , Harrington , 1990 ) . Indeed , in the 1980s , an explicit social psychology of creativity emerged to supplement the cog - nitive , differential , and developmental perspectives ( e . g . , Amabile , 1983 ) . The methods adopted in this burgeoning field range from laboratory experiments and field observa - tions to content analytical and historiometric studies . These investigations have also looked at a diversity of external conditions , with perhaps the greatest emphasis on the in - terpersonal , disciplinary , and sociocultural environments . Interpersonal environment . Although there has long existed the popular image of the lone genius , it is clear that much creativity takes place in interpersonal set - tings . The student may be expected to display creativity on a term paper or essay exam , or the worker may be expected to exhibit some creativity on the job . The particular nature of the interpersonal expectations may then serve to either enhance or inhibit the amount of creativity shown by the individual . A good illustration of the possibilities may be found in the research of Amabile and her associates ( e . g . , Amabile , 1996 ) on the repercussions of rewards , evalua - tion , surveillance , and other circumstances . Particularly valuable are their inquiries into the impact of intrinsic and extrinsic incentives for performing a task . Creativity usu - ally appears more favored when individuals perform a task for inherent enjoyment rather than for some external reason that has little to do with the task itself . However , circum - stances also occur in which the extrinsic motivation can contribute to the amplification of individual creativity ( Am - abile , 1996 ; Eisenberger & Cameron , 1996 ) . This research has obvious implications for how to best nurture creativity in both schools and the workplace . Before advancing to the next variety of social context , I should at least mention the current status of research on brainstorming . This technique was first introduced as a way of stimulating the production of creative ideas in problem - solving groups ( Osborn , 1963 ) . In a sense , brainstorming purports to generate creativity from an interpersonal rather than an intrapersonal process . Brainstorming has become a very popular approach in industrial and organizational set - tings ( Farr , 1990 ) . Unfortunately , although the research literature is not uniform in its assessment of the method ' s validity , it is clear that brainstorming has utility only with rather specific types of instructions and guidance ( e . g . , Diehl & Stroebe , 1987 ) . At present , it is impossible to say whether this method will be rendered more effective by the current research on electronic brainstorming in which the interactions occur through computer mediation ( e . g . , Roy , Gauvin , & Limayem , 1996 ) . Disciplinary environment . Most creators do not function in isolation from other creators , but rather their creativity takes place within a particular artistic , scientific , or intellectual discipline . For example , in the systems view put forward by C sikszentmihalyi ( 1990 ) , creativity requires the dynamic interaction between three subsystems , only one of which entails the individual creator . The second subsystem is the domain , which consists of the set of rules , 154 January 2000 • American Psychologist the repertoire of techniques , and any other abstract at - tributes that define a particular mode of creativity ( e . g . , the paradigm that guides normal science , according to Kuhn , 1970 ) . The third subsystem is the field , which consists of those persons who work within the same domain , and thus have their creativity governed by the same domain - specific guidelines . These colleagues are essential to the realization of individual creativity , according to the systems view , because creativity does not exist until those making up the field decide to recognize that a given creative product represents an original contribution to the domain . Once psychologists recognize that creativity emerges out of an interaction of individual , field , and domain , then the phenomenon becomes far more complex . One illustra - tion of this complexity may be found in Martindale ' s ( 1990 ) research on stylistic change in the arts , especially in poetic literature . Although the poet wants to reach as wide a public as possible , Martindale argued that the most im - portant audience for poetry is fellow writers ( as well as a few select critics ) , who play the major part in evaluating whether an author ' s poetry qualifies as creative . That eval - uation is based on two considerations . First , the poetry must conform to the stylistic rules of the time , rules that define the acceptable form and content for that particular domain of creativity . Second , the poetry must be original , rather than merely rehashing what has already been said . In the early history of a particular style , poets can attain this second end by ever more extensive use of what Martindale called " primordial thought " ( i . e . , primary - process thinking in psychoanalytic terms ) , but as time goes on , originality can only be obtained by stretching , even outright violating , the various rules of the game . After a few generations , the stylistic conventions begin to break down , and the domain loses its coherence - - which means it becomes increasingly difficult for anyone to judge what is good and bad among contemporary poems . Fortunately , a new style usually emerges , with distinctive sets of form and content prescrip - tions , and the whole cyclical process begins once again . Martindale has empirically documented this progression not just in poetry , but in most other forms of creativity as well , including music and painting . Needless to say , once psychologists acknowledge that creativity is a systemic rather than a totally individualistic phenomenon , it becomes far more difficult to study using the more commonplace methods of psychology . Experi - mental studies of human problem solving become far less enlightening to the extent that the laboratory cubical iso - lates the person from a disciplinary domain and field . Psychometric inquiries into the creative personality are likewise rendered less insightful to the degree that the creator has been unrooted from his or her disciplinary matrix . To circumvent these limitations , psychologists have adopted a number of strategies . Some , like Martindale ( 1990 ) , have taken advantage of archival data to study the interplay between creators and their disciplines ( see also Simonton , 1992b ) . Others have engaged in some form of participant observation , such as Dunbar ' s ( 1995 ) provoca - tive in situ examination of scientific discovery in biomed - ical research laboratories . Although these alternative meth - ods are much more arduous than the more commonplace experimental and psychometric investigations , they have contributed findings that could not be acquired in any other way . In particular , such investigations have amply proven that creativity cannot be divorced from its disciplinary context . Sociocultural environment . Beyond the realm of interpersonal and disciplinary interactions , there exists the larger external milieu . Sociologists and anthropologists have long argued that creativity is mostly if not entirely a sociocultural phenomenon ( e . g . , Kroeber , 1944 ) , but only in the past couple of decades have psychologists begun to scrutinize the extent to which creative achievements de - pend on the impersonal and pervasive zeitgeist ( Simonton , 1984 ) . Two findings warrant special mention here : 1 . It has become increasingly clear that certain polit - ical environments affect the degree of creativity manifested by the corresponding population . Some of these political influences operate directly on the adult creator , such as when warfare depresses the output of creative ideas ( Sim - onton , 1984 ) . Other political effects function during the developmental stages of an individual ' s life , either encour - aging or discouraging the acquisition of creative potential . Thus , on the one hand , growing up in times of anarchy , when the political world is plagued by assassinations , coups d ' dtat , and military mutinies , tends to be antithetical to creative development ( e . g . , Simonton , 1976 ) . On the other hand , growing up when a civilization is fragmented into a large number of peacefully coexisting independent states tends to be conducive to the development of creative potential ( e . g . , Simonton , 1975 ) . In fact , nationalistic re - volts against the oppressive rule of empire states tends to have a positive consequence for the amount of creativity in the following generations ( Kroeber , 1944 ; Simonton , 1975 ; Sorokin , 1947 / 1969 ) . Many nations have experienced golden ages after winning independence from foreign dom - ination , with ancient Greece providing a classic example . 2 . The rationale for the last mentioned consequence may be that nationalistic rebellion encourages cultural het - erogeneit ~ y rather than homogeneity ( Simonton , 1994 ) . Rather than everyone having to speak the same language , read the same books , follow the same laws , and so on , individuals are left with more options . This suggests that cultural diversity may facilitate creativity , and there is evidence that this is the case . Creative activity in a civili - zation tends to increase after it has opened itself to exten - sive alien influences , whether through immigration , travel abroad , or studying under foreign teachers ( Simonton , 1997b ) . By enriching the cultural environment , the ground may be laid for new creative syntheses . This finding is consistent with a host of other empirical results , such as the creativity - augmenting effects of ethnic marginality , bilin - gualism , and even exposure to ideological or behavioral dissent ( e . g . , Campbell , 1960 ; Lambert , Tucker , & d ' Anglejan , 1973 ; Nemeth & Kwan , 1987 ; Simonton , 1994 ) . These and other sociocultural forces are potent enough that they can completely extinguish creativity in a given nation , sometimes producing a dark age that may last for January 2000 • American Psychologist 155 generations ( Simonton , 1984 ) . However , it requires empha - sis that zeitgeist factors serve to raise or lower the general level of creative activity at a given time and place , but cannot easily account for individual differences in the development and manifestation of creativity . For example , the general milieu may largely explain why the Renais - sance began in Italy but not why Michelangelo towered over his Italian contemporaries . Conclusion Although psychologists have made tremendous progress in the understanding of creativity , much work remains to be done . Certainly , many substantive questions demand con - siderably more empirical scrutiny . Consider , for example , the following three desiderata : 1 . Psychologists still have a long way to go before they come anywhere close to understanding creativity in women and minorities ( see , e . g . , Helson , 1990 ) . So far , creativity in such groups seems to display a complex pat - tern of divergence and convergence relative to what has been observed in majority - culture male study participants ( e . g . , Simonton , 1992a , 1998 ) . The details of these differ - ences and similarities must be empirically documented before psychologists can be said to understand how this form of optimal functioning operates in the entire human race . 2 . Psychologists must carry out more ambitious lon - gitudinal studies that examine how creativity develops dur - ing the course of childhood , adolescence , and adulthood . Terman ' s ( 1925 ) classic investigation followed a cohort of intellectually gifted children throughout their life courses , but most current work has been obliged to scrutinize a narrower slice of the life span ( e . g . , Csikszentmihalyi , Rathunde , & Whalen , 1993 ; Getzels & Csikszentmihalyi , 1976 ; Subotnik & Arnold , 1994 ) . Although such investi - gations have told psychologists much about creative devel - opment , only more extensive studies can complete the picture of the origins of creative potential . 3 . Psychologists also need to carry out more research on the attributes of the creative product . Ironically , al - though psychologists have made considerable advances in their understanding of what contributes to the success of an aesthetic composition ( e . g . , Martindale , 1990 ; Simonton , 1980 ) , they still know very little about what determines the creativity of a scientific contribution ( e . g . , Shadish , 1989 ; Sternberg & Gordeeva , 1996 ) . Beyond expanding the scope of empirical inquiries , more attention must be devoted to the development of more comprehensive and precise theories of creativity . At present , two theoretical movements look the most promis - ing : ( a ) economic models that examine the individual ' s willingness to invest in " human capital " and to engage in risk - taking behaviors ( see , e . g . , Rubenson & Runco , 1992 ; Sternberg & Lubart , 1995 ) ; and ( b ) evolutionary models that have elaborated Campbell ' s ( 1960 ) variation - selection model of creativity into more complete explanations of the creative process , person , and product ( see , e . g . , Eysenck , 1995 ; Simonton , 1999b ) . Both the economic and evolution - ary theories have supported the emergence of mathematical models that make predictions susceptible to empirical tests ( e . g . , Simonton , 1997a ) . Finally , and perhaps most important , the scientific understanding of creativity should be extended to lead to ever more useful applications . To the world at large , cre - ativity is not just an interesting psychological phenomenon but a socially and personally valued behavior besides . It is partly for this reason that there are so many workshops and self - help books that purport to enhance personal creativity ; yet the gap between scientific knowledge and practical interventions is often so wide that doubts are cast on both science and practice . However , if creativity research con - tinues to expand and diversify , a time will come when scientific theories prove their utility by successfully stim - ulating creativity in the everyday world . Ultimately , ever more human beings may be able to display optimal func - tioning through creativity . REFERENCES Amabile , T . M . ( 1983 ) . The social psychology of creativity . New York : Springer - Verlag . Amabile , T . M . ( 1996 ) . Creativity in context . Boulder , CO : Westview . Barton , F . X . ( 1969 ) . Creative person and creative process . New York : Holt , Rinehart , & Winston . Barron , F . X . , & Harrington , D . M . ( 1981 ) . Creativity , intelligence , and personality . Annual Review of Psychology , 32 , 439 - 476 . Boden . M . A . ( 1991 ) . The creative mind : Myths & mechanisms . New York : Basic Books . Bouchard . T . J . , Jr . ( 1994 ) . Genes , environment , and personality . Science , 264 , 1700 - 1701 . Bowers , K . S . , Farvolden , P . , & Mermigis , L , ( 1995 ) . Intuitive anteced - ents of insight . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , Ttle creative cognition approach ( pp . 27 - 51 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Campbell , D . T . ( 1960 ) . Blind variation and selective retention in creative thought as in other knowledge processes . Psychological Review , 67 , 38 ( ! - 400 . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1990 ) . The domain of creativity . In M . A . Runco & R . S . Albert ( Eds . ) , Theories of creativity ( pp . 190 - 212 ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1997 ) . Creativity : Flow and the psychology of dis ~ oveo , and invention . New York : Harper Collins . Csikszentmihalyi , M . , Rathunde , K . , & Whalen , S . ( 1993 ) . Talented teenagers : The roots of success and failure . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Dellas , M . , & Gaier , E . L . ( 1970 ) . Identification of creativity : The indi - vidual . Psychological Bulletin , 73 , 55 - 73 . Dennis , W . ( 1966 ) . Creative productivity between the ages of 20 and 80 years . Journal of Gerontology , 21 , 1 - 8 . Diehl . M . , & Stroebe , W . ( 1987 ) . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : Toward the solution of a riddle . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 53 , 497 - 509 . Dunbar , K . ( 1995 ) . How scientists really reason : Scientific reasoning in real - world laboratories . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 365 - 396 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Eisenberger , R . , & Cameron , J . ( 1996 ) . Detrimental effects of reward : Reality or myth ? American Psychologist , 51 , 1153 - 1166 . Eisenstadt , J . M . ( 1978 ) . Parental loss and genius . American Psychologist , 33 , 211 - 223 . Ericsson , K . A . ( Ed . ) . ( 1996 ) . The road to expert performance : Empirical evidence / ? om the arts and sciences , sports , and games . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Eysenck , H . J . ( 1995 ) . Genius : The natural history , of creativity . Cam - bridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Farr , J . L . ( 1990 ) . Facilitating individual role innovation . In M . A . West & I . L . Farr ( Eds . ) , Innovation and creativity at work : Psychological and organizational strategies ( pp . 207 - 230 ) . New York : Wiley . 156 January 2000 • American Psychologist Finke , R . A . , Ward , T . B . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1992 ) . Creative cognition . " Theory , research , and applications . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Galton , F . ( 1869 ) . Hereditary genius : An inquiry into its laws and con - sequences . London : Macmillan . Gardner , H . ( 1983 ) . Frames of mind : A theory of multiple intelligences . New York : Basic Books . Gardner , H . ( 1993 ) . Creating minds : An anatomy of creativity seen through the lives of Freud , Einstein , Pieasso , Stravinskv , Eliot , Gra - ham , and Gandhi . New York : Basic Books . Gedo , J . E . ( 1997 ) . Psychoanalytic theories of creativity . In M . A . Runco fed . ) , The creativity , research handbook ( Vol . 1 , pp . 29 - 39 ) . Cresskill , NJ : Hampton Press . Getzels , J . , & Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1976 ) . The creative vision : A long # tudinal study of problem finding in art . New York : Wiley . Goertzel , M . G . , Goertzel . V . , & Goertzel , T . G . ~ 1978 ) . 300 eminent personalities : A psychoso ~ ial analysis ~ f the ~ m ~ ous . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Gruber , H . E . ( 1989 ) . The evolving systems approach to creative work . In D . B . Wallace & H . E . Gruber ( Eds . ) , Creative people at nork : Twelve cognitive case studies ( pp . 3 - 24 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Guilford , J . P . ( 1950 ) . Creativity . American Psychologist , 5 , 444 454 . Guilford , J . P . ( 1967 ) . The natutv of human intelligence . New York : McGraw - Hill . Harrington , D . M . ( 1990 ) . The ecology of human creativity : A psycho - logical perspective . In M . A . Runco & R . S . Albert ( Eds . ) , Theories of creativity ( pp . 143 - 169 ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Hayes , J . R . ( 1989 ) . The complete plwblem solver ( 2nd ed . ) . Hillsdale , N J : Erlbaum . Helson , R . ( 1990 ) . Creativity in women : Outer and inner views over time . In M . A . Runco & R . S . Albert ( Eds . ) , Theories ( ? f creativity ( pp . 46 58 ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Howe . M . J . A . , Davidson , J . W . , & Sloboda , J . A . ( 1998 ) . Innate talents : Reality or myth ? Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 21 , 399 - 442 . Jamison , K . R . ( 1993 ) . Touched with fire : Manic - depressive illness and the artistic temperament . New York : Free Press . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1993 ) . Human and machine thinking . Hillsdale , N J : Erlbaum . Kroeber , A . L . ( 1944 ) . Configurations of culture growth . Berkeley : Uni - versity of California Press . Kuhn , T . S . ( 1970 ) . The structure of scientific revolutions ( 2nd ed . ) . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Lambert , W . E . , Tucker , G . R . , & d ' Anglejan , A . ( 1973 ) . Cognitive and attitudinal consequences of bilingual schooling : The St . Lambert project through grade five . Journal of Educational Psychology , 65 , 141 - 159 . Langley , P . , Simon , H . A . , Bradshaw , G . L . , & Zythow , J . M . ( 1987 ) . Scientific discovery . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Lehman , H . C . ( 1953 ) . Age and achievement . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Lindaner , M . S . ( 1993a ) . The old - age style and its artists . Empirical Studies and the Arts , 11 , 135 - 146 . Lindauer , M . S . ( 1993b ) . The span of creativity among long - lived histor - ical artists . Creativity Research Journal , 6 . 231 - 239 . Ludwig , A . M . ( 1995 ) . The price of greatness : Resolving the creativit ) , and madness controversy . New York : Guilford Press . Lykken , D . T . ( 1998 ) . The genetics of genius . In A . Steptoe fEd . ) , Genius and the mind : Studies of creativity and temperament in the historical record ( pp . 15 - 37 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . MacKinnon , D . W . ( 1978 ) . h ~ search ~ human ejJectiveness . Buffalo , NY : Creative Education Foundation . Martindale , C . ( 1989 ) . Personality , situation , and creativity . In J . A . Glover , R . R . Ronning , & C . R . Reynolds ( Eds . ) , Handbook of creativ - ity ( pp . 211 - 232 ) . New York : Plenum Press . Martindale , C . ( 1990 ) . The clockwork muse : The predictability of artistic styles . New York : Basic Books . Martindale , C . ( 1995 ) . Creativity and connectionism . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 249 - 268 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . McCrae , R . R . , Arenberg , D . , & Costa , P . T . ( 1987 ) . Declines in divergent thinking with age : Cross - sectional . longitudinal , and cross - sequential analyses . Psychology and Aging , 2 , 130 - 136 . Nemeth , C . J . , & Kwan , J . ( 1987 ) . Minority influence , divergent thinking and detection of correct solutions . Journal of Applied Social Psychol - ogy 17 , 788 - 799 . Newell , A . . & Simon , H . A . ( 1972 ) . Human problem solving . Englewood Cliffs , NE Prentice - Hall . Osborn , A . F . ( 1963 ) . Applied imagination . " Principles and procedures oJ creative problem - solving ( 3rd ed . ) . New York : Scribner . Root - Bernstein , R . S . , Bernstein , M . , & Gamier , H . ( 1993 ) . Identification of scientists making long - term , high - impact contributions , with notes on their methods of working . Creativity Research Journal , 6 , 329 - 343 . Rothenbero , A . ( 1990 ) . Creativity and madness : New findings and old stereotypes . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins University Press . Roy , M . C . . Gauvin , S . , & Limayem , M . ( 1996 ) . Electronic group brain - storming : The role of feedback on productivity . Small Group Research , 27 , 215 - 247 . Rubenson , D . L . , & Runco , M . A . ( 1992 ) . The psychoeconomic approach to creativity . New Ideas in Psychology , 10 , 131 - 147 . Schooler . J . W . , & Melcher , J . ( 1995 ) . The ineffability of insight . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approactl ( pp . 97 - 133 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Shadish , W . R . , Jr . ( 1989 ) . The perception and evaluation of quality in science . In B . Gholson , W . R . Shadish , Jr . , R . A . Neimeyer , & A . C . Hours ( Eds . ) , The pxychology of science : Contributions to metascience ( pp . 383 - 426 ) . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Shrager , J . . & Langley , P . ( Eds . ) . ( 1990 ) . Computational models of scienti ~ c discovery and theory . formation . San Mateo , CA : Kanfmann . Simonton , D . K . ( 1975 ) . Sociocultural context of individual creativity : A transhistorical time - series analysis . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 32 , 1119 - 1133 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1976 ) . Philosophical eminence , beliefs , and zeitgeist : An individual - generational analysis . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 34 , 630 - 640 . Simonton , I ) . K . ( 1980 ) . Thematic fame , melodic originality , and musical zeitgeist : A biographical and transhistorical content analysis . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 38 , 972 - 983 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1984 ) . Genius , creativity , and leadership . " Historiomet - rie inquiries . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Simonton , D . K . ( 1987 ) . Developmental antecedents of achieved emi - nence . Annals of Child Development , 5 , 131 - 169 . Simonton , I ) . K . ( 1988 ) . Age and outstanding achievement : What do we know after a century of research ' ; ' Psychological Bulletin , 104 , 251 - 267 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1989 ) . The swan - song phenomenon : Last - works effects for 172 classical composers . Psychology and Aging , 4 , 42 - 47 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1991a ) . Career landmarks in science : Individual differ - ences and interdisciplinary contrasts . Developmental Psychology , 27 , 119 - 130 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1991 b ) . Emergence and realization of genius : The lives and works of 120 classical composers . Journal of Personality and Social Psycholo , ~ v 61 , 829 - 840 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1992a ) . Gender and genius in Japan : Feminine eminence in masculine culture . Sex Roles , 27 , 101 - 119 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1992b ) . Leaders of American psychology , 1879 - 1967 : Career development , creative output , and professional achievement . Journal of Personality and Social Ps ~ ' chology 62 , 5 - 17 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1994 ) . Greatness . " Who makes history and why . New York : Guilford Press . Simonton , D . K . ( 1997a ) . Creative productivity : A predictive and explan - atory model of career trajectories and landmarks . Psychological Re - view , 104 , 66 89 . Simonton , I ) . K . ( 1997b ) . Foreign influence and national achievement : The impact of open milieus on Japanese civilization . Journal of Per - sonali ( v and Social Psychology , 72 , 86 - 94 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1998 ) . Achieved eminence in minority and majority cultures : Convergence versus divergence in the assessments of 294 African Americans . Journal of Personally ' and Social Psychology , 74 , 804 - 817 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1999a ) . Creativity and genius . In L . Pervin & O . John ( Eds . ) , Handbook qf personality theory and research ( 2nd ed . , pp . 629 652 ~ . New York : Guilford Press . Simonton , D . K . ( 1999b ) . Origins of genius : Darwinian perspectives on creativity . New York : Oxford University Press . January 2000 • American Psychologist 157 Simonton , D . K . ( 1999c ) . Talent and its development : An emergenic and epigenetic model . Psychological Review , 106 , 435 - 457 . Smith , S . M . , Ward , T . B . , & Finke , R . A . ( Eds . ) . ( 1995 ) . The creative cognition approach . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Sorokin , P . A . ( 1969 ) . Society , culture , and personality . New York : Cooper Square . ( Original work published 1947 ) Sternberg , R . J . ( 1985 ) . Beyond 1Q : A triarchic theory of human intelli - gence . New York : Cambridge University Press . Sternberg , R . J . , & Davidson , J . E . ( Eds . ) . ( 1995 ) . The nature of insight . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Sternberg , R . J . , & Gordeeva , T . ( 1996 ) . The anatomy of impact : What makes an article influential ? Psychological Science , 7 , 69 - 75 . Sternberg , R . J . , & Lubart , T . I . ( 1995 ) . Defying the crowd . " Cultivating creativity in a culture of conformity . New York : Free Press . Sternberg , R . J . , & Lubart , T . I . ( 1996 ) . Investing in creativity . American Psychologist , 51 , 677 - 688 . Subotnik , R . F . , & Arnold , K . D . ( Eds . ) . ( 1994 ) . Beyond Terman : Contem - porary longitudbzal studies of giftedness and talent . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Terman , L . M . ( 1925 ) . Mental and physical traits of a thousand gifted children . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . Wallace , D . B . , & Gruber , H . E . ( Eds . ) . ( 1989 ) . Creative people at work : Twelve cognitive case studies . New York : Oxford University Press . Waller , N . G . , Bouchard , T . J . , Jr . , Lykken , D . T . , Tellegen , A . , & Blacker , D . M . ( 1993 ) . Creativity , heritability , familiality : Which word does not belong ? Psychological Inquiry , 4 , 235 - 237 . Ward , T . B . , Smith , S . M . , & Vaid , J . ( Eds . ) . ( 1997 ) . Creative thought : An investigation ¢ ~ f conceptual structures and processes . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . 158 January 2000 • American Psychologist