Biochem . J . ( 2015 ) 466 , 431 – 442 ( Printed in Great Britain ) doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20141404 431 REVIEW ARTICLE Platelet Rho GTPases – a focus on novel players , roles and relationships Robert Goggs * , Christopher M . Williams † , Harry Mellor ‡ and Alastair W . Poole † 1 * Department of Clinical Sciences , College of Veterinary Medicine , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY 14853 , U . S . A . † School of Physiology and Pharmacology , Faculty of Medical and Veterinary Sciences , University of Bristol , Bristol BS8 1TD , U . K . ‡ School of Biochemistry , Faculty of Medical and Veterinary Sciences , University of Bristol , Bristol BS8 1TD , U . K . Rho GTPases are critical for platelet function . Although the roles of RhoA , Rac and Cdc42 are characterized , platelets express other Rho GTPases , whose activities are less well understood . This review summarizes our understanding of the roles of platelet Rho GTPases and focuses particularly on the functions of Rif and RhoG . In human platelets , Rif interacts withcytoskeletonregulatorsincludingforminsmDia1andmDia3 , whereas RhoG binds SNARE - complex proteins and cytoskeletal regulators ELMO and DOCK1 . Knockout mouse studies suggest that Rif plays no critical functions in platelets , likely due to functional overlap with other Rho GTPases . In contrast , RhoG is essential for normal granule secretion downstream of the collagen receptor GPVI . The central defect in RhoG − / − platelets is reduced dense granule secretion , which impedes integrin activation and aggregation and limits platelet recruitment to growing thrombi under shear , translating into reduced thrombus formation in vivo . Potential avenues for future work on Rho GTPases in platelets are also highlighted , including identiﬁcation of the key regulator for platelet ﬁlopodia formation and investigation of the role of the many Rho GTPase regulators in platelet function in both health and disease . Key words : cell division control protein 42 ( Cdc42 ) , Rif , RhoG , shape change , secretion , thrombosis . PLATELETS IN PHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOLOGY The activities of Rho GTPase proteins are central to many of the processes that underpin the physiological and pathological roles of platelets [ 1 ] . Platelets are small , disc - shaped cells with a short lifespan that number in the hundreds of millions per millilitre of bloodandareintegraltotheinitialresponsetovascularendothelialdamage [ 2 , 3 ] . In vivo , haemostasis is a complex continuum of events , initiated by damage or disruption of the normally continuous endothelial cell barrier that exposes subendothelial extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . Platelets are activated by cell - surface receptor interactions with ECM ligands , leading to shape change , granule secretion , platelet aggregation and procoagulant surface expression . Locally generated thrombin , platelet - synthesized thromboxane and adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) secreted from platelet dense granules stimulate platelets arriving at the site of injury , amplifying platelet responses to primary agonists and extending the platelet plug . Activating interactions between platelets and von Willebrand factor ( VWF ) and collagen via the cell - surface receptors GpIb - IX - V and GPVI , respectively lead to dramatic alterations in shape , due principally to reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton . Alterations in platelet morphology increase surface area , maximizing opportunities for interactions with ECM and other cells [ 4 , 5 ] . These initial shape change events are loss of the discoid shape , sphering and then extension of ﬁlopodia [ 6 ] . These thin ( 0 . 1 – 0 . 3 μ m ) ﬁnger - like membrane protrusions enclosing tight parallel bundles of ﬁlamentous actin ( F - actin ) increase the potential for contact between platelets and extracellular matrix and for interactions with other cells [ 7 ] . Later , cell shape changes involve lamellipodia formation to allow platelet spreading [ 8 ] , enabling platelets to cover endothelial surface defects . Granule secretion is critical for normal platelet function and is a highly orchestrated and regulated process . In platelets , some granules may be pre - docked at the plasma membrane , but most are homogeneously distributed through the platelet cytosol and must be brought to the plasma membrane or membranes of the open canalicular system for release to occur [ 9 , 10 ] . Granule secretion requires reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton to facilitate granule transport and enable granule access to platelet membranes . These cytoskeletal rearrangements occur prior to the soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive factor ( NSF ) attachment protein receptor ( SNARE ) machinery - mediated regulation of the membrane fusion process . The Rab family of small GTPases are Abbreviations : AP - MS , afﬁnity - puriﬁcation mass spectrometry ; ARHGEF , Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor ; ARP2 / 3 , actin related protein 2 / 3 complex ; Cdc42 , cell division control protein 42 ; CRP , collagen - related peptide ; DOCK , dedicator of cytokinesis ; ECM , extracellular matrix ; ELMO , engulfment and cell motility ; Ena , enabled ; F - actin , ﬁlamentous actin ; FcR , Fc receptor ; GAP , GTPase activating protein ; GDI , guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor ; GEF , guanine nucleotide exchange factor ; GP , glycoprotein ; IMD , IRSp53 and MIM homology domain ; ITAM , immunoreceptor tyrosine - based activation motif ; LARG , leukaemia - associated Rho GEF ( ARHGEF12 ) ; LAT , linker for activation of T - cells ; MLC , myosin light chain ; MTSS1 , metastasis suppressor protein 1 ; NSF , N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive factor ; PAK , P21 - activated kinase ; PAR , protease activated receptor ; PF4 , platelet factor - 4 ; PI3K , phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ; PKC , protein kinase C ; PLC , phospholipase C ; PREX - 1 , PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 - dependent Rac exchanger 1 protein ; Rac , Ras - related C3 botulinum toxin substrate ; Rho GTPase , Ras homology family GTPase ; Rif , Rho in ﬁlopodia ( RhoF ) ; ROCK , Rho kinase ; SNARE , soluble N - ethylmaleimide attachment protein receptors ; Syk , spleen tyrosine kinase ; TCR , T - cell receptor ; TRIO , triple functional domain containing protein ; VAMP , vesicle - associated membrane protein ; VASP , vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ; VWF , von Willebrand factor ; WASP , Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed ( email a . poole @ bris . ac . uk ) . c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2015 Biochemical Society B i o c h e m i ca l J ou r n a l www . b i o c h e m j . o r g © 2014 The Author ( s ) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Licence ( CC - BY ) ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 3 . 0 / ) which permits unrestricted use , distribution and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . 432 R . Goggs and others Figure 1 A schematic representation of the known roles of Cdc42 , Rac1 and RhoA in the shape change and granule secretion functions of platelets The potential roles of RhoG and Rif are also included for comparison . Cdc42 plays a role in regulating dense granule secretion and may be partly responsible for platelet ﬁlopodia formation . Rac is involved in lamellipodia formation downstream of both collagen - GPVI and thrombin interactions with PARs . RhoA is also involved in regulating lamellipodia formation , integrin activation and is responsible for generating stress ﬁbres . involved in platelet granule formation and Rabs 3b , 6 , 8 and 27a are all involved in activation - triggered granule secretion [ 11 – 14 ] . The differential roles of individual Rab proteins in regulation of distinct platelet and megakaryocyte secretion events are still being clariﬁed [ 15 ] , but a thorough discussion of platelet Rab proteins is outside the scope of this review . Mammalian platelets are highly specialized for haemostasis but also contribute to antimicrobial host defence through expression of cell - surface receptors for immunoglobulins [ 16 ] , pathogen - associated molecular patterns [ 17 ] , and chemokines [ 18 ] . Platelets can directly bind bacteria through multiple receptor – ligand interactions that trigger platelet shape change [ 19 ] , characterized by ﬁlopodia formation with coincident rearrangement of both the platelet actin cytoskeleton and microtubule networks [ 20 – 22 ] . Platelets also secrete antimicrobial proteins including thymosin β - 4 , platelet kinocidins and complement proteins from their α granules [ 23 ] , which can be released in direct response to interactions with bacteria [ 24 , 25 ] . Haemostatic accumulations of platelets at vascular injury sites also place them in the ideal location to promote and co - ordinate revascularization and tissue repair through secretion of angiogenesis activators , growth factors and chemokines from their α granules [ 26 , 27 ] . Platelets are implicated in pathological processes typically due to inappropriate or excessive activation of normal platelet physiological processes . The best - known example is atherothrombosis , where collagen exposure and local thrombin generation at sites of plaque rupture leads to exuberant thrombus formation and consequent ischaemia or infarction , most commonly occurring in coronary and cerebral arteries . Platelets may also be involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis itself [ 28 ] . At predilection sites for atherosclerosis and in the presence of risk factors such as hypercholesterolaemia , platelets may adhere to intact endothelium and stimulate endothelial cells to recruit leucocytes that become the foam cells characteristic of atherosclerosis [ 29 – 31 ] . Platelets also play complex roles in the development and resolution of such varied diseases as diabetes [ 32 ] , sepsis [ 33 ] and cancer [ 34 ] . Rho GTPases Platelets contain classical Rho family members from all four subfamilies and also atypical Rho GTPases such as RhoBTB1 [ 35 ] . The Rho GTPases Rac [ 8 ] , RhoA [ 36 ] and Cdc42 [ 37 ] , have established roles as regulators of platelet function ( Figure 1 ) . Transcript and proteomic studies suggest human platelets also express other classical Rho family members including RhoB , RhoC , RhoH and RhoQ but the functions of many of these other GTPases in platelets are unknown [ 35 , 38 ] . One major function of Rho GTPases is regulation of the actin cytoskeleton , but they are also involved in a number of other biochemical pathways . Of most relevance to platelets are control of phospholipase C ( PLC ) [ 39 ] , and phosphoinositide - 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) [ 40 ] , and the regulation of microtubule dynamics [ 41 ] , cell – cell contacts [ 42 ] , and granule secretion [ 43 ] . This functional diversity is accomplished through the binding of a wide range of effector proteins to the GTP - loaded activated GTPase . These effectors belong to multiple protein families including actin nucleation proteins such as the diaphanous related formins and the ARP2 / 3 complex , actin binding and bundling proteins such as enabled / vasodilator - stimulatedphosphoprotein ( Ena / VASP ) andmembranedeforming proteins such as the IRSp53 and MIM homology domain ( IMD ) containing protein MTSS1 ( metastasis suppressor protein 1 ) ( Table 1 ) [ 1 ] . Although there is considerable variation in the motifs that different effectors use to bind Rho GTPases , a number of effectors share consensus binding regions such as the Cdc42 / Rac - interactive - binding ( CRIB ) domain found in Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) and P21 - activated kinase ( PAK ) . Among the Rho GTPase effector proteins of particular importance to actin cytoskeletal rearrangements in platelets are c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2015 Biochemical Society © 2014 The Author ( s ) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Licence ( CC - BY ) ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 3 . 0 / ) which permits unrestricted use , distribution and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . Platelet Rho GTPases 433 Table 1 Platelet Rho GTPase effectors A list of known effector proteins for RhoA , Rac1 and Cdc42 compiled from Bishop and Hall [ 113 ] and Bustelo et al . [ 144 ] and cross - referenced against mRNA transcripts from human platelets [ 35 ] , and two recent proteomic databases such that only proteins known to be expressed are listed [ 145 , 146 ] . Effector Protein type ( alternate protein name ) Upstream GTPase Main biological function FilaminA Actin binding protein RhoA , Rac1 , Cdc42 Cytoskeletal regulation , actin ﬁlament cross - linking CopG2 Coatomer protein ( γ 2 - Cop ) Cdc42 Vesicle trafﬁcking ( clathrin route ) DIAPH1 , 2 Formin RhoA , Rac1 Cytoskeletal change via proﬁlin and IRSp53 FHOD1 Formin Rac1 Cytoskeletal and transcriptional regulation FMNL1 Formin Rac1 Cytoskeletal organization , cell polarity , cytokinesis IP3R1 Inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - triphosphate receptor RhoA Calcium entry in endothelial cells PI4 , 5PK Lipid kinase RhoA Phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate level modulation CybA NADPH oxidase complex subunit Rac1 Superoxide production NCF1 , 2 NADPH oxidase complex subunit Rac1 , Cdc42 Superoxide production PLC - β 2 Phospholipase , C type ( PLC - β 2 ) Cdc42 , Rac1 Production of second messengers KCNA2 Potassium Channel subunit RhoA Potassium entry PIK3R1 Regulatory p85 subunit of PIK3C Rac1 , Cdc42 Regulation of PIK3C activity , signal transduction PPP1R12A Regulatory subunit of phosphatase1 RhoA MLC inactivation , cytoskeletal regulation IQGAP1 , 2 RhoGAP and scaffold protein Rac1 , Cdc42 Cytoskeletal regulation , cell – cell contacts ARFIP2 Scaffold protein ( Por1 ) Rac1 Cytoskeletal regulation Cdc42SE1 , 2 Scaffold protein ( Spec1 , 2 ) Rac1 , Cdc42 Modulation of GTPase signalling outputs CYFIP1 , 2 Scaffold protein ( Pir121 ) Rac1 Regulation of the cytoskeleton via WASF proteins MTSS1 Scaffold protein Rac1 Cytoskeletal organization via WASF / WAVE Kinectin1 Scaffold protein RhoA , Rac1 , Cdc42 Kinesin binding , microtubule vesicular trafﬁcking NCK1 Scaffold protein with SH2 / 3 domains Rac1 Complex formation with WASP , signal transduction NCKAP1 Scaffold protein ( Nap125 , Nap1 ) Rac1 Regulation of the cytoskeleton via WASF proteins N - WASP Scaffold protein Cdc42 Cytoskeletal regulation via Arp2 / 3 complex Pard6 A , G Scaffold protein ( Par6 α , γ ) Rac1 , Cdc42 Cell polarity . Links GTPases and atypical PKCs Trip10 Scaffold protein Cdc42 Binding of WASP to microtubules WASP Scaffold protein Rac1 Cytoskeletal regulation via the Arp2 / 3 complex WAVE / Scar1 , 2 Scaffold protein Cdc42 , Rac1 Cytoskeletal regulation via the Arp2 / 3 complex Cdc42bpgB Serine / threonine kinase ( MRCK β ) Rac1 , Cdc42 Cytoskeletal regulation p70S6K Serine / threonine kinase Cdc42 Regulation of translation , cell cycle PAK2 Serine / threonine kinase Rac1 , Cdc42 Cytoskeletal organization , kinase activation PKC α Serine / threonine kinase RhoA , Rac1 , Cdc42 Signal transduction PKN1 , 2 Serine / threonine kinase ( Prk ) RhoA Vesicle recycling , PLD1 activation ROCK1 , 2 Serine / threonine kinase ( Rok α , β ) RhoA Cytoskeleton , blockage of cell contact inhibition Stat3 Transcriptional factor Rac1 , Cdc42 Transcription α - Tubulin - 1C Tubulin Rac1 Integral component of microtubules proteins of the WASP / WAVE / Scar family and the diaphanous - related formin proteins [ 44 , 45 ] . RhoA In platelets , RhoA activation causes the initial platelet sphering seen after activation [ 46 ] . Following stimulation of platelets with thrombin or the thromboxane mimetic U46619 , RhoA is activated by ARHGEF1 ( p115RhoGEF ) [ 47 ] . This RhoA GEF is stimulated by activity of G α 13 subunits of the thrombin and thromboxane receptors [ 46 , 48 , 49 ] . RhoA may act through mDia1 to nucleate new actin ﬁlaments and through ROCK and LIM - kinase to stabilize actin ﬁlaments . RhoA is also able to cause myosin contraction through myosin phosphatase targeting protein phosphorylation and hence inhibition of myosin light chain ( MLC ) phosphatase activity [ 50 ] . RhoA regulation in platelets is complex , because after initial activation , signalling from α IIb β 3 inhibits the GTPase allowing spreading to occur [ 51 ] . Subsequently , this inhibition is released and RhoA is then able to help stabilize thrombi under shear [ 52 ] , and to mediate stress ﬁbre formation and clot retraction [ 53 ] . In ﬁbroblast cell cultures , RhoA expression promotes actin stress ﬁbre formation and focal adhesions [ 54 ] . Several RhoA effector proteins have been implicated in the formation of these structures , including ROCK and mDia1 [ 55 , 56 ] . Stress ﬁbre formation by thrombin - stimulated platelets also involves the interaction of RhoA with mDia1 in a PI3K - dependent manner ( Figure 1 ) [ 57 ] . Studies of platelets lacking RhoA have conﬁrmed the data obtained by pharmacological means and show that RhoA is required for integrin activation , granule secretion and clot retraction and that these defects translate into haemostatic and thrombotic defects in vivo [ 36 ] . Cdc42 Cdc42 is an established regulator of ﬁlopodia formation . The prototypic pathway for ﬁlopodia formation involving Cdc42 - WASP - ARP2 / 3 was based on studies of ﬁbroblasts [ 58 ] , but other Cdc42 driven pathways to ﬁlopodia also exist . Cdc42 binds the formins mDia2 and mDia3 [ 59 , 60 ] , and can activate IRSp53 , which binds mDia1 [ 61 , 62 ] . Cdc42 also promotes ﬁlopodia formation through the Ena / VASP protein Mena [ 63 ] . Experiments in ﬁbroblasts show Cdc42 is not absolutely required for ﬁlopodia formation , however [ 64 ] , andadditionalnovelCdc42 - independent pathways have been identiﬁed involving the Rho GTPase Rif [ 65 ] , and lipid - phosphatase - related protein - 1 ( LPR1 ) [ 66 ] . Cdc42 is highly expressed in platelets ( ∼ 28000 copies ) [ 38 ] , and is activated by thrombin stimulation or when platelets spread on collagen [ 67 , 68 ] . Cdc42 translocates to the actin cytoskeleton upon stimulation of protease activated receptors ( PARs ) or P2Y receptors , an event that requires integrin activation , actin polymerization and tyrosine kinase activity [ 69 , 70 ] . Although it is c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2015 Biochemical Society © 2014 The Author ( s ) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Licence ( CC - BY ) ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 3 . 0 / ) which permits unrestricted use , distribution and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . 434 R . Goggs and others known to be activated in platelets , the extent of Cdc42’s functions inplateletsispresentlyunclear . StudiesusingtheGTPaseinhibitor secramine A suggested that Cdc42 was required for platelet ﬁlopodia formation [ 71 , 72 ] . The selectivity of this inhibitor has been questioned , however [ 37 ] , and two studies have since used distinct mouse gene deletion strategies to study the function of Cdc42 in platelets . Use of a PF4 - Cre driven system to produce megakaryocyte - and platelet - speciﬁc deletion of the Cdc42 gene in mice resulted in mild macrothrombocytopenia ( ∼ 500 × 10 3 / μ l ) and shortened platelet lifespans [ 37 ] . Critically and surprisingly , Cdc42 − / − platelets formed ﬁlopodia with normal morphology on ﬁbrinogen - coated surfaces [ 37 ] , demonstrating that Cdc42 - independent pathways to ﬁlopodia formation exist in platelets . That study found that Cdc42 was not fully redundant in platelets , however , because ﬁlopodia formation on VWF was defective in Cdc42 − / − platelets suggesting Cdc42 may couple speciﬁcally to GPIb . The principal phenotype of platelets from these mice was increased secretion in response to GPVI agonists , thrombin and the thromboxane mimetic U46619 , suggesting that Cdc42 normally functions as a negative regulator of platelet secretion . This augmented secretion translated into increased thrombus formation in vivo , but oddly these mice had increased tail - bleeding times . A subsequent comparable study used an Mx - Cre gene deletion system to induce excision of the Cdc42 gene in haematopoietic cells by administration of polyinosinic acid – polycytidylic acid . The phenotype of these mice is more consistent with the hypothesized functions of Cdc42 in platelet function including impaired ﬁlopodia formation and reduced spreading , secretion and aggregation responses [ 73 ] . The discrepancies between these studies may well relate to methodological differences , but leave unanswered questions about platelet ﬁlopodia formation and have fed debate in the ﬁeld about the best strategy for generation of platelet - speciﬁc conditional knockout mice [ 74 ] . It is clear from the PF4 - Cre mice data , however , that even when platelet Cdc42 protein expression is ablated , these platelets still retain certain functions including ﬁlopodia formation and secretion . As such , this ﬁnding suggests that other pathways to these processes exist in platelets . Rif The small GTPase Rif ( RhoF ) was identiﬁed from partial cDNA sequences during a search for novel Rho - family GTPases and displays relatively low homology with other Rho proteins , with the exception of RhoD [ 75 ] . In contrast with Rac1 , RhoA and Cdc42 , Rif is expressed in only a subset of tissues [ 76 ] . Messenger RNA for Rif has been identiﬁed in human megakaryocytes [ 77 ] , and in human and mouse platelets [ 35 ] . Our understanding of endogenous Rif is limited , although it is expressed at higher levels in malignant lymphoma cells , compared with normal B - lymphocytes , suggesting Rif overexpression promotes malignant transformation [ 78 ] . Using recombinant Rho protein afﬁnity puriﬁcation - mass spectrometry ( AP - MS ) our group has identiﬁed interacting protein networks for Rif in platelets and conﬁrmed some of these interactions by immunoblotting ( Goggs , Mellor and Poole , unpublished observations ) . Although the interaction of Rif with the formins has been documented in other cell types , our work suggests Rif is able to interact with mDia1 and mDia3 in platelets , which hints at its function . Ectopic Rif expression in cultured cells promotes formation of long , thin , ﬂexible , actin - rich protrusions [ 79 , 80 ] . In contrast , the ﬁlopodia formed by Cdc42 are shorter , thicker and emerge only from the cell periphery [ 81 ] . It is possible that ﬁlopodia induced by Cdc42 and those induced by Rif represent different subtypes . Alternatively , generation of distinct structures may result solely from different molecular mechanisms of formation , since Rif directly binds and activates both mDia1 and mDia2 , whereas Cdc42 does not directly activate mDia1 [ 59 , 61 , 65 ] . Rif also generates ﬁlopodia through interactions with the formin proteins mDia1 and mDia2 in various cell types in culture [ 61 , 65 ] , and can induce stress ﬁbre formation in HeLa cells [ 82 ] . Once activated by Rif , the formin proteins directly nucleate actin ﬁlament polymerization at ﬁlopodia tips [ 65 , 83 ] , and as such provide a pathway to ﬁlopodia formation that is independent of Cdc42 . Both ﬁlopodia and stress ﬁbres are important for platelet function , enhancing cell – cell and cell – matrix interactions and facilitating clot retraction respectively . Previous studies using platelets from gene deletion mice suggest that the canonical pathway to ﬁlopodia formation is not the only means by which ﬁlopodia form in platelets [ 25 , 26 , 37 ] , and functional overlap between Cdc42 and Rif is probable on the basis of shared interactions with mDia2 [ 84 ] . Our group recently generated a novel constitutive Rif knockout mouse line to test the hypothesis that Rif might provide an alternative , Cdc42 - independent route to ﬁlopodia formation and to evaluate the role of Rif in platelets [ 85 ] . The mice were viable andshowednoovertphenotype . Evaluationsofmultipleaspectsof platelet function including assessments of inside - out and outside - in signalling through integrin α IIb β 3 and secretion from α and dense granules did not identify an essential role for Rif in mouse platelets , however . In addition our data suggest that Rif is not required for the actin rearrangements in megakaryocytes that facilitate thrombopoiesis , since platelet counts were comparable with wild - type controls [ 85 ] . Most importantly , static adhesion and ﬂow chamber assays suggested that Rif is not essential for platelet ﬁlopodia formation or for manipulating the actin cytoskeleton during other platelet shape change events . Although the lack of an identiﬁed role for Rif in mouse platelets does not preclude a role for the protein in human platelets , the question of which Rho GTPase ( s ) regulate platelet ﬁlopodia formation remains open . The most probable explanation for the lack of an observed phenotype in the Rif − / − mice , is that Rif plays redundant roles in platelets for which other Rho GTPases can substitute . Phylogenetic analysis of Rho GTPases suggests that the functions of Rif are most likely to overlap with RhoD [ 58 ] , but analysis of platelet mRNA sequences and proteomics data suggests that RhoD is not expressed [ 35 , 38 ] . Interestingly , a recent study of platelets in the mDia1 − / − mouse found no defects in clot retraction or in ﬁbrinogen binding , P - selectin surface expression , or cell spreading in response to either collagen - related peptide ( CRP ) or thrombin stimulation [ 86 ] . As such , data from the mDia1 − / − mouse is consistent with analyses of Rif − / − platelets and suggests pathways other than Rif - mDia1 regulate ﬁlopodia formation in platelets . Functional overlap with Cdc42 seems most likely given the common binding partners and data which suggests Cdc42 and Rif co - operate during development of dendritic spines from dendritic ﬁlopodia [ 87 ] . Rac Although three Rac isoforms exist , only Rac1 and Rac2 are expressed in platelets [ 38 ] . Rac1 activation occurs downstream of collagen – GPVI interactions and thrombin activation of PARs [ 39 , 88 ] . Platelet adhesion through integrin α 2 β 1 initiates outside - in signalling and activation of tyrosine kinases and small GTPases , including Rac1 , which is involved in cross - talk between integrins in collagen - adherent platelets [ 89 ] . Studies using platelets from Rac1 / Rac2 double null mice suggest that Rac promotes c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2015 Biochemical Society © 2014 The Author ( s ) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Licence ( CC - BY ) ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 3 . 0 / ) which permits unrestricted use , distribution and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . Platelet Rho GTPases 435 lamellipodia formation but not ﬁlopodia formation [ 8 ] . The Rac1 - dependent formation of lamellipodia in platelets likely occurs via WAVE / Scar activation of the ARP2 / 3 complex [ 90 ] . In other cells , Rac acts in tandem with the protein gelsolin [ 91 ] , generating novel barbed ends from which the Rac - activated ARP2 / 3 complex can nucleate new branched ﬁlaments at the lamellipodia leading edge ( Figure 1 ) [ 92 ] . Such links are plausible for platelets also , but have not been explored to date . Rac1 is essential for GPVI - regulated platelet spreading and for sustaining shear - resistant platelet aggregates under ﬂow both in vitro and in vivo and may also be involved in granule secretion [ 43 ] . Data from a recent study of conditional Rac1 / Cdc42 double null mice suggest that additional understanding of the overlapping roles of related proteins can emerge from such studies [ 93 ] . The platelet / megakaryocyte selective Rac1 / Cdc42 − / − mice had marked macrothrombocytopenia , abnormal platelet ultrastructure characterized by irregular granule distribution and impaired platelet function . Some of these abnormalities overlapped with those described for platelets from mice with single gene deletions , for instance an inability of Rac1 / Cdc42 − / − platelets to spread on ﬁbrinogen . The present study again used the PF4 - Cre system for gene deletion and demonstrated that Rac1 / Cdc42 − / − platelets are still able to form ﬁlopodia . Some novel abnormalities were identiﬁed in the double gene deletion mice , particularly the abolition of proplatelet formation , a phenotype that was associated with defective tubulin organization , whereas actin assembly and structure were largely preserved . RhoG RhoG is a classically regulated GTPase , most closely related to Rac [ 94 ] . Several GEFs and guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitors ( GDIs ) for RhoG have now been identiﬁed [ 95 – 98 ] , as well as a number of key effector proteins . In various cell types , RhoG regulates the actin cytoskeleton and is involved in ﬁlopodia formation [ 99 ] , membrane rufﬂing [ 100 ] , neurite outgrowth [ 101 , 102 ] , T - cell spreading [ 103 ] , dendritic spine morphogenesis [ 104 ] and lamellipodia formation [ 105 ] . The pathways to these various structures involve diverse effector proteins and may be separately regulated by GEFs such as Vav [ 106 ] , and triple functional domain containing protein ( TRIO ) [ 100 , 107 ] . Unusually , however , the involvement of RhoG in these processes is frequently through upstream regulation of Rac1 and / or Cdc42 . The regulation of Rac1 by RhoG likely occurs through recruitment of engulfment and cell motility ( ELMO ) family proteins [ 105 , 108 ] , and the dedicator of cytokinesis ( DOCK ) family of Rac1 GEFs [ 104 , 109 ] . The complex of RhoG – ELMO – DOCK1 proteins is required for integrin - mediated cell spreading and neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells [ 108 ] . This work has since been extended to demonstrate that Rac activation through ELMO and DOCK proteins enables RhoG to control lamellipodia formation in epithelia [ 110 ] , spine morphogenesis in hippocampal neurons [ 104 ] , and front – rear polarity and cell migration in keratinocytes [ 105 ] . The functions of RhoG in lymphocytes have been investigated in cell culture systems [ 103 ] , and using constitutive RhoG − / − mice [ 111 ] . In B - and T - lymphocyte cell culture systems , RhoG is activated by Vav - 1 and enhances gene transcription , particularly following ligation of the T - cell receptor ( TCR ) [ 103 ] . It is apparent that many of the activities driven by RhoG in other cells correspond closely with key platelet functions . Furthermore , the potential for RhoG to control Rac and / or Cdc42 in platelets is clearly of interest given the known importance of Rac and Cdc42 to platelet function . The equivalent receptors in platelets to lymphocyte TCRs are Fc γ RIIa – a low - afﬁnity immunoglobulin receptor ( not present in mouse platelets ) – andtheimmunoreceptortyrosine - basedactivationmotif ( ITAM ) domain containing GPVI – FcR γ complex , which is the principal platelet receptor for collagen . By extension , this suggests that in platelets , RhoG may be involved in the signalling pathways downstream of GPVI . Potential RhoG effector proteins in platelets have recently been identiﬁed using GST – RhoG AP - MS assays [ 112 ] . Proteins that speciﬁcally bound to active RhoG were identiﬁed and grouped by function and the interaction of selected candidate proteins conﬁrmed by immunoblotting . Several plausible interactions were identiﬁed , including with ELMO and DOCK1 ( DOCK180 ) and with regulators of the actin cytoskeleton and granule secretion machinery components such as VAMP2 . These interactions have clear implications for the potential roles of RhoG in platelet function in both haemostasis and thrombosis . The action of ELMO is to enhance the GEF activity of DOCK1 for Rac . Thus , RhoG may activate Rac and hence manipulate the actin cytoskeleton or control cellular processes via protein and lipid kinases [ 113 ] . RhoG also interacts with several other DOCK proteins ( DOCK5 , DOCK10 ) expressed in platelets [ 114 ] . These proteins are also GEFs for other Rho GTPases , suggesting that RhoG may act as a hub controlling activation of several signalling pathways . Two groups , including our laboratory recently independently investigated the role of RhoG in platelets using the same RhoG − / − mouse line [ 112 , 115 ] . Both studies demonstrated that integrin activation , aggregation , α and dense granule secretion in responsetoGPVIagonistsaresigniﬁcantlydecreasedinRhoG − / − platelets , whereas responses to agonists of the PARs are normal . ThisreducedsecretionintheabsenceofRhoGdiminishedpositiveautocrineandparacrinefeedbackandhencereducedplateletactivation . Secretion defects in the absence of RhoG led to reduced formation of arterial thrombi , demonstrated using two different thrombosis models . The contribution of RhoG to dense granule secretion is particularly important in this context . Platelet ADP secretion is necessary for stabilizing thrombi under shear conditions and co - stimulation with ADP ameliorated the integrin activation and aggregation defects in the RhoG − / − platelets . One study suggested that RhoG activation by GPVI and the hemi - ITAM domain containing receptor CLEC - 2 are dissimilar since aggregation in response to the CLEC - 2 agonist , fucoidan , was normal [ 115 ] . This may suggest that the FcR γ chains ( associated with GPVI but not with CLEC - 2 ) may be involved in RhoG signal transduction . The thrombotic defects in RhoG − / − mice were not paralleled by a haemostatic abnormality , however , since RhoG − / − mice tail bleeding times were normal and there was no evidence of a bleeding propensity . It is possible that intact PAR - mediated signalling in RhoG − / − mice was sufﬁcient to compensate for the abnormal granule secretion after collagen stimulation , or that the tail bleeding assay employed was insensitive to collagen pathway defects [ 116 ] . The defect noted in RhoG − / − platelets downstream of GPVI but not the PARs is most likely explained by the divergent signalling pathways engaged by these receptors . Stimulation of GPVI activates Syk ( spleen tyrosine kinase ) , leading to the assembly of the linker for activation of T - cells ( LAT ) signalsome , consisting of various protein and lipid kinases and adapter proteins . Syk activates PLC γ 2 , which then activates PKC and increases intracellular calcium . In contrast , PARs couple to G α q and G α 13 . Signalling through G α 13 activates RhoA and hence ROCK , whereas G α q signals through PLC β to activate PKC and c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2015 Biochemical Society © 2014 The Author ( s ) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Licence ( CC - BY ) ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 3 . 0 / ) which permits unrestricted use , distribution and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . 436 R . Goggs and others increase intracellular calcium . Both pathways activate RhoG , but it seems likely that RhoG activation is integral to the GPVI pathway to granule secretion , whereas RhoG activation following thrombin stimulation may be a secondary event . Regulation of granule secretion by Rho GTPases can occur through actin cytoskeletal manipulation , granule biogenesis and intracellular calcium signalling regulation [ 37 , 39 , 117 ] , but none of these were responsible for the phenotype in RhoG − / − . Direct links between active RhoG and regulators of these granule secretion events , including interactions with regulators of the actin cytoskeleton and the microtubule network , both of which facilitate platelet granule release , might provide an explanation [ 112 , 118 ] . Direct interactions between RhoG , SNARE proteins and SNARE regulators represent an important avenue for future study since similar connections have been described for Cdc42 and syntaxin [ 119 ] . RhoG regulation and relationships The speciﬁc interaction of RhoG with ELMO and DOCK1 in human platelet lysates , raises the possibility that RhoG might activate Rac in platelets . Investigations of this possibility using G - LISA assays , coﬁlin phosphorylation and platelet spreading did not suggest a defect in Rac activation in the absence of RhoG however [ 112 ] . This does not preclude Rac activation by RhoG through DOCK and ELMO in platelets , but it does show that Rac activation downstream of GPVI can occur via RhoG independent routes , potentially through the GEF activity of Vav . The GEF for RhoG in platelets is unknown . The LAT signalsome that assembles after GPVI activation includes the GEFs Vav1 and Vav3 . In ﬁbroblasts and in T - lymphocytes , Vav proteins act as RhoG GEFs [ 111 , 120 ] . Interestingly , Vav1 / Vav3 − / − mice have a similar phenotype to the RhoG − / − mice including reduced platelet aggregation responses to CRP , but normal aggregation responses to thrombin . Similarly , Vav1 / Vav3 − / − platelets also adhere poorly to collagen under shear . In contrast with RhoG − / − platelets , PLC γ 2 phosphorylation is reduced in response to CRP in Vav1 / Vav3 − / − mice . This suggests that Vav is involved in PLC γ 2 phosphorylation and that RhoG lies downstream of this event , consistent with RhoG activation being dependent on Vav when platelets are stimulated with CRP . Although Vav1 is phosphorylated in platelets by thrombin stimulation [ 121 ] , the phenotype of Vav1 / Vav3 − / − mice suggests Vav proteins do not mediate platelet function following PAR activation . In turn , this may explain why RhoG is not required following thrombin stimulation of platelets . The ﬁnding that PLC γ 2 phosphorylation is unaffected by RhoG expression suggests that two signalling pathways may follow LAT signalsome assembly : one mediated by PLC γ 2 and an alternative route linking RhoG to granule secretion independent of intracellular calcium or PKC , perhaps via direct interactions with SNAREs . A possible alternative to Vav is TRIO , a Rho - GEF that can mediate activation of Rac1 , RhoG and RhoA [ 122 ] . TRIO is expressed at the transcript and protein levels in platelets , although there are no reports of its function to date [ 35 , 38 ] . Recently , it has been demonstrated in neuroblastoma cells that TRIO is tyrosine phosphorylated by Fyn and that this phosphorylation enhances Rac activation [ 123 ] . It is therefore plausible that Fyn phosphorylation of TRIO might accelerate RhoG activation downstream of GPVI in platelets . Potentially signiﬁcant differences exist in the recent analyses [ 112 , 115 ] of RhoG − / − platelets , relating to the role of RhoG in Syk phosphorylation and to the point of activation of RhoG downstream of GPVI ( Figure 2 ) . One set of data [ 112 ] suggests RhoG is activated downstream of Syk and that RhoG is not required for Syk phosphorylation . In contrast , the other study [ 115 ] found that CRP - induced Syk phosphorylation was reduced in RhoG − / − platelets and that RhoG activation was independent of Syk activity . That would suggest RhoG activation occurs prior to Syk activation , which would support a role for TRIO – phosphorylated by Fyn – as the GEF for RhoG . It may be that differences in platelet preparations , assay conditions or timings are responsible for these discrepancies in signal pathway analysis . Identiﬁcation of the GEFs for RhoG acting downstream of GPVI in platelets may help to clarify this issue . PROSPECTS FOR FUTURE INVESTIGATION Perhaps because platelets rely on Rho GTPases to orchestrate many of their critical functions , several early insights into the function of Rho GTPases were gained from studies of platelets [ 1 ] , and they remain an excellent model system for the investigation of Rho GTPase function . Although the anucleate nature of platelets does preclude certain genetic manipulation , such disadvantages are countered by the ease with which millions of platelets can be acquired for study . Furthermore , the availability of multiple in vitro and in vivo assays of platelet function enables the roles of Rho GTPases to be dissected . There remain a number of Rho GTPases in platelets including RhoH , RhoJ and RhoBTB that are yet to be characterized , and a number of as yet unanswered questions , discussed below , suggesting there is considerable scope for further investigation in this ﬁeld . What is the function of Rif and how do platelets form ﬁlopodia ? Our recent investigation of the function of Rif in platelets concluded that Rif is apparently dispensable for platelet function because it has redundant roles with other GTPases , although studies of megakaryocytes in Rif − / − mice might provide additional information about the function of Rif in this cell lineage . Additional insight into the functions of Rif might be gained from looking at the functions of its effector proteins , since some are novel and uncharacterized . Additional cell culture work conﬁrming and clarifying the nature of these interactions and identifying the probable functions of these effectors could be undertaken prior to returning to in vivo systems . In order to test whether Cdc42 is compensating for Rif in the Rif − / − mice , strategies to inhibit or prevent the function of Cdc42 could be employed . Pharmacological inhibition of Cdc42 with compounds such as secramine A [ 124 ] , has previously been used to investigate the role of Cdc42 in platelets [ 125 ] . Since the selectivity of secramine A has been questioned , the preferable alternative would be genetic manipulation to produce mouse platelets devoid of both Rif and Cdc42 . This is no small undertaking , however , since Cdc42 − / − platelets can only be produced through conditional targeting . Although challenging to perform , such follow - up work may be necessary to identify the critical regulators of ﬁlopodia formation by platelets . The functional importance of ﬁlopodia to platelets suggests continued investigation of the mechanics of their formation is warranted . Various candidate proteins have been investigated but few critical proteins have been identiﬁed . A systematic , methodical approach investigating both Rho GTPases and their effector proteins will likely be necessary in order to identify the key regulators . It was reported in 2002 that ARP2 / 3 activity is essential for platelet ﬁlopodia formation [ 126 ] , but this has not been replicated to date . This is of particular interest in the light c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2015 Biochemical Society © 2014 The Author ( s ) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Licence ( CC - BY ) ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 3 . 0 / ) which permits unrestricted use , distribution and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . Platelet Rho GTPases 437 Figure 2 A schematic overview of the role of RhoG in the regulation of platelet secretion The interaction of ﬁbrillar collagen with GPVI leads to the dimerization of the receptor and the association of the ITAM domains of the FcR γ chains . These are phosphorylated by Src family kinases Lyn and Fyn . In the model suggested by the Kunapuli group data , Fyn phosphorylates the Rho GEF TRIO , which in turn activates RhoG [ 115 ] . In the model supported by data from our laboratory [ 112 ] , the activity of the Srcfamily kinasesleads tothe activation of Syk [ 112 ] . Theactivity ofSyk thenassemblesvarioussignalling adapters , kinasesandGEFproteinsincludingVav , whichleadsto the GTP loading of RhoG . Active RhoG then interacts with SNARE regulators and SNARE proteins including VAMP2 to promote dense granule secretion . Autocrine and paracrine feedback signalling then occurs through P2Y 12 receptors . of evidence that Cdc42 may be dispensable for platelet ﬁlopodia formation and given the potential for interactions between Rif and ARP2 / 3 complex components to occur in platelets . The lack of previous studies related to the ARP2 / 3 complex in platelets may relatetothelackofviableknockoutmice . Forinstanceconstitutive deletions of ARPC3 or APRC4 are both embryonically lethal , whereas work has progressed only to ES cell development for knockouts of APR2 and APRC5 [ 127 ] . Further study of platelet formin proteins is also warranted . Platelets express multiple formins and here , as with the GTPases , there is likely to be redundancy . Targeted inhibition of these proteins potentially in combination with pharmacological inhibitionorgenedeletionofprobableRhoGTPaseactivatorsmayaidthesearch . For instance mDia1 is known to be dispensable for platelet ﬁlopodia formation [ 86 ] . This formin protein binds to both Rif [ 61 ] , and to Cdc42 via IRSp53 [ 62 ] . It would be intriguing to see what effects removal or inhibition of multiple formin proteins for example mDia1 and mDia3 ( leaving only mDia2 ) or combined deletion of Cdc42 and mDia1 ( favouring Rif – mDia3 ) might produce in platelets . The availability of all of these relevant mice lines means that such experiments are within reach . What GEFs , GAPs and GDIs regulate platelets ? Signalling via small GTPases is determined by their spatial and temporal distribution and by numerous regulating proteins ( Table 2 ) [ 128 ] . Rho GTPases may either be GDP - loaded and inactive or GTP - loaded and active . Since GDP is typically tightly bound and the rate of hydrolysis of GTP is slow , Rho GTPases require the activity of two additional types of protein to function efﬁciently [ 129 ] . Activation of Rho GTPases occurs via the GTP loading activity of GEFs , which catalyse the exchange of bound GDP for GTP . To facilitate the regulation of the various platelet Rho GTPases , platelets contain a large number of Rho GEFs . Some GEFs , including PIP3 - dependent Rac exchanger 1 protein ( PREX - 1 ) , speciﬁcally interact with certain GTPases in vivo [ 130 ] , whereas others such as Vav are more promiscuous and can activate multiple Rho family members . Many GEFs including Vav and RhoGEF12 existinauto - inhibitedconformations . InthecaseofVav , activation of the GEF requires phosphorylation of several tyrosine residues to unlock the protein and expose the GEF active site [ 129 ] . Such regulation presumably explains why Vav associates with the LAT signalsome of tyrosine kinases assembled following collagen stimulation of GPVI [ 131 ] . In contrast , TRIO has not been characterized in platelets to date , although various reagents exist that would enable initial investigation of its expression and regulation . For instance , it has been demonstrated that TRIO is phosphorylated at Tyr2622 by the Src kinase Fyn in response to upstream receptor stimulation in cultured neurons [ 123 ] . An inhibitor of TRIO ( ITX - 3 ) has also recently been reported and could be used to determine if TRIO activates RhoG in platelets and more generally to investigate the role of TRIO in platelets [ 132 ] . Knockout mice with both conditional and constitutive targeted mutations of TRIO have c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2015 Biochemical Society © 2014 The Author ( s ) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Licence ( CC - BY ) ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 3 . 0 / ) which permits unrestricted use , distribution and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . 438 R . Goggs and others Table 2 A list of the most prevalent Rho GTPase GEFs , GAPs and GDIs in human platelets with their known target GTPases The list was based on Takai et al . [ 147 ] augmented with information from domain homology searches conducted using protein sequence ( www . uniprot . org / ) and protein interaction ( string - db . org / ) databases . Table entries were cross - referenced against two recent proteomic databases such that only proteins known to be expressed are listed [ 145 , 146 ] , and then ranked using mRNA transcript levels from human platelets [ 35 ] . UniProt ID Gene name Protein name GTPase target Q9NZN5 ARHGEF12 Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 12 RhoA , RhoB , Rac Q5JSP0 FGD3 FYVE , RhoGEF and PH domain - containing protein 3 Cdc42 Q92888 ARHGEF1 Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 1 RhoA Q9NR81 ARHGEF3 Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 3 RhoA , RhoB , Cdc42 O60229 KALRN Kalirin Rac Q8TCU6 PREX1 P - Rex1 ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) - dependent Rac exchanger 1 ) Rac Q9UKW4 VAV3 Guanine nucleotide exchange factor VAV3 Rac , Cdc42 O75962 TRIO Triple functional domain protein ( TRIO ) Rac , RhoA Q15052 ARHGEF6 Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 6 Rac , Cdc42 Q8NF50 DOCK8 Dedicator of cytokinesis protein 8 Rac , Cdc42 Q6ZSZ5 ARHGEF18 Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 18 RhoB , Rac Q9H7D0 DOCK5 Dedicator of cytokinesis protein 5 RhoA , Rac Q92974 ARHGEF2 Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2 RhoA Q07889 SOS1 Son of sevenless homologue 1 ( SOS - 1 ) Rac Q92608 DOCK2 Dedicator of cytokinesis protein 2 Rac P15498 VAV1 Proto - oncogene Vav Rac , Cdc42 Q9NZM3 ITSN2 Intersectin - 2 Cdc42 Q5T5U3 ARHGAP21 Rho GTPase - activating protein 21 RhoA , Cdc42 Q8N392 ARHGAP18 Rho GTPase - activating protein 18 Rac , RhoQ , RhoU O43182 ARHGAP6 Rho GTPase - activating protein 6 Rac P11274 BCR Breakpoint cluster region protein Rac , Cdc42 Q96P48 ARAP1 Arf - GAP with Rho - GAP , ANK repeat , PH domains 1 ? Q9P107 GMIP GEM - interacting protein RhoA P98171 ARHGAP4 Rho GTPase - activating protein 4 Rac Q92502 STARD8 StAR - related lipid transfer protein 8 RhoA , Cdc42 Q07960 ARHGAP1 Rho GTPase - activating protein 1 Cdc42 Q7Z6I6 ARHGAP30 Rho GTPase - activating protein 30 Rac , RhoH Q9BRR9 ARHGAP9 Rho GTPase - activating protein 9 Cdc42 , Rac , RhoA O60890 OPHN1 Oligophrenin - 1 RhoA , Rac A1A4S6 ARHGAP10 Rho GTPase - activating protein 10 RhoA , Cdc42 P42331 ARHGAP25 Rho GTPase - activating protein 25 ? Q12979 ABR Active breakpoint cluster region - related protein Rac , Cdc42 Q6ZUM4 ARHGAP27 Rho GTPase - activating protein 27 Cdc42 , Rac Q8N103 TAGAP T - cell activation Rho GTPase - activating protein ? P52566 ARHGDIB Rho GDP - dissociation inhibitor 2 Rac , RhoA , RhoB , RhoH P52565 ARHGDIA Rho GDP - dissociation inhibitor 1 Rac , RhoA , RhoH been produced and would also facilitate detailed investigation of the role of this GEF in platelets [ 133 ] . Interestingly , in a recent AP - MS study using GST - RhoG , no probable GEF proteins for RhoG were identiﬁed [ 112 ] . This was likely due to the use of a minimally truncated native RhoG bait protein . Although this protein was suitable for nucleotide exchange and the identiﬁcation of GTPase activating proteins ( GAPs ) and effector proteins , it was less suitable for identiﬁcation of GEFs . Studies that speciﬁcally aimed to identify GEF proteins have employed dominant negative mutants with single amino acid substitutions ( RhoG G15A , RhoA G17A ) [ 134 , 135 ] . These amino acid substitutions cause the protein to bind very poorly to both GDP and GTP [ 136 ] , making the protein essentially nucleotide - free . This state of Rho GTPase proteins is an intermediate within the nucleotide exchange reaction enabling these mutant proteins to form high afﬁnity binary complexes with GEFs [ 137 , 138 ] . Currently , the roles of GAPs in platelets are poorly characterized [ 1 , 139 ] . Several Rho GAPs in platelets have now been described including p190RhoGAP which acts on RhoA [ 1 ] , nadrin which acts on Rac and Cdc42 [ 140 ] , and oligophrenin - 1 [ 141 ] , which has recently been demonstrated to play a role regulating platelet ﬁlopodia formation [ 142 ] . Use of constitutively active Rho GTPase mutants to preferentially capture GAPs may increase the likelihood of identifying these regulators in platelets . Four Rho GDIs are expressed in platelets , and proteomics data suggest that RhoGDI α is highly expressed ( 21700 copies per platelet ) and therefore represents a plausible candidate for the inhibitory regulation of Rho GTPases in platelets [ 38 ] . Our lack of understanding of GDI function in platelets was recently highlighted , and any data regarding the functions of these proteins in platelets will be novel [ 1 ] . How do Rho GTPases contribute to the pathological roles of platelets ? Rho GTPase regulated platelet secretion is likely to be involved in the roles played by platelets in the development and progression of various disease processes including atherogenesis , asthma and cancer . Few ( if any ) suitable agents exist for the selective inhibition of Rho GTPases to reduce platelet secretion , however , selective modulation of Rho GTPase activity through inhibition of upstream GEFs may hold more promise [ 95 , 132 , 143 ] . In addition , investigation of the pathogenesis of inﬂammatory or neoplastic disease processes within mice lacking speciﬁc Rho GTPases may c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2015 Biochemical Society © 2014 The Author ( s ) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Licence ( CC - BY ) ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 3 . 0 / ) which permits unrestricted use , distribution and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . Platelet Rho GTPases 439 provide insights into the role of platelet secretion in disease and determine if such GEF inhibition holds any promise for future therapeutic interventions . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We apologize to those researchers whose work we could not cite due to space limitations . FUNDING This work was funded in part by the British Heart Foundation [ grant number PG / 13 / 14 / 30023 ] . REFERENCES 1 Aslan , J . E . and McCarty , O . J . ( 2013 ) Rho GTPases in platelet function . J . Thromb . Haemost . 11 , 35 – 46 CrossRef PubMed 2 Brass , L . F . , Wannemacher , K . M . , Ma , P . and Stalker , T . J . ( 2011 ) Regulating thrombus growth and stability to achieve an optimal response to injury . J . Thromb . Haemost . 9 , 66 – 75 CrossRef PubMed 3 Monroe , D . M . and Hoffman , M . ( 2006 ) What does it take to make the perfect clot ? Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 26 , 41 – 48 CrossRef PubMed 4 Hensler , M . E . , Frojmovic , M . , Taylor , R . G . , Hantgan , R . R . and Lewis , J . C . ( 1992 ) Platelet morphologic changes and ﬁbrinogen receptor localization . Initial responses in ADP - activated human platelets . Am . J . Pathol . 141 , 707 – 719 PubMed 5 Maxwell , M . J . , Dopheide , S . M . , Turner , S . J . and Jackson , S . P . ( 2006 ) Shear induces a unique series of morphological changes in translocating platelets : effects of morphology on translocation dynamics . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 26 , 663 – 669 CrossRef PubMed 6 Hartwig , J . H . ( 2013 ) The platelet cytoskeleton . In Platelets ( Michelson , A . D . , ed . ) , pp . 145 – 168 , Academic Press , London CrossRef 7 Eliautou , S . , Mangin , P . H . , Walter , U . , Gachet , C . and Lanza , F . ( 2009 ) Normal ﬁlopodia extension in VASP - deﬁcient platelets upon activation by adhesive matrices or soluble agonists . Thromb . Haemost . 102 , 792 – 794 PubMed 8 McCarty , O . J . , Larson , M . K . , Auger , J . M . , Kalia , N . , Atkinson , B . T . , Pearce , A . C . , Ruf , S . , Henderson , R . B . , Tybulewicz , V . L . , Machesky , L . M . and Watson , S . P . ( 2005 ) Rac1 is essential for platelet lamellipodia formation and aggregate stability under ﬂow . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 39474 – 39484 CrossRef PubMed 9 Stenberg , P . E . , Shuman , M . A . , Levine , S . P . and Bainton , D . F . ( 1984 ) Redistribution of alpha - granules and their contents in thrombin - stimulated platelets . J . Cell Biol . 98 , 748 – 760 CrossRef PubMed 10 Morgenstern , E . , Neumann , K . and Patscheke , H . ( 1987 ) The exocytosis of human blood platelets . A fast freezing and freeze - substitution analysis . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 43 , 273 – 282 PubMed 11 Pfeffer , S . ( 2003 ) Membrane domains in the secretory and endocytic pathways . Cell 112 , 507 – 517 CrossRef PubMed 12 Karniguian , A . , Zahraoui , A . and Tavitian , A . ( 1993 ) Identiﬁcation of small GTP - binding Rab proteins in human platelets – thrombin - induced phosphorylation of Rab3b , Rab6 and Rab8 proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 90 , 7647 – 7651 CrossRef PubMed 13 Fitzgerald , M . L . and Reed , G . L . ( 1999 ) Rab6 is phosphorylated in thrombin - activated platelets by a protein kinase C - dependent mechanism : effects on GTP / GDP binding and cellular distribution . Biochem . J . 342 , 353 – 360 CrossRef PubMed 14 Shirakawa , R . , Higashi , T . , Tabuchi , A . , Yoshioka , A . , Nishioka , H . , Fukuda , M . , Kita , T . and Horiuchi , H . ( 2004 ) Munc13 – 4 is a GTP - Rab27 - binding protein regulating dense core granule secretion in platelets . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 10730 – 10737CrossRef PubMed 15 Flaumenhaft , R . ( 2013 ) Platelet secretion . In Platelets ( Michelson , A . D . , ed . ) , pp . 343 – 366 , Academic Press , London CrossRef 16 Rosenfeld , S . I . , Looney , R . J . , Leddy , J . P . , Phipps , D . C . , Abraham , G . N . and Anderson , C . L . ( 1985 ) Human platelet Fc receptor for immunoglobulin G . Identiﬁcation as a 40 , 000 - molecular - weight membrane protein shared by monocytes . J . Clin . Invest . 76 , 2317 – 2322 CrossRef PubMed 17 Shiraki , R . , Inoue , N . , Kawasaki , S . , Takei , A . , Kadotani , M . , Ohnishi , Y . , Ejiri , J . , Kobayashi , S . , Hirata , K . , Kawashima , S . and Yokoyama , M . ( 2004 ) Expression of Toll - like receptors on human platelets . Thromb . Res . 113 , 379 – 385 CrossRef PubMed 18 Clemetson , K . J . , Clemetson , J . M . , Proudfoot , A . E . , Power , C . A . , Baggiolini , M . and Wells , T . N . ( 2000 ) Functional expression of CCR1 , CCR3 , CCR4 , and CXCR4 chemokine receptors on human platelets . Blood 96 , 4046 – 4054 PubMed 19 Yeaman , M . R . ( 1997 ) The role of platelets in antimicrobial host defense . Clin . Infect . Dis . 25 , 951 – 968 CrossRef PubMed 20 Clawson , C . C . and White , J . G . ( 1971 ) Platelet interaction with bacteria . I . Reaction phases and effects of inhibitors . Am . J . Pathol . 65 , 367 – 380 PubMed 21 Clawson , C . C . and White , J . G . ( 1971 ) Platelet interaction with bacteria . II . Fate of the bacteria . Am . J . Pathol . 65 , 381 – 397 PubMed 22 Clawson , C . C . ( 1973 ) Platelet interaction with bacteria . III . Ultrastructure . Am . J . Pathol . 70 , 449 – 471 PubMed 23 Yeaman , M . R . and Bayer , A . S . ( 1999 ) Antimicrobial peptides from platelets . Drug Resist . Updat . 2 , 116 – 126 CrossRef PubMed 24 Tang , Y . Q . , Yeaman , M . R . and Selsted , M . E . ( 2002 ) Antimicrobial peptides from human platelets . Infect . Immun . 70 , 6524 – 6533 CrossRef PubMed 25 Fitzgerald , J . R . , Foster , T . J . and Cox , D . ( 2006 ) The interaction of bacterial pathogens with platelets . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 4 , 445 – 457 CrossRef PubMed 26 Maynard , D . M . , Heijnen , H . F . , Horne , M . K . , White , J . G . and Gahl , W . A . ( 2007 ) Proteomic analysis of platelet alpha - granules using mass spectrometry . J . Thromb . Haemost . 5 , 1945 – 1955 CrossRef PubMed 27 Coppinger , J . A . , Cagney , G . , Toomey , S . , Kislinger , T . , Belton , O . , McRedmond , J . P . , Cahill , D . J . , Emili , A . , Fitzgerald , D . J . and Maguire , P . B . ( 2004 ) Characterization of the proteins released from activated platelets leads to localization of novel platelet proteins in human atherosclerotic lesions . Blood 103 , 2096 – 2104 CrossRef PubMed 28 Linden , M . D . and Jackson , D . E . ( 2010 ) Platelets : pleiotropic roles in atherogenesis and atherothrombosis . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 42 , 1762 – 1766 CrossRef PubMed 29 Theilmeier , G . , Michiels , C . , Spaepen , E . , Vreys , I . , Collen , D . , Vermylen , J . and Hoylaerts , M . F . ( 2002 ) Endothelial von Willebrand factor recruits platelets to atherosclerosis - prone sites in response to hypercholesterolemia . Blood 99 , 4486 – 4493 CrossRef PubMed 30 May , A . E . , Kalsch , T . , Massberg , S . , Herouy , Y . , Schmidt , R . and Gawaz , M . ( 2002 ) Engagement of glycoprotein IIb / IIIa ( alpha ( IIb ) beta3 ) on platelets upregulates CD40L and triggers CD40L - dependent matrix degradation by endothelial cells . Circulation 106 , 2111 – 2117 CrossRef PubMed 31 Gawaz , M . , Langer , H . and May , A . E . ( 2005 ) Platelets in inﬂammation and atherogenesis . J . Clin . Invest . 115 , 3378 – 3384 CrossRef PubMed 32 Randriamboavonjy , V . and Fleming , I . ( 2012 ) Platelet function and signaling in diabetes mellitus . Curr . Vasc . Pharmacol . 10 , 532 – 538 CrossRef PubMed 33 Levi , M . ( 2005 ) Platelets in sepsis . Hematology 10 , 129 – 131 CrossRef PubMed 34 Jain , S . , Harris , J . and Ware , J . ( 2010 ) Platelets : linking hemostasis and cancer . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 30 , 2362 – 2367 CrossRef PubMed 35 Rowley , J . W . , Oler , A . J . , Tolley , N . D . , Hunter , B . N . , Low , E . N . , Nix , D . A . , Yost , C . C . , Zimmerman , G . A . and Weyrich , A . S . ( 2011 ) Genome - wide RNA - seq analysis of human and mouse platelet transcriptomes . Blood 118 , e101 – e111 CrossRef PubMed 36 Pleines , I . , Hagedorn , I . , Gupta , S . , May , F . , Chakarova , L . , van Hengel , J . , Offermanns , S . , Krohne , G . , Kleinschnitz , C . , Brakebusch , C . and Nieswandt , B . ( 2012 ) Megakaryocyte - speciﬁc RhoA deﬁciency causes macrothrombocytopenia and defective platelet activation in hemostasis and thrombosis . Blood 119 , 1054 – 1063 CrossRef PubMed 37 Pleines , I . , Eckly , A . , Elvers , M . , Hagedorn , I . , Eliautou , S . , Bender , M . , Wu , X . , Lanza , F . , Gachet , C . , Brakebusch , C . and Nieswandt , B . ( 2010 ) Multiple alterations of platelet functions dominated by increased secretion in mice lacking Cdc42in platelets . Blood 115 , 3364 – 3373 CrossRef PubMed 38 Burkhart , J . M . , Vaudel , M . , Gambaryan , S . , Radau , S . , Walter , U . , Martens , L . , Geiger , J . , Sickmann , A . and Zahedi , R . P . ( 2012 ) The ﬁrst comprehensive and quantitative analysis of human platelet protein composition allows the comparative analysis of structural and functional pathways . Blood 120 , e73 – e82 CrossRef PubMed 39 Pleines , I . , Elvers , M . , Strehl , A . , Pozgajova , M . , Varga - Szabo , D . , May , F . , Chrostek - Grashoff , A . , Brakebusch , C . and Nieswandt , B . ( 2009 ) Rac1 is essential for phospholipase C - gamma2 activation in platelets . Pﬂugers Arch . 457 , 1173 – 1185 CrossRef PubMed 40 Zheng , Y . , Bagrodia , S . andCerione , R . A . ( 1994 ) Activationofphosphoinositide3 - kinase activity by Cdc42Hs binding to p85 . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 18727 – 18730 PubMed 41 Hotta , K . , Tanaka , K . , Mino , A . , Kohno , H . and Takai , Y . ( 1996 ) Interaction of the Rho family small G proteins with kinectin , an anchoring protein of kinesin motor . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 225 , 69 – 74 CrossRef PubMed 42 Fukata , M . , Nakagawa , M . , Kuroda , S . and Kaibuchi , K . ( 1999 ) Cell adhesion and Rho small GTPases . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 4491 – 4500 PubMed 43 Akbar , H . , Kim , J . , Funk , K . , Cancelas , J . A . , Shang , X . , Chen , L . , Johnson , J . F . , Williams , D . A . and Zheng , Y . ( 2007 ) Genetic and pharmacologic evidence that Rac1 GTPase is involved in regulation of platelet secretion and aggregation . J . Thromb . Haemost . 5 , 1747 – 1755 CrossRef PubMed 44 Kim , A . S . , Kakalis , L . T . , Abdul - Manan , N . , Liu , G . A . and Rosen , M . K . ( 2000 ) Autoinhibition and activation mechanisms of the Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein . Nature 404 , 151 – 158 CrossRef PubMed 45 Watanabe , N . , Kato , T . , Fujita , A . , Ishizaki , T . and Narumiya , S . ( 1999 ) Cooperation between mDia1 and ROCK in Rho - induced actin reorganization . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 136 – 143 CrossRef PubMed c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2015 Biochemical Society © 2014 The Author ( s ) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Licence ( CC - BY ) ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 3 . 0 / ) which permits unrestricted use , distribution and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . 440 R . Goggs and others 46 Klages , B . , Brandt , U . , Simon , M . I . , Schultz , G . and Offermanns , S . ( 1999 ) Activation of G ( 12 ) / G ( 13 ) results in shape change and Rho / Rho - kinase - mediated myosin light chain phosphorylation in mouse platelets . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 745 – 754 CrossRef PubMed 47 Huang , J . S . , Dong , L . , Kozasa , T . and Le Breton , G . C . ( 2007 ) Signaling through G ( alpha ) 13 switch region I is essential for protease - activated receptor 1 - mediated human platelet shape change , aggregation , and secretion . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 10210 – 10222 CrossRef PubMed 48 Offermanns , S . , Laugwitz , K . L . , Spicher , K . and Schultz , G . ( 1994 ) G proteins of the G12 family are activated via thromboxane A2 and thrombin receptors in human platelets . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 91 , 504 – 508 CrossRef PubMed 49 Moers , A . , Nieswandt , B . , Massberg , S . , Wettschureck , N . , Gruner , S . , Konrad , I . , Schulte , V . , Aktas , B . , Gratacap , M . P . , Simon , M . I . et al . ( 2003 ) G13 is an essential mediator of platelet activation in hemostasis and thrombosis . Nat . Med . 9 , 1418 – 1422 CrossRef PubMed 50 Essler , M . , Amano , M . , Kruse , H . J . , Kaibuchi , K . , Weber , P . C . and Aepfelbacher , M . ( 1998 ) Thrombin inactivates myosin light chain phosphatase via Rho and its target Rho kinase in human endothelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 21867 – 21874 CrossRef PubMed 51 Li , Z . , Delaney , M . K . , O’Brien , K . A . and Du , X . ( 2010 ) Signaling during platelet adhesion and activation . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 30 , 2341 – 2349 CrossRef PubMed 52 Schoenwaelder , S . M . , Hughan , S . C . , Boniface , K . , Fernando , S . , Holdsworth , M . , Thompson , P . E . , Salem , H . H . and Jackson , S . P . ( 2002 ) RhoA sustains integrin alpha IIbbeta 3 adhesion contacts under high shear . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 14738 – 14746 PubMed 53 Flevaris , P . , Stojanovic , A . , Gong , H . , Chishti , A . , Welch , E . and Du , X . ( 2007 ) A molecular switch that controls cell spreading and retraction . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 553 – 565 CrossRef PubMed 54 Ridley , A . J . ( 2012 ) Historical overview of Rho GTPases . Methods Mol . Biol . 827 , 3 – 12 CrossRef PubMed 55 Riento , K . and Ridley , A . J . ( 2003 ) Rocks : multifunctional kinases in cell behaviour . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 4 , 446 – 456 CrossRef PubMed 56 Higashi , T . , Ikeda , T . , Shirakawa , R . , Kondo , H . , Kawato , M . , Horiguchi , M . , Okuda , T . , Okawa , K . , Fukai , S . , Nureki , O . et al . ( 2008 ) Biochemical characterization of the Rho GTPase - regulated actin assembly by diaphanous - related formins , mDia1 and Daam1 , in platelets . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 8746 – 8755 CrossRef PubMed 57 Gao , G . , Chen , L . , Dong , B . , Gu , H . , Dong , H . , Pan , Y . , Gao , Y . and Chen , X . ( 2009 ) RhoA effector mDia1 is required for PI 3 - kinase - dependent actin remodeling and spreading by thrombin in platelets . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 385 , 439 – 444 CrossRef PubMed 58 Heasman , S . J . and Ridley , A . J . ( 2008 ) Mammalian Rho GTPases : new insights into their functions frominvivostudies . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 9 , 690 – 701 CrossRef PubMed 59 Lammers , M . , Meyer , S . , Kuhlmann , D . and Wittinghofer , A . ( 2008 ) Speciﬁcity of interactions between mDia isoforms and Rho proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 35236 – 35246 CrossRef PubMed 60 Peng , J . , Wallar , B . J . , Flanders , A . , Swiatek , P . J . and Alberts , A . S . ( 2003 ) Disruption of the diaphanous - related formin Drf1 gene encoding mDia1 reveals a role for Drf3 as an effector for Cdc42 . Curr . Biol . 13 , 534 – 545 CrossRef PubMed 61 Goh , W . I . , Sudhaharan , T . , Lim , K . B . , Sem , K . P . , Lau , C . L . and Ahmed , S . ( 2011 ) Rif - mDia1 interaction is involved in ﬁlopodium formation independent of Cdc42 and Rac effectors . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 13681 – 13694 CrossRef PubMed 62 Goh , W . I . , Lim , K . B . , Sudhaharan , T . , Sem , K . P . , Bu , W . , Chou , A . M . and Ahmed , S . ( 2012 ) mDia1 and WAVE2 proteins interact directly with IRSp53in ﬁlopodia and are involved in ﬁlopodium formation . J . Biol . Chem . 287 , 4702 – 4714 CrossRef PubMed 63 Mellor , H . ( 2010 ) The role of formins in ﬁlopodia formation . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1803 , 191 – 200 CrossRef PubMed 64 Czuchra , A . , Wu , X . , Meyer , H . , van Hengel , J . , Schroeder , T . , Geffers , R . , Rottner , K . and Brakebusch , C . ( 2005 ) Cdc42 is not essential for ﬁlopodium formation , directed migration , cell polarization , and mitosis in ﬁbroblastoid cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 4473 – 4484 CrossRef PubMed 65 Pellegrin , S . and Mellor , H . ( 2005 ) The Rho family GTPase Rif induces ﬁlopodia through mDia2 . Curr . Biol . 15 , 129 – 133 CrossRef PubMed 66 Sigal , Y . J . , Quintero , O . A . , Cheney , R . E . and Morris , A . J . ( 2007 ) Cdc42 and ARP2 / 3 - independent regulation of ﬁlopodia by an integral membrane lipid - phosphatase - related protein . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 340 – 352 CrossRef PubMed 67 Azim , A . C . , Barkalow , K . , Chou , J . and Hartwig , J . H . ( 2000 ) Activation of the small GTPases , rac and cdc42 , after ligation of the platelet PAR - 1 receptor . Blood 95 , 959 – 964 PubMed 68 Suzuki - Inoue , K . , Yatomi , Y . , Asazuma , N . , Kainoh , M . , Tanaka , T . , Satoh , K . and Ozaki , Y . ( 2001 ) Rac , a small guanosine triphosphate - binding protein , and p21 - activated kinase are activated during platelet spreading on collagen - coated surfaces : roles of integrin alpha ( 2 ) beta ( 1 ) . Blood 98 , 3708 – 3716 CrossRef PubMed 69 Dash , D . , Aepfelbacher , M . and Siess , W . ( 1995 ) The association of pp125FAK , pp60Src , CDC42Hs and Rap1B with the cytoskeleton of aggregated platelets is a reversible process regulated by calcium . FEBS Lett . 363 , 231 – 234 CrossRef PubMed 70 Dash , D . , Aepfelbacher , M . and Siess , W . ( 1995 ) Integrin alpha IIb beta 3 - mediated translocation of CDC42Hs to the cytoskeleton in stimulated human platelets . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 17321 – 17326 CrossRef PubMed 71 Chang , J . C . , Chang , H . H . , Lin , C . T . and Lo , S . J . ( 2005 ) The integrin alpha6beta1 modulation of PI3K and Cdc42 activities induces dynamic ﬁlopodium formation in human platelets . J . Biomed . Sci . 12 , 881 – 898 CrossRef PubMed 72 Pula , G . and Poole , A . W . ( 2008 ) Critical roles for the actin cytoskeleton and cdc42in regulating platelet integrin alpha2beta1 . Platelets 19 , 199 – 210 CrossRef PubMed 73 Akbar , H . , Shang , X . , Perveen , R . , Berryman , M . , Funk , K . , Johnson , J . F . , Tandon , N . N . and Zheng , Y . ( 2011 ) Gene targeting implicates Cdc42 GTPase in GPVI and non - GPVI mediated platelet ﬁlopodia formation , secretion and aggregation . PLoS One 6 , e22117 CrossRef PubMed 74 Calaminus , S . D . , Guitart , A . , Sinclair , A . , Schachtner , H . , Watson , S . P . , Holyoake , T . L . , Kranc , K . R . and Machesky , L . M . ( 2012 ) Lineage tracing of Pf4 - Cre marks hematopoietic stem cells and their progeny . PLoS One 7 , e51361 CrossRef PubMed 75 Ellis , S . and Mellor , H . ( 2000 ) The novel Rho - family GTPase rif regulates coordinated actin - based membrane rearrangements . Curr . Biol . 10 , 1387 – 1390 CrossRef PubMed 76 Boureux , A . , Vignal , E . , Faure , S . and Fort , P . ( 2007 ) Evolution of the Rho family of ras - like GTPases in eukaryotes . Mol . Biol . Evol . 24 , 203 – 216 CrossRef PubMed 77 Watkins , N . A . , Gusnanto , A . , de Bono , B . , De , S . , Miranda - Saavedra , D . , Hardie , D . L . , Angenent , W . G . , Attwood , A . P . , Ellis , P . D . , Erber , W . et al . ( 2009 ) A HaemAtlas : characterizing gene expression in differentiated human blood cells . Blood 113 , e1 – e9 CrossRef PubMed 78 Gouw , L . G . , Reading , N . S . , Jenson , S . D . , Lim , M . S . and Elenitoba - Johnson , K . S . ( 2005 ) Expression of the Rho - family GTPase gene RHOF in lymphocyte subsets and malignant lymphomas . Br . J . Haematol . 129 , 531 – 533 CrossRef PubMed 79 Aspenstrom , P . , Fransson , A . and Saras , J . ( 2004 ) Rho GTPases have diverse effects on the organization of the actin ﬁlament system . Biochem . J . 377 , 327 – 337 CrossRef PubMed 80 Gad , A . K . and Aspenstrom , P . ( 2010 ) Rif proteins take to the RhoD : Rho GTPases at the crossroads of actin dynamics and membrane trafﬁcking . Cell Signal . 22 , 183 – 189 CrossRef PubMed 81 Passey , S . , Pellegrin , S . and Mellor , H . ( 2004 ) What is in a ﬁlopodium ? Starﬁsh versus hedgehogs . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 32 , 1115 – 1117 CrossRef PubMed 82 Fan , L . , Pellegrin , S . , Scott , A . and Mellor , H . ( 2010 ) The small GTPase Rif is an alternative trigger for the formation of actin stress ﬁbers in epithelial cells . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 1247 – 1252 CrossRef PubMed 83 Rose , R . , Weyand , M . , Lammers , M . , Ishizaki , T . , Ahmadian , M . R . and Wittinghofer , A . ( 2005 ) Structural and mechanistic insights into the interaction between Rho and mammalian Dia . Nature 435 , 513 – 518 CrossRef PubMed 84 Goh , W . I . and Ahmed , S . ( 2012 ) mDia1 – 3in mammalian ﬁlopodia . Commun . Integr . Biol . 5 , 340 – 344 CrossRef PubMed 85 Goggs , R . , Savage , J . S . , Mellor , H . and Poole , A . W . ( 2013 ) The small GTPase Rif is dispensable for platelet ﬁlopodia generation in mice . PLoS One 8 , e54663 CrossRef PubMed 86 Thomas , S . G . , Calaminus , S . D . , Machesky , L . M . , Alberts , A . S . and Watson , S . P . ( 2011 ) G - protein coupled and ITAM receptor regulation of the formin FHOD1 through Rho kinase in platelets . J . Thromb . Haemost . 9 , 1648 – 1651 CrossRef PubMed 87 Hotulainen , P . , Llano , O . , Smirnov , S . , Tanhuanpaa , K . , Faix , J . , Rivera , C . and Lappalainen , P . ( 2009 ) Deﬁning mechanisms of actin polymerization and depolymerization during dendritic spine morphogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 185 , 323 – 339 CrossRef PubMed 88 Piechulek , T . , Rehlen , T . , Walliser , C . , Vatter , P . , Moepps , B . and Gierschik , P . ( 2005 ) Isozyme - speciﬁc stimulation of phospholipase C - gamma ( 2 ) by Rac GTPases . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 38923 – 38931 CrossRef PubMed 89 Guidetti , G . F . , Bernardi , B . , Consonni , A . , Rizzo , P . , Gruppi , C . , Balduini , C . and Torti , M . ( 2009 ) Integrin alpha2beta1 induces phosphorylation - dependent and phosphorylation - independent activation of phospholipase Cgamma2in platelets : role of Src kinase and Rac GTPase . J . Thromb . Haemost . 7 , 1200 – 1206 CrossRef PubMed 90 Oda , A . , Miki , H . , Wada , I . , Yamaguchi , H . , Yamazaki , D . , Suetsugu , S . , Nakajima , M . , Nakayama , A . , Okawa , K . , Miyazaki , H . et al . ( 2005 ) WAVE / Scars in platelets . Blood 105 , 3141 – 3148 CrossRef PubMed 91 Azuma , T . , Witke , W . , Stossel , T . T . , Hartwig , J . H . and Kwiatkowski , D . J . ( 1998 ) Gelsolin is a downstream effector of rac for ﬁbroblast motility . EMBO J . 17 , 1362 – 1370 CrossRef PubMed 92 May , R . C . ( 2001 ) The Arp2 / 3 complex : a central regulator of the actin cytoskeleton . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 58 , 1607 – 1626 CrossRef PubMed 93 Pleines , I . , Dutting , S . , Cherpokova , D . , Eckly , A . , Meyer , I . , Morowski , M . , Krohne , G . , Schulze , H . , Gachet , C . , Debili , N . et al . ( 2013 ) Defective tubulin organization and proplatelet formation in murine megakaryocytes lacking Rac1 and Cdc42 . Blood 122 , 3178 – 3187 CrossRef PubMed c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2015 Biochemical Society © 2014 The Author ( s ) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Licence ( CC - BY ) ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 3 . 0 / ) which permits unrestricted use , distribution and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . Platelet Rho GTPases 441 94 Vincent , S . , Jeanteur , P . and Fort , P . ( 1992 ) Growth - regulated expression of rhoG , a new member of the ras homolog gene family . Mol . Cell . Biol . 12 , 3138 – 3148 PubMed 95 Ellerbroek , S . M . , Wennerberg , K . , Arthur , W . T . , Dunty , J . M . , Bowman , D . R . , DeMali , K . A . , Der , C . and Burridge , K . ( 2004 ) SGEF , a RhoG guanine nucleotide exchange factor that stimulates macropinocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 3309 – 3319 CrossRef PubMed 96 Hiramoto - Yamaki , N . , Takeuchi , S . , Ueda , S . , Harada , K . , Fujimoto , S . , Negishi , M . and Katoh , H . ( 2010 ) Ephexin4 and EphA2 mediate cell migration through a RhoG - dependent mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 190 , 461 – 477 CrossRef PubMed 97 Faure , J . and Dagher , M . C . ( 2001 ) Interactions between Rho GTPases and Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor ( Rho - GDI ) . Biochimie 83 , 409 – 414 CrossRef PubMed 98 Zalcman , G . , Closson , V . , Camonis , J . , Honore , N . , Rousseau - Merck , M . F . , Tavitian , A . and Olofsson , B . ( 1996 ) RhoGDI - 3 is a new GDP dissociation inhibitor ( GDI ) . Identiﬁcation of a non - cytosolic GDI protein interacting with the small GTP - binding proteins RhoB and RhoG . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 30366 – 30374 CrossRef PubMed 99 Gauthier - Rouviere , C . , Vignal , E . , Meriane , M . , Roux , P . , Montcourier , P . and Fort , P . ( 1998 ) RhoG GTPase controls a pathway that independently activates Rac1 and Cdc42Hs . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 1379 – 1394 CrossRef PubMed 100 Bellanger , J . M . , Astier , C . , Sardet , C . , Ohta , Y . , Stossel , T . P . and Debant , A . ( 2000 ) The Rac1 - and RhoG - speciﬁc GEF domain of Trio targets ﬁlamin to remodel cytoskeletal actin . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 888 – 892 CrossRef PubMed 101 Katoh , H . , Yasui , H . , Yamaguchi , Y . , Aoki , J . , Fujita , H . , Mori , K . and Negishi , M . ( 2000 ) Small GTPase RhoG is a key regulator for neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 , 7378 – 7387 CrossRef PubMed 102 Estrach , S . , Schmidt , S . , Diriong , S . , Penna , A . , Blangy , A . , Fort , P . and Debant , A . ( 2002 ) The human Rho - GEF trio and its target GTPase RhoG are involved in the NGF pathway , leading to neurite outgrowth . Curr . Biol . 12 , 307 – 312 CrossRef PubMed 103 Vigorito , E . , Billadeu , D . D . , Savoy , D . , McAdam , S . , Doody , G . , Fort , P . and Turner , M . ( 2003 ) RhoG regulates gene expression and the actin cytoskeleton in lymphocytes . Oncogene 22 , 330 – 342 CrossRef PubMed 104 Kim , J . Y . , Oh , M . H . , Bernard , L . P . , Macara , I . G . and Zhang , H . ( 2011 ) The RhoG / ELMO1 / Dock180 signaling module is required for spine morphogenesis in hippocampal neurons . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 37615 – 37624 CrossRef PubMed 105 Ho , E . and Dagnino , L . ( 2012 ) Epidermal growth factor induction of front - rear polarity and migration in keratinocytes is mediated by integrin - linked kinase and ELMO2 . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 , 492 – 502 CrossRef PubMed 106 Wennerberg , K . , Ellerbroek , S . M . , Liu , R . Y . , Karnoub , A . E . , Burridge , K . and Der , C . J . ( 2002 ) RhoG signals in parallel with Rac1 and Cdc42 . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 47810 – 47817 CrossRef PubMed 107 Blangy , A . , Vignal , E . , Schmidt , S . , Debant , A . , Gauthier - Rouviere , C . and Fort , P . ( 2000 ) TrioGEF1 controls Rac - and Cdc42 - dependent cell structures through the direct activation of rhoG . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 729 – 739 PubMed 108 Katoh , H . and Negishi , M . ( 2003 ) RhoG activates Rac1 by direct interaction with the Dock180 - binding protein Elmo . Nature 424 , 461 – 464 CrossRef PubMed 109 Hiramoto , K . , Negishi , M . and Katoh , H . ( 2006 ) Dock4 is regulated by RhoG and promotes Rac - dependent cell migration . Exp . Cell Res . 312 , 4205 – 4216 CrossRef PubMed 110 Katoh , H . , Hiramoto , K . and Negishi , M . ( 2006 ) Activation of Rac1 by RhoG regulates cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 56 – 65 CrossRef PubMed 111 Vigorito , E . , Bell , S . , Hebeis , B . J . , Reynolds , H . , McAdam , S . , Emson , P . C . , McKenzie , A . and Turner , M . ( 2004 ) Immunological Function in Mice Lacking the Rac - Related GTPase RhoG . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 719 – 729 CrossRef PubMed 112 Goggs , R . , Harper , M . T . , Pope , R . J . , Savage , J . S . , Williams , C . M . , Mundell , S . J . , Heesom , K . J . , Bass , M . , Mellor , H . and Poole , A . W . ( 2013 ) RhoG protein regulates platelet granule secretion and thrombus formation in mice . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 34217 – 34229 CrossRef PubMed 113 Bishop , A . L . and Hall , A . ( 2000 ) Rho GTPases and their effector proteins . Biochem . J . 348 , 241 – 255 CrossRef PubMed 114 Wright , B . , Stanley , R . G . , Kaiser , W . J . , Mills , D . J . and Gibbins , J . M . ( 2011 ) Analysis of protein networks in resting and collagen receptor ( GPVI ) - stimulated platelet sub - proteomes . Proteomics 11 , 4588 – 4592 CrossRef PubMed 115 Kim , S . , Dangelmaier , C . , Bhavanasi , D . , Meng , S . , Wang , H . , Goldﬁnger , L . E . and Kunapuli , S . P . ( 2013 ) RhoG protein regulates glycoprotein VI - Fc receptor gamma - chain complex - mediated platelet activation and thrombus formation . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 34230 – 34238 CrossRef PubMed 116 Mangin , P . , Yap , C . L . , Nonne , C . , Sturgeon , S . A . , Goncalves , I . , Yuan , Y . , Schoenwaelder , S . M . , Wright , C . E . , Lanza , F . and Jackson , S . P . ( 2006 ) Thrombin overcomes the thrombosis defect associated with platelet GPVI / FcRgamma deﬁciency . Blood 107 , 4346 – 4353 CrossRef PubMed 117 Ory , S . and Gasman , S . ( 2011 ) Rho GTPases and exocytosis : what are the molecular links ? Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 22 , 27 – 32 CrossRef PubMed 118 Woronowicz , K . , Dilks , J . R . , Rozenvayn , N . , Dowal , L . , Blair , P . S . , Peters , C . G . , Woronowicz , L . and Flaumenhaft , R . ( 2010 ) The platelet actin cytoskeleton associates with SNAREs and participates in alpha - granule secretion . Biochemistry 49 , 4533 – 4542 CrossRef PubMed 119 Daniel , S . , Noda , M . , Cerione , R . A . and Sharp , G . W . ( 2002 ) A link between Cdc42 and syntaxin is involved in mastoparan - stimulated insulin release . Biochemistry 41 , 9663 – 9671 CrossRef PubMed 120 Schuebel , K . E . , Movilla , N . , Rosa , J . L . and Bustelo , X . R . ( 1998 ) Phosphorylation - dependent and constitutive activation of Rho proteins by wild - type and oncogenic Vav - 2 . EMBO J . 17 , 6608 – 6621 CrossRef PubMed 121 Pearce , A . C . , Wilde , J . I . , Doody , G . M . , Best , D . , Inoue , O . , Vigorito , E . , Tybulewicz , V . L . , Turner , M . and Watson , S . P . ( 2002 ) Vav1 , but not Vav2 , contributes to platelet aggregation by CRP and thrombin , but neither is required for regulation of phospholipase C . Blood 100 , 3561 – 3569 CrossRef PubMed 122 van Rijssel , J . , Hoogenboezem , M . , Wester , L . , Hordijk , P . L . and Van Buul , J . D . ( 2012 ) The N - terminal DH - PH domain of Trio induces cell spreading and migration by regulating lamellipodia dynamics in a Rac1 - dependent fashion . PLoS One 7 , e29912 CrossRef PubMed 123 DeGeer , J . , Boudeau , J . , Schmidt , S . , Bedford , F . , Lamarche - Vane , N . and Debant , A . ( 2013 ) Tyrosine phosphorylation of the Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor Trio regulates netrin - 1 / DCC - mediated cortical axon outgrowth . Mol . Cell . Biol . 33 , 739 – 751 CrossRef PubMed 124 Pelish , H . E . , Peterson , J . R . , Salvarezza , S . B . , Rodriguez - Boulan , E . , Chen , J . L . , Stamnes , M . , Macia , E . , Feng , Y . , Shair , M . D . and Kirchhausen , T . ( 2006 ) Secramine inhibits Cdc42 - dependent functions in cells and Cdc42 activationinvitro . Nat . Chem . Biol . 2 , 39 – 46 CrossRef PubMed 125 Pula , G . , Schuh , K . , Nakayama , K . , Nakayama , K . I . , Walter , U . and Poole , A . W . ( 2006 ) PKCdelta regulates collagen - induced platelet aggregation through inhibition of VASP - mediated ﬁlopodia formation . Blood 108 , 4035 – 4044 CrossRef PubMed 126 Li , Z . , Kim , E . S . and Bearer , E . L . ( 2002 ) Arp2 / 3 complex is required for actin polymerization during platelet shape change . Blood 99 , 4466 – 4474 CrossRef PubMed 127 Yae , K . , Keng , V . W . , Koike , M . , Yusa , K . , Kouno , M . , Uno , Y . , Kondoh , G . , Gotow , T . , Uchiyama , Y . , Horie , K . and Takeda , J . ( 2006 ) Sleeping beauty transposon - based phenotypic analysis of mice : lack of Arpc3 results in defective trophoblast outgrowth . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 , 6185 – 6196 CrossRef PubMed 128 Aspenstrom , P . ( 2004 ) Integration of signalling pathways regulated by small GTPases and calcium . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1742 , 51 – 58 129 Cherﬁls , J . and Zeghouf , M . ( 2013 ) Regulation of small GTPases by GEFs , GAPs , and GDIs . Physiol . Rev . 93 , 269 – 309 CrossRef PubMed 130 Welch , H . C . , Coadwell , W . J . , Ellson , C . D . , Ferguson , G . J . , Andrews , S . R . , Erdjument - Bromage , H . , Tempst , P . , Hawkins , P . T . and Stephens , L . R . ( 2002 ) P - Rex1 , a PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 - and Gbetagamma - regulated guanine - nucleotide exchange factor for Rac . Cell 108 , 809 – 821 CrossRef PubMed 131 Watson , S . P . , Auger , J . M . , McCarty , O . J . and Pearce , A . C . ( 2005 ) GPVI and integrin alphaIIb beta3 signaling in platelets . J . Thromb . Haemost . 3 , 1752 – 1762 CrossRef PubMed 132 Bouquier , N . , Vignal , E . , Charrasse , S . , Weill , M . , Schmidt , S . , Leonetti , J . P . , Blangy , A . and Fort , P . ( 2009 ) A cell active chemical GEF inhibitor selectively targets the Trio / RhoG / Rac1 signaling pathway . Chem . Biol . 16 , 657 – 666 CrossRef PubMed 133 Peng , Y . J . , He , W . Q . , Tang , J . , Tao , T . , Chen , C . , Gao , Y . Q . , Zhang , W . C . , He , X . Y . , Dai , Y . Y . , Zhu , N . C . et al . ( 2010 ) Trio is a key guanine nucleotide exchange factor coordinating regulation of the migration and morphogenesis of granule cells in the developing cerebellum . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 24834 – 24844 CrossRef PubMed 134 Samson , T . , Welch , C . , Monaghan - Benson , E . , Hahn , K . M . and Burridge , K . ( 2010 ) Endogenous RhoG is rapidly activated after epidermal growth factor stimulation through multiple guanine - nucleotide exchange factors . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 1629 – 1642 CrossRef PubMed 135 Takefuji , M . , Kruger , M . , Sivaraj , K . K . , Kaibuchi , K . , Offermanns , S . and Wettschureck , N . ( 2013 ) RhoGEF12 controls cardiac remodeling by integrating G protein - and integrin - dependent signaling cascades . J . Exp . Med . 210 , 665 – 673 CrossRef PubMed 136 Chen , S . Y . , Huff , S . Y . , Lai , C . C . , Der , C . J . and Powers , S . ( 1994 ) RAS - 15A protein shares highly similar dominant - negative biological properties with RAS - 17N and forms a stable , guanine - nucleotide resistant complex with CDC25 exchange factor . Oncogene 9 , 2691 – 2698 PubMed 137 Cherﬁls , J . and Chardin , P . ( 1999 ) GEFs : structural basis for their activation of small GTP - binding proteins . Trends Biochem . Sci . 24 , 306 – 311 CrossRef PubMed c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2015 Biochemical Society © 2014 The Author ( s ) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Licence ( CC - BY ) ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 3 . 0 / ) which permits unrestricted use , distribution and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . 442 R . Goggs and others 138 Garc´ıa - Mata , R . , Wennerberg , K . , Arthur , W . T . , Noren , N . K . , Ellerbroek , S . M . and Burridge , K . ( 2006 ) Analysis of activated GAPs and GEFs in cell lysates . In Methods in Enzymology ( William , E . , Balch , C . J . D . and Alan , H . , eds ) , pp . 425 – 437 , Academic Press CrossRef 139 Tcherkezian , J . and Lamarche - Vane , N . ( 2007 ) Current knowledge of the large RhoGAP family of proteins . Biol . Cell 99 , 67 – 86 CrossRef PubMed 140 Beck , S . , Fotinos , A . , Lang , F . , Gawaz , M . and Elvers , M . ( 2013 ) Isoform - speciﬁc roles of the GTPase activating protein Nadrin in cytoskeletal reorganization of platelets . Cell Signal . 25 , 236 – 246 CrossRef PubMed 141 Elvers , M . , Beck , S . , Fotinos , A . , Ziegler , M . and Gawaz , M . ( 2012 ) The GRAF family member oligophrenin1 is a RhoGAP with BAR domain and regulates Rho GTPases in platelets . Cardiovasc . Res . 94 , 526 – 536 CrossRef PubMed 142 Bleijerveld , O . B . , van Holten , T . C . , Preisinger , C . , van der Smagt , J . J . , Farndale , R . W . , Kleefstra , T . , Willemsen , M . H . , Urbanus , R . T . , de Groot , P . G . , Heck , A . J . et al . ( 2013 ) Targeted phosphotyrosine proﬁling of glycoprotein VI signaling implicates oligophrenin - 1in platelet ﬁlopodia formation . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 33 , 1538 – 1543 CrossRef PubMed 143 Samson , T . , van Buul , J . D . , Kroon , J . , Welch , C . , Bakker , E . N . , Matlung , H . L . , van den Berg , T . K . , Sharek , L . , Doerschuk , C . , Hahn , K . and Burridge , K . ( 2013 ) The guanine - nucleotide exchange factor SGEF plays a crucial role in the formation of atherosclerosis . PLoS One 8 , e55202 CrossRef PubMed 144 Bustelo , X . R . , Sauzeau , V . and Berenjeno , I . M . ( 2007 ) GTP - binding proteins of the Rho / Rac family : regulation , effectors and functionsinvivo . Bioessays . 29 , 356 – 370 CrossRef PubMed 145 Kim , M . S . , Pinto , S . M . , Getnet , D . , Nirujogi , R . S . , Manda , S . S . , Chaerkady , R . , Madugundu , A . K . , Kelkar , D . S . , Isserlin , R . , Jain , S . et al . ( 2014 ) A draft map of the human proteome . Nature 509 , 575 – 581 CrossRef PubMed 146 Wilhelm , M . , Schlegl , J . , Hahne , H . , Moghaddas Gholami , A . , Lieberenz , M . , Savitski , M . M . , Ziegler , E . , Butzmann , L . , Gessulat , S . , Marx , H . et al . ( 2014 ) Mass - spectrometry - based draft of the human proteome . Nature 509 , 582 – 587 CrossRef PubMed 147 Takai , Y . , Sasaki , T . and Matozaki , T . ( 2001 ) Small GTP - binding proteins . Physiol . Rev . 81 , 153 – 208 PubMed Received 14 November 2014 / 09 December 2014 ; accepted 18 December 2014 Published on the Internet 6 March 2015 , doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20141404 c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2015 Biochemical Society © 2014 The Author ( s ) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Licence ( CC - BY ) ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 3 . 0 / ) which permits unrestricted use , distribution and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited .