NeuroResource Rapid Cue - Speciﬁc Remodeling of the Nascent Axonal Proteome Graphical Abstract Highlights d pSILAC - SP3 reveals the newly synthesized axonal proteome within minutes d Extrinsic cues rapidly up - and downregulate large subsets of nascent proteins d Different repulsive cues generate distinct proteomic signatures d Switch from repulsion to attraction elicits opposite changes in nascent proteome Authors Roberta Cagnetta , Christian K . Frese , Toshiaki Shigeoka , Jeroen Krijgsveld , Christine E . Holt Correspondence j . krijgsveld @ dkfz . de ( J . K . ) , ceh33 @ cam . ac . uk ( C . E . H . ) In Brief Cagnetta et al . establish a highly sensitive proteomics approach to characterize the nascent proteome of a subcellular compartment ( axon ) on a rapid timescale ( minutes ) . Remarkably , different extrinsic cues trigger distinct signatures of up - and downregulated nascent protein changes within 5 min . pSILAC Cue Control Medium Heavy SP3 Nascent protein detection by MS Cell body removal Control Cue BDNF Netrin - 1 Sema3A RGCaxons up down 5’ - 30’ 5’ 15’ 30’ 5’ 15’ 30’ 5’ 15’ 30’ Nascent protein : Cue - specific signatures Cagnetta et al . , 2018 , Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 July 11 , 2018 ª 2018 The Author ( s ) . Published by Elsevier Inc . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2018 . 06 . 004 Neuron NeuroResource Rapid Cue - Speciﬁc Remodeling of the Nascent Axonal Proteome Roberta Cagnetta , 1 , 6 Christian K . Frese , 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 Toshiaki Shigeoka , 1 Jeroen Krijgsveld , 2 , 3 , 5 , * and Christine E . Holt 1 , 7 , * 1 Department of Physiology Development and Neuroscience , Downing Street , University of Cambridge , Cambridge CB2 3DY , UK 2 European Molecular Biology Laboratory ( EMBL ) , Meyerhofstr . 1 , Heidelberg 69117 , Germany 3 German Cancer Research Center ( DKFZ ) , Im Neuenheimer Feld 581 , Heidelberg 69120 , Germany 4 CECAD Research Center , University of Cologne , Joseph - Stelzmann - Str . 26 , Cologne 50931 , Germany 5 Excellence Cluster CellNetworks , University of Heidelberg , Im Neuenheimer Feld 581 , Heidelberg 69120 , Germany 6 These authors contributed equally 7 Lead Contact * Correspondence : j . krijgsveld @ dkfz . de ( J . K . ) , ceh33 @ cam . ac . uk ( C . E . H . ) https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2018 . 06 . 004 SUMMARY Axonal protein synthesis and degradation are rapidly regulated by extrinsic signals during neural wiring , but the full landscape of proteomic changes remains unknown due to limitations in axon sampling and sensitivity . By combining pulsed stable isotope label - ing of amino acids in cell culture with single - pot solid - phase - enhanced sample preparation , we character - ized the nascent proteome of isolated retinal axons on an unparalleled rapid timescale ( 5 min ) . Our anal - ysis detects 350 basally translated axonal proteins on average , including several linked to neurological disease . Axons stimulated by different cues ( Netrin - 1 , BDNF , Sema3A ) show distinct signatures with more than 100 different nascent protein species up - or downregulated within the ﬁrst 5 min followed by further dynamic remodeling . Switching repulsion to attraction triggers opposite regulation of a subset of common nascent proteins . Our ﬁndings thus reveal the rapid remodeling of the axonal proteomic land - scape by extrinsic cues and uncover a logic underly - ing attraction versus repulsion . INTRODUCTION The generation of neuronal networks requires neurons to con - nect to their synaptic partners with precision . This process is mediated through axon navigation , guided by the growth cone , which senses growth and guidance factors and transduces these signals to regulate the speed and direction of axon exten - sion , often long distances away from the soma . Growing axons contain complex transcriptomes ( Zivraj et al . , 2010 ) , and the regulation of local translation and protein degradation allows the rapid and dynamic control of the axonal proteome in response to extracellular stimuli ( Campbell and Holt , 2001 ; De - glincerti et al . , 2015 ) . Previous studies have focused on only a handful of candidate transcripts regulated by guidance cues , even though more than 1 , 000 different mRNAs are known to reside in axons ( Leung et al . , 2006 ; Piper et al . , 2006 ; Yao et al . , 2006 ; Bellon et al . , 2017 ; Vidaki et al . , 2017 ; Lepelletier et al . , 2017 ; Wu et al . , 2005 ; Villarin et al . , 2016 ; Hengst et al . , 2009 ; Jain and Welshhans , 2016 ; Zivraj et al . , 2010 ) . It is not known whether cues elicit large - scale translational changes across the axonal transcriptome or whether different guidance molecules trigger the translation of different subsets of mRNAs . A recent genome - wide analysis on the ribosome - associated mRNAs revealed a complex and dynamically regulated transla - tome in retinal axons in vivo ( Shigeoka et al . , 2016 ) . This approach , however , did not provide information to distinguish the cue - induced translatome from the basal translatome and did not address the question of cue - speciﬁc up - and downregu - lation of newly synthesized proteins ( NSPs ) . These questions require an unbiased analysis of the cue - induced nascent prote - ome in the axonal compartment over a short timescale . The characterization and quantiﬁcation of the nascent prote - ome of whole cells or tissue samples by metabolic labeling methods , such as pulsed stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture ( pSILAC ) or bio - orthogonal non - canonical amino acid tagging ( BONCAT ) , are straightforward due to sample abun - dance and typical labeling periods of hours ( Schwanh € ausser et al . , 2009 ; Dieterich et al . , 2006 ; Schanzenb € acher et al . , 2016 ) . However , a systematic analysis of the nascent proteome from very low sample amounts of a subcellular compartment , uncontaminated by the soma , over a short timescale ( < 20 min ) remains a major challenge ( Eichelbaum and Krijgsveld , 2014 ) . To overcome these challenges , we applied pSILAC in a com - partmentalized chamber in combination with ultrasensitive sample preparation technology , termed single - pot solid - phase - enhanced sample preparation ( SP3 ) ( Hughes et al . , 2014 ) . This enabled us to characterize and quantify the sys - tem - wide proteome dynamics in response to speciﬁc guidance cues from tiny amounts ( % 2 m g ) of somaless retinal axons on a timescale of minutes . Further , we used this unbiased highly sen - sitive approach to investigate the axonal proteomic changes that characterize the switch between repulsive and attractive chemo - tropic responses . Our results revealed that hundreds of proteins , encompassing a wide range of cellular functions , are rapidly translated within Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 ª 2018 The Author ( s ) . Published by Elsevier Inc . 29 This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) . B C D E F G A Figure 1 . pSILAC - SP3 Detects the Axonal Newly Synthesized Proteome within 5 min ( A ) Intact whole - eye primordia were cultured in compartmentalized Boyden chambers . Only the axons of RGCs exit the eye—via optic nerve head ( ONH ) —and extendthroughthe1 m mporestogrowonthelaminin - coatedundersideofthetransﬁlter . Cellbodiesanddendritesremainintheeyeontheuppersurfaceandare removed immediately prior the experiment , leaving pure somaless axons . ( B ) RT - PCR conﬁrms the purity of the axonal compartment . Actb ( positive control ; Leung et al . , 2006 ) , but not Actg or Brn3 ( negative controls ; Willis and Twiss , 2011 ; Yoon et al . , 2012 ) , mRNAs were detected . ( C ) Schematic representation of the pSILAC - SP3 methodology applied to somaless retinal axons . Axons are exposed to vehicle or cue in pSILAC medium containing either ‘‘medium’’ or ‘‘heavy’’ isotope - coded Arg and Lys . ( D ) Proteins identiﬁed in axons derived from 100 eye explants and NSPs identiﬁed in axons after 5 min of pSILAC . Error bars , SEM . ( legend continued on next page ) 30 Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 the axonal compartment in basal conditions and in response to guidance cues . Comparative analysis of cue - induced newly synthesized proteomes revealed more than 100 nascent protein species regulated within just 5 min , some distinctly associated with speciﬁc guidance cues and some common to all cues . When cue - induced responses are switched from repulsion to attraction , a fraction of a common subset of NSPs undergo opposite regulation . Collectively , our data show rapid nascent proteome remodeling in response to guidance molecules and uncover subsets of opposite proteomic changes involved in the switch between repulsive and attractive chemotropic responses . RESULTS Ultrasensitive Proteomics Detects Rapid Changes in the Axonal Nascent Proteome First , we tested whether the SP3 approach ( Hughes et al . , 2014 ) was sufﬁciently sensitive for detecting the nascent proteome of axons of a single cell type within 5 min in basal ( non - stimulated ) conditions . To obtain isolated axons , we cultured intact whole - eye primordia from Xenopus laevis embryos in compartmental - ized transﬁlter chambers ( Figure 1A ) ( Willis and Twiss , 2011 ) . Ex - planted whole eyes maintain their anatomical integrity in culture , and only the axons of retinal ganglion cells ( RGCs ) exit the eye to grow through the 1 m m pores of the transﬁlter onto the lower sur - face ( Figure 1A ) . Immunostaining of eye sections with speciﬁc markers veriﬁed the exclusive presence of RGC axons exiting the eye ( Figures S1A – S1C ) and the absence of nuclei and dendrites ( Figures S1D and S1E ) on the lower surface of the transﬁlter . Axonal purity was further demonstrated by RT - PCR , showing the presence of b - actin mRNA and of the axonal marker microtubule - associated protein Tau ( Mapt ) mRNA ( Figure 1B ; Figure S1F ) ( Leung et al . , 2006 ; Litman et al . , 1993 ) and the absence of somal and dendritic mRNAs in the axonal material collected from the transﬁlter ( Figure 1B ; Figure S1F ) . Given the limited availability of axonal material , we assessed the detection sensitivity of the SP3 protocol on axon samples derived from 100 eye explants ( % 2 m g protein typical yield ) ( Hughes et al . , 2014 ) . SP3 - MS ( mass spectrometry ) analysis identiﬁed more than 1 , 000 proteins ( Figure 1D ; Table S3 ) . In line with our results on axonal purity ( Figures S1D – S1F ) , the RGC marker g - synuclein was detected in the axonal proteome , whereas dendrite markers were absent ( Table S3 ) . To investigate the newly synthesized proteome , we incubated retinal cultures for 1 hr in medium depleted of lysine and arginine . Subsequently , the cell bodies were eliminated by eye removal from the upper surface of the transﬁlter , and the somaless axons on the lower transﬁlter surface were incubated for 5 min with ‘‘Medium’’ ( M ) isotope - coded amino acids ( Lys4 , Arg6 ) . After lysis , the pSILAC axon samples were processed by SP3 prior to MS analysis ( Fig - ure 1C ) . pSILAC - SP3 detected an average of 350 NSPs that incorporated the labeled amino acids under basal conditions following a 5 min pulse of SILAC in a % 2 m g axonal sample ( Fig - ure 1D ; Table S3 ) . The distribution of the M label incorporation rate in NSPs relative to total protein , calculated as ( M / ( M + L ) ) / 5 min , where ‘‘Medium’’ represents the basally NSPs and ‘‘Light’’ ( L ) indicates the pre - existing proteins , showed that protein synthesis occurs at a basal level in non - stimulated axons and that signals , although low , were consistently detectable ( median = 1 . 4 % of the total signal ; Figure 1E ) . Samples were analyzed in biological triplicate to assess reproducibility , which yielded an average Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient ( PCC ) of 0 . 6 between replicates ( Figure S1G ) , higher than the PCC derived from 20 min BONCAT - pSILAC previously carried out on (cid:1) 10 7 RAW 264 . 7 macrophages ( PCC = (cid:3) 0 . 11 ; Eichelbaum and Krijgsveld , 2014 ) . These data indicate that approximately one - third of the axonal proteome is synthesized locally ( Figure 1D ) . A positive correlation was found between the abundance of pre - existing proteins and NSPs ( Figure S1H ) , indicating borderline detection of de novo synthesis for low - abundance proteins due to the sam - ple scarcity and short timescale . The ratios between newly syn - thesized and pre - existing proteins correlated negatively with the abundance of the pre - existing proteins ( PCC = (cid:3) 0 . 5 ; Figure S1I ) , suggesting that the average basal translation rate is relatively constant for the majority of the proteins . To gain insight into the potential function of basal protein synthesis in developing axons , we conducted functional Gene Ontology ( GO ) enrichment analysis . ‘‘ribosome and translation’’ was the most - enriched category ( Figure 1F ) , consistent with evidence from the in vivo mouse axonal translatome ( Shigeoka et al . , 2016 ) . The ‘‘proteasome complex’’ was also signiﬁcantly enriched ( Figure 1F ) , in line with the in vivo mouse axonal trans - latome and with previous work showing that ubiquitin - protea - some system ( UPS ) components are abundant in growth cones and that axonally synthesized proteins undergo a particularly high degree of UPS - dependent turnover ( Deglincerti et al . , 2015 ) . A further highly enriched cluster was the ‘‘extracellular region part , ’’ containing extracellular matrix ( ECM ) proteins . Of note , these categories were much more enriched than the ‘‘actin binding’’ one ( Figure 1F ) . Similar to the GO analysis , Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes ( KEGG ) pathway analysis revealed signiﬁcant enrichment in ‘‘ribosome , ’’ ‘‘cell adhesion molecules , ’’ and ‘‘ECM - receptor interaction’’ path - ways ( Figure 1G ) . KEGG analysis also highlighted several metabolic pathways linked to amino acid synthesis , such as ‘‘histidine metabolism’’ and ‘‘glycolysis , ’’ suggesting that the axon is equipped with its own biosynthetic processes and energy supply ( Figure 1G ; Figure S1L ) . Several of the metabolic NSPs belonged to the ‘‘mitochondrion’’ and ‘‘mitochondrial matrix’’ GO categories ( Figure S1L ) . Categories related to stress and apoptosis were absent , consistent with evidence showing that axons deprived of their cell bodies do not exhibit anatomical signs of degeneration up to (cid:1) 3 hr ( Harris et al . , 1987 ) . ( E ) Density distribution of basal NSPs per minute relative to total protein amount . Red line indicates the median . ( F ) Enriched GO terms in the biological process , molecular function , and cellular composition categories for constitutive axonal NSPs ( p < 0 . 1 ) . ( G ) Enriched KEGG pathways for constitutive axonal NSPs ( p < 0 . 1 ) . Circle size and numbers indicate NSP counts . See also Figure S1 . Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 31 The results demonstrate that NSPs can be detected in extremely small quantities of subcellular material within minutes by pSILAC - SP3 . Furthermore , they show that developing axons basally synthesize proteins encompassing a wide range of cellular functions , suggesting the capacity to locally replenish metabolic proteins and machineries subject to high protein turnover . Guidance Cues Trigger Rapid Wide - Scale Remodeling of the Nascent Axonal Proteome To investigate whether guidance cues induce a proteome - wide response and whether it changes over time , we carried out pSILAC - SP3 on somaless axons stimulated with three different cues present along the visual pathway ( brain - derived neurotro - phic factor [ BDNF ] , Netrin - 1 , and Semaphorin3A [ Sema3A ] ) , together with ‘‘heavy’’ ( H ) isotope labels ( Lys8 , Arg10 ) , for 5 , 15 , and 30 min . Control somaless axon samples were incubated simultaneously with M isotope labels ( Lys4 , Arg6 ) . Subsequently , in each independent replicate , control and cue - stimulated sam - ples sharing the same pulse duration were lysed , pooled , and processed through SP3 ( Figure 1C ) . To obtain (cid:1) 2 m g of axonal material , we explanted 100 eye primordia per transﬁlter , yielding < 5 , 000 axons , and cultured more than 1 , 800 eyes for each single replicate . The MS analysis revealed up to 500 quantiﬁed NSP changes per cue stimulation undergoing a similar trend across the biolog - ical replicates ( meeting the requirements ( 1 ) quantiﬁed in > 50 % of biological replicates , ( 2 ) standard deviation ( SD ) % 1 , ( 3 ) average log 2 ( H / M ) > j 0 . 3 j ) and up to 166 signiﬁcant NSP changes per cue stimulation , thus indicating that guidance cues cause wide - scale remodeling of the nascent proteome ( Figure 2 ; Table S3 ) . This large set of changes was reproducibly detected after just 5 min of cue stimulation ( up to 108 signiﬁcant NSP changes ) . Whereas previous studies have mainly shown that some mRNAs can be translated in response to cue stimulation , our data re - vealed that , in addition to upregulation , several NSPs undergo cue - induced downregulation ( Figure 2 ) , thus indicating tight con - trol of the axonal nascent proteome in both directions . As ex - pected , given the limiting rate of protein synthesis , the NSPs up - regulated in response to cues at the 5 min time point are shifted slightly toward a smaller size with respect to the axonal prote - ome size distribution ( Figure S2A ) . We next asked how cue - induced NSP changes correlate with the abundance of their local transcripts by comparing the mRNA levels in retinal growth cones of Xenopus stage 32 ( Zivraj et al . , 2010 ) with the abundance of repulsive cue - induced heavy - labeled NSPs . This yielded a signiﬁcant but low positive correla - tion ( r = 0 . 33 ; Figure S2B ) , as seen in other systems ( Gygi et al . , Figure 2 . Guidance Molecules Trigger Rapid and Wide - Scale Up / Down Remodeling of the Nascent Axonal Proteome Hierarchical clustering of cue - induced NSP changes ( log 2 ( H / M ) ) at different timepoints ( 5 0 , 15 0 , 30 0 ) derived from R 3independent biological replicatesper each cue stimulation ( derived from 5 , 5 , and 3 independent biological repli - cates for stimulation with BDNF , Netrin - 1 , and Sema3A , respectively ) . Red indicatesupregulation , blueindicatesdownregulation , anddarkgrayindicates NSP quantiﬁed in < 50 % of biological replicates . Proteins not annotated in Xenopus laevis were blasted against Xenopus tropicalis ( identity R 90 % , indicated in gray ) . See also Figure S2 . 32 Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 A D E F B C ( legend on next page ) Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 33 1999 ; Rajasundaram et al . , 2014 ) . The results suggest that cue - induced NSP changes , supported to some degree by local transcriptome levels , rapidly remodel the axonal nascent prote - ome on a wide scale in both up and down directions . Validation of the Axonal Nascent Proteome To validate the pSILAC - SP3 data , we used two orthogonal methods : ( 1 ) puromycylation combined with proximity ligation assay ( puro - PLA ) to quantify protein synthesis ( Figures 3A – 3C ; Figure S3A ; Table S1 ) ( tom Dieck et al . , 2015 ) and ( 2 ) quantitative immunoﬂuorescence ( qIF ) to measure the overall total protein level ( Figures 3D and 3E ; Figure S3A ; Table S1 ) . For puro - PLA , the use of one single antibody and rabbit IgG served as two inde - pendent negative controls , conﬁrming the absence of a non - spe - ciﬁc signal ( Figure 3B ; Figure S3A ) . Sixteen NSP changes were chosen from the proteomic dataset for validation , representing proteins across different functional categories , in stimulated and non - stimulated conditions , after various pulses of SILAC ( 5 , 15 , or 30 min ) and exhibiting different average log 2 ratios ( Ta - ble S1 ) . We conﬁrmed the two negative controls ( Figures 3A and 3B ) whose transcripts were not detected in axons ( Figure 1B ) and successfully validated 15 out of 16 NSP changes ( Figures 3B – 3E ; Figure S3A ) . The majority of the mRNAs corresponding to the validated NSPs were previously detected in axons ( Table S1 ) . The pSILAC and ﬂuorescence - based ‘‘cue / control condi - tion’’ ratios showed a strong positive correlation ( PCC = 0 . 81 ) ( Figure 3F ) . The correlation was higher for the puro - PLA data than the immunoﬂuorescence ( IF ) data , which was expected due to the higher degree of speciﬁcity of the puro - PLA method that detects only the NSPs and not total protein . For example , at 5 min , both pSILAC and puro - PLA revealed that Sema3A up - regulates histone H4 translation ( Figures 3B and 3C ; Table S1 ) , whereas the total protein amount of H4 does not change at 5 min and signiﬁcantly decreases following 15 min Sema3A stim - ulation ( Figure S3B ) . This decrease is blocked by Ciliobrevin A , a dynein inhibitor that prevents retrograde transport ( Figure S3B ) ( Firestone et al . , 2012 ) , suggesting that H4 may be transported back to the nucleus after being locally translated in response to Sema3A . This indicates that the amount of total protein does not necessarily correlate with the amount of locally synthe - sized protein and illustrates a further dynamic complexity in the proteomic response to cues . It should be noted that while pSILAC - SP3 was carried out on axons plus growth cones ( Figure 1C ) , the validation above was carried out on single growth cones as these are easily identiﬁable by their expanded morphology , aiding accurate quantiﬁcation of the immunoﬂuorescence signal per unit area , whereas retinal axons often fasciculate together in bundles , making quantitative measurement more challenging . To test the validity of growth cone sampling on axons , we selected one of the growth - cone - validated NSP changes ( puro - Pdi PLA in response to 15 min Sema3A stimulation ; Figures 3B , 3C , and 3F ) and conducted qIF on the axon shaft ( distal 20 m m segment ) . The results corre - lated with both the growth cone qIF values and the pSILAC ( Figures S3C and S3D ; Figure 3F ; Table S1 ) , indicating consis - tency between the two types of sampling analyses ( growth cone versus axon ) . We also interrogated the pSILAC datasets for proteins previ - ously reported to be axonally translated in basal conditions or in response to the same cues and stimulation time used in our experiments . The analysis conﬁrmed the pSILAC - SP3 detection of the majority of protein changes ( 8 / 10 ) , including some from axons of other species and types of neurons ( Table S2 ) . The 2 / 10 protein changes not detected by pSILAC - SP3 were previ - ously reported in mouse cortical and hippocampal growth cones and identiﬁed in the retinal axonal translatome ( Table S2 ) ( Shi - geoka et al . , 2016 ) . This suggests that either the pSILAC - SP3 approach has limited sensitivity due to the paucity of axonal sample and the rapid timescale or that not all responses to cues are conserved among different species . Finally , we compared the pSILAC - SP3 outcome in response to cues versus the mRNAs bound in vivo to ribosomes in the RiboTag mouse RGC axons at three developmental stages : embryonic day 17 . 5 ( E17 . 5 ) ( axon elongation ) , postnatal day 0 . 5 ( P0 . 5 ) ( axon branching ) , and P7 . 5 ( pruning ) ( Shigeoka et al . , 2016 ) . Comparative analysis revealed an overlap at stages E17 . 5 and P0 . 5 ( Figure S3E ) , consistent with previous evidence showing a physiological relevance for the cues investigated and local translation in axon elongation , branching , and synapto - genesis ( Hengst et al . , 2009 ; Wong et al . , 2017 ; Campbell et al . , 2001 ; Cohen - Cory and Fraser , 1995 ; Manitt et al . , 2009 ; Lyles et al . , 2006 ; Aguado et al . , 2003 ) . The abundance of the NSPs showed apositivecorrelation with theRiboTag data ( Figure S3E ) , although this was unsurprisingly low given the difference be - tween the in vitro and the in vivo context ( e . g . , axons experience multiple cues simultaneously in the tectum ) and the different species . Guidance Cues Induce a Temporally Dynamic Newly Synthesized Proteome Next , we asked whether the newly synthesized proteome is dy - namic over the 30 min period of stimulation . Both common and different NSP changes were detected among different cue stimulation periods ( 5 min , 15 min , 30 min ; Figure 4A ) . For example , several vacuolar ATPase subunits belonging to the metabolic pathways were upregulated in response to BDNF over the whole stimulation time ( Figure 4A ) . Several proteins underwent translational change at 5 min , but not 15 and Figure 3 . Validation of the pSILAC - SP3 Approach in Axonal Growth Cones ( A ) Images of puro - PLA for negative controls ( Figure 1B ) . ( BandC ) Puro - PLAquantiﬁcation ( B ) andrepresentativeimages ( C ) tovalidateNSPsacrossdifferentfunctionalcategories , conditions , andtimepoints ( TableS1 ; Mann - Whitney test and one - way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test ) . ( D and E ) IF representative images ( D ) and quantiﬁcation ( E ) to validate NSPs across different functional categories , conditions , and time points ( Table S1 ; Mann - Whitney test and one - way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test ) . ( F ) Direct comparison of pSILAC and IF - derived detection of NSPs reveals excellent correlation with r = 0 . 81 ( r puro - PLA = 0 . 87 ; r qIF = (cid:3) 0 . 41 ) . Error bars , SEM . Scale bars , 5 m m . See also Figure S3 . 34 Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 30 min , suggesting that these proteins might subsequently un - dergo homeostatic regulation , UPS - mediated degradation , retrograde transport , or secretion . For example , several pro - teins involved in endocytosis ( e . g . , Rab11b ) were uniquely up - regulated after 5 min Sema3A stimulation but not at later time points , possibly due to an immediate burst in synthesis fol - lowed by retrograde transport ( Figure 4A ) ( Zylbersztejn et al . , 2012 ) . Similarly , the Netrin - 1 axon guidance receptor Kazald1 was the most upregulated NSP within 5 min Netrin - 1 stimula - tion but was not detected at later time points , suggesting an autocrine mechanism underlying the rapid ampliﬁcation of Ne - trin - 1 signaling ( Cheng et al . , 2011 ) . Other NSPs were regulated only at later time points ( e . g . , some ribosomal proteins ) ( Fig - ure 4A ) . Similarly , functional enrichment analysis revealed GO clusters that were constant ( e . g . , ‘‘cytoskeleton’’ ) and differen - tially enriched ( e . g . , ‘‘cellular macromolecular complex subunit organization’’ ) along the time course of one cue stimulation ( Figure 4B ; Figure S4 ) . These data indicate that part of the cue - induced axonal nascent proteome changes dynamically during the period of stimulation . up - regulated down - regulated Netrin - 1 5’ 15’ 30’ 5’ 15’ 30’ 5’ 15’ 30’ 120 47 100 27 37 17 37 BDNF 139 113 44 75 16 16 22 86 21 28 27 37 14 42 Sema3A A 2 . 5 5 . 0 7 . 5 10 . 0 enrichmentscore B translation threonine − type endopeptidase activity structural molecule activity structural constituent of ribosome ribonucleoprotein complex proteasome core complex intracellular non − membrane − bounded organelle generation of precursor metabolites and energy cytoskeleton cellular macromolecular complex subunit organization B DN F 5 ' B DN F 15 ' B DN F 30 ' N e t r i n - 1 5 ’ N e t r i n - 1 15 ’ N e t r i n - 1 30 ’ S e m a3 A 5 ' S e m a3 A 15 ' S e m a3 A 30 ' B DN F 5 ' B DN F 15 ' B DN F 30 ' N e t r i n - 1 5 ’ N e t r i n - 1 15 ’ N e t r i n - 1 30 ’ S e m a3 A 5 ' S e m a3 A 15 ' S e m a3 A 30 ' • Metabolic pathways • Lysosome• Metabolic pathways • Tight junction • Apoptosis• Phagosome• Endocytosis• Cell cycle • Protein processing in ER • Val , Leu and Ile degradation • Focal adhesion • Carbon metabolism • Gap junction • Ribosome• Metabolic pathways • Oxidative phosphorylation • Metabolic pathways • Cell cycle • Metabolic pathways • NOD - like receptor signaling pathway • Ribosome• Ribosome• Metabolic pathways • RNA transport • Metabolic pathways • Phagosome• Protein processing in ER • Ribosome• Glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism • Metabolic pathways • Carbon metabolism • Metabolic pathways • Metabolic pathways • Endocytosis• Cell adhesion molecules ( CAMs ) • Metabolic pathways • Metabolic pathways • Proteasome • Metabolic pathways• Oxydative phosphorylation• Phagosome significant Figure 4 . Nascent Axonal Proteome Changes Dynamically over the Duration of Cue Stimulation ( A ) Overlap of the NSP changes among different times of stimulation in response to each cue . Both common ( i . e . , the same NSP undergoes similar directional change with log 2 ( H / M ) ratio > j 0 . 3 j ) and different ( i . e . , a new NSP exhibits change with log 2 ( H / M ) ratio > j 0 . 3 j or the same NSP undergoes opposite directional change ) NSP changes were detected among different cue stimulation periods . Rectangles with solid lines outline KEGG pathway analysis for the NSP changes uniqueforeachtimepoint , andrectangleswithdashedlinesoutlineKEGGpathwayanalysisfortheNSPchangesconstantamongdifferenttimepoints ( cutoff R 3 proteins per pathway ) . Red indicates upregulated pathways , and blue indicates downregulated pathways . ( B ) Enriched GO terms in the biological process , molecular function , and cellular composition categories of selected categories ( category count > 15 ; for complete table , see Figure S4 ) . Rectangles indicate signiﬁcantly enriched GO terms ( p < 0 . 05 ) . See also Figure S4 . Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 35 A C B D ( legend on next page ) 36 Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 Different Guidance Molecules Induce Cue - Speciﬁc Signatures To discover whether different guidance cues induce the same or different sets of NSP changes , we compared the nascent proteomes of axons in response to the three cues—BDNF , Netrin - 1 , and Sema3A—at three different time points . Principal component analysis ( PCA ) showed that the factor contributing the most to the total variation is the type of cue ( Figure 5A ) . The stimulation time also contributed to the total variation ( consistent with our previous ﬁndings ; Figures 4A and 4B ) , but the three time points for each cue stimulation clustered together , indicating that they are coordinately controlled by a speciﬁc cue signaling pathway ( Figure 5A ) . To quantify and identify the different and common NSP changes in response to the three cue stimulations , we ﬁrst ﬁltered our datasets by averaging the three time points . We then partitioned proteins with SD < 0 . 5 ( ‘‘common’’ among different cue stimulations ; Figure 5B ) and > 0 . 5 ( ‘‘different’’ among different cue stimulations ; Figure 5C ) . NSPs such as cytoskeletal proteins ( e . g . , b - actin and several a - and b - tubulin isotypes ) , cell adhesion proteins ( e . g . , L1cam - a ) , proteins involved in endo - and exocytosis ( e . g . , Vamp2 ) , ‘‘nuclear’’ pro - teins ( e . g . , histone H2b ) , and several proteasomal subunits were similarly regulated by all three cues ( Figures 5B and 5C ) . As these cues all act as chemorepellents in our culture condi - tions ( 10 m g / mL laminin substrate ; Ho¨pker et al . , 1999 ; Campbell and Holt , 2001 ) , the shared NSP changes may underlie a com - mon chemorepulsive mechanism . In addition to these common NSPs , the different cues also elicited distinct changes ( Figure 5C ) . For example , the RNA - binding protein ( RBP ) Hnrnpa1 was upregulated in response to Netrin - 1 and BDNF , but not Sema3A , in line with previous evidence showing that BDNF stimulation increases Hnrnpa1 and its association with speciﬁc mRNAs ( Zielinski et al . , 2006 ) . Histone H4 was upregulated in response to Sema3A and Ne - trin - 1 but not in response to BDNF ( Figure 5C ) . Several proteaso - mal and ribosomal proteins , as well as proteins involved in neu - rite and ﬁlopodia adhesion , outgrowth , and motility , also exhibited differential regulation in response to distinct cues ( Fig - ure 5C ) . For example , Tuba1a was upregulated in response to Netrin - 1 but downregulated in response to Sema3A ( Figure 5C ) . Next , we analyzed the NSP changes unique to each cue and found 83 for Netrin , 93 for BDNF , and 70 for Sema3A ( Figure 5D ) . Functionalenrichmentanalysisrevealedthat , forexample , BDNF , but neither Netrin - 1 nor Sema3A , upregulated the ‘‘RNA binding’’ group comprising several RBPs involved in mRNA transport and splicing and various translational control factors , such as eIF5A ( Figure5D ) , reminiscentofitsroledownstreamofNGFstimulation in mediating cell survival and neurite outgrowth ( Huang et al . , 2007 ) . Netrin - 1 uniquely downregulated the ‘‘cell redox homeo - stasis’’ functional cluster whereas Sema3A upregulated it . Sema3A uniquely upregulated GTP binding proteins reported to be involved in growth cone collapse ( Figure 5D ) ( Igarashi et al . , 1993 ) . Collectively , the data reveal shared signatures , possibly underlying a common chemorepulsive action , and cue - speciﬁc changes in the nascent proteome . Repulsive Gradient Elicits Proteomic Changes with Opposite Spatial Polarity To explore the biological signiﬁcance of the cue - induced prote - omic changes and their potential role in the chemotropic response , we analyzed NSP localization in growth cones following gradient stimulation . We chose two NSPs belonging to different functional categories and undergoing the same change in response to all three different repulsive cue stimula - tion : b - actin , which is commonly downregulated , and RpSA ( 40S ribosomal protein SA ) , which is commonly upregulated ( Figures 2 , 5B , and 5C ) . We reasoned that a repulsive gradient may elicit a polarized decrease in b - actin on the near - stimulus side of the growth cone , leading to polarized ( near - side ) ﬁlopo - dial collapse and repulsive turning . To test this , a gradient of Sema3A was applied for 7 min at a 90 (cid:4) angle to the growth cone to achieve a steep difference between the ‘‘near’’ and the ‘‘far’’ sides of the growth cone . As predicted , qIF indicated that a Sema3A gradient causes a rapid decrease in b - actin on the near - versus the far - stimulus side ( Figures 6A and 6B ) . We conﬁrmed the asymmetrical localization by comparing the center of mass of b - actin signal intensity between the control and Sema3A conditions , which revealed an equivalent shift away from the Sema3A gradient ( Figure 6C ) . RpSA was the only ribosomal protein to undergo the same change ( increase ) in response to all three repulsive cue stimula - tions ( Figures 2 and 5B ) . When dimerized , RpSA ( a . k . a . 67 kDa laminin receptor [ 67lr ] ) , can play an extra - ribosomal role by func - tioning as a cell surface receptor for laminin contributing to cell adhesion , cytoskeletal rearrangement , and directional turning ( Jamieson et al . , 2008 ; Ho¨pker et al . , 1999 ; Umeda et al . , 2008 ) . Selective activation of 67lr with epigallocatechin - 3 - gallate ( EGCG ) ( Tachibana et al . , 2004 ) caused an increase in the num - ber of ﬁlopodia and ﬁlamentous - actin ( F - actin ) ( Figures S5A – S5C ) . Live imaging revealed that this was due to decreased ﬁlo - podial retraction ( Figure S5D ) , an effect likely due to increased cell adhesion , as suggested by a marked decrease in growth cone speed ( Figure S5E ) . We then asked how RpSA / 67lr was distributed spatially across the growth cone in response to a Sema3A gradient , as in the b - actin experiment above . qIF re - vealed a signiﬁcant increase in RpSA signal on the far - stimulus side of the growth cone ( Figures 6D and 6E ) . Center - of - mass displacement analysis conﬁrmed a signiﬁcant shift away from the gradient side ( Figure 6F ) . Figure 5 . Different Guidance Molecules Induce Both Common and Distinct NSP Signatures ( A ) Principal component analysis ( PCA ) based on the NSP changes identiﬁed in response to the three cue stimulations and time points . ( B ) Hierarchical clustering of the NSP changes ( averaged over the three time points ) exhibiting similarity ( SD < 0 . 5 ) among different cue stimulations . ( C ) Hierarchical clustering of the NSP changes ( averaged over the three time points ) exhibiting diverging behavior ( SD > 0 . 5 ) among different cue stimulations . Proteins not annotated in Xenopus laevis were blasted against Xenopus tropicalis ( identity R 90 % , indicated in gray ) . ( D ) Overlapofthethreecue - inducedNSPchanges ( averagedoverthethreetimepoints ) . RectanglesoutlinetheNSPchangesuniquepercuestimulationandtheir enriched GO terms in the biological process , molecular function , and cellular composition categories ( p < 0 . 1 ) . Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 37 The results point toward a general model whereby polarized repulsive stimuli elicit a complex set of spatially compartmental - ized proteomic changes that remodel the growth cone and direct turning . Those on the near - stimulus side , for example , promote cytoskeletal disassembly ( decrease in b - actin ) , while those on the far side promote adhesion ( increase in 67lr ) , cytoskeleton assembly ( increase in F - actin ) , and ﬁlopodial accumulation , thus helping the growth cone to steer away from the repulsive source ( Figure 6G ) . Switching from Repulsion to Attraction Induces Opposite Changes in the Nascent Proteome We next investigated how the newly synthesized axonal proteome changes when a cue is switched from repulsive to attractive . Axons were co - treated with a cue and one of the following pharmacological reagents that switch the directional response of the growth cone from repulsive to attractive : Tauto - mycin , an inhibitor of protein phosphatase 1 , for Netrin - 1 ( Wen et al . , 2004 ) ; Sp - cAMP , a membrane - permeable analog of cyclic adenosine monophosphate ( cAMP ) , for BDNF ( Song et al . , 1997 ) ; and 8 - Br - cGMP , a membrane - permeable agonist of cy - clic guanosine monophosphate ( cGMP ) , for Sema3A ( Song et al . , 1998 ) . Three not mutually exclusive scenarios were envis - aged : switching to attraction induces ( 1 ) distinct NSP changes , ( 2 ) opposite changes for the same NSPs , and ( 3 ) the same NSP changes with opposite spatial distribution within the growth cone . Correlation analysis showed that the repulsive cue - induced nascent proteomes corresponding to the three time points clustered together , whereas they exhibited a PCC close to 0 with respect to the attractive cue - induced nascent C E F B A D G Figure 6 . Repulsive Cue Gradient Elicits Proteomic Changes in RpSA and b - actin with Opposite Spatial Polarity within the Growth Cone ( A ) Growth cone stained for b - actin with a line dividing the near and far sides . Arrow indicates the 90 (cid:4) polarized gradient . ( B ) Asymmetric decrease of b - actin assessed by the near / far ratio method ( unpaired t test ) . ( C ) Asymmetric decrease of b - actin assessed by ‘‘center of mass’’ method ( unpaired t test ) . ( D ) Growth cone stained for RpSA with a line dividing near and far sides . Arrow indicates the 90 (cid:4) polarized gradient . ( E ) Asymmetric decrease of RpSA assessed by near / far ratio method ( unpaired t test ) . ( F ) Asymmetric decrease of RpSA assessed by center of mass method ( unpaired t test ) . ( G ) Repulsivemodel : b - actin decreaseson thenear - stimulus side , helping cytoskeletondeconstructionandgrowthcone collapse , whereas RpSA / 67lr increases on the far - stimulus side , thus increasing F - actin and cell adhesion . Error bars , SEM . Scale bars , 5 m m . See also Figure S5 . 38 Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 C A D B E ( legend on next page ) Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 39 proteomes ( Figure 7A ) . This outcome was consistent with the PCA ( Figure S6A ) , thus pointing toward hypotheses 1 and 2 . Similar to the repulsive cue - speciﬁc outcome ( Figure 5D ) , the attractive cue - induced nascent proteome analysis revealed that the majority of the NSP changes were cue speciﬁc , although BDNF and Sema3A shared a much higher number of NSP changes than Netrin - 1 ( Figure 7B ; Table S4 ) . Pharmacological treatments , it should be noted , may also induce additional effects ( e . g . , Sp - cAMP can alter mTOR in addition to protein kinase A ; Kim et al . , 2010 ) . We then compared the attractive cue - induced nascent proteomes to the respective repulsive ones . We found that up to 122 NSPs were commonly regulated between repulsion and attraction ( Figure 7C ; Figures S6B and S6C ; Table S5 ) . In strong support of hypothesis 2 , up to 73 % of these common subsets ( 53 % , on average , among the three cue stimulations ) underwent an opposite change with the switch from repulsion to attraction ( Figure 7D ; Figure S6D ; Table S5 ) and exhibited a strong negative correlation ( PCC = (cid:3) 0 . 79 , on average , among the three cue stimulations ; Figure 7C ; Figures S6B and S6C ) . Some NSP changes were cue speciﬁc ; for example , Olfactomedin 1 ( Olfm1 ) was speciﬁcally downregu - lated in response to repulsive Netrin - 1 and upregulated in attrac - tive conditions ( Figure 7C ) , in accord with recent work on mouse dorsal root ganglia showing that Olfm1 is involved in inhibiting growth cone collapse and promoting axon growth ( Nakaya et al . , 2012 ) . Cortactin ( Ctt ) , reported to promote actin network density , lamellipodial protrusion , and ﬁlopodial formation and stability in growth cones , was speciﬁcally upregulated in response to attractive BDNF and downregulated in response to repulsive BDNF ( Figure S6B ) ( He et al . , 2015 ) . Growth - associ - ated protein - 43 ( Gap43 ) , whose knockdown causes a failure in commissural axon guidance and reduced levels of F - actin in growth cones ( Shen et al . , 2002 ) , was speciﬁcally upregulated in response to attractive Sema3A and downregulated in response to repulsive Sema3A ( Figure S6C ) . Some NSP changes were shared between common repulsive - attractive subsets of distinct cue stimulations ( Figures S6B and S6C ) . For example , the cell adhesion molecule L1cam , necessary for topographic mapping of retinal axons ( Demyanenko and Maness , 2003 ) , was upregulated in response to all three repulsive cues and downregulated in response in all three attractive conditions ( Fig - ure 7C ; Figures S6B and S6C ) . Together with our ﬁndings of polarized RpSA / 67lr synthesis ( Figures 5B and 6D – 6G ) , this sug - gests a generalized cell adhesion model in which adhesion mol - ecules increase on the far - stimulus side in response to a polar - ized repulsive gradient and decrease on the far - stimulus side in response to an attractive gradient . Interestingly , 47 % of NSP changes , on average , underwent the same change in attractive and repulsive conditions ( Fig - ure 7D ; Figure S6D ) , exhibiting a strong correlation ( PCC = 0 . 72 , on average , among the three cue stimulations ; Figure 7C ; Figures S6B and S6C ) . This is exempliﬁed by the upregulation of many proteins known to underlie the formation of presynaptic terminals and functional synapses ( e . g . , Cadm1 , Ptprd ) in response to both repulsive and attractive BDNF ( Figure S6B ) , in accord with previous work showing that BDNF elicits synapto - genesis ( Biederer et al . , 2002 ; Takahashi and Craig , 2013 ; Aguado et al . , 2003 ) . Network - based functional enrichment analysis of the NSPs regulated downstream of each Netrin - 1 , BDNF , and Sema3A pathway in both attractive and repulsive conditions revealed that several NSP changes undergoing the same or opposite regulation belong to classes of proteins with related biological function ( Figure 7E ; Figures S6E and S6F ) , indicating that func - tionally coherent sets of mRNAs are differentially translationally regulated . A network - based overview of the functionally en - riched groups regulated by the three repulsive - attractive cues showed that several of these functional clusters are conserved across different cue stimulations , although the particular pro - teins regulated can be cue speciﬁc ( Figure S7 ) . Collectively , the results strengthen the ﬁnding that different cues induce distinct proteomic signatures . Furthermore , they show that guid - ance molecules coordinate functionally coherent sets of NSPs and switch between repulsion and attraction by inducing distinct NSP changes and by bidirectionally regulating common NSPs . Neurological Disorder - Associated NSPs Suggest Novel Connections between Local Translation and Disease In light of recent work showing that constitutive translation of Lamin B2 ( also detected in our basal axonal nascent proteome ; Table S3 ) supports axon maintenance and that the excessive axonal translation of the Activating transcription factor 4 ( Atf4 ) spreads Alzheimer’s disease pathology across the brain ( Yoon et al . , 2012 ; Baleriola et al . , 2014 ) , we investigated whether any of the axonal NSPs are linked to neurological disorders . KEGG disease analysis revealed more than 60 axonal proteins basally translated or translationally regulated in response to cue stimu - lation to be associated with 43 different neurological dysfunc - tions ( Table 1 ) . These include proteins such as Amyloid beta pre - cursor protein ( App ) and Mapt , whose aggregates are Figure 7 . Opposite Regulation of Shared NSPs Underlies Conversion of Netrin - 1 Repulsion to Attraction ( A ) PCC correlation values among the different cue - induced axonal nascent proteomes . ( B ) Overlap of the three attractive cue - induced NSP changes following 15 min stimulation . Solid rectangles outline the NSP changes unique for each cue stimulation , and dashed rectangles outline the NSP changes in common between Sema3A and BDNF and their related enriched GO terms in the biological process , molecular function , and cellular composition categories ( p < 0 . 1 ) . ( C ) Plot showing repulsive and attractive Netrin - 1 ratios . Circle size correlates with count number , and colored dots indicate commonly regulated NSPs ( count > 50 % , averageratio > j 0 . 30 j ) . Blueindicates NSPsundergoingoppositechange , andredindicates NSPsundergoingthesamechange . ExamplesofNSP changes are labeled with protein name ( for complete list , see Table S5 ) . ( D ) Common NSP changes after converting Netrin - 1 repulsion into attraction ( count > 50 % , average ratio > j 0 . 30 j ) . ( E ) Network - based cluster analysis of the enriched Netrin - 1 - induced NSP changes and their associated functional classes ( p < 0 . 1 ) . Blue nodes indicate NSPs undergoing opposite change , red nodes indicate NSPs undergoing same change , light blue lines indicate interactions known from databases , and purple lines indicate interactions experimentally determined . Disconnected nodes are not shown ( i . e . , more NSPs for each enriched functional cluster have been detected ) . See also Figures S6 and S7 . 40 Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 Table 1 . Axonal NSPs Associated with Neurological Disorders Neurological Disease Constitutive NSPs Netrin - 1 - regulated NSPs Sema3A - regulated NSPs BDNF - regulated NSPs Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Fus , Mapt , Hnrnpa1 , Hnrnpa2b1 , Prph , Vcp Fus , Vcp , Prph , Tuba4a , Hnrnpa1 , Hnrnpa2b1 Fus , Sod1 , Prph , Pfn1 , Tuba4a Fus , Sod1 , Prph , Vcp , Pfn1 , Tuba4a , Hnrnpa1 , Hnrnpa2b1 Charcot - Marie - Tooth disease Rab7a , Aars , Gars , Vcp Rab7a , Vcp – Rab7a , Aars , Vcp Syndromic X - linked mental retardation Syn1 , L1cam , Syp Syn1 , L1cam , Syp Syp , L1cam L1cam , Syp , Atp6ap2 Lissencephaly Pafah1B1 , Ywhae , Reln Pafah1B1 , Ywhae Pafah1B1 , Ywhae Pafah1B1 , Ywhae , Reln Complex cortical dysplasia with other brain malformations Tubb , Tubb2a , Tubb3 Tubb , Tubb2a , Tubb3 Tubb , Tubb2a Tubb2a Primary dystonia Atp1a3 , Slc2a1 Atp1a3 , Slc2a1 Atp1a3 , Slc2a1 Slc2a1 Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy Stxbp1 , Gnao1 , Aars Stxbp1 , Mdh2 Gnao1 , Mdh2 Stxbp1 , Aars Polymicrogyria Col18a1 , Tubb2b Col18a1 , Tubb2b Col18a1 , Tubb2b Tubb2b , Col18a1 Alzheimer’s disease App , Mapt App App App Familial amyloidosis Gsn , Apoa1 Gsn , Apoa1 Gsn , Apoa1 Apoa1 Adult - onset autosomal dominant leukodystrophy Lmnb1 Lmnb1 Lmnb1 Lmnb1 Juvenile - onset dystonia Actb Actb Actb Actb Non - syndromic X - linked mental retardation Gdi1 Gdi1 – – Pierson syndrome Lamb2 , Hspd1 Lamb2 Lamb2 – Hereditary spastic paraplegia L1cam L1cam , Hspd1 L1cam L1cam , Hspd1 Progressive myoclonic epilepsy Ctsd Ctsd Ctsd Ctsd GLUT1 deﬁciency syndrome Slc2a1 Slc2a1 – Slc2a1 Autosomal dominant mental retardation Ctnnb1 – – Ctnnb1 Congenital systemic glutamine deﬁciency Glul Glul – Glul Essential tremor Fus Fus Fus Fus L1 syndrome L1cam L1cam L1cam L1cam D - 2 - hydroxyglutaric aciduria Idh2 Idh2 – – Retinoblastoma Cdh11 Cdh11 – Cdh11 Medulloblastoma Ctnnb1 – – Ctnnb1 Congenital hydrocephalus L1cam L1cam L1cam L1cam Parkinson’s disease Mapt – Park7 Vps35 Frontotemporal lobar degeneration Mapt , Vcp Vcp – Vcp Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis Ctsd Ctsd Ctsd Ctsd Propionic acidemia Pcca – – Pcca Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy Rab7a Rab7a , Cct5 – Rab7a Tubb3 syndromes Tubb3 Tubb3 – – Spinocerebellar ataxia Eef2 Eef2 – – Limb - girdle muscular dystrophy Dag1 Dag1 – Dag1 ( Continued on next page ) Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 41 associated with neurodegenerative disorders . Several proteins are related to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ALS ) , in line with recent evidence suggesting that defective axonal mRNA transla - tion may underlie ALS progression ( Murakami et al . , 2015 ) . NSPs causative of Charcot - Marie - Tooth disease were also identiﬁed in strong accord with the axon growth , pathﬁnding , and branching defects characterizing this pathology at early developmental stages ( Ponomareva et al . , 2016 ) . These ﬁndings strengthen the idea that mislocalized mRNAs , or impaired axonal transla - tion , constitute a possible etiology to neurological diseases . DISCUSSION We established pSILAC - SP3 to uncover the nascent proteome from a subcellular compartment ( the axons ) of growing neurons on a rapid timescale . This approach provides a direct readout of the newly synthesized proteome and can reveal information about both the magnitude and the dynamics of de novo protein regulation . The sensitivity of pSILAC - SP3 is sufﬁcient to identify hundreds of NSP changes in the axonal compartment within mi - nutes , although it is biased toward the most abundant proteins , as in any proteomics approach . It thereby contrasts with ribo - some proﬁling , which is more sensitive due to mRNA ampliﬁca - tion but provides a snapshot of ribosome - bound mRNAs that can be confounded by non - translated mRNAs on stalled ribo - somes . The potential underestimation of the total extent of NSP changes occurring in axons as determined by pSILAC - SP3 may be further improved by increasing the length of the SILAC pulse ( Eichelbaum and Krijgsveld , 2014 ) , but this comes at the expense of temporal resolution . Our ﬁndings revealed that protein synthesis occurs basally on a wide scale , suggesting that local translation supports proteo - stasis in developing axons . This agrees with the ﬁnding that proteins translated in growth cones undergo a higher degree of turnover than the more stable cell - body - derived proteins ( Deglincerti et al . , 2015 ) . Ribosomal proteins represented the most - enriched category of basally translated proteins , possibly playing extra - ribosomal functions , as supported by our RpSA / 67lr ﬁndings . A further possibility is that locally translated ribo - somal proteins are exchanged on pre - assembled ribosomes to preserve the homeostasis of axonal ribosomes ( Pulk et al . , 2010 ; Lastick and McConkey , 1976 ) . The basal axonal proteome also comprises several proteins belonging to metabolic path - ways , including glycolysis . One such example , the glyceralde - hyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase , has recently been shown to constitute the minimal energy machinery for fast axonal trans - port of vesicles and to generate ‘‘glycolitic metabolons’’ for the support of the synaptic function ( Hinckelmann et al . , 2016 ; Jang et al . , 2016 ) . Similarly , local translation of NSPs involved in amino acid biosynthesis and mitochondrial functions may be required to replenish proteins undergoing high turnover to main - tain axonal metabolism , in line with studies showing that acute inhibition of axonal protein synthesis impairs axonal mitochon - dria and viability in rat sympathetic neurons ( Gale et al . , 2018 ) . Together , these data indicate that the developing axon , as a soma - independent subcellular compartment , helps to sustain its own biosynthetic processes and energy supply locally . Netrin - 1 , Sema3A , and BDNF differentially affect axonal synthesis of multiple proteins in a cue - speciﬁc and temporally dynamic way . Interestingly , we found that the synthesis of pro - teasomal subunits a and b type is differentially regulated in response to different cues , raising the possibility that the degradation machinery may undergo cue - speciﬁc remodeling , leading to the formation of specialized non - canonical protea - somes with substrate selectivity . Indeed , specialized protea - somes can be generated by preferentially altering the composition of the a - ( e . g . , Psma4 and Psma7 ) and b - rings ( e . g . , Psmb1 and Psmb2 , all detected among our cue - induced NSP changes ; Padmanabhan et al . , 2016 ; Tanaka , 2013 ) . Simi - larly , some ribosomal proteins are differentially up - or downregu - lated in response to distinct cues , raising the possibility that extrinsic cues may also remodel the composition of pre - existing Table 1 . Continued Neurological Disease Constitutive NSPs Netrin - 1 - regulated NSPs Sema3A - regulated NSPs BDNF - regulated NSPs Pyridoxine - dependent epilepsy Aldh7a1 – – – Ataxia telangiectasia Pcna – Pcna Pcna Congenital mirror movements DCC – – – Familial encephalopathy with neuroserpin inclusion bodies Serpin I1 – – – Distal hereditary motor neuropathies Gars – – – Progressive supranuclear palsy Mapt – – – Nemaline myopathy Tpm3 – – – AICA - ribosiduria Atic – – Atic Krabbe disease – Psap – Psap Leigh syndrome – – Ndufs3 Pdha1 Neurological disorders were selected from the ‘‘KEGG disease’’ output . 42 Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 ribosomes in axons , thus tuning the translation efﬁciency of spe - ciﬁc transcripts ( Kondrashov et al . , 2011 ) . We also found histones and methyltransferases to be regu - lated in a cue - speciﬁc manner in axons . Some histone proteins have been previously identiﬁed in the extra - nuclear compart - ment and histone H1 has been detected in cerebellar neurites and suggested to play a role in neurite outgrowth ( Mishra et al . , 2010 ) . It is interesting to speculate that axonally synthesized histone proteins may bear distinct marks encoded by cue - or compartment - speciﬁc post - translational modiﬁcations , carrying this information back to the nucleus to modulate gene expres - sion ( Moretti et al . , 2015 ) . Alternatively , the ‘‘nuclear’’ proteins detected may play a novel extra - nuclear function in the axon , similar to what has been shown for LaminB2 ( Yoon et al . , 2012 ) . A question our results raise is why does cue - speciﬁc nascent proteome remodeling occur even though the cues investigated yield the same type of response ( repulsive ) in vitro ? This is likely due to the activation of different receptors and downstream signaling pathways . One possibility is that different NSP changes may participate in eliciting the same chemotropic response , in line with evidence that Slit and Sema3A can induce growth cone repulsion via different mechanisms ( McConnell et al . , 2016 ) . Furthermore , the in vitro chemotropic assay classiﬁes cues simply as repulsive versus attractive , while cues in the developing visual pathway control a variety of protein synthe - sis - dependent processes , such as axonal outgrowth , branching , and synaptogenesis . We also detected NSPs that undergo the same translational regulation in response to the three different repulsive cues , sug - gesting the possibility that they may be involved in common che - motropic response mechanisms . For example , the cell adhesion molecule L1cam - a , which is upregulated in response to all three repulsive cues , is required for topographic mapping of retinal axons ( Demyanenko and Maness , 2003 ) . Several tubulin iso - types also undergo common proteomic changes in response to repulsive cues but different to each other , thus supporting the ‘‘tubulin code hypothesis’’ proposing that tubulin isotypes possess distinctive functional properties ( Tischﬁeld and Engle , 2010 ) . Our results also corroborate and extend the ‘‘differential translation model’’ for growth cone turning ( Lin and Holt , 2007 ) as b - actin decreases on the near side of a repulsive source , lead - ing to ﬁlopodial loss , whereas RpSA / 67lr is upregulated on the far side , leading to increased adhesion and ﬁlopodial accumula - tion , thus helping the growth cone to turn away ( Figure 6G ) . Indeed , recent work has shown that RpSA / 67lr is crucial for directional steering at critical choice points in the retinotectal pathway ( Atkinson - Leadbeater et al . , 2016 ) . Collectively , these data suggest that guidance molecules rapidly induce a coordi - nated set of NSP changes precisely localized across the growth cone to evoke the steering response . Finally , we found that switching the effect of these cues from repulsion to attraction induces distinct NSP changes and differentially regulates NSPs shared between repulsion and attraction . Up to 73 % of these common subsets , including , for example , NSPs belonging to the ‘‘cell adhesion , ’’ ‘‘proteasome core complex , ’’ and ‘‘cytoskeleton’’ functional clusters , undergo opposite regulation between repulsion and attraction . In the limited cytoplasmic volume of the growth cone compartment , the number of molecules must be tightly controlled in order to avoid molecular crowding ; therefore , regulating a common subset of basally translated mRNAs would arguably be more efﬁ - cient than controlling a completely different subset of NSPs . Moreover , the opposite regulation of the local proteome is highly reminiscent of a phenomenon uncovered in rat hippocampal cul - tures in which homeostatic up - and downscaling elicits opposite regulation of 46 % NSPs over a 24 hr labeling period ( Schan - zenb € acher et al . , 2016 ) . Thus , this may be a conserved biological strategy to achieve a switch between opposite responses , especially in subcellular compartments . Yet , we also observed many NSPs with the same regulation between repulsion and attraction , suggesting opposite spatial distribution within the growth cone to help the turning , or a role independent from the chemotropic response , possibly underlying branching or synaptogenesis . In this study , we characterized the basal and rapidly cue - induced axonal nascent proteome , providing insight into the functional landscape of axon guidance and maintenance . Our work sets the stage for new studies exploring the cue - speciﬁc translational control mechanisms and the biological function of the locally synthesized proteins . Furthermore , several of the NSPs uncovered are known to be involved in neurological disorders and suggest novel possible links between defective local protein synthesis , impaired axon maintenance / wiring , and disease . Finally , guidance cues play a role also in the adult nervous system following axonal injury to inhibit ( e . g . , Sema3A ) or promote ( e . g . , BDNF ) axon survival and regenera - tion , which involve rapid local translation and degradation ( Gumy et al . , 2010 ) . Therefore , our technical approach and datasets provide a framework for studies of the nascent proteome on a rapid timescale from limited amounts of material and a resource to understand neural circuit assembly and clinical pathologies . STAR + METHODS Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following : d KEY RESOURCES TABLE d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS B Xenopus laevis Embryos Maintenance d METHOD DETAILS B Retinal Explant Cultures and Axotomy Assay on Trans - well Filter B Pharmacological Treatments B Pulsed Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino Acids in Cell Culture B Single - Pot Solid - Phase - Enhanced Sample Prepa - ration B Mass Spectrometry B Proteomics Data Processing B Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction B Immunocytochemistry B Immunohistochemistry B Puromycilation of NSPs and Proximity Ligation Assay Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 43 B Growth Cone Gradient Assay d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS B Statistics B Quantiﬁcation of Immunoﬂuorescence B Bioinformatic Data Analysis d DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes seven ﬁgures and six tables and can be found with this article online at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2018 . 06 . 004 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank N . Marsh - Armstrong and F . L . Watson for the anti - Sncg antibody ; A . Dwivedy for the Brn3a IF ( Figure S1A ) ; J . Schaeffer for the anti - Pdi antibody ; W . A . Harris , H . Jung , H . H . Wong , C . G . Roque , andL . Abrahamforcriticalcom - ments ; and A . Dwivedy , K . Mooslehner , A . Merlotti , and A . Azizi for technical assistance . This work was supported by BBSRC ( RG68461 ) ( R . C . ) , EMBO postdoctoral fellowship ( LTF1006 - 2013 ) ( C . K . F . ) , Wellcome Trust Programme Grant ( 085314 / Z / 08 / Z ) , and ERC Advanced Grant ( 322817 ) ( C . E . H . ) . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS R . C . andT . S . carriedouteyeexplantculturesandpSILAC . R . C . performedax - otomy assay , RT - PCR , bioinformatic data analyses , qIF , puro - PLA , growth cone gradient assays , and live imaging and interpreted the data . C . K . F . per - formed SP3 , MS , and bioinformatic data analyses . C . E . H . designed Figure 1A schematic . R . C . and C . E . H . wrote the manuscript . All authors commented on the manuscript . C . E . H . and J . K . supervised the project . DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no competing interests . Received : August 23 , 2017 Revised : December 24 , 2017 Accepted : May 31 , 2018 Published : June 28 , 2018 SUPPORTING CITATIONS ThefollowingreferencesappearintheSupplementalInformation : Batistaetal . ( 2017 ) ; Blichenberg et al . ( 1999 ) ; Eng et al . ( 1999 ) ; Grooms et al . ( 2006 ) ; Gumy et al . ( 2011 ) ; Kastenhuber et al . ( 2009 ) ; Kessler and Baude ( 1999 ) ; Nadal - Nic - ola´s et al . ( 2009 ) ; Nicolaı¨ et al . ( 2010 ) ; Preitner et al . ( 2014 ) ; Schwanh € ausser et al . ( 2011 ) ; Surgucheva et al . ( 2008 ) ; Taylor et al . ( 2013 ) . REFERENCES Aguado , F . , Carmona , M . A . , Pozas , E . , Aguilo´ , A . , Martı´nez - Guijarro , F . J . , Alcantara , S . , Borrell , V . , Yuste , R . , Iban˜ez , C . F . , and Soriano , E . ( 2003 ) . BDNF regulates spontaneous correlated activity at early developmental stages by increasing synaptogenesis and expression of the K + / Cl - co - trans - porter KCC2 . Development 130 , 1267 – 1280 . Atkinson - Leadbeater , K . , Hehr , C . L . , Johnston , J . , Bertolesi , G . , and McFarlane , S . ( 2016 ) . EGCG stabilizes growth cone ﬁlopodia and impairs retinal ganglion cell axon guidance . Dev . Dyn . 245 , 667 – 677 . Baleriola , J . , Walker , C . A . , Jean , Y . Y . , Crary , J . F . , Troy , C . M . , Nagy , P . L . , and Hengst , U . ( 2014 ) . Axonally synthesized ATF4 transmits a neurodegenerative signal across brain regions . Cell 158 , 1159 – 1172 . Batista , A . F . R . , Martı´nez , J . C . , andHengst , U . ( 2017 ) . Intra - axonal synthesisof SNAP25 is required for the formation of presynaptic terminals . Cell Rep . 20 , 3085 – 3098 . Bellon , A . , Iyer , A . , Bridi , S . , Lee , F . C . Y . , Ovando - Va´zquez , C . , Corradi , E . , Longhi , S . , Roccuzzo , M . , Strohbuecker , S . , Naik , S . , et al . ( 2017 ) . miR - 182 regulates Slit2 - mediated axon guidance by modulating the local translation of a speciﬁc mRNA . Cell Rep . 18 , 1171 – 1186 . Biederer , T . , Sara , Y . , Mozhayeva , M . , Atasoy , D . , Liu , X . , Kavalali , E . T . , and S € udhof , T . C . ( 2002 ) . SynCAM , a synaptic adhesion molecule that drives syn - apse assembly . Science 297 , 1525 – 1531 . Blichenberg , A . , Schwanke , B . , Rehbein , M . , Garner , C . C . , Richter , D . , and Kindler , S . ( 1999 ) . Identiﬁcation of a cis - acting dendritic targeting element in MAP2 mRNAs . J . Neurosci . 19 , 8818 – 8829 . Campbell , D . S . , and Holt , C . E . ( 2001 ) . Chemotropic responses of retinal growth cones mediated by rapid local protein synthesis and degradation . Neuron 32 , 1013 – 1026 . Campbell , D . S . , Regan , A . G . , Lopez , J . S . , Tannahill , D . , Harris , W . A . , and Holt , C . E . ( 2001 ) . Semaphorin 3A elicits stage - dependent collapse , turning , and branching in Xenopus retinal growth cones . J . Neurosci . 21 , 8538 – 8547 . Cheng , P . L . , Song , A . H . , Wong , Y . H . , Wang , S . , Zhang , X . , and Poo , M . M . ( 2011 ) . Self - amplifying autocrine actions of BDNF in axon development . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 18430 – 18435 . Cohen - Cory , S . , and Fraser , S . E . ( 1995 ) . Effects of brain - derived neurotrophic factor on optic axon branching and remodelling in vivo . Nature 378 , 192 – 196 . Cox , J . , and Mann , M . ( 2008 ) . MaxQuant enables high peptide identiﬁcation rates , individualized p . p . b . - range mass accuracies and proteome - wide pro - tein quantiﬁcation . Nat . Biotechnol . 26 , 1367 – 1372 . Deglincerti , A . , Liu , Y . , Colak , D . , Hengst , U . , Xu , G . , and Jaffrey , S . R . ( 2015 ) . Coupledlocaltranslationanddegradationregulategrowthcone collapse . Nat . Commun . 6 , 6888 . Demyanenko , G . P . , and Maness , P . F . ( 2003 ) . The L1 cell adhesion molecule is essential for topographic mapping of retinal axons . J . Neurosci . 23 , 530 – 538 . Dieterich , D . C . , Link , A . J . , Graumann , J . , Tirrell , D . A . , and Schuman , E . M . ( 2006 ) . Selective identiﬁcation of newly synthesized proteins in mammalian cells using bioorthogonal noncanonical amino acid tagging ( BONCAT ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 9482 – 9487 . Eichelbaum , K . , and Krijgsveld , J . ( 2014 ) . Rapid temporal dynamics of tran - scription , protein synthesis , and secretion during macrophage activation . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 13 , 792 – 810 . Eng , H . , Lund , K . , andCampenot , R . B . ( 1999 ) . Synthesisofbeta - tubulin , actin , and other proteins in axons of sympathetic neurons in compartmented cul - tures . J . Neurosci . 19 , 1 – 9 . Firestone , A . J . , Weinger , J . S . , Maldonado , M . , Barlan , K . , Langston , L . D . , O’Donnell , M . , Gelfand , V . I . , Kapoor , T . M . , and Chen , J . K . ( 2012 ) . Small - mole - cule inhibitors of the AAA + ATPase motor cytoplasmic dynein . Nature 484 , 125 – 129 . Gale , J . R . , Aschraﬁ , A . , Gioio , A . E . , and Kaplan , B . B . ( 2018 ) . Nuclear - encoded mitochondrial mRNAs : a powerful force in axonal growth and development . Neuroscientist 24 , 142 – 155 . Grooms , S . Y . , Noh , K . M . , Regis , R . , Bassell , G . J . , Bryan , M . K . , Carroll , R . C . , and Zukin , R . S . ( 2006 ) . Activity bidirectionally regulates AMPA receptor mRNA abundance in dendrites of hippocampal neurons . J . Neurosci . 26 , 8339 – 8351 . Gumy , L . F . , Tan , C . L . , and Fawcett , J . W . ( 2010 ) . The role of local protein synthesis and degradation in axon regeneration . Exp . Neurol . 223 , 28 – 37 . Gumy , L . F . , Yeo , G . S . , Tung , Y . C . , Zivraj , K . H . , Willis , D . , Coppola , G . , Lam , B . Y . , Twiss , J . L . , Holt , C . E . , and Fawcett , J . W . ( 2011 ) . Transcriptome analysis of embryonic and adult sensory axons reveals changes in mRNA repertoire localization . RNA 17 , 85 – 98 . Gygi , S . P . , Rochon , Y . , Franza , B . R . , and Aebersold , R . ( 1999 ) . Correlation between protein and mRNA abundance in yeast . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 , 1720 – 1730 . Harris , W . A . , Holt , C . E . , and Bonhoeffer , F . ( 1987 ) . Retinal axons with and without their somata , growing to and arborizing in the tectum of Xenopus embryos : a time - lapse video study of single ﬁbres in vivo . Development 101 , 123 – 133 . 44 Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 He , Y . , Ren , Y . , Wu , B . , Decourt , B . , Lee , A . C . , Taylor , A . , and Suter , D . M . ( 2015 ) . Src and cortactin promote lamellipodia protrusion and ﬁlopodia forma - tion and stability in growth cones . Mol . Biol . Cell 26 , 3229 – 3244 . Hengst , U . , Deglincerti , A . , Kim , H . J . , Jeon , N . L . , and Jaffrey , S . R . ( 2009 ) . Axonal elongation triggered by stimulus - induced local translation of a polarity complex protein . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 1024 – 1030 . Hinckelmann , M . V . , Virlogeux , A . , Niehage , C . , Poujol , C . , Choquet , D . , Hoﬂack , B . , Zala , D . , and Saudou , F . ( 2016 ) . Self - propelling vesicles deﬁne glycolysis as the minimal energy machinery for neuronal transport . Nat . Commun . 7 , 13233 . Ho¨pker , V . H . , Shewan , D . , Tessier - Lavigne , M . , Poo , M . , and Holt , C . ( 1999 ) . Growth - cone attraction to netrin - 1 is converted to repulsion by laminin - 1 . Nature 401 , 69 – 73 . Huang , Y . , Higginson , D . S . , Hester , L . , Park , M . H . , and Snyder , S . H . ( 2007 ) . Neuronal growth andsurvivalmediated byeIF5A , apolyamine - modiﬁedtrans - lation initiation factor . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 4194 – 4199 . Hughes , C . S . , Foehr , S . , Garﬁeld , D . A . , Furlong , E . E . , Steinmetz , L . M . , and Krijgsveld , J . ( 2014 ) . Ultrasensitive proteome analysis using paramagnetic bead technology . Mol . Syst . Biol . 10 , 757 . Igarashi , M . , Strittmatter , S . M . , Vartanian , T . , and Fishman , M . C . ( 1993 ) . Mediation by G proteins of signals that cause collapse of growth cones . Science 259 , 77 – 79 . Jain , S . , and Welshhans , K . ( 2016 ) . Netrin - 1 induces local translation of down syndrome cell adhesion molecule in axonal growth cones . Dev . Neurobiol . 76 , 799 – 816 . Jamieson , K . V . , Wu , J . , Hubbard , S . R . , and Meruelo , D . ( 2008 ) . Crystal structure of the human laminin receptor precursor . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 3002 – 3005 . Jang , S . , Nelson , J . C . , Bend , E . G . , Rodrı´guez - Laureano , L . , Tueros , F . G . , Cartagenova , L . , Underwood , K . , Jorgensen , E . M . , and Colo´n - Ramos , D . A . ( 2016 ) . Glycolytic enzymes localize to synapses under energy stress to sup - port synaptic function . Neuron 90 , 278 – 291 . Kastenhuber , E . , Kern , U . , Bonkowsky , J . L . , Chien , C . B . , Driever , W . , and Schweitzer , J . ( 2009 ) . Netrin - DCC , Robo - Slit , and heparan sulfate proteogly - cans coordinate lateral positioning of longitudinal dopaminergic diencephalo - spinal axons . J . Neurosci . 29 , 8914 – 8926 . Kessler , J . P . , and Baude , A . ( 1999 ) . Distribution of AMPA receptor subunits GluR1 - 4inthedorsalvagalcomplexoftherat : alightandelectronmicroscope immunocytochemical study . Synapse 34 , 55 – 67 . Kim , H . W . , Ha , S . H . , Lee , M . N . , Huston , E . , Kim , D . H . , Jang , S . K . , Suh , P . G . , Houslay , M . D . , and Ryu , S . H . ( 2010 ) . Cyclic AMP controls mTOR through regulation of the dynamic interaction between Rheb and phosphodiesterase 4D . Mol . Cell . Biol . 30 , 5406 – 5420 . Kondrashov , N . , Pusic , A . , Stumpf , C . R . , Shimizu , K . , Hsieh , A . C . , Ishijima , J . , Shiroishi , T . , and Barna , M . ( 2011 ) . Ribosome - mediated speciﬁcity in Hox mRNA translation and vertebrate tissue patterning . Cell 145 , 383 – 397 . Lastick , S . M . , and McConkey , E . H . ( 1976 ) . Exchange and stability of HeLa ribosomal proteins in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . 251 , 2867 – 2875 . Lepelletier , L . , Langlois , S . D . , Kent , C . B . , Welshhans , K . , Morin , S . , Bassell , G . J . , Yam , P . T . , and Charron , F . ( 2017 ) . Sonic Hedgehog guides axons via Zipcode Binding Protein 1 - mediated local translation . J . Neurosci . 37 , 1685 – 1695 . Leung , K . M . , van Horck , F . P . , Lin , A . C . , Allison , R . , Standart , N . , and Holt , C . E . ( 2006 ) . Asymmetrical beta - actin mRNA translation in growth cones mediates attractive turning to netrin - 1 . Nat . Neurosci . 9 , 1247 – 1256 . Lin , A . C . , and Holt , C . E . ( 2007 ) . Local translation and directional steering in axons . EMBO J . 26 , 3729 – 3736 . Litman , P . , Barg , J . , Rindzoonski , L . , and Ginzburg , I . ( 1993 ) . Subcellularlocal - ization of tau mRNA in differentiating neuronal cell culture : implications for neuronal polarity . Neuron 10 , 627 – 638 . Lyles , V . , Zhao , Y . , and Martin , K . C . ( 2006 ) . Synapse formation and mRNA localization in cultured Aplysia neurons . Neuron 49 , 349 – 356 . Manitt , C . , Nikolakopoulou , A . M . , Almario , D . R . , Nguyen , S . A . , and Cohen - Cory , S . ( 2009 ) . Netrin participates in the development of retinotectal synaptic connectivity by modulating axon arborization and synapse formation in the developing brain . J . Neurosci . 29 , 11065 – 11077 . McConnell , R . E . , Edward van Veen , J . , Vidaki , M . , Kwiatkowski , A . V . , Meyer , A . S . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2016 ) . A requirement for ﬁlopodia extension toward Slit during Robo - mediated axon repulsion . J . Cell Biol . 213 , 261 – 274 . Mishra , B . , von der Ohe , M . , Schulze , C . , Bian , S . , Makhina , T . , Loers , G . , Kleene , R . , and Schachner , M . ( 2010 ) . Functional role of the interaction between polysialic acid and extracellular histone H1 . J . Neurosci . 30 , 12400 – 12413 . Moretti , F . , Rolando , C . , Winker , M . , Ivanek , R . , Rodriguez , J . , VonKriegsheim , A . , Taylor , V . , Bustin , M . , and Pertz , O . ( 2015 ) . Growth cone localization of the mRNA encoding the chromatin regulator HMGN5 modulates neurite outgrowth . Mol . Cell . Biol . 35 , 2035 – 2050 . Murakami , T . , Qamar , S . , Lin , J . Q . , Schierle , G . S . , Rees , E . , Miyashita , A . , Costa , A . R . , Dodd , R . B . , Chan , F . T . , Michel , C . H . , et al . ( 2015 ) . ALS / FTD mutation - inducedphasetransitionofFUSliquiddropletsandreversiblehydro - gels into irreversible hydrogels impairs RNP granule function . Neuron 88 , 678 – 690 . Nadal - Nicola´s , F . M . , Jime´nez - Lo´pez , M . , Sobrado - Calvo , P . , Nieto - Lo´pez , L . , Ca´novas - Martı´nez , I . , Salinas - Navarro , M . , Vidal - Sanz , M . , and Agudo , M . ( 2009 ) . Brn3a as a marker of retinal ganglion cells : qualitative and quantitative time course studies in naive and optic nerve - injured retinas . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 50 , 3860 – 3868 . Nakaya , N . , Sultana , A . , Lee , H . S . , and Tomarev , S . I . ( 2012 ) . Olfactomedin 1 interacts with the Nogo A receptor complex to regulate axon growth . J . Biol . Chem . 287 , 37171 – 37184 . Nicolaı¨ , L . J . , Ramaekers , A . , Raemaekers , T . , Drozdzecki , A . , Mauss , A . S . , Yan , J . , Landgraf , M . , Annaert , W . , and Hassan , B . A . ( 2010 ) . Genetically en - coded dendritic marker sheds light on neuronal connectivity in Drosophila . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 20553 – 20558 . Nieuwkoop , P . D . , and Faber , J . ( 1994 ) . Normal table of Xenopus laevis ( Daudin ) : A Systematical and Chronological Survey of the Development from the Fertilized Egg till the End of Metamorphosis ( Garland ) . Padmanabhan , A . , Vuong , S . A . , and Hochstrasser , M . ( 2016 ) . Assembly of an evolutionarily conserved alternative proteasome isoform in human cells . Cell Rep . 14 , 2962 – 2974 . Piper , M . , Anderson , R . , Dwivedy , A . , Weinl , C . , van Horck , F . , Leung , K . M . , Cogill , E . , and Holt , C . ( 2006 ) . Signaling mechanisms underlying Slit2 - induced collapse of Xenopus retinal growth cones . Neuron 49 , 215 – 228 . Ponomareva , O . Y . , Eliceiri , K . W . , and Halloran , M . C . ( 2016 ) . Charcot - Marie - Tooth 2b associated Rab7 mutations cause axon growth and guidance defects during vertebrate sensory neuron development . Neural Dev . 11 , 2 . Preitner , N . , Quan , J . , Nowakowski , D . W . , Hancock , M . L . , Shi , J . , Tcherkezian , J . , Young - Pearse , T . L . , and Flanagan , J . G . ( 2014 ) . APC is an RNA - binding protein , and its interactome provides a link to neural development and micro - tubule assembly . Cell 158 , 368 – 382 . Pulk , A . , Liiv , A . , Peil , L . , Maiv € ali , U . , Nierhaus , K . , and Remme , J . ( 2010 ) . Ribosome reactivation by replacement of damaged proteins . Mol . Microbiol . 75 , 801 – 814 . Rajasundaram , D . , Selbig , J . , Persson , S . , and Klie , S . ( 2014 ) . Co - ordination and divergence of cell - speciﬁc transcription and translation of genes in arabi - dopsis root cells . Ann . Bot . ( Lond . ) 114 , 1109 – 1123 . Ritchie , M . E . , Phipson , B . , Wu , D . , Hu , Y . , Law , C . W . , Shi , W . , and Smyth , G . K . ( 2015 ) . limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA - sequencing and microarray studies . Nucleic Acids Res . 43 , e47 . Schanzenb € acher , C . T . , Sambandan , S . , Langer , J . D . , and Schuman , E . M . ( 2016 ) . Nascent proteome remodeling following homeostatic scaling at hippo - campal synapses . Neuron 92 , 358 – 371 . Schwanh € ausser , B . , Gossen , M . , Dittmar , G . , and Selbach , M . ( 2009 ) . Global analysis of cellular protein translation by pulsed SILAC . Proteomics 9 , 205 – 209 . Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 45 Schwanh € ausser , B . , Busse , D . , Li , N . , Dittmar , G . , Schuchhardt , J . , Wolf , J . , Chen , W . , and Selbach , M . ( 2011 ) . Global quantiﬁcation of mammalian gene expression control . Nature 473 , 337 – 342 . Shen , Y . , Mani , S . , Donovan , S . L . , Schwob , J . E . , and Meiri , K . F . ( 2002 ) . Growth - associated protein - 43 is required for commissural axon guidance in the developing vertebrate nervous system . J . Neurosci . 22 , 239 – 247 . Shigeoka , T . , Jung , H . , Jung , J . , Turner - Bridger , B . , Ohk , J . , Lin , J . Q . , Amieux , P . S . , and Holt , C . E . ( 2016 ) . Dynamic axonal translation in developing and mature visual circuits . Cell 166 , 181 – 192 . Song , H . J . , Ming , G . L . , and Poo , M . M . ( 1997 ) . cAMP - induced switching in turning direction of nerve growth cones . Nature 388 , 275 – 279 . Song , H . , Ming , G . , He , Z . , Lehmann , M . , McKerracher , L . , Tessier - Lavigne , M . , and Poo , M . ( 1998 ) . Conversion of neuronal growth cone responses from repulsion to attraction by cyclic nucleotides . Science 281 , 1515 – 1518 . Surgucheva , I . , Weisman , A . D . , Goldberg , J . L . , Shnyra , A . , and Surguchov , A . ( 2008 ) . Gamma - synuclein as a marker of retinal ganglion cells . Mol . Vis . 14 , 1540 – 1548 . Szklarczyk , D . , Morris , J . H . , Cook , H . , Kuhn , M . , Wyder , S . , Simonovic , M . , Santos , A . , Doncheva , N . T . , Roth , A . , Bork , P . , et al . ( 2017 ) . The STRING data - base in 2017 : quality - controlled protein - protein association networks , made broadly accessible . Nucleic Acids Res . 45 ( D1 ) , D362 – D368 . Tachibana , H . , Koga , K . , Fujimura , Y . , and Yamada , K . ( 2004 ) . A receptor for green tea polyphenol EGCG . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 11 , 380 – 381 . Takahashi , H . , and Craig , A . M . ( 2013 ) . Protein tyrosine phosphatases PTP d , PTP s , and LAR : presynaptic hubs for synapse organization . Trends Neurosci . 36 , 522 – 534 . Tanaka , K . ( 2013 ) . The proteasome : from basic mechanisms to emerging roles . Keio J . Med . 62 , 1 – 12 . Taylor , A . M . , Wu , J . , Tai , H . C . , andSchuman , E . M . ( 2013 ) . Axonaltranslationof b - catenin regulates synaptic vesicle dynamics . J . Neurosci . 33 , 5584 – 5589 . Tischﬁeld , M . A . , and Engle , E . C . ( 2010 ) . Distinct alpha - and beta - tubulin isotypes are required for the positioning , differentiation and survival of neu - rons : new support for the ‘multi - tubulin’ hypothesis . Biosci . Rep . 30 , 319 – 330 . tom Dieck , S . , Kochen , L . , Hanus , C . , Heum € uller , M . , Bartnik , I . , Nassim - Assir , B . , Merk , K . , Mosler , T . , Garg , S . , Bunse , S . , etal . ( 2015 ) . Direct visualizationof newly synthesized target proteins in situ . Nat . Methods 12 , 411 – 414 . Umeda , D . , Yano , S . , Yamada , K . , and Tachibana , H . ( 2008 ) . Green tea poly - phenol epigallocatechin - 3 - gallate signaling pathway through 67 - kDa laminin receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 3050 – 3058 . Vidaki , M . , Drees , F . , Saxena , T . , Lanslots , E . , Taliaferro , M . J . , Tatarakis , A . , Burge , C . B . , Wang , E . T . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2017 ) . A requirement for Mena , an actin regulator , in local mRNA translation in developing neurons . Neuron 95 , 608 – 622 . e5 . Villarin , J . M . , McCurdy , E . P . , Martı´nez , J . C . , and Hengst , U . ( 2016 ) . Local syn - thesis of dynein cofactors matches retrograde transport to acutely changing demands . Nat . Commun . 7 , 13865 . Vizcaı´no , J . A . , Csordas , A . , del - Toro , N . , Dianes , J . A . , Griss , J . , Lavidas , I . , Mayer , G . , Perez - Riverol , Y . , Reisinger , F . , Ternent , T . , et al . ( 2016 ) . 2016 update of the PRIDE database and its related tools . Nucleic Acids Res . 44 ( D1 ) , D447 – D456 . Wen , Z . , Guirland , C . , Ming , G . L . , andZheng , J . Q . ( 2004 ) . ACaMKII / calcineurin switch controls the direction of Ca ( 2 + ) - dependent growth cone guidance . Neuron 43 , 835 – 846 . Willis , D . E . , and Twiss , J . L . ( 2011 ) . Proﬁling axonal mRNA transport . Methods Mol . Biol . 714 , 335 – 352 . Wong , H . H . , Lin , J . Q . , Stro¨hl , F . , Roque , C . G . , Cioni , J . M . , Cagnetta , R . , Turner - Bridger , B . , Laine , R . F . , Harris , W . A . , Kaminski , C . F . , and Holt , C . E . ( 2017 ) . RNAdocking and local translation regulate site - speciﬁc axonremodel - ing in vivo . Neuron 95 , 852 – 868 . e8 . Wu , K . Y . , Hengst , U . , Cox , L . J . , Macosko , E . Z . , Jeromin , A . , Urquhart , E . R . , and Jaffrey , S . R . ( 2005 ) . Local translation of RhoA regulates growth cone collapse . Nature 436 , 1020 – 1024 . Yao , J . , Sasaki , Y . , Wen , Z . , Bassell , G . J . , and Zheng , J . Q . ( 2006 ) . An essential role for beta - actin mRNA localization and translation in Ca2 + - dependent growth cone guidance . Nat . Neurosci . 9 , 1265 – 1273 . Yoon , B . C . , Jung , H . , Dwivedy , A . , O’Hare , C . M . , Zivraj , K . H . , and Holt , C . E . ( 2012 ) . Local translation of extranuclear lamin B promotes axon maintenance . Cell 148 , 752 – 764 . Zielinski , J . , Kilk , K . , Peritz , T . , Kannanayakal , T . , Miyashiro , K . Y . , Eirı´ksdo´ttir , E . , Jochems , J . , Langel , U . , and Eberwine , J . ( 2006 ) . In vivo identiﬁcation of ribonucleoprotein - RNA interactions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 1557 – 1562 . Zivraj , K . H . , Tung , Y . C . , Piper , M . , Gumy , L . , Fawcett , J . W . , Yeo , G . S . , and Holt , C . E . ( 2010 ) . Subcellular proﬁling reveals distinct and developmentally regulated repertoire of growth cone mRNAs . J . Neurosci . 30 , 15464 – 15478 . Zylbersztejn , K . , Petkovic , M . , Burgo , A . , Deck , M . , Garel , S . , Marcos , S . , Bloch - Gallego , E . , Nothias , F . , Serini , G . , Bagnard , D . , et al . ( 2012 ) . The vesicular SNARE Synaptobrevin is required for Semaphorin 3A axonal repul - sion . J . Cell Biol . 196 , 37 – 46 . 46 Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 , July 11 , 2018 STAR + METHODS KEY RESOURCES TABLE REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Antibodies Anti - b - actin Abcam Cat # ab6277 ; RRID : AB _ 305394 Anti - a - tubulin Sigma Cat # T6074 ; RRID : AB _ 477582 Anti - RpSA Proteintech Cat # 14533 - 1 - AP ; RRID : AB _ 2182528 Anti - F - actin Phalloidin Alexa Fluor 488 Molecular Probes / Invitrogen Cat # A12379 ; RRID : AB _ 2315147 Anti - puromycin Millipore Cat # MABE343 ; RRID : AB _ 2566826 Anti - g - actin Chemicon Cat # AB3265 ; RRID : AB _ 11214345 Anti - Brn3a Santa Cruz Cat # sc6026 ; RRID : AB _ 673441 Anti - RpL24 Proteintech Cat # 17082 - 1 - AP ; RRID : AB _ 2181728 Anti - Rps23 Origene Cat # TA314496 ; RRID : AB _ 2728701 Anti - Pdi Sigma Cat # P7496 ; RRID : AB _ 261952 Anti - Vamp2 Proteintech Cat # 10135 - 1 - AP ; RRID : AB _ 2256918 Anti - H4 Abcam Cat # ab10158 ; RRID : AB _ 296888 Anti - H2b Abcam Cat # ab1790 ; RRID : AB _ 302612 Anti - Fus Abcam Cat # ab70381 ; RRID : AB _ 1271242 Anti - Sncg Covance N / A ( customized ) Anti - Neuroﬁlament - associated 3A10 Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank Cat # 3A10 ; RRID : AB _ 531874 Anti - Glur1 Abcam Cat # ab183797 ; RRID : AB _ 2728702 IgG isotype control Abcam Cat # ab27478 ; RRID : AB _ 2616600 Chemicals , Peptides , and Recombinant Proteins Netrin - 1 R & D Systems Cat # 1109 - N1 Sema3A R & D Systems Cat # 1250 - S3 BDNF Sigma Cat # B3795 Tautomycin Calbiochem Cat # 580551 Sp - cAMP Sigma Cat # A166 8 - Br - cGMP Sigma Cat # B1318 Poly - L - lysine Sigma Cat # P1274 Laminin Sigma Cat # L2020 Leibovitz L - 15 medium - Lys - Arg GIBCO Life Technologies N / A ( customized ) Stable isotope - coded amino acids Lys4 Silantes GmbH Cat # 211103913 Stable isotope - coded amino acids Lys8 Silantes GmbH Cat # 211603902 Stable isotope - coded amino acids Arg6 Silantes GmbH Cat # 201203902 Stable isotope - coded amino acids Arg10 Silantes GmbH Cat # 201603902 Puromycin Sigma Cat # P8833 Sera - Mag Speed Beads A GE Healthcare Cat # 24152105050250 Sera - Mag Speed Beads B GE Healthcare Cat # 44152105050250 Trypsin / LysC Promega Cat # V5071 Critical Commercial Assays RNAqueous - Micro Total RNA Isolation Kit Invitrogen Cat # AM1931 OneStep RT - PCR kit QIAGEN Cat # 210210 Duolink in situ PLA kit Sigma Cat # DUO92014 ( Continued on next page ) Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 . e1 – e4 , July 11 , 2018 e1 CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the lead contact Christine E . Holt ( ceh33 @ cam . ac . uk ) . EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS Xenopus laevis Embryos Maintenance Xenopus laevis embryos of either sex were obtained by in vitro fertilization as previously described ( Campbell and Holt , 2001 ) , raised in 0 . 1x modiﬁed Barth’s saline ( MBS ; 0 . 88 mM NaCl , 0 . 01 mM KCl , 0 . 024 mM NaHCO 3 , 0 . 1 mM HEPES , 8 . 2 m M MgSO 4 , 3 . 3 m M Ca ( NO 3 ) 2 , 4 . 1 m M CaCl 2 ) at 14 – 22 (cid:4) C and staged according to Nieuwkoop and Faber ( 1994 ) . This research has been regulated under the Animals ( Scientiﬁc Procedures ) Act 1986 Amendment Regulations 2012 following ethical review by the University of Cambridge Animal Welfare and Ethical Review Body ( AWERB ) . METHOD DETAILS Retinal Explant Cultures and Axotomy Assay on Transwell Filter Whole retinas of anesthetized embryos stage 33 / 34 - 35 / 36 were dissected and cultured at 20 (cid:4) C for 24 hr in 60 % L15 minimal medium ( Invitrogen ) , 1x Penicillin Streptomycin Fungizone on glass bottom dishes ( MatTek ) or on the top compartment of 6 - well hanging in - serts with 1 m m membrane pores ( Falcon ) , coated on both sides of the membrane with poly - L - lysine ( 10 m g / ml ) and only on the bottom side with laminin ( 10 m g / ml ) . Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Deposited Data Proteomics data This paper PRIDE : PXD005469 Experimental Models : Organisms / Strains X . laevis Nasco https : / / www . enasco . com / p / LM00535MX / Oligonucleotides b - actin : for 5 0 CCTGTGCAGGAAGATCACAT 3 0 , rev 5 0 TGTTAAAGAGAATGAGCCCC 3 0 Sigma N / A ɣ - actin : for 5 0 GCGGATCTGACAGCTACTG 3 0 , rev 5 0 ATCCATACAGAATGTTTTGGG 3 0 Sigma N / A Brn3 : for 5 0 TGAGCGATTCAAGCAGAGGAGG 3 0 , rev 5 0 TGCGACAGGGTGAGGGATTCAAAC 3 0 Sigma N / A Tau : for 5 0 TCTGCCAAGAGCCGCCTTCA 3 0 , rev 5 0 GGACTGCACGTTGCCCAAATCC 3 0 Sigma N / A Map2 : for 5 0 CGATCATCCTTGCCAAGACCTTCCTC 3 0 , rev 5 0 GCGACCTGGAGATTGGGTGATGATTT 3 0 Sigma N / A Glur1 : for 5 0 GGGATTGGCCATGCTTGTTG 3 0 , rev 5 0 GCCATTCCTGCACTGTGGCTCA 3 0 Sigma N / A Icam5 : for 5 0 TCCACCTGCAGCATTCCAGTCC 3 0 , rev 5 0 TGGGGAGGCCTTCTGCATCA 3 0 Sigma N / A Software and Algorithms Volocity v . 6 . 3 . 1 RRID : SCR _ 002668 GraphPad PRISM v . 5 . 0c RRID : SCR _ 002798 ImageJ v . 149 RRID : SCR _ 003070 DAVID v . 6 . 8 RRID : SCR _ 001881 KEGG N / A RRID : SCR _ 012773 String v . 10 . 5 RRID : SCR _ 005223 Maxquant v . 1 . 4 . 1 . 2 RRID : SCR _ 014485 Perseus v . 1 . 5 . 1 . 6 or 1 . 5 . 5 . 3 RRID : SCR _ 015753 e2 Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 . e1 – e4 , July 11 , 2018 For the pSILAC experiment 100 eye explants were cultured per condition . Prior to stimulation , retinal explants were removed , scraped , and washed off 7 times from the top compartment of the ﬁlter , leaving the somaless axons ( (cid:1) 2 m g protein typical yield ) at the bottom . Each cue was added together with stable isotope - coded amino acids to the somaless axons for the time indicated . After stimulation the membrane was cut away , rinsed with ice cold PBS and lysed for protein extraction . Pharmacological Treatments Stimulations were carried out using the following concentrations : Netrin - 1 ( 600 ng / ml ) , Sema3A ( 150 ng / ml ) , BDNF ( 200 ng / ml ) , Tautomycin ( 4 nM ) , Sp - cAMP ( 20 m M ) , 8 - Br - cGMP ( 100 m M ) . Pulsed Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino Acids in Cell Culture All experiments were performed in at least three independent biological replicates . Retinal explants were cultured in SILAC light me - dium ( Lys0 , Arg0 ) for 24 hr and incubated in depletion medium ( - Lys , - Arg ) for 60 min prior pulse labeling . Subsequently , cell bodies were removed and somaless axons were incubated for the desired time ( 5 , 15 or 30 min ) with medium ( M ) ( Lys4 , Arg6 ) or heavy ( H ) isotope - coded amino acids ( Lys8 , Arg10 ) . At each time point corresponding samples were lysed , immediately pooled , and pro - cessed by SP3 . Single - Pot Solid - Phase - Enhanced Sample Preparation Axons were harvested by addition of lysis buffer ( 1 % SDC , 0 . 1 % SDS , 100 mM TrisHCl ph 8 . 5 , 10 mM DTT , 1x protease inhibitor EDTA free ) . Samples were supplemented with 25 units Benzonase nuclease ( Merck ) , and lysed in a Bioruptor ( Diagenode ) for 5 min ( cycle 30 / 30 , 4 (cid:4) C ) . Alkylation was performed by addition of 30 mM Chloroacetamide followed by incubation in the dark for 30 min . Protein clean - up , digestion , and peptide clean - up were performed using a modiﬁed version of the recently developed ultra - sensitive sample preparation protocol SP3 ( Hughes et al . , 2014 ) . In brief , 5 m L of beads ( 1 : 1 mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic SeraMag Carboxylate - Modiﬁed beads , GE Life Sciences ) were added to each sample . Acidiﬁed acetonitrile was added to achieve a ﬁnal fraction of organic solvent of 50 % . Beads were incubated for 10 min to allow complete binding of proteins to the beads . Protein clean - up was performed by subsequent wash with 70 % Ethanol and once with Acetonitrile . For digestion , 0 . 1 m g sequencing grade Trypsin / LysC ( Promega ) was added and digestion was performed at 37 (cid:4) C for 16 hr . Peptides were eluted with 9 m L 5 % DMSO . 1 m L 10 % formic acid was added and samples were stored at (cid:3) 20 (cid:4) C prior MS analysis . Mass Spectrometry Samples were analyzed on Orbitrap Velos Pro , Q - Exactive , or Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometers ( all Thermo Scientiﬁc ) using default settings . Mass spectrometers were coupled to UPLC systems ( Waters nanoAcquity UPLC or Thermo EASY LC 1200 ) . Peptides were loaded onto trap columns ( Waters nanoAcquity Symmetry C 18 , 5 m m , 180 m m 3 20 mm [ for Waters nanoAcquity UPLC ] or Acclaim PepMap100 C18 Nano - Trap 2cm 3 100 m m 3 5 m m [ for EASY nLC 1200 ] ) with Buffer A ( 0 . 1 % formic acid in water ) and separated over 25 or 50 cm analytical columns ( Acclaim PepMap RSLC , 75 m m 3 2 m m ) using 90 , 145 , or 240 min linear gradients from 3 % – 40 % Buffer B ( 0 . 1 % formic acid in Acetonitrile ) . Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer using a Pico - Tip Emitter ( 360 m m outer diameter 3 20 m m inner diameter , 10 m m tip , New Objective ) . MS2 Fragmentation was set to HCD ( Q - Exactive and Fusion ) or CID ( Orbitrap Velos Pro ) , and MSMS scans were acquired in the ion trap ( Orbitrap Velos Pro and Fusion ) or Orbitrap ( Q - Exactive ) . Proteomics Data Processing Raw data were processed with Maxquant ( version 1 . 4 . 1 . 2 ) ( Cox and Mann , 2008 ) using default settings . MSMS spectra were searched against the Xenopus laevis Uniprot database ( v20140925 ) concatenated to a database containing protein sequences of common contaminants . Enzyme speciﬁcity was set to trypsin / P , allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages . Cysteine carbami - domethylation was set as ﬁxed modiﬁcation , and methionine oxidation and protein N - terminal acetylation were used as variable modiﬁcations . The minimal peptide length allowed was set to six amino acids . The mass tolerances for peptide identiﬁcation were set to 20 ppm for the ﬁrst search , and 4 . 5 ppm for the main search . Global false discovery rates for peptide and protein identiﬁcation were set to 1 % . The match - between - runs and re - quantify options were enabled . Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction RNA was extracted from using RNAqueous - Micro Total RNA Isolation Kit . Primers were designed using Primer3Plus software . The annealing temperature used was 58 (cid:4) C for b - actin and Brn3 , 65 (cid:4) C for ɣ - actin , 64 (cid:4) C for Map2 , GluR1 and Icam5 , and 63 (cid:4) C for Mapt . Immunocytochemistry Retinal cultures were ﬁxed by paraformaldehyde except for anti - b - actin ( AC - 15 FITC ) where methanol ﬁxation was carried out . Immunohistochemistry Embryos were euthanized and ﬁxed overnight with 4 % formaldehyde . The embryos were cryoprotected by inﬁltration with 30 % sucrose for 1 hr , embedded in O . C . T . ( Scigen ) and frozen . 14 m m serial cryosections were cut and immunostained . Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 . e1 – e4 , July 11 , 2018 e3 Puromycilation of NSPs and Proximity Ligation Assay Retinal cultures were incubated with puromycin ( 2 ng / m l ) for the condition and time ( up to 15 min ) of interest , ﬁxed , and incubated with anti - puromycin antibody and the antibody against the protein of interest . Subsequently , Proximity Ligation Assay ( PLA ) was carried out using species - speciﬁc probes ( tom Dieck et al . , 2015 ) . Growth Cone Gradient Assay Retinal explants from embryos stage 35 / 36 were cultured for 14 - 18 hr on coverslips coated with poly - L - lysine ( 10 m g / ml ) and laminin ( 10 m g / ml ) . Sema3A ( 9 m g / ml ) or control polarized gradients were established by pulsatile ejection as described previously ( Campbell et al . , 2001 ) for 7 min placing the micropipette at 70 m m distance and at an angle of 90 (cid:4) relative to the growth cone and to the initial axon shaft ( Leung et al . , 2006 ) . Subsequently samples were immediately ﬁxed and stained for b - actin and RpSA . QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS Statistics Data were analyzed with PRISM 5 ( GraphPad ) . Data are presented as mean and error bars represent SEM . All experiments were performed in at least three independent biological replicates . Details of statistical tests used and p values are presented in the ﬁgure legends . * p % 0 . 05 , * * p % 0 . 01 , * * * p % 0 . 001 , * * * * p % 0 . 0001 , ns : non - signiﬁcant . Quantiﬁcation of Immunoﬂuorescence For the quantiﬁcation of ﬂuorescence intensity , isolated growth cones were selected randomly with phase optics . Pixel saturation was avoided and the same gain and exposure settings were used for digital capture of images for each experiment which was performed during the same day . The outline of each single growth cone was traced using the phase image to deﬁne the region of interest ( ROI ) and the mean pixel intensity per unit area was measured in each channel using Volocity software . The background ﬂuorescence was measured in a ROI as close as possible to the growth cone selected and subtracted to the mean ﬂuorescence value of the growth cone . For the growth cone gradient assay IF ratio analysis , the growth cone was bisected into two areas by a line drawn through the axon shaft and the background ﬂuorescence level was subtracted . For the center of mass analysis , measurement was calculated as the average of all pixel locations weighted as intensity by using ImageJ software . The center of mass of the bright ﬁeld was subtracted from the center of mass of the ﬂuorescence signal . Bioinformatic Data Analysis For protein quantiﬁcation , a minimum ratio count of 2 was set , considering unique and razor peptides . The iBAQ was calculated to determine relative abundance levels of the pre - existing light - labeled proteins . Protein ratios were log 2 - transformed , and H / M ratios of NSPs were normalized to the median using the Perseus computational framework . NSP changes were ﬁltered applying the following criteria per each treatment , unless otherwise speciﬁed in the text : ( 1 ) quantiﬁed in > 50 % of biological replicates , ( 2 ) SD % 1 , ( 3 ) average log 2 ratio larger than 0 . 3 or smaller than (cid:3) 0 . 3 . Subsequently NSPs that fulﬁlled the following criteria were subjected to further statistical analysis . To test whether the log 2 ratio of each NSP was signiﬁcantly different from zero , p values were computed by a moderated t test implemented in the R / Bioconductor package limma ( Ritchie et al . , 2015 ) . p values were corrected for multiple testing by controlling the false discovery rate with the method of Benjamini - Hochberg . Hierarchical clustering of proteins was performed in Perseus on log 2 transformed ratios , using Euclidean distances and average linkage . Enrichment of categorical annotations ( Gene Ontology ) was determined using DAVID . Pathway and disease analyses were carried out using KEGG . Interaction network analysis was obtained by employing String v10 . 5 database ( Szklarczyk et al . , 2017 ) . Each node represents a NSP change and each edge shows protein - protein interaction . Proteins with related functions were clustered together based on enrichment of categorical annotations ( Gene Ontology ) obtained using DAVID and disconnected nodes were removed from the plot for simplicity . DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY The accession number for the mass spectrometry proteomics data reported in this paper is ProteomeXchange Consortium via PRIDE ( Vizcaı´no et al . , 2016 ) : PXD005469 . e4 Neuron 99 , 29 – 46 . e1 – e4 , July 11 , 2018 Neuron , Volume 99 Supplemental Information Rapid Cue - Speci ﬁ c Remodeling of the Nascent Axonal Proteome Roberta Cagnetta , Christian K . Frese , Toshiaki Shigeoka , Jeroen Krijgsveld , and Christine E . Holt replicate 1 replicate 2 replicate 3 0 . 57 0 . 63 0 . 60 G 10 4 - 10 - 8 - 6 - 4 - 2 0 p S I L A C M / L un s t i m u l a t ed [ l og2 ] 10 5 10 6 10 9 10 7 10 8 I BA Q p r e - e x i s t i ng p r o t e i n I Supplemental Figure 1 10 5 10 9 10 7 I BA Q p r e - e x i s t i ng p r o t e i n 0 1 2 3 Number of M / L ratio counts H mt mt mt mt mt mt mt mt mt mt mt L r = - 0 . 5 eye axon Actb eye axon Mapt eye axon Map2 eye axon GluR1 eye axon Icam5 D E DAPI Sncg GluR1 NF - A 3A10 F A DAPI NF - A 3A10 RGC layer Lens B ONH DAPIBrn3a Lens ONH RGC layer GluR1 ONH Lens RGClayer dendrites C NF - A 3A10 OPL IPL ! Figure S1 . Analysis of the basal newly synthesized proteome after 5 min pSILAC – Related to Figure 1 ( A ) Embryo retinal section was counterstained for the nuclear marker DAPI and the RGC marker Brn3a ( Nadal - Nicolas et al . , 2009 ) , thus identifying the RGC layer . ( B ) Embryo retinal section was counterstained for the nuclear marker DAPI and the axonal marker Neurofilament - associated 3A10 ( NF - A 3A10 ; Kastenhuber et al . , 2009 ) . All the axons leaving the eye through the ONH derive from the RGC layer . ( C ) Embryo retinal section was stained for the somatodendritic marker Glutamate Receptor 1 ( GluR1 ; Kessler and Baude , 1999 ) . GluR1 was not detected in the ONH . ( D ) Retinal explants were cultured on the boyden chamber , isolated from the eye and counterstained for DAPI , the axonal marker NF - A 3A10 and the RGC marker γ - synuclein ( Sncg ; Surgucheva et al . , 2008 ) . Stack image throughout the transfilter shows that no DAPI was detected and all the axons were positive to Sncg . ( E ) Retinal explants were cultured on the boyden chamber , isolated from the eye and stained for the axonal marker NF - A 3A10 and the somatodendritic marker GluR1 . Stack image throughout the transfilter shows that all the axons were negative to GluR1 . ( F ) RT - PCR confirms the purity of the axonal compartment . The positive control Actb ( Leung et al . , 2006 ) and the axonal marker Mapt / Tau ( Litman et al . , 1993 ) were detected . The dendritic markers Map2 , GluR1 and Icam5 ( Blichenberg et al . , 1999 ; Grooms et al . , 2006 ; Nicolaï et al . , 2010 ) were absent in the axonal sample . ( G ) Multi scatter plot illustrating reproducibility for 3 independent biological replicates of 5 min pSILAC labeling . Numbers correspond to PCC . ( H ) Number of M / L ratio counts vs Intensity Based Absolute Quantification ( IBAQ ) as measure of protein abundance of preexisting proteins ( Schwanhausser et al . , 2011 ) . ( I ) log 2 ratios of constitutive axonal NSPs over pre - existing proteins vs IBAQ of preexisting proteins ( Schwanhausser et al . , 2011 ) reveals a negative correlation . ( L ) STRING - based interactome of the basal NSPs belonging to enriched KEGG metabolic pathways . Nodes represent NSPs acting in the histidine metabolism , selenoamino acid metabolism , biosynthesis of amino acids and glycolysis / gluconeogenesis pathways ; ‘mt’ indicates proteins belonging to the GO cellular composition categories ‘mitochondrion’ and ‘mitochondrial matrix’ ; light blue lines indicate interactions known from databases , purple lines indicate interactions experimentally determined . RGC : Retinal ganglion cell ; ONH : Optic Nerve Head ; IPL : Inner Plexiform Layer ; OPL : Outer Plexiform Layer . Scale bar Figure S1A - C : 25 µm , S1D - E : 50 µm . Supplemental Figure 2 A B 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 Log 2 ( iBAQ heavy channel ) Log 2 ( t r an sc r i p t ) ρ = 0 . 33 ( ) * * * * 0 1 2 3 4 0 500 1000 1500 3500 Protein length [ AA ] c oun t ) 5 min cue stimulation ( Pre - existing proteins * ! Figure S2 . Analysis of the cue - induced newly synthesized proteome – Related to Figure 2 ( A ) Protein size distribution of the axonal proteome and of NSPs up - regulated in response to 5 min cue stimulation . The NSPs up - regulated within 5 min stimulation are shifted slightly towards the shorter size end ( Kolmogorov - Smirnov test ) . ( B ) Analysis of the transcriptome abundance previously detected in Xenopus stage 32 growth cones ( Zivraj et al . , 2010 ) versus the cue - induced IBAQ ( Schwanhausser et al . , 2011 ) shows significant positive correlation ( Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient ρ = 0 . 33 ) . Netrin - 1 5’ Vamp2 Control 5’ Sema3A 5’ Control 15’ Control 5’ Netrin - 1 30’ Actb Min Max Control 15’ Sema3A 15’ RPL24 Control 15’ Sema3A 15’ Sema3A 15’ Control 15’ Rps23 IgG Basal 5’ Puromycin Basal 15’ A RpSA / 67lr Control 5’ RpSA Control 5’ Supplemental Figure 3 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 ns ns * * ns ns H 4 i n t en s i t y o f I F ( no r m a li z ed t o c on t r o l ) Ribo Sema3ACiliobrevin A - - - + + - + - + + + + 5 min 15 min B E Pdi Control 15’ Sema3A 15’ C on t r o l S e m a3 A 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 P d i - pu r o m c y i n P L A s i gna l i n t en s i t y ( no r m a li z ed t o c on t r o l ) log2 ( Sema3A / Control ) = 1 . 07 C D l og2 ( S e m a3 A 5 m i n / C on t r o l ) = - 0 . 04 * * * * E17 . 5 P0 . 5 P7 . 5 R i bo T ag m ou s e s t age * * * * * * * 0 20 40 60 80 100 ns % overlap pSILAC - SP3 – RiboTag r = 0 . 15 r = 0 . 30 r = 0 . 13 ! Figure S3 . Validation of the pSILAC - SP3 approach – Related to Figure 3 ( A ) puro - PLA and IF representative images . ( B ) Growth cones were stimulated with Sema3A and co - treated with Ciliobrevin A , stained for Histone H4 , and IF was measured . H4 total protein level does not change following 5 min Sema3A stimulation and decreases following 15 min Sema3A stimulation . This decrease is blocked by Ciliobrevin A ( Mann - Whitney test and one - way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s Multiple Comparison test ) . ( C - D ) Pdi puro - PLA in response to 15 min Sema3A stimulation measured along 20 µm of the axon proximal to the growth cone . Sema3A increases Pdi axonal translation . The outcome perfectly correlates with the pSILAC outcome ( Table S1 ) and the puro - PLA measurement in growth cones ( Figure 3F ) ( Mann - Whitney test ) . ( E ) Percentage of overlap and abundance correlation ( r ) between the pSILAC - SP3 outcome in response to cues and the mRNAs detected to be associated with ribosomes in the RiboTag at different developmental stages in vivo ( Chi - square test ) . Scale bars 5 µm . Table S1 Protein Condition log 2 ( Condition / Control ) p - value mRNA Actg Basal - U 1 , 5 Brn3a Basal - U 1 , 4 RpL24 Basal - 2 . 15 D 1 RpL24 Sema3A 15’ NaN D 1 RpS23 Basal NaN D 1 RpS23 Sema3A 15’ NaN D 1 Pdi Sema3A 15’ 1 . 03 0 . 10 D 1 Pdi Netrin - 1 15’ - 1 . 67 0 . 09 D 1 RpSA Sema3A 5’ 1 . 32 0 . 00 D 1 RpSA Netrin - 1 5’ 0 . 42 0 . 32 D 1 Vamp2 Sema3A 5’ 0 . 87 0 . 07 U H4 Sema3A 5’ 1 . 13 0 . 06 D 2 , 3 H2b Sema3A 5’ 1 . 09 0 . 02 D 3 Fus BDNF 30’ - 0 . 79 0 . 18 D 1 Tuba Sema3A 15’ - 1 . 63 ( Tuba1a ) - 1 . 75 ( Tuba3c ) 0 . 00 0 . 00 D 3 D 1 Actb Netrin - 1 5’ - 1 . 34 0 . 00 D 1 Actb Netrin - 1 15’ - 0 . 89 0 . 09 D 1 Actb Netrin - 1 30’ - 0 . 14 NaN D 1 Actb BDNF 5’ - 0 . 53 NaN D 1 Actb Sema3A 5’ - 2 . 27 NaN D 1 ! Table S1 . pSILAC and transcriptome outcome of the proteins selected for validation – Related to Figure 3 Table shows the pSILAC - derived NSP changes of the proteins selected for validation . It has to be noted that the ratio log 2 ( ‘Medium’ / ’Light’ ) corresponding to basal translation always exhibits negative value due to the predominance of pre - existing proteins ( i . e . ‘Light’ ) . Green indicates validated NSP changes , black indicates not validated NSP changes likely due to bordeline detection by pSILAC - SP3 ( NaN : Not a Number ) . The mRNA column indicates if the corresponding transcript has been detected ( D ) or undetected ( U ) in axons by previous work : ( 1 ) Zivraj et al . , 2010 ; ( 2 ) experimentally detected by RT - PCR ; ( 3 ) Gumy et al . , 2011 ; ( 4 ) Yoon et al . , 2012 ; ( 5 ) Willis and Twiss , 2011 . Table S2 Protein Condition log 2 ( Condition / Control ) System Reference RiboTag Tubb Basal - 5 . 27 Rat sympathetic axons Eng et al . , 1999 D Tubb2b Basal - 4 . 97 Mouse dorsal root ganglion growth cones Preitner et al . , 2014 D Pafah1b1 Basal - 3 . 96 Rat dorsal root ganglion axons Villarin et al . , 2016 D Lmnb2 Basal - 2 . 66 Xenopus retinal growth cones Yoon et al . , 2012 U Ctnnb1 Basal - 5 . 29 Rat hippocampal axons Taylor et al . , 2013 D Snap25 Basal - 3 . 14 Rat hippocampal axons Batista et al . , 2017 D Actb BDNF 5’ - 0 . 53 Xenopus spinal growth cones Yao et al . , 2006 D Cofilin Sema3A 5’ 0 . 82 ( Cfl - 1a ) Xenopus retinal growth cones Piper et al . , 2006 D Dyrk1a BDNF 15’ NaN Mouse cortical growth cones Vidaki et al . , 2017 D Dscam Netrin - 1 30’ NaN Mouse hippocampal growth cones Jain and Welshhans , 2016 D ! Table S2 . Comparison of the pSILAC outcome with previous findings – Related to Figure 3 Table shows the pSILAC - derived NSP changes compared to previous findings and the RiboTag axonal translatome ( Shigeoka et al . , 2016 ) , D : detected , U : undetected . It has to be noted that the ratio log 2 ( ‘Medium’ / ’Light’ ) corresponding to basal translation always exhibits negative value due to the predominance of pre - existing proteins ( i . e . ‘Light’ ) . Green indicates NSP changes in accord with previous findings , black indicates NSP changes not matching with previous findings likely due either to borderline detection by pSILAC - SP3 or to inter - species differences . NaN : Not a Number . up - regulated translation threonine−type peptidase activity threonine−type endopeptidase activity str uctu r al molecule activity str uctu r al constituent of r ibosome r ibosome ribon ucleotide metabolic process ribon ucleotide biosynthetic process ribon ucleotide binding ribon ucleoprotein compl ex pur ine ribon ucleotide metabolic process pur ine ribon ucleotide biosynthetic process pur ine ribon ucleotide binding pur ine n ucleotide metabolic process pur ine n ucleotide biosynthetic process pur ine n ucleotide binding pur ine n ucleoside binding proteolysis i n v ol ved in cellular protein catabolic process proteolysis protein t ransport protein localization protein catabolic process proteasome core compl ex proteasome compl ex peptidase activity , acting on L−amino acid peptides peptidase activity n ucleotide biosynthetic process n ucleotide binding n ucleoside binding n ucleobas e , n ucleosid e , n ucleotide and n ucleic acid biosynthetic process n ucleobas e , n ucleoside and n ucleotide biosynthetic process non−memb r ane−bounded organelle nitrogen compound biosynthetic process monosaccha r ide metabolic process monosaccha r ide catabolic process modification−dependent protein catabolic process modification−dependent macromolecule catabolic process metal ion binding macromolecule catabolic process macromolecular compl e x su b unit organization macromolecular compl e x assem b ly ion binding intr acellular non−memb r ane−bounded organelle he xose metabolic process he xose catabolic process guan yl ribon ucleotide binding guan yl n ucleotide binding GTP binding glycolysis glucose metabolic process glucose catabolic process gener ation of precursor metabolites and energy estab lishment of protein localization endopeptidase activity cytos keleton cytos k eletal pa rt cellular protein catabolic process cellular macromolecule catabolic process cellular macromolecular compl e x su b unit organization cellular macromolecular compl e x assem b ly cellular carbo h yd r ate catabolic process cation t ransport cation binding carbo h yd r ate catabolic process calcium ion binding A TP binding alcohol catabolic process aden yl ribon ucleotide binding aden yl n ucleotide binding 2 . 5 5 . 0 7 . 5 10 . 0 score down - regulated B DN F 5 ' B DN F 15 ' B DN F 30 ' N e t r i n − 1 5 ' N e t r i n − 1 15 ' N e t r i n − 1 30 ' S e m a3 A 5 ' S e m a3 A 15 ' S e m a3 A 30 ' B DN F 5 ' B DN F 15 ' B DN F 30 ' N e t r i n − 1 5 ' N e t r i n − 1 15 ' N e t r i n − 1 30 ' S e m a3 A 5 ' S e m a3 A 15 ' S e m a3 A 30 ' Supplemental Figure 4 significant ! Figure S4 . Functional enrichment analysis of the cue - induced newly synthesized proteomes after different stimulation times – Related to Figure 4 Enriched GO terms in the biological process , molecular function and cellular composition categories ( category count > 15 ) . Rectangles indicate significantly enriched GO terms ( p - value < 0 . 05 ) . A C on t r o l E G C G 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 G C s p e e d ( μ m / m i n ) D Min Control 20’ EGCG 20’ C C on t r o l E G C G 0 5 10 15 20 N u m be r o f ﬁ l opod i a C on t r o l E G C G 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 67 77 F - a c t i n i n t en s i t y o f i mm uno f l uo r e sc en c e ( no r m a li z ed t o c on t r o l ) B F - actin E Supplemental Figure 5 Max 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 0 1 2 3 4 Control EGCG ( n = 11 ) ( n = 11 ) Time ( min ) N u m be r o f f il op od i a added 0 1 2 3 * * * * * N u m be r o f f il opod i a r e t r a c t ed 11 11 11 77 11 * * * * * * * * * * * * ! Figure S5 . RpSA / 67lr activation promotes increase in F - actin and cell adhesion – Related to Figure 6 ( A - B ) Growth cones were treated with EGCG for 20 min , stained for F - actin and IF was measured . EGCG induced an increase in F - actin signal ( Unpaired t - test ) . ( C ) EGCG induced an increase in the number of filopodia ( Paired t - test ) . ( D ) EGCG was added at T 0 and live imaging was carried out on growth cones . EGCG did not affect the number of filopodia added but decreased the number of filopodia retracted ( Two - way ANOVA ) . ( E ) EGCG decreased the growth cone speed ( Paired t - test ) . Scale bar 5 µm . Error bars s . e . m . A Supplemental Figure 6 30’ 15’5’ 30’ 15’5’ 30’15’5’ Component 1 ( 32 . 4 % ) C o m ponen t 2 ( 26 . 0 % ) 10 8 6 4 2 0 - 2 - 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 D Vcan Ptprd Rpl4 eeF1a1 Psma2 Ncam1 - B Cfl1 - A Cct3 Vdac2 eiF3e Ctsd Cadm1 Tgfbi Ldhb eiF3i Psma5 Actn4 Spock2 Cttn L1cam Rpl7a Calu App Wdr77 CopgTpm3 C c t 2 Col18a1 eeF1d Col1a1 H2b Rab3a Gapdh Aldoa Aplp2 Hmgb2 Gpm6a Vamp1 / 2 Sri Psma7 Thbs1 A l dh2 Nasp Txnrd3 NSPs undergoing same change NSPs undergoing opposite change Ruvbl2 Hnrnpa1 St13 −2 −1 0 1 2 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 Attractive BDNF ( average log2 ) R epu l s i v e B DN F ( a v e r age l og2 ) r = - 0 . 73 r = 0 . 85 55 % 45 % Sema3A NSPs undergoing opposite change NSPs undergoing same change Psmb5 Psmb6 Syp - BH2b Rps3a Tuba8 eeF1a1 Cfl1 - B Cfl1 - A Vamp1 / 2 Gap43 Gnb1 Anp32c Aldoa Nap1l1 - a Sri Tuba4a Rab3a Psma1 Rab14 Cdhr1 Myl6 L1cam Aplp2 Ldhb Hmgb2 Rps12 Atp6v0d1 Prmt1 Gapdh Pafah1b1 Psma7 Gpm6a −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 Attractive Sema3A ( average log2 ) R epu l s i v e S e m a 3 A ( a v e r age l og2 ) r = - 0 . 82 r = 0 . 57 C BDNF Proteasome core complex Actin cytoskeleton Translationalinitiation ATP hydrolysiscoupled proton transport Glycolyticprocess Cell adhesion Intracellular ribonucleoprotein complex SNAREcomplexassembly Regulation of neuronal synaptic plasticity Synapse organization - A Proteasome core complex Glycolyticprocess Cytoskeletal part Microtubule Structural constituent of ribosome Na + / K + exchanging ATPase activity - B SNAREcomplexassembly Regulation of neuronalsynapticplasticity B E F Repulsive Netrin 58 % 42 % 3 Repulsive BDNF Repulsive Sema3A Attractive Netrin - 1 Attractive BDNF Attractive Sema3A BDNF Sema3A NSPs undergoing same change NSPs undergoing opposite change ! Figure S6 . Analysis of the nascent axonal proteome in repulsive vs attractive conditions – Related to Figure 7 ( A ) Principal Component Analysis ( PCA ) based on the common subset of NSPs identified in response to both repulsive ( three time points ) and attractive Netrin - 1 , BDNF , Sema3A . Data were plotted using the first two PCs . ( B ) Repulsive and attractive BDNF ratios were plotted . Dot size correlates to count number , colored dots indicate ‘commonly regulated NSPs’ ( count > 50 % , average ratio > | 0 . 30 | ) . Blue indicates NSPs undergoing opposite change , red indicates NSPs undergoing same change . Examples of NSP changes are labeled with protein name ( for complete list see Table S5 ) . Specifically , protein names indicated in blue or red indicate respectively NSPs undergoing opposite or same change in response to at least two distinct attractive cue stimulations among the three investigated . ( C ) Repulsive and attractive Sema3A ratios were plotted . Dot size correlates to count number , colored dots indicate ‘commonly regulated NSPs’ ( count > 50 % , average ratio > | 0 . 30 | ) . Blue indicates NSPs undergoing opposite change , red indicates NSPs undergoing same change . Examples of NSP changes are labeled with protein name ( for complete list see Table S5 ) . Specifically , protein names indicated in blue or red indicate respectively NSPs undergoing opposite or same change in response to at least two distinct attractive cue stimulations among the three investigated . ( D ) Common NSP changes after converting BDNF and Sema3A repulsion into attraction ( count > 50 % , average ratio > | 0 . 30 | ) . ( E ) Network - based cluster analysis of the enriched BDNF - induced NSP changes in common between repulsion and attraction , and their associated functional classes ( p - value < 0 . 1 ) . Blue nodes indicate NSPs undergoing opposite change , red nodes indicate NSPs undergoing same change , light blue lines indicate interactions known from databases , purple lines indicate interactions experimentally determined . Disconnected nodes are not shown . ( F ) Network - based cluster analysis of the enriched Sema3A - induced NSP changes in common between repulsion and attraction , and their associated functional classes ( p - value < 0 . 1 ) . Blue nodes indicate NSPs undergoing opposite change , red nodes indicate NSPs undergoing same change , light blue lines indicate interactions known from databases , purple lines indicate interactions experimentally determined . Disconnected nodes are not shown , i . e . more components for each enriched functional cluster have been detected ( see also Figure S7 ) . Supplemental Figure 7 Proteasome core complex Structural constituent of ribosome Actin cytoskeleton Regulation of neuronal synapticplasticity SNAREcomplexassembly Glycolyticprocess ATP hydrolysiscoupled proton transport Cell adhesion Synapse organization Nervoussystem development Heparin binding Nucleosomeassembly Microtubule GTP binding Integral component of membrane Flavinadenine dinucleotidebinding NADPbinding Intracellular ribonucleoprotein complex Translationalinitiation CFL1 - A - B Netrin - 1 BDNF Sema3A Protein folding Vesicle - mediated transport Na + / K + exchanging ATPase activity ! Figure S7 . Network - based functional overview of cue - induced NSP changes shared between repulsion and attraction – Related to Figure 7 Network - based cluster analysis of the enriched cue - induced NSP changes in common between repulsion and attraction and their associated functional classes ( p - value < 0 . 1 ) . Light blue nodes indicate NSPs regulated by Netrin - 1 , green nodes indicate NSPs regulated by BDNF , yellow nodes indicate NSPs regulated by Sema3A , light blue lines indicate interactions known from databases , purple lines indicate interactions experimentally determined . Disconnected nodes are not shown .