Contents lists available at ScienceDirect BBA - Bioenergetics journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / bbabio Mitochondria in cancer Cancer cells generally display a high metabolic plasticity in order to match energy transduction and biosynthesis with their aggressive agenda in a supportive microenvironment . Mitochondria occupy a central position in the metabolic machinery of cancer cells and metabolic exchanges with the stroma . They are well known as powerhouses that , in the presence of oxygen , optimally produce energy from various metabolic substrates that fuel the tricarboxylic cycle and , ultimately , oxidative phosphorylation . Mitochondria also generate precursors , such as aspartate , acetate , citrate and malate , used in various biosynthetic processes . They control cell survival and death and act as signaling organelles that in ﬂ uence cellular behaviors from cell proliferation to immune response . In cancer , increasing evidence indicates that mitochondrial bioenergetics and signaling actively participate in tumor initiation , progression and metastasis . This topic issue reviews the current knowledge on mitochondrial alterations associated to cancer cell survival , proliferation , resistance to treatments , stemness and metastasis . It also summarizes the development of new therapeutic strategies targeting mitochondrial peculiarities in cancer . These topics are grouped in four di ﬀ erent themes : (cid:129) Mitochondrial metabolism in cancer (cid:129) Altered mitochondrial functions in cancer (cid:129) Mitochondrial transporters in cancer (cid:129) Mitochondrial manipulations , mitochondria - targeted therapy and imaging in cancer 1 . Mitochondrial metabolism in cancer As a general introduction to mitochondrial metabolism in cancer , several groups reviewed the current fundamental knowledge on the topic . Danhier et al . [ 1 ] ﬁ rst addressed metabolic heterogeneity in cancer , highlighting that metabolic plasticity allows cancer cells to use a variety of substrates and to switch from a predominantly oxidative to a glycolytic metabolism , and vice - versa , as function of cellular needs , cellular activities and substrate availability . A key aspect in metabolic plasticity is the molecular control of mitochondrial physiology . In this context , nitric oxide ( NO ) exerts a fundamental control of mitochondrial respiration by inhibiting the electron transport chain , mainly at the level of complex IV . How NO ﬁ ne - tunes mitochondrial bioenergetics and mitochondrial biogenesis is reviewed by Tengan et al . [ 2 ] , who further detail NO - dependent mitochondrial dysfunctions in cancer . Iommarini et al . [ 3 ] then set the focus on AMP - activated protein kinases ( AMPK ) , a family of sensors that control cellular energy homeostasis in function of the adenylate energy charge . Interestingly , AMPK is described as a factor with dual , opposite activities in cancer progression , as it prevents cell proliferation by limiting the activity of mammalian target of rapamycin ( mTOR ) pathway during the ﬁ rst phases of carcinogenesis , but sustains cancer cell metabolism and adaptation to hypoxia in established solid tumors . To conclude the section on general aspects of mitochondrial metabolism in cancer , De Luise et al . [ 4 ] analyze the case of oncocytomas where mitochondria exert a prominent role . Often due to mitochondrial DNA ( mtDNA ) mutations that impair their respiration capacity , this type of non - aggressive neoplasms lack metabolic plasticity yet survive to the metabolic constrains commonly found in other types of cancers . Oncocytic tumors represent an interesting metabolic entity to study because naturally occurring metabolic defects in these tumors could o ﬀ er therapeutic clues to convert highly aggressive cancer types into indolent lesions . 2 . Altered mitochondrial functions in cancer Altered mitochondrial functions di ﬀ erentiate cancer cells from non - malignant cells . Srinivasan et al . [ 5 ] draw a wide - angle picture on the manifold types of mitochondrial dysfunctions and the consequences that they have on both mitochondrial dynamics and overall cell cytoskeletal reorganization . In their review , which also displays novel original data , they delve into the ultimate response that is generated upon mitochondrial dysfunction and the subsequent reorganization of organellar structure in terms of changes in gene expression , focusing on those that drive tumor progression . As altered fusion and ﬁ ssion processes are relevant to tumorigenesis , so is the subsequent alteration of calcium homeostasis , discussed by Danese et al . [ 6 ] . Perturbations that occur at the level of mitochondria - associated membranes are further discussed to highlight the importance of calcium equilibrium and signaling in sustaining cell proliferation , also through inhibition of apoptosis . A review of the mitochondrial calcium http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2017 . 05 . 004 ☆ “ This article is part of a Special Issue entitled : Mitochondria in Cancer edited by Giuseppe Gasparre , Rodrigue Rossignol and Pierre Sonveaux . ” BBA - Bioenergetics 1858 ( 2017 ) 553 – 555 0005 - 2728 / © 2017 Published by Elsevier B . V . MARK uniporter function is included , bridging this section of the issue to that of mitochondrial transporters in cancer . Among the consequences of mitochondrial dysfunction and closely related to tumorigenesis is the increase in reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) production by cells . In this context , the role played by antioxidant systems is essential in determining the fate of a neoplastic cell , as ROS levels are pro - tumorigenic and contribute to a positive loop of genetic instability . Ekoue et al . [ 7 ] deal with this issue through highlighting the role of two key antioxidant enzymes , manganese superoxide dismutase ( SOD ) and glutathione peroxidase I , in cancer promotion and progression . An interesting view of a potentially opposite e ﬀ ect of these two proteins on tumorigenesis is proposed , paving the way to the reevaluation of a relatively under - investigated ﬁ eld , i . e . , that of antioxidant proteins playing a double - edge role in cancer . Chang et al . [ 8 ] then discuss the main downstream process that a cell implements to deal with mitochondrial dysfunction , namely mitophagy . Yet a controversial and widely discussed topic , the role of mitophagy in cancer is still to be established and is likely to depend on the balance between the need to recover mitochondrial function for pro - survival and proliferative aims and that to relieve pro - tumorigenic stress conditions . The review by Chang et al . addresses this challenging issue . 3 . Mitochondrial transporters in cancer Metabolic control analyses long revealed that mitochondrial transporters play a central role in the regulation of oxidative phosphorylation , and studies of mitochondrial transporters expression and activity evidenced deregulations in cancer cells . In this section , Lytovchenko et al . [ 9 ] ﬁ rst focus on the role of mitochondrial inner membrane carriers and discuss how speci ﬁ c transporters can combine their activities to promote the export of acetyl - coA required for lipid synthesis in the cytosol . They also propose a list of 32 mitochondrial carriers involved in cancer cell physiology as a good support to further discussions . Pharmacological strategies are then proposed to block selected mitochondrial transporters with potential bene ﬁ ts for anticancer therapies yet to be developed at the preclinical stage . A speci ﬁ c group of mitochondrial transporters termed uncoupling proteins ( UCPs ) is reviewed by Ba ﬀ y [ 10 ] . Carriers of this family play a role in the control of ROS generation and participate to cancer cell metabolic ﬂ exibility . In particular , the role of UCP2 in cancer biology is extensively discussed given its recently discovered capacity to transport malate and aspartate between mitochondria and the cytosol . Then , Mazure [ 11 ] describes the main mitochondrial outer membrane transporter , voltage - dependent anion channel ( VDAC ) , and its participation in metabolite exchanges and in the control of cell death . In particular , the post - translational regulation of VDAC1 in tumors is discussed in the context of cancer resistance to chemotherapy . 4 . Mitochondrial manipulations , mitochondria - targeted therapy and imaging in cancer Following the description of mitochondrial participation to carcinogenesis , Amoedo et al . [ 12 ] discuss the current limitations of drug discovery strategies in the ﬁ eld of tumor energy metabolism . A particular emphasis is made on metabolic target discovery and validation , tumor metabolic ﬂ exibility and metabolic resistance to chemotherapy . How mitochondria modulate cancer chemoresistance is further addressed by Guerra et al . [ 13 ] . Based on the observation that mitochondrial transfer can generate chemoresistance in cancer cells , the authors detail mtDNA alterations and functional mitochondrial alterations impacting cell death and survival . Evaluation of the e ﬃ cacy of anticancer strategies targeting tumor metabolism using metabolic imaging is addressed by Gallez et al . [ 14 ] who detail the use of imaging biomarkers for positron emission tomography and magnetic resonance imaging , that may be used for therapeutic guidance . In particular , biomarkers able to identify shifts in oxygen consumption and tumor oxygenation are presented . A review by Hosseini et al . [ 15 ] then introduces metabolic alterations of skin cancer identi ﬁ ed at initiation and during progression . An original discussion is proposed on the role that energy metabolism plays in tumor responses to targeted therapies . Lastly , Zecchini & Frezza [ 16 ] describe recent developments in metabolism - based cancer therapy , focusing on the concept of metabolic synthetic lethality . 5 . Transparency document The Transparency document associated with this article can be found in online version . Acknowledgements We thank all corresponding authors and coauthors of this topic issue for their contributions in compiling and summarizing the current knowledge on mitochondrial functions in cancer . We extend our special thanks to BBA editorial sta ﬀ , especially to publishing content specialist Rukmani Krishnan , for their professional support in producing this special issue . References [ 1 ] P . Danhier , P . Banski , V . L . Payen , D . Grasso , L . Ippolito , P . Sonveaux , P . E . Porporato , Cancer metabolism in space and time : beyond the Warburg e ﬀ ect , Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2017 . 02 . 001 . [ 2 ] C . H . Tengan , C . T . Moraes , NO control of mitochondrial function in normal and transformed cells , Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2017 . 02 . 009 . [ 3 ] L . Iommarini , A . Ghelli , G . Gasparre , A . M . Porcelli , Mitochondrial metabolism and energy sensing in tumor progression , Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2017 . 02 . 006 . [ 4 ] M . De Luise , G . Girolimetti , B . Okere , A . M . Porcelli , I . Kurelac , G . Gasparre , Molecular and metabolic features of oncocytomas : seeking the blueprints of indolent cancers , Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2017 . 01 . 009 . [ 5 ] S . Srinivasan , M . Guha , A . Kashina , N . G . Avadhani , Mitochondrial dysfunction and mitochondrial dynamics - The cancer connection , Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2017 . 01 . 004 . [ 6 ] A . Danese , S . Patergnani , M . Bonora , M . R . Wieckowski , M . Previati , C . Giorgi , P . Pinton , Calcium regulates cell death in cancer : roles of the mitochondria and mitochondria - associated membranes ( MAMs ) , Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2017 . 01 . 003 . [ 7 ] D . N . Ekoue , C . He , A . M . Diamond , M . G . Bonini , Manganese superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase - 1 contribute to the rise and fall of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species which drive oncogenesis , Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2017 . 01 . 006 . [ 8 ] J . Y . Chang , H . S . Yi , H . W . Kim , M . Shong , Dysregulation of mitophagy in carcinogenesis and tumor progression , Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2016 . [ 9 ] O . Lytovchenko , E . R . S . Kunji , Expression and putative role of mitochondrial transport proteins in cancer , Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2017 . 03 . 006 . [ 10 ] G . Ba ﬀ y , Mitochondrial uncoupling in cancer cells : liabilities and opportunities , Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2017 . 01 . 005 . [ 11 ] N . M . Mazure , VDAC in cancer , Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2017 . 03 . 002 . [ 12 ] N . D . Amoedo , E . Obre , R . Rossignol , Drug discovery strategies in the ﬁ eld of tumor energy metabolism : limitations by metabolic ﬂ exibility and metabolic resistance to BBA - Bioenergetics 1858 ( 2017 ) 553 – 555 554 chemotherapy , Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2017 . 02 . 005 . [ 13 ] F . Guerra , A . A . Arbini , L . Moro , Mitochondria and cancer chemoresistance , Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2017 . 01 . 012 . [ 14 ] B . Gallez , M . A . Neveu , P . Danhier , B . F . Jordan , Manipulation of tumor oxygenation and radiosensitivity through modi ﬁ cation of cell respiration . A critical review of approaches and imaging biomarkers for therapeutic guidance , Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2017 . 01 . 002 . [ 15 ] M . Hosseini , Z . Kasraian , H . R . Rezvani , Energy metabolism in skin cancers : a therapeutic perspective , Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2017 . 01 . 013 . [ 16 ] V . Zecchini , C . Frezza , Metabolic synthetic lethality in cancer therapy , Biochim . Biophys . Acta ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2016 . 12 . 003 . Giuseppe Gasparre , PhD , is Professor of Medical Genetics at the University of Bologna , Italy , and coordinator of the MEET – Mitochondrial European Educational Training , a European consortium on mitochondrial medicine , funded within the FP7 ITN Program by the EU . He graduated at the University of Bologna in Pharmaceutical Biotechnologies and in 2008 he obtained a PhD in Human Genetics at the University of Turin , Italy , where he currently serves as a mentor for the PhD program . The main stream of his research focuses on dissecting the details of the metabolic status of oncocytic tumors presenting mitochondrial hyperplasia as a distinctive hallmark . As a consequence , his research addresses the role of mtDNA mutations in the metabolic rewiring of cancer cells , touching aspects such as resistance to therapy , induction of cell senescence , and the recognition of diagnostic / prognostic markers . He receives funding from the EU , Worldwide Cancer Research , the Italian Ministry of Health and of University , the Italian Association for Cancer Research and the Fondazione Umberto Veronesi . Rodrigue Rossignol , PhD , is Research Director at INSERM Unit 1211 - Laboratory of Rare Diseases , Metabolism and Genetics ( MRGM ) - in Bordeaux ( University of Bordeaux ) . His domain of expertise is cellular bioenergetics in human physiology and pathology . Dr . Rossignol performed his PhD training on the tissue speci ﬁ city of Mitochondrial Diseases and his postdoc in the laboratory of Roderick Capaldi at the Institute of Molecular Biology ( University of Oregon ) on the metabolic ﬂ exibility of human cancer cells . Dr . Rossignol published 85 articles in the ﬁ eld of cellular bioenergetics and related diseases , and co - chaired the International Society of Mitochondrial Physiology . He is founding editor of the " organelle in focus " section of the International Journal of Biochemistry and Cell Biology . He is also editorial board member for scienti ﬁ c journals of biochemistry , including The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology and Mitochondrion . Dr . Rossignol runs a collaborative research exchange program with the University of Rio in Brazil and was recently appointed visiting professor at the University of Bari ( Italy ) . Dr . Rodrigue Rossignol is CEO of the contract research organization CELLOMET ( www . cellomet . com ) and serves as Key Opinion Leader on metabolic projects for the pharmaceutical industry . Dr . Rossignol current research is focused on the plasticity of energy metabolism in rare diseases and cancer . Pierre Sonveaux , PhD , is Director of the team of Tumor Metabolism ( TUMETABO ) at the Pole of Pharmacology & Therapeutics of the IREC Institute at the Université catholique de Louvain ( UCL ) Medical School in Brussels , Belgium . He is Professor of Pharmacology and Senior Research Associate of the Belgian National Fund for Scienti ﬁ c Research ( F . R . S . - FNRS ) . Prof . Sonveaux is President of the International Society of Tumor Metabolism ( ISCaM ) and a member of the Editorial Board of Cancer Research and Frontiers in Pharmacology . Research by his team aims to characterize cancer metabolism in tumors as an organ in order to identify and validate new anticancer targets . Based on collaborative work , key achievements include the identi ﬁ cation of a metabolic symbiosis in cancer and of mitochondrial superoxide as an amenable target for the prevention of cancer metastasis . Prof . Sonveaux received several awards , including the ESTRO - VARIAN Juliana Denekamp Award 2007 , the FECS - EJC Award 2007 , the Galien Prize in Pharmacology 2010 , the EACR Highly Commended Award in 2010 and the Award of the AstraZeneca Foundation – Oncology - in 2016 . He is O ﬃ cer of the Walloon Merit Order in Belgium . Giuseppe Gasparre 1 Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences , Medical Genetics Unit , University of Bologna , Italy Rodrigue Rossignol 1 INSERM U1211 Rare Diseases , Genetics and Metabolism , University of Bordeaux , CHU Pellegrin , Ecole des Sages Femmes , Bordeaux , France Pierre Sonveaux ⁎ , 1 Pole of Pharmacology , Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique ( IREC ) , Université catholique de Louvain ( UCL ) , Brussels , Belgium 1 Equal contribution . ⁎ Corresponding author . BBA - Bioenergetics 1858 ( 2017 ) 553 – 555 555