Resource DNA origami signposts for identifying proteins on cell membranes by electron cryotomography Graphical Abstract Highlights d Asymmetric DNA signpost origami tags ( SPOTs ) precisely localize proteins d SPOTs identify speciﬁc proteins in electron cryomicroscopy d SPOTs have a high contrast ‘‘sign’’ and functionalized ‘‘post’’ base for targeting d SPOTs recognize ﬂuorescent fusion proteins on vesicles , viruses , and cell surfaces Authors Emma Silvester , Benjamin Vollmer , Vojt (cid:1) ech Pra (cid:1) za´k , . . . , Andrew J . Turberﬁeld , Kay Gru¨newald , Lindsay A . Baker Correspondence andrew . turberﬁeld @ physics . ox . ac . uk ( A . J . T . ) , kay . gruenewald @ cssb - hamburg . de ( K . G . ) , lindsay @ strubi . ox . ac . uk ( L . A . B . ) In Brief Large , folded DNA structures , designed to recognize proteins on cell surfaces , facilitate in situ structural analyses . Silvester et al . , 2021 , Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 February 18 , 2021 ª 2021 The Authors . Published by Elsevier Inc . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2021 . 01 . 033 ll Resource DNA origami signposts for identifying proteins on cell membranes by electron cryotomography Emma Silvester , 1 , 2 , 3 Benjamin Vollmer , 1 , 3 Vojt (cid:1) ech Pra (cid:1) za´k , 1 , 3 Daven Vasishtan , 1 , 3 Emily A . Machala , 1 Catheryne Whittle , 1 Susan Black , 1 , 3 Jonathan Bath , 2 Andrew J . Turberﬁeld , 2 , * Kay Gru¨newald , 1 , 3 , 4 , * and Lindsay A . Baker 1 , 3 , 5 , * 1 Oxford Particle Imaging Centre , Division of Structural Biology , University of Oxford , Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics , Roosevelt Drive , Oxford UK OX3 7BN 2 Department of Physics , University of Oxford , Clarendon Laboratory , Parks Road , Oxford UK OX1 3PU 3 Centre for Structural Systems Biology , Heinrich - Pette - Institut , Leibniz - Institut fu¨r Experimentelle Virologie , Notkestrasse 85 , 22607 Hamburg , Germany 4 Department of Chemistry , University of Hamburg , Martin - Luther - King Platz 6 , 20146 Hamburg , Germany 5 Lead contact * Correspondence : andrew . turberﬁeld @ physics . ox . ac . uk ( A . J . T . ) , kay . gruenewald @ cssb - hamburg . de ( K . G . ) , lindsay @ strubi . ox . ac . uk ( L . A . B . ) https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2021 . 01 . 033 SUMMARY Electron cryotomography ( cryoET ) , an electron cryomicroscopy ( cryoEM ) modality , has changed our under - standing of biological function by revealing the native molecular details of membranes , viruses , and cells . However , identiﬁcation of individual molecules within tomograms from cryoET is challenging because of sample crowding and low signal - to - noise ratios . Here , we present a tagging strategy for cryoET that precisely identiﬁes individual protein complexes in tomograms without relying on metal clusters . Our method makes use of DNA origami to produce ‘‘molecular signposts’’ that target molecules of interest , here via ﬂuorescent fusion proteins , providing a platform generally applicable to biological surfaces . We demonstrate the spec - iﬁcity of signpost origami tags ( SPOTs ) in vitro as well as their suitability for cryoET of membrane vesicles , enveloped viruses , and the exterior of intact mammalian cells . INTRODUCTION Electron cryotomography ( cryoET ) is a modality of electron cryo - microscopy ( cryoEM ) wherea seriesoftiltedelectronmicroscopic images of a frozen , hydrated specimen are computationally com - bined into a three - dimensional ( 3D ) volume . Because no aver - aging is needed for 3D reconstruction , it is especially well - suited to studying pleiomorphic biological structures such as cells , vi - ruses , and membrane vesicles . CryoET is routinely used to reveal molecular details in complex biological systems ( Weber et al . , 2019 ) , including eukaryotic cellular structures , such as the Golgi ( Engel et al . , 2015 ) , nuclear pores ( von Appen et al . , 2015 ) , coat protein complex I ( COPI ) ( Bykov et al . , 2017 ) , caveolae ( Stoeber et al . , 2016 ) , and retromers ( Kovtun et al . , 2018 ) and events including trafﬁcking ( Grange et al . , 2017 ) , translation ( Pfeffer et al . , 2017 ) , and virus entry ( Maurer et al . , 2008 ; Strauss et al . , 2015 ) . With sufﬁcient numbers of repeating biological features , sub - volume averaging can be used to improve the resolution of these structures ( Schur , 2019 ) , sometimes to sub - nanometer res - olution ( Bykov et al . , 2017 ; Kovtun et al . , 2018 ; Schur et al . , 2015 , 2016 ) . The resulting higher - resolution structures can then be plotted back into the original tomogram , providing additional in - formation about molecular organization . In cryoET , electrons are scattered directly off the native atoms in the biological sample without stains or resin embedding . As a result , every molecule in the sample contributes to the images and reconstructed volume . In crowded biological environments it is often difﬁcult to identify small features of interest or those without a distinct appearance , especially without prior structural information . Correlative methods , such as a combination with cryogenic ﬂuorescence microscopy ( cryoCLEM ) ( Wolff et al . , 2016 ) , can be used to identify regions or events of interest . How - ever , technical challenges , including required laser powers and objective lens design , inhibit the widespread use of super - reso - lution cryoCLEM methods . At best , the localization precision un - der cryogenic conditions is currently around 50 nm ( Schellen - berger et al . , 2014 ) , insufﬁcient to resolve individual molecules in most cases . Because of these challenges in identifying features of interest , tagging plays an important role in biological electron micro - scopy . Several tags have been used with traditional ﬁxed and stained samples , including mini Singlet Oxygen Generator ( min - iSOG ) ( Shu et al . , 2011 ) , metal - tagging transmission electron mi - croscopy ( METTEM ) ( Risco et al . , 2012 ) , metallothionein ( Morphew et al . , 2015 ) , FerriTag ( Clarke and Royle , 2018 ) , and Vi - per ( Doh et al . , 2018 ) , but none of these methods are suitable for frozen hydrated samples . A smaller number of tags have been proposed or used for cryoET , including ferritin protein fusions ( Wang et al . , 2011 ) and ‘‘native’’ immunogold labeling ( Bos et al . , 2014 ; Yi et al . , 2015 ) . Ferritin , when genetically fused to ll OPEN ACCESS 1110 Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 , February 18 , 2021 ª 2021 The Authors . Published by Elsevier Inc . This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) . the gene of the protein of interest , provides a very high - contrast tag in bacteria , but the required iron concentrations are typically toxic to mammalian cells . The localization precision of traditional immunogold labeling using primary and secondary antibodies is limited to (cid:1) 20 nm by the distance between the gold and the an - tigen recognition site , and the low contrast of the antibodies themselves . This ambiguity generates a large sphere of possible localizations of the molecule of interest in relation to the observed gold nanoparticle ( Figure S1 ) . Gold nanoparticles can also be conjugated directly to primary antibodies or antibody fragments ( FAbs ) ( Baschong and Wrigley , 1990 ; Hainfeld and Furuya , 1992 ) , nanobodies ( Goossens et al . , 2017 ; Kijanka et al . , 2017 ) , oligonucleotides ( Alivisatos et al . , 1996 ; Azubel and Kornberg , 2016 ; Mirkin et al . , 1996 ) , or other small molecules ( Azubel et al . , 2019 ; Dahan et al . , 2018 ) , which would reduce this distance . Physical adsorption is often used to conjugate colloidal gold to proteins such as antibodies ( Oliver , 2010 ) but is suscep - tible to dissociation ( Park , 1989 ) because it relies on the hydro - phobic effect . Another tag has been proposed that would use glutathione reductase to produce Se - based nanoparticles at the site of interest ( Ni et al . , 2015 ) , but this has not yet been demonstrated . All of these tagging methods rely on metal atom clusters , which give rise to signiﬁcantly more scattering than the atoms of the biological sample . Metal clusters can obscure the sample and produce artifacts during tomogram reconstruc - tion ( Fernandez et al . , 2016 ) and , because they are roughly spherical , can indicate a general localization rather than a spe - ciﬁc position without other contextual information . Here , we set out to develop a method , suitable for cryoET , to label or tag proteins , enabling their identiﬁcation on crowded biological surfaces . Critically , we wanted our method to be compatible with frozen hydrated sample preparation and imag - ing , and not to rely on stains or metals . The tags must be easily identiﬁed in projection images and tomograms but not occlude or obstruct the biological structure of interest . Because these tags are to be introduced before vitriﬁcation , to be used with cells they would have to be non - toxic with minimal side effects . To be widely applicable , these tags should take advantage of commonly used protein modiﬁcations such as green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) fusions . Most importantly , they must give precise localization with high conﬁdence . Toovercomethelimitationsassociatedwithtoxicityandopacity ofexistingtags , wedecidedtoinvestigatetagscomposedsolelyof biomolecules . Phosphorus scatters elastically (cid:1) 4 3 more elec - tronsthancarbon , oxygen , ornitrogen ( National Institutes ofStan - Figure 1 . Signpost origami tagging A DNA origami nanostructure , with a ‘‘sign’’ for contrast and identiﬁcation and a ‘‘post’’ whose base contains an RNA aptamer that binds specif - ically to a molecular target , is added to cells con - taining target proteins . The signpost origami tags ( SPOTs ) are used to identify the proteins of interest in a 3D volume of the sample generated by cryoET . dards and Technology USA , https : / / srdata . nist . gov / SRD64 / Elastic ) . We reasoned that the phosphate backbone in nucleic acids could provide signiﬁcant contrast with minimal obstruction of the structures around them , as seen previously in cryoEM of DNA and DNA - protein nanostructures ( Bai et al . , 2012 ; Kato et al . , 2009 ; Malo et al . , 2005 ; Martin et al . , 2016 ; Selmi et al . , 2011 ) . DNA and RNA can be used to construct elaborate nanostructures ( Douglasetal . , 2009a ; Gearyetal . , 2014 ; Hanetal . , 2017 ; Keetal . , 2009 , 2012 ; Langecker et al . , 2012 ; Rothemund , 2006 ; Zhang et al . , 2015 ) by using sequence complementarity to form and link secondary and tertiary structures . Nucleic acid self - assembly therefore has the potential to create biocompatible nanostructure tags with appropriate contrast and distinctive shapes that should be identiﬁable in a cellular tomogram . Positions on the surface of nucleic acid nanostructures are uniquely identiﬁed through the base sequences of the oligonucle - otide components . Functional targeting moieties can thus be located withsub - nanometer precision ( Niemeyer , 2010 ) , precisely deﬁningthesiteofinteractionwiththetargetmoleculeorstructure . Control of the stoichiometry of the targeting molecules will also preclude‘‘clustering’’effects , whichcanbeinducedbymultivalent tags such as ferritin ( Wang et al . , 2011 ) . Aptamers ( Ellington and Szostak , 1990 ; Tuerk and Gold , 1990 ) provide a potent , adaptable targetingstrategy . Aptamersareshortnucleicacidsequencesthat are selected in vitro to bind speciﬁc molecules . Although the afﬁn - ities of aptamers for their targets vary widely , published aptamers to standard protein fusion tags ( Srisawat and Engelke , 2001 ; Tan et al . , 2012 ; Tsuji et al . , 2009 ) include , for example , a high - afﬁnity aptamer to standard ﬂuorescent proteins including GFP and yel - low ﬂuorescent protein ( YFP ) ( Shui et al . , 2012 ) . Here , we describe the development of a nucleic - acid - based tag for cryoET . We have used DNA origami to construct a ‘‘sign - post’’ structure , where the ‘‘sign’’ provides the signal for identiﬁ - cation in cryoEM images and the bottom of the post is linked to an RNA aptamer that targets common ﬂuorescent proteins ( Shui et al . , 2012 ) ( Figure 1 ) . We characterize the structure and ap - tamer - based targeting of our signpost origami tags ( SPOTs ) and demonstrate their use to tag ﬂuorescent fusion proteins on native membrane vesicles , an enveloped virus and the surfaces of eukaryotic cells . RESULTS Design and characterization of origami shapes for cryoEM We designed the signpost tags by using the DNA origami method ( Rothemund , 2006 ) , which enables robust assembly of ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 , February 18 , 2021 1111 Resource large and complex nanostructures . In this technique , a long ‘‘scaffold’’ strand is folded into a designed shape through hybrid - ization to many complementary ‘‘staple’’ strands . Each staple binds two or more domains on the scaffold , bringing distant regions of the sequence into close proximity . Among many alter - native architectures , this technique can be used to construct multilayer nanostructures comprising sets of interconnected parallel helices arranged on a square ( Ke et al . , 2009 ) or honey - comb ( Douglas et al . , 2009a ) lattice . Nanostructures based on these lattice architectures are dense and rigid . To investigate their suitability as markers for cryoEM , we initially designed and assembled a simple rectangular wedge of (cid:1) 90 nm long 3 30 nm wide 3 20 nm maximum thickness . Because of their periodic structure , the wedges were easily recognized in cryoEM projection images after vitriﬁcation in cell lysate ( Figure S2A ) , demonstrating that these lattices are a suitable option for tag design . These observations inspired our subsequent signpost structure , which was designed to maintain these approximate dimensions but incorporate sufﬁcient asym - metry that the orientation of the structure could be uniquely determined in three dimensions . The center of mass of the struc - ture was moved away from the targeting end to allow tagging of closely spaced molecules without spatial conﬂicts . The signpost is built from a 7 , 249 - nucleotide scaffold strand ( single - stranded M13mp18 ) hybridized to 238 staple oligonucle - otides to form a structure of approximately 5 MDa comprising 96 parallel helices arranged in a honeycomb lattice ( Figure 2A ) . Signpost origami nanostructures were folded by thermal anneal - ing and puriﬁed by polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) precipitation followed by molecular weight cut - off ﬁltration ( full protocols pro - vided in STAR methods ) . Five mM Mg 2 + was maintained in all subsequent preparations to retain proper folding of the nano - structures . The structure of the signpost origami was ﬁrst veriﬁed by negative - stain electron microscopy ( Figure 2B ) . Nanostruc - tures were subsequently imaged in vitriﬁed cell lysate by cryoEM to conﬁrm that the contrast of the structure was sufﬁcient to allow it to be identiﬁed in crowded biological environments ( Fig - ure 2C ) . The structure of the signpost origami was conﬁrmed by cryoET and sub - volume averaging ( Figure 2D ) and closely matches the designed structure . Signpost origami tags are made by using well - established , robust methodologies , accessible to any laboratory with a ther - mocycler and commercial oligonucleotide synthesis services , as described in STAR methods . A complete list of the staple sequences needed to produce the signpost origami with its targeting mechanism , described in the following sections , is provided in Tables S1 and S4 ( in a format suitable for commer - cial orders ) . Targeting of signpost origami to structures of interest After demonstrating that the designed DNA origami structure was suitable for identiﬁcation by cryoEM , we investigated how to target these structures to proteins of interest . Because ﬂuo - rescent proteins are well - studied and commonly used as genetic fusions to proteins of interest , we chose to focus on targeting these proteins to create tools that are broadly applicable to many biological systems . We ﬁrst tested whether a published RNA aptamer targeting common ﬂuorescent proteins ( Shui et al . , 2012 ) could be used . The RNA aptamer was produced by in vitro transcription from the corresponding DNA template duplex and puriﬁed by ethanol precipitation . Five different ﬂuo - rescent proteins—super folder GFP ( sfGFP ) ( Pe´delacq et al . , 2006 ) , monomeric enhanced GFP ( mEGFP ) ( Zacharias et al . , 2002 ) , YFP ( Ormo¨ et al . , 1996 ) , mVenus ( Kremers et al . , 2006 ) , and mCherry ( Shaner et al . , 2004 ) —were produced recombi - nantly with C - terminal hexahistidine tags and puriﬁed from E . coli by Ni - nitrilotriacetic acid ( Ni - NTA ) afﬁnity and size exclu - sion chromatography . Isothermal titration calorimetry ( ITC ) was used to characterize binding of the isolated aptamer to each ﬂuorescent protein . Shui et al . ( 2012 ) used ITC to measure the binding of this aptamer to the native GFP from the jellyﬁsh Aequorea victoria ( avGFP ) . avGFP is dimeric in solution and ex - hibits different folding behaviors and environmental sensitivity than the ﬂuorescent proteins that subsequently have been engi - neered as fusion tags . As expected from Shui et al . ( 2012 ) , the aptamer bound with low nM afﬁnity to mEGFP ( k D = 5 ± 6 nM ) , sfGFP ( k D = 13 ± 8 nM ) , YFP ( k D = 4 ± 2 nM ) , and mVenus ( k D = 5 ± 2 nM ) ( Figure 3A ) . We saw no evidence of aptamer binding to mCherry , as anticipated from the low sequence con - servation between mCherry and the other ﬂuorescent proteins Figure 2 . Design and structural character - ization of signpost origami ( A ) Four views of a ribbon ( backbone ) and plank ( base pairs ) representation of the signpost origami design . Scale bar , 20 nm . ( B ) Negative - stain EM projection image ( top ; scale bar , 100 nm ) and selected particles in different orientations ( bottom ; scale bar , 25 nm ) of the fol - ded signpost origami . ( C ) CryoEM projection image ( top ; scale bar , 100 nm ) and selected particles ( bottom ; scale bar , 50 nm ) show signiﬁcant contrast of the folded signpost origami in a background of cell lysate . ( D ) Four views of a 3D structure of the signpost origami obtained from cryoET and sub - volume averaging . This experimentally determined struc - ture closely matches the designed structure in ( A ) . TheDNAdesign ofthissignpostorigami isgivenin Figure S2 . Scale bar , 10 nm . ll OPEN ACCESS 1112 Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 , February 18 , 2021 Resource tested . These results were conﬁrmed by native acrylamide gel shift assays , where a change in the mobility of the ﬂuorescent proteins in the presence of the aptamer was observed for sfGFP , mEGFP , YFP , and mVenus but not for mCherry ( Figure 3B ) . To enable conjugation to the DNA origami nanostructure , a 3 0 extension of 12 nucleotides was added to the aptamer sequence . The modiﬁed aptamer binds the nanostructure by hy - bridization of the aptamer extension to a complementary staple extension . Because the molar concentrations needed for ITC were too high to measure binding of intact SPOTs ( aptamer - origami conjugates ) to ﬂuorescent proteins , we used an agarose gel shift assay ( Figure 3C ) to conﬁrm that the aptamer was still capable of binding ﬂuorescent proteins after conjugation . The diffuse YFP ( detected by YFP ﬂuorescence ) sharpens into a band on addition of SPOTs ( aptamer - origami conjugates ) , consistent with binding to the nanostructure tag . A similar effect was observed when the experiment was repeated with deter - gent - solubilized Env protein , the membrane glycoprotein from murine leukemia virus ( MLV ) , with a surface - exposed YFP tag : this result conﬁrms that binding is not impaired when the ﬂuores - cent protein is used as a tag on a target protein . YFP - Env - SPOTs are expected to run as two species due the partial isomerization of a disulphide bond in Env ( Pinter and Fleissner , 1977 ) , which produces a mixture of stoichiometrically YFP - tagged Figure 3 . Targeting of ﬂuorescent protein tags by an RNA aptamer The raw data for each experiment can be found in Figure S3 . ( A ) Isothermal titration calorimetry ( ITC ) of the RNA aptamer alone binding to different ﬂuorescent proteins . ( B ) Acrylamide gel - shift assay to conﬁrm aptamer binding to ﬂuorescent pro - teins . The dotted lines indicate bands corresponding to each ﬂuorescent protein without ( top line , left column ) and with ( bottom line , right column ) aptamer . ( C ) Agarose gel - shift assay to conﬁrm binding to ﬂuorescent proteins of the aptamer incorporated into the signpost DNA origami structure . YFP ﬂuores - cencewasusedfordetection . ShownatthetopisYFPalone ; atthebottomisa fusion protein of YFP and Env , the major membrane glycoprotein of murine leukemia virus . YFP and YFP - Env run as sharper bands ( black arrow heads ) when bound to SPOTs ( right lane ) than the proteins alone ( left lane ) , as ex - pected from decreased diffusion with SPOTs bound . YFP - Env is expected to run as two species because of the partial isomerization of a disulphide bond , whichproducesspecieswithbothsingleand triplicatecopies ofYFP . Someof the DNA nanostructures and associated proteins aggregate in the well ( top of image ) . These samples were run on a single gel ; the image is split to better ﬁt ﬁgure spacing . ( D ) Bio - layer interferometry ( BLI ) was used to conﬁrm the binding of the ap - tamer - functionalized origami ( SPOT ) to isolated ﬂuorescent proteins ( top ) and to a ﬂuorescent protein fusion to glycoprotein B ( gB ) , a surface glycoprotein from herpes simplex virus 1 in native membrane vesicles ( bottom ) . As observed in the other assays , SPOTs bound to the sfGFP or sfGFP - gB much more than signpost origami alone , and SPOTs speciﬁcally bound sfGFP or sfGFP - gB , not mCherry or mCherry - gB . Each experiment was run in triplicate , and the lighter region behind each measurement indicates the standard de - viation across the three replicates . ( E ) Dynamiclightscatteringwasusedtocheckforaggregationinconcentrated solutions of SPOTs in buffer ( left ) and cell culture medium ( center ) . A small amount of aggregate was only observed in culture medium at SPOT con - centrations of 200 nM , (cid:1) 20x higher than needed for cellular experiments ( FigureS6 ) . The50nMand10nMsamplesweretoodilutetoobserveinculture medium . The aggregation - induced control sample ( gray dotted lines ) was stained for electron microscopy ( right ) to monitor the amount of aggregation ( scale bar , 200 nm ) . Such aggregation was not seen in normal preparations of SPOTs ( Figures 2B and 2C ) . ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 , February 18 , 2021 1113 Resource trimers ( with three SPOTs bound ) and monomers ( with one SPOT bound ) . To conﬁrm target - binding by the aptamer - origami in a more biologically complex setting , we used native membrane vesi - cles displaying either sfGFP - or mCherry - tagged versions of glycoprotein B ( gB ) , a principal component of the herpes sim - plex virus 1 ( HSV - 1 ) membrane fusion machinery . Vesicles dis - playing membrane - embedded target proteins were produced by using the MPEEV ( membrane protein - enriched extracellular vesicles ) system ( Zeev - Ben - Mordehai et al . , 2014a ) , exploiting endogenous extracellular vesicle production during membrane protein overexpression . We have used these vesicles previ - ously for structural characterization of HSV - 1 gB ( Vollmer et al . , 2020 ; Zeev - Ben - Mordehai et al . , 2016 ) and C . elegans cell - cell fusion protein EFF - 1 ( Zeev - Ben - Mordehai et al . , 2014b ) . We created tagged versions of gB with sfGFP or mCherry inserted after the 30 - residue N - terminal signal sequence . Upon transfection into HEK293T or BHK - 21 cell lines , sfGFP / mCherry - gB vesicles were produced with the ﬂuo - rescent protein located on the ectodomain of gB , facing the extracellular space . Mass spectrometry has been used previ - ously to show that gB is the only transmembrane protein found at detectable amounts in these vesicles ; other soluble proteins are present in the background of the puriﬁcation as well as in - side the vesicles ( Zeev - Ben - Mordehai et al . , 2014a ) . We measured binding of SPOTs to puriﬁed sfGFP and mCherry or , in context , with gB vesicles by using bio - layer interferometry ( BLI ) ( Figure 3D ) . As expected , no binding to mCherry was observed either in isolation or as a fusion protein , with or without the aptamer . In comparison with the signpost origami without aptamer , signiﬁcantly more SPOT binding was observed to sfGFP in isolation and on the gB membrane vesi - cles . Further , when we dilute the sfGFP - gB vesicles with mCherry - gB vesicles , binding decreases in correspondence with the sfGFP concentration , indicating that SPOTs will also bind to sfGFP when sparsely distributed across a surface ( Fig - ure S6A ) . Altogether , these results suggest that our SPOTs can target GFP and related ﬂuorescent proteins with high afﬁnity and speciﬁcity . Finally , to conﬁrm that SPOTs remained stably folded and did not aggregate under the conditions used for imaging , we used dynamic light scattering ( DLS ) to monitor their size distribution under different conditions ( Figure 3E ) . No evidence of aggrega - tion was observed in the conditions used for imaging , although Figure 4 . SPOTs binding to sfGFP - gB vesicles observed by cryoET Computed tomogram slices in all panels are 2 . 8 nm thick . ( A ) Computed slice from a high - magniﬁcation tomogram ( 1 . 34 A˚ / pix ) showing SPOTs binding selectively to sfGFP - gB vesicles . The distal edge of sfGFP - gB is indicated by a green dashed line ; an orange line is drawn just below the membrane surface . SPOTs are indicated with dark blue arrow heads if their posts are visible in the tomogram slice and light blue if they are situated across multiple slices . Full views of all slices from the tomogram are shown in Figure S4 . Average defocus across the tilt series was (cid:1)(cid:3) 3 . 8 m m . Scale bar , 100 nm . ( B ) Sequential computed tomogram slices showing SPOTs bound to sfGFP - gB . Structures are labeled as in ( A ) . Scale bar , 50 nm . ( C ) SPOTs are not observed binding to the vesicles in a projection image when gB is tagged with mCherry instead of sfGFP . Magenta dashed lines indicate the distal protein face , and orange lines indicate the inside of the membrane . mCherry belongs to a different family of ﬂuorescent proteins than sfGFP . Scale bar , 100 nm . ( D ) GalleryofimagesofindividualSPOTsextractedfromtomogramsoflabeledsfGFP - gBvesicles . Eachimageisshowntwice , withandwithoutannotationonthe leftandright , respectively . SPOTsarehighlightedinblue , sfGFP - gBingreen , andthemembraneinorange . ItisoftenpossibletofollowtheSPOTpostsdirectlyto the recognized protein density on the vesicle surfaces . Scale bar , 50 nm . ( E ) Asub - volumeaverageofSPOTs ( blue ) boundtosfGFP - gB ( green ) invesiclemembrane ( orange ) withtheorientationsdeterminedbythepositionsoftheposts of the SPOTs as initial alignment markers . Scale bar , 10 nm . ll OPEN ACCESS 1114 Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 , February 18 , 2021 Resource a small amount of aggregation was observed in cell culture me - dium supplemented with fetal bovine serum at SPOT concentra - tions (cid:1) 20 3 higher than needed for cellular imaging . Applications to biological systems I : membrane vesicles As a preliminary test of the SPOT tagging method in cryoET , we used the same sfGFP - gB vesicles described above . Vesicles were incubated with SPOTs for 15 – 30 min on ice and plunge frozen for cryoET . On these vesicles , the target protein gB can be recognized by eye in reconstructed tomograms ( Figure 4A ) . As intended , we frequently observed SPOTs bound to sfGFP - gB on the vesicle surfaces ( Figures 4A , 4B , and 4E ) . When the experiment was repeated with control mCherry - gB , no associa - tion between SPOTS and the vesicle membrane was observed despite an abundance of SPOTs ( Figure 4C ) . SPOTs adopted an array of orientations in relation to the mem - brane , often spanning multiple z - slices of the tomogram . This variability is most likely due to the ﬂexibility of the N - terminal re - gion of gB where sfGFP is inserted , as well as inherent ﬂexibility in the aptamer and its oligonucleotide linker to the origami ( Fig - ure S5Ai ) . A slight curve was observed in some posts of the SPOTs ( Figure S5Aii ) , but this variability was much smaller ( (cid:1) 25 (cid:4) ) than for the link between the targeting and identiﬁcation portion of the SPOTs ( (cid:1) 65 (cid:4) ) . To try to reduce the variability in binding angle in relation to the membrane , we designed a ‘‘rigid SPOT’’ in which the aptamer is linked to the signpost at the 5 0 and 3 0 ends of the aptamer sequence , instead of the single link at one end that was used in the original design . BLI was used to compare the binding to sfGFP - gB vesicles of these rigid SPOTs Figure 5 . SPOTs binding to YFP - tagged Env in the envelope of murine leukemia virus ( MLV ) Computed slices through the tomogram re - constructed from the tilt series shown in Fig - ure S5G . The slice position in the reconstructed volume increases in a clockwise manner and is re - corded in each panel as text and by the colored frame indicated in the central schematic diagram , where the virus is represented by the orange sphere . In the ﬁrst panel ( z = 0 nm ) , the inside of the viral membrane and approximate distal surface of the viral glycoproteins tagged with YFP are indi - cated by the solid orange and dashed yellow cir - cles , respectively . A single SPOT is highlighted in blue . Tomogram slices are (cid:1) 0 . 5 nm thick . Scale bar , 100 nm . and the original design ( Figure S5B ) . The rigid SPOTs bound signiﬁcantly less ( (cid:1) 30 % of the original SPOT binding ) , strongly suggesting that the ﬂexibility of the aptamer and its attachment is impor - tant for efﬁcient targeting of proteins of in - terest on crowded surfaces . Because no attempt was made to re - move SPOTs during sample preparation for cryoET , a small proportion of unbound SPOTs were also observed in the sfGFP - gB sample , either free in solution ( < 5 % ) or interacting with the air - water interface or carbon ﬁlm , but these were easily identiﬁed visually and excluded . The propor - tion of unbound SPOTs depends on their concentration relative to that of the protein of interest , which is difﬁcult to measure accurately for membrane vesicles . Although some SPOTs were observed binding to the top or bottom surface of the vesicles , the majority ( > 90 % ) were detected on the sides of the vesicles , suggesting that the air - water interface , sample thickness , or blotting might affect binding . In many cases , the posts of the SPOTs could be directly traced to protein density on the vesicle surface ( see Figures 4D and S5C for examples ) . We therefore decided to evaluate the use of SPOTs in the context of sub - volume averaging . Particles were picked manually at the apparent joint between the base of the SPOT post and the protein on the vesicle surface , and a second point further up the post of each SPOT was used for initial orien - tation determination . The resultant average showed the SPOTs , membrane , and protein ( Figure 4D ) , but the protein structure was of insufﬁcient quality to identify it conclusively as gB . Using a mask that only included the protein and a small amount of mem - brane did not produce a coherent average when the SPOTs were used to provide initial orientations . However , if the SPOTs were only used to deﬁne the proteins of interest , and their initial orien - tations were given by a line normal to the membrane ( as would be done if the SPOTs were not present ) , an average was pro - duced that revealed both membrane and proteins ( Figure S5D ) . Glycoprotein B exists in multiple conformations on the mem - branes ( Figure S5C ) ( Maurer et al . , 2013 ; Zeev - Ben - Mordehai et al . , 2016 ) . After several iterations of alignment , classiﬁcation ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 , February 18 , 2021 1115 Resource produced averages with features resembling the two known conformations ( Figure S5D ) , both of which contribute to the over - all average . These results suggest that although SPOTs cannot be used as additional rigid density to improve alignment in sub - volume averaging , their presence does not interfere with sub - volume averaging . Further , because most particles for sub - volume averaging are still picked manually , SPOTs might reduce the bias of the experimenter in particle picking , improving the quality of the picked dataset . Applications to biological systems II : viruses To assess the suitability of SPOTs for targeting proteins on viral surfaces , we used murine leukemia virus ( MLV ) . MLV has a single glycoprotein , Envelope ( Env ) , on its surface , providing a simple test system . To enable SPOT targeting , we used Env displaying YFP inserted into a large extra - viral loop . We incubated recom - binant MLV and SPOTs for 30 min before vitriﬁcation and imag - ing by cryoET ( Figure 5 ) . To investigate the radiation stability of SPOTs , we collected dose - symmetric tilt series with high electron exposures ( (cid:1) 225 e (cid:3) / A˚ 2 total ) . Halfway through the tilt series ( at > 100 e (cid:3) / A˚ 2 total exposure ) , contrast is reduced by radiation damage , but the characteristic stripe pattern of the parallel DNA helices of the SPOTs is still visible . At the highest tilts ( > 60 (cid:4) , > 200 e (cid:3) / A˚ 2 ) , the SPOTs are still clearly visible , though the stripes are harder to resolve ( Figure S5G ) . The resulting tomograms show a strikingly high level of binding by SPOTs . In many slices , the virus surface appeared to be fully covered ( Figure 5 ) . SPOT binding does not appear to disrupt the native organization in areas where Env is densely packed ; rather , in such regions SPOT binding is occluded . As with the vesicle preparations , most SPOTs were found around the sides of the vi - rus rather than at the top or bottom , most likely again due to blot - ting or the air - water interface ( Figures S5E and S5F ) . As with the vesicles , many SPOTs can be traced directly to individual pro - teins on the viral surface , even when they span multiple z slices , Figure 6 . SPOTs binding to cells expressing sfGFP - gB ( A ) In ( i ) is a confocal slice from live - cell ﬂuorescence microscopy of HEK293T cells expressing sfGFP - tagged gB from HSV - 1 ( green ) (cid:1) 15 min after addition of Cy5 - labeled SPOTs ( blue ) . SPOTs quickly localize to the surface of cells expressing sfGFP - gB . In ( ii ) , the pattern of SPOT binding is similar to that observed with a - GFP antibodies conjugated to Alexa - 647 ( red ) . In ( iii ) , no evidence of cell surface binding is observed when SPOTs are added to cells expressing mCherry - gB ( magenta ) . Scale bars , 5 m m . ( B ) Two low - magniﬁcation cryoEM projection images of SPOTS bound to the surface of BHK - 21 cells expressing sfGFP - gB ( i and ii ) . SPOTs are indicated with blue arrow heads . Scale bar , 250 nm . ( C ) Sequential computed tomographic slices of the areas indicated in ( Bi ) and ( Bii ) , respectively . Although the SPOTs ( blue arrow heads ) often extend across multiple slices , it is still possible to trace the post structure to the membrane in many cases . Slice thickness is (cid:1) 2 . 8 nm . Scale bars , 50 nm . Average defocus across the tilt series is (cid:1)(cid:3) 3 . 8 and (cid:3) 4 . 5 m m for ( i ) and ( ii ) , respectively . ( D ) Manual segmentation of the tomograms in ( C ) . The signpost origami structure ( various shades of blue ) from Figure 2 is ﬁt into each of the segmented SPOTs ( gray mesh ) . The plasma membrane is shown in green , with protein density on the membrane surface in light green . Scale bars , 50 nm . ll OPEN ACCESS 1116 Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 , February 18 , 2021 Resource conﬁrming that YFP targeting behaves very similarly to sfGFP targeting , as suggested by our biophysical data . Applications to biological systems III : mammalian cells Finally , we investigated the use of SPOTs for cellular cryoET . We transiently transfected HEK293T or BHK - 21 cells with the gene for sfGFP - gB used in the vesicle system above . We used confocal ﬂuorescence microscopy to observe co - localization between SPOTs , labeled with the ﬂuorophore Cy5 or Texas Red on an oligonucleotide that hybridizes with 12 staples used to fold the signpost structure ( Tables S1 and S2 ) , and the sfGFP - gB on the cell surface ( Figure 6Ai ) . The SPOT signal local - ized to the cell surface and became especially pronounced in live imaging (cid:1) 15 min after addition to cells . This binding was similar to that of an anti - GFP antibody ( Figure 6Aii ) . We performed a titration ( Figure S6B ) to explore the amount of surface binding that could be achieved with SPOTs and compared it with a titra - tion of an anti - GFP antibody labeled with Alexa - 647 . Similar pat - terns of binding were observed for the SPOTs and antibody , which saturated at concentrations of (cid:1) 10 nM . Additional control experiments showing sfGFP - gB - expressing cells before SPOT addition and the slow dissociation of SPOTs upon a change in medium are presented in Figure S6 . Negative controls using the signpost origami without the aptamer and cells expressing mCherry - gB ( Figure S6C ) conﬁrmed the binding speciﬁcity of SPOTs . The gB protein carries a cytoplasmic endocytosis motif , causing it to be trafﬁcked from the plasma membrane back into the cell via the endocytic pathway ( Niazy et al . , 2017 ) . At later time points , vesicles inside the cell also displayed SPOT or anti - GFP antibody ﬂuorescence , suggesting that they are endo - cytosed along with their protein target without affecting this function of gB ( Figure S6D ) . We next grew BHK - 21 cells on EM grids and , after transient transfection with sfGFP - gB , incubated them with SPOTs for (cid:1) 15 min and plunge froze . The thin periphery of the cells was then used for cryoET without thinning ( Figure 6B ) . With careful observation at low magniﬁcation , SPOTs could be seen bound to the cell surface and these areas were selected for tilt series collection . After tomogram reconstruction , SPOTs were easily observed bound to the plasma membrane . On most cells , SPOTs were not bound uniformly across the cell surface but in small clusters . Some SPOT posts could be traced to protein den - sity on the surface . This protein density would have been difﬁcult to resolve otherwise , more so than with the vesicle and virus im - aging described above , due to the increased thickness of the cellular tomograms and corresponding decrease in signal - to - noise ratio . DISCUSSION Feasibility of DNA origami as a marker for cryoET The results show that our purpose - designed DNA origami sign - post tags can be clearly identiﬁed in tomograms of crowded bio - logical surfaces . In projection images , SPOTs are easily identi - ﬁed by the contrast of the repeating stripe patterns generated by the overlap of aligned DNA helices ( Figure 2 ) . In tomograms , details to the level of individual DNA helices were visible and the overall shape of the SPOTs was clearly recognizable , and there was sufﬁcient contrast to orient the sub - volume averaging struc - ture by eye . Partially folded or dis - assembled SPOTs were not observed . SPOTs have higher contrast than the surrounding pro - tein and often lipids as a result of the phosphorus in the aligned DNA backbones . However , we did not observe any artifacts in tomogram reconstruction caused by strong scattering that vio - lates the weak phase or amplitude approximations , which can be a problem with gold or other metal clusters ( Fernandez et al . , 2016 ) . Because of the direct attachment to the target mole - cule , SPOTs enable precise target localization whereas immuno - gold labeling puts the gold clusters up to 20 nm away ( Figure S1 ) . Effectiveness of the aptamer - based targeting of SPOTs A successful tag enables precise localization with high speci - ﬁcity for its target . For all three of the biological systems tested , the posts of a substantial fraction of bound SPOTs can be traced in 3D to a single protein on a membrane surface . In the absence of the ﬂuorescent protein fusion recognized by the SPOTs , no such binding was observed by cryoEM or other biophysical methods ( Figures 3 , 4 , 6 , and S6 ) , conﬁrming the effectiveness of the aptamer - based targeting system . Altogether , these results demonstrate that SPOT targeting is speciﬁc and precise . The aptamer used in our SPOTs successfully binds several popular ﬂuorescent proteins widely used as genetic fusions , including sfGFP , YFP , and mVenus . Notably , it does not interact with other commonly used ﬂuorescent proteins such as mCherry ( and by extension , most likely other ﬂuorescent proteins in the ‘‘mFruit’’ series , such as mApple or mGrape ) that are not closely related to GFP . This speciﬁcity will be particularly advantageous for cryoCLEM applications , enabling the use of multiple ﬂuores - cent protein fusions for co - localization experiments without interfering with SPOTs . In cases where events are particularly rare , cryogenic ﬂuorescence microscopy could be used , prior to cryoEM , to identify subcellular locations where ﬂuorescent SPOTs are bound . In general , our results indicate that SPOTs can be used for cellular tagging without the need for cryoCLEM when expression amounts and event numbers are sufﬁ - ciently high . Suitability of SPOTs for tagging different biological systems Based on the range of biological systems tested here , we expect SPOTs to be suitable for most sample types studied by cryoET . Importantly , we did not observe any toxicity effects when using SPOTs with cells . Each sample required some optimization but , once conditions for freezing had been determined , SPOTs could be added without changing those conditions . We did not ﬁnd it necessary to wash off unbound SPOTs because they were rare and easy to identify . If necessary , the number of un - bound SPOTs could be minimized in cellular samples by replac - ing the culture medium immediately prior to plunge freezing , given that SPOTs were still observed bound to the cell surface after 30 min and 3 washes ( Figure S6E ) . For vesicles or viruses , a dedicated separation protocol , perhaps involving differential centrifugation , could be implemented if needed . However , because of the equilibrium nature of aptamer binding , a small proportion of unbound SPOTs will always be present in an equil - ibrated system . ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 , February 18 , 2021 1117 Resource The many biological questions that could be addressed by us - ing SPOTs include protein ( co ) localization , de novo structure detection , identiﬁcation of isolated sub - cellular membranes , and determination of vesicle or synthetic membrane bilayer orientation . Indeed , SPOTs will be useful in most situations where immunolabeling could be applied , as long as the targeted protein is tractable to genetic tagging . Although untested here , SPOTs could potentially be used to conﬁrm the presence of a subunit in a protein complex in solution , for example before sin - gle - particle cryoEM of samples sensitive to disassembly by the air - water interface . This approach would provide an advantage over antibody - or chemically based gold tags because the bulk of the tag is displaced from the subunit of interest and com - plexes would not have to be reconstituted in vitro ( e . g . , Ho¨lzl et al . , 2000 ) . As demonstrated here , SPOTs can be applied in crowded biological environments such as cell surfaces . As SPOTs interact with their targets post - translationally , immedi - ately before observation , they should have little effect on native protein localization beyond that of the original ﬂuorescent protein fusion . In the MLV example studied here ( Figure 5 ) , SPOT binding does not disrupt the native organization of densely packed proteins of interest . In cases where SPOT binding is occluded by protein packing , proteins might have a variable number of SPOTs bound , depending on the oligomer number and organization . Sub - volume averaging and SPOTs We have demonstrated here that the SPOTs themselves are suit - able for sub - volume averaging ( Figure 2 ) . However , we also determined that a ﬂexible link to the aptamer is necessary to maintain optimal binding ( Figure S5B ) . This ﬂexibility , in combi - nation with the linker connecting the ﬂuorescent tag to the pro - tein of interest that is often necessary to maintain biological func - tion , limits the potential for sub - volume averaging of SPOT - target protein complexes . Nevertheless , we have demonstrated here that SPOTs do not interfere with sub - volume averaging of the target protein itself ( Figure S5D ) and still allow classiﬁcation . Indeed , there could be cases where sub - volume averaging can be improved by using SPOTs to remove user bias in particle picking . Further , if we had been unaware of the multiple confor - mations of gB , the SPOTs would have revealed these additional forms of the protein , given that they can easily be seen bound to individual particles of clearly different shapes ( Figure S5C ) . In the future , SPOTs could potentially provide a larger signal for tem - plate matching than the protein of interest , allowing for automa - tion and a further reduction in picking bias . Potential applications and directions for further development Looking forward , there are several obvious extensions to the tagging method described here . For example , SPOTs could also be used with stained , embedded cellular samples : DNA stains readily with uranyl acetate ( Erenpreisa , 1981 ) , and SPOTs could provide signiﬁcantly higher localization precision than im - munogold labeling . The DNA origami design can be readily adapted to produce tags with different shapes and sizes which , with independent targeting strategies , could be used to identify protein co - localization or otherwise target multiple proteins in a single experiment . Although the aptamer to GFP binds with high afﬁnity , we have been less successful in replicating this behavior with other aptamers we tested ( Figure S3B ) . We hope that this study will encourage development of more robust ap - tamers to common protein fusion tags . Targeting methods other than aptamers might be developed in the future , giving even broader applications for SPOTs . An exciting further use of SPOTs would be for intracellular identiﬁcation of proteins of interest . Because SPOTs are composed entirely of biomolecules themselves , and other DNA nanostructures have successfully been introduced into mamma - lian cells previously ( Jiang et al . , 2012 ; Modi et al . , 2009 ; Schu¨ller et al . , 2011 ; Walsh et al . , 2011 ) , biocompatibility and toxicity should not present major hurdles that would preclude using SPOTs inside mammalian cells . Further , our experiments imag - ing SPOTs in cell lysate ( Figure 2C ) suggest that the current origami design provides sufﬁcient contrast for cryoEM in a back - ground of cytoplasm . However , the architecture of mammalian cells poses two main challenges for making intracellular use widely applicable . Methodology is needed to allow enough SPOTs to enter the cell for sufﬁcient labeling while not disrupting biological activity . Further , robust delivery of SPOTs to their target organelle or subcellular region is needed . Given that high - yield delivery of diverse molecules into cells is an active area of research , we anticipate future developments will allow SPOT use inside mammalian cells . In conclusion , SPOTs provide a previously lacking tool for the identiﬁcation and precise localization of structures of interest in the rapidly developing ﬁeld of cryoEM . The ability to label and localize molecules with high speciﬁcity and precision within a native , hydrated specimen has the potential to greatly expand applications of cryoET . SPOTs also have the potential for use in other branches of biological electron microscopy , including imaging of plastic sections and single - particle cryoEM . STAR + METHODS Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following : d KEY RESOURCES TABLE d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY B Lead Contact B Materials Availability B Data and Code Availability d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS B Bacterial cells for cloning and recombinant ﬂuorescent protein expression B Cells for production of Murine Leukemia Virus B Murine Leukemia Virus source / genotype B Cells for expression of glycoprotein B d METHOD DETAILS B Aptamer production B Origami construction with and without aptamer B Fluorescent protein cloning B Biological sample preparation B Binding and biophysical assays B Sample preparation and electron microscopy ll OPEN ACCESS 1118 Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 , February 18 , 2021 Resource d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS B Isothermal titration calorimetry B Bio - layer interferometry B Dynamic light scattering B Sub - volume averaging and template matching SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information can be found online at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2021 . 01 . 033 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank David Staunton for his help with ITC and supporting the Oxford Molecular Biophysics Suite . We acknowledge Diamond Light Source for access and support of the cryo - EM facilities at the UK’s National Electron Bio - imaging Centre ( eBIC ) ( proposal EM - AP22 ) , funded by the Wellcome Trust , MRC , and BBSRC . This research was funded by a grant ( MR / R017875 / 1 ) from the MRC UK to L . A . B . , B . V . , A . J . T . and K . G . L . A . B . was supported by a Human Frontier Science Program Long Term Fellowship and a Canadian Institutes for Health Research Postdoctoral Fellowship . K . G . was supported by Wellcome Trust grants 107806 / Z / 15 / Z and 209250 / Z / 17 / Z . A . J . T . was supported by a Royal Society Wolfson Research Merit Award . This research was funded in part by a Wellcome Trust core award to The Well - come Trust Centre for Human Genetics ( 090532 / Z / 09 / Z ) . E . S . was supported byan EPSRC studentship ( 1734437 ) . V . P . wassupportedby aNufﬁeld Dept of Medicine Prize Studentship . B . V . was supported by a Marie - Curie Individual Fellowship ( KGBVIFEF ) . We gratefully acknowledge funding from the DFG ( a Cluster of Excellence RESIST [ EXC 2155 ] project to K . G . , and INST 152 / 772 - 1 , 774 - 1 , 775 - 1 , 776 - 1 FUGG to the CSSB cryoEM facility ) . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Conceptualization and funding acquisition , L . A . B . , B . V . , J . B . , A . J . T . , and K . G . ; methodology , L . A . B . , E . S . , B . V . , and J . B . ; formal analysis , investigation , and visualization , L . A . B . , E . S . , B . V . , V . P . , D . V . , S . B . , and E . A . M . ; resources , C . W . ; writing – original draft , L . A . B . , E . S . , and B . V . ; writing – reviewing & edit - ing , L . A . B . , E . S . , B . V . , V . P . , D . V . , S . B . , E . A . M . , J . B . , A . J . T . , and K . G . ; supervi - sion , L . A . B . , J . B . , A . J . T . , and K . G . DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no competing interests . Received : June 4 , 2020 Revised : September 14 , 2020 Accepted : January 20 , 2021 Published : February 18 , 2021 REFERENCES Alivisatos , A . P . , Johnsson , K . P . , Peng , X . , Wilson , T . E . , Loweth , C . J . , Bruchez , M . P . , Jr . , and Schultz , P . G . ( 1996 ) . Organization of ‘nanocrystal molecules’ using DNA . Nature 382 , 609 – 611 . Azubel , M . , and Kornberg , R . D . ( 2016 ) . Synthesis of Water - Soluble , Thiolate - Protected Gold Nanoparticles Uniform in Size . Nano Lett . 16 , 3348 – 3351 . Azubel , M . , Carter , S . D . , Weiszmann , J . , Zhang , J . , Jensen , G . J . , Li , Y . , and Kornberg , R . D . ( 2019 ) . FGF21 trafﬁcking in intact human cells revealed by cryo - electron tomography with gold nanoparticles . eLife 8 , e43146 . Bai , X . - C . , Martin , T . G . , Scheres , S . H . W . , and Dietz , H . ( 2012 ) . Cryo - EM struc - ture of a 3D DNA - origami object . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 20012 – 20017 . Bairoch , A . ( 2018 ) . The Cellosaurus , a Cell - Line Knowledge Resource . J . Biomol . Tech . 29 , 25 – 38 . Baschong , W . , and Wrigley , N . G . ( 1990 ) . Small colloidal gold conjugated to Fab fragments or to immunoglobulin G as high - resolution labels for electron microscopy : a technical overview . J . Electron Microsc . Tech . 14 , 313 – 323 . Bos , E . , Hussaarts , L . , van Weering , J . R . T . , Ellisman , M . H . , de Wit , H . , and Koster , A . J . ( 2014 ) . Vitriﬁcation of Tokuyasu - style immuno - labelled sections for correlative cryo light microscopy and cryo electron tomography . J . Struct . Biol . 186 , 273 – 282 . Bykov , Y . S . , Schaffer , M . , Dodonova , S . O . , Albert , S . , Plitzko , J . M . , Baumeis - ter , W . , Engel , B . D . , and Briggs , J . A . ( 2017 ) . The structure of the COPI coat determined within the cell . eLife 6 , e32493 . Castro , C . E . , Kilchherr , F . , Kim , D . - N . , Shiao , E . L . , Wauer , T . , Wortmann , P . , Bathe , M . , and Dietz , H . ( 2011 ) . A primer to scaffolded DNA origami . Nat . Methods 8 , 221 – 229 . Clarke , N . I . , and Royle , S . J . ( 2018 ) . FerriTag is a new genetically - encoded inducible tag for correlative light - electron microscopy . Nat . Commun . 9 , 2604 . Dahan , I . , Sorrentino , S . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , and Medalia , O . ( 2018 ) . Tio - pronin - Protected Gold Nanoparticles as a Potential Marker for Cryo - EM and Tomography . Structure 26 , 1408 – 1413 . e3 . de Jong , R . N . , Danie¨ls , M . A . , Kaptein , R . , and Folkers , G . E . ( 2006 ) . Enzyme free cloning for high throughput gene cloning and expression . J . Struct . Funct . Genomics 7 , 109 – 118 . Doh , J . K . , White , J . D . , Zane , H . K . , Chang , Y . H . , Lo´pez , C . S . , Enns , C . A . , and Beatty , K . E . ( 2018 ) . VIPER is a genetically encoded peptide tag for ﬂuores - cence and electron microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 115 , 12961 – 12966 . Douglas , S . M . , Dietz , H . , Liedl , T . , Ho¨gberg , B . , Graf , F . , and Shih , W . M . ( 2009a ) . Self - assembly of DNA into nanoscale three - dimensional shapes . Nature 459 , 414 – 418 . Douglas , S . M . , Marblestone , A . H . , Teerapittayanon , S . , Vazquez , A . , Church , G . M . , and Shih , W . M . ( 2009b ) . Rapid prototyping of 3D DNA - origami shapes with caDNAno . Nucleic Acids Res . 37 , 5001 – 5006 . Ellington , A . D . , and Szostak , J . W . ( 1990 ) . In vitro selection of RNA molecules that bind speciﬁc ligands . Nature 346 , 818 – 822 . Engel , B . D . , Schaffer , M . , Albert , S . , Asano , S . , Plitzko , J . M . , and Baumeister , W . ( 2015 ) . In situ structural analysis of Golgi intracisternal protein arrays . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 11264 – 11269 . Erenpreisa , J . ( 1981 ) . Staining of DNA with uranylacetate in hydrolysed ultra - thin sections . Acta Histochem . 68 , 22 – 26 . Fernandez , J . - J . , Laugks , U . , Schaffer , M . , Ba¨uerlein , F . J . B . , Khoshouei , M . , Baumeister , W . , and Lucic , V . ( 2016 ) . Removing Contamination - Induced Reconstruction Artifacts from Cryo - electron Tomograms . Biophys . J . 110 , 850 – 859 . Geary , C . , Rothemund , P . W . K . , and Andersen , E . S . ( 2014 ) . A single - stranded architecture for cotranscriptional folding of RNA nanostructures . Science 345 , 799 – 804 . Goossens , J . , Sein , H . , Lu , S . , Radwanska , M . , Muyldermans , S . , Sterckx , Y . G . - J . , and Magez , S . ( 2017 ) . Functionalization of gold nanoparticles with nanobodies through physical adsorption . Anal . Methods 9 , 3430 – 3440 . Grange , M . , Vasishtan , D . , and Gru¨newald , K . ( 2017 ) . Cellular electron cryo to - mographyandinsitusub - volumeaveragingrevealthecontextofmicrotubule - based processes . J . Struct . Biol . 197 , 181 – 190 . Grant , T . , and Grigorieff , N . ( 2015 ) . Measuring the optimal exposure for single particlecryo - EMusinga2 . 6A˚reconstructionofrotavirusVP6 . eLife 4 , e06980 . Hainfeld , J . F . , and Furuya , F . R . ( 1992 ) . A 1 . 4 - nm gold cluster covalently attached to antibodies improves immunolabeling . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 40 , 177 – 184 . Han , D . , Qi , X . , Myhrvold , C . , Wang , B . , Dai , M . , Jiang , S . , Bates , M . , Liu , Y . , An , B . , Zhang , F . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Single - stranded DNA and RNA origami . Science 358 , eaao2648 . Heumann , J . M . , Hoenger , A . , and Mastronarde , D . N . ( 2011 ) . Clustering and variance maps for cryo - electron tomography using wedge - masked differ - ences . J . Struct . Biol . 175 , 288 – 299 . ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 , February 18 , 2021 1119 Resource Ho¨lzl , H . , Kapelari , B . , Kellermann , J . , Seemu¨ller , E . , Su¨megi , M . , Udvardy , A . , Medalia , O . , Sperling , J . , Mu¨ller , S . A . , Engel , A . , and Baumeister , W . ( 2000 ) . The regulatory complex of Drosophila melanogaster 26S proteasomes . Sub - unit composition and localization of a deubiquitylating enzyme . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 119 – 130 . Jiang , Q . , Song , C . , Nangreave , J . , Liu , X . , Lin , L . , Qiu , D . , Wang , Z . - G . , Zou , G . , Liang , X . , Yan , H . , and Ding , B . ( 2012 ) . DNA origami asa carrier for circumven - tion of drug resistance . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 134 , 13396 – 13403 . Kato , T . , Goodman , R . P . , Erben , C . M . , Turberﬁeld , A . J . , andNamba , K . ( 2009 ) . High - resolution structural analysis of a DNA nanostructure by cryoEM . Nano Lett . 9 , 2747 – 2750 . Ke , Y . , Douglas , S . M . , Liu , M . , Sharma , J . , Cheng , A . , Leung , A . , Liu , Y . , Shih , W . M . , and Yan , H . ( 2009 ) . Multilayer DNA origami packed on a square lattice . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 131 , 15903 – 15908 . Ke , Y . , Ong , L . L . , Shih , W . M . , and Yin , P . ( 2012 ) . Three - dimensional structures self - assembled from DNA bricks . Science 338 , 1177 – 1183 . Kijanka , M . , van Donselaar , E . G . , Mu¨ller , W . H . , Dorresteijn , B . , Popov - (cid:1) Celeketi (cid:3) c , D . , El Khattabi , M . , Verrips , C . T . , van Bergen En Henegouwen , P . M . P . , andPost , J . A . ( 2017 ) . Anovelimmuno - goldlabelingprotocolfornano - body - based detection of HER2 in breast cancer cells using immuno - electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 199 , 1 – 11 . Kovtun , O . , Leneva , N . , Bykov , Y . S . , Ariotti , N . , Teasdale , R . D . , Schaffer , M . , Engel , B . D . , Owen , D . J . , Briggs , J . A . G . , and Collins , B . M . ( 2018 ) . Structure of the membrane - assembled retromer coat determined by cryo - electron to - mography . Nature 561 , 561 – 564 . Kremer , J . R . , Mastronarde , D . N . , and McIntosh , J . R . ( 1996 ) . Computer visual - ization of three - dimensional image data using IMOD . J . Struct . Biol . 116 , 71 – 76 . Kremers , G . - J . , Goedhart , J . , van Munster , E . B . , and Gadella , T . W . J . J . , Jr . ( 2006 ) . Cyan and yellow super ﬂuorescent proteins with improved brightness , protein folding , and FRET Fo¨rster radius . Biochemistry 45 , 6570 – 6580 . Langecker , M . , Arnaut , V . , Martin , T . G . , List , J . , Renner , S . , Mayer , M . , Dietz , H . , andSimmel , F . C . ( 2012 ) . Syntheticlipidmembranechannelsformedbyde - signed DNA nanostructures . Science 338 , 932 – 936 . Malo , J . , Mitchell , J . C . , Ve´nien - Bryan , C . , Harris , J . R . , Wille , H . , Sherratt , D . J . , and Turberﬁeld , A . J . ( 2005 ) . Engineering a 2D protein - DNA crystal . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 44 , 3057 – 3061 . Martin , T . G . , Bharat , T . A . M . , Joerger , A . C . , Bai , X . - C . , Praetorius , F . , Fersht , A . R . , Dietz , H . , and Scheres , S . H . W . ( 2016 ) . Design of a molecular support for cryo - EM structure determination . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 113 , E7456 – E7463 . Mastronarde , D . N . ( 2005 ) . Automated electron microscope tomography using robust prediction of specimen movements . J . Struct . Biol . 152 , 36 – 51 . Maurer , U . E . , Sodeik , B . , andGru¨newald , K . ( 2008 ) . Native3Dintermediatesof membrane fusion in herpes simplex virus 1 entry . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 10559 – 10564 . Maurer , U . E . , Zeev - Ben - Mordehai , T . , Pandurangan , A . P . , Cairns , T . M . , Han - nah , B . P . , Whitbeck , J . C . , Eisenberg , R . J . , Cohen , G . H . , Topf , M . , Huiskonen , J . T . , and Gru¨newald , K . ( 2013 ) . The structure of herpesvirus fusion glycopro - tein B - bilayer complex reveals the protein - membrane and lateral protein - pro - tein interaction . Structure 21 , 1396 – 1405 . Mirkin , C . A . , Letsinger , R . L . , Mucic , R . C . , and Storhoff , J . J . ( 1996 ) . A DNA - basedmethodforrationallyassemblingnanoparticlesintomacroscopicmate - rials . Nature 382 , 607 – 609 . Modi , S . , M G , S . , Goswami , D . , Gupta , G . D . , Mayor , S . , and Krishnan , Y . ( 2009 ) . A DNA nanomachine that maps spatial and temporal pH changes in - side living cells . Nat . Nanotechnol . 4 , 325 – 330 . Morphew , M . K . , O’Toole , E . T . , Page , C . L . , Pagratis , M . , Meehl , J . , Giddings , T . , Gardner , J . M . , Ackerson , C . , Jaspersen , S . L . , Winey , M . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Met - allothioneinasaclonable tagforproteinlocalizationbyelectronmicroscopyof cells . J . Microsc . 260 , 20 – 29 . Ni , T . W . , Staicu , L . C . , Nemeth , R . S . , Schwartz , C . L . , Crawford , D . , Seligman , J . D . , Hunter , W . J . , Pilon - Smits , E . A . H . , andAckerson , C . J . ( 2015 ) . Progressto - ward clonable inorganic nanoparticles . Nanoscale 7 , 17320 – 17327 . Niazy , N . , Temme , S . , Bocuk , D . , Giesen , C . , Ko¨nig , A . , Temme , N . , Ziegfeld , A . , Gregers , T . F . , Bakke , O . , Lang , T . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Misdirection of endosomal trafﬁcking mediated by herpes simplex virus - encoded glycoprotein B . FASEB J . 31 , 1650 – 1667 . Niemeyer , C . M . ( 2010 ) . Semisynthetic DNA - protein conjugates for biosensing and nanofabrication . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 49 , 1200 – 1216 . Oliver , C . ( 2010 ) . Conjugation of colloidal gold to proteins . Methods Mol . Biol . 588 , 369 – 373 . Ormo¨ , M . , Cubitt , A . B . , Kallio , K . , Gross , L . A . , Tsien , R . Y . , and Remington , S . J . ( 1996 ) . Crystal structure of the Aequorea victoria green ﬂuorescent protein . Science 273 , 1392 – 1395 . Park , K . ( 1989 ) . Factors affecting efﬁciency of colloidal gold staining : pH - dependent stability of protein - gold conjugates . Scanning Microsc . Suppl . 3 , 15 – 24 , discussion 24 – 25 . Pe´delacq , J . - D . , Cabantous , S . , Tran , T . , Terwilliger , T . C . , and Waldo , G . S . ( 2006 ) . Engineering and characterization of a superfolder green ﬂuorescent protein . Nat . Biotechnol . 24 , 79 – 88 . Pettersen , E . F . , Goddard , T . D . , Huang , C . C . , Couch , G . S . , Greenblatt , D . M . , Meng , E . C . , and Ferrin , T . E . ( 2004 ) . UCSF Chimera – a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis . J . Comput . Chem . 25 , 1605 – 1612 . Pfeffer , S . , Dudek , J . , Schaffer , M . , Ng , B . G . , Albert , S . , Plitzko , J . M . , Baumeis - ter , W . , Zimmermann , R . , Freeze , H . H . , Engel , B . D . , and Fo¨rster , F . ( 2017 ) . Dissecting the molecular organization of the translocon - associated protein complex . Nat . Commun . 8 , 14516 . Pinter , A . , and Fleissner , E . ( 1977 ) . The presence of disulﬁde - linked gp70 - pl5 ( E ) complexes in AKR murine leukemia virus . Virology 83 , 417 – 422 . Riedel , C . , Vasishtan , D . , Siebert , C . A . , Whittle , C . , Lehmann , M . J . , Mothes , W . , and Gru¨newald , K . ( 2017 ) . Native structure of a retroviral envelope protein and its conformational change upon interaction with the target cell . J . Struct . Biol . 197 , 172 – 180 . Risco , C . , Sanmartı´n - Conesa , E . , Tzeng , W . - P . , Frey , T . K . , Seybold , V . , andde Groot , R . J . ( 2012 ) . Speciﬁc , sensitive , high - resolution detection of protein moleculesineukaryoticcellsusingmetal - taggingtransmissionelectronmicro - scopy . Structure 20 , 759 – 766 . Rothemund , P . W . K . ( 2006 ) . Folding DNA to create nanoscale shapes and pat - terns . Nature 440 , 297 – 302 . Schellenberger , P . , Kaufmann , R . , Siebert , C . A . , Hagen , C . , Wodrich , H . , Gru¨newald , K . , and Grunewald , K . ( 2014 ) . High - precision correlative ﬂuores - cence and electron cryo microscopy using two independent alignment markers . Ultramicroscopy 143 , 41 – 51 . Schindelin , J . , Arganda - Carreras , I . , Frise , E . , Kaynig , V . , Longair , M . , Pietzsch , T . , Preibisch , S . , Rueden , C . , Saalfeld , S . , Schmid , B . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Fiji : an open - sourceplatform forbiological - imageanalysis . Nat . Methods 9 , 676 – 682 . Schu¨ller , V . J . , Heidegger , S . , Sandholzer , N . , Nickels , P . C . , Suhartha , N . A . , En - dres , S . , Bourquin , C . , and Liedl , T . ( 2011 ) . Cellular immunostimulation by CpG - sequence - coated DNA origami structures . ACS Nano 5 , 9696 – 9702 . Schur , F . K . ( 2019 ) . Toward high - resolution in situ structural biology with cryo - electron tomography and subtomogram averaging . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 58 , 1 – 9 . Schur , F . K . M . , Hagen , W . J . H . , Rumlova´ , M . , Ruml , T . , Mu¨ller , B . , Kra¨usslich , H . - G . , and Briggs , J . A . G . ( 2015 ) . Structure of the immature HIV - 1 capsid in intact virus particles at 8 . 8 A˚ resolution . Nature 517 , 505 – 508 . Schur , F . K . M . , Obr , M . , Hagen , W . J . H . , Wan , W . , Jakobi , A . J . , Kirkpatrick , J . M . , Sachse , C . , Kra¨usslich , H . - G . , and Briggs , J . A . G . ( 2016 ) . An atomic model of HIV - 1 capsid - SP1 reveals structures regulating assembly and matu - ration . Science 353 , 506 – 508 . Selmi , D . N . , Adamson , R . J . , Attrill , H . , Goddard , A . D . , Gilbert , R . J . C . , Watts , A . , and Turberﬁeld , A . J . ( 2011 ) . DNA - templated protein arraysfor single - mole - cule imaging . Nano Lett . 11 , 657 – 660 . ll OPEN ACCESS 1120 Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 , February 18 , 2021 Resource Shaner , N . C . , Campbell , R . E . , Steinbach , P . A . , Giepmans , B . N . G . , Palmer , A . E . , andTsien , R . Y . ( 2004 ) . Improvedmonomericred , orangeandyellowﬂuo - rescentproteinsderivedfromDiscosomasp . redﬂuorescentprotein . Nat . Bio - technol . 22 , 1567 – 1572 . Sherer , N . M . , Lehmann , M . J . , Jimenez - Soto , L . F . , Ingmundson , A . , Horner , S . M . , Cicchetti , G . , Allen , P . G . , Pypaert , M . , Cunningham , J . M . , and Mothes , W . ( 2003 ) . Visualization of retroviral replication in living cells reveals budding into multivesicular bodies . Trafﬁc 4 , 785 – 801 . Shu , X . , Lev - Ram , V . , Deerinck , T . J . , Qi , Y . , Ramko , E . B . , Davidson , M . W . , Jin , Y . , Ellisman , M . H . , and Tsien , R . Y . ( 2011 ) . A genetically encoded tag for corre - lated light and electron microscopy of intact cells , tissues , and organisms . PLoS Biol . 9 , e1001041 . Shui , B . , Ozer , A . , Zipfel , W . , Sahu , N . , Singh , A . , Lis , J . T . , Shi , H . , andKotlikoff , M . I . ( 2012 ) . RNAaptamersthatfunctionallyinteractwithgreenﬂuorescentpro - tein and its derivatives . Nucleic Acids Res . 40 , e39 . Sjo¨berg , M . , Wu , S . - R . , Lo¨ving , R . , Rantalainen , K . , Lindqvist , B . , and Garoff , H . ( 2014 ) . Furin cleavage of the Moloney murine leukemia virus Env precursor reorganizes the spike structure . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 6034 – 6039 . Srisawat , C . , and Engelke , D . R . ( 2001 ) . Streptavidin aptamers : afﬁnity tags for the study of RNAs and ribonucleoproteins . RNA 7 , 632 – 641 . Stahl , E . , Martin , T . G . , Praetorius , F . , and Dietz , H . ( 2014 ) . Facile and scalable preparation of pure and dense DNA origami solutions . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 53 , 12735 – 12740 . Stoeber , M . , Schellenberger , P . , Siebert , C . A . , Leyrat , C . , Helenius , A . , and Gru¨newald , K . ( 2016 ) . Model for the architecture of caveolae based on a ﬂex - ible , net - like assembly of Cavin1 and Caveolin discs . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 113 , E8069 – E8078 . Strauss , J . D . , Hammonds , J . E . , Yi , H . , Ding , L . , Spearman , P . , andWright , E . R . ( 2015 ) . Three - Dimensional Structural Characterization of HIV - 1 Tethered to Human Cells . J . Virol . 90 , 1507 – 1521 . Tan , X . , Chen , W . , Lu , S . , Zhu , Z . , Chen , T . , Zhu , G . , You , M . , and Tan , W . ( 2012 ) . Molecular beacon aptamers for direct and universal quantitation of re - combinant proteins from cell lysates . Anal . Chem . 84 , 8272 – 8276 . Tsuji , S . , Tanaka , T . , Hirabayashi , N . , Kato , S . , Akitomi , J . , Egashira , H . , Waga , I . , and Ohtsu , T . ( 2009 ) . RNA aptamer binding to polyhistidine - tag . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 386 , 227 – 231 . Tuerk , C . , and Gold , L . ( 1990 ) . Systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment : RNA ligands to bacteriophage T4 DNA polymerase . Science 249 , 505 – 510 . Vollmer , B . , Pra (cid:1) za´k , V . , Vasishtan , D . , Jefferys , E . E . , Hernandez - Duran , A . , Vallbracht , M . , Klupp , B . G . , Mettenleiter , T . C . , Backovic , M . , Rey , F . A . , et al . ( 2020 ) . The prefusion structure of herpes simplex virus glycoprotein B . Sci . Adv . 6 , eabc1726 . von Appen , A . , Kosinski , J . , Sparks , L . , Ori , A . , DiGuilio , A . L . , Vollmer , B . , Mackmull , M . - T . , Banterle , N . , Parca , L . , Kastritis , P . , etal . ( 2015 ) . Insitustruc - tural analysis of the human nuclear pore complex . Nature 526 , 140 – 143 . Walsh , A . S . , Yin , H . , Erben , C . M . , Wood , M . J . A . , and Turberﬁeld , A . J . ( 2011 ) . DNA cage delivery to mammalian cells . ACS Nano 5 , 5427 – 5432 . Wang , Q . , Mercogliano , C . P . , and Lo¨we , J . ( 2011 ) . A ferritin - based label for cellular electron cryotomography . Structure 19 , 147 – 154 . Weber , M . S . , Wojtynek , M . , and Medalia , O . ( 2019 ) . Cellular and Structural Studies of Eukaryotic Cells by Cryo - Electron Tomography . Cells 8 , 57 . Wolff , G . , Hagen , C . , Gru¨newald , K . , andKaufmann , R . ( 2016 ) . Towardscorrel - ative super - resolution ﬂuorescence and electron cryo - microscopy . Biol . Cell 108 , 245 – 258 . Yadavalli , T . , Agelidis , A . , Jaishankar , D . , Mangano , K . , Thakkar , N . , Pen - metcha , K . , and Shukla , D . ( 2017 ) . Targeting Herpes Simplex Virus - 1 gD by a DNA Aptamer Can Be an Effective New Strategy to Curb Viral Infection . Mol . Ther . Nucleic Acids 9 , 365 – 378 . Yi , H . , Strauss , J . D . , Ke , Z . , Alonas , E . , Dillard , R . S . , Hampton , C . M . , Lamb , K . M . , Hammonds , J . E . , Santangelo , P . J . , Spearman , P . W . , and Wright , E . R . ( 2015 ) . Native immunogold labeling of cell surface proteins and viral glycopro - teins for cryo - electron microscopy and cryo - electron tomography applica - tions . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 63 , 780 – 792 . Zacharias , D . A . , Violin , J . D . , Newton , A . C . , and Tsien , R . Y . ( 2002 ) . Partitioning of lipid - modiﬁed monomeric GFPs into membrane microdomains of live cells . Science 296 , 913 – 916 . Zeev - Ben - Mordehai , T . , Vasishtan , D . , Siebert , C . A . , Whittle , C . , and Gru¨ne - wald , K . ( 2014a ) . Extracellular vesicles : a platform for the structure determina - tion of membrane proteins by Cryo - EM . Structure 22 , 1687 – 1692 . Zeev - Ben - Mordehai , T . , Vasishtan , D . , Siebert , C . A . , and Gru¨newald , K . ( 2014b ) . The full - length cell - cell fusogen EFF - 1 is monomeric and upright on the membrane . Nat . Commun . 5 , 3912 . Zeev - Ben - Mordehai , T . , Vasishtan , D . , Herna´ndez Dura´n , A . , Vollmer , B . , White , P . , Prasad Pandurangan , A . , Siebert , C . A . , Topf , M . , and Gru¨newald , K . ( 2016 ) . Two distinct trimeric conformationsofnativelymembrane - anchored full - length herpes simplex virus 1 glycoprotein B . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 113 , 4176 – 4181 . Zhang , F . , Jiang , S . , Wu , S . , Li , Y . , Mao , C . , Liu , Y . , and Yan , H . ( 2015 ) . Com - plex wireframe DNA origami nanostructures with multi - arm junction vertices . Nat . Nanotechnol . 10 , 779 – 784 . ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 , February 18 , 2021 1121 Resource STAR + METHODS KEY RESOURCES TABLE REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Antibodies Alexa Fluor 647 anti - GFP Antibody BioLegend Cat # 338006 ; RRID : AB _ 1279411 Bacterial and Virus Strains Escherichia coli strain DH5 a ThermoFisher Taxonomy ID : 668369 ; Cat # 18258012 Escherichia coli strain BL21 ThermoFisher Taxonomy ID : 469008 ; Cat # C600003 Chemicals , Peptides , and Recombinant Proteins Super - folder green ﬂuorescent protein This study N / A Yellow ﬂuorescent protein This study N / A Monomeric enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein This study N / A mCherry ﬂuorescent protein This study N / A mVenus ﬂuorescent protein This study N / A Critical Commercial Assays HiScribe T7 High Yield RNA Synthesis Kit New England Biolabs NEB # E2040S X - tremeGENE HP DNA Transfection Reagent Merck Cat # 6366244001 Pierce BCA Protein Assay ThermoFisher Cat # 23227 Deposited Data Subvolume averaging - derived signpost origami map Electron Microscopy Data Bank EMDB : EMD - 12188 sfGFP - gB vesicle + SPOTs tomograms ( Figure S4 ) EMPIAR EMPIAR : EMPIAR - 10613 Atomic model of designed signpost origami PDB PDB : 7BHO Experimental Models : Cell Lines HEK293T human embryonic kidney cells ATCC CRL - 3216 ; RRID : CVCL _ 0063 , female DFJ8 chicken cells expressing mCAT - 1 Gift from Walter Mothes ( Yale University , USA ) N / A BHK 21 baby hamster kidney cells ATCC ATCC (cid:2) CCL - 10 ; RRID : CVCL _ 1914 , male Oligonucleotides Staple oligonucleotides for signpost origami and SPOT construction : see supplementary Table S1 Integrated DNA Technologies N / A DNA templates for production of RNA aptamers for SPOTS : see supplementary Table S1 Integrated DNA Technologies N / A Oligonucleotides for adding ﬂuorescence to SPOTs : see supplementary Table S1 Integrated DNA Technologies N / A Primers for insertion of ﬂuorescent proteins in pEP98 - gB : see supplementary Table S3 Integrated DNA Technologies N / A Primers for insertion of TEV restriction site as linker into mCherry - gB in pEP98 - gB : see supplementary Table S3 Integrated DNA Technologies N / A Primers for ligation independent cloning of ﬂuorescent proteins into pET - 28 , plasmid : see supplementary Table S3 Integrated DNA Technologies N / A Primers for ligation independent cloning of ﬂuorescent proteins into pET - 28 , insert : see supplementary Table S3 Integrated DNA Technologies N / A Recombinant DNA Single - stranded scaffold DNA type p7249 tilibit nanosystems M1 - 12 pET - 28 - sfGFP This study N / A ( Continued on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS e1 Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 . e1 – e7 , February 18 , 2021 Resource RESOURCE AVAILABILITY Lead Contact Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact , Lindsay Baker ( lindsay @ strubi . ox . ac . uk ) . Materials Availability Reagents generated in this study are available on request from the Lead Contact with a completed Materials Transfer Agreement . Data and Code Availability The density map corresponding to the subvolume average of SPOTs has been deposited in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank ( EMDB ) as EMD : 12188 with the designed structure ﬁle PDB : 7BHO . The tomograms shown in Figure 4 have been deposited in EMPIAR as EMPIAR : 10613 . EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS Bacterial cells for cloning and recombinant ﬂuorescent protein expression Escherichia coli strains DH5 a ( Taxonomy ID : 668369 ) and BL21 ( Taxonomy ID : 469008 ) were cultured in lysogeny broth ( LB - Lennox ) with 5 g / L NaCl at 37 (cid:4) C . Cells for production of Murine Leukemia Virus HEK293T cells ( RRID : CVCL _ 0063 , female ) and DFJ8 ( DF - 1 / J chicken cells , RRID : CVCL _ XF11 , sex unknown ) expressing the gene for CAT - 1 from Mus musculus ( mCAT - 1 ) [ GenBank SLC7A1 ] were grown in Dulbeco’s Modiﬁed Eagle Medium ( DMEM , GIBCO ) with 1 % GlutaMax ( GIBCO ) and 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) ( Sigma - Aldrich ) at 37 (cid:4) C and 5 % CO 2 . DFJ8 cells were a gift from Walter Mothes ( Yale University , USA ) . Murine Leukemia Virus source / genotype The MLV genome was encoded on a pcDNA3 vector containing gagpol , gag , env - YFP sequences ( Sherer et al . , 2003 ) . These plas - mids were a gift from a gift from Walter Mothes ( Yale University , USA ) . Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER pET - 28 - mEGFP This study N / A pET - 28 - YFP This study N / A pET - 28 - mCherry This study N / A pET - 28 - mVenus This study N / A pcDNA3 - MLV - YFP Sherer et al . , 2003 Gift from Walter Mothes ( Yale University , USA ) pEP98 - sfGFP - gB This study N / A pEP98 - mCherry - gB This study N / A Software and Algorithms cadnano Douglas et al . , 2009b https : / / cadnano . org / CanDo Castro et al . , 2011 https : / / cando - dna - origami . org / PEET ( Particle Estimation for Electron Tomography ) Heumann et al . , 2011 https : / / bio3d . colorado . edu / PEET / IMOD Kremer et al . , 1996 https : / / bio3d . colorado . edu / imod / UCSF Chimera Pettersen et al . , 2004 https : / / www . cgl . ucsf . edu / chimera / FIJI Schindelin et al . , 2012 https : / / imagej . net / Fiji SerialEM Mastronarde , 2005 https : / / bio3d . colorado . edu / SerialEM / MicroCal PEAQ - ITC Analysis Software Malvern Pananalytica https : / / www . malvernpanalytical . com / en / support / product - support / microcal - range / microcal - itc - range / microcal - peaq - itc / Unblur Grant and Grigorieff , 2015 https : / / grigoriefﬂab . umassmed . edu / unblur _ summovie ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 . e1 – e7 , February 18 , 2021 e2 Resource Cells for expression of glycoprotein B BHK 21 cells ( RRID : CVCL _ 1914 , male ) were grown at 37 (cid:4) C with 5 % CO 2 in Glasgow Minimum Essential Medium ( GIBCO ) with 2 % – 5 % FBS , 2 % HEPES pH 7 . 2 - 7 . 5 ( GIBCO ) , 2 % tryptose phosphate broth ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and 1 % GlutaMax . HEK293T cells ( RRID : CVCL _ 0063 , female ) were cultured at 37 (cid:4) C with 5 % CO 2 in DMEM supplemented with 1 % non - essential amino acids ( NEAA ) ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 3 % GlutaMax and 10 % FBS . All cell line details were accessed through Cellosaurus ( Bairoch , 2018 ) . METHOD DETAILS Aptamer production Template Generation DNA templates for aptamer transcription were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies ( 4 nmole Ultramer DNA oligo , standard desalting ) . Sequences are provided in the Key Resources table below . Sense and anti - sense strands were mixed 1 : 1 in 100 mM Potassium Acetate , 30 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 5 at a ﬁnal duplex concentration of 80 m M . Double - stranded template was prepared by heating the mixture to 94C (cid:4) for 2 min , and cooling to 5 (cid:4) C at a rate of 1 (cid:4) C / minute . Transcription Transcription reactions were prepared using HiScribe T7 High Yield RNA Synthesis Kit ( New England Biolabs ) using the standard protocol for short transcripts . Duplex template was included at a ﬁnal concentration of 2 m M , and the reaction mix was incubated for 16 h at 37 (cid:4) C . The transcription mix was diluted 1 in 5 in water , and template was removed by DNase I digestion . DNase I ( New England Biolabs ) was included at 0 . 2 units / m L in the supplied buffer and the reaction mix was incubated for 30 min at 37 (cid:4) C . Puriﬁcation The aptamer was puriﬁed by ethanol precipitation . After DNase I digestion , 1 volume of unpuriﬁed aptamer was added to 3 . 5 volumes of ethanol and 1 / 8 volumes of 3 M sodium acetate . The ethanol precipitation mix was incubated at (cid:3) 80 (cid:4) C for 2 h and pelleted by centrifugation at 13 , 000 x g for 20 min at 4 (cid:4) C . The pellet was washed twice by addition of 70 % ethanol and centrifugation at 13 , 000 x g for 10 min at 4 (cid:4) C . The pellet was resuspended in Tris - EDTA buffer , pH 8 . 0 ( Applichem ) . Origami construction with and without aptamer Design and Materials The signpost DNA origami structure was designed using CaDNAno ( Douglas et al . , 2009b ) . A model of the structure was generated using the CanDo web server ( Castro et al . , 2011 ) . Single - stranded p7249 ( M13mp18 ) scaffold was purchased from Tilibit Nanosys - tems . Staple strands were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies ( 25 nmole DNA Plate Oligo , 96 well V - bottom plates , 200 m M in Tris - EDTA ( TE ) buffer pH 8 . 0 ) . The strand Cy5 _ label was purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies ( 250 nmole Oligo , HPLC puriﬁcation , dry ) and resuspended at 200 m M in TE . The complete list of staple sequences required to fold the signpost origami structure is in Table S1 . The mixes of staples required to fold different origami variants are given in Table S2 . Assembly The one - pot assembly reaction mix was prepared as follows : scaffold p7249 ( ﬁnal concentration 40 nM ) was mixed in Folding Buffer containing TE buffer and 12 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , with the appropriate staple strand mixtures ( Tables S1 and S2 ) at ﬁnal concentrations of 400 nM ) and the aptamer ( ﬁnal concentration 4 m M ) . If used , the Cy5 or Texas Red ﬂuorescent strand ( 5 0 - Cy5 - or 5 0 - TexRd - XN / GGGAGTAGTAAGGAGGTGGT ) is added at a ﬁnal concentration of 9 . 6 m M with staple mix 5 ( Table S2 ) , which has extended sequences to hybridize with the Cy5 ﬂuorescent strand in comparison to staple mix 4 . The signpost DNA origami structures are folded by thermal annealing . The one - pot assembly mix is heated to 65 (cid:4) C for 15 min followed by cooling to 59 (cid:4) C at 1 (cid:4) C / 5 min , cooling from 59 (cid:4) C to 35 (cid:4) C at 1 (cid:4) C / 35 min , cooling from 35 (cid:4) C to 30 (cid:4) C at 1 (cid:4) C / 10 min and cooling from 30 (cid:4) C to 15 (cid:4) C at 1 (cid:4) C / 5 min . For checking folding by negative stain EM , (cid:1) 100 m L total reaction volume is used . To produce enough material for cryoET tagging , 1 mL total re - action volume is split into 10 3 100 m L to match wells in the thermocycler block . Puriﬁcation Folded origami nanostructures were puriﬁed from excess staples by poly ( ethylene ) glycol ( PEG ) precipitation ( Stahl et al . , 2014 ) . Un - puriﬁed origami structures were mixed 1 : 1 with PEG precipitation buffer ( TE buffer , 12 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , 500 mM NaCl , 15 % w / v PEG 8000 ) and pelleted by centrifugation at 20 , 000 x g for 30 min at 20 (cid:4) C . The origami pellet was then resuspended in 100 m L folding buffer ( TE buffer with 12 . 5 mM MgCl 2 ) . The PEG precipitation step is repeated two more times , and the pellet is resuspended in Folding Buffer to the desired concentration . Excess PEG may be removed by molecular weight cut - off ( MWCO ) ﬁltration . For MWCO puriﬁcation , the PEG - puriﬁed sample is supplemented with Folding Buffer to a ﬁnal volume of 500 m L , applied to a 100 kDa Amicon Ultra - 0 . 5 mL centrifugal ﬁlter device ( Merck ) , and concentrated by centrifugation at 14 , 000 x g for 15 min at 20 (cid:4) C . 3 centrifugation steps are applied before recovering the sample , and the mixture is supplemented with 485 m L Folding buffer before each successive step . After centrifugal removal of PEG , initial volumes of 100 m L and 1 mL yield around 20 m L of origami at 100 - 200 nM and 1 - 2 m M respectively . For cryoET , concen - trations of (cid:1) 1 m M are typically desired . ll OPEN ACCESS e3 Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 . e1 – e7 , February 18 , 2021 Resource Fluorescent protein cloning Primers , gene sequence , and plasmid for each construct Synthetic DNA ( GenScript ) was purchased coding for the following ﬂuorescent proteins : super - folder green ﬂuorescent protein ( sfGFP ) ( Pe´delacq et al . , 2006 ) , monomeric enhanced GFP ( mEGFP ) ( Zacharias et al . , 2002 ) , mVenus ( Kremers et al . , 2006 ) , yellow ﬂuorescent protein ( YFP ) ( Ormo¨ et al . , 1996 ) , and mCherry ( Shaner et al . , 2004 ) . The genes were cloned into pet28a vector using Liga - tion Independent Cloning ( LIC ) ( de Jong et al . , 2006 ) and the primers in Table S3 . gB cloning The original gB pEP98 Plasmid was a gift from G . Cohen ( Penn State University ) . N - terminally labeled gB constructs were created by insertion of sfGFP or mCherry genes after the gB signal peptide ( 90 bp from start ) using inserted EcoRI / XhoI restriction sites . The mCherry sequence was followed by a TEV cleavage site ( ENLYFQS ) . Biological sample preparation Expression and puriﬁcation of ﬂuorescent proteins The above plasmids carrying the genes for sfGFP , mEGFP , YFP , mVenus and mCherry ﬂuorescent proteins with a N - terminal 6xHis tag were used to transform E . coli BL21 cells ( New England Biolabs ) by heat shock before plating on LB with ampicillin ( AMP ) at 50 m g / mL . Protein expression was performed by autoinduction , growing cultures at 37 (cid:4) C overnight using 5 mL overnight culture in 500 mL LB AMP supplemented with 1 mM MgSO 4 , 25 mM ( NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 , 50 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 50 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 0 . 5 % glycerol , 0 . 05 % glucose , 0 . 2 % alpha - lactose . Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4 , 000 x g for 10 min at 4 (cid:4) C , and resuspended in 10 mL cold lysis buffer ( 20 mM Tris pH 7 . 4 , 500 mM NaCl , 30 mM imidazole in H 2 O ) with cOmplete EDTA protease inhibitor , following manufacturer’s instructions ( Roche ) . Cells were lysed in a constant ﬂow cell disruptor ( Constant Systems ) at 8 , 000 psi with lysozyme and DNase . Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 21 , 000 x g for 30 min and the supernatant was bound to 5 mL Ni - NTA resin ( QIAGEN ) per liter culture for 60 - 90 min at 4 (cid:4) C . Resin was washed using 4 column volumes ( CV ) of wash buffer ( 20 mM Tris pH 7 . 4 , 500 mM NaCl , 30 mM imidazole ) and eluted with wash buffer containing 400 mM imidazole and 10 % glycerol . The eluent was then run on a Superdex 75 300 / 10 GL size exclusion column ( GE Lifesciences ) , and eluted in 0 . 25 mL fractions in PBS ( 10 mM phosphate buffer pH 7 . 4 , 137 mM NaCl , 2 . 7 mM KCl ) . Six fractions were pooled for each protein and concentrated with centrifugal devices ( Millipore ) . The protein concentration was estimated using the BCA assay ( Pierce ) . YFP - Murine Leukemia Virus production and puriﬁcation YFP - MLV was produced as described previously ( Riedel et al . , 2017 ) . Brieﬂy , live MLV virus stocks were prepared by transfecting HEK293T cells with a pcDNA3 vector containing gagpol , gag , env - YFP sequences ( Sherer et al . , 2003 ) ( a gift from WM ) using Fugene Xtreme Gene ( Roche ) as per manufacturer’s instructions . The cell supernatant was harvested after 5 days , cleared by centrifugation at 3000 x g for 5 min and stored at (cid:3) 80 (cid:4) C . The livevirus stock was used to infect DFJ8 in a T - 25 ﬂask ( Cellstar ) which was expanded to 6 T - 175 ﬂasks . Initial virus harvest was performed after 3 days , followed by 2 more harvests every 2 days . The virus - containing su - pernatant was precleared at 3000 x g for 30 min and centrifuged through a cushion of 15 % sucrose in 20 mM HEPES pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl and 3 . 6 mM CaCl 2 ( 1 / 6 of total centrifuge tube volume ) at 100 000 x g for 1 h at 4 (cid:4) C . The supernatant was aspirated , and the virus pellet was allowed to dissolve overnight at 4 (cid:4) C in a small volume of 20 mM HEPES pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl and 3 . 6 mM CaCl 2 . The concentrated virus ( 0 . 5 mL ) was then centrifuged at 15 , 000 x g for 1 min to remove large clumps and passed through Capto TM Core 700 1 mL pre - packed column ( GE Healthcare ) before snap - freezing in liquid N 2 and storage at (cid:3) 80 (cid:4) C . YFP - Env for gel shift assays was puriﬁed using a method adapted from ( Sjo¨berg et al . , 2014 ) . Brieﬂy , virus particles were solubilized in Buffer A ( 20 mM HEPES , 130mM NaCl , 3 . 6 mM CaCl 2 ) containing 1M NDSB - 201 , 1 % Triton X - 100 for 1 h at 4 (cid:4) C followed by centrifugation at 25 , 000 x g for 20 min . The supernatant was concentrated using Vivaspin 1 kDa MWCO spin concentrators ( ThermoFisher Scien - tiﬁc ) and buffer exchanged using Zeba spin desalting column ( ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc ) into Buffer A . SfGFP - gB and mCherry - gB expression for vesicle samples Vesicle preparations were performed in a similar manner to Zeev - Ben - Mordehai et al . , 2014a . In detail , HEK293T cells were grown to conﬂuency in T175 ﬂasks using supplemented DMEM ( 1 % non - essential amino acids ( NEAA ) ( Sigma ) , 3 % GlutaMax ( GIBCO ) ) and 10 % FBS ( Sigma ) . Transient transfection was performed using 30 m g DNA of respective gB constructs and 185 m L polyethylenimine ( PEI ) , each diluted in 4 . 5 mL supplemented , serum free DMEM which were mixed and added to cells in addition to 9 mL supple - mented DMEM with 4 % FBS . After 24 h the medium was exchanged for 18 mL supplemented , serum - free DMEM and cells incubated for another 24 h . 48 h post transfection cell supernatant was collected and replaced with 18 mL supplemented , serum - free DMEM . Supernatants were harvested every 24 h up to 120 h post transfection . Vesicles were puriﬁed from cell supernatant by centrifugation at 4 , 000 xg for 20 min at 4 (cid:4) C to remove cellular debris . The pellet was discarded and the supernatant loaded in SW32 ultracentrifugation tubes before being underlaid by 5 mL of 20 % sucrose solution in HEPES buffer ( 130 mM NaCl , 20 mM HEPES pH 8 ) . After a 2 h spin at 30 000 rpm ( (cid:1) 150 000 xg ) in a SW32 rotor ( Beckman Coulter ) at 4 (cid:4) C the supernatant was completely removed and discarded . Pelleted vesicles were rehydrated overnight in a small volume of HEPES buffer ( 100 m L / T175 ﬂask ) . BHK 21 growth on grids and sfGFP - gB expression Quantifoil2 / 1carbonﬁlmgold - meshgridswereplasmacleaned ( HarrickPlasma ) for2minandincubatedindecanoicacidunderashort - wave UV light ina class 2 biosafety cabinet overnight . Grids were then sequentially washed in 12volumes methanol , ethanol , and sterile phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) before storing each grid in 50 m L PBS in one well of 2x9 - well microslides ( Ibidi ) at 37 (cid:4) C until use . ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 . e1 – e7 , February 18 , 2021 e4 Resource BHK - 21 cells were grown to conﬂuency in a T25 ﬂask , before removal with trypsin and seeding onto the treated Quantifoil gold - mesh grids in fresh 2x9 - well microslides ( Ibidi ) . Grids were seeded at 2x the desired density to allow for cells adhering to the well surface . Cells were left to adhere overnight , and transfected the next day with the sfGFP - gB construct using the Xtreme - Gene HP transfection kit ( Roche ) with a DNA : reagent ratio of 1 : 3 . Cells were incubated at 37 (cid:4) C for 8 - 14 h post - transfection before plunge freezing . Binding and biophysical assays Gel shift assays Agarose gels : 100 nM YFP or Env - YFP were mixed 1 : 1 with Folding Buffer or 440 nM SPOTs . Samples were incubated for 15 min on ice and analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis ( 2 % agarose gel , 1x TAE buffer ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 11 mM MgCl 2 , run at 60V at 4 (cid:4) C for 2 h ) . Polyacrylamide gels : 1 m M YFP , mCherry , mEGFP , sfGFP or mVenus were mixed 1 : 1 with Tris - EDTA buffer or 10 m M aptamer . Samples were incubated for 15 min on ice and analyzed by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( 6 % Acrylamide / Bis 29 : 1 , 0 . 5 x TBE buffer ( Sigma - Aldrich ) at 180 V for 40 min . Scanning conditions : Both agarose and polyacrylamide gels were scanned with an Amersham Typhoon Gel Imaging System ( GE Healthcare ) . GFP ﬂuorescence was imaged using a 488 nm laser and 525 nm bandpass ﬁlter combination . mCherry ﬂuorescence was imaged using a 532 nm laser and 670 nm bandpass ﬁlter combination . Isothermal titration calorimetry ( ITC ) Fluorescent proteins and aptamer ( variant without the 3 0 extension for origami conjugation ) were prepared in ITC buffer ( PBS ( Ther - moFisher Scientiﬁc ) + 5 mM MgCl 2 ) by dialysis using 10K Slide - A - Lyzer MINI devices ( ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc ) at 4 (cid:4) C overnight . Pro - tein concentrations were measured prior to dialysis by Pierce BCA assay . ITC experiments were carried out at 25 (cid:4) C on a MicroCal PEQ - ITC microcalorimeter ( Malvern Panalytical ) . 1 - 3 m M aptamer was placed in the sample cell with a volume of 250 m L and binding isotherms were recorded following injections of (cid:1) 30 m M ﬂuorescent protein ( 4 m L each ) . Bio - layer interferometry ( BLI ) BLI measurements were performed on the Octet system ( ForteBio ) . Brieﬂy , amine reactive group 2 ( ARG2 ) tips ( ForteBio ) were pre - soaked in buffer FPO ( PBS + 12 . 5 mM MgCl 2 ) before activation with equal parts 20 mM N - hydroxysuccinimide ( NHS ) and 200 mM 1 - ethyl - 3 - ( 3 - dimethylaminopropyl ) - carbodiimide ( EDC ) for 5 min , followed by a 5 min incubation with buffer FPO , puriﬁed ﬂuorescent proteins or vesicles , quenching in 1 M Tris pH 7 . 4 for 5 min , and washing with buffer FPO . Example tip loading curves are shown in Figure S2 . After loading , tips were stored at 4 (cid:4) C in buffer FPO until use later the same day . SPOT binding was assayed by equilibrating the tips in buffer OS ( TE + 12 . 5 mM MgCl 2 + 100 mM NaCl ) for 3 min , then measuring association of the appropriate SPOT or origami without aptamer ( both at (cid:1) 100 nM ) for 8 - 10 min , followed by a 8 - 10 min dissociation measurement in buffer OS . Fluorescence microscopy HEK293T cells were grown to conﬂuency in a T75 ﬂask , before removal with trypsin and seeding into 18 - well chambered coverslips coated with ibidiTreat ( Ibidi ) at a density of 3x10 5 cells per well . Cells were left to adhere overnight , and transfected with the sfGFP - gB construct ( 100 ng ) using the Xtreme - Gene HP transfection kit ( Roche ) with a DNA : reagent ratio of 1 : 3 ( m g : m l ) at 37 (cid:4) C for 20 h . Post - transfection the cells were washed once and incubated in Fluorobrite ( GIBCO ) with 1 % GlutaMax ( GIBCO ) and 10 % FBS ( 100 m L per well ) for 1 h . Culture media ( 100 m l ) was supplemented with a ﬁnal concentration of 5 mM MgCl 2 before 1 m L of 100 nM aptamer origami tagged with cy5 was added directly to each culture well and incubated for T 15 min before imaging . Live cell ﬂuorescence microscopy data were recorded on a SP8 X - SMD FLIM confocal microscope ( Leica ) . Images were recorded at 63x magniﬁcation and processed in FIJI ( Schindelin et al . , 2012 ) . Dynamic light scattering ( DLS ) DLS measurements were acquired on an Uncle System instrument ( Unchained Labs ) . SPOTs were prepared in folding buffer ( TE buffer with 12 . 5 mM MgCl 2 ) at 2x the required concentration and diluted to 200 , 100 , 50 and 10 nM by the addition of equal volumes of buffer ( PBS with 5 mM MgCl 2 ) , or culture medium ( DMEM with 10 % FBS and 5 mM MgCl 2 ) . The positive control aggregated SPOTs were produced by skipping the ﬁnal temperature decrease ( 30 (cid:4) C – 15 (cid:4) C ) in the folding protocol and selecting for large aggregates ( following one round of PEG precipitation to remove excess staples ) by spinning the sample without PEG , removing the supernatant and resuspending the pelleted material . 9 m l of these samples including buffer and culture medium baseline controls ( 50 : 50 mixture of folding buffer and either PBS with 5 mM MgCl 2 or DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS and 5 mM MgCl 2 ) were loaded into a UNi and 10 DLS acquisitions of 10 s each were measured at 25 (cid:4) C . Sample preparation and electron microscopy Negative stain EM of signpost origami For negative stain TEM imaging , 10 m L of a 5 nM origami sample solution was applied to glow - discharged Carbon type - B - Formvar supported copper grids ( Agar scientiﬁc ) for 2 min . The sample was subsequently stained using a solution of 2 % uranyl acetate for 10 s . Negative stain EM data were recorded on a T12 microscope ( FEI , Thermoﬁsher ) operating at 120 kV , equipped with a OneView camera ( Gatan ) . Images were recorded at 30 , 000x nominal magniﬁcation and processed in FIJI ( Schindelin et al . , 2012 ) . ll OPEN ACCESS e5 Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 . e1 – e7 , February 18 , 2021 Resource Incubation of SPOTs with biological samples sfGFP - gB vesicles or MLV preparations were mixed 1 : 1 with aptamer - origami ( ﬁnal concentration (cid:1) 200 nM ) and incubated on ice for 30 min . For cellular samples , the 50 m L of culture medium surrounding each grid was supplemented to a ﬁnal concentration of 5 mM MgCl 2 . 1 m L of 200 nM aptamer origami was added directly to each culture well and incubated for (cid:1) 15 min before vitriﬁcation . Longer incubations could lead to issues with endocytic recycling of membrane proteins with bound SPOTs or degradation of the RNA ap - tamer by RNases in FBS that has not been heat inactivated . Plunge freezing 4 m L of vesicles or virus were applied to a freshly plasma - cleaned ( Harrick Plasma ) Quantifoil 2 / 1 holey carbon copper - mesh grids ( Agar Scientiﬁc ) . Grids with adherent cells were removed from the culture medium immediately prior to plunging . 1 m L of 10 nm ﬁdu - cial gold markers ( Aurion ) were added to the drop on the grid for each sample before blotting away excess by hand and plunging into a reservoir of propane / ethane with a manual plunger . Grids were stored under liquid nitrogen until imaging . CryoEM CryoEM data were recorded on either a TF30 , TF30 Polara or Titan Krios microscope ( FEI , Thermoﬁsher ) , equipped with K2 or K3 direct electron detectors and ( Bio - ) Quantum energy ﬁlters ( Gatan ) . Tomographic data was collected with SerialEM ( Mastronarde , 2005 ) with pixel sizes between 1 and 3 A˚ / pixel at the specimen level and the energy - selecting slit set to 20 eV . The sfGFP - gB vesicles ( ± 60 (cid:4) ) and MLV ( ± 66 (cid:4) ) datasets were collected using dose - symmetric acquisition and the cell data ( ± 60 (cid:4) ) was collected using bi - directional acquisition schemes ( starting from (cid:3) 21 (cid:4) up , and returning to (cid:3) 24 (cid:4) to collect the negative tilts ) with 3 (cid:4) tilt increments . 7 - 15 image frames ( 0 . 2 s exposure / frame ) in counting mode were collected per tilt at a dose rate of (cid:1) 5 e (cid:3) / unbinned pixel / second , giving an overall dose of between 100 and 225 e (cid:3) / A˚ 2 . Defoci between 2 and 5 m m underfocus were used to record tilt series and projection images . Tomogram reconstruction and data processing Frames were aligned and ﬁltered for radiation damage using Unblur ( Grant and Grigorieff , 2015 ) for the sfGFP - gB vesicles , and on the ﬂy in SerialEM for the other datasets . Tomograms were reconstructed using IMOD ( Kremer et al . , 1996 ) . Contrast transfer functions were measured and data phase - ﬂipped in IMOD . Tomograms were further processed for viewing in FIJI ( Schindelin et al . , 2012 ) . Seg - menting was done manually in FIJI . Sub - volumes were picked manually in IMOD and sub - volume averaging and classiﬁcation was done with PEET ( Heumann et al . , 2011 ) . Segments , sub - volume averages and atomic models were visualized with UCSF ( University of California San Francisco ) Chimera ( Pettersen et al . , 2004 ) . Template matching was done with PEET , using the subvolume average of the DNA origami template derived from Figure 2D as the template , and with the ‘no reference reﬁnement’ option switched on . The initial particle model was a grid of points with 15 A˚ spacing . QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS Isothermal titration calorimetry Data were processed and analyzed using a non - linear least - squares ﬁt to a one - site binding model using MicroCal PEAQ - ITC Anal - ysis Software ( Malvern Panalytical ) . The binding stoichiometry and protein concentrations were speciﬁed in the ﬁt while the thermo - dynamic parameters and aptamer concentrations were varied , as aptamer concentrations measured from absorbance were inaccu - rate due to residual rNTPs . The ﬁtted aptamer concentrations were consistent across all ITC experiments , allowing for dilution effects . Bio - layer interferometry The raw data were exported from the interferometer software ( ForteBio ) and processed in Excel ( Microsoft ) . The unloaded buffer con - trols were subtracted from each experiment , and the magnitude of the binding scaled by the amount bound to the tips , as measured by the ﬁnal wash value during tip loading . With the exception of the titration curve ( Figures S6A ) , each measurement was made in triplicate and the results averaged to ensure any variation due to the heterogeneous sample nature was minimized . For the titration curve and rigid SPOT binding assays , the curve for 100 % mCherry vesicles was used as a further baseline after buffer subtraction . For rigid SPOT binding assays , the maximum amplitude of each ‘normal’ SPOT binding was set to 1 to aid in comparison . Dynamic light scattering The raw data were exported from the instrument software ( UnChained Labs ) and processed in Excel ( Microsoft ) . The instrument soft - ware applies a scaling regime which means raw intensities are unavailable for comparison across samples , so the amplitude of the signal from samples with concentrations lower than 200 nM were scaled by the ratio of the samples derived intensity ( in counts per second ) to the 200 nM sample’s derived intensity . Sub - volume averaging and template matching Sub - volume averaging was done using PEET ( Heumann et al . , 2011 ) . For the origami - only averaging , sub - tomograms of 694 origami particles from 54 tomograms were selected manually . An initial orientation was assigned to each sub - tomogram , with the y axis directed along the nanostructure ‘post’ . An initial average was created using these rough orientations and used as the ﬁrst reference in the alignment . The whole dataset was used for iterative sub - volume reﬁnement . For the averaging of the origami together with ll OPEN ACCESS Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 . e1 – e7 , February 18 , 2021 e6 Resource membrane - bound gB , 661 particles were selected from 54 tomograms , with each particle’s y axis pointing to the center of the vesicle to which it is bound . We attempted to use template matching to automatically identify SPOTs in these tomograms , using the sub - volume average from Figure 2D as a reference . Unfortunately , of all the conditions tested , the best identiﬁed only 60 % of the manually picked SPOTs , with a false positive rate > 65 % for all particles . To identify 90 % of the manually picked SPOTs ( the maximum number identiﬁed ) , the required conditions produced a false positive rate of nearly 80 % . As excluding the false positives required more time than manual picking , we concluded that template matching requires further development for use with SPOTs . As above , an initial average was created and used for subsequent reﬁnement . No mask was applied during this process . PCA - based classiﬁcation was then applied to the resultant particles to create 4 classes , with the goal of mitigating the effects of ﬂexible linkage between gB and the origami structure while maintaining enough particles per class to produce viable averages . No mask was applied during this process . Visualization of the reconstructed volumes was performed in USCF Chimera ( Pettersen et al . , 2004 ) . ll OPEN ACCESS e7 Cell 184 , 1110 – 1121 . e1 – e7 , February 18 , 2021 Resource Supplemental Figures Figure S1 . Comparison between immunolabeling and labeling with signpost origami tags ( SPOTs ) , related to Figure 1 ( A ) Schematic diagram of the two labeling schemes . ( B ) Labeling of gB vesicles with SPOTs in cryoET , as in Figure 4 . The end of the post of the SPOT indicates the position of the labeled protein . ( C ) Immunolabeling of gB vesicles by negative stain . ( D ) Surface representation of the crystal structures of the protein being labeled ( gB , green ) and primary ( yellow ) and secondary ( orange ) antibodies in a putative labeling arrangement . Scale bars , 20 nm . ll OPEN ACCESS Resource Figure S2 . Design of the origami nanostructure , related to Figure 2 ( A ) CryoEMprojectionimageofthe‘wedge’origaminanostructureusedforinitialcharacterization . Thewedge ( whitearrowheads ) wasfrozeninconcentratedcell lysate to determine the contrast of these structures in high - density backgrounds . Scale bar 100 nm . ( B ) Schematic diagram of staple and scaffold connections for the signpost origami design shown in Figure 2 , as generated in caDNAno2 ( Douglas et al . , 2009b ) . The ﬁrst schematic shows the staple layout for the unfunctionalized signpost origami ( SPO ) , the second schematic shows the staple layout for the functionalized signpost origami tag ( SPOT ) with a Cy5 ﬂuorescent label . The M13mp18 scaffold strand is depicted in light blue . Staples belonging to mixes 1 & 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 and 7 & 8 ( Table S1 ) are depicted in black , red , green , dark blue , and pink , respectively . ll OPEN ACCESS Resource Figure S3 . Biophysical data , related to Figure 3 ( A ) Raw isothermal titration calorimetry data for ﬂuorescent proteins titrated into aptamer ( not linked to origami signpost ) . The ﬁtted parameters are shown in the table for each binding curve . ( legend continued on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS Resource ( B ) Wewereunabletoconﬁrmbindingofotheraptamersusingacrylamidegelshiftassays . Left , anaptamerreportedagainsthexahistidinetags ( Tsujietal . , 2009 ) ; Right , a reported aptamer against glycoprotein D from Herpes simplex virus I ( Yadavalli et al . , 2017 ) Ci - iii . Unprocessed gel images with ﬂuorescent detection in the GFP ( i ) , RFP ( ii ) , and YFP ( iii ) channels for gel - shift assays in Figures 3B and 3C . iii Lane 3 - YFP alone . Because of its low molecular weight ( (cid:1) 26 kDa ) , we expectYFPtodiffuseintheagarosegel , resultinginabandthatthusappearsfaintandwithalowerapparentmotility . Lane4 - uponadditionofSPOTstoYFP , the molecularweight of theﬂuorescent structure wouldincrease dramatically whenthey bind ( (cid:1) 5 MDa ) so itdiffuses much less , and asharperand therefore brighter bandwouldbeseen . Lane1 - YFP - EnvhasamuchhighermolecularweightthanYFP ( (cid:1) 125kDamonomer , (cid:1) 375kDatrimer ) . AsbothformsofYFP - Envaremuch larger than YFP , the molecules should diffuse less inthe agarose and thus appear asa more concentrated band . Additionally , there are 3YFP oneachEnv trimer such that we would expect 3x the signal of YFP alone . Lane 2 - upon addition of SPOTs to YFP - Env , the trimer population of YFP - Env could bind 3 SPOTs ( (cid:1) 15 MDa ) and the monomer population could bind one SPOT ( (cid:1) 5 MDa ) . As YFP - Env is a membrane protein produced in mammalian cells , it is glycosylated and detergent - solubilized here , both of which may impact the appearance of bands by electrophoresis . D . Example replicate buffer - subtracted and loading - normalized traces for BLI binding of unfunctionalized sign post origami ( ‘SPO’ ) or SPOTs to immobilized sfGFP - gB vesicles ( i ) or mCherry - gB vesicles ( ii ) from Figure3D ( bottompanel ) . Thebufferreplicates ( unloadedtipsdippedinanalytenanostructuresolutions ) andaverage ( usedforsubtraction ) areshowiniii , andthe loading curves ( normalized in the same way as the data ) in iv . ll OPEN ACCESS Resource ( legend on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS Resource Figure S4 . Tomograms of SPOTs binding sfGFP - gB vesicles from Figure 4 , shown as a series of computed z - slices with each slice 2 . 7 nm thick ( A ) A tomogram from Figure 4D . ( B ) The tomogram in Figure 4A and B . Gold beads used as ﬁducial markers have been computationally removed and appear as white spots in some slices due to the contrast enhancement applied for presentation . Field of view in each slice is (cid:1) 557 3 783 nm . ll OPEN ACCESS Resource Figure S5 . Behavior of SPOTs in cryoET , related to Figures 4 and 5 ( A ) The ﬂexibility in the link to the aptamer ( i ) is more pronounced than ﬂexibility in the SPOTs themselves ( ii ) . The variation in the SPOT orientation relative to the membrane was approximately ± 65 (cid:4) , while the bend in the SPOT post was approximately ± 25 (cid:4) . Scale bars 10 nm ; computed tomographic slice thick - ness 9 . 8 nm . ( legend continued on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS Resource ( B ) RigidityintheattachmentoftheaptamertotherestoftheorigamidecreasesSPOTbindingtosfGFP - gBvesiclesasmeasuredbyBLI . Inadditiontotheoriginal SPOTdesign , aseconddesignwastestedwheretheaptamerwaslinkedatthe5 0 and3 0 endstothesignpoststructure . Thisdesign ( blueline ) boundmuchlessto sfGFP - gB vesicles than the ﬂexible SPOT design used throughout ( green line ) . The experiments were repeated in triplicate , and the shaded area behind each curve represents the standard deviation of the three measurements . ( C ) sfGFP - gB exhibitsmultiple conformations onvesicles , and SPOTs bindatleasttwo previouslyidentiﬁedconformations – toprow , atallconformation ( Maurer et al . , 2013 ) ( EMD : 2380 ) ; bottom row , a short conformation ( Zeev - Ben - Mordehai et al . , 2016 ) ( EMD : 3362 ) . Scale bars 5 nm , computed slice thickness 2 . 8 nm . ( D ) When using SPOTs to estimate the locations of gB , and subjecting these particles to sub - volume averaging , it is possible to obtain two classes ( comprising (cid:1) 2 / 3 of the data ) that broadly resemble two known conformations of gB , with the overall average a mixture of conformations . Scale bars 5 nm ; computed slice thicknesses (cid:1) 2 nm . ( E ) Schematic diagram showing the position of murine leukemia virus ( orange ) in the ice layer ( gray ) after vitriﬁcation with SPOTs ( blue ) ( tomogram shown in Figure 5 ) . The edge of the hole in the carbon support layer is shown in brown on the left . ( F ) Example XZ ( i ) and YZ ( ii ) slices of the tomogram in Figure 5 . The position of the virus is shown in orange and the approximate boundaries of the vitreous ice layer are drawn with dashed white lines . Scale bars 100 nm . ( G ) Example projection images from a dose - symmetric tilt scheme with high electron exposures , monitoring changes in appearance of SPOTs at high exposure and tilt . After total exposures of > 100 e - / A ˚ 2 ( 300 kV ) , the stripe pattern of the DNA helices and the overall shape of the SPOTs are still clearly visible . Scale bar , 100 nm . ll OPEN ACCESS Resource Figure S6 . Control experiments for SPOT binding , related to Figure 6 ( A ) Bio - layer interferometry ( BLI ) was used to measure the binding of SPOTs as a function of tagged protein concentration . sfGFP - gB vesicles ( Figures 3 and 4 ) were diluted with vesicles with mCherry - gB . Even at 1 % sfGFP , a small amount of binding was still detected . ( B ) Confocal slices from live cell ﬂuorescence microscopy of titrations of HEK293T cells expressing sfGFP - gB ( green ) with increasing concentrations of Texas Red - labeled SPOTs ( blue , top row ) and an a - GFP antibody conjugated to Alexa - 647 ( red , bottom row ) . Similar patterns of binding were observed for the SPOTs and antibody , reaching maximum binding at (cid:1) 10 nM . Scale bars 10 m m . ( C ) Control experiments for ﬂuorescent SPOT binding to cells . First panel from left – some cells expressing sfGFP - gB ( green ) exhibit unusual morphologies as a result of gB expression , independent of SPOT or antibody addition . Second panel – when the Texas Red - labeled signpost origami structure is produced without aptamer ( SPO , red ) , itisfoundinsolutionandnobindingisobservedtosfGFP - gBexpressingcells ( green ) . Theblackspacesareoccupiedbyuntransfectedcells which also occlude the SPO . Third panel – NoCy5 - labeled SPOT ( blue ) binding is observed on cells expressiong mCherry - gB ( magenta ) . The free SPOTs can be seen in the background when the contrast is enhanced ( fourth panel ) . Scale bars 10 m m . ( D ) Internal cell vesicles ( green ) were often observed with both Texas Red - labeled SPOT ( blue , left ) and a - GFP antibody ( red , right ) signal after incubation . gB undergoes a recycling process from the plasma membrane that appears to not be impeded by SPOTs or the antibody . Scale bars 5 m m . ( E ) Texas Red - labeled SPOTs ( blue ) remained bound to sfGFP - gB expressing cells ( green ) even after the culture medium was fully replaced three times over 30 min . The fresh medium was left for 10 min between washes to allow for dissociation . This continued binding is consistent with the slow dissociation rates measured by BLI for sfGFP - gB vesicles ( Figure 3D ) . Scale bars 10 m m . ll OPEN ACCESS Resource