Traffic2000 1 : 35 – 37 MunksgaardInternationalPublishers Toolbox Membrane Trafﬁc in Anaglyph Stereo John E . Heuser WashingtonUniversitySchoolofMedicine , Departmentof CellBiology , 660SouthEuclid , Box8228 , StLouis , MO 63110 , USA jheuser @ cellbio . wustl . edu Anaglyphs are stereoscopic image - pairs that are projected through a single optical path and rely on optical ﬁlters to separate left and right eye views . In the ﬁgures , each image represents digital camera - copy of transmission electron micro - graphs taken at 9 10° of specimen tilt , using a standard side - entry goniometer on a transmission electron microscope . Anaglyphs can also be produced today by computational means , as from the z - axis image - stacks generated by modern confocal light microscopes . In both of these cases , the image - pairs need not be projected but can also be viewed on a computer screen or superimposed during printing , but in all cases they are separated by viewing through eye glasses with complimentary - colored ﬁlters over each eye 1 . The term ‘anaglyph’ originally referred to any embossed object ( coin , metal , etching , etc . ) that appeared to be sculpted in low relief ( e . g . in ‘bas - relief’ ) . The ﬁrst use of this term was in 1651 by N Biggs , who deﬁned an ‘anaglyphe’ as ‘the external ﬁgure or cortex of a thing’ ( OED ) , a very apt deﬁnition , in terms of what the technique shows in modern cell biology ! In later art literature , the term ‘anaglyph’ came to refer to any image that had the appearance of being raised from the surface of the paper . We hope that the readers of Trafﬁc will ﬁnd the anaglyphs included here to be both entertaining and informa - tive . The inclusion of anaglyph glasses in this issue is intended to improve our readers’ appreciation of the many wonderful 3 - D images that are currently being generated by confocal light and electron microscopy , and to encourage the submission to Trafﬁc of more studies that include such 3 - D images . The technique of generating these images relies heavily on certain Adobe Photoshop ® operations 2 . Three steps are criti - cal : ( Step 1 ) Converting the left eye’s image to a pure red image and the right eye’s image to a pure green - and - blue image ( after both images have ﬁrst been converted from their original black - and - white to full RGB mode ) . ( Step 2 ) Superim - posing the two images by ‘selecting all’ and ‘copying’ one image and ‘pasting’ it as a second layer on top of the other . ( Step 3 ) Imaging both images simultaneously by choosing the ‘screen’ command in the ‘layers’ control panel of Photoshop ® . Several ancillary Photoshop ® operations can be used to spruce up the anaglyph image as it emerges . During step 1 the images can be corrected for disparities in contrast and brightness and after step 3 , the two images can be brought into perfect register and made perfectly equal in size by using the ‘free translate’ command under the ‘Edit’ section of the Menu Bar of Photoshop . Several examples of anaglyphs are reproduced here . Figure 1 shows budding viral particles as viewed from the outside ( top panel ) and from the inside ( bottom panel ) of an infected cell . Figure 1 : Viral budding . Upper and lower panels depict the outside and inside surface of an infected cell releasing Sindbis viruses via plasmalemmal budding . On the outside ( above ) , the Sindbis capsid proteins can be discriminated from amongst the exofacial domains of other plasmalemmal proteins by their tight packing into icosahedral crystals . Note that crystallization of the Sindbis capsid proteins ‘causes’ the membrane to bud outward , analogous to the inward budding of the ER and Golgi membranes ‘caused’ by the assembly of COP I and II proteins . Note also that the budding Sindbis virions ‘choose’ positively - curved membrane to bud from , as around the circumference of the dark opening of what is most likely an endocytotic coated pit . On the inside ( below ) , Sindbis nucleocapsids can be discerned as the spherical structures that attach to , and gently indent , the plasmalemma . As seen above , they ‘choose’ to collect around the circumference of the polygonal lattice of clathrin on the one coated pit in the ﬁeld . 1 In order to view the appropriate image for each eye , the included glasses should be held with the red ﬁlter over the left eye regardless of whether they are red : green or red : blue ﬁlter pairs . If the glasses are reversed , an inside - out or ‘intaglio’ ( mask - like ) view will be obtained , which is very hard to interpret . 35 Heuser Figure 2 : Three dimensional view of caveolae . 36 Traffic 2000 : 1 : 35 – 37 Membrane Trafﬁc in Anaglyph Sterro Figure 3 : Stereo electron micrograph of a 250 - nm thick section through a wild - type yeast cell . The Golgi element is a network of membranous tubules , with nodules of varying cal - ibers at its junctions . Some secretion granules are still intercon - nected by tubular tethers . Magniﬁcation (cid:29) 80000 . A detail of this picture is shown in mono on Fig . 1E of the manuscript by Morin - Ganet et al . on page 56 in this issue . ( Anaglyph courtesy of Alain Rambourg and Franc¸ois Ke´pe ` s . ) cholesterol ( top ) versus a control image of caveolae ( below ) . Viewing the plate in 3 - D with the anaglyph glasses will demonstrate that cholesterol removal totally ﬂattens caveolae , indicating their dependence on this sterol . Superimposed on this background are a series of progressively more raised images , starting at the bottom with a confocal light micrograph showing the distribution of human folate receptors transfected into these CHO cells ( the receptor being demonstrated in living cells by applying ﬂuorescent folate ) . Note that this GPI - linked protein is diffusely distributed in the plasma membrane , at least in living cells . The view immediately above is another confocal anaglyph of the distribution of transfected GFP : cave - olin in the same area of the same living CHO cell . The distinctly punctate distribution of caveolin corresponds to the electron microscopic image of discrete caveolae , but does not correlate at all with the distribution of folate receptors in the cell . This disagrees with much previous work on GPI - linked protein : caveolae colocalization in chemically ﬁxed cells . The next panel up illustrates the general application of deep - etch electron microscopy to EM immunocytochemistry , using 15 nm col - loidal gold antibodies as a ‘secondary’ for caveolae labeled with a monoclonal anti - caveolin antibody . The upper , most highly raised inset demonstrates this same ﬁeld at a higher magniﬁ - cation , to show more clearly the discrete labeling of caveolae with gold particles ( which appear as small white dots in such contrast - reversed deep etch electron micrographs ) . Note the complete absence of gold particles over the honeycomb clathrin lattice , which also stands out very prominently when viewing such ﬁelds in anaglyph 3 - D . Figure 3 shows an anaglyph representation of organelles seen in wild - type S . cerevisiea . More images of these organelles in 3 - D can be seen in the manuscript by Morin - Ganet et al . on page 56 of this issue . 2 Special thanks to Mark Newbold for publishing the above method of generating anaglyphs in Photoshop ® on the Internet . He apparently learned it from a now defunct homepage of Andrew J . Kelly of Walt Disney Engineering in Florida . Mark can be reached at manx @ sover . net and his homepage , which carefully describes the above method , can be downloaded from : http : : : www . sover . net : (cid:2) manx : 3dhowto . html Note the viral buds emerging from around an endocytic pit ( top ) and forming at the edges of a clathrin - coated pit ( bottom ) . The plate labeled Figure 2 illustrates the use of anaglyphs in conjunction with both electron microscopy and light mi - croscopy and shows various views of the enigmatic organelles found in the plasmalemma of most cells : the caveolae . ( These are all taken from a study in progress under the direction of Dr K - N Chung of Washington University . ) In the background of the Plate are shown two panels of caveolae in CHO cells that have been treated with cyclodextrin to lower plasmalemmal Hold onto your glasses and look for more anaglyphs in these and other manuscripts published in Traffic Morin - Ganet M - N , Rambourg A , Dietz SB , Franzusoff A , Ke´pe ` s F . Morphogenesis and dynamics of the yeast Golgi apparatus . Traffic 2000 ; 1 : 56 – 68 Fujimoto LM , Roth R , Heuser JE , Schmid SL . Actin assembly plays a variable but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Traffic 2000 ; 1 in press Dietz SB , Rambourg A , Ke´pe ` s F , Franzusoff A . The sec7p Scaffold Protein for COP - mediated compartment transitions in yeast Golgi maturation . Traffic 2000 ; 1 in press 37 Traffic 2000 : 1 : 35 – 37 .