An agent - based model of exaptive processes Marco Villani 1 , Stefano Bonacini 1 , Davide Ferrari 2 , Roberto Serra 1 , David Lane 1 1 Department of Social , Cognitive and Quantitative Sciences , University of Modena and Reggio Emilia , Reggio Emilia , Italy 2 School of Statistics , University of Minnesota , Minneapolis , MN , USA Correspondence : Marco Villani , Department of Social , Cognitive and Quantitative Sciences , University of Modena and Reggio Emilia , via Allegri 9 Reggio Emilia , Reggio Emilia 42100 , Italy . Tel : þ 39 0522 523553 ; Fax : þ 39 0522 522512 ; E - mail : marco . villani @ unimore . it Abstract A key problem in research on innovations is that of understanding their origins . In this paper , we propose that radical innovations are created by a process of ’exaptation’ , and we introduce a dynamical model that describes how it may happen . In particular , our model is focussed on the interplay between artefact innovation and attributions of functionality . We propose that the explicit representation of artefacts and categories eases the understanding of the exaptation phenomenon , seen in this context as a shift in terms of ‘leading attributions’ and allows the identification of the elements favouring the emergence of innovations . European Management Review ( 2007 ) 4 , 141 – 151 . doi : 10 . 1057 / palgrave . emr . 1500085 Keywords : innovation ; agent - based model ; exaptation ; cognitive representation Introduction A major problem in research on innovations is the understanding of creativity , that is , the origin of innovations . A common claim in the literature is that innovations are recombinations of current capabilities , as Schumpeter claimed , and that search is local ( see e . g . , March , 1991 ) . This perspective treats creativity then as discovered in close proximity to current practice . A contrary perspective is to consider creativity as sudden blind insight . In our opinion , the local recombination and search perspective fails to treat the many cases of significant creativity that we observe , while the latter perspective yields little theoretical and conception gain . The key point seems to us that those approaches lack an appropriate ontology . In particular , the recombination - centred perspective emphasises the role of artefacts , leaving the agents ( whether humans or human organisations ) a secondary role of pure recombinators . It becomes , there - fore , possible to ignore the role of agents and to follow the pure technological trajectories of the artefacts . However , human agents – which are endowed with sophisticated cognitive and communication capabilities – can create and use artefacts in ways , which are not just obvious at all . Indeed , they are embedded in a web of relationships among themselves , with their organisations and with their environment , which affect their ways of thinking and of using artefacts . Therefore , in our view , in order to understand innovation it is much more appropriate to take explicitly into account the presence of both artefacts and agents , rather than trying to ‘project out’ of the description one of these two terms . The fact that agents ( be they human beings or groups or organisations ) have an internal structure also affect their behaviours . Broadly speaking , interactions between parti - cular ( groups of ) agents often take the form of recurring patterns that persist over time . Making ( new ) artefacts , for example , or generating ( new ) forms of organisation in a society , is a multi - faceted process that is based on recurrent sets of actions , in which a number of agents with different roles are involved . In this process , new concepts and objects are discovered and invented by simultaneously surveying the opportunities offered by the social and material environment , and adapting the existing categor - isations of the agents . When looking for inventions ( new strategies , new products , or organisational innovations ) the different agents participating in this process can explore a variety of opportunities from one’s own perspective . But for an innovation to emerge , there must also be a degree of convergence among their perspectives so that the group as a whole aligns itself around the creation and use of the invention . In order to innovate , agents should share ( or come to share ) a common system of beliefs , which enables them to European Management Review ( 2007 ) 4 , 141 – 151 & 2007 EURAM Palgrave Macmillan Ltd . All rights reserved 1740 - 4754 / 07 $ 30 . 00 palgrave - journals . com / emr interact and otherwise express themselves in ways that they mutually recognise ( e . g . , do things in compatible ways , identify and use similar resources , share technology , have similar norms , similar institutions ) . Key features of this system are the categories , the tools the individuals use to process such a kind of information ( Selby and El Guindi , 1976 ) ; in addition , a large body of literature in social psychology has emphasised the central role of categorical thinking in social relationships ( Macrae and Bodenhausen , 2000 ; Markman and Gentner , 2001 ) . In this paper , we propose a model by which radical innovations are created by a process of ‘exaptation’ ( Gould and Verba , 1982 ; Ceruti , 1995 ; Gould , 2002 ) , which according to our hypotheses represents a key aspect of innovation processes . In particular , our model is focussed on the interplay between artefact innovation and the functionalities , which agents attribute to artefacts through their categories . Our claim is that the explicit representa - tion of artefacts and categories eases the understanding of the exaptation phenomenon , seen in this context as a shift in terms of ‘leading attributions’ , and allows the identifica - tion of the elements favouring the emergence of exaptation . Artefacts are key components of human organisations and activities . Artefacts are entities forged by constituent entities of an organisation that enhance that organisation’s functionality . One of their main properties of interest to us is their capability to convey information , although they may not be explicitly designed for this purpose . In addition , there are artefacts specifically designed to store and carry information : books , radios , televisions , human languages , including the very special kind of artefact represented by computers , objects able to process information at a very high abstraction level . Since artefacts convey information , their explicit repre - sentation eases the understanding of the exaptation phenomenon , seen in this context as a shift in terms of ‘leading attributions’ . Actually , their introduction is im - portant in order to characterise the ontology necessary to identify exaptation events . In the model presented here , we focus on phenomena occurring at the micro - level ( how individuals collect information about the external world , categorise it , and combine existing categories in order to create new ones ) and meso - level ( the exchange of informa - tion among individuals ) . However , we do not explicitly include the details concerning the macro - level events ( the shared system of beliefs and the common physical and technological resources ) , that are left for further research . In the first two sections , we will provide a detailed introduction on the notion of exaptation . The third and fourth sections describe the model that we developed in order to explore some aspects of exaptation and its dynamics . Finally , we discuss the results of our first simulations . Exaptation Recently , the concept of exaptation has been introduced to explain the changes resulting from innovation processes and the rise of new technologies . Exaptation originates from the domain of biology , where it appears for the first time in Gould and Verba ( 1982 ) who referred to species evolution as the mechanism complementary to Darwinian adaptation . The following definition provided by Ceruti ( 1995 ) gives insight on the main idea of exaptation : ‘ y the processes whereby an organ , a part , a characteristic ( behavioural , morphologic , biochemical ) of an organism , which was originally developed for a certain task , is employed for carrying out tasks that are completely different from the original one’ . The typical example provided by Gould ( 2002 ) is represented by a line of feathered dinosaurs , arboreal or runners who developed the capability to take advantage of feathers for flying , when originally they were intended for thermoregulation purposes . Furthermore , exaptation can provide a key to interpret the serendipity that characterises the generation of new products . Exaptation emphasises that the functionalities for which a technology has been selected are only a subset of the consequences generated by its introduction . In many cases , the number of consequences generated by a new technology , a product , or a process can be incredibly large and thus , its exaptive potential practically unbounded . Hence , exaptation is to be interpreted as a central idea connecting technological progress and emergence of recurrent patterns of interaction . Mokyr ( 1998 ) defines the phenomenon of exaptation saying that ‘it refers to cases in which an entity was selected for one trait , but eventually ended up carrying out a related but different function’ . Such a definition captures the idea that exaptations are those characteristics of a certain technology that are co - opted by another origin or utility because of their current role . Different from adaptations , which present functions for which they are selected , the exaptations generate effects that are not subject to pressures from the current selections , but potentially relevant later on . A classical example of technical innovation illustrating both adaptation and exaptation is the Compact Disk ( CD ) . The CD was originally developed in 1960 in the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in Richland , WA and it was designed for a specific task : solve the problem of the sound quality deterioration of the classical vinyl records . Its inventor , J . T . Russell , developed a system based on the idea of using light to carry information , avoiding the usual contact with mechanical parts of the recording device . The CD - ROM was patented in 1970 as a digital - optic system for recording and reproducing sound . Later , researchers used the technology of the CD - ROM for a different purpose : storage media for computer data . Although the latter represented a function not originally intended for the CD - ROM , it became very clear that it was indeed effective . As a result , during the 1970s , the Laboratory refined the CD - ROM technology commercialising a product that could be usefully employed for different purposes and improving some of its characteristics ( increment of memory capacity , recording speed , recording and repro - duction sound quality ) . Another important aspect of such a phenomenon is represented by what Gould defines as ‘exaptive pool’ . The exaptive pool represents the potential allowed for future selection episodes ( at all levels ) . There are two categories of potential : ( i ) intrinsic potential and ( ii ) real entities . In order to understand intrinsic potential , the reader should recall the smallest and lightest among the US coins , An agent - based model of exaptive processes Marco Villani et al . 142 the dime , which despite its very little purchasing value , is still in use . An unforeseen consequence of its technical characteristics is that the dime can be employed as an occasional screwdriver . Hence , the dime is an adaptation if considered as money and exaptation if considered as a screwdriver . Note that , the potential for the additional functionality as a screwdriver is an intrinsic characteristic of the dimensions and the shape of the coin and , thus , cannot be considered as disjoint or separated from it . The second category of the exaptive pool includes real entities , matter or material things that became part of the item under exam , due to various reasons . They are not currently associated with a particular use and at the same time do not generate substantial damages , thus avoiding elimination by selection , a phenomenon called ‘neutral mutation’ in biology ( Kimura , 1983 ) . The members of this category can be generated in various ways as structures that previously were considered useful or as neutral character - istics introduced ‘in incognito’ with respect to the selection process . A now classical example , quoted in Gould and Lewontin ( 1979 ) can be found in architecture , where spandrels ( initially empty spaces between the vaults and archs in churches ) have been later used as a support for paintings and mosaics : while their initial role was that of structural elements , spandrels thus became a key aesthetic feature . The origin and peculiar features of exaptation In order to complete a picture of the exaptation phenom - enon , we consider two questions . ( i ) What are the factors that lead to the birth of such a process ? ( ii ) What are the traits that distinguish exaptation from other processes ? In order to answer the first question , we can remember that in our description exaptation originates from the interplay between the artefacts and the functionalities , which agents attribute to them through their categories : therefore , we have to describe what an artefact is , what a category is and which kind of relations can they have . In a very general way , we can describe an artefact as a hierarchical structure composed by subparts that are approximately independent in the short term , but con - nected by a global behaviour in the long term ( i . e . , the notion of decomposability , introduced by Simon ( 1996 ) . As a consequence , the subparts are selected and proliferate in time as a consequence of being only one among many aspects of the whole artefact . While some such subparts can have an important role with respect to the goal of the whole artefact , others remain latent waiting future activation . Agents evaluate artefacts using their categories , a category being a tool the agents use in order to : " focus the attention on a subset of the artefact character - istics ; " interpret the highlighted features ; " give an evaluation of the artefact functionality , based upon the highlighted features ( ‘I like’ , ‘I hate’ , ‘very good’ , and so on ) . Based on the above observations , we can divide the possible origins of an exaptation into three groups : ( 1 ) the case where a subpart is already providing a positive contribution to the functionality for which the technol - ogy was selected ; only in a later moment and after changing the context , the subpart becomes the main component ; ( 2 ) the case where the subpart has no role in the overall performance of the system ; ( 3 ) the case where the subpart provides a negative contribution to the overall performance of the system . An example of case ( 1 ) is represented by the phonograph invented by Edison in 1877 . The innovative technology for amplifying and reproducing sound suggested the commer - cialisation of the invention as an office dictaphone . Only such a dramatic change of the context led to the exaptation of the phonograph , later re - named as gramophone , and nowadays considered one of the most popular inventions made during the 19th century . Case ( 2 ) is well identifiable in the process of vitrification , originally developed to reduce environmental pollution ( safe waste disposition and limited radio - active waste ) , is now mainly exaptated for biological dangerous processes such as elimination of biochemical weapons . Finally , case ( 3 ) can be exemplified by the innovation in plastic production during the Second World War , based on sub - products deriving from oil refinement ( Dew et al . , 2004 ) . Next , we begin to address the second question of what traits distinguish exaptation from other processes . First , exaptation is not a simple side effect , that is , an unintended ( and often undesirable ) consequence of a particular treatment . Although the apparent affinity between the two notions , an exaptation is usually identifiable with respect to change of context , whereas we cannot say the same for a side effect . Second , exaptations are not an alternative description of the Schumpeter’s process ( Schumpeter , 1934 ) , usually understood as a creative combination of existing ideas belonging to different entrepreneurs . Although it is true that in economics , exaptation is mainly due to entrepreneurs , it usually refers to the variation of context that generates a change in the utility of the technology , not to a simple mixture of existing elements . One could think that an exaptation is simply an unintended consequence of technology . However , this statement ignores the fact that the act of exaptating requires the intentional activation of a technology that otherwise would remain latent ; and it is actually the entrepreneur that makes possible such an activation . Finally , the basic research often generates inventions that are initially designed without an immediate and defined target , and thus at least in the first phase are not properly adaptive . The process of exaptation points out that the principle of such research is non - adaptive in its nature . The model There are in literature models that describe the feedbacks between artefact innovation and attributions of function - ality ( e . g . , see Ferrari et al . , in press ) ; nevertheless , these models do not take into account explicitly the presence of artefacts . The aim of the EMIS system ( Exaptation Model in Innovation Studies ) is to highlight the factors that An agent - based model of exaptive processes Marco Villani et al . 143 contribute to the occurrences of exaptation , by means of the explicit description of both artefacts and agents . EMIS is an agent - based model characterised by the presence of two kinds of social agents ( A ) , producers and users . The agents have only partial knowledge of the world , and each producer owns : ( i ) a set of categories ( C ) , utilised to interpret a certain set of artefacts and ( ii ) a set of weights representing the importance that a certain agent assigns to each cognitive characteristics of an artefact ( represented by means of the correspondent categories ) . The model postulates a continuous interaction between producers and users : the artefacts are transferred from the producers to the users and subsequent feedback messages are sent from the users to the producers . The aim of the model is to analyse the effects of the ambiguities present in artefacts and categories on the exaptation phenomena . Obviously , this implementation is only a first step toward a more complete model of exaptation ; in particular , we defer to further works the problem of the origins of the categories , as well as the representation of the interdependencies and complementarities among the features composing the agents’ categories . Agents The agents A i ( i A { 1 , y , g } , g A N 0 ) are the model main active units . They have limited system knowledge and are distinguishable by means of their identifier ID . Their total number g is not changing in time , and are grouped in two different classes : " producers ( represented by means of the symbol A p , where p A { 1 , y , l } ) " users ( represented by means of the symbol A u , where u A { 1 , y , h } ) Thus , the total number of agents is g ¼ l þ h . Each agent owns a given number of categories , which can be different for agents belonging to the two different classes . We denote the categories belonging to producers and users by C p and C u , respectively . 1 The number of categories belonging to a given agent is constant at any time period . Moreover , each agent is characterised by a weight vector ( different for agents belonging to different classes , respectively W p and W u ) . Note that in our representation , only the producers are able to build and modify the artefacts ( one artefact for each category owned by the producer ) . Conversely , only the users can evaluate the artefacts . Categories In this work , we use the term ‘functional attribution’ , or simply ‘attribution’ , referring to : ‘the functionality carried out by the corresponding feature of the artefact I’m evaluating is useful / indifferent / damaging’ ( or ‘I wish / don’t _ care / don’t _ wish to give to the artefact I’m building this particular functionality’ if we are considering produ - cers ) . Thus , we say that the set of categories owned by and agent corresponds to his / her collection of attributions . We define the knowledge space as the collection of all the possible functionality attributions . In this context , each category is a D - dimensional vector , whose elements C x ( j ) ( indicated by the words ‘characteristic’ , or ‘feature’ ) are discrete random variables taking values { 1 , 0 , $ 1 } with the following probability distribution : t if C x ( j ) ¼ 1 , ( 1 $ t $ e ) if C x ( j ) ¼ 0 , and e if C x ( j ) ¼ $ 1 , where t and e A [ 0 , 1 ] . Further , we assume that the number of relevant characteristics ( i . e . , the characteristics corresponding to symbols ‘1’ and ‘ $ 1’ ) is only a fraction Z of the total number of features . A category composed only by relevant characteristics implies not realistic agents attributing relevance to each single cognitive detail . The agents are also able to modify their categories : in case of categories trespassing such a threshold , not all the relevant features can be memorised ( in the rest of the paper indicated by the symbol | 1 | ) . In order to simulate such a memory loss , the number of relevant features n C | 1 | is computed after each modification . If K ¼ n C | 1 | $ Z 4 0 , a removal process eliminates each relevant feature with probability P k ¼ K n C j 1 j recovering in such a way a more realistic situation . Weights Each agent owns a D - dimensional vector of weights , whose elements , W p ( i ) and W u ( j ) take values in the interval [ 0 , 1 ] . Each element represents the importance that the agent assigns to the corresponding cognitive feature of its categories . For example , we could appreciate a car because of several reasons : power , style , size , price , colour , maintenance costs , practicality , and so on ; nevertheless , not all these characteristics have the same influence on our feeling . Namely , W x ( i ) ( w A { u , p } ) represents the weight that the agent assigns to the ith cognitive feature of the D - dimensional cognitive space ( colour is more important than maintenance costs , or class more than price , etc . ) . In the present version of the model , these vectors are built during the initialisation phase at t ¼ 0 and are constant with respect to time . Artefacts The artefacts are ‘goods’ , built by producers and utilised by users . Each artefact art p s is identified by an identification variable , IDs and corresponds to only one category ( each category belonging to a particular producer Id p ) . The artefacts art ps are characterised by an extremely simple representation : they are D - dimensional vectors , whose elements ( again indicated by the words ‘characteristic’ or ‘feature’ ) take values { 0 , 1 } , where 1 indicates the presence of a given characteristic ( feature ) and 0 its absence . In such a representation , the producers can build new artefacts by modifying their categories . Despite this simple representation , the artefacts are suitably defined for conveying information , and can be successfully ‘interpreted’ by users ; this fact allows the system to produce interesting behaviours . Artefact production In this section , we introduce one of the more delicate aspects of the model : the production artefacts . In this model , a producer tries to build an artefact as much as possible similar to the prototype memorised in one of its An agent - based model of exaptive processes Marco Villani et al . 144 categories , but despite his efforts it has to deal with errors and physical / technical constraints . Typically , a producer processes already existing artefacts , and tries to add some desirable characteristics to it . Namely , the producer selects one of its categories , and attaches the tag 1 to the artefact in correspondence to a 1 memorised for the chosen category . Similarly , the producer places a 0 tag in correspondence to a $ 1 tag , a 0 tag in the category meaning that the producer is not interested in changes in these positions and therefore , the already present values will not be altered ( see Table 1 for a simple example ) . In particular , we wish to highlight that the artefact feature can take only two values ( 0 and 1 ) , whereas the corresponding feature on the categories can take three values ( 1 ¼ ‘wish’ , 0 ¼ ‘indifference’ , $ 1 ¼ ‘not desired’ ) . Therefore , the feature correspondence represented in Table 1 can be characterised as follows : " if the values are identical , there is no change in art ps " if C p ( j ) ¼ 1 , then art ps ¼ 1 " if C p ( j ) ¼ 0 , then art ps is unchanged " if C p ( j ) ¼ $ 1 , then art ps ¼ 0 If some additional restrictions were not imposed , this process would lead to the ‘perfect’ artefact , where all the desired characteristics are present at the maximum level ( e . g . , think of a unrealistic car , able to fly , navigate , interact with human beings , produce and translate documents and make excellent coffees ) . In order to take into account these constraints , we decided simply to bind the number of characteristics present simultaneously in the same artefact . If , after the producer processing , an artefact has number 1’s exceeding the given threshold s , a stochastic removal process eliminates a subset of the current characteristics . Such a removal process is slightly more complex than the corresponding process acting on categories . For instance , characteristics that are judged to be irrelevant to the agent purposes should have a deletion probability higher than characteristics that are regarded as having higher impor - tance . Therefore , we can have three main situations : " N 1 : the number of 1’s in artefact art ps , corresponding to a feature 1 in C p ( j ) " N 2 : the number of 1’s in artefact art ps , corresponding to a feature 0 in C p ( j ) " N 3 : the number of 1’s in artefact art ps , corresponding to a feature $ 1 in C p ( j ) In correspondence to these numbers , we have the following the removal probabilities : " P 1 : probability that a 1 in artefact art ps is eliminated , when the feature C p ( j ) is 1 " P 2 : probability that a 1 in artefact art ps is eliminated , when the feature C p ( j ) is 0 " P 3 : probability that a 1 in artefact art ps is eliminated , when the feature C p ( j ) is $ 1 The following relation holds for the above quantities : ð 1 $ P 1 Þ N 1 þ ð 1 $ P 2 Þ N 2 þ ð 1 $ P 3 Þ N 3 ¼ s Note that in order to set the probabilities P 1 , P 2 and P 3 , we have to fix m : quotient between P 1 and P 3 l : quotient between P 1 and P 3 In particular , we wish to obtain P 1 o P 2 o P 3 , that is , P 1 P 3 ¼ m o 1 ) P 1 ) m P 3 P 2 P 3 ¼ l o 1 ) P 2 ¼ l P 3 Therefore , we have ð 1 $ m P 3 Þ N 1 þ ð 1 $ l P 3 Þ N 2 þ ð 1 $ P 3 Þ N 3 ¼ s and obtain the elimination probabilities P 3 ¼ $ ð s $ N 1 $ N 2 $ N 3 Þ ð m N 1 þ l N 2 þ N 3 Þ ; P 1 ¼ m P 3 ; P 2 ¼ l P 3 As a consequence , it is enough to act only on two parameters ( l and m ) . Finally , we remark that since the final goal is to simulate exaptation phenomena , we can disregard an overly detailed description of production processes and costs . Functionality In EMIS , we define the ‘functionality of an artefact with respect to a particular category’ , as an index measuring the level of user’s satisfaction with the artefact . The index appraises the satisfaction received from the artefact , when the user evaluates the corresponding category . Its max - imum value , denoted by F max , indicates that the artefact fits perfectly in the requirements contained in the associated category . In order to evaluate an artefact , the agent must ‘interpret’ it by means of one of its categories . Practically , the agent performs a filtering operation on the artefact using the involved category , according to the scheme reported in Table 2 . Table 1 Artefact production / innovation Considered vector Feature value Artefact – A p 1 0 1 0 1 0 Category – A p 1 1 0 0 $ 1 $ 1 New artefact 1 1 1 0 0 0 The producers have to modify the already - existing artefacts . An artefact is a string of ‘1’ ( the feature is present ) and ‘0’ ( the feature is absent ) ; the category is a string of ‘1’ ( the agent monitors the corresponding feature and considers in a positive way its presence ) , ‘ $ 1’ ( the agent monitors the corresponding feature and considers in a negative way its presence ) and ‘0’ ( the agent does not monitor the corresponding feature ) . The new artefact has started from an already existing one . Therefore , if the producer desires a given characteristic ( ‘1’ tag on the corre - sponding category position ) the new artefact has a ‘1’ on the interested position ; if the producer does not desire a given characteristic ( ‘ $ 1’ tag on the corresponding category position ) the new artefact has a ‘0’ on the interested position ; if the producer does not monitor the characteristic ( ‘0’ tag on the corresponding category position ) the new artefact maintains the value of the already existing artefact . An agent - based model of exaptive processes Marco Villani et al . 145 The hypotheses of Table 2 are very simple : " if A p i ¼ 1 and C u ( i ) ¼ 1 ( user’s desires and producer’s realisation coincide ) , then the comparison produces a desirable outcome ( denoted by 1 ) ; " if A p i ¼ 1 and C u ( i ) ¼ $ 1 , ( user’s desires and producer’s realisation do not coincide ) , then the comparison results in an undesirable outcome ( denoted by $ 1 ) ; " all the other cases correspond to a situation of indifference . Clearly , the dynamics generated by such a model should tend to produce the ‘correct’ positioning of 1’s in the artefact vector . In order to achieve this goal , we can define the artefact functionality ( with respect to a given category ) simply as the scalar product between the comparison vector art - C and the agent’s weight vector W u . Note that the largest functionality value F max of an artefact with respect to a given category is given by the scalar product between the weight vector and the category itself , where all the ‘ $ 1’s are set to be ‘0’ . Dynamics The most critical interactions for the outcome of the model take places between producers and users . Two distinct parts compose the interaction process : ( i ) when the user receives and evaluates an artefact built by a producer ; ( ii ) when the user provides feedback evaluation to the producer about the satisfaction level reached by the artefact ( the artefact functionality ) . First , we focus our attention to the delivery and subsequent evaluation of an artefact . In order to evaluate the artefact the user computes its functionality ( already described in the previous paragraphs ) ; filters the artefact with respect to all her / his categories and finally commu - nicates the best result to the producer . Moreover , the user can deliver to the producer some additional information , which can result useful for the future artefact innovations . Specifically , the user can transmit to the producer particular subsets of the two categories that give the highest functionality values . These subset are composed of " I jq ( q ¼ 1 ) , Actual Information ( AI ) . Features of the selected category that correspond to the art - C character - istics that highly contribute to the determination of the functionality value ( it does not matter if in positive or negative direction ) . " I jq ( q ¼ 2 ) , Desired Information ( DI ) . Features of the selected category that potentially have the highest contribution power ( the I jq features that highly con - tribute to the scalar product between the selected category C u as is and the weight vector ) . These two different kinds of information allow the user to explicit her / his requests . In particular : " AI represents the features of the current artefact that give positive or negative contribution to the functionality . " DI expresses what the agent likes or dislikes about the artefact ( when it is filtered by means of the selected category ) . Sometimes , it is possible that the two subsets have a non - empty intersection : for example , it is possible that an artefact feature be important for a category , and at the same time it gives a negative contribution to the functionality of another category . In other words , in the example we are supposing that for AI we observe C u ( i ) ¼ 1 , whereas for DI we have C u ( i ) ¼ $ 1 , as a result of some other category . In such a case , we impose that either AI or DI is randomly left out of the transmission . The producer uses the transmitted features in order to modify the features C p ( i ) of the category employed to build the artefact . The new value of each characteristic is computed by means of the following formula : v ¼ ð a d þ b c Þ d þ c where a is the value of the feature C p ( i ) of the A p , b is the value of the feature C u ( i ) of the A u , d is the influence of A p on next feature value and c is the influence of A u on next feature value . The feature will be 1 if v X o 0 if j o v o o $ 1 if v p j where o is the lower bound for the upper interval and j is upper bound for the lower interval ( Figure 1 ) . The goal of the above calculation is to transform the features communicated to the producers by the user . All the remaining features are left unchanged , except the admit - tance of some random ‘noise’ obtained as : a 1 or a $ 1 starting from a 0 tag , a 0 or a $ 1 starting from a 1 tag , and a 1 or a 0 starting from a ‘ $ 1’ tag . Finally , in order to limit the number of relevant features , the new vector is filtered by the removal process described in the previous section , according to the given threshold s . The final vector represents the new category that the producer employs to build the subsequent generations of the artefact . EMIS and the study of exaptation In the initial paragraph , we have defined exaptation as a sudden emergent phenomenon in evolution dynamics . Where does exaptation appear in our model ? Recall that EMIS simulates exchanges of products ( artefacts ) between producers and users , the users evaluating the artefacts by Table 2 Computation of the comparison vector art - C Considered vector Feature value Artefact – A p 1 0 1 0 1 0 Category – A u 1 1 0 0 $ 1 $ 1 Comparison art - C 1 0 0 0 $ 1 0 The users have to interpret the already - existing artefacts . An artefact is a string of ‘1’ ( the interested feature is present ) and ‘0’ ( the interested feature is absent ) ; The comparison vector art - C monitors the details of the users’ artefact evaluation : it has the positive value ‘1’ when , in the corresponding position , both artefact and category are ‘1’ , and has the negative value ‘ $ 1’ when on the corresponding position the artefact is ‘1’ , but the category is not a desired one . All the other combinations give no contribution to the evaluation . An agent - based model of exaptive processes Marco Villani et al . 146 means of their categories . In this context , an exaptation is a category change in interpreting the artefact . For example , after hundreds of steps the category that was systematically returning the best functionality is no longer the best one : the last innovation ( s ) has ( have ) increased the functionality of another category that in such a way becomes the new referring category for the selected artefact . Recall that the producer supplies the user only with the best functionality value among all the values computed using all the categories it owns . The category that furnishes such a best value during one interaction is likely to have a large value also in the next interaction , and so forth . In a sense , such best category is , for the user , the ‘leading’ category for this particular artefact . Sometimes , but quite unlikely , another category reaches a functionality value larger than that of the leading category . In a sense , this can be interpreted as a variation of the utilisation context of the artefact under exam ; in this case , we are observing an exaptation event . Model dynamics Initialisation In order to test the model , we perform some preliminary simulations by avoiding unnecessary complications . There - fore , we reduce the number of the actors , maintaining only one producer and one user : l ¼ 1 ; h ¼ 1 ; g ¼ 2 The knowledge space of the categories involved is D ¼ 1000 features . The user utilises five categories , which guarantee sufficient diversity , while the producer owns only one category , corresponding to the artefact that it is building . The other parameters we have to fix in order to create the initial categories are : 1 . the threshold Z , limiting the number of | 1 | ’s in C i ( j ) , is set to be 100 ; 2 . the initial fraction of 1s in C i ( j ) , is set to be 0 . 05 ; 3 . the initial fraction of value $ 1s in C i ( j ) , is set to be 0 . 05 . The value of Z is relatively low with respect to the D value and indicates that the space of all the possible character - istics of a category is very large with respect to the really imagined ones . Each feature of the initial artefact ( at time t ¼ 0 ) takes the value 1 with probability P art ¼ s D where s is the threshold defining the maximum number of 1’s that can be present on an artefact , and D being the total number of features composing the knowledge space . Thus , initially we have a ‘raw’ artefact that is able contains a large set of details . In order to correctly link each artefact to its referring category , this raw artefact is filtered following the schema proposed in Table 1 , and in sequence trimmed by eliminating the accidental ‘1’ exceeding the threshold s , as during the usual production processes . The parameters m and l , which tune the presence of 1s within the artefact during the final elimination process , are fixed to 0 . 01 and 0 . 05 , respectively , while the upper bound s is set to 200 . Please note that s 4 Z , that is , we are assuming that " the producer can build artefacts with not explicitly desirable characteristics ; " the artefacts can carry out more characteristics than the planned ones ; " the typical user focuses its attention only within a subset of the whole potentiality of the artefacts . Therefore , it is actually possible that an artefact carries out a number of functions larger than the number of functionalities for which it has been selected ( exaptive pool of possibilities ) . In the last part of this paper , we will see that in order to study the exaptation phenomenon it is enough to trace the path for a single artefact . In the second phase of the interaction process , the producer creates new categories ( new knowledge ) . In order to do so it enriches its knowledge using the feedback messages sent by the user . Particularly , we choose to give the same relevance to both the agents , by setting the balancing weights d ¼ c ¼ 0 . 5 , and o ¼ 1 / 3 , j ¼ $ 1 / 3 , in order to obtain three intervals of approximately equal length . Hence , we have that the producer averages the feature values of its category with the corresponding values provided by the user . A typical run Figure 2 shows some of the main variables simulated by EMIS . Figure 2a shows the best functionality value of the artefact at a given time step , and its F max value . Note that at step 207 the user changes the leading category ( exaptation ) and F max . In this case , it is observed that the upper limit for the achievable satisfaction decreases , despite an increase in the actual functionality Figure 2b shows the distance among user’s categories and the artefact actually built by the producer . In this context , the distance describes the semantic discrepancy between the artefact and the category referred to that particular artefact . Table 3 is based on the two following principles : " a distance between artefact and category occurs when the agent ‘desires’ a feature that is not currently present ; Figure 1 Modification schema of the A p features . An agent - based model of exaptive processes Marco Villani et al . 147 " a distance between artefact and category occurs when the agent ‘does not desire’ the present feature . At each step the user analyses producer’s artefacts , which are interpreted using her / his own categories and furnishes to the producer , the corresponding more elevated value of functionality . At step 207 the functionality value of category 2 outperforms the functionality value of category 4 . In the rest of the simulations , category 2 maintains its superiority and we do not observe new other exaptation events ( Figure 3 ) . Experimental results We individuate three main factors that are able to favour the emergence of exaptation phenomena : 1 . communication among different agents ; 2 . communication and production noise ; 3 . evolution of the users’ categories . In all the situations the user can utilise two different modalities of communication : 1 . Symmetrical : both communicated categories provide the same amount of information ‘actual’ and ‘desired’ . 2 . Asymmetrical : the category that better interprets the artefact provides ‘actual’ information , while the second one provides ‘desired’ information . This specification has been introduced to verify whether the presence of communication symmetry / asymmetry can favour the occurrence of exaptation phenomena . Recall that the ‘actual’ information represents the objective user’s evaluation , whereas the ‘desired’ information expresses what the user wants . Therefore , symmetric communication means that the user treats the categories without any bias , whereas asymmetric communication means that the user transmits an objective report about the first category , and then communicates some desires corresponding to a second one . Communication Typically , the user transmits to the producer a ( small ) subset of the features extracted from the two categories that are returning the best functionality values . In this paragraph , we analyse the behaviour of our model by varying the number of transmitted features , or bandwidth ( B ) . In particular , in this set of experiments the total number of transmitted characteristics is set to be B ¼ { 20 , 40 , 60 , 80 , 100 , 200 } . First , we observe that the number of exaptations found by using the asymmetric modality is consistently larger than the number of exaptations found by using the symmetric modality . Moreover , larger values for the bandwidth correspond to a larger number of exaptation events , in both short and long run ( 50 and 1000 time steps , respectively ) ( see Figure 4 ) . In particular , we noticed that a larger bandwidth with asymmetric modality could favour the presence of exaptations during the long run . Con - versely , if the number of transferred features is small , the exaptation events are rare . These facts suggest that an unbiased communication modality is not able to favour a context change , whereas a qualitatively asymmetric communication modality could effectively support the success of categories that are not favoured initially . In this case , in order to favour exaptations phenomena , it is helpful to transmit a large amount of information , creating the potential for the discovery of new and previously disregarded solutions . The exaptations occur mostly during the short period , whereas they are rarely observed during the long period . Figure 2 Interactions between user and producer . At each step the user returns to the producer the best evaluation of the artefact on the basis of its own categories . ( a ) ( left ) Shows this variable and its maximum value ( F max in the text ) , obtainable only in the case of null distance among artefact and category . At step 207 exaptation occurs , as the user changes the referring category ( thus leading to a change of F max ) value changes . In this case , the maximum reachable satisfaction decreases , although the actual functionality value increases . ( b ) ( right ) Shows the distance among the user categories and the artefact actually built by the producer . Table 3 Example of semantic distance calculation between artefact and category Considered vector Features value Artefact – A p 1 0 1 0 1 0 Category – A u 1 1 0 0 $ 1 $ 1 Distance 0 1 0 0 1 0 An artefact and a category are not similar ( a ) when the agent ‘desires’ a feature that is not currently present on the artefact , or ( b ) when the agent ‘does not desire’ a feature that is currently present on the artefact . The total distance is the sum of these differences in all the positions of the strings that describe , respectively , agents and categories . An agent - based model of exaptive processes Marco Villani et al . 148 Actually , during the first interactions the producer can easily modify her / his artefacts and contemporarily increase the functionality values with respect to several different categories . However , when the artefact is highly specialised , the simultaneous satisfaction of several requirements is challenging . Conversely , symmetric information and large bandwidth values can support best performances of the model in terms of attainment of F max , allowing producer to satisfy user’s requests . Noise A second study concerns the analysis of two types of noise that can be possibly specified in the model : " Communication noise . The value of the features commu - nicated by the user agents is changed with probability a ( 1 or $ 1 from a 0 tag , 0 or $ 1 from a 1 tag , and 1 or 0 from a $ 1 tag ) . " Production noise . The value of the characteristics of the artefact built by the producer is changed with probability b ( 0 from 1 , and 1 from 0 ) . The communication noise does not affect the main behaviour of the model , although its presence makes it more difficult to reach larger functionality values . The production noise worsens such a tendency , but at the same time increases the frequency of exaptation occurrences , both in the long period and in presence of low bandwidth communications . Some innovations , obtained because of this type of error , are able to foster a change of context for the whole artefact . Learning In the study presented in this section , we allow the user to modify her / his own categories ( so far considered as fixed ) , through two different modalities : 1 . The user can randomly create a new category , and substitute one of the already existing ones ( excluding the category , giving the highest functionality ) . This repre - sents the knowledge the user can acquire by interacting in new environments not explicitly modelled , Figure 3 Artefacts’ evaluation . The figure shows the evaluation the artefact received from the agent’s categories during the same simulation of Figure 2 . Please note that at step 207 the second category suddenly increases its value and becomes the referring category . Figure 4 Effects of the communication modalities . The user can communicate to the producer the artefacts’ features that mostly influenced the artefacts’ evaluation , and / or the artefacts’ features that potentially can influence the artefacts’ evaluation . By using symmetric communication , for the first two categories the user transmits both the features that influenced the artefacts’ evaluation and the features that potentially can influence the artefacts’ evaluation . By using asymmetric communication , the user transmits for the best category the features that influenced the artefacts’ evaluation , and for the second category the features that potentially can influence the artefacts’ evaluation . Part ( a ) shows the percentage of simulations ( over 10 runs ) with at least one exaptation for different quantities of features transmitted to the producer . The time interval of reference ( from 50 to 1000 steps ) is also shown . Part ( b ) shows the average number of exaptations for each simulation over 10 runs . An agent - based model of exaptive processes Marco Villani et al . 149 2 . The user can modify a randomly selected category ( all five categories being involved ) by introducing some information coming from the artefact . This modality allows the user to learn and to actively participate in defining its own satisfaction , measured by means of the already presented variable F max . Both modalities are characterised by the updating rate f , expressing the probability that at each time step the category of the user is selected for a substitution ( updat - ing ) . In addition , we remark that the second modality needs the change probability P ch for each feature ( in all our trials P ch ¼ 0 . 02 ) , once a feature is chosen for merging with the corresponding artefact characteristics . The merging algo - rithm is described in Table 4 . The random modality shows a small increase in the number of exaptation events , for both symmetric and asymmetric communications . Such a phenomenon appears to be relevant and it is evident also during the longer simulation runs . An higher updating rate f does not enhance this phenomenon . The second modality shows more interesting features . We find a bigger exaptation frequency that increases almost linearly with the growth of the adjournment rate f ( see also Figure 5a ) ; also the F max level of satisfaction increases with the adjournment rate ( Figure 5b ) . A real example of ‘learned’ exaptation could be that of the SMSs ( the Short Message Service ) , initially introduced to send brief official messages from the telephone company and subsequently became a new mean for the communication of mass . In this case , the users succeeded in understanding the communicative potentiality of this system overcoming limits of space by means of creation of a particular language , more ‘assembled’ and intuitive . As a result , the phone companies initiated a market strategy based upon this new functionality . Conclusion Common claims in literature about innovation are that novelties are recombinations of current capabilities and that their search is local , or that creativity is constituted by sudden blind insight . Both views are not satisfactory , because the first hypothesis is not able to describe radical innovation , whereas the second one provides little con - ceptual gain . In this paper , we propose that radical innovations are created by a process of ‘exaptation’ . We introduce an agent - based model designed to investigate the dynamics of some aspects of exaptation in a world populated by agents , whose activity is organised around production and utilisation of artefacts . The model , EMIS not only explicitly includes agents and artefacts , but also encompasses agents’ sub - jective representation of the artefacts by means of cognitive categories . In our model , the agents build ( as producers ) Figure 5 Learning from the environment . Agents can modify their categories by learning from the environment : at each time step there is the probability f of selecting a category for modification ; in this case , a fraction P ch of the category’s features change their value . The user can communicate to the producer the artefacts’ features that mostly influenced the artefacts’ evaluation , and / or the artefacts’ features that potentially can heavily influence the artefacts’ evaluation . By using symmetric communication , for the first two categories the user transmits both the features that influenced the artefacts’ evaluation and the features that potentially can influence the artefacts’ evaluation . By using asymmetric communication , the user transmits for the best category the features that influenced the artefacts’ evaluation , and for the second category the features that potentially can influence the artefacts’ evaluation . Part ( a ) shows learning modality : the percentage of simulations ( over 10 runs ) with atleast one exaptation , by varying the adjournment rate f . Part ( b ) shows the average for the same runs : the fraction of the satisfaction index F max reached by the artefact functionality , by varying the adjournment rate f , for both random and learning modality . The learning increases the exaptation event probability . Table 4 Learning from the environment Considered vector Features value Artefact – A p 1 0 1 0 1 0 Category – A u 1 1 0 0 $ 1 $ 1 New category 1 0 1 0 0 $ 1 Agents can modify their categories by learning from the environment : at each time step there is the probability f of selecting a category for a modification ; in this case , a fraction P ch of the category’s features change their value . The table shows all the possible combinations and the correspondent outcomes . The general schema is that the differences tend to decrease and that the category is plastic . Therefore : ( a ) if the artefact feature is ‘1’ , the corresponding feature of the new category become ‘1’ , unless the involved characteristic is ‘not desired’ ( in this case , it reduces the distance and becomes ‘0’ ) ; ( b ) if the artifact features is ‘0’ , the corresponding feature of the new category also becomes ‘0’ , unless the involved characteristic is ‘not desired’ ( in this case , it maintains the old value ) . An agent - based model of exaptive processes Marco Villani et al . 150 and interpret ( as users ) the artefacts using cognitive categories . One of the main features of EMIS is the description of the information exchange dynamics among agents . Two main processes characterise such a dynamics : ( i ) interpretation and storage of information by each agent and ( ii ) circulation of information through the exchange of artefacts . The first process takes place in the cognitive domain of each agent . In particular , at any given time , each agent owns a cognitive representation of a number of real objects ( artefacts ) in terms of a set of cognitive features ( categories ) . The second process involves the communica - tion among agents of a fraction of the information stored in categories . Eventually , the producers employ their sets of cognitive categories to make artefacts that are in turn submitted to the users . The users evaluate the functionality of such artefacts by means of their cognitive categories and next send signals to producers about their ‘satisfaction’ with such artefacts . The agents in the model are able to attribute ‘function - alities’ to the artefacts in terms of categories ; a given attribution can generate a certain reward associated with the artefact of reference . Thus , the type of representation proposed is suitable to take into account exaptation events , which are understood as shifts in terms of the ‘leading attributions’ ( attributions corresponding to highest reward ) that the agents assign to the artefacts . The model has been implemented in a computer environment . The main goal of the computer simulations is to determine some of the factors playing a central role in the information - exchange processes , with particular atten - tion to the study of exaptation . From our first simulations , we can conclude that some of the most important elements favouring the emergence of exaptation events are : 1 . an asymmetrical communication , where evaluations and desires are differently expressed for different categories ; 2 . a high number of cognitive features ( characteristics ) communicated among the agents 3 . a high level of production noise ; 4 . the plasticity of the users’ categories . In conclusion , we can assert that the explicit representa - tion of artefacts and categories eases the understanding of the exaptation phenomenon , seen in this context as a shift in terms of ‘leading attributions’ , and allows the identification of the elements favouring the emergence of exaptation . Note 1 A more correct notation would be C k , p and C k , u , with k A [ 1 , y , s ] , s being different for producers and users . Never - theless , for reason of clarity , in the following we omit such an index : simply , the reader should remember that both users and producers possess more than one category ( the producers owning one category for each artefact ) . References Ceruti , M . , 1995 , Evoluzione senza fondamenti . Laterza , Bari : collana ‘‘Il nocciolo’’ . Dew , N . , S . D . Sarasvathy and S . Venkataraman , 2004 , ‘‘The economic implications of exaptation’’ . Journal of Evolutionary Economics , 14 ( 1 ) : 69 – 84 . Ferrari , D . , D . Read and S . van der Leeuw , 2008 ( in press ) . The emergence of new categories in artefact innovation’’ . In D . Pumain , D . Lane and S . van der Leeuw ( eds . ) Complexity perspectives on innovation and social change . Berlin : Springer . Gould , J . S . , 2002 , The structure of evolutionary theory . Cambridge , MA : The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press . Gould , S . J . and R . C . Lewontin , 1979 , The spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian paradigm , Proceedings of the Royal Society of London , B . 205 , pp : 581 – 598 . Gould , S . J . and E . Verba , 1982 , ‘‘Exaptation , a missing term in the science of form’’ . Paleobiology , 8 ( 1 ) : 4 – 15 . Kimura , M . , 1983 , The neutral theory of molecular evolution . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Macrae , N . and G . Bodenhausen , 2000 , ‘‘Social cognition : Thinking categorically about others’’ . Annual Review of Psychology , 51 : 93 – 120 . March , J . G . , 1991 , ‘‘Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning’’ . Organisation Science , 2 ( 1 ) : 77 – 87 . Markman , A . B . and D . Gentner , 2001 , ‘‘Thinking’’ . Annual Review of Psychology , 52 : 223 – 247 . Mokyr , J . , 1998 , ‘‘Induced technical innovation and medical history : An evolutionary approach’’ . Journal of Evolutionary Economics , 8 ( 2 ) : 119 – 137 . Schumpeter , J . A . , 1934 , The theory of economic development ( 1983 Edition , John Elliott , ed . ) , New Brunswick , NH : Transaction Publishers . Selby , H . A . and F . El Guindi , 1976 , ‘‘Dialectics in zapotec thinking’’ . In K . Basso and H . A . Selby ( eds . ) Meaning in anthropology . Albuquerque , NM : University of New Mexico Press , pp : 181 – 196 . Simon , H . A . , 1996 , ‘‘The architecture of complexity’’ . In Sciences of the artificial , 3rd edn . , Cambridge : MIT Press . An agent - based model of exaptive processes Marco Villani et al . 151