CHAPTER ONE Philosophy in the Flesh The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge to Western Thought By GEORGE LAKOFF and MARK JOHNSON Basic Books Read the Review Introduction : Who Are We ? How Cognitive Science Reopens Central Philosophical Questions The mind is inherently embodied . Thought is mostly unconscious . Abstract concepts are largely metaphorical . These are three major findings of cognitive science . More than two millennia of a priori philosophical speculation about these aspects of reason are over . Because of these discoveries , philosophy can never be the same again . When taken together and considered in detail , these three findings from the science of the mind are inconsistent with central parts of Western philosophy . They require a thorough rethinking of the most popular current approaches , namely , Anglo - American analytic philosophy and postmodernist philosophy . This book asks : What would happen if we started with these empirical discoveries about the nature of mind and constructed philosophy anew ? Philosophy in the Flesh https : / / www . nytimes . com / books / first / l / lakoff - philosophy . html 1 of 7 6 / 28 / 2013 1 : 12 PM The answer is that an empirically responsible philosophy would require our culture to abandon some of its deepest philosophical assumptions . This book is an extensive study of what many of those changes would be in detail . Our understanding of what the mind is matters deeply . Our most basic philosophical beliefs are tied inextricably to our view of reason . Reason has been taken for over two millennia as the defining characteristic of human beings . Reason includes not only our capacity for logical inference , but also our ability to conduct inquiry , to solve problems , to evaluate , to criticize , to deliberate about how we should act , and to reach an understanding of ourselves , other people , and the world . A radical change in our understanding of reason is therefore a radical change in our understanding of ourselves . It is surprising to discover , on the basis of empirical research , that human rationality is not at all what the Western philosophical tradition has held it to be . But it is shocking to discover that we are very different from what our philosophical tradition has told us we are . Let us start with the changes in our understanding of reason : * Reason is not disembodied , as the tradition has largely held , but arises from the nature of our brains , bodies , and bodily experience . This is not just the innocuous and obvious claim that we need a body to reason ; rather , it is the striking claim that the very structure of reason itself comes from the details of our embodiment . The same neural and cognitive mechanisms that allow us to perceive and move around also create our conceptual systems and modes of reason . Thus , to understand reason we must understand the details of our visual system , our motor system , and the general mechanisms of neural binding . In summary , reason is not , in any way , a transcendent feature of the universe or of disembodied mind . Instead , it is shaped crucially by the peculiarities of our human bodies , by the remarkable details of the neural structure of our brains , and by the specifics of our everyday functioning in the world . * Reason is evolutionary , in that abstract reason builds on and makes use of forms of perceptual and motor inference present in " lower " animals . The result is a Darwinism of reason , a rational Darwinism : Reason , even in its most abstract form , makes use of , rather than transcends , our animal nature . The discovery that Philosophy in the Flesh https : / / www . nytimes . com / books / first / l / lakoff - philosophy . html 2 of 7 6 / 28 / 2013 1 : 12 PM reason is evolutionary utterly changes our relation to other animals and changes our conception of human beings as uniquely rational . Reason is thus not an essence that separates us from other animals ; rather , it places us on a continuum with them . * Reason is not " universal " in the transcendent sense ; that is , it is not part of the structure of the universe . It is universal , however , in that it is a capacity shared universally by all human beings . What allows it to be shared are the commonalities that exist in the way our minds are embodied . * Reason is not completely conscious , but mostly unconscious . * Reason is not purely literal , but largely metaphorical and imaginative . * Reason is not dispassionate , but emotionally engaged . This shift in our understanding of reason is of vast proportions , and it entails a corresponding shift in our understanding of what we are as human beings . What we now know about the mind is radically at odds with the major classical philosophical views of what a person is . For example , there is no Cartesian dualistic person , with a mind separate from and independent of the body , sharing exactly the same disembodied transcendent reason with everyone else , and capable of knowing everything about his or her mind simply by self - reflection . Rather , the mind is inherently embodied , reason is shaped by the body , and since most thought is unconscious , the mind cannot be known simply by self - reflection . Empirical study is necessary . There exists no Kantian radically autonomous person , with absolute freedom and a transcendent reason that correctly dictates what is and isn ' t moral . Reason , arising from the body , doesn ' t transcend the body . What universal aspects of reason there are arise from the commonalities of our bodies and brains and the environments we inhabit . The existence of these universals does not imply that reason transcends the body . Moreover , since conceptual systems vary significantly , reason is not entirely universal . Since reason is shaped by the body , it is not radically free , because the possible human conceptual systems and the possible forms of reason are limited . In addition , once we have learned a conceptual system , it is neurally instantiated in our brains and we are not free to think just anything . Hence , we have no absolute freedom in Kant ' s sense , no full Philosophy in the Flesh https : / / www . nytimes . com / books / first / l / lakoff - philosophy . html 3 of 7 6 / 28 / 2013 1 : 12 PM autonomy . There is no a priori , purely philosophical basis for a universal concept of morality and no transcendent , universal pure reason that could give rise to universal moral laws . The utilitarian person , for whom rationality is economic rationality - - the maximization of utility - - does not exist . Real human beings are not , for the most part , in conscious control of - - or even consciously aware of - - their reasoning . Most of their reason , besides , is based on various kinds of prototypes , framings , and metaphors . People seldom engage in a form of economic reason that could maximize utility . The phenomenological person , who through phenomenological introspection alone can discover everything there is to know about the mind and the nature of experience , is a fiction . Although we can have a theory of a vast , rapidly and automatically operating cognitive unconscious , we have no direct conscious access to its operation and therefore to most of our thought . Phenomenological reflection , though valuable in revealing the structure of experience , must be supplemented by empirical research into the cognitive unconscious . There is no poststructuralist person - - no completely decentered subject for whom all meaning is arbitrary , totally relative , and purely historically contingent , unconstrained by body and brain . The mind is not merely embodied , but embodied in such a way that our conceptual systems draw largely upon the commonalities of our bodies and of the environments we live in . The result is that much of a person ' s conceptual system is either universal or widespread across languages and cultures . Our conceptual systems are not totally relative and not merely a matter of historical contingency , even though a degree of conceptual relativity does exist and even though historical contingency does matter a great deal . The grounding of our conceptual systems in shared embodiment and bodily experience creates a largely centered self , but not a monolithic self . There exists no Fregean person - - as posed by analytic philosophy - - for whom thought has been extruded from the body . That is , there is no real person whose embodiment plays no role in meaning , whose meaning is purely objective and defined by the external world , and whose language can fit the external world with no significant role played by mind , brain , or body . Because our conceptual systems grow out of our bodies , meaning is grounded in and through our bodies . Because a vast range of our concepts are metaphorical , meaning is not entirely literal and the classical correspondence theory of truth is false . The correspondence theory holds that statements are true or false objectively , depending on how they map directly onto the world - - independent of any human understanding of either Philosophy in the Flesh https : / / www . nytimes . com / books / first / l / lakoff - philosophy . html 4 of 7 6 / 28 / 2013 1 : 12 PM the statement or the world . On the contrary , truth is mediated by embodied understanding and imagination . That does not mean that truth is purely subjective or that there is no stable truth . Rather , our common embodiment allows for common , stable truths . There is no such thing as a computational person , whose mind is like computer software , able to work on any suitable computer or neural hardware - - whose mind somehow derives meaning from taking meaningless symbols as input , manipulating them by rule , and giving meaningless symbols as output . Real people have embodied minds whose conceptual systems arise from , are shaped by , and are given meaning through living human bodies . The neural structures of our brains produce conceptual systems and linguistic structures that cannot be adequately accounted for by formal systems that only manipulate symbols . Finally , there is no Chomskyan person , for whom language is pure syntax , pure form insulated from and independent of all meaning , context , perception , emotion , memory , attention , action , and the dynamic nature of communication . Moreover , human language is not a totally genetic innovation . Rather , central aspects of language arise evolutionarily from sensory , motor , and other neural systems that are present in " lower " animals . Classical philosophical conceptions of the person have stirred our imaginations and taught us a great deal . But once we understand the importance of the cognitive unconscious , the embodiment of mind , and metaphorical thought , we can never go back to a priori philosophizing about mind and language or to philosophical ideas of what a person is that are inconsistent with what we are learning about the mind . Given our new understanding of the mind , the question of what a human being is arises for us anew in the most urgent way . Asking Philosophical Questions Requires Using Human Reason If we are going to ask philosophical questions , we have to remember that we are human . As human beings , we have no special access to any form of purely objective or transcendent reason . We must necessarily use common human cognitive and neural mechanisms . Because most of our thought is unconscious , a priori philosophizing provides no privileged direct access to Philosophy in the Flesh https : / / www . nytimes . com / books / first / l / lakoff - philosophy . html 5 of 7 6 / 28 / 2013 1 : 12 PM knowledge of our own mind and how our experience is constituted . In asking philosophical questions , we use a reason shaped by the body , a cognitive unconscious to which we have no direct access , and metaphorical thought of which we are largely unaware . The fact that abstract thought is mostly metaphorical means that answers to philosophical questions have always been , and always will be , mostly metaphorical . In itself , that is neither good nor bad . It is simply a fact about the capacities of the human mind . But it has major consequences for every aspect of philosophy . Metaphorical thought is the principal tool that makes philosophical insight possible and that constrains the forms that philosophy can take . Philosophical reflection , uninformed by cognitive science , did not discover , establish , and investigate the details of the fundamental aspects of mind we will be discussing . Some insightful philosophers did notice some of these phenomena , but lacked the empirical methodology to establish the validity of these results and to study them in fine detail . Without empirical confirmation , these facts about the mind did not find their way into the philosophical mainstream . Jointly , the cognitive unconscious , the embodiment of mind , and metaphorical thought require not only a new way of understanding reason and the nature of a person . They also require a new understanding of one of the most common and natural of human activities - - asking philosophical questions . What Goes into Asking and Answering Philosophical Questions ? If you ' re going to reopen basic philosophical issues , here ' s the minimum you have to do . First , you need a method of investigation . Second , you have to use that method to understand basic philosophical concepts . Third , you have to apply that method to previous philosophies to understand what they are about and what makes them hang together . And fourth , you have to use that method to ask the big questions : What it is to be a person ? What is morality ? How do we understand the causal structure of the universe ? And so on . This book takes a small first step in each of these areas , with the intent of giving an overview of the enterprise of rethinking what philosophy can become . The methods we use come from cognitive science and cognitive Philosophy in the Flesh https : / / www . nytimes . com / books / first / l / lakoff - philosophy . html 6 of 7 6 / 28 / 2013 1 : 12 PM linguistics . We discuss these methods in Part I of the book . In Part II , we study the cognitive science of basic philosophical ideas . That is , we use these methods to analyze certain basic concepts that any approach to philosophy must address , such as time , events , causation , the mind , the self , and morality . In Part III , we begin the study of philosophy itself from the perspective of cognitive science . We apply these analytic methods to important moments in the history of philosophy : Greek metaphysics , including the pre - Socratics , Plato , and Aristotle ; Descartes ' s theory of mind and Enlightenment faculty psychology ; Kant ' s moral theory ; and analytic philosophy . These methods , we argue , lead to new and deep insights into these great intellectual edifices . They help us understand those philosophies and explain why , despite their fundamental differences , they have each seemed intuitive to many people over the centuries . We also take up issues in contemporary philosophy , linguistics , and the social sciences , in particular , Anglo - American analytic philosophy , Chomskyan linguistics , and the rational - actor model used in economics and foreign policy . Finally , in Part IV , we summarize what we have learned in the course of this inquiry about what human beings are and about the human condition . What emerges is a philosophy close to the bone . A philosophical perspective based on our empirical understanding of the embodiment of mind is a philosophy in the flesh , a philosophy that takes account of what we most basically are and can be . ( C ) 1999 George Lakoff and Mark Johnson All rights reserved . ISBN : 0 - 465 - 05673 - 3 Home | Site Index | Site Search | Forums | Archives | Marketplace Quick News | Page One Plus | International | National / N . Y . | Business | Technology | Science | Sports | Weather | Editorial | Op - Ed | Arts | Automobiles | Books | Diversions | Job Market | Real Estate | Travel Help / Feedback | Classifieds | Services | New York Today Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company Philosophy in the Flesh https : / / www . nytimes . com / books / first / l / lakoff - philosophy . html 7 of 7 6 / 28 / 2013 1 : 12 PM But in the late 1960s , he joined with other . former students to promote generative semantics as an alternative to Chomsky ' s gener - . ative syntax . The result was a series of " linguistic wars , " whose history has been retold . by various participants over the past twenty years . Chapter 22 of this book presents . a strong case against Chomsky ' s " autonomous syntax " and for an approach that . Â The philosophical and linguistic arguments of Chapter 22 are reinforced in the . appendix by a summary of the . Neural Theory of Language . ( NTL ) , which is being de - . veloped by Jerome Feldman , George Lakoff , Lokendra Shastri , and their students . To . date , the NTL group has undertaken three major tasks in language understanding . f ~ . In the style of Daniel Dennett ' s Consciousness Explained , George Lakoff and Mark Johnson break down complex concepts in easy - to - follow terms . They clarify how three major discoveries - - the workings of mind cannot be separated from the anatomy and physiology of brain ; thought is mostly unconscious ; and abstract concepts are largely metaphorical - - refute the long - held view that reason is independent of the body , literal , directly accessible to conscious reflection , and uniquely human . Keen insights into concepts of time , mind , self , and morality accompanyreexaminations of philosophical tr His new book Philosophy In The Flesh , coauthored by Mark Johnson , makes the following points : " The mind is inherently embodied . Thought is mostly unconscious . Abstract concepts are largely metaphorical . " Lakoff believes that new empirical evidence concerning these finding of cognitive science have taken us over the epistemological divide : we are in a new place and our philosophical assumptions are all up for grabs . He and Johnson write : " When taken together and considered in detail , these three findings from the science of the mind are inconsistent with central parts of Western philosophy