Biochem . J . ( 2009 ) 418 , 701 – 715 ( Printed in Great Britain ) doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20081288 701 Dab2 regulates clathrin assembly and cell spreading David CHETRIT , Naomi ZIV and Marcelo EHRLICH 1 Department of Cell Research and Immunology , George S . Wise Faculty of Life Sciences , Tel Aviv University , Tel Aviv 69978 , Israel The recruitment of clathrin to the membrane and its assembly into coated pits results from its interaction with endocytic adaptors and other regulatory proteins in the context of a speciﬁc lipid microenvironment . Dab2 ( disabled 2 ) is a mitotic phosphoprotein and a monomeric adaptor for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . In the present study , we employed GFP ( green ﬂuorescent protein ) fusion constructs of different isoforms and mutants of rat Dab2 and characterized their effect on the size , distribution and dynamics of clathrin assemblies . Enhanced levels of expression of the p82 isoform of Dab2 in COS7 cells induced enlarged clathrin assemblies at the plasma membrane . p82 – clathrin assemblies , which concentrate additional endocytic proteins , such as AP2 ( adaptor protein 2 ) and epsin , are dynamic structures in which both p82 and clathrin exchange actively between the membrane - bound and cytosolic sub - populations . The ability of p82 to induce enlarged clathrin assemblies is dependent on the presence of a functional PTB do - main ( phosphotyrosine - binding domain ) , on binding to clathrin and phospholipids , and on a newly identiﬁed and evolutionarily conserved poly - lysine stretch which precedes the PTB domain . These same molecular features are required for Dab2 to enhance the spreading of COS7 cells on ﬁbronectin . The ability of the p82 isoform of Dab2 to enhance cell spreading was conﬁrmed in both HeLa cells and HBL cells ( human breast epithelial cells ) . COS7 cells expressing GFP – p82 and plated on to ﬁbronectin concentrate the β 1 integrin into clathrin – p82 assemblies . Furthermore , during cell spreading , p82 – clathrin assemblies con - centrate at the site of the initial cell – matrix contact and are absent from regions of intense membrane rufﬂing . We propose a role for Dab2 and clathrin in integrin - mediated cell spreading . Key words : clathrin , cell spreading , disabled 2 ( Dab2 ) , endo - cytosis , live - cell microscopy , membrane binding . INTRODUCTION The monomeric CLASPs ( clathrin - associated sorting proteins ) are prominent mediators and synchronizers of receptor activation , cargo selection and clathrin coat polymerization [ 1 – 3 ] . Numb , ARH ( autosomal recessive hypercholesterolaemia ) and Dab2 ( disabled 2 ) form an important subclass of CLASPs , characterized by an evolutionarily conserved PTB domain ( phosphotyrosine - binding domain ) that recognizes unphosphorylated NPXY signals [ 4 ] . This recognition is essential for clathrin - dependent internalization of receptors , such as the LDLR [ LDL ( low - density lipoprotein ) receptor ] and the megalin receptor [ 5 – 8 ] . In spite of the structural similarities in their endocytic motif recognition module , there are considerable differences among CLASPs . Dab2 and ARH both mediate LDLR endocytosis ; however , only Dab2 is able to do so in the absence of the endocytic adaptor complex AP2 ( adaptor protein 2 ) [ 7 ] . This ability stems from the structure of Dab2 , which includes modules for interaction with PIP2 ( phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ) , clathrin , SH3 ( Src homology 3 ) and EH ( Eps15 homology ) domains and myosin [ 7 , 9 ] . This myriad of interactions endows Dab2 with the potential of co - ordinating coat assembly , cargo recruitment and vesicle formation and trafﬁc . Alternative splicing generates different Dab2 isoforms . These isoforms are labelled as p96 , p93 and p67 in mice and humans , and p82 and p59 in rats ( corresponding to the p96 and p67 isoforms respectively ) . Exon 9 , which differentiates p59 ( p67 ) and p82 ( p96 ) Dab2 isoforms , encodes for clathrin - and AP2 - binding motifs . However , p59 retains an AP2 - binding motif ( of the FXDXF category [ 10 ] ) and NPF motifs , which bind EH domains . These motifs may mediate its localization to endocytic structures and determine its function as an internalization adaptor . The p82 and p59 isoforms have been reported to differ in their intracellular localization and function . In previous studies , p82 ( or p96 ) has been shown to be localized to the plasma membrane , in accordance with its proposed function in endocytosis [ 8 , 11 ] . In contrast , p59 has been shown to localize to the cytosol and nucleus , and is proposed to function as a transcriptional activator [ 12 ] . Accordingly , in dab2 - knockout mice , the p67 isoform only partially rescues the effect of the absence of Dab2 [ 5 ] . However , in addition to its endocytic functions , Dab2 is a signal mediator . In this context , the differences between isoforms are less clear . For example , both p59 and p82 inhibit NGF ( nerve growth factor ) - induced neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells [ 13 ] . Dab2 is also a mitotic phosphoprotein and a tumour - supressor gene [ 14 – 20 ] . In this context , Dab2 regulates the Wnt and TGF β ( transforming growth factor β ) signalling pathways [ 21 – 23 ] . The role played by Dab2 in signal transduction is underscored by its direct interactions with signalling mediators , such as Src , Grb2 ( growth - factor - receptor - boundprotein2 ) andaGTPase - activating protein of Ras , Dab2IP ( Dab2 - interacting protein ) [ 24 – 26 ] . Dab2 also binds the β 3 integrin subunit , making it a candidate for the regulation of cell – matrix interactions [ 27 , 28 ] . Accordingly , an increase in Dab2 expression enhances the adhesion and spreading of macrophages to laminin - coated surfaces [ 29 ] . Abbreviations used : AP1 , adaptor protein 1 ; AP2 , adaptor protein 2 ; ARH , autosomal recessive hypercholesterolaemia ; CCF , cross correlation function ; CLASP , clathrin - associated sorting protein ; Dab2 , disabled 2 ; Dab2IP , Dab2 - interacting protein ; Dab2 pSer24 , Dab2 phosphorylated at Ser 24 ; EH , Eps15 homology ; FRAP , ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching ; GFP , green ﬂuorescent protein ; GGA , Golgi - associated γ - adaptin ear homology domain Arf ( ADP - ribosylation factor ) - interacting protein ; HBL cell , human breast epithelial cell ; LCa , clathrin light chain A ; LDL , low - density lipoprotein ; LDLR , LDL receptor ; maxCCF , maximal CCF ; PIP2 , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ; PTB domain , phosphotyrosine - binding domain ; RFP , red ﬂuorescent protein ; S24DDD , substitution of p82 Ser 24 with three aspartate residues ; shRNA , small - hairpin RNA ; siRNA , small interfering RNA ; TGF β , transforming growth factor β ; T β RI , type 1 TGF β receptor . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed ( email marceloe @ tauex . tau . ac . il ) . c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2009 Biochemical Society 702 D . Chetrit , N . Ziv and M . Ehrlich The levels of expression of Dab2 and other PTB - domain - containing endocytic adaptors vary markedly depending on the cell type and state . Thus Dab2 was identiﬁed initially as a gene whose expression is reduced early in the tumour progress - ion of ovarian , colorectal , breast and other epithelial cancers [ 16 , 18 , 20 ] . Furthermore , a recent study has shown that a marked transcriptional up - regulation of PTB - domain - containing adaptors occurs during mosquito oogenesis [ 30 ] , a process which involves reorganization of the clathrin endocytic machinery [ 31 , 32 ] . In spite of growing interest in Dab2 , the characterization of its in vivo dynamics , the effects of variations in the levels of Dab2 on the organization and function of the clathrin endocytic mach - inery , its role in the spreading of non - haematopoietic cells and the molecular determinants which regulate these functions have yet to be addressed . In the present study , we have monitored the dynamics of Dab2 in live cells . To this end , we have generated GFP ( green ﬂuorescent protein ) fusion constructs of the p82 and p59 isoforms of rat Dab2 . We have also generated GFP – p82 mutants that are deﬁcient in their ability to interact with speciﬁc proteins or phospholipids . We report that overexpression of the p82 isoform of Dab2 alters the distribution of clathrin on the cell membrane . Dab2 – clathrin platforms are dynamic struc - tures which concentrate β 1 integrin , are absent from areas of membrane rufﬂing and enhance the spreading of COS7 cells on ﬁbronectin . EXPERIMENTAL Antibodies and reagents Alexa Fluor ® 546 - conjugated anti - ( biferric transferrin ) and Alexa Fluor ® 555 - conjugated goat anti - mouse antibodies were from Molecular Probes . The monoclonal anti - α - adaptin ( sc - 32284 ) and anti - ( clathrin heavy chain ) ( sc - 58715 ) antibodies , and the polyclonal anti - Dab2 ( sc - 13982 ) and anti - ( Dab2 pSer24 ) ( Dab2 phosphorylated at Ser 24 ) ( sc - 32573 - R ) antibodies were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology . The monoclonal anti - β 1 integrin antibody ( TS2 / 16 ) [ 33 ] was a gift from Dr Ilana Yron ( Department of Cell Research and Immunology , George S . Wise Faculty of Life Sciences Tel Aviv University , Tel Aviv , Israel ) . Monoclonal anti - Myc antibody ( 9E10 ) was from Harvard Monoclonals . Cy3 ( indocarbocyanine ) - conjugated goat anti - rabbit secondary antibodies were from Jackson Immunoresearch . DAPI ( 4 (cid:3) , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ) , ﬁbronectin and BSA were from Sigma – Aldrich , and butan - 1 - ol was from Merck . Cells COS7 cells and HeLa cells ( both from the A . T . C . C . ) and HBL cells ( human breast epithelial cells ) , which were a gift from Dr Nechama Smorodinsky ( Department of Cell Research and Immunology , George S . Wise Faculty of Life Sciences Tel Aviv University , Tel Aviv , Israel ) were maintained in DMEM ( Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium ) supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) fetal calf serum , 5 mM L - glutamine and antibiotics ( all from Biological Industries ) . Plasmids , mutants and transfections The rat Dab2 ( p82 ) clone was from Open Biosystems . GFP - p82 / p59 fusion proteins were obtained by cloning p82 into the HindIII and XbaI sites of the pEGFP - C1 expression vector ( Clontech ) . The GFP – p59 construct was generated by overlapping PCR , using p82 as a template . The overlapping primers used were 5 (cid:3) - TGACCTAAATAATCCAACATCTTCAGCAAACGACCTGC - TTG - 3 (cid:3) and 5 (cid:3) - CAGGTCGTTTGCTGAAGATGTTGGATTATT - TAGGTCAGGAGG - (cid:3) 3 . Mutations to GFP – p82 were made using the QuikChange II site - directed mutagenesis kit ( Stratagene ) employing the following primers : S24A 5 (cid:3) - GCACCGAAAGC - ACCAGCGAAGAAGGAAAAGAAGAAAGG - 3 (cid:3) ( sense ) and 5 (cid:3) - CTTTTCCTTCTTCGCTGGTGCTTTCGGTGCAGCCTG - 3 (cid:3) ( antisense ) , S24D 5 (cid:3) - GCACCGAAAGCACCAGACAAGAAG - GAAAAGAAGAAAGG - 3 (cid:3) ( sense ) and 5 (cid:3) - CTTTTCCTTCTT - GTCTGGTGCTTTCGGTGCAGCCTG - 3 (cid:3) ( antisense ) , S24DDD ( substitution of p82 Ser 24 with three aspartate residues ) 5 (cid:3) - GC - ACCGAAAGCACCAGACGACGACAAGAAGGAAAAGAA - GAAAGG - 3 (cid:3) ( sense ) and 5 (cid:3) - CTTTTCCTTCTTGTCGTC - GTCTGGTGCTTTCGGTGCAGCCTG - 3 (cid:3) ( antisense ) , K28A / K29A / K30A 5 (cid:3) - CAAAGAAGGAAGCGGCGGCGGGTTCTG - AAAAGACAGATGAG - 3 (cid:3) ( sense ) and 5 (cid:3) - CTTTTCAGAACC - CGCCGCCGCTTCCTTCTTTGATGGTGCTTTCG - 3 (cid:3) ( anti - sense ) , K53Q 5 (cid:3) - AAATACAAGGCCCAGCTAATCGGTATTG - ATGATGTGC - 3 (cid:3) ( sense ) and 5 (cid:3) - CAATACCGATTAGCTGGG - CCTTGTATTTTACACCATCACC - 3 (cid:3) ( antisense ) , S122Y 5 (cid:3) - GT - AAATAAGATTTACTTCATTGCTCGTGATGTGAC - 3 (cid:3) ( sense ) and 5 (cid:3) - CACGAGCAATGAAGTAAATCTTATTTACTGGATGT - TCATGC - 3 (cid:3) ( antisense ) , and G139A / G140A / E141A 5 (cid:3) - GGTT - ATGTGTGTGCGGCGGCGGGCCAGCATCAATTTTTTGC - 3 (cid:3) ( sense ) and 5 (cid:3) - TTGATGCTGGCCCGCCGCCGCACACACAT - AACCAAATGCTC - 3 (cid:3) ( sense ) . The C - terminal primer employed for the generation of tL208 ( Dab2 truncated at Leu 208 ) was : 5 (cid:3) - TTTTCCTTTTTCTAGATTACAGCTTCAGTTTGTTAGCT - TG - (cid:3) 3 . The shRNA ( small - hairpin RNA ) against Dab2 was from Open Biosystems and comprised the sequence 5 (cid:3) - CCGGGTGG - CTTCTTCTCAACCTGTACTCGAGTACAGGTTGAGAAGA - AGCCACTTTTTTG - 3 (cid:3) . The scrambled shRNA and the shRNA against the clathrin heavy chain were gifts from Dr Eran Bacharach ( Department of Cell Research and Immunology , George S . Wise Faculty of Life Sciences Tel Aviv University , Tel Aviv , Israel ) . The clathrin heavy chain shRNA oligonucleotide sequence was GATCCCCTGAGCTGTTTGAAGAAGC - ATTCAAGAGATGCTTCTTCAAACAGCTCATTTTTA . The sequence and the vector ( pSUPER _ retro _ puro vector ) were digested with BglII and HindIII . The siRNA ( small interfering RNA ) oligonucleotide against α - adaptin ( GAGCAUGUGCACGCUGGCCAGCU ) was purchased from Dharmacon . The sequence of the non - speciﬁc ( scrambled ) siRNA was AAGGTTGAAGACGGAAGTCCAGGCCCT . For the endocytosis assays , we employed two gain - of - function endocytosis mutants based on the addition of the NPXY signal to truncated Myc - tagged T β RI ( type 1 TGF β receptor ) [ see Figure 3 ( A ) for details ] [ a gift from Professor Yoav Henis ( Neurobiology Department , Tel Aviv University , Tel Aviv , Israel ) ] , which is not internalized . Insertion of the FDNPVY motif ( T β RI - LDL ) or the sequence EMASRARYNPVYKP ( T β RI - β 5 ) was performed by successive PCR using the following primer pairs : 5 (cid:3) - ATTCACCATAATCCAGTACCGAGTGTAGGCGGC - CG - 3 (cid:3) and 5 (cid:3) - CTACACTCGGTATACTGGATTATGGTGAATG - ACAGTG - 3 (cid:3) ( for the generation of both mutants ) , 5 (cid:3) - CAT - TCACCATTTCGACAATCCAGTATACCGAG - 3 (cid:3) and 5 (cid:3) - ATA - CTGGATTGTCGAAATGGTGAATGACAG - 3 (cid:3) ( for the gener - ation of the T β RI - LDL mutant ) , and 5 (cid:3) - TTCACCATGAGATG - GCATCCAATCCAGTATACCGAG - 3 (cid:3) , 5 (cid:3) - ATACTGGATTGG - ATGCCATCTCATGGTGAATGACAG - 3 (cid:3) , 5 (cid:3) - AGTATACCGA - AAGCCTGTGTAGGCCGCTCGAGC - 3 (cid:3) , 5 (cid:3) - CCGCCTACACA - GGCTTTCGGTATACTGGATTAGATGCC - 3 (cid:3) , 5 (cid:3) - CATTCAC - CATAGGGCCAGGTACGAGATGGCATCTAATCCAGTATAC - 3 (cid:3) and 5 (cid:3) - TGCCATCTCGTACCCCCTATGGTGAATGACAGT - GCGGTTG - 3 (cid:3) ( for the generation of the T β RI - β 5 mutant ) . c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2009 Biochemical Society Dab2 modiﬁes clathrin assemblies 703 All cloned fragments and mutants were checked by DNA sequencing . RFP ( red ﬂuorescent protein ) – epsin , a fusion of rat epsin 1 to the C - terminus of HcRFP ( where Hc is Heteractis crispa ) , was a gift from Professor Yossi Yarden ( Department of Biological Regulation , Weizmann Institute , Rehovot , Israel ) . All transfections of COS7 cells ( with the exception of siRNA transfection ) were carried out using the DEAE – dextran method as described previously [ 34 ] . siRNA transfection into COS7 cells was carried out using INTERFERin TM ( Polyplus Transfection ) . Transfection of DNA into HeLa cells was carried out using Lipofectamine TM 2000 ( Invitrogen ) . Transfection of siRNA into HeLa cells was carried out by microporation ( Digital Bio ) . Imaging data acquisition Images were acquired using a motorized spinning - disc confocal microscope ( Yokogawa CSU - 22 Confocal Head ; Axiovert 200M , Zeiss ) under the control of SlideBook TM ( Intelligent Imaging Innovations ) . A × 63 oil immersion objective lens ( NA 1 . 4 ) and a × 40 air objective lens ( Plan Apochromat , NA 0 . 75 ) were employed . Three dimensional image stacks were acquired by sequential acquisition of views recorded every 70 – 300 ms along the z - axis by varying the position of the piezo electrically controlled stage ( step size of 0 . 4 μ m ) . Time - lapse series were acquired with time intervals as speciﬁed in the Figure legends . Samples were illuminated with a 40 mW 473 nm or a 10 mW 561 nm solid - state laser ( typical exposure times of 0 . 5 – 1 s ) . Imaging data processing Images were restored in three dimensions by constrained iterative deconvolution [ 35 ] with SlideBook TM , using experimentally de - termined point - spread functions corresponding to 170 nm beads labelled with ﬂuorescent dyes ( Molecular Probes ) compatible with the 473 nm and 561 nm ﬁlter sets . Fluorescence intensities of the total amount of GFP – Dab2 or RFP – LCa ( clathrin light chain A ) constructs in cells was measured in the deconvoluted images after their projection into two dimensions by summing the pixel intensities of each plane . Photobleaching assays FRAP ( ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching ) was per - formed with a near - diffraction limited collimated laser beam ( Micropoint , Photonics Instruments ) generated by a nitrogen pulse laser ( VSL - 337ND - S ; Laser Science ) , wavelength - tuned with a coumarin - based dye to speciﬁcally photobleach EGFP ( enhanced GFP ) . The photobleached area was determined on the computer screen with SlideBook TM software ; bleaching was achieved with minimal intensities to avoid possible phototoxic effects . Fluorescence intensity measurements were corrected for non - speciﬁc photobleaching . The premise for the correction is that the overall intensity of non - bleached areas ( of different cells in the same ﬁeld ) should remain constant over time . Intensity measurements were multiplied by the inverse of the ratio of ﬂuorescence at a given time point over ﬂuorescence at the initial time point . Cell - spreading assay COS7 cells , transfected with the different GFP – Dab2 fusion constructs for 24 h , were resuspended by trypsinization , left to recover for 30 min at 37 ◦ C and replated on to ﬁbronectin - coated plates . At the indicated times , cells were ﬁxed and imaged . The Figure 1 Schematic representation of the GFP fusion constructs of the two rat Dab2 isoforms , the various deletion mutants , and alanine and aspartate substitution mutants used in the present study The generation of the mutants was performed as described in the Experimental section . Rat p82 consists of 768 amino acids . The PTB domain is located between amino acid residues 45 – 196 . Residues 230 – 447 of p82 are absent in p59 . Point mutations were planned according to published studies which attribute speciﬁc functions as speciﬁed in the Results section to Ser 24 , Ser 122 and Lys 53 . The G139A / G140A / E141A ( GGE139 – 141AAA ) mutation was planned accordingtothestructureoftheDab2PTBdomaininteractingwiththeFDNPXYmotifpublishedpreviously [ 66 ] . aa , amino acid ; tL208 , Dab2 truncated at Leu 208 . area of the cell in contact with the glass surface was measured with SlideBook TM software . Only mono - nucleated cells without blatantly aberrant nuclear morphology were examined . Statistical calculations All calculations of statistical signiﬁcance that appear in the text and in the Figure legends were calculated using the Student’s t test . RESULTS GFP – Dab2 modulates the distribution of clathrin at the plasma membrane To follow the distribution and dynamics of the different isoforms and mutants of Dab2 and characterize the effect of their ex - pression on the organization of plasma - membrane - bound clathrin assemblies , we generated GFP – Dab2 fusion proteins ( see Figure 1 for details ) , expressed them in different cell types , including COS7 cells , and analysed the cells by spinning - disc confocal microscopy . The reasons for choosing this experimental setup were : ( i ) COS7 cells are suitable for analysis of the distribution and dynamics of GFP fusion constructs of the LCa and other endocytic proteins [ 36 – 39 ] and ( ii ) COS7 cells contain minimal Dab2 ( Figure 2A ) , facilitating analysis of the effects elicited by the expression of different isoforms and mutant constructs of Dab2 . Two experimental approaches were employed to follow c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2009 Biochemical Society 704 D . Chetrit , N . Ziv and M . Ehrlich Figure 2 GFP – p82 and GFP – p59 localize to endocytic structures which contain clathrin and AP2 COS7cellsweretransfectedwithGFP – p82 ( A – C ) orco - transfectedwithGFP – p82 ( D ) orGFP – p59 ( E , F ) andRFP – LCa . Singlytransfectedcellswereﬁxed , permeabilizedandstainedwithpolyclonal anti - Dab2 ( A ) , monoclonal anti - ( clathrin heavy chain ) ( B ) or monoclonal anti - α - adaptin ( C ) antibodies , followed by a Alexa Fluor ® 555 - conjugated secondary antibody . Doubly transfected cells wereﬁxedandmountedpriortoimaging . In ( F ) , cellsexpressingGFP – p59andRFP – LCaweretreatedwithmediumsupplementedwith0 . 45Msucrose ( hypertonicshock ) for15minpriortoﬁxation . All micrographs , which were acquired with a spinning - disc confocal microscope , depict the ventral membrane of the cell . The ﬁrst two columns show pictures of individual wavelengths ; the third and fourth columns are merges , with the fourth column showing a close - up of the boxed region . Note the DAPI ( 4 (cid:3) , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ) staining of nuclear DNA in ( A ) , which marks the position of untransfected cells in the same ﬁeld . Quantitative measurement of the co - localization of these pictures was carried by calculating the van Steele’s CCF using ImageJ software ( maxCCF for the different pairs of proteins is speciﬁed in the text ) . Scale bar , 10 μ m . c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2009 Biochemical Society Dab2 modiﬁes clathrin assemblies 705 Figure 3 Overexpression of GFP – p82 and GFP – p59 speciﬁcally enhances the internalization of model receptors endowed with NPXY - based endocytic signals ( A ) Schematic representation of the constructs used . ( B ) T β RI - 158 , T β RI - LDL or T β RI - β 5 was co - transfected into COS7 cells with GFP ( white bars ) , GFP – p59 ( black bars ) or GFP – p82 ( striped bars ) . Transfected cells were incubated with amonoclonal anti - Myc antibody ( 9E10 ) for 1h at 4 ◦ C , warmed to 37 ◦ C for 20min and either acid washed or not prior to ﬁxation , permeabilization and stainingwithﬂuorescentlylabelledsecondaryantibodies . Theentirevolumeoflabelledcellswasimagedbyspinning - discconfocalmicroscopy ( 0 . 4 μ mbetweenz - steps ) , andtotalcellﬂuorescence was measured . The histogram depicts the average percentage of internalized receptor ( calculated as a percentage of the average ﬂuorescence intensity of unwashed cells ) of ∼ 30 – 50 cells per condition . Results are means + − S . E . M . ( n = 3 ) for a representative experiment . ∗∗∗ P < 0 . 0001 . ( C ) COS7 cells were transfected with GFP , GFP – p59 or GFP – p82 . After transfection ( 24h ) , cells were washed and incubated with Alexa Fluor ® 546 - conjugated transferrin ( 25 μ g / ml ) for 20min at 37 ◦ C . Cells were either acid washed or not prior to ﬁxation and imaging by confocal microscopy . The entire cell volume was imaged for ﬂuorescence intensity calculations . Graph depicts the average Alexa - 546 ﬂuorescence intensity ( calculated as a percentage of similarly transfected unwashed cells ) of 30 – 40 cells treated under each condition . Black bars represent acid - washed cells ( internalized transferrin ) and white bars represent cells that were not acid washed ( total transferrin ) . Results are means + − S . E . M . ( n = 3 ) for a representative experiment . ∗∗ P < 0 . 01 . the distribution of Dab2 , clathrin and AP2 in cells : ( i ) immuno - staining of endogenous proteins in ﬁxed cells and ( ii ) co - express - ion of ﬂuorescent fusion proteins ( i . e . GFP – Dab2 and RFP – LCa ) and analysis of their distribution by live - cell imaging . The degree of co - localization of the differently labelled proteins at the ventral membrane of the cell was measured by calculating the van Steele’s CCF ( cross correlation function ) of their ﬂuorescence on single confocal slices ( carried out using the co - localization module of NIH ImageJ ) [ 40 ] , with the maxCCF ( maximal CCF value ) at dX = 0 calculated for the typical pictures presented in the Figures . When the GFP fusion construct of the p82 isoform of rat Dab2 ( GFP – p82 ) was transiently expressed in COS7 cells ( 24 h post - transfection ) , the ﬂuorescent staining fully overlapped with the staining observed using the polyclonal anti - Dab2 antibody ( maxCCF = 0 . 847 ) , indicating that there are no major sites of accumulation of endogenous Dab2 that exclude GFP – p82 ; GFP – p82 also co - localized with clathrin heavy chain ( maxCCF = 0 . 738 ) , overexpressed clathrin light chain fused to RFP ( RFP – LCa ) ( maxCCF = 0 . 8 ) and endogenous AP2 ( maxCCF = 0 . 777 ) . Typical pictures used for quantiﬁcation are shown in Fig - ures 2 ( A ) – 2 ( D ) . Under similar expression conditions , GFP – p59 ( shown in Figure 1 ) displayed a mostly diffuse cytosolic distribution ( Figure 2E ) . However , at the ventral membrane of cells , clathrin and GFP – p59 co - localized to a certain extent ( maxCCF = 0 . 61 , see Figure 2E for typical images ) . To further probe the nature of this co - localization and to see if altering the localization of clathrin entails a similar change in the distribution of p59 , we subjected cells transiently expressing GFP – p59 and RFP – LCa to hypertonic shock ( 0 . 45 M sucrose ) , a condition that leads to the formation of clathrin microcages and to the depletion of soluble clathrin from the cytosol [ 41 ] . This treatment led to an analogous alteration of the intracellular distribution of GFP – p59 , i . e . recruitment to diffraction - limited punctate structures where clathrin was co - localized ( maxCCF = 0 . 841 , Figure 2F ) . Thus although GFP – p59 co - localized with clathrin to a lower extent than GFP – p82 in untreated cells , the notion that p59 interacts with endocytic structures is reinforced by its recruitment to clathrin microcages ( Figure 2F ) . Having conﬁrmed the localization of GFP – Dab2 fusion constructs to clathrin - coated structures at the plasma membrane , we next addressed the effect of their overexpression on endocytosis by using two methods . First , using a quantitative microscopy - based internalization assay , we followed the endo - cytosis of model receptors generated by the addition of endocytic motifs to an endocytosis - negative truncation mutant of the Myc - tagged T β RI [ 42 ] . This truncated receptor ( termed T β RI - 158 and depicted in Figure 3A ) is only internalized when supplemented with endocytic signals , such as FDNPXY ( the endocytic signal of the LDLR ) or the NPXY - based signal of the β 5 integrin ( schematically depicted in Figure 3A ) . COS7 cells were co - transfected for 24 h with the model receptor and GFP , GFP – p59 or GFP – p82 . The plasma membrane population of c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2009 Biochemical Society 706 D . Chetrit , N . Ziv and M . Ehrlich Myc - tagged receptors was labelled ( at 4 ◦ C to avoid internal - ization ) on live intact cells with a monoclonal anti - Myc antibody . Cells were then warmed to 37 ◦ C ( to allow endocytosis ) , after which they were either acid washed or not , prior to ﬁxation , permeabilization and staining with a ﬂuorescently labelled secondary antibody . The entire cell volume was captured by spinning - disc confocal microscopy and served as the basis for the calculation of ﬂuorescence intensities . The ratio between the internal ( acid washed ) and total cell ﬂuorescence was interpreted as the percentage of endocytosis . The results in Figure 3 ( B ) represent the average internalization percentage of ∼ 40 – 50 cells for each condition from a typical experiment ( n = 3 ) , and no substantial differences were observed between experiments . The internalization of T β RI - 158 was negligible under all conditions examined . Furthermore , the low level of internalization was not affected signiﬁcantly by overexpression of either GFP – p59 or GFP – p82 ( P > 0 . 1 in both cases ) . This is in accordance with the lack of internalization signals in its truncated cytoplasmic domain . In contrast , the internalization of the construct containing with the FDNPXY signal ( T β RI - LDL ) was enhanced by co - expression with GFP – p59 ( 5 . 12 + − 0 . 6 - fold enhancement , P < 0 . 0001 ) and GFP – p82 ( 4 . 6 + − 0 . 6 - fold enhancement , P < 0 . 0001 ) when compared with cells expressing GFP alone . To examine if the ability of GFP – p82 and GFP – p59 to enhance the internalization of endocytic cargo bearing NPXY - based signals is restricted to the sequence present in the LDLR , we repeated the experiment with an additional construct based on truncated T β RI . This construct , termed T β RI - β 5 , comprises , in its cytoplasmic domain , an NPXY sequence ( underlined ) surroundedbyresiduesthatareadjacenttothismotifin β 5integrin ( RARYEMASNPXYKP , see Figure 3A ) . The basal level of internalization of this receptor in GFP - expressing cells was lower than T β RI - LDL , supporting the notion that the phenylalanine and aspartate residues which precede this motif in the LDLR contribute to its effective internalization . Both GFP – p59 and GFP – p82 enhanced T β RI - β 5 internalization . Furthermore , the extent of the enhancement was similar to that obtained with T β RI - LDL ( 4 . 7 + − 0 . 63 - and 4 . 8 + − 0 . 77 - fold when compared with GFP for GFP – p59 and GFP – p82 respectively , with P < 0 . 0001 in both cases ) . Taken together , these results support the notion that under our experimental conditions , both GFP – p59 and GFP – p82 are functional endocytic adaptors . In the second approach , we followed the endocytosis of ﬂuor - escently labelled transferrin ( used here as an endocytic ligand internalized via an YXX (cid:4) signal ) . As expected for PTB - domain adaptors ( speciﬁc for NPXY - based signals ) [ 8 ] , the over - expression of either Dab2 isoform does not enhance the endo - cytosis of transferrin ( Figure 3C ) . In a typical experiment ( n = 3 ) , overexpression of GFP – p82 reduced transferrin endocytosis by ∼ 30 % ( P < 0 . 01 ; Figure 3C ) , whereas a lesser inhibitory effect is observed with GFP – p59 ( ∼ 15 % reduction ; Figure 3C ) . Thus , under our experimental conditions , GFP – p59 and GFP – p82 are endocytic adaptors , localize to clathrin - based structures and affect , in different manners , the internalization of receptors endowed with different endocytic signals . When imaging COS7 cells transiently transfected with GFP – p82 , we observed routinely GFP – p82 assemblies which were clearly above the diffraction limit ( ∼ 4 adjacent pixels in our imaging conditions ) . To further characterize these assemblies , we correlated the level of expression of GFP – p82 ( measured as the total GFP ﬂuorescence in cells ) and the average GFP – p82 content of individual assemblies at the plasma membrane . The average content of individual GFP – p82 assemblies correlated directly with the expression levels of GFP – p82 in each cell ( see Supplementary Figure S1 at http : / / www . BiochemJ . org / bj / 418 / bj4180701add . htm ) . Thus enhancing the expression level of GFP – p82 leads to an enlargement ( both in size and in p82 content ) of the membrane - bound p82 assemblies . Next , we employed spinning - disc confocal microscopy to characterize the intracellular distribution of GFP – p82 assemblies . Enlarged GFP – p82 assemblies localized mainly to the cell surface in contact with the glass ( see Supplementary Figure S2 at http : / / www . BiochemJ . org / bj / 418 / bj4180701add . htm ) . Quantiﬁcation of the distribution of assembled GFP – p82 from ﬁve cells revealed that 89 + − 3 % of the assembled GFP – p82 localized to the ventral membrane ( Supplementary Figure S2 ) . Furthermore , co - expression with GFP – p82 also seemed to change the distribution of clathrin ( Figures 4A – 4C and Supplementary Figure S2A ) . The co - localization of clathrin to the enlarged GFP – p82 assemblies was conﬁrmed by immunoﬂuorescence staining of endogenous clathrin heavy chain in ﬁxed cells expressing GFP – p82 ( Figure 4A ) , as well as by co - expression of GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa ( Figure 4B ) . Importantly , p82 not fused to GFP altered the distribution of clathrin in a similar manner ( Figure 4C ) . From this we conclude that in COS7 cells over - expressing GFP – p82 , a signiﬁcant proportion of clathrin and GFP – p82 are co - localized , at the ventral plasma membrane , to spots above the diffraction limit . To further characterize the enlarged clathrin - containing clusters inducedbyp82 , wesubjectedcellsexpressingGFP – p82andRFP – LCa to confocal time - lapse microscopy . A large proportion of the p82 – clathrin platforms were present throughout the entire duration of the time - lapse ( 4 – 6 min ) . In these structures , the amount of both clathrin and Dab2 was relatively constant over time and generally did not change by more than 10 % between consecutive time points ( Figures 4D , 4E and 4G ) . In addition , mostly at the cell periphery , smaller structures which were closer to the diffraction limit were observed . These either appeared and intensiﬁed , or were internalized ( acquired lateral mobility and concomitantly lost their ﬂuorescence ) , suggesting a behaviour which is qualitatively similar to the previously characterized clathrin – AP2 structures [ 36 , 37 ] ( results not shown ) , albeit with slower kinetics . In all structures , the RFP – LCa content was proportional to the GFP – p82 content ( Figure 4F ) . Furthermore , in individual clusters , changes in GFP – p82 ﬂuorescence were paralleled by changes in RFP – LCa ﬂuorescence ( Figure 4G ) . Thus , in cells overexpressing GFP – p82 , the dynamics and extent of the association and dissociation of p82 from the membrane are paralleled by that of clathrin . To understand if , in addition to overexpression , a reduction in the level of Dab2 may also alter the organization of clathrin at the plasma membrane , and if the ability of Dab2 to alter the organization of clathrin is restricted to COS7 cells , we observed the effects of overexpression of GFP – p82 , or the knockdown of endogenous Dab2 by shRNA , on the levels and distribution of clathrin and endogenous Dab2 present on the ventral membrane of HeLa cells . Similarly to what was observed in COS7 cells , Dab2 and clathrin ( both endogenous and overexpressed ) display high levels of co - localization ( maxCCF > 0 . 75 in all cases , and maxCCF = 0 . 88 in the inset of Figures 5A and 5B ) . Under similar conditions of transfection and expression as those employed in COS7 cells ( transfection with 2 μ g of DNA , and expression for 24 – 48 h ) , HeLa cells accumulated markedly lower levels of GFP – p82 ( measured as the total GFP – p82 ﬂuorescence per cell , results not shown ) . Consequently , the modulatory effects towards the organization of clathrin were clearer in the subset of cells showing higher expression . Here too , the expression of GFP – p82 ledtotheaccumulationofclathrininmembrane - boundassemblies which appeared larger than the diffraction limit . Furthermore , the RFP – LCa content of individual assemblies was proportional to c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2009 Biochemical Society Dab2 modiﬁes clathrin assemblies 707 Figure 4 Characterization of the enlarged assemblies containing GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa in COS7 cells ( A – C ) Expression of p82 induces the enlargement of clathrin assemblies at the ventral membrane of the cell . ( A ) COS7 cells , expressing GFP – p82 for 24h , were ﬁxed , permeabilized and stained with the X22 anti - ( clathrin heavy chain ) antibody . ( B ) COS7 cells , co - expressing GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa for 24h , were ﬁxed and processed for imaging . ( C ) COS7 cells , co - transfected with an 5 : 1 excess of p82 compared with RFP – LCa ( 24h ) , were ﬁxed and processed for imaging . ( D ) Kymograph of the time - lapse of a typical cell co - expressing GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa . A COS7 cell , 24h post - transfection , was continuously imaged ( 270s , 3s intervals between planes ) by spinning - disc confocal microscopy . The central panel of each micrograph depicts the ventral membrane of the imaged cell , whereas the upper panel is a projection of y in time and the left - hand panel is a projection of x in time . ( E ) Individual GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa assemblies ( 55 ) present throughout the entire time - lapse , were tracked with the help of SlideBook TM . The graph depicts changes in intensity relative to their maximal intensity reached by each assembly in the course of the time - lapse , with each spot representing one measurement . Note the concentration of points in the − 10 % to 10 % interval . ( F ) The amount of clathrin in the assemblies is proportional directly to the amount of Dab2 . The graph depicts the measured intensities of GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa in individual assemblies in one frame of the time - lapse . a . u . , arbitrary units . ( G ) Tracings of the relative intensities of GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa in typical clusters show that changes in the amount of GFP – p82 are mirrored by changes in the amount of RFP – LCa . For ( A – D ) , scale bar , 10 μ m . c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2009 Biochemical Society 708 D . Chetrit , N . Ziv and M . Ehrlich Figure 5 Alterations in the level of expression of p82 alters the membrane organization of clathrin in HeLa cells ( A ) Kymograph of the time - lapse of a typical HeLa cell co - expressing GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa . The ventral membrane of a HeLa cell , 24h post - transfection , was continuously imaged ( 360s , 6s intervals between planes ) by spinning - disc confocal microscopy . The central panel of each micrograph depicts the ventral membrane of the imaged cell , whereas the upper panel is a projection of y in time and the left - hand panel is a projection of x in time . The inset depicts a higher magniﬁcation of a typical membrane region ( box in Overlay ) . Scale bar , 10 μ m . ( B ) van Steele’s CCF of GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa ﬂuorescence in the inset shown in ( A ) . ( C ) The amount of RFP – LCa in the assemblies is directly proportional to the amount of GFP – p82 . The graph depicts the measured intensities of GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa in individual assemblies in the inset shown in ( A ) . a . u . , arbitrary units . ( D ) Tracings of the relative intensities of GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa in typical clusters show that changes in the amount of GFP – p82 are mirrored by changes in the amount of RFP – LCa . ( E ) shRNA - mediated knockdown of Dab2 or clathrin leads to a reciprocal reduction in the amount of clathrin and Dab2 at the ventral membrane of the cell . HeLa cells co - transfected for 48h with a 5 : 1 ratio of shRNA [ scrambled , anti - Dab2 ( shDab2 ) or anti - clathrin ( ShClathrin ) ] and GFP were ﬁxed , permeabilized and stained with polyclonal anti - Dab2 and monoclonal anti - clathrin antibodies . GFP - positive cells were imaged and the amount of Dab2 or clathrin at the ventral cell membrane was calculated using SlideBook TM . The histogram represents the average of the relative ﬂuorescence ( as a percentage of the ﬂuorescence in cells transfected with the control shRNA ) of Dab2 ( black bars ) and clathrin ( striped bars ) at the ventral cell membrane . The measurement was performed using at least 30 cells per condition . Results are means + − S . E . M . ( n = 2 ) ∗∗∗ P < 0 . 001 . their GFP – p82 content ( Figure 5C ) . The GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa assemblies in HeLa cells displayed similar dynamics to those observed in COS7 cells , as a signiﬁcant portion of these assemblies were present throughout the entire period of the movie ( Figure 5A ) . The amount of RFP – LCa or GFP – p82 did not generally change by more than 10 % between time frames ( results not shown ) . Furthermore , changes in GFP – p82 were paralleled by analogous changes in the amount of RFP – LCa ( Figure 5D ) . Interestingly , shRNA - mediated knockdown of ∼ 70 % of Dab2 resulted in a 60 % reduction in the amount of clathrin at the ventral membrane of these same cells ( Figure 5E ) . In addition , an analogous reduction in the levels of Dab2 at ventral membrane of the cells was observed upon shRNA - mediated knockdown of clathrin heavy chain ( Figure 5E ) . Thus both elevation and reduction in the levels of expression of Dab2 cause changes to the organization of clathrin at the plasma membrane ; suggesting a potential role for Dab2 in the recruitment of clathrin ; and a reduction in the amount of clathrin results in a reduction in the amount of endogenous Dab2 that is recruited to the ventral membrane of the cell , suggesting a possible role for clathrin in the stabilization of this association . We applied a similar methodology ( siRNA - mediated knockdown of α - adaptin , see above ) to address the requirement of AP2 for the localization of Dab2 to the membrane and the formation of GFP – p82 assemblies . Only in rare cells was the knockdown of α - adaptin complete ( as measured by a lack of staining with the monoclonal anti - α - adaptin antibody ) . Thus , to identify functionally signiﬁcant levels of reduction , we subjected the cells undergoing α - adaptin knockdown to Alexa Fluor ® 546 - conjugated transferrin uptake . Levels of reduction of α - adaptin , which are sufﬁcient to inhibit transferrin uptake , did not affect the levels of endogenous Dab2 at the ventral membrane of HeLa cells ( see Supplementary Fig - ure S3 at http : / / www . BiochemJ . org / bj / 418 / bj4180701add . htm ) . Furthermore , when knockdown of α - adaptin was performed in c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2009 Biochemical Society Dab2 modiﬁes clathrin assemblies 709 cells overexpressing GFP – p82 , enlarged assemblies could still be visualized . Interestingly , in these conditions , the residual AP2 present in the cell was mainly concentrated in the GFP – p82 assemblies ( Supplementary Figure S3 ) . Taken together , these results demonstrate that Dab2 is recruited to the plasma membrane independently of AP2 . Having shown that clathrin and AP2 are present in the enlarged assemblies induced by GFP – p82 overexpression ( Figures 2 , 4 and 5 ) , we probed for epsin , an additional accessory molecule of the endocytic process . GFP – p82 and RFP – epsin were co - transfected in COS7 cells , and 24 h post - transfection were observed by confocal microscopy . The co - expression with RFP – epsin did not alter the distribution of GFP – p82 , with a similar mixture of a majority of assemblies above the diffraction limit and a minority of peripherally localized diffraction - limited spots observed ( see Supplementary Figure S4A at http : / / www . BiochemJ . org / bj / 418 / bj4180701add . htm ) . GFP – p82 and RFP – epsin co - localized in both classes of structures ( maxCCF = 0 . 88 , see Supplementary Figure S4B ) . Furthermore , the amount of RFP – epsin in individual assemblies is directly proportional to the amount of GFP – p82 ( Supplementary Figure S4C ) . A major portion of the larger p82 – epsin assemblies was present throughout the entirety of the time - lapse acquisition ( 10 min , see Supplementary Figure S4D ) . Interestingly , in many cases , diffraction - limited concentrations of RFP – epsin and GFP – p82 could be seen emanating from the borders of the larger assemblies ( Supplementary Figure S4E and Supplementary Movie 1 at http : / / www . BiochemJ . org / bj / 418 / bj4180701add . htm ) . Such diffraction - limited objects moved laterally just prior to their disappearance , in accord with the behaviour of coated vesicles described previously [ 37 ] . Thus , in cells overexpressing p82 , the distribution of endocytic proteins ( Figures 2 , 4 and 5 and Supplementary Figures S2 and S4 ) and their dynamic behaviour ( Figures 4 , 5 and Supplementary Figure S4 ) are suggestive of a mixed organization in which static Dab2 – clathrin platforms might be adjacent to dynamic endocytic - coated pits . To examine if the apparently constant ﬂuorescence intensity of the p82 – clathrin clusters results from a dynamic rather than static equilibrium , we performed FRAP on membrane - bound GFP – p82 and GFP – LCa ( in cells over - expressing unlabelled p82 ) in untreated cells , and in cells that underwent hypertonic shock . In untreated cells , GFP – p82 and GFP – LCa exchanged from the enlarged / stable structures , albeit with different kinetics . GFP – p82 presented a mobile fraction of ∼ 63 % and a t 1 / 2 of the recovery of ∼ 6 s ( Figure 6A ) ; in contrast , GFP – LCa presented a lower mobile fraction ( ∼ 50 % ) and a slower rate of recovery ( Figure 6B , t 1 / 2 of ∼ 30 seconds ) . Hypertonic shock arrests clathrin - coated - pit - mediated endocytosis and induces the formation of clathrin microcages [ 41 ] . This treatment was reported to differentially affect the exchange of clathrin and AP1 ( adaptor protein 1 ) , AP2 and GGA [ Golgi - associated γ - adaptin ear homology domain Arf ( ADP - ribosylation factor ) - interacting protein ] adaptors [ 43 , 44 ] . Similarly to AP1 , AP2 and GGAs , and in contrast with GFP – LCa , GFP – p82 continues to exchange under these conditions , show - ing that it can do so independently of clathrin . However , a signi - ﬁcant reduction was observed in both parameters of ﬂuorescence recovery ( Figure 6C ; mobile fraction of ∼ 33 % and t 1 / 2 ∼ 33 s ) . Molecular requirements of GFP – p82 for the formation of enlarged assemblies Dab2 is rich in protein – protein and protein – lipid interaction motifs ( Figure 1 ) . To dissect the putative contribution of indi - vidual motifs to the formation of the enlarged p82 – clathrin assemblies , we modiﬁed GFP – p82 by site - directed mutagenesis ( mutants are shown in Figure 1 ) and expressed the mutated constructs in COS7 cells . The distribution of the different GFP – Dab2 constructs and their tendency to form enlarged membrane - bound assemblies were assessed by live - cell confocal microscopy . To take into account the differences in expression levels resulting from the transient transfection of COS7 cells , we imaged the entire cell volume and expressed the GFP – Dab2 content of individual assemblies as the percentage of the total GFP – Dab2 signal of the corresponding cells ( 15 – 20 randomly selected cells per condition , Figure 7B ) . The ability of GFP – p82 to form enlarged assemblies was dependent on binding NPXY signals , as mutants devoid of the PTB domain or mutagenized at residues that directly interact with the NPXY sequence ( S122Y and G139A / G140A / E141A mutants ) formed signiﬁcantly smaller assemblies ( Figures 7A and 7B ) . A similar reduction in GFP – p82 content in individual assemblies was observed upon mutating Lys 53 , which interacts with negatively - charged phospholipids [ 7 ] ( Figures 7A and 7B ) . The surface recruitment of many proteins which associate with the inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane is mediated by patches of positively charged residues . In Dab2 , the region which precedes the PTB domain contains an evolutionarily conserved poly - lysine patch . Toprobefortheimportanceofthispatchintheabilityofp82 togenerateenlargedassemblies , wemutatedLys 28 , Lys 29 andLys 30 to alanine residues . Indeed , the K28A / K29A / K30A mutation led to signiﬁcantly smaller GFP – p82 assemblies ( Figures 7A and 7B ) . Dab2 is a mitotic phosphoprotein . Furthermore , the interaction of Dab2 with other proteins , such as Dab2IP , is modulated by the phosphorylation of Ser 24 by protein kinase C [ 19 ] . The proximity of Ser 24 to the patch of lysine residues ( amino acids 28 – 30 ) raises the possibility that , upon phosphorylation , the local net addition of the negative charge might hamper the ability of p82 to interact with the membrane , and induce the enlarged assemblies . Indeed , although the S24A mutant showed that phosphorylation at this position is not needed for the generation of enlarged assemblies , the phosphomimetic mutations S24D and S24DDD abrogated the ability of GFP – p82 to induce enlarged assemblies in proportion to the amount of negative charge added at amino acid position 24 ( Figures 7A and 7B ) . Furthermore , in contrast with the identical staining pattern obtained for GFP – p82 ﬂuorescence and for staining with a polyclonal anti - Dab2 antibody ( Figure 2A ) , staining with an antibody that recognizes Dab2 pSer24 showed a lack of antibody staining at the plasma membrane , a lack of co - localization with GFP – p82 assemblies , and yielded mainly a diffuse cytosolic and nuclear distribution in Dab2 pSer24 - positive cells ( Figure 7C ) . To further support our hypothesis that interactions of GFP – p82 with membrane phospholipids play a central role in deter - mining its ability to alter the size of clathrin assemblies at the plasma membrane , we monitored GFP – p82 / RFP – LCa clusters under conditions known to perturb protein – phospholipid interac - tions . Acute inhibition , with primary alcohols , of the generation of phosphatidic acid by phospholipase D leads to the dismantling of clathrin - and AP2 - coated pits at the plasma membrane [ 36 ] . Furthermore , upon washout , a burst of PIP2 - dependent nucleations leads to a transient 3 - fold increase in the number of clathrin - and AP2 - coated pits [ 36 ] . In order to examine if a similar dissociation of Dab2 is induced by the primary alcohol , we incubated COS7 cells which had been transiently transfected with GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa with 1 . 3 % ( v / v ) butan - 1 - ol for 5 min at 37 ◦ C . This treatment led to a marked reduction in the amount of GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa in the membrane - bound assemblies ( see Supplementary Figure S5B at http : / / www . BiochemJ . org / bj / 418 / bj4180701add . htm ) . Furthermore , upon washout , a synchronous nucleation of an increased number ( ∼ 3 - fold ) of c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2009 Biochemical Society 710 D . Chetrit , N . Ziv and M . Ehrlich Figure 6 FRAP of GFP – p82 and GFP - LCa localized to the enlarged assemblies induced by p82 COS7cellsplatedontocoverslipsandtransfectedwitheitherGFP – p82 ( A , C ) orwithacombination ( 1 : 5ratio ) ofGFP – LCaandun - fusedp82 ( B , D ) weresubjectedtoFRAPexperimentsat37 ◦ Cas described in the Experimental section . Theexperiment was carried out undertwo conditions : with isotonic ( A , B ) or hypertonic ( 0 . 45M sucrose ) ( C , D ) buffers . The ﬂuorescentintensity of individual clusters was monitored in pre - bleach , bleach and post - bleach ( 70s ) conditions . The graphs depict the average normalized ﬂuorescence intensity of 12 clusters originating from three different cells from a typical experiment , and results are means + − S . E . M . at every time point . Scale bar , 10 μ m . GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa assemblies was observed . In accordance with their larger number , and similarly to what was observed previously for clathrin and AP2 [ 36 ] , the newly formed assemblies were weaker in intensity and had a higher tendency to present a nucleation / growth / internalization type of behaviour ( Supplementary Figures S5C and S5D ) . The p82 isoform of Dab2 enhances cell spreading Cell spreading is a multi - stage process governed by different molecular mechanisms [ 45 ] . The later stages of cell spreading involve the formation and maturation of focal adhesions which are devoid of clathrin ( reviewed in [ 46 ] ; results not shown ) . However , we observed previously that acute inhibition of the GTPase activity of dynamin with the selective inhibitor dynasore ( a condition that inhibits clathrin - mediated endocytosis ) inhibited the initial stages of cell spreading [ 47 ] . Nevertheless , dynamin has also been implicated in non - clathrin - mediated trafﬁcking [ 47 ] . To probe directly for a function for clathrin in cell spreading , we measured the area achieved by HeLa cells transfected with either shRNA for clathrin or a control - scrambled shRNA upon replating on to ﬁbronectin ( 45 min incubation at 37 ◦ C ) . Clathrin knockdown leads to a small but signiﬁcant reduction ( 20 % , P < 0 . 05 , n = 40 ) in the area of the spreading cells . Due to the prominence of the p82 – clathrin platforms at the ventral membrane of the cell and the ability of Dab2 to interact with NPXY - bearing β - integrin chains [ 28 ] , we hypothesized that Dab2 – clathrin assemblies may regulate cell spreading . This hypothesis was tested using three experimental approaches : ( i ) a quantitative cell - spreading assay of cells expressing GFP – p82 mutants which differ in their ability to generate enlarged p82 – clathrin platforms , ( ii ) visualization of the distribution of β 1 integrin receptors in COS7 cells expressing GFP – p82 and plated on to ﬁbronectin , and ( iii ) live - cell imaging of the spreading of COS7 cells expressing GFP – p82 with or without RFP – LCa and plated on to ﬁbronectin . To probe for the putative effect of GFP – p82 overexpression on the initial stages of spreading , transfected COS7 cells were c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2009 Biochemical Society Dab2 modiﬁes clathrin assemblies 711 suspended by trypsinization , left to recover for 30 min at 37 ◦ C and replated on to ﬁbronectin - coated coverslips . At 45 – 60 min post - replating , the rate of spreading diminished as the cell area reached a plateau ( results not shown ) . Thus all subsequent experiments , aimed at comparing different expression conditions , were carried out at 45 min . When compared with cells expressing GFP alone , overexpression of GFP – p82 ( but not GFP – p59 ) enhancedtheinitialspreadingofCOS7cellssigniﬁcantly ( ∼ 60 % increase in area , P < 0 . 001 , Figure 7D ) . This enhancement was reproducible in additional cell types ( HeLa and HBL cells , with 40 and 30 % enhancement respectively , P < 0 . 01 and P < 0 . 05 ) . To examine if the capacity of p82 to enhance cell spreading depends on the same features which govern its ability to generate enlarged p82 – clathrin assemblies , we repeated the experiment , but now expressing the different GFP – p82 mutants shown in Figure 7 . Only non - mutated GFP – p82 and the S24A mutant ( which both have the ability to generate enlarged clathrin – Dab2 assemblies ) signiﬁcantly enhance cell spreading compared with control ( GFP - transfected ) cells ( ∗∗∗ , P < 0 . 001 ; Figure 7D ) . To visualize the intracellular distribution of β 1 integrin , we stained COS7 cells ( transfected with GFP – p82 or non - transfected cells ) plated on to ﬁbronectin - covered coverslips with the TS2 / 16 monoclonal antibody [ 33 ] ( Figure 7E ) . A clear concentration of β 1 integrin is observed in the GFP – p82 assemblies ( in a typical cell presented in Figure 7E , the co - localization of GFP – Dab2 and β 1 integrin , maxCCF = 0 . 8 ) . Our attempts to co - immunoprecipitate Dab2 and β 1 integrin were unsuccessful . This contrasts with results presented previously by Hocevar et al . [ 23 ] , but is in line with those of Calderwood et al . [ 28 ] ; thus , currently , we cannot determine if the recruitment of β 1 integrin to the Dab2 – clathrin assemblies is a result of a direct interaction with Dab2 . Finally , we visualized the dynamics of GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa in cells undergoing spreading on ﬁbronectin - coated coverslips by live - cell confocal microscopy . Immediately after plating , GFP – p82 concentrated at the region of cell – matrix contact . At the initial stages of spreading , p82 – clathrin structures were mostly smaller in size and were extremely dynamic in nature ( Figure 8 and see Supplementary Movie 2 at http : / / www . BiochemJ . org / bj / 418 / bj4180701add . htm ) . The number of GFP – p82 assemblies increased according to the area of the cell in contact with the matrix ( Figures 8C and 8D ) . With time , the Dab2 clusters became larger and more static ( Supplementary Movie 2 ) . At later stages of spreading , and in contrast with cells which express GFP – LCa alone ( results not shown ) , the distribution of GFP – p82 assemblies , which are generally absent from the actively rufﬂing membranes , continued to be concentrated away from the cell border ( Figures 8A and 8B ) . This distribution contrasts with the distribution of focal adhesions , which are generally present at the cell periphery [ 46 ] , and suggests a role for p82 – clathrin assemblies at early stages of cell spreading . DISCUSSION Our view that Dab2 performs a role in cell attachment and spreading by regulating the content and distribution of clathrin platforms at the matrix – cell membrane interface is supported by the following lines of evidence : ( i ) expression of the p82 isoform of Dab2 alters the distribution and clathrin content of clathrin assemblies at the ventral membrane of the cell ( Figures 4 and 5 ) , ( ii ) similar conditions of expression of p82 enhance the spreading of COS7 cells on ﬁbronectin ( Figure 7D ) , ( iii ) the same molecular requirements and motifs are necessary for both phenomena : a functional PTB domain , the ability to bind phospholipids and the presence of the sequence which differentiates the p82 and p59 isoforms of Dab2 , ( iv ) the generation of enlarged platforms and the enhancement of cell spreading are equally affected by phosphomimetic mutations of Ser 24 and by the abrogation of the positive charge contributed by a stretch of lysine residues adjacent tothislocation ( Lys 28 – Lys 30 ) ( Figures7A – 7D ) , and ( v ) COS7cells growing on ﬁbronectin concentrate β 1 - integrin into the enlarged GFP – p82 assemblies ( Figure 7E ) . The notion that the enhancement of cell spreading mediated by GFP – p82 is not mainly ( or solely ) based on an enhancement of endocytosis of NPXY - based cargo is supported by the following lines of evidence : ( i ) overexpression of GFP – p82 and GFP – p59 enhances the endocytosis of two different receptors bearing NPXY signals in a similar manner ( Figures 3A and 3B ) . This is in sharp contrast with the differential effect they elicit in the two parameters that base the main correlation of the present study : ( a ) the composition and dynamics of clathrin assemblies at the ventral membrane of the cell , and ( b ) the rate of cell spreading on ﬁbronectin . Here , in comparison with GFP , only GFP – p82 ( and not GFP – p59 ) altered the organization of clathrin by generating enlarged clathrin assemblies ( Figures 2 , 4 , 5 and 7A – 7C ) and enhanced the spreading of transfected cells on ﬁbronectin ( Figures 7D and 8 ) . ( ii ) GFP – p82 generates enlarged clathrin assemblies mainly at the ventral membrane of the cell ( Supplementary Figure S2 ) , in accordance with a proposed function in the mediation of cell – matrix attachment . ( iii ) The number of GFP – p82 assemblies increases concomitantly with the increase in the cell area that is attached to the matrix ( Figure 8 ) . Furthermore , the dynamics of these assemblies changes from a dynamic behaviour at the initial point of cell – matrix contact prior tocelladhesion , totheircharacteristicstaticbehaviouratlatertime points post - plating ( Figures 4 and 8 and Supplementary Movie 2 for cells 24 h post - plating ) . Thus the static behaviour of ‘mature’ GFP – p82 assemblies correlates with cell adhesion . Due to its ability to integrate receptor trafﬁcking and cell – matrix interactions , variations to the levels of expression of Dab2 constitute an important mechanism in the determination of the cellular phenotype and are normally under tight regulation . Thus the transcription factors GATA6 and PU . 1 elevate Dab2 expression levels in a variety of cell types [ 48 – 50 ] , including differentiating K562 megakaryocytes [ 29 ] . Megakaryocytes which overexpress Dab2 show enhanced spreading , supporting the notion that Dab2 is a mediator of cell – matrix interactions . Our results support a direct role for Dab2 in this process , via the recruitment of integrins to the enlarged clathrin assemblies generated in cells expressing higher levels of p82 . However , an indirect role , via the mediation of the induction of ﬁbronectin by TGF β , has also been suggested [ 51 ] . Additional endocytic adaptors , endowed with PTB domains , may potentially exert similar functions to Dab2 . One such adaptor , Numb , has been shown recently to mediate directional cell migration by regulating integrin endocytosis [ 52 ] . However , in spite of having DPF motifs , Numb is devoid of a classical clathrin box . Furthermore , our preliminary experiments point to the fact that Numb overexpression does not alter the organization of clathrin in COS7 cells ( results not shown ) . Nevertheless , although GFP – p82 overexpression enhances signiﬁcantly the spreading of cells on ﬁbronectin ( Figure 7D ) , shRNA - mediated knockdown of Dab2 only has a minor effect on this phenomenon ( results not shown ) . In addition , COS7 cells expressing GFP ( which have low levels of Dab2 , similarly to untransfected cells , Figure 2A ) undergo cell spreading , albeit at a lower rate than the GFP – p82 - expressing cells ( Figure 7D ) . This suggests that although the expression of GFP – p82 enhances cell spreading , additional proteins may be involved in the basal level of spreading of cells on ﬁbronectin . c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2009 Biochemical Society 712 D . Chetrit , N . Ziv and M . Ehrlich Figure 7 The ability of Dab2 to form enlarged clusters and enhance cell spreading on ﬁbronectin is isoform speciﬁc , dependent on a functional PTB domain and is modulated by the charge in a region which precedes it LiveCOS7cellstransfectedwiththedifferentDab2constructsandplatedoncoverslipswereimagedwithaspinning - discconfocalmicroscope . ( A ) Panelsdepicttheventralmembraneoftypicalcells expressingthedifferentconstructs . ( B ) QuantiﬁcationoftheaverageﬂuorescenceintensityofindividualassembliesgeneratedbythedifferentDab2mutants ( normalizedtothetotalGFP – Dab2content of the cell ) . White bars , wild - type constructs ; black bars , mutant PTB - domain constructs ; and striped bars , mutants in the region preceding the PTB domain . To calculate total cell ﬂuorescence , the entire cell volume was acquired by successivez - stacks , deconvoluted and projected on to a two dimensional plane . The histogram depicts the average ﬂuorescent intensity of individual GFP – Dab2 assemblies ( expressedasthepercentageofthetotalGFPﬂuorescenceofthecell ) × 10 3 . Valuesaremeans + − S . E . M . for5 – 30cellswith200 – 2000assembliesforeachDab2construct . ∗∗∗ P < 0 . 001 . The truncation mutant tL208 ( Dab2 truncated at Leu 208 ) does not form detectable assemblies and is thus only represented in the quantiﬁcation graph . GGE139 – 141AAA , G139A / G140A / E141A ; KKK28 - 30AAA , K28A / K29A / K30A . ( C ) COS7 cells expressing GFP – p82 or not expressing the construct were stained with a polyclonal antibody that speciﬁcally recognizes Dab2 pSer24 ( α - p - S24 ) . Note that GFP – p82 assemblies are negative for Dab2 pSer24 , whereas the adjacent cell is intensely stained . ( D ) Quantitative comparison of the ability of the different constructs based on GFP – Dab2 to enhance cell spreading . COS7 cells transfected with different wild - type isoforms ( white bars ) , PTB - domain mutants of GFP – p82 ( black bars ) , mutants of GFP – p82 differing in the charge of residues preceding the PTB domain ( diagonally striped bars ) and a GFP – p82 truncation mutant ( vertically striped bar ) were resuspended by trypsinization , left to recover in full medium for 30min andre - platedontoﬁbronectin - coatedplates . Afterplating ( 45min ) , cellswereﬁxedandimagedwithaninvertedﬂuorescencemicroscope ( × 40lens ) . ThecellareawascalculatedusingSlideBook TM software . Randomly selected cells ( 30 – 150 ) were imaged and measured per construct . Bars are average of the percentage of the area achieved by the different transfectants as compared with the area of cells transfected with GFP . Results are means + − S . E . M ( n = 3 ) ∗∗∗ P < 0 . 001 . K53Q53 , K53Q ; GGE139 – 141AAA , G139A / G140A / E141A ; KKK28 - 30AAA , K28A / K29A / K30A . ( E ) GFP – Dab2 assemblies concentrate β 1 integrin when cells are plated on to ﬁbronectin . COS7 cells transfected with GFP – Dab2 were resuspended by trypsinization at 24h post - transfection and replated on to ﬁbronectin - coated coverslips . Attached cells ( 24h post - replating ) were ﬁxed , permeabilized and stained for β 1 integrin . The micrographs depict the wavelength - speciﬁc pictures , the merge and the respective close - ups of the boxed area of the ventral plane of transfected ( left - hand side ) and non - transfected ( right - hand side ) cells . Arrows point to typical structures where GFP – p82 and β 1 integrin co - localize . For ( A , C , E ) , scale bar , 10 μ m . c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2009 Biochemical Society Dab2 modiﬁes clathrin assemblies 713 Figure 8 Real - time visualization of the spreading on ﬁbronectin of cells expressing GFP – p82 ( A ) The micrographs depict selected time points ( 12 , 14 , 16 and 18min ) ( annotated on the upper left - hand corner ) of a continuous time - lapse in which the spreading of a recently plated COS7 cell expressing GFP – p82 ( A ) or GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa ( B ) was monitored by confocal microscopy . Scale bar , 10 μ m . The entire time - lapse of ( A ) is shown in Supplementary Movie 2 ( at http : / / www . BiochemJ . org / bj / 418 / bj4180701add . htm ) . ( C , D ) Correlation between the number of GFP – p82 clusters and the area ( μ m 2 ) acquired by the ventral membrane of the cells depicted in ( A ) and ( B ) respectively in the course of the spreading process . Due to the negatively charged phosphoinositides which form the inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane , the recruitment of many proteins to the membrane is regulated by an electrostatic switch mechanism [ 53 , 54 ] . Our results suggest that the region which precedes the PTB domain plays a regulatory role in governing Dab2 – membrane interactions , possibly through such a mechanism . This region is endowed with both a phos - phorylatable serine residue ( Ser 24 ) as well as with an adjacent positively charged tri - lysine stretch ( Lys 28 , Lys 29 and Lys 30 ) . Phosphorylation involves the local addition of negative charge . Indeed , we observed that the addition of three negative charges by the S24DDD phosphomimetic mutation at position 24 , or the reduction of three positive charges in the vicinity of Ser 24 by the K28A / K29A / K30A mutation , generates similar phenotypes and abrogates the ability of p82 to both generate enlarged clathrin assemblies and enhance cell spreading ( Figures 7A – 7D ) . Previously , phosphorylation of Ser 24 was shown to stimulate the membrane translocation of Dab2 and its interaction with β 3 integrin in K562 cells differentiating to the megakaryocytic lineage [ 27 ] . This interaction was proposed to inhibit integrin - mediated adhesion to ﬁbrinogen . However , phosphorylation of Dab2 , on unidentiﬁed residues , was also reported to occur upon the adhesion of the RAW 264 . 1 murine macrophage cell line [ 29 ] . In this context , and similarly to the present study , Dab2 was suggested to play a positive regulatory role , as its overexpression enhanced cell spreading on a series of different extracellular matrices . Thus the role of phosphorylation in determining the function of Dab2 in regulating cell – matrix interactions is most probably dependent on the cellular context . Clathrin generates platforms and pits of different size and structure at the ventral membrane of attached cells . Although a broad consensus exists concerning the functional and morpho - logical progression of a coated pit to an endocytic vesicle , the composition , structure and function of larger clathrin platforms are subjects of debate [ 37 , 38 , 55 , 56 ] . In various cell types , clathrin has been proposed to form structures which are involved in cell – matrix interactions . Thus ﬂat clathrin sheets are seen at the adhesion membrane of many cell types ranging from HeLa cells to osteoclasts plated on various substrata [ 41 , 57 , 58 ] . In addition , clathrin - coated membrane domains containing β 1 and β 5 integrins form upon the adhesion of rat myotubes to vitronectin [ 59 ] . Furthermore , the initial adhesion and spreading of astrocytes to various substrata was shown to be mediated by α 1 β 1 integrin localized to clathrin - based point contacts [ 60 ] . Moreover , previous reports have implicated the clathrin - mediated transport of integrins in the regulation of cell motility [ 52 , 61 , 62 ] , a process which is reﬂective of the nature of cell – matrix inter - actions . In the present study , we observed that prominent p82 – clathrin structures , present at the ventral surface of the cell , concentrate β 1 integrin when COS7 cells are plated on ﬁbronectin ( Figure 7E ) . Furthermore , these same structures are practically absent from regions of active membrane rufﬂing ( Supplementary Movie 2 ) , suggesting an adhesion - related function . This spatial distribution of clathrin assemblies is similar to the polarized dis - tribution of endocytic clathrin structures at the uropod of moving T - lymphocytes . There , clathrin assemblies are also absent from actively rufﬂing membranes [ 63 ] . Studies employing FRAP [ 43 , 64 , 65 ] show that clathrin , adaptors and epsin dynamically exchange between cytosolic and membrane - bound populations . In the present study , we show that even though the majority of the enlarged GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa structures present near - constant levels of p82 and clathrin c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2009 Biochemical Society 714 D . Chetrit , N . Ziv and M . Ehrlich over time ( Figures 4 and 5 ) , both molecules are in dynamic exchange ( Figure 6 ) . The exchange of GFP – p82 is not strictly dependent on endocytosis , as it continues ( albeit at a lower rate ) in hypertonically shocked cells ( Figure 6 ) and in cells expressing the dominant negative mutant of dynamin 2 , Dyn2K44A ( results not shown ) . Interestingly , the exchange of clathrin is blocked completely in hypertonic conditions , indicating differences in the nature of the membrane association of Dab2 and clathrin . These differences are analogous to those described for the exchange of AP2 , AP1 , GGAsandclathrinundersimilarconditions [ 64 ] . How - ever , in contrast with the results presented in the previous study , in untreated conditions , in the present study we still observe sizeable immobile fractions of clathrin ( ∼ 50 % ) and Dab2 ( ∼ 30 % ) . The presence of both exchangeable and immobile fractions of endocytic proteins in the same structures is suggestive of subpopulations of these proteins , characterized by different modes or degrees of binding to the membrane and / or the coated pit . In summary , the results of the present study strongly suggest that by regulating the size , nature and content of clathrin assem - blies , Dab2 modulates the interaction of the cell with the sup - porting extracellular matrix and enhances cell spreading . After the e - publication of the present paper , it was brought to the attention of the authors that Dab2 – AP2 aggregates , albeit devoid of clathrin , were identiﬁed previously upon overexpression of Dab2 in NIH 3T3 cells [ 67 ] . The authors regret the omis - sion of this reference . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work is in partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for a Ph . D . thesis by D . C . , to be submitted to the Senate of the Tel Aviv University . FUNDING This work was supported by the Israel Science Foundation ( administered by the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities ) [ grant number 1122 / 06 ] ; and by the Israel Cancer Association through the Boaz Adar Memorial Fund . REFERENCES 1 Traub , L . M . and Lukacs , G . L . ( 2007 ) Decoding ubiquitin sorting signals for clathrin - dependent endocytosis by CLASPs . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 543 – 553 2 Traub , L . M . ( 2003 ) Sorting it out : AP - 2 and alternate clathrin adaptors in endocytic cargo selection . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 203 – 208 3 Robinson , M . S . ( 2004 ) Adaptable adaptors for coated vesicles . Trends Cell Biol . 14 , 167 – 174 4 Uhlik , M . T . , Temple , B . , Bencharit , S . , Kimple , A . J . , Siderovski , D . P . and Johnson , G . L . ( 2005 ) Structural and evolutionary division of phosphotyrosine binding ( PTB ) domains . J . Mol . Biol . 345 , 1 – 20 5 Maurer , M . E . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2005 ) Endocytosis of megalin by visceral endoderm cells requires the Dab2 adaptor protein . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 5345 – 5355 6 Gallagher , H . , Oleinikov , A . V . , Fenske , C . and Newman , D . J . ( 2004 ) The adaptor disabled - 2 binds to the third ψ xNPxY sequence on the cytoplasmic tail of megalin . Biochimie 86 , 179 – 182 7 Maurer , M . E . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2006 ) The adaptor protein Dab2 sorts LDL receptors into coated pits independently of AP - 2 and ARH . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 4235 – 4246 8 Keyel , P . A . , Mishra , S . K . , Roth , R . , Heuser , J . E . , Watkins , S . C . and Traub , L . M . ( 2006 ) A single common portal for clathrin - mediated endocytosis of distinct cargo governed by cargo - selective adaptors . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 4300 – 4317 9 Hasson , T . ( 2003 ) Myosin VI : two distinct roles in endocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 3453 – 3461 10 Mishra , S . K . , Hawryluk , M . J . , Brett , T . J . , Keyel , P . A . , Dupin , A . L . , Jha , A . , Heuser , J . E . , Fremont , D . H . and Traub , L . M . ( 2004 ) Dual engagement regulation of protein interactions with the AP - 2 adaptor α appendage . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 46191 – 46203 11 Mishra , S . K . , Keyel , P . A . , Hawryluk , M . J . , Agostinelli , N . R . , Watkins , S . C . and Traub , L . M . ( 2002 ) Disabled - 2 exhibits the properties of a cargo - selective endocytic clathrin adaptor . EMBO J . 21 , 4915 – 4926 12 Tseng , C . P . , Ely , B . D . , Li , Y . , Pong , R . C . and Hsieh , J . T . ( 1998 ) Regulation of rat DOC - 2 gene during castration - induced rat ventral prostate degeneration and its growth inhibitory function in human prostatic carcinoma cells . Endocrinology 139 , 3542 – 3553 13 Huang , C . H . , Cheng , J . C . , Chen , J . C . and Tseng , C . P . ( 2007 ) Evaluation of the role of Disabled - 2 in nerve growth factor - mediated neurite outgrowth and cellular signalling . Cell . Signalling 19 , 1339 – 1347 14 Yang , D . H . , Cai , K . Q . , Roland , I . H . , Smith , E . R . and Xu , X . X . ( 2007 ) Disabled - 2 is an epithelial surface positioning gene . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 13114 – 13122 15 Zhou , J . , Fan , J . and Hsieh , J . T . ( 2006 ) Inhibition of mitogen - elicited signal transduction and growth in prostate cancer with a small peptide derived from the functional domain of DOC - 2 / DAB2 delivered by a unique vehicle . Cancer Res . 66 , 8954 – 8958 16 Yang , D . H . , Fazili , Z . , Smith , E . R . , Cai , K . Q . , Klein - Szanto , A . , Cohen , C . , Horowitz , I . R . and Xu , X . X . ( 2006 ) Disabled - 2 heterozygous mice are predisposed to endometrial and ovarian tumorigenesis and exhibit sex - biased embryonic lethality in a p53 - null background . Am . J . Pathol . 169 , 258 – 267 17 He , J . , Xu , J . , Xu , X . X . and Hall , R . A . ( 2003 ) Cell cycle - dependent phosphorylation of Disabled - 2 by cdc2 . Oncogene 22 , 4524 – 4530 18 Kleeff , J . , Huang , Y . , Mok , S . C . , Zimmermann , A . , Friess , H . and Buchler , M . W . ( 2002 ) Down - regulation of DOC - 2 in colorectal cancer points to its role as a tumor suppressor in this malignancy . Dis . Colon Rectum 45 , 1242 – 1248 19 Wang , Z . , Tseng , C . P . , Pong , R . C . , Chen , H . , McConnell , J . D . , Navone , N . and Hsieh , J . T . ( 2002 ) The mechanism of growth - inhibitory effect of DOC - 2 / DAB2 in prostate cancer . Characterization of a novel GTPase - activating protein associated with N - terminal domain of DOC - 2 / DAB2 . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 12622 – 12631 20 Fazili , Z . , Sun , W . , Mittelstaedt , S . , Cohen , C . and Xu , X . X . ( 1999 ) Disabled - 2 inactivation is an early step in ovarian tumorigenicity . Oncogene 18 , 3104 – 3113 21 Hocevar , B . A . , Mou , F . , Rennolds , J . L . , Morris , S . M . , Cooper , J . A . and Howe , P . H . ( 2003 ) Regulation of the Wnt signaling pathway by disabled - 2 ( Dab2 ) . EMBO J . 22 , 3084 – 3094 22 Prunier , C . and Howe , P . H . ( 2005 ) Disabled - 2 ( Dab2 ) is required for transforming growth factor β - induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 17540 – 17548 23 Hocevar , B . A . , Smine , A . , Xu , X . X . and Howe , P . H . ( 2001 ) The adaptor molecule Disabled - 2 links the transforming growth factor β receptors to the Smad pathway . EMBO J . 20 , 2789 – 2801 24 Zhou , J . , Scholes , J . and Hsieh , J . T . ( 2003 ) Characterization of a novel negative regulator ( DOC - 2 / DAB2 ) of c - Src in normal prostatic epithelium and cancer . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 6936 – 6941 25 Zhou , J . and Hsieh , J . T . ( 2001 ) The inhibitory role of DOC - 2 / DAB2 in growth factor receptor - mediated signal cascade . DOC - 2 / DAB2 - mediated inhibition of ERK phosphorylation via binding to Grb2 . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 27793 – 27798 26 Chen , H . , Toyooka , S . , Gazdar , A . F . and Hsieh , J . T . ( 2003 ) Epigenetic regulation of a novel tumor suppressor gene ( hDAB2IP ) in prostate cancer cell lines . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 3121 – 3130 27 Huang , C . L . , Cheng , J . C . , Liao , C . H . , Stern , A . , Hsieh , J . T . , Wang , C . H . , Hsu , H . L . and Tseng , C . P . ( 2004 ) Disabled - 2 is a negative regulator of integrin α ( IIb ) β ( 3 ) - mediated ﬁbrinogen adhesion and cell signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 42279 – 42289 28 Calderwood , D . A . , Fujioka , Y . , de Pereda , J . M . , Garcia - Alvarez , B . , Nakamoto , T . , Margolis , B . , McGlade , C . J . , Liddington , R . C . and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 2003 ) Integrin β cytoplasmic domain interactions with phosphotyrosine - binding domains : a structural prototype for diversity in integrin signaling . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 100 , 2272 – 2277 29 Rosenbauer , F . , Kallies , A . , Scheller , M . , Knobeloch , K . P . , Rock , C . O . , Schwieger , M . , Stocking , C . and Horak , I . ( 2002 ) Disabled - 2 is transcriptionally regulated by ICSBP and augments macrophage spreading and adhesion . EMBO J . 21 , 211 – 220 30 Mishra , S . K . , Jha , A . , Steinhauser , A . L . , Kokoza , V . A . , Washabaugh , C . H . , Raikhel , A . S . , Foster , W . A . and Traub , L . M . ( 2008 ) Internalization of LDL - receptor superfamily yolk - protein receptors during mosquito oogenesis involves transcriptional regulation of PTB - domain adaptors . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 1264 – 1274 31 Roth , T . F . and Porter , K . R . ( 1964 ) Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte of the mosquito Aedesaegypti . L . J . Cell Biol . 20 , 313 – 332 32 Raikhel , A . S . ( 1984 ) Accumulations of membrane - free clathrin - like lattices in the mosquito oocyte . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 35 , 279 – 283 33 Hemler , M . E . , Sanchez - Madrid , F . , Flotte , T . J . , Krensky , A . M . , Burakoff , S . J . , Bhan , A . K . , Springer , T . A . and Strominger , J . L . ( 1984 ) Glycoproteins of 210 , 000 and 130 , 000 m . w . on activated T cells : cell distribution and antigenic relation to components on resting cells and T cell lines . J . Immunol . 132 , 3011 – 3018 34 Ehrlich , M . , Shmuely , A . and Henis , Y . I . ( 2001 ) A single internalization signal from the di - leucine family is critical for constitutive endocytosis of the type II TGF - β receptor . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1777 – 1786 35 Agard , D . A . , Hiraoka , Y . , Shaw , P . and Sedat , J . W . ( 1989 ) Fluorescence microscopy in three dimensions . Methods Cell Biol . 30 , 353 – 377 c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2009 Biochemical Society Dab2 modiﬁes clathrin assemblies 715 36 Boucrot , E . , Saffarian , S . , Massol , R . , Kirchhausen , T . and Ehrlich , M . ( 2006 ) Role of lipids and actin in the formation of clathrin - coated pits . Exp . Cell Res . 312 , 4036 – 4048 37 Ehrlich , M . , Boll , W . , Van Oijen , A . , Hariharan , R . , Chandran , K . , Nibert , M . L . and Kirchhausen , T . ( 2004 ) Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 , 591 – 605 38 Bellve , K . D . , Leonard , D . , Standley , C . , Lifshitz , L . M . , Tuft , R . A . , Hayakawa , A . , Corvera , S . and Fogarty , K . E . ( 2006 ) Plasma membrane domains specialized for clathrin - mediated endocytosis in primary cells . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 16139 – 16146 39 Gaidarov , I . , Santini , F . , Warren , R . A . and Keen , J . H . ( 1999 ) Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 1 – 7 40 van Steensel , B . , van Binnendijk , E . P . , Hornsby , C . D . , van der Voort , H . T . , Krozowski , Z . S . , de Kloet , E . R . and van Driel , R . ( 1996 ) Partial colocalization of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors in discrete compartments in nuclei of rat hippocampus neurons . J . Cell Sci . 109 , 787 – 792 41 Heuser , J . E . and Anderson , R . G . ( 1989 ) Hypertonic media inhibit receptor - mediated endocytosis by blocking clathrin - coated pit formation . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 389 – 400 42 Yao , D . , Ehrlich , M . , Henis , Y . I . and Leof , E . B . ( 2002 ) Transforming growth factor - β receptors interact with AP2 by direct binding to β 2 subunit . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 4001 – 4012 43 Wu , X . , Zhao , X . , Baylor , L . , Kaushal , S . , Eisenberg , E . and Greene , L . E . ( 2001 ) Clathrin exchange during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 291 – 300 44 Wu , J . H . , Peppel , K . , Nelson , C . D . , Lin , F . T . , Kohout , T . A . , Miller , W . E . , Exum , S . T . and Freedman , N . J . ( 2003 ) The adaptor protein β - arrestin2 enhances endocytosis of the low density lipoprotein receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 44238 – 44245 45 Dobereiner , H . G . , Dubin - Thaler , B . J . , Giannone , G . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2005 ) Force sensing and generation in cell phases : analyses of complex functions . J . Appl . Physiol . 98 , 1542 – 1546 46 Zaidel - Bar , R . , Cohen , M . , Addadi , L . and Geiger , B . ( 2004 ) Hierarchical assembly of cell - matrix adhesion complexes . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 32 , 416 – 420 47 Macia , E . , Ehrlich , M . , Massol , R . , Boucrot , E . , Brunner , C . and Kirchhausen , T . ( 2006 ) Dynasore , a cell - permeable inhibitor of dynamin . Dev . Cell 10 , 839 – 850 48 Caslini , C . , Capo - chichi , C . D . , Roland , I . H . , Nicolas , E . , Yeung , A . T . and Xu , X . X . ( 2006 ) Histone modiﬁcations silence the GATA transcription factor genes in ovarian cancer . Oncogene 25 , 5446 – 5461 49 Zhou , J . , Hernandez , G . , Tu , S . W . , Scholes , J . , Chen , H . , Tseng , C . P . and Hsieh , J . T . ( 2005 ) Synergistic induction of DOC - 2 / DAB2 gene expression in transitional cell carcinoma in the presence of GATA6 and histone deacetylase inhibitor . Cancer Res . 65 , 6089 – 6096 50 Morrisey , E . E . , Musco , S . , Chen , M . Y . , Lu , M . M . , Leiden , J . M . and Parmacek , M . S . ( 2000 ) The gene encoding the mitogen - responsive phosphoprotein Dab2 is differentially regulated by GATA - 6 and GATA - 4 in the visceral endoderm . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 19949 – 19954 51 Hocevar , B . A . , Prunier , C . and Howe , P . H . ( 2005 ) Disabled - 2 ( Dab2 ) mediates transforming growth factor β ( TGF β ) - stimulated ﬁbronectin synthesis through TGF β - activated kinase 1 and activation of the JNK pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 25920 – 25927 52 Nishimura , T . and Kaibuchi , K . ( 2007 ) Numb controls integrin endocytosis for directional Cell migration with aPKC and PAR - 3 . Dev . Cell 13 , 15 – 28 53 McLaughlin , S . and Murray , D . ( 2005 ) Plasma membrane phosphoinositide organization by protein electrostatics . Nature 438 , 605 – 611 54 Bivona , T . G . , Quatela , S . E . , Bodemann , B . O . , Ahearn , I . M . , Soskis , M . J . , Mor , A . , Miura , J . , Wiener , H . H . , Wright , L . , Saba , S . G . et al . ( 2006 ) PKC regulates a farnesyl - electrostatic switch on K - Ras that promotes its association with Bcl - XL on mitochondria and induces apoptosis . Mol . Cell 21 , 481 – 493 55 Piehl , M . , Lehmann , C . , Gumpert , A . , Denizot , J . P . , Segretain , D . and Falk , M . M . ( 2007 ) Internalization of large double - membrane intercellular vesicles by a clathrin - dependent endocytic process . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 337 – 347 56 Merriﬁeld , C . J . , Perrais , D . and Zenisek , D . ( 2005 ) Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 – 606 57 Maupin , P . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1983 ) Improved preservation and staining of HeLa cell actin ﬁlaments , clathrin - coated membranes , and other cytoplasmic structures by tannic acid - glutaraldehyde - saponin ﬁxation . J . Cell Biol . 96 , 51 – 62 58 Akisaka , T . , Yoshida , H . , Suzuki , R . , Shimizu , K . and Takama , K . ( 2003 ) Clathrin sheets on the protoplasmic surface of ventral membranes of osteoclasts in culture . J . Electron Microsc . 52 , 535 – 543 59 De Deyne , P . G . , O’Neill , A . , Resneck , W . G . , Dmytrenko , G . M . , Pumplin , D . W . and Bloch , R . J . ( 1998 ) The vitronectin receptor associates with clathrin - coated membrane domains via the cytoplasmic domain of its β 5 subunit . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 2729 – 2740 60 Tawil , N . , Wilson , P . and Carbonetto , S . ( 1993 ) Integrins in point contacts mediate cell spreading : factors that regulate integrin accumulation in point contacts vs . focal contacts . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 261 – 271 61 Ramsay , A . G . , Keppler , M . D . , Jazayeri , M . , Thomas , G . J . , Parsons , M . , Violette , S . , Weinreb , P . , Hart , I . R . and Marshall , J . F . ( 2007 ) HS1 - associated protein X - 1 regulates carcinoma Cell migration and invasion via clathrin - mediated endocytosis of integrin α v β 6 . Cancer Res . 67 , 5275 – 5284 62 Panicker , A . K . , Buhusi , M . , Erickson , A . and Maness , P . F . ( 2006 ) Endocytosis of β 1 integrins is an early event in migration promoted by the cell adhesion molecule L1 . Exp . Cell Res . 312 , 299 – 307 63 Samaniego , R . , Sanchez - Martin , L . , Estecha , A . and Sanchez - Mateos , P . ( 2007 ) Rho / ROCK and myosin II control the polarized distribution of endocytic clathrin structures at the uropod of moving T lymphocytes . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 3534 – 3543 64 Wu , X . , Zhao , X . , Puertollano , R . , Bonifacino , J . S . , Eisenberg , E . and Greene , L . E . ( 2003 ) Adaptor and clathrin exchange at the plasma membrane and trans - Golgi network . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 516 – 528 65 Yim , Y . I . , Scarselletta , S . , Zang , F . , Wu , X . , Lee , D . W . , Kang , Y . S . , Eisenberg , E . and Greene , L . E . ( 2005 ) Exchange of clathrin , AP2 and epsin on clathrin - coated pits in permeabilized tissue culture cells . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 2405 – 2413 66 Yun , M . , Keshvara , L . , Park , C . G . , Zhang , Y . M . , Dickerson , J . B . , Zheng , J . , Rock , C . O . , Curran , T . and Park , H . W . ( 2003 ) Crystal structures of the Dab homology domains of mouse disabled 1 and 2 . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 36572 – 36581 67 Morris , S . M . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2001 ) Disabled - 2 colocalizes with the LDLR in clathrin - coated pits and interacts with AP - 2 . Trafﬁc 2 , 111 – 123 Received 25 June 2008 / 5 November 2008 ; accepted 11 November 2008 Published as BJ Immediate Publication 11 November 2008 , doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20081288 c (cid:2) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:2) 2009 Biochemical Society Biochem . J . ( 2009 ) 418 , 701 – 715 ( Printed in Great Britain ) doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20081288 SUPPLEMENTARY ONLINE DATA Dab2 regulates clathrin assembly and cell spreading David CHETRIT , Naomi ZIV and Marcelo EHRLICH 1 Department of Cell Research and Immunology , George S . Wise Faculty of Life Sciences , Tel Aviv University , Tel Aviv 69978 , Israel Figure S1 The GFP – p82 content of individual clusters correlates directly with the total amount of GFP – p82 in cells COS7 cells , transiently transfected with GFP – p82 ( 24h ) were plated on to glass coverslips and imaged by live - cell spinning - disc confocal microscopy . The entire cell volume was acquired by successive z - sections ( 0 . 4 μ m between planes ) . Total cell GFP – p82 ﬂuorescence , as well as the GFP – p82 ﬂuorescence of individual assemblies at the ventral membrane of the cell , were calculated using SlideBook TM software . The graph depicts the average GFP – p82 ﬂuorescence intensity of individual assemblies as a function of the total GFP – p82 ﬂuorescence of the entire cell . The average GFP – p82 ﬂuorescence per assembly and the total GFP – p82 ﬂuorescence of the cell are in direct correlation ( R 2 = 0 . 804 ) , as calculated with the correlation function of Microsoft Excel . Values are means + − S . E . M . for 50 – 250 clusters / cell . a . u . , arbitrary units . Figure S2 GFP – p82 asemblies localize mainly to the ventral membrane of the cell COS7 cells , plated on to glass coverslips , were co - transfected with GFP – p82and RFP – LCa . After transfection for 24h , the entire cell volume was imaged by live - cell confocalmicroscopy . ( A ) Image ( x , zprojection ) of a single co - expressing cell . Top panel , GFP – p82 ﬂuorescence ; middle panel , RFP – LCa ; bottom panel , overlay of images acquired at both wavelengths . ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of the distributionofGFP – p82assemblies . ThenumberofGFP – p82assembliesineithertheventralordorsalmembraneswascalculatedfromthreedimensionalimageacquisitions . Thehistogramdepicts the average percentage of GFP – p82 assemblies in the ventral ( white bar ) or dorsal ( black bar ) membranes . Results are means + − S . E . M . ( n = 5 ) ∗∗∗ P < 0 . 0001 . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed ( email marceloe @ tauex . tau . ac . il ) . c (cid:3) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:3) 2009 Biochemical Society D . Chetrit , N . Ziv and M . Ehrlich Figure S3 Knockdown of α - adaptin does not affect endogenous Dab2 clusters and does not abolish GFP – p82 enlarged assemblies ( A ) Mock - transfected HeLacells ( white bar ) or HeLa cells depletedof AP2 ( black bar ) were ﬁxed , permeabilized and stained with a polyclonalanti - Dab2 antibody at 48h post - transfection . Cells were imaged by confocal microscopy and the ﬂuorescence intensity of ∼ 2000 individual Dab2 clusters from 20 different cells under each condition was measured . The histogram depicts the average ﬂuorescence intensity of individual Dab2 clusters ( calculated as the percentage of the average ﬂuorescence of individual clusters in mock - transfected cells ) . The intensity of Dab2 clusters in AP2 - depleted cells is 96 + − 1 % of the intensity in mock - transfected cells ( P > 0 . 05 ) . For each condition , approx . 2000 pits from 20 cells were measured , and results are means + − S . E . M . ( B ) COS7 cells , transfected with GFP – p82 in conjunction with either a non - speciﬁc siRNA or siRNA directed against α - adaptin , were incubated for 20min at 37 ◦ C with transferrin ( Tfr ) ( 25 μ M ) to assess uptake , ﬁxed with methanol / acetone , and stained with a polyclonal anti - Dab2 antibody and a monoclonal anti - α - adaptin antibody . Cells were imaged by deconvolution microscopy . Images were deconvoluted using the Nearest Neighbour algorithm of SlideBook TM software . Typical assemblies containing overexpressed p82 are indicated in the Merge panels ( arrowheads ) . ( C ) COS7 cells transfected with either GFP – p82 ( upper panels ) or GFP – p82 in conjunction with siRNA directed against α - adaptin ( anti - AP - 2 siRNA ) ( lower panels ) were submitted to 15min transferrin uptake and imaged by live - cell spinning - disc confocal microscopy . For ( B and C ) , scale bar , 10 μ m . c (cid:3) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:3) 2009 Biochemical Society Dab2 modiﬁes clathrin assemblies Figure S4 RFP – epsin localizes to enlarged GFP – p82 assemblies ( A ) Co - localizationofRFP – epsinandGFP – p82inenlargedassemblies . ExpressionofRFP – epsindoesnotalterthetypicalmorphologyofGFP – p82assemblies . Panelsdepictconfocalmicrographs oftheventralmembraneoftypicaltransientlytransfectedCOS7cellsco - expressingGFP – p82andRFP – epsin ( Doubletransfection ) orexpressingGFP – p82alone ( Singletransfection ) . ( B ) RFP – epsin andGFP – p82co - localizeattheplasmamembrane . ThegraphdepictsthevanSteele’sCCFofGFP – p82andRFP – epsinﬂuorescencein ( A ) . ( C ) TheamountofRFP – epsinintheassembliesisdirectly proportionaltotheamountofGFP – p82 . ThegraphdepictsthemeasuredintensitiesofGFP – p82andRFP – epsininindividualassembliesin ( A ) . a . u . , arbitraryunits . ( D ) Theﬂuorescenceintensityof GFP – p82 and RFP – epsin assemblies is stable over time . Panels depict a kymograph of a time - lapse sequence ( 360s , 6s between frames ) of the cell depicted in ( A ) . ( E ) Diffraction - limited GFP – p82 and RFP – epsin assemblies appear to bud off from the stable / larger assemblies . The panels depict sequential time points of a close - up region of the time - lapse sequence depicted in ( D ) . Arrowheads indicate the vesicle - like assembly budding from the larger assembly . The entire sequence is depicted in Supplementary Movie 1 ( at http : / / www . BiochemJ . org / bj / 418 / bj4180701add . htm ) . For ( A , D ) , scale bar , 10 μ m . For ( E ) , scale bar , 1 μ m . c (cid:3) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:3) 2009 Biochemical Society D . Chetrit , N . Ziv and M . Ehrlich Figure S5 Effects of butan - 1 - ol and its washout on the membrane distribution of GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa COS7 cells expressing GFP – p82 and RFP – LCa were imaged prior to treatment ( A ) , in the course of incubation with 1 . 3 % ( v / v ) butan - 1 - ol ( B ) and following the washout of the alcohol with fresh imaging medium ( C and D ) . ( D ) Kymograph of a time - lapse ( 100 frames , 4s intervals ) of a cell after butan - 1 - ol washout . The central panel is a typical time point , whereas the left - hand and upper panels are the projections ofxandyin time ( z ) . Scale bar , 10 μ m . Received 25 June 2008 / 5 November 2008 ; accepted 11 November 2008 Published as BJ Immediate Publication 11 November 2008 , doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20081288 c (cid:3) The Authors Journal compilation c (cid:3) 2009 Biochemical Society