Received : 22 December 2016 | Accepted : 7 May 2017 DOI : 10 . 1002 / cae . 21842 RESEARCH ARTICLE The use and analysis of anti - plagiarism software : Turnitin tool for formative assessment and feedback Malka N . Halgamuge Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering , The University of Melbourne , Parkville , Victoria , Australia Correspondence Malka N . Halgamuge , Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering , The University of Melbourne , Parkville , Victoria 3010 , Australia . Email : malka . nisha @ unimelb . edu . au Abstract This analysis investigates the efficiency of the Turnitin software as a formative writing tool . The inquiry is especially looking into undergraduate and postgraduate students ’ experiences while using Turnitin . The perceptions and experiences of students will be prioritized in the study with the purpose of determining ways to improve Turnitin from students ’ point of view . Turnitin obtains text matches or similarity index values of 3 , 173 assignments submitted on subjects uploaded between 2012 and 2014 by university students . We statistically analyzed the similarity index values or levels of plagiarism percentage between the first and the last assignments , using the two - sample Kolmogorov – Smirnov test , and we found that there was a significant improvement ( p = 0 . 002 ) . Hence , our results demonstrated that using Turnitin as a formative writing tool , allows students to prepare an assignment in an academically acceptable way , during the second half of the semester , with less plagiarism . The results found in this study suggests an insignificant difference between the draft version and final version of the same assignment ( p = 0 . 192 ) . Similarity index values are also different for different courses , such as writing based project subject and mathematics based engineering subject have different values ( p < 0 . 0001 ) . We also observed that students seem to be able to fool Turnitin tool by uploading images of the assignments instead of the text . Nevertheless , the nature of the subject , individual talent , learning approach , time contribution , and the exclusion of consecutive word count may affect the plagiarism percentage . Our results also indicate that there is a substantial benefit in using Turnitin as an educational writing tool rather than a punitive tool , as the use of Turnitin , promotes student learning outcomes with significantly improved academic skills . Thus , this paper provides an insight into avoiding high levels of plagiarism by using Turnitin as a preemptive tool . KEYWORDS assessment , formative assessment , formative writing tool , Turnitin , plagiarism 1 | INTRODUCTION The growth rate of the Internet technology exceeds the progress rate of any other technology . This advancement is foreseeable due to the conveniences of the digital age . Technology also helps people to access the World Wide Web to navigating in exchange of valuable information . Technol - ogy has many advances for university students notwithstand - ing the opportunity to access materials related to their work through university libraries from anywhere in the world . The Comput Appl Eng Educ . 2017 ; 1 – 15 . wileyonlinelibrary . com / cae © 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . | 1