Direct dynamin – actin interactions regulate the actin cytoskeleton Changkyu Gu 1 , Suma Yaddanapudi 1 , 5 , Astrid Weins 2 , 5 , Teresia Osborn 3 , Jochen Reiser 4 , Martin Pollak 2 , John Hartwig 3 and Sanja Sever 1 , * 1 Nephrology Division , Department of Medicine , Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital , Charlestown , MA , USA , 2 Division of Nephrology , Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center , Boston , MA , USA , 3 Translational Medicine Division , Brigham and Women’s Hospital , Boston , MA , USA and 4 Division of Nephrology and Hypertension , University of Miami , FL , USA The large GTPase dynamin assembles into higher order structures that are thought to promote endocytosis . Dynamin also regulates the actin cytoskeleton through an unknown , GTPase - dependent mechanism . Here , we identify a highly conserved site in dynamin that binds directly to actin ﬁlaments and aligns them into bundles . Point mutations in the actin - binding domain cause aberrant membrane rufﬂing and defective actin stress ﬁbre forma - tion in cells . Short actin ﬁlaments promote dynamin assembly into higher order structures , which in turn efﬁciently release the actin - capping protein ( CP ) gelsolin from barbed actin ends in vitro , allowing for elongation of actin ﬁlaments . Together , our results support a model in which assembled dynamin , generated through interac - tions with short actin ﬁlaments , promotes actin polymer - ization via displacement of actin - CPs . The EMBO Journal ( 2010 ) 29 , 3593 – 3606 . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2010 . 249 ; Published online 8 October 2010 Subject Categories : cell & tissue architecture Keywords : actin ; cytoskeleton ; dynamin Introduction Dynamic cellular properties such as migration and division depend on the actin cytoskeleton , a dense meshwork of protein polymers that undergoes rapid cycles of assembly and disassembly and that is controlled by a large number of actin - associated proteins ( reviewed in Pollard and Cooper , 2009 ) . One of the proteins implicated in regulation of cell motility is the GTPase dynamin ( reviewed in Schafer , 2004 ) , best known for its essential role in clathrin - coated vesicle formation during endocytosis ( reviewed in Mettlen et al , 2009 ) . In addition to its role in endocytosis , dynamin co - localizes with actin ﬁlaments , often in locations where membranes undergo remodelling such as cortical rufﬂes and podosomes . Dynamin binds numerous actin - regulating or - binding proteins such as proﬁlin , Nck and cortactin ( reviewed in Schafer , 2004 ) . These interactions are mediated through dynamin’s C - terminal proline , arginine - rich ( PRD ) domain and the Src homology 3 ( SH3 ) domains of actin - binding proteins . It is through these interactions that dynamin is thought to link the plasma membrane to actin and thereby assemble actin ﬁlaments on membranes that are undergoing remodelling ( Orth and McNiven , 2003 ) . According to this model , dynamin’s regulation of the actin cytoskeleton is tightly connected to its membrane localization and its ability to bind actin - binding proteins . Several lines of evidence suggest an alternative model in which dynamin has a more direct role in regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . Thus , expression of a dynamin mutant that cannot bind GTP , dyn K44A , but can still bind SH3 - domain containing proteins , signiﬁcantly reduced formation of F - actin comets generated either by Listeria or on vesicles by overexpression of type I phosphatidylinositol 5 - phosphate kinase ( Lee and De Camilli , 2002 ; Orth et al , 2002 ) . Interestingly , dynamin was not only concentrated at the actin – vesicle – membrane interface , but also extended along the length of the comet tails . Thus , in addition to nucleotide - independent , PRD - dependent interactions with actin - binding proteins ( McNiven et al , 2000 ) , these data raised the possi - bility of dynamin GTPase - dependent regulation of actin . Supporting this connection are studies showing a role for dynamin’s GTPase activity in podosome structure and func - tion ( Bruzzaniti et al , 2005 ) . Podosomes are highly dynamic actin - containing adhesion structures found in osteoclasts , macrophages and Rous sarcoma virus - transformed ﬁbro - blasts . While expression of dyn K44A decreased osteoclast resorption and migration , overexpression of dyn WT increased these processes ( Bruzzaniti et al , 2005 ) . Recent work by Mooren et al ( 2009 ) attempted to explain the role of dynamin’s GTPase cycle in regulation of the actin cytoskele - ton . They showed that in the presence of dynamin , GTP led to remodelling of actin ﬁlaments in vitro via the actin - binding protein cortactin . This suggested that a GTP hydrolysis - in - duced conformational change within dynamin is transduced to cortactin , which in turn alters orientation of the actin ﬁlaments . However , as interactions between dynamin’s PRD and cortactin’s SH3 domain do not require GTP binding or hydrolysis by dynamin , it is uncertain how such a conforma - tional change within dynamin might be transmitted to cortactin . In this study , we identify a direct interaction between dynamin and actin , which is mediated by a conserved domain in dynamin . Expression of dynamin mutants with impaired afﬁnity for F - actin in podocytes decreased the number of actin stress ﬁbres and disrupted the cortical actin cytoskeleton . In contrast , expression of a dynamin mutant with increased afﬁnity for F - actin enhanced stress ﬁbre formation . Importantly , actin binding was closely linked to the assembly status of dynamin . Thus , short actin ﬁla - ments stimulated dynamin self - assembly via direct dynamin – Received : 10 May 2010 ; accepted : 10 September 2010 ; published online : 8 October 2010 * Corresponding author . Nephrology Division , Department of Medicine , Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital , 149 13th Street , Charlestown , MA 02129 , USA . Tel . : þ 1 617 724 8922 ; Fax : þ 1 617 726 5669 ; E - mail : ssever @ partners . org 5 These authors contributed equally to this work . The EMBO Journal ( 2010 ) 29 , 3593 – 3606 | & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization | All Rights Reserved 0261 - 4189 / 10 www . embojournal . org & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 29 | NO 21 | 2010 EMBO THE EMBO JOURNAL THE EMBO JOURNAL 3593 actin interactions in vitro . Importantly , assembled dynamin displaced the capping protein ( CP ) gelsolin ( Gsn ) from barbed ends , which in turn promoted elongation of actin ﬁlaments . The effect was Gsn speciﬁc as dynamin could not displace another mammalian CP . Together , the data suggest that short actin ﬁlaments , generated by actin severing and CPs , lead to dynamin self - assembly . Dynamin oligomers in turn promote de - capping of barbed ends , allowing for actin ﬁlament elongation . The experiments reveal an intricate functional interplay between the actin cytoskeleton and the assembly status of dynamin . Results Dynamin binds to ﬁlamentous actin To revisit the question of how dynamin regulates the actin cytoskeleton , we tested whether dynamin binds to F - actin using a co - sedimentation assay . We used the neuronal isoform , dynamin 1 ( dyn1 ) , which has a lower propensity to spontaneously oligomerize ( Warnock et al , 1997 ) . At physiological ionic strength , dyn1 was soluble and thus found in the supernatant after ultracentrifugation ( Figure 1A , lanes 13 , 15 and 17 ) . However , in the presence of F - actin , dynamin was found in the pellet ( Figure 1A , compare lanes 2 and 14 ; Supplementary Figure S1A ) inde - pendently of GTP or GTP g S ( Figure 1A , compare lanes 2 , 4 and 6 ) . Recombinant dyn1 and isolated actin did not contain cortactin , an actin - binding protein known to interact with dynamin ( Supplementary Figure S1B ) , suggesting that inter - actions between dynamin and actin are direct . The binding constant ( K d ) of dynamin for actin was B 0 . 4 m M ( Figure 1B , black circles ) ; which is comparable with the K d s of known actin - binding proteins such as a - actinin 4 or cortactin ( van Rossum et al , 2003 ; Weins et al , 2005 ) . Based on a Scatchard analysis ( Supplementary Figure S1C ; saturation - binding curve ) , one dynamin tetramer bound 4 – 6 actin subunits of the ﬁlament . We next mapped the actin - binding domain ( ABD ) within dynamin . Importantly , dynamin lacking its PRD domain ( dyn D PRD ) bound F - actin as efﬁciently as dyn1 WT with a K d of B 0 . 3 m M ( Figure 1B ; Supplementary Figure S1D ) . Thus , dynamin – actin interactions are not mediated through SH3 containing actin regulators . Dynamin’s GTPase effector do - main ( GED ) did not bind F - actin ( data not shown ) , suggesting that the actin - binding site was situated within the GTPase , middle or PH domains . Using in vitro transcription / transla - tion ( IVT ) , we generated several dynamin fragments and thereby mapped the actin - binding site to a region between amino acids 399 and 444 ( Supplementary Figures S1E – G ) . As predicted for an ABD ( Van Troys et al , 1996 ) , this region contains several positively charged amino acids , and these are conserved from yeast to mammals ( Figure 1C ) . A B C D 0 . 033 1 . 69 2 . 82 0 . 42 K d ( F - actin ) μ M Dyn1E / K Dyn1K / E Dyn1K / A Dyn1WT Protein 25 ± 4 25 ± 4 15 ± 2 30 ± 6 k cat ( min – 1 ) ( stimulated ) k cat ( min – 1 ) ( basal ) 1 . 3 ± 0 . 1 1 . 3 ± 0 . 2 0 . 7 ± 0 . 2 0 . 9 ± 0 . 1 WT E / K K / A K / E Δ PRD Figure 1 Direct dynamin – actin interactions are mediated by dyna - min’s middle domain . ( A ) Dyn1 co - sediments with F - actin . Representative Coomassie blue - stained gel of supernatants ( S ) and pellets ( P ) after centrifugation at 150000 g in the presence and absence of 100 m M nucleotides as indicated in the ﬁgure ; 1 m M dynamin was incubated with 5 m M rabbit skeletal muscle actin . ( B ) Actin - binding analysis of dynamin ( wild - type , D PRD and actin - binding site mutants ) to F - actin . Increasing concentrations of dyn1 were added to 2 . 5 m M F - actin . After centrifugation at 150000 g , proteins were separated on SDS – PAGE and bands were analysed using densitometry . ( C ) Top , schematic diagram of dynamin do - mains and fragments tested in the actin co - sedimentation assay using IVT proteins . The presence or absence of an actin - binding domain ( ABD ) is indicated . Bottom , amino - acid sequence align - ment of dyn2 ( splice variants a and b ) , dyn1 ( splice variants a and b ) , Drosophila dynamin ( Shi ) , Caenorhabditis elegans dynamin ( Cele ) , and yeast dynamin ( Vps1 ) . Dnm1 is a dynamin family member involved in mitochondrial morphogenesis . ( D ) Dynamin mutants with altered afﬁnity for actin exhibit wild - type GTPase activities . Kinetic parameters were determined performing the GTPase assays using 0 . 2 m M dynamin and when indicated 80 m M lipids . Direct dynamin – actin interactions regulate the actincytoskeleton C Gu et al The EMBO Journal VOL 29 | NO 21 | 2010 & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization 3594 Interestingly , this region is alternatively spliced within differ - ent mammalian dynamin isoforms ( called variant a and b ) . Site - directed mutagenesis was performed on conserved , charged residues within the ABD of dyn1b to generate putative ‘loss - of - function’ mutants , dyn1 K / E and dyn1 K / A , and a putative ‘gain - of - function’ mutant , dyn1 E / K ( Figure 1C ) . As predicted , the afﬁnities of dyn1 K / E and dyn1 K / A for actin were reduced ( K d of 1 . 7 and 2 . 8 m M , respectively ) , whereas the afﬁnity of dyn1 E / K for actin was increased ( K d ¼ 0 . 03 m M ) ( Figure 1B ; Supplementary Figures S1H and I ) . All three mutant proteins exhibited wild - type basal rates of GTP hydro - lysis ( Figure 1D ) , indicating proper folding . In addition , all three mutants supported lipid - stimulated GTP hydrolysis ( Figure 1D ) , with dyn1 K / A being partially impaired because of its reduced self - assembly ( Supplementary Figure S1J , lane 3 ) . In agreement with their normal GTPase activities , dyn1 K / E and dyn1 E / K supported endocytosis of transferrin ( Supplementary Figures S2A and B ) . Expression of these mutant proteins did not change the overall level ( Supplementary Figure S2C ) , or GTP - bound forms of known Rho - family GTPases ( Supplementary Figure S2D ) in cells . Together , these data suggest that the actin - binding mutants of dynamin are properly folded and that they do not detectably affect clathrin - mediated endocytosis or signal - ling by Cdc42 , Rac1 or RhoA . Direct dynamin – actin interactions regulate the actin cytoskeleton To explore the function of direct dynamin – actin interactions in cells , we used cultured podocytes . Podocytes are specia - lized cells of the glomerulus containing a highly organized actin cytoskeleton that is necessary for their function as part of the glomerular ﬁltration apparatus in the kidney ( Saleem et al , 2008 ) . Changes in podocyte morphology and attach - ment to the glomerular basement membrane , which are driven by reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton , are directly linked to chronic kidney diseases ( Oh et al , 2004 ) . The actin cytoskeleton in conditionally immortalized mouse podocytes supports podocyte adhesion , motility and morpho - genesis , and like many other cell types can be roughly divided into three domains : ( 1 ) a lamellipodial actin network , ( 2 ) ﬁlopodial actin bundles and ( 3 ) contractile actin stress ﬁbres ( Figure 2A , panel 1 ) . Downregulation of the ubiquitously expressed dynamin 2 ( dyn2 ) using lentivirus - based short hairpin RNAs was moni - tored using RT – PCR ( Supplementary Figure S3A ) and western blot analysis ( Supplementary Figure S3B ) . Three different shRNAs downregulated dyn2 protein levels by 70 – 90 % ( Supplementary Figure S3B ) , resulting in similar alterations in cell morphology with cells becoming smaller , less round and eventually detaching from the coverslip ( Supplementary Figure S3C ) . There was a dramatic loss of F - actin and the number of focal adhesions ( FAs ) in dynamin - deﬁcient cells ( Figure 2A , panel 2 and 2C , 2D for quantiﬁca - tion ) . These data are in agreement with the global alteration in the actin cytoskeleton observed after dyn2 was down - regulated in U2OS cells ( Mooren et al , 2009 ) . The data are also in agreement with our previous ﬁnding that downregula - tion of dynamin by CatL processing resulted in loss of stress ﬁbres ( Sever et al , 2007 ) . We next examined whether expression of dyn1 WT or our novel ABD mutants of dynamin could rescue the dyn2 - depletion phenotype . Of note , 4 70 % loss of dyn2 resulted in signiﬁcant loss of cells from the coverslips ( Supplementary Figure S3C and data not shown ) . Thus , all rescue experiments were performed under viral infection conditions in which downregulation of dynamin was B 70 % ( Supplementary Figures S3D and E ) . Expression of the neuronal isoform of dynamin , dyn1 WT , restored normal actin organization in dyn2 - deﬁcient cells ( Figure 2A , panel 3 ; Supplementary Figure S3F ) . Quantiﬁcation of the data showed that dyn1 WT restored levels of F - actin ( Figure 2C ) and FAs ( Figure 2D ) to wild - type levels . In contrast , expres - sion of ‘loss - of - function’ dyn1 K / E failed to rescue the deple - tion of dyn2 ( Figure 2A , panel 4 ; Supplementary Figure S3F ) . Whereas dyn1 K / E induced formation of FAs and stress ﬁbres above levels seen in cells lacking dynamin ( Figure 2C and D ) , it mostly induced formation of focal complexes and some disorganized actin cables within the cell body . Expression of ‘gain - of - function’ dyn1 E / K rescued formation of FAs within the cell body ( Figure 2A , panel 5 , 2D ; Supplementary Figure S3F ) , as well as formation of stress ﬁbres ( Figure 2C ) . While expression of dyn1 E / K clearly restored formation of stress ﬁbres within the cell body ( Figure 2A ) , it seems that these structures are also somewhat disorganized . As ABD mutants exhibit wild - type GTPase activity ( Figure 1D ) and do not affect clathrin - mediated endocytosis or signalling by Cdc42 , Rac1 and RhoA ( Supplementary Figure S2 ) , our data indicate that direct dynamin – actin interactions are essential for actin polymerization , which drives formation of stress ﬁbres as well as cortical actin cytoskeleton in podocytes . Interactions between dynamin and SH3 - domain containing proteins are not essential for stress ﬁbre formation in podocytes Until now , the role of dynamin in regulation of the actin cytoskeleton has been viewed through its interactions with actin - binding / regulatory proteins such as cortactin . As these interactions are mediated by dynamin’s PRD domain , we examined effects of ABD mutants in the context of dynamin mutants that lack the PRD , dyn1 D PRD . Unexpectedly , expres - sion of dyn1 D PRD complemented dyn2 knockdown to a simi - lar extent as dyn1 WT , as seen by the restoration of stress ﬁbres and FAs within podocytes ( Figure 2B , panel 1 , 2C , 2D ; Supplementary Figure S3F ) . In contrast , expression of the double mutant , dyn1 D PRD / KE , which is impaired in actin binding , failed to restore stress ﬁbres and FAs ( Figure 2B , panel 2 ) , whereas dyn1 D PRD / EK behaved like dyn1 WT ( Figure 2B , panel 3 ) . Together , these results further support the conclusion that the effects of dynamin on the actin cyto - skeleton occurred through direct dynamin – actin interactions . The importance of direct dynamin – actin interactions in actin regulation is not unique to podocytes . Thus , it has been shown that expression of dyn1 D PRD can induce stress ﬁbre formation in rat hepatocytes called clone 9 cells ( Supplementary Figure S4A , panel 1 ; McNiven et al , 2000 ) . Consistent with our experiments in podocytes , dyn1 D PRD / KE failed to induce stress ﬁbre formation in clone 9 cells , whereas dyn1 D PRD / EK retained this activity ( Supplementary Figure S4A ) . In fact , expression of dyn1 E / K induced stress ﬁbre formation , whereas expression of dyn1 K / E had the opposite effect ( Supplementary Figure S4B ) . Together , these data suggest that in clone 9 cells , interactions between dynamin’s PRD and SH3 - domain containing proteins are Direct dynamin – actin interactions regulate the actincytoskeleton C Gu et al & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 29 | NO 21 | 2010 3595 not essential for formation of stress ﬁbres , but that direct dynamin – actin interactions are essential . Direct dynamin – actin interactions regulate actin polymerization To further examine the role of dynamin – actin interactions in regulation of actin cytoskeleton , we overexpressed ABD mutants in podocytes . If dynamin – actin interactions are essential for actin polymerization , then overexpression of ABD mutants might be predicted to function as dominant negative or dominant positive with respect to actin polymer - ization . As shown previously ( Sever et al , 2007 ) , expression of dyn1 K44A , a mutant that cannot bind GTP , dramatically altered organization of the actin cytoskeleton in podocytes , whereas expression of dyn1 WT had no effect ( Supplementary Figures S5A – C ) . Expression of ‘loss - of - function’ dyn1 K / E resulted in elongated podocytes whose cytoplasm collapsed into a narrow space around the nucleus ( Supplementary Figure S5A ) , which correlated with a statistically signiﬁcant loss of stress ﬁbres and FAs ( Supplementary Figures S5B and C ) . Dyn K / E was also generated in the context of dyn2 , and the cells exhibited the same phenotypes as dyn1 K / E ( compare Supplementary Figure S5A , row 4 and Supplementary Figure S5D , row 3 ) , showing that the effects were not isoform speciﬁc . In contrast , expression of the ‘gain - of - function’ dyn1 E / K exhibited a statistically signiﬁcant increase in the number of FAs and stress ﬁbres ( Supplementary Figures S5B and C ) . Further supporting a role for dynamin – actin Paxillin F - actin Merge 2 . shRNA - s4 4 . shRNA - s4 + dyn1K / E 3 . shRNA - s4 + dyn1WT 5 . shRNA - s4 + dyn1E / K B C 1 . Endo * * A Paxillin F - actin Merge G E F D 1 . shRNA - s4 + (cid:2) PRD 2 . shRNA - s4 + (cid:2) PRD / ( K / E ) 3 . shRNA - s4 + (cid:2) PRD / ( E / K ) Figure 2 Direct dynamin – actin interactions are essential for organization of the actin cytoskeleton in podocytes . ( A , B ) Podocytes were ﬁrst infected with adenoviruses expressing different dyn1 constructs as indicated ; 18h post - infection , cells were infected with lentivurus expressing shRNA construct S4 , and dyn2 was downregulated for 3 days , after which cells were examined via immunoﬂuorescence . Focal adhesions and F - actin were visualized with anti - paxillin antibodies and rhodamin phalloidin , respectively . In ( A ) , white asterisk marks cells that were not infected with adenoviruses expressing dyn1 constructs . ( C , D ) Expression of dyn1 WT , dyn1 E / K , dyn1 D PRD / EK , but not dyn1 K / E or dyn1 D PRD / KE promotes formation of stress ﬁbres and focal adhesions in podocytes . Bar graphs depicting total F - actin ( C ) and the number of focal adhesions ( D ) . Data represent measurements of 4 50 cells and are plotted as ± s . d . ( n ¼ 3 ) . ( E ) Effects of expression of dynamin mutants on the partitioning of actin into Triton - X 100 soluble and insoluble fractions . ( Top ) Flow chart of experiment , ( bottom ) western blot analysis of actin distribution among low - speed pellet ( LSP ) , high - speed pellet ( HSP ) , and high - speed supernatant ( HSS ) fractions in three separate experiments . ( F ) Bar graphs depicting the partitioning of actin in ( E ) . The actin distribution in each fraction was expressed as a percentage of the total . Values shown are the mean ± s . d . ( n ¼ 3 ) shown in ( E ) . ( G ) Fractionation of a - actinin 4 by differential centrifugation in podocye lysates expressing different dynamin mutants . The result from three separate experiments are shown . Direct dynamin – actin interactions regulate the actincytoskeleton C Gu et al The EMBO Journal VOL 29 | NO 21 | 2010 & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization 3596 interactions in these phenotypes , both ABD mutants were able to interact with cortactin , an SH3 - domain containing protein , to the same extent as the wild - type enzyme ( Supplementary Figures S5E and F ) . Together , these data further show a role for direct dynamin – actin interactions in regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . As a complementary means to examine dynamin - mediated regulation of actin polymerization , we performed subcellular fractionation using differential centrifugation ( Watts and Howard , 1992 ) . In this assay , higher order bundles and networks of F - actin are isolated in the low - speed fraction in the presence of Triton - X 100 ( low - speed pellet , LSP in Figure 2E ) . The soluble fraction is recovered and re - centri - fuged at high speed to separate non - crosslinked F - actin ( high - speed pellet , HSP ) from soluble G - actin monomers ( high - speed supernatant , HSS ) . Wild - type mouse podocytes contained almost identical amounts of actin in the LSP ( bundles ) and HSP ( F - actin ) fractions and almost no actin in HSS ( G - actin ; Figure 2E , Endo ; see Figure 2F for quantiﬁ - cation ) , and this distribution was maintained in cells over - expressing dyn1 WT ( Figure 2E ) . Expression of dyn1 K44A shifted F - actin into the LSP fraction ( Figure 2E ) consistent with formation of hyper - bundled cortical actin ( Supplementary Figure S5A ) . In contrast , expression of ‘loss - of - function’ dyn1 K / E and dyn1 K / A resulted in a signiﬁ - cant increase in the amount of G - actin in HSS , while decreas - ing the levels of crosslinked F - actin in LSP and HSP ( Figure 2E ) . These data are in agreement with the overall loss of stress ﬁbres observed by immunoﬂuorescence micro - scopy ( Supplementary Figures S5A and B ) . Cells expressing the ‘gain - of - function’ dyn1 E / K exhibited a dramatic increase in F - actin pelleting into the LSP , and a concomitant decrease of F - actin in the HSP fraction ( Figure 2E ) , consistent with increased stress ﬁbre formation ( Supplementary Figures S5A and B ) . A known podocyte actin bundling protein , a - actinin 4 , co - fractionated with actin in cells expressing the different dynamin mutants ( Figure 2G ) ; thus , similar to the effects on actin , dyn1 K44A and dyn1 E / K expression shifted a - actinin 4 into the LSP , whereas dyn1 K / E expression resulted in an increase of a - actinin 4 into the HSS fraction ( Figure 2G , lanes 7 – 9 ) . Together , these data show that dynamin – actin interactions have a major function in regulating actin polymerization in podocytes . Our data suggest that dyna - min – actin interactions regulate both the formation of stress ﬁbres and the cortical actin cytoskeleton in podocytes . As the coordinated interplay between the cortical actin cytoskeleton and stress ﬁbres underlies cell motility , we examined whether the dynamin – actin interaction inﬂuences podocyte motility . Podocyte motility was examined using a scratch wound - healing assay ( Asanuma et al , 2006 ) . As predicted from actin cytoskeleton organization , overexpres - sion of dyn1 WT had no effect on podocyte motility , in contrast to diminished podocyte motility in cells expressing dyn1 K44A ( Supplementary Figures S5G and H for quantiﬁcation ) . Importantly , motility was also impaired in cells expressing any of the three ABD mutants of dynamin ( Supplementary Figure S5G ) . Thus , both ‘loss - of - function’ and ‘gain - of - func - tion’ ABD dynamin mutants act as dominant negatives with respect to podocyte motility . The loss of motility in cells expressing dyn1 E / K can be explained by the increase in the number of FAs within the cell body ( Supplementary Figure S5C ) . Together , these data show that direct dynamin – actin interactions control global organization of the actin cytoske - leton by regulating actin polymerization . To our knowledge , dynamin is the only GTPase known to directly regulate global organization of the actin cytoskeleton in cells . Dynamin bundles ﬁlamentous actin We next investigated the molecular mechanism by which dynamin – actin interactions inﬂuence the organization of the actin cytoskeleton . First , we examined whether dynamin alters F - actin organization . Figure 3A shows that dyn1 bun - dles F - actin in vitro , as visualized by ﬂuorescence microscopy of actin after FITC - phalloidin staining ( Figure 3A , panel 2 ) . Importantly , dyn1 E / K also bundled F - actin ( panel 5 ) , whereas dyn1 K / E did not ( panel 4 ) , indicating that bundling is mediated by direct dynamin – actin interactions mediated by the dynamin ABD . Although dynamin can bundle F - actin , it does so less effectively than a - actinin 4 , a known actin bundling protein ( Figure 3A , panel 3 ) . Given dynamin’s ability to oligomerize into higher order structures such as rings , we tested whether dynamin rings also bind and bundle F - actin . Dynamin was induced to oligomerize into rings by GTP g S , a non - hydrolysable GTP analogue . Although bundles were detected , the presence of GTP g S diminished the extent of bundling ( Figure 3A , compare panels 2 and 6 ) . Co - sedi - mentation at low speed was used to independently measure the ability of dynamin to crosslink F - actin into bundles . In the absence of dyn1 , o 10 % of F - actin sedimented during cen - trifugation ( Figure 3B , lane 2 , and 3C for quantiﬁcation ) . Addition of 1 m M dyn1 increased the amount of F - actin found in the pellet to B 35 % of the total ( Figure 3B , lane 8 ) , but this was slightly reduced in the presence of GTP g S ( Figure 3B , lane 10 ) . Therefore , unassembled dynamin tetramers and , to a lesser extend , dynamin rings can bundle actin ﬁlaments . To visualize actin bundles generated by dynamin , negative staining and electron microscopy were performed . In agree - ment with the light microscopy , the addition of dyn1 to F - actin resulted in bundles that could be visualized in the electron microscope ( Figure 3D ) . White ‘knobs’ attached to actin ﬁlaments are recombinant dynamin . As observed by the IF , the EM analysis also showed that dynamin bundled F - actin in the presence of GTP g S ( Figure 3E ) . In Figure 3E , black arrows point to the dynamin rings that associate with actin bundles in the presence of GTP g S . The ﬁlament - to - ﬁlament spacing in the presence of GTP g S was 17 – 20nm and quite regular , showing that in contrast to unassembled dynamin , dynamin rings generate bundles with deﬁned spa - cing ( see model in Figure 3E ) . Therefore , both tetrameric and oligomeric dynamin can interact with and crosslink F - actin ﬁlaments into bundles and modify actin structure . Dynamin is known to bind phospho - lipids . Thus , we tested whether dynamin might recruit actin ﬁlaments to mem - branes . Actin ﬁlaments and PIP 2 - containing lipid vesicles were visualized with rhodamine phalloidin and ﬂuorescein phosphatidylethanolamine ( PE ) , respectively ( Schafer et al , 2002 ) . As seen before ( Schafer et al , 2002 ) , addition of dyn2 induced aggregation of lipid vesicles and resulted in associa - tion of actin ﬁlaments with lipid aggregates ( Figure 3F ) . In fact , addition of lipid vesicles increased dynamin’s ability to bundle actin ﬁlaments into disordered and entangled net - works of thin ﬁlament bundles . Together , these data show that dynamin can crosslink actin ﬁlaments into bundles even when associated with the membranes , and thus suggest that Direct dynamin – actin interactions regulate the actincytoskeleton C Gu et al & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 29 | NO 21 | 2010 3597 it can directly inﬂuence the organization of the actin ﬁlaments in the vicinity of the membrane . Short actin ﬁlaments promote dynamin oligomerization To fully explore the functional connection between actin and dynamin , we addressed whether actin also modulates the properties of dynamin . The GTPase activity of dynamin is tightly connected to its oligomerization cycle . In its basal state at high ionic strength , dynamin exhibits a dimer – tetra - mer equilibrium ( Muhlberg et al , 1997 ) . At low ionic strength , or in the presence of lipid vesicles ( reviewed in Praefcke and McMahon , 2004 ) , dynamin tetramers self - as - semble into higher order structures such as rings and / or spirals . Dynamin self - assembly increases its GTPase activity because of activation of an internal GTPase - activating protein domain ( Sever et al , 1999 ) . GTP hydrolysis in turn drives dynamin disassembly ( Warnock et al , 1996 ) . GTPase assays were performed in the presence and absence of actin . Addition of G - actin , G - actin treated with latranculin A ( to ensure that actin remains monomeric at the salt conditions of the assay ) or F - actin did not signiﬁcantly alter the basal rate of dynamin GTP hydrolysis ( data not shown ) . To determine whether actin ﬁlament length might affect the GTPase activity of dyn1 , F - actin ( 2 m M ﬁnal G - actin concentration ) was sheared by ﬁve passages through a 27 - gauge needle , followed immediately by the addition of different concentrations of cytochalasin D ( cytoD ) , an inhi - bitor of actin polymerization . This shearing procedure A B C E D F - actin Lipids Merge F F - actin + dyn1 + GTP γ S F - actin + dyn1 20 μ m 1 . F - actin 4 . F - actin + dyn1K / E 5 . F - actin + dyn1E / K 6 . F - actin + dyn1 + GTP γ S 1 . Lipids + actin 2 . Lipids + actin + dyn2 3 . Lipids + actin + dyn2 4 . F - actin + dyn2 5 . Lipids 6 . Lipids + dyn2 3 . F - actin + α - actinin 4 2 . F - actin + dyn1 Figure 3 Dynamin crosslinks actin ﬁlaments into bundles . ( A ) Actin bundling viewed with confocal microscopy of phalloidin staining of 5 m M F - actin in control sample lacking dynamin ( 1 ) , in the presence of 1 m M dyn1 WT ( 2 ) , 1 m M a - actinin 4 ( 3 ) , 1 m M dyn1 K / E ( 4 ) , 1 m M dyn1 E / K ( 5 ) and 1 m M dyn1 WT þ 200 m M GTP g S ( 6 ) . Pictures were taken 1h after initiation of the reaction . Bar is 100 m m . ( B ) Effects of increasing dynamin concentrations on the partitioning of actin ﬁlaments after centrifugation for 20min at 15000 g . Only ﬁlaments crosslinked into the bundles sediment at this speed . To generate long ﬁlaments of similar lengths , actin was polymerized in the presence of gelsolin , a barbed end - binding protein at the ratio of G1 : A1000 . Where indicated , 200 m M GTP g S was added . Dynamin and F - actin were detected using Coomassie blue staining of the gels . ( C ) Quantiﬁcation of F - actin and dynamin partitioning in ( B ) . The actin and dynamin recovery in the pellet was expressed as a percentage of the total . Values shown are mean ± s . d . ( n ¼ 3 ) . ( D , E ) Electron micrographs of actin ﬁlaments generated after 1h in the presence of 1 m M dyn1 , 5 m M Gsn – F - actin ( G1 : A1000 ) , and without ( D ) , or with 100 m M of GTP g S ( E ) . Arrowheads indicate dynamin rings attached to actin bundles . Cartoons depict possible mechanisms by which dynamin crosslinks long actin ﬁlaments into bundles . ( F ) Dynamin binds and crosslinks F - actin in the presence of lipids . Actin ﬁlaments and lipid vesicles were visualized with rhodamine phalloidin ( red ) and ﬂuorescein - PE ( green ) , respectively . Reactions contained 50 m M PC : PIP2 ( 90 : 10mol : mol ) , 5 m M F - actin and 0 . 5 m M dyn2 . Single actin ﬁlaments distributed on the coverslip surface are not detected in these images because the exposure time for collecting images of the actin ﬁlament bundles was short . Bar is 100 m m , except in panel 3 where it is 20 m m . Direct dynamin – actin interactions regulate the actincytoskeleton C Gu et al The EMBO Journal VOL 29 | NO 21 | 2010 & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization 3598 generates short ﬁlaments that are B 0 . 7 m m long ( Supplemen - tary Figure S6A ) , which are efﬁciently capped by 0 . 5 m M cytoD . As uncapped actin ﬁlaments can anneal through an end - to - end mechanism ( Andrianantoandro et al , 2001 ) , lower concentrations of cytoD are expected to generate actin ﬁlaments longer than 0 . 7 m m . As shown in Figure 4A , the shortest actin ﬁlaments generated by the addition of 0 . 5 m M cytoD stimulated dynamin’s GTPase activity by B 3 . 5 - fold , whereas a lower concentration of cytoD or cytoD alone had no effect . These data suggest that short actin ﬁlaments can promote dynamin oligomerization into higher order struc - tures , which in turn increases dynamin’s GTPase activity . In cells , short actin ﬁlaments are generated as a result of F - actin cleavage and capping by severing proteins such as Gsn ( Barkalow et al , 1996 ; Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . Thus , we next tested whether dynamin’s GTPase activity can be stimulated by the addition of short ﬁlaments generated in the presence of Gsn , a calcium - activated protein , and calcium ( Yin et al , 1981 ) . Under our experimental conditions , Gsn caps actin barbed ends , thus inhibiting actin polymerization . By varying the ratio of Gsn to actin ( G : A ) , actin ﬁlaments of different lengths can be generated ( Supplementary Figure S6B ) . Strikingly , Gsn - treated F - actin complexes increased dynamin’s basal rate of GTP hydrolysis up to eight - fold , with the highest stimulation achieved by the shortest ﬁlaments ( k cat B 8 min (cid:2) 1 ; Figure 4B , black diamonds ) . EM images revealed that actin ﬁlaments were 51 ± 34nm long for a G1 : A5 ratio ( which is equivalent to B 19 monomers ) , whereas they were 3 . 2 ± 1 . 7 m m long for a G1 : A300 ration ( which poorly stimulated dynamin ) . Together , these data show that ﬁlament lengths between 51 ± 34 and 700nm have the best ability to stimulate dynamin oligomerization into higher order structures . The observed increase in GTPase activity was dependent on dynamin – actin interactions , as Gsn – F - actin complexes could neither activate the dyn1 K / A mutant ( Figure 4B , red Figure 4 Short actin ﬁlaments promote dynamin oligomerization into ring - like structures . ( A ) Time course of GTP hydrolysis by 0 . 2 m M dyn1 incubated without or with 2 . 5 m M sheared F - actin treated with the indicated concentrations of Cyto D . ( B ) Time course of GTP hydrolysis by 0 . 2 m M dyn1 WT or dyn1 K / A ( red circle ) incubated with 2 . 5 m M Gsn or 2 . 5 m M Gsn - capped F - actin complexes generated with the indicated ratios of Gsn to actin . ( C ) A coupled assay of GTP hydrolysis by 0 . 2 m M dyn1 in the absence or presence of 2 . 5 m M Gsn - capped F - actin ( G1 : A100 ) . The GTPase activity was measured at the indicated times . ( D ) Electron micrographs of dynamin rings formed in the presence of Gsn – F - actin ( G1 : A100 ) . Bar is 100nm . Note actin ﬁlaments around and adjacent to dynamin rings . Direct dynamin – actin interactions regulate the actincytoskeleton C Gu et al & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 29 | NO 21 | 2010 3599 circles ) , nor could addition of only Gsn ( Figure 4B , black squares ) . As dynamin’s GTPase activity is dependent on its oligomerization state , these ﬁndings suggest that actin ﬁlaments can promote dynamin oligomerization into rings in a length - dependent manner , with the shortest ﬁlaments being most potent . As an alternative approach to investigate the ability of short actin ﬁlaments to promote dynamin oligomerization into rings , GTP hydrolysis was monitored continuously in a coupled assay ( Ingerman and Nunnari , 2005 ) . Addition of Gsn – F - actin complexes to this assay over - came the kinetic lag that reﬂects dynamin assembly into rings ( Figure 4C , grey circles ) . To directly visualize dynamin’s oligomerization status in the presence of Gsn – F - actin complexes , samples were negatively stained with uranyl acetate and observed in the electron microscope . In agreement with biochemical experiments , Gsn – F - actin complexes induced limited assem - bly into ring - like structures B 40nm in diameter ( Figure 4D ) , similar to rings that self - assemble at low ionic strength ( Hinshaw and Schmid , 1995 ) . Oligomerization into single rings is consistent with the maximum eight - fold increase in the rate of dynamin’s GTP hydrolysis , as assembly into spirals causes up to a 100 - fold increase ( Warnock et al , 1996 ) . Together , these data suggest that short actin ﬁlaments can have a direct and profound effect on the oligomerization status of dynamin . Dynamin rings induce elongation of Gsn - capped actin ﬁlaments The results presented so far show that direct binding of dynamin to actin promotes actin stress ﬁbre formation in cells . Moreover , we found that short actin ﬁlaments in turn promote dynamin assembly . To understand how assembled dynamin might modulate actin dynamics , we ﬁrst tested whether dynamin can promote actin polymerization . A solu - tion - based actin polymerization assay using pyrene - labelled actin was performed ( Fujiwara et al , 2009 ) . In this assay , pyrene ﬂuorescence increases when monomeric actin is assembled into ﬁlaments . We tested whether addition of dynamin stimulates actin polymerization from actin seeds by reducing the lag phase , as shown for other actin regulatory proteins such are formins ( Moseley et al , 2006 ) . As shown in Figure 5A , addition of dynamin with or without GTP g S had no effect on the rate of actin polymerization . Given the ability of short actin ﬁlaments to promote dynamin oligomerization , we next tested whether dynamin rings can induce elongation of actin ﬁlaments that are capped by CP . CP is a ubiquitously expressed heterodimeric actin - binding protein that is essen - tial for normal actin dynamics in cells . As ﬁlaments in this experiment are relatively long , dynamin oliogmerization is promoted by addition of GTP g S . Addition of dynamin in the presence or absence of GTP g S failed to induce actin poly - merization from the CP - capped ﬁlaments ( Figure 5A ) . In striking contrast , dynamin induced rapid actin polymeriza - tion of ﬁlaments that were capped by Gsn ( Figure 5B ) . Interestingly , the actin polymerization was achieved only in the presence of GTP g S , suggesting that only assembled dynamin can promote actin elongation . Importantly , ‘loss - of - function’ dyn1 K / A mutant was signiﬁcantly impaired in stimulating actin polymerization ( blue circles ) , whereas ‘gain - of - function’ dyn1 E / K mutant stimulated actin polymer - ization better than dyn1 WT ( green circles ) . Together , these data suggest that dynamin oligomerization driven by direct dynamin – actin interactions is essential for observed actin polymerization . If this conclusion is correct , it is predicted that Gsn : actin ratios that stimulate dynamin oligomerization ( based on the GTPase assays presented in Figure 4B ) should promote dynamin oligomerization in the absence of GTP g S . Indeed , dynamin stimulated actin polymerization at Gsn – actin ratios of 1 : 5 ( Figure 5C , red circles ) , but not those capped by CP ( red triangle ) . Together , these data show that dynamin rings can promote elongation of actin ﬁlaments capped by Gsn , but not those capped by CP . As an alternative means to measure dynamin - dependent actin polymerization , we performed sedimentation assays . At low salt conditions , dynamin is induced to oligomerize into single rings , which pellet during high - speed centrifugation ( Warnock et al , 1996 ) , but at physiological salt concentration , dyn1 stays in the supernatant ( Figure 5D , lane 7 ) . Short actin ﬁlaments generated at a Gsn : actin ratio of 1 : 10 did not pellet in this assay ( Figure 5D , lane 1 ) . However , when dyn1 was mixed with Gsn – F - actin ﬁlaments , the majority of both actin and dynamin were recovered in the pellet ( Figure 5D , lane 4 ) . In contrast , dyn1 did not bring short actin ﬁlaments capped by CP into the pellet ( Supplementary Figure S6D ) , in agree - ment with its inability to promote actin elongation of CP - capped ﬁlaments ( Figure 5C ) . Together , these data argue that sedimentation of actin ﬁlaments in this assay was due to their elongation , which was promoted by actin - dependent dynamin oligomerization . The sedimentation assay allowed us to further explore the role of dynamin rings in inducing elongation of capped actin ﬁlaments . Thus , we performed co - sedimentation assays under conditions that impaired the oligomerization of dyn1 . Dynamin’s GED is directly involved in dynamin oligomeriza - tion through GED – GED contacts ( Sever et al , 1999 ; Zhang and Hinshaw , 2001 ) . Hence , recombinant GED competes for these GED – GED interactions and impairs dynamin oligomer - ization ( Sever et al , 1999 ) . As shown in Figure 5E , GED counteracted the ability of dyn1 to draw Gsn – F - actin com - plexes into the pellet , leaving more actin and dynamin in the supernatant ( compare lanes 5 and 7 ) . Importantly , GED had no signiﬁcant effect on the fractionation of Gsn – F - actin in the absence of dyn1 ( Figure 5E , compare lanes 1 , 2 and 3 , 4 ) . Thus , pelleting of Gsn – F - actin in this assay was dependent on dynamin oligomerization and because of elongation of actin ﬁlaments . Together , these data show that dynamin oligomers can induce actin elongation from ﬁlaments capped by Gsn . Dynamin rings displace Gsn from the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments Next , we attempted to elucidate the mechanism by which dynamin induces elongation of Gsn - capped actin ﬁlaments . Thus , we ﬁrst investigated whether dynamin itself binds barbed ends by using actin annealing assays ( Andrianantoandro et al , 2001 ) . Short actin ﬁlaments gener - ated by shearing F - actin can re - associate through end - to - end annealing , which is impaired by saturating concentrations of CPs ( Andrianantoandro et al , 2001 ) . G - actin was allowed to polymerize for 1 h , resulting in actin ﬁlaments that were on average B 7 . 4 m m long ( Supplementary Figure S6A , panel 1 ) . Shearing of F - actin by passage through a 27 - gauge needle generated short actin ﬁlaments that were B 0 . 75 m m long ( panel 2 ) . After annealing for 2h , the sheared ﬁlaments grew Direct dynamin – actin interactions regulate the actincytoskeleton C Gu et al The EMBO Journal VOL 29 | NO 21 | 2010 & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization 3600 to a length of B 3 . 1 m m ( panel 3 ) . Addition of dyn1 with or without GTP g S resulted in actin ﬁlaments that were B 3 . 9 m m long and that appeared crosslinked into bundles ( panels 4 and 5 ) . Thus , addition of dynamin did not impair annealing of short actin ﬁlaments , suggesting that dynamin , even when oligomerized into rings , did not bind naked barbed ends . The differential effects of dynamin rings on ﬁlaments capped by Gsn and CP , both of which bind to barbed ends , suggested that dynamin might increase actin polymerization by removing Gsn from the barbed ends . To test this , actin was assembled in the presence of Gsn at a ratio of G1 : A300 . Under these conditions , 4 90 % of the Gsn pellets with F - actin after high - speed centrifugation ( Figure 5F , lane 2 ) . Addition of dyn1 to Gsn – F - actin promoted release of Gsn from F - actin in a GTP g S - dependent manner ( Figure 5F , lane 5 ) , whereas F - actin stayed in the pellet ( lane 6 ) . These data show that , Figure 5 Dynamin rings dissociate gelsolin from barbed ends and promote actin elongation . ( A ) Solution - based actin polymerization using actin seeds . Actin seeds were generated by vortexing actin ﬁlaments for 20s immediately before use ; 0 . 2 m M dyn1 was added to 0 . 8 m M seeds or seeds capped with 5nM CP protein . At time zero , 2 m M pyrene - labelled monomeric actin was added , and pyrene ﬂuorescence was monitored . ( B ) Effects of dynamin on actin elongation ; 5 m M Gsn – F - actin ( G1 : A1000 ) was incubated with 0 . 2 m M dyn1 WT , dyn1 E / K and dyn1 K / A with or without 200 m M GTP g S . At time zero , 0 . 5 m M pyrene - labelled monomeric actin was added , and pyrene ﬂuorescence was monitored . ( C ) Experiment performed as in ( B ) except that capped actin ﬁlaments were generated either by addition of gelsolin or CP at a 1 : 5 ratio to supply short actin ﬁlaments that can promote dynamin oligomerization in the absence of GTP g S . ( D , E ) Dynamin promotes elongation of short actin ﬁlaments capped by gelsolin . Elongation of actin ﬁlaments was measured by their ability to pellet under high - speed centrifugation . Actin was polymerized in the presence of gelsolin ( G1 : A10 ) for 20min to generate short actin ﬁlaments that stay in the supernatant during high - speed centrifugation ; 16 . 5 m M Gsn – F - actin complexes were incubated with 1 m M dyn1 for 30min . Subsequently , samples were centrifuged at 150000 g for 30min at 22 1 C . Experiments were performed with dyn1 WT ( D ) and in the presence of 5 m M recombinant GED , as indicated ( E ) . ( F ) Dynamin rings displace gelsolin from the barbed ends . Effect of dynamin with or without 200 m M GTP g S on the partitioning of Gsn ; 20 m M Gsn – F - actin ( G1 : A300 ) was incubated with 0 . 2 m M dyn1 for 30min at RT . Samples were centrifuged at 150000 g for 30min . Gsn was detected using anti - Gsn antibody , dyn1 using anti - dynamin antibody and F - actin using Coomassie staining . ( G ) Schematic diagram of experiments performed under ( H ) . Pyrene - labelled G - actin ( 3 . 3 m M ) was polymerized for 1h in the presence of gelsolin at the indicated ratios ( G1 : A200 or G1 : A1000 ) . Under these conditions , gelsolin capped 4 99 % of the barbed ends . The Gsn – F - actin was then diluted to 0 . 33 m M in the presence or absence of dynamin . As G - and F - actin coexist in equilibrium , the concentration of G - actin is determined by the critical concentration ( K d ) , which is deﬁned by the on and off rates at the ﬁlament ends : 0 . 1 m M at the barbed ( þ ) end , and 0 . 6 m M or greater at the pointed ( (cid:2) ) end . Thus , after dilution to 0 . 33 m M , which lies between the critical concentrations at the two ends , Gsn – F - actin depolymerizes from the pointed ends , generating a new pool of G - actin . Depolymerization generates B 0 . 23 m M pyrene G - actin that can re - polymerize in this assay , but only if the barbed ends become available . ( H ) Representative time courses of the re - polymerization of actin when 0 . 33 m M Gsn – actin complexes ( G1 : A200 or G1 : A1000 ) are incubated in the presence or absence of 0 . 1 m M dyn1 and with or without 100 m M GTP g S . Of note , 1 m M pyrene actin represents 300 – 400 ﬂuorescence units . Therefore , 75 – 100 units represents B 0 . 25 m M F - actin , which re - polymerized at the barbed ends . Direct dynamin – actin interactions regulate the actincytoskeleton C Gu et al & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 29 | NO 21 | 2010 3601 when oligomerized into rings , dynamin can efﬁciently displace Gsn from the barbed ends of F - actin . As an alternative means to examine actin elongation that is dependent on displacement of Gsn from the barbed ends , we performed an actin re - polymerization assay ( see model in Figure 5G ; Barkalow et al , 1996 ; Pruyne et al , 2002 ) . As shown in Figure 5H , dyn1 induced actin re - polymerization , but only in the presence of GTP g S ( compare black diamonds and red circles with red squares ) . These data show that dynamin did not inhibit actin depolymerization from the pointed end , and that only dynamin rings can promote actin re - polymerization at the barbed ends capped by Gsn . To our knowledge , dynamin is the ﬁrst protein that has been shown to induce actin elongation from Gsn - capped actin ﬁlaments by displacing Gsn from the barbed ends . Dynamin – actin interactions promote formation of free barbed ends in cells Given the role of dynamin – actin interactions in formation of FAs and stress ﬁbres in cells ( Figure 2 ) , together with the biochemical analysis , our data suggested that dynamin rings might regulate actin polymerization at FAs by generating free barbed ends . Thus , we next examined localization of endo - genous dynamin in podocytes . As shown before ( Kruchten and McNiven , 2006 ) , endogenous dynamin could be detected at FAs , marked by paxillin staining ( Figure 6A ) . To examine whether endogenous dynamin associates with actin ﬁla - ments , we performed electron microscopy on detergent permeabilized podocytes ( Figure 6B ; Schliwa et al . , 1981 ) . This method visualizes the cortex of cells from which the cytoplasm has been released . Dynamin antigenic sites were C D B A Merge 1 . Dyn 2 . Dyn 3 . Dyn F - actin Paxillin Paxillin Merge Merge F Dynamin Biotin – G - actin Merge 1 . Endo 2 . dyn1WT 3 . dyn1K / E 4 . dyn1E / K E Phalloidin Biotin – G - actin Merge G H I 1 . dyn1E / K ( – ) 2 . dyn1E / K ( + ) 3 . dyn1E / K ( + ) N u m be r o f ba r bed end s / c e ll 161412108642180 Leng t h o f t he ne w l y sy n t he s i z ed a c t i n f il a m en t s ( p i x e l 2 ) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 Endo Endo WT + EGF * * * * * * * K / E E / K Endo Endo WT + EGF K / E E / K Gsn - driven cleavage and capping Unassembleddynamin Gsn release / actin polymerization Cortical actin Increase in actin filaments Actin - dependent dynamin rings Gsn – F - actin Regulated by SH3 – PRD interactions and / or the length of the actin filaments Actin filaments + + Stress fibres Figure 6 Dynamin – actin interactions at focal adhesions drive actin polymerization by generating free barbed ends . ( A ) Dynamin localizes to focal adhesions in podocytes . Podocytes were stained using anti - dynamin antibody , rhodamin phalloidin for F - actin or anti - paxillin antibody . Dynamin co - localizes with paxillin at focal adhesions and focal complexes along the membrane . ( B – D ) Electron micrographs of the podocyte cytoskeleton . Podocytes contain a thick actin network . Dynamin antigenic sites were visualized in the electron microscope by treatment with monoclonal anti - dynamin antibody followed by secondary antibody labelled with 10nm gold particles ( white arrow ) . Paxillin antigenic sites were visualized by polyclonal anti - paxillin antibody followed by secondary antibody labelled with 5nm gold particles ( black arrow ) . Scale bars , 200nm . ( E , F ) Dynamin – actin interactions promote formation of free barbed ends in podocytes . Podocytes expressing the indicated dynamin mutants were stimulated with 5nM EGF to induce de novo actin polymerization . After 5min , cells were permeabilized in the presence of 0 . 45 m M biotin - labelled G - actin for 45s , ﬁxed and stained using rhodamin - conjugated anti - biotin antibody ( red ) . In ( E ) , total F - actin was labelled using FITC phalloidin ( green ) . In ( F ) , cells were stained using anti - dynamin antibody ( green ) . Scale bars , 20 m m . ( G , H ) Quantiﬁcation of barbed ends per cell ( G ) and length of the newly synthesized actin ﬁlaments ( H ) . Data represent measurements of 4 20 cells ( except for dyn1 K / E where only 10 cells were examined ) and are plotted as ± s . d . * P o 0 . 05 , * * P o 0 . 01 . ( I ) Working model for the role of dynamin oligomerization in regulation of actin cytoskeleton . Short actin ﬁlaments are generated by gelsolin - driven cleavage of the actin ﬁlaments . Their high local concentration promotes dynamin oligomerization into rings , which in turn displace gelsolin from the barbed end and allow ﬁlament extension . Direct dynamin – actin interactions regulate the actincytoskeleton C Gu et al The EMBO Journal VOL 29 | NO 21 | 2010 & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization 3602 detected using monoclonal anti - dynamin antibody followed by 10 - nm gold - conjugated secondary antibody ( white arrow in Figure 6C ) , whereas paxilin antigenic sites were detected using anti - paxillin polyclonal antibody followed by 5 nm gold - conjugated secondary antibody ( black arrow in Figure 6C ) . Dynamin antigenic sites were concentrated along actin ﬁlaments at distinct locations . Groups of large gold particles co - localized with small gold particles ( Figure 6B – D ) , suggesting that in some instances , dynamin clustered around FAs . Next , we examined whether dynamin – actin interactions underlie the formation of free barbed ends in cells . Formation of barbed ends in cells expressing different dynamin mutants was examined upon EGF stimulation ( Figure 6E and F ; Symons and Mitchison , 1991 ; Bailly et al , 1999 ) . In this assay , permeablized cells were allowed to incorporate bio - tin - labelled G - actin at barbed ends in situ for 45s ( red in Figure 6E and F ) . Thus , newly polymerized actin incorpo - rated at barbed ends will be labelled red ( compare biotin – G - actin and phalloidin staining in Figure 6E ) . As podocytes are terminally differentiated cells , only B 5 % of all cells exhibited EGF - dependent induction of free barbed ends ( Supplementary Figure S6E ) . To identify cells expressing dynamin mutants , dynamin was subsequently stained using anti - dynamin antibody ( green in Figure 6F ) . Compared with the endogenous control , expression of dyn1 WT did not alter the number of cells expressing barbed ends ( Supplementary Figure S6E ) , the number of free barbed ends per cell ( Figure 6G ) or the size of newly polymerized actin ﬁlaments ( Figure 6H ) . Thus , endogenous dynamin is not rate limiting for the formation of free barbed ends . Notably , endogenous dynamin localized at the newly generated free barbed ends ( Figure 6F , panel 1 , white arrows ) . In the presence of ‘loss - of - function’ dyn1 K / E , much fewer cells exhibited barbed ends ( Supplementary Figure S6E ) , and in these , the number and length of newly labelled actin ﬁlaments were reduced ( Figure 6F – H ) , consistent with a loss of barbed ends . In contrast , cells expressing the ‘gain - of - function’ dyn1 E / K exhibited a statisti - cally signiﬁcant increase in the number and length of newly polymerized actin ﬁlaments ( Figure 6F – H ) . Together , our data indicate that direct dynamin – actin interactions promote the formation of free barbed ends , which drive actin poly - merization at FAs in podocytes . Discussion The data presented in this paper suggest a novel , dynamin - dependent mechanism that promotes actin polymerization ( Figure 6I ) . In this model , proteins such as Gsn ﬁrst fragment and cap F - actin ﬁlaments ; the resulting short ﬁlaments bind and promote dynamin assembly into rings ; dynamin rings in turn displace CPs ; ﬁnally , the uncapped barbed actin ends undergo polymerization . The model is based on four key observations . First , we discovered a direct , functional inter - action between dynamin and actin . Mutations in a previously unrecognized ABD of dynamin reduced actin stress ﬁbre formation and altered the cortical actin cytoskeleton in cultured podocytes and rat hepatocytes . Conversely , a dyna - min mutant with increased actin - binding afﬁnity stimulated formation of stress ﬁbres in cells . Therefore , direct binding of dynamin to actin is crucial for maintenance of the actin cytoskeleton . Second , actin directly regulates dynamin self - assembly . Thus , using GTPase assays and electron micro - scopy , we found that the interaction of short actin ﬁlaments with dynamin promotes dynamin self - assembly . Third , assembled dynamin dissociates the actin - CP Gsn from barbed ends in vitro , thereby allowing ﬁlament elongation . Fourth , direct dynamin – actin interaction promotes formation of free barbed ends in podocytes . Together , the data establish a feedback loop in which short actin ﬁlaments promote forma - tion of dynamin rings , which in turn displace barbed end CPs , thereby allowing actin ﬁlament elongation . A role for dynamin rings in regulating Gsn - dependent actin polymerization Many cellular processes in which dynamin has been impli - cated are driven by actin polymerization ( e . g . cell motility , endocytosis , cytokinesis ) . They all depend on rapid bursts of actin ﬁlament assembly at speciﬁc subcellular locations . Actin polymerization can be achieved either by de novo ﬁlament formation , or by severing of pre - existing ﬁlaments and elongation of the resulting barbed ends . The extent of ﬁlament elongation in vivo is limited by the presence of high - afﬁnity barbed end CPs ( for review see Chesarone and Goode , 2009 ) . Our study identiﬁes a novel role for dynamin rings in regulating actin polymerization by displacing barbed end CPs such as Gsn . As dynamin rings displaced Gsn , but not CP , our study suggests speciﬁcity in dynamin’s interaction with different CPs . Dynamin’s novel role in regulating actin polymerization through Gsn is consistent with the previous studies , which implicate Gsn in the same cellular processes that are regu - lated by dynamin . Thus , Gsn has been implicated in podo - somal assembly ( Chellaiah et al , 2000 ) , reorganization of cortical actin ﬁlament networks that underlie protruding lamellae ( Saﬁejko - Mroczka and Bell , 2001 ) and the length of Listeria actin tails ( Laine et al , 1998 ) . Indeed , immuno - ﬂuorescence micrographs revealed that both dynamin and Gsn concentrate just behind motile bacteria , at the junction between the actin ﬁlament rocket tail and the bacterium ( Laine et al , 1998 ; Lee and De Camilli , 2002 ; Orth et al , 2002 ) . Finally , it has been shown that Gsn also has a function in stress - ﬁbre - dependent cell contraction ( Arora et al , 1999 ) . While Gsn has been implicated in actin polymerization , the mechanism by which Gsn , once associated with the barbed ends , can be displaced has not been identiﬁed ( Kuhn and Pollard , 2007 ) . Our study suggests that dynamin rings reg - ulate actin polymerization at the FAs by displacing the CP Gsn . We are currently exploring in detail how dynamin rings promote the de novo formation of FAs . We can envision two different mechanisms by which dynamin rings displace gelosolin from the barbed ends . One possibility is that dynamin binds and displaces Gsn . However , Gsn did not affect the GTPase activity of dynamin , suggesting that these two proteins might not form direct protein – protein interactions . Nevertheless , oligomerization - dependent interaction of dynamin with Gsn on actin ﬁla - ments cannot be ruled out . A second possibility is that dynamin affects Gsn indirectly . We show that dynamin rings bind and align F - actin ﬁlaments into bundles with deﬁned ﬁlament – ﬁlament spacing ( Figure 3E ) . Thus , it is possible that dynamin rings alter ﬁlament geometry / twist and thereby affect the binding properties of other actin - binding / regulatory proteins including Gsn ( Stokes and Direct dynamin – actin interactions regulate the actincytoskeleton C Gu et al & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 29 | NO 21 | 2010 3603 DeRosier , 1987 ) . We favour the second model for the follow - ing reasons . Gsn binds to ﬁlament ends and changes the twist of actin ﬁlaments , which in turn displaces phalloidin ( Cooper , 1987 ) . This observation implies that locking F - actin into an unfavourable conformation could disfavour Gsn binding . In contrast , CP is not known to alter actin ﬁlament twist , and CP was not displaced by dynamin rings . These data are consis - tent with the idea that dynamin rings stabilize terminal actin subunits in a conformation that disfavours Gsn binding . By analogy with coﬁlin , another protein that binds and changes actin geometry ( McGough et al , 1997 ) , we speculate that dynamin rings promote the formation of a distinct population of conformationally unique actin ﬁlaments , which binds or releases speciﬁc sets of actin - binding / regulatory proteins . Role of dynamin – actin interactions in regulation of dynamin oligomerization Our study identiﬁes unexpected regulation of dynamin’s oligomerization status by actin ﬁlaments . Interestingly , while long actin ﬁlaments had no effect on dynamin oligo - merization , shorter actin ﬁlaments ( 50 – 700nm ) promoted dynamin oligomerization into single rings . In addition , we have developed a novel , cell - based assay that measures dynamin oligomerization into higher order structures using ﬂuorescence lifetime imaging microscopy . This assay conﬁrms that dynamin oligomerization is promoted by short actin ﬁlaments in live cells ( Gu et al , manuscript in preparation ) . As dynamin oligomerization is highly coopera - tive with respect to dynamin concentration ( Warnock et al , 1996 ) , our data suggest that local concentration of short actin ﬁlaments promotes actin - dependent dynamin oligomeriza - tion at distinct cellular locations . Supporting our hypothesis , we found that dynamin antigenic sites are concentrated at distinct locations on actin ﬁlaments , some of which are most likely FAs ( Figure 6C and D ) . The mechanism by which short actin ﬁlaments promote dynamin oligomerization is not readily apparent and is topic of future studies . It is plausible that short ﬁlaments exhibit lower steric hindrance , thus allowing more efﬁcient oligo - merization of bound dynamin . Regardless of the mechanism , the preference for short ﬁlaments is expected to provide temporal and spatial regulation of dynamin assembly . Importantly , a number of SH3 - domain containing proteins that bind / regulate actin such as SNX9 and cortactin have been shown to regulate dynamin oligomerization ( Yarar et al , 2007 ; Mooren et al , 2009 ) . Thus , it seems reasonable to conclude that dynamin oligomerization is regulated not only by the length of actin ﬁlaments , but also by PRD – SH3 interactions . In summary , our study provides a direct link between the oligo - merization cycle of dynamin and the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . It further suggests that dynamin’s effect on the actin cytoskeleton will ultimately depend on actin binding , its intrinsic oligomerization cycle and other actin regulators that modulate dynamin’s assembly state . Materials and methods Cells , antibodies , reagents and standard techniques Mouse podocyte cell lines were grown as described previously ( Mundel et al , 1997 ) . Antibodies : anti - dyn1 / 2 hudy 1 ( Upstate Technology , Lake Placid , NY ) ; mouse anti - dyn1 VAM - SV041 ( StressGene , Victoria , Canada ) ; anti - dyn2 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnol - ogy , Delaware Avenue , CA ) ; rabbit polyclonal anti - paxillin ( StressGene , Victoria , Canada ) ; mouse monoclonal anti - Gsn ( Sigma - Aldrich , Saint Louis , MO ) ; anti - cortactin ( Millipore , Bill - erica , MA ) . Subcellular fractionation was performed as described ( Damke et al , 1994 ) . GTPase assays were performed as described ( Leonard et al , 2005 ) . PC : PIP 2 vesicles and actin bundling experiments were performed as described ( Schafer et al , 2002 ) . Adenoviral infections of cultured podocytes were preformed as described ( Sever et al , 2007 ) . Internalization of rhodamine transferrin was performed using HeLa cells , 18h post - infection with 20 m gml – 1 of rhodmaine - Tfn in PBS containing 1mM CaCl 2 , 1mM MgCl 2 , 5mM glucose and 0 . 2 % BSA for 10min at 37 1 C . The wound - healing assays were performed as described ( Asanuma et al , 2006 ) . Rho type GTPases activation assays were performed using commercial Rho activation kit ( Cell Biolabs , San Diego , CA ) . Plasmid constructs Plasmid construction for adenovirus production and in vitro transcription and translation was accomplished by Gateway Technology System with Clonase II ( Invitrogen ) . Donor vector was generated by cloning full - length human dyn1 or dyn2 cDNA into the pDONR201 vector using site - speciﬁc recombination reaction of BP clonase II enzyme . Actin - binding defective dyn mutant constructs were generated using appropriate site - directed mutagenesis . Resulting fragments were cloned using Bst XI and Cla I into the pDONR201 - containing gene for dyn . IVT expression vector pCITE4 ( Invitrogen ) was generated using pDONR201 vector and the site - speciﬁc recombination reaction of LR clonase II . Adenoviral vectors were generated by recombining pDONR201 with pAd / CMV / V5 - DEST . C - terminally His - tagged dynamin was generated by subcloning dyn1 cDNA into the pGE - 60 vector ( Qiagen ) using Nco I and Bam HI enzymes . All subsequent mutants were generated by subcloning Bst XI and Cla I fragments from pDONR201 into pQE - 60 ( Qiagen ) . Vectors expressing ECFP and EYFP N - terminally tagged dynamin were generated using pECFP and pEYFP vectors ( BD Biosciences Clontech ) . To generate the dyn1 D PRD mutant , ﬁrst , 970 - bp PCR products corresponding to nt 1414 – 2250 of human dynamin1 coding DNA sequence were ampliﬁed using speciﬁc primers , incorporating three stop codons and Nar I restriction site at COOH terminus of PCR products . Subsequently , Cla I / Nar I digested PCR fragments were subcloned into the corresponding region of full - length dynamin1 cDNA in pDONR201 vector via T / A cloning using pGEM - T - easy vector ( Promega ) . To construct double mutants , dyn1 D PRD / EK and (cid:2) KE , dyn1 EK and – KE mutant constructs were restricted by Bst XI and Cla I enzymes and then the resulting DNA fragments were subcloned into the corresponding regions of dyn1 D PRD cDNA in pDONR201 vector . Adenoviral vectors were generated by recombining pDONR201 with pAD / CMV / V5 - DEST , using LR clonase II and production of adenoviruses was accom - plished followed by manufacture’s manual ( Invitrogen ) . All constructs were veriﬁed by DNA sequencing . Dynamin expression and puriﬁcation Non - tagged human dyn1 ( isoform 1 ) was expressed using baculovirus expression system in Tn5 insect cells , and was puriﬁed as described ( Damke et al , 2001 ) . Baculoviruses expressing C - terminally His - tagged rat dyn2 were generous gift from Dorothy Schaffer ( University of Virginia , Charlottesville , VA ) . Baculoviruses expressing N - terminally His - tagged D PRD were generated in this study . C - terminally His - tagged dyn1 WT , dyn1 K / E , dyn1 K / A and dyn1 E / K were either expressed in Tn5 insect cells ( baculoviral expression ) , or in Escherichia coli ( bacterial expression ) , and puriﬁed on a nickel column as described ( Ingerman and Nunnari , 2005 ) . Alternatively , untagged dyn1 WT , dyn1 K / E , dyn1 K / A and dyn1 E / K were expressed in HeLa cells and puriﬁed using GST - SH3 domain of amphiphysin II as described ( Quan and Robinson , 2005 ) . Different puriﬁcation strategies for dynamin were used to minimize possibility to co - purify putative actin - binding proteins . Activity of recombinant dynamin was measured using GTPase assays ( Leonard et al , 2005 ) . Given different strategies to purify recombinant proteins , only recombinant proteins that exhibited catalytic constant k cat between 0 . 5 and 1 . 5min (cid:2) 1 ( wild - type values ) were used in this study . Actin staining and quantiﬁcation Cells expressing different dynamin constructs were stained with anti - dynamin antibody ( mouse monoclonal VAM - SV041 ) , anti - paxillin antibody and / or phalloidin ( Invitrogen ) . Images were Direct dynamin – actin interactions regulate the actincytoskeleton C Gu et al The EMBO Journal VOL 29 | NO 21 | 2010 & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization 3604 captured with a Zeiss LSM 5 PASCAL laser scanning microscope and a (cid:3) 40 objective . For quantiﬁcation of actin , cells were imaged with above microscope using a ﬁxed exposure of 700ms for phalloidin . The intensity of the actin staining was measured from whole cells by Image J ( v1 . 4 ) software . Total ﬂuorescence from uninfected cells and infected was analysed separately , and the staining intensity were normalized to the uninfected cells . The experiment was repeated at least three times . Number of FAs was determined by integrated morphometry analysis performed using Image J ( v1 . 4 ) on thresholded images to select classiﬁed objects of a size range of 4 1 pixels as FAs , based on anti - paxillin staining . The analysed particles command was used to measure number of FAs . The number of barbed ends in podocytes was examined as described in Chan et al ( 1998 ) and is included in Supplementary data . When indicated , data were further analysed using GraphPad Prism ( v 4 . 03 ) for Windows ( GraphPad Software , San Diego , CA ) to perform statistical analysis using two - tailed unpaired t - tests . Based on this analysis , * P o 0 . 05 , * * P o 0 . 01 and P 4 0 . 05 is considered not signiﬁcant . Actin puriﬁcation and assembly Actin was puriﬁed from rabbit skeletal muscle as published in Pardee and Spudich ( 1982 ) , with an additional gel ﬁltration step ( HiLoad 16 / 60 Superdex 200pg ) . Actin was stored as monomer at (cid:2) 80 1 C in G - buffer ( 2mM Tris – HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 0 . 5mM ATP , 0 . 2mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 5mM b - mercaptoethanol ) and was a generous gift of F Nakamura , Brigham and Women’s Hospital , Boston , MA . Before each experiment , G - actin was thawed and diluted to ﬁnal concentration of 25 m M in G - buffer , incubated at 37 1 C for 1h and centrifuged at 250000 g for 30min to remove aggregates . The G - actin was polymerized by the addition of 0 . 1M KCl and 2mM MgCl 2 for 20min at RT . Thus , F - actin buffer contains 10mM Tris – HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 0 . 5mM ATP , 0 . 2mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 5mM b - mercaptoetha - nol , 2mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 1M KCl . Gsn – F - actin complexes were generated by adding recombinant human Gsn at the indicated ratios during the polymerization step . Recombinant human Gsn was puriﬁed as described in Wen et al ( 1996 ) , and was a generous gift of F Nakamura , Brigham and Women’s Hospital , Boston , MA . Recombinant mouse CP was puriﬁed as described in Fujiwara et al ( 2009 ) and was a generous gift of Fujiwara Ikuko and John A Hammer , Laboratory of Cell Biology , NIHBI / NIH , Bethesda , MD . Detail description of different actin assays is included in the Supplementary data . Supplementary data Supplementary data are available at The EMBO Journal Online ( http : / / www . embojournal . org ) . Acknowledgements We are indebted to Fujiwara Ikuko and John A Hammer III for providing recombinant CP as well as pyrine - labelled actin . This work was supported by the National Institute of Health ( R01 DK64787 to SS ) and the NephCure Foundation . Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest . References Andrianantoandro E , Blanchoin L , Sept D , McCammon JA , Pollard TD ( 2001 ) Kinetic mechanism of end - to - end annealing of actin ﬁlaments . J Mol Biol 312 : 721 – 730 Arora PD , Janmey PA , McCulloch CA ( 1999 ) A role for gelsolin in stress ﬁber - dependent cell contraction . Exp Cell Res 250 : 155 – 167 Asanuma K , Yanagida - Asanuma E , Faul C , Tomino Y , Kim K , Mundel P ( 2006 ) Synaptopodin orchestrates actin organization and cell motility via regulation of RhoA signalling . Nat Cell Biol 8 : 485 – 491 Bailly M , Macaluso F , Cammer M , Chan A , Segall JE , Condeelis JS ( 1999 ) Relationship between Arp2 / 3 complex and the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments at the leading edge of carcinoma cells after epidermal growth factor stimulation . J Cell Biol 145 : 331 – 345 Barkalow K , Witke W , Kwiatkowski DJ , Hartwig JH ( 1996 ) Coordinated regulation of platelet actin ﬁlament barbed ends by gelsolin and capping protein . J Cell Biol 134 : 389 – 399 Bruzzaniti A , Neff L , Sanjay A , Horne WC , De Camilli P , Baron R ( 2005 ) Dynamin forms a Src kinase - sensitive complex with Cbl and regulates podosomes and osteoclast activity . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 3301 – 3313 Chan AY , Raft S , Bailly M , Wyckoff JB , Segall JE , Condeelis JS ( 1998 ) EGF stimulates an increase in actin nucleation and ﬁla - ment number at the leading edge of the lamellipod in mammary adenocarcinoma cells . J Cell Sci 111 ( Part 2 ) : 199 – 211 Chellaiah M , Kizer N , Silva M , Alvarez U , Kwiatkowski D , Hruska KA ( 2000 ) Gelsolin deﬁciency blocks podosome assembly and produces increased bone mass and strength . J Cell Biol 148 : 665 – 678 Chesarone MA , Goode BL ( 2009 ) Actin nucleation and elongation factors : mechanisms and interplay . Curr Opin Cell Biol 21 : 28 – 37 Cooper JA ( 1987 ) Effects of cytochalasin and phalloidin on actin . J Cell Biol 105 : 1473 – 1478 Damke H , Baba T , Warnock DE , Schmid SL ( 1994 ) Induction of mutant dynamin speciﬁcally blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J Cell Biol 127 : 915 – 934 Damke H , Muhlberg AB , Sever S , Sholly S , Warnock DE , Schmid SL ( 2001 ) Expression , puriﬁcation , and functional assays for self - association of dynamin - 1 . Methods Enzymol 329 : 447 – 457 Fujiwara I , Remmert K , Hammer JA , 3rd . ( 2009 ) Direct observation of the uncapping of capping protein - capped actin ﬁlaments by CARMIL homology domain 3 . J Biol Chem 285 : 2707 – 2720 Hinshaw JE , Schmid SL ( 1995 ) Dynamin self assembles into rings suggesting a mechanism for coated vesicle budding . Nature 374 : 190 – 192 Ingerman E , Nunnari J ( 2005 ) A continuous , regenerative coupled GTPase assay for dynamin - related proteins . Methods Enzymol 404 : 611 – 619 Kruchten AE , McNiven MA ( 2006 ) Dynamin as a mover and pincher during cell migration and invasion . J Cell Sci 119 : 1683 – 1690 Kuhn JR , Pollard TD ( 2007 ) Single molecule kinetic analysis of actin ﬁlament capping . Polyphosphoinositides do not dissociate capping proteins . J Biol Chem 282 : 28014 – 28024 Laine RO , Phaneuf KL , Cunningham CC , Kwiatkowski D , Azuma T , Southwick FS ( 1998 ) Gelsolin , a protein that caps the barbed ends and severs actin ﬁlaments , enhances the actin - based motility of Listeria monocytogenes in host cells . Infect Immun 66 : 3775 – 3782 Lee E , De Camilli P ( 2002 ) Dynamin at actin tails . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 : 161 – 166 Leonard M , Song BD , Ramachandran R , Schmid SL ( 2005 ) Robust colorimetric assays for dynamin’s basal and stimulated GTPase activities . Methods Enzymol 404 : 490 – 503 McGough A , Pope B , Chiu W , Weeds A ( 1997 ) Coﬁlin changes the twist of F - actin : implications for actin ﬁlament dynamics and cellular function . J Cell Biol 138 : 771 – 781 McNiven MA , Kim L , Krueger EW , Orth JD , Cao H , Wong TW ( 2000 ) Regulated interactions between dynamin and the actin - binding protein cortactin modulate cell shape . J Cell Biol 151 : 187 – 198 Mettlen M , Pucadyil T , Ramachandran R , Schmid SL ( 2009 ) Dissecting dynamin’s role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Biochem Soc Trans 37 : 1022 – 1026 Mooren OL , Kotova TI , Moore AJ , Schafer DA ( 2009 ) Dynamin2 GTPase and cortactin remodel actin ﬁlaments . J Biol Chem 284 : 23995 – 24005 Moseley JB , Maiti S , Goode BL ( 2006 ) Formin proteins : puriﬁcation and measurement of effects on actin assembly . Methods Enzymol 406 : 215 – 234 Muhlberg AB , Warnock DE , Schmid SL ( 1997 ) Domain structure and intramolecular regulation of dynamin GTPase . EMBO J 16 : 6676 – 6683 Mundel P , Reiser J , Borja AZ , Pavenstadt H , Davidson GR , Kriz W , Zeller R ( 1997 ) Rearrangements of the cytoskeleton and cell contacts induce process formation during differentiation of Direct dynamin – actin interactions regulate the actincytoskeleton C Gu et al & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization The EMBO Journal VOL 29 | NO 21 | 2010 3605 conditionally immortalized mouse podocyte cell lines . Exp Cell Res 236 : 248 – 258 Oh J , Reiser J , Mundel P ( 2004 ) Dynamic ( re ) organization of the podocyte actin cytoskeleton in the nephrotic syndrome . Pediatr Nephrol 19 : 130 – 137 Orth JD , Krueger EW , Cao H , McNiven MA ( 2002 ) The large GTPase dynamin regulates actin comet formation and movement in living cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 : 167 – 172 Orth JD , McNiven MA ( 2003 ) Dynamin at the actin - membrane interface . Curr Opin Cell Biol 15 : 31 – 39 Pardee JD , Spudich JA ( 1982 ) Puriﬁcation of muscle actin . Methods Enzymol 85 ( Part B ) : 164 – 181 Pollard TD , Borisy GG ( 2003 ) Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 : 453 – 465 Pollard TD , Cooper JA ( 2009 ) Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 : 1208 – 1212 Praefcke GJ , McMahon HT ( 2004 ) The dynamin superfamily : uni - versal membrane tubulation and ﬁssion molecules ? Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 5 : 133 – 147 Pruyne D , Evangelista M , Yang C , Bi E , Zigmond S , Bretscher A , Boone C ( 2002 ) Role of formins in actin assembly : nucleation and barbed - end association . Science 297 : 612 – 615 Quan A , Robinson PJ ( 2005 ) Rapid puriﬁcation of native dynamin I and colorimetric GTPase assay . Methods Enzymol 404 : 556 – 569 Saﬁejko - Mroczka B , Bell Jr PB ( 2001 ) Reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton in the protruding lamellae of human ﬁbroblasts . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 50 : 13 – 32 Saleem MA , Zavadil J , Bailly M , McGee K , Witherden IR , Pavenstadt H , Hsu H , Sanday J , Satchell SC , Lennon R , Ni L , Bottinger EP , Mundel P , Mathieson PW ( 2008 ) The molecular and functional phenotype of glomerular podocytes reveals key features of con - tractile smooth muscle cells . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 295 : F959 – F970 Schafer DA ( 2004 ) Regulating actin dynamics at membranes : a focus on dynamin . Trafﬁc 5 : 463 – 469 Schafer DA , Weed SA , Binns D , Karginov AV , Parsons JT , Cooper JA ( 2002 ) Dynamin2 and cortactin regulate actin assembly and ﬁlament organization . Curr Biol 12 : 1852 – 1857 Schliwa M , van Blerkom J , Porter K ( 1981 ) Stabilization of the cytoplasmic ground substance in detergent - opened cells and a structural and biochemical analysis of its composition . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 78 : 4329 – 4333 Sever S , Altintas M , Nankoe S , Moller C , Ko D , Wei C , Henderson J , del Re E , Hsing L , Erickson A ( 2007 ) Proteolytic processing of dynamin by cytoplasmic cathepsin L deﬁnes a mechanism for proteinuric kidney disease . J Clin Invest 117 : 2095 – 2104 Sever S , Muhlberg AB , Schmid SL ( 1999 ) Impairment of dynamin’s GAP domain stimulates receptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature 398 : 481 – 486 Stokes DL , DeRosier DJ ( 1987 ) The variable twist of actin and its modulation by actin - binding proteins . J Cell Biol 104 : 1005 – 1017 Symons MH , Mitchison TJ ( 1991 ) Control of actin polymerization in live and permeabilized ﬁbroblasts . J Cell Biol 114 : 503 – 513 van Rossum AG , de Graaf JH , Schuuring - Scholtes E , Kluin PM , Fan YX , Zhan X , Moolenaar WH , Schuuring E ( 2003 ) Alternative splicing of the actin binding domain of human cortactin affects cell migration . J Biol Chem 278 : 45672 – 45679 Van Troys M , Dewitte D , Goethals M , Carlier MF , Vandekerckhove J , Ampe C ( 1996 ) The actin binding site of thymosin beta 4 mapped by mutational analysis . EMBO J 15 : 201 – 210 Warnock DE , Baba T , Schmid SL ( 1997 ) Ubiquitously expressed dynamin - II has a higher intrinsic GTPase activity and a greater propensity for self - assembly than neuronal dynamin - I . Mol Biol Cell 8 : 2553 – 2562 Warnock DE , Hinshaw JE , Schmid SL ( 1996 ) Dynamin self assem - bly stimulates its GTPase activity . 271 : 22310 – 22314 Watts RG , Howard TH ( 1992 ) Evidence for a gelsolin - rich , labile F - actin pool in human polymorphonuclear leukocytes . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 21 : 25 – 37 Weins A , Kenlan P , Herbert S , Le TC , Villegas I , Kaplan BS , Appel GB , Pollak MR ( 2005 ) Mutational and biological analysis of alpha - actinin - 4 in focal segmental glomerulosclerosis . J Am Soc Nephrol 16 : 3694 – 3701 Wen D , Corina K , Chow EP , Miller S , Janmey PA , Pepinsky RB ( 1996 ) The plasma and cytoplasmic forms of human gelsolin differ in disulﬁde structure . Biochemistry 35 : 9700 – 9709 Yarar D , Waterman - Storer CM , Schmid SL ( 2007 ) SNX9 couples actin assembly to phosphoinositide signals and is required for membrane remodeling during endocytosis . Dev Cell 13 : 43 – 56 Yin HL , Hartwig JH , Maruyama K , Stossel TP ( 1981 ) Ca2 + control of actin ﬁlament length . Effects of macrophage gelsolin on actin polymerization . J Biol Chem 256 : 9693 – 9697 Zhang P , Hinshaw JE ( 2001 ) Three - dimensional reconstruction of dynamin in the constricted state . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 922 – 926 Direct dynamin – actin interactions regulate the actincytoskeleton C Gu et al The EMBO Journal VOL 29 | NO 21 | 2010 & 2010 European Molecular Biology Organization 3606