Original Article Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude for Intra - institutional Research Collaboration : Survey Study in a US Doctoral / Research University Michail Tsikerdekis a and Ning Yu b a Computer Science Department , Western Washington University , Ofﬁce CF 489 , Mail Stop 9165 , 516 High Street , Bellingham , WA 98225 , USA . E - mail : Michael . Tsikerdekis @ wwu . edu b Leidos , 4001 Fairfax Dr . , Arlington , VA 22203 , USA . E - mail : ning . yu @ leidos . com Intra - institutional collaboration is an often neglected type of research collaboration from the literature . This study aimed to understand what factors contribute to this type of collaboration as well as what types of factors can impact negatively the likelihood of this collaboration . We deployed a survey in a US research institution and measured for factors relating to environmental , past researcher behavior and personal research characteristics . We developed a model that demonstrates how these sets variables inﬂuence intra - institutional collaboration and developed recommendations for units . Unit support for collaboration and past behavior were found to impact intra - institutional collaboration . Additionally , researcher’s attitudes toward sharing knowledge and resources were also found to impact the likelihood for collaboration within institution . Higher Education Policy ( 2018 ) 31 , 559 – 581 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41307 - 017 - 0071 - 7 ; published online 1 November 2017 Keywords : research ; collaboration ; academic ; university ; support ; experience Introduction Much discussion and focus on international collaborations among university faculty often ignores the value for intra - institutional collaboration . There is also a large push from departments to have their faculty collaborate on an international level ( Adams , 2013 ) . One motivation for international collaboration is that it increases the likelihood of securing grants . However , institutions should also arguably push for collaborations within themselves aimed at improving cohesion and resource utilization . A cohesive institute can inspire interdisciplinary communications and encourage resource sharing . However , the factors affecting intra - institutional collaboration are largely unknown . Research collaboration has been a hot topic in various academic ﬁelds such as biomedical research ( Chung et al . , 2015 ; Franceschet , 2011 ; Huang et al . , 2015 ) Higher Education Policy , 2018 , 31 , ( 559 – 581 ) (cid:2) 2017 International Association of Universities 0952 - 8733 / 18 www . palgrave . com / journals and often having international collaboration at the spotlight ( Chinchilla - Rodrı´guez et al . , 2012 ; Choi et al . , 2015 ; Gazni et al . , 2012 ; Sin , 2011 ) . There are great advantages for universities to increase international collaboration ; however , there are also disadvantages ( Papatsiba , 2013 ) . Sud and Thelwall ( 2015 ) found that international collaboration in general decreases impact although context and types of collaboration inﬂuence this outcome . Arguably , even though information communication technologies have made it easy to collaborate remotely , local collaboration is easier and faster to establish and local resource sharing is more efﬁcient . Recently , intra - institutional collaboration is becoming more popular ( Birnholtz et al . , 2013 ) , but there have not been studies on the topic . Often time factors affecting co - authorship are factors that affect intra - institutional collaboration as well . However , co - authorship is not collaboration ( Katz and Martin , 1997 ) . Similarly , intra - institutional collaboration is not inherently the same as inter - institutional collaboration because they refer to different conditions of collabora - tion , and arguably , there are different factors affecting these two types of research collaboration . In this paper , we examine factors that impact intra - institutional collaboration . A literature review is ﬁrst provided on research collaboration and its impact factors such as institutional environment . Research questions are then constructed based on the past literature on academic collaboration , and the survey method for this study is introduced . Following model descriptions and discussion of results , this paper ends with a discussion on how our ﬁndings may impact both a researcher’s and institution’s decision - making policies on collaboration . Background Theory Historically there have been many initiatives that studied research collaboration . These varied from building new centers of excellence in order to bring researchers together to merging groups from various disciplines ( Katz and Martin , 1997 ) . Since there have never been past studies that thoroughly examined intra - institutional collaboration , the focus of the literature review is to identify what is known about research collaboration in general and attempt formulate research questions that will quantify ﬁndings for intra - institutional research collaboration . Research collaboration Research collaboration has been considered to take place when general advice or insights are exchanged or active participation in a speciﬁc piece of research occurs ( Katz and Martin , 1997 ) . Bozeman and Corley ( 2004 ) have deﬁned research collaboration as a condition when researchers work together on a project , conducting the project together and publishing the results together . The latter Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 560 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 equates collaboration to co - authorship . Further , collaboration is perceived as a concrete form of networking that is observable to funding and performance systems . On the other hand , science communication is considered to involve discussion of research and ideas , feedback and commentary on research work as well as draft papers ( Meadows , 1974 ) . However , this is also referred to as ‘‘collaboration by literature . ’’ A study attempted to distinguish the two aforementioned deﬁnitions of collaboration . Here we utilize a different wording for the two types of collaboration discussed by Lewis et al . ( 2012 ) . We refer to the ﬁrst as instrumental collaboration and the second as expressive collaboration ( Lewis et al . , 2012 ) . Although both types of collaboration exist in institutions , some are favored more than others by different disciplines . Expressive collaboration can refer to activities that include teaching , organizing and attending seminars , preparing publications , having research discussions , planning and conducting research , grant applications , group meetings and even socializing . Community engagement outside an institution is also considered expressive collaboration . The idea is that while all these are not directly measurable , they indirectly contribute to instrumental research ( which is the observable and measurable collaboration ) through pathways that exist but are complex to measure . A more balanced view of the two types of collaboration merged into one has also been provided ( Katz and Martin , 1997 ) . It attempts to elevate research collaboration from co - authorship while still maintaining to some practical degree measurable outcomes . Research collaboration involves one or more of the following : ( a ) those who work together on a project throughout its duration and make a substantial or frequent contribution , ( b ) co - authors , ( c ) those responsible for main elements of research , ( d ) those responsible for a key step and ( e ) the original proposer or fund raiser that plays a managerial role rather than an active research role in a project . Research collaboration is said to have occurred if a researcher has crossed paths with another researcher on any of the aforementioned ﬁve points . This is the deﬁnition that we utilized for the purposes of this study as well and survey subjects were instructed to think of collaborators based on these ﬁve points . The deﬁnition also excluded those that make a minor contribution to a research project or those who are not often treated as researchers ( e . g . , technicians , research assistants ) . Research collaboration factors Several internal and external factors appear to inﬂuence the collaborative research potential and success for an individual ( Bukvova , 2010 ) . These can be categorized as past behavioral and experiential factors ( e . g . , communication , coordination ) , environmental factors ( e . g . , academic culture and geography , funding , institutional support ) and researcher personal characteristics . Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 561 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 Research collaboration is seen as the result of informal communication where informal conversation generates collaboration ( De Solla Price and Beaver , 1966 ; Edge , 1979 ; Hagstrom , 1965 ) . The mechanism for this is thought to be associated with the increasing commitment that informal communication can generate ( Katz and Martin , 1997 ) . Coordination is also of high importance to success ( Cummings and Kiesler , 2007 ) . These aspects of collaboration help establish the past experiences that can form the basis of future collaborations . Environmental factors are also of high importance . Spatial proximity is also thought to be an important factor through its association with informal conversation ( Hagstrom , 1965 ; Kraut et al . , 1988 ) . The effect may vary between disciplines ( Lewis , 2013 ) , but a general rule could be assumed for spatial proximity to contribute to informal communication and in turn lead to research collaboration . The closer two potential collaborators are in space , the more likely they are to engage in informal communication . This has also been empirically conﬁrmed in a study that showed that co - authorship decreases exponentially with the distance separating pairs of institutional partners ( Katz , 1993 ) . This may be the result of a higher coordination cost that has been found to exist in inter - institutional and international collaborations ( Bukvova , 2010 ) . Social distance is another factor that often affects research collaboration ( Hagstrom , 1965 ) . However , such an effect has also been found to be highly depended on the academic discipline ( Lewis , 2013 ) . A general effect has been demonstrated to exist for collaboration between researchers who hold similar ranks although this is not always the case ( Katz and Martin , 1997 ) . Research funding is another factor found to affect research collaboration . Collaborators associated with grants appear to be more productive ( Pao , 1992 ) . However , there is a pool of secondary authors that have low productivity . Arguably , the appearance of grants contributing to research collaboration is also a side effect of ‘‘big science’’ that requires involving big budget , staff and laboratories especially in ﬁelds such as physics , chemistry and life sciences ( De Solla Price , 1986 ) . However , depending on the deﬁnition chosen for research collaboration , some of these interactions ( e . g . , laboratory collaborations between laboratory technicians ) may not be counted as collaboration . Research has also been conducted in order to investigate the link between institutional and department policy and scholarly productivity . Mixed results have been produced with some strategies . Requirement of faculty to participate in research increases research involvement ; however , other design interventions had no or negative effects on research productivity ( Katerndahl , 1996 ) . Research on institutional policy and research collaboration has not been conducted , but there is potential for the former to affect the latter . Finally , personal researcher characteristics have also been associated with effective interdisciplinary collaboration ( Anholt et al . , 2012 ) . Factors such as trust , passion and commitment , strong social networks , interdisciplinary training and Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 562 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 experience have all been associated with successful interdisciplinary collaboration . This is a highly likely type of collaboration that could potentially be observed when looking for intra - institutional collaboration . To a larger extent , much of the literature that investigated collaboration factors has to date focused on collaboration across institutions rather than within an institution ( Adams , 2013 ; Boix Mansilla et al . , 2015 ; Bukvova , 2010 ; Heffner , 1981 ; Katz , 1993 ; Lewis , 2013 ; Papatsiba , 2013 ; Smith and Katz , 2000 ) . Researcher motives for collaboration Aside from the aforementioned environmental factors affecting collaboration , there are also factors found to inﬂuence an individual’s decision to collaborate . Collaboration is internally incentivized through the need for a formal division of labor ( Katz and Martin , 1997 ) . There is also the need for interdisciplinary research especially in experimental ﬁelds that forces researchers to seek collaborations ( Hagstrom , 1965 ) . ‘‘Basic’’ ﬁelds appear to attract more international collaboration although geopolitics also play a role in collaborations ( Davidson Frame and Carpenter , 1979 ) . Many researchers also see collaboration as a means to increase their publication capacity ( Pao , 1992 ) . The increase in multi - author papers has been found to be affected by several factors ( Katz and Martin , 1997 ) . Funding level changes may lead to individuals seeking collaboration ( Heffner , 1981 ) . Co - authorship is also seen by many researchers as a way to increase their popularity ( Katz and Martin , 1997 ) as well as their visibility and recognition ( Beaver and Rosen , 1978 , 1979 ; de Beaver and Rosen , 1979 ) . Another common motive is the need for more complex and large - scale instrumentation ( Meadows , 1974 ) . The advancement of scientiﬁc disciplines has increased the need for an increased knowledge on a topic which often happens to be distributed among multiple researchers and hence the need for collaboration ( Fox and Faver , 1984 ) . Finally , there is also the need for junior researchers to gain experience but also for senior researchers to train ‘‘apprentice’’ researchers through collaboration ( Beaver and Rosen , 1978 , 1979 ; de Beaver and Rosen , 1979 ) . This is a need to attain skills and tacit knowledge through working in close proximity with others . This can be seen both as a need and an opportunity that arises for collaboration through spatial proximity . As such , both motives and environmental conditions could often coincide to bring forth collaboration between researchers . Further , researchers that show high levels of collaboration also show high levels of productivity ( Lee and Bozeman , 2005 ; Persson et al . , 2004 ) . This is seen as causality between collaboration and productivity and also demonstrates that in part motives for collaboration are linked to productivity . Further , collaborations with other researchers that are highly productive increase personal productivity . However , collaborations with low productivity researchers have been found to Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 563 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 decrease personal productivity ( Katz and Martin , 1997 ) . Collaborations have also been found to increase the likelihood for publication acceptance ( Gordon , 1980 ) . Finally , collaboration differences have been found between different academic ﬁelds ( Meadows and O’Connor , 1971 ; Lewis , 2013 ) . That is , the likelihood of research collaboration is also motivated by the nature of the ﬁeld and whether the ﬁeld appreciates collaborative work . For example , humanities scholars have been found to collaborate more with scholars from other universities ( Lewis , 2013 ) . Knowledge sharing Knowledge sharing has been identiﬁed as the underlying structure that largely can inﬂuence collaboration through increased communication and exchange of academic ideas as well as the need for knowledge sharing due to the expansion of academic disciplines in both breadth and depth . A recent study has examined factors in terms of their relational dimension and structural dimension between researchers ( Seonghee and Boryung , 2008 ) . Perception was a relational dimension factor that was found to be statistically signiﬁcant in inﬂuencing knowledge sharing . Perceptions on the value and necessity of teaching and sharing contributed to an increased knowledge sharing . Structural factors such as reward systems have also been found to have an effect on knowledge sharing . Information Communi - cation Technology ( ICT ) infrastructure was not found to be statistically signiﬁcant . The authors of the study attributed this in the lack of familiarity by researchers to use ICT tools for knowledge sharing as well as lack or existence of poor communication channels on campus . Interview data conﬁrmed that ICT tools on campus were not advertised enough to be considered as an option by researchers . Additionally , many researchers reported that they were not aware of who needed materials to be shared . If the same behavior applies for collaboration , then awareness about other researchers’ scholarly activity may enable individuals to considered sharing more of their work with others . Measuring collaboration Several types of collaborations can be identiﬁed through the literature . There is collaboration between individuals but also intra - and inter - group collaboration . Collaborations between departments and institutions and nations are also types of research collaboration that is observed . When it comes to measuring these types of collaborations , there are several approaches that can be taken varying from the level of collaboration aimed to study ( e . g . , intra - institutional collaboration or international collaboration ) . A common measurement used most frequently by previous studies is examining co - authorship as a proxy for research collaboration , but it is thought to be an imperfect measure ( Katz and Martin , 1997 ) . Not all contributions are considered equal , and at times , ideas are more important than the co - authors that end up in a Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 564 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 paper ( Subramanyam , 1983 ) . For example , an idea may have come from a researcher that does not appear as a co - author . Honorary co - authorship can also contribute to faulty measures . This type of co - authorship is present in cases where people are listed in publications for social reasons ( Bozeman and Corley , 2004 ) . On the other hand , co - authorship as a proxy for collaboration has the advantage of being invariant and veriﬁable . However , it does not account for expressive collaboration but only instrumental collaboration , as mentioned in the previous section . Research Model Independent sets of factors Several research factors arise from the literature review that show potential for understanding intra - institutional research collaboration . These factors are environ - mental factors , past researcher behavior and personal researcher characteristics as well as attitudes . However , the effects of these factors on intra - institutional collaboration have not thoroughly been examined . We identiﬁed a set of variables within these three categories to utilize them as independent sets of factors that affect our dependent variables relating to our research questions presented later in this section . Environmental factors that show potential relate to institutional or unit support for collaboration ( Katerndahl , 1996 ) , research sharing attitudes ( Seonghee and Boryung , 2008 ) , as well as perceptions of difﬁculties in collaborating with others due to various obstacles be it the lack of being aware of other collaborators ( Carroll et al . , 2009 ) or lack of communication channels ( Stokols et al . , 2008 ) . For the purposes of this study , we measured the following environmental variables : unit support for collaboration , colleagues’ research sharing attitudes and experiencing difﬁculties in collaborating . Past behaviors may also reinforce current research attitudes . Factors that show potential include past collaborations of a researcher ( Boix Mansilla et al . , 2015 ) and initiating communication channels ( Stokols et al . , 2008 ) . For the purposes of this study , we measured the following variables : past collaborative research , past collaborative research within institution and whether a researcher initiated contact for collaboration with a previous non - collaborator . Personal researcher characteristics are also important when it comes to deﬁning collaboration . We measured the following variables : having a joint appointment ( Smith and Katz , 2000 ) , nature of scholarship in academic ﬁeld ( Lewis , 2013 ) , academic rank , tenure status , years in current position , sex , personal research sharing attitudes and number of languages spoken . The nature of scholarship in the academic ﬁeld was aimed to behave as a control for the broad variety of academic disciplines ( Lewis , 2013 ) some of which value collaboration , while others don’t Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 565 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 and others are impartial . The latter may matter in initiating international collaborations but potentially could affect the formation of clusters for researchers that share a common background or culture . Dependent factors In examining intra - institutional collaboration , we formulated our ﬁrst research question that aimed to understand what leads to a preference on collaborating with others as opposed to conducting solitary work . Q1 : Do the research environment , past researcher behavior and personal researcher characteristics impact the desire to collaborate as opposed to conducting solitary work ? While the preference of collaborating with others inﬂuences research collaboration in general , the preference in collaborating within the university is more speciﬁc . We sought to understand what factors affect the likelihood of a researcher searching for collaborations within their institution . Q2 : Do the research environment , past researcher behavior and personal researcher characteristics impact the likelihood of primarily searching for collaborations within a researcher’s institution ? Since communication can form channels that eventually will lead to collaboration , it is also important to understand how sets of factors affect the likelihood for initiating contact with potential collaborators . Q3 : Do the research environment , past researcher behavior and personal researcher characteristics impact the decision of e - mailing a potential collaborator within institution ? Finally , an often overlooked direction on the topic is examining whether researchers encounter difﬁculties in collaborating . This is an aspect that is not measurable through traditional methods that examine co - authorship as a proxy for collaboration . Individuals that experience difﬁculties in collaborating but still express a preference for collaboration are unlikely to produce any collaborative publications . By understanding the obstacles and factors that contribute to these difﬁculties , one can help alleviate eliminate such hurdles . Q4 : Do the research environment , past researcher behavior and personal researcher characteristics impact the likelihood of experiencing difﬁculties in collaborating ? Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 566 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 A further research question was established to help identify the complex relationships between all the variables sets that were tested . Q5 : How do the research environment , past researcher behavior , personal researcher characteristics and preferences inﬂuence each other as well as the potential for intra - institutional collaboration ? Methods In order to evaluate the aforementioned research questions , we created and administered a survey . Using this methodological approach , we standardized data collection ( Wright and Marsden , 2010 ) . We aimed to target the survey in an institutional setting that is actively seeking to increase not just research productivity but also research funding . The University of Kentucky ( abbreviated to UK in the university’s culture ) is categorized as having a very high research activity , which is the highest category of research activity for US institutions ( Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching , 2011 ) . The institution consists of 16 colleges that cover many different disciplines such as social science , engineering , law , design , education and medical sciences . The survey was designed by utilizing multiple questions based on ﬁve - point Likert scale , multiple answer questions as well as open - ended questions . The software used for the survey was RedCap ( Harris et al . , 2009 ) . We initially piloted an earlier version of the survey within our unit before launching the survey to the whole university . Relevant questions and variables utilized for the purposes of this study are included in ‘‘Appendix’’ . The survey was sent out to all employees of the university with academic assignments on April 22 , 2014 . A total of 1847 e - mail invitations were sent to people with research mandated based on their employment contract . Each invitation contains a unique link , which eliminates the likelihood of obtaining responses from non - invited respondents as well as the likelihood of obtaining duplicate responses . A reminder was sent on May 5 , 2014 , and at the end of May , the survey ofﬁcially ended . The survey can be found in ‘‘Appendix’’ . Results A total of 414 respondents participated in the survey of which 352 completed the survey to the end . The response rate is within acceptable bounds known for e - mail surveys ( Sheehan , 2001 ) . The composition of non - respondents reﬂected to a large degree that of respondents . For example , 68 . 25 % of respondents were tenured faculty , while 64 . 29 % of non - respondents were tenured faculty . Tenure - eligible Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 567 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 percentages were at 21 . 26 and 19 . 12 % , respectively . Adjunct , visiting and part - time faculty elected not to participate in the survey . 25 % of respondents came from the College of Arts and Sciences ( includes many humanities as well as science departments ) . The same college represented 24 . 38 % of non - respondents . A similar pattern was observed for the College of Medicine ( 20 . 33 vs . 17 . 30 % ) , College of Agriculture ( 8 . 47 vs . 13 . 37 % ) , College of Communication and Information ( 7 . 62 vs . 2 . 70 % ) , College of Pharmacy ( 4 . 23 vs . 4 . 45 % ) and College of Business and Economics ( 4 . 23 vs . 4 . 98 % ) . The datasets of responses were linked with the dataset of institutional records containing academic rank and joint appointment assignment information . After merging the two datasets , missing data were removed and a total of 283 records with no missing data were utilized for the analyses . Desire to collaborate Environmental factors Unit support for collaboration and desire to collaborate are signiﬁcantly correlated , r s = 0 . 172 , p \ . 01 . Similarly , sharing attitudes of colleagues correlates with the desire to collaborate , r s = 0 . 124 , p \ . 05 . However , both effects are small . Past researcher behavior Correlation effects of past collaborations , past collaboration within institution and past initiation of contact on the likelihood that participants primarily will be looking for collaborations within their institution were r s = 0 . 598 , p \ . 001 , r s = 0 . 123 , p \ . 05 , r s = 0 . 201 , p \ . 001 , respectively . Personal researcher characteristics Positive statistically signiﬁcant correlation was found for individuals holding joint appointments , r s = 0 . 117 , p \ . 05 . Negative statistically signiﬁcant correlation was found for individuals whose ﬁeld values sole scholarship , r s = - 0 . 274 , p \ . 001 . Academic rank , employment duration , knowledge of other languages and gender were not found to be statistically signiﬁcant in relation to the likelihood of expressing a desire to collaborate . Primarily looking for collaboration within institution Environmental factors Correlation tests were performed to investigate how unit support for collaboration , colleagues’ research sharing attitudes and experiencing difﬁculties relate to the likelihood that participants will primarily be looking for collaborations within their university . Results were , r s = 0 . 036 , p [ . 05 , r s = 0 . 119 , p \ . 05 , r s = - 0 . 149 , p \ . 05 , respectively . Overall , colleagues’ research sharing attitudes and experi - encing difﬁculties in collaborating appear to interact ( albeit to a limited degree ) Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 568 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 with whether a respondent sought primarily collaboration within the institution . Past behavior variables were also tested . Past researcher behavior Past collaborative research ( r s = 0 . 166 , p \ . 01 ) , past collaborative research within institution ( r s = 0 . 293 , p \ . 001 ) and how often a researcher initiated contact for a new collaboration with a non - previous collaborator ( r s = 0 . 044 , p [ . 05 ) were also tested in relation to whether an individual sought primarily collaborations within institution . Personal researcher characteristics Employment duration ( r s = - 0 . 187 , p \ . 01 ) and languages spoken ( r s = - 0 . 198 , p \ . 001 ) were found to be statistically signiﬁcant and negatively correlated with individuals seeking primarily collaborations within their institution . Contacting a potential collaborator within institution Environmental factors Unit support was the only variable found to be statistically signiﬁcant r s = 0 . 184 , p \ . 01 . Past researcher behavior Researchers that initiated contact with a potential collaborator in the past were also likely to report that they would contact a potential collaborator that they have not met before in their institution , r s = 0 . 282 , p \ . 001 . Signiﬁcant correlation was also found in relation to past collaborations ( r s = 0 . 198 , p \ . 001 ) as well as past intra - institutional collaboration ( r s = 0 . 140 , p \ . 05 ) . All these are important indicators that past experience inﬂuences potential future communication . Personal researcher characteristics Personal research characteristic variables were not found to be statistically signiﬁcant in relation to an individual contacting a potential intra - institutional collaborator . On the other hand , individual preferences were found to be statistically signiﬁcant . These were the personal research sharing attitudes ( r s = 0 . 199 , p \ . 001 ) as well as desire to collaborate ( r s = 0 . 165 , p \ . 01 ) . Experiencing difﬁculties in collaborating Environmental factors Both unit support for collaboration and colleagues’ research sharing attitudes correlated well with the whether a researcher was experiencing difﬁculties , r s = - 0 . 326 , p \ . 001 , r s = - 0 . 373 , p \ . 001 , respectively . These demonstrate a substantial inverse relationship . Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 569 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 Past researcher behavior Additionally , we tested set of variables relating to past research behavior . Past collaborations as well as past intra - institutional collaborations were found to be signiﬁcant , r s = - 0 . 128 , p \ . 05 , r s = - 0 . 166 , p \ . 01 , respectively . Personal researcher characteristics Individuals holding joint appointments ( r s = - 0 . 134 , p \ . 05 ) and polyglots ( r s = 0 . 161 , p \ . 01 ) were statistically signiﬁcant and correlated with whether a researcher was experiencing difﬁculties in collaborating with others within the institution . Structural equation model A structural equation model was constructed based on the research questions of the study ( Q1 – Q5 ) . Variables were added based on the signiﬁcance produced on the individual correlations . This helped to better identify how variables inﬂuence one another on a more complex model and revealed additional patterns of interest . The model is shown in Figure 1 . For our model , we utilized the package lavaan in R ( Rosseel , 2012 ) , which supports weighted least squares means and variance ( WLSMV ) estimation . This was necessary given the nature of our data ( Finney and DiStefano , 2006 ) . Additionally the estimator is considered to be robust since it does not assume normally distributed variables and it is the best option for modeling ordinal variables ( Brown , 2015 ) . The model has a good model ﬁt based on the Chi - square and the ratio of sample size to number of free parameters is within acceptable bounds ( Anderson and Gerbing , 1984 ; Bentler , 1980 ) . The root mean square error of approximation ( RMSEA ) considered by many to be a more robust test also indicates an ‘‘excellent’’ model ﬁt ( MacCallum et al . , 1996 ) . The accounted variance for the desire to collaborate is 39 . 8 % . Factors found to be statistically signiﬁcant and inﬂuence the desire to collaborate are the percentage of past collaborative research and whether an academic ﬁeld values solitary scholarship . The latter has a negative impact on the desire to collaborate . E - mailing a potential collaborator within institution yielded 15 . 8 % of accounted variance . Both personal research sharing attitudes and past behavior of initiating contact for collaboration with a non - previous collaborator have a medium positive impact . The accounted variance for the predicted variable representing those primarily seeking collaboration within institution is 23 . 6 % . The percentage of past collaborative research within institution and the years in current position have a statistically signiﬁcant effect with the latter having a negative impact as a researcher’s years in the position increase . Finally , accounted variance for those experiencing difﬁculties is 20 % . Sharing attitudes from colleagues and unit support for collaboration have a Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 570 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 negative effect on the predicted variable . That is , the more the colleagues share their research ideas and units support collaborations , the less the difﬁculties researchers have in ﬁnding and collaborating with others . However , a surprising result was that the more the number of languages an individual knows , the more likely he or she is to experience difﬁculties in collaborating within the institution . Open - ended questions analysis The survey also included open - ended questions that aimed to enhance our understanding on the topic . Questions referred to why respondents preferred working alone or collaboratively and what are the obstacles for establishing collaboration at their institution . Three graduate assistants were utilized to code the answers based on a set of rigid guidelines after initially the authors conducted a pilot coding analysis . We asked coders to read the respondents’ answer and assign one or more categories from the following two groups : Figure 1 . Structural equation modeling based on all the research questions addressed in this study . Note : Signiﬁcance levels , * * * p \ . 001 , * * p \ . 01 ; * p \ . 05 ; + p \ . 10 . Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 571 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 Preference in working collaboratively + A : better experience ( e . g . , pleasure ) + B : effective + C : better opportunities / higher impact ( e . g . , lead to more publication channels ) + D : requirement / responsibility ( e . g . , mentor students / young faculty , required by domain ) Preference in working alone - A : logistic is tedious ( e . g . , dealing with multiple institutional review boards , scheduling etc . ) - B : lack of support / credit for collaboration / nature of ﬁeld - C : bad collaboration is inefﬁcient / better control / independence working alone - D : cannot ﬁnd anyone A coder could assign more than one categories for each answer and it may be a mix from the two groups , e . g . , + A , + B , - D . For 290 valid answers for this question , the inter - rater reliability ( Fleiss’ kappa ) score was 0 . 58 , which falls into moderate agreement ( Landis & Koch , 1977 ) . We took a voting approach and kept the categories assigned by more than one raters , when calculating the Fleiss’ kappa score . Figure 2 shows the summary based on the Figure 2 . Reasons for preferring working alone or collaborating based on the open - ended question . Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 572 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 reported reasons for why people prefer working alone or collaboratively . Reasons for preferring to work alone are shown in black , while reasons for preferring to work collaboratively are shown in gray . The Y - axis represents the percentage of respondents that claimed the target reason out of all respondents . For example , 58 . 28 % of respondents think effectiveness is the primary reason for their preference in working collaboratively . Overall , most people demonstrate a preference in working collaboratively . Effectiveness of collaboration is the primary reason for this preference ( i . e . , more than half of respondents list this as their main reason ) . On the other hand , reduction in coordination costs through better control is the primary reason for the preference in working alone . Both reasons revolve around effectiveness as the main theme for the decision . Further , respondents also see more opportunities and better experience when working with others than alone . When seeking general collaboration opportunities that are not only within campus , 4 . 07 % of respondents ﬁnd a lack of support for collaboration from their department will lead them to prefer working alone . Finally , 0 . 96 % of respondents report that it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd someone to collaborate with . Difﬁculties in collaborating with others were also examined using an open - ended question . Coders had the option to assign one or more categories to each respondent’s response . The following categories were used : A . Environmental obstacles ( e . g . , lack of supporting system / environment / tech - nologies , low priority in unit , unit barriers , lack of collaboration guidelines ) . B . Human factor : blaming others but not self ( e . g . , lack of colleague with motivation , esp . senior and well - funded faculty , and colleagues do not want to share materials / data , lack of people with similar interests ) . C . Lack of information on people’s expertise and availability ( e . g . , not knowing who is doing what , where are the experts ) . D . Personal factors : blaming self and no external factors ( e . g . , don’t know how to convince others to join my project , egos and silos , too busy and do not have time , difﬁcult to write cross disciplines ) . We received 268 valid answers . Following the same voting approach , we calculated the Fleiss’ kappa score and got 0 . 66 , which falls into substantial agreement ( Landis and Koch , 1977 ) . The summary for coders’ category assign - ments is shown in Figure 3 . The Y - axis represents the percentage of respondents that claim the target obstacle out of the total number of subjects . Environmental and human factors are the major two obstacles that hinder researchers from collaborating at their institution , followed by lack of information . Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 573 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 Discussion Results in this study bring a new light to intra - institutional collaborative research . We have measured how sets of factors relating to the environment , past researcher behavior , personal researcher characteristics impact intra - institutional collaborative research . This was achieved by understanding what contributes to the preference of collaboration in general and then targeted within - institution - speciﬁc factors relating to whether a researcher experiences difﬁculty in collaborating , what contributes to the likelihood of e - mailing a potential collaborator and what contributes to primarily seeking collaboration within an institution . The ﬁndings suggest that environmental factors can have a substantial impact on intra - institutional collaboration . Unit support for collaboration was found to impact whether researchers experience difﬁculties in collaborating . As such , it does not directly contribute as an incentive to a researcher’s psyche to seek intra - institutional collaboration , but it does act as a hurdle when not present . Colleagues’ research sharing attitudes also impact the likelihood of a researcher experiencing difﬁculties in collaborating . In turn , those that experience difﬁculties in collabo - rating are less likely to be seeking collaborations within their institution ( although the effect is small ) . Figure 3 . Obstacles for establishing collaboration at UK as coded from the open - ended question . Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 574 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 Past researcher behavior appeared to be substantially important . In general , past research collaboration contributes to the desire to collaborate . Additionally , past intra - institutional collaboration affects whether someone will primarily be search - ing for collaboration within their institution . Further , researchers that have in the past initiated contact ﬁrst with a potential collaborator are also likely to e - mail a potential collaborator within their institution . All these ﬁndings reveal the importance of past researcher behavior to have a residual impact on future attitudes of a researcher . It demonstrates the importance of ﬁrst collaboration to have a long - term effect in the practice of a researcher when it comes to intra - institutional collaboration . Personal research characteristics were found to be the least inﬂuential in our model with few exceptions . The academic ﬁeld appears to inﬂuence the desire to collaborate based on whether it values solitary scholarship . This ﬁnding provides a new perspective compared to past studies that investigated the type of academic ﬁeld as oppose to how the ﬁeld values academic work . The effect is considerable but not deﬁnitive which indicates that many researchers are still willing to collaborate even though their ﬁeld values solitary scholarship . Further , it appears that the longer a researcher is employed in a particular position , the less likely he or she will be in primarily searching for collaboration within their institution . This is a likely consequence of higher ranked researchers being asked by institutions to seek for collaborations that can enable grants . It is also likely that a higher rank will change the objectives of a researcher to increase popularity and reputation . Finally , the number of languages a researcher knows was found to impact the likelihood of experiencing difﬁculties in collaboration . This result is puzzling , but we can speculate on the reasons behind this result . For example , many non - native speakers in the English - speaking institution that we conducted the survey may be having trouble in ﬁnding collaborators due to cultural or temporal factors ( e . g . , they are new to the geographic area ) . On the other hand , difﬁculties experienced may be self - perceived or self - imposed due to intra - group and inter - group behaviors , commonly found in many group settings ( Dovidio et al . , 2009 ) . Recommendations Results indicate direct implications for departments as well as researchers that need to enhance intra - institutional collaboration . Researchers are encouraged to seek collaborations especially early on in their careers within their institutions . The effect of successful early collaborations will persist and will provide additional advantages with multiple researcher projects . Even though sharing research projects and ideas with other colleagues is often seen as challenging , researchers are encouraged to do so in their own comfort level ( e . g . , sharing a secondary project which is not on a researcher’s main research objective ) . The effect of sharing will enhance the probability of contacting others for projects Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 575 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 which holds the potential for successful collaborations that will propagate to future collaborations . Departments have also a responsibility in enhancing intra - institutional collab - oration . Attention should be paid to how solitary scholarship is appreciated in the ﬁeld . A ﬁeld that values solitary scholarship will impact negatively collaborations . Additionally , how unit support collaborative research can impact collaborations substantially . Further , the culture generated by units will affect the culture that will be embedded into researchers that work in an institution . It is imperative to break the norm and expand communication and sharing of projects and ideas . Although not all projects end up in a successful collaboration , ﬁndings suggest that the mere presence of colleagues that share projects and ideas will reduce difﬁculties in collaborating to a substantial degree . Additionally , units should attempt to introduce all faculty in this process especially geographically non - native . This study has focused on languages as a proxy for international faculty , and although not a rule , the effect of experiencing difﬁculties in collaborating seems to be considerable for some of these researchers . Breaking cultural barriers can contribute toward reducing the hurdles of collaborating within an institution . Finally , information systems will be helpful in assisting researchers with identifying potential area experts . It can also help improve environmental support for collaboration by raising the awareness that it is supported and promoted by an institution . Information systems could also consider making use of social media practices to enhance researcher engagement in those systems . Limitations This study aimed to measure collaboration through self - reported responses for collaboration . Although this is an effective solution in extracting though processes from respondents , the objectiveness of responses may have been affected by individual bias . As such , future studies should look for actual data that will look at established collaborations but also identify emotional factors quantiﬁed by researchers . The study did not also look at differences that have been known to exist between academic disciplines ( Lewis , 2013 ) . A much larger survey that can have a higher statistical power for disciplinary sub - categories is likely to display a much clearer effect between some factors . Conclusion Intra - institutional collaboration was examined in this study . It has been a topic that the literature review revealed to have been neglected in scholarly literature of academic collaboration . However , as more institutions attempt to enhance such a type of collaboration , there are steps that need to be taken to achieve a higher Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 576 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 percentage of collaborations . Institutions need to place more emphasis on key factors that can lead to more cohesion and connectedness for their researchers which can result to potentially more research productivity . References Adams , J . ( 2013 ) ‘Collaborations : The fourth age of research’ , Nature 497 ( 7451 ) : 557 – 560 . Anderson , J . C . and Gerbing , D . W . ( 1984 ) The effect of sampling error on convergence , improper solutions , and goodness - of - ﬁt indices for maximum likelihood conﬁrmatory factor analysis , Psychometrika 49 ( 2 ) : 155 – 173 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF02294170 . Anholt , R . M . , Stephen , C . and Copes , R . ( 2012 ) ‘Strategies for Collaboration in the Interdisciplinary Field of Emerging Zoonotic Diseases’ , Zoonoses and Public Health 59 ( 4 ) : 229 – 240 . Beaver , D . and Rosen , R . ( 1978 ) ‘Studies in scientiﬁc collaboration Part I . The professional origins of scientiﬁc co - authorship’ , Scientometrics 1 ( 1 ) : 65 – 84 . Beaver , D . and Rosen , R . ( 1979 ) ‘Studies in scientiﬁc collaboration Part III . Professionalization and the natural history of modern scientiﬁc co - authorship’ , Scientometrics 1 ( 3 ) : 231 – 245 . Bentler , P . M . ( 1980 ) ‘Multivariate Analysis with Latent Variables : Causal Modeling’ , Annual Review of Psychology 31 ( no issue number ) : 419 – 456 . Birnholtz , J . , Guha , S . , Yuan , Y . C . , Gay , G . and Heller , C . ( 2013 ) ‘Cross - campus collaboration : a scientometric and network case study of publication activity across two campuses of a single institution’ , Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 64 ( 1 ) : 162 – 172 . Boix Mansilla , V . , Lamont , M . and Sato , K . ( 2015 ) ‘Shared Cognitive – Emotional – Interactional Platforms’ , Science , Technology , and Human Values 41 ( 4 ) : 571 – 612 . Bozeman , B . and Corley , E . ( 2004 ) ‘Scientists’ collaboration strategies : implications for scientiﬁc and technical human capital’ , Research Policy 33 ( 4 ) : 599 – 616 . Brown , T . A . ( 2015 ) Conﬁrmatory Factor Analysis for Applied Research , New York , The Guilford Press . Bukvova , H . ( 2010 ) ‘Studying Research Collaboration : A Literature Review’ , Sprouts : Working Papers on Information Systems 10 ( 3 ) . Retrieved from https : / / www . researchgate . net / publication / 200629645 _ Studying _ Research _ Collaboration _ A _ Literature _ Review . Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching ( 2011 ) The Carnegie Classiﬁcation of Institutions of Higher Education , 2010 edition , Menlo Park , CA : Carnegie Classiﬁcation of Institutions of Higher Education . Carroll , J . M . , Rosson , M . B . , Farooq , U . and Xiao , L . ( 2009 ) ‘Beyond being aware’ , Information and Organization 19 ( 3 ) : 162 – 185 . Chinchilla - Rodrı´guez , Z . , Benavent - Pe´rez , M . , de Moya - Anego´n , F . and Miguel , S . ( 2012 ) ‘International collaboration in Medical Research in Latin America and the Caribbean ( 2003 – 2007 ) ’ , Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 63 ( 11 ) : 2223 – 2238 . Choi , S . , Yang , J . S . and Park , H . W . ( 2015 ) ‘The triple helix and international collaboration in science’ , Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 66 ( 1 ) : 201 – 212 . Chung , E . , Kwon , N . and Lee , J . ( 2015 ) ‘Understanding scientiﬁc collaboration in the research life cycle : Bio - and nanoscientists’ motivations , information - sharing and communication practices , and barriers to collaboration’ , Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology . Published online 5 May 2015 . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / asi . 23520 . Cummings , J . N . and Kiesler , S . ( 2007 ) ‘Coordination costs and project outcomes in multi - university collaborations’ , Research Policy 36 ( 10 ) : 1620 – 1634 . Davidson Frame , J . and Carpenter , M . P . ( 1979 ) ‘International Research Collaboration’ , Social Studies of Science 9 ( 4 ) : 481 – 497 . Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 577 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 De Solla Price , D . ( 1986 ) Little Science , Big Science … and Beyond , New York : Columbia University Press . De Solla Price , D . J . and Beaver , D . ( 1966 ) ‘Collaboration is an invisible college’ , American Psychologist 21 ( 11 ) : 1011 – 1018 . Dovidio , J . F . , Saguy , T . and Shnabel , N . ( 2009 ) ‘Cooperation and Conﬂict within Groups : Bridging Intragroup and Intergroup Processes’ Journal of Social Issues 65 ( 2 ) : 429 – 449 . Edge , D . ( 1979 ) ‘Quantitative measures of communication in science : A critical review’ , History of Science 17 ( 2 ) : 102 – 134 . Finney , S . J . and DiStefano , C . ( 2006 ) ‘Non - normal and categorical data in structured equation modeling’ , in G . R . Hancock and R . O . Mueller ( eds . ) Structural Equation Modeling : A Second Course , Charlotte , NC : IAP , pp . 269 – 297 . Fox , M . F . and Faver , C . A . ( 1984 ) ‘Independence and cooperation in research : the motivations and costs of collaboration’ The Journal of Higher Education 55 ( 3 ) : 347 – 359 . Franceschet , M . ( 2011 ) ‘Collaboration in computer science : a network science approach’ Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 62 ( 10 ) : 1992 – 2012 . Gazni , A . , Sugimoto , C . R . and Didegah , F . ( 2012 ) ‘Mapping world scientiﬁc collaboration : authors , institutions , and countries’ , Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 63 ( 2 ) : 323 – 335 . Gordon , M . ( 1980 ) ‘A critical reassessment of inferred relations between multiple authorship , scientiﬁc collaboration , the production of papers and their acceptance for publication’ , Scientometrics 2 ( 3 ) : 193 – 201 . Hagstrom , W . O . ( 1965 ) The Scientiﬁc Community , New York : Basic Books . Harris , P . A . , Taylor , R . , Thielke , R . , Payne , J . , Gonzalez , N . and Conde , J . G . ( 2009 ) ‘Research electronic data capture ( REDCap ) —a metadata - driven methodology and workﬂow process for providing translational research informatics support’ , Journal of Biomedical Informatics 42 ( 2 ) : 377 – 381 . Heffner , A . ( 1981 ) ‘Funded research , multiple authorship , and subauthorship collaboration in four disciplines’ , Scientometrics 3 ( 1 ) : 5 – 12 . Huang , M . - H . , Wu , L . - L . and Wu , Y . - C . ( 2015 ) ‘A study of research collaboration in the pre - web and post - web stages : a coauthorship analysis of the information systems discipline’ , Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 66 ( 4 ) : 778 – 797 . Katerndahl , D . A . ( 1996 ) ‘Associations between departmental features and departmental scholarly activity’ , Family Medicine 28 ( 2 ) : 119 – 127 . Katz , J . S . ( 1993 ) Bibliometic assessment of intranational university - university collaboration . PhD thesis , University of Sussex , Brighton , UK . Katz , J . S . and Martin , B . R . ( 1997 ) ‘What is research collaboration ? ’ , Research Policy 26 ( 1 ) : 1 - 18 . Kraut , R . , Egido , C . and Galegher , J . ( 1988 ) Patterns of Contact and Communication in Scientiﬁc Research Collaboration , in Proceedings of the 1988 ACM Conference on Computer - supported Cooperative Work , 26 – 28 September 1988 , Portland , Oregon . New York : ACM , pp . 1 – 12 . Landis , J . R . and Koch , G . G . ( 1977 ) ‘The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data’ , Biometrics 33 ( 1 ) : 159 – 174 . Lee , S . and Bozeman , B . ( 2005 ) ‘The impact of research collaboration on scientiﬁc productivity’ , Social Studies of Science 35 ( 5 ) : 673 – 702 . Lewis , J . , Ross , S . and Holden , T . ( 2012 ) ‘The how and why of academic collaboration : disciplinary differences and policy implications’ , Higher Education 64 ( 5 ) : 693 – 708 . Lewis , J . M . ( 2013 ) Academic Governance : Disciplines and Policy , New York : Routledge . MacCallum , R . C . , Browne , M . W . and Sugawara , H . M . ( 1996 ) ‘Power analysis and determination of sample size for covariance structure modeling’ , Psychological Methods 1 ( 2 ) : 130 – 149 . Meadows , A . J . ( 1974 ) Communication in Science , London : Butterworths . Meadows , A . J . and O’Connor , J . G . ( 1971 ) ‘Bibliographic statistics as a guide to growth points in science’ , Science Studies 1 ( 1 ) : 95 – 99 . Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 578 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 Pao , M . L . ( 1992 ) ‘Global and local collaborators : A study of scientiﬁc collaboration’ , Information Processing and Management 28 ( 1 ) : 99 – 109 . Papatsiba , V . ( 2013 ) ‘The idea of collaboration in the academy : its epistemic and social potentials and risks for knowledge generation’ , Policy Futures in Education 11 ( 4 ) : 436 – 448 . Persson , O . , Gla¨nzel , W . and Danell , R . ( 2004 ) ‘Inﬂationary bibliometric values : the role of scientiﬁc collaboration and the need for relative indicators in evaluative studies’ , Scientometrics 60 ( 3 ) : 421 – 432 . Rosseel , Y . ( 2012 ) ‘lavaan : An R Package for Structural Equation Modeling’ , Journal of Statistical Software 48 ( 2 ) , published online 24 / 05 / 2012 . doi : 10 . 18637 / jss . v048 . i02 . Seonghee , K . and Boryung , J . ( 2008 ) ‘An analysis of faculty perceptions : attitudes toward knowledge sharing and collaboration in an academic institution’ , Library and Information Science Research 30 ( 4 ) : 282 – 290 . Sheehan , K . B . ( 2001 ) ‘E - mail Survey Response Rates : A Review’ , Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 6 ( 2 ) , published online 01 / 01 / 2001 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1083 - 6101 . 2001 . tb00117 . x . Sin , S . - C . J . ( 2011 ) ‘International coauthorship and citation impact : a bibliometric study of six LIS journals , 1980 – 2008’ , Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 62 ( 9 ) : 1770 – 1783 . Smith , D . and Katz , J . S . ( 2000 ) . Collaborative Approaches to Research . HEFCE Fundamental Review of Research Policy and Funding , Final Report . Higher Education Policy Unit ( HEPU ) , University of Leeds and the Science Policy Research Unit ( SPRU ) University of Sussex . Available on http : / / users . sussex . ac . uk / * sylvank / pubs / collc . pdf . Stokols , D . , Misra , S . , Moser , R . P . , Hall , K . L . and Taylor , B . K . ( 2008 ) ‘The ecology of team science’ , American Journal of Preventive Medicine 35 ( 2 ) : S96 – S115 . Subramanyam , K . ( 1983 ) ‘Bibliometric studies of research collaboration : a review’ , Journal of Information Science 6 ( 1 ) : 33 – 38 . Sud , P . and Thelwall , M . ( 2015 ) Not all international collaboration is beneﬁcial : the mendeley readership and citation impact of biochemical research collaboration , Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology . doi : 10 . 1002 / asi . 23515 . Wright , J . D . and Marsden , P . V . ( 2010 ) ‘Survey research and social science : history , current practice , and future prospects’ , in J . D . Wright and P . V . Marsden ( eds . ) Handbook of Survey Research , Bingley , UK : Emerald Group Publishing , pp . 3 – 26 . Appendix Independent variables were measured using a 5 - point Likert scale , numeric scale as well as categorical data . Environmental factors 1 . Do you experience difﬁculties in ﬁnding potential collaborators on campus ? ( 5 = Almost Always and 1 = Almost never ) 2 . Would you say your current unit supports within - unit collaborations ? ( 5 = Strongly agree and 1 = Strongly Disagree ) 3 . Do you experience difﬁculties in ﬁnding potential collaborators on campus ? ( 5 = Almost always and 1 = Almost never ) Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 579 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 Past researcher behavior 1 . In what percentage of past collaborative efforts did you initiate contact with individuals whom you had never collaborated ? * * Failed attempts should be included ; please skip if you have neither collaborated nor attempted collabo - rating ( 5 = Between 76 and 100 % of attempts and 1 = None of my attempts ) 2 . In the past , about what percentage of your research projects involved collaboration with others ? ( 5 = Between 76 and 100 % of my research projects and 1 = None of my research projects ) 3 . Among all the above research collaboration , about what percent was WITHIN YOUR INSTITUTION ( including former and current institutions ) ? ( 5 = Between 76 % and 100 % of my research projects and 1 = None of my research projects ) Personal researcher characteristics 1 . Do you hold a joint appointment in a different unit at UK [ University of Kentucky ] or have you worked for a different unit at UK [ University of Kentucky ] ? ( Y / N ) 2 . Does your research area value sole scholarship ? _ _ Yes _ _ No , but they don’t devalue it either _ _ No , they do not value sole scholarship at all I don’t know 3 . How long have you worked in your current position ? _ _ Less than one year _ _ 1 – 2 years _ _ 3 – 4 years _ _ 5 – 6 years _ _ More than 6 years 4 . Please list any languages ( up to four ) in which you are ﬂuent ( in reading and writing ) , with your primary daily used language ( s ) listed ﬁrst . ( open - ended question ) 5 . Do you freely and openly share your own research ideas and projects with your colleagues on campus ? ( 5 = Almost always and 1 = Almost never ) Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 580 Higher Education Policy 2018 31 Whether a researcher was experiencing difﬁculties in collaborating also became a dependent variable in later models . Additional dependent variables utilized in this study were the following : 1 . Do you prefer working collaboratively to working alone ? ( 5 = Almost always and 1 = Almost never ) 2 . Where are you PRIMARILY looking for collaboration in the next few years ? ( Check all that apply . ) _ _ Within your unity _ _ Within your university , but outside your unit _ _ Other university _ _ Out of university community ( community outreach ) _ _ International 3 . If you have identiﬁed a UK [ University of Kentucky ] researcher through his or her work ( not through personal contacts ) , will you contact him / her for potential collaboration . ( 5 = Strongly agree , 1 = Strongly disagree ) Additional open - ended questions used in this study were the following : 1 . Please list a few reasons for why you prefer working alone or why you prefer working collaboratively . 2 . In your opinion , what are the obstacles for establishing collaboration at UK [ University of Kentucky ] ? Please list the greatest obstacles ﬁrst . Further variables that were obtained by combining the dataset with institutional data were the following : Academic Rank , Tenure Status and Sex . Michail Tsikerdekis and Ning Yu Unit Support , Past Experience and Researcher Attitude 581 Higher Education Policy 2018 31