REVIEW Platelet a - granules : Basic biology and clinical correlates Price Blair , Robert Flaumenhaft * Department of Medicine , Division of Hemostasis and Thrombosis , Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02215 , USA a r t i c l e i n f o Keywords : a - Granule Vesicle trafﬁcking Endocytosis Secretion Hemostasis s u m m a r y a - Granules are essential to normal platelet activity . These unusual secretory granules derive their cargo from both regulated secretory and endocytotic pathways in megakaryocytes . Rare , inheritable defects of a - granule formation in mice and man have enabled identiﬁcation of proteins that mediate cargo trafﬁck - ing and a - granule formation . In platelets , a - granules fuse with the plasma membrane upon activation , releasing their cargo and increasing platelet surface area . The mechanisms that control a - granule mem - brane fusion have begun to be elucidated at the molecular level . SNAREs and SNARE accessory proteins that control a - granule secretion have been identiﬁed . Proteomic studies demonstrate that hundreds of bioactive proteins are released from a - granules . This breadth of proteins implies a versatile functionality . While initially known primarily for their participation in thrombosis and hemostasis , the role of a - gran - ules in inﬂammation , atherosclerosis , antimicrobial host defense , wound healing , angiogenesis , and malignancy has become increasingly appreciated as the function of platelets in the pathophysiology of these processes has been deﬁned . This review will consider the formation , release , and physiologic roles of a - granules with special emphasis on work performed over the last decade . (cid:2) 2009 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Overview of platelet a - granules Platelets are anucleate , discoid shaped blood cells that serve a critical function in hemostasis and other aspects of host defense . These cells are replete with secretory granules , which are critical to normal platelet function . Among the three types of platelet secretory granules – a - granules , dense granules , and lysosomes – the a - granule is the most abundant . There are approximately 50 – 80 a - granules per platelet , ranging in size from 200 to 500 nm . 1 They comprise roughly 10 % of the platelet volume , 10 - fold more than dense granules . The total a - granule membrane surface area per platelet is 14 l m 2 , (cid:2) 8 - fold more than dense granules and approximately equal to that of the open canalicular system ( OCS ) , 1 an elaborate system of tunneling invaginations of the cell membrane unique to the platelet . 2 The extra membrane provided by the OCS and a - granules enables the platelet to increase its sur - face area by 2 – 4 - fold upon platelet stimulation and / or spreading . Morphologic features observed by electron microscopy have historically deﬁned a - granules . They include ( 1 ) the peripheral membrane of the granule , ( 2 ) an electron dense nucleoid that con - tains chemokines and proteoglycan , ( 3 ) a less electron dense area adjacent to the nucleoid that contains ﬁbrinogen , and ( 4 ) a periph - eral electronluscent zone that contains von Willebrand factor ( vWf ) . 3 Not all zones , however , need to be observed in order to positively identify an a - granule . a - Granules have also been identi - ﬁed based on immunoﬂuorescence studies . Staining of granule constituents such as P - selectin , vWf , and / or ﬁbrinogen or other established markers identiﬁes a - granules by this technique . How - ever , a - granules appear to be heterogeneous with regard to car - go . 4 , 5 Absence of a particular a - granule marker does not preclude classiﬁcation of a vesicular structure as an a - granule . Thus , the def - inition of a - granules may yet undergo further reﬁnement as we learn more about their formation , structure , and content . Formation of a - granules Vesicle trafﬁcking The development of a - granules begins in the megakaryocyte , but continues in the circulating platelet . In the megakaryocyte , a - granules are derived in part from budding of small vesicles con - taining a - granule cargo from the trans - Golgi network ( Fig . 1 ) . 6 , 7 In other cell models , an orchestrated assemblage of coat proteins ( e . g . , clathrin , COPII ) , adaptor proteins ( e . g . , AP - 1 , AP - 2 , AP - 3 ) , fu - sion machinery ( e . g . , soluble NSF attachment protein receptors [ SNAREs ] ) , and monomeric GTPases ( e . g . , Rabs ) mediate vesicle trafﬁcking and maturation . Clathrin coat assembly likely functions , too , in trafﬁcking of vesicles from the trans - Golgi network to a - granules in megakaryocytes . The clathrin - associated adaptor proteins AP - 1 , AP - 2 , and AP - 3 are found in platelets 8 , 9 and are proposed to function in clathrin - mediated vesicle formation in 0268 - 960X / $ - see front matter (cid:2) 2009 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . blre . 2009 . 04 . 001 * Corresponding author . Address : Center for Life Science , Rm 939 , Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center , 3 Blackfan Circle , Boston , MA 02215 , USA . Tel . : + 1 617 735 4005 ; fax : + 1 617 735 4000 . E - mail address : rﬂaumen @ bidmc . harvard . edu ( R . Flaumenhaft ) . Blood Reviews 23 ( 2009 ) 177 – 189 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Blood Reviews journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / blre platelets . 10 Mutations in the gene encoding AP - 3 , for example , re - sults in impaired dense granule formation . 9 Clathrin - mediated endocytosis also functions in the delivery of plasma membrane into a - granules ( Fig . 1 ) . Vesicles budding off from either the trans - Golgi network or the plasma membrane can subsequently be directed to multivesicular bodies ( MVBs ) . MVBs found in most cells are endosomal structures containing vesicles that form from the limiting membrane of the endo - some . 11 , 12 They are typically transient structures involved in sort - ing vesicles containing endocytosed and newly synthesized proteins . In megakaryocytes , MVBs serve in an intermediate stage of granule production . 13 Both dense granules and a - granules are sorted by MVBs . 13 , 14 Vesicles budding from the trans - Golgi net - work may be delivered directly to MVBs ( Fig . 1 ) . 13 Kinetic studies in megakaryocytes have demonstrated that transport of endocyto - sed proteins proceeds from endosomes to immature MVBs ( MVB I , with internal vesicles alone ) to mature MVBs ( MVB II , with internal vesicles and an electron dense matrix ) to a - granules . a - Granules within MVBs contain 30 – 70 nm vesicles , termed exosomes . 13 Some exosomes persist in mature a - granules and are secreted following platelet activation . 15 Although it is unknown whether all or most vesicle trafﬁcking to a - granules proceeds through MVB , these observations indicate that MVB represent a developmental stage in a - granule maturation . Maturation of a - granules continues in circulating platelets by endocytosis of platelet plasma membranes . 16 – 18 A clathrin - depen - dent pathway leading to the delivery of plasma membrane to a - granules has been described , as has a clathrin - independent path - way that trafﬁcs vesicles to lysosomes . 18 Unlike other cells , coated vesicles in platelets retain their clathrin coat throughout trafﬁcking and for a period following fusion with a - granules . 17 Platelet endo - cytosis appears to be a constitutive activity of resting platelets . The molecular control of endocytosis in platelets is not known , but may involve the Src family receptors Fyn , Fgr , Lck , and / or Lyn based on colocalization studies , their tyrosine - phosphorylation status , 19 , 20 and evidence of a role for Src family receptors in lymphocyte endo - cytosis . 21 Studies performed in dogs evaluating the accumulation of ﬁbrinogen and immunoglobulin , which are endocytosed by cir - culating platelets , show that levels of endocytosed , but not endog - enous , a - granule proteins increase as platelets age . 22 This observation conﬁrms that constitutive trafﬁcking to a - granules continues throughout the lifespan of the platelet . Protein sorting Many a - granule proteins are produced by megakaryocytes and sorted to a - granules via a regulated secretory pathway . These pro - teins are synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum , exported to the Golgi for maturation , and subsequently sorted at the trans - Gol - gi network . 23 Trafﬁcking of some well - known a - granule proteins synthesized in megakaryocytes , such as P - selectin , has been evalu - ated . Initial studies in heterologous cells indicated that the sorting sequence for P - selectin is contained within its cytoplasmic tail . 24 – 27 Subsequent studies , however , indicated that the cytoplas - mic tail of P - selectin targets this adhesion molecule to storage granules in endothelial cells , but not in platelets . 25 , 28 This observa - tion demonstrates that while some principles of protein sorting can be generalized among cell types , the mechanism of sorting of a particular protein can vary between cell types . Trafﬁcking of soluble proteins has also been evaluated . Study of the targeting of CXCL4 ( also known as platelet factor 4 ) to a - gran - ules has led to the identiﬁcation of a signal sequence responsible for sorting chemokines into a - granules . 29 , 30 These experiments demonstrate that a four amino acid sequence within the exposed hydrophilic loop is required for sorting of CXCL4 into a - granules . 30 An analogous sequence was identiﬁed in the platelet chemokines RANTES and NAP - 2 . 30 Soluble proteins must be incorporated into vesicles formed at the trans - Golgi network to become cargo within mature a - gran - ules . A mechanism involving binding to glycosaminoglycans has been proposed for sorting small soluble chemokines . Mice that lack the dominant platelet glycosaminoglycan , serglycin , fail to store soluble proteins containing basically charged regions , such as CXCL4 , PDGF , or NAP - 2 , in their a - granules . 31 This observation sug - gests that glycosaminoglycans may serve as a retention mecha - nism for chemokines possessing an exposed cationic region . A mechanism to incorporate larger soluble proteins into a - granules is by aggregation of protein monomers . 32 Although not formally proven to sort by aggregation , large , self - assembling proteins such as multimerin have been proposed to sort into immature vesicles by homoaggregation . 33 vWf self - assembles into large multivalent structures and is packaged into a discrete tubular structure within a - granules . 34 , 35 Heterologous expression of vWf can drive the for - mation of granules in cell lines possessing a regulated secretory pathway ( e . g . , AtT - 20 , HEK293 , or RIN 5F cells ) , but not in cells lines that lack such a pathway ( CHO , COS , or 3T3 cells ) . 36 , 37 While aggregation and glycosaminoglycan binding represent plausible mechanisms for sorting soluble proteins , alternative sorting recep - tors must exist for other endogenous a - granule proteins . Plasma proteins are incorporated into a - granules via several distinct mechanisms of endocytosis . During receptor - mediated endocytosis , a plasma protein is bound to a platelet surface recep - tor and subsequently internalized via a clathrin - dependent pro - cess . The most well - studied example is the incorporation of ﬁbrinogen via integrin a IIb b 3 . 38 – 42 Plasma proteins such as immu - noglobulins and albumin incorporate into a - granules via pinocyto - sis . 43 The endocytosis of factor V by megakaryocytes involves two receptors . Following initial binding to a speciﬁc factor V receptor , Fig . 1 . Working model of a - granule formation in megakaryocytes . a - Granule cargo derives from budding of the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) and endocytosis of the plasma membrane . Both processes are clathrin - mediated . Receptor - mediated endocytosis is depicted in this ﬁgure ; however , pinocytosis of a - granule cargo can also occur . Vesicles can subsequently be delivered to multivesicular bodies ( MVBs ) , where sorting of vesicles occurs . It is possible that vesicles may also be delivered directly to a - granules . Some vesicles within MVBs contain exosomes . MVBs can mature to produce a - granules . 178 P . Blair , R . Flaumenhaft / Blood Reviews 23 ( 2009 ) 177 – 189 subsequent binding to low - density lipoprotein receptor - related protein - 1 ( LRP - 1 ) occurs and clathrin - dependent mediated endo - cytosis ensues . 44 , 45 Endocytosis of a - granule proteins may occur at the level of the megakaryocyte , the platelet , or both . Transport of a - granules into platelets a - Granules formed in megakaryocytes must be distributed to platelets during megakaryopoiesis . Two models to account for organelle delivery during megakaryopoiesis include the fragmen - tation model and the proplatelet model . The fragmentation model predicts that the megakaryocyte demarcation membrane system divides the cell into regions , each containing their allotment of organelles . 46 The proplatelet model predicts that , in a profound terminal reorganization of the megakaryocyte , platelets form along extended projections termed proplatelets . 47 – 49 Recent studies have indicated that platelets are produced in vivo via the formation of proplatelets 50 and that a - granules are transported from megakar - yocytes to a - granules on microtubule bundles . 51 These studies demonstrate that organelles within the megakaryocyte move from the cell body to the nascent platelets on microtubule tracks , pow - ered by the microtubule motor proteins . Organelles move at a rate of 0 . 1 – 2 l m / min in what appears to be a random direction . They are captured in developing platelets by virtue of microtubule coils , which persist in platelets . 51 Individual granules that move along proplatelet microtubule tracks appear to be heterogeneous with regard to cargo ( Fig . 2 ) . 4 Some a - granules stained with antibodies directed against vWf , but not ﬁbrinogen . Others stained with antibodies against ﬁbrino - gen , but not vWf . 4 Additional antigen pairs such as vascular endo - thelial cell growth factor ( VEGF ) and endostatin , as well as basic ﬁbroblast growth factor ( bFGF ) and thrombospondin - 1 , were also found to reside in different a - granule subpopulations . 4 Differential staining of a - granule subpopulations is observed in mature plate - lets as well . 4 , 5 Whether different a - granule subpopulations repre - sent a - granules derived from different sources ( e . g . , endocytosis versus regulated secretory pathway ) , differentially sorted in MVBs , stochastically segregated , or separated by yet unknown mecha - nisms remains to be determined . Defects in a - granule formation Defects of a - granule formation have been described in both pa - tients and mice . Gray platelet syndrome is the best known of the inherited disorders of a - granule formation ( for review see Ref . 52 ) . This syndrome is heterogenous and its genetic underpinnings have yet to be elucidated . a - Granules are also severely reduced in Medich giant platelet disorder and the White platelet syn - drome . 53 , 54 The molecular defects resulting in these syndromes , however , have not been identiﬁed . a - Granule deﬁciency can result from mutations or deletions of speciﬁc transcription factors . For example , mice that lack Hzf , a zinc ﬁnger protein that acts as a transcription factor , produce megakaryocytes and platelets with markedly reduced a - granules , mimicking gray platelet syndrome . 55 Fibrinogen , PDGF , and vWf are nearly absent from Hzf - deﬁcient platelets . However , no muta - tions in the orthologous Hzf gene were identiﬁed in a series of pa - tients with gray platelet syndrome . 56 Mutations in GATA1 have been described in patients with thrombocytopenia and markedly reduced or absent a - granules . 57 , 58 The downstream regulators in - volved in granule formation a - granules have not been character - ized for these transcription factor mutants . Some mutations resulting in markedly decreased or absent a - granules occur in genes encoding proteins involved in vesicular trafﬁcking . ARC syndrome results from mutations in the VPS33B gene . 59 , 60 VPS33B is a membrane - associated protein that binds tightly to and regulates the function of SNAREs . 60 VPS33B associ - ates with a - granules in platelets . 59 Patients with this mutation possess a - granule - deﬁcient platelets ( Fig . 3 ) , and their platelets possess no detectable PF4 , vWf , ﬁbrinogen , nor P - selectin . 59 This observation indicates that loss of VPS33B effects incorporation of both endogenous and endocytosed proteins , as well as both soluble and membrane - bound proteins , into a - granules . 59 The number of dense granules in VPS33B - deﬁcient platelets is somewhat in - creased , indicating that VPS33B function is not critical for dense granule formation . Isolated deﬁciencies of dense granule formation with normal a - granule formation , such as in the Hermansky - Pud - lak syndrome , are well - described . These observations further sup - port the premise that dense granule and a - granule formation require distinct membrane trafﬁcking machineries . Nonetheless , some mutations in vesicle trafﬁcking proteins re - sult in defects in both dense granule and a - granule formation , indi - cating aspects of commonality between the two pathways . Gunmetal mice with a mutant Rab geranylgeranyl transferase demonstrate a macrothrombocytopenia with a signiﬁcant defect in both a - granule and dense granule production . 61 , 62 While the substrates of Rab geranylgeranyl transferase involved in granule formation have not all been elucidated , Rab27 is hypoprenylated Fig . 2 . Model of transport of a - granules during platelet formation . Platelet a - granules are transported along microtubules from the megakaryocyte cell body through long pseudopodial extensions termed proplatelets . Platelets form as bulges along the length of these extensions . a - Granules are maintained in the nascent platelets by coiled microtubules . The insert demonstrates subpopulations of a - granules containing distinct cargos being transported along a proplatelet . a - Granules containing ﬁbrinogen are shown in green , while those containing vWf are shown in red ( Adapted with permission from Ref . 4 , Fig . 2 ) . P . Blair , R . Flaumenhaft / Blood Reviews 23 ( 2009 ) 177 – 189 179 in gunmetal mice and associates with both a - granules and dense granules . 61 , 63 , 64 Rab27 is a small GTP binding protein that regulates membrane trafﬁcking . 65 Mice deﬁcient in Rab27b demonstrate re - duced numbers of a - granules and dense granules in their megakar - yocytes and impaired proplatelet formation . 63 These observations suggest that Rab27b may coordinate proplatelet formation with granule transport . Other Rab proteins , including Rabs 1a , 1b , 3b , 5a , 5c , 6a , 7 , 8 , 10 , 14 , 18 , 21 , 27a , 27b , 32 , 37 are present in plate - lets , associated with membranes , and may function in membrane trafﬁcking and granule formation . 8 , 66 Defects in membrane composition can also result in aberrant a - granule formation . Mice lacking the ATP - binding cassette half - transporter , ABCG5 , suffer sitosterolemia , an accumulation of cir - culating plant sterols , and a macrothrombocytopenia characterized by large platelets with decreased granules . 67 Sitosterolemia sec - ondary to ABCG5 deﬁciency also occurs in humans and results in macrothrombocytopenia . 68 The reason why the megakaryocyte membrane system is more sensitive than other cells to plant ster - ols is unknown . However , the observation that a - granule forma - tion is impaired in this condition may inform strategies for studying how a - granule membranes form . Molecular mechanisms of a - granule release a - Granule contents must be released from their intracellular repository in order to achieve their physiologic function . a - Granule contents are release when the a - granule membrane fuses with sur - face - connected membranes of the OCS or the plasma membrane . 69 SNAREs represent the core of the fusion machinery . They are mem - brane - associated proteins that are oriented to the cytosol ( Fig . 4 ) . SNAREs associated with granules are termed vesicular SNAREs ( vSNAREs ) , while those associated with target membranes ( e . g . , OCS and plasma membrane ) are termed tSNAREs . The association of vSNAREs with tSNAREs generates the energy required for mem - brane fusion . 70 Known platelet vSNAREs include VAMP - 2 , - 3 , - 7 , and - 8 ; while known platelet tSNAREs include syntaxins 2 , 4 , 7 , and 11 and SNAP - 23 , - 25 , and - 29 . 71 – 77 Studies performed in mice deﬁcient in speciﬁc VAMP isoforms indicate that VAMP - 8 is the dominant vSNARE involved in a - granule release , while VAMP - 3 and perhaps VAMP - 2 play subordinate roles . 76 , 78 Syntaxins 2 and 4 both appear to function in a - granule release , which is unusual in that two syn - taxin isoforms do not typically mediate release of the same gran - ule . 72 , 79 There is no indication that SNAP - 25 or SNAP - 29 function in a - granule release , while the function of SNAP - 23 is well - estab - lished . 72 , 79 , 80 The distribution of SNAREs in platelets provides a ba - sis for several characteristics of a - granule secretion , including homotypic a - granule fusion and the fusion of a - granules with the open canalicular system and plasma membrane . 81 In addition to their roles in a - granule release , SNAREs likely participate in platelet granule formation . However , this SNARE function yet to be evaluated in detail . Fig . 3 . Absence of a - granules in platelets from patients harboring a mutation in VPS33B . Thin - section transmission electron micrographs of platelets ( A ) from a fetus with a mutation in VPS33B and ( B ) platelets from an unaffected fetus . Abundant a - granules indicated with white arrows in control platelets are lacking in platelets with mutant VSP33B . Bar , 500 nm ( Adapted with permission from Ref . 59 , Fig . 2 ) . Fig . 4 . Role of SNAREs a - granule membrane fusion . ( A ) The primary vSNARE mediating platelet a - granule secretion is VAMP - 8 , with VAMP - 3 and perhaps VAMP - 2 serving subordinate functions . Platelet tSNAREs include syntaxins and SNAP - 23 . Syntaxin - 2 and 4 participate in a - granule release . Coiled - coil domains ( bolded ) within vSNAREs ( blue ) and tSNAREs ( orange ) interact , forming a twisted 4 - helical bundle . ( B ) Interaction of the coiled - coil domains brings the opposing membranes of the granule and target membrane into close apposition . ( C ) Binding of vSNAREs and tSNAREs generates energy required for membrane fusion . Pore formation with release of granule contents subsequently ensues . 180 P . Blair , R . Flaumenhaft / Blood Reviews 23 ( 2009 ) 177 – 189 The function of SNAREs in platelet granule secretion must be tightly regulated so as to prevent the indiscriminant release of a - granule cargo . The ( Sec1 / Munc ) SM proteins function as clamps to regulate the function of SNAREs . SM protein isoforms found in platelets include Munc13 - 4 and Munc18a , b , and c . Of these , Munc18c has been found to function in a - granule release . 82 Munc - 18c is complexed primarily to syntaxin - 4 in platelets . 82 An antibody that prevents association of Munc - 18c with syntaxin - 4 augments a – granule release , raising the possibility that Munc18c serves as a negative regulatory of SNARE function . 82 Munc13 - 4 functions in dense granule release as a downstream effector of Rab27 ; 83 however , its role in a - granule release is not known . CDC - rel - 1 is another syntaxin binding protein implicated in the regula - tion of a - granule release . Platelets from mice lacking CDCrel - 1 demonstrate enhanced secretion in response to collagen . 84 Many other chaperone proteins that bind to and direct the func - tion of SNARE proteins have been described . A subset of these pro - teins has been found in platelets , and some of these function in a - granule secretion . NSF is a hexameric ATPase that is essential for most forms of membrane - trafﬁcking , including regulated gran - ule secretion . 85 The primary role of NSF is to disassemble SNARE complexes present on the same membrane ( cis conformation ) so that they are available to interact with cognate SNAREs on oppos - ing membranes ( trans conformation ) . Both inhibitory peptides and antibodies to NSF have been demonstrated to interfere with a - granule release from platelets . 79 , 86 Further evidence suggests that nitric oxide inhibits NSF regulation of a - granule release . 87 The sol - uble NSF - attachment protein ( SNAP ) a - SNAP binds and activates NSF . 88 In platelets , wild - type a - SNAP augments granule secretion , whereas a dominant - negative a - SNAP mutant ( a - SNAPL294A ) and antibodies directed at a - SNAP inhibit granule secretion . Rab proteins and their effectors are capable of docking opposing membranes and seem to modify SNARE protein function . Rab pro - teins are the largest branch of the ras superfamily of GTPases . Rabs 3b , 6c , and 8 are phosphorylated upon platelet activation . 66 , 89 Rab GDP dissociation inhibitor ( RabGDI ) , a general inhibitor of RabGTP - ases , inhibits a - granule but not dense granule release . 90 In addi - tion , a dominant - negative mutant of His - tagged Rab4S22 N ( but not mutant His - Rab3BT36 N ) inhibits a - granule secretion but fails to affect dense granule release . 90 These data raise the possibility that Rab 4 is required for a - granule but not dense granule secre - tion . In nucleated cells , Rab proteins have been shown to function by binding to large effector proteins that have been proposed to interact with SNARE proteins directly or with proteins , such as NSF and Munc - 18c , which mediate SNARE protein function 91 The Rab effector proteins in platelets that mediate a - granule release have not yet been identiﬁed . Platelet a - granules content a - Granule function derives from their contents . The content of a - granules includes both membrane bound proteins that become expressed on the platelet surface and soluble proteins that are re - leased into the extracellular space . Most membrane bound pro - teins are also present on the resting plasma membrane 92 These proteins include integrins ( e . g . , a IIb , a 6 , b 3 ) , immunoglobulin family receptors ( e . g . , GPVI , Fc receptors , PECAM ) , leucine - rich repeat family receptors ( e . g . , GPIb - IX - V complex ) , tetraspanins ( e . g . , CD9 ) and other receptors ( CD36 , Glut - 3 ) 93 – 97 The abundance of plasma membrane receptors residing in a - granule membranes suggests that endocytosis of plasma membrane contributes to the presence of adhesion molecules in a - granules . 92 Not all mem - brane - associated a - granule proteins , however , are present on the plasma membrane ( e . g . , the integral membrane proteins ﬁbrocy - stin L , CD109 , P - selectin ) . 93 Proteomic studies suggest that hundreds of soluble proteins are released by a - granules . It bears considering that proteins found in platelet releasate can originate from other platelet granules , cleav - age of surface proteins , or exosomes . Nonetheless , the combination of proteomic studies evaluating releasate , isolated platelet a - gran - ules , and isolated platelet dense granules provides creditable information regarding the identity of proteins released by a - granules . 93 , 98 – 101 Many of the proteins found in a - granules are present in plasma . This observation raises the question of whether the a - granule counterparts of plasma proteins differ in structure or function . Also , while many important bioactive proteins are pres - ent , concentrated , and even modiﬁed in platelet a - granules , estab - lishing the physiologic importance of a particular a - granular protein is challenging . Nonetheless , as discussed below , there is evidence that secreted a - granule proteins function in coagulation , inﬂammation , atherosclerosis , antimicrobial host defense , angio - genesis , wound repair , and malignancy . Functional roles of platelet a - granules Coagulation Platelets secrete many mediators of blood coagulation . Whereas platelet dense granules contain high concentrations of low molec - ular weight compounds that potentiate platelet activation ( e . g . , ADP , serotonin , and calcium ) , a - granules concentrate large poly - peptides that contribute to both primary and secondary hemosta - sis . a - Granules secrete ﬁbrinogen and von Willebrand factor ( vWf ) , adhesive proteins which mediate platelet – platelet and platelet – endothelial interactions . a - Granular vWf constitutes 20 % of the to - tal vWf protein and is enriched in high molecular weight forms . 102 , 103 Studies in which normal bone marrow was trans - planted into pigs with severe von Willebrand disease demon - strated that platelet vWf could partially compensate for lack of plasma vWf . 104 In a separate study , gene transfer resulting in ecto - pic expression of vWf in liver of mice with severe vWD led to nor - mal thrombus formation following vascular injury . 105 These results suggest that a - granule vWf can contribute to , but is not necessary for , normal hemostasis and thrombus formation . Adhesive receptors found in a - granules also participate in platelet adhesion . Components of the vWf receptor complex , GPI - b a - IX - V , the major receptor for ﬁbrinogen , integrin a IIb b 3 , and the collagen receptor , GPVI , are found in a - granules . 92 , 97 Although these receptors are constitutively expressed on the platelet plasma membrane , an estimated one - half to two - thirds of a IIb b 3 and one - third or more of GPVI reside in a - granule membranes in resting platelets and are expressed following activation . 94 – 97 Platelet a - granules contain a number of coagulation factors and co - factors which participate in secondary hemostasis . Factors V , XI , and XIII each localize in a - granules and are secreted upon platelet activation . 106 Factor V is endocytosed from the plasma and is stored complexed to the carrier protein multimerin , while factors XI and XIII are endogenously synthesized in megakaryo - cytes . 107 – 109 Some platelet - derived coagulation factors are struc - turally different from their plasma counterparts . In contrast to plasma pools , platelet - derived factor V is released in a partially activated form that exhibits substantial cofactor activity prior to thrombin activation . 110 Puriﬁed platelet - derived factor V / Va is more resistant to inactivation by activated protein - C or Ser ( 692 ) phosphorylation than its plasma counterpart . 111 Washed platelets from both normal and plasma factor XI - deﬁcient donors correct the clotting defects observed in factor XI - deﬁcient plasma . 112 Platelet a - granules also contain the inactive precursor of thrombin , prothrombin , and signiﬁcant stores of high molecular weight kininogens , which augment the intrinsic clotting cascade . 93 , 106 P . Blair , R . Flaumenhaft / Blood Reviews 23 ( 2009 ) 177 – 189 181 In addition , platelets release inhibitory proteases , such plasmino - gen activator inhibitor - 1 ( PAI - 1 ) and a 2 - antiplasmin , which limit plasmin - mediated ﬁbrinolysis . 106 Degradation of a - granule pro - teins by plasmin secondary to upregulation of urokinase plasmin - ogen activator in megakaryocytic a - granules , 113 as observed in the Quebec platelet disorder , results in a bleeding diathesis . 114 Patients with gray platelet syndrome lack a - granules and also present with a bleeding diathesis . 52 These observations demonstrate a role for a - granule proteins in hemostasis . Platelets also contribute to hemostatic balance by secreting numerous proteins that limit the progression of coagulation . a - Granules store antithrombin , which cleaves activated clotting fac - tors in both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways , and C1 - inhibitor , which degrades plasma kallikrein , factor XIa , and factor XIIa . Plate - lets secrete tissue factor pathway inhibitor ( TFPI ) , 115 protein S , 116 and protease nexin - 2 ( amyloid b - A4 protein ) , which inhibits fac - tors XIa and IXa . 117 The anticoagulant properties of platelet - de - rived protease nexin - 2 have been demonstrated in transgenic mouse models , as speciﬁc and modest overexpression of protease nexin - 2 in platelets both reduces in vivo cerebral thrombosis and increases intracerebral hemorrhage . 118 a - Granules store the pro - teinase plasmin and its inactive precursor plasminogen . The obser - vation that a - granules are heterogenous and may be differentially released could explain how they contribute both anti - and pro - coagulants to regulate coagulation . However , the possibility that pro - and anticoagulants are separated into different populations and that these populations are differentially released has not been evaluated . Inﬂammation Accumulating evidence demonstrates that platelets contribute to the initiation and propagation of the inﬂammatory process . 119 Platelet a - granules function in inﬂammation both by expressing receptors that facilitate adhesion of platelets with other vascular cells and by releasing a wide range of chemokines . Adhesive interactions generally result in mutual activation and in the propagation of the inﬂammatory phenotype of each cell . Fibrinogen , ﬁbronectin , vitronectin , and vWf , contribute to ﬁrm platelet – endothelial adhesion by forming cross - bridges between platelet GPIIb - IIIa and endothelial a V b 3 integrin or ICAM - 1 . 120 , 121 However , although these proteins are found in a - granules , the spe - ciﬁc contributions of platelet - , endothelial - and plasma - derived pools have not been established . P - Selectin , which translocates from a - granules to the platelet surface membrane following plate - let activation , participates in platelet interactions with endothelial cells , monocytes , neutrophils , and lymphocytes . 122 , 123 In vitro and in vivo studies demonstrate that platelets , regardless of their acti - vation state , are able to transiently adhere to the intact , activated endothelium . 124 , 125 These interactions are mediated by endothelial P - selectin binding to constitutively - expressed platelet P - selectin glycoprotein - 1 ( PSGL - 1 ) or platelet GPIb a . 124 , 126 Platelet – endothe - lial interactions are strengthened following platelet activation , as platelet P - selectin binds to endothelial PSGL - 1 . 127 A recent study using intravital ﬂuorescence microscopy demonstrates the impor - tance of P - selectin and PSGL - 1 in these interactions , as platelet adherencetoaninﬂamedendothelialwallwassigniﬁcantlyreduced following immunoneutralization of either P - selectin or PSGL - 1 . 128 P - Selectin also mediates platelet interactions with PSGL - 1 - expressing immune cells . Activated platelets bind to circulating immune cells in the blood stream , and surface - adherent platelets facilitate the recruitment , rolling , and arrest of monocytes , neutro - phils , and lymphocytes to the activated endothelium . 123 , 129 , 130 Platelets have been shown to play a critical role in the recruitment of neutrophils to damaged lung capillaries . Platelet depletion , P - selectin neutralization , or selective knockout of P - selectin in the hematopoietic compartment reduces neutrophil recruitment and inhibits the development of acute lung injury . 131 , 132 Adherence to platelets induces a host of proinﬂammatory responses in immune cells , including activation of adhesion receptor complexes , secre - tion of chemokines , cytokines , proteases , and pro - coagulants , and promotion of cellular differentiation . 119 In platelets , these interac - tions promote further activation and granular secretion . Platelet a - granules also inﬂuence inﬂammation by secreting high concentrations of proinﬂammatory and immune - modulating factors . These mediators induce recruitment , activation , chemo - kine secretion , and differentiation of other vascular and hemato - logic cells . 133 In some cases , these chemokines feed back to stimulate chemokine receptors on the platelet surface , thereby causing platelet activation , secretion , and perpetuation of the inﬂammatory cycle . a - Granules contain a wide range of chemo - kines including CXCL1 ( GRO - a ) , CXCL4 , CXCL5 ( ENA - 78 ) , CXCL7 ( PBP , b - TG , CTAP - III , NAP - 2 ) , CXCL8 ( IL - 8 ) , CXCL12 ( SDF - 1 a ) , CCL2 ( MCP - 1 ) , CCL3 ( MIP - 1 a ) , and CCL5 ( RANTES ) . 133 Among these , CXCL4 and CXCL7 are the most abundant . 134 For example , platelets contain 20 l g of CXCL4 / 10 9 cells , and following thrombin stimulation the serum concentration of CXCL4 rises to 5 – 10 l g / ml , approximately 1000 - fold greater than normal plasma . 135 , 136 Plate - lets are considered the major cellular source of CXCL4 and CXCL7 , whereas platelet secretion of other chemokines is thought to merely augment their secretion by other cells . 121 CXCL4 has been shown to induce neutrophil adhesion and degranulation , monocyte activation , and monocyte differentiation to macrophages and foam cells . 137 – 139 In coordination with CCL5 , CXCL4 is also able to induce adhesion of monocytes to endothelial cells . 140 The most abundant platelet - derived chemokine , CXCL7 , can be sequentially and pro - teolytically cleaved to form four distinct chemokines – PBP , CTAP - III , b - TG , and NAP - 2 . 134 It is only NAP - 2 , however , that is thought to display signiﬁcant chemotactic activity . 141 Numerous studies demonstrate that CXCL7 induces neutrophil chemotaxis and adhesion to endothelial cells . 134 , 142 Atherosclerosis Atherosclerosis represents an important example of the role of platelet a - granule function in inﬂammation . Atherosclerosis is a chronic inﬂammatory disease characterized by the inﬁltration of immune cells into the subendothelial layers of the arterial wall ( Fig . 5 ) . 127 , 143 Platelets are increasingly thought to play a central role in both the initiation and progression of the disease . 144 Plate - lets inﬂuence atherogenesis by adhering to activated endothelial cells and depositing chemotactic mediators on the endothelial sur - face . Platelets also interact with leukocytes , facilitating their migration into the arterial wall . 121 In multiple mouse models of atherosclerosis ( LDL - receptor (cid:3) / (cid:3) and apolipoprotein E (cid:3) / (cid:3) ) , P - selec - tin deﬁciency is associated with decreased formation of fatty streaks and reduction in plaque lesion size . 145 , 146 Speciﬁc knockout of platelet P - selectin reduces lesion development by 30 % in apoE (cid:3) / (cid:3) mice . A subsequent study demonstrated that platelet , not endothelial , P - selectin is required for neointimal formation following vascular injury . 147 , 148 In apoE (cid:3) / (cid:3) mice , injection of acti - vated wild - type , but not P - selectin deﬁcient , platelets increased monocyte arrest on atherosclerotic lesions and , subsequently , the size of the lesion . 149 P - Selectin has also been shown to be neces - sary for platelet deposition of CCL5 on inﬂamed and atherosclerotic endothelium . 150 CCL5 and other chemokines found in platelet a - granules , including CCL2 , CCL3 , CXCL4 , and CXCL12 , have been detected in atherosclerotic plaques . In mouse models , pharmacological inhi - bition or genetic mutation of these chemokines and / or their receptors decrease the progression of atherosclerosis . 133 , 151 – 155 CXCL4 - deﬁcient , ApoE (cid:3) / (cid:3) mice show reduced lesion size . 154 Disruption of proinﬂammatory interactions between CXCL4 and 182 P . Blair , R . Flaumenhaft / Blood Reviews 23 ( 2009 ) 177 – 189 CCL5 inhibit atherosclerosis in hyperlipidemic mice . 151 Unlike CXCL4 , however , which derives from platelets , many of these chemokines are secreted by multiple cell types . Functional studies directly assessing the contribution of platelet - derived chemokines to atherogenesis have been limited . Bone marrow reconstitution in chimeric mice and platelet - speciﬁc conditional knockouts will help deﬁne the direct contribution of a - granular chemokines to atherogenesis . 121 , 156 Antimicrobial host defense Although it was once thought that platelets promoted infection by facilitating the adhesion of microbes to the vessel wall , it is now understood that platelets play a signiﬁcant role in host defense against pathogenic microorganisms . 157 , 158 Numerous studies have demonstrated that platelets are among the ﬁrst blood cells to rec - ognize endothelium damaged by microbial colonization and to accumulate at sites of infected endovascular lesions . 157 , 159 – 161 Platelets rapidly associate with vegetations in infective endocardi - tis and accrue at sites of suppurative thrombophlebitis . 161 Platelets interact directly with viruses , bacteria , fungi , and protozoa . 162 – 166 Recent studies , for example , have demonstrated that platelets bind to erythrocytes infected with plasmodium and kill the parasite . 166 Platelet a - granules contain proteins with direct microbicidal properties , a group collectively referred to as platelet microbicidal proteins . 121 Many of the chemokines secreted by activated plate - lets – including CXCL4 , thymosin - b 4 , the derivatives of CXCL7 ( PBP , CTAP - III , NAP - 2 ) , and CCL5 ( RANTES ) – are microbici - dal . 167 , 168 Truncation of CTAP - III and NAP - 2 at their C - terminus generates two additional peptides , thrombocidins - 1 and - 2 ( TC - 1 , TC - 2 ) , which are bactericidal in vitro against some strains of Bacil - lus subtilis , Staphylococcus aureus , and fungicidal for Cryptococcus neoformans . 169 In the setting of infective endocarditis , in vitro sus - ceptibility of staphylococcal extracts to thrombocidin - 1 correlated well with clinical severity and prognosis . 170 Another microbicidal protein , thymosin - b 4 , localizes to platelet a - granules . 168 While it is debatable whether the local concentration of these secreted pro - teins are more important for antimicrobial activity or chemoattrac - tion of leukocytes , multiple studies using combined in vitro and in vivo techniques have demonstrated that platelets are clinically relevant to host defense . 170 – 173 a - Granules also contain complement and complement binding proteins , which facilitate the clearance of microorganisms from the circulation . Platelet a - granules secrete complement C3 and complement C4 precursor , which participate in the complement activation cascade . 93 P - Selectin binds C3b , localizing the inﬂamma - tory response to sites of vascular injury . 174 Platelets a - granules also contain regulators of complement activation , such as C1 inhib - itor . 175 Platelet factor H secreted from a - granules regulates C3 con - vertase in the alternative pathway . 176 Despite these suggestive observations , the impact of a - granule deﬁciency on complement activation and regulation is not known . Angiogenesis That platelets support angiogenesis is well - established . 177 , 178 However , the molecular mechanisms of this function are just beginning to be understood . 179 Platelet a - granules contain a vari - ety of both pro - and anti - angiogenic proteins . Growth factors stored in a - granules include vascular endothelium growth factor ( VEGF ) , platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) , ﬁbroblast growth factor ( FGF ) , epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) , hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) , and insulin - like growth factor ( IGF ) . 106 , 180 These angiogenic activators collectively promote vessel wall permeabil - ity and recruitment , growth , and proliferation of endothelial cells and ﬁbroblasts . Although these growth factors are secreted by a variety of inﬂammatory cells , the rapidity with which platelets accumulate at sites of vascular injury makes them a relevant source of mitogenic mediators . For example , VEGF concentrations are elevated threefold during the ﬁrst minutes after plug forma - tion following forearm incision . 181 VEGF also accumulates inside platelet thrombi formed in vivo . 182 Platelet - derived VEGF and FGF - 2 exert trophic effects on cultured endothelial cells . 183 In an ex vivo rat aortic ring model , platelet - derived VEGF , bFGF , and PDGF promote sprouting of new blood vessels . 184 a - Granules con - tain other pro - angiogenic mediators , including angiopoietin , CXCL12 ( SDF - 1 a ) , and matrix metalloproteinases ( MMP - 1 , - 2 , and - 9 ) . Platelet - derived CXCL12 has been reported to induce recruitment of CD34 + progenitor cells to arterial thrombi in vivo and promote differentiation of cultured CD34 + cells to endothelial progenitor cells . 155 , 185 a - Granules also contain established inhibitors of angiogenesis . TSP - 1 , a major constituent of a - granules , acts as a potent inhibitor of endothelial cell proliferation and stimulates endothelial cell apoptosis . 186 In vivo studies demonstrate that TSP - 1 inhibits revas - cularization in a model of hind limb ischemia , while TSP - deﬁcient mice show accelerated revascularization . The pro - angiogenic activ - ity in TSP - deﬁcient mice is directly related to increased platelet secretion of CXCL12 . 186 CXCL4 displays anti - angiogenic properties , likely by preventing VEGF binding to its cellular receptor and by interfering with the mitogenic effects of FGF . 187 , 188 In a rat aortic ring model in which platelet - derived VEGF and FGF induced endo - thelial sprouting , immunoneutralization of CXCL4 in the releasate further ampliﬁed neovascularization . 184 Platelet a - granules contain other anti - angiogenic proteins , including angiostatin , Fig . 5 . Hypothetical model of atherogenesis triggered by platelets . Activated platelets roll along the endothelial monolayer via GPIb a / P - selectin or PSGL - 1 / P - selectin . Thereafter , platelets ﬁrmly adhere to vascular endothelium via b 3 integrins , release proinﬂammatory compounds ( IL - 1 b , CD40L ) , and induce a proatherogenic phenotype of ECs ( chemotaxis , MCP - 1 ; adhesion , ICAM - 1 ) . Subsequently , adherent platelets recruit circulating leukocytes , bind them , and inﬂame them by receptor interactions and paracrine pathways , thereby initiating leukocyte transmigration and foam cell formation . Thus , platelets provide the inﬂammatory basis for plaque formation before physically occluding the vessel by thrombosis upon plaque rupture ( Reprinted with permission from Ref . 127 , Fig . 4 ) . P . Blair , R . Flaumenhaft / Blood Reviews 23 ( 2009 ) 177 – 189 183 endostatin , and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases ( TIMPs - 1 and - 4 ) . Recent studies suggest anti - angiogenic proteins may be packaged in different a - granule subpopulations than pro - angio - genic proteins . 4 There is some evidence that secretion of pro - ver - sus anti - angiogenic stores may be agonist - speciﬁc . 4 , 189 Wound healing Platelets promote wound healing in several in vitro and in vivo models . 180 Although many of these studies and applications in - volve preparations that include platelets , isolated platelet superna - tants enriched in a - granule proteins are sufﬁcient to support wound healing . In vitro studies demonstrate that platelet releasate increases the proliferation and migration of osteogenic cells . 190 Platelet releasate also stimulates proliferation of human tendon cells in culture and promotes signiﬁcant synthesis of VEGF and HGF . 191 Studies in dogs demonstrated that platelet releasate in a collagen sponge promotes periodontal tissue regeneration . 192 Healing of cutaneous wounds is also promoted by platelet relea - sate in diabetic rats . 193 Perhaps the strongest evidence that platelet releasate promotes wound healing is the use of ‘‘platelet - derived wound healing fac - tor” ( PDWHF ) in the treatment of chronic wounds . PDWHF is a FDA - regulated preparation of the supernatant of washed , throm - bin - stimulated platelets . This supernatant is added to microcrys - talline collagen to generate PDWHF . 194 In placebo controlled studies , PDWHF accelerated wound healing in the settings of chronic diabetic foot ulcers . 195 , 196 PDWHF has also been used to treat leg ulcers in the setting of b - thalassemia intermedia . 197 The mechanism by which PDWHF promotes healing remains largely unstudied ; however , upregulation of a V b 3 in capillaries surround - ing treated , but not untreated wounds , has been observed . 198 Not all studies using PDWHF have demonstrated a positive effect on wound healing compared to placebo . 199 Differences in results may be secondary to differences in platelet concentrations used for preparations or different patient populations . Malignancy Platelets have been implicated in tumor stability , growth , and metastasis . Acute thrombocytopenia results in rapid tumor desta - bilization and intratumor hemorrhage . 200 This observation implies an ongoing requirement for platelets in maintaining tumor stabil - ity . Infusion of resting , but not degranulated , platelets prevents thrombocytopenia - induced tumor bleeding ( Fig . 6 ) , suggesting that platelet granules contribute to tumor stability . 200 Angiopoie - tin - 1 may enhance intratumor stability in this model , 200 however , the speciﬁc a - granule constituents that stabilize tumors remain to be identiﬁed . Primary tumors are highly dependent on the development of an adequate blood supply . As previously discussed , platelets contain both pro - and anti - angiogenic factors and support angiogenesis . In animals bearing malignant tumors , platelets selectively accumu - late angiogenesis regulators . 201 In a canine model of cutaneous mast cell tumor , VEGF concentrations in activated platelet - rich plasma correlate well with microvascular density , mast cell den - sity , and malignancy grading . 202 Cancer patients have increased levels of serum VEGF and angiopoietin - 1 , which decrease after tu - mor resection . 203 – 206 Platelet a - granules from cancer patients con - tain elevated levels of VEGF and angiopoietin - 1 207 , 205 , 208 and platelets constitute a signiﬁcant source of circulating VEGF in can - cer patients . 209 Early evidence that platelets function in cancer progression de - rive from studies showing decreases in lung metastases following induction of thrombocytopenia . 210 – 213 Platelet infusion reverses the effect on tumor metastasis . Adhesion of platelets to tumor cells is thought to facilitate tumor metastasis . Potential mechanisms by which platelet adhesion may facilitate tumor metastasis include Fig . 6 . Degranulated platelets are unable to prevent thrombocytopenia - induced tumor bleeding . At day 8 after tumor cell implantation , mice were injected with either the control IgG ( control ) or the platelet - depleting IgG ( depleted ) . A subset of mice was transfused 30 min before the induction of thrombocytopenia with tyrode buffer ( no transfusion ) or 7 (cid:4) 10 8 of either resting or activated platelets and s . c . Lewis lung carcinoma cells were photographed 18 h later . Bar , 5 mm ( Adapted with permission from Ref . 200 , Fig . 6 ) . 184 P . Blair , R . Flaumenhaft / Blood Reviews 23 ( 2009 ) 177 – 189 cloaking tumor cells from immune surveillance and assisting their egress from the circulation . 214 , 215 Adhesive proteins found in a - granules mediate direct interactions between tumors and platelets . P - Selectin can mediate initial interactions by binding to mucins on the tumor surface . 216 Global deﬁciency of P - selectin is associated with reduced tumor growth and metastasis , but speciﬁc knockout of platelet P - selectin has not been examined . 217 Vitronectin and ﬁbronectin in platelet releasate enhance the adhesion of tumor cells to cultured endothelial cells under shear in a a V b 3 - dependent manner . 218 In addition , platelet releasate can induce expression of tumor - proteases that enhance invasiveness . 219 Future studies using platelet - speciﬁc knockouts of a - granule - derived mediators will enhance our understanding of the role of the platelet in angi - ogenesis and tumor metastasis . Perspective The diversity of physiologic functions inﬂuenced by platelets – coagulation , inﬂammation , microbial host defense , wound healing , and malignancy – raises the questionhow the platelet can modulate so many varied processes . Proteomic data cataloging individual a - granule proteins demonstrate that the a - granule possesses a wide array of bioactive proteins , implying participation of a - granule pro - teins in varied physiologic functions . The vast majority of these pro - teins , however , arealsofoundineitherplasmaand / orothervascular cells , leaving the contribution of the a - granule source uncertain . Assessment of the a - granule pool of a speciﬁc protein in a given physiologicfunctionwillrequirebonemarrowreconstitutioninchi - meric mice and / or platelet - speciﬁc conditional knockouts . Evaluation of a - granule contents also demonstrates that a - granules contain many proteins with opposing activities : pro - and anticoagulants , proteases and their inhibitors , pro - and anti - angiogenic proteins . To understand the role of a - granules in vari - ous physiologic functions , a more detailed understanding of how the activity of these contents is regulated is required . Do molar concentrations of various components dictate which activity is dominant ? Is the activity of releasate regulated in a kinetic man - ner , with rapid onset of pro - coagulant or pro - angiogenic activities that are subsequently controlled by lagging inhibitory activities ? Is the activity of these components regulated by differential release of heterogenous a - granule subpopulations ? An appreciation of the role of a - granule release in multiple physiologic functions raises the question of whether this activity can be controlled for therapeutic beneﬁt . The observation that the biosynthetic pathway to dense granule and a - granule forma - tion diverge at a relatively proximal step in granule formation sug - gests that a - granule formation could be speciﬁcally inhibited . Therapeutics that render platelets selectively deﬁcient in either dense or a - granules could be useful in some clinical settings . Understanding the differential release of a - granules versus dense granules and , perhaps , differential release of distinct a - granule subpopulations may also inform strategies of controlling a - granule participation in disease processes . A more detailed understanding of the role of a - granules in disease states will be required for opti - mally targeting such strategies to speciﬁc disease entities . Conﬂict of interest statement The authors have no conﬂicts of interest to declare . Acknowledgements This work was supported by NIH HL87203 ( R . F . ) and T32 HL07917 ( P . B . ) and an Established Investigator Award from the American Heart Association ( R . F . ) . References 1 . Frojmovic MM , Milton JG . Human platelet size , shape , and related functions in health and disease . Physiol Rev 1982 ; 62 : 185 – 261 . 2 . White JG , Clawson CC . The surface - connected canalicular system of blood platelets – a fenestrated membrane system . Am J Pathol 1980 ; 101 : 353 – 64 . 3 . Harrison P , Cramer EM . Platelet alpha - granules . Blood Rev 1993 ; 7 : 52 – 62 . 4 . Italiano Jr JE , Richardson JL , Patel - Hett S , et al . Angiogenesis is regulated by a novel mechanism : pro - and antiangiogenic proteins are organized into separate platelet alpha granules and differentially released . Blood 2008 ; 111 : 1227 – 33 . 5 . Sehgal S , Storrie B . Evidence that differential packaging of the major platelet granule proteins von Willebrand factor and ﬁbrinogen can support their differential release . J Thromb Haemost 2007 ; 5 : 2009 – 16 . 6 . Cramer EM , Harrison P , Savidge GF , et al . Uncoordinated expression of alpha - granule proteins in human megakaryocytes . Prog Clin Biol Res 1990 ; 356 : 131 – 42 . 7 . Hegyi E , Heilbrun LK , Nakeff A . Immunogold probing of platelet factor 4 in different ploidy classes of rat megakaryocytes sorted by ﬂow cytometry . Exp Hematol 1990 ; 18 : 789 – 93 . 8 . Moebius J , Zahedi RP , Lewandrowski U , Berger C , Walter U , Sickmann A . The human platelet membrane proteome reveals several new potential membrane proteins . Mol Cell Proteom 2005 ; 4 : 1754 – 61 . 9 . Li W , Rusiniak ME , Chintala S , Gautam R , Novak EK , Swank RT . Murine Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome genes : regulators of lysosome - related organelles . Bioessays 2004 ; 26 : 616 – 28 . 10 . King SM , Reed GL . Development of platelet secretory granules . Semin Cell Dev Biol 2002 ; 13 : 293 – 302 . 11 . Piper RC , Katzmann DJ . Biogenesis and function of multivesicular bodies . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2007 ; 23 : 519 – 47 . 12 . Woodman PG , Futter CE . Multivesicular bodies : co - ordinated progression to maturity . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2008 ; 20 : 408 – 14 . 13 . Heijnen HF , Debili N , Vainchencker W , Breton - Gorius J , Geuze HJ , Sixma JJ . Multivesicular bodies are an intermediate stage in the formation of platelet alpha - granules . Blood 1998 ; 91 : 2313 – 25 . 14 . Yousseﬁan T , Cramer EM . Megakaryocyte dense granule components are sorted in multivesicular bodies . Blood 2000 ; 95 : 4004 – 7 . 15 . Heijnen HF , Schiel AE , Fijnheer R , Geuze HJ , Sixma JJ . Activated platelets release two types of membrane vesicles : microvesicles by surface shedding and exosomes derived from exocytosis of multivesicular bodies and alpha - granules . Blood 1999 ; 94 : 3791 – 9 . 16 . Zucker - Franklin D . Endocytosis by human platelets : metabolic and freeze - fracture studies . J Cell Biol 1981 ; 91 : 706 – 15 . 17 . Behnke O . Coated pits and vesicles transfer plasma components to platelet granules . Thromb Haemost 1989 ; 62 : 718 – 22 . 18 . Behnke O . Degrading and non - degrading pathways in ﬂuid - phase ( non - adsorptive ) endocytosis in human blood platelets . J Submicrosc Cytol Pathol 1992 ; 24 : 169 – 78 . 19 . Stenberg PE , Pestina TI , Barrie RJ , Jackson CW . The Src family kinases , Fgr , Fyn , Lck , and Lyn , colocalize with coated membranes in platelets . Blood 1997 ; 89 : 2384 – 93 . 20 . Pestina TI , Stenberg PE , Druker BJ , et al . Identiﬁcation of the Src family kinases , Lck and Fgr in platelets . Their tyrosine phosphorylation status and subcellular distribution compared with other Src family members . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 1997 ; 17 : 3278 – 85 . 21 . Panigada M , Porcellini S , Barbier E , et al . Constitutive endocytosis and degradation of the pre - T cell receptor . J Exp Med 2002 ; 195 : 1585 – 97 . 22 . Heilmann E , Hynes LA , Friese P , George IN , Burstein SA , Dale GL . Dog platelets accumulate intracellular ﬁbrinogen as they age . J Cell Physiol 1994 ; 161 : 23 – 30 . 23 . Cramer EM , Debili N , Martin JF , et al . Uncoordinated expression of ﬁbrinogen compared with thrombospondin and von Willebrand factor in maturing human megakaryocytes . Blood 1989 ; 73 : 1123 – 9 . 24 . Koedam JA , Cramer EM , Briend E , Furie B , Furie BC , Wagner DD . P - Selectin , a granule membrane protein of platelets and endothelial cells , follows the regulated secretory pathway in AtT - 20 cells . J Cell Biol 1992 ; 116 : 617 – 25 . 25 . Daugherty BL , Straley KS , Sanders JM , et al . AP - 3 adaptor functions in targeting P - selectin to secretory granules in endothelial cells . Trafﬁc 2001 ; 2 : 406 – 13 . 26 . Disdier M , Morrissey JH , Fugate RD , Bainton DF , McEver RP . Cytoplasmic domain of P - selectin ( CD62 ) contains the signal for sorting into the regulated secretory pathway . Mol Biol Cell 1992 ; 3 : 309 – 21 . 27 . GreenSA , Setiadi H , McEver RP , Kelly RB . Thecytoplasmicdomain of P - selectin contains a sorting determinant that mediates rapid degradation in lysosomes . J Cell Biol 1994 ; 124 : 435 – 48 . 28 . Hartwell DW , Mayadas TN , Berger G , et al . Role of P - selectin cytoplasmic domain in granular targeting in vivo and in early inﬂammatory responses . J Cell Biol 1998 ; 143 : 1129 – 41 . 29 . Briquet - Laugier V , Lavenu - Bombled C , Schmitt A , et al . Probing platelet factor 4 alpha - granule targeting . J Thromb Haemost 2004 ; 2 : 2231 – 40 . 30 . El Golli N , Issertial O , Rosa JP , Briquet - Laugier V . Evidence for a granule targeting sequence within platelet factor 4 . J Biol Chem 2005 ; 280 : 30329 – 35 . 31 . Woulfe DS , Lilliendahl JK , August S , et al . Serglycin proteoglycan deletion induces defects in platelet aggregation and thrombus formation in mice . Blood 2008 ; 111 : 3458 – 67 . 32 . Tooze SA , Martens GJ , Huttner WB . Secretory granule biogenesis : rafting to the SNARE . Trends Cell Biol 2001 ; 11 : 116 – 22 . P . Blair , R . Flaumenhaft / Blood Reviews 23 ( 2009 ) 177 – 189 185 33 . Hayward CP , Song Z , Zheng S , et al . Multimerin processing by cells with and without pathways for regulated protein secretion . Blood 1999 ; 94 : 1337 – 47 . 34 . Cramer EM , Meyer D , le Menn R , Breton - Gorius J . Eccentric localization of von Willebrand factor in aninternal structure of platelet alpha - granule resembling that of Weibel - Palade bodies . Blood 1985 ; 66 : 710 – 3 . 35 . Huang RH , Wang Y , Roth R , et al . Assembly of Weibel - Palade body - like tubules from N - terminal domains of von Willebrand factor . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008 ; 105 : 482 – 7 . 36 . Blagoveshchenskaya AD , Hannah MJ , Allen S , Cutler DF . Selective and signal - dependent recruitment of membrane proteins to secretory granules formed by heterologously expressed von Willebrand factor . Mol Biol Cell 2002 ; 13 : 1582 – 93 . 37 . Wagner DD , Saffaripour S , Bonfanti R , et al . Induction of speciﬁc storage organelles by von Willebrand factor propolypeptide . Cell 1991 ; 64 : 403 – 13 . 38 . Handagama P , Scarborough RM , Shuman MA , Bainton DF . Endocytosis of ﬁbrinogen into megakaryocyte and platelet alpha - granules is mediated by alpha IIb beta 3 ( glycoprotein IIb – IIIa ) . Blood 1993 ; 82 : 135 – 8 . 39 . Handagama P , Bainton DF , Jacques Y , Conn MT , Lazarus RA , Shuman MA . Kistrin , an integrin antagonist , blocks endocytosis of ﬁbrinogen into guinea pig megakaryocyte and platelet alpha - granules . J Clin Invest 1993 ; 91 : 193 – 200 . 40 . Handagama PJ , Amrani DL , Shuman MA . Endocytosis of ﬁbrinogen into hamster megakaryocyte alpha granules is dependent on a dimeric gamma A conﬁguration . Blood 1995 ; 85 : 1790 – 5 . 41 . Handagama PJ , Shuman MA , Bainton DF . Incorporation of intravenously injected albumin , immunoglobulin G , and ﬁbrinogen in guinea pig megakaryocyte granules . J Clin Invest 1989 ; 84 : 73 – 82 . 42 . Handagama PJ , George JN , Shuman MA , McEver RP , Bainton DF . Incorporation of a circulating protein into megakaryocyte and platelet granules . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987 ; 84 : 861 – 5 . 43 . George JN , Saucerman S . Platelet IgG , IgA , IgM , and albumin : correlation of platelet and plasma concentrationsinnormalsubjects and inpatientswithITP or dysproteinemia . Blood 1988 ; 72 : 362 – 5 . 44 . Bouchard BA , Meisler NT , Nesheim ME , Liu CX , Strickland DK , Tracy PB . A unique function for LRP - 1 : a component of a two - receptor system mediating speciﬁc endocytosis of plasma - derived factor V by megakaryocytes . J Thromb Haemost 2008 ; 6 : 638 – 44 . 45 . Bouchard BA , Williams JL , Meisler NT , Long MW , Tracy PB . Endocytosis of plasma - derived factor V by megakaryocytes occurs via a clathrin - dependent , speciﬁc membrane binding event . J Thromb Haemost 2005 ; 3 : 541 – 51 . 46 . Tavassoli M . Fusion – ﬁssion reorganization of membrane : a developing membrane model for thrombocytogenesis in megakaryocytes . Blood Cells 1979 ; 5 : 89 – 99 . 47 . Italiano Jr JE , Lecine P , Shivdasani RA , Hartwig JH . Blood platelets are assembled principally at the ends of proplatelet processes produced by differentiated megakaryocytes . J Cell Biol 1999 ; 147 : 1299 – 312 . 48 . Patel SR , Hartwig JH , Italiano Jr JE . The biogenesis of platelets from megakaryocyte proplatelets . J Clin Invest 2005 ; 115 : 3348 – 54 . 49 . Handagama P , Jain NC , Kono CS , Feldman BF . Scanning electron microscopic studies of megakaryocytes and platelet formation in the dog and rat . Am J Vet Res 1986 ; 47 : 2454 – 60 . 50 . Junt T , Schulze H , Chen Z , et al . Dynamic visualization of thrombopoiesis within bone marrow . Science 2007 ; 317 : 1767 – 70 . 51 . RichardsonJL , Shivdasani RA , Boers C , HartwigJH , Italiano JrJE . Mechanisms of organelle transport and capture along proplatelets during platelet production . Blood 2005 ; 106 : 4066 – 75 . 52 . Nurden AT , Nurden P . The gray platelet syndrome : clinical spectrum of the disease . Blood Rev 2007 ; 21 : 21 – 36 . 53 . White JG . Medich giant platelet disorder : a unique alpha granule deﬁciency I . Structural abnormalities . Platelets 2004 ; 15 : 345 – 53 . 54 . White JG , Key NS , King RA , Vercellotti GM . The White platelet syndrome : a new autosomal dominant platelet disorder . Platelets 2004 ; 15 : 173 – 84 . 55 . Kimura Y , Hart A , Hirashima M , et al . Zinc ﬁnger protein , Hzf , is required for megakaryocyte development and hemostasis . J Exp Med 2002 ; 195 : 941 – 52 . 56 . Benit L , Cramer EM , Masse JM , Dusanter - Fourt I , Favier R . Molecular study of the hematopoietic zinc ﬁnger gene in three unrelated families with gray platelet syndrome . J Thromb Haemost 2005 ; 3 : 2077 – 80 . 57 . Balduini CL , Pecci A , Loffredo G , et al . Effects of the R216Q mutation of GATA - 1 on erythropoiesis and megakaryocytopoiesis . Thromb Haemost 2004 ; 91 : 129 – 40 . 58 . Tubman VN , Levine JE , Campagna DR , et al . X - Linked gray platelet syndrome due to a GATA1 Arg216Gln mutation . Blood 2007 ; 109 : 3297 – 9 . 59 . Lo B , Li L , Gissen P , et al . Requirement of VPS33B , a member of the Sec1 / Munc18 protein family , in megakaryocyte and platelet alpha - granule biogenesis . Blood 2005 ; 106 : 4159 – 66 . 60 . Gissen P , Johnson CA , Morgan NV , et al . Mutations in VPS33B , encoding a regulator of SNARE - dependent membrane fusion , cause arthrogryposis – renal dysfunction – cholestasis ( ARC ) syndrome . Nat Genet 2004 ; 36 : 400 – 4 . 61 . Detter JC , Zhang Q , Mules EH , et al . Rab geranylgeranyl transferase alpha mutation in the gunmetal mouse reduces Rab prenylation and platelet synthesis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000 ; 97 : 4144 – 9 . 62 . Swank RT , Jiang SY , Reddington M , et al . Inherited abnormalities in platelet organelles and platelet formation and associated altered expression of low molecular weight guanosine triphosphate - binding proteins in the mouse pigment mutant gunmetal . Blood 1993 ; 81 : 2626 – 35 . 63 . Tiwari S , Italiano Jr JE , Barral DC , et al . A role for Rab27b in NF - E2 - dependent pathways of platelet formation . Blood 2003 ; 102 : 3970 – 9 . 64 . TheBarral DC , Ramalho JS , Anders R , et al . Functional redundancy of Rab27 proteins and the pathogenesis of Griscelli syndrome . J Clin Invest 2002 ; 110 : 247 – 57 . 65 . Fukuda M . Versatile role of Rab27 in membrane trafﬁcking : focus on the Rab27 effector families . J Biochem 2005 ; 137 : 9 – 16 . 66 . Karniguian A , Zahraoui A , Tavitian A . Identiﬁcation of small GTP - binding rab proteins in human platelets : thrombin - induced phosphorylation of rab3B , rab6 , and rab8 proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993 ; 90 : 7647 – 51 . 67 . Kruit JK , Drayer AL , Bloks VW , et al . Plant sterols cause macrothrombocytopenia in a mouse model of sitosterolemia . J Biol Chem 2008 ; 283 : 6281 – 7 . 68 . Rees DC , Iolascon A , Carella M , et al . Stomatocytic haemolysis and macrothrombocytopenia ( Mediterranean stomatocytosis / macrothrombo - cytopenia ) is the haematological presentation of phytosterolaemia . Br J Haematol 2005 ; 130 : 297 – 309 . 69 . Flaumenhaft R . Molecular basis of platelet granule secretion . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2003 ; 23 : 1152 – 60 . 70 . Sudhof TC , Rothman JE . Membrane fusion : grappling with SNARE and SM proteins . Science 2009 ; 323 : 474 – 7 . 71 . Lemons PP , Chen D , Bernstein AM , Bennett MK , Whiteheart SW . Regulated secretion in platelets : identiﬁcation of elements of the platelet exocytosis machinery . Blood 1997 ; 90 : 1490 – 500 . 72 . Flaumenhaft R , Croce K , Chen E , Furie B , Furie BC . Proteins of the exocytotic core complex mediate platelet alpha - granule secretion . Roles of vesicle - associated membrane protein , SNAP - 23 , and syntaxin 4 . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 2492 – 501 . 73 . Bernstein AM , Whiteheart SW . Identiﬁcation of a cellubrevin / vesicle associated membrane protein 3 homologue in human platelets . Blood 1999 ; 93 : 571 – 9 . 74 . Polgar J , ChungSH , Reed GL . Vesicle - associated membrane protein 3 ( VAMP - 3 ) and VAMP - 8 are present in human platelets and are required for granule secretion . Blood 2002 ; 100 : 1081 – 3 . 75 . Polgar J , Lane WS , Chung SH , Houng AK , Reed GL . Phosphorylation of SNAP - 23 in activated human platelets . J Biol Chem 2003 ; 278 : 44369 – 76 . 76 . Ren Q , Barber HK , Crawford GL , et al . Endobrevin / VAMP - 8 is the primary v - SNARE for the platelet release reaction . Mol Biol Cell 2007 ; 18 : 24 – 33 . 77 . Chen D , Bernstein AM , Lemons PP , Whiteheart SW . Molecular mechanisms of platelet exocytosis : role of SNAP - 23 and syntaxin 2 in dense core granule release . Blood 2000 ; 95 ( Feb 1 ) : 921 – 9 . 78 . Schraw TD , Rutledge TW , Crawford GL , et al . Granule stores from cellubrevin / VAMP - 3 null mouse platelets exhibit normal stimulus - induced release . Blood 2003 ; 8 : 8 . 79 . Lemons PP , Chen D , Whiteheart SW . Molecular mechanisms of platelet exocytosis : requirements for alpha - granule release . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2000 ; 267 : 875 – 80 . 80 . Lai KC , Flaumenhaft R . SNARE protein degradation upon platelet activation : calpain cleaves SNAP - 23 . J Cell Physiol 2003 ; 194 : 206 – 14 . 81 . Feng D , Crane K , Rozenvayn N , Dvorak AM , Flaumenhaft R . Subcellular distribution of 3 functional SNARE proteins : Human cellubrevin , SNAP - 23 , and Syntaxin 2 . Blood 2002 ; 99 : 4006 – 14 . 82 . Houng A , Polgar J , Reed GL . Munc18 - syntaxin complexes and exocytosis in human platelets . J Biol Chem 2003 ; 278 : 19627 – 33 . 83 . Shirakawa R , Higashi T , Tabuchi A , et al . Munc13 - 4 is a GTP - Rab27 - binding protein regulating dense core granule secretion in platelets . J Biol Chem 2004 ; 279 : 10730 – 7 . 84 . Dent J , Kato K , Peng XR , et al . A prototypic platelet septin and its participation in secretion . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002 ; 99 : 3064 – 9 . 85 . Whiteheart SW , Schraw T , Matveeva EA . N - Ethylmaleimide sensitive factor ( NSF ) structure and function . Int Rev Cytol 2001 ; 207 : 71 – 112 . 86 . Polgar J , Reed GL . A critical role for N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein ( NSF ) in platelet granule secretion . Blood 1999 ; 94 : 1313 – 8 . 87 . Morrell CN , Matsushita K , Chiles K , et al . Regulation of platelet granule exocytosis by S - nitrosylation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005 ; 102 : 3782 – 7 . 88 . Clary DO , Griff IC , Rothman JE . SNAPs , a family of NSF attachment proteins involved in intracellular membrane fusion in animals and yeast . Cell 1990 ; 61 : 709 – 21 . 89 . Fitzgerald ML , Reed GL . Rab6 is phosphorylated in thrombin - activated platelets by a protein kinase C - dependent mechanism : effects on GTP / GDP binding and cellular distribution . Biochem J 1999 ; 342 : 353 – 60 . 90 . Shirakawa R , Yoshioka A , Horiuchi H , Nishioka H , Tabuchi A , Kita T . Small GTPase rab4 regulates Ca2 + - induced alpha - granule secretion inplatelets . J Biol Chem 2000 ; 275 : 33844 – 9 . 91 . Zerial M , McBride H . Rab proteins as membrane organizers . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2001 ; 2 : 107 – 17 . 92 . Berger G , Masse JM , Cramer EM . Alpha - granule membrane mirrors the platelet plasma membrane and contains the glycoproteins Ib , IX , and V . Blood 1996 ; 87 : 1385 – 95 . 93 . Maynard DM , Heijnen HF , Horne MK , White JG , Gahl WA . Proteomic analysis of platelet alpha - granules using mass spectrometry . J Thromb Haemost 2007 ; 5 : 1945 – 55 . 94 . Niiya K , Hodson E , Bader R , et al . Increased surface expression of the membrane glycoprotein IIb / IIIa complex induced by platelet activation . Relationship to the binding of ﬁbrinogen and platelet aggregation . Blood 1987 ; 70 : 475 – 83 . 186 P . Blair , R . Flaumenhaft / Blood Reviews 23 ( 2009 ) 177 – 189 95 . Berger G , Caen JP , Berndt MC , Cramer EM . Ultrastructural demonstration of CD36 in the alpha - granule membrane of human platelets and megakaryocytes . Blood 1993 ; 82 : 3034 – 44 . 96 . Nurden P , Jandrot - Perrus M , Combrie R , et al . Severe deﬁciency of glycoprotein VI in a patient with gray platelet syndrome . Blood 2004 ; 104 : 107 – 14 . 97 . Suzuki H , Murasaki K , Kodama K , Takayama H . Intracellular localization of glycoprotein VI in human platelets and its surface expression upon activation . Br J Haematol 2003 ; 121 : 904 – 12 . 98 . Piersma SR , Broxterman HJ , Kapci M , et al . Proteomics of the TRAP - induced platelet releasate . J Proteom . 99 . Hernandez - Ruiz L , Valverde F , Jimenez - Nunez MD , et al . Organellar proteomics of human platelet dense granules reveals that 14 – 3 - 3zeta is a granule protein related to atherosclerosis . J Proteom Res 2007 ; 6 : 4449 – 57 . 100 . Coppinger JA , Cagney G , Toomey S , et al . Characterization of the proteins released from activated platelets leads to localization of novel platelet proteins in human atherosclerotic lesions . Blood 2004 ; 103 : 2096 – 104 . 101 . Coppinger JA , O’Connor R , Wynne K , et al . Moderation of the platelet releasate response by aspirin . Blood 2007 ; 109 : 4786 – 92 . 102 . Cramer EM , Breton - Gorius J , Beesley JE , Martin JF . Ultrastructural demonstration of tubular inclusions coinciding with von Willebrand factor in pig megakaryocytes . Blood 1988 ; 71 : 1533 – 8 . 103 . Gralnick HR , Williams SB , McKeown LP , Krizek DM , Shafer BC , Rick ME . Platelet von Willebrand factor : comparison with plasma von Willebrand factor . Thromb Res 1985 ; 38 : 623 – 33 . 104 . Bowie EJ , Solberg Jr LA , Fass DN , et al . Transplantation of normal bone marrow into a pig with severe von Willebrand’s disease . J Clin Invest 1986 ; 78 : 26 – 30 . 105 . De Meyer SF , Vandeputte N , Pareyn I , et al . Restoration of plasma von Willebrand factor deﬁciency is sufﬁcient to correct thrombus formation after gene therapy for severe von Willebrand disease . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol . 106 . Rendu F , Brohard - Bohn B . Theplatelet release reaction : granules’ constituents , secretion and functions . Platelets 2001 ; 12 : 261 – 73 . 107 . Hayward CP , Furmaniak - Kazmierczak E , Cieutat AM , et al . Factor V is complexed with multimerin in resting platelet lysates and colocalizes with multimerin in platelet alpha - granules . J Biol Chem 1995 ; 270 : 19217 – 24 . 108 . Jeimy SB , Fuller N , Tasneem S , et al . Multimerin 1 binds factor V and activated factor V with high afﬁnity and inhibits thrombin generation . Thromb Haemost 2008 ; 100 : 1058 – 67 . 109 . Kiesselbach TH , Wagner RH . Demonstration of factor XIII in human megakaryocytes by a ﬂuorescent antibody technique . Ann NY Acad Sci 1972 ; 202 : 318 – 28 . 110 . Monkovic DD , Tracy PB . Functional characterization of human platelet - released factor V and its activation by factor Xa and thrombin . J Biol Chem 1990 ; 265 : 17132 – 40 . 111 . Gould WR , Silveira JR , Tracy PB . Unique in vivo modiﬁcations of coagulation factor V produce a physically and functionally distinct platelet - derived cofactor : characterization of puriﬁed platelet - derived factor V / Va . J Biol Chem 2004 ; 279 : 2383 – 93 . 112 . Hu CJ , Baglia FA , Mills DC , Konkle BA , Walsh PN . Tissue - speciﬁc expression of functional platelet factor XI is independent of plasma factor XI expression . Blood 1998 ; 91 : 3800 – 7 . 113 . Veljkovic DK , Rivard GE , Diamandis M , Blavignac J , Cramer - Borde EM , Hayward CP . Increased expression of urokinase plasminogen activator in Quebec platelet disorder is linked to megakaryocyte differentiation . Blood 2009 ; 113 : 1535 – 42 . 114 . Hayward CP , Cramer EM , Kane WH , et al . Studies of a second family with the Quebec platelet disorder : evidence that the degradation of the alpha - granule membrane and its soluble contents are not secondary to a defect in targeting proteins to alpha - granules . Blood 1997 ; 89 : 1243 – 53 . 115 . Novotny WF , Girard TJ , Miletich JP , Broze Jr GJ . Platelets secrete a coagulation inhibitor functionally and antigenically similar to the lipoprotein associated coagulation inhibitor . Blood 1988 ; 72 : 2020 – 5 . 116 . Schwarz HP , Heeb MJ , Wencel - Drake JD , Grifﬁn JH . Identiﬁcation and quantitation of protein S in human platelets . Blood 1985 ; 66 : 1452 – 5 . 117 . Van Nostrand WE , Schmaier AH , Farrow JS , Cunningham DD . Protease nexin - II ( amyloid beta - protein precursor ) : a platelet alpha - granule protein . Science 1990 ; 248 : 745 – 8 . 118 . Xu F , Previti ML , Van Nostrand WE . Increased severity of hemorrhage in transgenic mice expressing cerebral protease nexin - 2 / amyloid beta - protein precursor . Stroke 2007 ; 38 : 2598 – 601 . 119 . May AE , Seizer P , Gawaz M . Platelets : inﬂammatory ﬁrebugs of vascular walls . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2008 ; 28 : s5 – s10 . 120 . Bombeli T , Schwartz BR , Harlan JM . Adhesion of activated platelets to endothelial cells : evidence for a GPIIbIIIa - dependent bridging mechanism and novel roles for endothelial intercellular adhesion molecule 1 ( ICAM - 1 ) , alphavbeta3 integrin , and GPIbalpha . J Exp Med 1998 ; 187 : 329 – 39 . 121 . von Hundelshausen P , Weber C . Platelets as immune cells : bridging inﬂammation and cardiovascular disease . Circ Res 2007 ; 100 : 27 – 40 . 122 . Larsen E , Celi A , Gilbert GE , et al . PADGEM protein : a receptor that mediates the interaction of activated platelets with neutrophils and monocytes . Cell 1989 ; 59 : 305 – 12 . 123 . Diacovo TG , Puri KD , Warnock RA , Springer TA , von Andrian UH . Platelet - mediated lymphocyte delivery to high endothelial venules . Science 1996 ; 273 : 252 – 5 . 124 . Frenette PS , Johnson RC , Hynes RO , Wagner DD . Platelets roll on stimulated endothelium in vivo : an interaction mediated by endothelial P - selectin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995 ; 92 : 7450 – 4 . 125 . Massberg S , Enders G , Leiderer R , et al . Platelet - endothelial cell interactions during ischemia / reperfusion : the role of P - selectin . Blood 1998 ; 92 : 507 – 15 . 126 . Romo GM , Dong JF , Schade AJ , et al . The glycoprotein Ib - IX - V complex is a platelet counterreceptor for P - selectin . J Exp Med 1999 ; 190 : 803 – 14 . 127 . Gawaz M , Langer H , May AE . Platelets in inﬂammation and atherogenesis . J Clin Invest 2005 ; 115 : 3378 – 84 . 128 . Braun OO , Slotta JE , Menger MD , Erlinge D , Thorlacius H . Primary and secondary capture of platelets onto inﬂamed femoral artery endothelium is dependent on P - selectin and PSGL - 1 . Eur J Pharmacol 2008 ; 592 : 128 – 32 . 129 . Ott I , Neumann FJ , Gawaz M , Schmitt M , Schomig A . Increased neutrophil – platelet adhesion in patients with unstable angina . Circulation 1996 ; 94 : 1239 – 46 . 130 . Diacovo TG , Roth SJ , Buccola JM , Bainton DF , Springer TA . Neutrophil rolling , arrest , and transmigration across activated , surface - adherent platelets via sequential action of P - selectin and the beta 2 - integrin CD11b / CD18 . Blood 1996 ; 88 : 146 – 57 . 131 . Tabuchi A , Kuebler WM . Endothelium – platelet interactions in inﬂammatory lung disease . Vasc Pharmacol 2008 ; 49 : 141 – 50 . 132 . Zarbock A , Singbartl K , Ley K . Complete reversal of acid - induced acute lung injury by blocking of platelet – neutrophil aggregation . J Clin Invest 2006 ; 116 : 3211 – 9 . 133 . Gleissner CA , von Hundelshausen P , Ley K . Platelet chemokines in vascular disease . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2008 ; 28 : 1920 – 7 . 134 . Brandt E , Petersen F , Ludwig A , Ehlert JE , Bock L , Flad HD . The beta - thromboglobulins and platelet factor 4 : blood platelet - derived CXC chemokines with divergent roles in early neutrophil regulation . J Leukocyte Biol 2000 ; 67 : 471 – 8 . 135 . Slungaard A . Platelet factor 4 : a chemokine enigma . Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2005 ; 37 : 1162 – 7 . 136 . Zucker MB , Katz IR . Platelet factor 4 : production , structure , and physiologic and immunologic action . Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1991 ; 198 : 693 – 702 . 137 . Kasper B , Brandt E , Bulfone - Paus S , Petersen F . Platelet factor 4 ( PF - 4 ) - induced neutrophil adhesion is controlled by src - kinases , whereas PF - 4 - mediated exocytosis requires the additional activation of p38 MAP kinase and phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase . Blood 2004 ; 103 : 1602 – 10 . 138 . Kasper B , Brandt E , Brandau S , Petersen F . Platelet factor 4 ( CXC chemokine ligand 4 ) differentially regulates respiratory burst , survival , and cytokine expression of human monocytes by using distinct signaling pathways . J Immunol 2007 ; 179 : 2584 – 91 . 139 . Scheuerer B , Ernst M , Durrbaum - Landmann I , et al . The CXC - chemokine platelet factor 4 promotes monocyte survival and induces monocyte differentiation into macrophages . Blood 2000 ; 95 : 1158 – 66 . 140 . von Hundelshausen P , Koenen RR , Sack M , et al . Heterophilic interactions of platelet factor 4 and RANTES promote monocyte arrest on endothelium . Blood 2005 ; 105 : 924 – 30 . 141 . Walz A , Dewald B , von Tscharner V , Baggiolini M . Effects of the neutrophil - activating peptide NAP - 2 , platelet basic protein , connective tissue - activating peptide III and platelet factor 4 on human neutrophils . J Exp Med 1989 ; 170 : 1745 – 50 . 142 . Schenk BI , Petersen F , Flad HD , Brandt E . Platelet - derived chemokines CXC chemokine ligand ( CXCL ) 7 , connective tissue - activating peptide III , and CXCL4 differentially affect and cross - regulate neutrophil adhesion and transendothelial migration . J Immunol 2002 ; 169 : 2602 – 10 . 143 . Libby P . Atherosclerosis : disease biology affecting the coronary vasculature . Am J Cardiol 2006 ; 98 : 3Q – 9Q . 144 . Croce K , Libby P . Intertwining of thrombosis and inﬂammation in atherosclerosis . Curr Opin Hematol 2007 ; 14 : 55 – 61 . 145 . Collins RG , Velji R , Guevara NV , Hicks MJ , Chan L , Beaudet AL . P - Selectin or intercellular adhesion molecule ( ICAM ) - 1 deﬁciency substantially protects against atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E - deﬁcient mice . J Exp Med 2000 ; 191 : 189 – 94 . 146 . Dong ZM , Brown AA , Wagner DD . Prominent role of P - selectin in the development of advanced atherosclerosis in ApoE - deﬁcient mice . Circulation 2000 ; 101 : 2290 – 5 . 147 . Burger PC , Wagner DD . Platelet P - selectin facilitates atherosclerotic lesion development . Blood 2003 ; 101 : 2661 – 6 . 148 . Wang K , Zhou X , Zhou Z , et al . Platelet , not endothelial , P - selectin is required for neointimal formation after vascular injury . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2005 ; 25 : 1584 – 9 . 149 . Huo Y , Schober A , Forlow SB , et al . Circulating activated platelets exacerbate atherosclerosis in mice deﬁcient in apolipoprotein E . Nat Med 2003 ; 9 : 61 – 7 . 150 . Schober A , Manka D , von Hundelshausen P , et al . Deposition of platelet RANTES triggering monocyte recruitment requires P - selectin and is involved in neointima formation after arterial injury . Circulation 2002 ; 106 : 1523 – 9 . 151 . Koenen RR , von Hundelshausen P , Nesmelova IV , et al . Disrupting functional interactions between platelet chemokines inhibits atherosclerosis in hyperlipidemic mice . Nat Med 2009 ; 15 : 97 – 103 . 152 . Boring L , Gosling J , Cleary M , Charo IF . Decreased lesion formation in CCR2 (cid:3) / (cid:3) mice reveals a role for chemokines in the initiation of atherosclerosis . Nature 1998 ; 394 : 894 – 7 . 153 . Hayes IM , Jordan NJ , Towers S , et al . Human vascular smooth muscle cells express receptors for CC chemokines . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 1998 ; 18 : 397 – 403 . 154 . Sachais BS , Turrentine T , Dawicki McKenna JM , Rux AH , Rader D , Kowalska MA . Elimination of platelet factor 4 ( PF4 ) from platelets reduces P . Blair , R . Flaumenhaft / Blood Reviews 23 ( 2009 ) 177 – 189 187 atherosclerosis in C57Bl / 6 and apoE (cid:3) / (cid:3) mice . Thromb Haemost 2007 ; 98 : 1108 – 13 . 155 . Karshovska E , Zernecke A , Sevilmis G , et al . Expression of HIF - 1alpha in injured arteries controls SDF - 1alpha mediated neointima formation in apolipoprotein E deﬁcient mice . Arterioscler Thromb VascBiol 2007 ; 27 : 2540 – 7 . 156 . Tiedt R , Schomber T , Hao - Shen H , Skoda RC . Pf4 - Cre transgenic mice allow the generation of lineage - restricted gene knockouts for studying megakaryocyte and platelet function in vivo . Blood 2007 ; 109 : 1503 – 6 . 157 . Scheld WM , Valone JA , Sande MA . Bacterial adherence in the pathogenesis of endocarditis . Interaction of bacterial dextran , platelets , and ﬁbrin . J Clin Invest 1978 ; 61 : 1394 – 404 . 158 . Klinger MH , Jelkmann W . Role of blood platelets in infection and inﬂammation . J Interferon Cytokine Res 2002 ; 22 : 913 – 22 . 159 . Durack DT . Experimental bacterial endocarditis . IV . Structure and evolution of very early lesions . J Pathol 1975 ; 115 : 81 – 9 . 160 . Sullam PM , Drake TA , Sande MA . Pathogenesis of endocarditis . Am J Med 1985 ; 78 : 110 – 5 . 161 . Vinter DW , Burkel WE , Wakeﬁeld TW , et al . Radioisotope - labeled platelet studies and infection of vascular grafts . J Vasc Surg 1984 ; 1 : 921 . 162 . Zucker - Franklin D , Seremetis S , Zheng ZY . Internalization of human immunodeﬁciency virus type I and other retroviruses by megakaryocytes and platelets . Blood 1990 ; 75 : 1920 – 3 . 163 . Bik T , Sarov I , Livne A . Interaction between vaccinia virus and human blood platelets . Blood 1982 ; 59 : 482 – 7 . 164 . Clawson CC , Rao GH , White JG . Platelet interaction with bacteria . IV . Stimulation of the release reaction . Am J Pathol 1975 ; 81 : 411 – 20 . 165 . Maisch PA , Calderone RA . Adherence of Candida albicans to a ﬁbrin – platelet matrix formed in vitro . Infect Immun 1980 ; 27 : 650 – 6 . 166 . McMorran BJ , Marshall VM , de Graaf C , et al . Platelets kill intraerythrocytic malarial parasites and mediate survival to infection . Science 2009 ; 323 : 797 – 800 . 167 . Cole AM , Ganz T , Liese AM , Burdick MD , Liu L , Strieter RM . Cutting edge : IFN - inducible ELR - CXC chemokines display defensin - like antimicrobial activity . J Immunol 2001 ; 167 : 623 – 7 . 168 . Tang YQ , Yeaman MR , Selsted ME . Antimicrobial peptides from human platelets . Infect Immun 2002 ; 70 : 6524 – 33 . 169 . Krijgsveld J , Zaat SA , Meeldijk J , et al . Thrombocidins , microbicidal proteins from human blood platelets , are C - terminal deletion products of CXC chemokines . J Biol Chem 2000 ; 275 : 20374 – 81 . 170 . Kupferwasser LI , Yeaman MR , Shapiro SM , Nast CC , Bayer AS . In vitro susceptibility to thrombin - induced platelet microbicidal protein is associated with reduced disease progression and complication rates in experimental Staphylococcus aureus endocarditis : microbiological , histopathologic , and echocardiographic analyses . Circulation 2002 ; 105 : 746 – 52 . 171 . Sullam PM , Bayer AS , Foss WM , Cheung AL . Diminished platelet binding in vitro by Staphylococcus aureus is associated with reduced virulence in a rabbit model of infective endocarditis . Infect Immun 1996 ; 64 : 4915 – 21 . 172 . Dhawan VK , Yeaman MR , Cheung AL , Kim E , Sullam PM , Bayer AS . Phenotypic resistance to thrombin - induced platelet microbicidal protein in vitro is correlated with enhanced virulence in experimental endocarditis due to Staphylococcus aureus . Infect Immun 1997 ; 65 : 3293 – 9 . 173 . Mercier RC , Rybak MJ , Bayer AS , Yeaman MR . Inﬂuence of platelets and platelet microbicidal protein susceptibility on the fate of Staphylococcus aureus in an in vitro model of infective endocarditis . Infect Immun 2000 ; 68 : 4699 – 705 . 174 . Del Conde I , Cruz MA , Zhang H , Lopez JA , Afshar - Kharghan V . Platelet activation leads to activation and propagation of the complement system . J Exp Med 2005 ; 201 : 871 – 9 . 175 . Schmaier AH , Smith PM , Colman RW . Platelet C1 - inhibitor . A secreted alpha - granule protein . J Clin Invest 1985 ; 75 : 242 – 50 . 176 . Devine DV , Rosse WF . Regulation of the activity of platelet - bound C3 convertase of the alternative pathway of complement by platelet factor H . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987 ; 84 : 5873 – 7 . 177 . Knighton DR , Hunt TK , Thakral KK , Goodson 3rd WH . Role of platelets and ﬁbrin in the healing sequence . an in vivo study of angiogenesis and collagen synthesis . Ann Surg 1982 ; 196 : 379 – 88 . 178 . Pipili - Synetos E , Papadimitriou E , Maragoudakis ME . Evidence that platelets promote tube formation by endothelial cells on matrigel . Br J Pharmacol 1998 ; 125 : 1252 – 7 . 179 . Kisucka J , Butterﬁeld CE , Duda DG , et al . Platelets and platelet adhesion support angiogenesis while preventing excessive hemorrhage . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006 ; 103 : 855 – 60 . 180 . Nurden AT , Nurden P , Sanchez M , Andia I , Anitua E . Platelets and wound healing . Front Biosci 2008 ; 13 : 3532 – 48 . 181 . Weltermann A , Wolzt M , Petersmann K , et al . Large amounts of vascular endothelial growth factor at the site of hemostatic plug formation in vivo . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 1999 ; 19 : 1757 – 60 . 182 . Arisato T , Hashiguchi T , Sarker KP , et al . Highly accumulated platelet vascular endothelial growth factor in coagulant thrombotic region . J Thromb Haemost 2003 ; 1 : 2589 – 93 . 183 . Pintucci G , Froum S , Pinnell J , Mignatti P , Raﬁi S , Green D . Trophic effects of platelets on cultured endothelial cells are mediated by platelet - associated ﬁbroblast growth factor - 2 ( FGF - 2 ) and vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) . Thromb Haemost 2002 ; 88 : 834 – 42 . 184 . Brill A , Elinav H , Varon D . Differential role of platelet granular mediators in angiogenesis . Cardiovasc Res 2004 ; 63 : 226 – 35 . 185 . Massberg S , Konrad I , Schurzinger K , et al . Platelets secrete stromal cell - derived factor 1alpha and recruit bone marrow - derived progenitor cells to arterial thrombi in vivo . J Exp Med 2006 ; 203 : 1221 – 33 . 186 . Jimenez B , Volpert OV , Crawford SE , Febbraio M , Silverstein RL , Bouck N . Signals leading to apoptosis - dependent inhibition of neovascularization by thrombospondin - 1 . Nat Med 2000 ; 6 : 41 – 8 . 187 . Bikfalvi A . Recent developments in the inhibition of angiogenesis : examples from studies on platelet factor - 4 and the VEGF / VEGFR system . Biochem Pharmacol 2004 ; 68 : 1017 – 21 . 188 . Perollet C , Han ZC , Savona C , Caen JP , Bikfalvi A . Platelet factor 4 modulates ﬁbroblast growth factor 2 ( FGF - 2 ) activity and inhibits FGF - 2 dimerization . Blood 1998 ; 91 : 3289 – 99 . 189 . Ma L , Perini R , McKnight W , et al . Proteinase - activated receptors 1 and 4 counter - regulate endostatin and VEGF release from human platelets . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005 ; 102 : 216 – 20 . 190 . Kark LR , Karp JM , Davies JE . Platelet releasate increases the proliferation and migrationof bonemarrow - derived cellscultured underosteogenic conditions . Clin Oral Implant Res 2006 ; 17 : 321 – 7 . 191 . Anitua E , Andia I , Sanchez M , et al . Autologous preparations rich in growth factors promote proliferation and induce VEGF and HGF production by human tendon cells in culture . J Orthop Res 2005 ; 23 : 281 – 6 . 192 . Nagai M , Sato S , Kamoi H , Kamoi K . Effects of application of platelet releasate in periodontal regeneration therapy . Int J Periodont Restorat Dent 2005 ; 25 : 571 – 83 . 193 . Moulin V , Lawny F , Barritault D , Caruelle JP . Platelet releasate treatment improves skin healing in diabetic rats through endogenous growth factor secretion . Cell Mol Biol ( Noisy - le - grand ) 1998 ; 44 : 961 – 71 . 194 . Knighton DR , Ciresi KF , Fiegel VD , Austin LL , Butler EL . Classiﬁcation and treatment of chronic nonhealing wounds . Successful treatment with autologous platelet - derived wound healing factors ( PDWHF ) . Ann Surg 1986 ; 204 : 322 – 30 . 195 . Steed DL , Goslen JB , Holloway GA , Malone JM , Bunt TJ , Webster MW . Randomized prospective double - blind trial in healing chronic diabetic foot ulcers . CT - 102 activated platelet supernatant , topical versus placebo . Diabet Care 1992 ; 15 : 1598 – 604 . 196 . Margolis DJ , Kantor J , Santanna J , Strom BL , Berlin JA . Effectiveness of platelet releasate for the treatment of diabetic neuropathic foot ulcers . Diabet Care 2001 ; 24 : 483 – 8 . 197 . Josifova D , Gatt G , Aquilina A , Seraﬁmov V , Vella A , Felice A . Treatment of leg ulcers with platelet - derived wound healing factor ( PDWHFS ) in a patient with beta thalassaemia intermedia . Br J Haematol 2001 ; 112 : 527 – 9 . 198 . Herouy Y , Mellios P , Bandemir E , et al . Autologous platelet - derived wound healing factor promotes angiogenesis via alphavbeta3 - integrin expression in chronic wounds . Int J Mol Med 2000 ; 6 : 515 – 9 . 199 . Senet P , Bon FX , Benbunan M , et al . Randomized trial and local biological effect of autologous platelets used as adjuvant therapy for chronic venous leg ulcers . J Vasc Surg 2003 ; 38 : 1342 – 8 . 200 . Ho - Tin - Noe B , Goerge T , Cifuni SM , Duerschmied D , Wagner DD . Platelet granule secretion continuously prevents intratumor hemorrhage . Cancer Res 2008 ; 68 : 6851 – 8 . 201 . Klement GL , Yip TT , Cassiola F , et al . Platelets actively sequester angiogenesis regulators . Blood . 202 . Patruno R , Arpaia N , Gadaleta CD , et al . VEGF concentration from plasma activated platelets rich correlates with microvascular density and grading in canine mast cell tumour spontaneous model . J Cell Mol Med . 203 . Caine GJ , Ryan P , Lip GY , Blann AD . Signiﬁcant decrease in angiopoietin - 1 and angiopoietin - 2 after radical prostatectomy in prostate cancer patients . Cancer Lett 2007 ; 251 : 296 – 301 . 204 . George DJ , Regan MM , Oh WK , et al . Radical prostatectomy lowers plasma vascular endothelial growth factor levels in patients with prostate cancer . Urology 2004 ; 63 : 327 – 32 . 205 . Salgado R , Vermeulen PB , Van Marck E , Benoy I , Dirix L . Correspondence re : George ML et al . Correlation of plasma and serum vascular endothelial growth factor levels with platelet count in colorectal cancer : clinical evidence of platelet scavenging ? Clin Cancer Res , 6 : 3147 – 52 , 2000 . Clin Cancer Res 2001 ; 7 : 1481 – 3 . 206 . Adams J , Carder PJ , Downey S , et al . Vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) in breast cancer : comparison of plasma , serum , and tissue VEGF and microvessel density and effects of tamoxifen . Cancer Res 2000 ; 60 : 2898 – 905 . 207 . Caine GJ , Lip GY , Blann AD . Platelet - derived VEGF , Flt - 1 , angiopoietin - 1 and P - selectin in breast and prostate cancer : further evidence for a role of platelets in tumour angiogenesis . Ann Med . 2004 ; 36 : 273 – 7 . 208 . Salven P , Orpana A , Joensuu H . Leukocytes and platelets of patients with cancer contain high levels of vascular endothelial growth factor . Clin Cancer Res 1999 ; 5 : 487 – 91 . 209 . Gunsilius E , Petzer A , Stockhammer G , et al . Thrombocytes are the major source for soluble vascular endothelial growth factor in peripheral blood . Oncology 2000 ; 58 : 169 – 74 . 210 . Gasic GJ , Gasic TB , Stewart CC . Antimetastatic effects associated with platelet reduction . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1968 ; 61 : 46 – 52 . 211 . Pearlstein E , Ambrogio C , Karpatkin S . Effect of antiplatelet antibody on the development of pulmonary metastases following injection of CT26 colon adenocarcinoma , Lewislung carcinoma , and B16 amelanotic melanomatumor cells into mice . Cancer Res 1984 ; 44 : 3884 – 7 . 212 . Skolnik G , Ericson LE , Bagge U . The effect of thrombocytopenia and antiserotonin treatment on the lodgement of circulating tumor cells . A vital 188 P . Blair , R . Flaumenhaft / Blood Reviews 23 ( 2009 ) 177 – 189 ﬂuorescence microscopic , electron microscopic and isotope study in the rat . J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1983 ; 105 : 30 – 7 . 213 . Jain S , Zuka M , Liu J , et al . Platelet glycoprotein Ib alpha supports experimental lung metastasis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007 ; 104 : 9024 – 8 . 214 . Karpatkin S , Pearlstein E . Role of platelets in tumor cell metastases . Ann Int Med 1981 ; 95 : 636 – 41 . 215 . Nash GF , Turner LF , Scully MF , Kakkar AK . Platelets and cancer . Lancet Oncol 2002 ; 3 : 425 – 30 . 216 . Borsig L , Wong R , Feramisco J , Nadeau DR , Varki NM , Varki A . Heparin and cancer revisited : mechanistic connections involving platelets , P - selectin , carcinoma mucins , and tumor metastasis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001 ; 98 : 3352 – 7 . 217 . Kim YJ , Borsig L , Varki NM , Varki A . P - Selectin deﬁciency attenuates tumor growth and metastasis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998 ; 95 : 9325 – 30 . 218 . Lawler K , Meade G , O’Sullivan G , Kenny D . Shear stress modulates the interaction of platelet - secreted matrix proteins with tumor cells through the integrin alphavbeta3 . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2004 ; 287 : C1320 – 7 . 219 . Belloc C , Lu H , Soria C , Fridman R , Legrand Y , Menashi S . The effect of platelets on invasiveness and protease production of human mammary tumor cells . Int J Cancer 1995 ; 60 : 413 – 7 . P . Blair , R . Flaumenhaft / Blood Reviews 23 ( 2009 ) 177 – 189 189