i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 317 — # 1 i i i i i i tmcs @ inf . unideb . hu http : / / tmcs . math . klte . hu 4 / 2 ( 2006 ) , 317 – 337 Levels of students’ understanding on inﬁnity Markku S . Hannula , Erkki Pehkonen , Hanna Maijala and Riitta Soro Abstract . Here we report some results of a two - year study for grades 5 - 6 and 7 - 8 ( dur - ing the academic years 2001 – 03 ) . The study included a quantitative survey for ap - proximately 150 Finnish mathematics classes out of which 10 classes were selected to a longitudinal part of the study . Additionally , 40 students from these classes participated also a qualitative study . This paper will focus on students’ understanding of inﬁnity and the development of that understanding . The results show that most of the students did not have a proper view of inﬁnity but that the share of able students grew , as the students got older . Key words and phrases : inﬁnity , metaphors , conceptual change , understanding . ZDM Subject Classiﬁcation : C33 . Most primary children are very interested in inﬁnity , and they enjoy dis - cussing the concept , if the teacher is only ready for it . On one hand , they have a concrete view on the world around and mathematics and , on the other hand , they are ready to play with numbers . Thus , questions on inﬁnity may also come into light . In the primary curriculum , the concept ‘inﬁnity’ is implicitly present in many of the topics , e . g . in arithmetic , when dealing with fractions , or in geom - etry , e . g . when introducing the concept ‘straight line’ . Inﬁnity awakes curiosity in children already before they enter school : “preschool and young elementary school children show intuitions of inﬁnity” [ 24 ] . However , this early interest is not often met by school mathematics curriculum , and inﬁnity remains mysterious for most students throughout school years . Copyright c (cid:13) 2006 by University of Debrecen i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 318 — # 2 i i i i i i 318 Markku S . Hannula , Erkki Pehkonen , Hanna Maijala and Riitta Soro Inﬁnity in mathematics Actual and potential inﬁnity Inﬁnity is an important concept in mathematics , especially in analysis , and we encounter inﬁnity already in , perhaps , the most basic of mathematical concepts , namely in natural numbers . Consider the sequence of natural numbers 1 , 2 , 3 , . . . and think of continuing it on and on . There is no limit to the process of counting ; it has no endpoint . Such ongoing processes without an end are usually the ﬁrst examples of inﬁnity for children ; such processes are called potentially inﬁnite . In mathematics , such unlimited processes are quite common . Consider , for example , drawing regular polygons with more and more sides inside a circle , or counting more and more decimals of π . However , the interesting cases in mathematics are , when inﬁnity is conceptualised as a realised “thing” – the so - called actual inﬁnity . The set of all natural numbers is an example of actual inﬁnity , because it requires us to conceptualise the potentially inﬁnite process of counting more and more numbers as if it was somehow ﬁnished [ 11 ] . The question of inﬁnity has its roots already in the mathematics of ancient Greece , cf . for example , the famous paradox of Zenon [ 2 ] . However , the transi - tion from potential to actual inﬁnity includes a transition from ( an irreversible ) process to a mathematical object . This step Greek mathematicians were unable to accomplish [ 16 ] . In the history of mathematics , the exact deﬁnition of and dealing with inﬁnity is about one hundred years old . The foundation of inﬁnity as modern mathematics sees it was laid when Dedekind and Cantor solved the problem of potential inﬁnity at the end of the 19 . century , and Cantor developed his theory of cardinal numbers ( e . g . [ 2 ] , [ 16 ] ) . We may distinguish diﬀerent kinds of inﬁnities in mathematical objects . For example , the set of natural numbers has inﬁnitely many elements , and it has no upper bounds . Therefore , the numbers may become bigger and bigger . Whereas , some sub - sets of rational numbers are diﬀerent . For example , the set of ratio - nal numbers between zero and one also has inﬁnitely many elements , but it is bounded . Furthermore , between any two rational numbers ( however close they are to each other ) there are inﬁnitely many rational numbers . This property of rational numbers is called density . When mathematicians write about counterintuitive nature of inﬁnity , they typically refer to actual inﬁnity . For example , take the ( actually inﬁnite ) set of natural numbers { 1 , 2 , 3 , . . . } and compare it with its subset which includes only all even numbers { 2 , 4 , 8 , . . . } . Intuitively , one would assume that the ‘number i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 319 — # 3 i i i i i i Levels of students’ understanding on inﬁnity 319 of elements’ in the latter would be smaller by half . However , the concept “equal number of elements” in a set is generalized to inﬁnite sets by saying that the two sets have “equal number” of elements , if their elements can be put into one - to - one correspondence with each other ; thus we say that their cardinality is the same ( e . g . [ 2 ] ) . Tsamir and Dreyfus [ 22 ] summarise the problems mathematicians have had with actual inﬁnity , as follows : Actual inﬁnity , a central concept in philosophy and mathematics , has profoundly contributed to the foundation of mathematics and to the theo - retical basis of various mathematical systems . It has long and persistently been rejected by mathematicians and philosophers alike , and was highly controversial even in the last century in spite of the comprehensive frame - work provided for it by Cantorian set theory . They also cite Davis & Hersh who warned that “the inﬁnite has turned out to be the hiding place of much that is strange and paradoxical” ( [ 4 , p . 155 ] ) , and Fishbein [ 7 ] who explained that when dealing with actual inﬁnity – namely with inﬁnite sets – we are facing situations which may appear intuitively unacceptable . . . we are intuitively not equipped to deal with actually given inﬁnite sets . Their logic is not our logic , which is rooted in our practical experience ( [ 7 , p . 92 ] ) . Hence , although the concept of inﬁnity as a potentiality is relatively easy for mathematicians , the concept of actual inﬁnity is counterintuitive and diﬃcult . Students’ conceptions of inﬁnity Inﬁnity has been an inspiring , but diﬃcult concept for mathematicians . It is no wonder , that also students have had diﬃculties with it , although they might be fascinated about it . Previous research has identiﬁed typical problems and constructive teaching approaches to cardinality of inﬁnite sets . Students use in - tuitively the same methods for the comparison of inﬁnite sets as they use for the comparison of ﬁnite sets . Although students have no special tendency to use the Cantorian method of “one - to - one correspondence” , they are prone to visual cues that highlight the correspondence . For example , students tend to match the set { 1 , 2 , 3 , . . . } more easily with the set { 1 2 , 2 2 , 3 2 , . . . } than with the set { 1 , 4 , 9 , . . . } [ 22 ] . i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 320 — # 4 i i i i i i 320 Markku S . Hannula , Erkki Pehkonen , Hanna Maijala and Riitta Soro One issue that was raised already by Piaget [ 19 ] , is the cognitive development of grasping inﬁnitely large and inﬁnitely dense . Wheeler [ 24 ] considered these questions , as follows : Our decimal numeration system provides two perspectives of inﬁnity : counting leads to a consideration of numbers that continue to get bigger without bounds , whereas successive partitionings of an interval lead to a consideration of numbers that continue to get smaller and are bounded . Does a hierarchical relationship exist between understanding the decimal system and understanding of the other ? [ 24 ] Wistedt and Martinsson [ 25 ] have challenged Swedish 5 th graders ( 11 years old ) with a realistic problem of dividing a one meter long piece of wood into three equal parts . Mathematically , the task can be reduced to dividing 100 with 3 . Since the students could only think of ﬁnite or potentially inﬁnite decimals , they obtained either numbers that are not exactly equal or their sum is not exactly 100 . Fishbein , Tirosh and Hess inquired students’ view of inﬁnite partitioning through using successive halving of a number segment [ 8 ] . They concluded that students on grades 5 - 9 seem to have a ﬁnitist rather than a nonﬁnitist or an inﬁnitist point of view in questions of inﬁnity . Even at the university level , the concept of inﬁnity of real numbers is not clear for all students [ 15 ] . For example , Wheeler [ 24 ] points out that university students distinguished between 0 . 999 . . . and 1 , because “the three dots tell you the ﬁrst number is an inﬁnite decimal” . Metaphorical thinking Metaphorical thought The view exposed here is based on an understanding of mathematical thinking as embodied [ 11 ] . Embodiment of mathematical thinking means an acceptance of biological grounding of thinking in human brain , an eﬀort to accept and adopt results from neurosciences to human thinking . One important cognitive process that is well grounded in modern cognitive science and that can explain a lot of mathematical thinking is metaphorical thought . “For the most part , human beings conceptualize abstract concepts in con - crete terms , using ideas and modes of reasoning grounded in the sensory - motor system . ” ( [ 11 , p . 5 ] ) i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 321 — # 5 i i i i i i Levels of students’ understanding on inﬁnity 321 This process is called conceptual metaphor , and Lakoﬀ & N´u˜nez [ 11 ] de - scribe how these metaphors underlie mathematical thinking . In their terminol - ogy metaphor is not “simply a linguistic phenomenon , a mere ﬁgure of speech” ( ibid p . 6 ) . Rather , a conceptual metaphor is a cognitive mechanism that is – in technical terms – a “grounded inference - preserving cross - domain mapping” ( ibid p . 6 ) . Cross - domain mapping means that the mechanism applies a cogni - tive domain ( e . g . motion ) to reason about another domain ( e . g . time ) . Because of inference - preservation we , for example , tend to think of time as going slow or fast . Grounding metaphors use our everyday experience of perception and action , like addition as adding objects to a collection . Linking metaphors use metaphorical ideas of one domain to reason about another domain . We use a linking metaphor , for example , when we think of numbers as points on a line . Lakoﬀ & N´u˜nez [ 11 ] present four grounding metaphors for arithmetic that include a conceptualisation of numbers . The numbers are conceptualised as col - lections of objects , as objects of diﬀerent size , as segments of a measuring stick , and as point - locations on a path . Through linking metaphors numbers can also be conceptualised in terms of geometry ( points on a line ) , symbols ( sequences of numerals ) and set theory ( elements in a set ) . Diﬀerent metaphors allow us diﬀerent extensions of number system beyond the natural numbers . For exam - ple , the metaphor of numbers as locations on a path or a line , leads us easily to conceptualise negative numbers as locations left from the origin . Metaphors for inﬁnity Our brains are ﬁnite , and our everyday experience consists solely of ﬁnite processes . Lakoﬀ & N´u˜nez [ 11 ] have tried to answer how we yet can conceptualise inﬁnity . The conceptual metaphor of inﬁnity is embodied in the neural system that controls movement – the motor control system . This neural structure is not used only for motor control , but it can be used also to reason about events and actions . We conceptualise some actions to include their end ( ‘to jump’ ) and other actions to have their completion external to the act ( ‘to ﬂy’ ) . Potential inﬁnity is conceptualised through iterative processes that may be repeated on and on , and the completion of this process is external to the act . We can count numbers on and on , and we know that there is no boundary for the counting process . However , when we use The Basic Metaphor of Inﬁnity ( [ 11 , p . 159 ] ) , we take this iterative process that has no end , and metaphorically think of it in terms of a process that includes its completion and has a resulting state . This is a paradoxical thought – a process that goes on and on , and yet has a ﬁnal state . i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 322 — # 6 i i i i i i 322 Markku S . Hannula , Erkki Pehkonen , Hanna Maijala and Riitta Soro Using this metaphor for natural numbers , we can conceptualise the process of counting to be completed and we have the set of all natural numbers . We can also conceptualise ‘the ﬁnal resultant state’ of counting , ∞ , which is unique and bigger than all integers . Actual inﬁnity “ ∞ ” cannot be conceptualised through potentially inﬁnite process alone , but it requires the conceptualisation of an end point of the process [ 11 ] . Potential inﬁnity can be used also to construct an unlimited number of dec - imal numbers between any given two numbers . However , actual inﬁnity is re - quired to conceptualise the size of the set as inﬁnite . The diﬀerence between potential and actual inﬁnity becomes crucial in the understanding of the state - ment 0 . 9999 . . . = 1 . When the number 0 . 999 . . . is conceptualised as potentially inﬁnite , it diﬀers from one although the diﬀerence decreases as the process of adding new decimals continues . However , when it is conceptualised as actually inﬁnite , the diﬀerence has disappeared as the end result of the process and there - fore 0 . 999 . . . equals one . The metaphors for numbers and inﬁnity are not arbitrarily chosen , but re - stricted by two main conditions . Firstly , they have plausible ultimate embodied groundings and evidence for it ( e . g . cross - linguistic studies and spontaneous ges - tures ) . For example , humans have an innate capacity to subitize – to instantly recognize the number of up to three items . Cognitive capacities needed in order to count beyond three objects include grouping , ordering , pairing , memory , and exhaustion detection . Secondly , the embodied groundings “must have just the right inferential structure and the hypothesized meta - phors must have just the right mapping structure to account all the rel - evant mathematical inferences and all of the properties of the branch of mathematics studied” ( [ 11 , p . 101 ] ) . If we accept the fundamental nature of conceptual metaphors in human think - ing , then learning new mathematical ideas can be understood as a change of metaphor to be used for reasoning in one domain . For example , the learning of rational numbers can be seen as a shift from a conceptual metaphor of numbers as ‘collections of objects’ into a metaphor of numbers as ‘points on a line’ . Fur - thermore , in order to conceptualise real numbers there is need to apply other metaphors , like irrational numbers as inﬁnite sequences of numerals . In a study of the 5 th graders , Boero , Douek & Garuti [ 1 ] distinguished three source domains for metaphors used in argumentation about inﬁnity : another mathematical domain ( typically geometry ) , everyday life experiences ( a mortal woman giving birth to girl who will grow into a woman who will give birth to a i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 323 — # 7 i i i i i i Levels of students’ understanding on inﬁnity 323 girl etc . thus producing inﬁnitely long life ) , and religious ideas ( eternity of God and / or soul ) . Focus of the paper We want to ﬁnd out what is the level of students’ understanding on inﬁnity in Finnish comprehensive school , and how this understanding develops from grade 5 to grade 7 . We will distinguish three levels of students understanding of inﬁnity . The lowest level is when they do not understand inﬁnity , but use only ﬁnite numbers . In the intermediate level , the students understand potential inﬁnity , and use processes that have no end . Those students , who have reached the third level , are able to conceptualise actual inﬁnity and the ﬁnal resultant state of the inﬁnite process . Methods The paper describes some partial results of the research project “Develop - ment of Understanding and Self - conﬁdence in Mathematics” , implemented at the University of Turku ( Finland ) , directed by professor Erkki Pehkonen , and ﬁnan - cially supported by the Academy of Finland ( project # 51019 ) . The project was a two - year longitudinal investigation during the academic years 2001 – 03 on grades 5 - 8 . More results of the project are to be found in the papers [ 10 ] and [ 12 ] . In order to measure the level of students’ self - conﬁdence and understanding of number concept in grades 5 and 7 of the Finnish comprehensive school , we designed a survey . The representative random sample of students consisted of 1154 ﬁfth - graders ( 11 to 12 years of age ) and 1902 seventh - graders ( 13 to 14 years of age ) from diﬀerent parts of Finland . The response rate of schools was 72 % . The survey was administered by teachers during a normal 45 - minute lesson in the fall 2001 . The questionnaire consisted of ﬁve parts : student background , 19 mathematics tasks , success expectation for each task , solution conﬁdence for each task , and a mathematical belief scale . The students’ conﬁdence was measured with three diﬀerent measures . Before the students did the actual tasks , they estimated on a 5 - point Likert scale whether they think that they can solve the task or not ( ‘success expectation’ ) . After solving each task they answered on another 5 - point Likert scale on their conﬁdence on their solution ( ‘solution conﬁdence’ ) . In addition , we had a mathematical belief i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 324 — # 8 i i i i i i 324 Markku S . Hannula , Erkki Pehkonen , Hanna Maijala and Riitta Soro scale with 25 items of which 10 were measuring students’ self - conﬁdence ( adopted from Fennema - Sherman mathematics attitude scales [ 6 ] ) . In the 19 mathematical questions , there were three that measured students’ understanding of inﬁnity ( tasks 5 , 7 and 8 ) . Task 5 measured understanding of inﬁnitely large natural numbers . The two other tasks measured understanding of the density of the rational numbers . Task 5 . Write the largest number that exists . How do you know that it is the largest ? Task 7 . How many numbers are there between numbers 0 . 8 and 1 . 1 ? Task 8 . Which is the largest of numbers still smaller than one ? How much does it diﬀer from one ? Here we will concentrate on the results of these three inﬁnity tasks . After the survey was completed , ﬁve classes from each grade were selected , i . e . ﬁve grade 5 and ﬁve grade 7 classes . Furthermore , 40 students were selected to the qualitative part of the study , 20 students from each grade in question . The 40 students consisted of four students from each of the ﬁve grade 5 classes and of the ﬁve grade 7 classes . The students were interviewed , and they did some mathematical tasks in a group . In these situations , we returned to question 7 of the survey . This was done in order to get deeper insight of students’ thinking . Results Survey results of competence We categorized student responses to the inﬁnity tasks according to how proper we deemed answers to be . In each question , we can ﬁnd answers that remain on the level of ﬁnite numbers , answers that describe processes that do not end ( potential inﬁnity ) as well as some answers that indicate that the student has an understanding of a ﬁnal state of the inﬁnite process ( actual inﬁnity ) . To give a general description of the development from ﬁfth grade to seventh grade we compared the answer distributions in each item . In Figures 1 – 3 we can see , that tasks were demanding and most students scored only zero or one point per task ( maximum being 4 - 5 points ) . As expected , seventh graders gave better answers . i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 325 — # 9 i i i i i i Levels of students’ understanding on inﬁnity 325 Task 5 . Write the largest number that exists . How do you know that it is the largest ? Answer categories ( and scoring ) : • Actual inﬁnity 2 : There is no largest number ( 4 points ) • Actual inﬁnity 1 : Inﬁnity , ∞ ( 3 points ) • Potential inﬁnity : Unending number , e . g . 9999 . . . ( 2 points ) • Finite : A number larger than one million , e . g . 99999999999999999 , centillion ( 1 point ) • Incorrect : No answer or a number not exceeding one million ( 0 points ) Figure 1 . Students’ scoring for task 5 . Frequency of each answer cat - egory in grades 5 and 7 In task 5 ( inﬁnitely large ) , the development consisted mainly of the decrease of ﬁnite numbers as answers and of increase of diﬀerent types of inﬁnite answers . Task 7 . How many numbers are there between the numbers 0 . 8 and 1 . 1 ? Answer categories ( and scoring ) : • Actual inﬁnity : Inﬁnitely many ( 5 points ) • Potential inﬁnity : Unending number , e . g . 9999 . . . ( 4 points ) • Finite 3 : A ﬁnite number larger than one million , e . g . 9999999999999 ( 3 points ) • Finite 2 : Working with more than one decimal , a number between 20 and one million ( 2 points ) • Finite 1 : Working on one decimal level ( even incorrectly ) , 2 , 3 or 4 ( 1 point ) • Incorrect : Working on integral level ( i . e . 1 ) , no answer or other incorrect answers ( e . g . 0 . 3 ) ( 0 points ) i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 326 — # 10 i i i i i i 326 Markku S . Hannula , Erkki Pehkonen , Hanna Maijala and Riitta Soro Figure 2 . Students’ scoring for task 7 . Frequency of each answer cat - egory in grades 5 and 7 In task 7 ( inﬁnitely many ) , the decrease was mainly in completely incorrect answers ( typically 0 . 3 ) and in single decimal thinking , and the biggest increase was in correct answers ( inﬁnitely many ) . Task 8 . Which is the largest of numbers still smaller than one ? How much does it diﬀer from one ? Answer categories ( and scoring ) : • Actual inﬁnity : There is no such number ( 5 points ) • Potential inﬁnity 2 : Such number cannot be written ( 4 points ) • Potential inﬁnity 1 : 0 . 999 . . . ( 3 points ) • Finite 2 : 0 . 999 ; three or more decimals ( 2 points ) • Finite 1 : 0 . 9 ; 0 . 99 ( 1 point ) • Incorrect : Working on natural number level ( i . e . 0 ) , no answer or other incorrect answers ( e . g . negative inﬁnity ) ( 0 points ) In task 8 ( inﬁnitely close ) , the decrease was mainly in completely incorrect answers ( typically ‘zero’ or ‘minus inﬁnity’ ) , and a signiﬁcant increase was in answers ( 0 . 999 . . . ) that require understanding of potential inﬁnity , but not actual inﬁnity . The chi square test revealed signiﬁcant gender diﬀerences in task 5 ( inﬁnitely large ) on ﬁfth grade , and in tasks 7 ( inﬁnitely many ) and task 8 ( inﬁnitely close ) on seventh grade , in all cases boys giving signiﬁcantly more frequently answers of inﬁnite nature than girls . i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 327 — # 11 i i i i i i Levels of students’ understanding on inﬁnity 327 Figure 3 . Students’ scoring for task 8 . Frequency of each answer cat - egory in grades 5 and 7 Summary of competence results In the ﬁfth grade 20 percent of the students had some understanding of the inﬁnity of natural numbers , but few had any understanding of density of numbers . The situation is not much better in the seventh grade . Yet , there is an obvious development from grade 5 to grade 7 in student levels of answering these questions . Inﬁnity of natural numbers is understood earlier than inﬁnity of subsets rational ( real ) numbers , and potential inﬁnity is understood earlier than actual inﬁnity . Boys perform much better than girls in these tasks dealing with inﬁnity . Survey results of conﬁdence Next we shall look at how student’s expectation of success and conﬁdence in own solution relate to actual performance . As a general tendency students tended to use the upper end of both these scales indicating that most students had rea - sons for their answer and the results were not randomly picked . In earlier analyses it was observed that both average success expectation and average solution conﬁ - dence had a moderate correlation with overall mathematical self - conﬁdence ( 0 . 49 and 0 . 50 , respectively ) , while correlation with overall achievement in test was lower ( 0 . 33 and 0 . 40 , respectively ) . Below we shall report more detailed analyses on task - level . According to the chi square test both students’ success expectation and so - lution conﬁdence related to their answers ( with an exception of the ﬁfth grade boys’ success expectation ) . In tasks 5 and 8 , the students’ solution conﬁdence i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 328 — # 12 i i i i i i 328 Markku S . Hannula , Erkki Pehkonen , Hanna Maijala and Riitta Soro increased , as their answers got better . In task 7 ( inﬁnitely many ) , however , the relationship between answer and conﬁdence was more complex ( Table 1 ) . Stu - dents who gave 0 - or 1 - point answers were modestly uncertain , while solution conﬁdence was much lower for 2 - point answers . Conﬁdence remained low for 3 - and 4 - point answers and was high for 5 - point answers . Students who operate on one decimal level seem to be conﬁdent on their answers , while those more ad - vanced students who move beyond that level have lower conﬁdence . Only when they realize that there are inﬁnitely many numbers within the given interval , they regain high conﬁdence . Table 1 . The means of solution conﬁdence for responses of task 7 Points for task 7 N Success expectation mean Std . deviation N Solution conﬁdence mean Std . deviation 0 561 4 . 06 1 . 06 539 3 . 42 1 . 35 1 1933 4 . 15 0 . 94 1922 3 . 68 1 . 16 2 171 3 . 99 0 . 94 169 2 . 91 1 . 19 3 109 3 . 54 1 . 28 104 3 . 10 1 . 56 4 42 3 . 88 1 . 11 40 3 . 18 1 . 52 5 210 4 . 07 1 . 16 210 3 . 92 1 . 12 Total 3026 4 . 09 1 . 00 2984 3 . 58 1 . 24 Looking at the results on an individual level ( not presented here ) , we can see that most typical relationship between success expectation and solution con - ﬁdence is that they are equal . However , among students who gave two - point answers most were less conﬁdent than their expectation had been , and there were hardly any students whose conﬁdence after the task was higher than the expec - tation they had before solving it . We can assume , that most students who moved beyond ‘one decimal thinking’ , had not realized the complexity of the task before actually beginning to solve it . Among students who gave three - point answers , the pattern was similar , although less extreme . The relationship between answer and its success expectation was slightly dif - ferent from the relationship between answer and its solution conﬁdence presented above . For task 5 ( inﬁnitely large ) those students who gave 3 - point answers ( “in - ﬁnity” ) had highest expectations , for task 8 ( inﬁnitely close ) expectations were highest when the answer got 2 or 3 points ( “0 . 999” , three or more decimals or i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 329 — # 13 i i i i i i Levels of students’ understanding on inﬁnity 329 “0 . 999 . . . ” , respectively ) . This suggests that those who gave the best answers did not know the right answer beforehand , but they had to produce it during the test . Furthermore , for task 7 ( inﬁnitely many ) only those students who gave 3 - point answers ( a large ﬁnite number ) had much lower expectations than oth - ers . Especially those students who gave a 2 - point answer ( 20 – one million ) had roughly as high expectations as others ( cf . Figure 4 ) . Figure 4 . Comparison of the means in success expectation and in so - lution conﬁdence in diﬀerent levels of solutions ( Task 7 ) In all cases , the students’ success expectation was higher than their solution conﬁdence . In the result group 2 ( Working with more than one decimal , a number between 20 and one million ) , the diﬀerence was the biggest one , and in the best answers ( group 5 ) the smallest one . Summary of conﬁdence results Students’ conﬁdence both before and after solving the task is related to the success they have . That is what we should expect to ﬁnd . However , those who gave the most sophisticated answers were not the most conﬁdent in their expec - tations . i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 330 — # 14 i i i i i i 330 Markku S . Hannula , Erkki Pehkonen , Hanna Maijala and Riitta Soro In the task ( task 7 ) where we asked how many numbers there are between 0 . 8 and 1 . 1 , students’ conﬁdence had even more complex relationship with suc - cess . Many of the students indicated strong false conﬁdence in their one - decimal thinking of numbers . Furthermore , when their thinking begun to advance , their conﬁdence dropped . Sometimes they even had an initial expectation of success before they begun to solve the task but this conﬁdence fell after they had tried to solve the task . Conﬁdence was reassured when they reached the level where they had an understanding of the density of numbers . Qualitative results In the qualitative part of the study , students were asked the same question about the number of numbers between 0 . 8 and 1 . 1 as in the test , and they were also asked to explain their reasoning . One of the students ( grade 7 ) simply knew immediately that there are inﬁnitely many numbers . He was also able to reason why this was the case . He was the only one to reason with actual inﬁnity . From the students’ explanations we found four interesting phenomena that we shall describe below : ( 1 ) transformation of the decimal numbers into whole num - bers , ( 2 ) ability to ﬁnd more numbers within the interval when further prompted , ( 3 ) assumed ﬁniteness of a bounded interval , ( 4 ) reasoning based on the concretely drawn number line . ( 1 ) Some students talked about whole numbers 9 , 10 and 11 . To our under - standing , this reﬂects that they were reasoning about the decimals as natural numbers . Cf . the following episodes from the 5 th grade classes 1 S1 : Thrrrree . Three . S2 : Four . 8 , 9 , 0 , 1 . S4 : I know , three . S6 : Three . I : What do you others think ? ? S7 : Three . S8 : { Nods } . S6 : 9 , 10 , 11 . . . But no , 2 : 9 and 10 . I : Well how many numbers do you think that there are then ? S8 : In between you mean ? 1 In the transcripts the following conventions are used : [ text in square brackets indicates over - lapping speech ] ; “ < ” marks an interrupted ﬂow of speech ; text in ellipses indicates nonverbal information i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 331 — # 15 i i i i i i Levels of students’ understanding on inﬁnity 331 I : Yes . S8 : 2 . I : Well , what numbers are there then ? S6 : 9 and 10 . S8 : 0 . 9 and 1 . 0 . Others agree . ( 2 ) Several 5 th graders thought ﬁrst on decimal level and suggested only two , three or four numbers . However , when they were further prompted , some students either suggested isolated numbers ( “1 . 05” ; “1 . 09” ) or answered that there are also hundredths and thousandths . Some other students thought of fractions ( “fractions of fractions of fractions” ) as existing between decimals . However , only one 5 th grader even pondered the possibility of inﬁnitely many numbers . S6 : Well , fractions at least and then they decrease into fractions of fractions of fractions and so on . And then they become smaller all the time . I : How small can they become ? S6 : I don’t know how small they can become . Similar thinking was common even on the 7 th grade . S21 : There could be hundredths , too . I : Give an example . S21 : Well , for example 0 . 81 . I : And anything else ? S22 : Thousandths . I : What are they like ? S22 : Well , for example 0 . 938 . ( 3 ) There was one clear example of mistaking boundedness to be the same as ﬁniteness . One seventh - grader ( S25 ) refused to accept her peers’ reasoning that there would be inﬁnitely many numbers within a bounded interval of the number line . S25 : that there are almost inﬁnite . S26 : { whispers to S27 } ( ﬁve ) S28 : ( Well , there ) is that inﬁnity . It can’t be , in a way , almost inﬁnity , because it , when [ isn’t < ( its not ≤ ) ] . S25 : [ Yes it can . ] Think about it . Inﬁnity is so , that it doesn’t end [ ever , you know . ] i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 332 — # 16 i i i i i i 332 Markku S . Hannula , Erkki Pehkonen , Hanna Maijala and Riitta Soro S28 : [ That’s not a number . ] S25 : But because there are two numbers there , and in - between them , so it will end some time . S27 : No it doesn’t . S26 : It does not end . 0 . 8888 blablabla S27 : 0 . 00 [ 00000 ] S25 : [ Well , yes , but ] it will end where is the point { points to the number 1 . 1 } where it has to end . ( 4 ) Students sometimes reasoned about the task using a mental image of a num - ber line . In one interview seventh grade students also expressed views that indicate that they draw inferences from the properties of concretely drawn number lines – speciﬁcally that each number needs some space . S29 : There would be at least m < at least more < in principle more < must be 20 000 numbers , maybe . S30 : But those all cannot ﬁt into there ! S29 : Well , yes . S30 : Well , of course in a way . S29 : In a way , but one could no way squeeze them into a number line like this . Summarizing results from interview data There was quite clear evidence that at least some students use natural num - bers to reason about decimal numbers . Some even erroneously talk about whole numbers instead of decimal numbers . Although most students initially answered that there was two or three numbers between 0 . 8 and 1 . 1 , many were able to produce further numbers when prompted to reconsider . There was also evidence for blending of concrete and abstract number line models . Some reasoned that inﬁnitely many numbers cannot ‘ﬁt’ within a bounded interval . Based on our results , we suggest that students who answered that there was more than three numbers ( but not inﬁnitely many ) , had an intuition that they had not found the end of the process , and therefore their solution conﬁdence was low . Furthermore , when they ﬁrst had read the task , their success expec - tation had been high . This suggests that these students realized that they need to move beyond the one decimal level while they were solving the task . In order to understand that there are inﬁnitely many numbers between 0 . 8 and 1 . 1 , the students needed to realize that the process of constructing more and more num - bers within the given interval is potentially inﬁnite . Furthermore , they need to i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 333 — # 17 i i i i i i Levels of students’ understanding on inﬁnity 333 use the basic metaphor of inﬁnity to conceptualise the ﬁnal resultant state of the process – inﬁnitely many numbers . Only when they would reach that level they would feel conﬁdent . Most students who understood that there are inﬁnitely many numbers within the interval seemed to ﬁnd that solution through reasoning a potentially inﬁnite process . Only one student immediately reasoned with actual inﬁnity . We might say that the former represents an approach of constructing a solution through a process , while the latter represents deduction from a known property ( density ) of a number line . Conclusions Discussion In the ﬁfth grade most students have no clue of inﬁnity , and the situation is not much better in the seventh grade . Yet , there is an obvious development from grade 5 to grade 7 in student levels of answering these questions . Inﬁnity is , indeed , a diﬃcult concept and students have diﬃculties with it , even in high school [ 13 ] and at the university level [ 15 ] . In international comparative studies the gender diﬀerence in mathematics achievement among 15 - year olds has disappeared in many countries , Finland being one of those countries [ 17 ] , [ 18 ] . However , in this representative large sample boys gave signiﬁcantly better answers than girls in tasks dealing with inﬁnity . This ﬁnding can be understood in the light of the general conclusion made by Fennema and Hart [ 5 ] . According to them , gender diﬀerences in mathematics still remain within the most diﬃcult topics . The test used can be regarded as an example of a very challenging one that is likely to produce large gender diﬀerences even in countries where overall gender diﬀerences in mathematics achievement have disappeared . In most cases students who gave better answers were also more conﬁdent of their answers . This is what we would have expected . However , ﬁndings for task 7 confront this expected tendency . Also Merenluoto [ 13 ] has found similar results , where there was a general tendency for conﬁdence to increase as the answers got better , but also some topics where this was not the case . Our empirical evidence supports some of the ideas we presented in the begin - ning . The nature of non - linearity in students’ solution conﬁdence supports the i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 334 — # 18 i i i i i i 334 Markku S . Hannula , Erkki Pehkonen , Hanna Maijala and Riitta Soro view that learning inﬁnity requires a conceptual change . Furthermore , our inter - view data supports the view that many students reason about decimal numbers with a linking metaphor to natural numbers . Students who work on a single dec - imal level are conﬁdent of their answer . They have assimilated tenths into their concept of natural numbers . When students realise that it is possible to generate more decimals , hundredths , thousandths , etc . , it is like opening a Pandora’s box . The logic of natural numbers is challenged : is the successor of 0 . 8 0 . 9 , 0 . 81 , or 0 . 80001 ? Even if they still produce a ﬁnite answer , they are uncertain of their answers , because they are aware of the alternatives . Only when their conception of ( rational ) numbers has changed to include the idea of density , can they again gain conﬁdence . Regarding metaphors , we found clear evidence that students used natural numbers to reason about decimal numbers . Another metaphor that we found evidence for was the number line metaphor . At least some students draw from this metaphor the incorrect inference that each number would occupy a space on the number line . However , unlike in the study by Boero et al . [ 1 ] we found no reference to God or chain of generations as source metaphors for inﬁnity . This suggests that some metaphors are culture - dependent . Some ﬁnal comments Mathematics is often considered to form a hierarchical structure where all new concepts logically follow from prior ones , which allows students to enrich their knowledge step by step . This hierarchy of structures was most clearly seen in the bourbakist way of compiling mathematics according the structures ( cf . [ 2 ] ) . Such a structural way of learning mathematics can , however , be dangerous , since in some cases old structures may disturb the adaptation of new and more general ones . The very fundamental idea of a successor , for example , is necessary for learning the notion of natural numbers . The idea is , however , later on seriously conﬂicting with the understanding of the character of both rational and real numbers . According to the theories on conceptual change ( cf . [ 3 ] , [ 23 ] , [ 14 ] ) the relationship between learners’ prior knowledge and new information to be learned is one of the most crucial factors in determining the quality of learning . Theories of conceptual change focus especially to those processes where an earlier way of thinking is challenged by new knowledge to be learned ( e . g . [ 13 ] , [ 14 ] ) . Since learning can happen , at least , in two diﬀerent ways – using the Piagetian language : through accommodation or through adaptation – we have also two categories of conceptual change theories . Enrichment ( cf . assimilation ) is i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 335 — # 19 i i i i i i Levels of students’ understanding on inﬁnity 335 an easier process , where old knowledge remains mainly valid , and new knowledge is added to the slightly modiﬁed knowledge structure . The second category of conceptual change ( cf . accommodation ) is a more complicated one , since it needs a drastic revision or restructuring of old knowledge . Moving from potential inﬁnity to actual inﬁnity of natural numbers is an example of enrichment , and some students can handle this already at grade ﬁve . A more radical restructuring is necessary for grasping the density of rational ( real ) numbers . It requires moving beyond the logic of natural numbers where each number has a successor and this seems to be more diﬃcult for students . In another analysis of the longitudinal development of student competence in number concept , we noticed that proper understanding of fractions as numbers is an important predictor of learning the density of numbers [ 9 ] . This suggests that learning fractions is an important opportunity for this challenging conceptual change . In our opinion the results are not satisfactory . Majority of students seemed to think purely on the level of ﬁnite processes . The basic idea of potential inﬁnity is not diﬃcult to introduce to students . Usually children are very interested about these questions . Are teachers afraid of this topic as too diﬃcult ? In school we should teach mathematics and not only to master routine tasks of the textbook . This means that the main mathematical ideas should be discussed in the class , too . Inﬁnity is one of the mathematical ‘Fundamental Ideas’ that need to be introduced to children early on [ 21 ] . That inﬁnity is introduced relatively late in the curriculum , may be especially harmful for female students , who tend to rely more on the ideas taught in school . Students need experiences that allow them to develop rich images of the topic , which will function as the basis for a formalisation at a later stage [ 20 ] . References [ 1 ] P . Boero , N . Douek , R . Garuti , Children’s conceptions of inﬁnity of numbers in a ﬁfth grade discussion context , in : Proceedings of the 27 th Conference of the Interna - tional Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education , Vol . 2 , ( N . A . Pateman , B . J . Dougherty , J . Zilliox , eds . ) , University of Hawaii , 2003 , 121 – 128 . [ 2 ] C . B . Boyer , A history of mathematics , Princeton University Press , Princeton ( NJ ) , 1985 . [ 3 ] S . Carey , Conceptual change in childhood , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1985 . [ 4 ] P . J . Davis , R . Hersh , The Mathematical Experience , Birkh¨auser , Boston , MA , 1980 / 1990 . i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 336 — # 20 i i i i i i 336 Markku S . Hannula , Erkki Pehkonen , Hanna Maijala and Riitta Soro [ 5 ] E . Fennema , L . E . Hart , Gender and the JRME , Journal for Research in Mathe - matics Education 24 , no . 6 ( 1994 ) , 648 – 659 . [ 6 ] E . Fennema , J . A . Sherman , Fennema - Sherman mathematics attitudes scales , JSAS Catalog of Selected Documents in Psychology 6 , no . 31 ( 1976 ) , Ms . No . 1225 . [ 7 ] E . Fischbein , Intuition in Science and Mathematics , Reidel , Dordrecht , The Nether - lands , 1987 . [ 8 ] E . Fishbein , D . Tirosh , P . Hess , The intuition of inﬁnity , Educational Studies in Mathematics 1 ( 1979 ) , 3 – 40 . [ 9 ] M . S . Hannula , H . Maijala , E . Pehkonen , Development of understanding and self - - conﬁdence in mathematics ; grades 5 - 8 , in : Proceedings of the 28 th Conference of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education , Vol . 3 , ( M . J . Høines , A . B . Fuglestad , eds . ) , Bergen University College , 2004 , 17 – 24 . [ 10 ] M . S . Hannula , H . Maijala , E . Pehkonen , A . Nurmi , Gender comparisons of pupils’ self - conﬁdence in mathematics learning , Nordic Studies in Mathematics Education 10 , no . 3 – 4 ( 2005 ) , 29 – 42 . [ 11 ] G . Lakoﬀ , R . E . N´u˜nes , Where mathematics comes from ; How the embodied mind brings mathematics into being , Basic Books , 2000 . [ 12 ] H . Maijala , How does classroom teaching in mathematics look like ? , manuscript , 2005 . [ 13 ] K . Merenluoto , Lukiolaisen reaaliluku ; Lukualueen laajentaminen k¨asitteellisen¨a muutoksena matematiikassa ( in English : Students’ real number ; Enlargement of the number concept as a conceptual change in mathematics ) , University of Turku , 2001 , Publications C 176 . [ 14 ] K . Merenluoto , Discussion about conceptual change in mathematics , Nordic Studies in Mathematics Education 10 , no . 2 ( 2005 ) , 17 – 33 . [ 15 ] K . Merenluoto , E . Pehkonen , Elementary teacher students’ mathematical under - standing explained via conceptual change , in : Proceedings of the PME - NA XXIV , ( D . Mewborne , P . Sztajn , D . Y . White , H . G . Wiegel , R . L . Bryant , K . Nooney , eds . ) , ERIC , Columbus ( OH ) , 2002 , 1936 – 1939 . [ 16 ] A . L . E . Moreno , G . Waldegg , The conceptual evolution of actual mathematical inﬁnity , Educational Studies in Mathematics 22 , no . 3 ( 1991 ) , 211 – 231 . [ 17 ] I . V . S . Mullis , M . O . Martin , E . J . Gonzales , K . D . Gregory , R . A . Garden , K . M . O’Connor , S . J . Chostowski , T . A . Smith , TIMSS 1999 international mathe - matics report ; Findings from IEA’s repeat of the Third International Mathematis and Science Study at the eight grade , International Study Center , Lynch School of Education , Boston College , 2000 . [ 18 ] OECD / PISA , Problem solving for tomorrow’s world ; First measures of cross - cul - tural competencies from PISA 2003 , OECD , 2004 . [ 19 ] J . Piaget , B . Inhelder , A child’s conception of space , Routledge & Kegan Paul , London , 1967 . i i “hannula” — 2007 / 2 / 15 — 13 : 51 — page 337 — # 21 i i i i i i Levels of students’ understanding on inﬁnity 337 [ 20 ] S . Pirie , T . Kieren , Growth in mathematical understanding : How can we charac - terise it and how can we represent it ? , Educational Studies in Mathematics 26 , no . 2 – 3 ( 1994 ) , 165 – 190 . [ 21 ] F . Schweiger , Fundamentale Ideen . Eine geistesgeschichtliche Studie zur Mathe - matikdidaktik , Journal f¨ur Mathematik - Didaktik 13 ( 1992 ) , 199 – 214 . [ 22 ] P . Tsamir , T . Dreyfus , Comparing inﬁnite sets – a process of abstraction . The case of Ben , The Journal of Mathematical Behavior 21 , no . 1 ( 2002 ) , 1 – 23 . [ 23 ] S . Vosniadou , Capturing and modeling the process of conceptual change , Learning and Instruction 4 ( 1994 ) , 45 – 69 . [ 24 ] M . M . Wheeler , Children’s understanding of zero and inﬁnity , Arithmetic teacher ( Nov 1987 ) , 42 – 44 . [ 25 ] I . Wistedt , M . Martinsson , Orchestrating a mathematical theme : eleven - year olds discuss the problem of inﬁnity , Learning and Instruction 6 , no . 2 ( 1996 ) , 173 – 185 . MARKKU S . HANNULA UNIVERSITY OF HELSINKI DEPARTMENT OF APPLIED SCIENCES OF EDUCATION KUUSIKALLIONKUJA 3 C 44 02210 ESPOO FINLAND ANDTALLINN UNIVERSITY DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS ESTONIA E - mail : markku . hannula @ helsinki . fi ERKKI PEHKONEN UNIVERSITY OF HELSINKI DEPARTMENT OF APPLIED SCIENCES OF EDUCATION FINLAND HANNA MAIJALA UNIVERSITY OF TURKU DEPARTMENT OF TEACHER EDUCATION FINLAND RIITTA SORO SECONDARY SCHOOL LOIMAA FINLAND ( Received February , 2006 )