49 Empowering Users To Become Designers : Using Meta - Design Environments to Enable and Motivate Sustainable Energy Decisions Holger Dick , Hal Eden , Gerhard Fischer , and Jason Zietz University of Colorado at Boulder , ECOT 717 , 430 UCB Boulder , CO 80309 , USA { holger . dick , haleden , gerhard , jason . zietz } @ colorado . edu ABSTRACT . Unsustainable energy consumption is a systemic problem facing societies . While technological innovations are necessary to address this problem , they are not sufficient ; they need to be integrated with social and behavioral changes in order to be most effective . Our approach is based on understanding and using participatory design as a paradigm for software design as well as the foundation for socio - technical environments that enable and support a cultural shift from passive consumers of energy to active decisions makers . Our research is grounded in two theoretical frameworks , meta - design and cultures of participation . We are developing E MPIRE , a socio - technical environment supporting rich ecologies of participation that enable people to become active designers of their energy consumption . E MPIRE engages people to participate in the design of their own energy environment and supports individuals and communities in understanding and making more sustainable choices regarding energy . Author Keywords : meta - design , cultures of participation , rich ecologies of participation , design - in - use , decision - making , energy sustainability ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 2 User Interfaces : User - centered design , H . 1 . 2 User / Machine Systems : Software psychology INTRODUCTION There is overwhelming evidence that our current lifestyle is not sustainable and human energy consumption causes global warming ( Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 2007 ) . Governments , industry , and environmental groups are undertaking major efforts to reduce energy consumption resulting in systems that are technically innovative but relegate end - users into passive consumer roles . To reduce energy consumption to sustainable levels , technological innovations and policy changes are not sufficient—changes in human behavior are necessary ( Ehrhardt - Martinez , Donnelly et al . 2010 ) and systems that involve end - users as active decision makers are needed ( Fischer 2002 ) . MOTIVATING AND ENABLING PEOPLE TO BECOME DECISION MAKERS WITH SOCIO - TECHNICAL ENVIRONMENTS To reach the goal of reducing energy consumption at a societal level , socio - technical interventions ( Mumford 2000 ) that go beyond simple presentations of facts are necessary . Changes in behavior to reduce energy consumption can be fostered through both social and technological interventions . Feedback , goal setting , and tailored information are useful in motivating people to change their energy behavior ( Abrahamse , Steg et al . 2007 ) . Steg and Vlek ( Steg and Vlek 2009 ) found that if participants are asked to become active in planning their energy environment , the probability of participants changing their behaviors and saving more energy increases . Staats , Harland and Wilke ( Staats , Harland et al . 2004 ) found in their longitudinal study that one of the most important contributing factors for changing behaviors and energy savings were supportive social environments . Computer - based feedback mechanisms can adapt these efforts ( Froehlich , Findlater et al . 2010 ) and have been implemented to take advantage of smart grids , smart meters , and advanced metering infrastructures ( http : / / www . oe . energy . gov / smartgrid . htm ) . In addition to these findings , we have identified psychological ownership and motivating social environments as being important for involving consumers , though they are largely ignored in the energy domain . Psychological ownership ( Pierce 2002 ) describes a state in which a person feels closely connected to an object or idea , to the degree that it becomes part of an ‘extended self’ . When people are involved in solving a problem or building something , they place a higher value on that activity and are more likely to continue to invest time and effort in it ( Ariely 2010 ) . The software infrastructure currently available to energy consumers does not foster psychological ownership . Consumers are not motivated to become active participants and assume ownership over their own energy consumption . Motivating Social Environments . Although changes in the social environment have been shown to cause people to use less energy ( Schultz , Nolan et al . 2007 ) , supportive social environments are not commonly used in this fashion . For example , social proof ( Cialdini 2009 ) describes the effect that people act a certain way because they observe others acting this way . In such situations , the fact that Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . PDC ' 12 , August 12 - 16 2012 , Roskilde , Denmark Copyright 2012 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1296 - 7 / 12 / 08 … $ 10 . 00 50 others chose something acts to validate this choice as preferable . But in the current smart - grid implementations , energy consumption remains individualistic and invisible to the consumers themselves as well as to others ( Ehrhardt - Martinez , Donnelly et al . 2010 ) . When a consumer tries to decide how to set the temperature of the thermostat or what appliances to buy , there are no role models , no examples to follow . Without awareness of other people’s actions and decisions , no social proof can be created . CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORKS We have developed the foundations of two theoretical frameworks : meta - design and cultures of participation that fundamentally change the way we perceive end - users in the design process . Meta - Design ( Fischer and Giaccardi 2006 ) is a design methodology for creating socio - technical environments in which users are able to identify , explore , and reassess their needs during use time and act as designers that can change the environment accordingly when needed ( Henderson and Kyng 1991 ) . Meta - design environments foster psychological ownership by giving users control and openness . Being an owner of the system makes people more likely to appreciate a system , invest more time in it , and develop extensions to it . Cultures of Participation ( Fischer 2011 ) offer a new platform for human connection , bringing together otherwise unconnected individuals and replacing or enhancing common background or geographic proximity with a sense of well - defined purpose and the successful common pursuit . Our research is exploring a richer ecology of participation in cultures of participation by differentiating , analyzing , and supporting five distinct roles : unaware consumers , aware consumers , collaborators , designers , and meta - designers ( Preece and Shneiderman 2009 , Fischer and Giaccardi 2006 ) . The concepts of cultures of participation and meta - design environments are tightly integrated ( Fischer 2010 ) . To be a successful meta - design system , users have to be able to share their ideas and developments , to get help from other users , and to find extensions and developments that have already been implemented by others ; they have to form a culture of participation . Cultures of participation require the underlying software system to be open and modifiable so that users can participate in meaningful problems . The software underlying a culture of participation has to allow users to adapt it to their needs ; meta - design environments are needed . Cultures of participation are well suited to foster and support motivating social environments in which people can create social proof and social norms by providing tools for sharing and for creating awareness . Since people are not merely consumers of a meta - designed system but active participants of a community , they are more likely to be influenced by the actions and opinions of others . E MPIRE — A SYSTEM TO REDUCE ENERGY CONSUMPTION Grounded in our conceptual frameworks , we are building E MPIRE ( see Figure 1 ) as a suite of tools that enhances participation in order to foster and support migration to more active roles . The components of E MPIRE allow consumers to understand how they use energy , compare their energy usage to that of others , and make educated decisions based on their insights . To foster and support a richer ecology of participation , we have identified the following design requirements : ( 1 ) tools that create awareness , ( 2 ) tools that foster interest and motivation to assume different and more active roles ( Csikszentmihalyi 1990 ) , and ( 3 ) tools that support users in their migration to these roles ( Preece and Shneiderman 2009 ) . E MPIRE supports migration between different roles ( see Table 1 ) in order to enrich the ecology of participation . Migration from Role 0 to Role 1 : Becoming an Aware Consumer . For cultures of participation to be successful , unaware consumers ( Role 0 ) need to be able to migrate to active decision makers ( Role 1 ) . Based on the current wide spread energy illiteracy ( Reeves , Robinson et al . 2009 ) this is a demanding task that requires a significant Figure 1 : Overview of E MPIRE Energy Tracking Infrastructure E MPIRE Computational and Information - Sharing Backend TheoreticalFrameworks - Cultures of Participation - Richer Ecologies - Meta - Design D ASHBOARD through Website , Mobile Apps , and in - home displays Insight in - home display SetPoint thermostat Volt outlet Transport gateway Energy Journal Goal Setting Alerts Open Data API Design APIs 51 effort . First , consumers need to realize which problems exist with their energy consumption . Then they need to identify sources of reliable and personally relevant information , such as sources about devices and appliances , about behaviors and activities , about energy - production , and about the local energy provider . This information needs to be understood ( a nontrivial task , given the abstract and confusing information currently provided by utility companies ( Ehrhardt - Martinez , Donnelly et al . 2010 ) ) and to be analyzed in detail to derive conclusions about the users’ energy consumption . Rather than presenting users with one big step and no support , E MPIRE guides and helps them in their migration by offering a variety of many small steps that individually require little effort while still providing value to the users . For example , to make it easier for users to identify problems in their energy consumption , E MPIRE not only presents the user with abstract numbers but also creates meaningful representations that put the consumption into context and allow people quickly explore and understand where their consumption is unusual or higher than normal ( see Figure 2 ) . Users can use E MPIRE to see how , where , and when other users are using energy to get a better idea of possible alternate behaviors and social norms for energy usage . By providing social norms , people can get motivation as well as guidance to reduce their energy consumption ( Schultz , Nolan et al . 2007 ) . Our previous work on cultures of participation ( Fischer 2011 ) and related research ( Preece and Shneiderman 2009 ) have demonstrated that the migration paths for more advanced roles present problems similar to the described transition from Role 0 to Role 1 : People with an interest in becoming more involved and active are confronted with big steps that require substantial effort to learn new information and use a completely new set of tools without receiving immediate value in return . NEXT STEPS We are currently evaluating the system in a long - term study with 40 participants . This study combines Table 1 : Envisioned Roles , Demands , and Activities for a Culture of Participation in the Energy Domain Role 0 The Unaware Role 1 Aware Consumers Role 2 Collaborators Role 3 Designers Role 4 Meta - Designers Specific roles Unaware consumers Aware users of energy ; active decision makers Assistants ; teachers ; learners ; observers End - user developer ; visualization designer Leaders , software architects , social community founders Demands and activities Use energy unconsciously as part of daily life Are aware of energy and energy use ; know the space of possibilities ; make educated decisions Share data and knowledge with others ; compare with and learn from others Learn advanced languages and tools ; use existing infrastructure to design new artifacts Define tools and languages ; perform seeding ; create infrastructure ; set policies Figure 2 : Detailed Energy Visualization in E MPIRE 52 quantitative and qualitative data collection and analysis to assess how E MPIRE helps people to understand their energy consumption , how it motivates them to reduce their consumption , and how it compares to simple direct feedback mechanisms that only provide decontextualized energy data ( Ehrhardt - Martinez , Donnelly et al . 2010 ) . E MPIRE is a first step toward enabling people to become participatory designers of their energy consumption . Future developments will improve the meta - design aspects of the system itself and let all users modify and expand the system to their needs by creating simulations and visualizations that are meaningful to them . Finally , the individual’s actions are being integrated with a culture of participation , so that users can share their creations and insights , help others , gain social recognition , and take on leadership roles within the community , thereby fostering and rewarding the investment of self , a requirement for psychological ownership ( Pierce 2002 ) . The community of E MPIRE participants will be supported in sharing and becoming aware of people’s , insights , behaviors , consumption , and improvements in energy use . CONCLUSIONS Meta - design and cultures of participation are promising frameworks for designing engaging experiences not only through participation at design time but also for different levels of active participation at use time . Grounded and influenced by a variety of different views from the literature about rethinking participatory design and based on our own research over the last decade , we are developing E MPIRE as an initial prototype of a socio - technical environment for empowering citizens to act as active decision makers in the domain of energy sustainability . Acknowledgments . The research is supported in part by grants from the National Science Foundation : ( 1 ) IIS - 0968588 “SoCS : Energy Sustainability and Smart Grids : Fostering and Supporting Cultures of Participation in the Energy Landscape of the Future , ” ( 2 ) IIS - 1111025 “Theoretical Frameworks and Socio - Technical Systems for Fostering Smart Communities in Smart Grid Environments , ” and ( 3 ) OCI - 1028017 “CDI - Type I : Transformative Models of Learning and Discovery in Cultures of Participation” . REFERENCES Abrahamse , W . , L . Steg , et al . ( 2007 ) . " The effect of tailored information , goal setting , and tailored feedback on household energy use , energy - related behaviors , and behavioral antecedents . " Journal of Environmental Psychology 27 ( 4 ) : 265 - 276 . Cialdini , R . ( 2009 ) . Influence : Science and Practice ( 5th Edition ) . Boston , Pearson . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1990 ) . Flow : The Psychology of Optimal Experience . New York , HarperCollins Publishers . Ehrhardt - Martinez , K . , K . A . Donnelly , et al . ( 2010 ) . Advanced Metering Initiatives and Residential Feedback Programs : A Meta - Review for Household Electricity - Saving Opportunities . Washington , D . C . , American Council for an Energy - Efficient Economy . E105 : 128 . Fischer , G . ( 2002 ) . " Beyond ' Couch Potatoes ' : From Consumers to Designers and Active Contributors . " FirstMonday ( Peer - Reviewed Journal on the Internet ) , from http : / / firstmonday . org / issues / issue7 _ 12 / fischer / . Fischer , G . ( 2010 ) . " End - User Development and Meta - Design : Foundations for Cultures of Participation . " Journal of Organizational and End User Computing 22 ( 1 ) : 52 - 82 . Fischer , G . ( 2011 ) . " Understanding , Fostering , and Supporting Cultures of Participation . " ACM Interactions 18 ( 3 ) : 42 - 53 . Fischer , G . and E . Giaccardi ( 2006 ) . Meta - Design : A Framework for the Future of End User Development . End User Development . H . Lieberman , F . Paternò and V . Wulf . Dordrecht , The Netherlands , Kluwer Academic Publishers : 427 - 457 . Froehlich , J . , L . Findlater , et al . ( 2010 ) . The design of eco - feedback technology . Proceedings of CHI Conference . Atlanta , Georgia , ACM : 1999 - 2008 . Henderson , A . and M . Kyng ( 1991 ) . There ' s No Place Like Home : Continuing Design in Use . Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems . J . Greenbaum and M . Kyng . Hillsdale , NJ , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . : 219 - 240 . Intergovernmental Panel on Climate , C . ( 2007 ) . Climate Change 2007 : Synthesis Report . Summary for Policymakers , Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . Mumford , E . ( 2000 ) . " A Socio - technical Approach to Systems Design . " Requirements Engineering , 5 ( 2 ) : 59 - 77 . Pierce , J . L . , Kostova , Tatiana , Dirks , Kurt T . ( 2002 ) . " The State of Psychological Ownership : Integrating and Extending a Century of Research . " Review of General Psychology : 84 - 107 . Preece , J . and B . Shneiderman ( 2009 ) . " The Reader - to - Leader Framework : Motivating Technology - Mediated Social Participation . " AIS Transactions on Human - Computer Interaction 1 ( 1 ) : 13 - 32 . Reeves , B . , T . Robinson , et al . ( 2009 ) . " Large - Scale Energy Reductions through Sensors , Feedback , & Information Technology . " from http : / / arpa - e . energy . gov / LinkClick . aspx ? fileticket = xpbAhwLKiw E % 3d & tabid = 200 . Schultz , P . W . , J . M . Nolan , et al . ( 2007 ) . " The constructive , destructive , and reconstructive power of social norms . " Psychological science : A Journal of the American Psychological Society / APS 18 : 429 - 434 . Staats , H . , P . Harland , et al . ( 2004 ) . " Effecting Durable Change . " Environment and Behavior 36 ( 3 ) : 341 - 367 . Steg , L . and C . Vlek ( 2009 ) . " Encouraging pro - environmental behaviour : An integrative review and research agenda . " Journal of Environmental Psychology 29 ( 3 ) : 309 - 317 .