Balancing Specialization and Adaptation in a Transforming Scientific Landscape Lucas Gautheron 1 , 2 Abstract How scientists navigate between the need to capitalize on their prior knowledge by specializing , and the urge to adapt to evolving research opportunities ? Drawing from diverse perspectives on adaptation , in particular from institutional change and cultural evolution , this paper proposes a Bayesian model of the evolution of scientists’ research portfolios in response to transformations in their field . The model relies on scientific abstracts and authorship data to evaluate the influence of intellectual , social , and institutional resources on scientists’ trajectories within a cohort of 2 195 high - energy physicists between 2000 and 2019 . The reallocation of research efforts in response to the incentives to adapt is shown to be mainly structured by learning costs , thus maximizing the utility of the scientific capital disseminated among scientists . Two dimensions of social capital , namely “diversity” and “power” , have opposite effects on the magnitude of change in scientists’ research interests : while “diversity” disrupts and expands research interests , “power” stabilizes physicists’ research agendas – as does institutional stability . Social capital plays a more crucial role in shifts between cognitively distant research areas . * lucas . gautheron @ gmail . com ORCID : 0000 - 0002 - 3776 - 3373 1 Interdisciplinary Centre for Science and Technology Studies ( IZWT ) , University of Wuppertal , Germany 2 Département d’Études Cognitives , École Normale Supérieure , Paris , France 1 a r X i v : 2312 . 14040v1 [ c s . S I ] 21 D e c 2023 1 Introduction Scientists are subject to conflicting incentives . On the one hand , they must work within the realm of their expertise , where they can most effectively exploit their prior knowledge and compete with other experts ; such a conservative preference for familiar research topics is at the root of specialization . On the other hand , scientists are simultaneously compelled to revise their research agenda to engage with more promising research areas , in order to benefit from more exposure , to secure funding , or to seize job opportunities . Thus , in some instances , specialization may be at odd with the need to adapt to the decay of certain research opportunities and the growth of new ones . Therefore , we may ask : how scientists navigate the trade - off between specialization and adaptation ? This conflict is in some respect similar to the “essential tension” between “tradition” and “innovation” proposed by Kuhn ( 1977 ) , or that between “exploration” and “exploitation” proposed by March ( 1991 ) , which have been explored quantitatively in previous works ( Foster et al . , 2015 ; Jia et al . , 2017 ; Aleta et al . , 2019 ; Zeng et al . , 2019 ; Tripodi et al . , 2020 ; Singh et al . , 2023 ; Liu et al . , 2023 ) . The balance between “specialization” and “adaptation” , however , must be distinguished from the balance between incremental science and the risky exploration of uncharted territories . In particular , “adaptation” is not tantamount to innovation or disruption , for “adaptation” can be a conformist move ( e . g . as a result of a bandwagon effect , Fujimura 1988 ) . Of course , scientists may be prompted to adapt to disruptive breakthroughs in their field , a recent example being generative Large Language Models in computational linguistics ( Saphra et al . , 2023 ) . Disruptions expected from climate change , too , encourage further research on adaptation in science . Therefore , the present paper investigates scientists’ response to changes in their scientific environment ( whether it is driven by epistemic or institutional factors ) , and the effect of their capital ( intellectual , social or institutional ) on their ability to adapt . Drawing insights from various perspectives on adaptation ( in particular from cultural evolution and institutional change ) , we develop an unsupervised Bayesian approach to analyze changes in scientists’ research agenda while measuring the effect of “capital” ( intellectual or social ) on their individual trajectories . We apply the model to a cohort of high - energy physicists between the years 2000 and 2020 , as the historical driver of progress in the field – particle accelerators – are now being contested by emerging astrophysical experiments , thus transforming the landscape of opportunities . Our approach first reveals trends in the field : the boom of dark matter , fueled by migrations away from the physics of neutrinos and the electroweak sector , and the partial disintegration of string theory into the study of black holes and holographic duality . More importantly , we show that changes in scientists’ research portfolios are primarily structured by learning costs , and that scientific communities adapting to new circumstances address an Optimal Transport problem by reallocating research efforts efficiently . Moreover , two dimensions of social capital , namely “diversity” and “power” ( Abbasi et al . , 2014 ) , have opposite effects on change . While “diversity” of social capital ( that is , the extent to which scientists have access to diverse cognitive resources via their collaborators ) promotes change and further diversification of scientists’ research interests , “power” ( roughly speaking , the size of their network ) stabilizes their research interests . Social capital has a stronger effect on transfers between research areas that are more cognitively “distant” . Furthermore , institutional stability is associated with more conservative research interests . Overall , we contribute : i ) a theoretical account of the features of change in scientists’ research interests ; ii ) a novel methodological approach that includes a model of scientists’ trajectories , and measures of intellectual capital , social capital , diversity , and power ; and finally , iii ) empirical evidence from the case of high - energy physics . More generally , this paper contributes to address the present lack of empirical works in the literature investigating science as a cultural evolutionary system ( Wu et al . , 2023 ) . The paper is structured as follows . Section 1 . 1 summarizes previous research and lays out the conceptual background on which the analysis rests , and Section 1 . 2 introduces the context of high - energy physics to which the model is applied . Section 2 elaborates the methodology , starting with the data used in the paper ( 2 . 1 ) , followed by the topic model approach for measuring the authors’ commitment to each “research area” ( 2 . 2 ) , the developed measures of intellectual and social “capital” ( 2 . 3 ) , and finally , the model of individual scientists’ trajectories ( 2 . 4 ) . Section 3 then proceeds with the results : i ) the transfers of attention from one research area to another as the scientific landscape has change ; ii ) the structuring role of learning costs in the observed patterns of adaptation ( 3 . 2 ) , and iii ) the effect of capital ( intellectual and social ) and position stability on the physicists’ strategies ( 3 . 3 ) . 2 1 . 1 Empirical and conceptual background Changes in scientists’ research interests have been the focus of several previous works . For instance , by mapping the trajectories of 103 , 246 physicists over 26 years using the American Physical Society ( APS ) dataset and its topic classification ( the Physics and Astronomy Classification Scheme® ( PACS ) ) , Aleta et al . ( 2019 ) have demonstrated that a majority of physicists have gradually migrated to entirely different topics by the end of their career while often staying within the same general area . They reveal differences between subfields of physics , such that “exploitation” ( i . e . specialization , as opposed to the “exploration” of new topics ) is especially prevalent in particle and nuclear physics . Using the same data , Jia et al . ( 2017 ) find an exponentially decaying distribution of changes in scientists’ interests , a result that seems at odd with Aleta et al . 2019 1 . They also find that physicists tend to investigate a few core topics quite frequently , as well as many “peripheral” topics less frequently . They also show that a model in which scientists draw combinations of ideas from a topic pool that itself drifts gradually can qualitatively reproduce the observed distribution of changes in research interests . All findings emphasize the graduality of change in research topics over time , in line with a much less recent observation from Gieryn ( 1978 ) that astronomers were more likely to alter their research agenda incrementally . Recognizing that scientists typically investigate several research questions in parallel , Gieryn proposed four mechanisms of gradual change : “accretion” ( a problem is added to the “problem set” ) , “selective substitution” ( one problem is replaced by another ) , or “selective disengagement” ( one problem is neglected ) . Much more recently , Zeng et al . ( 2019 ) have analyzed the frequency of topic switching throughout scientific careers and its association with research performance ( in terms of citations ) , retrieving topics by identifying clusters in the co - citation network ; and , analyzing arXiv’s categories , Singh et al . ( 2023 ) have found two types of scientists , specialized “exploiters” and trandisciplinary “explorers” . All these works are very valuable for understanding the structure of changes in scientists’ interests . However , they do not relate changes in scientists’ research agendas to changes in the epistemic and institu - tional context , to the incentives that scientists receive , or to the resources that they can leverage in order to broaden their research opportunities . In particular , they do not explain differences in the behavior of physicists , except in terms of their subfield of origin or their academic age ( Zeng et al . , 2019 ; Aleta et al . , 2019 ) . Tripodi et al . ( 2020 ) have achieved a tremendous step in this direction . Using the APS dataset , they show that physicists are more likely to explore areas closer to their core specialization or areas to which they are connected via their collaborators . Their work highlights the crucial importance of collaboration in the expansion of research portfolios , especially for the exploration of cognitively distant research areas . However , Tripodi et al . do not address the transformations of scientists research portfolios throughout time ( i . e . , they do not quantify “change” , its magnitude , and the distribution of attention across research areas ) , and they recognize the need for further longitudinal analyses . This paper complements previous work in several ways . First , since the focus is on adaptation strategies , the core of our approach is both comparative ( as in Tripodi et al . 2020 , and unlike previous work ) and lon - gitudinal ( unlike Tripodi et al . 2020 , although the paper includes longitudinal robustness checks ) . Second , this contribution evaluates previously unexplored aspects , such as the choice between expansion or consoli - dation of research portfolios and the effect of institutional stability on change . Third , this work relates the findings to the epistemic context of the field and its transformations , which is made possible by performing the analysis at a smaller scale ( high - energy physics alone , rather than physics as a whole ) . Fourth , this work does not rely on the APS dataset and PACS categories on which rest most previous works ( Jia et al . , 2017 ; Aleta et al . , 2019 ; Battiston et al . , 2019 ; Tripodi et al . , 2020 ; Liu et al . , 2023 ) . A different dataset is used , and research areas are clustered with a topic model , so that the contributed methodology can in principle be applied to any body of scientific ( or non scientific ) literature . Finally , the proposed approach is grounded in theory , by translating concepts such as capital ( Bourdieu , 1980 , 1986 ) into quantitative constructs , and by exploiting theoretical insights from diverse approaches to “adaptation” . Let us now introduce the conceptual framework underlying the present paper . Scientists’ opportunities are effectively constrained by their prior knowledge , given that entering new research areas is associated with high learning costs . Yet , the exploitation of prior knowledge may require adjustments to new realities . Through a gradual process of adaptation , scientists can strategically retain the benefits of “problem retention” ( e . g . , the exploitation of “accumulated skills and resources” in one area , 1 This discrepancy could be explained by the different decisions these authors made regarding which physicists should be included in their analysis and how to estimate “initial” and “final” research interests 3 or “of an established research network” , Gieryn 1978 , p . 106 ) while progressively investing resources in new research directions . This is illustrated in Figure 1 , which represents the research agenda of a scientist in two separate time periods , in terms of the resources they exploit ( e . g . , concepts , models , methods , or technical skills ) and to what research areas these resources are applied . Problem areas are designated by different colors . A resource can be applied simultaneously to different ends , as expressed by the hatched rectangles ; however , resources are typically tailored for specific research areas . Scientists can take advantage of their prior knowledge in different ways . Of course , they can embrace specialization and commit to similar problems with the same theoretical and methodological tools . Alternatively , they can enter a new research area , repurposing their knowledge to new ends ( Mulkay , 1974 ; Schon , 1963 ) . We call this strategy “ conversion ” , in reference to the typology of incremental institutional change proposed by Mahoney and Thelen ( 2009 ) . Indeed , as shown in previous works on the transformations of high - energy physics facilities to multipurpose photon science instruments ( Hallonsten & Heinze , 2013 ; Heinze et al . , 2017 ) , historical institutionalism can account for gradual adaptations with large cumulative effects taking place in response to scientific and technological change ( Heinze & Münch , 2012 ) . In this paper , we apply the typology of change to individuals rather than organizations . Not all intellectual or methodological resources can be successfully applied to new research areas , and scientists are more likely to shift resources and attention to research areas that are less “cognitively distant” from their previous expertise . Additionally , as illustrated in Figure 1 , entering new research areas typically requires “ layering ” ( here again , borrowing the terminology from historical institutionalism ) , that is , the introduction of new concepts , models , or methods , on top of prior knowledge . However , the acquisition of new knowledge and skills implies learning costs , which can be partially avoided by collaborating with experts in the target domain ( Tripodi et al . , 2020 ) . Another mode of change is displacement , when the replacement of one research area for another involves significant neglect of prior knowledge . This may not be the preferred strategy , since it fails to take advantage of accumulated knowledge ; however , certain knowledge may not apply in a new context , or sometimes there might be reasons to suspend a line of research in order to concentrate attention on more promising topics . Resource 1 Resource 2 Resource 3 Resource 4 Resource 5 Resource 6 Resource 7 Resource 8 Conversion Displacement } } Layering Resource 1 Resource 2 Resource 3 Resource 4 Resource 5 Resource X Resource Y Resource Z Figure 1 : Schematic illustration of the changes in a scientist’s “research portfolio” over time . Each color represents a different research area . Resources entail any intellectual or methodological assets that a scientist uses to address scientific problems from each research area . Conversion applies prior resources to new goals . Displacement is the replacement of certain research interests with little or no transfer of prior knowledge . Layering is the introduction of new research interests via the addition of new knowledge . Scientists can take advantage of two types of resources as they navigate the trade - off between special - ization and adaptation . The first type is their own prior expertise , and the second is the expertise to which they potentially have access through their social network . We propose to consider both of these as “capital” ( Bourdieu , 1986 ) that can be leveraged in a changing epistemic landscape , where the boundaries between specializations must be crossed . Bourdieu’s “capital” designates assets of different kinds that individuals ( e . g . scientists ) can accumulate and leverage in the competitive context of their field . It is indeed “capital” ( whether “economic” , “cultural” , “social” or even “symbolic” , cf . Bourdieu 1986 ) that defines the scope of scientists’ opportunities and therefore their ability to broaden their research agenda . This paper considers 4 the cultural capital possessed by scientists in the form of scientific knowledge ( which will be referred to as “intellectual capital” ) , and social capital 2 . Measures that represent these concepts are proposed , and their effect on the magnitude of transfers of attention across research areas is evaluated . The emphasis will be placed on the divide underlined by Abbasi et al . ( 2014 ) between two dimensions of social capital , namely “power” ( in fact , network size in the present paper ) and “diversity” ( in this case , that of a group’s cognitive resources ) . Group diversity is generally recognized as a factor of adaptation in an evolving environment ( Schimmelpfennig et al . , 2021 ; Muthukrishna & Henrich , 2016 ; Henrich , 2004 ) or in the context of problem solving ( Hong & Page , 2004 ) . Power , status , and prestige are also plausibly associated with higher abilities . While capital defines scientists’ opportunities , it is not sufficient to explain why scientists do turn to new research areas or not , which also requires understanding the incentives that actors receive and why they must respond to these incentives . Consequently , the present paper also considers the effect of institutional stability on migrations between research areas , since the need to respond to changes in the epistemic and institutional environment is presumably different for physicists applying to new jobs than it is for tenured professors and researchers . Before introducing the data and the quantitative approach developed in this paper , the next section elab - orates on the relevance of the example of high - energy physics for investigating adaptation in a transforming scientific landscape . 1 . 2 The case of high - energy physics : navigating a changing epistemic landscape Historically , the field of particle physics has relied on the input of increasingly large particle colliders to achieve progress . These efforts culminated in 2010 with the start of the Large Hadron Collider ( LHC ) , the largest particle accelerator ever built . However , the LHC has found no evidence for anything that was not already predicted by the Standard Model of particle physics , and it is becoming increasingly plausible that in fact no conceivable particle accelerator would ever find any evidence for new particles or phenomena , leading to a situation of “crisis” ( Lykken & Spiropulu , 2014 ) . Although the LHC will continue to take data for years and plans for future accelerators are being discussed ( Roser et al . , 2023 ) , some have even speculated that particle physics as we know it had come to an end ( Harlander et al . , 2023 ; Kosyakov , 2023 ) , “the proscenium [ being ] captured by astrophysics and cosmology” instead ( Kosyakov , 2023 ) . In a recent assessment of the field , physicist Mikhail Shifman claimed that “pause in accelerator programs we are witnessing now is not necessarily [ . . . ] the end of explorations at [ high energies ] ” ; instead , such explorations “will continue , perhaps in a new form , with novel devices” ( Shifman , 2020 ) . Indeed , new experimental opportunities have emerged in the meantime . Gravitational Waves astronomy has begun in 2016 , with the announcement of the first “direct” detection of such waves from a black - hole merger by LIGO ( Abbott et al . , 2016 ) . Other opportunities include direct searches of dark matter of astrophysical origin in underground facilities ( e . g . LUX and Xenon experiments ) , and more precise data on the early universe from the Planck observatory . In fact , astrophysics seems to be increasingly replacing particle colliders in citations across experimental and theoretical high - energy physics . ( Gautheron & Omodei , 2023 ) . These transformations have been gradual : the LHC started in 2010 but operated much below its target energy until 2015 ; Planck has released data on the cosmic microwave background between 2010 and 2018 ; etc . ( see Figure 9 , Appendix A . 1 ) . In what follows , we propose to investigate how high - energy physicists have adapted in reaction to these changes in the scientific landscape . 2 Methods 2 . 1 Data Our source is the Inspire HEP database ( Moskovic , 2021 ) . It aggregates high - energy physics literature from various sources , including the main scientific publishers and arXiv , and has been used in a number of works ( Perović et al . , 2016 ; Chall et al . , 2019 ; Strumia , 2021 ; Sikimić & Radovanović , 2022 ; Gautheron & Omodei , 2023 ) . For the literature on high - energy physics , it is more comprehensive than the APS dataset that has been the focus of previous work on the evolution of research interests , because the latter is limited to a few 2 Although we do not consider economic capital , it is in principle relevant for research that requires expensive material , the hiring of many technicians , or large computing resources . 5 journals 3 . The database is free - access and includes a variety of high - quality data : semantic data about each paper ( mainly their title and abstract , sometimes also keywords and PACS categories ) , curated authorship and institutional affiliations , lists of references and experiments associated with each paper . This database implements both automatized and manual measures for the disambiguation of author names 4 , which has previously allowed Strumia ( 2021 ) to analyze gender gaps in physicists’ research careers based on these data . Nevertheless , occasional misidentifications remain possible . The present analysis includes all papers from the categories “Theory - HEP” and “Phenomenology - HEP” ( according to the classification of the database , which is itself based on that of the arXiv ) , to which most high - energy physics publications belong . Occasionally , this filter might exclude high - energy physics papers not classified as such – the categories are assigned manually by the authors . Moreover , the minority of purely experimental high - energy physics publications are excluded : given such papers are typically authored by thousands of collaborators , authorship data provide no information about individual experimentalists’ specialization . Therefore , this work documents how theorists and phenomenologists have adapted to the changes outline above . In total , the corpus includes D = 186 , 162 articles published between 2000 and 2019 . For the longitudinal analysis , two time periods are considered . An initial phase ( 2000 - 2009 ) is used to infer a reference “research agenda” for each physicist in the cohort , as well as their intellectual and social capital . A late phase ( 2015 - 2019 ) is used to measure how each physicist’s research agenda has shifted in comparison to the initial time period , in the context of the changes outlined above . The five - year gap between these two periods allows to measure the cumulative effect of the transformations in the scientific landscape that have unfolded gradually between 2010 and 2015 ( had they been sudden , we would not have introduced such a wide gap ) , as well as the effect of the capital acquired prior to these transformations . Only physicists with at least 5 publications during each time period ( 2000 to 2009 , and 2015 to 2019 ) are included , resulting in a cohort of N = 2 195 physicists . As a result , this study is limited to physicists that have remained sufficiently dedicated to high - energy physics ; what we observe is thus the physicists’ strategies for adapting within high - energy physics , thus excluding authors that exited the field ( there is a survivorship bias ) . Furthermore , our author inclusion rule excludes scientists who publish very irregularly ; however , although scientists who continuously publish are a minority , they make up most of the publications in their field 5 . In any case , we do not seek “representativeness” : we only aim to achieve enough variance to uncover patterns among this particular cohort of productive high - energy physicists . The median academic age of the physicists in the cohort was 23 years in 2015 , and 49 % of them have had an affiliation that spanned the entire time period ( see Appendix A . 2 , Figure 10 ) . 2 . 2 Measuring research agendas The first step is to evaluate the amount of attention physicists have devoted to each research area during each time period . We propose a strategy that relies neither on PACS categories ( in contrast to Jia et al . 2017 ; Battiston et al . 2019 ; Aleta et al . 2019 ; Tripodi et al . 2020 ) nor on citation data ( unlike Zeng et al . 2019 ) . Instead , research areas are extracted through the use of a topic model , which simultaneously recovers latent “topics” within the corpus and their vocabulary distributions ( Blei et al . , 2003 ; Griffiths & Steyvers , 2004 ) . This makes the approach applicable to a wider range of situations for which only textual data ( even short texts ) are available , including nonscientific corpora . Arguably , texts also provide a more direct representation of the structure of knowledge . Given that research areas should be rather broad and autonomous , we perform a coarse - grained classification of the literature into only K = 20 “topics” . There is always some level of arbitrariness involved in choosing the number of topics , but this is not as much an issue of topic models themselves : as Gieryn ( 1978 ) puts it , “in such analyses [ of problem change ] , empirical findings will in part reflect the defined scope of problem areas” , which is itself arbitrary . In fact , that topic models give some control over the cognitive scale can be considered a feature , rather than a bug 6 . 3 https : / / journals . aps . org / datasets 4 Besides the use of “advance algorithms” of author - disambiguation , Inspire invites scientists to correct their own publication record on the website ( cf . https : / / twiki . cern . ch / twiki / pub / Inspire / WebHome / INSPIRE _ background . pdf , June 2014 ) 5 According to Ioannidis et al . ( 2014 ) , less than 1 % of scientists active in the years 1996 – 2011 have published every year during this period , and yet this minority is responsible for 47 % of the publications ; and Liu et al . ( 2023 ) , find that the 13 % of physicists with ≥ 16 publications over the course of 24 years account for 82 % of publications . 6 In fact , previous works based on the PACS categories have leveraged the different levels of this hierarchical classification system to investigate different scales . 6 We use the Embedded Topic Model ( ETM ) developed by Dieng et al . 2020 , which relies on pretrained embeddings representations of the keywords . This model provides more reliable classifications of heavy - tailed vocabulary distributions . We train the model the abstracts of the D = 186 , 162 documents published between 2000 and 2019 . Keywords are extracted from the papers’ titles and abstracts by filtering n - grams between one and three words matching certain syntactic expressions that we can expect to carry scientific information ( by designating concepts , models , methds etc . ) , following the procedure described in Gautheron and Omodei 2023 and Omodei 2014 . Keywords’ embeddings are learned using a skip - grap model in a L = 50 dimension space ( few dimensions are needed given the small size of the vocabulary , V = 4 , 751 ) . In the end , we obtain the topics listed in Appendix A . 3 , Table 1 . This table shows their most frequent keywords , as well as the PACS categories that are most correlated with them . Of the 20 resulting topics , 16 topics are interpretable ; the other four seem to regroup keywords that do not clearly refer to any specific research area ( e . g . “paper” , “approach” ) and correlate poorly with the PACS categories , which confirms their lack of scientific dimension . As a result , the present analysis only considers the K = 16 remaining topics that designate actual research areas ( as confirmed by their strong tendency to cite themselves , cf . Appendix A . 3 . 3 , and their correlation with the PACS classification , cf . Appendix A . 3 . 4 ) . Using the topic model , we derive n dk , the amount of keywords in the abstract of d that refer to a research area k 7 , and consequently X a , k , the amount of times keywords ( “resources” , i . e . concepts , models , methods , etc . ) in relation to research area k have occurred in papers ( co - ) authored by a in the initial time - period ( 2000 to 2009 ) . Mathematically , X a , k = (cid:80) d ∈ P , a ∈ A d n d , k , where A d is the set of authors of a publication d , and P is the set of papers published between 2000 and 2009 . The matrix Y a , k is derived identically , using publications from the later time period ( 2015 to 2019 ) . Research portfolios are finally represented by the normalized distributions x ak ≡ X ak / (cid:80) k ′ X ak ′ and y ak ≡ Y ak / (cid:80) k ′ Y ak ′ . They represent how each scientist a divided his attention between research areas during each period . 2 . 3 Measuring capital Evaluting the effect of intellectual and social capital on scientists’ trajectories requires a quantitative op - erationalization of these concepts . An extensive review of prior usage of Bourdieu’s notion of capital in bibliometrics has been provided by Schirone ( 2023 , p . 198 - 200 ) , with most references addressing symbolic and social capital , and none focusing on cultural capital . In the following , a consistent approach to intellectual and social capital is proposed , from which measures of diversity and power are derived . 2 . 3 . 1 Intellectual capital We represent intellectual capital by a vector I a = ( I ak ) that purportedly measures the proficiency of an author a in each research area k ∈ { 1 , . . . , K } . It is constructed in a way similar to x a , summing the contribution of keywords dedicated to each research area in the publications of each author during years 2000 to 2009 , except that publications are now weighed differently depending on their amount of authors . Indeed , publications with fewer co - authors convey more information about each author’s own expertise . The weight is 1 | A d | , where | A d | is the amount of authors of publication d 8 : I ak ∝ (cid:88) d ∈ P , a ∈ A d n d , k | A d | ( 1 ) The vector I a is normalized , such that (cid:80) k I ak = 1 ; as a result , I a only captures the ways scientists divide their cognitive resources between research areas , rather than the “absolute magnitude” of their knowledge of each area . 2 . 3 . 2 Social capital Many measures of scientists’ social capital have been proposed ( Abbasi et al . , 2014 ; Schirone , 2023 ) , the simplest being the amount of collaborators of a scientist ( which amounts to degree centrality in the co - authorship network ) . More sophisticated weighted variants , that take into consideration the frequency of 7 See Appendix A . 3 . 1 for further details on the counting procedure . 8 A justification for this weight is that the probability that a given author has been responsible for introducing any particular concept or method present in the paper is O ( 1 / | A d | ) . 7 collaborations , have also been suggested ( Abbasi et al . , 2014 ) . Other measures are related to the notion of betweeness centrality , which concerns the extent to which an actor “bridges” a network . For instance , Burt ( 2007 ) has proposed to measure social capital in terms of brokerage , i . e . , the ability of an individual to overcome “structural holes” in a social network . The distinction between these different measures is important ; for instance , redundant contacts ( and sheer network size ) can detrimental in some circumstances . Abbasi et al . ( 2014 ) distinguishes two general approaches to social capital , depending on whether the emphasis is placed on “power” versus “diversity” . They propose alternative measures based on citations that correlate better with scientists’ performance than measures of degree centrality . All the measures discussed in Abbasi et al . 2014 represent social capital by a single scalar ; however , a single number necessarily misses multiple dimensions of social capital ( Martín - Alcázar et al . , 2019 ) . In fact , according to Bourdieu ( 1980 ) , “the volume of social capital possessed by a particular agent [ . . . ] depends on the extent of the network of links that he can effectively mobilize , and on the volume of capital ( economic , cultural or symbolic ) possessed by each of those to whom he is linked” . In that respect , social capital can come in different forms depending on the resources being leveraged via one’s network . In the following , we propose to focus on one aspect of social capital , that is , its intellectual dimension . We represent it by a vector S a that encodes how the amount of expertise in each research area is carried is available to scientists via their network . More specifically , we define S a as the sum of the intellectual capital of a ’s collaborators , weighted by the strength of their relationship : S a ≡ (cid:88) c ∈ co - authors ( a ) w ac I c \ a ( 2 ) The vector I c \ a is the intellectual capital of c , evaluated by excluding papers co - authored with a ( in order to disentangle the effect of an author’s own intellectual capital and intellectual capital available to them in social form ) . Collaborators outside the cohort are taken into account . The weight w ac , which represents the strength of the relationship between a and c , is defined as : w ac ≡ max d | { a , c } ⊂ A d 1 | A d | − 1 ( 3 ) Where d runs over all publications and A d is the set of the co - authors of a paper d . Such a weighing scheme , inspired from Newman 2004 ( eq . 4 ) , captures the fact that a paper with , say , two co - authors , signals a stronger relationship between the authors than a publication with a dozen authors . 9 However , Equation ( 3 ) does not take into account the recency and frequency of collaborations . 2 . 3 . 3 Diversity and power Although these two constructs ( I a and S a ) operationalizing the notions of intellectual and social capital are vectors ( with one dimension per research area ) , scalar metrics representing “diversity” and “power” can be derived from them . A common measure of diversity is the Shannon entropy H 10 . Let D ( I a ) = exp H ( I a ) be the diversity of intellectual capital ( and D ( S a ) = exp H ( S a ) that of social capital ) . Roughly speaking , these quantities measure the effective amount of research areas a scientist has access to via their own cognitive resources or those of their collaborators . In the present cohort , individuals typically have cognitive resources in several research area ( µ D ( I a ) = 6 . 1 , σ = 2 . 2 ) , and social capital is even more diverse ( µ D ( S a ) = 8 . 5 , σ = 2 . 2 ) . In fact , intuitively , scientific collaborations are expected to empower individual scientists by enabling them to take advantage of their group’s cognitive diversity . Furthermore , D ( I a ) and D ( S a ) are highly correlated ( R = 0 . 75 ) ; indeed , individuals with more diverse interests are more able to engage with diverse collaborators . However , the diversity of social capital is only expected to enhance individuals’ abilities when it exceeds that of their own intellectual resources . Therefore , in the following , only excess social capital diversity D ∗ ( S a ) will be considered ; it is defined as the residuals of the linear regression of D ( S a ) against D ( I a ) ( by ordinary least squares ) 11 . 9 Different assumptions about division of labor within collaborations lead to this expression . For instance , assuming that in a collaboration , each author interacts with a constant amount of co - authors in practice ( regardless of the total amount of co - authors ) , then the probability that they interact with one specific co - author in particular is ∝ 1 | A d | − 1 . 10 The Shannon entropy of the discrete uniform distribution on { 1 , . . . , n } ( of probability mass - function ( 1 / n , . . . , 1 / n ) ) is log n , such as that the exponential of the entropy is roughly the effective amount of outcomes for the distribution ( n ) . 11 In their paper , Tripodi et al . ( 2020 ) noted the difficulty of determining the direction of the causal relationship between social resources and research interests . This approach aims to overcome the very same challenge . 8 Furthermore , the “power” dimension of social capital is evaluated as the magnitude of social capital : P ( S a ) ≡ (cid:88) k S ak = (cid:88) c ∈ co - authors ( a ) w ac ( 4 ) . The magnitude of social capital is therefore the amount of collaborators weighed by the strength of each relationship , regardless of the diversity or redundancy of their knowledge . Our measures of diversity and power therefore depart from Abbasi et al . 2014 in which diversity is conflated with network size and power with performance . By combining semantic and authorship data , our approach assesses diversity more directly . For each of these three measures ( diversity of intellectual capital , excess diversity of social capital , and magnitude of social capital – power – ) , an alternative measure is also proposed for robustness assessment ( based on Stirling’s index for diversity and brokerage for power ) . A comparison of these six measures is provided in Appendix A . 4 . 2 . 4 Modelling trajectories In order to model the physicists’ trajectories , we propose a hierarchical multinomial logistic model inspired from Bayesian models of ecological inference ( Rosen et al . , 2001 ) . Figures 2a , 2b , 2c illustrate the intuition underlying this model . It is assumed that how a scientist divides his attention across research areas at a later stage of their career ( Y a ∈ R K , the counts of keywords that belong to each research are k in papers by a ) is a function of how they previously divided their attention ( X a ) ; this captures the features of problem change illustrated in Figure 1 , according to which change in agenda typically involves strategic transfers of knowledge from one research area to another . A more formal representation of the model is given in Figure 2d . It shows that Y a is a function of the previous research agenda ( X a ) , and of a mixing matrix θ a that measures the extent to which attention has been redistributed to different research areas . The matrix θ a is drawn from a hierarchical process , thus capturing the “average” behavior of the cohort . θ a is also a function of covariates ( Z a in Figure 2d ) , in this case intellectual and social capital , which are hypothesized to affect how individuals have revised their research agenda . Formally speaking , we assume that Y a derives from a multinomial process involving linear combinations of ( x ak ) : Y a ∼ multinomial ( K (cid:88) k = 1 x ak θ ak 1 , . . . , K (cid:88) k = 1 x ak θ akK ) ( 5 ) Where θ akk ′ is the fraction of attention to a topic k that has been redirected to a topic k ′ . Moreover , we introduce intellectual capital I a and social - intellectual capital S a as covariates for transfers θ in the model , through a generalized linear model : θ ak = softmax ( β ak 1 + γ k 1 I a 1 + δ k 1 S a 1 , . . . , β akK + γ kK I aK + δ kK S aK ) ( 6 ) δ kk ′ is the effect of the expertise in k ( social capital ) that is available through the scientists’ collaborators on the magnitude of transfers from k to k ′ . Similarly , γ kk ′ is the effect of having more expertise in k ′ ( intellectual capital ) on shifts from k to k ′ . High values of γ kk ( the diagonal elements of γ ) would imply that physicists are more conservative toward research areas in which they have comparatively more expertise . The coefficients β akk ′ encode the average behavior of the cohort plus individual deviations to the average 9 behavior that are unexplained by the covariates 12 , 13 . Models of ecological inference can be weakly identified , as the data alone sometimes poorly constrain individual values of θ ak . Nevertheless , this approach enables estimates of the effect of certain variables on transitions between research areas , and the Bayesian formulation naturally accounts for the uncertainty associated with limited identifiability . To verify the predictive power of the model , we calculate the total variation distance between the truth y a and the predicted distribution y pred a ( assuming β akk ′ = µ kk ′ , thus discarding random deviations from the average behavior not explained by the covariates ) . We find an average distance µ ( d TV ( y a , y pred a ) ) = 0 . 15 . Assuming a baseline model that predicts no change in the research agenda ( y baseline a = x a ) , the average distance is µ ( d TV ( y a , y baseline a ) ) = 0 . 32 . The model prediction is therefore twice as close to the actual distribution as the baseline model . Our model is inspired by ecological inference , which can be framed in terms of Optimal Transport ( Muzellec et al . , 2017 ; Li et al . , 2019 ) . Optimal Transport seeks the most efficient way to “transport” a source distribution ( say , x = ( x k ) ) to a target distribution ( e . g . , y = ( y k ′ ) ) through “transfers” ( θ kk ′ ) across their components , given a cost function (cid:80) k , k ′ x k θ kk ′ C kk ′ ( where C kk ′ is a cost matrix ) ( Peyré & Cuturi , 2018 ) . The difference is that our Bayesian approach , estimates transfers θ kk ′ by minimizing a likelihood rather than a cost function . Interestingly , the connection with Optimal Transport suggests an “economic” interpretation of the reallocation of research efforts , which will be leveraged in Section 3 . 2 in order to show that patterns of change in research interests are mainly structured by learning costs . X a , 1 Y a , 1 X a , 2 Y a , 2 X a , 3 Y a , 3 . . . . . . X a , K Y a , K θ a , 1 , 1 θ a , 1 , 2 θ a , 1 , 3 θ a , 1 , . . . θ a , 1 , K ( a ) X a , 1 Y a , 1 X a , 2 Y a , 2 X a , 3 Y a , 3 . . . . . . X a , K Y a , K θ a , 2 , 1 θ a , 2 , 2 θ a , 2 , 3 θ a , 2 , . . . θ a , 2 , K ( b ) X a , 1 Y a , 1 X a , 2 Y a , 2 X a , 3 Y a , 3 . . . . . . X a , K Y a , K θ a , 3 , 1 θ a , 3 , 2 θ a , 3 , 3 θ a , 3 , . . . θ a , 3 , K ( c ) x a y a θ a β a µ , Σ Z a ( d ) Figure 2 : 2a , 2b , 2c : Schematic representation of physicists’ transfers of attention across research areas . θ ak = ( θ akk ′ ) represents the fraction of the attention devoted by an author a to a topic k that has been redirected to topics k ′ ∈ { 1 , . . . , K } . By definition , (cid:80) k ′ θ akk ′ = 1 . 2d : Directed acyclic graph representation of the hierarchical model . x a and y a are the distributions of scientists a ’s interests across research areas in the early phase and the late phase respectively . θ a is the mixing matrix that represents how scientists a shifted their attention from one research area to another . θ a depends on a number of covariates Z a ( e . g . I a and S a , intellectual and social “capital” ) . Observed variables are represented in gray , latent variables in white . 12 The priors for this hierarchical model are : β akk ′ ∼ N ( µ kk ′ , σ kk ′ ) for 1 ≤ k ′ ≤ K − 1 and β akK = µ kK ( 7 ) µ kk ′ ∼ N ( λ × ν kk ′ , 1 ) ( average behavior ) ( 8 ) δ kk ′ ∼ N ( δ 0 + λ ′ × ν kk ′ , 1 ) ( effect of social capital ) ( 9 ) γ kk ′ ∼ N ( 0 , 1 ) ( effect of intellectual capital ) ( 10 ) σ ∼ Exponential ( 1 ) ( 11 ) Where ν kk ′ is the fraction of physicists with expertise in k ( that is , with more intellectual capital than average in k ) who also have expertise in k ′ ( see Appendix A . 5 , Figure 14b ) . Priors must be thought thoroughly , as certain invariances can lead to identification issues – for instance , shifting µ by a constant amount does not change the likelihood . 13 In order to fit the model to the data , we use Stan’s Hamiltonian Monte - Carlo sampler ( HMC is better behaved than Gibbs for such problems ) . 10 3 Results 3 . 1 Transfers across research areas Figure 3 shows the transfers of attention from one research area to another at the macroscopic level according to the model . The width of each flow is proportional to (cid:80) a X ak θ akk ′ ( summing over each author a ) , thus directly measuring how much attention was transferred from k to k ′ at the level of the cohort . The most obvious feature is the overall conservatism of physicists toward their research area , i . e . specialization . Certain research areas have significantly grown , most notably “dark matter” and “AdS / CFT” while others such as “neutrinos and flavor physics” and “string theory and supergravity” have significantly shrunk . The increasing interest in dark matter seems to be mainly fueled by a shift away from “neutrinos and flavor physics” and “electroweak sector” , while the growth in AdS / CFT and black hole research has been at the expense of “string theory and supergravity” research 14 . Hadrons String theory & supergravity Perturbative methods Classical ﬁelds Collider physics Dynamics Neutrinos & ﬂavour physics Black holes Gauge theory & Grand Uniﬁcation Dark matter Thermodynamics Cosmology Electroweak sector QCD Quantum Field Theory AdS / CFT Hadrons String theory & supergravity Perturbative methods Classical ﬁelds Collider physics Dynamics Neutrinos & ﬂavour physics Black holes Gauge theory & Grand Uniﬁcation Dark matter Thermodynamics Cosmology Electroweak sector QCD Quantum Field Theory AdS / CFT Figure 3 : Aggregate transfers of attention across research areas , between 2000 - 2009 ( to the left ) and 2015 - 2019 ( to the right ) . Widths of flows are proportional to (cid:80) a X ak θ akk ′ . Insignificant transfers ( that happen less than expected by chance alone assuming uniform mixing ) are transparent . Another finding from these general trends is that smaller research areas such as “classical fields” ( which are 14 Interestingly , this provides some credence to physicist Peter Woit’s controversial assessment that “string theorists” are no longer doing string theory per se , though they keep identifying themselves as string theorists . As Peter Woit puts it , citing the 2022 “Strings” conference : “one thing that stands out is that the string theory community has almost completely stopped doing string theory . ” ; and , “ [ presentations’ titles ] make very clear what the string theory community has found to replace string theory : black holes” ( Woit , 2022 , https : / / www . math . columbia . edu / ~ woit / wordpress / ? p = 12981 ) ; See also Woit , 2023 ( https : / / www . math . columbia . edu / ~ woit / wordpress / ? p = 12401 ) 11 typically involved in classical gravity or cosmological inflation for instance ) , “dynamics” or “thermodynamics” seem less cohesive , i . e . , they are subject to larger transfers . These bodies of knowledge are linguistically coherent ( and therefore appear as clusters of their own with topic modeling ) but yet are not able to sustain careers over the long run by themselves . It is insightful to look into specific careers . For instance , the two physicists who made the most abrupt switch from neutrinos to dark matter are shown in Figure 4 . Physicist A’s personal website reads : “I am working on particle astrophysics and cosmology . In particular , I am interested in dark matter problem in the Universe , and how to probe it using annihilation products such as energetic gamma rays and neutrinos . [ . . . ] I started my research career by studying supernova neutrinos from various aspects [ our emphases ] . ” 15 . This example therefore constitutes an instance of “conversion” of prior knowledge to new purposes , one of the forms of change drawn from historical institutionalism represented in Figure 1 . Similarly , Physicist B started his career in Neutrino Physics with a PhD on the “Semiclassical Analysis of Solar Neutrino Data” . His personal webpage reads : “My main research interests lie at the intersection of the fields of astrophysics , particle physics , and nuclear physics , concerning mostly neutrinos and the weak interactions . In the past several years , there has been strong growth at this intersection , in part due to new results from the ongoing experiments . ” 16 . Moreover , Physicist A claims that “Although [ he is ] a theoretical astrophysicist , [ he ] always consider prospects of current or near future generation of experiments and telescopes . ” . This supports the assumption that experiments create opportunities ( and pressures to adapt ) that physicists can accommodate by building upon their prior knowledge . Q C D H a d r o n s P e r t u r b a t i v e m e t h o d s C o lli d e r ph y s i c s E l ec t r o w e a k s ec t o r N e u t r i n o s & ﬂ a v o u r ph y s i c s D a r k m a tt e r A dS / C F T D y n a m i c s B l a c k h o l e s C o s m o l og y T h e r m o d y n a m i c s C l a ss i c a l ﬁ e l d s Q u a n t u m F i e l d T h e o r y G a u g e t h e o r y & G r a nd U n i ﬁ c a t i o n S t r i n g t h e o r y & s up e r g r a v i t y QCD Hadrons Perturbativemethods Colliderphysics Electroweaksector Neutrinos & ﬂavourphysics Darkmatter AdS / CFT Dynamics Blackholes Cosmology Thermodynamics Classicalﬁelds QuantumField Theory Gaugetheory & GrandUniﬁcation Stringtheory & supergravity ( a ) Physicist A . Q C D H a d r o n s P e r t u r b a t i v e m e t h o d s C o lli d e r ph y s i c s E l ec t r o w e a k s ec t o r N e u t r i n o s & ﬂ a v o u r ph y s i c s D a r k m a tt e r A dS / C F T D y n a m i c s B l a c k h o l e s C o s m o l og y T h e r m o d y n a m i c s C l a ss i c a l ﬁ e l d s Q u a n t u m F i e l d T h e o r y G a u g e t h e o r y & G r a nd U n i ﬁ c a t i o n S t r i n g t h e o r y & s up e r g r a v i t y QCD Hadrons Perturbativemethods Colliderphysics Electroweaksector Neutrinos & ﬂavourphysics Darkmatter AdS / CFT Dynamics Blackholes Cosmology Thermodynamics Classicalﬁelds QuantumField Theory Gaugetheory & GrandUniﬁcation Stringtheory & supergravity ( b ) Physicist B . Figure 4 : Trajectory of the two physicists with the most significant shift from Neutrino physics to Dark matter . The initial distribution of the research agenda is shown in blue . The late distribution is shown in red . Rows represent research areas of origin and columns represent target research areas . 3 . 2 The structuring effect of learning costs on scientists’ behavior As research priorities change , research efforts must be reallocated among scientists in an optimal way , given their prior individual knowledge . Here , we leverage the similarity between our model of scientists’ trajectories and Optimal Transport ( Muzellec et al . , 2017 ; Li et al . , 2019 ) to formulate the observed behavior in economic 15 https : / / staff . fnwi . uva . nl / s . ando / eng / Research . html 16 https : / / www . asc . ohio - state . edu / beacom . 7 / 12 terms and demonstrate that the shifts of attention seem mainly structured by the need to minimize “learning costs” . Let x = (cid:80) a x a be the cohort’s initial distribution of attention across research areas ( summing over each author a ) , and y = (cid:80) a y a the late distribution . Let us further assume that x and y can be considered “fixed” by the institutions ( scientific leadership , laboratories , funding agencies , etc . ) that define scientific priorities throughout time . In order to achieve the distribution of research efforts y given the previous distribution x , some scientists must redirect their attention away from certain research areas ( for which y k < x k ) and towards more pressing ones ( for which y k > x k ) . What is the most efficient way to reallocate research efforts and achieve the transition from x to y ? Intuitively , research areas should be assigned to scientists in a way that requires as few of them as possible to acquire new knowledge – in other words , in a way that minimizes learning costs , given the way knowledge is distributed among individuals . This , as we show , can be framed as an Optimal Transport problem . Let T kk ′ be the coupling matrix that encodes how much attention has been shifted from one research area k to a research area k ′ . There are two constraints on T kk ′ : (cid:80) k ′ T kk ′ = x k , and (cid:80) k T kk ′ = y k ′ . These constraints encode the need to adapt ( since y ̸ = x ) . But T must also minimize learning costs ( C ) , which are linear in T : C = (cid:80) k , k ′ T kk ′ C kk ′ , where C kk ′ is a cost matrix . The problem of finding the couplings T kk ′ that minimize the “transportation” costs ( given a cost matrix C kk ′ and the constraints on T kk ′ ) is an instance of Optimal Transport problem ( Peyré & Cuturi , 2018 ) – a paradigmatic example of Optimal Transport problem being that of efficiently transporting ore from a set of mines to a set of factories given the distances between them . Our problem is the opposite : the couplings are known ( they have been retrieved by our model from Section 2 . 4 ) , and we would like to infer the underlying cost matrix . Indeed , the transfers from a research area k to k ′ for each individual are simply x ak θ akk ′ . Summing over individuals , we obtain the coupling matrix T kk ′ = (cid:80) a x ak θ akk ′ , which measures how much attention was shifted away from k and toward k ′ at the cohort level . The problem of recovering the cost matrix given the couplings is called the Inverse Optimal Transport problem . Chiu et al . ( 2022 ) proposed a method to solve it in the discrete case ( which they tested on migration data ) . This method requires to put a prior on P ( C kk ′ ) – indeed , there are infinitely many cost matrices that can yield the same optimum , and priors are needed to lift this degeneracy . Therefore , we assume that C kk ′ ∼ N ( β × ( 1 − ν kk ′ ) , 1 ) , where ν kk ′ is the fraction of physicists who already held expertise in k ′ among those who already held expertise in k , and β ∼ N ( 0 , 1 ) is the contribution of learning costs . If ν kk ′ = 1 then no scientist shifting attention from k to k ′ would need to acquire new knowledge , and E ( C kk ′ ) = 0 ( zero learning costs ) . If ν kk ′ = 0 , any scientist shifting from k toward k ′ must acquire new knowledge , and the cost is maximal ( E ( C kk ′ ) = β ) . If actual behaviors do involve the minimization of learning costs , we should observe a strong correlation between C kk ′ and the knowledge gap 1 − ν kk ′ . Using the Metropolis - Hastings algorithm proposed in Chiu et al . 2022 together with our own choice of priors , we are able to recover C kk ′ – the underlying cost matrix – and we find R ( C kk ′ , 1 − ν kk ′ ) = 0 . 77 ( where R is the Pearson correlation ) , such that R 2 = 0 . 59 ( see Appendix A . 5 , Figure 14a ) . As expected , learning costs make up for most of the recovered cost matrix ( but not all of it , given that strategies like the “conversion” of prior knowledge or collaborations can partially circumvent learning costs ) . Under changing circumstances , research efforts must be reallocated efficiently . Therefore , scientific norms and institutions address an Optimal Transport problem by providing incentives for scientists to conform to new research imperatives , in a way that minimizes global learning costs . While this observation characterizes behavior at the level of the cohort , we will now consider drivers of differences among individuals . 3 . 3 Individual behavior and the effect of capital 3 . 3 . 1 Magnitude of change and capital In order to measure by how much the research agenda of a scientist has changed between the two time periods under consideration , we propose a change score c a defined for each physicist a as the total variation distance between their initial and late research agendas : c a ≡ d TV ( x a , y a ) = 1 2 (cid:88) k | y ak − x ak | ( 12 ) It is comprised between 0 ( if research attention has remained identically distributed ) and 1 ( if the research 13 agenda has changed entirely and all previously explored areas were abandoned ) . The distribution of c a across authors ( Figure 5 ) shows that large values are quite rare , with 50 % of values lying between 0 . 21 and 0 . 40 . However , one must be cautious about interpreting the absolute value of c a . As pointed out by Gieryn ( 1978 ) , the degree to which problem change is “gradual” depends on the choice of “cognitive scope” ( the broadness of research areas ) and the duration of the time periods considered . Moreover , we always expect some level of fluctuations in the measured agendas , and c a is never expected to be exactly zero . 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Change score c a = 12 P k | y ak − x ak | 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 # o f s c i e n t i s t s Figure 5 : Distribution of change scores in the cohort . Higher values correspond to more drastic changes in a scientists’ research agenda . Nevertheless , the change score allows for comparisons between physicists . What explains differences in individual strategies ? We propose to evaluate the role of several factors , namely : i ) the diversity of intellectual capital D ( I a ) , based on the Shannon entropy of I a ; ii ) the excess diversity of social capital D ∗ ( S a ) ; and iii ) the magnitude of social capital , i . e . (cid:80) k S ak . We also consider iv ) the effect of position stability , represented by a binary variable s a such that s a = 1 if scientist a has at least one affiliation that spans the whole time range considered , and s a = 0 otherwise . We perform a linear regression of c a as a function of these four variables , adjusting for Z a = arg max k x ak , i . e . physicists’ primary research area over the years 2000 to 2009 ( see the model specification in Appendix A . 6 . 1 ) . The results are shown in Figure 6 . As can be seen in this figure , the diversity of intellectual capital has a significant positive effect . Physicists with resources in many areas tend to revise their research agenda more . There is also evidence of a positive effect of diversity of social capital on the magnitude of changes in scientists’ research focus . The sheer magnitude of social capital ( “power” ) , however , has a negative direct effect on change ( for a given value of diversity ) . In other words , “power” promotes stability , while “diversity” promotes change . It is noteworthy that these dimensions of social capital can have opposite effects . Moreover , physicists with permanent affiliations are more conservative toward their research agenda . This could be because they experience less incentive to “adapt” by committing to trending research problems . Conversely , new positions might be associated with changes in research topics . Unsurprisingly , both research areas that have shrunk considerably have a significant positive effect on migration score . “Collider physics” , on the other hand , has a negative effect on the magnitude of change . This is the case ceteris paribus ; in other words , physicists whose primary category is “Collider physics” are more conservative than other physicists with similar capital diversity , power , and position stability . In fact , these physicists also have less diverse capital , and are by far the most conservative , with an average change score 24 % lower than the rest of the cohort . It is plausible that the long time - scales of collider experiments provide stable opportunities to physicists in that area ( Galison , 1987 , p . 138 ) , thus promoting conservatism . It must be emphasized that the variance explained is quite low ( R 2 = 0 . 15 ) , and all these factors only partially explain differences between individuals . 14 − 0 . 3 − 0 . 2 − 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 Eﬀect on change Intellectual capital ( diversity ) Social capital ( diversity ) Social capital ( power ) Stable aﬃliation String theory & supergravity Collider physics Neutrinos & ﬂavour physics µ ( β ) = 0 . 28 µ ( β ) = 0 . 091 µ ( β ) = − 0 . 22 µ ( β ) = − 0 . 14 , P ( β > 0 ) = 0 . 00013 µ ( β ) = 0 . 3 µ ( β ) = − 0 . 17 , P ( β > 0 ) = 0 . 011 µ ( β ) = 0 . 24 , P ( β < 0 ) = 0 . 0018 Figure 6 : Effect of measures of intellectual and social capital , and of position stability on the amplitude of changes in high - energy physicists’ interests ( as measured by the change score c a ) . Diversity is evaluated in terms of the exponential of the Shannon entropy of the distribution of intellectual and social resources physicists possess across research areas . The effect of the primary research area during the initial period ( 2000 - 2009 ) was also included as a control . Three research areas have a significant ( 95 % CL ) effect . Error bars indicate 95 % credible intervals ; µ ( β ) denotes the mean posterior effect size . R 2 = 0 . 15 . Continuous variables ( diversity , power and the change score ) are standardized . The change score c a neglects the cognitive gap between research areas . Figure 15 in Appendix A . 6 . 3 shows that , using an alternative measure of change ( “disruption” ) that takes into account cognitive distance , the diversity of social capital has a much larger effect ( µ ( β ) = 0 . 28 instead of 0 . 091 ) . Moreover , using the Stirling index ( rather than entropy ) as a measure of diversity does not qualitatively change the previous results ( see Table 2 , Appendix A . 6 . 3 ) . In fact , using the Stirling index as a measure of diversity , the diversity of social capital has an even stronger effect on disruption ( µ ( β ) = 0 . 85 ) . A manual inspection of the 20 least and most conservative physicists of the cohort is conducted in Appendix A . 7 and is found to be consistent with these findings . 3 . 3 . 2 Diversification of research interests versus consolidation of expertise Research portfolios can be altered by two opposite strategies . On the one hand , they can be expanded through the addition of new research areas ; we might call such a strategy “diversification” . On the other hand , research portfolios can be narrowed by deserting certain research areas and concentrating increasingly on a core specialization ( Figure 1 illustrates how this can happen , whether via “conversion” or “displacement” ) . To explore how physicists choose between these two strategies , we evaluate the influence of the same factors on the probability that physicists have i ) entered at least one new research area in between the two periods or ii ) exited one research area ( see the specification of the model in Appendix A . 6 . 2 ) 17 . The results are shown in Figure 7 . The diversity of intellectual capital has a strong positive effect on the probability of exiting a research area ; intuitively , scientists with diverse interests can afford to disengage from certain research areas . Excess diversity of social capital increases the probability of entering new re - search areas , but has no discernible effect on the probability of exiting research areas . In contrast , “power” significantly decreases the probability of leaving a research area . This suggests that having many collabora - tors allows scientists to remain committed to many research areas with minimal personal investment , thus stabilizing their research agendas ( as previously observed ) . Moreover , “power” also decreases the probabil - ity to of entering new research areas ; this suggests that powerful scientists have less incentives to invest resources in new topics . String theory & supergravity has a significant positive effect of both entering and exiting research areas ; most likely , many physicists have operated a displacement , by replacing this area with a new one . “Collider physics” , however , significantly decreases the probability of entering new areas . 17 A research area k is considered “entered” by a when x ak < 1 N (cid:80) a ′ x a ′ k and y ak > 1 N (cid:80) a ′ y a ′ k ; conversely , a research area is considered exited when x ak > 1 N (cid:80) a ′ x a ′ k and y ak < 1 N (cid:80) a ′ y a ′ k . 15 Indeed , the LHC has secured this research area for the decades to come : for instance , the HL - LHC project ( High - Luminosity LHC ) , which consists in upgrading the LHC in order to higher collision rates , is scheduled to start in 2029 at the time of writing 18 . “Dark matter” has a negative effect on the probability of entering a new research area , possibly because scientists with prior commitment to this research area had less incentive to diversify their research portfolio and more incentive to focus increasingly on this topic given its success over the following years . Again , these conclusions hold as an alternative measure of diversity is considered ( A . 6 . 3 , Table 3 ) and if “brokerage” is used as a measure of power . − 1 . 0 − 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 Eﬀect size ( log odds ratio ) Intellectual capital ( diversity ) Social capital ( diversity ) Social capital ( power ) Stable aﬃliation String theory & supergravity Collider physics Dark matter µ ( β ) = 0 . 15 , P ( β < 0 ) = 0 . 003 µ ( β ) = 0 . 2 µ ( β ) = − 0 . 12 , P ( β > 0 ) = 0 . 0096 P ( β > 0 ) = 0 . 081 µ ( β ) = 0 . 44 , P ( β < 0 ) = 0 . 0027 µ ( β ) = − 0 . 35 , P ( β > 0 ) = 0 . 017 µ ( β ) = − 0 . 65 , P ( β > 0 ) = 0 . 0069 µ ( β ) = 1 . 1 µ ( β ) = − 0 . 31 µ ( β ) = 0 . 46 , P ( β < 0 ) = 0 . 0027 entered new research area exited research area Figure 7 : Effect of capital and position stability on the probability of entering new research areas or exiting previously explored ones . Bars indicate 95 % credible intervals . µ ( β ) denotes the mean posterior effect size . Continuous variables ( diversity and power ) are standardized . 3 . 3 . 3 Why diversity promotes change Access to diverse cognitive resources promotes change . To see how this happens , it is insightful to look into the detail of how intellectual capital ( as represented by I a = ( I ak ) , the proficiency of scientist a in each research area k ) affects trajectories . In the model introduced in Section 2 . 4 , the diagonal coefficients of the γ matrix measure the effect of having intellectual resources in a certain area on the commitment to this area . The matrix is shown in Figure 8a . Most coefficients on the diagonal are significantly positive , thus suggesting that physicists with a strong specialization in a research area have tend to further exploit and consolidate their specialization in this area . The effect of social capital on transfers from one research area to another , given by the matrix δ kk ′ ( see equation 6 ) , is shown in Figure 8b . Statistically significant effects are always positive : having collaborators with expertise in a target area generally increases the likelihood of redirecting attention toward this area . Moreover , the effect of social capital varies across research areas . In their work on research portfolio diversification , Tripodi et al . ( 2020 ) found that “social - relatedness” ( i . e . whether scientists have immediate access to a subfield via a collaborator ) is more crucial as scientists move further away from their specialization . In fact , our model reproduces this finding . It was indeed assumed that the effect of social capital ( δ kk ′ ) depends on the matrix ν kk ′ ∈ { 0 , 1 } , defined as the fraction of physicists with more expertise than average in a research area k ′ among those who have more expertise than average in k ( see Eq . ( 9 ) , Section 2 . 4 ) . We find a strong association , with δ kk ′ decreasing by 1 . 5 unit of standard deviation on average as ν kk ′ goes from 18 See https : / / home . cern / science / accelerators / high - luminosity - lhc . Note that until a successor to the LHC is under active development , its prolongation can help preserve the know - how necessary for the design and operation of such complex experiments . 16 Q C D H a d r o n s P e r t u r b a t i v e m e t h o d s C o lli d e r ph y s i c s E l ec t r o w e a k s ec t o r N e u t r i n o s & ﬂ a v o u r ph y s i c s D a r k m a tt e r A dS / C F T D y n a m i c s B l a c k h o l e s C o s m o l og y T h e r m o d y n a m i c s C l a ss i c a l ﬁ e l d s Q u a n t u m F i e l d T h e o r y G a u g e t h e o r y & G r a nd U n i ﬁ c a t i o n S t r i n g t h e o r y & s up e r g r a v i t y QCD Hadrons Perturbativemethods Collider physics Electroweaksector Neutrinos & ﬂavourphysics Darkmatter AdS / CFT Dynamics Blackholes Cosmology Thermodynamics Classicalﬁelds QuantumField Theory Gaugetheory & GrandUniﬁcation String theory & supergravity ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ − 4 − 2 0 2 4 ( a ) Effect of intellectual capital ( γ kk ′ ) . Q C D H a d r o n s P e r t u r b a t i v e m e t h o d s C o lli d e r ph y s i c s E l ec t r o w e a k s ec t o r N e u t r i n o s & ﬂ a v o u r ph y s i c s D a r k m a tt e r A dS / C F T D y n a m i c s B l a c k h o l e s C o s m o l og y T h e r m o d y n a m i c s C l a ss i c a l ﬁ e l d s Q u a n t u m F i e l d T h e o r y G a u g e t h e o r y & G r a nd U n i ﬁ c a t i o n S t r i n g t h e o r y & s up e r g r a v i t y QCD Hadrons Perturbativemethods Collider physics Electroweaksector Neutrinos & ﬂavourphysics Darkmatter AdS / CFT Dynamics Blackholes Cosmology Thermodynamics Classicalﬁelds QuantumField Theory Gaugetheory & GrandUniﬁcation String theory & supergravity ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ ∗ ∗∗ − 8 − 6 − 4 − 2 0 2 4 6 8 ( b ) Effect of social capital ( δ kk ′ ) . Figure 8 : Effect of capital on the magnitude of transfers of attention from one research area to another . Rows represent research areas of origin and columns represent target research areas . Stars represent statistical significance according to the effect posterior distribution ( ∗ : 95 % ; ∗∗ : 99 . 7 % ) . Effect sizes are increases in transfer log odds ( log [ θ akk ′ / ( 1 − θ akk ′ ) ] , where θ akk ′ is the fraction of attention to k redirected to k ′ ) per unit of intellectual or social capital in the target research area k ′ . 0 ( nobody holds expertise in both research areas k and k ′ ) to 1 ( everyone with expertise in k has expertise in k ′ ) . In other words , the strength of the effect of social capital increases with the cognitive distance , as observed by Tripodi et al . ( 2020 ) . This explains why the diversity of social capital has a stronger effect on the reallocation of research efforts across cognitively distant research areas , as observed above . 4 Discussion This paper addressed the conflict between conservatism in science , which is driven by the need to fully exploit accumulated knowledge , and the imperative to adapt to changes in the epistemic landscape . To this end , an unsupervised Bayesian approach was developed , enrooted in the intuition that shifts from one research area to another involve transfers of knowledge and cumulative strategies of incremental changes . The model simultaneously measures transfers of attention across research areas and the effect of various variables on the evolution of scientists’ research portfolios , in particular intellectual and social capital . The model was applied to a cohort of N = 2 195 high - energy physicists between 2000 and 2019 . At the macroscopic level , it reveals the decline of neutrinos physics as a result of a massive transfer of atten - tion towards the electroweak sector – that the LHC explores – and more importantly dark matter . In the meantime , many physicists have redirected their efforts from the electroweak sector towards dark matter . Moreover , string theory & supergravity has started to disintegrate into black holes and AdS / CFT research . This demonstrates that the cohort has responded to changes in experimental opportunities as well as to theoretical developments involving quantum gravity . Then , leveraging the connection between our model and Optimal Transport ( which is generally concerned with optimal strategies for relocating resources ) , we showed that the reallocation of research efforts among scientists is mainly structured by “learning costs” . Indeed , under changing circumstances , scientific institu - tions must address an “Optimal Transport” problem by efficiently reallocating scientific capital , in a way that balances learning costs and the imperative to adapt to new circumstances . This has the effect of maximizing the utility of the scientific capital disseminated among scientists as the perceived payoff of certain research areas increases . The connection with Optimal Transport is useful in other ways . From a methodological standpoint , Optimal Transport induces “distances” that can be used to measure change , as illustrated by the 17 change and disruption scores employed in this work . The derivation of a cost matrix using Inverse Optimal Transport may also have practical applications , as it can , in principle , identify areas of expertise that would be more adaptable to new circumstances . The longitudinal comparative analysis of individual behaviors revealed that the diversity of intellectual and social capital is positively associated with change : diversity promotes adaptability under new circum - stances , and therefore diversifying research portfolios is a rational strategy when the future is uncertain . However , the enforcement of diversity can lead to suboptimal allocations of research efforts under stable circumstances ( Schimmelpfennig et al . , 2021 ) . Differences among research areas are found . Physicists experts in the physics of particle colliders have remained particularly specialized and conservative , possibly because they have secured long - term research opportunities ( thanks to very large investments in particle accelerators like the LHC ) . There is also evidence that physicists specialized in dark matter have been consolidating their specialization , presumably because the increasing popularity of the topic encouraged them to “double down” their investment in this research area . Higher concentrations of intellectual capital in certain research areas is associated with stronger commitment to these research areas ; therefore , specialized scientists may be more likely to remain trapped in a “sunk cost” fallacy as their expertise is unfit for new circumstances . However , specialized scientists can offset the risks associated with specialization by diversifying their social network . This raises the possibility of free - riding , as scientists have an incentive to focus on what seems most promising at the time and let their peers take the risks of exploring alternatives until their value is established ( Kummerfeld & Zollman , 2016 ) . In addition , social capital plays an increasingly important role as scientists expand their research agenda further beyond their specialization , as observed by Tripodi et al . 2020 , suggesting that collaborations are crucial in overcoming cognitive barriers between research areas . Unlike diversity , “power” ( that is , the magnitude of social capital ) and institutional stability are associated with more stability and conservatism in research interests . In particular , “power” decreases the probability of leaving research areas . We suggest that coalitions and institutional resources can safeguard individuals from pressures to adapt . The negative association between change and institutional stability , although weak ( µ ( β ) = − 0 . 14 ) , suggests that scientific institutions may exploit temporary contracts to compell the scientific workforce to adapt . Prior research has demonstrated that change in scientists’ interests was generally gradual . Consequently , we have proposed to characterize these changes in terms of a typology of incremental change developed in the context of historical institutionalism , which has been shown to account for how organizations like DESY and SLAC have transitioned from high - energy physics to multi - purpose photon science . Adaptation strategies include the “conversion” of prior knowledge to new purposes , the “layering” of additional research interests via the acquisition of new knowledge , or the “displacement” of former research commitments . In applying this typology to individuals rather than organizations , we emphasize that institutions can face a challenge similar to that experienced by specialized scientists confronted with transformations in their scientific landscape , in that they too must adapt and redirect accumulated capital in directions that may not have been foreseen at the time of their “design” . We conclude that a better understanding of adaptation benefits from the pooling of diverse insights . For instance , while studies of institutional change have documented strategies of adaptation when change is resisted , the literature on cultural evolvability stresses the critical roles of “diversity” and social learning . In return , this work provides an empirical contribution to the literature that treats science as a cultural evolutionary system ( Wu et al . , 2023 ) . Throughout the paper , various methodological limitations were raised . Most of them pertain to data selection , such as the requirement on authors’ publications counts that makes the cohorts “unrepresentative” , or the filters on selected publications . A second issue , already noted by Gieryn ( 1978 ) , lies in the arbitrariness in the choice of cognitive scope . Previous works ( e . g . Tripodi et al . 2020 ; Aleta et al . 2019 ; Battiston et al . 2019 ; Jia et al . 2017 ) have typically relied on the hierarchical PACS classification of the physics literature , such that cognitive scales were imposed . For this work , the literature was divided into 16 topics that captured the features of change in the epistemic landscape discussed above , i . e . the rise of new probes of the cosmos , but other scales could have been considered . However , the topic model recovers a flat structure that does not explain the correlations between different research areas . A hierarchical structure of knowledge might be better able to capture what allows physicists to switch from one research area to another . Acknowledgements I thank Thomas Heinze , Radin Dardashti and Elisa Omodei for useful discussions . I also thank the LATTICE lab in Montrouge for the opportunity to exchange about this work . 18 Funding This work has received support from the G - Research Grant for Early - Career Researchers . Data and code availability The data and code used for this publication will be made available in a public repository . References Abbasi , A . , Wigand , R . T . , & Hossain , L . ( 2014 ) . Measuring social capital through network analysis and its influence on individual performance . Library & Information Science Research , 36 ( 1 ) , 66 – 73 . Abbott , B . , Abbott , R . , Abbott , T . D . , Abernathy , M . , Acernese , F . , Ackley , K . , & Adams , C . ( 2016 ) . Observation of gravitational waves from a binary black hole merger . Physical Review Letters , 116 ( 6 ) . Aleta , A . , Meloni , S . , Perra , N . , & Moreno , Y . ( 2019 ) . Explore with caution : Mapping the evolution of scientific interest in physics . EPJ Data Science , 8 ( 1 ) . Battiston , F . , Musciotto , F . , Wang , D . , Barabási , A . - L . , Szell , M . , & Sinatra , R . ( 2019 ) . Taking census of physics . Nature Reviews Physics , 1 ( 1 ) , 89 – 97 . Blei , D . M . , Ng , A . Y . , & Jordan , M . I . ( 2003 ) . Latent Dirichlet Allocation . J . Mach . Learn . Res . , 3 ( Jan ) , 993 – 1022 . Bourdieu , P . ( 1980 ) . Le capital social . Actes de la Recherche en Sciences Sociales , 31 ( 1 ) , 2 – 3 . Bourdieu , P . ( 1986 ) . The forms of capital . In J . Richardson ( Ed . ) , Handbook of theory and research for the sociology of education ( pp . 241 – 258 ) . Greenwood . Burt , R . S . ( 2007 ) . Brokerage and closure : An introduction to social capital . Oxford University Press . Chall , C . , King , M . , Mättig , P . , & Stöltzner , M . ( 2019 ) . From a boson to the standard model higgs : A case study in confirmation and model dynamics . Synthese , 198 ( S16 ) , 3779 – 3811 . Chiu , W . - T . , Wang , P . , & Shafto , P . Discrete probabilistic inverse optimal transport ( K . Chaudhuri , S . Jegelka , L . Song , C . Szepesvari , G . Niu , & S . Sabato , Eds . ) . In : Proceedings of the 39th international conference on machine learning ( K . Chaudhuri , S . Jegelka , L . Song , C . Szepesvari , G . Niu , & S . Sabato , Eds . ) . Ed . by Chaudhuri , K . , Jegelka , S . , Song , L . , Szepesvari , C . , Niu , G . , & Sabato , S . 162 . Proceedings of Machine Learning Research . PMLR , 2022 , 17 – 23 Jul , 3925 – 3946 . Dieng , A . B . , Ruiz , F . J . R . , & Blei , D . M . ( 2020 ) . Topic modeling in embedding spaces . Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 8 , 439 – 453 . Foster , J . G . , Rzhetsky , A . , & Evans , J . A . ( 2015 ) . Tradition and innovation in scientists’ research strategies . American Sociological Review , 80 ( 5 ) , 875 – 908 . Fujimura , J . H . ( 1988 ) . The molecular biological bandwagon in cancer research : Where social worlds meet . Social Problems , 35 ( 3 ) , 261 – 283 . Galison , P . ( 1987 ) . How experiments end . University of Chicago Press . Gautheron , L . , & Omodei , E . ( 2023 ) . How research programs come apart : The example of supersymmetry and the disunity of physics . Quantitative Science Studies , 1 – 29 . Gieryn , T . F . ( 1978 ) . Problem retention and problem change in science . Sociological Inquiry , 48 ( 3 - 4 ) , 96 – 115 . Griffiths , T . L . , & Steyvers , M . ( 2004 ) . Finding scientific topics . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 101 ( suppl 1 ) , 5228 – 5235 . Hallonsten , O . , & Heinze , T . ( 2013 ) . From particle physics to photon science : Multi - dimensional and multi - level renewal at DESY and SLAC . Science and Public Policy , 40 ( 5 ) , 591 – 603 . Harlander , R . , Martinez , J . - P . , & Schiemann , G . ( 2023 ) . The end of the particle era ? The European Physical Journal H , 48 ( 1 ) . Heinze , T . , Hallonsten , O . , & Heinecke , S . ( 2017 ) . Turning the ship : The transformation of DESY , 1993 – 2009 . Physics in Perspective , 19 ( 4 ) , 424 – 451 . Heinze , T . , & Münch , R . ( 2012 ) . Intellektuelle erneuerung der forschung durch institutionellen wandel . In Institutionelle erneuerungsfähigkeit der forschung ( pp . 15 – 38 ) . VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften . Henrich , J . ( 2004 ) . Demography and cultural evolution : How adaptive cultural processes can produce mal - adaptive losses—the tasmanian case . American Antiquity , 69 ( 2 ) , 197 – 214 . Hong , L . , & Page , S . E . ( 2004 ) . Groups of diverse problem solvers can outperform groups of high - ability problem solvers . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 101 ( 46 ) , 16385 – 16389 . 19 Ioannidis , J . P . A . , Boyack , K . W . , & Klavans , R . ( 2014 ) . Estimates of the continuously publishing core in the scientific workforce ( L . A . N . Amaral , Ed . ) . PLoS ONE , 9 ( 7 ) , e101698 . Jia , T . , Wang , D . , & Szymanski , B . K . ( 2017 ) . Quantifying patterns of research - interest evolution . Nature Human Behaviour , 1 ( 4 ) . Kosyakov , B . ( 2023 ) . A farewell to particles . Kuhn , T . S . ( 1977 ) . The essential tension : Tradition and innovation in scientific research . In The essential tension ( pp . 225 – 239 ) . University of Chicago Press . Kummerfeld , E . , & Zollman , K . J . S . ( 2016 ) . Conservatism and the scientific state of nature . The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science , 67 ( 4 ) , 1057 – 1076 . Leahey , E . , Beckman , C . M . , & Stanko , T . L . ( 2016 ) . Prominent but less productive . Administrative Science Quarterly , 62 ( 1 ) , 105 – 139 . Li , R . , Ye , X . , Zhou , H . , & Zha , H . ( 2019 ) . Learning to match via inverse optimal transport . Journal of machine learning research , 20 . Liu , F . , Zhang , S . , & Xia , H . ( 2023 ) . Modelling scientists’ migration in the geometric knowledge space : Tracing hotspots or seeking opportunity ? Lykken , J . , & Spiropulu , M . ( 2014 ) . Supersymmetry and the crisis in physics . Scientific American , 310 ( 5 ) , 34 – 39 . Mahoney , J . , & Thelen , K . ( 2009 ) . A theory of gradual institutional change . In Explaining institutional change : Ambiguity , agency , and power ( pp . 1 – 37 ) . Cambridge University Press . March , J . G . ( 1991 ) . Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning . Organization Science , 2 ( 1 ) , 71 – 87 . Martín - Alcázar , F . , Ruiz - Martínez , M . , & Sánchez - Gardey , G . ( 2019 ) . Assessing social capital in academic research teams : A measurement instrument proposal . Scientometrics , 121 ( 2 ) , 917 – 935 . Moskovic , M . ( 2021 ) . The INSPIRE REST API . Mulkay , M . ( 1974 ) . Conceptual displacement and migration in science : A prefatory paper . Science Studies , 4 ( 3 ) , 205 – 234 . Muthukrishna , M . , & Henrich , J . ( 2016 ) . Innovation in the collective brain . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences , 371 ( 1690 ) , 20150192 . Muzellec , B . , Nock , R . , Patrini , G . , & Nielsen , F . Tsallis regularized optimal transport and ecological infer - ence . In : In Proceedings of the aaai conference on artificial intelligence . 31 . ( 1 ) . 2017 . Newman , M . E . ( 2004 ) . Who is the best connected scientist ? A study of scientific coauthorship networks . In Complex networks ( pp . 337 – 370 ) . Springer . Omodei , E . ( 2014 ) . Modeling the socio - semantic dynamics of scientific communities [ Thesis ] . Ecole Normale Supérieure . Perović , S . , Radovanović , S . , Sikimić , V . , & Berber , A . ( 2016 ) . Optimal research team composition : Data envelopment analysis of fermilab experiments . Scientometrics , 108 ( 1 ) , 83 – 111 . Peyré , G . , & Cuturi , M . ( 2018 ) . Computational optimal transport . Porter , A . L . , Cohen , A . S . , Roessner , J . D . , & Perreault , M . ( 2007 ) . Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity . Scientometrics , 72 ( 1 ) , 117 – 147 . Rosen , O . , Jiang , W . , King , G . , & Tanner , M . A . ( 2001 ) . Bayesian and frequentist inference for ecological inference : The RxC case . Statistica Neerlandica , 55 , 134 – 156 . Roser , T . , Brinkmann , R . , Cousineau , S . , Denisov , D . , Gessner , S . , Gourlay , S . , Lebrun , P . , Narain , M . , Oide , K . , Raubenheimer , T . , Seeman , J . , Shiltsev , V . , Strait , J . , Turner , M . , & Wang , L . - T . ( 2023 ) . On the feasibility of future colliders : Report of the snowmass’21 implementation task force . Journal of Instrumentation , 18 ( 05 ) , P05018 . Saphra , N . , Fleisig , E . , Cho , K . , & Lopez , A . ( 2023 ) . First tragedy , then parse : History repeats itself in the new era of large language models . Schimmelpfennig , R . , Razek , L . , Schnell , E . , & Muthukrishna , M . ( 2021 ) . Paradox of diversity in the collective brain . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences , 377 ( 1843 ) . Schirone , M . ( 2023 ) . Field , capital , and habitus : The impact of pierre bourdieu on bibliometrics . Quantitative Science Studies , 4 ( 1 ) , 186 – 208 . Schon , D . A . ( 1963 ) . Displacement of concepts ( 1st ) . Routledge . Shifman , M . ( 2020 ) . Musings on the current status of HEP . Modern Physics Letters A , 35 ( 07 ) , 2030003 . 20 Sikimić , V . , & Radovanović , S . ( 2022 ) . Machine learning in scientific grant review : Algorithmically predicting project efficiency in high energy physics . European Journal for Philosophy of Science , 12 ( 3 ) . Singh , C . K . , Tupikina , L . , Lécuyer , F . , Starnini , M . , & Santolini , M . ( 2023 ) . Charting mobility patterns in the scientific knowledge landscape . Stirling , A . ( 2007 ) . A general framework for analysing diversity in science , technology and society . Journal of The Royal Society Interface , 4 ( 15 ) , 707 – 719 . Strumia , A . ( 2021 ) . Gender issues in fundamental physics : A bibliometric analysis . Quantitative Science Studies , 2 ( 1 ) , 225 – 253 . Tripodi , G . , Chiaromonte , F . , & Lillo , F . ( 2020 ) . Knowledge and social relatedness shape research portfolio diversification . Scientific Reports , 10 ( 1 ) . Wu , J . , O’Connor , C . , & Smaldino , P . E . ( 2023 ) . The cultural evolution of science . In The Oxford Handbook of Cultural Evolution . Oxford University Press . Zeng , A . , Shen , Z . , Zhou , J . , Fan , Y . , Di , Z . , Wang , Y . , Stanley , H . E . , & Havlin , S . ( 2019 ) . Increasing trend of scientists to switch between topics . Nature Communications , 10 ( 1 ) . 21 A Supplementary material A . 1 Transformations in high - energy physics 2000 2005 2010 2015 0 0 . 5 1 F r a c t i o n o f c i t a t i o n s F N A L L E P D E S Y F N A L L E P D E S Y F N A L L E P D E S Y F N A L L E P D E S Y F N A L L E P D E S Y S L A C K E K F N A L S L A C L E P D E S Y K E K F N A L S L A C K E K F N A L S L A C K E K F N A L S L A C K E K D E S Y B N L F N A L S L A C B N L D E S Y K E K F N A L B N L F N A L L H C B N L L H C F N A L L H C F N A L L H C F N A L L H C F N A L L H C F N A L L H C L H C L H C colliders neutrinos astro . neutrinos other cosmic sources supernovae cosmic µ wave background dark matter ( direct ) gravitational waves Top - 25 most cited experiments in HEP , per year Figure 9 : Share of citations of each of the most cited experiments in high - energy physics litera - ture , between 2000 and 2019 . Hatched rectangles correspond to experiments observing particles produced in colliders or nuclear reactors ; other rectangles correspond to observations of phenomena or particles of as - trophysical origin . We use citation and experiment data from the Inspire HEP database ( Moskovic , 2021 ) . The classification of these experiments is our own . 22 A . 2 Cohort characteristics Figure 10 : Distribution of academic age ( in 2015 ) and affiliation stability within the considered cohort . Academic age ( left plot ) is evaluated as the time passed since the first publication . There is a cut - off in the distribution academic age due to the requirement on publication counts between 2000 and 2009 . The median age is 23 years in 2015 . 49 % of the cohort has had at least one permanent affiliation spanning the period under consideration ( right plot ) . As expected , permanent affiliations are associated with higher academic ages ( bars indicate min / max / quartiles ) . A . 3 Topics A . 3 . 1 Keyword classification In the ETM – as in topic models in general – , documents are mixtures of several topics ; moreover , keywords may belong to several topics . This is a desirable feature : certain concepts serve different purposes depending on the context , and some concepts do not clearly belong to any research area . More importantly , this is crucial to the present approach , given that we must be sensitive to situations in which scientists have repurposed certain concepts to new research goals ; i . e . , instances where the same resources are applied in a new context ( a new research area ) . For that , each keyword i from a document d is assigned a research area z di : = arg max k = 1 , . . . , K P ( z di = k | w di , θ d ) , which is the research area most probably associated with the keyword i given the topic distribution of the document θ d – i . e . the context . In fact : z di : = arg max k = 1 , . . . , K P ( z di = k | w di , θ d ) = arg max k = 1 , . . . , K P ( w di | z di = k ) P ( z di = k | θ d ) P ( w di | θ d ) ( 13 ) In the process , we discard ambiguous keywords for which H ( z di ) ≥ log 2 , where H denotes the entropy of the distribution P ( z di = k | w di ) . Either such keywords do not carry any scientific content , or the context is insufficient to disambiguate among the possible research areas to which they might belong . The average effective amount of topics in documents according to the topic model – measured as exp H ( θ d ) where H is the Shannon entropy – is 7 . 5 , which is unrealistically high . By performing this filtering and classification procedure , the average effective amount of topics goes down to 3 . 2 per document , which is much more informative and realistic . This extra step is especially important for short texts such as abstracts , which poorly constrain the latent topic distribution θ d . A . 3 . 2 List of topics 23 Table 1 : Research areas , their top - words , and their correlation with a standard classification ( PACS ) . Research area Top words Most correlated PACS categories AdS / CFT boundary , holographic , flow , bulk , critical , conformal , criti - cal _ point , boundary _ theory , cfts , point , bootstrap , central , conformal _ anomaly , strip , fixed , free , entanglement _ entropy , conformal _ field _ theory , criticality , condition Gauge / string duality ( 0 . 27 ) Conformal field theory , algebraic [ . . . ] ( 0 . 23 ) Theory of quantized fields ( 0 . 15 ) Theories and models of [ . . . ] ( 0 . 14 ) Critical point phenomena ( 0 . 14 ) Black holes hole , black _ hole , gravity , black , horizon , geometry , gravita - tional , spacetimes , spacetime , curvature , thermodynamics , ein - stein , schwarzschild , metric , ad , hair , relativity , space _ time , observer , graviton Quantum aspects of black holes , [ . . . ] ( 0 . 51 ) Classical black holes ( 0 . 41 ) Physics of black holes ( 0 . 32 ) Exact solutions ( 0 . 24 ) Higher - dimensional black holes , [ . . . ] ( 0 . 23 ) Classical fields scalar , general , first , scalar _ field , massless , real , explicit , dy - namical , second , exact , special , linear , full , symmetric , static , electromagnetic , classical , nonlinear , approximate , non _ trivial Modified theories of gravity ( 0 . 19 ) Lorentz and Poincaré invariance ( 0 . 16 ) Nonlinear or nonlocal theories and [ . . . ] ( 0 . 11 ) Exact solutions ( 0 . 10 ) Higher - dimensional gravity and [ . . . ] ( 0 . 10 ) Collider physics distribution , collision , production , cross _ sections , section , par - ton , hadron , cross , cross _ section , process , hadronic _ collision , scattering , correction , fragmentation , partons , kinematics , transverse , impact , event , partonic Perturbative calculations ( 0 . 29 ) Polarization in interactions and [ . . . ] ( 0 . 28 ) Inclusive production with [ . . . ] ( 0 . 27 ) Total and inclusive cross sections [ . . . ] ( 0 . 26 ) Relativistic heavy - ion collisions ( 0 . 25 ) Cosmology constant , cosmological , inflation , cosmic , perturbation , vac - uum , universe , inflationary , cosmology , fluctuation , inho - mogeneity , tension , lambda , planck , inflaton , cosmologi - cal _ perturbation , era , epoch , density , background Particle - theory and field - theory [ . . . ] ( 0 . 59 ) Cosmology ( 0 . 32 ) Observational cosmology ( including [ . . . ] ( 0 . 28 ) Dark energy ( 0 . 25 ) Background radiations ( 0 . 21 ) Dark matter matter , dark , dark _ matter , detection , dm , signal , abundance , observation , relic , direct , constraint , candidate , wimp , asym - metric , prospect , dark _ matter _ particle , center , detectable , cold , contribute Dark matter ( 0 . 74 ) γ - ray ( 0 . 22 ) Cosmic rays ( 0 . 19 ) γ - ray sources ; γ - ray bursts ( 0 . 17 ) Elementary particle processes ( 0 . 17 ) Dynamics solution , equation , phase , space , time , system , transition , re - gion , condition , constraint , dynamic , class , background , con - figuration , wave , range , motion , set , star , instability Exact solutions ( 0 . 14 ) Nonlinear or nonlocal theories and [ . . . ] ( 0 . 11 ) Extended classical solutions ; [ . . . ] ( 0 . 10 ) Relativistic wave equations ( 0 . 10 ) Modified theories of gravity ( 0 . 09 ) Electroweak sector standard , higgs , boson , particle , standard _ model , physic , lhc , sm , top , tev , collider , mssm , electroweak , minimal , phe - nomenology , extension , extra , supersymmetric _ model , super - partners , new _ particle Extensions of electroweak Higgs sector ( 0 . 34 ) Supersymmetric models ( 0 . 33 ) Non - standard - model Higgs bosons ( 0 . 30 ) Supersymmetric partners of known [ . . . ] ( 0 . 28 ) Standard - model Higgs bosons ( 0 . 27 ) Gauge theory dimension , coupling , scale , structure , operator , fermion , value , matrix , number , su , charge , sector , spin , group , topological , anomalous , breaking , anomaly , global , flavor Unified theories and models of [ . . . ] ( 0 . 22 ) Unification of couplings ; mass relations ( 0 . 17 ) Quark and lepton masses and mixing ( 0 . 13 ) Unified field theories and models ( 0 . 12 ) Field theories in dimensions other [ . . . ] ( 0 . 12 ) Hadrons decay , data , channel , bound , resonance , gamma , meson , width , experimental _ data , collaboration , kaon , prediction , experimental , measurement , admixture , narrow , process , hadronic _ decay , s0 , ratio Decays of bottom mesons ( 0 . 30 ) Decays of J / ψ , Υ , and other quarkonia ( 0 . 24 ) Meson - meson interactions ( 0 . 21 ) Decays of bottom mesons ( 0 . 20 ) Bottom mesons ( | B | > 0 ) ( 0 . 19 ) Neutrinos and flavour physics neutrino , violation , oscillation , flavor , cp , angle , mix - ing , experiment , lepton , flavour , hierarchy , majorana , cp _ violation , beta , leptogenesis , asymmetry , neutrino _ mass , neutrino _ oscillation , smallness , generation Neutrino mass and mixing ( 0 . 74 ) Non - standard - model neutrinos , [ . . . ] ( 0 . 41 ) Ordinary neutrinos ( 0 . 30 ) Neutrino interactions ( 0 . 28 ) Quark and lepton masses and mixing ( 0 . 23 ) Perturbative methods amplitude , qcd , loop , diagram , sum , contribution , perturba - tive , expansion , vertex , rule , light _ cone , perturbative _ qcd , propagator , approach , correlator , one _ loop , evaluation , non - perturbative , kernel , diagrammatic General properties of perturbation [ . . . ] ( 0 . 25 ) Other nonperturbative calculations ( 0 . 24 ) Sum rules ( 0 . 22 ) Perturbative calculations ( 0 . 21 ) General properties of QCD [ . . . ] ( 0 . 16 ) QCD quark , chiral , magnetic , baryon , relativistic , moment , qcd , light _ quark , strong , heavy , heavy _ quark , lattice , mag - netic _ field , electric , deconfinement , chromodynamics , current , diquarks , plasma , color Lattice QCD calculations ( 0 . 27 ) Chiral symmetries ( 0 . 26 ) Chiral Lagrangians ( 0 . 25 ) Quark - gluon plasma ( 0 . 23 ) General properties of QCD [ . . . ] ( 0 . 20 ) Continued on next page 24 Table 1 : Research areas , their top - words , and their correlation with a standard classification ( PACS ) . Research area Top words Most correlated PACS categories Quantum Field The - ory quantum , group , quantum _ field , representation , quantisation , mechanic , quantum _ field _ theory , transformation , hamiltoni - ans , algebra , finite _ dimensional , quantization , commutator , algebraic , arbitrary , operator , qft , invariant , analog , associated Algebraic methods ( 0 . 26 ) Noncommutative field theory ( 0 . 25 ) Quantum mechanics ( 0 . 22 ) Noncommutative geometry ( 0 . 19 ) Quantum groups ( 0 . 18 ) String theory and su - pergravity string , supersymmetric , superstring , six _ dimensional , modu - lus , super , instantons , supergravity , dyons , n2 , mathcaln , su - perpotentials , heterotic , sigma _ models , n1 , n4 , gauged , space , deformation , compactifications Supersymmetry ( 0 . 31 ) Strings and branes ( 0 . 29 ) Supergravity ( 0 . 29 ) Compactification and four - [ . . . ] ( 0 . 25 ) D branes ( 0 . 20 ) Thermodynamics potential , effective , interaction , limit , temperature , action , fi - nite , local , freedom , approximation , level , weak , chemical , force , effective _ field _ theory , lagrangian , finite _ temperature , effective _ field , degree , effective _ theory Finite - temperature field theory ( 0 . 26 ) Chiral symmetries ( 0 . 09 ) Nuclear forces ( 0 . 08 ) Quark - gluon plasma ( 0 . 08 ) General properties of QCD [ . . . ] ( 0 . 08 ) Uninterpretable approach , method , analysis , recent , calculation , numerical , for - malism , study , prediction , sigma , previous , work , theoretical , systematic , comparison , uncertainty , agreement , good , investi - gation , paper Lattice QCD calculations ( 0 . 07 ) Baryon resonances ( S = C = B = 0 ) ( 0 . 05 ) Other nonperturbative calculations ( 0 . 05 ) Few - body systems ( 0 . 05 ) Lagrangian and Hamiltonian approach ( 0 . 05 ) Uninterpretable form , correction , momentum , tensor , mode , relation , higher , factor , vector , invariant , formula , angular , part , theorem , spec - trum , power , dimensional , invariance , expression , derivative Electromagnetic form factors ( 0 . 17 ) Protons and neutrons ( 0 . 10 ) Lorentz and Poincaré invariance ( 0 . 08 ) Gauge field theories ( 0 . 06 ) Dispersion relations ( 0 . 06 ) Uninterpretable spectrum , low , problem , low _ energy , important , high , prop - erty , high _ energy , small , physical , soft , fundamental , behav - ior , analytic , behaviour , spectral , dispersion , essential , phe - nomenon , regime General properties of QCD [ . . . ] ( 0 . 07 ) Regge formalism ( 0 . 07 ) Wave propagation , transmission and [ . . . ] ( 0 . 05 ) Elastic scattering ( 0 . 05 ) Lattice gauge theory ( 0 . 05 ) Uninterpretable different , possible , particular , present , various , mechanism , type , example , massive , several , scenario , simple , single , simi - lar , consistent , addition , hand , different _ type , interesting , way Particle - theory and field - theory [ . . . ] ( 0 . 07 ) Modified theories of gravity ( 0 . 07 ) Field theories in dimensions other [ . . . ] ( 0 . 05 ) Cosmology ( 0 . 05 ) Dark energy ( 0 . 05 ) A . 3 . 3 Topic validation using the citation network In order to validate the consistency of the topics that were recovered , we verify that papers from a given topic tend to cite more papers from the same topic . Let N k , k ′ be the amount of citations of articles that belong to topic k ′ originating from articles that belong to k , and N = (cid:80) k , k ′ N k , k ′ the total number of citations . From this matrix , a normalized pointwise mutual correlation npmi ( k , k ′ ) is calculated : npmi ( k , k ′ ) = log N k , k ′ / N ( (cid:80) i N k , i / N ) ( (cid:80) i N i , k ′ / N ) ( 14 ) npmi ( k , k ′ ) is shown in Figure 11 . It measures how frequent citations from k to k ′ are , relative to what would be expected if citations were uniformly distributed . The diagonal values are positive , indicating that the topics we retrieved tend to refer to themselves significantly more than expected by chance alone , providing further evidence of their scientific content and coherence . 25 Q C D H a d r o n s P e r t u r b a t i v e m e t h o d s C o lli d e r ph y s i c s E l ec t r o w e a k s ec t o r N e u t r i n o s & ﬂ a v o u r ph y s i c s D a r k m a tt e r A dS / C F T D y n a m i c s B l a c k h o l e s C o s m o l o g y T h e r m o d y n a m i c s C l a ss i c a l ﬁ e l d s Q u a n t u m F i e l d T h e o r y G a u g e t h e o r y & G r a nd U n i ﬁ c a t i o n S t r i n g t h e o r y & s up e r g r a v i t y Cited category ( references ) QCD Hadrons Perturbative methods Collider physics Electroweak sector Neutrinos & ﬂavour physics Dark matter AdS / CFT Dynamics Black holes Cosmology Thermodynamics Classical ﬁelds Quantum Field Theory Gauge theory & Grand Uniﬁcation String theory & supergravity C i t i n g c a t e go r y × 7 . 0 × 1 . 6 × 1 . 1 × 1 . 1 × 2 . 2 × 1 . 8 × 8 . 9 × 1 . 4 × 1 . 1 × 7 . 2 × 1 . 3 × 1 . 2 × 1 . 2 × 1 . 1 × 6 . 7 × 1 . 1 × 5 . 4 × 1 . 1 × 1 . 2 × 10 . 2 × 1 . 4 × 9 . 1 × 7 . 1 × 1 . 5 × 1 . 6 × 1 . 3 × 1 . 3 × 1 . 3 × 1 . 1 × 1 . 4 × 4 . 9 × 1 . 6 × 1 . 1 × 1 . 7 × 2 . 4 × 1 . 8 × 1 . 2 × 1 . 6 × 1 . 4 × 6 . 5 × 1 . 9 × 1 . 1 × 7 . 0 × 1 . 9 × 2 . 1 × 1 . 3 × 1 . 4 × 1 . 8 × 5 . 6 × 2 . 3 × 1 . 3 × 1 . 3 × 2 . 4 × 1 . 9 × 2 . 0 × 2 . 0 × 8 . 2 × 1 . 4 × 1 . 3 × 1 . 1 × 1 . 3 × 1 . 7 × 1 . 1 × 1 . 4 × 8 . 9 × 1 . 6 × 1 . 5 × 1 . 1 × 1 . 3 × 1 . 5 × 1 . 3 × 1 . 4 × 1 . 6 × 5 . 8 × 1 . 4 × 1 . 3 × 1 . 4 × 5 . 8 − 3 − 2 − 1 0 1 2 3 Figure 11 : Normalized pointwise mutual information npmi ( k , k ′ ) of the citation matrix N k , k ′ . Positive values ( in blue ) indicate that the y - axis research area cites the x - axis research area more often than expected by chance ; negative values indicate that citations occur less than expected by chance . When shown , individual values indicate how many times citations occur compared to chance alone . For instance , papers about Hadrons cite papers about Perturbative methods 1 . 4 times what would be expected if citations were uniform across research areas . 26 A . 3 . 4 Topic validation using the PACS classification Q C D H a d r o n s P e r t u r b a t i v e m e t h o d s C o lli d e r ph y s i c s E l ec t r o w e a k s ec t o r N e u t r i n o s & ﬂ a v o u r ph y s i c s D a r k m a tt e r A dS / C F T D y n a m i c s B l a c k h o l e s C o s m o l og y T h e r m o d y n a m i c s C l a ss i c a l ﬁ e l d s Q u a n t u m F i e l d T h e o r y G a u g e t h e o r y & G r a nd U n i ﬁ c a t i o n S t r i n g t h e o r y & s up e r g r a v i t y − 0 . 4 − 0 . 2 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 Mathematical methods in physics Quantum mechanics , ﬁeld theories , and special relativity General relativity and gravitation Statistical physics , [ . . . ] General theory of ﬁelds and particles Speciﬁc theories and interaction models ; particle systematics Speciﬁc reactions and phenomenology Properties of speciﬁc particles Nuclear reactions : general Nuclear reactions : speciﬁc reactions Fundamental astronomy and [ . . . ] Stellar systems ; interstellar [ . . . ] Figure 12 : Correlation between PACS categories present in ≥ 100 publications in the corpus ( rows ) , and the research areas recovered by the topic model ( columns ) . 27 A . 4 Measures of capital Figure 13 shows the Pearson correlation between these diversity and power measures , as evaluated in the cohort of high - energy physicists . For comparison purposes , an alternative measure of diversity based on Stirling’s index ( Stirling , 2007 ) , with prior applications to studies of interdisciplinarity ( Porter et al . , 2007 ; Leahey et al . , 2016 ) is evaluated 19 . A measure of brokerage is also considered 20 . As shown in Figure 13 , the entropic measure of diversity considered in this paper correlates strongly with the Stirling measure . The magnitude of social capital ( which is similar to degree centrality ) correlates weakly with excess social diversity , thus emphasizing that power and diversity are partially orthogonal aspects of social capital . Power is strongly correlated with brokerage ; indeed , strongly connected scientists , with higher degree centrality , are also those scientists who initiate collaborations between otherwise disconnected scientists , as measured by brokerage . Most importantly , brokerage correlates slightly better with measures of intellectual diversity than with excess social diversity . This suggests that the benefits of “bridging” positions in social networks can sometimes be confused with the benefits of the actors’ own diversity of intellectual resources , which enables them to occupy such positions in the first place . This emphasizes the value of distinguishing the effect of individual intellectual capital from that of social capital . I n t e ll ec t u a l d i v e r s i t y ( S t i r li n g ) E x c e sss o c i a l d i v e r s i t y E x ce sss o c i a l d i v e r s i t y ( S t i r li n g ) P o w e r B r o k e r ag e Intellectual diversity Intellectual diversity ( Stirling ) Excess social diversity Excess social diversity ( Stirling ) Power 0 . 89 0 . 00 - 0 . 00 0 . 12 0 . 16 0 . 03 0 . 00 0 . 08 0 . 11 0 . 86 0 . 14 0 . 13 0 . 11 0 . 10 0 . 83 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Figure 13 : Correlation between different measures of capital . Measures considered in this analysis are shown in bold . Alternative measures are shown for comparison purposes . By construction , excess social diversity is orthogonal to intellectual diversity . A . 5 Learning costs The MCMC algorithm from Chiu et al . 2022 is run on 500 , 000 iterations . The mean posterior values of C k , k ′ are shown in Figure 14a , as a function of the knowledge gap from k to k ′ . The knowledge gap is defined as 19 The Stirling - based diversity measured is evaluated as : D Stirling = 1 − (cid:88) k , k ′ d kk ′ I ak I ak ′ ( 15 ) Where d kk ′ is the fraction of scientists who have more expertise than average in both k and k ′ among those that have expertise in one or the other ( i . e . , a similarity matrix ) . 20 We evaluated brokerage as the amount of pairs of scientists that have collaborated with a given physicist while having no common collaborator except for this physicist . This effectively measures the extent to which this physicist connects otherwise disconnected scientists . 28 1 − ν kk ′ , that is , as the fraction of experts in k who do not hold significant expertise in k ′ ( the matrix ν is shown in Figure 14b ) . 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Fraction of physicists with expertise in k ′ among those with expertise in k ( ν k , k ′ ) 0 2 4 6 C o s t o f s h i f t i n g a tt e n t i o n f r o m k t o k ′ ( C k , k ′ ) R = − 0 . 77 ( a ) Cost of shifting a unit of cohort’s research at - tention from k to k ′ as a function of the fraction of physicists with expertise in k ′ among those with ex - pertise in k ( ν kk ′ ) . Q C D H a d r o n s P e r t u r b a t i v e m e t h o d s C o lli d e r ph y s i c s E l ec t r o w e a k s ec t o r N e u t r i n o s & ﬂ a v o u r ph y s i c s D a r k m a tt e r A dS / C F T D y n a m i c s B l a c k h o l e s C o s m o l og y T h e r m o d y n a m i c s C l a ss i c a l ﬁ e l d s Q u a n t u m F i e l d T h e o r y G a u g e t h e o r y & G r a nd U n i ﬁ c a t i o n S t r i n g t h e o r y & s up e r g r a v i t y QCD Hadrons Perturbativemethods Collider physics Electroweaksector Neutrinos & ﬂavour physics Dark matter AdS / CFT Dynamics Black holes Cosmology Thermodynamics Classicalﬁelds Quantum Field Theory Gauge theory & Grand Uniﬁcation String theory & supergravity 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 ( b ) Fraction ν kk ′ of physicists with expertise in the horizontal research area ( k ) who also hold expertise in the vertical research area ( k ′ ) . Figure 14 : Learning costs and knowledge gap . The cost of shifting attention from one area to another ( left plot ) is in great part determined by how frequently individuals hold knowledge in both areas ( right plot ) . A . 6 Effect of capital on strategies of change A . 6 . 1 Model for the magnitude of change The model for c a is : z ( c a ) ∼ N ( µ a , σ ) µ a = β int - div z ( D ( I a ) ) + β soc - div z ( D ∗ ( S a ) ) + β power z ( P ( S a ) ) + β stability p a + µ area k a + µ k a = arg max k x ak β , µ ∼ N ( 0 , 1 ) | µ area k | ∼ Exponential ( τ ) τ , σ ∼ Exponential ( 1 ) Where z ( · ) denotes standardized variables . A . 6 . 2 Model for the probability of having entered / exited a research area The model for the probability p a of having entered a new field : 29 logit ( p a ) = β int - div z ( D ( I a ) ) + β soc - div z ( D ∗ ( S a ) ) + β power z ( P ( S a ) ) + β stability p a + µ area k a + µ k a = arg max k x ak β , µ ∼ N ( 0 , 1 ) | µ area k | ∼ Exponential ( τ ) τ , σ ∼ Exponential ( 1 ) The same model structure is used for the probability of having exited a research area . A . 6 . 3 Effect of capital and robustness checks − 0 . 2 − 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 Eﬀect on disruption Intellectual capital ( diversity ) Social capital ( diversity ) Social capital ( power ) Stable aﬃliation String theory & supergravity µ ( β ) = 0 . 041 , P ( β < 0 ) = 0 . 024 µ ( β ) = 0 . 28 µ ( β ) = − 0 . 23 µ ( β ) = − 0 . 1 , P ( β > 0 ) = 0 . 0064 µ ( β ) = 0 . 019 , P ( β < 0 ) = 0 . 0019 Figure 15 : Effect of standardized measures of intellectual and social capital , and position stability on the disruption of the physicists’ research agenda ( as measured by the disruption score d a ) . The disruption score is defined as the minimum cost of “transporting” x a to y a given the cost matrix C kk ′ = 1 − ν kk ′ ( see Section 3 . 2 ) . Disruption is higher for scientists who migrate to cognitively distant research areas . 30 Table 2 : Effect of each variable on ( a ) the change score and ( b ) the disruption score for each model . The reference model uses entropy as the diversity measure D and the magnitude of intellectual capital as a measure of power P . Values indicate the mean posterior effect size and the 95 % credible interval . Significant effects are shown in bold . Dep . variable Change score ( c a ) Disruption score ( d a ) Model Reference D = Stirling P = Brokerage Reference D = Stirling P = Brokerage Predictor Intellectual capital ( diversity ) + 0 . 28 + 0 . 043 − 0 . 043 + 0 . 28 + 0 . 041 − 0 . 041 + 0 . 22 + 0 . 043 − 0 . 043 + 0 . 04 + 0 . 04 − 0 . 04 + 1 . 2 + 0 . 47 − 0 . 48 + 0 . 04 + 0 . 04 − 0 . 04 Social capital ( diversity ) + 0 . 09 + 0 . 04 − 0 . 04 + 0 . 07 + 0 . 042 − 0 . 041 + 0 . 06 + 0 . 04 − 0 . 04 + 0 . 28 + 0 . 045 − 0 . 044 + 0 . 85 + 0 . 47 − 0 . 48 + 0 . 22 + 0 . 043 − 0 . 044 Social capital ( power ) − 0 . 22 + 0 . 041 − 0 . 041 − 0 . 2 + 0 . 04 − 0 . 04 − 0 . 14 + 0 . 044 − 0 . 044 − 0 . 23 + 0 . 042 − 0 . 042 − 0 . 21 + 0 . 04 − 0 . 041 − 0 . 14 + 0 . 044 − 0 . 045 Stable affiliation − 0 . 14 + 0 . 079 − 0 . 08 − 0 . 14 + 0 . 079 − 0 . 079 − 0 . 17 + 0 . 079 − 0 . 08 − 0 . 1 + 0 . 079 − 0 . 08 − 0 . 11 + 0 . 078 − 0 . 078 − 0 . 13 + 0 . 082 − 0 . 081 Hadrons + 0 . 01 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 1 − 0 . 11 + 0 . 17 − 0 . 2 − 0 . 02 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 1 + 0 . 003 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 02 − 0 . 008 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 03 + 0 . 0006 + 0 . 01 − 0 . 01 String theory & supergravity + 0 . 3 + 0 . 14 − 0 . 14 + 0 . 39 + 0 . 18 − 0 . 18 + 0 . 15 + 0 . 13 − 0 . 13 + 0 . 02 + 0 . 03 − 0 . 02 + 0 . 04 + 0 . 04 − 0 . 02 + 0 . 004 + 0 . 01 − 0 . 008 Perturbative methods + 0 . 1 + 0 . 21 − 0 . 17 + 0 . 03 + 0 . 2 − 0 . 2 + 0 . 09 + 0 . 2 − 0 . 2 + 0 . 01 + 0 . 03 − 0 . 02 + 0 . 01 + 0 . 03 − 0 . 03 + 0 . 008 + 0 . 03 − 0 . 01 Classical fields − 0 . 13 + 0 . 29 − 0 . 46 − 0 . 1 + 0 . 34 − 0 . 44 − 0 . 08 + 0 . 2 − 0 . 4 − 0 . 009 + 0 . 03 − 0 . 05 − 0 . 009 + 0 . 04 − 0 . 05 − 0 . 003 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 03 Collider physics − 0 . 17 + 0 . 15 − 0 . 16 − 0 . 35 + 0 . 18 − 0 . 19 − 0 . 21 + 0 . 15 − 0 . 15 − 0 . 005 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 02 − 0 . 02 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 03 − 0 . 004 + 0 . 01 − 0 . 02 Dynamics − 0 . 05 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 3 − 0 . 02 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 4 − 0 . 02 + 0 . 25 − 0 . 29 + 0 . 0006 + 0 . 03 − 0 . 03 + 0 . 003 + 0 . 05 − 0 . 05 + 0 . 001 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 02 Neutrinos & flavour physics + 0 . 24 + 0 . 17 − 0 . 16 + 0 . 17 + 0 . 19 − 0 . 18 + 0 . 15 + 0 . 16 − 0 . 15 + 0 . 02 + 0 . 03 − 0 . 02 + 0 . 02 + 0 . 03 − 0 . 02 + 0 . 006 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 009 Black holes + 0 . 05 + 0 . 2 − 0 . 1 + 0 . 18 + 0 . 22 − 0 . 2 + 0 . 02 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 1 − 0 . 007 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 02 + 0 . 008 + 0 . 03 − 0 . 02 − 0 . 005 + 0 . 01 − 0 . 02 Gauge theory & Grand Unification − 0 . 08 + 0 . 2 − 0 . 3 − 0 . 1 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 4 − 0 . 04 + 0 . 2 − 0 . 3 − 0 . 003 + 0 . 03 − 0 . 03 − 0 . 009 + 0 . 04 − 0 . 05 − 9 e − 05 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 02 Dark matter − 0 . 19 + 0 . 2 − 0 . 24 − 0 . 27 + 0 . 25 − 0 . 27 − 0 . 16 + 0 . 19 − 0 . 24 − 0 . 01 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 04 − 0 . 02 + 0 . 027 − 0 . 043 − 0 . 007 + 0 . 01 − 0 . 03 Thermodynamics + 0 . 08 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 2 + 0 . 2 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 3 + 0 . 08 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 2 + 0 . 006 + 0 . 04 − 0 . 03 + 0 . 02 + 0 . 06 − 0 . 04 + 0 . 004 + 0 . 03 − 0 . 02 Cosmology − 0 . 01 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 2 + 0 . 03 + 0 . 2 − 0 . 2 − 0 . 03 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 2 − 0 . 009 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 03 − 0 . 004 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 03 − 0 . 006 + 0 . 01 − 0 . 02 Electroweak sector − 0 . 06 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 1 − 0 . 16 + 0 . 17 − 0 . 18 − 0 . 01 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 1 + 0 . 002 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 02 − 0 . 009 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 02 + 0 . 006 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 009 QCD − 0 . 04 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 2 − 0 . 12 + 0 . 18 − 0 . 2 − 0 . 04 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 1 + 0 . 0009 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 02 − 0 . 01 + 0 . 022 − 0 . 029 + 0 . 001 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 01 Quantum Field Theory + 0 . 04 + 0 . 2 − 0 . 2 + 0 . 12 + 0 . 25 − 0 . 21 + 0 . 04 + 0 . 2 − 0 . 2 − 0 . 006 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 03 + 0 . 0001 + 0 . 03 − 0 . 03 − 0 . 002 + 0 . 01 − 0 . 02 AdS / CFT + 0 . 005 + 0 . 2 − 0 . 2 + 0 . 08 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 2 + 0 . 009 + 0 . 2 − 0 . 2 − 0 . 007 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 03 − 0 . 001 + 0 . 04 − 0 . 03 − 0 . 003 + 0 . 02 − 0 . 02 31 Table 3 : Effect of each variable on ( a ) the probability of having entered a new research area and ( b ) the probability of having exited a research area , for each model . The reference model uses entropy as the diversity measure D and the magnitude of intellectual capital as a measure of power P . Values indicate the mean posterior effect size and the 95 % credible interval . Significant effects are shown in bold . Dep . variable Entered a new research area Exited a research area Model Reference D = Stirling P = Brokerage Reference D = Stirling P = Brokerage Predictor Intellectual capital ( diversity ) + 0 . 15 + 0 . 11 − 0 . 11 + 0 . 14 + 0 . 099 − 0 . 1 + 0 . 12 + 0 . 11 − 0 . 11 + 1 . 1 + 0 . 14 − 0 . 14 + 0 . 86 + 0 . 12 − 0 . 12 + 0 . 96 + 0 . 14 − 0 . 13 Social capital ( diversity ) + 0 . 2 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 1 + 0 . 16 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 1 + 0 . 18 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 1 + 0 . 06 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 1 + 0 . 04 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 1 + 0 . 01 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 1 Social capital ( power ) − 0 . 12 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 1 − 0 . 11 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 1 − 0 . 07 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 1 − 0 . 31 + 0 . 11 − 0 . 11 − 0 . 26 + 0 . 11 − 0 . 11 − 0 . 18 + 0 . 1 − 0 . 1 Stable affiliation − 0 . 14 + 0 . 19 − 0 . 19 − 0 . 14 + 0 . 19 − 0 . 19 − 0 . 15 + 0 . 2 − 0 . 19 − 0 . 11 + 0 . 21 − 0 . 21 − 0 . 07 + 0 . 2 − 0 . 2 − 0 . 15 + 0 . 21 − 0 . 21 Hadrons − 0 . 11 + 0 . 31 − 0 . 36 − 0 . 21 + 0 . 33 − 0 . 39 − 0 . 13 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 36 − 0 . 04 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 3 − 0 . 27 + 0 . 39 − 0 . 45 − 0 . 06 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 3 String theory & supergravity + 0 . 44 + 0 . 35 − 0 . 32 + 0 . 53 + 0 . 36 − 0 . 35 + 0 . 36 + 0 . 33 − 0 . 31 + 0 . 46 + 0 . 36 − 0 . 34 + 0 . 9 + 0 . 42 − 0 . 42 + 0 . 23 + 0 . 34 − 0 . 25 Perturbative methods + 0 . 05 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 4 + 0 . 03 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 4 + 0 . 06 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 4 − 0 . 13 + 0 . 33 − 0 . 46 − 0 . 33 + 0 . 47 − 0 . 57 − 0 . 1 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 4 Classical fields + 0 . 26 + 1 . 2 − 0 . 63 + 0 . 4 + 1 . 5 − 0 . 75 + 0 . 26 + 1 . 2 − 0 . 63 − 0 . 43 + 0 . 64 − 1 . 6 − 0 . 51 + 0 . 85 − 1 . 3 − 0 . 27 + 0 . 48 − 1 . 2 Collider physics − 0 . 35 + 0 . 33 − 0 . 35 − 0 . 52 + 0 . 34 − 0 . 35 − 0 . 37 + 0 . 33 − 0 . 35 + 0 . 06 + 0 . 31 − 0 . 25 − 0 . 2 + 0 . 35 − 0 . 41 + 0 . 02 + 0 . 26 − 0 . 23 Dynamics − 0 . 18 + 0 . 6 − 0 . 85 − 0 . 18 + 0 . 66 − 0 . 89 − 0 . 16 + 0 . 58 − 0 . 83 − 0 . 02 + 0 . 6 − 0 . 7 + 0 . 14 + 1 . 1 − 0 . 86 − 0 . 006 + 0 . 6 − 0 . 6 Neutrinos & flavour physics + 0 . 14 + 0 . 37 − 0 . 29 + 0 . 1 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 3 + 0 . 11 + 0 . 35 − 0 . 29 − 0 . 19 + 0 . 27 − 0 . 35 − 0 . 33 + 0 . 38 − 0 . 44 − 0 . 25 + 0 . 28 − 0 . 37 Black holes − 0 . 07 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 4 + 0 . 006 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 4 − 0 . 08 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 4 + 0 . 16 + 0 . 48 − 0 . 32 + 0 . 78 + 0 . 59 − 0 . 56 + 0 . 12 + 0 . 44 − 0 . 28 Gauge theory & Grand Unification + 0 . 003 + 0 . 6 − 0 . 6 + 0 . 009 + 0 . 7 − 0 . 6 + 0 . 02 + 0 . 6 − 0 . 6 − 0 . 11 + 0 . 52 − 0 . 78 − 0 . 12 + 0 . 8 − 0 . 88 − 0 . 06 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 6 Dark matter − 0 . 65 + 0 . 56 − 0 . 55 − 0 . 71 + 0 . 56 − 0 . 57 − 0 . 64 + 0 . 55 − 0 . 56 + 0 . 02 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 4 − 0 . 002 + 0 . 5 − 0 . 5 + 0 . 02 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 3 Thermodynamics − 0 . 07 + 0 . 6 − 0 . 7 − 0 . 04 + 0 . 6 − 0 . 6 − 0 . 05 + 0 . 6 − 0 . 6 + 0 . 05 + 0 . 7 − 0 . 6 + 0 . 35 + 1 . 2 − 0 . 77 + 0 . 04 + 0 . 6 − 0 . 5 Cosmology + 0 . 004 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 3 + 0 . 06 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 4 − 0 . 004 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 3 + 0 . 15 + 0 . 5 − 0 . 33 + 0 . 56 + 0 . 6 − 0 . 54 + 0 . 1 + 0 . 44 − 0 . 29 Electroweak sector + 0 . 1 + 0 . 33 − 0 . 28 + 0 . 06 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 3 + 0 . 12 + 0 . 35 − 0 . 29 + 0 . 05 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 3 − 0 . 03 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 4 + 0 . 1 + 0 . 35 − 0 . 24 QCD − 0 . 07 + 0 . 31 − 0 . 35 − 0 . 12 + 0 . 33 − 0 . 38 − 0 . 07 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 4 + 0 . 02 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 3 + 0 . 008 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 4 + 0 . 03 + 0 . 3 − 0 . 3 Quantum Field Theory + 0 . 3 + 0 . 61 − 0 . 42 + 0 . 41 + 0 . 65 − 0 . 49 + 0 . 31 + 0 . 62 − 0 . 43 − 0 . 03 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 4 + 0 . 22 + 0 . 61 − 0 . 48 − 0 . 01 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 4 AdS / CFT + 0 . 17 + 0 . 64 − 0 . 45 + 0 . 26 + 0 . 72 − 0 . 5 + 0 . 18 + 0 . 65 − 0 . 45 − 0 . 05 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 5 + 0 . 21 + 0 . 74 − 0 . 57 − 0 . 03 + 0 . 4 − 0 . 5 A . 7 Exploring individual careers Tables 4 and 5 show the 20 most conservative and least conservative physicists . Measures of the diversity of intellectual capital ( D ( I a ) ) and social capital ( D ( S a ) ) are included . Table 4 shows the physicists who have been the most conservative towards their research agenda . Interestingly , 15 out of 20 are specialized in “Collider physics” , in line with the above observation that this particular research area is more specialized . Table 5 shows the 10 physicists with the highest change scores . Looking into the share of attention dedi - cated by each scientist to each area , one can see that high change scores are usually reached , unsurprisingly , when physicists exit a research area and enter a new one in which they had almost no prior interest . In order to make sure that these cases of high migration were not false positives due to the failure to properly disambiguate authors , we have inspected each of them manually , by comparing physicists’ Inspire HEP profiles with data from their personal websites , as well as their university or LinkedIn profiles . We found one of them to be a false positive due to failing author disambiguation , namely “T . Fuchs” , i . e . the author with the highest change score . In the case of S . D . Katz , certain publications were excluded due to inaccurate classifications in the database , which has led to overestimate their initial distribution of dark matter research . All other cases are accurate . For instance , on G . Ferretti’s university webpage , one can read : “Gabriele Ferretti joined Chalmers in 1999 . For the first ten years he has been mainly involved in research in quantum field theory and string theory with emphasis on their formal aspects . Since the start of the LHC he has also become interested in phenomenological applications of quantum field theory and model building” 32 21 . Comparing tables 4 and 5 , one can see that physicists with high change scores tend to have much more diverse intellectual and social capital . In other words , such physicists have had more opportunities to adapt or revise their research agenda . This is in line with the observation that change is enhanced by the diversity of cognitive resources one has access to . Table 4 : Physicists with the lowest change scores c a . D ( I a ) and D ( S a ) measure the diversity of intellectual and social capital . Numbers in parentheses indicate the share of attention dedicated to each research area . Asterisks ( ∗ ) indicate physicists with a permanent position . Physicist c a D ( I a ) D ( S a ) Previous main area Current main area J . Huston ( ∗ ) 0 . 04 2 . 96 5 . 50 Collider physics ( 0 . 61 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 60 ) U . D . Alesio ( ∗ ) 0 . 05 1 . 68 4 . 50 Collider physics ( 0 . 87 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 88 ) S . Schumann 0 . 06 4 . 15 7 . 90 Collider physics ( 0 . 46 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 45 ) A . V . Lipatov 0 . 06 2 . 88 4 . 28 Collider physics ( 0 . 68 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 68 ) Andreas Metz 0 . 06 2 . 01 3 . 61 Collider physics ( 0 . 85 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 89 ) I . Vitev 0 . 07 2 . 95 5 . 49 Collider physics ( 0 . 72 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 73 ) Xin Nian Wang ( ∗ ) 0 . 07 2 . 61 4 . 06 Collider physics ( 0 . 77 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 75 ) S . Goswami 0 . 07 2 . 15 5 . 22 Neutrinos & flavour physics ( 0 . 83 ) Neutrinos & flavour physics ( 0 . 79 ) Y . Mehtar Tani 0 . 07 2 . 75 5 . 17 Collider physics ( 0 . 75 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 75 ) M . Trigiante 0 . 07 5 . 11 6 . 42 String theory & supergrav - ity ( 0 . 55 ) String theory & supergrav - ity ( 0 . 56 ) F . Murgia ( ∗ ) 0 . 07 1 . 84 4 . 57 Collider physics ( 0 . 86 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 87 ) B . Kayser ( ∗ ) 0 . 07 2 . 07 4 . 94 Neutrinos & flavour physics ( 0 . 76 ) Neutrinos & flavour physics ( 0 . 77 ) J . F . Owens ( ∗ ) 0 . 07 2 . 01 5 . 42 Collider physics ( 0 . 78 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 80 ) A . Bacchetta 0 . 07 2 . 07 3 . 19 Collider physics ( 0 . 84 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 81 ) P . M . Nadolsky ( ∗ ) 0 . 07 3 . 19 5 . 28 Collider physics ( 0 . 62 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 59 ) D . Martelli 0 . 07 4 . 42 5 . 97 String theory & supergrav - ity ( 0 . 57 ) String theory & supergrav - ity ( 0 . 58 ) C . Pisano 0 . 08 1 . 77 4 . 53 Collider physics ( 0 . 87 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 88 ) M . Strikman ( ∗ ) 0 . 08 2 . 77 4 . 99 Collider physics ( 0 . 77 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 75 ) J . Nemchik ( ∗ ) 0 . 08 2 . 67 4 . 69 Collider physics ( 0 . 80 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 78 ) Zhi Zhong Xing ( ∗ ) 0 . 08 3 . 44 8 . 17 Neutrinos & flavour physics ( 0 . 71 ) Neutrinos & flavour physics ( 0 . 65 ) 21 https : / / www . chalmers . se / en / persons / ferretti / , accessed on 11 / 10 / 2023 33 Table 5 : Physicists with the highest change scores c a . D ( I a ) and D ( S a ) measure the diversity of intellectual and social capital . Numbers in parentheses indicate the share of attention dedicated to each research area during each time - period . Asterisks ( ∗ ) indicate physicists with a permanent position . Physicist c a D ( I a ) D ( S a ) Previous main area Current main area T . Fuchs 0 . 93 4 . 38 6 . 50 QCD ( 0 . 53 → 0 . 00 ) Neutrinos & flavour physics ( 0 . 00 → 0 . 64 ) N . G . Sanchez ( ∗ ) 0 . 88 7 . 52 13 . 08 Black holes ( 0 . 37 → 0 . 03 ) Dark matter ( 0 . 00 → 0 . 57 ) V . V . Braguta ( ∗ ) 0 . 88 5 . 03 8 . 04 Hadrons ( 0 . 45 → 0 . 00 ) QCD ( 0 . 05 → 0 . 60 ) G . B . Cleaver ( ∗ ) 0 . 83 6 . 34 12 . 22 String theory & supergrav - ity ( 0 . 40 → 0 . 00 ) Cosmology ( 0 . 03 → 0 . 62 ) J . Martin Ca - malich 0 . 82 2 . 34 4 . 57 QCD ( 0 . 78 → 0 . 03 ) Hadrons ( 0 . 06 → 0 . 38 ) Kwei Chou Yang ( ∗ ) 0 . 81 3 . 58 7 . 80 Hadrons ( 0 . 63 → 0 . 03 ) Dark matter ( 0 . 00 → 0 . 78 ) S . D . Katz ( ∗ ) 0 . 80 6 . 50 10 . 85 Dark matter ( 0 . 42 → 0 . 03 ) QCD ( 0 . 06 → 0 . 47 ) G . Ferretti ( ∗ ) 0 . 78 5 . 22 6 . 18 String theory & supergrav - ity ( 0 . 52 → 0 . 00 ) Electroweak sector ( 0 . 01 → 0 . 58 ) K . Bhat - tacharya 0 . 78 10 . 79 10 . 59 Neutrinos & flavour physics ( 0 . 20 → 0 . 00 ) Cosmology ( 0 . 09 → 0 . 37 ) H . Ebrahim ( ∗ ) 0 . 78 3 . 90 6 . 81 Black holes ( 0 . 44 → 0 . 06 ) AdS / CFT ( 0 . 02 → 0 . 34 ) K . Narayan 0 . 77 3 . 83 7 . 13 String theory & supergrav - ity ( 0 . 62 → 0 . 00 ) AdS / CFT ( 0 . 03 → 0 . 52 ) Mario Campan - elli 0 . 77 2 . 04 4 . 48 Neutrinos & flavour physics ( 0 . 79 → 0 . 06 ) Electroweak sector ( 0 . 09 → 0 . 64 ) V . K . Oikonomou ( ∗ ) 0 . 76 8 . 05 6 . 18 Thermodynamics ( 0 . 24 → 0 . 02 ) Cosmology ( 0 . 00 → 0 . 47 ) K . Sasaki 0 . 76 3 . 14 8 . 87 Collider physics ( 0 . 68 → 0 . 06 ) Thermodynamics ( 0 . 00 → 0 . 27 ) H . L . Verlinde ( ∗ ) 0 . 74 5 . 32 8 . 88 String theory & supergrav - ity ( 0 . 60 → 0 . 04 ) AdS / CFT ( 0 . 02 → 0 . 35 ) Bin Wu 0 . 74 5 . 02 8 . 01 QCD ( 0 . 41 → 0 . 02 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 15 → 0 . 56 ) Eiji Nakano ( ∗ ) 0 . 74 6 . 90 10 . 13 QCD ( 0 . 39 → 0 . 06 ) Hadrons ( 0 . 04 → 0 . 78 ) A . T . Suzuki ( ∗ ) 0 . 73 4 . 36 6 . 43 Perturbative methods ( 0 . 61 → 0 . 04 ) Neutrinos & flavour physics ( 0 . 01 → 0 . 39 ) A . Mariotti 0 . 73 3 . 81 4 . 91 String theory & supergrav - ity ( 0 . 63 → 0 . 01 ) Electroweak sector ( 0 . 01 → 0 . 38 ) I . Scimemi 0 . 73 6 . 77 8 . 60 Hadrons ( 0 . 36 → 0 . 00 ) Collider physics ( 0 . 09 → 0 . 81 ) 34