Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 11 , 2161 – 2173 , June 2000 Release of Kinesin from Vesicles by hsc70 and Regulation of Fast Axonal Transport Ming - Ying Tsai , Gerardo Morﬁni , Gyo¨rgyi Szebenyi , and Scott T . Brady * Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , Texas 75390 - 9039 Submitted December 22 , 1999 ; Revised March 17 , 2000 ; Accepted March 30 , 2000 Monitoring Editor : Jennifer Lippincott - Schwartz The nature of kinesin interactions with membrane - bound organelles and mechanisms for regu - lation of kinesin - based motility have both been surprisingly difﬁcult to deﬁne . Most kinesin is recovered in supernatants with standard protocols for puriﬁcation of motor proteins , but kinesin recovered on membrane - bound organelles is tightly bound . Partitioning of kinesin between vesicle and cytosolic fractions is highly sensitive to buffer composition . Addition of either N - ethylmaleimide or EDTA to homogenization buffers signiﬁcantly increased the fraction of kinesin bound to organelles . Given that an antibody against kinesin light chain tandem repeats also releases kinesin from vesicles , these observations indicated that speciﬁc cytoplasmic factors may regulate kinesin release from membranes . Kinesin light tandem repeats contain DnaJ - like motifs , so the effects of hsp70 chaperones were evaluated . Hsc70 released kinesin from vesicles in an MgATP - dependent and N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive manner . Recombinant kinesin light chains inhibited kinesin release by hsc70 and stimulated the hsc70 ATPase . Hsc70 actions may provide a mechanism to regulate kinesin function by releasing kinesin from cargo in speciﬁc subcellular domains , thereby effecting delivery of axonally transported materials . INTRODUCTION Translocation of organelles along microtubules by the kine - sin heterotetramer requires several discrete activities ( Brady , 1995 ) , all of which may be sites for regulating kinesin - based processes . Although hydrolysis of ATP , binding to microtu - bules , and generation of force have received considerable attention to date , relatively little information is available about interactions between kinesin and membrane - bound organelles ( MBOs ) . Curiously , although kinesin is generally thought to mediate transport of MBOs along microtubules , it is typically puriﬁed from soluble fractions of tissue extracts . In subcellular fractionation studies , ; 70 % of cellular kinesin was recovered in soluble fractions ( Hollenbeck , 1989 ) . How - ever , the presence of a signiﬁcant pool of soluble kinesin inside cells is problematic , because kinesin isolated in this way is a microtubule - activated ATPase . Soluble kinesin in cells might be expected to deplete cellular ATP through this ATPase activity or to interfere with MBO - associated motors sterically by competing for microtubule - binding sites . One possibility is that a mechanism exists to limit the activity of soluble kinesin in vivo . Several groups have provided evi - dence that conformational changes in soluble kinesin bring the tail of kinesin in contact with its head and inhibits microtubule - activated ATPase activity ( Hackney et al . , 1992 ; Verhey et al . , 1998 ; Coy et al . , 1999 ; Friedman and Vale , 1999 ) . However , this inhibition by folding of soluble kinesin is typically seen in low - ionic - strength buffers and is not signif - icant in buffers with intracellular ionic strength and pH ( Hirokawa et al . , 1989 ) . Alternatively , levels of soluble kine - sin in vivo might be substantially lower than fractionation studies imply . Several lines of evidence indicate that most kinesin is bound to MBOs in intact cells ( Brady , 1995 ; Brady and Sperry , 1995 ) . Kinesin immunoreactivity is associated with detergent - soluble , punctate structures in close proximity to microtubules , with little evidence of an unbound fraction ( Pﬁster et al . , 1989b ) . When a nonhydrolyzable analogue of ATP , adenylyl 5 9 - imidodiphosphate ( AMP - PNP ) , is per - fused into squid axoplasm , all MBOs stop moving and re - main attached to microtubules through kinesin links ( Brady , 1985 ; Lasek and Brady , 1985 ) , indicating both that kinesin is associated with these MBOs and that kinesin attachment to MBOs is relatively stable . Similarly , pulse labeling of kinesin in axonal transport demonstrated that kinesin travels in fast axonal transport with MBO with little or no kinesin detect - able in slow axonal transport with soluble , cytoplasmic pro - teins ( Elluru et al . , 1995 ) . Finally , kinesin still bound to MBOs after the initial fractionation is highly resistant to in vitro treatments , including high salt and carbonate , that release most peripheral membrane proteins ( Leopold et al . , 1992 ; Schnapp et al . , 1992 ) . * Corresponding author . E - mail address : Scott . Brady @ email . swmed . edu . © 2000 by The American Society for Cell Biology 2161 Such considerations suggest that regulation of kinesin binding to MBOs could be an important physiological path - way for regulating kinesin - based transport of MBOs . Al - though little is known about regulation of kinesin binding to membranes , the tightness of binding suggested that release of kinesin from MBOs might involve an energy - dependent step , presumably mediated by one or more enzymatic activ - ities . Active removal of kinesin from membranes could be increased during homogenization because of disruption of intracellular compartments . Such disruptions may activate cellular processes that are kept under tight control in the intact cell and thereby may increase soluble fractions of kinesin in tissue extracts . Two types of experiments were undertaken to test the hypothesis that membrane - bound kinesin is released during homogenization and extraction of tissues . First , whole - cell detergent extraction was combined with immunoﬂuorescence to compare the behavior of kine - sin with proteins known to be soluble in vivo . If the majority of cellular kinesin is in a soluble cytoplasmic pool , then the soluble kinesin fraction should behave like soluble marker proteins . Conditions that effectively extract all soluble cyto - plasmic markers had minimal effect on kinesin immunolo - calization . Second , the fraction of tissue kinesin that re - mained bound to vesicles was assayed after homogenization in the presence of various enzyme inhibitors . If kinesin release is an active process , then inhibition of the relevant enzymatic activities should inhibit release . Homogenization with buffers containing millimolar levels of either a sulfhy - dryl modifying agent ( N - ethylmaleimide [ NEM ] ) or a che - lator of divalent cations ( EDTA ) signiﬁcantly increased the percent of cellular kinesin in membrane fractions . Previously , an antibody directed against the tandem re - peat domain of kinesin light chains ( KLCs ) was found to release kinesin from MBOs . This led to reexamination of sequences in the tandem repeat domain . Identiﬁcation of motifs characteristic of the J - domain in DnaJ , a cofactor for hsp70 chaperones ( Cyr et al . , 1994 ; Kelley , 1998 ) , suggested a role for members of this chaperone family . Incubation of MBOs with puriﬁed hsc70 indicated that hsc70 released kinesin from MBOs in a nucleotide - dependent and NEM - sensitive manner . These results suggest that kinesin in vivo is tightly bound to MBO , but activation of hsc70 during homogenization releases a large fraction of bound kinesin into the supernatant . Consistent with this , treatment of per - meabilized , unﬁxed cells with puriﬁed hsc70 led to a reduc - tion in kinesin immunoreactivity . The hsc70 pathway may serve as a mechanism for regulating kinesin function by releasing kinesin from MBOs in speciﬁc subcellular do - mains , much as hsc70 is thought to remove clathrin coats from coated vesicles ( Ungewickell et al . , 1995 ; Holstein et al . , 1996 ; Ungewickell et al . , 1997 ) , and other hsp70 family mem - bers mediate a variety of protein – membrane interactions ( Horst et al . , 1997 ; Terada et al . , 1997 ; Zimmermann , 1998 ) . MATERIALS AND METHODS The following cell lines were used : BHK21 wt ( kidney cell line ) , BHK21 stably transfected with green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) un - der the control of the cytomegalovirus promoter ( a gift from Z . Min ) , and 3T3 ( mouse ﬁbroblast cell line ) . Four chamber culture slides ( Becton Dickinson , Franklin Lakes , NJ ) were coated with poly - l - lysine ( 0 . 8 mg / ml in water ; Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) for 1 h at room temperature and then washed three times with water . Forty - eight hours before extraction , cells were plated at densities of 2500 – 5000 cells / cm 2 in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium supple - mented with 5 % FBS and a mixture of antibiotics . Immediately before detergent treatment , cells were rinsed twice with 37°C PHEM buffer ( 60 mM 1 , 4 - piperazinediethanesulfonic acid , 25 mM HEPES , 10 mM EGTA , and 2 mM MgCl 2 , pH 7 . 4 ) to remove serum and debris . Cells were then extracted for 4 min at 37°C with various concentrations of either Triton X - 100 ( 0 . 01 – 1 % ; Sigma ) , or digitonin ( 0 . 05 – 0 . 2 % ; Calbiochem , La Jolla , CA ) freshly made in PHEM sup - plemented with 1 mM GTP , 10 m M Taxol , and protease inhibitors ( 20 mM AEBSF , 200 mg / ml aprotinin , 100 mM pepstatin , and 1 mM leupeptin ) . Digitonin extraction buffers were also supplemented with 5 mM EDTA ( Mackall et al . , 1979 ) . Unextracted controls were incubated in supplemented PHEM for 4 min before ﬁxation . Cells treated with hsc70 were ﬁrst extracted with 0 . 01 % Triton X - 100 for 1 min in PHEM ( as above ) . Then the solution was replaced with a fresh aliquot of 0 . 01 % Triton X - 100 containing PHEM supplemented with 200 m M ATP , 10 mM MgCl 2 , and puriﬁed bovine hsc70 , and cells were extracted for an additional 4 min . At the end of detergent incubations , cells were ﬁxed in 2 % paraformaldehyde and 0 . 01 % glutaraldehyde in PHEM for 10 min at 37°C . Fixed cells were rinsed in PBS and then extracted in 0 . 6 % Triton X - 100 and PBS for 20 min , except that GFP - trans - fected cells were extracted in 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 and PBS for 10 min . Before application of primary antibodies , cells were incu - bated in blocking solution ( 2 . 5 % gelatin , 2 . 5 % BSA , and 0 . 01 % Na azide in PBS ) fo r 1 h atroom temperature . Primary and second - ary antibodies were diluted in blocking solution . Primary anti - bodies were incubated at 4°C for ; 16 h , whereas secondary antibodies were incubated for 45 min at room temperature . We used the following antibodies : rabbit anti - tubulin polyclonal an - tibody ( Sigma T - 3626 ) at 1 : 200 ; H2 anti - kinesin mouse monoclo - nal antibody at 5 – 20 m g / ml ; goat anti - rabbit immunoglobulin G - Texas Red ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) at a dilution of 1 : 500 ; and goat - anti - mouse Oregon Green 488 at a dilution of 1 : 500 ( Molecular Probes ) . After incubation with antibodies , cells were washed in PBS . After additional washes in 50 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , slides were incubated with either a 1 : 400 dilution of To - Pro3 ( Molecular Probes ) for 15 min or a 1 m g / ml dilution of Hoechst dye ( Aldrich Chemicals , St . Louis , MO ) for 2 min and then rinsed with 50 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 . Slides were coversliped with ProLong antifade ( Molecular Probes ) or Gel / Mount ( Biomedia , Foster City , CA ) . GFP , Texas Red immunoﬂuorescence , and To - Pro3 or Hoechst ﬂuorescence were visualized on a Zeiss ( Thornwood , NY ) Axiovert microscope using either a 40 3 ( numerical aperture , 1 . 4 ) or a 63 3 ( numerical aperture , 1 . 3 ) objective . Images were acquired either with a Bio - Rad ( Hercules , CA ) confocal laser scanning microscope or with a cooled charge - coupled device camera ( ORCA ; Hamamatsu , Hamamatsu City , Japan ) controlled by Openlab Software ( Improvision , Lexington , MA ) . Images were processed for presentation in Adobe Photoshop ( Adobe Systems , Mountain View , CA ) . All images shown in the same panel were altered for contrast identically . Microsomal vesicles were puriﬁed by homogenizing fresh bovine brains in 5 volumes of homogenization buffer ( HB ; 300 mM sucrose , 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 4 , 5 mM MgCl 2 , and protease inhibitor mixture [ 1 mM - 4 - ( 2 - aminoethyl ) benzenesulfonyl ﬂuoride and 10 m g / ml leupeptin , pepstatin , and aprotinin ] ) . As indicated , HB was used without additions , with NEM ( 0 . 1 – 5 mM ) , or with EDTA ( 5 mM ) added to buffer before homogenization . For NEM experiments , the suspension was centrifuged 15 min at 39 , 800 3 g . This 39 , 800 3 g pellet ( V1 ) was resuspended in homogenization buffer by 10 pas - sages through a 25 - gauge hypodermic needle to disperse vesicles for further analysis . The 39 , 800 3 g supernatant was centrifuged 40 min at 120 , 000 3 g . The supernatant was layered onto 600 mM sucrose in 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 4 , and centrifuged for 2 h at 260 , 000 3 g . The 260 , 000 3 g pellet ( V2 ) was resuspended in ho - mogenization buffer as described above . Vesicle samples were ei - ther processed for immunoblots or used for release assays . For M . - Y . Tsai et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2162 quantitative immunoblots , the supernatant ( S ) and vesicle fractions ( V1 and V2 ) were probed for the presence of kinesin with the H2 antibody as described previously ( Pﬁster et al . , 1989b ) . Primary antibodies were detected by 125 I - protein A , and the amount of kinesin in different fractions was quantitated with a Molecular Dynamics ( Sunnyvale , CA ) PhosphorImager after overnight expo - sure of screens . For quantitative and qualitative comparisons between NEM and EDTA treatments , this protocol was modiﬁed to generate a single vesicle fraction that retained a lower percentage of kinesin . Brains were homogenized in a buffer containing 320 mM sucrose and 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 4 , and homogenates were centrifuged at 11 , 000 3 g maximum for 8 min to eliminate debris , nuclei , and mitochondria . Three milliliters of each supernatant were taken from each tube and centrifuged fo r 1 h at200 , 000 3 g max in a Beckman Instruments ( Palo Alto , CA ) TLA . 100 . 3 ultracentrifuge rotor . After recovering the soluble fraction , the 200 , 000 3 g pellets were resuspended by brief sonication in 1 . 5 ml of HB . Protein concentration was mea - sured by the Coommasie blue assay ( Pierce , Rockford , IL ) . Equal amounts ( 50 m g ) of protein from each fraction were separated by SDS - PAGE and transferred to a ZetaProbe nylon membrane ( Bio - Rad ) 16 h at 25 V in 10 mM CAPS buffer , pH 11 . Chemiluminescent assays and quantitative inmunoblots were performed as described previously ( Stenoien and Brady , 1997 ) . The amounts of kinesin , hsc70 , synaptophysin , and other proteins were quantitated with a Molecular Dynamics PhosphorImager after overnight exposure of screens . Monoclonal antibodies against hsc70 and synaptophysin were purchased from StressGen ( Victoria , BC ) . Secondary antibod - ies were from Jackson ImmunoResearch ( West Grove , PA ) . The effects of hsc70 on the kinesin bound to microsomal vesicles ( V2 ) were evaluated by incubating at a concentration of 1 mg / ml total vesicle protein with or without hsc70 for 30 min at 37°C in release buffer ( HB plus 75 mM KCl ) . Hsc70 was used at concentra - tion of 10 m g / ml for a molar ratio of 2 : 1 for hsc70 : kinesin . After centrifugation over 600 mM sucrose in 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 4 , at 260 , 000 3 g , the supernatants and pellets were probed for the presence of kinesin using the H2 antibody on quantitative immu - noblots . Antibodies were detected using 125 I - labeled protein A and analyzed by PhosphorImager . The effects of NEM on hsc70 - medi - ated release of endogenous kinesin were determined by addition of NEM ( 2 mM ) to V2 vesicles in vitro either at the same time as hsc70 ( time 0 ) or at different intervals after hsc70 . To control for nonspe - ciﬁc effects of the NEM vehicle , the action of NEM on free sulfhydryl groups was blocked by simultaneous addition of dithiothreitol ( DTT ; 2 mM ) . To evaluate the ability of different KLC constructs to affect hsc70 - mediated release of kinesin from vesicles , varying concentrations of recombinant proteins were added to puriﬁed microsomal vesicles ( 1 mg / ml total vesicle protein ) with hsc70 at a concentration of 10 m g / ml ( a molar ratio of 2 : 1 for hsc70 : kinesin ) for 30 min at 37°C . Four different constructs were generated : glutathione S - transferase ( GST ; no insert ) , GST - LCA ( full - length KLC1 ) , GST - TR1 ( two tan - dem repeats ) , and GST - TR2 ( four tandem repeats ) . The molar ratios for fusion protein to hsc70 ranged from 0 . 25 to 8 : 1 . To determine whether different KLC constructs differed in their ability to bind hsc70 , activation of hsc70 ATPase was assayed . Bovine brain hsc70 ( 1 m M ) was incubated in a volume of 10 m l containing 0 . 2 mM [ g - 32 P ] ATP with or without 2 m M GST - LCA or GST - TR1 or GST alone fo r 1 h at37°C in ATPase assay buffer ( 75 mM KCl , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 4 , and protease inhibitor mixture ) . At given time intervals , an aliquot ( 0 . 5 – 0 . 7 m l ) was withdrawn and spotted on polyethyleneimine - cellulose plates ( Aldrich , Milwaukee , WI ) . After developing in 0 . 5 M LiCl and 1 M formic acid , the spots on the chromatograms corresponding to [ 32 P ] phosphate and [ g - 32 p ] ATP were excised , and the amount of radioactivity was mea - sured . The ATP hydrolyzed was expressed as the percent radioac - tivity in phosphate as a fraction of total radioactivity calculated from the sum of radioactivity in phosphate and ATP . RESULTS Differential detergent extraction was used to evaluate the extractability of kinesin in cultured cells . Brief extraction of cells with 0 . 015 % digitonin creates holes in the plasma mem - brane with minimal effects on intracellular organelles ( Mackall et al . , 1979 ; Womack et al . , 1983 ; Ramsby and Ma - kowski , 1998 ) . Cultured cells extracted under these condi - tions release 90 – 100 % of traditional cytosolic markers such as lactate dehydrogenase and carbonic anhydrase , but mi - tochondrial , lysosomal , and endoplasmic reticulum markers are retained ( Ramsby et al . , 1994 ) . The proteins released by digitonin treatment include myosin II , calpastatin and other proteins . 300 kDa in molecular mass ( Weigel et al . , 1983 ; Ramsby et al . , 1994 ) . In contrast , extraction of cells with Triton X - 100 solubilizes many plasma membrane and intra - cellular organelle membrane proteins in a time - and concen - tration - dependent manner ( Ramsby and Makowski , 1998 ) . The behavior of kinesin during detergent extractions was compared with that of a protein known to be soluble in vivo . BHK21 cells constitutively expressing GFP were ﬁxed di - rectly or extracted before ﬁxation with either Triton X - 100 or digitonin ( Figure 1 ) . When ﬁxed without extraction GFP was retained in the cell , but even the mildest detergent treat - ments led to rapid loss of cytoplasmic GFP , leaving only a small residual fraction in nuclei . Comparison between GFP and kinesin distributions in unextracted cells suggested that these two proteins did not colocalize . GFP permeated the cell , matching well to cell boundaries and thickness , but kinesin immunoreactivity appeared to be more restricted , perhaps enriched in selected cellular domains . Digitonin extraction before ﬁxation revealed more striking differences between GFP and kinesin localization ( Figure 1 ) . Virtually all GFP was extracted from cytoplasmic domains within 4 min , leaving only a weak signal in the nucleus . In contrast , the bulk of the kinesin remained as discrete struc - tures that were often closely apposed to microtubules in double - label studies . Signiﬁcant punctate kinesin immuno - reactivity remains even after more stringent extractions us - ing Triton X - 100 under conditions in which intracellular organelles begin to be extracted ( Ramsby and Makowski , 1998 ) . Although kinesin immunoreactivity appeared re - duced with Triton X - 100 treatment ( Figure 1 ) , much kinesin remained as punctate structures . Longer extractions and higher concentrations of Triton X - 100 that disrupt internal membranes substantially reduced kinesin immunoreactivity ( Morﬁn et al . , 2000 ; Pﬁster et al . , 1989b ) . Triton X - 100 extrac - tion also eliminated essentially all cytoplasmic GFP but was no more effective than digitonin in removing nuclear GFP . Although immunoﬂuorescence methods are semiquantita - tive , they demonstrated that most kinesin immunoreactivity is resistant to treatments that release cytosolic proteins . A more quantitative measure of kinesin bound to MBOs can be obtained by subcellular fractionation . Kinesin levels were evaluated by quantitative immunoblots of two puriﬁed or - ganelle fractions ( V1 and V2 ) and the supernatant ( S ) using standard cell fractionation methods . Consistent with previous reports ( Hollenbeck , 1989 ) , ; 70 % of cellular kinesin was present in the supernatant with control buffers ( Figure 2a ) . A wide range of buffer conditions and enzyme inhibitors were evaluated for an ability to affect the partitioning of kinesin between membrane and soluble fractions . Two treatments sig - niﬁcantly increased the amount of kinesin in membrane frac - Hsc70 Release of Kinesin from Vesicles Vol . 11 , June 2000 2163 Figure 1 . Soluble GFP but not kinesin is released from detergent - permeab - lilized cells . Fluorescent images of un - extracted ( A ) , 0 . 015 % digitonin - ex - tracted ( B ) , and 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 - extracted ( C ) wild - type BHK21 cells ( H2 ) or BHK21cells stably expressing GFP are shown . After ﬁxation , cells were processed for immunoﬂuores - cence with a mouse anti - KHC anti - body ( H2 ) or GFP ﬂuorescence was di - rectly visualized ( GFP ; green , left column ) . All cells were also stained with an anti - tubulin antibody ( red ) and with the nuclear marker To - Pro3 ( blue ; middle column ) . Merged images are overlays of pseudocolored green – red – blue images ( right column ) . Thin colored lines separate images of cells from different ﬁelds . The pattern of ki - nesin immunoreactivity differs from GFP ﬂuorescence even in unextracted cells . These differences are more obvi - ous after detergent extraction . Mild de - tergent extraction ( digitonin ) removes most of the GFP , except for a residual nuclear fraction . In contrast , signiﬁcant kinesin immunoreactivity remains vis - ible throughout the cell even after harsher detergent extraction ( Triton X - 100 ) , indicating that most kinesin is not soluble . M . - Y . Tsai et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2164 tions : NEM , a sulfhydryl modifying agent , and EDTA , a che - lator of divalent cations . Both were effective at millimolar concentrations when added to homogenization buffers . Addition of NEM to homogenization buffer before extrac - tion alkylates any free sulfhydryls that become accessible during homogenization and inhibits enzyme activities re - quiring free sulfhydryls . Millimolar NEM in the homogeni - zation buffer increased the amount of total protein in both V1 and V2 fractions only ; 5 % . In contrast , the amount of kinesin associated with V1 and V2 membrane fractions in - creased approximately threefold , going from ; 0 . 5 % to ; 1 . 5 % of total protein . Under these conditions , . 90 % of recovered kinesin partitioned with vesicle fractions after NEM treatment ( Figure 2 ) , compared with 30 % of total kinesin in vesicle fractions under standard conditions . Kine - sin associated with MBOs after NEM treatment remained bound through sucrose gradient fractionation , indicating that increased membrane - bound kinesin with NEM treat - ment was not due to aggregation of soluble kinesin . Consis - tent with this , in vitro studies on inhibition of kinesin ATPase , microtubule binding and gliding assays by NEM , showed that NEM - treated kinesin does not aggregate but remains soluble ( Pﬁster et al . , 1989a ; Sickles et al . , 1996 ) . These experiments indicate that NEM inhibits kinesin re - lease from MBOs during homogenization and suggested that at least one NEM - sensitive pathway in cytoplasmic extracts releases kinesin from MBOs during homogeniza - tion . A comparable increase of kinesin in membrane fractions was produced by addition of 5 mM EDTA to homogeniza - tion buffers . In Figure 3a , the upper histogram shows that NEM , EDTA , or the combination of NEM and EDTA treat - ments had little effect on the total amount of protein in cytosolic and sonicated membrane fractions . Similarly , none of these treatments altered the distribution of either hsc70 , a predominantly cytoplasmic protein , or synaptophysin , an integral membrane protein ( Figure 3b ) . However , the lower histogram shows that treatment with either NEM ( 51 % ) or EDTA ( 54 % ) more than doubled the amount of kinesin in membrane fractions compared with control buffers ( 26 % ) . Adding both NEM and EDTA to homogenization buffer increased the amount of kinesin in membrane fractions to nearly 80 % ( Figure 3 ) . The fact that NEM and EDTA effects on kinesin binding to membranes were at least partially additive suggests that multiple pathways may exist to re - lease kinesin from MBOs and become activated during stan - dard homogenization protocols . The ability of NEM and EDTA to inhibit release of kinesin from MBOs suggested an active process but did not identify the cellular components responsible . Immunochemical stud - ies had implicated KLCs in kinesin binding to vesicles ( Hi - rokawa et al . , 1989 ; Stenoien and Brady , 1997 ) , so the KLC primary sequence was examined for motifs that might be involved in regulation of membrane binding . The central domain of KLC contains ﬁve imperfect tandem repeats of 42 amino acids each ( Cyr et al . , 1991 ) . These repeats have a high degree of similarity to each other and are conserved to an unusually high degree ( . 95 % identity ) across species ( Brady , 1995 ; Stenoien and Brady , 1997 ) . Our previous work had implicated these tandem repeat domains in kinesin binding to MBOs , because an antibody ( KLC - ALL ) directed against the repeat domain released kinesin from isolated vesicles in vitro and inhibited fast axonal transport . As a result , KLC tandem repeat domains were thought to medi - ate protein – protein or protein – lipid bilayer interactions Figure 2 . Effects of NEM on kinesin release from vesicles during homogenization . ( a ) Microsomal vesicles were puriﬁed by homogeniz - ing fresh bovine brains either with or without 2 mM NEM . Three fractions were deﬁned : the 39 , 800 3 g pellet ( V1 ) , the 260 , 000 3 g pellet ( V2 ) , and the 260 , 000 3 g supernatant ( S ) . The supernatant and vesicle fractions were probed for the presence of kinesin using the H2 anti - body on quantitative immunoblots as described previously ( Pﬁster et al . , 1989b ) . The presence of 2 mM NEM during homogenization min - imized kinesin release from vesicles during homogenization . Error bars represent 6 SEM ; n 5 3 . ( b ) The concentration dependence of NEM effects on the amount of kinesin in V2 was assayed by varying the concentrations of NEM added to homogenization buffer from 0 . 1 to 5 . 0 mM before the homogenization . Kinesin was quantitated as de - scribed above . NEM at concentrations of 1 – 2 mM maximally inhibited kinesin release from vesicles . Hsc70 Release of Kinesin from Vesicles Vol . 11 , June 2000 2165 needed for kinesin binding to MBOs ( Stenoien and Brady , 1997 ) . Analysis of KLC sequences ( Figure 4 ) revealed that tan - dem repeat domains contain conserved sequences character - istic of the “J - domain” motif ﬁrst described in DnaJ ( Tsai and Douglas , 1996 ) . The predicted structure of the tandem repeat domains ( Cyr et al . , 1991 ) was also consistent with a J - domain function ( Hill et al . , 1995 ; Kelley , 1998 ) . The hall - marks of a J - domain are a tripeptide HPD sequence between two alpha helical - rich stretches ( Figure 4 ) , creating a ﬁnger - like structure that can interact with members of the hsp70 chaperone family . A variety of proteins have been found to contain J - domains , several of which mediate processes in - volving protein – membrane interactions and molecular chaperones ( Cyr et al . , 1994 ; Kelley , 1998 ) . This suggested that an hsp70 chaperone might bind to KLC . The action of hsp70 proteins on kinesin – MBO interactions was tested by evaluating the in vitro ability of hsc70 to release kinesin from puriﬁed vesicle fractions ( Figure 5 ) . Puriﬁed V2 vesi - cles were incubated with or without hsc70 for 30 min at 37°C . Only 5 % of vesicle - associated kinesin was released into the supernatant by incubation with buffer alone . In contrast , ; 50 % of bound kinesin was released from vesicle surfaces by in vitro incubations with hsc70 and ATP ( Figure 5a ) . This is likely to be an underestimate of kinesin releas - able by hsc70 , because vesicle fractions used for these assays were puriﬁed by standard cell fractionation methods . Kine - sin release by hsc70 during homogenization is likely to be more extensive , because much endogenous membrane - bound kinesin was lost during puriﬁcation ( Figures 2 and 3 ) . The effect of ATP alone was also assayed , because ATP is required for hsc70 function . Approximately 12 % of kinesin was released into the supernatant of the sample after incu - bation with buffer plus ATP in the absence of added hsc70 ( Figure 5 ) . This ATP - dependent release probably resulted from hsc70 contamination of vesicle fractions , because a small amount of hsc70 was consistently detectable in immu - noblots of the vesicle fractions ( see Figure 3 ) . Moreover , immunoblots with anti - hsc70 antibody showed release of Figure 3 . NEM and EDTA increase the amount of kinesin in membrane fractions after subcellular fractionation . ( a ) Bar graphs showing partitioning of total protein and kinesin in cytosolic versus membrane fractions . Changes in the partitioning of kinesin in the absence ( control ) or presence of NEM , EDTA , or NEM and EDTA combined are shown . Average kinesin levels were calculated from results of two quantitative immunoblots . Bars indicate the range of variation . ( b ) Representative immunoblots showing the partitioning of kinesin , hsc70 , and the integral membrane protein p38 in control and treated samples . The partitioning of total protein , hsc70 , and p38 between cytosolic and membrane fractions was unaltered by the various treatments . However , all treatments dramatically shifted kinesin from cytosolic to membrane fractions . Figure 4 . Structure and sequence homologies between KLC tan - dem repeats and J - domains . Alignment of KLC tandem repeat se - quences with a prokaryote J - domain sequence from Escherichia coli DnaJ and two eukaryotic J - domains from auxilin and Sec63P is shown ( see DISCUSSION for more details ) . The invariant motifs are an essential HPD sequence ( star ) and the arrangement of short , ﬂanking stretches of alpha helix ( brackets under aligned sequences ) . The position of the alpha helical stretches is based on the nuclear magnetic resonance structure of the J - domains in DnaJ ( Hill et al . , 1995 ) . Sequences in these helical stretches are more variable across family members , although some residues appear to be either con - served ( letters under the sequence ) or homologous ( dots under sequence ) . Shading shows conserved residues in multiple J - domain sequences . This alignment shows that the primary sequences of tandem repeats 1 – 2 and 3 – 4 are consistent with a J - domain function . M . - Y . Tsai et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2166 endogenous hsc70 from samples only in the presence of added ATP ( our unpublished data ) . The roles of divalent cations and ATP hydrolysis in re - lease of vesicle - bound kinesin by hsc70 were assessed be - cause hsc70 function requires Mg 11 - dependent hydrolysis of ATP ( Wilbanks et al . , 1994 ) . Addition of millimolar EDTA in the absence of added Mg 11 signiﬁcantly reduced the amount of kinesin released by hsc70 / ATP to ; 20 % ( Figure 5a ) . This was consistent with observations that EDTA in - creased the amount of kinesin retained by MBOs during homogenization ( Figure 3 ) . Under the conditions of the as - say , EDTA did not completely inhibit , probably as a result of residual divalent cations present in the vesicle fraction and added ATP . Efﬁciency of release was also reduced by incu - bation with either AMP - PNP or adenosine 5 9 - [ b , g - methyl - ene ] triphosphate , two nonhydrolyzable analogues of ATP . Both ATP analogues reduced hsc70 - mediated release of ki - nesin from vesicles to ; 30 % ( Figure 5a ) . Neither of these analogues bind tightly to hsc70 but act as weak competitive inhibitors in the presence of residual ATP from vesicle frac - tions . Together , these results indicate that binding and hy - drolysis of MgATP is required for hsc70 - mediated release of kinesin from MBOs . Release of membrane - bound kinesin by hsc70 was also sensitive to NEM in vitro ( Figure 5b ) . When 2 mM NEM and hsc70 were added at the same time ( time 0 ) , kinesin release by hsc70 was effectively blocked . This block required alky - lation of a sulfhydryl by NEM because addition of compa - rable amounts of NEM inactivated by DTT at time 0 had no effect on release of kinesin by hsc70 . However , addition of NEM to samples at various times after addition of hsc70 generated a time course for kinesin release ( Figure 5b ) . Adding NEM . 20 min after hsc70 did not affect the amount of kinesin released into supernatant , but clear decrements in kinesin release resulted if NEM was added # 10 min after starting hsc70 incubation . If vesicle fractions were pretreated with 5 mM NEM and excess NEM was neutralized by ad - dition of excess DTT before addition of hsc70 , hsc70 was no longer able to release kinesin from vesicle fractions ( Figure 5b ) . In contrast , a similar pretreatment of hsc70 with NEM had no effect on its ability to release kinesin from vesicles . Thus , the NEM - sensitive component required for hsc70 re - lease of kinesin must be an MBO - associated component . To characterize interactions between KLC and hsc70 fur - ther , fusion proteins containing different KLC constructs were added to the kinesin release assay . Four different bac - terially expressed GST fusion proteins were used : 1 ) GST - LCA contains full - length KLC A fused to GST ; 2 ) GST - TR1 of NEM at times . 10 min had no effect on the amount of kinesin released by hsc70 . ( c ) The target for NEM modiﬁcation is a vesicle component , not hsc70 itself . To determine the site of action for NEM , the amount of kinesin remaining bound to vesicles ( V ) was compared with the amount of kinesin found in the soluble fraction ( S ) for ﬁve different conditions . When vesicles were pretreated with 5 mM NEM , the amount of kinesin released from vesicles by un - treated hsc70 ( VS pair 2 ) was similar to that seen without hsc70 ( VS pair 1 ) or with NEM present during the hsc70 incubation ( VS pair 3 ) . In contrast , hsc70 pretreated with 5 mM NEM ( VS pair 4 ) exhibited an ability to release kinesin comparable with that of untreated hsc70 ( VS pair 5 ) . For pretreatments with NEM , unreacted NEM was neutralized by addition of excess DTT before assay . Error bars represent 6 SEM ; n 5 3 experiments unless otherwise speciﬁed . Figure 5 . Release of endogenous kinesin from vesicles by Hsc70 . V2 vesicles ( puriﬁed without the use of NEM as described in the text ) were resuspended and incubated at a concentration of 1 mg / ml total protein with or without hsc70 for 30 min at 37°C in release buffer ( HB plus 75 mM KCl ) . Hsc70 was used at a concen - tration of 10 m g / ml for a molar ratio for hsc70 : kinesin of 2 : 1 . After incubation , V2 vesicles were recentrifuged at 260 , 000 3 g , and then supernatants and pellets were probed for the presence of kinesin using the H2 antibody on quantitative immunoblots as described above . ( a ) Puriﬁed hsc70 released 50 % of the endogenous kinesin remaining on V2 vesicles in a nucleotide - dependent manner . The reaction required Mg - ATP and was blocked by a nonhydrolyzable ATP analogue ( AMP - PNP ) and EDTA . The amount of kinesin re - leased by hsc70 in this assay was comparable with that released by an antibody against the KLC tandem repeat domain ( Stenoien and Brady , 1997 ) . ( b ) When 2 mM NEM is added to vesicles in vitro at the same time as the hsc70 ( time 0 ) , hsc70 - mediated release is blocked . The inhibition of hsc70 - mediated kinesin release by NEM was eliminated by simultaneous addition of DTT ( 2 mM ) . The ability of NEM to inhibit hsc70 - mediated release permitted deﬁni - tion of a time course for kinesin release . This could be estimated by adding NEM ( 2 mM ) at the indicated times after the start of incu - bation , where the start of incubation is the addition of hsc70 . When the reaction is allowed to proceed for 5 min before addition of NEM , substantial amounts of kinesin were released . Release of kinesin by hsc70 was essentially complete between 10 and 20 min , so addition Hsc70 Release of Kinesin from Vesicles Vol . 11 , June 2000 2167 contains KLC tandem repeat amino acids 238 – 321 fused to GST ; 3 ) GST - TR2 contains KLC tandem repeat amino acids 238 – 488 fused to GST ; and 4 ) GST alone was used as a control in these assays . GST - LCA , GST - TR1 , and GST - TR2 all inhibited release of kinesin by hsc70 , but GST alone was ineffective ( Figure 6a ) . GST - TR1 and GST - TR2 were more effective than GST - LCA in inhibiting kinesin release by hsc70 ( Figure 6a ) . Differences in degree of inhibition be - tween GST - LCA and GST - TR1 / TR2 raised the possibility of negative cooperativity between tandem repeats and other KLC domains . When the abilities of GST - LCA and GST - TR1 to inhibit kinesin release was tested at various molar ratios ( Figure 6b ) , both GST - LCA and GST - TR1 approached satu - ration at a 1 : 1 molecular ratio to hsc70 . However , GST - TR1 was more effective at inhibiting kinesin release than GST - LCA at all molar ratios . GST - LCA never reduced kinesin release by hsc70 to less than half - maximal , whereas GST - TR1 almost completely inhibited hsc70 - mediated kinesin re - lease . Conformational differences between GST - LCA and GST - TR1 / TR2 that affected interactions with hsc70 could also explain this difference . The ability of a J - domain to bind hsc70 can be evaluated by assaying its stimulation of hsc70 ATPase activity ( Cyr et al . , 1994 ; Tsai and Douglas , 1996 ; Greene et al . , 1998 ) . GST alone was inactive in hsc70 ATPase assays , but both GST - LCA and GST - TR1 stimulated hsc70 ATPase activity to a similar extent ( Figure 6c ) . This indicates that tandem repeats and full - length KLC fusion proteins were comparable in their ability to bind and activate hsc70 ATPase . Taken together , these results suggest that KLC J - domain motifs interact directly with hsc70 . Differences be - tween KLC and tandem repeat domain inhibition of hsc70 - mediated kinesin release from vesicles may reﬂect interaction of other domains in KLC with membrane com - ponents . Finally , the ability of exogenous hsc70 to release kinesin from membranes in situ was examined ( Figure 7 ) . Cells were permeabilized by incubation with 0 . 01 % Triton X - 100 for 4 min in the presence or absence of exogenous hsc70 before ﬁxation . Brief incubation with hsc70 produced a consistent reduction in kinesin immunoreactivity ( Figure 7 , a and b ) . Kinesin immunoreactivity in processes was most severely Figure 6 . Fusion proteins containing KLC or KLC tandem repeats inhibited the ability of hsc70 to release kinesin from vesicles . ( a ) Hsc70 - mediated release of kinesin from V2 vesicle fractions was assayed as described above . Four different constructs were gener - ated : GST , GST - LCA , GST - TR1 , and GST - TR2 . At a molar ratio of 1 : 1 for fusion protein : hsc70 , GST - LCA , GST - TR1 , and GST - TR2 con - structs inhibited release of kinesin by hsc70 . In contrast , GST alone was inactive in these assays . Constructs containing only KLC tan - dem repeat domains ( TR1 and TR2 ) were more effective than ones also containing other KLC domains ( GST - LCA ) . Recombinant KLC and tandem repeat fusion proteins differ in their relative efﬁcacy to inhibit hsc70 - mediated release of kinesin . ( b ) The lesser ability of GST - LCA to inhibit hsc70 - mediated release relative to GST - TR1 / TR2 might reﬂect differences in the amount of active protein or an effect of domains in KLC other than the tandem repeats . If the amount of active protein differs , increased molar ratios of KLC to hsc70 should reduce observed differences . However , at all molar ratios tested , GST - TR1 was more effective at inhibiting kinesin re - lease by hsc70 than GST - LCA . The effects of GST - LCA appeared to plateau at ; 30 % . ( c ) To determine whether GST - LCA and GST - TR1 differed in their interactions with hsc70 , the ability of different constructs to activate hsc70 ATPase activity was evaluated . Both GST - LCA and GST - TR1 stimulated hsc70 ATPase activity to a sim - ilar extent , indicating a comparable ability to bind and activate hsc70 ATPase . GST alone was inactive . Therefore , differences in the ability of LCA and TR1 fusion proteins to inhibit hsc70 - mediated release of kinesin from vesicles were not due to differences in their ability to interact with hsc70 , so KLC domains outside the tandem repeats must affect the ability of hsc70 to release kinesin from MBOs . Error bars represent 6 SEM ; n 5 3 experiments unless otherwise speciﬁed . M . - Y . Tsai et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2168 affected , but there was also depletion of kinesin in cell bodies relative to control cells . The fact that not all kinesin was extracted by a short hsc70 incubation is consistent with the biochemical studies ( see Figure 5 ) but may also represent either a fraction of kinesin that is resistant to hsc70 release or one that requires an additional cofactor not preserved under these conditions . DISCUSSION The large amount of kinesin present in soluble fractions of tissue extracts had always been at odds with its putative role as a motor for MBOs . Moreover , homogenization data were not consistent with evidence that kinesin was bound very tightly to vesicles ( Leopold et al . , 1992 ; Schnapp et al . , 1992 ) or with in vivo studies that detected only vesicle - associated kinesin ( Pﬁster et al . , 1989b ; Elluru et al . , 1995 ) . Similarly , gentle permeabilization of cells releases a smaller fraction of cellular kinesin than homogenization . These observations suggested that some membrane - associated kinesin might be actively released during subcellular fractionations . When a variety of enzyme inhibitors were evaluated , two chemically distinct treatments substantially increased the amount of kinesin associated with MBOs in homogenates : NEM and EDTA . Subcellular fractionation with these two agents sug - gest that virtually all cellular kinesin is associated with MBOs , so that the removal , and possibly the addition , of kinesin to vesicles are likely to be active , highly regulated processes . The action of these agents is consistent with other ele - ments of membrane trafﬁcking in cells . Previous studies showed that alkylation of free sulfhydryls by NEM inhibits a number of cellular processes associated with membranes , including vesicle fusion ( Rothman , 1994 ; Hay and Scheller , 1997 ) and posttranslational translocation of precursor pro - teins into the endoplasmic reticulum ( Chirico et al . , 1988 ) , mitochondria ( Murakami et al . , 1988 ) , or nucleus ( Shi and Thomas , 1992 ) . Several distinct NEM - sensitive factors ap - pear to act at different stages of intracellular transport path - ways . At least two NEM - sensitive components are involved in endosomal fusion ( Rodriguez et al . , 1994 ) . A membrane - associated component is sensitive to low levels of NEM ( 1 mM ) , whereas a second component is cytosolic and requires higher NEM concentrations for inhibition ( $ 3 mM ) . NEM concentrations in the range of 1 – 2 mM had maximal effects on the amount of membrane - associated kinesin , a concen - tration comparable with that reported with the membrane - associated NEM - sensitive component in endosomal fusion ( Rodriguez et al . , 1994 ) . Consistent with this , pretreatment of vesicles with NEM but not pretreatment of hsc70 blocked the ability of hsc70 to release kinesin . These results suggest that at least one membrane - associated component sensitive to low concentrations of NEM is required for release of kinesin from MBOs during homogenization . The identity of this membrane - associated component is not yet known . Both kinesin heavy chain ( KHC ) and KLC can be modiﬁed by NEM ( Pﬁster et al . , 1989a ) and are potential candidates . However , washing MBOs with 1 M NaCl blocks hsc70 re - lease of kinesin but has little effect on kinesin binding to MBOs . This suggests that a vesicle component other than kinesin is required for hsc70 - mediated release , and this would also be a potential NEM target . KLCs have long been thought to participate in binding of kinesin motors to MBOs ( Hirokawa et al . , 1989 ; Cyr et al . , 1991 ) . This interpretation is reinforced by changes in KHC distribution associated with knocking out one of the KLC genes in mouse ( Rahman et al . , 1999 ) , but the molecular basis of that interaction was not well understood . Based on ac - tions of an antibody against KLC , the KLC tandem repeat domain was proposed to interact with receptor molecules on MBOs ( Stenoien and Brady , 1997 ) . The presence of two conserved HPD sequences characteristic of the J - domain in DnaJ - like proteins ( Tsai and Douglas , 1996 ) and similarities between the structure predicted for KLC tandem repeats and known J - domain structures ( Hill et al . , 1995 ) suggested that KLC might contain functional J - domains . J - domain mo - tifs are found in a variety of polypeptides that mediate cellular processes in cooperation with hsp70 chaperone fam - ily members ( Cyr et al . , 1994 ) . Hsp70 - like proteins function as molecular chaperones to mediate or facilitate a variety of Figure 7 . Exogenous hsc70 releases kinesin from gently permeabil - ized cells . Kinesin immunoﬂuorescence in untreated ( A and B ) and hsc70 - treated ( C and D ) cells is shown . Images A and C were acquired with a 40 3 , objective and B and D were acquired with a 63 3 objective ; calibration bars are 20 m m in each case . Insets in B and D were digitally enlarged ( 4 3 ) from the areas demarcated by black boxes . Kinesin inmunoreactivity declined after hsc70 treat - ment . Comparing A and C , the amount of kinesin in processes and in the perinuclear halo is reduced . Comparing B and D , this erosion of kinesin immunoreactivity in the perinuclear halo is more readily visulalized . The effect is most obvious near the cell center ( B and D , insets ) , where the density of punctuate structures is reduced , result - ing in a thinner perinuclear stain . Longer treatments will remove more kinesin immunoreactivity . Hsc70 Release of Kinesin from Vesicles Vol . 11 , June 2000 2169 biological processes that include folding and unfolding of proteins , formation or dissociation of protein complexes , and translocation of proteins across membranes ( Hartl , 1996 ; Schatz and Dobberstein , 1996 ) . Signiﬁcantly , many hsp70 - mediated processes are also NEM sensitive ( Chirico et al . , 1988 ; Murakami et al . , 1988 ; Shi and Thomas , 1992 ) , although hsp70 itself is not sensitive to NEM . The homologies be - tween KLC tandem repeats and J - domain sequences sug - gested that a member of the Hsp70 chaperone protein family might catalyze removal of kinesin from vesicles . Incubating vesicles with puriﬁed hsc70 and MgATP selectively re - moved tightly bound kinesin from membrane surfaces . A requirement for MgATP would explain the effects of EDTA in stabilizing kinesin association with membranes during fractionations , whereas a requirement for NEM - sensitive cofactors is consistent with NEM stabilization of kinesin binding . The tight binding of kinesin to MBOs probably involves multiple organelle binding domains involving both heavy and light chains of kinesin . KLC domains such as the heter - ogeneous carboxyl and conserved amino termini may play other roles , such as targeting of kinesin to a speciﬁc type of organelle or mediating interactions between KLC and KHC ( Cyr et al . , 1991 ; Stenoien and Brady , 1997 ) . The presence of Figure 8 . Model for hsc70 regula - tion of kinesin - mediated axonal transport . The molecular chaperone hsc70 may regulate kinesin binding in both the cell body and in subcel - lular domains targeted for delivery of material in fast axonal transport . To package materials for movement in fast axonal transport , membrane proteins must be synthesized on rough endoplasmic reticulum ( 1 ) and packaged in the Golgi apparatus ( GA ) . Kinesin is not associated with Golgi membranes ( Pﬁster et al . , 1989b ; Leopold et al . , 1992 ) but is en - riched on transport vesicles near the trans - Golgi face ( see , for example , Figures 1 and 7 ) . Kinesin motors are synthesized on free polysomes ( 2 ) and must be added to transport ves - icles post - Golgi . This pathway has not been characterized , but the role of chaperones in delivering proteins synthesized on free polysomes to or - ganelles such as the mitochondrion and the enrichment of hsc70 near the trans - Golgi face suggest a role for hsc70 adding kinesin to MBOs in the cell body . Vesicles with kinesin mo - tors are moved in fast axonal trans - port toward the plus ends of micro - tubules ( 3 ) away from the cell body . In the axon , hsc70 is complexed with cytoplasmic proteins such as clathrin ( Black et al . , 1991 ) . Upon reaching a presynaptic terminal , kinesin is re - moved from MBO surfaces ( 4 ) by available hsc70 that is released from cytoplasmic complexes with clathrin or other proteins . This frees clathrin to play a role in vesicle recycling ( 5 ) , in which hsc70 may also be impor - tant for removal of clathrin coats from coated vesicles that recycle syn - aptic vesicle components or repack - age membrane proteins for return to the cell body by retrograde transport mediated by dynein . Cytoplasmic ki - nesin appears to be rapidly degraded in terminal regions after release from membranes , because it is not en - riched in terminal regions or re - turned by retrograde transport ( Li et al . , 1999 ) . M . - Y . Tsai et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2170 other domains with different functions would explain why recombinant KLC and tandem repeat fusion proteins differ in their ability to inhibit hsc70 - mediated release of kinesin from MBOs . The KLC tandem repeat domain itself may have two functions : as a binding domain for membrane components and as a DnaJ - like cochaperone that recruits hsp70 to MBO surfaces for selective removal of kinesin . Consistent with this idea , KLC tandem repeats exhibit homology not only with J - domains but also with a tetratricopeptide repeat motif ( Gindhart et al . , 1998 ) , a motif thought to be involved in protein – protein interactions . The two functions for KLC may be analogous to dual roles played by other DnaJ - like proteins . For example , both auxilin and Sec63 regulate binding of peptide substrates to hsp70 and stimulate hsp70 ATPase activity . Auxilin was recently identiﬁed as a cofactor that binds hsc70 via a J - domain and recruits hsc70 to the clathrin - coated vesicle via its clathrin binding domain ( Ungewickell et al . , 1995 ) . When the two domains of auxilin are expressed separately , the ability to recruit hsc70 to coated vesicles is lost , even though each domain retains its speciﬁc binding activity ( Holstein et al . , 1996 ; Ungewickell et al . , 1997 ) . Sim - ilarly , Sec63 is an integral membrane protein in Saccharomy - ces cerevisiae with a lumenal DnaJ - like region that mediates interaction with Bip , an hsp70 family member , and promotes protein translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum . A sol - uble Sec63p lumenal domain inhibited efﬁcient precursor import into proteoliposomes ( Ann and Randy , 1997 ) but retained its ability to activate hsc70 . The activities of KLC , auxilin , and Sec63P suggest that the J - domain of DnaJ - like proteins serves to regulate kinetics of peptide substrate binding and hsp70 ATPase activity , but associated domains may be required for recruiting hsp70s to speciﬁc locations . As a result , both KLC and tandem repeat fusion proteins exhibit comparable abilities to interact with hsc70 , but tandem repeats alone are more efﬁcient at inhib - iting hsc70 - mediated release of kinesin . Additional KLC do - mains present in the full - length GST - LCA may retain the ability to bind membranes containing endogenous kinesin . This effectively increases the local concentration of hsc70 near bound kinesin and facilitates release of kinesin , albeit less efﬁciently than if LCA were associated with a KHC . In contrast , GST - TR1 / TR2 act as soluble dominant negative factors that bind hsc70 but have lost the ability to recruit hsc70 to kinesin on a vesicle surface . The complex organization of neurons and many other eukaryotic cells requires specialized mechanisms to ensure that proteins are efﬁciently transported to appropriate des - tinations . This implies the existence of speciﬁc targeting mechanisms , but once an organelle has reached the correct destination , mechanisms must exist to prevent continued translocation . Previous investigations on regulation of kine - sin motors assumed that posttranslational modiﬁcations would be involved ( Bloom et al . , 1993 ; Lee and Hollenbeck , 1995 ; Okada et al . , 1995 ) . Unfortunately , despite extensive study , no biochemical switch has been found to turn off kinesin motor activity . Although such pathways may exist , an alternative mechanism to prevent an MBO from translo - cating farther is removal of kinesin from MBOs . Cytoplasmic hsc70 was found to release kinesin from vesicles in a nucle - otide - dependent and NEM - sensitive manner in vitro . These results suggest that members of the hsp70 chaperone family might have a role in regulating delivery of axonally trans - ported materials in vivo to the proper sites by releasing motor proteins from their cargoes in speciﬁc subcellular regions . An attractive corollary to this hypothesis is that a recip - rocal relationship may exist between clathrin - coated vesicles and kinesin transport vesicles ( Figure 8 ) . For example , cel - lular locations in neurons with high levels of coated vesicle assembly and disassembly are places either where kinesin is thought to be added to an MBO ( i . e . , post - Golgi formation of transport vesicles ) or where kinesin is removed from an MBO ( i . e . , presynaptic terminals ) ( Maycox et al . , 1992 ) . Stud - ies on axonal transport of clathrin and hsc70 are consistent with this idea ( Garner and Lasek , 1981 ; Gower and Tytell , 1987 ; de Waegh and Brady , 1989 ; Black et al . , 1991 ) . Very little clathrin is detectable moving with MBOs in fast axonal transport ( Black et al . , 1991 ) . Instead , the bulk of clathrin and associated coated vesicle proteins move as part of slow axonal transport ( Garner and Lasek , 1981 ; Gower and Tytell , 1987 ; Black et al . , 1991 ) . Similarly , hsc70 moves as part of slow axonal transport ( de Waegh and Brady , 1989 ) , and coated vesicle proteins coimmunoprecipitate with hsc70 ( Black et al . , 1991 ) . Coated vesicle proteins and hsc70 must form a stable complex in axons that is dissociated in presyn - aptic terminals or other domains with active recycling of membrane proteins ( see Figure 8 ) . Axonal hsc70 bound to clathrin coat proteins would not be available to act on kine - sin , but hsc70 in presynaptic terminals with active mem - brane recycling would be able to act on kinesin . Such a model for hsc70 action provides a mechanistic link between kinesin binding to MBOs and other stages of vesicle trafﬁck - ing . Regardless , the highly conserved amino acid sequence of KLC tandem repeat domains establishes that this motif has an essential function . The ability of hsc70 to bind tandem repeats and release kinesin from vesicles suggests that con - trol of kinesin binding to membranes represents such an essential function . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank H . Ross Payne , Robin Wray , Zhao Min , and Pilar Coffee for technical assistance during these studies . Preparation of this manuscript was supported in part by grants from the National Institute of Neurological Disease and Stroke ( NS - 23868 and NS - 23320 ) , the National Institute of Aging ( AG - 12646 ) , the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NAG2 - 962 ) , and the Welch Foundation ( 1237 ) . REFERENCES Ann , K . C . , and Randy , S . ( 1997 ) . The lumenal domain of sec63p stimulates the ATPase activity of Bip and mediates Bip recruitment to the translocon in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 1483 – 1493 . Black , M . M . , Chestnut , M . H . , Pleasure , I . T . , and Keen , J . H . ( 1991 ) . Stable clathrin : uncoating protein ( HSC70 ) complexes in intact neu - rons and their axonal transport . J . Neurosci . 11 , 1163 – 1172 . Bloom , G . S . , Richards , B . W . , Leopold , P . L . , Ritchey , D . M . , and Brady , S . T . ( 1993 ) . GTP g S inhibits organelle transport along axonal microtubules . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 467 – 476 . Brady , S . T . ( 1985 ) . A novel brain ATPase with properties expected for the fast axonal transport motor . Nature 317 , 73 – 75 . Hsc70 Release of Kinesin from Vesicles Vol . 11 , June 2000 2171 Brady , S . T . ( 1995 ) . A kinesin medley : biochemical and functional heterogeneity . Trends Cell Biol . 5 , 159 – 164 . Brady , S . T . , and Sperry , A . O . ( 1995 ) . Biochemical and functional diversity of microtubule motors in the nervous system . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 5 , 551 – 558 . Chirico , W . J . , Waters , M . G . , and Blobel , G . ( 1988 ) . 70K heat shock related proteins stimulate protein translocation into microsomes . Nature 332 , 805 – 810 . Coy , D . L . , Hancock , W . O . , Wagenbach , M . , and Howard , J . ( 1999 ) . Kinesin’s tail domain is an inhibitory regulator of the motor do - main . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 288 – 292 . Cyr , D . M . , Langer , T . , and Douglas , M . G . ( 1994 ) . DNAJ - like pro - teins : molecular chaperones and speciﬁc regulators of HSP70 . Trends Biochem . Sci . 19 , 176 – 181 . Cyr , J . L . , Pﬁster , K . K . , Bloom , G . S . , Slaughter , C . A . , and Brady , S . T . ( 1991 ) . Molecular genetics of kinesin light chains : generation of isoforms by alternative splicing . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 88 , 10114 – 10118 . de Waegh , S . M . , and Brady , S . T . ( 1989 ) . Axonal transport of the clathrin uncoating ATPase ( HSC70 ) : a role for HSC70 in modulation of coated vesicle assembly in vivo . J . Neurosci . Res . 23 , 433 – 440 . Elluru , R . , Bloom , G . S . , and Brady , S . T . ( 1995 ) . Fast axonal transport of kinesin in the rat visual system : functionality of the kinesin heavy chain isoforms . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 21 – 40 . Friedman , D . S . , and Vale , R . D . ( 1999 ) . Single - molecule analysis of kinesin motility reveals regulation by the cargo - binding tail domain . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 293 – 297 . Garner , J . A . , and Lasek , R . J . ( 1981 ) . Clathrin is axonally transported as part of slow component b : the microﬁlament complex . J . Cell Biol . 88 , 172 – 178 . Gindhart , J . G . , Jr . , Desai , C . J . , Beushausen , S . , Zinn , K . , and Gold - stein , L . S . ( 1998 ) . Kinesin light chains are essential for axonal trans - port in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 443 – 454 . Gower , D . , and Tytell , M . ( 1987 ) . Axonal transport of clathrin asso - ciated proteins . Brain Res . 407 , 1 – 8 . Greene , M . K . , Maskos , K . , and Landry , S . J . ( 1998 ) . Role of the J - domain in the cooperation of Hsp40 with Hsp70 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 6108 – 6113 . Hackney , D . D . , Levitt , J . D . , and Suhan , J . ( 1992 ) . Kinesin undergoes a 9S to 6S conformational transition . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 8696 – 8701 . Hartl , F . U . ( 1996 ) . Molecular chaperones in cellular protein folding . Nature 381 , 571 – 579 . Hay , J . C . , and Scheller , R . H . ( 1997 ) . SNAREs and NSF in targeted membrane fusion . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 , 505 – 512 . Hill , R . B . , Flanagan , J . M . , and Prestegard , J . H . ( 1995 ) . 1 H and 15 N magnetic resonance assignments , secondary structure , and tertiary fold of Escherichia coli DnaJ ( 1 – 78 ) . Biochemistry 34 , 5587 – 5596 . Hirokawa , N . , Pﬁster , K . K . , Yorifuji , H . , Wagner , M . C . , Brady , S . T . , and Bloom , G . S . ( 1989 ) . Submolecular domains of bovine brain kinesin identiﬁed by electron microscopy and monoclonal antibody decoration . Cell 56 , 867 – 878 . Hollenbeck , P . J . ( 1989 ) . The distribution , abundance , and subcellu - lar localization of kinesin . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 2335 – 2342 . Holstein , S . E . , Ungewickell , H . , and Ungewickell , E . ( 1996 ) . Mech - anism of clathrin basket dissociation : separate functions of protein domains of the DnaJ homologue auxilin . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 925 – 937 . Horst , M . , Oppliger , W . , Rospert , S . , Schonfeld , H . J . , Schatz , G . , and Azem , A . ( 1997 ) . Sequential action of two hsp70 complexes during protein import into mitochondria . EMBO J . 16 , 1842 – 1849 . Kelley , W . L . ( 1998 ) . The J - domain family and the recruitment of chaperone power . Trends Biochem . Sci . 23 , 222 – 227 . Lasek , R . J . , and Brady , S . T . ( 1985 ) . Attachment of transported vesi - cles to microtubules in axoplasm is facilitated by AMP - PNP . Nature 316 , 645 – 647 . Lee , K . - D . , and Hollenbeck , P . J . ( 1995 ) . Phosphorylation of kinesin in vivo correlates with organelle association and neurite outgrowth . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 5600 – 5605 . Leopold , P . L . , McDowall , A . W . , Pﬁster , K . K . , Bloom , G . S . , and Brady , S . T . ( 1992 ) . Association of kinesin with characterized mem - brane - bounded organelles . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 23 , 19 – 33 . Li , J . - Y . , Pﬁster , K . K . , Brady , S . T . , and Dahlstro¨m , A . ( 1999 ) . Axonal transport and distribution of immunologically distinct kinesin heavy chains in rat neurons . J . Neurosci . Res . 58 , 226 – 241 . Mackall , J . , Meredith , M . , and Lane , M . D . ( 1979 ) . A mild procedure for the rapid release of cytoplasmic enzymes from cultured animal cells . Anal . Biochem . 95 , 270 – 274 . Maycox , P . R . , Link , E . , Reetz , A . , Morris , S . A . , and Jahn , R . ( 1992 ) . Clathrin - coated vesicles in nervous tissue are involved primarily in synaptic vesicle recycling . J . Cell Biol . 118 , 1379 – 1388 . Morﬁni , G . , Szebenyi , G . , Tsai , G . , and Brady , S . T . ( 2000 ) Assay of membrane - associated kinesin . In : Kinesin Protocols , ed . I . Vernos , Clifton , NJ : Humana Press ( in press ) . Murakami , H . , Pain , D . , and Blobel , G . ( 1988 ) . 70 - kD heat shock - related protein is one of at least two distinct cytosolic factors stim - ulating protein import into mitochondria . J . Cell Biol . 107 , 2051 – 2057 . Okada , Y . , Sato - Yoshitake , R . , and Hirokawa , N . ( 1995 ) . The activa - tion of protein kinase A pathway selectively inhibits anterograde axonal transport of vesicles but not mitochondria transport or ret - rograde transport in vivo . J . Neurosci . 15 , 3053 – 3064 . Pﬁster , K . K . , Wagner , M . C . , Bloom , G . S . , and Brady , S . T . ( 1989a ) . Modiﬁcation of the microtubule - binding and ATPase activities of kinesin by N - ethylmaleimide ( NEM ) suggests a role for sulfhydryls in fast axonal transport . Biochemistry 28 , 9006 – 9012 . Pﬁster , K . K . , Wagner , M . C . , Stenoien , D . , Bloom , G . S . , and Brady , S . T . ( 1989b ) . Monoclonal antibodies to kinesin heavy and light chains stain vesicle - like structures , but not microtubules , in cultured cells . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 1453 – 1463 . Rahman , A . , Kamal , A . , Roberts , E . A . , and Goldstein , L . S . ( 1999 ) . Defective kinesin heavy chain behavior in mouse kinesin light chain mutants . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1277 – 1288 . Ramsby , M . L . , and Makowski , G . S . ( 1998 ) . Differential detergent fractionation of eukaryotic cells . Analysis by two dimensional gel electrophoresis . In : 2 - D Proteome Analysis Protocols , ed . A . J . Link , Totowa , NJ : Humana Press , 53 – 65 . Ramsby , M . L . , Makowski , G . S . , and Khairallah , E . A . ( 1994 ) . Differ - ential detergent fractionation of isolated hepatocytes : biochemical , immunochemical , and two dimensional gel electrophoresis charac - terization of cytoskeletal and noncytoskeletal compartments . Elec - trophoresis 15 , 265 – 277 . Rodriguez , L . , Stirling , C . J . , and Woodman , P . G . ( 1994 ) . Multiple N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive components are required for endoso - mal vesicle fusion . Mol . Biol . Cell 5 , 773 – 783 . Rothman , J . E . ( 1994 ) . Mechanisms of intracellular protein transport . Nature 372 , 55 – 63 . Schatz , G . , and Dobberstein , B . ( 1996 ) . Common principles of pro - tein translocation across membranes . Science 271 , 1519 – 1526 . Schnapp , B . J . , Reese , T . S . , and Bechtold , R . ( 1992 ) . Kinesin is bound with high afﬁnity to squid axon organelles that move to the plus - end of microtubules . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 389 – 399 . M . - Y . Tsai et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2172 Shi , Y . , and Thomas , J . O . ( 1992 ) . The transport of proteins into the nucleus requires the 70 - kilodalton heat shock protein or its cytosolic cognate . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2186 – 2192 . Sickles , D . W . , Brady , S . T . , Testino , A . , and Wrenn , R . W . ( 1996 ) . Direct effect of the neurotoxicant acrylamide on kinesin - based mi - crotubule motility . J . Neurosci . Res . 46 , 7 – 17 . Stenoien , D . S . , and Brady , S . T . ( 1997 ) . Immunochemical analysis of kinesin light chain function . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 , 675 – 689 . Terada , K . , Kanazawa , M . , Bukau , B . , and Mori , M . ( 1997 ) . The human DnaJ homologue dj2 facilitates mitochondrial protein import and luciferase refolding . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 1089 – 1095 . Tsai , J . , and Douglas , M . G . ( 1996 ) . A conserved HPD sequence of the J - domain is necessary for YDJ1 stimulation of Hsp70 ATPase activ - ity at a site distinct from substrate binding . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 9347 – 9354 . Ungewickell , E . , Ungewickell , H . , and Holstein , S . E . ( 1997 ) . Functional interaction of the auxilin J domain with the nucleotide - and substrate - binding modules of Hsc70 . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 19594 – 19600 . Ungewickell , E . , Ungewickell , H . , Holstein , S . E . H . , Lindner , R . , Prasad , K . , Barouch , W . , Martin , B . , Green , L . E . , and Eisenberg , E . ( 1995 ) . Role of auxilin in uncoating clathrin - coated vesicles . Nature 378 , 632 – 635 . Verhey , K . J . , Lizotte , D . L . , Abramson , T . , Barenboim , L . , Schnapp , B . J . , and Rapoport , T . A . ( 1998 ) . Light chain - dependent regulation of Kinesin’s interaction with microtubules . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1053 – 1066 . Weigel , P . H . , Ray , D . A . , and Oka , J . A . ( 1983 ) . Quantitation of intra - cellular membrane - bound enzymes and receptors in digitonin - per - meabilized cells . Anal . Biochem . 133 , 437 – 449 . Wilbanks , S . M . , DeLuca - Flaherty , C . , and McKay , D . B . ( 1994 ) . Struc - tural basis of the 70 - kilodalton heat shock cognate protein ATP hydrolytic activity . I . Kinetic analyses of active site mutants . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 12893 – 12898 . Womack , M . D . , Kendall , D . A . , and MacDonald , R . C . ( 1983 ) . Deter - gent effects on enzyme activity and solubilization of lipid bilayer membranes . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 733 , 210 – 215 . Zimmermann , R . ( 1998 ) . The role of molecular chaperones in pro - tein transport into the mammalian endoplasmic reticulum . Biol . Chem . 379 , 275 – 282 . Hsc70 Release of Kinesin from Vesicles Vol . 11 , June 2000 2173