Exploring Creativity Support for Concept Art Ideation Blake Williford Samantha Ray Jung In Koh Texas A & M University Texas A & M University Texas A & M University United States of America United States of America United States of America bwilliford @ gmail . com sjr45 @ tamu . edu jungin @ tamu . edu Josh Cherian Paul Taele Tracy Hammond Texas A & M University Texas A & M University Texas A & M University United States of America United States of America United States of America jcherian14 @ tamu . edu ptaele @ tamu . edu hammond @ tamu . edu ABSTRACT Creatives often struggle with fxation on a narrow set of ideas . There is potential for co - creative systems to stimulate creatives in new and powerful ways . We sought to lay a foundation for such systems with an exploratory study . We recruited 20 university students and asked them to rapidly draw a series of creature concepts with two technology probes , one of which generates ambiguous stimuli from user strokes . We analyzed the 240 sketches visually and discovered that while most participants were fxated on humanoid forms , those that began sketching with the ambiguous stimuli frst were provoked to explore more unusual varieties ( p < 0 . 01 ) . We also interviewed participants and used thematic analysis to analyze the data . While some participants resisted the partial loss of control and freedom , most believed the stimuli encouraged more divergent exploration and holistic thinking , and they acknowledged their potential beneft in the earliest stages of the ideation process . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Interactive systems and tools ; • Applied computing → Computer - aided design . KEYWORDS Human - Computer Interaction , Creativity Support , Co - creative Sys - tem , Drawing , Sketching , Concept Art , User Experience Design ACM Reference Format : Blake Williford , Samantha Ray , Jung In Koh , Josh Cherian , Paul Taele , and Tracy Hammond . 2023 . Exploring Creativity Support for Concept Art Ideation . In Extended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’23 ) , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 7 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544549 . 3585684 1 INTRODUCTION Ambiguity , by defnition , is the quality of being open to more than one interpretation . Since multiple interpretations by a sin - gle individual or across several individuals can lead to multiple solutions [ 24 ] , ambiguity has long been considered a useful tool in Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . CHI EA ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9422 - 2 / 23 / 04 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544549 . 3585684 the creative process for designers , artists , and other creative profes - sionals . Renowned concept artist and art educator Scott Robertson regularly uses and encourages ambiguous underlay drawings in his approach to concept art [ 23 ] . Gaver et al . support ambiguity as be a wonderful resource for design [ 9 ] . Sketching is a domain where ambiguity can be utilized readily . In addition to facilitating one’s internal thought processes [ 25 ] and problem - solving ability [ 29 ] , sketching can be considered a “dialectic” thinking exercise [ 11 ] . Sketches form a dialogue between the brain and the external artifact that is constantly evolving and changing . When the artifact is ambiguous , it holds potential for many diferent interpretations and new directions . In creative pro - fessions like concept art , animation , and game design , creativity and original ideas are highly valued and sought after . Our curiosity in this research centered around the role technology can play in promoting ambiguity and thus creativity in the creative process while sketching . We primarily wanted to understand the efects of ambiguous stimuli — which provide the brain with sensory in - formation that contains conficting evidence for multiple mutually exclusive interpretations [ 15 ] —on novice and intermediate creators who would likely beneft the most from assistance from such tech - nology . We recruited 20 visual arts university students , most of whom are aspiring concept artists , animators , and game designers , and conducted a study that involved sketching twelve alien creature concepts . For half of the concepts the students sketched in a normal manner on a digital tablet , and for the other half they were exposed to a technology probe that generates ambiguous stimuli underlays based on the user’s strokes . We make the following contributions in this work : • A discovery that using ambiguous stimuli in the beginning of the ideation process resulted in less fxation on humanoid forms and provoked more unusual forms . Other efects in - cluded cultivating holistic thinking , stimulating exploration , enjoyment , resistance to a loss of control and freedom , and a consensus that the stimuli are most useful in the earliest stages of the creative process . • Implications for further research in utilizing ambiguous stimuli to augment human creativity and provoke more exploration , along with design implications for related co - creative systems and creativity support tools . CHI EA ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Blake Williford , Samantha Ray , Jung In Koh , Josh Cherian , Paul Taele , and Tracy Hammond Figure 1 : Examples of ambiguous stimuli that aid the user in developing creative concepts . 2 RELATED WORK The frst area of related work focuses on creativity research . Many studies related to human creativity have involved sketching . In particular , the work of Ward’s “structured imagination” studies involved participants sketching alien creatures [ 27 ] . He discovered that existing conceptual frameworks could constrain creativity . Many of the participants drew bilaterally symmetric creatures with limbs , sensory organs , etc . even when asked to imagine crea - tures from a planet very diferent than Earth . We draw inspiration from both the subject of this study ( alien creatures ) as well as his approach to coding the drawings visually . In the summative work Creative Cognition [ 7 ] , Finke et al . discuss the importance of “preinventive forms” in the generative stage of the creative process . They found that people are more creative when they generate their own preinventive forms as opposed to building of of pre - existing ones . This is infuential in how we designed our prototype to be user - driven and co - creative rather than providing users with ambiguous stimuli to start from . The second area of related work is concept art techniques . Pro - fessional concept artists and art educators like Scott Robertson have popularized techniques for producing concept art that utilize am - biguous stimuli such as light gray marker underlays [ 16 , 23 ] . These underlays serve as guides for line work , but they are ambiguous and fexible enough to allow for design changes as the artist or designer ideates . This technique is sometimes referred to as value sketching as the initial focus is on value and overall form development rather than line work and details [ 23 ] . We believe technology can play a role in making these underlays more dynamic and stimulating . Digitally drawn strokes can be abstracted in unique and provocative ways [ 11 ] . While this can reduce the freedom and control the user has , it could lead to more divergent thinking and thus more creative concepts . The third area of related work is computational creativity . Com - putational co - creative systems are systems that facilitate the co - creation of artifacts between users and computers [ 4 , 8 , 13 ] . Also referred to as Mixed - Initiative Creative Interfaces ( MICIs ) [ 28 ] , such systems have been considered in a variety of domains such as public art installations [ 21 ] , music improvisation [ 22 ] , poetry writing [ 3 ] , dancing [ 20 ] , design ideation [ 14 ] , and so on . A relevant example of such a system would be the Drawing Apprentice from Davis et al [ 5 , 6 ] . This system responds to user strokes with strokes of its own , resulting in abstract co - created drawings . We draw inspiration from this work , however , we focus more on formalized concept sketching rather than making abstract art . In other words , we focus on a more practical use case of sketching specifc concepts or ideas . Another relevant example in this domain is ShadowDraw from Lee et al . [ 19 ] . This system responds to user strokes by recognizing what the user is trying to draw and providing underlays of that object to assist the user . For example , a user can begin drawing a bicycle , and ShadowDraw will generate underlays of bicycle drawings which the user can then trace , helping the user to converge on a stronger bicycle drawing . We draw inspiration from the underlay aspect of this work in particular , but our approach is oriented more towards divergent thinking rather than convergent thinking . 3 TECHNOLOGY PROBES We built two web - based drawing technology probes , each with a basic set of drawing tools and limited options . We were not focused on providing the users with power and features ; rather , we wanted to ensure they could quickly sketch ideas and be focused on those ideas rather than the user interface . One of the tools has the additional capability of allowing the user to co - create ambiguous stimuli with the system . It does this by converting the user’s stroke input into shapes of semi - transparent light gray value and mirroring those shapes . The probe allows for a simple series of strokes to yield fairly complex , layered , and symmetrical ambiguous stimuli which can then serve as an underlay for normal line work . While symmetry could be optional in a more feature - rich co - creative system , we did not make turning of symmetry possible for the study . The symmetry can lead to unexpected and stimulating forms which we considered an important aspect of our exploration on ambiguous stimuli . Exploring Creativity Support for Concept Art Ideation CHI EA ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany 4 METHODOLOGY We conducted a study primarily aimed at answering our research question : How do these ambiguous stimuli afect an individual’s creativity and form ideation ? We chose a within - subjects experiment design where all participants used the ambiguous stimuli probe as well as a basic sketching interface as a control condition . For each participant , we alternated between which condition they were exposed to frst , as we were also interested in learning if ambiguous stimuli could have lingering efects on their ideation process . We recruited 20 university students for the study , most of whom were pursuing a degree in Visualization . the details of the demographics and our participants can be found in Appendix A . After answering some demographic questions and self - assessing their ability , participants were prompted with the following task : An animation studio has recruited you to design an alien creature which will star in their upcoming animated flm . Your task is to generate 12 early - stage concepts for this creature . Each participant was asked to draw 12 creatures , each having a time limit of four minutes . Drawing inspiration from Shah’s C - Sketch [ 24 ] study , we chose a four - minute time limit because it gave students enough time to fully fesh out a concept . For six of the creatures , the participants used the control probe ( basic sketching interface ) , and for the remaining six they used the ambiguous stim - uli probe ( experimental condition ) . For the ambiguous stimuli probe , the four minutes was split between two minutes of creating the ambiguous stimuli underlay and two minutes of normal sketching . This was timed automatically by the system . We alternated between participants being exposed to the control condition frst or the experimental condition frst as we were interested in observing if that had any lingering efects on their creativity or fxation . Participants were encouraged to think aloud and discuss their creative process as they sketched , including narratives around their creatures , yielding rich qualitative data . For the sketch data , we saved static PNG images of each creature sketch as well as time - stamped vector stroke data in JSON format to a MySQL database . A total of 240 sketches were collected . We analyzed the sketch data by randomizing the images and coding them visually [ 2 , 17 ] based on themes and patterns seen in the images . We also took inspiration from previous creativity research in which sketches were coded visually , such as Ward’s studies on structured imagination [ 27 ] . Our visual analysis resulted in six types of creatures , four “novelty factors” , and the emergence of four key fndings . We used thematic analysis [ 1 ] and the constant comparative method [ 10 ] to analyze the qualitative data . In the initial coding phase , we analyzed 362 codes from transcripts and notes gained from the studies . After focused coding and theoretical coding , six categories emerged which are described in the results . Theoretical saturation was reached when data from the last several participants did not add any new categories or dimensions to the existing categories . 5 RESULTS 5 . 1 Visual Analysis Our visual analysis resulted in the categories as follows : • Creature Types : Humanoid : primarily bipedal , with 2 arms and 2 legs ; Abstract : amorphous / blob - like , or do not ft into any other category ; Insectoid : resembles insects including butterfies , moths , and so on ; Mammalian : re - sembles terrestrial mammals such as dogs , cats , bears , and so on ; Aquatic : resembles fsh , squids , octopi , jellyfsh , and so on ; and Inorganic : appears to be robotic or an inanimate object . • Novelty Factors : Proportions : unusual size relationships such as head to body ratio ; Limbs / Appendages : unusual number or kinds of limbs , appendages , and so on ; Sensory Organs : unusual number or kinds of eyes , mouths , ears , and so on ; and Clothing / Accessories : external items such as robes , capes , hats , or weapons . Note that creature types alone were not enough to sufciently measure the creativity or novelty of the creature concepts , so novelty factors were an additional metric we introduced to quantify the unique features of the creatures that the participants explored . Overall fxation on humanoid forms . 43 . 8 % of all creatures sketched were categorized as humanoid , suggesting a fxation on humanoid forms across most participants . This is consistent with similar prior research and is very reminiscent of Ward’s “structured imagination” work in which most creatures had human - like traits like limbs and sensory organs [ 27 ] . Participants may have been attempting to anthropomorphize their creatures and make them relatable due to the prompt . This can be observed in Figure 2 . Ambiguous stimuli frst caused less overall fxation on humanoid forms . The participants who were exposed to the ambiguous stimuli frst had had 41 % less humanoid forms , 42 % more abstract forms , and nearly four times as many inorganic forms , e . g . , robots and inanimate objects ( see Figure 3 ) . We acknowledge that one participant P12 was clearly fxated on robots . A Pearson’s chi - squared test revealed that the efect of beginning with the ambiguous stimuli frst was statistically signifcant ( p < 0 . 01 ) in infuencing diferent creature varieties . Ambiguous stimuli provoked particular forms more than others . When isolating the sketches from the ambiguous stim - uli condition , we found that particular forms were provoked . For example , there were signifcantly more ( 12 to 1 ) insectoid forms . Meanwhile , the control condition resulted in much more inorganic forms such as robots and inanimate objects , as well as more aquatic forms like octopi and squids . This fnding is very consistent with the qualitative data and we will touch on it again in Section 5 . 2 . A Pearson’s chi - squared test revealed that there was statistical signifcance ( p < 0 . 01 ) in the efect of ambiguous stimuli on creature varieties . Ambiguous stimuli don’t impede exploration of novelties . The stimuli resulted in the exploration of slightly more novelties in - cluding proportions , limbs , and sensory organs , but less of clothing and accessories . A Pearson’s chi - squared test revealed that there was statistical signifcance ( p < 0 . 02 ) in the efect of ambiguous stimuli on exploring more novel features . We recognize that the coding of novelties is highly subjective , so the key fnding we are claiming is that ambiguous stimuli do not impede an individual’s creativity or inclination for exploring novel features . The average CHI EA ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Blake Williford , Samantha Ray , Jung In Koh , Josh Cherian , Paul Taele , and Tracy Hammond Figure 2 : A heatmap visualization of creature types across all participants and both conditions . Note that participants who were exposed to the ambiguous stimuli condition frst produced signifcantly less humanoid forms and produced more abstract and inorganic forms . participant explored around two novelties ( 1 . 98 ± 0 . 82 ) per creature concept regardless of condition . 5 . 2 Qualitative Analysis Holistic Thinking Cultivated . The ambiguous stimuli seemed to cultivate many participants’ focus on the “big - picture” and overall form rather than being caught up in details . This was likely due to the combination of symmetry and value allowing for a full form to emerge very quickly . Some participants expressed that they normally begin by drawing silhouettes , suggesting that the ambiguous stimuli meshed well with their creative process . “I do like how it made me think in generalities”—P9 “It was forcing me to fgure out the shape of the charac - ter before the details”—P4 “You can get stuck in the details so it prevents you from that”—P3 Exploration was Stimulated . Many of the participants found that the stimuli cultivated more exploration and led to less fxation on what they normally are accustomed to drawing . Some partici - pants felt that it loosened them up and expressed that it caused them to approach the sketching with less of a preconceived idea . This is consistent with the fnding that the participants who were exposed to the ambiguous stimuli frst had less fxation on humanoid forms despite the overall trend of humanoid forms across both conditions . It is also consistent with the fnding that the ambiguous stimuli condition resulted in diferent forms and slightly more exploration of novelties . “It’s freeing me up a bit”—P3 “The really expressive shapes keep your mind going . It makes you think of something else”—P4 “After you get used to using it , it gives you an interesting way to think of ideas”—P10 Interesting and Enjoyable . Most of the participants found it interesting and enjoyable to generate the ambiguous stimuli . Most Exploring Creativity Support for Concept Art Ideation CHI EA ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Figure 3 : Participants who were exposed to the ambiguous stimuli condition frst produced signifcantly less humanoid forms and instead produced more abstract or inorganic forms . of them had never used symmetry tools or sketched in such a way before . Some found it relaxing while others found it humorous or pleasantly surprising . “It’s weird , but not in a bad way”—P9 “It feels very satisfying . It’s super fun to make creature on this”—P2 “This is cool , I’ve never tried drawing like this before”— P7 Particular Forms Provoked . Many of the participants ex - pressed that the stimuli pushed them towards certain specifc forms . The most common themes were “insects” and “bugs” , including “butterfies” and “moths” . Some participants also mentioned clothing including “robes” and “tuxedos” . A few participants expressed that the stimuli encouraged “organic” forms as opposed to more angular and inorganic forms . This was not seen as a negative by most participants , although some did feel constrained by it . This is very consistent with the fnding from our visual analysis discussed earlier . The ambiguous stimuli did result in signifcantly more insectoid forms and signifcantly less inorganic forms such as robots and inanimate objects . This may have been infuenced by the particular way we designed the ambiguous stimuli probe . “It makes me think of insect shapes”—P3 “It’s defnitely easier to think of organic forms”—P5 “I felt constrained by bugs”—P9 Loss of Control and Freedom . Some participants were initially jarred by the loss of control in their creative process . The ambiguous stimuli forced symmetry and areas of values which could sometimes be surprising and not what was originally intended . Many expressed that they prefer asymmetry when sketching for a variety of reasons . “This is not the typical way I draw”—P11 “I defnitely feel like the symmetry is constraining me”— P20 “Sometimes you need asymmetry for a character to stand out”—P1 Beneft to Creative Process . Still , most participants acknowl - edged they could see the beneft of giving up some power and freedom for what the ambiguous stimuli allow for . Participants acknowledged their usefulness in speed , forcing reconsideration , and adding benefcial “chaos” to the creative process . There was also a nearly universal consensus from participants that the am - biguous stimuli would be useful in the earliest stages of ideation but not in any other part of their creative process . This includes “thumbnailing” and the initial efort of generating a variety of ideas from which to later narrow down the best ones . This is consistent with our intention for ambiguous stimuli . “This would help with production speed . I feel like I can make a lot of silhouettes this way”—P2 “It kind of forces chaos in to your design work fow”— P12 “I’d use it only for thumbnailing and early concepts for characters”—P9 6 DISCUSSION We acknowledge that this study focused only on university students within one major at one university . The study is also focused on one particular subject ( creatures ) . The claims made on the efects of creativity are therefore preliminary , and should be validated and expanded upon in further research . Furthering Creativity Research . The results showed that be - ing exposed to the ambiguous stimuli frst resulted in less fxation on humanoid forms in subsequent sketches , however the participants were overall still largely fxated on these forms . This is consistent with previous creativity research which suggests that humans rely on categorical knowledge when ideating and that creativity is little diferent than normal cognition [ 7 , 27 ] . An interesting further inquiry is how can these stimuli further push people towards less expected results and help them overcome the limitations of “structured imagination” . Balance Between User , System , and Control . These results lead to an interesting question : How much control should the user and the system each have when generating ambiguous stimuli ? Some participants resisted the forced symmetry aspect of the am - biguous stimuli . Allowing them the fexibility to turn this feature of and on is simple to implement and would give them more control and freedom , however it would push the system more towards a standard sketching program . Adding adjustable parameters may give users more fexibility and power and make the ambiguous stimuli more useful and provocative . We purposely avoided making the system in this study too sophisticated and feature - rich , as we wanted to isolate the ambiguous stimuli as a variable . Perhaps allowing the system to automatically adapt to a users sketching style or preferences may be a promising future direction [ 18 ] . These “adaptable interfaces” are a promising way of using machine learning to automatically personalize the experience to the user . Benefts at Various Skill Levels . We believe ambiguous stimuli can be helpful to individuals with a variety of skill levels . We chose to conduct the study with students in creative majors because we sought feedback from people who had a stake in creativity and would beneft the most from co - creative tools . The participant pool was more intermediate in terms of drawing ability on average . CHI EA ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Blake Williford , Samantha Ray , Jung In Koh , Josh Cherian , Paul Taele , and Tracy Hammond Figure 4 : Examples of creature sketches generated by participants with the ambiguous stimuli probe . However , we believe there is also potential for ambiguous stimuli to help absolute novices overcome a phenomenon described by many drawing instructors and their students as “Fear of the Blank Page” [ 12 ] . By quickly gaining momentum through generating ambiguous stimuli , novices could potentially improve their creative self - efcacy [ 26 ] . 7 CONCLUSION In this work , we explored the efects of ambiguous stimuli on the ideation process of aspiring creatives . We discovered that while participants were largely fxated on humanoid forms , sketching with the stimuli frst seemed to lessen that fxation . We also found that the stimuli infuenced sketching particular forms over others , but did not impede individual approaches to creativity and the exploration of novel features . Most participants seemed to enjoy the stimuli , saw beneft in their potential to infuence their creative process , and considered them to be most valuable in the earliest stages of ideation . Some participants resisted a partial loss of control and freedom in their creative process , suggesting a better balance between the user and system is important . We fnd the lessons learned valuable for related research in the domains of co - creative systems , creativity support tools , and creativity research in general . This works serves as a strong step towards augmenting human creativity in the domain of concept art with co - creative systems . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2012 . Thematic Analysis . American Psychological Association , Washington DC , USA . [ 2 ] Adele E Clarke , Carrie Friese , and Rachel Washburn . 2016 . Situational analysis in practice : Mapping research with grounded theory . Routledge , Oxfordshire , United Kingdom . [ 3 ] Amitava Das and Björn Gambäck . 2014 . Poetic Machine : Computational Creativity for Automatic Poetry Generation in Bengali . . In The International Conferences on Computational Creativity ( ICCC ) . The Association for Computa - tional Creativity , Ljubljana , Slovenia , 230 – 238 . [ 4 ] Nicholas Davis , Chih - Pin Hsiao , Yanna Popova , and Brian Magerko . 2015 . An enactive model of creativity for computational collaboration and co - creation . In Creativity in the Digital Age . Springer , Midtown Manhattan , New York City , 109 – 133 . [ 5 ] Nicholas Davis , Chih - PIn Hsiao , Kunwar Yashraj Singh , Lisa Li , Sanat Moningi , and Brian Magerko . 2015 . Drawing Apprentice : An Enactive Co - Creative Agent for Artistic Collaboration . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( Glasgow , United Kingdom ) ( C & C ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 185 – 186 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2757226 . 2764555 [ 6 ] Nicholas Davis , Chih - PIn Hsiao , Kunwar Yashraj Singh , Lisa Li , and Brian Magerko . 2016 . Empirically Studying Participatory Sense - Making in Abstract Drawing with a Co - Creative Cognitive Agent . In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ( Sonoma , California , USA ) ( IUI ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 196 – 207 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2856767 . 2856795 [ 7 ] Ronald A Finke , Thomas B Ward , and Steven M Smith . 1996 . Creative cognition : Theory , research , and applications . MIT press , Cambridge , Massachusetts , USA . [ 8 ] Gerhard Fischer , Elisa Giaccardi , Hal Eden , Masanori Sugimoto , and Yunwen Ye . 2005 . Beyond binary choices : Integrating individual and social creativity . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 63 , 4 - 5 ( 2005 ) , 482 – 512 . [ 9 ] William W . Gaver , Jacob Beaver , and Steve Benford . 2003 . Ambiguity as a Resource for Design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Ft . Lauderdale , Florida , USA ) ( CHI ’03 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 233 – 240 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 642611 . 642653 [ 10 ] Barney G Glaser . 1965 . The constant comparative method of qualitative analysis . Social problems 12 , 4 ( 1965 ) , 436 – 445 . [ 11 ] Tracy Hammond . 2015 . Dialectical creativity : sketch - negate - create . In Studying Visual and Spatial Reasoning for Design Creativity . Springer , Midtown Manhattan , New York City , 91 – 108 . [ 12 ] Caneel K Joyce . 2009 . The blank page : Efects of constraint on creativity . University of California , Berkeley , Berkeley , CA , USA . [ 13 ] Anna Kantosalo , Jukka M Toivanen , Ping Xiao , and Hannu Toivonen . 2014 . From Isolation to Involvement : Adapting Machine Creativity Software to Support Human - Computer Co - Creation . . In The International Conferences on Computational Creativity ( ICCC ) . The Association for Computational Creativity , Ljubljana , Slovenia , 1 – 7 . [ 14 ] Pegah Karimi , Jeba Rezwana , Safat Siddiqui , Mary Lou Maher , and Nasrin Dehbozorgi . 2020 . Creative Sketching Partner : An Analysis of Human - AI Co - Creativity . In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ( Cagliari , Italy ) ( IUI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 221 – 230 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3377325 . 3377522 [ 15 ] P . C . Klink , R . J . A . van Wezel , and R . van Ee . 2012 . United we sense , divided we fail : context - driven perception of ambiguous visual stimuli . Phil . Trans . R . Soc . 367 , 1591 ( 2012 ) , B367932 – 941 . [ 16 ] Joseph A . Koncelik and Kevin Reeder . 2008 . Conceptual Drawing ( 1 ed . ) . Course Technology , Boston , Massachusetts , USA . [ 17 ] Krzysztof Tomasz Konecki . 2011 . Visual grounded theory : A methodological outline and examples from empirical work . Revija za sociologiju 41 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 131 – 160 . [ 18 ] Pat Langley . 1999 . User modeling in adaptive interface . In UM99 User Modeling . Springer , Midtown Manhattan , New York City , 357 – 370 . [ 19 ] Yong Jae Lee , C . Lawrence Zitnick , and Michael F . Cohen . 2011 . ShadowDraw : Real - Time User Guidance for Freehand Drawing . ACM Trans . Graph . 30 , 4 , Article 27 ( jul 2011 ) , 10 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2010324 . 1964922 [ 20 ] Duri Long , Mikhail Jacob , Nicholas Davis , and Brian Magerko . 2017 . Designing for Socially Interactive Systems . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( Singapore , Singapore ) ( C & C ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 39 – 50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3059454 . 3059479 [ 21 ] Duri Long , Mikhail Jacob , and Brian Magerko . 2019 . Designing Co - Creative AI for Public Spaces . In Proceedings of the 2019 on Creativity and Cognition ( San Diego , CA , USA ) ( C & C ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 271 – 284 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3325480 . 3325504 Exploring Creativity Support for Concept Art Ideation [ 22 ] Prashanth Thattai Ravikumar . 2017 . Notational Communication with Co - Creative Systems : Studying Improvements to Musical Coordination . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( Singapore , Singapore ) ( C & C ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 518 – 523 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3059454 . 3078702 [ 23 ] Scott Robertson and Thomas Bertling . 2013 . How to Draw : Drawing and Sketching Objects and Environments from your Imagination ( 1   ed . ) . Design Studio Press , Culver City , California , USA . [ 24 ] Jami J Shah , NOE Vargas - Hernandez , Joshua D Summers , and Santosh Kulkarni . 2001 . Collaborative Sketching ( C - Sketch ) —An idea generation technique for engineering design . The Journal of Creative Behavior 35 , 3 ( 2001 ) , 168 – 198 . [ 25 ] Kathy G . Short , Gloria Kaufman , and Leslie H . Kahn . 2000 . " I Just Need To Draw " : Responding to Literature across Multiple Sign Systems . The Reading Teacher 54 , 2 ( Oct 2000 ) , 160 – 171 . [ 26 ] Pamela Tierney and Steven M Farmer . 2002 . Creative self - efcacy : Its potential antecedents and relationship to creative performance . Academy of Management journal 45 , 6 ( 2002 ) , 1137 – 1148 . [ 27 ] Thomas B Ward . 1994 . Structured imagination : The role of category structure in exemplar generation . Cognitive psychology 27 , 1 ( 1994 ) , 1 – 40 . [ 28 ] Georgios N Yannakakis , Antonios Liapis , and Constantine Alexopoulos . 2014 . Mixed - initiative co - creativity . Foundations of Digital Games 0 , 0 ( 2014 ) , 8 pages . [ 29 ] Ruhizan M . Yasin , Lilia Halim , and Azaman Ishar . 2012 . Efects of Problem - Solving Strategies in the Teaching and Learning of Engineering Drawing Subject . CHI EA ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Asian Social Science 8 , 16 ( 2012 ) , 65 – 79 . A PARTICIPANTS These students are working towards careers in concept art , ani - mation , game design , and other felds related to entertainment . We chose from this pool because we wanted participants who had a stake in creativity and who could potentially beneft the most from creativity support for form ideation . We expected more rich sketch data and qualitative data from these participants . The participants included 10 males and 10 females at the un - dergraduate and graduate levels ranging from 19 to 32 years old . In general , participants ranged from novice to intermediate with respect to their confdence in their drawing ability and creativity . Their average self - rating for drawing ability was 3 . 55 ( ± 1 ) out of 5 while their average self - rating for creativity with respect to drawing was 3 . 85 ( ± 0 . 59 ) out of 5 .