Assessment of physicians ' information needs in five Texas counties * By Virginia Massey Bowden , M . S . L . S . Library Director Briscoe Library Megan E . Kromer , Ph . D . Evaluation Specialist Division of Instructional Development Rajia C . Tobia , A . M . L . S . Associate Library Director for Public Services Briscoe Library The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio7703 Floyd Curl Drive San Antonio , Texas 78284 In 1990 , a questionnaire was mailed to all physicians in four counties in the lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas and to a random sample of physicians in Bexar County , Texas ( San Antonio ) . Two hundred and eighty of 573 Valley physicians ( 48 . 9 % ) and 162 of 273 Bexar County physicians ( 59 . 3 % ) responded to the survey , for an overall response rate of 52 . 2 % . The two groups were compared primarily to determine differences between physicians who have access to established medical libraries and physicians who practice in remote areas without local access to medical information . Demographic variables , professional practice characteristics , and patient characteristics were compared . Information resource use , particularly reasons for use and non - use of MEDLINE , was explored . Questions also were asked about the availability of various types of information technology . The results indicated that differences in the health care profile did not affect the information usage of the physicians but that differences did exist between the two groups in the use of MEDLINE and libraries . There was no statistically significant difference in either group ' s rating of experience with using databases , with more than 40 % in each group rating themselves as not at all experienced . INTRODUCTION Do differences in availability of information re - sources affect the use of medical information by phy - sicians in different communities ? How is the use of information resources affected by the health care pro - file of the communities ? How frequently are infor - mation resources used and for what purposes ? These questions guided a 1990 survey of the total physician population of four counties in the lower Rio Grande Valley area of Texas . A random sample of physicians in Bexar County also was surveyed to gain perspective on whether information use by physicians was af - fected by location and proximity to an academic health sciences library . This study was conducted as part of a project to examine the efficacy of a circuit librarian program designed to improve the availability and use of med - ical information in four counties of the lower Rio Grande Valley . The project had three components : information needs assessment , evaluation of the Cir - cuit Librarian Health Information Network ( CLHIN ) program , and evaluation of the flat - rate MEDLINE access program , the GRATEFUL MED® / South Texas Bull Med Libr Assoc 82 ( 2 ) April 1994 * This project was supported in part by NIH Contract no . N01 - LM - 6 - 3505 from the National Library of Medicine . 189 Bowden et al . Figure 1 The five Texas counties MEDLINE® Project ( GM / STMP ) . The lengthy project report , including copies of the questionnaires and physician responses , has been published as an ERIC document [ 1 ] . This paper discusses the major results of the physician questionnaire portion of the needs assessment . The five Texas counties The five counties are located in the southern portion of Texas , which differs from other areas of the state in terms of its high percentages of Mexican - American citizens , extreme poverty , and limited educational re - sources . Cameron , Hidalgo , Starr , and Willacy coun - ties are in the lower Rio Grande Valley in the south - ernmost tip of Texas bordering Mexico , an area commonly referred to as " the Valley . " The fifth coun - ty is Bexar , one of the northernmost counties of south Texas ( Figure 1 ) . Bexar has strong links to the Valley due to the Hispanic heritage of its population , al - though it is approximately 250 miles north of the Valley . Three of the state ' s metropolitan areas are located in south Texas : about one million persons live in San Antonio in Bexar county ; approximately 250 , 000 persons live in the cities of Brownsville , Harlingen , and San Benito in Cameron County ; and about 375 , 000 persons live in McAllen , Edinburg , Mission , and Wes - laco in Hidalgo County . Starr and Willacy counties are rural . The Hispanic population ranges from 47 . 6 % in Bexar County to 97 . 4 % in Starr County , while the poverty rate ranges from 22 . 4 % to 51 . 6 % , respectively . Information from the Valley Primary Health Care Re - view indicated that a full range of diagnostic and treat - ment services for acute illness as well as prenatal care and family planning is available from community health centers , private physicians , and hospitals in the Valley . Barriers to health care access include eco - nomics , transportation , culture , and knowledge of health plans and health information [ 2 ] . More than 80 , 000 persons in the Valley live in unincorporated settlements known as colonias , which often lack septic tanks , sewers , or running water [ 3 ] . In 1989 , a circuit librarian program managed by the Briscoe Library of The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio ( UTHSCSA ) was es - tablished in the Valley through funding from the UTHSCSA ' s South Texas Health Research Center . In 1990 , funding for the CLHIN was continued through the Lower Rio Grande Valley / South Texas Area Health Education Center program . At the time of the study , ten hospitals and one family - practice residency pro - gram received library services through the CLHIN . Until the CLHIN was initiated , the major health information resource for Valley physicians was the Texas Medical Association ( TMA ) Library in Austin . All members of the TMA are entitled to request , at no charge , literature searches from TMA librarians . Photocopying and prompt delivery by fax are avail - able for a fee . In 1990 , TMA ' s three reference librar - ians conducted more than 9 , 000 literature searches , with half of the requests received from nonmetro - politan areas of Texas [ 4 ] . The eleven institutions par - ticipating in the CLHIN program had no local pro - fessional library support and minimal medical library collections . Bexar County has several medical libraries , the larg - est being the Briscoe Library of the UTHSCSA . The Briscoe Library serves as a resource library in the National Network of Libraries of Medicine , South Central Region , and has an extensive collection and a variety of services , including miniMEDLINE , the Micromedex Computerized Clinical Information Ser - vice® , and CD - ROM - based services . Several military installations maintain extensive medical libraries in Bexar County , including the Brooks Air Force Base School of Aerospace Medicine , Wilford Hall U . S . Air Force Hospital at Lackland Air Force Base , the Brooke Army Medical Center at Fort Sam Houston , and the Academy of Health Sciences at Fort Sam Houston . Libraries are also maintained at four area hospitals and at a private research institution . METHODOLOGY Three assumptions influenced the decision of whom to survey . The first assumption was that physicians Bull Med Libr Assoc 82 ( 2 ) April 1994 190 Physicians ' information needs in Texas would be major users of the CLHIN services . The project team thus limited the baseline survey to phy - sicians , for whom a computer database of addresses and demographic and practice information was readi - ly available . The second assumption was that the in - formation - seeking patterns would be affected by local access to a large medical library . By surveying both Valley physicians and Bexar County physicians , the project team could determine whether such differ - ences existed . The third assumption was that it was acceptable to survey only a sample of physicians in Bexar County , even though the complete population of physicians in the Valley was surveyed . This de - cision was logistical , because there were approxi - mately 600 physicians in the Valley and more than 2 , 900 in Bexar County . The project team also was in - terested in behavior change in the Valley following the initiation of the circuit librarian service , and no similar service had been initiated in Bexar County . Questionnaire development The Physician Information Needs Assessment Ques - tionnaire used in this project was based on the Ge - neric Questionnaire for Outreach Enhancement Pro - jects developed at the National Library of Medicine ( NLM ) in February 1990 . This questionnaire was modified by a team of Briscoe librarians and an eval - uation specialist in consultation with the NLM plan - ning and evaluation staff during the spring of 1990 . The questions covered several major topic areas : in - formation resources ( how frequently specific re - sources were used and what resources had been used prior to January 1990 ) ; use of MEDLINE ( reasons for using or not using MEDLINE , databases used , how MEDLINE was accessed ) ; available technology ; and professional practice information . Two versions of the questionnaire were devel - oped - one for the Valley counties and one for Bexar County . The only difference between the two ver - sions was that the latter questionnaire asked about local medical library use , a topic not included on the Valley questionnaire . The questionnaires were given to a sample of physicians in both Bexar County and the Valley for field testing in May 1990 . The feedback from this sample was favorable , and only a few edi - torial changes were made . Sampling and response rates A computer tape was purchased from the Texas State Board of Medical Examiners ( TSBME ) as a source for the physicians ' addresses . The tape contained records for all physicians then residing in Texas and with current licenses to practice medicine in Texas . The first mailing of the questionnaire took place in June 1990 . Questionnaires were coded so that respondents could be identified . There were 2 , 993 physicians in Bexar County who were licensed to practice medicine in Texas at the time the questionnaire was distributed . A random sample of 284 physicians ( 9 . 5 % of the total ) was se - lected from this pool using a computer - generated ran - dom - number table . There were 627 physicians in the Valley , according to the TSBME database . Thus , 911 questionnaires were distributed in the first mailing . This number later was reduced to 846 , eliminating sixty - five physicians ( eleven in Bexar County , fifty - four in the Valley ) who did not have current ad - dresses or were deceased , retired , or requested re - moval from the list . After two follow - up question - naires and a postcard reminder were mailed to nonrespondents , a total of 442 surveys were returned , yielding a 52 . 2 % response rate . RESULTS Comparison of respondents and nonrespondents Demographic factors were analyzed comparing re - spondents and nonrespondents . The factors that dif - fered statistically were practice type ( P < . 009 ) and location ( P < . 004 ) . Within practice types , a greater number of physicians in administration ( 82 . 9 % ) , teaching ( 69 . 4 % ) , and research ( 100 % ) responded than did not respond , while an equal number of physicians in direct patient care responded as did not . The response rate from the Valley was 48 . 9 % ( 280 of 573 ) , which was significantly lower than the re - sponse rate of 59 . 3 % ( 162 of 273 ) from Bexar County . One factor that may have lowered the Valley ' s re - sponse rate is the large number of surveys sent to these physicians ; the Valley has been studied re - peatedly . " A continuing complaint regarding re - search along the border is that they are researched to death but see no resultant services " [ 5 ] . Description of respondents Overall , the majority of those who responded may be categorized as being between thirty - one and fifty years of age ( 61 . 8 % ) ; specializing in internal medicine or family practice ( 54 . 3 % ) ; working more than forty hours per week ( 84 . 2 % ) ; involved in direct patient care ( 91 . 9 % ) ; and , within the Valley sample only , affiliated with an institution using the circuit librarian program ( 87 . 5 % ) . Valley counties versus Bexar County . The two groups ' responses to each of the questions on the survey were compared , primarily to determine if differences exist between physicians who have access to established medical libraries ( Bexar County ) and physicians who practice in a remote area without local , direct access to medical information ( the Valley ) . Each comparison of the two groups was evaluated with a X2 test of Bull Med Libr Assoc 82 ( 2 ) April 1994 191 Bowden et al . Table 1 Information resource use by respondents % Texas Medical % continuing % MEDLINE % medical Association medical by self school library Library education Valley Bexar Valley Bexar Valley Bexar Valley Bexar ( n = ( n = ( n = ( n = ( n = ( n = ( n = ( n = 148 ) 133 ) 136 ) 148 ) 203 ) 142 ) 249 ) 148 ) Daily 1 . 4 3 . 8 0 . 7 2 . 7 - 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 7 Weekly 6 . 8 12 . 0 1 . 5 17 . 6 1 . 5 - 14 . 1 16 . 2 Monthly 12 . 8 24 . 8 4 . 4 27 . 7 10 . 3 3 . 5 54 . 6 39 . 2 Rarely 34 . 5 36 . 1 41 . 2 41 . 9 48 . 3 13 . 4 24 . 9 27 . 7 Never 44 . 6 23 . 3 52 . 2 10 . 1 39 . 9 82 . 4 5 . 6 16 . 2 significance unless indicated otherwise . A signifi - cance level of . 05 was used to evaluate the significance of each test . Demographic differences . Respondents were com - pared using the following demographic variables : practice specialty , practice type , practice setting , and age . The only variable yielding a significant differ - ence between the two groups was specialty type ( P = . 00015 ) . A greater percentage of Valley respondents were family practitioners , while a greater number of Bexar County respondents had specialized practices . Professional practice information . Physicians were asked to indicate their primary workplace and pri - mary professional activity . In both geographic areas , the majority indicated that their primary workplace was a private - practice setting ; however , more phy - sicians in the Valley ( 72 . 1 % ) indicated this setting than did those in Bexar County ( 50 . 6 % ) . Bexar County physicians were more likely than were Valley phy - sicians to indicate an academic health science center as their primary work setting . This finding is obvious because there is no academic health center in the Valley . In terms of primary professional activity , the over - whelming majority of respondents in the Valley ( 95 % ) and in Bexar County ( 72 . 8 % ) were involved with pa - tient care . More physicians in Bexar County indicated research ( 6 . 2 % ) , teaching ( 9 . 3 % ) , and training ( 8 . 6 % ) as their primary professional activity than did phy - sicians in the Valley . The lower degree of involve - ment with patient care in Bexar County is most likely due to affiliation with an academic health science center . Patient population . Several characteristics of the pa - tient population differed between physicians in the Valley counties and Bexar County . Valley physicians were more likely than Bexar physicians to indicate that their patients were predominantly Mexican - American , rural , migrant , and more than sixty years of age . Thirty - seven percent of the Valley physicians , as opposed to only 6 . 7 % of Bexar County physicians , said 75 % to 100 % of their patients were Mexican - American . Thirty - five percent of Valley physicians , as opposed to less than 5 % of Bexar County physi - cians , said at least 50 % of their patients were rural . The most dramatic difference was in migrant patients . Eighteen percent of Valley physicians said at least 50 % of those served were migrant , whereas 67 % of the physicians in Bexar County said they had no mi - grant patients . Frequency of information resource use The primary information resource used on a daily , weekly , or monthly basis was personal or office col - lection of books and journals ( 85 . 7 % of Valley re - spondents and 82 . 1 % of Bexar County respondents ) . The second most frequently used resource was con - sultation with colleagues ( 76 . 1 % of Valley respon - dents and 72 . 2 % of Bexar County respondents ) . Sta - tistically significant differences existed between Bexar County and Valley physicians in frequency of using MEDLINE personally , a medical school library , the TMA Library , and continuing medical education ( CME ) ( Table 1 ) . A large proportion of physicians in the Valley counties reported they never used either MEDLINE on their own ( 44 . 6 % ) or a medical school library ( 52 . 2 % ) , while only 23 . 3 % and 10 . 1 % , respectively , of the Bexar County physicians responded " never " to these items . The majority of Bexar County physicians ( 82 . 4 % ) reported that they never used the TMA Li - brary , while only 40 % of the Valley physicians so reported . In terms of CME , the majority ( 54 . 6 % ) of Valley physicians reported using it on a monthly ba - sis , while physicians in Bexar County reported CME less frequently . In fact , 16 . 2 % of the physicians in Bexar County reported never using CME . These dif - ferences reflect the expected pattern . That is , physi - cians in the Valley report not having access to a med - ical library , which may decrease their awareness of MEDLINE and increase their use of the TMA Library and CME . Physicians also were asked to describe shortcom - ings in the information services they used . Those in Bexar County most often mentioned the inconve - nience of the Briscoe Library ( UTHSCSA ) , finding time to use the services , and a lack of computer train - ing to use online services . Valley physicians cited the overall lack of services and the lack of time needed to track down information . In addition , once infor - mation was located , the length of time spent waiting for information to arrive was reported to be too long . Finally , Valley physicians also referred to their lack of expertise in computers for online services . Bull Med Libr Assoc 82 ( 2 ) April 1994 192 Physicians ' information needs in Texas Table 2 Method of obtaining articles prior to January 1990 % Bexar % Valley County Method of obtaining articles ( n = 280 ) ( n = 162 ) Library ( myself or staff ) * 34 . 3 84 . 6 From a hospital staff member 25 . 0 32 . 7 Mail from a library * 36 . 1 21 . 0 Fax from a library 6 . 8 4 . 9 Reprints from author * 17 . 9 29 . 0 Reprints from commercial service 9 . 3 6 . 2 Did not obtain * 22 . 5 4 . 3 * Indicates statistically significant difference . Method of obtaining articles prior to January 1990 Physicians were asked to indicate how they had ob - tained articles prior to January 1990 , when the circuit librarian program was established . Because respon - dents could indicate more than one answer , the sum of the percentages may be greater than 100 . Statisti - cally significant differences did exist between the two groups and are indicated with an asterisk in Table 2 . A greater percentage of the Bexar County sample re - ported obtaining journal articles by going to the li - brary personally or sending a staff member and by requesting reprints from authors than did the Valley respondents . Physicians in the Valley were more like - ly to report that they received articles through the mail from a library or that they simply did not obtain the articles at all . Respondents also were asked to estimate the num - ber of articles they received in a typical six - month period . The means and standard deviations for each group were as follows : Bexar County , 32 . 34 ( SD = 57 . 06 ) and Valley , 10 . 68 ( SD = 21 . 87 ) . Bexar County physicians reported obtaining a significantly greater number of articles than did Valley physicians ( t = 4 . 43 , P < . 0001 ) . MEDLINE use If respondents used MEDLINE or other databases , they were asked to answer a series of questions . ( Per - sons who did not use databases were instructed to skip to the next section of the questionnaire ) . Re - spondents who had used MEDLINE were asked to indicate the specific reasons they had done so . Be - cause respondents could indicate more than one an - swer , percentages may add up to more than 100 . The question did not differentiate among persons who did their own MEDLINE searches or who used mediated searches or who did their own and also used mediated searches . The percentages of respondents within each Table 3 Reasons for using MEDLINE % Valley % Bexar County Reason ( n = 280 ) ( n = 162 ) Patient care ( in general ) * 27 . 9 43 . 8 Confirm an opinion 18 . 2 24 . 1 Lecture / paper * 22 . 9 58 . 6 Leam about a new field * 14 . 3 31 . 5 Stay current * 24 . 3 42 . 0 Research * 7 . 5 21 . 0 Legal or regulatory questions 12 . 5 8 . 6 Other 3 . 9 3 . 1 No response 58 . 2 32 . 1 * Indicates statistically significant difference . geographical group that indicated a reason for using MEDLINE are shown in Table 3 . For Bexar County physicians , the most frequently noted reasons for using MEDLINE were preparing a lecture or paper ( 58 . 6 % ) , patient care ( 43 . 8 % ) , and stay - ing current ( 42 . 0 % ) . Physicians in the Valley counties cited their most frequent reasons as patient care ( 27 . 9 % ) , staying current ( 24 . 3 % ) , and preparing a lec - ture or paper ( 22 . 9 % ) . For each significant difference in Table 3 ( as indicated with an asterisk ) , physicians in Bexar County were more likely to indicate that reason for having used MEDLINE than those in the Valley counties . Reasons for using MEDLINE that specifically re - lated to patient care were also probed . These results are shown in Table 4 . Again , respondents could in - dicate more than one answer . Both Bexar County and Valley physicians indicated treatment , diagnosis , and drug information as their top three reasons for using MEDLINE for patient care . Significantly more Bexar County physicians than Val - ley physicians indicated treatment and drug infor - mation as reasons for use . To further investigate the patient care reasons for using MEDLINE , only those physicians ( n = 406 ) who Table 4 Patient care reasons for using MEDLINE % Valley % Bexar County Reason ( n = 280 ) ( n = 162 ) Diagnosis 25 . 0 32 . 1 Physical signs / symptoms 11 . 1 15 . 4 Treatment * 27 . 1 46 . 9 Lab tests 10 . 7 13 . 0 Drug information * 14 . 3 23 . 5 Referral 2 . 1 1 . 2 Provide info to family 8 . 6 9 . 3 * Indicates statistically significant difference . Bull Med Libr Assoc 82 ( 2 ) April 1994 193 Bowden et al . had indicated patient care as their primary profes - sional activity were compared . The results for this group of physicians mirror the results of all respon - dents using MEDLINE for patient care reasons . A significantly greater proportion of Bexar County phy - sicians indicated treatment and drug information as reasons for using MEDLINE for patient care concerns . Physicians were asked to indicate what system they used to access MEDLINE . Nineteen physicians in the Valley ( 6 . 8 % ) and nine physicians in Bexar County ( 5 . 6 % ) reported using GRATEFUL MED . Most re - spondents did not answer this question . More than 80 % of the respondents also did not answer the ques - tion about use of databases other than MEDLINE . Reasons for not requesting MEDLINE searches Physicians were asked to indicate their reasons for not doing MEDLINE searches themselves or having them done by a librarian . Regarding asking a librar - ian , physicians in Bexar County indicated their main reasons as the search not being needed ( 13 . 0 % ) , an inconvenient location ( 10 . 5 % ) , and having to wait to have the search done ( 8 . 0 % ) . Physicians in the Valley responded that there was no local access ( 20 . 0 % ) , they had never heard of it ( 16 . 4 % ) , or the search was not needed ( 11 . 8 % ) . Significantly more physicians in the Valley than in Bexar County indicated that there was no local access for obtaining a MEDLINE search or that they had never heard of it . When asked why they did not search MEDLINE by themselves , physicians in both geographic areas were consistent in their responses . The major reason was that respondents did not know how to do MEDLINE searches by themselves . More physicians in Bexar County indicated lack of time as a reason for not doing MEDLINE searches on their own ( 22 . 8 % ) than did those in the Valley counties ( 14 . 3 % ) . Technology Physicians were asked to report on the availability of microcomputers , modems , fax machines , and their experience in working with computer databases . Phy - sicians in Bexar County were more likely than were Valley physicians to have access to microcomputers in the office or lab ( 52 . 5 % versus 45 . 4 % ) , at home ( 45 . 7 % versus 32 . 1 % ) , and in a local library ( 30 . 2 % versus 9 . 3 % ) . There were no differences in terms of the availability of fax machines and modems at home or at the office . One hundred forty - nine Valley phy - sicians ( 53 . 6 % ) reported having fax machines , 118 ( 42 . 9 % ) reported having modems at the office , and 62 ( 22 . 4 % ) reported having modems at home . Ninety - nine Bexar County physicians ( 61 . 9 % ) , reported hav - ing FAX machines , seventy ( 44 . 3 % ) reported having modems at the office , and thirty - eight ( 23 % ) reported having modems at home . More physicians in the Val - ley ( 63 . 2 % ) considered themselves to be not at all experienced database users than did those in Bexar County ( 42 . 9 % ) . DISCUSSION The results of this study were based on self - reported data and , therefore , must be interpreted with caution . However , that the responses were consistent with results of other information - use studies lends credi - bility to the findings . There were no statistically significant differences between the Valley and Bexar County physicians in terms of the primary information resources used on a daily or weekly basis - personal or office collections of books and journals and consultation with col - leagues . These findings are consistent with reviews of health professionals ' information usage by Stinson and Mueller [ 6 ] , Northup et al . [ 7 ] , Osiobe [ 8 ] , and Gruppen [ 9 ] . There were statistically significantly differences be - tween physicians in the Valley and in Bexar County in their personal use of MEDLINE , use of a medical school library , use of the TMA library , and use of CME courses for obtaining information . That Bexar County physicians were more likely to use MEDLINE themselves is consistent with the results of a 1986 study of characteristics of early adopters of end - user online searching in the Canadian health professions [ 10 ] . In that study , Marshall found that the typical adopter was living in a large urban center , was in a group practice , and was affiliated with a hospital ; she concluded that the findings underscored the impor - tance of interpersonal networks in the adoption of innovations . It is not surprising that Bexar County physicians were significantly more likely to use a medical school library , because the Briscoe Library is located in that county . Similarly , the finding that the Valley phy - sicians used the TMA Library significantly more than did Bexar County physicians was expected . That the Valley physicians reported using CME as an infor - mation resource significantly more than did the Bexar County physicians was surprising . However , this finding is consistent with a 1983 study by Stross of eighty - five physicians in small community hospitals [ 11 ] . Significantly more Valley physicians than Bexar County physicians were unaware of MEDLINE or did not request MEDLINE from a librarian because of lack of local access . However , both Valley and Bexar Coun - ty physicians ' main reason for not searching MED - LINE by themselves was " don ' t know how . " There was no statistically significant difference between the respondents ' ratings of their experience with data - bases , with more than 42 % of both groups considering Bull Med Libr Assoc 82 ( 2 ) April 1994 194 Physicians ' information needs in Texas themselves " not at all experienced . " Shumway , Jack - nowitz , and Abate studied physicians ' , pharmacists ' , and nurses ' attitudes toward the use of computers for accessing drug information and concluded that the lack of computer use by physicians probably does not represent resistance but may be attributed to lack of familiarity and work style [ 12 ] . Patient care was the major reason MEDLINE was used . The survey subdivided patient care reasons into seven categories . Of these , the three major MEDLINE uses for both groups were treatment , diagnosis , and drug information . The Bexar County physicians used MEDLINE significantly more than did the Valley physicians for patient care reasons , particularly for treatment and drug information . These reasons are consistent with the findings of Woolf and Benson [ 13 ] , Covell et al . [ 14 ] , Williamson et al . [ 15 ] , and Marshall [ 16 ] . Personal access to a microcomputer at the office or lab and access to modems were not statistically dif - ferent for the two groups . More than 42 % had mo - dems at the office , and more than 22 % had modems at home . A 1987 survey of American College of Ob - stetricians and Gynecologists members indicated that more than 50 % use or plan to use computers in their practice [ 17 ] . Of the 49 % who did not perceive the need to use computer technology , one fifth indicated that with more information they could conceivably change their minds . Bexar County physicians were significantly more likely than were Valley physicians to have access to a microcomputer for personal use at home or library or for staff use at office or library . There was no statistically significant difference be - tween the two groups in the availability of fax ma - chines , because more than 53 % of both groups had a fax machine . Bexar County physicians reported lack of time as a reason for not doing MEDLINE searches by them - selves significantly more often than did Valley phy - sicians . Williamson reported that physicians in solo practice indicated that finding the time to look for information was less of a problem than did physicians in other practice settings [ 18 ] . " Lack of time " is a very subjective reason for not doing something . Covell et al . , in a study of California internists , found that " re - ported use of information sources " was different from " observed use " [ 19 ] . In that study , the physicians be - lieved they used print sources more than they were observed to do . CONCLUSIONS Contrasting the health care profile , the health infor - mation resources , and the self - reports of physicians in the lower Rio Grande Valley and Bexar County helped to provide some perspective on the needs of the areas . There were major differences between the two areas in health care profiles and health infor - mation resources , but the overall differences in phy - sicians ' self - reported use of information were not great . The major findings of the needs assessment were as follows : * There was no evidence that differences in the health care profile affected the information use of the phy - sicians in the five counties . That is to say , the different types of patients seen and the types of illnesses did not appear to be dominant factors in information use . * The statistically significant differences in infor - mation use between the physicians in the Valley and the physicians in Bexar County were related to the use of MEDLINE and libraries . For both groups , the primary information resources were personal collec - tions of books and journals and consultation with colleagues . These findings have been reflected in most studies of physicians ' information use . However , the present study found differences between the physi - cians in the Valley and Bexar County in use of li - braries , MEDLINE , and other databases and in aware - ness of information resources . * When asked why they did not search MEDLINE by themselves , physicians in both locations were con - sistent in their responses . The major reason was that respondents did not know how to do MEDLINE searches by themselves . This response was consistent with there being no statistically significant difference between the groups ' ratings of their experience with using databases . These assessments of ability indicate that increased opportunities for training are needed , with a variety of options being made available . Further investigation is needed into the informa - tion use patterns and needs of health care profes - sionals in areas remote from academic medical insti - tutions by methods other than questionnaire studies . The results would help determine how best to reach these professionals with the latest information on diagnosis and treatment of their patients . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors gratefully acknowledge the encourage - ment and support for various aspects of this project from Karen Wallingford , Elliot Siegel , and Barbara Rapp , National Library of Medicine . Appreciation also is expressed to Mary Jo Dwyer , circuit librarian , whose provision of library services in the Valley was in - strumental in encouraging Valley physicians to re - spond to the survey . REFERENCES 1 . BOWDEN VM , KROMER ME , TOBiA RC . Medical informa - tion availability and usage in south Texas . Final report . Springfield , VA : ERIC , 1991 . ( ED IR053461 ) . Bull Med Libr Assoc 82 ( 2 ) April 1994 195 Bowden et al . 2 . LOWER Rio GRANDE VALLEY DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL . INDI - GENT HEALTH CARE COMMITTEE . The Valley primary health care review : a report . McAllen , TX : The Council , 1989 : 38 - 42 . 3 . WARNER DC . Health issues at the US - Mexican border . JAMA 1991 Jan 9 ; 265 ( 2 ) : 242 - 7 . 4 . BUSBY J . TMA library keeps watch on tomorrow ' s tech - nology . Tex Med 1991 Jun ; 87 ( 6 ) : 48 - 9 . 5 . University of Texas System Valley / Border Health Sym - posium , October 22 - 23 , 1990 . Austin , TX : University of Tex - as System , Office of Health Affairs , 1990 : 55 . 6 . STINSON ER , MUELLER DA . Survey of health professionals ' information habits and needs . JAMA 1980 Jan 1 1 ; 243 ( 2 ) : 140 - 3 . 7 . NORTHUP DE , MOORE - WEST M , SKIPPER B , TEAF SR . Char - acteristics of clinical information - searching : investigation using critical incident technique . J Med Educ 1983 Nov ; 58 ( 11 ) : 873 - 81 . 8 . OSIOBE SA . Use of information resources by health pro - fessionals : a review of the literature . Soc Sci Med 1985 ; 21 ( 9 ) : 965 - 73 . 9 . GRUPPEN LD . Physician information seeking : improving relevance through research . Bull Med Libr Assoc 1990 Apr ; 78 ( 2 ) : 165 - 72 . 10 . MARSHALL JG . Characteristics of early adopters of end - user online searching in the health professions . Bull Med Libr Assoc 1989 Jan ; 77 ( 1 ) : 48 - 55 . 11 . STROSS JK . Information sources and clinical decisions . J Gen Intern Med 1987 May / Jun ; 2 ( 3 ) : 155 - 9 . 12 . SHUMWAY JM , JACKNOWITZ AI , ABATE MA . Analysis of physicians ' , pharmacists ' , and nurses ' attitudes toward the use of computers to access drug information . Methods Inf Med 1990 Mar ; 29 ( 2 ) : 99 - 103 . 13 . WOOLF SH , BENSON DA . The medical information needs of internists and pediatricians at an academic medical cen - ter . Bull Med Libr Assoc 1989 Oct ; 77 ( 4 ) : 372 - 80 . 14 . COVELL DG , UMAN GC , MANNING PR . Information needs in office practice : are they being met ? Ann Intern Med 1985 Oct ; 103 ( 4 ) : 596 - 9 . 15 . WILLIAMSON JW , GERMAN PS , WEIss R , SKINNER EA ET AL . Health science information management and continu - ing education of physicians ; a survey of U . S . primary care practitioners and their opinion leaders . Ann Intern Med 1989 Jan 15 ; 110 ( 2 ) : 151 - 60 . 16 . MARSHALL JG . The impact of the hospital library on clinical decision making : the Rochester study . Bull Med Libr Assoc 1992 Apr ; 80 ( 2 ) : 169 - 78 . 17 . JELOVSEK FR , RITTWAGE J , PEARSE WH , VISSCHER HC . In - formation management needs of the obstetrician - gynecol - ogist - a survey . Obstet Gynecol 1989 Mar ; 73 ( 3 ) part 1 : 395 - 9 . 18 . WILLIAMSON , op . cit . , 155 . 19 . COVELL , op . cit . , 598 . Received December 1992 ; accepted May 1993 Bull Med Libr Assoc 82 ( 2 ) April 1994 196