Article Disruptions of Topological Chromatin Domains Cause Pathogenic Rewiring of Gene - Enhancer Interactions Graphical Abstract Highlights d Disruptions of TADs lead to de novo enhancer - promoter interactions and misexpression d Misexpression occurs when CTCF - associated TAD boundary elements are disrupted d Structural variations disrupting TAD structures can cause malformation syndromes d Different phenotypes can result from one enhancer acting on different target genes Authors Darı´o G . Lupia´n˜ez , Katerina Kraft , . . . , Axel Visel , Stefan Mundlos Correspondence mundlos @ molgen . mpg . de In Brief Disease - associated structural variants , when affecting CTCF - associated boundary elements , cause pathogenicity by disrupting the structure of topologically associated chromatin domains leading to ectopic promoter interactions and altered gene expression . Accession Numbers GSE66383 Lupia´n˜ez et al . , 2015 , Cell 161 , 1012 – 1025 May 21 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 04 . 004 Article Disruptions of Topological Chromatin Domains Cause Pathogenic Rewiring of Gene - Enhancer Interactions Darı´o G . Lupia´n˜ez , 1 , 2 Katerina Kraft , 1 , 2 Verena Heinrich , 2 Peter Krawitz , 1 , 2 Francesco Brancati , 3 Eva Klopocki , 4 Denise Horn , 2 Hu¨lya Kayserili , 5 John M . Opitz , 6 Renata Laxova , 6 Fernando Santos - Simarro , 7 , 8 Brigitte Gilbert - Dussardier , 9 Lars Wittler , 10 Marina Borschiwer , 1 Stefan A . Haas , 11 Marco Osterwalder , 12 Martin Franke , 1 , 2 Bernd Timmermann , 13 Jochen Hecht , 1 , 14 Malte Spielmann , 1 , 2 , 14 Axel Visel , 12 , 15 , 16 and Stefan Mundlos 1 , 2 , 14 , * 1 Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics , RG Development & Disease , 14195 Berlin , Germany 2 Institute for Medical and Human Genetics , Charite´ Universita¨tsmedizin Berlin , 13353 Berlin , Germany 3 Medical Genetics Unit , Policlinico Tor Vergata University Hospital , 00133 Rome , Italy 4 Institute of Human Genetics Biozentrum , Julius Maximilian University of Wu¨rzburg , 97070 Wu¨rzburg , Germany 5 Medical Genetics Department , Istanbul Medical Faculty , Istanbul University , 34093 Istanbul , Turkey 6 Department of Pediatrics , School of Medicine , University of Utah , Salt Lake City , UT 84108 , USA 7 Instituto de Gene´tica Me´dica y Molecular ( INGEMM ) , IdiPAZ , Hospital Universitario La Paz , 28046 Madrid , Spain 8 U753 Centro de Investigacio´n Biome´dica en Red de Enfermedades Raras ( CIBERER ) , Instituto de Salud Carlos III , 28046 Madrid , Spain 9 Service de Ge´ne´tique , C . H . U . de Poitiers , 86021 Poitiers , France 10 Department Developmental Genetics , Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics , 14195 Berlin , Germany 11 Department of Computational Molecular Biology , Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics , 14195 Berlin , Germany 12 Genomics Division , MS 84 - 171 , Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory , Berkeley , CA 94720 , USA 13 Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics , Sequencing Core Facility , 14195 Berlin , Germany 14 Berlin - Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies ( BCRT ) , Charite´ Universita¨tsmedizin Berlin , 13353 Berlin , Germany 15 U . S . Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute , Walnut Creek , CA 94598 , USA 16 School of Natural Sciences , University of California , Merced , CA 95343 , USA * Correspondence : mundlos @ molgen . mpg . de http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 04 . 004 SUMMARY Mammalian genomes are organized into megabase - scale topologically associated domains ( TADs ) . We demonstrate that disruption of TADs can rewire long - range regulatory architecture and result in path - ogenic phenotypes . We show that distinct human limb malformations are caused by deletions , inver - sions , or duplications altering the structure of the TAD - spanning WNT6 / IHH / EPHA4 / PAX3 locus . Using CRISPR / Cas genome editing , we generated mice with corresponding rearrangements . Both in mouse limb tissue and patient - derived ﬁbroblasts , dis - ease - relevant structural changes cause ectopic in - teractions between promoters and non - coding DNA , and a cluster of limb enhancers normally asso - ciated with Epha4 is misplaced relative to TAD boundaries and drives ectopic limb expression of another gene in the locus . This rewiring occurred only if the variant disrupted a CTCF - associated boundary domain . Our results demonstrate the func - tional importance of TADs for orchestrating gene expression via genome architecture and indicate criteria for predicting the pathogenicity of human structural variants , particularly in non - coding regions of the human genome . INTRODUCTION Approximately 5 % of the human genome is structurally variable in the normal population , which includes deletions and duplica - tions ( collectively referred to as copy number variants , CNVs ) , as well as inversions , and translocations . Structural variations have received considerable attention as a major cause for ge - netic disease , promoting the search for CNVs as a standard diagnostic procedure in conditions such as intellectual disability and congenital malformations ( Stankiewicz and Lupski , 2010 ; Swaminathan et al . , 2012 ) . The pathogenicity of many CNVs can be explained by their effect on gene dosage . In contrast , it is difﬁcult to predict the consequences of balanced rearrange - ments , such as inversions , or the functional impact of CNVs that are limited to non - coding DNA . Such variants have the po - tential to disrupt the integrity of the genome , causing changes in the regulatory architecture that lead to pathogenic alterations of gene expression levels and patterns ( Haraksingh and Snyder , 2013 ; Spielmann and Mundlos , 2013 ) . However , the lack of a comprehensive understanding of the large - scale functional or - ganization of the regulatory genome is a major limitation in pre - dicting their potential pathogenicity . New methods for enhancer identiﬁcation and analysis of chromosome conformation have enabled substantial progress toward elucidating genome - wide regulatory interactions . Chro - matin immunoprecipitation sequencing ( ChIP - seq ) performed directly on ex vivo tissues can reveal the location of distant - acting tissue - speciﬁc enhancer sequences at genomic scale 1012 Cell 161 , 1012 – 1025 , May 21 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . ( Visel et al . , 2009a ) . In parallel , sequencing - based studies of DNA - DNA interactions have provided insight into the general conformation of the genome in living cells , as well as interactions between promoters and distant - acting transcriptional enhancers in speciﬁc cell types ( Lieberman - Aiden et al . , 2009 ) . These data also show that enhancers can control multiple genes , frequently over hundreds of kilobases away from their target . Only a fraction of enhancers contact the nearest promoter , whereas most skip one or more genes ( de Laat and Duboule , 2013 ) . How the selec - tive interaction of enhancers with their respective target genes is achieved remains largely unknown , but the organization of the genome in domains of interaction that are shielded from each other by boundaries appears to be critical . Genome - wide interaction studies by chromosome conformation capture - based approaches such as Hi - C ( a high - throughput variant of the chromosome conformation capture technique [ 3C ] ) and 5C ( chromosome conformation capture carbon copy ) show that the genome is partitioned into megabase - scale topologically associated domains ( TADs ) ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ; Nora et al . , 2012 ) . These domains have been proposed to represent regula - tory units within which enhancers and promoters can interact . They are separated by boundary regions that often contain CTCF binding sites or housekeeping genes representing de facto insulators that block interactions across adjacent TADs ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ) . The importance of TAD structures is further supported by the ﬁnding that TAD boundaries appear to be largely static across different species and cell types . This sug - gests the existence of a preformed and stable topology that or - ganizes the physical proximity between enhancers and their target genes . However , the observation that TADs exist regard - less of transcriptional status has also raised questions regarding their role in cell - and tissue - speciﬁc regulatory processes ( de Laat and Duboule , 2013 ) . Furthermore , it has remained unclear if alterations in TAD structure , as they may occur in genomic re - arrangements , can contribute to disease etiology . In the present study , we analyze the potential value of anno - tated TAD boundaries for understanding how structural variation in the human genome elicits pathogenic phenotypes . Focusing on families with rare limb malformations , we identiﬁed several re - arrangements in the extended WNT6 / IHH / EPHA4 / PAX3 region and re - engineered them in mice . Through a series of circular chromosome conformation capture sequencing ( 4C - seq ) exper - iments and expression studies in mouse limb tissue and human patient - derived cells , we show that the rearrangements disrupt the normal topology of protein - coding genes and their en - hancers relative to TAD boundaries , resulting in inappropriate in - teractions and misexpression . Our results highlight the utility of considering the three - dimensional architecture of the genome for predicting the consequences of structural variation and rein - force that this approach may be useful for the analysis of struc - tural variants in a wide spectrum of human disease phenotypes . RESULTS Disruptions of TAD Structure at the EPHA4 Locus Are Associated with Limb Phenotypes The EPHA4 gene resides within a large gene desert ﬂanked by a gene - dense region on the centromeric side and the PAX3 gene on the telomeric side . Hi - C data show that the region is orga - nized into three adjacent TADs , the largest encompassing EPHA4 ( Figure 1A ) ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ) . Studying the genetic causes of rare limb malformations , we identiﬁed a series of struc - tural variants at the EPHA4 locus that potentially interfere with the integrity of this region . In mice , Epha4 is expressed during limb development and required for normal innervation of the limb , but inactivation of Epha4 does not cause changes in the limb skeleton ( Helmbacher et al . , 2000 ) . First , we investigated a dominantly inherited novel type of brachydactyly in three unrelated families , characterized by short digits predominantly on the preaxial ( radial ) side resulting in stub thumbs , short index ﬁngers and a cutaneous web between the ﬁrst and second ﬁngers ( Figure 1B ; Figure S1 ) . High - resolution array comparative genome hybridization ( CGH ) revealed hetero - zygous deletions of 1 . 75 – 1 . 9 Mb on chromosome 2q35 - 36 in all three affected families . All three deletions include the EPHA4 gene along with a large portion of its surrounding TAD and extend into the non - coding part of the adjacent PAX3 TAD , thereby removing the predicted boundary between the EPHA4 and PAX3 TADs . Second , we studied the molecular cause of F - syndrome , a limb malformation syndrome characterized by severe and com - plex syndactyly , often involving the ﬁrst and second ﬁngers , and polydactyly of the feet ( Figure 1C ) ( Grosse et al . , 1969 ) . F - syn - drome had previously been mapped to this chromosomal region ( 2q36 ) , but its genetic cause remained unknown ( Camera et al . , 1995 ; Thiele et al . , 2004 ) . We used whole - exome sequencing to detect mutations in genes located in the linkage interval but were not able to identify any potentially pathogenic changes . To search for non - coding mutations and structural variations , we used whole - genome sequencing . We detected a (cid:1) 1 . 1 - Mb heterozygous inversion in family F1 and a (cid:1) 1 . 4 - Mb heterozy - gous duplication , arranged in direct tandem orientation , in family F2 . The telomeric breakpoints were located 1 . 4 Mb away from the EPHA4 gene within the gene desert in the case of the inver - sion and 1 . 2 Mb in the case of the duplication . The centromeric breakpoints were located centromeric and telomeric of WNT6 in the duplication and inversion , respectively ( Figure 1C ) . Of note , both rearrangements bring the centromeric portion of the EPHA4 - containing TAD into close proximity of the WNT6 gene . Third , we studied a family that carries a heterozygous (cid:1) 900 - kb duplication in chromosomal region 2q35 that results in severe polysyndactyly and craniofacial abnormalities ( Fig - ure 1D ) ( Yuksel - Apak et al . , 2012 ) . The phenotype is reminiscent of the doublefoot ( Dbf ) mouse mutant , which also features massive polysyndactyly and was shown to be caused by a (cid:1) 600 - kb deletion affecting the same region ( Babbs et al . , 2008 ) . Of note , both the human and the mouse alleles bring the IHH / Ihh gene in proximity to the centromeric portion of the EPHA4 - containing TAD . Chromatin Interaction Landscape of the Extended WNT6 / IHH / EPHA4 / PAX3 Region To elucidate the genetic basis of these birth defects , we sought to examine the regulatory landscape at this locus in more detail . In addition to EPHA4 , we focused on the IHH , WNT6 , and PAX3 genes due to their location near breakpoints in patients and their Cell 161 , 1012 – 1025 , May 21 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 1013 involvement in other developmental processes ( Geetha - Logana - than et al . , 2010 ; Goulding et al . , 1994 ; St - Jacques et al . , 1999 ) . In each of the human disease alleles , at least one of the predicted TAD boundaries would be disrupted or its position changed rela - tive to the four genes highlighted above ( Figure 1 ) . As illustrated in Figures 1 and 2 , Hi - C data from human and mouse cells show a very similar TAD structure ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ) , indicating that mice could serve as a model system for these diseases . To test if the TAD structure observed in embryonic stem cells ( ESCs ) by Hi - C is consistent with the chromatin conformation in the developing limb , we performed 4C - seq experiments in E11 . 5 mouse limb buds using the promoters of Epha4 , as well as Ihh , Wnt6 , and Pax3 as baits . For each promoter we observed interaction domains that were compatible with the Hi - C pre - dicted TADs ( Figure 2 ) . These results conﬁrm that the general TAD organization identiﬁed by Hi - C around the Epha4 locus is consistent with the interaction landscape during limb develop - ment obtained with 4C - seq . CRISPR - Mediated Re - engineering of Human Disease Alleles in Mice To study the effects of the structural variants observed in human patients in an experimentally accessible in vivo system , we generated mice with genome rearrangements recapitulating the human disease alleles . Using a protocol adapted for the introduction of large structural variants ( Kraft et al . , 2015 ) , we co - transfected pairs of single guide RNAs ( sgRNAs ) into mouse ESCs to induce double strand breaks at desired positions . Figure 1 . Different Limb Pathogenic Structural Variations in Human and Mouse Map to the EPHA4 TAD ( A ) Hi - C proﬁle around the EPHA4 locus in human ESCs ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ) . Dashed lines indicate the EPHA4 TAD and boundaries . Cen , centromeric ; tel , telomeric . ( B – D ) Schematicofstructuralvariants ( left ) andassociatedphenotypes ( right ) . ( B ) Brachydactyly - associateddeletionsinfamiliesB1 , B2 , andB3 . Notethumband indexﬁngershorteningwithpartialwebbinginachild ( B1patient ) andadult ( B2patient ) . ( C ) F - syndrome - associatedinversioninfamilyF1andduplicationinfamily F2 . Note similar phenotypes of index / thumb syndactyly . ( D ) Polydactyly - associated duplication ( P1 ) and deletion in the doublefoot ( Dbf ) mouse mutant . The radiograph of the patient’s hand and the skeletal preparation of the Dbf / + mouse show similar seven - digit polydactyly . See also Figure S1 . 1014 Cell 161 , 1012 – 1025 , May 21 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . To generate a mouse model for the human brachydactyly cases , mouse line DelB was created from ESC clones carrying a corresponding CRISPR - induced deletion ( Figures 3A and 3B ) . Heterozygous DelB / + mice showed shortening of the sec - ond and third digits due to hypoplastic phalanges , which was most pronounced in the middle phalanx of the second digit ( Fig - ure S2 ) . This phenotype increased in severity when mice were bred to homozygosity , leading to severe shortening of the sec - ond digits due to very short middle phalanges , syndactyly be - tween the second and third digits , and a deviation of these digits toward the radial side ( Figure 3E , DelB / DelB ) . The phenotype is very similar to the human malformation that is also characterized by short thumb and index ﬁnger due to short or missing middle phalanges and partial syndactyly ( Figure 1B ) . Thus , mutant mice with a deletion corresponding to the human disease alleles recapitulated the phenotype observed in patients . In addition to these digit malformations , homozygous DelB / DelB mice also showed the known phenotype resulting from Epha4 inactivation , i . e . , a resultant hopping gait due to gross motor dysfunction ( Helmbacher et al . , 2000 ) . To create a mouse model of structural variants found in human F - syndrome patients , we reproduced the inversion observed in family F1 in mice . We obtained heterozygous and homozygous ESC clones carrying a 1 . 06 - Mb CRISPR - induced inversion with breakpoints at comparable positions in the mouse locus ( Figure 3C ) . Heterozygous as well as homozygous newborns generated via tetraploid aggregation died shortly after birth of unknown cause and did not show overt limb phenotypes or other morphological defects ( data not shown ) . Finally , we re - examined the previously described doublefoot ( Dbf ) mutant mouse strain due to the parallels in phenotype and genomic rearrangement with the human polydactyly pa - tients ( Figure 3D ) ( Yuksel - Apak et al . , 2012 ) . Dbf / + mice have six to nine digits per limb in a mirror image position with loss of Figure 2 . TAD Organization around the Wnt6 / Ihh / Epha4 / Pax3 Locus Hi - C proﬁle derived from mouse ESCs ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ) . Predicted TAD boundaries are indicated by vertical dashed lines . 4C - seq proﬁles from E11 . 5 mouse distal limbs with viewpoints on Wnt6 , Ihh , Epha4 , and Pax3 are shown . The y axis indicates number of normalized reads . 4C - seq interactions sharply drop at the Hi - C - predicted boundaries . The percentage of contacts per megabase within the TADs is shown on right . Orange bars represent contacts within corresponding TAD . Grey bars represent contacts located in the respective next two centromeric TADs and two telomeric TADs . Cell 161 , 1012 – 1025 , May 21 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 1015 Figure 3 . Ectopic Interaction of Wnt6 , Ihh , and Pax3 with the Epha4 TAD and Misexpression in Mouse Models ( A ) Schematicof thelocus . Dashedlinesindicate Epha4 TADand boundaries . Insituhybridization ( right ) shows Epha4 expressionindistallimbsofanE11 . 5wild - type embryo ( white arrow ) . ( B ) Brachydactyly - like deletion generated by CRISPR / Cas ( pink scissors ) . 4C - seq analysis with Pax3 as a viewpoint in E11 . 5 wild - type and heterozygous mutant distal limbs shows ectopic interaction with the centromeric part of the Epha4 TAD in the mutant ( red box ) . Pax3 shows ectopic distal limb expression in mutants ( white arrow ) . ( C ) F - syndrome inversion generated by CRISPR / Cas ( pink scissors ) . 4C - seq analysis with Wnt6 as a viewpoint shows ectopic interaction with the centromeric part of the Epha4 TAD in the mutant ( red box ) . Wnt6 shows ectopic distal limb expression in mutant limbs ( white arrow ) . ( D ) Dbf deletion . 4C - seqanalysiswith Ihh asaviewpointshowsectopicinteractionwithmostofthe Epha4 TADinmutants ( redbox ) . Ihh showsectopicdistallimb expression in mutants ( white arrow ) . ( E and F ) Autopod and corresponding skeletal preparations of wild - type and mutant mice at postnatal day 3 . Insets in ( E ) show digit II . Note reduction of digit II in the homozygous brachydactyly - like deletion and massive polydactyly in Dbf / + . See also Figures S2 , S3 , and S4 . 1016 Cell 161 , 1012 – 1025 , May 21 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . anterior - posterior differences and no thumb - equivalent bipha - langeal digit I ( Figure 3F ) . Patients with polydactyly resulting from duplication P1 have a very similar limb phenotype consist - ing of severe polydactyly , complete fusion of digits ( syndactyly ) , and a mirror conﬁguration of the digits ( Figure 1D ) . In two of three cases the mouse phenotypes closely resemble the human congenital limb defects , further supporting the utility of these mouse models . Structural Changes Cause Misexpression of Developmental Genes Resembling the Endogenous Epha4 Pattern The general nature of the structural variations and the resem - blance of phenotypes resulting from inversion and duplication ( F - syndrome ) or duplication and deletion ( polydactyly / Dbf ) raise the possibility that these phenotypes are caused by convergent alterations in gene regulation . In the case of Dbf mice , ectopic expression of Ihh in the embryonic limb was previ - ously described ( Babbs et al . , 2008 ) . To examine the new CRISPR - engineered lines for aberrant expression , we per - formed RNA - seq experiments in E11 . 5 limbs of wild - type , DelB / + ( brachydactyly - like deletion ) , InvF / InvF ( F - syndrome - like inversion ) , and Dbf / + ( polydactyly ) embryos . We analyzed the chromosomal region around the Wnt6 / Ihh / Epha4 / Pax3 locus ( chromosome 1 : 73000000 – 79000000 , mm9 ) , for altered levels of gene expression related to the corresponding structural vari - ation . We detected a signiﬁcant upregulation of Pax3 in DelB / + limbs , of Wnt6 in InvF / InvF limbs , and of Ihh in the Dbf / + limbs , whereas all other surrounding genes were unaltered or showed only marginal increases in expression levels ( Figure S3 ) . As ex - pected , Epha4 , which is contained in the brachydactyly ( DelB ) deletion , and all the genes located within the Dbf deletion were downregulated . On the basis of these results , we analyzed the expression patterns of Pax3 , Wnt6 , and Ihh in the respective mouse mutants by in situ hybridization at E11 . 5 and compared them with the wild - type Epha4 expression pattern . Epha4 is expressed in a distinct pattern in the developing limb , mainly in the distal mesoderm with predominance to the anterior side ( Figure 3A , right ) . At the same developmental stage , Pax3 is also expressed in the limb bud , but restricted to migrating mus - cle cells , evident as faint staining in the proximal limb , and absent from the developing hand plate ( Figure 3B , top right ) . DelB / + ( brachydactyly - like deletion ) mice showed strong misexpression of Pax3 in the distal anterior part of the autopod , in a pattern resembling endogenous Epha4 expression ( Figure 3B , bottom right ) . Wnt6 is normally expressed in the limb bud ectoderm , but not the distal mesoderm where Epha4 is expressed ( Fig - ure 3C , top right ) . In InvF / InvF ( F - syndrome - like inversion ) mice , we observed strong misexpression of Wnt6 in the distal limb autopod mesenchyme , in a similar pattern to Epha4 in wild - type controls and Pax3 in DelB / + mice ( Figure 3C , bottom right ) . The same pattern of misexpression was observed for het - erozygous InvF / + mice ( not shown ) . Finally , Ihh is not expressed at all in the limb bud autopod at E11 . 5 ( Figure 3D , top right ) . Mis - expression of Ihh in the distal limb bud of Dbf mutants was pre - viously demonstrated ( Babbs et al . , 2008 ) , and comparison at E11 . 5 revealed a striking resemblance of the expression pattern with Epha4 in wild - type embryos ( Figure 3D , bottom right ) . Taken together , these results indicate that genes near the chromo - somal breakpoints are misexpressed in all three mouse lines . In all cases , the acquired expression domain closely resembles the endogenous expression pattern of Epha4 , suggesting that regulatory sequences normally controlling Epha4 may play a role in the pathogenesis of the human limb phenotypes . 4C - Seq Reveals Ectopic Interaction of Misexpressed Genes with the Epha4 TAD Toexaminewhetherthestructuralvariantsresultinaberrantchro - matin interactions that may explain the ectopic expression do - mains observed in mutant mice , we performed 4C - seq on distal E11 . 5 limbs . We analyzed the different mutants and stage - matched wild - type embryos , using the promoters of Pax3 , Wnt6 , and Ihh as baits ( Figures 3B – 3D ) . For the deletions ( DelB and Dbf ) , heterozygous animals were examined in order to mini - mize the possibility of deleterious effects that otherwise may result from homozygous deletion of genes . For the copy num - ber - balancedinversion ( InvF ) , weexaminedhomozygousanimals because no genes are deleted and the absence of the wild - type allele simpliﬁes the interpretation of the 4C - seq data . In wild - type distal limbs , 4C - seq experiments showed minimal interac - tion of Pax3 , Wnt6 , and Ihh with non - coding sequences in the Epha4 TAD . In contrast , all three genes showed substantial inter - action with the Epha4 TAD in the mutants . In the DelB / + ( brachy - dactyly - like deletion ) mice , Pax3 showed a novel interaction domain of (cid:1) 800 kb , spanning the remaining part of the Epha4 TAD ﬂanking the centromeric breakpoint ( Figure 3B ) . In InvF / InvF ( F - syndrome - like inversion ) , we detected strong interaction of Wnt6 with a (cid:1) 300 - kb region that corresponds to the centro - meric part of the Epha4 TAD , brought to the vicinity of Wnt6 through the inversion ( Figure 3C ) . For better visualization , we mapped the 4C - seq data to a reference sequence that includes the inversion as present in the mice ( Figure S4 ) . Comparison with 4C - seq data from wild - type embryos showed that the inter - action levels substantially exceed interactions with equidistant sequences in wild - type limb buds . Finally , the Dbf / + deletion showed extensive interactions of Ihh with sequences throughout the entire Epha4 TAD ( Figure 3D ) . Thus , all rearrangements re - sulted in novel interactions within the Epha4 TAD and a fusion of adjacent TADs . Remarkably , all novel interactions in the fused TADs respected the adjacent boundaries , i . e . , Ihh and Wnt6 did not show interaction with the Pax3 domain and vice versa . Disrupted TADs Result in Ectopic Interaction in Patient Cells Previous studies showed that TADs are highly stable across spe - cies and cell lines ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ) , raising the possibility that patient - derived samples can provide direct insight into regulato - ry aberrations that affect early embryonic development . To test this paradigm , we applied 4C - seq to human adult ﬁbroblasts ( HAFs ) and compared the results to data from the mutant mouse strains . We processed HAFs from a brachydactyly patient of family B1 , a patient with F - syndrome from family F2 ( cells from F1 were not available ) , and a polydactyly patient ( P1 ) with the duplication . We compared patient samples with HAFs from age - , sex - , and passage - matched healthy control donors ( Figure 4 ) . All controls showed a 4C - seq proﬁle that was highly Cell 161 , 1012 – 1025 , May 21 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 1017 similar to that observed in mouse limbs ( Figure 2 ) and human Hi - C data ( Figure 1 , top ) . Similar to DelB mice , the human brachydactyly - associated deletion resulted in aberrant contact of the PAX3 promoter region with the centromeric part of the EPHA4 TAD ( Figure 4A ) . Likewise , the F - syndrome - associated duplication showed an ectopic interaction domain in the cen - tromeric regions of the EPHA4 TAD , closely resembling the interaction domain gained in InvF mice ( Figure 4B ) . Finally , the polydactyly - associated human duplication resulted in an over - lapping , smaller interaction domain in the most centromeric re - gion of the EPHA4 TAD ( Figure 4C ) . While individual reads could not be unambiguously traced to one of the two copies present in the duplication allele , one plausible explanation for this observa - tion are ectopic interactions between the telomeric copies of Wnt6 / Ihh and the centromeric copy of the duplicated regions of the EPHA4 TAD . Figure 4 . 4C - Seq Analysis in Patient - Derived Human Adult Fibroblasts ( A – C ) Schematic representation of the locus and the structural variations are shown on top . 4C - seq proﬁles from human adult ﬁbroblasts from healthy controls and patients with heterozygous structural variations are shown below . Red boxes indicate ectopic interaction . The EPHA4 TAD is indicated by dashed lines . ( A ) Patientwithbrachydactyly - associated deletion . 4C - seqanalysiswith PAX3 asaviewpointshowsextensiveectopicinteractionwiththe EPHA4 TAD ( redbox ) . ( B ) Patient with the F - syndrome - associated duplication . The 4C - seq proﬁle with WNT6 as a viewpoint shows ectopic interaction with the EPHA4 TAD ( red box ) . ( C ) Patient with the polydactyly - associated duplication . The 4C - seq proﬁle with IHH as a viewpoint shows ectopic interaction with the centromeric region of the EPHA4 TAD ( red box ) . 1018 Cell 161 , 1012 – 1025 , May 21 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . De Novo Interaction between Distal Limb Enhancers and Ectopic Target Genes upon TAD Reorganization Comparisons between the 4C - seq proﬁles obtained from the different mutant mouse tissues and patient cells revealed a minimal common region of (cid:1) 150 kb within the EPHA4 TAD ( Figure 5A ) . 4C - seq analysis of distal wild - type mouse limbs at E11 . 5 showed that this region frequently interacts with the EPHA4 promoter during normal development across 1 . 66 Mb Figure 5 . A Cluster of Limb Enhancers Is Located in the Interacting Region of the EphA4 TAD ( A ) Color bars indicate the fragment of the Epha4 TAD showing increased interaction with target genes in different mouse mutant limbs or human patient ﬁbroblasts . The 4C - seq proﬁle of Epha4 in E11 . 5 distal mouse limbs is shown for comparison . The red box indicates region of minimal overlap analyzed for enhancer activity . ( B ) Close - upviewofthechromosomalregionanalyzed . DNaseHS , H3K27ac , andp300ChIP - seqfromE11 . 5limbsandconservationtrackswere usedtopredict enhancers . Arrows indicate putative enhancer regions . The gray box indicates the location of a cluster of enhancers shown below ( C ) . ( C ) Transgenic enhancer reporter ( LacZ ) staining at E11 . 5 . ( D ) Pattern of forelimb expression of Pax3 ( DelB ) , Wnt6 ( InvF ) , and Ihh ( Dbf ) in mutants and endogenous pattern of expression of Epha4 by in situ hybridization at E11 . 5 . Note the similarity of endogenous Epha4 and ectopic Pax3 , Wnt6 , and Ihh expression domains ( D , white arrows ) with the enhancer activity patterns ( C , black arrows ) . See also Figures S5 and S6 . Cell 161 , 1012 – 1025 , May 21 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 1019 of the intervening gene desert ( Figure 5A ) . To identify en - hancers with regulatory activity during limb development , we screened public ChIP - seq data for enhancer - associated chro - matin marks , DNase hypersensitive sites ( HS ) data from equiv - alent developmental stages ( E11 . 5 ) for open chromatin , and sequence conservation in this region ( Figure 5B ) . To examine the strongest candidate sequences identiﬁed through this screen in more detail , we studied the in vivo activity pattern of ﬁve candidate enhancers . Two of these regions were already studied and documented in the VISTA enhancer browser data - base ( Visel et al . , 2007 ) . The remaining three were tested for enhancer activity using a transgenic mouse LacZ enhancer re - porter system . At E11 . 5 , four of the ﬁve regions showed reproducible LacZ re - porter activity in the developing limb . Three of these enhancers , clustered in a 30 - kb region , showed a high degree of spatial overlap with the endogenous expression pattern of Epha4 , as well as the ectopic expression domains of Pax3 , Ihh , and Wnt6 gained in DelB , Dbf , and InvF mice , respectively ( Figures 5C and 5D ; Figure S5 ) . To conﬁrm that the interactions in this region previously observed in mouse wild - type and mutant limbs involve these en - hancers , we performed 4C - seq using the enhancer cluster as bait . The interaction proﬁle revealed that this region interacts frequently with Epha4 during development in wild - type distal limbs ( Figure S6 , top ) . Next we tested if these enhancers had contact with the promoters of Pax3 , Wnt6 , or Ihh in the distal limbs of mutants compared with wild - type controls ( Figure S6 , bottom ) . This analysis conﬁrmed that in all three cases , as a consequence of the different structural variations , new interac - tions are established between limb enhancers located inside the Epha4 TAD and genes outside the domain . Boundaries of the EPHA4 TAD Determine the Pathogenicity of Structural Variants All structural variants examined do not only change the arrange - ment of genes , enhancers , and predicted TAD boundaries relative to each other but also result in changes in the distance between enhancers and their possible target genes . To investi - gate if the observed ectopic interactions are caused by disrup - tion of boundary elements or merely by distance effects , we examined the role of the putative boundaries at either side of the Epha4 TAD in additional mouse mutants . Regions with boundary - like properties were suggested by the Hi - C data ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ) . The analysis of CTCF ChIP - seq data in hu - man and mouse cell lines and tissues ( ENCODE Project Con - sortium , 2004 ) showed an absence of CTCF binding sites within the Epha4 TAD and the presence of several CTCF peaks at each boundary region ( Figure 6A ) . To investigate the possible role of the border regions ﬂanking the Epha4 TAD , we generated DelB S and Dbf S mutant mice carrying deletions similar to the DelB ( brachydactyly - like ) and Dbf ( polydactyly - like ) mutants , except that the region containing the predicted boundary element was left intact ( Figures 6B and 6C ) . Animals carrying these deletions had normal limbs and did not show any other abnormalities . Moreover , in situ hybridization for Ihh and Pax3 showed that these genes were not misexpressed and had retained their endogenous pattern of expression ( Figures 6B and 6C , right ) . To compare the interaction proﬁles in the absence or presence of boundary elements , we performed 4C - seq experiments using Ihh or Pax3 as baits in E11 . 5 distal limbs . This analysis revealed that the ectopic interactions of the corresponding gene with the Epha4 TAD observed in DelB and Dbf mice is reduced in DelB S and Dbf S mice ( Figures 6B and 6C , left ) . Vice versa , 4C - seq using the enhancer cluster as bait also showed reduced interaction with the Ihh or Pax3 promoter ( Figure S7 ) . Thus , the presence of the boundary elements was sufﬁcient to prevent inappropriate cross - TAD chromatin interactions , ectopic expression of non - target genes , and the morphological phenotypes resulting from this misexpression . DISCUSSION Structural variations are common in the human genome , but often difﬁcult to interpret . Their inherent complexity necessitates model systems in which the human situation can be faithfully recapitulated and studied . Here we use an adapted CRISPR / Cas genome editing protocol to reproduce human rearrange - ments in mice ( Kraft et al . , 2015 ) . Using this approach , we re - en - gineered three human malformation - associated rearrangements and investigated their effect on chromatin higher - order struc - tures and gene function . Disruption of TADs Results in Aberrant DNA Domain Topology and Gene Misexpression TADs are stable units of genomic architecture that have been proposed to partition the genome into large regulatory units ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ) . To investigate the effect of structural vari - ants on TAD integrity , we examined limbs from the different mutant mouse strains using 4C - seq , which provides higher res - olution than Hi - C . In all cases , we observed ectopic interaction of Pax3 , Wnt6 , or Ihh with the Epha4 TAD . The extent of interac - tion varied across the mutants , but included in all cases a min - imal overlapping region of 150 kb ( chromosome 1 : 75694480 – 75848058 , mm9 ) . Based on the hypothesis that this region might contain regulatory elements that drive the misexpression of Pax3 , Wnt6 , and Ihh , we screened the region for enhancers and identiﬁed a cluster of regulatory elements driving limb expression . The pattern driven by these enhancers overlaps with the endogenous limb expression of Epha4 and is very similar to the misexpression domains of Pax3 , Wnt6 , and Ihh observed in the mutant strains . Taken together , these data sug - gest that the target genes near the breakpoints were adopted by Epha4 enhancers , which in turn results in their misexpression ( Figure 7 ) . In DelB / + mice we did not detect any other regulated genes . In both the InvF / InvF and the Dbf / + mice , only one gene , Cyp27a and Fev , respectively , showed signiﬁcant upregulation at overall marginal expression levels . Given the function of these genes in cholesterol metabolism ( Cyp27a ) and the central serotonin system ( Fev ) , a contribution to the phenotype seems unlikely . Ectopic expression of Wnt6 can cause limb malformations in the chick via its anti - chondrogenic effect ( Gee - tha - Loganathan et al . , 2010 ) , and misexpression of hedgehog proteins can induce polydactyly via the disruption of the ante - rior - posterior GLI3 gradient ( Lettice et al . , 2002 ) . While the mechanisms by which ectopic expression of Pax3 may affect 1020 Cell 161 , 1012 – 1025 , May 21 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . skeletal morphology remain to be established , the observed misexpression domains in combination with the morphogenetic potential of Wnt6 and hedgehog proteins offer a plausible mo - lecular explanation for at least two of the human phenotypes observed . Our 4C - seq data using the Epha4 enhancers as a viewpoint ( Figure S6 ) also show that the regions of ectopic interaction cover many other genes besides the identiﬁed targets Pax3 , Ihh , and Wnt6 . Nevertheless , expression analysis by RNA - seq showed no substantial upregulation of these genes , indicating that either enhancer - promoter distance or other unknown fac - tors contribute to the receptiveness of a promotor to respond to the enhancer . In a Drosophila in vitro system , housekeeping and developmental promoters can respond to different classes of enhancers ( Zabidi et al . , 2015 ) . It is possible that similar intrinsic speciﬁcities help to guide enhancer - promotor in verte - brate genomes . Here , the activated genes are all developmental genes expressed during limb development , indicating that there Figure 6 . Boundary Elements at Both Sides of the Epha4 TAD Prevent Ectopic Expression of Neighboring Genes ( A ) CTCF ChIP - seq track in E14 . 5 mouse limbs ( ENCODE / LICR ) . Red boxes and octagons mark clusters of CTCF peaks located at the boundary of the Epha4 TAD . The grey box indicates Epha4 TAD . 4C - seq proﬁles were generated from distal limb buds at E11 . 5 . All data were obtained from heterozygous animals . Aberrant interactions are indicated by red boxes . Pink scissors indicate CRISPR / Cas - induced breakpoints in each deletion . ( B ) Adeletion ( DelB s ) excludingtheboundaryregionandCTCFclusteratthetelomericsideofthe Epha4 TAD ( redoctagon ) wasgeneratedandcomparedwiththe brachydactyly - likedeletion ( DelB , including theCTCF cluster ) . Thelog2 ratioofthe4C - seqsignalof DelB / DelB S showsincreasedinteractionwiththe Epha4 TAD in the DelB deletion when compared with DelB s deletion ( red box ) . Pax3 ( right ) shows normal expression of DelB s / + deletion mice , in contrast to Pax3 mis - expression in DelB / + mice ( white arrow ) . ( C ) A deletion ( Dbf S ) excluding the boundary region and CTCF cluster at the centromeric side of the Epha4 TAD ( red octagon ) was generated and compared with the doublefoot deletion ( Dbf , including the CTCF cluster ) . The log2 ratio of the 4C - seq signal of Dbf / Dbf S shows increased interaction with the Epha4 TAD in the Dbf deletionwhencomparedwith Dbf S deletion ( redbox ) . Ihh ( right ) showsanabsenceoflimbexpressionin Dbf s / + deletionmice , incontrastto Ihh misexpression in Dbf / + deletion mice ( white arrow ) . See also Figure S7 . Cell 161 , 1012 – 1025 , May 21 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 1021 may be a preference toward genes that are poised to get acti - vated in this tissue . Conservation of TAD Structure across Species , Tissues , and Rearrangements Comparison of TADs across different mouse and human cell types suggeststhattheir boundariesarelargelyconserved ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ) . We hypothesized that this conservation allows for the analysis of disrupted regulatory interactions that occur in vivo during early embryonic development , using patient samples collected long after limb morphogenesis has ended . To test this approach , we performed 4C - seq in human adult ﬁbro - blasts from patients with the brachydactyly - associated deletion , the F - syndrome - associated duplication , and the polydactyly - associated duplication ( Yuksel - Apak et al . , 2012 ) . Fibroblasts from healthy control individuals showed interaction domains highly similar to wild - type developmental mouse limb buds , whereas patient ﬁbroblasts recapitulated the aberrant interac - tions observed in the respective mutant mouse strains . The observed chromatin interactions appear to be independent from gene expression levels , since EPHA4 and PAX3 are ex - pressed at robust levels , WNT6 is expressed at very low levels , and IHH transcript is not detectable in HAFs ( data not shown ) . While the ectopic interaction as well as the overall conﬁguration was similar between human ﬁbroblasts and mouse limb tissue , the distribution of peaks within the TADs was different . This is likely due to the different transcriptional activity and differenti - ation status of the analyzed samples ( Nora et al . , 2012 ) . Regard - less of such variation , our data indicate overall strong congru - ence between the developing mouse tissue and human - derived ﬁbroblasts in the overall conﬁguration of TADs . These results demonstrate the potential of patient - derived chromatin interac - tion data for gaining insight into the pathology of transient pro - cesses that occur during embryonic development . Perturbation of TAD Structure Results in the Formation of New TADs All structural variants examined in this study result in aberrant in - teractions of a regulatory unit with ectopic - target genes that nor - mally do not take place because enhancers interact only with their respective target promoters . TADs have been proposed to play an important role in establishing appropriate enhancer - promoter interactions by providing a structural scaffold that limits the distance and direction over which enhancers operate . However , it remains unclear if the observed partitioning of the genome is a cause or consequence of pervasive enhancer - pro - moter interactions and what functional role boundary regions between the TADs have ( de Laat and Duboule , 2013 ) . The pertur - bation of TADs by means of chromosomal rearrangements can provide insight into the fundamental mechanisms that drive this process . In vitro experiments at the Xist locus , for example , demonstrated reorganization of a TAD and spill - over of activity upon deletion of a 58 - kb element corresponding to the boundary region ( Nora et al . , 2012 ) . In the present study , variants that delete TAD boundaries result in interaction across the domains with no apparent new boundary formation and thus represent an apparently seamless fusion of neighboring TADs ( Figure 7 ) . The interactions within these apparent new TADs as well as their exact boundaries and their impact on the overall three - dimen - sional architecture of the locus will have to be resolved by more quantitative analysis methods . However , the 4C - seq data obtained in this study suggest that the new TADs are deﬁned by the next adjacent boundaries and that their functionality is not impaired . In the duplications the boundaries are not removed but the duplicated copy is ﬂanked by an additional boundary , re - sulting in ectopic interaction within the newly formed TAD . Accordingly , our 4C - seq results show increased frequency of interaction of IHH ( polydactyly family ) and WNT6 ( F - syndrome family ) with centromeric parts of the EPHA4 domain ( Figure 7 , Duplication ) . In the case of the inversion , the EPHA4 enhancer cluster and the adjacent boundary is moved next to WNT6 . This results in the ectopic interaction with WNT6 and the forma - tion of a new TAD that is now conﬁned by the former EPHA4 centromeric boundary ( Figure 7 , Inversion ) . Similar results were obtained at the Tfap2 / Bmp2 locus , showing that inversions can result in reorganization of TAD structure by shifting bound - aries ( Tsujimura et al . , 2015 ) . Thus , a boundary element can be inverted or moved to a different chromosomal region without losing its functionality . However , the minimal region to determine boundary functionality is still unknown , and therefore Figure 7 . A Model for Pathogenicity of Structural Variations Wild - typeconformationshowsthestructureoftwoadjacentTADs . Theactivity of the enhancer ( E ) is restricted to gene 1 ( G1 ) located inside the TAD . The TADsareseparatedbyaboundaryelement ( black ) . Theblackboxesrepresent the rearranged regions . The box with dotted lines represents the duplicated region . In the inversion , the enhancer is moved out of TADa and placed in the vicinityofgene2 ( G2 ) . TheboundaryisnowontherightsideofE . Thisresultsin interaction of E with G2 , but prevents its original interaction with G1 . In the duplication , E is placed next to the duplicated G2 0 , resulting in interaction and misexpression . If the deletion removes the boundary and parts of TADb ( black box ) , E is able to interact with G1 and G2 , resulting in misexpression of G2 . If the deletion leaves the boundary intact ( Deletion S , black box ) , the TAD structure remains intact and E interacts only with G1 . 1022 Cell 161 , 1012 – 1025 , May 21 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . the consequences of deleting only the boundary elements re - main to be tested . Boundary Structures Are Important for TAD Integrity We experimentally challenged the assumption that TAD bound - ary elements are functional and relevant for disease pathogen - esis by creating deletions that leave the proposed boundary regions on either side of the Epha4 TAD intact . Both regions con - tained a cluster of binding sites for CTCF , a factor involved in boundary formation ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ; Van Bortle et al . , 2014 ) . We engineered additional variants of the Dbf as well as the brachydactyly - associated rearrangements , this time leaving the predicted boundary regions undeleted . No phenotypes and no misexpression of either Ihh or Pax3 were observed . Further - more , 4C - seq experiments in these mice showed decreased fre - quency of interaction of the target genes Pax3 and Ihh with the Epha4 domain . Thus , leaving the proposed boundary regions intact diminishes all molecular phenotypes and averts morpho - logical aberrations by preventing ectopic interactions . Distance between regulatory elements and their target genes may be another determining factor . At the HoxD locus , for example , duplications within the TAD that result in an increase in the distance between promoter and enhancers were shown to result in an impairment of activation ( Montavon et al . , 2012 ) . While we cannot rule out that distance effects contribute to the attenuation of molecular phenotypes , the difference between the deletion sizes is 100 kb for the Dbf / Dbf S alleles and 200 kb for the DelB / DelB S alleles , corresponding to 17 % and 12 % of the total deletion size , respectively . It appears unlikely that these minor differences in distance alone are sufﬁcient to explain the reversion of molecular phenotypes to near - wild - type levels , given that similar differences in deletion size of (cid:1) 200 kb are pre - sent across the brachydactyly families ( B1 , B2 , and B3 ) without apparent effect on the phenotype . A Framework for Interpreting Human Structural Variation Depending on their size and position , structural variants may disrupt higher - order genomic organization . In this study we pre - sent a conceptual framework for the interpretation of such variants using genome - wide chromatin interaction datasets . Our results reinforce the notion that the pathogenicity of a sub - stantial proportion of human disease - associated deletions re - sults from ectopic enhancer - promoter interaction causing gene misexpression due to the elimination of annotated boundaries ( Ibn - Salem et al . , 2014 ) . The aberrant chromatin interactions observed at the EPHA4 locus in the present study exemplify how the disruption of TAD structure by eliminating or interfering with boundary elements can lead to the functional rewiring of gene - enhancer interactions ( schematically shown in Figure 7 ) . This model also illustrates how different types of large - scale structural changes can converge to give rise to the same pheno - type . We showed that duplication and an inversion , as observed in the F - syndrome cases , or duplication and a deletion , as in the polydactyly family / mouse mutant , result in nearly identical mo - lecular changes and morphological defects . In both cases the target gene interacts with the same non - coding genomic region and exhibits similar ectopic expression domains , despite the fundamentally different nature of the underlying structural muta - tion . In the deletions , a boundary is removed from the genome , permitting contact of the enhancer with genes outside of the TAD . In contrast , in the inversion and the duplications the enhancer is placed next to the new target gene . In the latter re - arrangements the boundaries are left intact , but their new posi - tion no longer restricts contact of the enhancer with the target gene ( Figure 7 ) . The effect of such rearrangements is a gain of function via misexpression of one or several target genes . On the other hand , rearrangements of comparable size that do not interfere with TAD boundaries can be without consequence , as shown for the DelB S and Dbf S mutants . Thus , considering overall TAD structure and in particular the integrity of the boundaries and their position relative to genes and enhancers appears critical when predicting ectopic and potentially pathogenic enhancer - promoter interactions . As this situation depends on the presence of several factors including available enhancers and receptive genes that can give rise to phenotypes when mis - expressed , other pathogenic mechanisms such as loss or gain of gene function have to be considered when interpreting structural variations . Notably , such predictions can be experimentally tested even if the affected tissue is not available . As shown in this study , normal and abnormal TAD structure and enhancer - promoter interactions may be preserved across developmental tissues and adult human cells such as ﬁbroblasts . Hence , 4C - seq in patient cells can yield diagnostically valuable information to predict effects of structural variants on gene regulation and thus disease etiology . While the present study focused on one lo - cus and one set of related morphological phenotypes , TAD data for the entire human and mouse genome are becoming available at increasing resolution ( Jin et al . , 2013 ; Rao et al . , 2014 ) . These data should also help to interpret rearrangements in regions with higher gene density . Thus , the general principles uncovered in this study and the resulting approaches for the interpretation of structural variation in human phenotypes are expected to be applicable to other genomic loci and a wide spectrum of genetic conditions caused by structural variants . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Human Material Venous blood samples and skin biopsies and were obtained from the patients and controls by standard procedures . Written informed consent was obtained from all individuals studied to participate in this study . This study was approved by the Charite´ Universita¨tsmedizin Berlin ethics committee . Identiﬁcation of Human Structural Variations All experiments were done with genomic DNA extracted from blood . Brachy - dactyly deletions were identiﬁed using array CGH . F - syndrome - associatedduplicationandinversionwereidentiﬁedusingnext generation sequencing ( NGS , see Supplemental Information ) . Breakpoints for each structural variation were identiﬁed by breakpoint spanning PCR and Sanger sequencing . Generation of Transgenic Animals Using CRISPR / Cas Mouse ESCs carrying structural variations were created using a CRISPR / Cas - basedprotocol ( Kraftetal . , 2015 ) ( seeSupplementalInformation ) . Thesizeand positionofthehumanstructuralvariations ( hg19 ) wereconvertedtothemouse genome ( mm9 ) using the USCS liftOver tool . CRISPR guides were designed using the CRISPR design tool based on the algorithm described in Hsu et al . ( 2013 ) to place guide sequences within close proximity of the predicted Cell 161 , 1012 – 1025 , May 21 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 1023 breakpoints ( see Table S1 ) . To minimize off target effects , guide sequences were chosen to have a quality score above 85 % . Embryos and live animals from ESCs were generated by tetraploid comple - mentation ( Artus and Hadjantonakis , 2011 ) . For each structural variation , at least two independent clones were aggregated . Genotyping was performed by PCR analysis . Guide primers , genotyping primers , and breakpoint coordi - nates are summarized in Table S1 . RNA - Seq E11 . 5 distal limbs were microdissected from wild - type or mutant embryos . RNA was isolated from tissue samples using the RNeasy Mini Kit ( QIAGEN ) . Samples were sequenced using Illumina HiSeq technology according to stan - dard protocols . In Vivo Enhancer Validation Putative enhancer regions were selected on the basis of public tracks for H3K27Ac ChIP - seq ( Cotney et al . , 2012 ) , DNase HS , p300 ChIP - seq data from 11 . 5 limbs ( Visel et al . , 2009b ) , and conservation available at the USCS genome browser ( http : / / genome . ucsc . edu / ) . Selected regions were ampliﬁed by PCR from mouse genomic DNA and cloned into a Hsp68 - promoter - LacZ reporter vector as previously described ( Visel et al . , 2009b ) ( see Table S2 ) . Transgenic embryos were generated and tested for LacZ reporter activity at E11 . 5 . All animal work performed at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory was reviewed and approved by the institutional Animal Welfare and Research Committee ( AWRC ) . In Situ Hybridization and Skeletal Preparations In situ hybridization was performed according to standard protocols . Probes from Pax3 , Ihh , Wnt6 , and Epha4 were generated by PCR ampliﬁcation using mouse limb cDNA . For skeletal preparation , specimens were stained accord - ing to standard Alcian blue / Alizarin red protocols . All animal procedures were in accordance with institutional , state , and gov - ernment regulations ( Berlin : LAGeSo ) . 4C - Seq 4C - seq libraries were generated from microdissected tissues or cells as describedpreviously ( vandeWerkenetal . , 2012 ) . BglIIorHindIII ( 6 - bpcutters ) were used as primary restriction enzymes . Csp6I or DpnII were used as secondary restriction enzymes . For each viewpoint , a total of 1 . 6 mg of each library was ampliﬁed by PCR ( primer sequence in Table S3 ) . Samples were sequenced with Ilumina Hi - Seq technology according to standard protocols . ACCESSION NUMBERS All data have been deposited at GEO : GSE66383 . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures , seven ﬁgures , and three tables and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 04 . 004 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS D . G . L . is supported by the Fundacio´n Alfonso Martı´n Escudero . This research was supported by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft , from the Berlin Institute for Health , and the Max Planck Foundation to S . M . M . O . was supported by a Swiss National Science Foundation ( SNSF ) fellowship . A . V . was supported by NIH grants R01HG003988 , U54HG006997 , and U01DE024427 . Research conducted at the E . O . Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory was performed under Department of Energy Contract DE - AC02 - 05CH11231 , University of California . We thank Daniel Ibrahim and Guillaume Andrey for comments on the manuscript . We also thank Nicole Ro¨sener , Asita Stiege , Karol Macura , Nadine Lehmann , Anne Heß , and Christin Franke for technical support . Received : January 5 , 2015 Revised : February 12 , 2015 Accepted : March 24 , 2015 Published : May 7 , 2015 REFERENCES Artus , J . , and Hadjantonakis , A . K . ( 2011 ) . Generation of chimeras by aggrega - tion of embryonic stem cells with diploid or tetraploid mouse embryos . Methods Mol . Biol . 693 , 37 – 56 . Babbs , C . , Furniss , D . , Morriss - Kay , G . M . , andWilkie , A . O . ( 2008 ) . Polydactyly in the mouse mutant Doublefoot involves altered Gli3 processing and is caused by a large deletion in cis to Indian hedgehog . Mech . Dev . 125 , 517 – 526 . Camera , G . , Camera , A . , Pozzolo , S . , Costa , M . , and Mantero , R . ( 1995 ) . F - syndrome ( F - form of acro - pectoro - vertebral dysplasia ) : report on a second family . Am . J . Med . Genet . 57 , 472 – 475 . Cotney , J . , Leng , J . , Oh , S . , DeMare , L . E . , Reilly , S . K . , Gerstein , M . B . , and Noonan , J . P . ( 2012 ) . Chromatin state signatures associated with tissue - spe - ciﬁc gene expression and enhancer activity in the embryonic limb . Genome Res . 22 , 1069 – 1080 . de Laat , W . , and Duboule , D . ( 2013 ) . Topology of mammalian developmental enhancers and their regulatory landscapes . Nature 502 , 499 – 506 . Dixon , J . R . , Selvaraj , S . , Yue , F . , Kim , A . , Li , Y . , Shen , Y . , Hu , M . , Liu , J . S . , and Ren , B . ( 2012 ) . Topological domains in mammalian genomes identiﬁed by analysis of chromatin interactions . Nature 485 , 376 – 380 . ENCODE Project Consortium ( 2004 ) . The ENCODE ( ENCyclopedia Of DNA El - ements ) Project . Science 306 , 636 – 640 . Geetha - Loganathan , P . , Nimmagadda , S . , Christ , B . , Huang , R . , andScaal , M . ( 2010 ) . Ectodermal Wnt6 is an early negativeregulator of limb chondrogenesis in the chicken embryo . BMC Dev . Biol . 10 , 32 . Goulding , M . , Lumsden , A . , and Paquette , A . J . ( 1994 ) . Regulation of Pax - 3 expression in the dermomyotome and its role in muscle development . Devel - opment 120 , 957 – 971 . Grosse , F . R . , Herrmann , J . , and Opitz , J . M . ( 1969 ) . The F - form of acropector - overtebral dysplasia : the F - syndrome . Birth Defects Orig . Artic . Ser . , V : 48 – 63 . Haraksingh , R . R . , and Snyder , M . P . ( 2013 ) . Impacts of variation in the human genome on gene regulation . J . Mol . Biol . 425 , 3970 – 3977 . Helmbacher , F . , Schneider - Maunoury , S . , Topilko , P . , Tiret , L . , and Charnay , P . ( 2000 ) . Targeting of the EphA4 tyrosine kinase receptor affects dorsal / ventral pathﬁnding of limb motor axons . Development 127 , 3313 – 3324 . Hsu , P . D . , Scott , D . A . , Weinstein , J . A . , Ran , F . A . , Konermann , S . , Agarwala , V . , Li , Y . , Fine , E . J . , Wu , X . , Shalem , O . , et al . ( 2013 ) . DNA targeting speciﬁcity of RNA - guided Cas9 nucleases . Nat . Biotechnol . 31 , 827 – 832 . Ibn - Salem , J . , Ko¨hler , S . , Love , M . I . , Chung , H . R . , Huang , N . , Hurles , M . E . , Haendel , M . , Washington , N . L . , Smedley , D . , Mungall , C . J . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Dele - tions of chromosomal regulatory boundaries are associated with congenital disease . Genome Biol . 15 , 423 . Jin , F . , Li , Y . , Dixon , J . R . , Selvaraj , S . , Ye , Z . , Lee , A . Y . , Yen , C . A . , Schmitt , A . D . , Espinoza , C . A . , and Ren , B . ( 2013 ) . A high - resolution map of the three - dimensional chromatin interactome in human cells . Nature 503 , 290 – 294 . Kraft , K . , Geuer , S . , Will , A . J . , Chan , W . L . , Paliou , C . , Borschiwer , M . , Harab - ula , I . , Wittler , L . , Franke , M . , Ibrahim , D . M . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Deletions , inversions , duplications : engineeringofstructuralvariantsusingCRISPR / Casinmice . Cell Rep . 10 , 833 – 839 . Lettice , L . A . , Horikoshi , T . , Heaney , S . J . , van Baren , M . J . , van der Linde , H . C . , Breedveld , G . J . , Joosse , M . , Akarsu , N . , Oostra , B . A . , Endo , N . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Disruption of a long - range cis - acting regulator for Shh causes preaxial poly - dactyly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 7548 – 7553 . Lieberman - Aiden , E . , van Berkum , N . L . , Williams , L . , Imakaev , M . , Ragoczy , T . , Telling , A . , Amit , I . , Lajoie , B . R . , Sabo , P . J . , Dorschner , M . O . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Comprehensive mapping of long - range interactions reveals folding principles of the human genome . Science 326 , 289 – 293 . 1024 Cell 161 , 1012 – 1025 , May 21 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . Montavon , T . , Thevenet , L . , and Duboule , D . ( 2012 ) . Impact of copy number variations ( CNVs ) on long - range gene regulation at the HoxD locus . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 20204 – 20211 . Nora , E . P . , Lajoie , B . R . , Schulz , E . G . , Giorgetti , L . , Okamoto , I . , Servant , N . , Piolot , T . , vanBerkum , N . L . , Meisig , J . , Sedat , J . , etal . ( 2012 ) . Spatialpartition - ing of the regulatory landscape of the X - inactivation centre . Nature 485 , 381 – 385 . Rao , S . S . , Huntley , M . H . , Durand , N . C . , Stamenova , E . K . , Bochkov , I . D . , Rob - inson , J . T . , Sanborn , A . L . , Machol , I . , Omer , A . D . , Lander , E . S . , et al . ( 2014 ) . A 3Dmapofthehumangenomeatkilobaseresolutionrevealsprinciplesofchro - matin looping . Cell 159 , 1665 – 1680 . Spielmann , M . , and Mundlos , S . ( 2013 ) . Structural variations , the regulatory landscape of the genome and their alteration in human disease . BioEssays 35 , 533 – 543 . Stankiewicz , P . , and Lupski , J . R . ( 2010 ) . Structural variation in the human genome and its role in disease . Annu . Rev . Med . 61 , 437 – 455 . St - Jacques , B . , Hammerschmidt , M . , and McMahon , A . P . ( 1999 ) . Indian hedgehog signaling regulates proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes and is essential for bone formation . Genes Dev . 13 , 2072 – 2086 . Swaminathan , G . J . , Bragin , E . , Chatzimichali , E . A . , Corpas , M . , Bevan , A . P . , Wright , C . F . , Carter , N . P . , Hurles , M . E . , and Firth , H . V . ( 2012 ) . DECIPHER : web - based , community resource for clinical interpretation of rare variants in developmental disorders . Hum . Mol . Genet . 21 ( R1 ) , R37 – R44 . Thiele , H . , McCann , C . , van’t Padje , S . , Schwabe , G . C . , Hennies , H . C . , Cam - era , G . , Opitz , J . , Laxova , R . , Mundlos , S . , and Nu¨rnberg , P . ( 2004 ) . Acropec - torovertebral dysgenesis ( F syndrome ) maps to chromosome 2q36 . J . Med . Genet . 41 , 213 – 218 . Tsujimura , T . , Klein , F . A . , Langenfeld , K . , Glaser , J . , Huber , W . , and Spitz , F . ( 2015 ) . A discrete transition zone organizes the topological and regulatory au - tonomy of the adjacent Tfap2c and Bmp7 genes . PLoS Genet . 11 , e1004897 . Van Bortle , K . , Nichols , M . H . , Li , L . , Ong , C . T . , Takenaka , N . , Qin , Z . S . , and Corces , V . G . ( 2014 ) . Insulatorfunctionandtopologicaldomainborderstrength scale with architectural protein occupancy . Genome Biol . 15 , R82 . van de Werken , H . J . , de Vree , P . J . , Splinter , E . , Holwerda , S . J . , Klous , P . , de Wit , E . , and de Laat , W . ( 2012 ) . 4C technology : protocols and data analysis . Methods Enzymol . 513 , 89 – 112 . Visel , A . , Minovitsky , S . , Dubchak , I . , and Pennacchio , L . A . ( 2007 ) . VISTA Enhancer Browser—a database of tissue - speciﬁc human enhancers . Nucleic Acids Res . 35 , D88 – D92 . Visel , A . , Rubin , E . M . , andPennacchio , L . A . ( 2009a ) . Genomicviewsofdistant - acting enhancers . Nature 461 , 199 – 205 . Visel , A . , Blow , M . J . , Li , Z . , Zhang , T . , Akiyama , J . A . , Holt , A . , Plajzer - Frick , I . , Shoukry , M . , Wright , C . , Chen , F . , et al . ( 2009b ) . ChIP - seq accurately predicts tissue - speciﬁc activity of enhancers . Nature 457 , 854 – 858 . Yuksel - Apak , M . , Bo¨gershausen , N . , Pawlik , B . , Li , Y . , Apak , S . , Uyguner , O . , Milz , E . , Nu¨rnberg , G . , Karaman , B . , Gu¨lgo¨ren , A . , et al . ( 2012 ) . A large dupli - cation involving the IHH locus mimics acrocallosal syndrome . Eur . J . Hum . Genet . 20 , 639 – 644 . Zabidi , M . A . , Arnold , C . D . , Schernhuber , K . , Pagani , M . , Rath , M . , Frank , O . , and Stark , A . ( 2015 ) . Enhancer - core - promoter speciﬁcity separates develop - mental and housekeeping gene regulation . Nature 518 , 556 – 559 . Cell 161 , 1012 – 1025 , May 21 , 2015 ª 2015 Elsevier Inc . 1025