Brief Communication 1587 Endocytosis and the development of cell polarity in yeast require a dynamic F - actin cytoskeleton Kathryn R . Ayscough Studies using drugs that cause the disassembly of filamentous actin ( F - actin ) have demonstrated the importance of an intact actin cytoskeleton for polarised secretion by yeast cells [ 1 , 2 ] . To address the level of dynamic turnover needed for such processes , however , drugs or mutants that confer stabilising properties on F - actin are needed . Jasplakinolide is the only readily available drug that stabilises F - actin structures both in vivo and in vitro [ 3 – 6 ] . Yeast strains have been generated in which two of the ABC multidrug resistance transporter genes have been deleted , rendering normally jasplakinolide - resistant yeast cells sensitive to its effects . Treatment of these cells with jasplakinolide caused rapid and dramatic effects on the actin cytoskeleton , resulting in the accumulation of single large actin structures in cells . These structures , however , still contained components that are normally associated with cortical actin patches . A dynamic actin cytoskeleton was found to be critical for the generation of cell polarity and endocytosis . Address : Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences , Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Davidson Building , University of Glasgow , Glasgow G12 8QQ , UK . E - mail : k . ayscough @ bio . gla . ac . uk Received : 15 September 2000 Revised : 13 October 2000 Accepted : 1 November 2000 Published : 8 December 2000 Current Biology 2000 , 10 : 1587 – 1590 0960 - 9822 / 00 / $ – see front matter © 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . Results and discussion Previous work demonstrated that relatively high concen - trations of jasplakinolide do not inhibit growth of wild - type yeast cells , nor does the drug affect actin structures , as determined by rhodamine – phalloidin staining [ 1 ] . Here , the effects of jasplakinolide were analysed in a Saccha - romyces cerevisiae strain in which two multidrug resistance ABC - transporter genes ( PDR5 and SNQ2 ) were deleted from the genome . While this strain is sensitive to a range of drugs , it is morphologically the same as wild - type yeast cells and rhodamine – phalloidin staining indicates that its actin cytoskeleton is organised appropriately ( K . R . A . , unpublished data ) . Sensitivity to jasplakinolide was assessed as detailed in the Supplementary material . The lowest concentration of jasplakinolide at which effects on growth were observed ( 10 µ M ) was then used to analyse the effects of the drug on the actin structures within cells . Using rhodamine – phalloidin to stain F - actin structures , a rapid and dramatic alteration in the actin cytoskeleton of jasplakinolide - treated cells was observed . Rather than many small cortical patches , a single large clump of actin was present ( Figure 1a , b ) . The staining obtained with rhodamine – phalloidin was considerably weaker than is Figure 1 Effect of jasplakinolide on actin . ( a ) Untreated wild - type cells showed both cytoplasmic cables and cortical small bright spots when fixed and stained with rhodamine – phalloidin . ( b ) A 30 min treatment with 10 µ M jasplakinolide caused a redistribution of actin to a single , large , but fainter , clump in cells . ( c ) Washing of cells before fixation and staining to remove jasplakinolide revealed a single large clump of actin , now brightly stained . ( d – g ) Live cells expressing Abp1 – GFP were also used to visualise the localisation of cortical actin . ( d ) Untreated cells showing small punctate cortical patches . ( e ) Cells after 10 min in the presence of 10 µ M jasplakinolide . ( f ) Cells were then incubated in the presence of 50 µ M LAT - A for a further 2 h . ( g ) The eight figures are successive images taken at 20 sec intervals from a series of images recorded between 5 – 10 min after addition of 10 µ M jasplakinolide . The arrow denotes a point where patches were observed to coalesce into a single large clump of actin . The arrowhead indicates a particular patch that became a part of this clump . Scale bars represent ( c , f ) 10 µ m ; ( g ) 5 µ m . Current Biology ( a ) ( c ) ( b ) ( d ) ( g ) ( e ) ( f ) normally seen for F - actin structures in yeast , however , and actin cable structures were not observed at all . This sup - ports previous in vitro reports which indicate competitive binding of jasplakinolide and rhodamine – phalloidin [ 5 ] . Treating cells with jasplakinolide for 10 minutes , then washing the cells , releasing into fresh medium and imme - diately taking a sample for rhodamine – phalloidin staining then revealed a single , but bright aggregate of F - actin staining and actin cables could be visualised , demonstrat - ing release of jasplakinolide and renewed access for rho - damine – phalloidin ( Figure 1c ) . This competition in F - actin binding suggests a site for jasplakinolide binding overlapping that for phalloidin , which has been mapped to the crux of three actin monomers within the filament [ 7 , 8 ] . To assess whether the actin clumps represented dynamic or static F - actin structures within the cell , another drug , latrunculin - A ( LAT - A ) , was used . Previous studies demonstrated that LAT - A is a rapid and reversible inhibitor of actin polymerisation that acts by association with the actin monomer , thus preventing its reincorpora - tion into filaments [ 1 , 9 ] . If actin in jasplakinolide - induced structures is dynamic , the monomer will be released and could be sequestered by LAT - A , leading to the steady dispersal of the aggregates . If , however , jasplakinolide sta - bilises the structures such that the actin is not dynamic , then the aggregates will persist in the presence of LAT - A . The jasplakinolide - sensitive yeast were assessed for LAT - A sensitivity and 10 µ M LAT - A was found to cause > 98 % of actin structures to disassemble after 15 minutes incubation , a similar degree of effect compared with incubation of wild - type strains with 200 µ M LAT - A ( data not shown ) [ 1 ] . Approaches , using both fixed and live cells , were used to study the effects of jasplakinolide and LAT - A treatment . For live - cell studies , yeast were transformed with a plasmid expressing green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) - tagged Abp1p . Abp1p is a protein that binds directly to actin and colocalises with cortical actin patches [ 10 ] . Similar results were obtained with both live and fixed cells but only those obtained with the Abp1 – GFP are reported here . To investigate whether F - actin clumps were dynamic , Abp1 – GFP - expressing cells were incu - bated with jasplakinolide for 10 minutes when over 90 % of actin was observed to be reorganised from multiple cortical patches ( Figure 1d ) into one or two clumps in cells ( Figure 1e ) . LAT - A was then added at various concentra - tions either equal to ( 10 µ M ) , or up to 5 times , that of jasplakinolide . The effects on the actin clumps over time points up to 8 hours were monitored . Over this time course , no dispersal of the aggregates was observed at any concentration of LAT - A , indicating that the aggregates are extremely stable structures and suggesting that monomeric actin is not released and made available for LAT - A binding ( Figure 1f ) . Possible mechanisms for formation of actin clumps could be that either the monomer is released from existing patches and then stably incorporated into an increasingly large jasplakinolide - stabilised clump , or that existing patches can coalesce and fuse to form large clumps . Time - lapse images taken at 20 second intervals demonstrated the movement and fusion of existing clumps rather than one patch growing as other patches depolymerise with their actin being reincorporated into the single clump ( see Figure 1g and the video in Supplementary material ) . Fur - thermore , the continued movement of cortical patches as they reorganise into the jasplakinolide - induced clump supports the idea that actin dynamics are not required for actin - patch movement in yeast [ 11 , 12 ] . To ascertain whether the actin in these large clumps was structurally affected or similar to that in untreated cells , we performed double - labelling immunofluorescence with antibodies against actin and several components that nor - mally associate with cortical F - actin patches : Arp2 , Abp1 and cofilin [ 10 , 13 , 14 ] , and Sac6p which associates with both patch and cable structures [ 10 ] . Following jasplakino - lide treatment , all four components were seen to colocalise with the large clumps of F - actin , providing convincing evi - dence that the actin within the patches is filamentous rather than monomeric ( Figure 2 ) . Furthermore , the large actin structures were also unlikely to represent aberrantly polymerised F - actin aggregates or precipitates as several protein - binding sites were preserved . Furthermore , when using antibodies to visualise actin rather than rho - damine – phalloidin , actin cables in cells in the presence of jasplakinolide were seen . Sac6p colocalised with actin in these structures , demonstrating that both actin patch and 1588 Current Biology Vol 10 No 24 Figure 2 The actin clumps induced by jasplakinolide contain proteins normally associated with cortical actin patches . Cells in exponential growth phase were treated for 30 min with 10 µ M jasplakinolide , then fixed and processed for immunofluorescence as described in the Supplementary material . Double labelling was performed using antibodies against yeast actin and ( a ) Arp2p , ( b ) Abp1p , ( c ) cofilin ( Cof1p ) and ( d ) Sac6p . The scale bar represents 10 µ m . ( a ) ( b ) Current Biology ( c ) ( d ) actin cable binding sites are maintained and provides further evidence that jasplakinolide stabilisation of actin does not cause gross perturbation of actin subdomain organisation within filaments . In studies of motile mammalian cells , at early time points after drug addition , F - actin stabilisation effects similar to those observed here have been reported but , at later times , a dramatic increase in F - actin levels is observed , presum - ably because of mobilisation of actin from sequestered monomer pools and its incorporation into filaments [ 4 ] . Thus , with prolonged incubation , it is difficult to deter - mine whether the effects observed are due to actin stabili - sation or because cells contain more F - actin . In yeast , nearly all actin is in the F - actin form and there is very little ‘reserve’ of G - actin available for such bursts of poly - merisation ( G - actin has been measured as about 0 . 015 ng / µ g of total cell protein with total actin being measured as about 1 . 5 ng / µ g total protein — thus G - actin represents only about 1 % of yeast cell actin [ 15 , 16 ] ) . An increase in level of F - actin is therefore unlikely on addition of jas - plakinolide to yeast , and changes observed will be due to an increase in F - actin stabilisation . Having established that jasplakinolide abrogates F - actin dynamics in yeast , mechanisms requiring an intact actin cytoskeleton were investigated to assess whether they also require the actin to be dynamic . It was determined whether , in the presence of jasplakinolide , a population of unbudded cells could form a bud and whether they could localise the polarity marker Cdc42p . In yeast , Cdc42p localises as a single patch at the presumptive site of bud formation and to the tip of growing buds [ 17 ] and is required for the generation of cell polarity [ 18 ] . In the untreated cells , budding was observed after 2 hours and Cdc42p became localised to a patch at the bud site and to the tip of the growing bud ( Figure 3a , b ) . At 4 hours , over 75 % of cells showed polarised staining of Cdc42p . In the presence of jasplakinolide cells did not bud , nor did Cdc42p become localised ( Figure 3c , d ) , indicating the importance for cellular F - actin to be dynamic for the establishment of cell polarity . Actin is also critical for endocytosis in yeast , and treat - ment of cells with LAT - A , which depolymerises the actin cytoskeleton , completely blocks uptake of the fluid - phase marker lucifer yellow ( LY ) [ 1 ] . In the absence of jasplaki - nolide , uptake of LY into vacuoles could be clearly seen ( Figure 4a ) . In jasplakinolide - treated cells , uptake was severely abrogated , though very low levels of fluorescence in the vacuoles could still be observed ( Figure 4b ) . A par - ticularly interesting observation was that , in jasplakino - lide - treated cells , rather than LY staining being observed uniformly over the cell surface as observed in studies when actin is disrupted in yeast cells [ 11 , 12 , 19 , 20 ] , there appeared to be discrete spots of staining at the cell cortex , suggesting that endocytosis is stalled at a specific stage in the uptake process . This previously unreported observa - tion of bright punctate staining at the cortex suggests a hitherto uncharacterised requirement for F - actin at a spe - cific stage in the endocytic process , and future studies will aim to characterise in more detail the stage at which endo - cytosis is blocked following F - actin stabilisation . A similar ‘single actin - clump’ phenotype is observed in cells in which genes for the actin - regulating kinases Ark1p and Prk1p are deleted [ 21 ] . It will be of interest to ascertain whether these kinases are directly involved in regulation of actin dynamics and have effects on endocytosis similar to those observed following jasplakinolide treatment . The studies presented here demonstrate that the actin - stabilising drug jasplakinolide can dramatically affect the actin cytoskeleton in S . cerevisiae . The structures formed appeared to be structurally similar to normal F - actin struc - tures in yeast but were no longer dynamic . Use of jasplaki - nolide has made it possible to address the question of the Brief Communication 1589 Figure 3 Dynamic F - actin is required for the generation of cell polarity . An unbudded population of cells was incubated in the presence or absence of 10 µ M jasplakinolide ( J ) and samples taken hourly for 4 h following release . Immunolocalisation of Cdc42p in cells exiting stationary phase in the ( a , b ) absence or ( c , d ) presence of 10 µ M jasplakinolide . The images shown were recorded after ( a , c ) 2 h or ( b , d ) 4 h following release into fresh medium . Note the absence of bud formation or polarised localisation of Cdc42p in the presence of the drug . The scale bar represents 10 µ m . ( e ) Kinetics of Cdc42p localisation in cells in the absence or presence of jasplakinolide . Current Biology P e r cen t a g e ce ll s w i t h p o l a r i s e d s t a i n i n g 0 1 2 3 4 Time ( h ) + Jasplakinolide – Jasplakinolide ( a ) ( e ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) 0 25 50 75 100 requirement for actin in yeast to be dynamic and demon - strate that this property is essential for the fundamental processes of polarity establishment and endocytosis , but is not necessary for movement of cortical actin . Supplementary material Additional methodological detail , a movie showing cells expressing Abp1 – GFP in the presence and absence of jasplakinolide , and a figure showing the assay used to determine the sensitivity of strains to jas - plakinolide is available at http : / / current - biology . com / supmat / supmatin . htm . Acknowledgements My thanks to Steve Winder and Sutherland McIver for critical reading of the manuscript ; Paul Andrews for assistance with the DeltaVision microscope ; Karl Kuchler and David Drubin for yeast strains ; David Drubin and Barbra Winsor for antibodies ; David Botstein for the plasmid for Abp1 – GFP ; Phil Crews for latrunculin - A and jasplakinolide . This work was supported by a Career Develop - ment Fellowship to K . R . A . from The Wellcome Trust ( 050934 / Z / 97 ) . References 1 . Ayscough KR , Stryker J , Pokala N , Sanders M , Crews P , Drubin DG : High rates of actin filament turnover in budding yeast and roles for actin in establishment and maintenance of cell polarity revealed using the actin inhibitor latrunculin - A . J Cell Biol 1997 , 137 : 399 - 416 . 2 . Ayscough KR , Drubin DG : A role for the yeast actin cytoskeleton in pheromone receptor clustering and signalling . Curr Biol 1998 , 8 : 927 - 930 . 3 . Lee E , Shelden EA , Knecht DA : Formation of F - actin aggregates in cells treated with actin stabilizing drugs . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 1998 , 39 : 122 - 133 . 4 . Cramer LP : Role of actin - filament disassembly in lamellipodium protrusion in motile cells revealed using the drug jasplakinolide . Curr Biol 1999 , 9 : 1095 - 1105 . 5 . Bubb MR , Senderowicz AMJ , Sausville EA , Duncan KLK , Korn ED : Jasplakinolide , a cytotoxic natural product , induces actin polymerization and competitively inhibits the binding of phalloidin to F actin . J Cell Biol 1994 , 269 : 14869 - 14871 . 6 . Bubb MR , Spector I , Beyer BB , Fosen KM : Effects of jasplakinolide on the kinetics of actin polymerization - An explanation for certain in vivo observations . J Biol Chem 2000 , 275 : 5163 - 5170 . 7 . Drubin D , Jones H , Wertman K : Actin structure and function : roles in mitochondrial organization and morphogenesis in budding yeast and identification of the phalloidin - binding site . Mol Biol Cell 1993 , 4 : 1277 - 1294 . 8 . Steinmetz MO , Stoffler D , Muller SA , Jahn W , Wolpensinger B , Goldie KN , et al . : Evaluating atomic models of F - actin with an undecagold - tagged phalloidin derivative . J Mol Biol 1998 , 276 : 1 - 6 . 9 . Morton WM , Ayscough KR , McLaughlin PJ : Latrunculin alters the actin - monomer subunit interface to prevent polymerization . Nat Cell Biol 2000 , 2 : 376 - 378 . 10 . Drubin DG , Miller KG , Botstein D : Yeast actin binding proteins : evidence for a role in morphogenesis . J Cell Biol 1988 , 107 : 2551 - 2561 . 11 . Lappalainen P , Drubin DG : Cofilin promotes rapid actin filament turnover in vivo . Nature 1997 , 388 : 78 - 82 . 12 . Belmont LD , Drubin DG : The yeast V159N actin mutant reveals roles for actin dynamics in vivo . J Cell Biol 1998 , 142 : 1289 - 1299 . 13 . Moon AL , Janmey PA , Louie A , Drubin DG : Cofilin is an essential component of the yeast cortical actin cytoskeleton . J Cell Biol 1993 , 120 : 421 - 435 . 14 . Moreau V , Madania A , Martin R , Winsor B : The Saccharomyces cerevisiae actin related protein Arp2 is involved in the actin cytoskeleton . J Cell Biol 1996 , 134 : 117 - 132 . 15 . Karpova T , Tatchell K , Cooper J : Actin filaments in yeast are unstable in the absence of capping protein . J Cell Biol 1995 , 131 : 1483 - 1493 . 16 . Karpova TS , McNally JG , Moltz SL , Cooper JA : Assembly and function of the actin cytoskeleton of yeast : Relationships between cables and patches . J Cell Biol 1998 , 142 : 1501 - 1517 . 17 . Ziman M , Preuss D , Mulholand J , O’Brien J , Botstein D , Johnson D : Subcellular localization of Cdc42p , a Saccharomyces cerevisiae GTP - binding protein involved in the control of cell polarity . Mol Biol Cell 1993 , 4 : 1307 - 1316 . 18 . Adams AEM , Johnson DI , Longnecker RM , Sloat BF , Pringle JR : CDC42 and CDC43 , two additional genes involved in budding and the establishment of cell polarity in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol 1990 , 111 : 131 - 142 . 19 . Kübler E , Riezman H : Actin and fimbrin are required for the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast . EMBO J 1993 , 12 : 2855 - 2862 . 20 . Belmont LD , Patterson GM , Drubin DG : New actin mutants allow further characterization of the nucleotide binding cleft and drug binding sites . J Cell Sci 1999 , 112 : 1325 - 1336 . 21 . Cope M , Yang S , Shang C , Drubin DG : Novel protein kinases Ark1p and Prk1p associate with and regulate the cortical actin cytoskeleton in budding yeast . J Cell Biol 1999 , 144 : 1203 - 1218 . 22 . Doyle T , Botstein D : Movement of yeast cortical actin cytoskeleton visualized in vivo . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996 , 93 : 3886 - 3891 . 23 . Kaiser C , Michaelis S , Mitchell A : Methods in Yeast Genetics : A Laboratory Course Manual . Cold Spring Harbor : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ; 1994 . 24 . Dulic V , Egerton M , Elgundi I , Raths S , Singer B , Riezman H : Yeast endocytosis assays . Methods Enzymol 1991 , 194 : 697 - 710 . 25 . Hagan IM , Ayscough KR : Fluorescence microscopy in yeast . In Protein Localization by Fluorescence Microscopy : A Practical Approach . Edited by Allan VJ . Oxford University Press ; 2000 : 179 - 205 . 26 . Ayscough KR , Drubin DG : Immunofluorescence methods in yeast . In Cell Biology : A Laboratory Handbook . Vol . 2 . Edited by Celis J . New York : Academic Press ; 1998 : 477 - 485 . 27 . Kozminski KG , Chen AJ , Rodal AA , Drubin DG : Functions and functional domains of the GTPase Cdc42p . Mol Biol Cell 2000 , 11 : 3539 - 3540 . 1590 Current Biology Vol 10 No 24 Figure 4 Fluid - phase endocytosis requires the presence of dynamic F - actin . Fluid - phase endocytosis was assessed by uptake of LY ( see Supplementary material ) . Cells were either ( a ) untreated or ( b ) incubated in the presence of 10 µ M jasplakinolide for 10 min prior to addition of LY and then throughout the 2 h incubation with the stain . To allow comparison of uptake , the time of exposure for image recording was the same in each case . The scale bar represents 10 µ m . ( a ) ( b ) Current Biology