T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y © The Rockefeller University Press $ 8 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Vol . 168 , No . 3 , January 31 , 2005 441 – 452 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200407076 JCB : ARTICLE JCB 441 Molecular mechanisms of invadopodium formation : the role of the N - WASP – Arp2 / 3 complex pathway and coﬁlin Hideki Yamaguchi , 1 , 3 Mike Lorenz , 1 Stephan Kempiak , 1 Corina Sarmiento , 1 Salvatore Coniglio , 5 Marc Symons , 1 , 2 Jeffrey Segall , 1 Robert Eddy , 1 Hiroaki Miki , 3 , 6 Tadaomi Takenawa , 4 , 7 and John Condeelis 1 1 Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology and 2 Department of Surgery , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , NY 10461 3 Department of Cancer Genomics and 4 Department of Biochemistry , Institute of Medical Science , University of Tokyo , Tokyo 108 - 8639 , Japan 5 Center for Oncology and Cell Biology , North Shore - Long Island Jewish Research Institute , Manhasset , NY 11030 6 Precursory Research for Embryonic Science and Technology and 7 Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology , Japan Science and Technology Corporation , Tokyo 108 - 8639 , Japan nvadopodia are actin - rich membrane protrusions with a matrix degradation activity formed by invasive cancer cells . We have studied the molecular mechanisms of invadopodium formation in metastatic carcinoma cells . Epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor kinase inhibitors blocked invadopodium formation in the presence of serum , and EGF stimulation of serum - starved cells induced invadopodium formation . RNA interference and dominant - negative mutant expression analyses revealed that neural WASP ( N - WASP ) , Arp2 / 3 complex , and their upstream regulators , Nck1 , Cdc42 , and WIP , are necessary for invadopodium formation . Time - lapse analysis revealed I that invadopodia are formed de novo at the cell periphery and their lifetime varies from minutes to several hours . Invadopodia with short lifetimes are motile , whereas long - lived invadopodia tend to be stationary . Interestingly , suppression of coﬁlin expression by RNA interference inhibited the formation of long - lived invadopodia , resulting in formation of only short - lived invadopodia with less matrix degradation activity . These results indicate that EGF receptor signaling regulates invadopodium formation through the N - WASP – Arp2 / 3 pathway and coﬁlin is neces - sary for the stabilization and maturation of invadopodia . Introduction Metastasis , a process in which tumor cells spread to another organ , is the most feared property of malignant cancer cells . For cancer cells to metastasize , they must first detach from the parent tumor and invade and migrate into surrounding connec - tive tissue and blood vessels ( Chambers et al . , 2002 ) . This in - vasion of cancer cells is induced by chemoattractants , such as EGF , that diffuse from blood vessels and get secreted from other cell types , including macrophages ( Condeelis and Segall , 2003 ; Wyckoff et al . , 2004 ) . The initial step of cancer cell mi - gration and invasion is the extension of cell protrusions in the direction of cell movement ( Friedl and Wolf , 2003 ) . The for - mation of these cell protrusions is driven by actin polymeriza - tion at the leading edge ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . Malignant tumor cells often show excessive cell protrusive activity due to aberrant activation of signaling pathways that regulate actin cy - toskeletal rearrangement ( Wang et al . , 2004 ) . Invadopodia are membrane protrusions with a matrix degradation activity formed by invasive cancer cells ( Chen , 1989 ) . These structures extend vertically from the ventral cell membrane into the ECM . In tumors , invadopodia - like struc - tures are believed to be important for tumor cells to penetrate the basement membrane of blood vessels ( Condeelis and Se - gall , 2003 ) . Invadopodia are enriched with actin filaments , ac - tin binding proteins , adhesion proteins , matrix proteinases , and signaling proteins that regulate the actin cytoskeleton and membrane remodeling ( Buccione et al . , 2004 ; McNiven et al . , 2004 ) . However , molecular mechanisms that govern assembly and dynamics of invadopodia are still not well understood . WASP ( Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ) family pro - teins are key regulators of the actin cytoskeleton ( Miki and Takenawa , 2003 ; Stradal et al . , 2004 ) . To date , five family members , WASP , neural WASP ( N - WASP ) , WAVE1 ( WASP Correspondence to John Condeelis : condeeli @ aecom . yu . edu Abbreviations used in this paper : CBD , cortactin - binding domain ; FN , fibronec - tin ; N - WASP , neural WASP ; RNAi , RNA interference ; siRNA , small interference RNA ; WBD , N - WASP binding domain . The online version of this article includes supplemental material . on July 24 , 2018 jcb . rupress . org Downloaded from http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200407076 Published Online : 31 January , 2005 | Supp Info : JCB • VOLUME 168 • NUMBER 3 • 2005 442 family verprolin - homologous protein 1 ) , WAVE2 , and WAVE3 , have been described . WASP family proteins are implicated in a variety of cellular processes associated with dynamic actin structures , such as the formation of membrane protrusions , ve - sicular trafficking , and the intracellular motility of several pathogens . All WASP family proteins have a conserved COOH - terminal region termed the VCA ( verprolin homology , cofilin homology or central , and acidic ) domain . This catalytic domain induces actin polymerization through the activation of the Arp2 / 3 ( actin - related protein 2 and 3 ) complex ( Millard et al . , 2004 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates actin filaments and forms a branched actin filament network observed in lamellipodia . Sev - eral signaling molecules , such as Nck , Grb2 , WISH ( WASP - interacting SH3 protein ) , Cdc42 , and phosphoinositides , have been shown to activate N - WASP by releasing it from the autoin - hibitory conformation . Nck recruits N - WASP protein to the ac - tive site of actin polymerization through WIP ( WASP - interact - ing protein ; Moreau et al . , 2000 ) . Several groups reported that WASP , N - WASP , and Arp2 / 3 complex are components of po - dosomes , similar structures to invadopodia ( Linder et al . , 1999 ; Mizutani et al . , 2002 ; Kaverina et al . , 2003 ) . Also , recent results with an N - WASP biosensor demonstrated that N - WASP is acti - vated at the cell membrane during the initiation of invadopo - dium formation , thereby implicating N - WASP activity in the initiation of invasion ( Lorenz et al . , 2004b ) . However , functions of these proteins in invadopodia remain to be determined . Cofilin is a critical regulator of actin dynamics and pro - trusive activity in cells . Cofilin nucleates actin polymeriza - tion by severing actin filaments to generate free barbed ends ( Condeelis , 2001 ) . Cofilin also increases the rate of actin depo - lymerization , thus maintaining a pool of actin monomer ( Car - lier et al . , 1999 ) . Previous studies showed that cofilin stimu - lates lamellipod protrusion and cell migration ( Chan et al . , 2000 ; Dawe et al . , 2003 ; Ghosh et al . , 2004 ) . Moreover , cofilin is one of the essential components for in vitro reconstitution of Listeria monocytogenes motility that is driven by actin poly - merization ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ) . The function of cofilin in inva - dopodium formation has not yet been studied . Recent studies using DNA microarrays have revealed that a subset of proteins involved in the rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton is overexpressed in metastatic cancer cells . For example , the N - WASP gene has been identified to be up - regulated in metastatic lesions of colorectal cancers ( Yanagawa et al . , 2001 ) . Moreover , the invasive population of tumor cells in mammary tumors expresses , at elevated levels , components of the pathways that regulate actin polymerization at the lead - ing edge , including Cdc42 , Arp2 / 3 complex subunits , and cofi - lin ( Wang et al . , 2004 ) . However , little is known about the role of N - WASP , Arp2 / 3 complex , and cofilin in the acquisition of invasive phenotypes by cancer cells . Here , we report the functional analyses of the N - WASP – Arp2 / 3 complex pathway and cofilin in invasiveness of MTLn3 rat adenocarcinoma cells . We found that N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex have a role in the formation of invadopodia in - duced by the EGF receptor signaling . Cdc42 , Nck1 , and WIP are necessary for invadopodium formation among upstream regulators of N - WASP . Interestingly , cofilin is not necessary for invadopodium formation , but is required for maturation of fully functional invadopodia . Results Characterization of invadopodium formation in rat mammary carcinoma cells When cultured on Alexa488 - labeled fibronectin ( FN ) and gela - tin - coated dishes , MTLn3 cells , highly metastatic rat mammary adenocarcinoma cells , formed punctate structures rich in actin filaments at the ventral cell membrane ( Fig . 1 A ) . Z sectioning by confocal microscopy revealed that these structures pro - truded vertically from the ventral membrane into FN matrix . These protrusions were often associated with sites of FN degra - dation that were detected as black holes in the Alexa488 chan - nel and were positive for cortactin , an actin binding protein known to localize at invadopodia ( Fig . 1 B ) . These properties of the actin dot structures are clearly consistent with that of in - vadopodia reported previously ( Buccione et al . , 2004 ; Mc - Niven et al . , 2004 ) . We examined the correlation between invadopodium for - mation and metastatic potential of cancer cells . MTC cells were Figure 1 . Metastatic MTLn3 cells but not nonmetastatic MTC cells form invadopodia . ( A ) MTLn3 cells cultured on Alexa488 - FN – and gelatin - coated glass coverslips were stained with rhodamine phalloidin . Bottom images are XZ sections showing a cell with an invadopodium collected with a confocal microscope . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m . ( B ) MTC and MTLn3 cells grown on FN - and gelatin - coated coverslips were stained with anti - cortactin anti - body and phalloidin . Arrowheads indicate cells displaying invadopodia . Bar , 20 (cid:1) m . ( C ) MTC cells cultured on Alexa488 - FN ( green ) – and gelatin - coated glass coverslips were stained with rhodamine phalloidin ( red ) . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m . ( D ) The percentage of cells with invadopodia in MTC and MTLn3 cells was calculated as described in Materials and methods . Error bars represent the SD of three different determinations . MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF INVADOPODIUM FORMATION • YAMAGUCHI ET AL . 443 derived from the same breast tumor as MTLn3 cells , but these cells are less invasive and nonmetastatic , as revealed by in vitro invasion assays and animal model experiments ( Neri et al . , 1982 ; Wyckoff et al . , 2000b ) . MTC cells were cultured on Alexa488 FN - gelatin dishes and examined for invadopodium formation . MTC cells showed well elongated and spread mor - phology on the FN - gelatin dish compared with MTLn3 cells . However , invadopodium formation and degradation of FN were hardly observed in these cells ( Fig . 1 , B and C ) . To quan - titate invadopodium formation , the number of cells with cortac - tin - positive invadopodia was calculated ( Fig . 1 D ) . Approxi - mately 21 % of MTLn3 cells and only 2 % of MTC cells showed invadopodium formation . Time - lapse analysis of invadopodia To study the assembly mechanism of invadopodia , we per - formed time - lapse microscopy with MTLn3 cells stably ex - pressing GFP - or YFP - actin cultured on the FN - gelatin dishes . Invadopodia often arise at the cell periphery ( Fig . 2 A and Video 1 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200407076 / DC1 ) . Most invadopodia were formed de novo , and few invadopodia showed fission or fusion behavior . Sur - prisingly , invadopodia were motile ; some of them moved around on the ventral cell membrane and then disappeared within minutes , whereas others first showed motile behavior and then arrested , remaining in the same position for hours ( Fig . 2 A , a – c ) . When invadopodia became stationary , they were often associated with halo - like actin clouds that surround an actin - rich core of invadopodia ( Fig . 2 A , a ) . When the fluo - rescence intensity of GFP - actin of an invadopodium is plotted versus the speed of its movement between frames as a function of time , there is a significant inverse correlation between the intensity and the speed of the invadopodium ( Fig . 2 C ) . This re - sult suggests that motile invadopodia are associated with fewer actin filaments than stable invadopodia . Interestingly , we re - peatedly observed that long - lived stable invadopodia were left Figure 2 . Time - lapse analysis of invadopodium formation . ( A ) Time - lapse image sequence of MTLn3 cells expressing GFP - actin . Cells were cultured on FN - gelatin – coated coverslips and analyzed by auto - mated time - lapse microscopy . The invadopodium denoted by an arrowhead is stationary , whereas in - vadopodia in the lower right cell are dynamic . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m . ( a – c ) Time - lapse image sequences of boxed regions . ( B ) Time - lapse image sequence showing a long - lived stationary invadopodium ( closed arrow - head ) . Open arrowhead denotes an invadopodium left behind by a moving cell . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m . ( C ) The fluorescence intensity of the invadopodium shown in Fig . 2 A ( a ) was plotted versus the speed of its move - ment as a function of time . The inverse correlation between the fluorescence intensity and the speed indicates that actin polymerization occurs in inva - dopodia when they become stationary . ( D ) Distribu - tion of the lifetimes of invadopodia shown in histo - gram . ( E and F ) The trajectories of representative long - lived ( E ) and short - lived ( F ) invadopodia are shown as lines . The lifetime of each invadopodium is also shown in the box . Bar , 5 (cid:1) m . ( G ) Net distance moved by each invadopodium was calculated as shown in the inset and divided by its lifetime , and the ratio was plotted versus lifetime . The ratio is expected to be lower if invadopodia are more stationary . The data indicate that long - lived invadopodia are more stationary than short - lived invadopodia . JCB • VOLUME 168 • NUMBER 3 • 2005 444 behind when cells moved away , resulting in formation of a tail - like membrane structure ( Fig . 2 B and Video 2 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200407076 / DC1 ) , indi - cating that they have a strong contact with the substrate , pro - truding into the ECM . We then measured the lifetime and movement of inva - dopodia . The lifetime of invadopodia varies from a few min - utes up to several hours ( Fig . 2 D ) . Tracking analysis of in - vadopodia movement showed that invadopodia with longer lifetimes have a tendency to stay at one spot and are less motile than short - lived invadopodia ( Fig . 2 , E and F ) . This observa - tion was confirmed by dividing the net distance moved for each invadopodium by its lifetime and plotting that ratio versus life - time ( Fig . 2 G ) . The ratio is expected to be lower if invadopo - dia are more stationary . The result is consistent with the hypothesis that long - lived invadopodia derive from motile pre - cursors and they are stationary because they are protruded into matrix . EGF and the EGF receptor signaling are necessary for the formation of invadopodia EGF is a well - known growth factor that induces dynamic cell protrusions associated with the actin cytoskeleton . The differ - ence in invasive potential between MTLn3 and MTC cells is at least partly due to different responsiveness to EGF . MTLn3 but not MTC cells show chemotaxis to EGF as observed both in culture and tumors ( Bailly et al . , 1998 ; Wyckoff et al . , 2000a ) . Therefore , we examined the importance of EGF receptor sig - naling in invadopodium formation . MTLn3 cells were cultured on the FN - gelatin dishes in the presence of serum with or without an EGF receptor kinase in - hibitor , AG1478 . AG1478 treatment inhibited formation of in - vadopodia in a dose - dependent manner ( Fig . 3 A ) . As shown in Fig . 3 C , MTLn3 cells formed lamellipodia and stress fibers even after treatment with AG1478 , suggesting that in serum , in - vadopodia are more dependent on EGF receptor signaling than other actin structures . Similar results were obtained with two other EGF receptor kinase inhibitors , PD153035 and Iressa ( Fig . S1 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200407076 / DC1 ) . We tested if EGF stimulation is sufficient to induce invadopodium formation in MTLn3 cells . After serum starvation , MTLn3 cells grown on FN - gelatin dishes were stim - ulated with EGF . Serum starvation markedly reduced invadopo - dium formation ( Fig . 3 , B and D ) . Stimulation with EGF in - duced extension of lamellipodia as well as formation of actin dot - like structures that were observed at the basal membrane and positive for cortactin staining ( Fig . 3 D ) . The EGF - induced formation of invadopodia was blocked by preincubation of cells with AG1478 ( Fig . 3 B ) . Localization of WASP family proteins and the Arp2 / 3 complex at invadopodia WASP family proteins have been reported to induce de novo ac - tin polymerization through activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex in response to extracellular stimuli including EGF stimulation . Thus , we next examined the localization of N - WASP and other WASP family proteins , WAVE1 and WAVE2 , along with the down - stream effecter Arp2 / 3 complex at invadopodia ( Fig . 4 ) . WAVE3 expression was undetectable in cultured MTLn3 cells by RT - PCR analysis ( Fig . S2 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200407076 / DC1 ) . N - WASP staining was clearly concentrated at invadopodia . WAVE1 staining was very dim in these cells and showed no specific localization . Strong staining for WAVE2 was seen in the cytoplasm and nucleus and at the leading edges of lamellipodia , but not at invadopodia . p34arc , a subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex , localized at invadopodia as well as at the leading edges of lamellipodia . A similar staining pattern was obtained Figure 3 . EGF and EGF receptor signaling are necessary for invadopo - dium formation . ( A ) Effect of an EGF receptor kinase inhibitor AG1478 on invadopodium formation . Cells were cultured on FN - gelatin coverslips in the presence of serum with or without AG1478 for 16 h . Cells were then stained with rhodamine phalloidin and anti - cortactin antibody to quanti - tate invadopodium formation . ( B ) Effect of serum starvation and subse - quent EGF stimulation on invadopodium formation . Cells cultured on FN - gelatin coverslips were serum starved for 4 h with or without 5 (cid:1) M AG1478 and stimulated with 12 . 5 nM EGF for 4 min . Error bars repre - sent the SD of three different determinations . ( C ) Morphology of cells treated with AG1478 . After treatment with AG1478 in the presence of serum , cells were stained with rhodamine phalloidin and anti - cortactin antibody . Cells formed stress fibers and lamellipodia even after AG1478 treatment . ( D ) Morphology of cells serum starved and stimulated with EGF . Arrowheads denote invadopodia . Bars , 10 (cid:1) m . MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF INVADOPODIUM FORMATION • YAMAGUCHI ET AL . 445 with an antibody against Arp2 , another subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( unpublished data ) . These results indicate that N - WASP is specifically localized at invadopodia together with the Arp2 / 3 complex , whereas the WAVE proteins are not . N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex are essential components of invadopodia We assessed the involvement of N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 com - plex in invadopodium formation . RNA interference ( RNAi ) was performed to reduce expression of N - WASP , WAVE1 , WAVE2 , and p34arc , and reduction of protein expression was confirmed by immunoblotting ( Fig . 5 A ) . In N - WASP small in - terference RNA ( siRNA ) – treated cells , the N - WASP expres - sion level was reduced to (cid:1) 30 % of control cells . The expres - sion of WAVE1 was reduced to (cid:2) 30 % of control cells by siRNA treatment , and WAVE2 and p34arc expression were hardly detected in the siRNA - treated cells . Cells treated with N - WASP siRNA showed a reduction of invadopodium forma - tion but no inhibition of lamellipodium formation ( Fig . 5 , B and C ) . This effect of N - WASP siRNA was rescued by ectopic ex - pression of bovine GFP - N - WASP that has mismatches in the N - WASP siRNA target sequence ( Fig . 5 C ) . Similar inhibition of invadopodium formation was observed in cells transfected with a dominant - negative mutant ( (cid:3) cof ) of N - WASP that lacks the sequence required for efficient Arp2 / 3 complex binding and activation ( Banzai et al . , 2000 ; Fig . 5 D ) . Overexpression of the N - WASP CA domain that dislocates the Arp2 / 3 complex and p34arc siRNA treatment also resulted in inhibition of invadopo - dium formation ( Fig . 5 , B , C , and E ) . In contrast , WAVE1 and WAVE2 siRNA - treated cells formed invadopodia as efficiently as control cells ( Fig . 5 , B and C ) . Degradation activity of the siRNA - treated cells correlated with invadopodium formation , except for WAVE1 siRNA ( Fig . S3 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200407076 / DC1 ) . WAVE1 siRNA - treated cells showed a significant decrease in degradation activ - ity , although formation of invadopodia looked normal . This result may be due to the decreased secretion of MMP - 2 , an ECM - degrading metalloproteinase and a component of inva - dopodia ( Chen and Wang , 1999 ) , by WAVE1 knock down as reported previously ( Suetsugu et al . , 2003 ) . Together , these re - sults indicate that N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex , but not WAVE1 and 2 , are required for formation of invadopodia and that WAVE1 has an indirect role in matrix degradation . Nck1 , but not Grb2 , is necessary for invadopodium formation Several upstream activators , including Nck , Grb2 , Cdc42 , WIP , and WISH , have been shown to regulate N - WASP acti - vation . Also , these proteins are known to mediate the EGF re - ceptor signaling pathway – dependent reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton . Therefore , we analyzed the importance of these upstream activators of N - WASP in invadopodium formation . First , we examined the localization of Nck1 and Grb2 at invadopodia by expressing GFP - fusion proteins ( Fig . 6 A ) . GFP - Nck1 accumulated at invadopodia , and to a lesser extent at focal adhesions . In contrast , GFP - Grb2 was seen throughout the cyto - plasm and not localized at invadopodia . Then , we performed tar - geted depletion of Nck1 and Grb2 by RNAi . Both Nck and Grb2 protein levels were reduced to (cid:2) 10 % of the control level after siRNA treatment in immunoblotting ( Fig . 6 B ) . Because we used an antibody against Nck that recognizes both Nck1 and Nck2 , the immunoblotting result demonstrates that Nck1 is the major isoform in MTLn3 cells . Invadopodium formation in Nck1 siRNA - treated cells was markedly suppressed , whereas Grb2 siRNA treatment had little effect ( Fig . 6 C ) . Degradation activity was also inhibited by Nck1 siRNA treatment ( Fig . S3 ) . Ectopic expression of human GFP - Nck1 partially restored invadopodium formation in Nck1 siRNA - treated cells ( Fig . 6 C ) . Nck2 may ac - count for the residual invadopodium formation in Nck1siRNA - treated cells . Indeed , expression of Nck2 was detected in MTLn3 cells ( Fig . S2 ) . We tried Nck2 knock down by RNAi in this as - say but it was not informative with regard to invadopodium for - mation due to impairment of cell adhesion and spreading on the matrix in Nck2 knockdown cells . Cdc42 and WIP are crucial regulators of invadopodium formation The importance of Cdc42 was examined by reducing its ex - pression by RNAi . Cells were transfected with siRNA designed against the Cdc42 gene and tested for invadopodium formation . Knock down of Cdc42 protein was confirmed by immunoblot - Figure 4 . Localization of WASP family proteins and Arp2 / 3 complex at invadopodia . Cells grown on FN - gelatin – coated coverslips were stained with anti - N - WASP , anti - WAVE1 , anti - WAVE2 , or anti - p34arc antibody . To visualize actin filaments , the cells were also stained with rhodamine phalloidin . Arrowheads denote invadopodia . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m . JCB • VOLUME 168 • NUMBER 3 • 2005 446 ting lysates prepared from cells treated with control or Cdc42 siRNA ( Fig . 7 A ) . Cells treated with Cdc42 siRNA showed a nearly complete inhibition of invadopodium formation ( Fig . 7 , B and C ) . Similar inhibition was observed in cells transfected with dominant - negative Cdc42 ( Fig . S4 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200407076 / DC1 ) . Thus , Cdc42 activity is required for invadopodium formation . Next , we tested whether or not WIP is involved in the formation of invadopodia . WIP is thought to link Nck and N - WASP to induce actin polymerization ( Moreau et al . , 2000 ; Benesch et al . , 2002 ) . MTLn3 cells were transfected with GFP - tagged wild - type WIP or the N - WASP binding domain ( WBD ) of WIP that disrupts the interaction between N - WASP and WIP ( Moreau et al . , 2000 ) . Wild - type GFP - WIP significantly accumulated at invadopodia ( Fig . 7 D ) . Cells expressing GFP - WBD showed a marked reduction in invadopodium formation ( Fig . 7 , D and E ) . Because WIP was also shown to associate with cortactin , a central component of invadopodia ( Kinley et al . , 2003 ) , we tested the importance of the WIP – cortactin inter - action by overexpressing a WIP fragment containing the cort - actin - binding domain ( CBD ) . GFP - CBD signals were observed at invadopodia , and its expression showed little effect on inva - dopodium formation ( Fig . 7 , D and E ) . These results demon - strate that WIP – N - WASP interaction is necessary for inva - dopodium formation but not WIP – cortactin interaction . WISH is an N - WASP binding protein that is able to fully activate N - WASP independently of Cdc42 ( Fukuoka et al . , 2001 ) . WISH expression in MTLn3 cells was confirmed by RT - PCR ( Fig . S2 ) . GFP - tagged wild - type and (cid:3) SH3 mutant of WISH proteins were overexpressed in MTLn3 cells . The (cid:3) SH3 mutant of WISH lacks the N - WASP binding site , therefore this mutant is supposed to act as a dominant - negative mutant . Wild - type GFP - WISH was observed at invadopodia ( Fig . 7 F ) . Inter - estingly , WISH (cid:3) SH3 also accumulated at invadopodia , indi - cating that localization of WISH at invadopodia is independent of N - WASP binding . Concurrently , invadopodium formation was not affected by overexpression of wild - type or (cid:3) SH3 WISH ( Fig . 7 G ) . These results suggest that WISH – N - WASP binding is dispensable for invadopodium formation . Suppression of cofilin expression results in the formation of short - lived , less invasive invadopodia We previously reported that cofilin is necessary for lamellipod protrusion induced by EGF in MTLn3 cells ( Chan et al . , 2000 ; DesMarais et al . , 2004 ) . Therefore , we investigated if cofilin Figure 5 . N - WASP and Arp2 / 3 complex are involved in invadopodium formation . ( A ) Cells were transfected with control , N - WASP , WAVE1 , WAVE2 , or p34arc siRNA . Cell lysates were prepared at 48 h after transfection and immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies . Anti - actin antibody was used for loading controls . ( B ) Cells treated with siRNAs were stained with anti - cortactin and rhodamine phalloidin to visualize invadopodia ( arrowheads ) . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m . ( C ) Inva - dopodium formation in cells treated with siRNAs . For rescue experiments , N - WASP siRNA - treated cells were transfected with the bovine GFP - N - WASP construct . ( D ) Invadopodium formation in cells infected with retroviruses expressing control GFP or dominant - negative N - WASP ( NW (cid:3) cof ) . ( E ) Cells were transfected with control GFP or GFP - N - WASP CA constructs , and invadopodium formation was quantified . Error bars represent the SD of three different determinations . MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF INVADOPODIUM FORMATION • YAMAGUCHI ET AL . 447 has a role in formation of invadopodia . Localization of endoge - nous cofilin was examined by immunostaining with antcofilin antibody ( Fig . 8 A ) . Strong cofilin staining was observed at the leading edge of lamellipodia , and cofilin was also localized at invadopodia . Cofilin function was investigated by knocking down cofilin expression by RNAi . The siRNA used was shown to be specific for cofilin by rescue experiments ( Ghosh et al . , 2004 ) . Cofilin expression in the siRNA - treated cells was sup - pressed at least by 80 % ( Fig . 8 B ) . Cofilin siRNA - treated cells had an elongated morphology and were still capable of form - ing cortactin - positive invadopodia , although these invadopodia looked smaller than those in control cells ( Fig . 8 C ) . Quantita - tive analysis revealed only a small but significant decrease in invadopodium formation in cofilin siRNA - treated cells ( Fig . 8 D ) . The matrix degradation activity of cofilin knockdown cells was also examined . Interestingly , cofilin siRNA - treated cells showed less ability to invade and degrade matrix than control cells ( Fig . 8 E and Fig . S3 ) . This result raised the possibility that cofilin is required for maturation of invadopodia . To test this possibility , time - lapse analysis was performed with YFP - actin cells treated with control or cofilin siRNA . This analysis clearly demonstrated that the lifetime of invadopodia was shortened by cofilin siRNA treatment as compared with control cells ( Fig . 8 F ) . The number of cells with invadopodia with lifetimes (cid:2) 20 min was increased , whereas the number with lifetimes (cid:4) 30 min was decreased . Together , these results indi - cate that cofilin has a role in the stabilization and / or maturation process of invadopodia rather than in the initiation process . Discussion Cells use two kinds of protrusions , filopodia and lamellipodia , to migrate forward in two - dimensional culture . In addition to these structures , invasive cancer cells can form another type of protrusive structure , the invadopodium that is associated with ECM degradation . Considering that most tumor cells are sur - rounded by ECM in vivo , invadopodia may be major protrusive structures formed by cancer cells in the three - dimensional physiological environment . N - WASP and Arp2 / 3 complex in invadopodium formation In this work , we demonstrate that N - WASP and Arp2 / 3 com - plex but not WAVE1 and WAVE2 are required for invadopo - dium formation by highly invasive and metastatic cancer cells . This finding is consistent with N - WASP biosensor ex - periments showing transient N - WASP activity in invadopodia ( Lorenz et al . , 2004b ) . Additionally , localization of N - WASP at invadopodia was also observed in other human cancer cell lines including HT1080 fibrosarcoma and RPMI7951 mela - noma cells ( unpublished data ) . These observations suggest that N - WASP functions in invadopodium formation in a broad range of cancer cell types . We demonstrated that highly metastatic MTLn3 cells but not nonmetastatic MTC cells can form invadopodia , indicating a direct correlation between the ability to form invadopodia and metastatic potential of cancer cells . Coopman et al . ( 1998 ) also showed a relationship be - tween the localized degradation of ECM by invadopodia and invasive capacity of human breast cancer cell lines . There - fore , invadopodia - related molecules , such as N - WASP and Arp2 / 3 complex , could be therapeutic targets of cancer me - tastasis . Additionally , our results also indicate that N - WASP is involved in the protrusion of invadopodia but not lamelli - podia . This is consistent with the observation that N - WASP – deficient fibroblasts can form lamellipodia normally ( Snapper et al . , 2001 ) . These results suggest that N - WASP is important for specialized focal protrusive structures and not broad pro - trusive activity involved in cell locomotion . Nck , Cdc42 , and WIP mediate EGF receptor signaling to invadopodium formation In many different cancer cell types the prognosis of a patient is inversely correlated with the overexpression and / or ampli - fication of the EGF receptor family ( Nicholson et al . , 2001 ) . Accumulating evidence suggests that EGF receptor ligands and the EGF receptor signaling pathway are critical for the invasiveness and metastasis of cancer cells . Indeed , EGF re - ceptor inhibitors have been shown to inhibit invasive po - Figure 6 . Nck1 but not Grb2 is required for formation of invadopodia . ( A ) Cells transfected with GFP - Nck1 or Grb2 construct were stained with rhodamine phalloidin to visualize invadopodia ( arrowheads ) . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m . ( B ) Cells were transfected with control , Nck1 , or Grb2 siRNA . Cell ly - sates were immunoblotted with anti - Nck , anti - Grb2 , and anti - actin anti - bodies . ( C ) Invadopodia formation was quantified among cells treated with indicated siRNAs . Nck1 siRNA - treated cells were transfected with human GFP - Nck1 construct for rescue experiment . Error bars represent the SD of three different determinations . JCB • VOLUME 168 • NUMBER 3 • 2005 448 tency of cancer cells ( Fujimura et al . , 2002 ; Yang et al . , 2004 ) . In this paper , we showed that EGF receptor signaling is necessary for invadopodium formation . Therefore , inva - dopodium formation may be an initial key step of cancer cell invasion and metastasis induced by activation of EGF recep - tor signaling . EGF receptor activation stimulates signaling pathways that lead to enhancement of cell growth and cell motility . N - WASP is known to be activated downstream of the EGF receptor through Cdc42 and / or adaptor proteins including Grb2 , Nck , WIP , and WISH . Additionally , activation of Cdc42 was observed after EGF stimulation in MTLn3 cells ( unpublished data ) . We report here that Nck1 , Cdc42 , and WIP , but not Grb2 and WISH , are crucial for invadopodium formation . Cdc42 was also shown to function in invadopo - dium formation in human melanoma cells ( Nakahara et al . , 2003 ) . Rohatgi et al . ( 2001 ) showed that Nck activates N - WASP in vitro , and , interestingly , Nck and Cdc42 have re - dundant effects on N - WASP activity . Therefore , it is unlikely that both Nck and Cdc42 directly bind to and activate N - WASP simultaneously at invadopodia . Nck and / or Cdc42 might have other effecters that regulate invadopodium forma - tion , such as PAK , a well - characterized Nck and Cdc42 downstream effecter that has been implicated in cytoskeletal dynamics and cell motility . However , PAK activity was not important for invadopodium formation ( Fig . S5 A , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200407076 / DC1 ) . An alternative possibility is that Cdc42 regulates N - WASP activity indirectly through Toca - 1 ( transducer of Cdc42 - dependent actin assembly ) , a novel regulator of Cdc42 - dependent actin polymerization ( Ho et al . , 2004 ) . Toca - 1 links Cdc42 activity to N - WASP by direct binding to both molecules . Notably , Ho et al . ( 2004 ) also showed that most of N - WASP proteins are complexed with WIP in bovine brain and Xenopus laevis eggs , and this complex formation is re - quired for proper regulation of N - WASP activity by Toca - 1 . Consistent with this , we also detected an interaction between N - WASP and WIP in MTLn3 cells , but this interaction was Figure 7 . Cdc42 and WIP – N - WASP inter - action are essential for invadopodium formation . ( A ) Cells were transfected with control or Cdc42 siRNA , and the cell lysates were immuno - blotted with anti - Cdc42 and anti - actin anti - bodies . Cdc42 was not detected in cells treated with Cdc42 siRNA . ( B ) Cells treated with control or Cdc42 siRNA were stained with anti - cortactin and rhodamine phalloidin to visualize invadopodia . ( C ) Invadopodia for - mation was quantified among cells transfected with control or Cdc42 siRNA . ( D ) Cells trans - fected with GFP - tagged WIP wild type ( WT ) , N - WASP binding domain ( WBD ) , or cortactin binding domain ( CBD ) construct were stained with rhodamine phalloidin . ( E ) Invadopodia formation was quantified among transfected cells . ( F ) Cells expressing GFP - tagged wild - type WISH ( WT ) or WISH mutant lacking SH3 domain ( (cid:3) SH3 ) were stained with rhodamine phalloidin . ( G ) Quantitation of invadopodium formation . Error bars represent the SD of three different determinations . Arrowheads denote invadopodia . Bars , 10 (cid:1) m . MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF INVADOPODIUM FORMATION • YAMAGUCHI ET AL . 449 unchanged upon EGF stimulation ( Fig . S5 B ) , indicating that the N - WASP – WIP complex is constitutive in MTLn3 cells . Collectively , Nck1 may recruit the N - WASP – WIP complex to the site of invadopodium formation upon EGF stimulation , and Cdc42 indirectly activates N - WASP through Toca - 1 to initiate invadopodium assembly . Also , it is possible that Nck and Cdc42 regulate N - WASP activity in succession at differ - ent stages of invadopodium formation . Further work would be necessary to define the exact upstream signals that regu - late N - WASP activation at invadopodia . Invadopodia and podosomes Podosomes are highly dynamic actin - rich adhesion structures formed by cells of monocytic lineage such as macrophages and osteoclasts and by other cell types including certain trans - formed fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells ( Linder and Aepfelbacher , 2003 ) . Podosomes are enriched in regulatory proteins for the actin cytoskeleton , including Cdc42 and WIP ( Moreau et al . , 2003 ) and adhesion proteins ( McNiven et al . , 2004 ) . Podosomes formed by transformed fibroblasts are ca - pable of degrading ECM ( Mizutani et al . , 2002 ) . Therefore , podosomes and invadopodia share similarities in appearance and molecular composition . However , recent studies have re - vealed several significant differences between these structures in structure and function ( Baldassarre et al . , 2003 ) . For exam - ple , podosomes are tubular invaginations of the ventral plasma membrane ( Ochoa et al . , 2000 ) , whereas invadopodia are membrane protrusions extending into the ECM that originate from the large invagination of the ventral plasma membrane without evidence of inward tubulations . It has been proposed that podosomes could be precursor structures that mature into invadopodia under the appropriate physiological conditions ( Baldassarre et al . , 2003 ; Linder and Aepfelbacher , 2003 ) , al - though direct experimental evidence for this hypothesis has not been available . In this work , we performed for the first time a time - lapse analysis of invadopodium formation . This analysis revealed that there are significant differences between podosomes and Figure 8 . Cofilin is required for fully functional invadopodia . ( A ) Cells grown on FN - gelatin – coated coverslips were stained with anti - cofilin antibody and rhodamine phalloidin . Arrowheads denote invadopodia . ( B ) Cells were transfected with control or cofilin siRNA , and the cell lysates were immuno - blotted with anti - cofilin and anti - actin antibodies . ( C ) Cells treated with control or cofilin siRNA were stained with anti - cortactin antibody and rhodamine phalloidin . Arrowheads denote invadopodia . ( D ) Invadopodia formation was quanti - fied among cells transfected with control or cofilin siRNA . Error bars represent the SD of three different determinations . Asterisk denotes statistical significance ( P (cid:2) 0 . 04 ) compared with control calculated by t test . ( E ) Cells treated with control or cofilin siRNA were cultured on Alexa488 - FN – and gelatin - coated glass coverslips to analyze their degradation activity . The cells were stained with rhodamine phalloidin . Arrow - heads denote the degradation sites . ( F ) MTLn3 cells express - ing YFP - actin were transfected with control or cofilin siRNA and analyzed by time - lapse microscopy . Lifetime of inva - dopodia was calculated from the time - lapse movies and shown in histograms . Bars , 10 (cid:1) m . JCB • VOLUME 168 • NUMBER 3 • 2005 450 invadopodia in terms of their dynamics : ( a ) invadopodia are mainly formed de novo at the cell periphery around lamellipo - dia . Evans et al . ( 2003 ) reported that macrophage podosomes assemble also at the leading lamella , but mainly by fragmenta - tion of preexisting precursors . Therefore , assembly mecha - nisms seem to differ between invadopodia and macrophage po - dosomes . ( b ) Invadopodia have lifetimes varying from a few minutes to hours , whereas the lifetime of podosomes was re - ported to be several minutes ( Destaing et al . , 2003 ; Evans et al . , 2003 ) . ( c ) Invadopodia are motile structures . In contrast , it was reported that net movement of podosome clusters is achieved by continuous formation of podosomes at the front and disas - sembly at the rear , and individual podosomes are not motile ( Destaing et al . , 2003 ) . We found that there are roughly two types of invadopo - dia , short - lived motile invadopodia and stationary long - lived invadopodia . The stationary invadopodia appear to have a strong contact with the substrate , suggesting that they protrude into matrix and execute matrix degradation . Additionally , it was often observed that long - lived invadopodia moved around after formation and then became stationary . Therefore , the short - lived motile invadopodia appear to be precursors of fully functional invadopodia . Given that the lifetime of podosome is several minutes , podosomes might be equivalent to the short - lived invadopodia observed in this paper . However , there are still some differences between these two structures as de - scribed in the previous paragraph . These differences could be caused by the use of different substrates for analysis because most studies of podosome function have been performed on nonphysiological substrates such as glass . Also , it is possible that the organization and dynamics of invadopodia / podosomes are cell type dependent . Therefore , more detailed analyses will be necessary to understand the relationship between invadopo - dia and podosomes . Function of cofilin in invadopodium formation We found that suppression of cofilin expression by siRNA re - sults in the formation of small , less invasive invadopodia with short lifetimes . These results suggest that cofilin principally functions in the maturation of invadopodia , rather than the ini - tiation of invadopodium assembly . We often observed that long - lived stationary invadopodia have strong actin signals and are associated with actin clouds indicative of a burst of actin polymerization , suggesting that actin polymerization is re - quired for maturation of invadopodia . Recent studies have demonstrated that Arp2 / 3 complex and cofilin synergize to in - duce barbed end formation that drives EGF - induced lamellipo - dia protrusion ( DesMarais et al . , 2004 ) . Therefore , cofilin and Arp2 / 3 complex activity may induce a burst of actin polymer - ization that is required for invadopodium protrusion , producing stabilization and subsequent maturation . A model for invadopodium formation In summary , we propose a model for invadopodium forma - tion ( Fig . 9 , A and B ) . Invadopodia are assembled at the cell periphery around lamellipodia de novo . Formation of inva - dopodia can be triggered by activation of the EGF receptor . Nck1 and Cdc42 are recruited and / or activated downstream of the EGF receptor . Nck1 recruits the N - WASP – WIP com - plex to the sites of invadopodium formation , and Cdc42 may activate N - WASP through Toca - 1 . Activated N - WASP induces actin polymerization through Arp2 / 3 complex that drives invadopodium initiation . These newly formed inva - dopodia are motile and move laterally at the ventral surface of the cell until additional stimuli induce stabilization . This process requires polymerization of an actin network at the base of invadopodia to anchor these structures . Cofilin may be required for optimizing Arp2 / 3 complex – mediated den - dritic nucleation to cause elongation of the invadopodia and its stabilization . Figure 9 . Model for invadopodium formation . ( A ) A model for invadopo - dium formation . Mature invadopodia are formed through three processes . ( 1 ) In the initiation phase , precursors of invadopodia are formed de novo at the cell periphery around lamellipodia . ( 2 ) These precursors are motile and move around on the ventral membrane until they stick to ECM . ( 3 ) In the maturation phase , anchored invadopodia protrude into ECM and degrade it . ( B ) Schematic diagram of the signaling pathway for invadopo - dium formation . EGF ligand binding to the EGF receptor activates and / or recruits Nck1 and Cdc42 . Nck1 recruits WIP – N - WASP complex , and Cdc42 activates N - WASP probably through Toca - 1 to initiate invadopo - dium formation . Cofilin mainly functions in the maturation process of inva - dopodium formation . MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF INVADOPODIUM FORMATION • YAMAGUCHI ET AL . 451 Materials and methods Cell culture MTLn3 and MTC cells are derived from the 13762NF rat mammary ade - nocarcinoma . Cells were cultured in (cid:5) - MEM supplemented with 5 % FBS and antibiotics and stimulated with EGF as described previously ( Segall et al . , 1996 ) . Antibodies and constructs Anti – N - WASP and anti - cofilin antibodies have been described previously ( Miki et al . , 1996 ; Chan et al . , 2000 ) . Anti - WAVE1 and - WAVE2 anti - bodies were provided by S . Suetsugu and D . Yamazaki ( Institute of Medi - cal Science , University of Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan ) and described previously ( Yamazaki et al . , 2003 ) . Anti - p34 and anti - Grb2 antibodies were pur - chased from Upstate Biotechnology , and anti – (cid:6) - actin antibody was pur - chased from Sigma - Aldrich . Anti - Cdc42 antibody was obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . Anti - Nck antibody is a gift from T . Pawson ( Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute , Mount Sinai Hospital , Toronto , Can - ada ) . GFP - Nck1 , Grb2 , WIP , and WIP WBD constructs are a gift from M . Way ( Cancer Research UK , London , UK ) . For GFP - tagged WISH con - structs , cDNAs encoding full - length mouse WISH and (cid:3) SH3 mutant ( 154 – 711 aa ) that were provided by M . Fukuoka ( Institute of Medical Science , University of Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan ) were cloned into pEGFP - C1 vector ( CLONTECH Laboratories , Inc . ) . For retroviral construct , cDNA encoding dominant - negative N - WASP ( (cid:3) cof ; Banzai et al . , 2000 ) was ligated into pMX plasmid vector . For bovine GFP - N - WASP construct , bovine N - WASP cDNA was ligated into pEGFP - C1 vector . For WIP CBD construct , cDNA encoding a WIP sequence ( 124 – 223 aa ) was amplified by RT - PCR from total RNA extracted from MTLn3 cells , and then subcloned into pEGFP - C1 vector . Invadopodium assay Fluorescent matrix - coated dishes were prepared as described previously ( Chen , 1989 ) . Alexa488 protein labeling kit ( Molecular Probes ) was used for labeling FN ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Cells were cultured on the FN - gelatin – coated dishes for 8 to 16 h . For quantitation of invadopodium formation , cells were stained with anti - cortactin antibody and phalloidin . The cells were scored as invadopodium positive if dot - like structures containing both actin filaments and cortactin were present at the basal membrane . Error bars in all figures represent the SD of three different determinations . At least 100 cells were counted in each determination . Transfection MTLn3 cells were transfected with indicated plasmids using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) . Cells were plated at 70 % confluence to 6 - well plate , and the next day they were incubated with 2 (cid:1) g DNA and 4 (cid:1) l Lipo - fectamine 2000 in OPTI - MEM ( Invitrogen ) for 45 min . After extensive wash with complete medium , cells were cultured in complete medium for 24 h . The cells were then replated onto FN - gelatin dishes and cultured for an additional 16 h before being analyzed . Retroviral transfection was per - formed as described previously ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) . RNAi Control , nonsilencing siRNA ( AATTCTCCGAACGTGTCACGT ) was purchased from QIAGEN . N - WASP siRNA ( AAGACGAGATGCTCC - AAATGG ) , WAVE1 siRNA ( AATGCCTCCGTCCCCACCTTC ) , WAVE2 siRNA ( AAGGAATCAACACTCGTAAGG ) , p34arc siRNA ( AAGGAACT - TCAGGCACACGGA ) , Grb2 siRNA ( AACATCCGTGTCCAGGAACCA ) , and Nck1 siRNA ( GATGATAGCTTTGTTGATCCA ) were purchased from Ambion . Cdc42 siRNA ( AAAGACTCCTTTCTTGCTTGT ) was purchased from Dharmacon . All aforementioned sequences are target rat gene se - quences used to design each siRNA . Cofilin siRNA was described previ - ously ( Mouneimne et al . , 2004 ) . MTLn3 cells were transfected with 100 nM siRNA ( WAVE2 siRNA , 50 nM ; Cdc42 siRNA , 30 nM ) using Oligo - fectamine ( Invitrogen ) . The cells were cultured for 32 h and then replated onto a FN - gelatin dish for 16 h before being analyzed . For rescue experi - ments , bovine GFP - N - WASP and human GFP - Nck1 constructs were trans - fected as described in the previous section at 24 h after siRNA transfec - tion . For immunoblotting , cell lysates were prepared at 48 h after siRNA transfection . Immunofluorescence Cells were fixed in 3 . 7 % formaldehyde for 15 min , permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 for 10 min , and blocked in 1 % BSA and 1 % FBS for 30 min . For cofilin staining , cells were fixed in 3 . 7 % formaldehyde , 0 . 1 % glu - taraldehyde , and 0 . 075 mg / ml saponin for 1 h . The cells were incubated with primary antibodies for 1 h , and then with fluorophore - conjugated sec - ondary antibodies and rhodamine phalloidin ( Molecular Probes ) for 30 min . The cells were treated with 1 mg / ml sodium borohydrate in PBS for 10 min to quench autofluorescence of residual glutaraldehyde that was used to cross - link gelatin film . All samples were observed with a micro - scope ( Olympus ) equipped with a cooled CCD camera or with a confocal laser - scanning microscope ( model Radiance 2000 ; Bio - Rad Laboratories ) . The images were processed with Adobe Photoshop . Immunoblotting Cells were washed with ice - cold PBS before direct extraction in SDS - PAGE sample buffer . The samples were resolved by SDS - PAGE , transferred to ni - trocellulose membrane , and blocked in 5 % nonfat dried milk . The mem - branes were incubated with primary antibodies for 1 h , and followed by incubation with peroxidase - conjugated secondary antibodies for 30 min . Immunoreactive bands were detected using a ECL - plus kit ( Amersham Biosciences ) . Time - lapse microscopy MTLn3 cells stably expressing YFP - or GFP - actin were used as described previously ( Lorenz et al . , 2004a ) . In brief , time - lapse series of the cells were taken at 37 (cid:7) C using a microscope ( model 470 ; Olympus ) equipped with a computer - driven cooled CCD camera , humidified CO 2 chamber , and autofocus system and operated by IPlab Spectrum software ( VayTek ) . Phase and fluorescence images were taken every 2 min for up to 16 h . Digital images were converted in NIH image , and lifetime , fluorescence intensity , and motion of invadopodia were analyzed . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows inhibition of invadopodium formation by EGF receptor ki - nase inhibitors . Fig . S2 shows RT - PCR analysis of Nck , WISH , and WAVE expression . Degradation activity of siRNA - treated cells is shown in Fig . S3 . Function of Cdc42 in invadopodia was analyzed in Fig . S4 . Involve - ment of PAK in invadopodium formation was examined in Fig . S5 A . Fig . S5 B shows interaction of WIP with N - WASP . Video 1 shows dynamics of invadopodia . Video 2 shows an invadopodium with long lifetime . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200407076 / DC1 . We are grateful to Dr . M . Way for Nck , Grb2 , and WIP constructs and Dr . T . Pawson for anti - Nck antibody . We thank Drs . S . Suetsugu and D . Yamazaki for anti - WAVE antibodies and Dr . M . Fukuoka for WISH constructs . This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health ( C38511 ) to J . Condeelis . Submitted : 12 July 2004 Accepted : 16 December 2004 References Bailly , M . , L . Yan , G . M . Whitesides , J . S . Condeelis , and J . E . Segall . 1998 . Reg - ulation of protrusion shape and adhesion to the substratum during che - motactic responses of mammalian carcinoma cells . Exp . Cell Res . 241 : 285 – 299 . Baldassarre , M . , A . Pompeo , G . Beznoussenko , C . Castaldi , S . Cortellino , M . A . McNiven , A . Luini , and R . Buccione . 2003 . Dynamin participates in fo - cal extracellular matrix degradation by invasive cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . 14 : 1074 – 1084 . Banzai , Y . , H . Miki , H . Yamaguchi , and T . Takenawa . 2000 . Essential role of neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein in neurite extension in PC12 cells and rat hippocampal primary culture cells . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 11987 – 11992 . Benesch , S . , S . Lommel , A . Steffen , T . E . Stradal , N . Scaplehorn , M . Way , J . Wehland , and K . Rottner . 2002 . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate ( PIP2 ) - induced vesicle movement depends on N - WASP and involves Nck , WIP , and Grb2 . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 37771 – 37776 . Buccione , R . , J . D . Orth , and M . A . McNiven . 2004 . Foot and mouth : podo - somes , invadopodia and circular dorsal ruffles . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 : 647 – 657 . Carlier , M . F . , F . Ressad , and D . Pantaloni . 1999 . Control of actin dynamics in cell motility . Role of ADF / cofilin . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 33827 – 33830 . Chambers , A . F . , A . C . Groom , and I . C . MacDonald . 2002 . Dissemination and growth of cancer cells in metastatic sites . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 2 : 563 – 572 . Chan , A . Y . , M . Bailly , N . Zebda , J . E . Segall , and J . S . Condeelis . 2000 . Role of cofilin in epidermal growth factor – stimulated actin polymerization and lamellipod protrusion . J . Cell Biol . 148 : 531 – 542 . JCB • VOLUME 168 • NUMBER 3 • 2005 452 Chen , W . T . 1989 . Proteolytic activity of specialized surface protrusions formed at rosette contact sites of transformed cells . J . Exp . Zool . 251 : 167 – 185 . Chen , W . T . , and J . Y . Wang . 1999 . Specialized surface protrusions of inva - sive cells , invadopodia and lamellipodia , have differential MT1 - MMP , MMP - 2 , and TIMP - 2 localization . Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 878 : 361 – 371 . Condeelis , J . 2001 . How is actin polymerization nucleated in vivo ? Trends Cell Biol . 11 : 288 – 293 . Condeelis , J . , and J . E . Segall . 2003 . Intravital imaging of cell movement in tu - mours . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 3 : 921 – 930 . Coopman , P . J . , M . T . Do , E . W . Thompson , and S . C . Mueller . 1998 . Phagocyto - sis of cross - linked gelatin matrix by human breast carcinoma cells corre - lates with their invasive capacity . Clin . Cancer Res . 4 : 507 – 515 . Dawe , H . R . , L . S . Minamide , J . R . Bamburg , and L . P . Cramer . 2003 . ADF / cofi - lin controls cell polarity during fibroblast migration . Curr . Biol . 13 : 252 – 257 . DesMarais , V . , F . Macaluso , J . Condeelis , and M . Bailly . 2004 . Synergistic in - teraction between the Arp2 / 3 complex and cofilin drives stimulated lamellipod extension . J . Cell Sci . 117 : 3499 – 3510 . Destaing , O . , F . Saltel , J . C . Geminard , P . Jurdic , and F . Bard . 2003 . Podosomes display actin turnover and dynamic self - organization in osteoclasts ex - pressing actin - green fluorescent protein . Mol . Biol . Cell . 14 : 407 – 416 . Evans , J . G . , I . Correia , O . Krasavina , N . Watson , and P . Matsudaira . 2003 . Mac - rophage podosomes assemble at the leading lamella by growth and frag - mentation . J . Cell Biol . 161 : 697 – 705 . Friedl , P . , and K . Wolf . 2003 . Tumour - cell invasion and migration : diversity and escape mechanisms . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 3 : 362 – 374 . Fujimura , M . , T . Hidaka , and S . Saito . 2002 . Selective inhibition of the epider - mal growth factor receptor by ZD1839 decreases the growth and inva - sion of ovarian clear cell adenocarcinoma cells . Clin . Cancer Res . 8 : 2448 – 2454 . Fukuoka , M . , S . Suetsugu , H . Miki , K . Fukami , T . Endo , and T . Takenawa . 2001 . A novel neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) binding protein , WISH , induces Arp2 / 3 complex activation independent of Cdc42 . J . Cell Biol . 152 : 471 – 482 . Ghosh , M . , X . Song , G . Mouneimne , M . Sidani , D . S . Lawrence , and J . S . Condeelis . 2004 . Cofilin promotes actin polymerization and defines the direction of cell motility . Science . 304 : 743 – 746 . Ho , H . Y . , R . Rohatgi , A . M . Lebensohn , M . Le , J . Li , S . P . Gygi , and M . W . Kirschner . 2004 . Toca - 1 mediates Cdc42 - dependent actin nucleation by activating the N - WASP - WIP complex . Cell . 118 : 203 – 216 . Kaverina , I . , T . E . Stradal , and M . Gimona . 2003 . Podosome formation in cul - tured A7r5 vascular smooth muscle cells requires Arp2 / 3 - dependent de - novo actin polymerization at discrete microdomains . J . Cell Sci . 116 : 4915 – 4924 . Kinley , A . W . , S . A . Weed , A . M . Weaver , A . V . Karginov , E . Bissonette , J . A . Cooper , and J . T . Parsons . 2003 . Cortactin interacts with WIP in regulat - ing Arp2 / 3 activation and membrane protrusion . Curr . Biol . 13 : 384 – 393 . Linder , S . , and M . Aepfelbacher . 2003 . Podosomes : adhesion hot - spots of inva - sive cells . Trends Cell Biol . 13 : 376 – 385 . Linder , S . , D . Nelson , M . Weiss , and M . Aepfelbacher . 1999 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein regulates podosomes in primary human macrophages . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 96 : 9648 – 9653 . Loisel , T . P . , R . Boujemaa , D . Pantaloni , and M . F . Carlier . 1999 . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Na - ture . 401 : 613 – 616 . Lorenz , M . , V . DesMarais , F . Macaluso , R . H . Singer , and J . Condeelis . 2004a . Measurement of barbed ends , actin polymerization , and motility in live carcinoma cells after growth factor stimulation . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 57 : 207 – 217 . Lorenz , M . , H . Yamaguchi , Y . Wang , R . H . Singer , and J . Condeelis . 2004b . Im - aging sites of N - WASP activity in lamellipodia and invadopodia of car - cinoma cells . Curr . Biol . 14 : 697 – 703 . McNiven , M . A . , M . Baldassarre , and R . Buccione . 2004 . The role of dynamin in the assembly and function of podosomes and invadopodia . Front . Biosci . 9 : 1944 – 1953 . Miki , H . , and T . Takenawa . 2003 . Regulation of actin dynamics by WASP fam - ily proteins . J . Biochem . ( Tokyo ) . 134 : 309 – 313 . Miki , H . , K . Miura , and T . Takenawa . 1996 . N - WASP , a novel actin - depoly - merizing protein , regulates the cortical cytoskeletal rearrangement in a PIP2 - dependent manner downstream of tyrosine kinases . EMBO J . 15 : 5326 – 5335 . Miki , H . , S . Suetsugu , and T . Takenawa . 1998 . WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein involved in actin reorganization induced by Rac . EMBO J . 17 : 6932 – 6941 . Millard , T . H . , S . J . Sharp , and L . M . Machesky . 2004 . Signalling to actin assem - bly via the WASP ( Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ) - family proteins and the Arp2 / 3 complex . Biochem . J . 380 : 1 – 17 . Mizutani , K . , H . Miki , H . He , H . Maruta , and T . Takenawa . 2002 . Essential role of neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein in podosome formation and degradation of extracellular matrix in src - transformed fibroblasts . Can - cer Res . 62 : 669 – 674 . Moreau , V . , F . Frischknecht , I . Reckmann , R . Vincentelli , G . Rabut , D . Stewart , and M . Way . 2000 . A complex of N - WASP and WIP integrates signal - ling cascades that lead to actin polymerization . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 : 441 – 448 . Moreau , V . , F . Tatin , C . Varon , and E . Genot . 2003 . Actin can reorganize into podosomes in aortic endothelial cells , a process controlled by Cdc42 and RhoA . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 : 6809 – 6822 . Mouneimne , G . , L . Soon , V . DesMarais , M . Sidani , X . Song , S . C . Yip , M . Ghosh , R . Eddy , J . M . Backer , and J . Condeelis . 2004 . Phospholipase C and cofilin are required for carcinoma cell directionality in response to EGF stimulation . J . Cell Biol . 166 : 697 – 708 . Nakahara , H . , T . Otani , T . Sasaki , Y . Miura , Y . Takai , and M . Kogo . 2003 . In - volvement of Cdc42 and Rac small G proteins in invadopodia formation of RPMI7951 cells . Genes Cells . 8 : 1019 – 1027 . Neri , A . , D . Welch , T . Kawaguchi , and G . L . Nicolson . 1982 . Development and biologic properties of malignant cell sublines and clones of a spontane - ously metastasizing rat mammary adenocarcinoma . J . Natl . Cancer Inst . 68 : 507 – 517 . Nicholson , R . I . , J . M . Gee , and M . E . Harper . 2001 . EGFR and cancer prognosis . Eur . J . Cancer . 37 ( Suppl 4 ) : S9 – S15 . Ochoa , G . C . , V . I . Slepnev , L . Neff , N . Ringstad , K . Takei , L . Daniell , W . Kim , H . Cao , M . McNiven , R . Baron , and P . De Camilli . 2000 . A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 377 – 389 . Pollard , T . D . , and G . G . Borisy . 2003 . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell . 112 : 453 – 465 . Rohatgi , R . , P . Nollau , H . Y . Ho , M . W . Kirschner , and B . J . Mayer . 2001 . Nck and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate synergistically activate actin polymerization through the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 26448 – 26452 . Segall , J . E . , S . Tyerech , L . Boselli , S . Masseling , J . Helft , A . Chan , J . Jones , and J . Condeelis . 1996 . EGF stimulates lamellipod extension in metastatic mammary adenocarcinoma cells by an actin - dependent mechanism . Clin . Exp . Metastasis . 14 : 61 – 72 . Snapper , S . B . , F . Takeshima , I . Anton , C . H . Liu , S . M . Thomas , D . Nguyen , D . Dudley , H . Fraser , D . Purich , M . Lopez - Ilasaca , et al . 2001 . N - WASP deficiency reveals distinct pathways for cell surface projections and mi - crobial actin - based motility . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 897 – 904 . Stradal , T . E . , K . Rottner , A . Disanza , S . Confalonieri , M . Innocenti , and G . Scita . 2004 . Regulation of actin dynamics by WASP and WAVE family proteins . Trends Cell Biol . 14 : 303 – 311 . Suetsugu , S . , D . Yamazaki , S . Kurisu , and T . Takenawa . 2003 . Differential roles of WAVE1 and WAVE2 in dorsal and peripheral ruffle formation for fibroblast cell migration . Dev . Cell . 5 : 595 – 609 . Wang , W . , S . Goswami , K . Lapidus , A . L . Wells , J . B . Wyckoff , E . Sahai , R . H . Singer , J . E . Segall , and J . S . Condeelis . 2004 . Identification and testing of a gene expression signature of invasive carcinoma cells within primary mammary tumors . Cancer Res . 64 : 8585 – 8594 . Wyckoff , J . , W . Wang , E . Y . Lin , Y . Wang , F . Pixley , E . R . Stanley , T . Graf , J . W . Pollard , J . Segall , and J . Condeelis . 2004 . A paracrine loop between tumor cells and macrophages is required for tumor cell migration in mammary tumors . Cancer Res . 64 : 7022 – 7029 . Wyckoff , J . B . , J . G . Jones , J . S . Condeelis , and J . E . Segall . 2000a . A critical step in metastasis : in vivo analysis of intravasation at the primary tumor . Cancer Res . 60 : 2504 – 2511 . Wyckoff , J . B . , J . E . Segall , and J . S . Condeelis . 2000b . The collection of the mo - tile population of cells from a living tumor . Cancer Res . 60 : 5401 – 5404 . Yamazaki , D . , S . Suetsugu , H . Miki , Y . Kataoka , S . Nishikawa , T . Fujiwara , N . Yoshida , and T . Takenawa . 2003 . WAVE2 is required for directed cell migration and cardiovascular development . Nature . 424 : 452 – 456 . Yanagawa , R . , Y . Furukawa , T . Tsunoda , O . Kitahara , M . Kameyama , K . Mu - rata , O . Ishikawa , and Y . Nakamura . 2001 . Genome - wide screening of genes showing altered expression in liver metastases of human colorectal cancers by cDNA microarray . Neoplasia . 3 : 395 – 401 . Yang , Z . , R . Bagheri - Yarmand , R . A . Wang , L . Adam , V . V . Papadimitrakopou - lou , G . L . Clayman , A . El - Naggar , R . Lotan , C . J . Barnes , W . K . Hong , and R . Kumar . 2004 . The epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine ki - nase inhibitor ZD1839 ( Iressa ) suppresses c - Src and Pak1 pathways and invasiveness of human cancer cells . Clin . Cancer Res . 10 : 658 – 667 .