Exosomes Facilitate Therapeutic Targeting of Oncogenic Kras in Pancreatic Cancer Sushrut Kamerkar 1 , Valerie S . LeBleu 1 , Hikaru Sugimoto 1 , Sujuan Yang 1 , Carolina F . Ruivo 2 , Sonia A . Melo 1 , 2 , J . Jack Lee 3 , and Raghu Kalluri 1 , * 1 Department of Cancer Biology , Metastasis Research Center , University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center , Houston , TX 77005 2 Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde , Universidade do Porto , Portugal ( I3S ) , 4200 Porto , Portugal ; Institute of Pathology and Molecular Immunology of the University of Porto ( IPATIMUP ) , 4200 Porto , Portugal 3 Department of Biostatistics , University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center , Houston , TX 77005 Summary The mutant form of the GTPase KRAS is a key driver of pancreatic cancer but remains a challenging therapeutic target . Exosomes , extracellular vesicles generated by all cells , are naturally present in the blood . Here we demonstrate that enhanced retention of exosomes in circulation , compared to liposomes , is due to CD47 mediated protection of exosomes from phagocytosis by monocytes and macrophages . Exosomes derived from normal fibroblast - like Users may view , print , copy , and download text and data - mine the content in such documents , for the purposes of academic research , subject always to the full Conditions of use : http : / / www . nature . com / authors / editorial _ policies / license . html # terms * Correspondence : Raghu Kalluri , MD , PhD , rkalluri @ mdanderson . org . Author contributions RK conceptually designed the strategy for this study , provided intellectual input and contributed to the writing of the manuscript . HS and VSL injected mice orthotopically with tumor cells . HS performed necropsy analyses and quantitation of the exosomes in pancreas tissue sections . VSL provided intellectual input , extracted the RNA and quantified the siRNA loading in exosomes by qPCR analyses , stained tissues for Kras , helped with the monitoring of in vivo experiments , designed the experimental strategy , prepared figures and wrote the manuscript . SK and SY prepared exosomes ( cultured cells for exosomes collection and preparation by ultracentrifugation ) , generated iExosomes ( performed electroporation and wash steps involved in the generation of iExosomes and Nanosight™ measurements ) , and treated mice with iExosomes . SY also performed an independent analysis of the in vivo imaging data , generated and genotyped KTC and KPC mice for iExosomes treatment , and participated in the preparation of the figures . SK provided intellectual input , helped design the experimental strategy , and performed all of the other experiments presented in the manuscript , including treatment of mice with iExosomes and preparation of the exosomes for sucrose gradient analyses and qPCR analyses . Unless otherwise noted above and in the methods section , SK performed the independent replication of the experiments . SK performed the sucrose gradient analyses , performed Nanosight™ measurements and flow cytometry experiments and analyses , processed tissues for immunostaining and analyzed the staining , extracted RNA and performed qPCR for gene expression analyses of treated cells , performed the MMT assays and TUNEL assays , performed and quantified the macropinocytosis assays and the western blot analyses , analyzed data , prepared figures , participated in the preparation of the methods section and wrote the manuscript . SAM advised and provided intellectual input to the experiments related to siRNA identification , MTT assay , KRASG12D qPCR , western blots for pERK , and one Panc - 1 tumor study and one KTC in vivo experiment . CFR provided the mass spectrometry data and methods sections for the mass spectrometry analyses . JJL reviewed the source data , advised on experimental design , and supervised statistical analyses . Conflict of interest MD Anderson Cancer Center and RK hold patents in the area of exosome biology and are licensed to Codiak Biosciences Inc . MD Anderson Cancer Center and RK are stock equity holders in Codiak Biosciences Inc . RK receives research support from Codiak Biosciences Inc . and serves as a member of the board of directors . VSL served once as a paid consultant for Codiak Biosciences Inc . HHS Public Access Author manuscript Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . Published in final edited form as : Nature . 2017 June 22 ; 546 ( 7659 ) : 498 – 503 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature22341 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t mesenchymal cells were engineered to carry siRNA or shRNA specific to oncogenic KRAS G12D ( iExosomes ) , a common mutation in pancreatic cancer . Compared to liposomes , iExosomes target oncogenic Kras with an enhanced efficacy that is dependent on CD47 , and is facilitated by macropinocytosis . iExosomes treatment suppressed cancer in multiple mouse models of pancreatic cancer and significantly increased their overall survival . Our results inform on a novel approach for direct and specific targeting of oncogenic Kras in tumors using iExosomes . Introduction Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma ( PDAC ) is in urgent need of effective new therapies 1 . Mutations in the GTPase KRAS are commonly encountered in PDAC 2 and these drive initiation , progression and metastasis 3 , 4 . Dampening oncogenic Kras using genetic manipulation in mice inhibits tumor progression despite the presence of other genetic defects 5 . A direct and specific targeting of Ras has however been elusive 6 . RNA interference ( RNAi ) - based approach to target wild - type Kras or downstream effectors using nanoparticles showed impact on tumor burden in lung and colorectal cancer models 7 – 9 . Targeting oncogenic Kras has been limited to delivery via direct electroporation 10 or biopolymeric implants 11 in xenograft models of pancreas cancer , and effective delivery of RNAi to non - liver parenchymal organs , especially pancreas , remains a challenge . While liposomes and nanoparticles may offer advantages for RNAi delivery over viral - based delivery systems , they exhibit low efficiency and rapid clearance from the circulation 12 . Here we probed whether exosomes can function as efficient carriers of RNAi . Exosomes are nano - sized extracellular vesicles ( 40 – 150 nm ) with a membrane lipid bilayer that are released by all cells and efficiently enter other cells 13 . Unlike liposomes and other synthetic drug nanoparticle carriers , exosomes contain transmembrane and membrane anchored proteins that likely enhance endocytosis , thus promoting the delivery of their internal content 14 , 15 . Exosomal proteins include CD47 16 , 17 , a widely expressed integrin associated transmembrane protein that functions in part to protect cells from phagocytosis 18 , 19 . CD47 is the ligand for signal regulatory protein alpha ( SIRP α ) , and CD47 - SIRP α binding initiates the ‘don’t eat me’ signal that inhibits phagocytosis 20 . Oncogenic RAS was shown to endow pancreatic cancer cells with enhanced macropinocytosis that may facilitate cellular uptake of exosomes 21 . The use of exosomes might also minimize cytotoxic effects observed when synthetic nanoparticles were used in vivo 22 . We identified the functional contribution of CD47 and Ras - induced macropinocytosis in suppressing exosomes clearance from circulation and enhancing specificity to pancreatic cancer cells , respectively . Such properties of exosomes enhanced their ability to deliver RNAi to specifically target oncogenic Kras in pancreatic tumors , and exosomes as ‘single targeted agent’ significantly enhances overall survival of all mouse models of PDAC tested . Kamerkar et al . Page 2 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Results CD47 on exosomes suppress their clearance by monocytes Exosomes were purified from the supernatant of normal human foreskin fibroblast ( BJ ) cultures ( Extended Fig . 1A – B ) . CD47 detection on exosomes is noted in mass spectrometry analysis of exosomes ( Supplementary Table 1 , ExoCarta database , http : / / exocarta . org ) . In contrast with exosomes derived from CD47 knockout ( k / o ) mouse ear fibroblasts ( CD47 k / o exosomes ) and liposomes , BJ fibroblasts exosomes were positive for CD63 and CD47 ( Extended Fig . 1C – D ) . We optimized the electroporation of Alexa - Fluor 647 ( AF647 ) - tagged siRNA into exosomes ( iExosomes ) and liposomes ( iLiposomes ) without compromising their structural integrity ( Extended Fig . 1A , E ) . Fractionation using sucrose gradient revealed detection of AF647 , indicative of siRNA , in fractions characteristic of exosomes and liposomes , whereas electroporated siRNA alone ( siRNA was mixed with electroporation buffer and subjected to electroporation without exosomes or liposomes ) did not accumulate in these fractions ( Fig . 1A , Extended Fig . 1F – G ) . Following intraperitoneal ( i . p . ) injection ( 24 hours ) , iExosomes but not iLiposomes were detected in the circulation of either C57Bl / 6 or nude mice ( Extended Fig . 2A – B ) . Three hours post i . p . injection , exosomes are also readily detected in the circulation , and while CD47 k / o exosomes showed diminished retention , exosomes with high levels of CD47 expression ( CD47 high exosomes , see methods ) showed higher retention in the circulation ( Fig . 1B , Extended Fig . 2C ) . Exosomes accumulated in the liver , lung and pancreas ( Fig . 1C , Extended Fig . 2D ) , and a greater number of pancreas cells showed AF647 - siRNA signal from iExosomes compared to iLiposomes ( Fig . 1D , Extended Fig . 2E – F ) . Generally , efficient phagocytosis by circulating monocytes and other cells removes dying / dead cells , cell debris and foreign particles . iLiposomes , compared to iExosomes , enhanced the mobilization of CD11b + monocytes in circulation ( Extended Fig . 3A – B ) . While control mouse blood ( untreated ) showed background levels of AF647 positivity in CD11b + monocytes , an increase in the number of circulating AF647 + monocytes ( indicative of phagocytosis ) was noted when mice were treated with liposomes compared to exosomes ( Fig . 1E , Extended Fig . 3C ) . Furthermore , the levels of CD47 on exosomes inversely correlated with circulating AF647 + monocytes in the blood ( Fig . 1E , Extended Fig . 3C ) , supporting that the presence of CD47 on exosomes limits their clearance . Additionally , following iExosomes injection , the AF647 + monocytes in the circulation were positive for SIRP - α ( Extended Fig . 3D ) . Using anti - CD47 B6H12 blocking antibody , which prevents CD47 / SIRP inhibition of phagocytosis in contrast with nonblocking anti - CD47 2D3 antibody 23 , resulted in a specific and significant increase in AF647 + CD11b + circulating monocytes ( Fig . 1E , Extended Fig . 3C ) . Notably , the binding of anti - CD47 2D3 and anti - CD47 B6H12 antibodies to exosomes was similar ( Extended Fig . 3E ) . In contrast , decreased AF647 + CD11b + circulating monocytes were noted when using CD47 High iExosomes ( Fig . 1E , Extended Fig . 3C ) . Interestingly , CD47 k / o mice showed lower levels of circulating exosomes compared to age - matched controls ( Extended Fig . 3F ) . Our results indicated a superior escape from phagocytic clearance of exosomes compared to liposomes , in part mediated by exosomal CD47 - SIRP α ‘don’t eat me’ signal . Kamerkar et al . Page 3 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Specific targeting of Kras G12D in pancreatic cancer cells using iExosomes iExosomes ( with siRNA or shRNA targeting Kras G12D ) significantly reduced Kras G12D mRNA levels and phosphorylated - ERK protein levels in Panc - 1 cells , with superior efficacy compared to iLiposomes despite a similar siRNA loading efficiency in both nanoparticles ( Extended Fig . 4A – H , Supplementary text , Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . iExosomes also suppressed Ras activity specifically in Panc - 1 cells compared to BxPC - 3 cells ( KRAS WT ) ( Extended Fig . 4I , Supplementary Figure 2 ) , and impaired proliferation ( Extended Fig . 4J – K ) and enhanced apoptosis ( Extended Fig . 4L – N ) in Panc - 1 cells , while leaving BxPC - 3 ( KRAS WT ) , Capan - 1 ( KRAS G12V ) , and MIA PaCa - 2 ( KRAS G12C ) cancer cells unaffected ( Extended Fig . 4O – U ) . iExosomes suppress Kras G12D - expressing human pancreatic orthotopic tumors Mice with luciferase expressing orthotopic Panc - 1 tumors were treated with repeated i . p . injection of ~ 10 8 iExosomes ( every other day , 0 . 15 to 0 . 20 μg of exosomal protein per injection ) or iLiposomes ( Extended Fig . 5A ) . Accumulation of iExosomes payload ( AF647 - siRNA ) was readily detected in the pancreas ( Extended Fig . 5B ) . While the tumors of control mice ( PBS vehicle , non - electroporated exosomes ( control Exo ) or exosomes and liposomes with scrambled RNAi ) grew at an exponential rate , the tumors treated with iExosomes were significantly reduced after 30 days of treatment ( Extended Fig . 5C ) . Tumor growth was blunted with iLiposomes , however to a much lesser extent than with iExosomes ( Extended Fig . 5C ) . When control mice revealed extensive tumor burden , tumors in iExosomes - treated mice were in contrast reduced to nearly undetectable level ( Fig . 2A – B , Extended Fig . 5D – E ) , and this persisted after 200 days of treatment ( Fig . 2C , Extended Fig . 5F ) . Histopathological analyses ( endpoint ) , relative pancreas mass , and overall survival indicated robust improvement in iExosomes treated mice ( Fig . 2C – E , Extended Fig . 5G ) . iExosomes suppressed downstream Kras signaling and KRAS G12D expression in tumors / pancreas ( Fig . 2F – G , Extended Fig . 5H ) . Suspending iExosomes treatment after initial tumor reduction showed sustained tumor suppression effects that lasted over 10 days following the last treatment with iExosomes ( Fig . 2H ) . Control mice succumbed to pancreatic cancer , whereas the siKras G12D iExosomes treated mice were all alive ( day 87 ) . Resuming iExosomes treatment at this point in time controlled the growth of these advanced tumors ( Fig . 2H – I ) . Despite continuous treatment at an advanced disease state , the mice responded with partial tumor growth control but ultimately succumbed ( Fig . 2H – I ) . iExosomes did not however impact orthotopic BxPC - 3 ( KRAS WT ) tumor growth or survival ( Extended Fig . 5I – M ) . Loss of surface proteins on exosomes with proteinase K ( PK ) treatment , validated by flow cytometry ( Extended Fig . 6A ) , significantly suppressed the anti - tumor efficacy of iExosomes , whereas RNAse A treatment alone did not have any impact on the anti - tumor efficacy of iExosomes ( Extended Fig . 6B – J , Supplementary text ) . CD47 and Ras - dependent macropinocytosis facilitates enhanced efficacy of iExosomes In mice with orthotopic Panc - 1 tumors , iExosomes and iLiposomes were administered with and without incubation with anti - CD47 neutralizing antibodies . Unlike with iLiposomes or anti - CD47 antibodies alone , the efficacy of iExosomes was significantly inhibited with Kamerkar et al . Page 4 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t neutralization of CD47 - SIRP α ‘don’t eat me’ signal ( Fig . 3A , Extended Fig . 6K – M , Supplementary Fig . 4C ) . In immunocompetent mice with KPC689 orthotopic tumors , CD47 k / o iExosomes failed to robustly suppress tumor growth and improve survival compared to iExosomes ( Fig . 3B – C , Extended Fig . 6N – O ) . In this model ( treatment start 16 days post cancer cell injection ) , iLiposomes and control treatment were ineffective ( Fig . 3B – C , Extended Fig . 6N – O ) . Similar results were obtained when performing the experiments in Nude mice , despite a more aggressive cancer progression in the immunocompromised background ( Extended Fig . 6P – R ) . Accumulation of PKH67 labeled exosomes signal ( fluorescent lipophilic dye ) was predominantly detected in established Panc - 1 tumors 3 hours after the injection , with less efficient accumulation noted in adjacent normal pancreas ( Fig . 3D ) , and accumulation of AF647 + foci ( iExosomes ) in KTC mice were observed predominantly in tumors cells , as well as in normal acini , ducts , endocrine islet and α SMA + CAFs ( Extended Fig . 7A ) . Notably , decreased AF647 + foci in pancreas tumors was noted when using CD47 k / o iExosomes compared to iExosomes ( Extended Fig . 7B ) . Collectively these data suggested that along with enhanced retention of iExosomes in systemic circulation , increased accumulation of iExosomes in tumors could reflect enhanced uptake of iExosomes in cancer cells when compared to normal pancreatic cells . This observation further complements the in vitro studies which demonstrate that exosomes more efficiently deliver RNAi molecules to the pancreatic cancer cells when compared to liposomes ( Extended Fig . 4A – H ) . In this regard , oncogenic Ras has been implicated in intensifying macropinocytosis 21 , 24 . Our results confirmed increased macropinocytosis in Panc - 1 cells compared to BxPC - 3 cells ( Fig . 3E , Extended Fig . 7C – D ) . Exosomes uptake mirrored the macropinocytosis frequency , and inhibition of macropinocytosis with EIPA reduced exosomes uptake but not liposomes ( Fig . 3F – H , Extended Fig . 7C – D ) . Treatment of exosomes with PK or trypsin significantly reduced their entry into Panc - 1 cells , yet this was independent of CD47 ( Extended Fig . 7E – G ) . Three distinct mechanisms thus likely contribute to the enhanced anti - tumor response to iExosomes : CD47 presence on exosomes contributes to evasion from the host immune clearance in the circulation , Ras mediated enhanced macropinocytosis , and presence of proteins on the surface of exosomes that may increase pancreatic cancer cells uptake of iExosomes . iExosomes inhibit advanced metastatic disease and increase overall survival We treated KTC mice 25 , 26 with iExosomes on day 18 ( early treatment start ) or day 33 ( late treatment start ) when mice present with PDAC ( Extended Fig . 8A ) . Notably , accumulation of AF647 - signal was detected in KTC tumors ( Extended Fig . 8B ) . In both experiments , iExosomes increased lifespan compared to control exosomes ( Fig . 4A – B ) , in contrast with a lack of response observed when mice were treated with gemcitabine ( Extended Fig . 8C and shown by others 25 , 27 – 29 ) . iExosomes reduced the tumor burden ( Fig . 4C – D , Extended Fig . 8D ) and improved histopathology ( Fig . 4E , Extended Fig . 8E ) . iExosomes from human or murine sources showed similar response ( Extended Fig . 8F – G ) . Diminished pancreas desmoplasia , enhanced cancer cell apoptosis , suppressed cancer cell proliferation , reduced phospho - ERK , phospho - AKT and Kras levels are noted in KTC tumors , as well as diminished oncogenic Kras G12D expression with iExosomes treatment ( Fig . 4F – G , Extended Kamerkar et al . Page 5 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Fig . 8H ) . Prior to treatment start , KPC mice showed comparable tumor burden ( Fig . 4H ) , and iExosomes in this model also showed anti - tumor efficacy with increased survival ( Fig . 4I ) . Further , no obvert cytotoxicity was observed with iExosomes therapy ( Extended Fig . 9A – C ) . iExosomes also suppressed PDAC progression in the advanced , highly metastatic KPC689 orthotopic tumor setting ( Extended Fig . 10A – G ) , reducing Kras G12D expression ( Extended Fig . 10H ) , increasing survival ( Extended Fig . 10I ) and limiting metastasis ( Extended Fig . 10J – K ) . Discussion Mutations in KRAS are associated with cancer of the pancreas , lung and colon , among others 30 , 31 , and oncogenic KRAS mutations and activation of downstream effectors such as MEK , Akt and Erk , among others , are sufficient drivers of pancreas cancer 3 – 5 , 30 , 32 – 35 . A sound rationale for targeting Ras emerged for the treatment of cancer 11 , 36 , 37 , but Ras has remained largely undruggable 6 . Some efficacy were reported with methodologies developed to target oncogenic Kras using siRNA molecules 7 , 8 , 10 , 11 , but these approaches may have been limited by lack of specificity and inefficient delivery . Nonetheless , a recent clinical study demonstrated that siG12D - LODER TM was well - tolerated and showed potential efficacy in patients with locally advanced pancreas cancer 38 . We report that engineered iExosomes can control advanced PDAC in mice and this approach is clinically feasible 39 . Our studies suggest that exosomes exhibit a superior ability to deliver RNAi and suppress tumor growth when compared to liposomes . Unlike liposomes , the plasma membrane - like phospholipids and membrane - anchored proteins of exosomes may contribute to their diminished clearance from the circulation 12 , 40 , 41 . Our results support that the presence of CD47 on exosomes allows for evasion from phagocytosis by the circulating monocytes and increases exosomes half - life in the circulation . While CD47 does not play a significant role in the entry of exosomes into pancreatic cells , enhanced macropinocytosis in Kras mutant cancer cells 22 , 31 favored their exosomes uptake . Our results also support an efficient uptake of iExosomes despite the stroma dense features of pancreas tumors . Whether exosomes entering cells via this mechanism ( macropinocytosis ) protect themselves from lysosome dependent degradation of their content needs further exploration . Collectively , our study offers insight into the therapeutic potential of exosomes in specific targeting of oncogenic Kras in pancreatic cancer . Methods Cell culture Human foreskin fibroblast ( BJ ) , Capan - 1 , MIA PaCa - 2 cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10 % exosomes depleted FBS and 1 % penicillin - streptomycin . Panc - 1 , BxPC - 3 , and T3M4 cells were cultured in RPMI 10 % FBS and 1 % penicillin - streptomycin . All cells lines were from American Type Culture Collection ( ATCC ) except for T3M4 ( Cell Bank , RIKEN BioResource Center ) ; there were no additional validation of the cell lines performed . Luciferase expressing Panc - 1 and BxPC - 3 cells ( expressing a CMV promoter 5 ′ to the firefly luciferase protein ) were gifts from Dr . Thiruvengadam Arumugam , UT MDACC . KPC689 cancer cell line was established from the pancreas tumors of Kamerkar et al . Page 6 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Pdx1 cre / + ; LSL - KRas G12D / + ; LSL - Trp53 R172H / + mice ( KPC ) mice 42 . KPC689 cells were engineered to stably express GFP and luciferase following infection with F - Luc - GFP lentivirus ( Capital Biosciences ) . C57BL / 6 wild type ( WT ) fibroblasts were isolated from the ears of C57BL / 6 mice by mincing the isolated ears in DMEM supplemented with collagenase type 4 ( 400 units / ml ) and incubating overnight . The next day the cells and tissue pieces were washed with DMEM supplemented with 20 % FBS and 1 % penicillin - streptomycin and expanded in this media . For exosomes collection , the cells were cultured using exosomes - depleted FBS . The same procedure was performed on the CD47 knockout mice ( B6 . 129S7 - Cd47 tm1Fpl / J ) mice and C57BL / 6 mice to generate ear and tail fibroblast lines . For overexpression of CD47 on BJ fibroblasts , transfections were performed using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent ( Invitrogen ) with pCMV6 - AC - GFP CD47 plasmid ( Origene , MG204706 ) , after which exosomes were isolated using the standard protocol described below . Isolation and purification of exosomes Exosomes were purified by differential centrifugation processes , as described previously 43 – 46 . Exosomes - depleted FBS was prepared as follows : the FBS is filtered using a 100nm filter , then ultracentrifuged for 16 hours , and then filtered again using a 100nm filter . Supernatant was collected from cells that were cultured in media containing exosomes - depleted FBS for 48 hours , and was subsequently subjected to sequential centrifugation steps for 800g for 5 minutes , and 2 , 000g for 10 minutes . This resulting supernatant was then filtered using 0 . 2 μm filters , and a pellet was recovered at 100 , 000g in a SW 32 Ti rotor after 2 hours of ultracentrifugation ( Beckman ) . The supernatant was aspirated and the pellet was resuspended in PBS and subsequently ultra - centrifuged at 100 , 000g for another 2 hours . The purified exosomes were then analyzed and used for experimental procedures . For treatment of exosomes with proteinase K , purified exosomes were incubated ( 37°C , 30 minutes ) with 5mg / mL of proteinase K ( Sigma - Aldrich , dissolved in RNase - free water ) followed by heat inactivation ( 60°C , 20 minutes ) . For RNase treatment , purified exosomes were incubated ( 37°C , 30 minutes ) with 2 mg / mL of protease - free RNase A ( Thermo Scientific ) followed by addition of 10X concentrated RNase inhibitor ( Ambion ) . These exosomes were then subsequently used for FACS analysis , in vitro assays and treatment of tumor bearing mice , as described below . Sucrose gradient 47 Sucrose density gradients were performed to characterize the exosomes . For the “Bottom - Up” sucrose gradient separation ( Extended Fig . 1F ) , the exosomes , resuspended in 2 mL of HEPES / sucrose solution ( 2 . 5M sucrose , 20mM HEPES / NaOH solution , pH 7 . 4 ) , were loaded first in the bottom of the tube and overlaid with a 9mL linear sucrose gradient ( 2 . 0 – 0 . 25M sucrose , 20mM HEPES / NaOH , pH 7 . 4 ) in a SW41 tube ( Beckman , 11mL ) . For the “Top - Down” sucrose gradient separation ( Extended Fig . 1G ) , exosomes were resuspended in 1mL of HEPES / sucrose solution ( 0 . 25M sucrose , 20mM HEPES / NaOH , pH 7 . 4 ) . A 10mL linear sucrose gradient ( 2 . 0 – 0 . 25M sucrose , 20mM HEPES / NaOH , pH 7 . 4 ) was built into a SW41 ultracentrifuge tube , and the exosomes suspension ( 1mL , 0 . 25M sucrose , 20mM HEPES / NaOH , pH 7 . 4 ) was deposited on top of this linear sucrose gradient . In both types of sucrose gradient experiments ( Bottom - Up and Top - Down ) , the gradients were Kamerkar et al . Page 7 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t ultracentrifuged for 16 hours at 210 , 000g at 4°C . Gradient fractions of 1 mL were collected from the top to the bottom of the tube , and the densities of each fractions were evaluated using a refractometer . Each layer was placed into a separate centrifuge tube , and PBS was added to a final volume of 11 mL , then this was ultracentrifuged at 150 , 000g at 4°C for 2 hours . The pellets for each layer were resuspended in 200 μl of PBS and loaded onto a black 96 - welled microplate to detect the Alexa fluor 647 ( AF647 ) fluorophore - tagged siRNA contained in them using a fluorescence detection plate reader . A microplate containing 200 μl of PBS was used for background readings . The detection of the fluorescence of Alexa - Fluor 647 fluorophore is depicted as the ratio of fluorescent intensity of the sucrose gradient layer wells over the fluorescent intensity of PBS ( negative control ) containing wells . The sucrose gradient experiments ( both Bottom - Up and Top - Down experiments ) were also performed with the siKras G12D iLiposomes and electroporated siKras G12D siRNA . A total of three independent experiments were performed and the results from each of these experiments are shown in Extended Fig . 1F – G . Electroporation of exosomes and liposomes 10 9 number of total exosomes ( measured by Nanosight ™ analysis ) and 1 μg of siRNA or plasmid ( for shRNA silencing ) were mixed in 400 μl of electroporation buffer ( 1 . 15mM potassium phosphate pH 7 . 2 , 25mM potassium chloride , 21 % Optiprep ) . These exosomes were electroporated using a single 4 mm cuvette using a Gene Pulser Xcell Electroporation System ( BioRad , catalog number 165 – 2081 ) , as previously described 45 , 46 . The cuvette electrode plates are made of aluminum that allows for a uniform pulse delivery to the entire system . Briefly , after adding 400 μl of the RNAi - exosomes mixture to the cuvette , it was electroporated at 400V , 125μF and ∞ ohms , and the cuvette was immediately transferred to ice . Of note , when injecting multiple mice or using more than 10 9 exosomes and 1 μg of siRNA , a master mix of exosomes and siRNA is prepared in the electroporation buffer , and 400 μl of the mixture is aliquoted into each cuvette prior to electroporation . A similar procedure was performed using liposomes ( 100 nm , purchased from Encapsula Nano Sciences ) . After electroporation , exosomes were washed with PBS , as described above . After the wash , the exosomes are resuspended in PBS , and kept on ice and injected into the mice immediately . Following this wash step , the mice were dosed with , conservatively , 10 8 iExosomes per injection in 100 μl PBS volume . This dosage represents approximately 0 . 15 to 0 . 20 μg of exosomes protein , and mice thus received approximately 0 . 15 – 0 . 20 μg of exosomes protein every 48 hours . For in vitro transfection , exosomes and liposomes were electroporated and washed with PBS as described above , and 200 , 000 cells in a 6 - well plate were treated with exosomes and liposomes for the indicated time as described for each assay and subsequently washed with PBS and used for further analysis . The siRNA sequence ( sense strand 5 ′ - GUUGGAGCUG A UGGCGUAGTT - 3 ′ , anti - sense 5 ′ - CUACGCCA U CAGCUCCAACTT - 3 ′ ) reflects a G to A nucleotide deviation from the wild - type Kras gene sequence ( bold ) to specifically target the Glycine to Aspartate amino acid substitution ( Kras G12D ) and include a TT nucleotide overhang to promote silencing efficiency , as described previously 10 , 48 , 49 . The central position of the nucleotide deviant in this Kras G12D siRNA enhances its specificity against the wild - type mRNA sequence . This was also labeled with an Alexa fluor 647 ( AF647 ) fluorophore at the 3 ′ end on the sense strand to track its delivery . The siRNA was obtained from Qiagen ( Cat . No . 1027424 ) . All Kamerkar et al . Page 8 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Stars Negative siRNA ( Scrambled siRNA ) ( 1027287 ) was obtained from Qiagen . The siRNA sequences were also tagged with Alexa fluor 647 . A second scrambled siRNA control was used ( sense strand 5 ′ - UUCUCCGAACGUGUCACGUTT - 3 ′ , anti - sense 5 ′ - ACGUGACACGUUCGGAGAATT - 3 ′ , Extended Fig . 4G ) and the results were consistent with the scrambled siRNA from Qiagen . The Kras G12D shRNA sequence used was 5 ′ CCGGGTTGGAGCTG A TGGCGTAGTTCTCGAGCTACGCCATCAGCTCCAACTTTT TT - 3 ′ , and was flanked with Age1 and EcoR1 sequences to allow for cloning into the pLKO . 1 vector , according to manufacturers protocol ( Addgene ) . The shRNA sequence reflects a G to A nucleotide deviation from the wild type Kras gene sequence ( bold ) so that to specifically target the Glycine to Aspartate amino acid substitution in the Kras G12D mutation . Scrambled pLKO . 1 shRNA was obtained from Addgene . For experiments performed on siRNA electroporated without exosomes , 1 μg of siRNA was added to 400 μl of electroporation buffer , and electroporated as described above . This mixture was then ultracentrifuged for 2 hours at 100 , 000g either by itself , or after it was mixed with 10 9 exosomes ( RT and 37°C , in PBS for 30 minutes ) , and then used for further downstream assays . Notably , freshly prepared exosomes were used for every single assay reported in this manuscript , in both in vivo and in vitro experiments . Immunogold Labeling and Electron Microscopy Fixed specimens at an optimal concentration were placed onto a 300 mesh carbon / formvar coated grids and allowed to absorb to the formvar for a minimum of 1 minute . For immunogold staining the grids were placed into a blocking buffer for a block / permeabilization step for 1 hour . Without rinsing , the grids were immediately placed into the primary antibody at the appropriate dilution overnight at 4°C ( monoclonal anti - CD9 1 : 10 , Abcam ) . As controls , some grids were not exposed to the primary antibody . The next day , all of the grids were rinsed with PBS then floated on drops of the appropriate secondary antibody attached with 10nm gold particles ( AURION , Hatfield , PA ) for 2 hours at room temperature . Grids were rinsed with PBS and were placed in 2 . 5 % Glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1M phosphate buffer for 15 minutes . After rinsing in PBS and distilled water the grids were allowed to dry and stained for contrast using uranyl acetate . The samples were viewed with a Tecnai Bio Twin transmission electron microscope ( FEI , Hillsboro , OR ) and images were taken with an AMT CCD Camera ( Advanced Microscopy Techniques , Danvers , MA ) . Flow cytometry analyses of exosomes Exosomes from BJ Fibroblasts , BJ Fibroblasts over - expressing CD47 , CD47 knockout mouse ear fibroblasts and WT - C57BL / 6 mouse ear fibroblasts were isolated as described above and resuspended in 200 μL of PBS . Aldehyde / sulfate beads ( 10 μL , Life Technologies ) were added to the solution and beads and exosomes mixture allowed to mix using a benchtop rotator for 15 minutes at room temperature . PBS ( 600 μL ) was then added to the solution and mixing was continued overnight at 4°C . 1M Glycine ( 400 μL ) was added and mixing was continued for 1 hour at room temperature . The mixture was then spun down at 12 , 000rpm at RT for 1 minute . The precipitate was then resuspended in 100 μL of 10 % BSA in PBS , and mixed for 45 minutes at room temperature . The mixture was spun down at 12 , 000rpm for 1 minute at RT and the supernatant aspirated . The beads with the exosomes attached ( pellet ) were then resuspended in 40 μL of 2 % BSA in PBS , and split equally into Kamerkar et al . Page 9 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t two tubes : one for staining for CD47 , CD63 or CD81 , the other for control ( secondary antibody only ) . The exosomes bound to beads were then incubated with 1μL of anti - CD47 antibody ( for mouse : BD biosciences , catalog no . 556045 ; for human : eBiosciences , catalog no . 14 – 0479 ) or 3μL of anti - CD63 ( for mouse : Santa Cruz Biotech catalog no . SC - 31211 ; for human : BD biosciences , catalog no . 556019 ) or anti CD - 81 antibody ( for human : BD Biosciences , catalog no . 555675 ) in 20 μL volume , and mixed at RT for 30 minutes . The mixture was then centrifuged at 12 , 000 rpm for 1 minute at RT , the supernatant aspirated , and the pellet resuspended in 20 μL of 2 % BSA in PBS . Secondary antibodies were then added and the samples were mixed at RT for 1 hour . The samples were then centrifuged at 12 , 000 rpm for 1 minute at RT , supernatant aspirated , and pellet resuspended in 200 μL of 2 % BSA in PBS . The exosomes bound to the beads were washed three times with 2 % BSA in PBS . CD47 , CD63 and CD81 detection on the beads was analyzed using the LSR Fortessa X - 20 cell analyzer . All control samples were run side by side with experimental samples . Flow cytometry analysis for exosomes and liposomes biodistribution Exosomes and liposomes were labeled with PKH67 ( Sigma Aldrich ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol . Alternatively , the exosomes and liposomes were electroporated with AF - 647 tagged RNAi prior to injection in mice . These were then injected i . p . into C57BL / 6 or Nude mice . Plasma was then obtained from these mice at the listed time points following injection of either exosomes or liposomes . The plasma was then diluted in 11 mL PBS and filtered through a 0 . 2 μm pore filter . Subsequently , the samples were then ultracentrifuged overnight at 150 , 000g at 4°C . The pellet was then washed with PBS , and followed by a second step of ultracentrifugation at 150 , 000g for 2 hours at 4°C . The samples were then resuspended in 200 μL of PBS . Aldehyde / sulfate beads ( 10 μL , Life Technologies ) were added to the solution and the beads and exosomes / liposomes mixture was allowed to mix using a benchtop rotator for 15 minutes at room temperature . PBS ( 600 μL ) was then added to the solution and mixing was continued overnight at 4°C . 1M Glycine ( 400 μL ) was added and mixing was continued for 1 hour at room temperature . The mixture was then spun down at 12 , 000rpm at RT for 1 minute , supernatant aspirated , and pellet resuspended in 200 μL of 2 % BSA in PBS . The exosomes / liposomes bound to the beads were washed three times with 2 % BSA in PBS . FITC or APC + beads were analyzed using the LSR Fortessa X - 20 cell analyzer . All control samples were run side by side with experimental samples . Flow cytometry analysis for binding efficiency of CD47 neutralizing antibody on exosomes Exosomes from BJ fibroblasts were isolated as described above , and then incubated with 10μg / mL of anti - CD47 neutralizing monoclonal antibody ( Bio - Xcell , B6H12 or 2D3 antibodies , as specified ) for 1 hour at either room temperature or 37°C , or overnight at 4°C , and then bound to aldehyde sulfate beads as described above . 1M Glycine ( 400 μL ) was added and mixing was continued for 1 hour at room temperature . The mixture was then spun down at 12 , 000rpm at RT for 1 minute . The samples were washed with 2 % BSA , and secondary antibody ( Alexa 488 ) was then added and the samples were mixed at RT for 1 hour . The samples were then centrifuged at 12 , 000 rpm for 1 minute at RT , supernatant aspirated , and pellet resuspended in 200 μL of 2 % BSA in PBS . The exosomes bound to the Kamerkar et al . Page 10 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t beads were washed three times with 2 % BSA in PBS . Alexa 488 positive beads were then analyzed using the LSR Fortessa X - 20 cell analyzer . All control samples were run side by side with experimental samples . Flow cytometry analysis for comparison of binding efficiency of exosomes and liposomes to aldehyde sulfate beads ( Extended Fig . 2A ) Exosomes and liposomes were electroporated with A647 siRNA as described above . The samples were then resuspended in 200 μL of PBS . Aldehyde / sulfate beads ( 10 μL , Life Technologies ) were added to the solution and the beads and exosomes / liposomes mixture was allowed to mix using a benchtop rotator for 15 minutes at room temperature . PBS ( 600 μL ) was then added to the solution and mixing was continued overnight at 4°C . 1M Glycine ( 400 μL ) was added and mixing was continued for 1 hour at room temperature . The mixture was then spun down at 12 , 000rpm at RT for 1 minute , supernatant aspirated , and pellet resuspended in 200 μL of 2 % BSA in PBS . The exosomes / liposomes bound to the beads were washed three times with 2 % BSA in PBS . A647 + beads were analyzed using the LSR Fortessa X - 20 cell analyzer . All control samples were run side by side with experimental samples . Visualization of exosomes biodistribution in the tissue Exosomes were labeled with PKH67 ( Sigma Aldrich ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol . Alternatively , the exosomes were electroporated with AF647 tagged RNAi prior to injection in mice . These were then injected i . p . into C57BL / 6 mice . The specific organs were obtained from these mice at the listed times post injection and then were frozen . Sectioned tissue was stained with DAPI nuclear stain , and images were then captured using Zeiss Observer Z1 inverted microscope . Images were quantified by counting the number of nuclei that had PKH67 labeled / AF647 labeled exosomes surrounding it ( PKH67 / AF647 positive cells ) and divided by the total number of nuclei , in five random visual fields per organ ( 400x ) . For evaluation of the entry of exosomes in the various pancreas structures , exosomes electroporated with AF647 tagged siRNA were injected i . p into 26 - day old KTC mice . The pancreas of these mice was then harvested 24 hours later , mounted in O . C . T . compound and frozen . Sectioned tissue was stained with DAPI nuclear stain , and the images were then captured using Zeiss Observer Z1 inverted microscope . Images were quantified by counting the number of nuclei within a particular structure ( Islet , Acinus , Duct , CAF , Tumor ) that had AF647 labeled exosomes surrounding it ( AF647 positive cells ) and dividing by the total number of nuclei within that structure ( 400x ) . All control samples were run side by side with experimental samples . Real - time PCR Analyses Cells were incubated with iExosomes for 3 hours , after which RNA was retro - transcribed with MultiScribe Reverse Transcriptase ( Applied Biosystems ) and oligo - d ( T ) primers following total RNA purification with Trizol ( Invitrogen ) , according to the manufacturer’s directions . Real - time PCR analyses were performed on an ABI PRISM 7300HT Sequence Detection System Instrument using SYBR Green Master Mix ( Applied Biosystems ) . The transcripts of interest were normalized to 18S transcript levels . Primers for Kras G12D were designed as described in 50 , Kras G12C / V were designed as described in 43 , and Kras WT Kamerkar et al . Page 11 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t primers were designed as described in 51 . Each reaction included three technical replicates , which were averaged to define one biological replicate . The experiments were repeated three times on distinct days and each experiment defined a biological replicate . Statistical analyses were performed on dCt of biological replicates ( mice or independent experiments ) and the results expressed as relative fold change . Forward primer sequence for KRAS G12D ( hu ) : F - 5 ′ - ACTTGTGGTAGTTGGAGCAGA - 3 ′ . Reverse primer sequence for KRAS G12D ( hu ) : R - 5 ′ - TTGGATCATATTCGTCCACAA - 3 ′ . Forward primer sequence for KRAS G12D ( Mo ) : F - 5 ′ - ACTTGTGGTGGTTGGAGCAGC - 3 ′ . Reverse primer sequence for KRAS G12D ( Mo ) : R - 5 ′ - TAGGGTCATACTCATCCACAA - 3 ′ . Forward primer sequence for KRAS WT ( hu ) : F - 5 ′ - ATTGTGAATGTTGGTGT - 3 ′ . Reverse primer sequence for KRAS WT ( hu ) : R - 5 ′ - GAAGGTCTCAACTGAAATT - 3 ′ . Forward primer sequence for 18S : F - 5 ′ - GTAACCCGTTGAACCCCATT - 3 ′ . Reverse primer sequence for 18S : R - 5 ′ - CCATCCAATCGGTAGTAGCG - 3 ′ . Forward primer sequence for KRAS G12V ( Hu ) : F - 5 ′ - ACTTGTGGTAGTTGGAGCAGT - 3 ′ . Reverse primer sequence for KRAS G12V ( Hu ) : R - 5 ′ - TTGGATCATATTCGTCCACAA - 3 ′ . Forward primer sequence for KRAS G12C ( Hu ) : F - 5 ′ - AACTTGTGGTAGTTGGAGATT - 3 ′ . Reverse primer sequence for KRAS G12C ( Hu ) : R - 5 ′ - TTGGATCATATTCGTCCACAA - 3 ′ . In some experiments , the exosomes were subjected to a variety of treatments as described below , prior to treatment of Panc - 1 cells : siKrasG12D iExo : Panc - 1 cells treated with siKras G12D iExo ( BJ derived exosomes ) . Media Exo : FBS - depleted culture medium was incubated without cells for 48hrs at 37°C , and then processed as to collect exosomes . The ultracentrifuged pellet was electroporated with siKras G12D iExo as performed in the siKras G12D iExo group . siRNA : Panc - 1 cells treated with siKras G12D siRNA ( no exosomes , no electroporation ) . siRNA ( E ) : Panc - 1 cells treated with siKras G12D siRNA that was electroporated ( ‘E’ ) . Exo ( E ) : Panc - 1 cells treated with just BJ derived exosomes were electroporated ( ‘E’ ) without siKras G12D . siRNA + Exo : Panc - 1 cells treated with BJ derived exosomes and siKras G12D added to the wells of cells concurrently . siRNA ( E ) + Exo : Panc - 1 cells treated with BJ derived exosomes that were mixed with electroporated siKras G12D . siRNA + Exo ( E ) : Panc - 1 cells treated with electroporated BJ derived exosomes that were mixed with siKras G12D . siRNA ( E ) + Exo ( E ) : Panc - 1 cells treated with electroporated BJ derived exosomes that were mixed with electroporated siKras G12D . Scramble iExo : Panc - 1 cells treated with BJ derived exosomes that were electroporated with siScramble siRNA ( from Qiagen , as described above ) . Kamerkar et al . Page 12 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Scramble ( 2 ) iExo : Panc - 1 cells treated with BJ derived exosomes that were electroporated with a distinct siScramble siRNA ( target sequence : AATTCTCCGAACGTGTCACGT ) . All control samples were run side by side with experimental samples . MTT , TUNEL and flow cytometry apoptosis assay Panc - 1 , BxPC - 3 , Capan - 1 and MIA PaCa - 2 cells were seeded in a 96 - well plate ( 1 , 000 cells / well ) and allowed to seed for 24 hours , after which they were treated with exosomes electroporated with Kras G12D siRNA , Kras G12D shRNA , scrambled siRNA , scrambled shRNA , PBS or non - electroporated control exosomes . Treatment was given only once at the beginning , post seeding of cells . Subsequently , every 24 hours , MTT reagent ( tetrazole , Sigma Aldrich ) was added to the cell culture media for 3 hours at 37°C . The supernatant was then discarded , cells washed with PBS , and lysed with dimethyl sulfoxide to dissolve the formazan product . Absorbance was measured at an optical density of 562 nm in a spectrophotometric plate reader . In these MTT experiments , each treatment ( e . g . iExosomes ) were aliquoted into 5 partitions , and each partition was used to treat 3 wells of cells . The triplicate wells were averaged to define n = 1 partition and each treatment thus totaled n = 5 partitions . The MTT assay for Panc - 1 and BXPC - 3 was repeated again under the exact same conditions , as independent experiments ( Extended Fig . 4 ) . For TUNEL assay , cells were treated with iExosomes for 24 hours , and apoptosis measurement by TUNEL was assessed using the In Situ Cell Death Kit , TMR red ( Roche ) , according to the manufacturer’s directions . The cells were fixed with 4 % PFA at room temperature for 20 minutes , and SYTOX green nucleic acid stain ( Invitrogen , 1 : 10 , 000 in PBS for 10 minutes at room temperature ) or DAPI were used to delineate the nuclei . Images were taken by Zeiss LSM 510 confocal microscope , quantified by counting the number of cells with TUNEL positivity per visual field ( 400x ) , and the results were expressed as the percentage of cells with positive label out of the total number of cells counted per visual field . The TUNEL assay was repeated again under the exact same conditions , as independent experiments ( Extended Fig . 4 ) . For flow cytometry analysis of apoptosis in Panc - 1 cells , Panc - 1 cells were treated with iExosomes or scramble iExosomes for 24 hours , and apoptosis and dead cells were measured by LIVE / DEAD fixable aqua ( ThermoFisher , L34957 ) and propidium idodide ( 5 μL of a 50μg / ml stock solution per reaction ( from BD Biosciences , 556547 ) , according to the manufacturers instructions . This was then analyzed by using the LSR Fortessa X - 20 cell analyzer . All control samples were run side by side with experimental samples . Visualization and quantification of Alexa Fluor 647 / CM - DiI in cells treated with exosomes or liposomes Exosomes isolated from BJ fibroblasts , CD47 knockout fibroblasts , and WT C57BL / 6 fibroblasts were electroporated with Alexa fluor 647 tagged siRNA and treated with PBS , proteinase K , or trypsin ( Life Technologies , 10X , 15 minutes at room temperature and ultracentrifuged with PBS for 2 hours at 4°C ) , were washed with PBS for 2 hours , and then added to Panc - 1 cells cultures on glass coverslips for 3 hours . For staining of exosomes with CM - DiI dye ( ThermoFisher ) , isolated exosomes were resuspended in 1 mL PBS , and 2 μL ( 1 : 500 ) of CM - DiI dye was added , after which the mixture was incubated at 37°C for 5 Kamerkar et al . Page 13 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t minutes , and then at 4°C for 10 minutes . This was then ultracentrifuged with PBS for 2 hours , and then added to Panc - 1 and BxPC - 3 cells on glass coverslips for 3 hours . The cells were then fixed by washing with cold PBS and incubating with 4 % PFA at room temperature for 20 minutes . The cells were then washed with PBS , incubated with 0 . 05 % Triton X for 10 minutes , washed with PBS and stained with Sytox green nuclear stain ( Invitrogen ) or DAPI . The coverslips were then mounted on to glass slides with mounting media . Accumulation of Alexa Fluor 647 / CM - DiI was visualized using Zeiss Observer Z1 inverted microscope . The number of cells with Alexa Fluor 647 / CM - DiI labels was counted per visual field ( x400 ) and the results were expressed as the percentage of cells with positive label out of the total number of cells counted per visual field . All control samples were run side by side with experimental samples . Quantification of Loading Efficiency within Exosomes / Liposomes by RT - PCR 10 9 exosomes or liposomes were electroporated with 1 μg siRNA as described above . When stated , the electroporated exosomes / liposomes were proteinase K treated and RNAse A treated ( as described above ) . Specifically , when both treatments were required , they were performed sequentially . The samples were first proteinase K ( PK ) treated , the PK was inactivated , then the samples were washed with PBS and spun down using ultracentrifugation . The resuspended , PK - treated exosomes were then RNAse A treated , then the RNAse was inactivated , and the exosomes were washed with PBS and spun down using ultracentrifugation . We also treated exosomes with 1 % Triton X - 100 prior to RNAse A treatment . Briefly , exosomes were subjected to treatment with 1 % Triton X - 100 for 30 minutes at 37°C , after which RNAse A was added . One microgram of siRNA was used as input , and 1 μg siRNA was also used for RNAse A treatment following an identical procedure as listed above . Control exosomes consisted in non - electroporated exosomes . All samples were mixed with 500 μl of TRIzol reagent , and 200 μl of chloroform was added to the mixtures . The aqueous phase was recovered following 15 minutes of centrifugation at 10 , 000g at 4°C . The aqueous phase , 200 μl for each sample , was then mixed with 250 μl of 100 % ethanol and bound to filters provided in the Total Exosomes RNA and Protein Isolation Kit ( Invitrogen , catalog number 4478545 ) . The protocol to purify the RNA was then followed according to the manufacturer’s directions . A total of 100 μl of eluted RNA for each sample was obtained . The Custom TaqMan® Small RNA Assay kit was purchased ( Applied Biosystems ) to specifically detect the sense strand of the Kras G12D siRNA and the manufacturer’s protocol was followed , using 5 μl of RNA template for the reverse transcription ( RT ) reaction , and 1 . 33 μl of 1 : 1000 diluted RT reaction product for the qPCR . The reactions were also performed by diluting the electroporated exosomes 1 : 1000 prior to proceeding with the described treatments , in which case the RT reaction product was not diluted . The RNA was extracted as described above , RT reaction performed as described above , and 1 . 33 μl of the RT reaction product was used for the pPCR . qPCRs were run with technical duplicates . The RT reaction product of the siRNA input sample was also further diluted 1 : 2 and 1 : 4 fold to establish a standard curve . No template control were included in the qPCR reaction and showed no detectable signal . Each exosomes and liposomes samples was prepared in triplicates , consisting in 3 independent preparations of exosomes / liposomes electroporation . The average 1 / Ct and standard deviation of the 3 independent experiments is presented . All control samples were run side by side with experimental samples . Kamerkar et al . Page 14 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Protein identification by nano Liquid Chromatography coupled to tandem Mass Spectrometry ( LC - MS / MS ) analysis Exosomes extraction was performed by ultracentrifugation ( Beckman Optima XE 100 ) 100 , 000g , overnight , 4ºC , followed by two washing steps with NaCl 0 . 9 % ( saline ) . Protein extraction was done using a solution of 8M / 2 . 5 % SDS - Urea ( Sigma ) , cComplete ( Roche ) and PMSF ( Sigma ) , for 30 minutes on ice followed by centrifugation 17 , 000g for 30 minutes . Proteins were present in the supernatant . T3M4 CD24 + CD44 + derived exosomes protein was precipitated using methanol / chloroform methodology and quantified with PIERCE 660nm . A total of 40 μg of protein was used for the analysis . The sample digestion was performed overnight using trypsin solution . The digestion product was purified with SEP - PAK C18 cartridge . For the analysis , 1 μg of peptides were subjected to nano liquid chromatography ( Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus , AB SCIEX , Foster City , CA ) coupled to high - speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer ( AB SCIEX , Foster City , CA ) with a Nanospray III source ( 1 technical replicate ) . The mass spectrometry data obtained was analyzed using Mascot Server v . 2 . 5 . 0 ( Matrix Science , London , UK ) as search engine against Homo sapiens database ( including also the decoy database ) . The confidence interval for protein identification was set to ≥ 95 % ( p < 0 . 05 ) and only peptides with an individual ion score above the 1 % False Discovery Rates ( FDR ) threshold were considered correctly identified . Western Blot To deduce the protein levels in cell lysates after 24 hours of treatment with exosomes , Panc - 1 cells were homogenized in RIPA lysis buffer and protein lysates were normalized using Bicinchoninic Acid ( BCA ) protein assay kit ( Pierce , Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . Twenty micrograms of protein lysates were loaded onto acrylamide gels for electrophoretic separation of proteins under denaturing conditions and transferred onto PVDF membranes ( ImmobilonP ) by wet electrophoretic transfer . The membranes were then blocked for 1 hour at room temperature with 5 % non - fat dry milk in PBS with 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 , and incubated overnight at 4°C with the following primary antibodies : anti - rabbit p - Erk - p44 / p42 MAPK ( Erk1 / 2 ) ( Thr202 / Tyr 204 ) ( Cell Signaling , 4376 , 1 : 1 , 000 ) , anti - rabbit Vinculin ( Abcam , 129002 , 1 : 10 , 000 ) . Secondary antibodies were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature . Washes after antibody incubations were done with an orbital shaker , three times at 15 min intervals , with PBS containing with 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 . Membranes were developed with chemiluminescent reagents from Pierce , according to the manufacturer’s directions . Supplementary Fig . 1 shows uncropped western blots from data presented in Extended Fig . 4H . The quantifications were performed on two independent experiments ( n = 2 ) with uncropped western blots shown in Supplementary Fig . 1 . Western blots were quantified by ImageJ software , wherein the p - ERK peak intensity values ( selecting both bands that represent p - Erk1 and p - Erk2 ) were normalized to those of vinculin ( selecting the ~ 124 kDa band ) , in each blot . All control samples were run side by side with experimental samples . RAS Binding Assay Lysates from cells treated with iExosomes and controls were isolated according to the manufacturers instructions ( Cytoskeleton , BK008 ) , and subsequently the GTP bound vs . Kamerkar et al . Page 15 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t GDP bound RAS activity in Panc - 1 and BxPC - 3 cells was measured using the Ras pulldown activation assay kit ( Cytoskeleton , BK008 ) , and using western blotting as the final readout . The scanned film saturation was uniformly set to 0 using the format picture tool in PowerPoint and the cropped blots are shown in Extended Fig . 4I ; and the uncropped , unmodified western blots are shown Supplementary Fig . 1 . All control samples were run side by side with experimental samples . Mice Female athymic nu / nu mice ( Charles Rivers ) between 4 to 6 weeks of age were housed in individually ventilated cages on a 12 hours light - dark cycle at 21 to 23ºC and 40 % to 60 % humidity . Mice were allowed free access to an irradiated diet and sterilized water . Under general anesthesia , Panc - 1 , BxPC - 3 ( 10 6 cells in 10μl PBS ) or KPC689 cells ( 5×10 5 cells in PBS ) were injected into the tail of the pancreas using a 27 - gauge syringe . For detection of luciferase expression , the mice were injected i . p . with 100mg / kg of body weight of luciferin ( 200 μl of 10mg / ml luciferin in PBS ) 12 – 15 minutes before imaging , anesthetized with isoflurane , and imaged using IVIS ( Xenogen Spectrum ) . For tumor burden analyses , Living Image version 4 . 4 ( Caliper Life Sciences ) was used to quantify all tumors . A circular region of interest ( ROI ) around the pancreas and tumor was set within the same experimental groups . In addition , exposure conditions ( time , aperture , stage position , binning ) were kept identical for all measurements within each experiment . Tumor measurements for average radiance ( p / sec / cm 2 / sr ) or total flux ( wherever mentioned , p / sec ) were obtained under the same conditions for all experimental groups . All IVIS imaging analyses were ascertained by two independent experimentalists , one of which was blinded to the treatment groups . The mice were imaged regularly and randomly divided into groups for treatments . The mice were monitored for sign of distress daily , and two of the 3 experimentalists monitoring health status were blinded to the treatment groups . Mice received 10 8 exosomes or liposomes i . p . in 100 μl volume of PBS every other day . Exosomes or liposomes were electroporated with 1 μg of siRNA ( Alexa 647 tagged siRNA ) , or shRNA , or were pre - treated with proteinase K and / or RNase A as described above , or were mixed with electroporated siRNA ( RT and 37°C ) , and washed with PBS prior to injection . When using KTC ( Ptf1a cre / + ; LSL - Kras G12D / + ; Tgfbr2 Lox / Lox ) 25 genetically engineered mice , exosomes treatment was initiated at 18 ( early ) or 33 ( late ) days of age . For exosomes biodistribution studies , adult C57BL / 6 mice were injected i . p . with exosomes labeled with PKH67 ( Sigma ) or exosomes electroporated with AF647 . For the KPC689 orthotopic study , 5×10 5 of KPC689 cells were injected orthotopically in the tail of the pancreas of adult female C57BL / 6 mice ( Jackson Laboratory ) . These mice were then imaged by IVIS or by Magnetic Resonance Imagining ( MRI ) 20 days post tumor cell induction . Treatment with exosomes ( siKras G12D iExo and siScramble iExo ) was started on day 16 ( early ) and day 32 ( late ) - post tumor cell induction , and continued every other day . Another MRI was additionally performed on 48 days post tumor cell induction . MRI was performed and analyzed as previously described 42 . For experiments aimed to neutralize CD47 , 10μg / mL of anti - CD47 neutralizing monoclonal antibody ( Bio - Xcell , B6H12 or 2D3 antibodies , as specified ) was incubated with either exosomes or liposomes for 1 hour at room temperature , washed with PBS by ultracentrifugation as described above , and injected into the mice . Treatment with both CD47 monoclonal antibody and iExosomes / iLiposomes along with controls was Kamerkar et al . Page 16 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t performed every other day . Treatment of KPC ( Pdx1 cre / + ; LSL - KRas G12D / + ; LSL - Trp53 R172H / + ) was started when the mice reached 100 days of age . Due to the variability of the model , the mice were subjected to MRI prior to treatment start , to determine baseline tumor size , and subsequently grouped into siKras G12D iExo or siScrbl iExo groups . For gemcitabine studies , a 50mg / kg dosage , administered every 48 hours intraperitoneally was used . At time of necropsy or euthanasia , gross observation of the metastatic burden and measure of primary tumor burden was performed in a blinded fashion : the experimentalist performing the tissue collection , recording of disease burden and metastasis , was blinded to the treatment group . Blood urea nitrogen ( BUN ) , aspartate transaminase ( AST ) and alanine transaminase ( ALT ) analyses were performed using plasma ( collected using heparin ) and BioAssay Systems blood chemistry assay kits ( catalog DIUR - 100 , EASTR - 100 EALT - 100 respectively ) , following the manufacturer’s specifications . In all orthotopic mouse models ( Panc - 1 , BxPC - 3 , KPC689 ) , all control groups were treated side by side with the experimental groups . For KTC and KPC GEMM , mice were enrolled randomly into control or experimental treatment groups when they became available and reached the stated age for treatment start , however , care was taken to ensure , whenever possible , that mice were enrolled into both control and experimental groups side by side . For KPC mice , baseline MRI confirmed the presence of tumor , following which mice were enrolled into either control or experimental groups at 100 days of age , and control and experimental treatment were administered side by side when the treatment windows overlapped during the experiment . All animal procedures were reviewed and approved by the Institute for Animal Care and Use Committee at UT MDACC . Histological analyses Tissues were fixed in formalin and processed for paraffin embedding . Tissue sections of 5 μm thickness were cut and stained for haematoxylin and eosin ( H & E ) and Masson’s trichrome ( MTS ) ( Leica ) . For histopathological scoring , H & E stained slides were scored based on the morphological stages of pancreas cancer : normal , pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia ( PanIN ) and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma ( PDAC ) . For each tissue section , a percentage score for each of the three stages ( Normal , PanIN , PDAC ) were performed in a blinded fashion . Specifically , at least two ( three in some experiments ) experimentalists evaluated the slides . They each performed their analyses independently from one another , and one of the two , or two of the three , experimentalists were blinded to the treatment groups . All three experimentalists returned identical conclusions and the scores were averaged for each stages for each mouse . Note that while small foci of cancer cells can be seen in the shKras G12D iExo treated pancreas , the vast majority of the pancreas was histologically unremarkable . For the analysis of fibrosis in mice , six 200× visual fields were randomly selected for each MTS stained pancreas section and fibrosis was quantified using a grid intersection analysis with Adobe Photoshop . For each image evaluated , a grid of a 100 squares was overlapped on each picture , and each intersection was counted for blue ( fibrotic area ) and purple / red ( non - fibrotic area ) . A percentage score was then obtained for each tissue section . Tissue sections were also subjected to antigen retrieval ( 15 minutes in 10nM citrate buffer at pH6 and 98°C ) prior to immunostaining . The tissue sections were incubated with 4 % CWFS gelatin ( Aurion ) in either TBS or PBS , 1 hour prior to overnight incubation with the primary antibodies . The following primary antibodies were used for staining : anti - Kamerkar et al . Page 17 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t rabbit p - Erk - p44 / p42 MAPK ( Erk1 / 2 ) ( Thr202 / Tyr 204 ) ( IHC , Cell Signaling , 4376 , 1 : 400 ) , anti - rabbit p - AKT - Anti AKT1 ( phospho S473 ) ( IHC , Abcam , ab81283 , 1 : 100 ) , anti - rabbit Ki - 67 ( IHC , Thermo Scientific , RM - 9106 - S , 1 : 400 ) and conjugated anti - actin α - SMA - Cy3 ( IF , Sigma , C6198 , 1 : 100 ) . For CK19 p - ERK co - staining , the primary antibodies used were anti - rabbit CK19 ( IF , Abcam , 52625 ) and anti - rabbit p - ERK p44 / p42 MAPK ( Erk1 / 2 ) ( IF , Cell Signaling , 4370 ) . For IHC , the sections were incubated with biotinylated goat anti - rabbit and streptavidin HRP ( Biocare Medical ) , each for 10 minutes , and counterstained with haematoxylin . DAB positivity was analyzed . Note that the quantification was performed on measurably smaller tumor areas in the siKras G12D iExo treated group compared to large tumor area in control group . This was performed on at least five , and up to eight 200× pictures per tissue section , and an average of relative percent positive score was obtained for each tissue section . Ki - 67 staining was quantified by counting the number of positively stained nuclei , per visual field ( 400x ) , whereas p - Erk , p - AKT , and α - SMA staining was quantified with ImageJ to define a positively stained area , which was then expressed as a percentage of positively stained area to the total image area . Quantification of CK19 and p - ERK co - immunolabels was performed on 8 random 400× images per tissue section , and inserted into FIJI by Image J co - localization software . TUNEL assay was performed using the In situ cell death detection kit , TMR Red ( Roche ) , according to the manufacturer’s directions . Alexa fluor 647 was detected on frozen tissue sections by staining the nuclei of the tissue with SYTOX green ( 1 : 10 , 000 in PBS for 10 minutes ) . Images were taken by Zeiss LSM 510 confocal microscope , and quantified by counting the number of cells with TUNEL positivity per visual field ( 400x ) and the results were expressed as the percentage of cells with positive label out of the total number of cells counted per visual field . PKH67 labeled exosomes or AF647 electroporated exosomes were also injected into mice 3 hours prior to euthanasia , and the pancreas were fixed , processed and sectioned as described above . Sections were mounted on slides , the nuclei stained with DAPI , and the pancreas sections imaged using the Zeiss Observer Z1 inverted microscope . PKH67 / AF647 positive cells were counted in each 400× visual field and differentiated according to tumor or normal peritumoral cells based on nuclear staining characteristics . For the exosomes biodistribution studies , the number of PKH67 positive cells was counted in 5 random 400× visual fields in the brain , G . I . Tract , kidney , liver , lung , pancreas and spleen from 3 mice . The results were expressed as the percentage of cells with positive label out of the total number of cells counted . For pancreas structure quantification , the number of AF647 positive cells was counted in each 400× visual field in the pancreas , and the results were expressed as the percentage of cells with positive label out of the total number of cells counted per visual field . Representative pictures of the structures were taken accordingly . For Kras staining , pancreas tumor , liver , lung , kidney , spleen and heart , 5 μm thick sections from formalin fixed , paraffin embedded tissues were processed for antigen retrieval ( 2 repeats of 15 minutes microwave based antigen retrieval using sodium citrate buffer ( 10mM sodium citrate , 0 . 05 % Tween 20 , pH 6 . 0 ) ) , then incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes with 3 % H 2 O 2 in methanol . The sections were washed in TBS , blocked with Rodent Block M solution ( Biocare ) for 30 – 45 minutes at room temperature , then incubated with 1 : 10 dilution of Kras antibody ( ThermoFisher , 414700 , clone 9 . 13 ) in 3 % BSA containing PBS diluent , overnight at 4°C or at room temperature for 4 hours . The slides were then processed for secondary antibody application and DAB based development using Biocare’s MACH 4 Kamerkar et al . Page 18 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t universal HRP - polymer reagents , according to the manufacturer’s recommendation . Analyses for comparative DAB positivity was performed using ImageJ software by designing a macros to define a positively stained area , which was then expressed as a percentage of positively stained area to the total image area . Each organ had a unique macros programmed for quantification . All control samples were run side by side with experimental samples . Quantification of the number of exosomes from the plasma of mice CD47 knockout mice ( CD47 k / o ) vs . WT C57BL / 6 mice were retro - orbitally bled using heparin and the plasma was isolated . 300 μl of plasma per mouse was then diluted in 11 mL PBS and filtered through a 0 . 2 μm pore filter . Subsequently , the samples were then ultracentrifuged overnight at 150 , 000g at 4°C . The pellet was then washed with PBS , and followed by a second step of ultracentrifugation at 150 , 000g for 2 hours at 4°C , after which the total number of exosomes in the plasma of the mice was measured by NanoSight ™ analysis . All control samples were run side by side with experimental samples . Macrophage clearance Immunocompetent C57BL / 6 mice between the ages of 10 and 14 weeks were injected i . p . with either exosomes or liposomes containing Alexa fluor 647 tagged siRNA . The blood of these mice was collected 3 hours post injection and processed for flow cytometry analyses . Red blood cells were depleted using ACK lysis buffer ( Invitrogen ) , and the peripheral cells were blocked with FC block ( 1 : 1000 , BD Pharmingen ) , stained with Live / Dead Aqua dye ( 1 : 200 , Life technologies , 405nm ) anti - CD11b ( 1 : 200 , BD Pharmingen , PerCP / Cye 5 . 5 ) and anti CD172a ( 1 : 200 , BD Pharmingen , FITC ) antibodies for 30 minutes , washed with PBS , and analyzed using the LSR Fortessa X - 20 cell analyzer ( UT MDACC flow cytometry core facility ) . Immunocompetent C57BL / 6 mice were also i . p . injected with exosomes that were electroporated with Alexa fluor 647 - tagged siRNA and incubated with 10μg / mL of CD47 neutralizing monoclonal antibody ( Bio - Xcell , B6H12 or 2D3 antibodies ) for 1 hour at RT . The blood of these mice was collected 3 hours post injection and processed for flow cytometry analyses as described above . All control samples were run side by side with experimental samples . Macropinosome visualization and quantification 21 Fifty thousand cells ( Panc - 1 and BxPC - 3 ) were seeded onto glass coverslips , and 24 hours after seeding the cells , they were serum starved for 18 hours . For 5 - ( N - ethyl - N - isopropyl ) amiloride ( EIPA , Sigma Aldrich ) treatment , cells were pre - treated with 5μM , 25μM or 75μM EIPA for 30 minutes at 37°C . DMSO was used as a vehicle . Cells were then incubated with exosomes or liposomes , labeled with PKH67 ( Sigma Aldrich ) for 3 hours at 37°C . Macropinosomes were detected using a high molecular mass TMR - dextran ( Invitrogen ) , wherein TMR dextran is added to the serum free media at a concentration of 1mg / mL for 30 minutes at 37°C . At the end of the incubation period , cells were rinsed 5 times with cold PBS and fixed with 4 % PFA . Cells were then stained with DAPI nuclear stain , and then coverslips were mounted onto the slides . Images were then captured using Zeiss Observer Z1 inverted microscope , and at least three fields from at least three to five separate wells were randomly selected across each sample , and analyzed using the ‘Analyze Particles’ Kamerkar et al . Page 19 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t feature on Image J , according to Commisso C . and colleagues 21 . The particle density was then expressed as the relative number of macropinosomes . Briefly , the ‘macropinocytic index’ was computed by determining the total macropinosome area in relation to the total cell area for each field , and then determining the average across all fields . A detailed protocol to analyze and calculate the amount of macropinocytosis within a sample is listed in 21 . A similar quantification was performed using PKH67 label and the result was expressed as the relative number of exosomes or liposomes . The macropinocytosis assay was repeated again as an independent experiment in Extended Fig . 7 . All control samples were run side by side with experimental samples . Statistical analyses Statistical analyses used are detailed in the figure legends . One - way ANOVA or unpaired two tailed student’s t test were used to establish statistical significance using GraphPad Prism ( GraphPad Software ) . For survival analyses , Kaplan - Meier plots were drawn and statistical differences evaluated using the Log - rank ( Mantel - Cox ) test . A P value < 0 . 05 was considered statistically significant . Data availability Source data for all figures are provided with the paper and reagents will be provided upon availability and reasonable request . Kamerkar et al . Page 20 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Extended Data Extended Figure 1 . Exosomes purification and siRNA loading ( A ) Exosomes and liposomes numbers and size distribution - using NanoSight ™ . ( B ) Transmission electron micrograph of exosomes and stained for CD9 by immunogold ( left panel : 2ary antibody only ) , scale bar : 100nm . ( C ) FC analyses for CD63 and CD47 on exosomes ( n = 3 distinct exosomes isolations ) . ( D ) FC analyses and quantification of exosomal proteins CD63 and CD47 in liposomes . ( E ) Schematic representation of Kamerkar et al . Page 21 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t electroporation of RNAi into exosomes . ( F ) Schematic and fluorescence intensity plot of sucrose gradient layers ( from the “Bottom - Up” method , UC : ultracentrifuge ) . Results from three independent experiments are shown . ( G ) Schematic and fluorescence intensity plot of sucrose gradient layers ( from the “Top - Down” method , UC : ultracentrifuge ) . Results from three independent experiments are shown . The data is presented as the mean ± SEM . FC : Flow cytometry . See accompanying source data . Extended Figure 2 . Tissue distribution and clearance of iExosomes Kamerkar et al . Page 22 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t ( A ) FC analyses and quantification of the comparison of the binding efficiency to aldehyde sulfate beads , n = 3 distinct batches of exosomes and liposomes ( B ) FC analyses and quantification of AF647 - tagged RNAi containing exosomes and liposomes isolated from the plasma of C57BL / 6 ( n = 3 mice ) and Nude ( Nu / nu ) mice ( n = 3 mice ) , 24 hours post injection . ( C ) FC analysis plots ( from data shown in Fig . 1B ) of exosomes with AF647 tagged siRNA in the circulation of mice . ( D ) Representative micrographs of the indicated organs of mice injected i . p . with PKH67 labeled BJ fibroblast exosomes ( n = 3 mice ) . Quantification is shown in Fig . 1C . ( E – F ) FC analyses of pancreas cells 6 hours ( E ) following injection of siKras G12D Exos ( quantification shown in Fig . 1D ) and 24 hours ( F ) following injection of siKras G12D Exos . The data is presented as the mean ± SEM . One - way ANOVA was used to determine statistical significance . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . FC : Flow cytometry . See accompanying source data . Extended Figure 3 . CD47 induced monocyte clearance and iExosomes characterization ( A ) Schematic representation of gating strategy for data shown in Fig 1E . ( B ) FC analysis of CD11b + cells in the circulation , liposomes ( n = 7 mice ) , exosomes ( n = 7 mice ) , Untreated Kamerkar et al . Page 23 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t mice ( n = 4 ) . ( C ) Representative dot plots from Fig . 1E . ( D ) FC analyses of SIRP - α ( CD172a ) expression from Alexa 647 + / CD11b + monocytes . ( E ) FC analyses of the binding efficiency of CD47 neutralizing antibodies to exosomes ( n = 3 distinct batches of exosomes ) . ( F ) Quantification of the number of exosomes / mL in the plasma of WT C57BL / 6 mice ( n = 5 ) vs . CD47 knockout mice ( n = 7 ) , unpaired two - tailed t test . The data is presented as the mean ± SEM . Unless otherwise stated , one - way ANOVA was used to determine statistical significance . * p < 0 . 05 , * * * p < 0 . 001 . FC : Flow cytometry . See accompanying source data . Extended Figure 4 . iExosomes specifically target Kras G12D expression ( A ) KRAS G12D transcript levels in Panc - 1 cells ( n = 3 independent experiments ) . ( B – C ) 1 / Ct values from RT - PCR analysis under the listed conditions , to determine the loading efficiency of siRNA . Standards ( siKras G12D , 1 : 2 and 1 : 4 dilution ) : n = 1 , experimental groups : n = 3 Kamerkar et al . Page 24 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t independent experiments . ( D ) KRAS G12D transcript levels in Panc - 1 cells , n = 3 independent experiments . The experiments with 400 exos per cell is the same data that is also presented in panel A . ( E – G ) KRAS G12D transcript levels in Panc - 1 cells under the listed conditions . In all groups , n = 3 independent experiments . ( H ) Western blotting ( Panc - 1 cells ) for phosphorylated ERK ( p - ERK ) and Vinculin . si and sh Kras G12D iExo : One way ANOVA , iLipo : two - tailed t - test , n = 2 independent experiments . ( I ) RAS pull - down assay . ( J – K ) Panc - 1 cells MTT assay ( n = 5 partitions of indicated treatments with 3 or 6 wells for each partition of treatment ) ( J ) and separate independent experiment ( K ) . ( L – M ) TUNEL assay ( n = 3 distinct wells of Panc - 1 cells ) ( L ) and separate independent experiment ( M ) . ( N ) FC analysis of apoptosis in Panc - 1 cells . Three different treatments were used to treat n = 3 distinct wells of cells . ( O ) Wild - type KRAS transcript levels in BxPC - 3 cells ( n = 3 independent experiments ) . ( P ) KRAS G12V transcript levels in Capan - 1 cells ( n = 3 independent experiments ) ( Q ) KRAS G12C transcript levels in MIA PaCa - 2 cells ( n = 3 independent experiments ) . ( R – U ) MTT assay : n = 5 partitions of treatment given to 3 wells each , BxPC - 3 cells ( R ) and separate independent experiment ( S ) , n = 3 partitions of treatment given to 10 wells each , Capan1 cells ( T ) , n = 3 partitions of treatment given to 10 wells each , MIA PaCa - 2 cells , ( U ) . The data is presented as the mean ± SEM . Unless otherwise stated , one - way ANOVA was used to determine statistical significance . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . FC : Flow cytometry . See accompanying source data . For uncropped blots for H and I , refer to Supplementary Fig . 1 . Kamerkar et al . Page 25 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Extended Figure 5 . Kras G12D RNAi containing exosomes suppress Panc - 1 orthotopic tumor growth but not BxPC - 3 orthotopic tumor growth ( A ) Experimental scheme . ( B ) Representative micrographs ( scale bar : 100μm , ) depicting accumulation of internalized AF647 - tagged siRNA from exosomes . ( C ) Panc - 1 orthotopic tumor growth . PBS : n = 6 mice , Control exos : n = 6 mice , siKras G12D iLipo : n = 3 mice , shKras G12D iLipo : n = 3 mice , siKras G12D iExo : n = 7 mice , shKras G12D iExo : n = 7 mice , siScrbl iExo : n = 5 mice , shScramble iExo : n = 5 mice . Statistical test compares treatment groups to PBS control group at day 42 - post cancer cell injection , or day 28 for siKras G12D exos group . Unpaired two - tailed t test . This graph is an inset from the graph shown in Fig . Kamerkar et al . Page 26 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 2C . ( D ) Tumor bioluminescence at day 77 ( total flux ) , PBS : n = 4 mice , Control Exo : n = 3 mice , shKras G12D iExo : n = 6 mice , shKras G12D iLipo : n = 3 mice , shScramble iExo : n = 3 mice , siScramble iExo : n = 4 mice . ( E ) Luciferase activity at day 7 , 35 , 77 and moribund stage or day 200 ( shKras G12D iExo ) - post cancer cell injection . Some of these panels are also shown in Fig . 2a . ( F ) Bioluminescence from Panc - 1 orthotopic tumors over time ( total flux ) . PBS : n = 7 mice , Control Exo : n = 6 mice , shKras G12D iExo : n = 7 mice , shKras G12D iLipo : n = 4 mice , shScramble iExo : n = 5 mice , siScramble iExo : n = 5 mice ( G ) Representative H & E of the Panc - 1 orthotopic pancreas ( scale bar : 100μm ) . ( H ) Representative micrographs ( scale bar : 100μm ) of tumors immunolabeled for phosphorylated AKT ( p - AKT ) and quantification . Control Exo , n = 4 mice ; shKras G12D iExo , n = 6 mice . Unpaired two - tailed t test . ( I – J ) BxPC - 3 orthotopic tumor growth , n = 3 mice per group . ( K ) Luciferase activity at day 14 and day 77 - post cancer cell ( BxPC - 3 ) injection . ( L ) Representative H & E of the BxPC - 3 orthotopic pancreas at the indicated experimental endpoints ( scale bar : 100μm ) . ( M ) Kaplan - Meier curve of BxPC - 3 tumor bearing mice , Log - rank Mantel - Cox , n = 3 mice per group . The data is presented as the mean ± SEM . Unless otherwise stated , one - way ANOVA was used to determine statistical significance . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . See accompanying source data . Kamerkar et al . Page 27 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Extended Figure 6 . Anti - tumor response of iExosomes in orthotopic models ( A ) FC analyses and quantification of CD81 on exosomes under listed conditions , n = 3 independent experiments . ( B ) Bioluminescence from Panc - 1 orthotopic tumors over time , n = 6 mice per group . ( C ) Kaplan - Meier curve of Panc - 1 tumor bearing mice . Log - rank Mantel - Cox test , n = 6 mice in each group . ( D ) Tumor bioluminescence at day 45 , n = 6 mice per group . One - way ANOVA . ( E – J ) Bioluminescence from Panc - 1 orthotopic tumors over time depicting separate groups , from panel B , and Kaplan - Meier curve depicting the separate groups , from panel C , Log - rank Mantel - Cox test . n = 6 mice per group . ( K ) Tumor bioluminescence at day 42 , n = 3 mice per group . Experimental groups compared to the PBS control group , one - way ANOVA . ( L ) Bioluminescence from Panc - 1 orthotopic tumors over time ( total flux ) , n = 3 mice per group . ( M ) Luciferase activity at day 10 and day 42 - post cancer cell ( Panc - 1 ) injection . ( N ) Surface lung nodules of KPC689 mice , n = 8 mice per group . ( O ) Tumor weights ( g : grams ) , n = 8 mice per group , siKras G12D iExo group is Kamerkar et al . Page 28 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t compared to other treatment groups , one - way ANOVA . ( P ) Bioluminescent KPC689 orthotopic tumors in nu / nu mice , n = 8 mice per group . ( Q ) Tumor weights ( g : grams ) , n = 8 mice per group . ( R ) Kaplan - Meier curve of KPC689 nu / nu mice . Log - rank Mantel - Cox test , n = 8 in each group . The data is presented as the mean ± SEM . Unless otherwise stated , unpaired two - tailed t test was used to determine statistical significance . * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . See accompanying source data . Extended Figure 7 . Pancreas localization and macropinocytosis promotes iExosomes uptake into tumor cells ( A ) Quantification and representative pictures ( scale bar : 100μm ) of pancreas structure in KTC mice injected with exosomes with AF647 tagged siRNA , n = 3 mice . ( B ) Quantification and representative images ( scale bar : 100μm ) of pancreas of mice injected with the indicated conditions , n = 3 mice , unpaired two - tailed t test . ( C ) Representative images ( scale bar : 50μm ) for data presented in Fig . 3E – H . ( D ) Quantification of macropinocytic and exosomes uptake ( independent experiment , identical statistical analyses ) . ( E ) AF647 RNAi - tagged Kamerkar et al . Page 29 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t exosomes / liposomes uptake in Panc - 1 cells ( scale bar : 100μm ) . n = 3 independent experiments . ( F ) CM - DiI tagged CD47 k / o vs . WT exosomes uptake in Panc - 1 cells ( scale bar : 100μm ) . n = 3 independent experiments . ( G ) CM - DiI tagged CD47 k / o vs . WT exosomes uptake in BxPC - 3 cells ( scale bar : 100μm ) . n = 3 independent experiments . The data is presented as the mean ± SEM . Unless otherwise stated , one - way ANOVA was used to determine statistical significance . ns : not significant . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . See accompanying source data . Extended Figure 8 . Treatment of KTC GEMM with iExosomes ( A ) Experimental scheme . ( B ) Accumulation of internalized AF647 - tagged siRNA from exosomes ( scale bar : 100μm ) . ( C ) Kaplan - Meier curve of KTC mice . PBS : n = 8 mice , gemcitabine : n = 5 mice . ( D ) Tumor burden at experimental end point ( Control Exo : ( n = 7 mice ) , siKras G12D iExo : ( n = 7 mice ) , shKras G12D iExo : ( n = 5 mice ) ) . One - way ANOVA . ( E ) H & E stained tumors ( scale bar : 100μm ) from KTC mice and relative percentages in histological phenotypes , n = 4 mice per group . ( F – G ) Kaplan - Meier curve of KTC mice , n = 3 mice per group , Log - rank Mantel - Cox test ( F ) and percent tumor burden ( G ) . ( H ) Representative micrographs ( scale bar : 100μm ) of tumors immunolabeled for Kamerkar et al . Page 30 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t phosphorylated AKT , α SMA and Kras from 44 days old KTC mice in the indicated experimental groups ( n = 3 mice ) . Unless stated otherwise , unpaired two - tailed t test was used to determine statistical significance . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . See accompanying source data . Extended Figure 9 . Cytotoxicity and off target effect of iExosomes ( A ) Change in the percentage of mouse body weights , pre - and post - treatment , in the listed groups and cohorts . ( B ) Mouse toxicity tests , consisting of BUN , AST and ALT in the listed groups . ( C ) Hematoxylin and eosin , and Kras immunostaining of the listed organs in KTC ( early ) mice . Three to five mice evaluated per organ , one - way ANOVA . The data is presented as the mean ± SEM . See accompanying source data . Kamerkar et al . Page 31 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Extended Figure 10 . iExosomes suppress pancreas cancer progression in KPC orthotopic mouse model ( A – B ) Magnetic Resonance Imaging ( MRI ) of KPC orthotopic tumors n = 9 mice per group ( A ) and each individual tumor ( B ) . ( C ) Tumor volume as measured by MRI n = 9 mice per group . One - way ANOVA . ( D ) Representative axial images . ( E ) Tumor weight ( g : grams ) at the experimental end point . siScrbl iExo : n = 9 mice , siKras G12D iExo : n = 8 mice . ( F ) Change in the percentage of mouse body weights , pre and post treatment ( endpoint ) , n = 9 mice per group . ( G ) Representative gross images of two KPC orthotopic mice that died on day 16 PTS ( siScrbl iExo ) or was euthanized on day 16 PTS ( siKras G12D iExo ) . ( H ) Kras G12D transcript levels in KPC689 cells ( n = 3 independent experiments ) . One - way ANOVA . ( I ) Kaplan - Meier curve of KPC orthotopic tumor bearing mice , Log - rank Mantel - Cox test . siScrbl iExo group : n = 9 mice , siKras G12D iExo group : n = 8 mice . ( J ) Macroscopic metastatic nodules , n = 9 mice per group . ( K ) H & E stained tissues . Unless stated otherwise , the data is presented as the mean ± SEM and unpaired two - tailed t test was used to determine statistical significance . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . See accompanying source data . Kamerkar et al . Page 32 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Supplementary Material Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material . Acknowledgments This work was primarily supported by the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas and the Knowledge Gap funding of MD Anderson Cancer Center . Other support include : VSL laboratory : UT MDACC Khalifa Bin Zayed Al Nahya Foundation ; High Resolution Electron Microscopy Facility : Institutional Core Grant CA16672 ; MDACC Flow Cytometry core facility & JJL : NIH P30CA16672 ; MDACC Small Animal Imaging Facility : NIH P30 - CA016672 and 5U24 - CA126577 . The Mass Spectrometry related analysis ( SAM ) was supported by the NORTE - 01 - 0145 - FEDER - 000029 ( NORTE 2020 ; ERDF ) and FEDER funds ( POCI - 01 / 0145 - FEDER - 016618 ) and FCT – PTDC / BIM - ONC / 2754 / 2014 . We thank Kenneth Dunner Jr . for the help with the transmission electron microscopy and immunogold techniques , Edward Chang for slide scanning , D . Lundy for tissue processing , J . Carstens and C . Kahlert for independent analyses of tissue histopathology , J . Kaye and L . Gibson for mouse husbandry support , C . Kingsley and D . Lundy for MRI support , E . Lawson for IVIS imaging help , and P . Correa - de - Sampaio for microscopy imaging help . References 1 . Hidalgo M , Von Hoff DD . Translational therapeutic opportunities in ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas . Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research . 2012 ; 18 : 4249 – 4256 . DOI : 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 12 - 1327 [ PubMed : 22896691 ] 2 . Chang DK , Grimmond SM , Biankin AV . Pancreatic cancer genomics . Current opinion in genetics & development . 2014 ; 24 : 74 – 81 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . gde . 2013 . 12 . 001 [ PubMed : 24480245 ] 3 . Collins MA , et al . Oncogenic Kras is required for both the initiation and maintenance of pancreatic cancer in mice . The Journal of clinical investigation . 2012 ; 122 : 639 – 653 . DOI : 10 . 1172 / JCI59227 [ PubMed : 22232209 ] 4 . Collins MA , et al . Metastatic pancreatic cancer is dependent on oncogenic Kras in mice . PloS one . 2012 ; 7 : e49707 . [ PubMed : 23226501 ] 5 . Ying H , et al . Oncogenic Kras maintains pancreatic tumors through regulation of anabolic glucose metabolism . Cell . 2012 ; 149 : 656 – 670 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 01 . 058 [ PubMed : 22541435 ] 6 . Gysin S , Salt M , Young A , McCormick F . Therapeutic strategies for targeting ras proteins . Genes & cancer . 2011 ; 2 : 359 – 372 . DOI : 10 . 1177 / 1947601911412376 [ PubMed : 21779505 ] 7 . Pecot CV , et al . Therapeutic Silencing of KRAS using Systemically Delivered siRNAs . Molecular cancer therapeutics . 2014 8 . Yuan TL , et al . Development of siRNA payloads to target KRAS - mutant cancer . Cancer discovery . 2014 ; 4 : 1182 – 1197 . DOI : 10 . 1158 / 2159 - 8290 . CD - 13 - 0900 [ PubMed : 25100204 ] 9 . Xue W , et al . Small RNA combination therapy for lung cancer . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 2014 ; 111 : E3553 – 3561 . DOI : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1412686111 [ PubMed : 25114235 ] 10 . Rejiba S , Wack S , Aprahamian M , Hajri A . K - ras oncogene silencing strategy reduces tumor growth and enhances gemcitabine chemotherapy efficacy for pancreatic cancer treatment . Cancer science . 2007 ; 98 : 1128 – 1136 . DOI : 10 . 1111 / j . 1349 - 7006 . 2007 . 00506 . x [ PubMed : 17489984 ] 11 . Zorde Khvalevsky E , et al . Mutant KRAS is a druggable target for pancreatic cancer . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 2013 ; 110 : 20723 – 20728 . DOI : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1314307110 [ PubMed : 24297898 ] 12 . van der Meel R , et al . Extracellular vesicles as drug delivery systems : Lessons from the liposome field . Journal of controlled release : official journal of the Controlled Release Society . 2014 13 . Kowal J , Tkach M , Thery C . Biogenesis and secretion of exosomes . Current opinion in cell biology . 2014 ; 29 : 116 – 125 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2014 . 05 . 004 [ PubMed : 24959705 ] 14 . Johnsen KB , et al . A comprehensive overview of exosomes as drug delivery vehicles - endogenous nanocarriers for targeted cancer therapy . Biochimica et biophysica acta . 2014 ; 1846 : 75 – 87 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . bbcan . 2014 . 04 . 005 [ PubMed : 24747178 ] Kamerkar et al . Page 33 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 15 . Vader P , Mol EA , Pasterkamp G , Schiffelers RM . Extracellular vesicles for drug delivery . Advanced drug delivery reviews . 2016 ; 106 : 148 – 156 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . addr . 2016 . 02 . 006 [ PubMed : 26928656 ] 16 . Kaur S , et al . CD47 - dependent immunomodulatory and angiogenic activities of extracellular vesicles produced by T cells . Matrix biology : journal of the International Society for Matrix Biology . 2014 ; 37 : 49 – 59 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . matbio . 2014 . 05 . 007 [ PubMed : 24887393 ] 17 . Kibria G , et al . A rapid , automated surface protein profiling of single circulating exosomes in human blood . Scientific reports . 2016 ; 6 : 36502 . [ PubMed : 27819324 ] 18 . Brown EJ , Frazier WA . Integrin - associated protein ( CD47 ) and its ligands . Trends in cell biology . 2001 ; 11 : 130 – 135 . [ PubMed : 11306274 ] 19 . Jaiswal S , et al . CD47 is upregulated on circulating hematopoietic stem cells and leukemia cells to avoid phagocytosis . Cell . 2009 ; 138 : 271 – 285 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2009 . 05 . 046 [ PubMed : 19632178 ] 20 . Chao MP , Weissman IL , Majeti R . The CD47 - SIRPalpha pathway in cancer immune evasion and potential therapeutic implications . Current opinion in immunology . 2012 ; 24 : 225 – 232 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . coi . 2012 . 01 . 010 [ PubMed : 22310103 ] 21 . Commisso C , et al . Macropinocytosis of protein is an amino acid supply route in Ras - transformed cells . Nature . 2013 ; 497 : 633 – 637 . DOI : 10 . 1038 / nature12138 [ PubMed : 23665962 ] 22 . Simoes S , et al . Cationic liposomes for gene delivery . Expert opinion on drug delivery . 2005 ; 2 : 237 – 254 . DOI : 10 . 1517 / 17425247 . 2 . 2 . 237 [ PubMed : 16296751 ] 23 . Willingham SB , et al . The CD47 - signal regulatory protein alpha ( SIRPa ) interaction is a therapeutic target for human solid tumors . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 2012 ; 109 : 6662 – 6667 . DOI : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1121623109 [ PubMed : 22451913 ] 24 . Nakase I , Kobayashi NB , Takatani - Nakase T , Yoshida T . Active macropinocytosis induction by stimulation of epidermal growth factor receptor and oncogenic Ras expression potentiates cellular uptake efficacy of exosomes . Scientific reports . 2015 ; 5 : 10300 . [ PubMed : 26036864 ] 25 . Ozdemir BC , et al . Depletion of carcinoma - associated fibroblasts and fibrosis induces immunosuppression and accelerates pancreas cancer with reduced survival . Cancer cell . 2014 ; 25 : 719 – 734 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2014 . 04 . 005 [ PubMed : 24856586 ] 26 . Ijichi H , et al . Inhibiting Cxcr2 disrupts tumor - stromal interactions and improves survival in a mouse model of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma . The Journal of clinical investigation . 2011 ; 121 : 4106 – 4117 . DOI : 10 . 1172 / JCI42754 [ PubMed : 21926469 ] 27 . Sherman MH , et al . Vitamin D receptor - mediated stromal reprogramming suppresses pancreatitis and enhances pancreatic cancer therapy . Cell . 2014 ; 159 : 80 – 93 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 08 . 007 [ PubMed : 25259922 ] 28 . Provenzano PP , et al . Enzymatic targeting of the stroma ablates physical barriers to treatment of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma . Cancer cell . 2012 ; 21 : 418 – 429 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2012 . 01 . 007 [ PubMed : 22439937 ] 29 . Olive KP , et al . Inhibition of Hedgehog signaling enhances delivery of chemotherapy in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer . Science . 2009 ; 324 : 1457 – 1461 . DOI : 10 . 1126 / science . 1171362 [ PubMed : 19460966 ] 30 . Guerra C , Barbacid M . Genetically engineered mouse models of pancreatic adenocarcinoma . Molecular oncology . 2013 ; 7 : 232 – 247 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . molonc . 2013 . 02 . 002 [ PubMed : 23506980 ] 31 . Ying H , et al . Genetics and biology of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma . Genes & development . 2016 ; 30 : 355 – 385 . DOI : 10 . 1101 / gad . 275776 . 115 [ PubMed : 26883357 ] 32 . Gidekel Friedlander SY , et al . Context - dependent transformation of adult pancreatic cells by oncogenic K - Ras . Cancer cell . 2009 ; 16 : 379 – 389 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2009 . 09 . 027 [ PubMed : 19878870 ] 33 . Pylayeva - Gupta Y , Lee KE , Hajdu CH , Miller G , Bar - Sagi D . Oncogenic Kras - induced GM - CSF production promotes the development of pancreatic neoplasia . Cancer cell . 2012 ; 21 : 836 – 847 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2012 . 04 . 024 [ PubMed : 22698407 ] 34 . Biankin AV , et al . Pancreatic cancer genomes reveal aberrations in axon guidance pathway genes . Nature . 2012 ; 491 : 399 – 405 . DOI : 10 . 1038 / nature11547 [ PubMed : 23103869 ] Kamerkar et al . Page 34 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 35 . Eser S , Schnieke A , Schneider G , Saur D . Oncogenic KRAS signalling in pancreatic cancer . British journal of cancer . 2014 ; 111 : 817 – 822 . DOI : 10 . 1038 / bjc . 2014 . 215 [ PubMed : 24755884 ] 36 . Singh H , Longo DL , Chabner BA . Improving Prospects for Targeting RAS . Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology . 2015 ; 33 : 3650 – 3659 . DOI : 10 . 1200 / JCO . 2015 . 62 . 1052 [ PubMed : 26371146 ] 37 . Zeitouni D , Pylayeva - Gupta Y , Der CJ , Bryant KL . KRAS Mutant Pancreatic Cancer : No Lone Path to an Effective Treatment . Cancers . 2016 ; 8 38 . Golan T , et al . RNAi therapy targeting KRAS in combination with chemotherapy for locally advanced pancreatic cancer patients . Oncotarget . 2015 ; 6 : 24560 – 24570 . DOI : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 4183 [ PubMed : 26009994 ] 39 . Kordelas L , et al . MSC - derived exosomes : a novel tool to treat therapy - refractory graft - versus - host disease . Leukemia . 2014 ; 28 : 970 – 973 . DOI : 10 . 1038 / leu . 2014 . 41 [ PubMed : 24445866 ] 40 . Clayton A , Harris CL , Court J , Mason MD , Morgan BP . Antigen - presenting cell exosomes are protected from complement - mediated lysis by expression of CD55 and CD59 . European journal of immunology . 2003 ; 33 : 522 – 531 . DOI : 10 . 1002 / immu . 200310028 [ PubMed : 12645951 ] 41 . Gomes - da - Silva LC , et al . Lipid - based nanoparticles for siRNA delivery in cancer therapy : paradigms and challenges . Accounts of chemical research . 2012 ; 45 : 1163 – 1171 . DOI : 10 . 1021 / ar300048p [ PubMed : 22568781 ] 42 . Zheng X , et al . Epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition is dispensable for metastasis but induces chemoresistance in pancreatic cancer . Nature . 2015 43 . Melo SA , et al . Glypican - 1 identifies cancer exosomes and detects early pancreatic cancer . Nature . 2015 44 . Melo SA , et al . Cancer exosomes perform cell - independent microRNA biogenesis and promote tumorigenesis . Cancer cell . 2014 ; 26 : 707 – 721 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . ccell . 2014 . 09 . 005 [ PubMed : 25446899 ] 45 . Alvarez - Erviti L , et al . Delivery of siRNA to the mouse brain by systemic injection of targeted exosomes . Nature biotechnology . 2011 ; 29 : 341 – 345 . DOI : 10 . 1038 / nbt . 1807 46 . El - Andaloussi S , et al . Exosome - mediated delivery of siRNA in vitro and in vivo . Nature protocols . 2012 ; 7 : 2112 – 2126 . DOI : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2012 . 131 [ PubMed : 23154783 ] 47 . Thery C , Amigorena S , Raposo G , Clayton A . Isolation and characterization of exosomes from cell culture supernatants and biological fluids . Current protocols in cell biology / editorial board , Juan S . Bonifacino … [ et al . ] . 2006 ; Chapter 3 ( Unit 3 ) : 22 . 48 . Ma JB , Ye K , Patel DJ . Structural basis for overhang - specific small interfering RNA recognition by the PAZ domain . Nature . 2004 ; 429 : 318 – 322 . DOI : 10 . 1038 / nature02519 [ PubMed : 15152257 ] 49 . Du Q , Thonberg H , Wang J , Wahlestedt C , Liang Z . A systematic analysis of the silencing effects of an active siRNA at all single - nucleotide mismatched target sites . Nucleic acids research . 2005 ; 33 : 1671 – 1677 . DOI : 10 . 1093 / nar / gki312 [ PubMed : 15781493 ] 50 . Rachagani S , et al . Activated KrasG ( 1 ) ( 2 ) D is associated with invasion and metastasis of pancreatic cancer cells through inhibition of E - cadherin . British journal of cancer . 2011 ; 104 : 1038 – 1048 . DOI : 10 . 1038 / bjc . 2011 . 31 [ PubMed : 21364589 ] 51 . Poliseno L , et al . A coding - independent function of gene and pseudogene mRNAs regulates tumour biology . Nature . 2010 ; 465 : 1033 – 1038 . DOI : 10 . 1038 / nature09144 [ PubMed : 20577206 ] Kamerkar et al . Page 35 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 1 . CD47 on exosomes limits their clearance by circulating monocytes ( A ) Fluorescence intensity in sucrose gradient layers from “Bottom - Up” method ( see Supplementary Fig . 1E – F ) , ( B ) FC analysis of exosomes with AF647 tagged siRNA in the circulation ( n = 6 mice per group ) . ( C ) Quantification of PKH67 labeled exosomes in the indicated organs ( n = 3 mice ) ( D ) FC analyses of pancreas cells 6 hours following injection of siKras G12D Exos ( n = 5 mice ) , siKras G12D Lipos ( n = 5 mice ) , and PBS ( untreated , n = 3 mice ) . ( E ) Quantification of Alexa 647 + / CD11b + monocytes in the blood 3 hours post i . p . injection . One way ANOVA : ( Non treated , n = 12 mice ) vs ( Liposomes , n = 9 mice ) , IgG + siKras G12D iExo ( n = 9 mice ) , anti - CD47 ( B6H12 ) + siKras G12D iExo ( n = 8 mice ) and anti - CD47 ( 2D3 ) + siKras G12D iExo ( n = 6 mice ) . Unpaired two - tailed t test : siKras G12D iExo ( n = 13 mice ) and ( CD47 high iExo , n = 7 mice ) . Unpaired two - tailed t test : ( mouse WT Exosomes , n = 9 mice ) and ( mouse CD47 k / o exosomes , n = 9 mice ) . The mean + / − SEM is depicted . Unless otherwise stated , one - way ANOVA was used . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . FC : Flow cytometry ; mo : mouse . See accompanying source data . Kamerkar et al . Page 36 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 2 . iExosomes restrains Panc - 1 tumor growth ( A ) Luciferase activity at day 7 and day 77 - post cancer cell injection . ( B ) Tumor bioluminescence at day 77 , PBS : n = 4 mice , Control Exo : n = 3 mice , shKras G12D iExo : n = 6 mice , shKras G12D iLipo : n = 4 mice , shScramble ( Scrbl ) iExo : n = 5 mice , siScramble ( Scrbl ) iExo : n = 5 mice . ( C ) Panc - 1 orthotopic tumor growth ( bioluminescence ) . PBS : n = 7 mice , Control Exo : n = 6 mice , shKras G12D iExo : n = 7 mice , shKras G12D iLipo : n = 4 mice , shScramble iExo : n = 5 mice , siScramble iExo : n = 5 mice . Representative H & E of the pancreas ( scale bar : 100μm ) is shown . ( D ) Relative pancreas mass ( PBS , n = 5 mice , Control exos , n = 5 mice , shKras G12D iExo , n = 6 mice , shKras G12D iLipo , n = 4 mice , shScramble iExo , n = 5 , mice siScramble iExo , n = 5 , and normal healthy mice , n = 5 ) mice . ( E ) Kaplan - Meier curve of Panc - 1 tumor bearing mice , Log - rank Mantel - Cox test , PBS : n = 7 mice , Control Exo : n = 6 mice , shKras G12D iExo : n = 7 mice , shKras G12D iLipo : n = 4 mice , shScramble iExo : n = 5 mice , siScramble iExo : n = 5 mice . ( F ) p - ERK immunolabeling ( scale bar : 100μm ) . Unpaired two - tailed t test , Control Exo : n = 4 mice , shKras G12D iExo : n = 6 mice . ( G ) Kras G12D transcript levels in tumors , Control Exo ( n = 5 mice ) , or shKras G12D iExo ( n = 6 Kamerkar et al . Page 37 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t mice ) , unpaired two - tailed t test . ( H ) Panc - 1 orthotopic tumor growth , siScramble iExo ( n = 5 ) or siKras G12D iExo ( n = 5 ) . ( I ) Kaplan - Meier curve of Panc - 1 tumor bearing mice . Log - rank Mantel - Cox test , n = 5 mice per group . The mean + / − SEM is depicted . Unless stated otherwise , one - way ANOVA comparing experimental groups to control group ( PBS ) was used to determine statistical significance . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , ns : not significant . See accompanying source data . Kamerkar et al . Page 38 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 3 . CD47 and macropinocytosis enhance iExosomes uptake and therapeutic efficacy ( A ) Panc - 1 orthotopic tumor growth , n = 3 mice per group . ( B ) KPC689 orthotopic tumor growth , n = 8 mice per group . ( C ) Kaplan - Meier curve , KPC689 orthotopic tumor bearing mice , Log - rank Mantel - Cox test , n = 8 mice per group . ( D ) Confocal micrographs ( scale bar : 100μm ) of increased ( preferential ) entry of labeled exosomes into tumor tissue . ( E ) Macropinocytic uptake in Panc - 1 or BxPC - 3 cells , unpaired two - tailed t test . ( F – G ) Macropinocytic and exosomes uptake in BxPC - 3 ( unpaired two - tailed t test , F ) or Panc - 1 ( one - way ANOVA comparing treated groups to non - treated group ( 0 μM EIPA , G ) cells treated with vehicle ( DMSO ) or EIPA at the indicated concentrations ( H ) Macropinocytic and liposomes uptake , unpaired two - tailed t test . E , G , H : 5 distinct wells , F : 3 distinct wells . In E – H , scale bar : 50μm . The data is presented as the mean ± SEM . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , ns : not significant . See accompanying source data . Kamerkar et al . Page 39 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 4 . iExosomes suppress pancreas cancer progression in KTC GEMM ( A ) Kaplan - Meier curve of KTC ( early treatment ) mice , Log - rank Mantel - Cox test , siKras G12D iExo : n = 8 mice , Control exos : n = 6 mice . ( B ) Kaplan - Meier curve of KTC mice , Log - rank Mantel - Cox test , siKras G12D iExo : n = 7 mice , shKras G12D iExo : n = 5 mice , Control exos : n = 7 mice . ( C ) Tumor burden ( early treatment ) at end point . siKras G12D iExo : n = 8 mice , Control exos : n = 6 mice . ( D ) Tumor burden at 44 days of age , n = 3 mice per group . ( E ) H & E stained tumors ( scale bar : 100μm , inset scale bar : 50 μm ) from 44 days - old KTC mice and relative percentages in histological phenotypes , n = 3 mice per group . ( F ) Masson Trichrome staining ( MTS , scale bar : 100μm ) , TUNEL , Ki - 67 , and phosphorylated - ERK / CK - 19 immunolabeling of 44 days - old KTC mice , n = 3 mice per group . ( G ) Kras G12D transcript levels in tumors of age - matched ( 44 days old ) KTC mice , n = 3 mice per group . ( H ) Tumor volume at baseline ( MRI ) , siKras G12D iExo : n = 6 mice , siScrbl iExo : n = 6 mice . ( I ) Kaplan - Meier curve of KPC mice , Log - rank Mantel - Cox test , n = 6 mice in each group . The Kamerkar et al . Page 40 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t mean ± SEM is depicted . Unless stated otherwise , unpaired two - tailed t test was used to determine statistical significance . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . See accompanying source data . Kamerkar et al . Page 41 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t