DANIEL KAHNEMAN AND AMOS TVERSKY * SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY : A JUDGMENT OF REPRESENTATIVENESS * * ABSTRACT . This paper explores a heuristic - representativeness - according to which the subjective probability of an event , or a sample , is determined by the degree to which it : ( i ) is similar in essential characteristics to its parent population ; and ( ii ) reflects the salient features of the process by which it is generated . This heuristic is explicated in a series of empirical examples demonstrating predictable and systematic errors in the evaluation of uncertain events . In particular , since sample size does not represent any property of the population , it is expected to have little or no effect on judgment of likelihood . This pre diction is confirmed in studies showing that subjective sampling distributions and posterior probability judgments are determined by the most salient characteristic of the sample ( e . g . , proportion , mean ) without regard to the size of the sample . The present heuristic approach is contrasted with the normative ( Bayesian ) approach to the analysis of the judgment of uncertainty . Subjective probabilities play an important role in our lives . The decisions we make , the conclusions we reach , and the explanations we offer are usually based on our judgments of the likelihood of uncertain events such as success in a new job , the outcome of an election , or the state of the market . Indeed an extensive experimental literature has been devoted to the question of how people perceive , process , and evaluate the probabili ties of uncertain events in the contexts of probability learning , intuitive statistics , and decision making under risk . Although no systematic theory about the psychology of uncertainty has emerged from this literature , several empirical generalizations have been established . Perhaps the most general conclusion , obtained from numerous investi gations , is that people do not follow the principles of probability theory in judging the likelihood of uncertain events . This conclusion is hardly surprising because many of the laws of chance are neither intuitively apparent , nor easy to apply . Less obvious , however , is the fact that the deviations of subjective from objective probability 1 seem reliable , syste matic , and difficult to eliminate . Apparently , people replace the laws of chance by heuristics , which sometimes yield reasonable estimates and quite often do not . In the present paper , we investigate in detail one such heuristic called C . - A . S . StoiU von Holstein ( ed . ) , The Concept of Probability in Psychological Experiments , 25 - 48 . Copyright © 1972 by Academic Press . 26 DANIEL KAHNEMAN AND AMOS TVERSKY representativeness . A person who follows this heuristic evaluates the probability of an uncertain event , or a sample , by the degree to which it is : ( i ) similar in essential properties to its parent population ; and ( ii ) reflects the salient features of the process by which it is generated . Our thesis is that , in many situ , ations , an event A is judged more probable than an event B whenever A appears more representative than B . In other words , the ordering of events by their subjective probabilities coincides with their ordering by representativeness . Representativeness , like perceptual similarity , is easier to assess than to characterize . In both cases , no general definition is available , yet there are many situations where people agree which of two stimuli is more similar to a standard , or which of two events is more representative of a given process . In this paper we do not scale representativeness , although this is a feasible approach . Instead , we consider cases where the ordering of events according to representativeness appears obvious , and show that people consistently judge the more representative event to be the more likely , whether it is or not . Although representativeness may play an important role in many varieties of probability judgments , e . g . , political forecasting and clinical judgment , the present treatment is restricted to essentially repetitive situations where objective probabilities are readily computable . Most data reported in this paper were collected in questionnaire form from a total of approximately 1500 respondents in Israel . The respon dents were students in grades 10 , 11 , and 12 of college - preparatory high schools ( ages 15 - 18 ) . Special efforts were made to maintain the attention and the motivation of the Ss . The questionnaires were administered in quiz - like fashion in a natural classroom situation , and the respondents ' names were recorded on the answer sheets . Each respondent answered a small number ( typically 2 - 4 ) of questions each of which required , at most , 2 min . The questions were introduced as a study of people ' s intuitions about chance . They were preceded by standard oral instruc tions which explained the appropriate question in detail . The experi mental design was counterbalanced to prevent confounding with school or age . Most questions were pretested on University undergraduates ( ages 20 - 25 ) and the results of the two populations were indistinguish able .