Strain analysis of protein structures and low dimensionality of mechanical allosteric couplings Michael R . Mitchell a , b , 1 , Tsvi Tlusty c , d , e , 1 , and Stanislas Leibler a , b , c , 1 a Laboratoryof Living Matter , The Rockefeller University , New York , NY 10065 ; b Center for Studies in Physics and Biology , The Rockefeller University , New York , NY 10065 ; c The Simons Center for Systems Biology , School of Natural Sciences , Institute for Advanced Study , Princeton , NJ 08540 ; d Center for Soft and Living Matter , Institute for Basic Science , Ulsan 689 - 798 , South Korea ; and e Department of Physics , Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology , Ulsan 689 - 798 , South Korea Contributed by Stanislas Leibler , August 2 , 2016 ( sent for review June 13 , 2016 ; reviewed by Alexander Y . Grosberg and Henri Orland ) In many proteins , especially allosteric proteins that communicate regulatory states from allosteric to active sites , structural defor - mations are functionally important . To understand these defor - mations , dynamical experiments are ideal but challenging . Using static structural information , although more limited than dynam - ical analysis , is much more accessible . Underused for protein analysis , strain is the natural quantity for studying local deforma - tions . We calculate strain tensor fields for proteins deformed by ligands or thermal fluctuations using crystal and NMR structure ensembles . Strains — primarily shears — show deformations around binding sites . These deformations can be induced solely by ligand binding at distant allosteric sites . Shears reveal quasi - 2D paths of mechanical coupling between allosteric and active sites that may constitute a widespread mechanism of allostery . We argue that strain — particularly shear — is the most appropriate quantity for analysis of local protein deformations . This analysis can reveal mechanical and biological properties of many proteins . strain | protein mechanics | protein allostery | elasticity A lthough many proteins fold into well - defined , stable struc - tures , their internal deformations around such average structures often play a vital role in their functions . In allosteric protein regulation , a protein ’ s ability to catalyze reactions or to associate with binding partners is influenced by binding of an allosteric regulator to a spatially distinct site . For example , subunits of the tetrameric protein hemoglobin , which transports oxygen in the bloodstream , undergo allosteric structural shifts as they bind O 2 ( 1 ) . These allosteric shifts alter the protein ’ s O 2 binding affinity ( 2 ) , enabling hemoglobin to deliver nearly twice as much oxygen to tissues as it could were it not allosteric ( 3 ) . Elsewhere , allostery enables cells to modulate the activity of pro - teins more quickly than other regulatory mechanisms like control of protein synthesis and degradation would permit ( e . g . , ref . 4 ) . This regulation enables cells to respond rapidly to changing conditions . Given the significant role that structural shifts of proteins play in their function , there has been substantial effort toward better understanding them . Several models have attempted to explain the mechanism of allostery . The most prominent have been the well - known concerted model of Monod , Wyman , and Changeux ( 5 ) and the sequential model of Koshland , Nemethy , and Filmer ( 6 ) . Recently , there has been increasing consideration of the thermodynamic nature of allostery ; allosteric proteins ’ transi - tions between different functional states can correspond not to discrete switching between states , but rather to a statistical shift in a population distribution of structural states ( reviewed in , e . g . , refs . 7 – 11 ) . In the present work , we remain largely agnostic among these models and simply attempt to exploit experimental data to understand the mechanical properties of allosteric proteins . Dynamical experiments can provide the most direct informa - tion about the conduction of allosteric signals and about protein structural dynamics more generally . Studies using methods in - cluding room - temperature crystallography ( e . g . , ref . 12 ) , time - resolved crystallography ( e . g . , ref . 13 ) , FRET ( e . g . , ref . 14 ) , and direct pulling measurements ( 15 , 16 ) have been published . However , these techniques are often labor - intensive and technically challenging . Some are applicable only to certain experimentally amenable pro - teins while some provide valuable but incomplete information . Thus , although such methods provide highly valuable information , many proteins are resistant to study using these methods . In contrast , thousands of crystallography and NMR structures are publicly available for many proteins in multiple ligand - binding states . Furthermore , standard crystallography and NMR techniques are generally more accessible for the study of new proteins than are methods for direct dynamical measurements . Although these data , being static , cannot provide the richness of full dynamical experiments , they nevertheless contain valuable information concerning the net deformations that take place within proteins . It would therefore be highly desirable to extract useful insights regarding allosteric and other structural proper - ties of proteins solely from datasets comprising several static crystal or NMR structures . Comparison of Protein Structural States The simplest and most widespread method used in detailed analysis of related crystal structures is direct , manual inspection of positions , distances , and angles of specific atoms , residues , and bonds in protein structures using molecular viewer programs such as PyMOL , VMD , or Chimera . Such inspection can provide detailed information about differences between a few related structures and may be appropriate for analysis of a small region within a protein such as an enzyme ’ s active site . In such a situ - ation , analysis is confined to a small region of the protein known Significance Regulation of biochemical activity is essential for proper cell growth and metabolism . Many proteins ’ activities are regu - lated by interactions with other molecules binding some dis - tance away from the proteins ’ active sites . In such allosteric proteins , active sites should thus be mechanically coupled to spatially removed regulatory regions . We studied crystal and NMR structures of proteins in various regulatory and ligand - binding states . We calculated and analyzed distributions of strains throughout several proteins . Strains reveal allosteric and active sites and suggest that quasi - two - dimensional strained surfaces mediate mechanical couplings between them . Strain analysis of widely available structural data can illuminate pro - tein function and guide future experimental investigation . Author contributions : M . R . M . , T . T . , and S . L . designed research ; M . R . M . performed re - search ; M . R . M . contributed new reagents / analytic tools ; M . R . M . , T . T . , and S . L . analyzed data ; and M . R . M . , T . T . , and S . L . wrote the paper . Reviewers : A . Y . G . , New York University ; and H . O . , Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission . The authors declare no conflict of interest . 1 Towhomcorrespondence may beaddressed . Email : mich . r . mitchell @ gmail . com , tsvitlusty @ gmail . com , or livingmatter @ rockefeller . edu . Thisarticlecontainssupportinginformationonlineatwww . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1609462113 / - / DCSupplemental . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1609462113 PNAS | Published online September 21 , 2016 | E5847 – E5855 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P N A S P L U S to be functionally important and measurements can be informed by knowledge of the relevant reaction chemistry . However , this approach is labor - intensive , particularly for analysis of many or large structures . In addition , it does not provide an unbiased framework for analyzing large - scale structural changes or distinguishing isolated fluctuations from biologically important deformations . Other methods have been applied to analyze large - scale protein deformations , usually based on some variant of global alignment of the structures to be compared ( 17 – 21 ) . These global and semilocal methods for comparing protein structures are useful in some circumstances , such as estimating structural similarity of two different proteins . However , because displacements in a structure are cumulative , a global or even semilocal best - fit alignment may highlight apparent “ differences ” where no local deformation , but only net displacement due to deformation elsewhere , has occurred ( Fig . 1 ) . Consequently , alignment - based approaches are not ap - propriate for studying local structural changes in proteins . Our goal is to learn about mechanical properties of proteins by examining structural variations between different protein states ( free , substrate - bound , regulator - bound , etc . ) using comparisons of multiple X - ray crystallography or solution NMR structures . For this purpose , it is most appropriate to consider local dis - placements , because most forces between atoms in a protein are short - range , contact - like forces ( 22 ) . Some attempts have been made along these lines . Daily et al . ( 23 ) analyzed networks of contact rearrangements to find regions of the protein proposed to transmit structural rearrangements between allosteric and active sites . Some attempts to use normal mode analysis to study relationships between residue mobility and allostery have been made ( 24 , 25 ) , and Miyashita et al . ( 26 ) attempted to estimate deformation energies of the elastic network model . Yamato ( 27 ) calculated strain tensor fields induced by high pressure in lysozyme and myglobin . Recently , Yamato and coworkers have applied a similar , molecular dynamics - based approach to sup - plement their analyses of protein dynamics ( 13 , 28 ) . These and other studies have yielded insights into the mechanics of globular proteins ; however , with the exception of Yamato ’ s 1996 work ( see ref . 27 ) , they rely on models layered on top of data , rather than analyzing data directly . We argue that calculation of finite strain tensor fields in deformed protein structures , until now highly underused for this purpose , is the simplest and most nat - ural method for measuring and analyzing protein structural properties . Strains can be calculated directly from a pair of struc - tural coordinates and explicitly describe local deformations be - tween these structures . We will demonstrate that strains reveal significant mechanical coupling between active and regulatory sites in allosteric proteins . Strain The standard method in mechanics to describe deformations in ( approximately ) continuous media is calculation and analysis of strain fields , applied to protein crystal structures by Yamato ( 27 ) . Strain measures local deformations in an elastic medium . In one spatial dimension , strain is the spatial derivative of the dis - placement . That is , if a point in an elastic medium at coordinate x is deformed to coordinate x ′ = x + u , then the 1D strain is e = ∂ u ð x Þ = ∂ x . Generalized to arbitrary dimension , the ( Euler – Almansi ) strain tensor is e ij = 1 2 ∂ u i ∂ x j + ∂ u j ∂ x i − X k ∂ u k ∂ u k ∂ x i ∂ x j ! , [ 1 ] where u i = x i ′ − x i is the i th component of the displacement vector ( 29 ) . Note that this strain tensor is well - defined for finite deforma - tions u , unlike the ( more common , in the physics literature ) infin - itesimal strain tensor , which contains only the linear terms in Eq . 1 . The strain e ij is a second - rank tensor ( similar to a 3 × 3 matrix ) . The six independent components of the symmetric strain tensor fully describe any local stretching / compression , twisting , and shear at a point in a structure ( the tensor varies across the structure ) . The strain tensors for each point in an object char - acterize small deformations of that object . Moreover , strain is a local measure . Unlike rmsd and other global alignment - based quantities , strain measures only local deformations at each point in a structure , so regions of high strain correspond to the sites where deformations originate ( and hence to the sites where deformation forces and energies are located ; Fig . 1 ) . The strain tensor ’ s trace ( sum of diagonal elements ) is a measure of bulk compression or expansion . Its traceless com - ponent is a measure of shear . Given strain tensors , shear tensors can be obtained as γ = e − 13 ð Tr e Þ I , where I is the 3 × 3 identity matrix . Under the simplifying assumptions that both the shear and bulk moduli ( strain analogs of spring constants ) are isotropic and take the values 1 and 2 , respectively , the linear elastic energy of a deformation at site i can be written in terms of shear and bulk components as E shear = X m , n ð γ mn Þ 2 E bulk = X m ð e mm Þ 2 E strain = E shear + E bulk . [ 2 ] Of course , protein deformation energies are clearly nonlin - ear , whereas the strain energy defined above assumes linearity . Nevertheless , linearization is a useful tool to aid our under - standing of proteins ’ deformations . Not knowing the precise nature of the proteins ’ nonlinearities , it is better not to bias our analysis by making assumptions about them . Additionally , as we will demonstrate below , even highly deformed regions of pro - teins typically have strain magnitudes of only around 10 − 1 ; lin - earization should be reasonably accurate in this regime . Finally , Fig . 1 . rmsd vs . strain . ( A ) Two states of a rod with one flexible , hinge - like region . ( B ) rmsd of a global alignment of the rod ’ s states primarily highlights regions with large displacement but no internal deformation . Strain highlights the region immediately around the deformation ( here , strain tensors are re - duced to scalars in the form of their apparent strain energies ; see Strain ) . E5848 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1609462113 Mitchell et al . other linear methods , such as those of refs . 24 and 25 , have been able to generate insights despite their use of this approximation . In addition , calculation of energies requires knowledge of strain moduli that are not known for proteins and surely vary throughout each protein . An important source of anisotropy in protein strain moduli are forces produced by covalent bonds between backbone atoms , which are much stronger than non - covalent interactions between neighboring atoms and residues . Our approach is to neglect both the nonlinearities and the an - isotropies present in the proteins . In this way , we can avoid bi - asing our analysis with ( necessarily incorrect ) assumptions regarding the actual distribution of strain moduli in the proteins we study . Instead , we interpret the strain tensors we estimate and the corresponding “ pseudoenergies ” as aggregate indications of the type and magnitude of local deformations occurring in the proteins under study , and of the local amino acid interactions present throughout those proteins . In doing so , we can use strains to analyze proteins ’ deformations and identify residues essential for allostery and other protein functions . Finally , the concept of strain is typically applied in the context of continuous media . Proteins are clearly not continuous , being composed of residues themselves made up of atoms . However , the theory of elasticity has been remarkably successful in de - scribing the mechanical properties of real materials , all discretely composed of atoms . Indeed , much of the early development of the theory of elasticity — including the models of Fresnel , Navier , Cauchy , Poisson , Voigt , Born , and von Karman — occurred in the context of discrete , atomic media ( 30 , 31 ) , with continuum the - ories arising as a limit of molecular models . Moreover , the cal - culation of strain tensors can readily be extended to granular media ( 32 ) , and strains remain highly useful in describing gran - ular materials ’ deformations . Ultimately , our calculation of strain tensors in protein structures is equivalent to calculation of the spatial derivatives of the displacement fields between pairs of structures ; these spatial derivatives ( i . e . , strains ) indicate the structure of local deformations independently of any interpre - tation under the theory of continuum elasticity . Taken together , the simplifying assumptions of linearity and homogeneous strain moduli mean that , while the calculated pseudoenergy values have the mathematical form of an energy , they can alternatively be interpreted as merely the magnitude of local deformation at each site in the protein . This interpretation assumes neither linearity of strain energies nor homogeneity of strain moduli . In this sense , our analysis is closely analogous to the use of rmsd and related measures for comparing two or more structures , except that where rmsd identifies large global dis - placements but not their structural origin , our approach identifies local deformations that underlie proteins ’ structural variations ( Fig . 1 ) . Results Protein Strains Are Primarily Shears and Reveal an Enzyme ’ s Active Site : Adenylate Kinase . We first illustrate the use of strain calcu - lations to describe the equilibrium structure of adenylate kinase measured by solution NMR . We computed deformations be - tween an ensemble of 20 solution NMR structures [ Protein Data Bank ( PDB ) ID code 1P4S ; ref . 33 ] . The NMR structures were obtained using free adenylate kinase , with no ligands present . Because there is no natural reference structure , we calculated the mean strain pseudoenergies across strains for all pairwise structure comparisons . Although the NMR structure ensemble corresponds to a collection of structures consistent with mea - sured NOE constraints rather than a directly measured set of conformations , strains between the calculated structures should provide information about local deformations within the protein . Strain , shear strain , and bulk strain pseudoenergies for each residue in the protein are shown in Fig . 2 A – C . The strain dis - tribution shows that relatively unconstrained loops at the top and bottom undergo very high shears ; in addition , a small pocket between the two loops undergoes relatively high shear defor - mations . Comparison with a crystal structure of the Escherichia coli adenylate kinase ( PDB ID code 4JLA ; ref . 34 ) shows that this sheared pocket corresponds to the ADP binding sites ( ADP shown in light blue ) . Here we observe that strains corresponding to structural fluctuations captured by the NMR structure en - semble reveal functionally significant features in the protein , even without perturbation of those sites by ligand binding . As seen in Fig . 2 , distributions of total strain , shear strain , and bulk strain throughout adenylate kinase are quite similar ; this observation holds true also for other proteins we studied . Be - cause of this similarity and because globular proteins are gen - erally not very compressible ( i . e . , bulk strain is a relatively small fraction of total strain ) , we will show only shear strains for sub - sequent proteins . Shear pseudoenergies were generally higher than bulk pseudoenergies , but they were typically within an order of magnitude of each other . The ratios of shear pseudoenergy to bulk pseudoenergy for adenylate kinase are shown in Fig . 2 D ; for all residues , shear pseudoenergy was larger than bulk pseudoenergy , but underconstrained surface sites tended to have lower shear / bulk ratios . We also calculated strains in a closely related protein , gua - nylate kinase , based on X - ray structures ( PDB ID codes 1ZNW , 1ZNX , and 1ZNY ; ref . 35 ) , with similar results ( Fig . S1 ) . Strain Analysis of an Allosteric Protein Reveals Mechanical Coupling Between Allosteric and Active Sites Not Demonstrated by rmsd : Glucokinase . The previous example has shown that analyzing strain distributions in proteins can highlight enzymes ’ active sites , but adenylate kinase is not known to be allosteric . As a result the strained region in that protein seems to be confined to the active site . In the case of allosteric proteins , it can be possible to ob - serve strained regions connecting active and allosteric sites , demonstrating a direct mechanical coupling between these sites . We now consider glucokinase , a monomeric allosteric enzyme that phosphorylates glucose to glucose - 6 - phosphate . Among its regulators is glucokinase regulatory protein ( GRP ) , which acts as an inhibitor . There are also numerous synthetic activators and inhibitors . We computed shears across 26 different structures of glucokinase including free enzyme , glucose - bound enzyme , GRP - bound enzyme , and multiple synthetic inhibitor - and acti - vator - bound states ( PDB ID codes 1V4S , 1V4T , 3A0I , 3F9M , 3FGU , 3FR0 , 3GOI , 3H1V , 3ID8 , 3IDH , 3IMX , 3S41 , 3VEV , 3VEY , 3VF6 , 4DCH , 4DHY , 4ISE , 4ISF , 4ISG , 4L3Q , 4LC9 , 4MLE , 4MLH , 4NO7 , and 4RCH ; refs . 36 – 48 ) , again studying the mean pseudoenergy across all pairwise structure comparisons . Shear pseudoenergies are shown in Fig . 3 A . There is a qua - siplanar region of high shear connecting the GRP binding site and the glucose binding site . This finding suggests that in glu - cokinase information about the GRP binding state is transmitted along the observed manifold of shear strain . This observation is consistent with previous reports that the two domains of gluco - kinase undergo relative displacement during regulation ( 43 ) , but by examining strains we can see that this displacement corre - sponds to a deformation propagated across the protein to the active site by the strained residues shown in Fig . 3 . Thus , for this allosteric protein , strain - based analysis reveals not only binding sites ( which , in this case , were apparent from the structures ) but also how functionally coupled sites are mechanically connected . We compared the distribution of shears across the glucoki - nase structure to the distribution of rmsds across the structure . The rmsd distribution is shown in Fig . 3 B ; it is distinctly dif - ferent from the distribution of shears . It is diffusely spread across the structure , and the regions of largest rmsd are the top and bottom lobes of the protein , which are largely free of shear . The sheared region extending between the GRP binding site and the glucose binding site , in fact , is near the region of lowest Mitchell et al . PNAS | Published online September 21 , 2016 | E5849 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P N A S P L U S rmsd . Although rmsd does show displaced regions of the pro - teins it does not identify the site of the local deformations causing those displacements . In fact , the shear and rmsd dis - tributions across the glucokinase structure look remarkably like those in the idealized example shown in Fig . 1 . Ligand Binding Reveals Multimeric Allosteric Coupling : Aspartate Carbamoyltransferase . Many allosteric enzymes are multimeric , unlike glucokinase , but it remains possible to detect strained re - gions that mediate allosteric regulation extending across mono - mers . Aspartate carbamoyltransferase ( ATCase ) is a multimeric allosteric enzyme in the pyrimidine biosynthesis pathway whose active form consists of a hexamer of catalytic and regulatory di - mers ( configuration illustrated in Fig . 4 A ) . The enzymatic activity of ATCase is allosterically regulated by the binding of one or two nucleotides to each regulatory subunit , with purines ( adenosine and guanosine bases ) enhancing activity and pyrimidines ( cytidine and thymidine bases ) inhibiting activity ( 49 ) . We calculated shears between T - state ATCase alone ( PDB ID code 6AT1 ; ref . 50 ) , in the presence of CTP ( PDB ID code 5AT1 ; ref . 50 ) , and in the presence of ATP ( PDB ID code 4AT1 ; ref . 50 ) and R - state ATCase in the presence of a bisubstrate analog ( PDB ID code 8ATC ; ref . 51 ) , in the presence of sub - strate analogs and CTP ( PDB ID code 8AT1 ; ref . 52 ) , and in the presence of substrate analogs and ATP ( PDB ID code 7AT1 ; ref . 52 ) , again studying the mean pseudoenergy across all pairwise structure comparisons . Shear strain pseudoenergies for a single catalytic ( C ) and regulatory ( R ) subunit are shown in Fig . 4 B ; this dimer forms the asymmetric unit in the crystal structures analyzed . Substantially sheared residues are visible around both the active site at bottom and the allosteric site at top , but the middle region ( constituting the lower part of the regulatory subunit and the upper part of the catalytic subunit ) seems very static . It is unclear from this view how the shears at the allosteric site are able to modulate activity at the active site . This question is clarified by considering the biological multi - mer , shown in Fig . 4 C . The biological assembly consists of two trimers of catalytic subunits at the top ( C1 – 3 ) and bottom ( C4 – 6 ) in a threefold symmetry ( seen edge - on ) bound to three dimers of regulatory subunits arranged around the catalytic subunits in a threefold symmetry ( also seen edge - on ; here , regulatory subunits R3 and R4 are hidden behind the structure ) . The allosteric sites are exposed at the outer surface of each regulatory dimer , while the active sites are at the interface between the two catalytic tri - mers in the center of the image . In this view , it appears that shears produced by purine or py - rimidine binding at the allosteric site are transmitted through the unsheared regions of the regulatory and catalytic subunits to produce displacements and corresponding shears at the active sites . In this way , shear strains are transmitted through the qua - ternary structure of a multimeric allosteric enzyme to provide the mechanical coupling required for regulation . Strained Residues Lie in Quasi - 2D Manifolds . The distribution of strained residues we observed in the studied proteins seems to be structured . To characterize the geometry of strained regions within proteins , we computed the correlation dimension of the structure composed of the most strained residues ( 53 , 54 ) . The correlation dimension is a form of the fractal dimension appropriate for use on datasets with relatively few points . Using the correlation Fig . 2 . Mycobacterium tuberculosis adenylate kinase strains ( PDB ID code 1P4S ) . ( A ) Strain pseudoenergies ( E strain ; Eq . 2 ) . ( B ) Shear strain pseudoenergies ( E shear ) . ( C ) Bulk strain pseudoenergies ( E bulk ) . ( D ) Ratio of shear to bulk pseudoenergies ( E shear = E bulk ) . Coloring in A – C is log - scaled ( same scale for all subfigures except D ) . For clarity , only the most strained residues are opaque . Histograms at the right show the distribution of pseudoenergies across all residues . ADP binding sites are indicated by blue ADP spheres ( white sticks in D ) . ADP was not bound in the NMR structure ; the binding site was obtained by superimposing an ADP - bound E . coli adenylate kinase structure ( PDB ID code 4JLA ) on the M . tuberculosis NMR structure . A region of high strain surrounds the ADP binding sites . High - strain regions visible at the top and bottom may be due to underconstraint of exposed residues there ( see Fig . S5 for discussion ) . Patterns of total strain , shear strain , and bulk strain are similar , but bulk strain pseudoenergies are consistently lower than shear and total strain pseudoenergies . E5850 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1609462113 Mitchell et al . dimension , we are able to estimate the approximate dimensionality of the structure formed by strained residues . Diffuse , unstructured distribution throughout a protein would produce a correlation di - mension close to 3 . A correlation dimension significantly less than 3 suggests that residues are positioned along some lower - dimensional manifold extending between distinct regions of the protein . We analyzed the correlation dimension of strained regions in four allosteric proteins : glucokinase and ATCase ( as previously described ) in addition to human serum albumin and hemoglobin . Human serum albumin is a monomeric allosteric protein ; it is known that binding of warfarin allosterically decreases the pro - tein ’ s heme affinity by an order of magnitude ( 55 ) . We calculated strains ( Fig . S2 ) between apo - human serum albumin and human serum albumin bound to heme , warfarin , oxyphenbutazone , or phenylbutazone ( two other drugs that bind in the same site as warfarin ) ( PDB ID codes 1E78 , 2BXB , 2BXC , 2BXD , and 1N5U ; refs . 56 – 58 ) . Hemoglobin is a tetrameric allosteric protein . We calculated hemoglobin strains ( Fig . S3 ) based on an ensemble of solution NMR structures ( PDB ID code 2M6Z ; ref . 59 ) . For all four allosteric proteins , we computed the correlation dimension of the N most sheared residues , varying N from only a few residues to the size of the protein . Results were similar for all proteins we studied . For very small clusters , anomalously high dimensions were observed , presumably because those clusters were not connected . As cluster size increased , the cluster di - mension decreased to approximately 2 and remained constant across a size span of several tens of residues , before eventually increasing to a dimension around 3 , consistent with the di - mension of the protein as a whole ( Fig . 5 ) . This apparent two - dimensionality suggests that the most strained residues of these proteins are distributed nonrandomly in some way . In particular , they seem to lie on quasi - 2D manifolds , consistent with the oc - currence of shears along a shear surface between relatively rigid 3D regions . To verify that this apparent two - dimensionality was not an artifact of our calculation or the proteins ’ structures , we repeated the calculation using randomized shear pseudoenergies and found that the dimensionality of randomly ranked residue coordinates never decreased significantly below 3 . To check that the apparent two - dimensionality was not simply a consequence of shears on the proteins ’ surfaces , we also performed this randomization while maintaining the distribution of surface and interior sites across the ranking , with similar results ( Fig . S4 ) . It is significant that this low - dimensionality result holds for both the two multimeric proteins studied ( ATCase and hemo - globin ) and the two monomeric proteins ( glucokinase and human serum albumin ) . Although it is easy to see that a multimeric protein might be susceptible to shear along intersubunit bound - aries , similar quasi - 2D surfaces are present in monomeric proteins with no such interfaces . Discussion Protein mechanics underlie many important protein functions , including ligand binding and allostery , making better under - standing of how the mechanical properties of proteins contribute to these functions quite valuable . Although direct dynamical experiments are the most powerful approach for detecting struc - tural transitions within proteins , the required techniques are challenging , labor - intensive , and not yet widely accessible . More - over , some of these techniques such as room - temperature crys - tallography produce datasets whose meaning is not clear without powerful analytic methods . A great deal of effort has been invested in generating static structural information , which is available for over 67 , 000 distinct protein sequences ( 60 ) , with multiple bio - chemical states present for many of these proteins . Methods to infer mechanical properties of proteins from these already available data can supplement ( although not replace ) direct experimental approaches . We observed shear around allosteric and active sites as a consequence of ligand binding at those sites , of ligand binding at mechanically coupled sites , and of mobility at those sites in solution NMR ensembles . A limitation of our method is that , to avoid imposing strain moduli that we are not capable of mea - suring , we interpreted apparent strain energies computed using Fig . 3 . Homo sapiens glucokinase shear vs . rmsd . ( A ) Glucokinase shear pseudoenergies ( E shear ) ( PDB ID code 4LC9 ) . Gray corresponds to low shear energy , and red corresponds to high energy . Coloring is log - scaled . For clarity , only the most sheared residues are opaque . The histogram at the right shows the distribution of pseudoenergies across all residues . Dark gray residues at the top left were unresolved in some of the structures analyzed , so no strain values were computed for them . The glucose substrate is shown in green . GRP , a regulator of glucokinase , is shown as a light blue ribbon . A path of high shear is visible connecting the GRP binding site and the active site . ( B ) Distribution of rmsds across the glucokinase structure ; compare with the shear distribution in A . Unlike the compact , quasiplanar region of shear extending from the GRP binding site to the glucose binding site , rmsds are diffusely spread across the structure , primarily localizing in the two , largely unsheared regions at top and bottom . ( C ) Comparison of per - residue rmsd values and log shear pseudoenergies . rmsd and shear are correlated , but there are distinct discrepancies ( Pearson correlation coefficient : 0 . 46 ) . These discrepancies indicate that rmsd and similar global alignment - based ap - proaches do not necessarily highlight the sites corresponding to local de - formations . Mitchell et al . PNAS | Published online September 21 , 2016 | E5851 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P N A S P L U S nominal strain moduli as indications of deformation magnitude rather than as true energies . This approximation means we cannot differentiate between flexible but weakly coupled low - strain regions and strongly coupled but rigid low - strain regions . Heuristically , we can filter out strained residues with relatively low coordination number ( and perhaps correspondingly low lo - cal rigidity ) ; this filtering tends to distinguish isolated surface residues and loops with high shear pseudoenergy from strained regions around active and allosteric sites ( Fig . S5 ) . Alternatively , one can divide strain pseudoenergies by the β - factors at each site ; in this way , the influence of thermal fluctuations can be mini - mized relative to the contribution of concerted deformations ( Fig . S6 ) . Ishikura et al . ( 61 ) proposed using short molecular dynamics simulations to thermalize protein crystal structures , then using the molecular dynamics force field to calculate the stress field describing the protein ’ s state . Such an approach would sidestep our limitation but necessitate recourse to a less data - driven and more computationally intensive approach , namely molecular dynamics . A combination of stress and strain analysis could permit more complete analysis of the mechanical properties of individual proteins . We expect that the allosteric nature of proteins exhibiting the shear phenomena we describe should depend strongly on the mechanical properties of the sheared residues . Our results , therefore , can readily be subjected to experimental verification by determining the robustness of proteins ’ allosteric regulation to mutation of these highly sheared residues . For example , mu - tations in the sheared region of glucokinase ( the simplest ex - ample here because it is monomeric ) that limit mobility in that region should reduce the protein ’ s responsiveness to regulation by GRP . Strain ( and shear strain in particular ) is a natural quantity to use in describing local deformations in proteins because it em - phasizes the short - range forces that dominate protein structural dynamics and deformations . We have shown that active and al - losteric sites are highly strained regions in proteins . In at least some allosteric proteins there seem to be shear surfaces trans - mitting deformations between active and allosteric sites . These sheared regions appear to be roughly 2D , indicating that strains are distributed nonrandomly through the proteins studied and may form surfaces along which deformations can be transmitted through proteins . For some time conventional wisdom indicated that allostery was limited to multimeric proteins owing to the need for the subunits to communicate their states to each other to “ cooperate . ” There are now numerous monomeric allosteric proteins known ( we have included analysis of two of them here ) , but it seems possible that multimeric allosteric proteins are common not just because they enable cooperation between multiple active sites but also because they provide a convenient shearable manifold between the subunits , which can act to transmit deformations between subunits . Even the monomeric allosteric enzymes we analyzed , though , seem to use quasi - 2D surfaces to transmit de - formations between binding sites , even transverse to the peptide chain ( Fig . S7 ) . The apparent two - dimensionality of shear surfaces in the pro - teins described here raises the possibility that 2D shear “ faults ” are a common mechanism for propagation of protein deforma - tions . A quasi - 2D shear manifold may minimize the number of amino acids involved in a protein deformation . By extension , a quasi - 2D shear manifold could minimize both size of the sequence space to be explored in evolving a particular function and the deformation energy involved in an allosteric transition , although Fig . 4 . E . coli ATCase shear pseudoenergy distribution . ( A ) ATCase quater - nary structure . The complex consists of two triangular catalytic trimers stacked next to each other , with three regulatory dimers arranged around them in a threefold symmetry . ( B ) ATCase shear pseudoenergies ( E shear ) in one regulatory ( R ) and one catalytic ( C ) subunit ( the crystallographic asym - metric unit ) ( PDB ID code 8AT1 ) . Gray corresponds to low shear energy , and red corresponds to high energy . Coloring is log - scaled . For clarity , only the most sheared residues are opaque . The histogram at the bottom shows the distribution of pseudoenergies across all residues . Substrates maltose ( Mal ) and phosphonoacetamide ( PCT ) are shown in purple and green , respectively . CTP ( blue ) is bound at the allosteric site . Shear is visible around both the allosteric and active sites , but no propagation of shear is visible from one to the other . ( C ) In the biological assembly , it seems that shear is transmitted from the allosteric sites to the active sites ( the red regions in the center ) via the unsheared regions of the catalytic domains . Shears appear localized along the planar interface between the two halves of the complex . E5852 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1609462113 Mitchell et al . further study is needed to better understand the origin of this phenomenon . The examples we have shown indicate that analysis of strains and shears in protein structures can reveal mechanically impor - tant sites in proteins . This method can highlight regions with high deformations and is more appropriate for this purpose than rmsd - based and similar analyses ( Fig . 3 A – C ) . Because the pres - ence of shears is expected to be a mechanism for propagation of deformations between functionally important sites in proteins , analysis of shears caused by ligand binding at one site in a protein can reveal mechanically and functionally coupled sites not yet experimentally investigated . Shears seem to be propagated along quasi - 2D manifolds in all cases studied here , suggesting that this may be a widespread mechanism for transmission of deformations through proteins . Finally , analysis of strains even in thoroughly studied proteins can illuminate the mechanics and mechanisms of their regulation . Materials and Methods Protein Strain Calculation . There are at least two straightforward methods for computing strain between two structures . One approach is to calculate the Delaunay tesselation of each structure and compute the continuum strain of each resulting cell produced by the deformation between the two structures ( 27 ) . The method used in this work employs reference and displaced coor - dinates to estimate at each site ( atom or amino acid , for example ) the matrix describing the local deformation . From this matrix , the stress tensor can be readily computed ( 62 ) . Consider a protein structure described by a set of points x α in some ref - erence state ( perhaps with no binding partners ) and a corresponding structure described by the points x α ′ = χ ð x α Þ in a deformed state ( perhaps with an allosteric effector bound ) . Locally , the deformation of the structure at a point is given by the derivative F α = ∂ χ = ∂ x α = ∂ x α ′ = ∂ x α . To first order , this de - rivative can be written as dx α ′ ≈ F α dx α . Given the matrix F α at a point α , the Eulerian strain tensor can be calculated as e α = 12 ½ I − ð F α F T α Þ − 1 (cid:2) , which is equivalent to Eq . 1 . Hence , calculation of strain tensors throughout a protein structure is reduced to estimating the local deformation matrix at each atom or amino acid . Note that the approximation dx α ′ ≈ F α dx α assumes that the material being studied is continuous rather than granular , like a protein consisting of col - lections of atoms . Our calculated strains , therefore , are discrete approxima - tions that nevertheless represent local deformations in the proteins . Results shown here are based on strains calculated between amino acids ; calculating strains between individual atoms produces similar results ( Fig . S8 ) . Determination of the deformation gradients F α essentially corresponds to estimation of spatial derivatives in the structures . For each site α , consider all other sites β within some neighborhood N α of point α . Define the relative positions of points α and β in the reference and deformed structures as Δ x αβ = x α − x β and Δ x αβ ′ = x α ′ − x β ′ , respectively . To first order , Δ x αβ ′ = F α Δ x αβ . [ 3 ] Provided N α , the neighborhood of α , contains at least three points , then the system Eq . 3 for all β ∈ N α is overdetermined and can be solved in the least squares sense to give an estimate of F α for each point α in the structure . In practice , this least - squares solution was weighted according to simple dis - tance - based weight functions . Amino acid - resolution strain calculations used the piecewise linear radial weight function w αβ = 8 > > > > < > > > > : 1 : r αβ ≤ 6Å 1 − 1 2 (cid:2) r αβ − 6 (cid:3) : 6Å < r αβ ≤ 8Å 0 : r αβ > 8Å , [ 4 ] although results did not depend strongly on the exact choice of weight function , provided the resultant neighborhoods were large enough to fully determine Eq . 3 ( typically at least 6Å ) and not so large as to include too much of the protein . It is important to note that the quantity we study — shear pseudoenergy — is invariant under rotations of the coordinate system used to represent the protein structures . If not for this fact , then the outcome of our analysis would depend arbitrarily on the axes chosen when assigning atomic coordinates in structures . One should expect a spring energy to be so invariant , and indeed Fig . 5 . Strain region dimension for several proteins . Correlation dimension of the N most strained residues was computed for N ranging from 10 up to the proteinsize , asdescribedin MaterialsandMethods . Correlationdimensionofthe protein is shown as a green horizontal line for reference . A background distri - bution of the dimensions of random residue rankings is shown ( mean ± SD ) for comparison . ( A ) Glucokinase . ( B ) ATCase . ( C ) Human serum albumin . ( D ) He - moglobin . In all cases , there is a period of quasi - two - dimensionality , typically for N around 10 % of the protein ’ s size . Glucokinase and human serum albumin are monomeric , whereas ATCase and hemoglobin are multimeric . Mitchell et al . PNAS | Published online September 21 , 2016 | E5853 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P N A S P L U S the shear strain energy is rotationally invariant . The three invariants of any symmetric second - order tensor A are I A = Tr ð A Þ II A = 1 2 (cid:4) Tr ð A Þ 2 − Tr (cid:2) A 2 (cid:3)(cid:5) III A = det ð A Þ . It should therefore be possible to write the shear strain energy as a function of these invariants . Shear strain energy can be written as Tr ð e 2 Þ − 13 Tr ð e Þ 2 , which is a function of I A and II A , by observing that the energy is the squared Frobenius norm of the shear tensor , which can be written Tr ð γ 2 Þ . Substituting the definition of the shear tensor γ yields the previous expression in terms of the first two symmetric tensor invariants . Although we could analyze other invariants of the shear tensor such as the trace or determinant , we are in - terested in a quadratic spring energy and so consider a function involving the second tensor invariant . In analysis of experimental data , the lower limit for meaningful mea - surementofstrainpseudoenergiesisanimportantconsideration . Thatis , very small apparent strain pseudoenergies might derive from the resolution limit of experimental data . We calculated shear pseudoenergies across an en - semble of five crystal structures of similarly prepared Bos taurus trypsin , which had been produced for the purpose of analyzing reproducibility of crystallography data ( PDB ID codes 4I8G , 4I8H , 4I8J , 4I8K , and 4I8L ; ref . 63 ) . Typical shear pseudoenergies in that dataset were 10 − 5 ∼ 10 − 4 , suggesting that shear pseudoenergies larger than this are most likely due to meaningful differences between structures ( Fig . S9 ) . ProteinstructurefileswereparsedusingtheBiopythonPDBmodule ( 64 , 65 ) . Where PDB residue numbering differed between structure files for the same protein , residues were aligned using the EMBOSS water Smith – Waterman alignment program ( 66 ) . Tables of raw strain , shear strain , and bulk strain pseudoenergies in the proteins described here will be provided on request . Protein rmsd Calculation . To compare strain calculations to rmsd - based structuralcomparison , wecalculatedper - residuermsdsforsomeproteins . We aligned ensembles of structures to globally minimize total rmsd using the iterative method of Wang and Snoeyink ( 67 ) . We then computed the rmsd for each residue relative to the average structure . Protein Structure Selection . Because our analysis made use of preexisting structural data , comparability of the structures involved is an important consideration ; experimental conditions such as pH , salt content , and crystal symmetry could affect structures and produce spurious results . For our analysis of adenylate kinase , we made use of a solution NMR structure en - semble ; experimental variability of this type is not a concern for NMR data , because all structures were obtained in the same solution . For our analysis of guanylate kinase , we used three structures crystallized by the same group for the same publication ; all structures had the same symmetry group and very similar unit cell parameters , and chemical conditions were quite similar for all three . In the case of glucokinase , more variability between crystal properties was unavoidable , because some structures were of free glucokinase whereas others were of glucokinase complexed with other proteins . However , in this case , we were able to average over 325 pairwise comparisons between 26 distinct structures ; any idiosyncratic variations due to experimental condi - tions should contribute negligibly to the final result in this case . Our analysis of ATCase made use of six crystal structures , all obtained under as similar chemical conditions as could be expected , and all exhibiting the same sym - metrygroupandverysimilarunitcellparameters . Ouranalysisofhemoglobin was based on analysis of solution NMR structures , for which these concerns are notrelevant . The humanserum albumin structureswere based oncrystals produced under similar chemical conditions , and four of the five structures we analyzed were based on crystals with the same space group . Finally , the consistency of our results across all of the proteins studied suggests that experimental variations contributed negligibly to the phenomena we de - scribe . The care that must be exercised in this matter does emphasize the importance of additional , carefully consistent experimentation . Strain Region Dimension . The fractal dimensions of point clouds corre - sponding to the most strained protein residues were estimated using the correlation dimension ( 53 , 54 ) . For a set of points f ~ X i g , the correlation di - mension is determined from the correlation integral C ð r Þ = lim M → ∞ 1 M 2 X M i , j = 1 θ (cid:4) r − (cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6) X i ! − X j ! (cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:5) = Z r 0 d d r ′ c (cid:4) r ′ ! (cid:5) , [ 5 ] which can be approximated for a finite set of size N ( 68 ) by C ð N , r Þ ≊ 1 N ð N − 1 Þ X i ≠ j θ (cid:4) r − (cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6) X i ! − X j ! (cid:6)(cid:6) (cid:6) (cid:5) . [ 6 ] The correlation dimension ν , then , is ν = lim r → 0 log C ð N , r Þ log r . [ 7 ] The correlation integral was computed across a range of radii spanning the smallest and largest pairwise distances in the protein structure . The gradient d log C ð N , r Þ = d log r was estimated using the first - order central difference . The dimension was estimated as the maximum of the smoothed gradient for r > 8 Å . To explore the relationship between strain cluster size and dimension , correlation dimension of the N most strained residues ( by strain , shear strain , or bulk strain ) was estimated for N from 10 residues up to the protein size . Tohelpinterprettheresults , thecorrelationdimensionoftheentireprotein was also computed . Additionally , a background dimension distribution was bootstrapped by repeatedly computing dimension as a function of cluster size using random residue rankings rather than strain pseudoenergies . To ensure the apparent dimensionality of strain clusters was not a surface artifact , this bootstrappingwasalsoperformedbyrandomlypermutingstrainlabelsamongsurfaceandinteriorresiduesseparately ; results were very similar ( Fig . S4 ) . Surface residues were defined using the Biopython PDB module in conjunc - tion with the MSMS tool ( 64 , 65 , 69 ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank Jean - Pierre Eckmann , Doeke Hekstra , David Huse , and Olivier Rivoire for discussions , comments , and suggestions . M . R . M . thanks the Institute for Advanced Study for its hospitality . This re - search has been partly supported by grants from the Simons Foundation to S . L . through The Rockefeller University ( Grant 345430 ) and the Institute for Advanced Study ( Grant 345801 ) . This material is based upon work supported by National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Grant DGE - 1325261 . T . T . has been partly supported by the Institute for Basic Science Grant IBS - R020 - D1 and The Simons Center for Systems Biology at the Institute for Advanced Study . 1 . Perutz MF ( 1970 ) Stereochemistry of cooperative effects in haemoglobin . Nature 228 ( 5273 ) : 726 – 739 . 2 . Hill AV ( 1910 ) The possible effects of the aggregation of the molecules of haemo - globin on its dissociation curves . J Physiol 40 ( suppl ) : iv – vii . 3 . Stryer L ( 1995 ) Biochemistry ( Freeman , New York ) , 4th Ed . 4 . Van Schaftingen E ( 1989 ) A protein from rat liver confers to glucokinase the property of being antagonistically regulated by fructose 6 - phosphate and fructose 1 - phos - phate . Eur J Biochem 179 ( 1 ) : 179 – 184 . 5 . Monod J , Wyman J , Changeux JP ( 1965 ) On the nature of allosteric transitions : A plausible model . J Mol Biol 12 : 88 – 118 . 6 . Koshland DE , Jr , Némethy G , Filmer D ( 1966 ) Comparison of experimental binding data and theoretical models in proteins containing subunits . Biochemistry 5 ( 1 ) : 365 – 385 . 7 . Kern D , Zuiderweg ER ( 2003 ) The role of dynamics in allosteric regulation . Curr Opin Struct Biol 13 ( 6 ) : 748 – 757 . 8 . Cui Q , Karplus M ( 2008 ) Allostery and cooperativity revisited . Protein Sci 17 ( 8 ) : 1295 – 1307 . 9 . Tsai CJ , Del Sol A , Nussinov R ( 2009 ) Protein allostery , signal transmission and dy - namics : A classification scheme of allosteric mechanisms . Mol Biosyst 5 ( 3 ) : 207 – 216 . 10 . ChangeuxJP ( 2012 ) AllosteryandtheMonod - Wyman - Changeuxmodelafter50years . Annu Rev Biophys 41 : 103 – 133 . 11 . Motlagh HN , Wrabl JO , Li J , Hilser VJ ( 2014 ) The ensemble nature of allostery . Nature 508 ( 7496 ) : 331 – 339 . 12 . Fraser JS , et al . ( 2009 ) Hidden alternative structures of proline isomerase essential for catalysis . Nature 462 ( 7273 ) : 669 – 673 . 13 . Tomita A , et al . ( 2009 ) Visualizing breathing motion of internal cavities in concert with ligand migration in myoglobin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 ( 8 ) : 2612 – 2616 . 14 . Rice S , et al . ( 1999 ) A structural change in the kinesin motor protein that drives motility . Nature 402 ( 6763 ) : 778 – 784 . 15 . Choi B , et al . ( 2005 ) Artificial allosteric control of maltose binding protein . Phys Rev Lett 94 ( 3 ) : 038103 . 16 . Wang Y , Zocchi G ( 2010 ) Elasticity of globular proteins measured from the ac sus - ceptibility . Phys Rev Lett 105 ( 23 ) : 238104 . E5854 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1609462113 Mitchell et al . 17 . Nichols WL , Rose GD , Ten Eyck LF , Zimm BH ( 1995 ) Rigid domains in proteins : an al - gorithmic approach to their identification . Proteins 23 ( 1 ) : 38 – 48 . 18 . Kelley LA , Gardner SP , Sutcliffe MJ ( 1997 ) An automated approach for defining core atoms and domains in an ensemble of NMR - derived protein structures . Protein Eng 10 ( 6 ) : 737 – 741 . 19 . Wriggers W , Schulten K ( 1997 ) Protein domain movements : Detection of rigid do - mains and visualization of hinges in comparisons of atomic coordinates . Proteins 29 ( 1 ) : 1 – 14 . 20 . Schneider TR ( 2002 ) A genetic algorithm for the identification of conformationally invariant regions in protein molecules . Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 58 ( Pt 2 ) : 195 – 208 . 21 . Damm KL , Carlson HA ( 2006 ) Gaussian - weighted RMSD superposition of proteins : A structural comparison for flexibleproteins andpredicted protein structures . BiophysJ 90 ( 12 ) : 4558 – 4573 . 22 . Finkelstein A , Ptitsyn O ( 2002 ) Protein Physics : A Course of Lectures , Soft Condensed Matter , Complex Fluids and Biomaterials ( Elsevier , Amsterdam ) . 23 . Daily MD , Upadhyaya TJ , Gray JJ ( 2008 ) Contact rearrangements form coupled net - works from local motions in allosteric proteins . Proteins 71 ( 1 ) : 455 – 466 . 24 . Hinsen K , Thomas A , Field MJ ( 1999 ) Analysis of domain motions in large proteins . Proteins 34 ( 3 ) : 369 – 382 . 25 . Panjkovich A , Daura X ( 2012 ) Exploiting protein flexibility to predict the location of allosteric sites . BMC Bioinformatics 13 ( 1 ) : 273 . 26 . Miyashita O , Onuchic JN , Wolynes PG ( 2003 ) Nonlinear elasticity , proteinquakes , and the energy landscapes of functional transitions in proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 ( 22 ) : 12570 – 12575 . 27 . Yamato T ( 1996 ) Strain tensor field in proteins . J Mol Graph 14 ( 2 ) : 105 – 107 , 98 – 99 . 28 . Koike K , Kawaguchi K , Yamato T ( 2008 ) Stress tensor analysis of the protein quake of photoactive yellow protein . Phys Chem Chem Phys 10 ( 10 ) : 1400 – 1405 . 29 . Landau L , Lifshitz E , Kosevich A , Pitaevski ˘ ı L ( 1986 ) Theory of Elasticity , Course of Theoretical Physics ( Butterworth - Heinemann , Amsterdam ) . 30 . Born M , Huang K ( 1954 ) Dynamical Theory of Crystal Lattices ( Clarendon , London ) . 31 . Capecchi D , Ruta G , Trovalusci P ( 2010 ) From classical to Voigt ’ s molecular models in elasticity . Arch Hist Exact Sci 64 ( 5 ) : 525 – 559 . 32 . Bagi K ( 1996 ) Stress and strain in granular assemblies . Mech Mater 22 ( 3 ) : 165 – 177 . 33 . Miron S , Munier - Lehmann H , Craescu CT ( 2004 ) Structural and dynamic studies on ligand - free adenylate kinase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis revealed a closed conformationthat canbe relatedto the reduced catalytic activity . Biochemistry 43 ( 1 ) : 67 – 77 . 34 . Kerns SJ , et al . ( 2015 ) The energy landscape of adenylate kinase during catalysis . Nat Struct Mol Biol 22 ( 2 ) : 124 – 131 . 35 . Hible G , et al . ( 2006 ) Unique GMP - binding site in Mycobacterium tuberculosis gua - nosine monophosphate kinase . Proteins 62 ( 2 ) : 489 – 500 . 36 . Kamata K , Mitsuya M , Nishimura T , Eiki JI , Nagata Y ( 2004 ) Structural basis for allo - steric regulation of the monomeric allosteric enzyme human glucokinase . Structure 12 ( 3 ) : 429 – 438 . 37 . Mitsuya M , et al . ( 2009 ) Discovery of novel 3 , 6 - disubstituted 2 - pyridinecarboxamide derivatives as GK activators . Bioorg Med Chem Lett 19 ( 10 ) : 2718 – 2721 . 38 . Nishimura T , et al . ( 2009 ) Identification of novel and potent 2 - amino benzamide derivatives as allosteric glucokinase activators . Bioorg Med Chem Lett 19 ( 5 ) : 1357 – 1360 . 39 . Petit P , et al . ( 2011 ) The active conformation of human glucokinase is not altered by allosteric activators . Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 67 ( Pt 11 ) : 929 – 935 . 40 . Bebernitz GR , et al . ( 2009 ) Investigation of functionally liver selective glucokinase activators for the treatment of type 2 diabetes . J Med Chem 52 ( 19 ) : 6142 – 6152 . 41 . Takahashi K , et al . ( 2009 ) The design and optimization of a series of 2 - ( pyridin - 2 - yl ) - 1H - benzimidazole compounds as allosteric glucokinase activators . Bioorg Med Chem 17 ( 19 ) : 7042 – 7051 . 42 . Pfefferkorn JA , et al . ( 2011 ) Designing glucokinase activators with reduced hypo - glycemia risk : Discovery of N , N - dimethyl - 5 - ( 2 - methyl - 6 - ( ( 5 - methylpyrazin - 2 - yl ) - carba - moyl ) benzofuran - 4 - yloxy ) pyrimidine - 2 - carboxamide as a clinical candidate for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus . Med Chem Commun 2 ( 9 ) : 828 – 839 . 43 . Liu S , et al . ( 2012 ) Insights into mechanism of glucokinase activation : Observation of multiple distinct protein conformations . J Biol Chem 287 ( 17 ) : 13598 – 13610 . 44 . Cheruvallath ZS , et al . ( 2013 ) Design , synthesis and SAR of novel glucokinase activa - tors . Bioorg Med Chem Lett 23 ( 7 ) : 2166 – 2171 . 45 . Filipski KJ , et al . ( 2013 ) Pyrimidone - based series of glucokinase activators with alter - native donor - acceptor motif . Bioorg Med Chem Lett 23 ( 16 ) : 4571 – 4578 . 46 . Beck T , Miller BG ( 2013 ) Structural basis for regulation of human glucokinase by glucokinase regulatory protein . Biochemistry 52 ( 36 ) : 6232 – 6239 . 47 . Hinklin RJ , et al . ( 2013 ) Identification of a newclass of glucokinaseactivators through structure - based design . J Med Chem 56 ( 19 ) : 7669 – 7678 . 48 . Hinklin RJ , et al . ( 2014 ) Discovery of 2 - pyridylureas as glucokinase activators . J Med Chem 57 ( 19 ) : 8180 – 8186 . 49 . Cockrell GM , et al . ( 2013 ) New paradigm for allosteric regulation of Escherichia coli aspartate transcarbamoylase . Biochemistry 52 ( 45 ) : 8036 – 8047 . 50 . Stevens RC , Gouaux JE , Lipscomb WN ( 1990 ) Structural consequences of effector binding to the T state of aspartate carbamoyltransferase : Crystal structures of the unligated and ATP - and CTP - complexed enzymes at 2 . 6 - A resolution . Biochemistry 29 ( 33 ) : 7691 – 7701 . 51 . Ke HM , Lipscomb WN , Cho YJ , Honzatko RB ( 1988 ) Complex of N - phosphonacetyl - L - aspartate with aspartate carbamoyltransferase . X - ray refinement , analysis of con - formational changes and catalytic and allosteric mechanisms . J Mol Biol 204 ( 3 ) : 725 – 747 . 52 . Gouaux JE , Stevens RC , Lipscomb WN ( 1990 ) Crystal structures of aspartate carba - moyltransferase ligated with phosphonoacetamide , malonate , and CTP or ATP at 2 . 8 - A resolution and neutral pH . Biochemistry 29 ( 33 ) : 7702 – 7715 . 53 . Grassberger P , Procaccia I ( 1983 ) Characterization of strange attractors . Phys Rev Lett 50 ( 5 ) : 346 – 349 . 54 . Grassberger P , Procaccia I ( 1983 ) Measuring the strangeness of strange attractors . Physica D 9 ( 1 – 2 ) : 189 – 208 . 55 . Baroni S , et al . ( 2001 ) Effect of ibuprofen and warfarin on the allosteric properties of haem - human serum albumin . A spectroscopic study . Eur J Biochem 268 ( 23 ) : 6214 – 6220 . 56 . Bhattacharya AA , Curry S , Franks NP ( 2000 ) Binding of the general anesthetics pro - pofol and halothane to human serum albumin . High resolution crystal structures . J Biol Chem 275 ( 49 ) : 38731 – 38738 . 57 . Ghuman J , et al . ( 2005 ) Structural basis of the drug - binding specificity of human se - rum albumin . J Mol Biol 353 ( 1 ) : 38 – 52 . 58 . Wardell M , et al . ( 2002 ) The atomic structure of human methemalbumin at 1 . 9 A . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 291 ( 4 ) : 813 – 819 . 59 . Fan JS , et al . ( 2013 ) Solution structure and dynamics of human hemoglobin in the carbonmonoxy form . Biochemistry 52 ( 34 ) : 5809 – 5820 . 60 . Berman HM , et al . ( 2000 ) The Protein Data Bank . Nucleic Acids Res 28 ( 1 ) : 235 – 242 . 61 . Ishikura T , Hatano T , Yamato T ( 2012 ) Atomic stress tensor analysis of proteins . Chem Phys Lett 539 – 540 : 144 – 150 . 62 . GullettPM , HorstemeyerMF , BaskesMI , FangH ( 2007 ) Adeformationgradienttensor and strain tensors for atomistic simulations . Model Simul Mater Sci Eng 16 ( 1 ) : 015001 . 63 . Liebschner D , Dauter M , Brzuszkiewicz A , Dauter Z ( 2013 ) On the reproducibility of protein crystal structures : five atomic resolution structures of trypsin . Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 69 ( Pt 8 ) : 1447 – 1462 . 64 . Cock PJA , et al . ( 2009 ) Biopython : Freely available Python tools for computational molecular biology and bioinformatics . Bioinformatics 25 ( 11 ) : 1422 – 1423 . 65 . Hamelryck T , Manderick B ( 2003 ) PDB file parser and structure class implemented in Python . Bioinformatics 19 ( 17 ) : 2308 – 2310 . 66 . Rice P , Longden I , Bleasby A ( 2000 ) EMBOSS : The European Molecular Biology Open Software Suite . Trends Genet 16 ( 6 ) : 276 – 277 . 67 . Wang X , Snoeyink J ( 2006 ) Multiple structure alignment by optimal RMSD implies that the average structure is a consensus . Comput Syst Bioinformatics Conf 2006 : 79 – 87 . 68 . Theiler J ( 1990 ) Estimating fractal dimension . J Opt Soc Am A Opt Image Sci Vis 7 ( 6 ) : 1055 – 1073 . 69 . SannerMF , OlsonAJ , SpehnerJC ( 1996 ) Reducedsurface : Anefficientwaytocompute molecular surfaces . Biopolymers 38 ( 3 ) : 305 – 320 . Mitchell et al . PNAS | Published online September 21 , 2016 | E5855 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P N A S P L U S