Frame as a clue to intention of data : toward new product ideas with framed components Jun Nakamura Volvo group Trucks , Sales & Marketing APAC and JVs Strategy , Business Intelligence Ageo shi , Saitama , Japan jun . nakamura . 2 @ volvo . com Masahiko Teramoto Volvo group Trucks , Technology Advanced Technology & Research Minato - ku , Tokyo , Japan masahiko . teramoto @ volvo . vom Abstract —When considering how to create and framedesign the market of data , the question of what is an intention behind the raw data has to be raised . Here a concept of Frame is introduced to capture products consisting of a set of components , such as usage , function , data and material representing raw data . A web based system has been developed to explore an effect of the frame . Although the workplace of the web system is not proposing a type of market of data , the findings are showing how framed components relate with others in generating new product ideas . Keywords—frame , component , product development I . I NTRODUCTION Consider data driven approaches in automotive industry . In developing new products , managers consider retaining the product quality as well as securing the basic performance in spite of a possible variance in the specification of the manufactured parts . For this purpose , a data driven approach referred to as Taguchi method that is well known as a “robust” development method , has been introduced in the industry in order to stabilize the quality level in engineering . This can be achieved independent of any static condition such as a possible gap between door panel and body pillar , or any dynamic condition such as inevitable rattling noise in driving vehicle [ 1 ] . The method has been expanded from Japan into various industries in the U . S . , rather than just the U . S . automotive industry , such as GM and Ford . Moreover it has resulted in an improvement of the manufacturing quality through KAIZEN activities [ 2 , 3 ] . The subsequent data driven approach , has been developed in order to transfer the required quality level such as performance , durability etc . into a relevant characteristic model as we here call functional level , as well as into an actualized system level on how to mechanize it to work . This is referred to as Quality Function Deployment ( QFD ) [ 4 ] . The attribution of the functional level and the operability of the system level have not been identified at the beginning because the QFD method starts from the requirement analysis involving the customers who are not concerned about the properties of both function and system at all . An essence of the QFD for product developer is “to discover contradiction from ambiguous requirements” , e . g . , we need to develop products with a system that should be both light and weight ( Table 1 ) . TABLE I . A SPECIFIC EXAMPLE OF QFD ID Requirement Quality Characteristic ( model ) System ( 1 ) Better fuel consumption F ( 1 ) [ w ] = [ km / L ] To be lightened ( 2 ) Quiet cabin F ( 2 ) [ w ] = [ dB ] To be weighted To address this contradiction , the QFD method induces new way of systems and / or technologies along with relevant data in order to discover some solutions by means of optimization , compromise , combination and creativity . Likewise in new drug development for a pathogen , discovery is necessary prior to creativity . This paper is related to support the creativity for new product ideas by introducing a concept of Frame . What is interesting here from the QFD point of view is that the data driven method has been designed with frame , e . g . , quality level , functional level , and system level , in order to deploy more detailed technical specifications from customer’s requirements . The frame supports us in being aware of what is needed for designing new product development in a variety of aspects . This can be seen as a reminder of Zachman’s framework [ 5 ] that is a simple and logical structure for classifying the descriptive representations of an enterprise , which promotes system thinking [ 6 ] . The frame does not define a method for architecture , but is a template for modeling that identifies gaps in the documented state of the organization [ 7 ] . The MDM , Multiple Domain Matrix , allows for the systematic modeling of networks comprising different domains and dependency types [ 8 ] . The type and / or number of components shall be varied depending on the objective of your task , and the type of objects . For instance , Enterprise Architecture is a set of components which is framed by business , application , data and technology , while a balanced scorecard is defined as finance , customer , process and capability [ 9 ] . The framework of VCM , the value capture model , which is a productive network with linkages defined by actual and potential transactions , provides two major components ; the value network , and agents outside the network [ 10 ] . This research was supported by JST , CREST . 2013 IEEE 13th International Conference on Data Mining Workshops 978 - 0 - 7695 - 5109 - 8 / 13 $ 31 . 00 © 2013 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / ICDMW . 2013 . 28 720 2013 IEEE 13th International Conference on Data Mining Workshops 978 - 0 - 7695 - 5109 - 8 / 13 $ 31 . 00 © 2013 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / ICDMW . 2013 . 28 720 For the purpose of this paper , a fram perspectives to structurally decompos products into several components . In thi fixed with four components which are u and material , by referring to Zachm which relatively similar to the purpo generating products . The difference bet is that Zachman focused on process function and data , whereas this pape instead as customers’ view point . In identified technology as enabler , wherea it by material to cover not only techno also natural ones such as water , wood , wider range of products . Whilst th previous research has focused on how to components of relevant product itself , paper is to explore how proposed fram components relate with other compo combining different types of products to product ideas . We construe the cross framed components as the intention of ra be one of topics to be studied for the ma In considering raw data ( of the r instance ) , these should be viewed s labeled data ( which is the required q represent the raw data . The labeled product’s components which consist materials etc . , and support explanation product is about in accordance with the the raw data of labeled data would b structured data , such as kg , hertz , horse the raw data of customers’ usage of unstructured data and / or wording , su shopping . The raw data of other c function is also mainly expressed verba accelerate , to turn to right or left etc . Th raw data of material as one of the comp steel , resin , or glass . Here we suppose above would be similar to the concept o Innovator’s Marketplace [ 11 ] . When it oriented perspective as a reference , th understood as an instance , the compone product as a system ( Fig . 1 ) . Fig . 1 . Frame of product by com The components representing the associated with its intention . An int indicates how customers’ usage deter how the function determines the labele me is defined as one’s se hard and / or soft is paper , the frame is usage , function , data man’s framework [ 5 ] ose of this paper in tween the two frame to be linked with er focuses on usage n addition , Zachman as this paper replaces logical resources but , wind and so on for he above - mentioned o design product with our purpose in this me consisting of four onents by means of ward generating new relationship among aw data which would arket of data . required quality , for separately from the quality as such ) that data is one of the of usage , function , ns of what the final frame . In this sense , be mainly numerical e power , (cid:864) , whereas f a vehicle is rather uch as transport , or components such as ally e . g . , to move , to he same applies to the ponents , such as iron that the components of “data jacket” in the comes to an object - he raw data may be ent as a class , and the mponents raw data should be tention of raw data rmines the function , ed data , and how the data determine the materia intention of the raw data sh framed components to un structured . One of the cases i II . A . Design In this paper , it is assum components as class would y the sake of developing new words , the model of synth generating new product i components with different pr in Fig . 2 . Fig . 2 . Model of sy The ideas of decomposin the components to achieve c psychology for decades [ 15 how combination of framed in combining different prod frame - design the market of users is expected to create ne of farmed components , for a would become function of pr B would be linked to data o creative point on previous r ideas by combinational thi framed thinking would ge consisting restructured comp Here a web based wor order to visualize how the usage , function , data and ma the two different sets of com are synthesized . The mode conception to develop the wo As shown in Fig . 3 , eac which is painted in different side , whereas each compone the right - hand side . The wor two products , where the u ( elements of relevant compon build clusters and to relat drawing lines and / or arrows . At the beginning of t positioned either at the left or al . Hence , we suppose that the hould be considered as a set of nderstand how the product is is introduced in chapter III . M ETHOD med that the synthesis of several yield additional valued ideas for w products or systems . In other hesis is based on the effect of deas , by combining different roducts [ 12 , 13 , 14 ] , as depicted ynthesis that creates value ng a structure and recombining reativity are around in cognitive 5 , 16 ] . We , however , focus on components would be generated ducts in order to take a cue to data . The creative point is that ew ideas in consideration of type an example , usage of product A roduct B , or material of product of product A , in addition to the esearch where users create new inking . It is assumed that this enerate new product offering ponents . rkplace has been developed in framed components which are aterial , relate to each other when mponents from different products el of synthesis is the base of orkplace . ch component of hard products , t color , is shown at the left - hand ent of soft products is shown at rkplace is located in between the user can drag necessary cards nent ) from both sides in order to te those to other clusters , by the experiment , all cards are r right - hand side of the screen in 721 721 accordance with the framed compon cards can be re - arranged to clusters i workplace for creating new product idea Fig . 3 . Screen image of a wok B . Method of analysis The data obtained from the logs are First , the act of clustering different components is interpreted as a reflectio underlying construction of a part of ne The number of possible combination o are categorized as cluster is defined as a ( 0 8 , int ) i i < ≤ = , ( 0 8 , int j j < ≤ = all i , ij ji d d = for all i and j . This dimensional scaling to be introduced in distance of all sets of two different com make each component positioned on dimensions . It is hypothesized that people who w tend to think of usage , function , materi existing products , so that the distance b becomes closer ( hypothesis 1 ) . On the o less to think of components which are companies if those are not competitor order to focus on the gap between calculated two times , i . e . , one for hard products as per hypothesis 1 and an products versus soft products as per hyp C . Preparation As a data set for the experiments , th by both companies A and B are intro produces hard products , e . g . , stationery the beginning of the experiment are po and right hand side of the screen with di ( experiment 1 ) . The company B pro which is 3D printing services are show side of the screen whereas the hard prod are shown at the left - hand side of the sc nents . Consequently in the center of the as . krplace analyzed as follows . t cards of different n of cognitive action ew ideas for product . of components which a determinant on ij d , ) , where 0 ii d = for is for MDS , Multi - order to measure the mponents in order to the map with two work for the company ial , etc . , of their own between components other hand , they tend e developed by other rs ( hypothesis 2 ) . In the two , MDS is products versus hard nother one for hard othesis 2 . he products produced oduced . Company A y , toy etc . , which at ositioned at both left ifferent hard products oduces soft products wn at the right - hand ducts of Company A creen ( experiment 2 ) . The components of the resp set to six elements . In this case , the frame is which are usage , function , ( Table II ) . TABLE II . L Components Hard Produc of Company Usage documents , memo dinner , gift , joke , communication Function Keep acoustic qua long time , keep th shape for long tim change water colo temperature , fix c with temperature , voice , bubble wat temperature Data voice data , RGB d temperature data , data , stress data , c data Material Plastic , extreme sm and solid ball , arti color , spring , clay chemical material Fig . 3 indicates that th represent components , could that can be chosen from te rule for administrators is that same component is not allow products , e . g . , a function of the same color as a function o The method of analysis combinations of products , i . e hard products of company A company . Experiment 2 is d company A and soft product ij d for the sum of both expe hypothesis 1 in order to fig components in total covering compare experiment 1 and 2 calculated for hypothesis 2 . would be relatively less sign outcome of experiment 2 . D . Action Four groups with nine un invited to the experiments , new product ideas , by con clusters , which are sets Participants could write on pencil and eraser in order to clusters by drawing lines , clustered cards of elements ( F The developed workpla regarding all the activities recorded activities can be rep pective company’s products are s composed of four components data and materials as below L IST OF COMPONENTS cts A Soft Products of Company B ory , trial production , interior , advertisement , figure , report , outsourcing ality for he me , or by olor record ter with Paint color on products , print on paper , rendering , bind a book , make special processing , set a layout data , time capacity CAD data , document data , graphic data , customer data , order data , purchase data mall ificial y , l Design , paper , machine , PC / printer , photo , internet he cards on the screen , which d be painted with different colors n color options . The minimum t painting the same color for the wed if those belong to different f hard products would not have of soft products . s are made with two different e . , experiment 1 is designed with A and hard products of the same designed with hard products of ts of company B . The average of eriment 1 and 2 is calculated for gure out distance between eight g both hard and soft products to 2 , whereas ij d of experiment 2 is So the outcome of experiment 1 nificant in comparison with the ndergraduate students who were will drag the cards to generate nsidering possible syntheses of s of combined components . n the workplace as if they use o express the relations between arrows and circle around the Fig . 3 ) . ace system stores logs of data above , so that the images of produced on demand later . 722 722 III . R ESULTS A . Case introduction Here we draw up a chronology of one of cases in generating ideas that were created from the experiment 2 . We understand the intention of data has been inferred through course of the process . The words that were written on the cards are highlighted in italic style , as the group has moved the cards on the workplace during the experiments . The figure is a doll made by mono material that people enjoys looking at . The group has gathered cards they considered as representing relevant meaning , such as memory , rendering , keep the shape for long time , keep acoustic quality for long time , plastic , photo , machine , paint color on products , voice data or graphic data . During the experiments , the group was aware of the figure that could speak using voice data that kept its acoustic quality for a long time . But the group faced deadlock because they felt that the solution was not innovative as it seemed to exist in the current market . When they consider the figure one more time , they became aware that it is originally the object which is transformed from two dimensions to three dimensions , and this idea could be extended and applied for other objects . The concept of the new product has been created with a “three dimensional digital photo frame” . By using technology to make special processing on a 3D - printer , a world of CAD data would be built in a miniature garden ; i . e . , an idea had been derived from a situation where any graph can be reproduced by graphic data on the screen . In this way , the group becomes aware that the idea could be applied to three dimensions as well . As a result , a box - like aquarium where any type of space would be reproduced was considered . The users can build figure in the box in any way they wish by using the function of a 3D printer . The concept is as mentioned previously a “three dimensional digital photo frame” that users can store the space of their memory and rebuild its design according to their wishes and set a layout . The object is made from plastic and ink to be painted color on products , which can be fixed color with temperature . The above generated idea would be summarized in a way of how components of different products would be combined , for examples , usage ( figure ) of soft product would relate with both function ( keep acoustic quality for long time ) and data ( voice data ) of hard product . Function ( make special processing , set layout ) , data ( CAD data , graphic data ) and material ( photo ) of soft product would relate with usage ( memory ) of hard product . B . Summary of results First , with regard to hypothesis 1 , the relevant procedure revealed that usage of the hard product has been highlighted as located in the middle of two dimensions as depicted in Fig . 4 , which implies that participants tend to consider the usage of hard product more with every point that is more or less equidistant from other components with the exception of the material of soft product . Second , the dimension 1 as vertical axis can be measured as either hard or soft product orientation , where components are moved to the upper and lower side . That clearly means that the upper side represents hard products and the lower side represents soft products . This implies that the participants’ perceptions differed depending on the type of products , as suggested by hypothesis 1 . Third , with regard to hypothesis 2 as shown in Fig . 5 , the relevant procedure revealed that the usage of the hard product become closer to the components of the soft product ( usage , data and material ) . In addition , these components of soft products become closer to each other with the exception of functions . Moreover , both material and data of hard products are moved to the opposite side of dimension 1 so that usage , data and material of soft products are located in the middle of components of hard products . This may suggest the two types of products are synthesized , which supports hypothesis 2 . Thus , a developed web based workplace with method of analysis provokes a visualization of relative position between components of different products . IV . D ISCUSSION When the respective components ( usage , function , data , and material ) were presented , the experiments envisaged cognition of usage where the elements were involved with other components . This entails the interpretation of usage as one of the “answers” of participants when the requirements of customers of existing products are considered . However , there are many possible answers that may let the user focus on the usage and relate with other components that have attracted relatively less attention in comparison to usage . Nevertheless , other components such as data and material ( excluding function ) of soft products have done much to reduce the distance between different components . This implies that the data and material would provide leverage for inferring the interpretation of how these data and / or material could be structured and therefore provide new ways of usage for potential new product ideas . This implication holds although the data and / or material do not directly provide an “answer” to the question of what a product constitutes or what usage customers require . Overall , the distance between different components indicates how framed components should relate with other framed components to create new products and / or systems . This means , system thinking [ 6 ] in which all relevant components are seen by proposed frames would relate different components to bring some ideas on new products and / or ideas . This approach is precisely opposite to the approach of data mining . In case to consider market of data as such where transaction between different company and / or different products would be activated , our method would implicate an initial step to reflect which type of data jacket ( components ) would be effective for designing the market of data . Instead , 723 723 Zachman framework would be considered as generating product by introducing components of relative products . In another words , Zachman framework addresses to explore function which requires relevant process , data which requires relevant function , and technology which requires relevant data . These are all generating product but with components of not different products but targeted product as such . Returning to the frame as an original idea source in this paper , i . e . , QFD , it is also considered to generate product with relevant components of targeted products . QFD tries to let users infer potential solutions along with function which would respond to customers’ expectation , as well as the system / mechanism which would realize the function for the sake of developing targeted product . But in this paper , the method is to explore generating new product as structured as possible by introducing concept of framed component , where the market of data would be in a similar situation in terms of synthesizing different products . It may suggest to improve the QFD by focusing on not only product oriented data but also one’s cognitive behavior such as usage by inferring an intention of relevant raw data for the purpose of product planning . V . C ONCLUSION The experiments demonstrated that the proposed frame with a developed workplace facilitates new product ideas by combining different components . According to relevant previous experiments , the usage would be transformed to the new type of usage with new proposed product ideas [ 14 , 17 ] . On the other hand , the data itself could not directly support the generation of new ideas but it leverages a user’s cognition of ideas in relation to other components ( usage , material , and sometimes function ) . In order to get a more general interpretation , however , we need to apply the approach to other types of products such as automotive parts , and to increase the number of participants as well as experiments . Other components made by other types of frames are also needed to be investigated in order to validate the findings . These are our further research agendas . In this regard , a developed web based workplace is considered just as an experimental tool . This means that how to classify the textual data and how to identify the functions , variables , are not automatically made but manually to explore possible pattern set of components . In automotive industry , data engineering has been developed to explore new product attractiveness with causal indicators by introducing resultant indicators for securing product quality . Recently the cutting technology in terms of energy environment and weight lightning of material is demanding . Consequently the data engineering is expected to be enhanced to identify a series of customers’ usages and intentions in order to infer latent customer’s requirement . We , however , might sometimes tend to consider as hypothesis 1 as closed network focusing on our own industry . Regarding industrial research on QFD , we need to develop QFD with reference to the user’s cognitive behavior . As it is a rather static way , we should develop it also by the approach aligning with additional frames such as a time frame , which is referred to as Dynamic - QFD . Thus , with development of various sorts of synthesis of components populated by frames , we need to be prepared for the market (cid:2) of data in which interacts across industries as the basis of B2B , the business to business with framed components toward further product innovation for a sustainable future . A CKNOWLEDGMENT This study was supported by Yoichi Sakurai of Volvo Group trucks , Advance Technology Research , in particular , with regard to Taguchi Method and QFD in the chapter of introduction . We appreciate all subjects for their participation in the experiment . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] G . Taguchi , M . Yoshizawa , “Quality engineering for product development” , Japanese Standard Association , 1988 . ( written in Japanese ) [ 2 ] QFD research group , “QFD Case Study for thrd generation” , Union of Japanese Scientists and Engneers , 2009 . ( written in Japanese ) [ 3 ] D . Clausing , “Total Quality Development : A Step - By - Step Guide to World - Class Concurrent Engineering , Amer Society of Mechanical , 1994 . [ 4 ] S . Mizuno , Y . Akao , “Quality Function Deployment” , Union of Japanese Scientists and Engineers , 1978 . ( writen in Japanese ) [ 5 ] J . Zachman , “A framework for information systems architecture” , IBM systems Journal , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , pp . 276 - 292 , 1987 . [ 6 ] P . Senge , “The Fifth Discipline : The Art & Practive of The Learning Organization” , Crown Businens , 2006 . [ 7 ] http : / / www . ja . wikipedia . org / Zachman [ 8 ] M . Maurer , “Structural Awareness in Complex Product Design – Multiple Domain Matrix” , in Proceedings of 9 th Internaitonal Desgn Structure Matrix Conference , 2007 . [ 9 ] R . S . Kaplan , & D . P . Norton , " The balanced scorecard : measures that drive performance " , Harvard Business Review Jan (cid:772) Feb , pp . 71 - 80 , 1992 . [ 10 ] M . D . Ryall , “The new dynamics of competition , An emerging science for modeling strategic moves” , Harvard Business Review , June 2013 , pp . 80 - 87 , 2013 . [ 11 ] Y . Ohsawa , H . Kido , T . Hayashi & C . Liu , “Data Jackets for Synthesizing Values in the Market of Data” , Procedia Computer Science 22 , pp . 709 - 716 , 2013 . [ 12 ] F . J . Costello & M . T . Keane , “Efficient Creativity : Constraint - guided conceptual combination” , Cognitive Science , Vol . 24 , No . 2 , pp . 299 – 349 , 2000 . [ 13 ] E . J . Shoben & C . L . Gagne , Thematic relation and the creation of combined concepts , in T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , and J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative Thought , American Pshychological Association , pp . 31 - 50 , 1997 . [ 14 ] J . Nakamura , & Y . Ohsawa , “Generating new product ideas by assemblage of different product components” , in Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society , 2012 . [ 15 ] R . J . Sternberg , “The nature of creativity” , Creativity Reserarch Journal , Vol . 18 , No . 1 . , pp . 87 - 98 , 2006 . [ 16 ] K . Hori , “A system for Aiding creative Concept Formation” , IEEE Transactions Systems , Man and Cybernetics , Vol . 24 , No . 6 , pp . 882 - 894 , 1994 . [ 17 ] O . Isaksson , T . C . Larsson , & P . Johansson , “Towards a framework for developing prodict / service systems” , in Proceedings of the 3 rd CIRP International Conference on Industrial Product Service Systems , 2011 . 724 724 “h” or “s ” Fig . 4 . MDS output in hypothesis 1 ” at the end of a word indicate h ard products or s oft products Fig . 5 . MDS output in hypothesis 2 725 725