Improved Preservation and Staining of HeLa Cell Actin Filaments , Clathrin - coated Membranes , and Other Cytoplasmic Structures by Tannic Acid - Glutaraldehyde - Saponin Fixation PAMELA MAUPIN and THOMAS D . POLLARD Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy , / ohns Hopkins Medical School , Baltimore , Maryland 21205 ABSTRACT Fixation of HeLa cells with a mixture of 100 mM glutaraldehyde , 2 mg / ml tannic acid and 0 . 5 mg / ml saponin allows the tannic acid to penetrate intact cells without disruption of membranes or extraction of the cytoplasmic matrix . After subsequent treatment with OsO4 cytoplasmic structures are stained so densely that fine details are visible even in very thin ( dark gray ) sections . Actin filaments are protected from disruption by OsO4 so that straight , densely stained filaments are seen in the cell cortex , filopodia , ruffling membranes , and stress fibers . Stress fibers also have 15 - 18 - nm densities similar in appearance to myosin filaments . Tannic acid staining reveals that the coats of coated vesicles , pits , and plaques have a 12 - nm layer of amorphous material between the membrane and the clathrin basketwork . HeLa cells have very large clathrin - coated membrane plaques on the basal surface . These coated membrane plaques appear to be a previously unrecognized site of cell - substrate adhesion . Work on the ultrastructure of the cytoplasmic matrix has been hampered by the continuing problem that methods of specimen preparation that are acceptable for organdies can destroy or alter major cytoplasmic fibers , especially actin fdaments and microtubules . In early work both microtubules and actin fda - ments were destroyed during fixation with OsO4 or KMnO4 . Fixation with glutaraldehyde followed by OsO4 ( 42 ) solved the problem with microtubule preservation , but glutaraldehyde can damage actin fdaments ( 29 ) and OsO4 can severely disrupt actin f ' daments even after glutaraldehyde treatment ( 32 ) . Ad - ditional problems with traditional chemical fixation and embedding techniques are that fibrous elements may have poor contrast compared with the embedding . medium ( 54 ) , and that they may be obscured by fixed soluble constituents of the matrix . These deficiences of conventional chemical fixation and embedding stimulated the development of four new methods to prepare cells for electron microscopy of the cytoplasmic matrix : ( a ) preparation of whole amounts of intact cells by chemical fixation , dehydration , and critical point drying ( 14 , 54 ) ; ( b ) physical or chemical lysis of cultured cells followed by A preliminary account of this work was presented at the 1981 Annual Meeting of the American Society for Cell Biology ( 31 ) . negative staining ( 12 , 16 , 30 , 47 ) ; ( c ) physical lysis , freeze - drying , and rotary shadowing ( 9 ) ; and ( d ) rapid freezing fol - lowed by freeze - substitution or by freeze - fracturing , deep etch - ing , and rotary shadowing ( 21 , 22 , 24 ) . These new methods have contributed most of the recent information about the organization of the cytoplasmic matrix . However , each of these methods has limitations , which we consider in the Discussion . We felt that thin sections offer enough advantages over the various whole mount procedures to justify a new effort to overcome the difficulties with chemical fixation and poor specimen contrast . We focused our efforts on methods to introduce tannic acid into the cell during fixation , for two reasons . First , it is well established that tannic acid is an excellent electron - dense stain for both membranes ( 45 ) and cytoplasmic fibers ( 10 , 19 , 27 , 49 ) . Second , we found that tannic acid also protects purified actin fdaments from fragmentation by OsO4 ( 38 ) . Unfortunately , intact cells are impermeable to tannic acids ( 35 ) . We report here that fixation of HeLa cells with a mixture of glutaraldehyde , tannic acid , and saponin allows the penetration of tannic acid without disrupting mem - branes . The actin f ' llaments are well preserved , and most cyto - plasmic structures , including large sheets of calthrin coating the basal plasma membrane , are densely stained , allowing one to study very thin sections . These advantages of the fixation THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY • VOLUME 96 JANUARY 1983 51 - 62 © The Rockefeller University Press • 0021 - 9525 / 83 / 01 / 0051 / 12 $ 1 , 00 51 method have allowed us to make a number of new or improved observations on HeLa cell free structure . MATERIALS AND METHODS HeLa Cell Culture HeLa cells were grown on 35 x 10 mm plastic petri dishes ( Falcon # 3001 , Falcon Labware , Div . Becton , Dickinson & Co . , Oxnard , CA ) in DME with I1 ~ fetal calf serum . Electron Microscopy The standard fixation method was to replace the culture medium with a 37°C solution of 100 mM ( 1 % ) glutaraldehyde ( Electron Microscopy Sciences , Ft . Washington , PA ) , 0 . 5 mg / ml saponin ( Merck and Co . , Inc . , Rahway , NJ ) , and 2 ' mg / ml tannic acid ( Mallinckrodt # 1764 , Mallinckrodt Inc . , St . Louis , MO ) in 100 mM sodium phosphate , 50 mM KC1 , 5 mM MgC1 , pH 7 . 0 ( Buffer A ) . After 30 min at room temperature the dish was rinsed briefly with Buffer A at pH 6 . 0 and treated with 40 mM ( 1 % ) OsO4 in Buffer A , pH 6 . 0 , for 20 min at room temperature ? The cells were dehydrated over 45 rain at room temperature with ethanol ( 50 % , 70 % , 95 % , three changes of absolute ) and then infiltrated with a 1 : 1 mixture of ethanol and epoxy resin ( Lufi mixture with Epon 812 ) for l h followed by 100 % epoxy resin for 1 h . Fresh epoxy was poured into the dishes to a height of 2 - 3 mm and cured at 60°C for 2 d . For comparison , the primary fixation was varied as follows : ( a ) as described above without saponin ; ( b ) in 400 mM glutaraldehyde , 80 mg / ml tannic acid in Buffer A ; and ( c ) in 400 mM glutaraldehyde , 80 mg / ml tannic acid in 100 mM cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 2 , for 2 h at room temperature . We separated the epoxy disks from the plastic dish by hammering away the sides of the plastic dish , then holding the resultant disk perpendicular to a hard surface and striking with a hammer the edge of the disk vertically tangential to the epoxy - dish interface . This leaves a smooth surface ( no stress marks ) so that single cells may be evaluated , marked , and photographed in a phase - contrast microscope . Identified cells were cut out of the epoxy disk and mounted on epoxy plugs in the desired orientation . For sectioning perpendicular to the growth surface , the specimen was reembedded . Silver - gray ( 75 nm ) to dark gray ( 35 nm ) sections were cut , collected on nitrocellulose and carbon - coated single hole grids , and stained with lead citrate ( 52 ) . Micrographs were taken with a JEOL 100 CX or Zeiss EM 10A electron microscope . Paracrystals of skeletal muscle tropomyosin 09 . 5 - nm periodicity ) were used as magnification standards . RESULTS Effects of Tannic Acid on Actin Filaments Fixation of actin fdaments with tannic acid and glutaralde - hyde strongly inhibits their disruption during subsequent treat - ment with OsO , . Actin fdament pellets prepared as in reference 32 can survive mild OsO4 treatment ( 32 ; Fig . I a ) , but even after glutaraldehyde fLxation actin filaments are disrupted by exposure to OsO4 under conditions traditionally used for fLxa - tion ( Fig . I b ) , unless tannic acid is present during primary fLxation with glutaraldehyde ( Fig . I c ) . Unfortunately , it is not possible to quantitate this effect of tannic acid by viscometry because , even after the samples are dialyzed to remove free glutaraldehyde and tannic acid , a dense black precipitate forms upon the addition of OsO4 . Tannic acid treatment also increases the electron density of actin fdaments ( Fig . 1 c and d ) as originally emphasized by LaFountain et al . ( 27 ) . The extra density is due , in part , to the fact that glutaraldehyde - tannic acid - fLxed fdaments reduce four to five times more OsO4 than native or glutaraldehyde - fixed actin fdaments ( data not shown ) . In addition , tannic acid itself must contribute part of the density , because it increases density even when applied after OsO4 treatment ( Fig . 1 d ) . After ex - Although we used 40 mM OsO4 in this study , we have subsequently determined that 4 mM OsO4 is adequate . This lower OsO4 concentra - tion has the theoretical advantage that it is less likely to alter cellular structure by oxidizing proteins . FIGURE I Thin sections of actin filament pellets fixed by different methods to illustrate effects of OsO4 and of tannic acid . Small pellets of actin filaments were fixed as follows : ( a ) 100 mM glutar - aldehyde , pH 7 . 0 , for 30 rain at room temperature followed by 4 mM OsO4 , pH 6 . 0 , for 10 min at 2°C ; ( b ) same glutaraldehyde treatment as ( a ) followed by40 mM OsO4 , pH 7 . 0 , for 1 h at room temperature ; ( c ) 100 mM glutaraldehyde with 2 mg / ml tannic acid , pH 7 . 0 , for 45 rain at room temperature followed by 40 mM OsO4 , pH 6 . 0 for 20 rain at room temperature ; ( d ) 100 mM glutaraldehyde , pH 7 . 0 , for 45 rain at room temperature followed by the same OsO4 treatment as ( c ) then by 2 mg / ml tannic acid , pH 6 . 0 , for 10 rain at room temperature . Buffer : ( a and b ) 50 mM or ( c and d ) 100 mM sodium phosphate , 50 mM KCI , 5 mM MgCl ~ . All samples were dehydrated with ethanol and propylene oxide . The filament diam - eters were ( SD < 1 , n 20 in each ) a , 7 nm ; b , 7 nm ; c , 9 nm ; d , 10 nm . × 90 , 000 . posure to tannic acid , the diameter of embedded actin fdaments is 7 - 10 nm depending on the concentration of tannic acid . This is larger than without tannic acid . Introduction of Tannic Acid into Cells During Fixation Using HeLa cells we cOnfLrmed the observation of La - Fountain et al . ( 27 ) that many cells are penetrated by the tannic acid and have densely stained cytoplasmic fibers and membranes after fixation with a high concentration ( 80 mg / ml ) of tannic acid and 400 mM glutaraldehyde in 100 mM cacodylate buffer . However , there is always some extraction of the cytoplasmic matrix in the penetrated ceils . This might be considered an advantage for visualizing individual fdaments , but cellular structure is altered by extraction . Very few cells are penetrated by tannic acid when 100 mM phosphate buffer , pH 7 , is substituted for cacodylate buffer , so we suspect that penetration by tannic acid in cacodylate is attributable , at least in part , to damage to the plasma membrane in the presence of cacodylate . When saponin is included in the tannic acid - glutaraldehyde fLxative , the fraction of HeLa cells penetrated by tannic acid depends on the concentration of saponin , the duration of fixation , and the stage of the cell cycle . Cells penetrated by tannic acid are readily identified by light microscopy ( Fig . 2 a ) 52 THE IOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY • VOLUME 96 , 1983 even after embedding , because they stain a deep brown . Like - wise , penetrated cells have a much higher electron density than unpenetrated neighbors ( Fig . 2 b ) . For most of our work we used 100 mM glutaraldehyde , 0 . 5 mg / ml saponin , and 2 nag / ml tannic acid for 30 min , because this treatment provides a reasonable number ofunpenetrated cells for comparison . When the saponin concentration is 0 . 1 mg / ml or less , very few cells are penetrated by tannic acid even after 30 min . At saponin concentrations - - > 0 . 3 mg / ml , > 90 % of the cells are penetrated by tannic acid within 10 min . All ceils are penetrated after treatment with 0 . 7 mg / ml saponin for 10 min . 2 Cells in mitosis are penetrated at lower saponin concentrations than cells in interphase . Cortical Actin Filaments The actin fdaments of Hega cells are well preserved and densely stained after tannic acid - glutaraldehyde - saponin fLXa - tion . For example , the filopodia ( Fig . 3 a ) of cells penetrated by tannic acid contain a regular bundle of - 19 ( SD 2 , n 30 ) straight actin filaments with diameters of 10 nm ( SD < 1 rim , n 20 ) with occasional densities between the filaments suggesting cross - links . There is some ill - defined granular material between the filament bundle and the plasma membrane . The surround - ing membrane is sometimes swollen away from the bundle of filaments , a distortion that probably occurs during fixation . Adjacent cells not penetrated by tannic acid have a lightly stained , irregular network of fme , branching 6 - rim ( SD 1 nm , n 15 ) fdaments in their fdopodia ( Fig . 3a ) that are similar to pure actin fdaments exposed to OsO4 without prior treatment with tannic acid ( Fig . I b ) . The cortex of HeLa cells contains largely random networks of straight , densely stained actin fdaments ( Fig . 3 c ) . Many , perhaps most , of these cortical actin fdaments are obscured by the surrounding amorphous components of the cytoplasmic matrix , but many can be identified , particularly if their paths are traced from near the plasma membrane or from bundles of actin filaments . Occasionally , small bundles of cortical actin fdaments appear to attach end - on to the plasma membrane ( Fig . 3 c ) . In some cases , a small amount of dense amorphous material is associated with the attachment site . Morphologically similar attachment site specializations are seen in negatively stained cells ( 30 , 47 ) . In cells not penetrated by tannic acid , the stress fiber actin fdaments are relatively intact ( Fig . 3 d ) , but cortical actin fdaments are difficult to identify . Actin fdaments predominate in membrane ruffles ( lamelli - podia ) at the margins of the ceil ( Fig . 3 b ) . As in other parts of the cortex , these actin fdaments are arranged in crisscrossed networks rather than in the regular bundles found in fdopodia . In earlier electron micrographs of the lamellipodia ( 2 , 11 ) , the actin fdaments were so poorly preserved after fixation and embedding that the matrix was described as " granular . . . with vague and irregular filaments ; ' ( 2 ) . Stress Fibers Stress fibers of HeLa ceils fixed with tannic acid are com - posed of straight , roughly parallel thin filaments with diameters of 10 nm ( Fig . 4 ) . In cross sections ( Fig . 5 ) , it is clear that the thin filaments are not organized in a regular array but instead have variable center - to - center spacing ( range 10 - 21 nm ; mean 2 We have successfully used this method to fix PtK cells , hepatocytes , and ocular trabecular meshwork . Each has a different optimal saponin concentration . FIGURE 2 Phase - contrast ( a ) andelectron ( b ) micrographsshowing differential penetration of neighboring cells by tannic acid after fixation by the standard method . Cells penetrated by tannic acid have a higher density than unpenetrated cells ( arrows ) . The cyto - plasmic matrix in general and stress fibers in particular are much denser in penetrated than in unpenetrated cells . SF , stress fibers , a , x 400 ; b , x 12 , 000 . 13 nm , SD 3 nm , n 35 ) . As a consequence of this tight packing , most of what appear to be individual actin filaments in routine longitudinal thin sections ( 60 - 75 nm thick ; Fig . 4a - b ) are actually two or more superimposed filaments as illustrated by the inset in Fig . 4 b . Consequently , very thin sections such as Fig . 4 c are necessary to visualize individual actin filaments in longitudinal sections . In such thin sections , it is seen that the individual fdaments are generally aligned with the long axis of the fiber but may be skewed up to 35 ° . Stress fibers stained with tannic acid have two different types of densities . One type consists of amorphous material between the actin fdaments and has a rounded shape ( Fig . 4 ) . They are probably comparable to the stress fiber densities observed by Goldman et al . ( 19 ) in BHK - 21 cells after fixation with tannic acid and glutaraldehyde . The other dense structure is a filament ~ 19 nm ( SD 3 nm , n 15 ) wide and up to 250 nm long , which is best seen in very thin sections ( Fig . 4c ) . In cross sections , it is difficult to identify with certainty but there are a number of fdaments 17 nm ( SD 1 am , n 15 ) in diameter among the 10 - nm thin fdaments ( Fig . 5 a and c ) . These thicker fdaments are the same size as synthetic platelet myosin fdaments ( 34 ) . Most of the stress fibers in HeLa cells are located near the basal plasma membrane oriented parallel to the substrate . A few stress fibers are located near the free surface ( Fig . 5 c ) or course diagonally through the cytoplasm . For the most part , the stress fibers located near the plasma membrane do not have any structural specializations linking them to the adjacent membrane , and the membrane is not closely associated with the underlying substrate ( Fig . 5 ) . Substrate Adhesion Sites We fred that HeLa cells have at least two morphologically distinct substrate adhesion sites : the classical adhesion plaques , called focal contacts , at the ends of stress fibers ( 1 , 25 ) , and adjacent plaques where the plasma membrane is coated with material which is morphologically identical to clathrin of coated pits and vesicles ( Fig . 6 ) . FOCAL CONTACTS : Stress fibers terminate on the plasma membrane at specialized adhesion plaques where the mem - brane is separated from the substrate by a uniform gap of 10 nm ( SD 2 am , n 25 ) ( Fig . 6 ) . The gap is bridged by free strands ~ 6 nm wide ( SD < 1 rim , n 15 ) , spaced at 14 - rim ( SD 4 nm , n MAUPIN AND POLLARD Tannic Acid - Glutaraldehyde - Saponin Fixation 53 54 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY - VOLUME 96 , 1983 FIGURE 4 Electron micrographs of longitudinal sections of stress fibers . All are the first or second section parallel to the substrate . Note the stress fibers ( SF ) with dense areas ( some circled ) , intermediate filament bundles ( IFB ) , coated pits ( CP ) , nuclear envelope ( N ) , and filopodia . Individual thin filaments ( width 10 nm ) and thicker filaments ( arrowheads , diameter 17 nm ) can be seen in b and c . Insets in b and c are tracings of stress fiber cross sections showing the packing density of the actin filaments and the approximate thickness of these two sections to illustrate the extent of actin filament superimposition expected in these longitudinal sections . Section thickness : ( b ) silver gray , ~ 75 nm ; ( c ) light gray , ~ 45 nm . a , x 5 , 200 ; b and c , x 56 , 000 . FIGURE 3 Electron micrographs of cortical actin filaments . ( a ) Longitudinal sections of filopodia sections showing the difference in preservation and staining of actin filaments in a cell that was penetrated by tannic acid and another that was not penetrated . Inset : a cross section of a filopodium stained with tannic acid showing the actin filament core with several fine fibers between it and the membrane . { b ) Three ruffling membranes { iameilipodia ) at the leading edge of a HeLa cell . The section is perpendicular to the growth substrate ( thin line ) and parallel to the long axis of the cell . All three membrane ruffles contain actin filament networks and are attached to the leading lamella in other planes of section . Insets : sequential sections illustrating longitudinal and cross sections of actin filaments and their relationship to the membrane . ( c ) A cell penetrated by tannic acid with many densely stained actin filaments in the cortex . Several filaments insert into the plasma membrane at two discrete loci { arrows ) . The majority of the cortical actin filaments are randomly arranged so that only short pieces or cross sections { arrowheads ) are seen in a thin section . / ~ marks the bifurcation of a small actin filament bundle . ( d ) A cell that was not penetrated by tannic acid from the same dish as c . Actin filaments are distinguishable in the stress fiber ( SF ) , but only indistinct microfilament networks are present elsewhere in the cortex , g , glycogen ; r , ribosome , a , x 73 , 000 ; b , x 26 , 000 ; insets , x 62 , 000 ; c and d , 67 , 000 . / V ~ AUPIN AND POLLARD Tannic Acid - Glutaraldehvde - Saponin Fixation 55 15 ) intervals . In conventional thin sections ( Fig . 6d - g ) , the actin filaments on the cytoplasmic surface of the plaque mem - brane appear to be embedded in amorphous dense material which is attributable , at least in part , to the high concentration of the actin filaments themselves , because in thinner sections ( Fig . 6 h and i ) only actin filaments or other fibers of similar size and staining properties are visible . COATED MEMBRANE PLAQUES " The second type of close association of the plasma membrane with the underlying sub - strate occurs in regions where the cytoplasmic surface of the membrane is coated exactly like coated pits and vesicles ( Fig . 6 ) . Tannic acid increases the electron density of these coats so that these membranes are readily distinguished from uncoated membranes . The extracellular surface of the coated membrane plaques is closely apposed to the substrate . The 12 - nm ( SD 2 am , n 25 ) gap between the membrane surface and the substrate is usually spanned by projections about 8 am ( SD < 1 am , n 10 ) wide ( Fig . 6 a - c and g - i ) . The cytoplasmic surface of the coated membrane has two layers . Directly associated with the membrane is a very dense amorphous layer 12 nm ( SD < 1 am , n 10 ) thick . Extending into the cytoplasm from the dense layer at regular intervals of 28 am ( SD 1 nm , n 20 ) are projections 9 nm ( SD < 1 rim , n 25 ) long and 16 am ( SD 3 am , n 15 ) wide . Sections parallel to the substrate show that these projections are elements of extended arrays of Polygons with center - to - center spacing of 28 am ( SD < 1 am , n 25 ) . Most of the polygons are hexagons , but a few of them are pentagons . Frequently , there is an electron - dense spot in the center of the polygon . These coated membrane plaques are most frequently located adjacent to stress fibers ( Fig . 7 a and b ) , especially near the focal contacts . The largest plaques consist of > l , 000 poly - gons and altogether they cover substantial areas of the basal plasma membrane . Other Coated Membranes The flat membrane plaques are continuous with coated pits with a mean radius of curvature of 54 am ( SD 18 am , n 10 ) , an amorphous dense layer , and projections spaced somewhat closer together ( 23 am , SD 3 nm , n 15 ) than in the flat areas . One section parallel with the substrate can provide views of both the amorphous and polygonal layers of the coat when it grazes the top of one of the pits ( Fig . 7 d ) . Coated vesicles with the same amorphous layer and surface projections are found throughout the cytoplasm of HeLa cells . Those > 1 / zm from the plasma membrane are seen in serial sections to be separated from the plasma membrane . Intermediate Filaments The tannic acid procedure stains intermediate filaments very densely and , as a consequence , small bundles of 5 - - 40 filaments stand out clearly in both longitudinal ( Fig . 4a ) and cross sections ( Fig . 5 a ) . After tannic acid staining , the intermediate filaments are 16 nm ( SD 1 rim , n 25 ) in diameter and their average center - to - center spacing in small bundles is 21 am ( SD 3 rim , n 65 ) . The intermediate filament bundles are usually located slightly deeper in the cytoplasm than the majority of the actin filaments and are concentrated around the nucleus ( Fig . 5 a ) . The intermediate filament bundles arc associated with the plasma membrane at structures similar to hemidesmosomes , which stain intensely with tannic acid ( Fig . 8 ) . The hemides - mosomes are found on all surfaces of the cell . On the cytoplas - mic surface of the membrane is a very dense plaque - 24 nm ( SD 2 am , n 10 ) thick and 130 - 190 nm wide . Interior to the plaque is a bundle of intermediate filaments - 153 am ( SD 21 nm , n 20 ) in diameter . The individual intermediate filaments FIGURE 5 Electron micrographs of cross sections of stress fibers . The cells in a and c were fixed by the standard method . The cell in b was fixed with 400 mM glutaraldehyde , 80 mg / ml tannic acid , 100 mM cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 2 , Stress fibers are bracketed . Thin filament diameters are 10 nm in a and c . The higher concentration of tannic acid used in b increases the thin filament diameter compared with a and c . Cross sections of some thicker filaments ( diameter 17 nm ) are indicated with arrowheads . IFB , intermediate filament bundle ; CV , coated vesicle ; NP , nuclear pore . Magnifications : a and b , x 56 , 000 ; c x 122 , 000 . 56 ] - HE jOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY • VOLUME 96 , 1983 in these bundles are difficult to resolve , even in very thin sections parallel ( Fig . 8 g and h ) or perpendicular ( Fig . 8 a - f ) to the bundle , because the filaments are tightly packed and embedded in electron - dense material . The area of contact between the filament bundle and the plaque is very limited , because only one or two sections in a series show any connec - tion . On the extracellular surface of the plaque membrane are irregularly spaced projections 11 nm ( SD < 1 rim , n 10 ) long , but these hemidesmosomes rarely make contact with the sub - strate ( Fig . 8 ) . Therefore , it is not likely that the intermediate filament system of HeLa cells is involved with anchorage to the substrate . FIGURE 6 Electron micrographs of cross sections of two types of adhesion plaques . Cells were fixed by the standard method except for d , which was prepared with a high concentration of tannic acid as in Fig . 5 ( b ) . The thin dense line beneath the cell is the substrate . Some adhesion plaques are associated with stress fibers and have a fairly uniform gap of 10 nm between the plasma membrane and the substrate . These " focal contacts " are indicated with h ~ lb , . Other plaques have a . distinct electron dense coat on the cytoplasmic surface of the plasma membrane and are separated from the substrate by a gap of 12 nm . These coated membrane plaques are indicated with AA . Micrographs ( g - i ) illustrate both types of plaques in three consecutive serial sections ranging in thickness from ( g ) ~ 75 nm ( silver - gray ) to ( i ) ~ 35 nm ( very dark gray ) . Amorphous densities in the stress fiber are noted with arrows . CP , coated pit ; U , unilamellar membrane vesicle , a - f , x 78 , 000 ; g - i , x 70 , 000 . Mau ~ n and PoLLarD Tannic Acid - Glutaratdehyde - Saponin Fixation 57 Tannic Acid Staining of Other Cellular Structures The effects of tannic acid staining on the structure and electron density of various cellular components can be appre - ciated by comparing penetrated with unpenetrated neighboring cells , especially in very thin sections where superimposition is minimal ( Fig . 9 ) . Most of the cytoplasmic matrix consists of densely stained fibrogranular material ( Figs . 3 c and 9 d ) . The concentration of this matrix material varies among cell types . For example , in HeLa cells its concentration is low enough to allow one to identify the matrix fdaments , whereas in hepato - cytes its concentration is so high that no details of matrix structure can be identified . Free ribosomes and glycogen par - ticles are identifiable on the basis of their size and shape ( Fig . 3 c and d ) . Plasma membranes are 12 nm ( SD 2 rim , n 30 ) thick and densely stained on both surfaces , which allows resolution of the three layers . This is difficult or impossible with conven - tional fixation and staining methods . Tannic acid also brings out the trilaminar appearance of most internal membranes including those of the endoplasmic reticulum , Golgi apparatus , and nuclear envelope ( all 7 - nm thick , SD < 1 , n 30 ) . Exceptions are the mitochondrial membranes , in which only the outer leaflet is densely stained , and a considerable number of vesicles 70 - 100 nm in diameter that are bounded by a " membrane " that appears as a single dense line ( 5 nm thick , SD < l , n 25 ) . FIGURE 7 Electron micrographs of thin sections parallel to the substrate illustrating the relationship between coated membrane plaques , coated pits , and stress fibers . The coated membrane plaques consist of extended sheets of hexagons ( HS ) frequently located adjacent to stress fibers ( SF ) . Some , but not all coated sheets are interrupted by coated pits ( CP ) , which appear as dark round spots in the hexagonal sheets . Micrograph ( c ) illustrates four coated pits that have invaginated to different extents , from 1 which has invaginated the least , to 4 which has invaginated the most . Micrograph d is an enlargement of b . a and b , × 26 , 000 ; c and d , x 78 , 000 . 58 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY • VOLUME 96 , 1983 The significance of this unusual membrane staining is not known . The nucleus of penetrated cells contains an abundance of densely stained round granules 11 nm in diameter ( SD 1 nm , n 30 ) ( Fig . 9 c ) . These nncleosome - size granules can be seen only in very thin sections in which there is minimal superimposition ( of . Fig . 9 b and c ) . Some of these granules are arranged in linear strands 11 or 23 nm wide ( Fig . 9 c ) . Larger particles with a diameter of 30 nm ( SD 6 rim , n 60 ) are presumably ribonucleoprotein ( RNP ) particles . The nuclear pores are densely stained like other nuclear structures . FIGURE 8 Electron micrographs of hemidesmosomes from the up - per ( a , b , and g ) , lateral ( c and d ) and basal ( e , f , and h ) membranes . The membrane bulges slightly outward and is coated on its cyto - plasmic surface with a dense amorphous plaque ( brackets in e ) . A bundle of tightly packed intermediate filaments ( parenthesis in e ) is associated with each dense plaque . The pairs of micrographs ( e . g . a and b ) are serial sections to illustrate the limited contact between the filament bundles and the plaques , x 86 , 000 . DISCUSSION Of the various methods used to study cellular architecture , thin sections of fixed , embedded cells have suffered from poor preservation and low contrast of cytoplasmic matrix elements . The tannic acid - glutaraldehyde - saponin fixation remedies some of these problems . Actin filaments are preserved better than with conventional fixatives , and the dense staining of membranes , membrane coats , filaments , and other elements of the cytoplasmic matrix allows one to visualize free details even in very thin sections . For introducing tannic acid during fLxa - tion of cultured cells , this saponin - glutaraldehyde method is superior to OsO4 vapor pretreatment ( 39 ) , which is less con - sistent and causes some extraction of the cytoplasmic matrix . Compared with whole cell mounts and replicas of extracted cells , thin sections do not provide easy access to three - dimen - sional interrelationships in the cytoplasmic matrix , but sections make it possible to visualize details in dense structures such as stress fibers and membrane coats , which are obscured in the other specimens . Furthermore , extraction is not necessary be - fore fixing and embedding . As emphasized by Buckley ( 13 ) , detergent extraction of soluble constituents results in the loss of some and the disorganization of other cytoplasmic actin filaments . Our fixation procedure appears to preserve and stain most of the components of the cytoplasmic matrix including the ground substance . This material is extracted in most repli - cating and negative - staining procedures and is mysteriously absent after critical point drying intact cells . The advantages of tannic acid - stained cells make thin sec - tions a valuable addition to the other methods for preparing cells for electron microscopy . None of the methods is without potential artifacts , so we will compare them in the following sections . Consistent results from several methods provide con - fidence that an accurate picture of the cell has been obtained . Morphology of Actin Filaments in the Intact Cell Cytoplasmic actin filaments fixed by our new method are long , straight , and constant in diameter . They are similar to the cytoplasmic actin filaments in lysed cells prepared for electron microscopy by rapid freezing , deep etching and shadowing ( 22 ) ; by freeze - drying and shadowing ( 9 ) ; by chem - ical fixation and critical point drying ( 44 ) ; and by negative staining ( 30 , 47 ) . The actin filaments in all of these preparations are different from the microtrabecnlae of critical - point - dried whole mounts ( 54 ) , but are similar to filaments in critical - point - dried whole mounts in which extra caution was taken to remove all traces of water before drying ( 40 ) . Cortical filaments seem to be the most damaged during conventional fLxation and embedding . This gave rise to earlier descriptions of micro filament networks in the cortex ( 55 ) and ruffling membranes ( 2 , 11 ) of cultured cells . Although it is true that the cortex has a network of actin filaments , our work and that of Small ( 47 ) show that the network consists of relatively long straight filaments of uniform width , not the branched , irregular fibers that comprise the microfilament networks ob - served after conventional fLxation . We suggest that the tannic acid - glutaraldehyde - saponin fLxation is capable of preserving , to a degree not possible with earlier fLxation - embedding meth - ods , the natural structure of individual actin filaments in the cytoplasm of HeLa ceils . This new fLxation method also provides the best available picture in thin sections of actin filament assemblies such as stress fibers , filopodia , ruffling membranes , and cortical net - Maueln AND Port ^ to Tannic Acid - G [ utaraJdehyde - Saponin Fixation 59 works . In each case the arrangement in our sectioned material is most similar to that seen in replicas of extracted , quick frozen , etched cells ( 22 ) , but some new features are revealed in sections of intact cells . In stress fibers there are two types of dense material in addition to the actin fdaments . One is the stress fiber dense body ( 19 , 43 ) thought to contain alpha - actinin ( 28 ) . The other can only be appreciated in very thin sections and seems to be a short filament similar in size to platelet myosin ftlaments ( 34 ) . These myosinlike filaments may be responsible for the staining of some stress fiber densities by ferritin - labeled anti - myosin ( 20 ) . Cytoplasmic Ground Substance The fibrous elements are not the major component of the cytoplasmic matrix of HeLa cells . Rather , it is a poorly char - acterized fibrogranular material that is continuous throughout the matrix . A similar cytoplasmic ground substance is preserved by rapid freezing , etching , and shadowing of intact cells ( 22 ) , but is absent in critical - point - dried whole mounts ( 54 ) , in which it may become associated with the fibrous elements during fixation , dehydration , or drying . In life this ground substance is probably a solution , because a large fraction of total cellular proteins salts and metabolites are soluble after gentle cell lysis ( 18 ) and because the diffusion coefficient of small protein molecules is only slightly less in the cytoplasm than in aqueous solution ( 53 ) . The gel - like consistency of cytoplasm is attrib - utable to the fibrous elements which form a continuous network in the cytoplasm ( 48 ) . As illustrated here , the spaces between the filaments and microtubules are idled with amorphous ground substance . These pores are large enough for small molecules to diffuse more or less freely , but small enough to restrict the movement of larger particles such as organelies . Stress Fiber Attachment Plaques Considering the recent interest in the localization of alpha - actinin , vincutin , and fibronectin on either side of the plasma membrane at the points where stress fibers are anchored to the membrane ( 7 , 15 , 46 ) , very tittle is known about the [ ' me structure of these plaques . In earlier thin section studies the preservation was not adequate to reveal much beyond the presence of actin f ' flaments ( 2 , 8 , 37 ) . In critical - point - dried whole mounts no details are visible at these sites and no work has been reported with frozen , etched replicas . We fred that the membrane of HeLa focal contacts is sepa - rated from the substrate by a fairly uniform gap of 10 nm that is spanned by small projections that may be the cell - substrate attachment molecules . The membrane itself appears no differ - ent from other parts of the plasma membrane . In particular , it does not have a conspicuous electron - dense coat on its cyto - plasmic surface comparable to the dense plaque where actin filaments insert at the tips of microvilli ( 33 ) . The cytoplasmic surface of the membrane is dense , but this is due largely to the high concentration of actin fdaments , which may be accom - panied by other fibrous material . FIGURE 9 Electron micrographs comparing an unpenetrated cell ( a ) with cells penetrated by tannic acid ( b , c and d ) . Sections a , b , 60 THE , JOURNAL OF C ~ LL BIOLOGY • VOLUME 96 , 1983 and d were bright gray ( ~ 60 nm thick ) . Section c was dark gray ( - 35 nm thick ) . CM , coated membrane ; ER , endoptasmic reticulum ; G , Golgi apparatus ; IFB , intermediate filament bundle ; L , lipid droplet ; M , mitochondria ; U , unilamellar membrane vesicle ; n , 11 - nm nu - clear granule ; NP , nuclear pore ; RNP , ribonucleoprotein particle ; [ ] , stress fiber ; J ~ , , coated membrane ; D < % 11 - nm chromatin filament ; < > , 23 nm chromatin fiber , x 55 , 000 . Coated Membranes The increased density of the membrane coats after fLxation in tannic acid makes it possible to identify these coats with ease and to discern new structural features . The polygonal nature of the coat has always been very clear by negative staining ( 26 ) , but the appearance of the coat in thin sections varies with the t ' utation method ( 5 , 23 , 41 ) . The major component of the polygonal coat is a protein called clathrin ( 36 ) that can self - assemble into triskelions and polygonal baskets ( 17 , 51 ) . Rotary shadowing preserves beautifully the polygonal clathrin struc - ture on coated pits and vesicles ( 21 ) and also reveals small fiat sheets of clathrin hexagons on the cytoplasmic surface of the plasma membrane of disrupted cells ( 3 , 21 ) . In membrane coats there is a 12 - rim thick , electron - dense layer between the membrane and the clathrin basket work , that has not been observed without tannic acid . The composition of this amorphous layer is not known , but it could very well include the 100 , 000 mol wt coated vesicle polypeptide that is necessary for binding clathrin to the membrane ( 50 ) . This amorphous layer may be the reason Heuser ( 21 ) found no evidence in replicas for a basket work on coated pits viewed from outside Triton - extracted cells . Likewise , the 19 - nm thick - ness of the " membrane " of cross fractured and replicated coated pits ( 21 ) is accounted for by the combined thickness of the membrane and the amorphous layer of the coat . The coated membrane plaques in HeLa cells are consider - ably larger than the small sheets of clathrin observed in other cells ( 3 , 21 ) . The large sheets might be peculiar to HeLa cells , but they could have been missed in previous studies , particu - larly those with fluorescent anticlathfin ( 6 ) . The high contrast in fluorescence microscopy can give the false impression of large differences in the fluorescence of intensity where the actual difference is only a factor of four or five . See Herman and Pollard ( 20 ) for such an example . In the case of clathrin sheets and coated pits observed normal to the sheets , the local concentration of clathrin is easily five times higher in the pits and vesicles than in the sheets , so the sheets could be missed unless the fdm is overexposed with respect to the pits and vesicles . The existence of large sheets with multiple internal pits puts some constraints on the way pits form , if these pits are , in fact , in the process of pinching off to form coated vesicles . If pits bud from intact hexagonal sheets , the rearrangement of hexa - gons to form the pentagons , which is necessary to establish the curvature of the pits , must take place within the sheet . This may differ mechanistically from the rearrangements observed by Heuser ( 21 ) at the edges of small hexagonal sheets caught in the process of pit formation . The close uniform apposition of the coated membrane plaques to the underlying substrate suggests that they are sites of cell - substrate attachment . The small projections that span the 12 - rim gap between the outer surface of the coated plasma membrane and the substrate could be attachment molecules . They are similar morphologically to the projections between the HeLa plasma membrane and the substrate at sites of adhesion , such as stress fiber attachment plaques ( Fig . 6 ) . There are similar projections between clathrin - coated phago - some membranes and ingested particles ( 4 ) . Thus the coated membrane plaques may represent a case of frustrated phago - cytosis . Because the stress fiber attachment plaques and the coated membrane plaques are located close together and both are separated from the substrate by 10 - - 15 nm , it is possible that some of the " focal contacts " observed previously by both fight ( 25 ) and electron ( 8 ) microscopy are actually coated membrane plaques . We thank Drs . Douglas Murphy , Ann Hubbard , and S . Charles Selden for their very helpful comments on the manuscript . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Research Grants GM - 26132 and GM - 26338 . Received for publication 26 May 1982 , and in revised form 7 September 1982 . REFERENCES 1 . Abero ' ombie , M . , and G . A . Dunn . 1975 . Adhesions of fibroblasts to substratum during contact inhibition . Exp . Cell Res . 92 : 57452 . 2 . Abcrerombie , M . , J . E . M . Heaysman , and S . M . Pegrum . 1971 . The locomotion of fibroblasts in culture . IV . Electron microscopy of the leading lameUa . Exp . Cell Res . 67 : 359 - 367 . 3 . Aggeler , J . , J . E . Heuser , and Z . Werb . 1982 . Presence of elathrin at adhesion sites in phagocytosin s macrophages . Proc . Electron Microsc . Soc . Amer . 114 - 117 . 4 . Aggeler , J . , and Z . Werb . 1982 . Initial events during phagocytosis by macrophages viewed from outside and inside the cell : membrane - particle interactions and clathrin . Y . Cell Biol . 94 : 6134523 . 5 . Anderson , R . G . W . , J . L . Goldstein , and M . S . Brown . 1976 . Localization of low density lipoprotem receptors on plasma membrane of normal human fibroblasts and their absence in ceils from a familial hypercholesterolemia homozygote . Proc . Natl . Acad Sci . U . S . A . 73 : 2434 - 2438 . 6 . Anderson , R . G . W . , E . Vasile , R . J . Mello , M . S . Brown , and J . L . Goldstein . 1978 . Immunocytoehemical visualization of coated pits and vesicles in human fibroblasts : relation to low density lipoprotein receptor distribution . Cell . 15 : 919 - 933 . 7 . Avnur , Z . , and B . Geiger . 1981 . The removal of extraceliular fibronectin from areas of cell - substrate contact . Cell . 25 : 121 132 . 8 . Badley , R . A . , A . Woods , C . G . Smith , and D . A . Rees . 1980 . Actomyosin relationships with surface features in fibroblast adhesion . Exp . Cell Res . 126 : 263 - 272 . 9 . Batten , B . E . , J . J . Aalberg , and E . Anderson . 1980 . The cytoplasmic filamentous network in cultured ovarian gsanulosa ceils . Cell . 21 : 885 - 895 . 10 . Begs , D . A . , R . Rodewald , and L . I . Rebhun . 1978 . Visualization of actin filament polarity in thin - sectinns evidence for uniform polarity of membrane - associated filaments . £ Cell Biol . 79 : 846 - 852 . 11 . Bragina , E . E . , Jr . , M . Vasilev , and I . M . Geifand . 1976 . Formation of bundles of microfilaments during spreading of fibroblasts on the substrate . Exp . Cell . Res . 97 : 241 - 248 . 12 . Brown , S . , W . Levinson , and J . Spudich . 1976 . Cytnskeletal elements of chick embryo fibroblasts revealed by detergent extraction . £ SupramoL Struct . 5 : 119 - 130 . 13 . Buckiey , I . K . 1981 . Fine structural and related aspects of nnrmauscle - cell motility . In Cell and Muscle Motility , Vol . 1 . R . M . Dowben and J . W . Shay , editors . Plenum Publishing Corp . , New York . 135 - 203 . 14 . Buckley , I . K . , and K . R . Porter . 1975 . Electron microscopy of critical point dried whole cultured cells . £ Microsc . ( Oxf ) . 104 : 107 133 . 15 . Chen , W . - T . , and S . J . Singer . 1981 . Immunoelectron microscopic characterization of three types of attachment sites at the fibroblast surface . Z Cell Biol . 91 : 258a ( abstr , ) . 16 . Clarke , M , , G . Schattan , D , Mazia ~ and J . A . Spudich . 1975 . Visualization of actin fibers associated with the cell membrane in amoebae of DictyosteIinm discoideum . Proc . Natl . Acad . ScL U . S . A . 72 : 1758 - 1762 . 17 . Crowther , R . A . , and B . M . Pearse . 1981 . Assembly and packing of clathrin into coats . J . Cell Biol . 91 : 790 - 797 . 18 . Fiskum , G . , S . W . Craig , G . L . Decker , and A . L . Lehninger . 1980 . The cytoskeleton of digitonin - treated rat hepatoeytes . Proc . NatL Acad . ScL U . S . A . 77 : 3430 - 3434 . 19 . Goldman , R . D . , B . Chojnacki , and M . - J . Yerna . 1979 . Ultrastructure of microftlament bandies in baby hamster kidney ( BHK - 21 ) cells : the use of tannic acid . J . Cell BioL 80 : 759 - 766 . 20 . Herman , I . M . , and T . D . Pollard . 1981 . Electron microscopic localization of cytoplasmic myosin with ferritin - labeted antibodies . J . Celt Biol . 88 : 346 - 351 . 21 . Henser , J . 1980 . Three dimensional visualization of coated vesicle formation in fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 84 : 560 - 583 . 22 . Heuser , J . E . , and M . W . Kirsehner . 1980 . Filament organization revealed in platinum replicas of freeze - dried cytoskeletons . Z Cell Biol . 86 : 212 - 234 . 23 . Heuser , J . E . , and T . S . Reese . 1973 . Evidence for recycling of synaptic vesicle membrane during transmitter release at the frog neuromuscular junction . . L Cell Biol . 57 : 315 - 344 . 24 . Hirokawa , N . , and J . E . Heuser . 1981 . Quick - freeze , decp - etch visualization of the cytoskeleton beneath surface differentiations of intestinal epithelial cells . . L Cell Biol . 91 : 399 - 409 . 25 . Izzard , C . S . , and L . R . Loehner . 1976 . Cell - to - substrate contacts in living fibroblasts : an interference refiexion study with an evaluation of the technique . J . Cell ScL 21 : 129 - 159 . 26 . Kanaseki , T . , and K . Kadota . 1969 . The " vesicle in a basket " . A morphological study of the coated vesicle isolated from the nerve endings of the guinea pig brain , with special reference to the mechanism of membrane movements . J . Cell Biol . 42 : 202 - 220 . 27 . LaFountain , J . R . , Jr . , C . R . Zobel , H . R . Thomas , and C . Galbreath . 1977 . Fixation and staining of F - actin and microfilaments using tannic acid . J . Ultrastruet . Res . 58 : 78 - 86 . 28 . Lazarides , E . 1976 . Actin , alpha - actinin and tropomynsin interaction in the structural organization of actin l ' daments in non - muscle cells . J . Cell Biol . 68 : 202 - 219 . 29 . Lehrer , S . S . 1981 . Damage to actin filaments by glutaraldehyde : protection by tropomyo - sin . . L Cell BioL 90 : 459 ~ 166 . 30 . Lindberg , U . , A . S . Hfglnnd , and R . Karlsson . 1981 . On the ultrastructural organization of the microfilament system and the possible role of proliferation . Biochimie ( Paris ) . 63 : 307 - 323 . 31 . Maupin , P . , and T . D . Pollard . 198 I . Visualization of coated membrane regions , membrane specializations , and cytoplasmic filaments of cultured cells . Z Cell Biol . 9 l : 300a ( abstr . ) . 32 . Maupin - Szamier , P . , and T . D . Pollard . 1978 . Actin filament destruction by osmium tetroxide . J . Cell BtoL 77 : 837 - 852 . 33 . Mooseker , M . S . , and L . G . Tilney . 1975 . The orgamzalion of an actin filament - membrane complex : filament polarity and membrane attachment in the microvilli of intestinal MAUPIN AND POLLARD Tannic Acid - Glutaraldehyde - Saponin Fixation 61 epithelial cells . £ Cell Biol . 67 : 725 - 743 . 34 . Niedermam R . , and T . D . Pollard . 1975 . Human platelet myosin . II . In vitro assembly and structure of myosin filaments . £ Cell Biol . 67 : 72 - 92 . 35 . Nufiez - Dur ~ in , H . 1980 . Tannic acid as an electron microscope tracer for permeable cell membranes . Stain Technol . 55 : 361 - 365 . 36 . Pcarse , B . M . F . 1976 . Clathrin : a unique protein associated with intracellular transfer of membrane by coated vesicles . Proc . Natl . Aead Sci . U . S . A . 73 : 1255 - 1259 . 37 . Perdue , J . F . 1973 . The distribution , altrastructure , and chemistry of microfLlaments in cultured chick embryo fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 58 : 265 - 283 . 38 . Pollard , T . D . , and P . Manpin . 1979 . Electron microscopy of cytoplasmic contractile proteins . In Electron Microscopy 1978 , VoL III ( Proceedings of the Ninth International Congress on Electron Microscopy , Toronto , Canada ) . J . M . Sturgess , editor . The Imperial Press , Ltd . , Mississiauga , Ontario , Canada . 606 - 614 . 39 . Pollard , T . D . , and P . Maupin . 1982 . Electron microscopy of actin and myosin . In Electron Microscopy in Biology , Vo | . 2 . J . D . Griffith , editor . Iohn Wiley & Sons , New York . 1 - 53 . 40 . Ris , H . 1981 . Morphology of cytoplasmic filaments in thick sections and critical point dried whole mounts . J . Cell Biol . 91 : 305a ( abstr . ) . 41 . Roth , T . F . , and K . R . Porter . 1964 . Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte oftbe mosquito Aedes Aegypti L . £ Cell Biol . 20 : 313 - 332 . 42 . Sabatim , D . D . , K . Bensch , and R . J . Barmett . 1963 . Cytochemistry and electron microscopy . The preservation of cellular ultrastructure and enzymatic activity by aldehyde fixation . J . Cell BioL 17 : 19 - 58 . 43 . Sanger , J . M . , and J . W . Sanger . 1980 . Banding and polarity of actin filaments in interphase and cleaving cells . , L Cell Biol . 86 : 568 - 575 . 44 . Skliwa , M . 198Z Action ofcytochalasin D on cytoskeletal networks . J . Cell BioL 92 : 79 - 91 . 45 . Simionescu , N . , and M . Siraionescu . 1976 . Galloyglucoscs of low molecular weight as mordant in electron microscopy . I . Procedure and evidence for mordanting effect , J . Cell Biol . 70 : 608 - 621 . 46 . Singer , I . I . 1982 . Assc ~ ation of fibronectin and vincalin with focal contacts and stress fibers in stationary hamster fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 92 : 398 ~ 08 . 47 . Small J . V . 1981 . Organization of actin in the leading edge of cultured cells : influence of osmium tetroxide and dehydration on the ullrastructure of actin meshworks . J . Cell Biol . 91 : 695 - 705 . 48 . Stoss¢l , T . P . 1978 . Contractile proteins in cell structure and function , dnnu . Rev . Med 29 : 427457 . 49 . Tilney , L . G . , J . Bryan , D . J . Bush , and K . Fujiwara . 1973 . Microtubules : evidence for thirteen protofilaments . £ Cell Biol . 59 : 267 - 275 . 50 . Unanue , E . R . , E . Ungewickeil , and D . Branton . 1981 . The binding of clathrm triskelioos to membranes from coated vesicles . Cell 26 : 439 ~ 46 . 51 . UngewickelL E . , and D . Branton . 1981 . Assembly units ofclathrin coats . Nature ( Lon ~ ) . 289 : 420 - 422 . 52 . Venable , H . H . , and R . Coggeshall . 1965 . A simplified lead citrate stain for use in electron microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 25 : 407 . 53 . Wojcieszym J . W . , R . A . Schlegel , and K . A . Jacobson . 1982 . Measurements of the diffusion of macromolecules infected into the cytoplasm of living cells . CoM Spring Harbor Syrup . Quant . Biol . 46 : 39 - 44 . 54 . Wolosewick , J . J . , and K . R . Porter . 1979 . Microtrabecalar lattice of the cytoplasmic ground substance . Artifact or reality . J . Cell Biol . 82 : 114 - 139 . 55 . Yamada , K . M . , B . S . Spooner , and N . K . Wesscls . 1971 . Ultrastructure and function of growth cones and axons of cultured nerve cells . J . Cell Biol . 49 : 614 - 635 . 62 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY • VOLUME 96 , 1983