University of Groningen Electron microscopy for ultrastructural analysis and protein localization in Saccharomyces cerevisiae Fränkl , Andri ; Muriel , Mari ; Reggiori , Fulvio Published in : Microbial Cell DOI : 10 . 15698 / mic2015 . 11 . 237 IMPORTANT NOTE : You are advised to consult the publisher ' s version ( publisher ' s PDF ) if you wish to cite from it . Please check the document version below . Document Version Publisher ' s PDF , also known as Version of record Publication date : 2015 Link to publication in University of Groningen / UMCG research database Citation for published version ( APA ) : Fränkl , A . , Muriel , M . , & Reggiori , F . ( 2015 ) . Electron microscopy for ultrastructural analysis and protein localization in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Microbial Cell , 2 ( 11 ) , 412 - 428 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 15698 / mic2015 . 11 . 237 CopyrightOther than for strictly personal use , it is not permitted to download or to forward / distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the author ( s ) and / or copyright holder ( s ) , unless the work is under an open content license ( like Creative Commons ) . Take - down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details , and we will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim . Downloaded from the University of Groningen / UMCG research database ( Pure ) : http : / / www . rug . nl / research / portal . For technical reasons the number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to 10 maximum . Download date : 14 - 02 - 2020 OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 412 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 www . microbialcell . com Review ABSTRACT The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a key model system for studying of a multitude of cellular processes because of its amenability to genetics , molecular biology and biochemical procedures . Ultrastructural ex - aminations of this organism , though , are traditionally difficult because of the presence of a thick cell wall and the high density of cytoplasmic proteins . A series of recent methodological and technical developments , however , has revived interest in morphological analyses of yeast ( e . g . [ 1 - 3 ] ) . Here we pre - sent a review of established and new methods , from sample preparation to imaging , for the ultrastructural analysis of S . cerevisiae . We include infor - mation for the use of different fixation methods , embedding procedures , ap - proaches for contrast enhancement , and sample visualization techniques , with references to successful examples . The goal of this review is to guide researchers that want to investigate a particular process at the ultrastructural level in yeast by aiding in the selection of the most appropriate approach to visualize a specific structure or subcellular compartment . Electron microscopy for ultrastructural analysis and protein localization in Saccharomyces cerevisiae Andri Frankl , Muriel Mari and Fulvio Reggiori * Department of Cell Biology , University Medical Center Groningen , University of Groningen , Groningen , The Netherlands . * Corresponding Author : Fulvio Reggiori , Department of Cell Biology , University Medical Center Groningen , A . Deusinglaan 1 , 9713 AV Groningen , The Netherlands ; Tel : + 31 50 363 2676 ; Fax : + 31 50 363 2515 ; E - mail : f . m . reggiori @ umcg . nl INTRODUCTION The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is an invaluable model system for the investigation of many biological processes but also for certain ultrastructural aspects of the eukaryot - ic cells . It is perhaps one of the most widely employed model organisms for research in life sciences disciplines because of its amenability to genetic and biochemical ap - proaches . By studying the yeast counterparts of mammali - an proteins S . cerevisiae helped to determine the function of countless proteins important in human biology . As ge - nomic projects continue to provide increasing amounts of high throughput datasets about the potential regulation and function of genes , the challenge is to assign a molecu - lar role to the corresponding gene products and determine their overall contribution to the cell physiology . For this goal , researchers take advantage of a multitude of experi - mental approaches and methods . One of them is electron microscopy ( EM ) , which allows the analysis of the ultra - structure of cells and tissues , and also of purified subcellu - lar compartments . EM helps to study cellular processes such as cytoskeleton organization , transport vesicle for - mation and the establishment of organelle architecture . It also contributes to the precise localization of proteins and other cellular components . Ultrastructural EM methods rely on microscopes that use electrons to obtain images at a higher resolution than those generated by microscopes . This is due to the fact that the wavelengths of electrons are much shorter than those of the photons used by light mi - croscopes , and consequently the resolving power is much better ( up to 10 Angstrom versus approximately 200 nm ) . doi : 10 . 15698 / mic2015 . 11 . 237 Received originally : 24 . 06 . 2015 ; in revised form : 23 . 08 . 2015 , Accepted 31 . 08 . 2015 Published 12 . 10 . 2015 . Keywords : electron microscopy , electron tomography , immunolabeling , chemical fixation , cryo - immobilization , correlative light and electron microscopy , Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Abbreviations : CLEM - correlative light - electron microscopy , CEMOVIS - cryo - electron microscopy of vitreous sections , EM - electron microscopy , ER - endoplasmic reticulum , ET - electron tomography , FS - freeze substitution , GA - glutaraldehyde , HPF - high - pressure freezing , IEM - immunoelectron microscopy , LC - lead citrate , SEM - scanning electron microscopy , TA - tannic acid , TEM - transmission electron microscopy , UA - uranyl acetate . A . Frankl et al . ( 2015 ) Electron microscopy methods for S . cerevisiae OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 413 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 In the past decade , innovations and breakthroughs turned EM from a mainly pure morphological approach to a much broader one , especially through integration of a variety of immunocytochemical and correlative light - electron microscopy techniques . In addition to their high resolution , another unique aspect of EM methods is that they provide information about the cellular context of the structure of interest , which very often cannot be explored with other experimental approaches . This advantage be - comes even clearer when analyzing mutant cells , for the reason that EM can provide clues about the possible func - tion of a protein and the effects caused by its mutation . The combination of EM and yeast genetics , which easily permits the knockout of a gene or the generation of point mutants , has great investigative potentials . This potential , however , has only been minimally ex - ploited mainly because yeast represents a challenge for most EM procedures . It possesses a cell wall , which impairs cell infiltration with chemicals and resins , and its high pro - tein concentration in the cytoplasm , which makes it diffi - cult to obtain good contrast and morphological resolution . Nevertheless , a series of recent EM developments and adaptations started a new era for ultrastructural investiga - tions in this organism . Although , there is a myriad of dif - ferent EM techniques ( Figure 1 ) , ranging from sample preparation to image analysis , it is often difficult to decide which could be the most appropriate approach to answer a specific biological question . We describe and discuss techniques that have been successfully applied for yeast , and provide information to select the optimal EM method for specific research ques - tions . While this compendium is focused on S . cerevisiae , most of the presented approaches are applicable to other unicellular yeast such as Schizosaccharomyces pombe , Candida albicans and Pichia pastoris , and they are also valid for the analysis of filamentous fungi . FIGURE 1 : EM approaches to explore yeast ultrastructure and immunocytochemical localization of proteins . Schematic representation summarizing mainstream approaches for EM and IEM ( immunoelectron microscopy ) to explore the morphology and protein localization in yeast . A . Frankl et al . ( 2015 ) Electron microscopy methods for S . cerevisiae OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 414 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 TABLE 1 . Advantages and disadvantages of different types of fixation . Fixatives Advantages Disadvantages Glutaraldehyde ( GA ) - Irreversible fixation of proteins . - Slow penetration through the cell wall . - Some preservation of antigenicity . - Fixation artifacts : volume changes , denatured components lead to texture changes , transfor - mation of protein gels into reticulated structures , spatial changes due to cross - linking of proteins . - Changes in molecular bonds , i . e . creation of new bonds between macromolecules can lead to reac - tive site misinterpretation during labeling . Paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) - Fast penetration through the cell wall . - Preserves antigenicity better than GA . - Causes fixation artifacts : volume change , dena - tured components lead to texture changes , trans - formation of protein gels into a reticulated struc - tures , spatial changes due to cross - linking of pro - teins . Potassium permanga - nate - Fixation by oxidation of proteins and lipids . - Fast penetration through the cell wall . - Provides membrane contrast . - Loss of fine ultrastructure . - Loss of antigenicity . Vitrification methods ( HPF , plunge - freezing , propane jet , clamp ) - Instantaneous fixation at near native state . - Well - preserved morphology and anti - genicity . - Low of contrast . - Physical damage from ice crystal nucleation . - Often requires experience and training . - It can only be applied to process a small - size samples . Osmium tetroxide - Rapid and irreversible fixation of pro - teins and lipids . - Provides pronounced membrane con - trast . - Loss of antigenicity . - Transformation of membrane phospholipids into thick unbroken lines . - Highly toxic . METHODS FOR YEAST CELL FIXATION The primary goal of sample fixation is to immobilize cellular structures in a way that they remain preserved as close as possible to their native state inside a living cell . To achieve this goal a number of chemical and physical fixation meth - ods are available . Every fixation method comes with its own advantages and disadvantages , which have to be con - sidered depending on the goal of the analysis ( Table 1 ) . Fixation is frequently followed by the removal of water , which requires that cellular structures are stabilized suffi - ciently to prevent their extraction along with the water . This is done through dehydration , usually performed by using organic solvents such as ethanol , methanol or ace - tone . The water removal from the sample is necessary to allow subsequent infiltration with a structural support , often a resin , which can be polymerized to provide rigidity to the specimen to endure the electron beam in the elec - tron microscope . This last step is also essential to obtain solid blocks of cells that can be easily cut and stained for EM . This general approach is commonly considered the conventional EM procedure for sample preparation . The most common form of fixation for yeast is the chemical cross - linking of proteins and lipids . When per - forming immunoelectron microscopy ( IEM ) this type of immobilization is generally limited to aldehydes because they minimally alter epitopes . Fixation is generally followed by either osmium tetroxide or potassium permanganate treatments when using conventional embedding proce - dures with epoxy resins ( see below ) . Chemical fixation is not an instantaneous process and consequently specific organelles such as vacuoles , which are mostly composed of water , require time to be completely immobilized and thus their morphology is frequently altered from its native state . Due to the chemical reactions taking place during fixa - tion , a release of protons often changes the pH , which may impede optimal cross - linking and may also affect the sub - sequent embedding of the sample [ 4 ] . To overcome this problem , fixatives are often delivered in buffered solutions and the most frequently employed ones to maintain the neutrality are phosphate , cacodylate or PIPES buffer [ 5 ] . PIPES and cacodylate buffers enhance membrane preser - vation via addition of calcium ions [ 6 ] . While cacodylate buffers are based on arsenic , PIPES is not . It is suggested that organic buffers such as PIPES and PHEM improve cell preservation and limit the formation of electron dense precipitates compared to non - organic buffer including phosphate and cocadylate [ 7 - 10 ] . Each buffer , in combina - tion or not with other cations , can give a better ultrastruc - tural preservation of specific structures [ 4 , 11 ] . The yeast cell wall is a significant obstacle for optimal fixation . This structure , which surrounds the plasma mem - brane , is a rigid extracellular polymer composed of man - noproteins , glucans and chitin [ 12 ] . The reduced porosity and cross - reactions between the components of the cell A . Frankl et al . ( 2015 ) Electron microscopy methods for S . cerevisiae OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 415 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 wall and the added reagents make yeast cell infiltration with embedding mixtures slow and inefficient [ 10 , 13 ] . The enzymatic removal of the cell wall with glucanases such as glusulase , lyticase or zymolyase , prior to fixation reduces these problems but could affect the cell physiology [ 6 , 14 ] . An alternative is incubation with sodium metaperiodate , a step that can be introduced after fixation [ 13 ] . Metaperio - date breaks glycosylic bonds to release proteins from the cell wall , leaving it more permeable to viscous embedding solutions . Aldehydes Glutaraldehyde ( GA ) is one of the most common chemical fixatives used for EM and it is also employed extensively for yeast [ 6 , 10 ] . It irreversibly binds with amino groups , like those on lysine residues , and forms various intra - and inter - protein bridges . Although GA is able to react with other molecules such as specific carbohydrates and amide groups , this compound does not bind well to lipids and therefore it is often combined with another fixative that cross - links with lipids with higher efficiency [ 15 ] . One of the chemicals used for this aim is paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) . Moreover the small size of PFA permits its rapid diffusion across the cell wall [ 16 ] . GA , as a five - carbon compound , is relatively large and uncharged in a solution , and therefore its diffusion through the yeast cell wall is slower [ 6 ] . In combination , PFA initiates stabilization of cellular structures until GA can begin to react . PFA targets similar amino groups as GA but as a fixative , it is relatively unsta - ble and consequently its cross - linking is reversible . The end result of a combination of the two fixatives is a clear image with little or no extraction , although not always perfectly accurate due to some of the possible artifacts that come from chemical fixation such as breaks , kinks or blisters in membranes . Typically , both GA and PFA are used in con - centration ranging from 0 . 05 % to 5 % [ 4 , 6 ] , with PFA in higher concentrations than GA . The irreversibility and high cross - linking properties of GA lead to severe alterations of epitopes and consequently the concentration of this chem - ical must be kept to a minimum if immunocytochemical examinations are planned . Other aldehydes have also been used in yeast such as acrolein [ 17 ] , which is often em - ployed together with GA , as well as other chemicals includ - ing imidoesters and peroxydisulphates [ 11 ] . Currently these fixatives are rarely used especially because they do not preserve the morphology better than GA and / or PFA . Potassium permanganate Potassium permanganate ( KMnO 4 ) was one of the first fixatives to be used for EM [ 18 ] . Potassium permanganate is also a common post - fixative for yeast because unlike aldehydes , it better preserves lipid bilayers and it is thus employed alone or in combination with aldehydes [ 6 ] . Permanganate binding to lipids already provides some membrane staining . The overall membrane morphology with this type of fixation appears highly contrasted , how - ever , closer observations show an extracted morphology . Although some prominent non - membranous structures , such as ribosome and microtubules , are not preserved and certain organelles like mitochondria and lipid droplets have a partially altered morphology , other subcellular compart - ments such as the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , nucleus , plasma membrane , vacuole , Golgi and endosomes are well defined in permanganate - fixed yeast preparations [ 6 , 19 - 21 ] . Potassium permanganate has been employed in a va - riety of concentrations in yeast , ranging from 0 . 5 % to 6 % [ 6 ] but this type of fixation is incompatible with immuno - labeling due to heavily altered epitopes . High - pressure freezing ( HPF ) and freeze substitution ( FS ) The use of conventional chemical fixation can sometimes lead to artifacts . Therefore physical immobilization ap - proaches have been implemented and most of them are based on rapid freezing of the sample . There are numerous ways to cryo - immobilize yeast and the major advantages of all these methods is that they are generally instantaneous and faster than conventional chemical fixation . These methods include plunge [ 22 ] , impact [ 23 ] , double - propane jet , self - pressurized freezing [ 24 ] and high - pressure freez - ing [ 25 ] . Their central principle is to vitrify ( freeze the wa - ter without ice crystals formation ) cells before further fix - ing them using chemicals . We will exclusively discuss HPF and FS because these are the most frequently used tech - niques , information on other types of quick freeze proce - dures can be found in other reviews [ 26 , 27 ] . HPF is currently the main approach for physical immo - bilization of yeast . Although other techniques such as plunge freezing and impact immobilization were more popular in the past , HPF is more reliable and efficient . Alt - hough it should be noted that it requires sophisticated and expensive equipment , this technique allows freezing rela - tively large quantities of yeast without cryo - protectants . HPF is achieved through application of high hydrostatic pressure and rapid lowering of the freezing point to halt the rate of ice crystal nucleation and growth [ 28 , 29 ] . This immobilizes the liquid milieu inside and outside the yeast in a vitreous near - native state . Although volumes of yeast up to approximately 120 mm 3 can be high pressure frozen , a volume around 10 - 20 mm 3 is considered a more reason - able working quantity [ 11 ] . Additional preservation of the native state can be achieved by adding non - penetrating cryo - protectants such as low melting point agarose or bo - vine serum albumin to the yeast suspension [ 30 ] . These two molecules have the ability to bind water through hy - drogen bonds and thereby change its freezing properties , which further aids the freezing process [ 31 ] . Once the cells have undergone HPF , the water inside is extracted and substituted through a process known as freeze substitution ( FS ) . The principle of FS has been around for more than 40 years . The concept of dehydrating and fixing cells at very low temperatures for EM can be traced back to the 1960’s [ 32 ] . FS involves substitution of the water found inside cells , initially with an organic solvent , typically acetone , ethanol or methanol , and subsequently with a resin at low temper - atures before finally increasing the sample temperature to room temperature [ 33 , 34 ] . Chemical fixatives are often added to the solvent employed for FS , to provide further A . Frankl et al . ( 2015 ) Electron microscopy methods for S . cerevisiae OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 416 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 immobilization during this procedure . Commonly used fixatives for FS mixtures include osmium tetroxide , uranyl acetate , PFA ( 0 . 1 - 3 % ) and GA ( 0 . 1 - 1 % ) , sometime in combination with small amounts of water ( 0 . 1 - 5 % ) to increase membrane contrast [ 26 ] . Unlike conventional chemical fixation , the fixation steps of FS take place during or after the dehydration steps . Temperatures for FS vary between - 90°C and - 78°C , and the solvent will dissolve and replace the cell water over a period of hours . Fixatives are not very reactive at these low temperatures , but become homogenously distributed throughout the yeast cell despite the presence of a cell wall because of the long incubation periods ( i . e . days ) , though rapid FS protocols have been developed as well [ 35 ] . The low temperatures keep the subcellular structure in place during the diffusion and the action of fixatives . At the moment the temperature allows the fixation to occur , the fixative is already in place , homogenously distributed . Osmium tetroxide This chemical is commonly used after an initial fixation with GA and / or PFA , and before embedding with a resin after FS . Osmium tetroxide binds lipids and promotes the oxidation of saturated bonds present in their fatty acid moieties causing retention of lipids in EM preparations [ 36 ] . Osmium tetroxide also adds density and contrast to lipid bilayers increasing the visibility of membranous compart - ments . This latter characteristic is due to the molecular structure of this compound , which possesses a high density allowing electron scattering . Unlike permanganate and aldehydes , osmium tetroxide infiltrates the cell wall of yeast even less efficiently [ 14 ] . It is thus necessary to remove or permeabilise the cell wall for short incubations with osmium tetroxide to promote its penetration into the yeast cell [ 14 ] . Sample incubation times with osmium tetroxide have important effects on the preparation morphology . Too short exposures do not allow a good infiltration of the yeast and a sufficient fixation of lipids , resulting in lipid extraction that is visible as blank membrane profiles on micrographs [ 15 ] . Prolonged expo - sures , in contrast , cause the extraction of cell components especially during the subsequent dehydration steps as well as deposits of electron - dense osmium precipitates near membrane concentrations [ 15 ] . After an appropriate exposure time , between 15 and 60 minutes depending on which protocol is used , osmium tetroxide extracts cell components much less than potassi - um permanganate , leaving relatively small cellular compo - nents including microtubules , microfilaments , chromatin and ribosomes visible [ 6 ] . Osmium tetroxide is a commonly used fixative in yeast and particularly in combination with HPF followed by FS and sample embedding in Epon or Lowicryl HM20 , it has been used to investigate for example the spindle pole body and nuclear envelope [ 37 ] , the cell wall structure [ 38 ] , and the formation of septa and nuclear pores [ 39 ] . Osmium tetroxide fixation is not recommended when cytochemical or immunocytochemical labeling are per - formed because the extractions , as well as the volume and morphological changes that it causes , can lead to physical distortions that greatly interfere with the preservation of enzyme activities and antibody - antigen reactions [ 11 ] . Nonetheless , in low quantities or with certain epitopes , osmium tetroxide can still be used without altering immu - nolabeling [ 22 ] . EMBEDDING APPROACHES : STRUCTURAL MORPHOL - OGY VERSUS IMMUNOGOLD LABELING Yeast , just like any other cell type , have to be properly infil - trated by a chemical compound that will generate the structural support required for both sectioning and viewing in an electron microscope . In choosing the resin , one must determine primarily what the focus of the study will be : structural morphology or protein localization , i . e . epitope preservation for immunolabeling . Moreover , the chosen resin has to be appropriate to the employed fixation ( see below ) . There are two main categories of plastic resins : epoxy and acrylic resins . Epoxy resins , such as Epon or Spurr’s , are good for resolving the cell morphology where - as acrylic resins , such as LR White and Lowicryl HM20 , are better in preserving antigenicity . Epoxy resins Epoxy resins initiated the age of fine structural analysis by EM ; other methacrylate resins were only marginally suc - cessful [ 40 , 41 ] . The significant advantages of epoxy resins come from their ability to cross - link virtually all structures composing a cell without losing the plasticity required to produce ultrathin sections . Epon mixtures were introduced for EM in yeast in the early 1960’s [ 40 ] . They continue to be used quite often as the primary embedding resin for yeast especially in combi - nation with HPF and FS [ 6 , 25 , 26 ] ( Figures 2A and 2C ) . It was employed to study septin rings during cell division [ 42 ] or the nucleus and vacuole connections [ 43 ] . Epon resins were used in combination with potassium permanganate - or GA - fixed yeast to study for example the ER morphology [ 44 , 45 ] . The components of a modern Epon mixture are the resin 812 , the hardeners dodecenyl succinic anhydride and nadic methyl anhydride , and the accelerator benzyl - dimethylamine [ 15 ] . Application of heat ( or ultraviolet light ) to this solution yields a rigid 3 - dimensional polymer that is both resistant to heat and solvents , and is structur - ally stable under electron beams . Another epoxy resin is the Spurr’s ( or vinylcyclohexene dioxide ) resin . The di - epoxide groups present in this mix - ture produce high cross - linking [ 15 ] . Its low viscosity facili - tates its infiltration into a variety of tissues that are difficult to embed including plant and yeast [ 46 ] . In particular , the cell wall of yeast can be efficiently infiltrated by the Spurr’s mixture and this allows an excellent preservation of the morphology , especially that of membranous structures , such as the ER , the nuclear envelop and the plasma mem - brane [ 6 ] . Excellent results have been obtained in combi - nation with potassium permanganate ( Figure 2B ) to inves - tigate the compartments of the secretory pathway , but also the morphology of mitochondria [ 47 , 48 ] , vacuoles A . Frankl et al . ( 2015 ) Electron microscopy methods for S . cerevisiae OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 417 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 and autophagosomes [ 49 ] , and the endocytic intermedi - ates [ 50 ] . Spurr’s resin has also been used to study com - partments of the secretory and endosomal systems in cells fixed with either GA ( followed by enzymatic removal of the cell wall ) or plunge freezing [ 51 - 55 ] ( Figure 2C ) . As mentioned above , both Epon and Spurr’s resins al - low excellent resolution of yeast morphology in combina - tion with the appropriate fixation methods . Epoxy resins , however , present a major disadvantage because they are typically not compatible with immunocytochemical reac - tions aimed at localizing proteins . Due to their extremely hydrophobic nature , samples have to be completely dehy - drated at room temperature or above , using solvents that can often cause protein denaturation . Furthermore the high polymerization temperatures ( above 50°C ) lead to further epitope denaturation . This limitation can be cir - cumvented when studying the endo - lysosomal system through pre - embedding labeling [ 56 ] but this approach has not been applied to yeast . Acrylic resins Limitations of the epoxy resins for immunocytochemical studies prompted a dedicated attempt to create more hy - drophilic resins that combine good cutting properties and electron - beam resistance . A major breakthrough came with the introduction of Lowicryl mixtures like e . g . Lowicryl HM20 , which are partly hydrophilic and consequently effi - ciently penetrate tissues [ 11 ] . A mixture of aliphatic acry - lates and methacrylate esters composes Lowicryl resins , which have a low viscosity and therefore they efficiently FIGURE 2 : Morphology of yeast cells embedded in epoxy resins . ( A ) Cells were cryofixed in liquid propane , freeze - substituted in acetone containing 4 % OsO 4 and embedded in Epon . CW , cell wall ; N , Nucleus ; IB , Inclusion body ; IBM , Inclusion body with membrane ; L , lipid droplets ; V , Vacuole . Scale bar , 0 . 5 µm . This image was originally published in [ 157 ] © Springer . ( B ) Yeast was fixed with 1 . 5 % KMnO 4 , dehydrated with acetone and embedded in Spurr’s resin . CW , cell wall ; M , mitochondria ; N , Nucleus ; V , vacuole . Scale bar , 0 . 5 µm . This image was originally published in [ 158 ] © the American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Bi - ology . ( C ) Cells were high - pressure frozen , freeze - substituted in acetone , and embedded in a mixture of Epon - Spurr’s resin . CW , cell wall ; ER , endoplasmic reticulum ; M , mitochondria ; N , nucle - us . Scale Bar , 1 . 0 µm . This image was originally published in [ 26 ] © Elsevier Limited . A . Frankl et al . ( 2015 ) Electron microscopy methods for S . cerevisiae OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 418 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 infiltrate the cell wall of yeast [ 11 ] . Lowicryl HM20 was developed in 1986 [ 57 ] initially to be able to handle much lower polymerization temperatures required ( below - 50°C ) for HPF - FS approaches . Importantly , it appears that any remaining water acts as a support agent at low tempera - tures to stabilize protein conformation during the dehydra - tion process [ 58 ] . The fact that lower temperatures signifi - cantly decrease the negative effects of dehydration on structural preservation and epitope denaturation , as well as negligible lipid extraction , makes immunolabeling reac - tions on Lowicryl resin - embedded samples more effective [ 59 , 60 ] . In yeast , Lowicryl HM20 has been employed in combination with either chemical ( Figure 3A ) or HPF fixa - tion to immunolocalize for example vacuolar enzymes [ 13 ] or proteins accumulated in the ER [ 61 ] . Another polyhydroxy - aromatic acrylic resin is LR White [ 62 ] . This low viscosity mixture requires tissue dehydration before infiltration and allows a rapid embedding . Its polymerization can be initiated in different ways , i . e . by either heating to temperatures above 50°C , exposure to UV or addition of an aromatic tertiary amine that acceler - ates chemical reactions . LR White resin has also been used for a number of studies using chemically ( Figure 3B ) or physically fixed yeast to localize through immunological reactions nuclear pore complex subunits [ 63 ] , plasma membrane Gas1 [ 64 ] , endosomal proteins [ 65 , 66 ] , endo - FIGURE 3 : Morphology and immunolabeling of yeast cells em - bedded in acrylic resins or processed following the Tokuyasu method . ( A ) Yeast was cryofixed in propane , freeze - substituted in acetone containing 3 % GA and embedded in Lowicryl HM20 at low temperatures . Specific antibodies and protein A were used to localize the COX complex . IB , inclusion body ; IBM , in - clusion body with membrane ; M , mitochondria ; N , nucleus . Scale bar , 0 . 5 µm . This image was originally published in [ 157 ] © Springer . ( B ) Cells were fixed in GA / PFA , dehydrated with ethanol and embedded in LR White resin . Immunolabeling was directed to cell wall antigens . K , karmellae ; M , mitochondria ; N , nucleus . This image was originally published in [ 6 ] © John Wiley and Sons . ( C ) Cells were fixed with 4 % PFA and 0 . 4 % GA , treat - ed with sodium metaperiodate , embedded in 12 % gelatin and infiltrated with 2 . 3 M sucrose before being frozen in liquid ni - trogen . Atg9 was localized with antibodies and protein A - gold . CW , cell wall ; M , mitochondria ; PM , plasma membrane ; V , vac - uole . Scale bar , 0 . 5 µm . This image was originally published in [ 159 ] © Mari et al , 2010 . A . Frankl et al . ( 2015 ) Electron microscopy methods for S . cerevisiae OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 419 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 TABLE 2 . Combinations of embedding media , fixation methods and staining procedures employed for yeast ultrastructural analyses . Epon Spurr ' s LR White Lowicryl HM20 Tokuyasu preparations Fixation Glutaraldehyde ( X ) ( X ) X X X Paraformaldehyde ND ( X ) X X X Potassium permanganate ND X ND ND ND HPF / FS X ( X ) ( X ) X ( X ) Staining Osmium tetroxide X ( X ) ND X ND Uranyl acetate X X X X X Lead citrate X X X ND ( X ) Tannic acid X ND ND ( X ) ND X , frequently used combination ; ( X ) , Combination not often used ; ND , never done . cytosed factors [ 67 ] , actin [ 68 ] , ER [ 69 ] and spindle body components [ 70 ] . The Tokuyasu method The thawed - frozen section technique is better known as the Tokuyasu method , from its developer’s name [ 71 , 72 ] . This approach utilizes ultra - thin sections that are obtained by cryo - ultramicrotomy from material that has been chem - ically fixed by aldehydes , embedded in gelatin and frozen in liquid nitrogen . Immunolabeling and imaging of the sec - tions , however , are done at room temperature . This tech - nique has many advantages over other embedding proce - dure because it provides a high - resolution of membranes as well as a higher efficiency of immunological reactions [ 73 ] . The Tokuyasu method remains one of the most sensi - tive post - sectioning techniques for immunolabeling be - cause aldehyde fixation is the only denaturing step for an - tigens ( i . e . samples are not treated with organic solvents ) . This method has recently been optimized for yeast [ 74 ] ( Figure 3C ) . The major modification in the protocol has been the introduction of a post - fixation treatment with metaperiodate to promote an infiltration of gelatin . Since cryo - sections obtained with the Tokuyasu method are not contrasted using a negative staining but rather with uranyl acetate and lead citrate ( see below ) , the extraction of the non - optimally fixed lipids and the high protein concentra - tion in the cytoplasm create negative contrast that leads to a unique resolution of the yeast morphology [ 74 ] . The Tokuyasu method adapted to yeast has been suc - cessfully used to perform localization studies on mitochon - dria [ 75 , 76 ] , endosomes [ 77 , 78 ] , subdomains of the plas - ma membrane [ 79 ] , nuclear pores [ 80 ] and autophagoso - mal membranes [ 81 - 83 ] . Lipids tend to be extracted during the preparation of cryo - sections because they are not op - timally fixed and therefore structures like lipid droplets with membranes low in protein concentrations are not optimally preserved . A way to overcome this problem and other possible fixation artifacts is that the Tokuyasu tech - nique is not restricted to chemical fixation but it can also be combined with physical immobilization by HPF followed by FS and a rehydration step [ 84 ] . This approach appears to work with yeast samples as well [ 74 ] . MEMBRANE CONTRASTING METHODS The gun of an electron microscope emits a beam of elec - trons with a particular wavelength that depends on the acceleration voltage applied . A phosphor - coated screen makes the electrons passing through sections visible by absorbing them . This results in an image being drawn by the density of the sample staining and the resulting intensi - ty ( number ) of electrons hitting the phosphor - coated screen . The components and structures present in biologi - cal samples have generally very little differences in density and consequently the contrasts in the image formed are minimal . Therefore , it is important to increase contrast in the sample ( Table 2 ) . This can be achieved by increasing the densities of structures by binding heavy metal salts to them . There are two main approaches to stain EM samples with heavy metals : ( i ) positive staining exhibits a positive contrast by increasing the density of a particular biological structure rather than any contiguous surrounding area ; ( ii ) negative staining through heavy metal salts increases the density of the area around a specific molecular structure so that the structure of interest appears lighter than the sur - rounding material . It must be noted that there are also contrasting methods such as tannic acid ( TA ) staining that do not rely on heavy metal salts [ 85 ] . Generally staining is carried out once sections have been cut and any immuno - A . Frankl et al . ( 2015 ) Electron microscopy methods for S . cerevisiae OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 420 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 cytochemical labelling has been performed . Positive staining The two most common compounds used for the positive contrasting are uranyl acetate ( UA ) and lead citrate ( LC ) . The staining mechanisms of these chemicals are not com - pletely understood . Uranyl ions may be strongly attracted to phosphate and specific amino groups , which facilitates the identification of nucleic acids and proteins [ 86 ] . In con - trast it is thought that lead ions bind to mostly negatively charged molecules such as hydroxyl groups or areas that have reacted to osmium tetroxide [ 87 ] . UA and LC are thus considered non - specific as they stain numerous different cellular components [ 15 ] and because of their complemen - tary reactivity , they are often employed in combination to obtain better contrast . UA and LC are compatible with all the types of fixation and sample embedding , and the vast majority of EM analyses of yeast but also other organisms use these two heavy metal salts to contrast membranes . Negative staining Negative stains are often made from heavy metal salts such as uranyl , tungsten or molybdenum [ 15 ] . The heavy metal staining does not affect the macromolecular struc - tures themselves , as with positive staining procedures , but rather the surrounding area . This results in a specimen that appears to be in negative contrast , i . e . a lighter tone against a darker background [ 15 ] . Although commonly used to identify small structures such as viruses , bacteria or little organelles , it can also be employed for the analysis of organisms of small size such as yeast [ 88 ] . The major advantage of negative staining compared to positive stain - ing is that it highlights the structure of interest , especially when of small dimensions , without staining the structure itself , something that could alter its fine ultrastructural details . This aspect has been exploited in yeast to study glucan polymer formation during the regeneration of the cell wall in protoplasts [ 21 , 89 ] and protein filaments [ 90 ] . Tannic acid staining Since it was first utilized as a mordant , i . e . a chemical that both fixes a dye on a cellular component and forms an insoluble compound with the dye , TA has become widely spread in its use because it optimally fixes a variety of dif - ferent tissues and cells either by itself or in conjunction with GA [ 91 ] . TA in particular binds with high affinity to collagen , glycogen and various other subcellular complexes . Although it acts as a fixative , its mordant properties are very useful to greatly enhance the sample contrast [ 85 ] . As one of the few alternatives to the use of heavy metal salts , TA appears to avoid regions that would be stained by con - ventional contrasting agents such as UA . Therefore its use , alongside other staining agents , provides different con - trasting patterns depending on the combination . In yeast , TA has only marginally been employed mostly as a post - embedding contrasting agent , to analyze purified microtu - bules [ 92 ] and nuclei [ 93 ] and COPII - coated vesicles [ 94 ] . 2D AND 3D VISUALIZATION TECHNIQUES Once the yeast samples are prepared , a variety of different imaging methods that revolve around the basic principles of EM are available , from widespread and fundamental approaches like transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) and scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) , to more sophisti - cated techniques like correlative light - electron microscopy ( CLEM ) , electron tomography ( ET ) , cryo - electron microsco - py of vitreous sections ( CEMOVIS ) and soft X - ray tomogra - phy . The analysis method largely determines the procedure of sample preparation and the type of data that are ex - tracted from the sample . Each technique has its own strength and weakness and it is wise to carefully consider the research goal before opting for a particular approach . Transmission electron microscopy TEM is the most commonly employed form of EM , it has a resolution hundreds of times higher than that of the classi - cal light microscopes and consequently it can visualize macromolecular structures and organelles that compose the cell at the nanoscale level . It consists of an intercon - nected set of electromagnetic lenses that channel a beam of primary electrons towards the sample [ 15 ] . As the pri - mary electrons pass through the sample , they create a two - dimensional ( 2D ) projection image with fine structural details [ 6 ] . TEM is easily handled by relatively inexperi - enced operators and can give some of the most detailed and high quality images that can be obtained [ 95 ] . With its high magnification and resolution , TEM makes it possible to see many of the structures present inside a yeast cell [ 95 ] , which are not detectable and / or identifiable through light microscopy approaches including super - resolution ones . As TEM is one of the most widely used forms of EM for biological samples , a vast variety of publications are available . A large number of them are about the morpho - logical and functional characterization of subcellular com - partments of yeast processed for EM using preparation obtained with practically all the procedures presented in this review . Electron tomography ET is a method that generates three - dimensional ( 3D ) re - constructions of a cellular structure , which provide more thorough and complete insights into its organization and possible functions . As a conventional electron micrograph has a large depth of focus and generates 2D projections , features in the z - axis of the section are superimposed on top of each other , making it hard to analyze and interpret them especially in thicker sections [ 96 ] . The improved in - sights are generated from a z - axis resolution that is at least 10 times better than the one of the average 2D projection image . Initially an approach called serial sectioning was devel - oped to introduce the third dimension in TEM , which has also been employed for studies in S . cerevisiae fixed with permanganate , GA / PFA or HPF before being infiltrated with an epoxy resin [ 97 - 102 ] . This technique involves the collection of several successive serial sections of the same A . Frankl et al . ( 2015 ) Electron microscopy methods for S . cerevisiae OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 421 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 sample , and then superposes and aligns their 2D images to generate 3D models . Some disadvantages for serial sec - tioning include a loss of material when handling cryo - sections and the stitching of multiple 2D projections can be very difficult . ET overcomes most of these issues and has the additional advantage of a simpler image collection and model reconstruction routine as well as a higher z - axis res - olution . This technique combines a higher electron output with a tilt series of images created by rotating the speci - men holder incrementally around a fixed axis [ 103 ] . The obtained tilt series of images ( i . e . a collection of a large number of 2D images ) are then stacked together and con - verted into a 3D representation of the sample . ET has many of the same strengths and weaknesses as conventional TEM , but it is able to create a 3D image with a 1 - 10 nm resolution , which is similar to that of TEM ( 0 . 1 - 1 nm ) and SEM ( 1 - 10 nm ) [ 95 ] . It must be noted , however , that the 3D reconstructions created from ET tilt series of images are not complete representations . This is due to the limitation of the microscope sample holder that makes only possible to tilt the sample to a maximum of 60 - 70 degrees . This leaves the reconstructions with undefined cone shaped areas and consequently ET does not provide a complete 360 degrees overview of the zone of interest . Alongside conventional TEM , ET has become a very prominent approach in many areas of cell biology and has been inclemently introduced in investigations performed in yeast as well . The most frequent approach has been to fix yeast through HPF and embedding in Epon , Spurr’s or Lowicryl HM20 resins before performing ET on thick sec - tions that can range from 0 . 2 to 1 µm [ 21 , 26 , 104 ] . This type of methodology has , in between others , allowed stud - ying the mitotic spindle / nuclear envelop [ 105 , 106 ] , the septin rings formed between two dividing cells [ 42 , 107 ] , multivesicular body formation [ 108 - 110 ] , various aspects of mitochondrial ultrastructure [ 111 - 113 ] , plasma mem - brane reshaping during endocytosis [ 114 ] , and ER mor - phology [ 111 , 113 ] . Chemical fixation with permanganate followed by embedding in Epon resin has also been suc - cessfully used for electron tomography studies of lipid droplets [ 115 ] . Recently , 200 - 250 nm serial cryo - sections obtained with the Tokuyasu methods were resolved by ET and through immunolabeling proteins were localized in 3D reconstructions [ 1 , 75 ] . Scanning electron microscopy SEM was developed approximately at the same time as the TEM . SEM can directly collect 3D representations of a cell surface or even an entire specimen but with lower resolu - tion than TEM . SEM uses a focused de - magnified spot of electrons to scan over an electrically conductive specimen . The result of the electrons hitting the specimen is the re - lease of a number of signals such as secondary electrons , backscatter electrons and X - rays [ 15 ] . Sensitive detectors that are specifically created for detecting them collect these various signals . SEM is limited in terms of resolution at a high magnifi - cation when compared to conventional TEM ( 1 - 10 nm ver - sus 0 . 1 - 1 nm , [ 95 ] ) and thus it is usually employed to ac - quire information about the topology and morphology of the sample surface , rather than the internal morphology of a cell obtained by TEM . As a result , SEM is generally not used for EM - based immunolocalization studies but this is slowly changing with the introduction of new protocols and equipment [ 116 ] . However , there are a number of tech - niques that can be coupled to SEM to provide additional information . An example of these methodologies that is applied for the analysis of yeast is the focused ion beam - scanning electron microscopy ( FIB - SEM ) , which allows the construction of 3D representations ( with lower resolution than those ET ) , but permits the employment of much larg - er samples , up to 1 µm [ 117 , 118 ] . FIB - SEM has been ex - ploited to generate 3D reconstructions of whole yeast cells , fixed with either GA / PFA and permanganate or HPF , before being embedded with a resin [ 119 - 122 ] . It should be noted that most biological specimens must be thoroughly dehydrated ( i . e . critical point drying ) and covered with a conductive metallic support film before being imaged by SEM . These treatments can distort cellular features and cause artifacts [ 15 ] , though this does not ap - ply to most embedded and sectioned samples due to the lower mass of specimen . There are several studies that relied on SEM of fixed and subsequently dehydrated yeast cells to examine surface features , i . e . cell wall and plasma membrane [ 123 - 126 ] , but also cellular components like the nuclear pore complex is studied on isolated nuclei [ 93 ] . Correlative light - electron microscopy The term CLEM includes all those methods that exploit light microscopy to localize structures of interest and sub - sequently determine ultrastructural details by EM ( re - viewed in [ 127 - 130 ] ) . These methods provide further in - sight into specific protein localizations that cannot be ob - tained by standard IEM because the immunological reac - tion does not allow the detection of the protein of interest [ 127 ] . Another application is the ultrastructural identifica - tion of a particular fluorescently labeled structure being monitored by fluorescent imaging . These latter approaches often require the fusion of the studied protein with a tag such as the green fluorescence protein ( GFP ) , which can be visualized by fluorescent microscopy [ 131 ] . Subsequently , GFP is directly detected on the EM preparations if the em - ployed fixation method and embedding support do not alter its ability to emit fluorescence upon excitation . While some proteins have been optimized to retain their fluorescence capacity after EM - preparation [ 132 ] , successful approaches employed fixation by either HPF followed by CEMOVIS ( see below , [ 133 - 135 ] ) or FS embed - ding in Lowicryl HM20 [ 2 , 114 ] , or plunge - freezing before application of the Tokuyasu method [ 136 ] . Alternatively , GFP can be indirectly localized on EM preparations through either immunolabeling or chemical reactions if the tag con - sists of GFP fused with an enzyme that generates an elec - tron dense precipitate , such as in the FLIPPER tag [ 3 ] . CLEM techniques have become very popular during the last dec - ade and some have been applied to yeast studies . An ex - ample is the localization and characterization at the ultra - structural level of Sup35 prions with very good morpholog - A . Frankl et al . ( 2015 ) Electron microscopy methods for S . cerevisiae OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 422 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 ical results [ 137 ] . For this analysis yeast has been fixed with GA before being first imaged by fluorescence microscopy , and then processed for EM after OsO 4 post - fixation and embedding into Epon812 . Another example has been the analysis of actin filaments using the marker protein GFP - Abp1 [ 131 ] . Importantly , HPF and subsequent yeast cell embedding with Lowicryl HM20 allows to preserve the fluorescence of GFP in section and together with a new tool to correlate the fluorescence signal to EM preparations , this approach has successfully been used to study early endocytic events [ 2 ] . Tomographic CLEM analyses can also be performed on thick cryo - sections obtained using the Tokuyasu method and labeled then with antibodies conjugated to a fluores - cent group [ 75 ] . Finally , CEMOVIS and soft X - ray tomogra - phy have also been employed for CLEM in yeast ( see be - low ) . Cryo - electron microscopy of vitreous sections CEMOVIS ( or cryo - EM / tomography ) is a technique that employs vitrified biological samples and allows the obser - vation of the specimen in a near native state [ 138 - 140 ] . Samples can range from cryo - sections of different thick - ness to entire cells if their width does not exceed 0 . 5 - 1 µm , and can be analyzed by TEM , SEM or ET . Moreover the serial sectioning of vitreous samples permits obtaining 3D reconstructions of larger samples [ 141 ] . The fact that sam - ples are at a near native state infers that those chemicals , which could alter some ultrastructural details , have not been used [ 95 ] . CEMOVIS has , however , some downsides . Vitrified samples are unstained and therefore the contrast gained during the preparations of the sections is extremely low [ 95 ] . Because of this limitation and the fact that CEMOVIS requires sophisticated equipment ( HPF system , cryo - ultramicrotome , cryo - EM , cryo - holder for ET… ) as well as a high degree of technical expertise , published works exploit - ing this approach are scarce but are steadily increasing especially due to the major availability in HPF technologies , which overcome the previous use of plunge or slam freez - ing for sample vitrification . So far yeast has been exclusive - ly used for proof - of - principle demonstrations for methods to be applied with CEMOVIS [ 133 - 135 ] , but the resolution degree shown is very promising . Another disadvantage of CEMOVIS is that frozen preparations cannot be immuno - labeled , which limits localization studies . Fluorescently tagged fusion proteins , however , are optimally preserved and as a result fluorescence signals can potentially be used for CLEM investigations [ 142 ] . Soft X - ray tomography This method combines the features of light and electron microscopy . It is an easy and high throughput technique ( similarly to light microscopy ) that allows collecting low - resolution , absorption - based images similarly to EM [ 143 ] . Soft X - ray tomography permits a user to view a whole hy - drated cell , and to examine its morphology at a high spatial resolution ( 0 . 8 µm ) up to 15 µm deep . It is based on the principle of X - rays being absorbed directly by the different cellular components and the resulting image is practically a projection of the dose of X - rays passing through the speci - men [ 144 - 146 ] . Organelles inside the cell are visualized directly due to their different biochemical composition and density . For example , a compartment with a high lipid con - tent is much more sensitive to X - rays than an organelle that contain a significant portion of water such as the vac - uole [ 147 ] . One of the big advantages of the soft X - ray tomography is its circumvention of the use of potentially damaging fixa - tion and staining procedures because samples are cryo - immobilized . Another positive consequence of this feature is that this technique also allows performing CLEM exami - nations through the determination of the subcellular dis - tribution of molecules tagged with a fluorescent label in entire and intact yeast cells projected in 3D [ 148 ] . On the downside of this approach is the relatively low resolution of the images , 50 nm at the maximum , which can vary de - pending on the machine used and the analyzed structure [ 149 ] . The 3D reconstructions , however , are accurate . While soft X - ray tomography requires special software and a very sensitive machinery able to detect the X - rays passing through the yeast samples , this technique is very helpful to determine organelle position , quantity , and structural changes due to growth conditions or mutations in large cell populations [ 143 , 147 , 150 , 151 ] . For example this ap - proach has been used to demonstrate that the volumetric ratios between organelles such as the nucleus , nucleoli , mitochondria , vacuoles and lipid particles do not change throughout the cell cycle [ 150 ] or identifying factors re - quired to regulate the shape of the mitotic nucleus [ 152 ] . CONCLUSIONS EM has considerably contributed to the field of biological sciences over the past 60 years . Virtually every organelle and major structure of the cell has been discovered and characterized by EM . This has allowed researchers unravel - ing morphological details of healthy cells and the changes that they undergo in diseased or mutated states . To determine which EM approach to use , it is crucial to consider the end goal of the research question . Choosing a particular imaging method , i . e . TEM , SEM or tomography will already reduce the available options for a researcher . As shown in Figure 1 and Table 2 , there are many possibili - ties and no single defined route for sample preparation and analysis is universally applicable to solve all the ques - tions . Different sample preparation steps can be combined or interchanged . For example one can employ HPF for cryoimmobilisation before either rehydrating the cells and using the Tokuyasu method or embedding them in a resin such as Epon . Therefore it is important to determine whether topographical details or conventional TEM images are required , or whether immunocytochemical methods will be employed to localize proteins . Another relevant aspect to consider is which subcellular organelle or struc - ture will be examined . Differences in lipid and protein composition , concen - tration and density can lead the cell components to be A . Frankl et al . ( 2015 ) Electron microscopy methods for S . cerevisiae OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 423 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 differently preserved and resolved depending on the em - ployed fixation method , embedding support and con - trasting agent . Sometimes it is better to choose a sample preparation method that is not ideal for immunological reactions but that provides a better morphology of the labeled structures rather than having a sample ideal for protein localization where the structure of interest is not clearly defined . One of the advantages of EM approaches is that there are several alternatives to choose from . A major obstacle in combining different EM methods , however , will be the eventual availability and accessibility to a specific EM in - strument . We also wish to emphasize that ultrastructural obser - vations must contain statistical evaluation . Rigorous ste - reological methods , including unbiased sampling tech - niques , can provide very precise quantifications about the subcellular distribution of a protein or compartment , the surface or volume of an organelle , or the recurrence of a phenotype [ 153 - 155 ] . To this aim , few guidelines have to be kept in consideration when designing and realizing EM analyses . Experiments have to be performed in triplicate and countings have to be done randomly . Typically 50 - 100 cells per experiment have to be examined but this number has to be increased if what is counted is infrequent . When carrying out IEM , two critical controls evaluating the speci - ficity of the used antibodies have to be included to get an accurate estimation of the relative distribution of a protein . The first is to immunolabel sections prepared from cells not expressing the analyzed protein . The second is to per - form an immunolabeling reaction that does not include the primary antibody . As important as the invention of the electron micro - scope was , its continuous development and the integration of other specialized techniques and hardware are what makes cellular morphology a real corner stone of modern research . As a result of ongoing developments and im - provements of computer software , electron detection sys - tems , image enhancement solutions , automated quantifi - cation , new CLEM probes , multifunctional EM machines and data storage , EM has a bright future and it will move from a relative small - scale to large throughput type of analysis . Moreover machines and procedures that have recently been developed and used in other cell types such as serial section SEM [ 156 ] and serial block face SEM [ 157 ] or CLEM tags like miniSOG [ 156 ] or APEX [ 158 ] , could also be applied to yeast . These advances will also result in more objective - and quantitative - studies than ever . Ultrastruc - tural research in yeast will also benefit from these pro - gresses and the continuous adaption and improvement of the established and new EM protocols for other systems will make ultrastructural studies in this model system a routine approach for investigators . In addition to having a large collection of mutant and knockout strains , yeast strains provide the straightforward possibility of endoge - nous gene fusion with sequences encoding for protein tags [ 156 ] . As a result , the development of new primary anti - bodies for IEM analyses is not an absolute necessity be - cause it is sufficient to purchase a commercially available secondary antibody recognizing the tag and known to work for ultrastructural studies . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors apologize to those researchers whose work is not included or cited due to space limitations . The authors thank Willie Geerts , Ben Giepmans and Kevin Knoops for the critical reading of the manuscript . F . R . is supported by ALW Open Program ( 822 . 02 . 014 ) , DFG - NWO cooperation ( DN82 - 303 ) , SNF Sinergia ( CRSII3 _ 154421 ) and ZonMW VICI ( 016 . 130 . 606 ) grants . CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no conflict of interest . COPYRIGHT © 2015 Frankl et al . This is an open - access article released under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution ( CC BY ) license , which allows the unrestricted use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original author and source are acknowledged . Please cite this article as : Andri Frankl , Muriel Mari and Fulvio Reggiori ( 2015 ) . Electron microscopy for ultrastructural analysis and protein localization in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Microbial Cell 2 ( 11 ) : 412 - 428 . doi : 10 . 15698 / mic2015 . 11 . 237 REFERENCES 1 . Mari M , Geerts WJ , Reggiori F . ( 2014 ) . Immuno - and correlative light microscopy - electron tomography methods for 3D protein locali - zation in yeast . Traffic 15 ( 10 ) : 1164 - 1178 . 2 . Kukulski W , Schorb M , Welsch S , Picco A , Kaksonen M , Briggs JA . ( 2011 ) . Correlated fluorescence and 3D electron microscopy with high sensitivity and spatial precision . J . Cell Biol . 192 ( 1 ) : 111 - 119 . 3 . Kuipers J , van Ham TJ , Kalicharan RD , Veenstra - Algra A , Sjollema KA , Dijk F , Schnell U , Giepmans BN . ( 2015 ) . FLIPPER , a combinatorial probe for correlated live imaging and electron microscopy , allows identification and quantitative analysis of various cells and organelles . Cell Tissue Res . 360 ( 1 ) : 61 - 70 . 4 . Fox CH , Johnson FB , Whiting J , Roller PP . ( 1985 ) . Formaldehyde fixation . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 33 ( 8 ) : 845 - 853 . 5 . Schliwa M , van Blerkom J . ( 1981 ) . Structural interaction of cytoskel - etal components . J . Cell Biol . 90 ( 1 ) : 222 - 235 . 6 . Wright R . ( 2000 ) . Transmission electron microscopy of yeast . Mi - crosc . Res . Tech . 51 ( 6 ) : 496 - 510 . 7 . Baur PS , Stacey TR . ( 1977 ) . The use of PIPES buffer in the fixation of mammalian and marine tissues for electron microscopy . J . Microsc . 109 ( 3 ) : 315 - 327 . 8 . Schiff RI , Gennaro JF . ( 1979 ) . The influence of the buffer on mainte - nance of tissue lipid in specimens for scanning electron microscopy . Scan . Electron Microsc . 3 ( 3 ) : 449 - 458 . 9 . Schultz RL , Whitter EF . ( 1989 ) . Improved procedures for pineal gland fixation for electron microscopy . J . Pineal Res . 6 ( 3 ) : 267 - 284 . A . Frankl et al . ( 2015 ) Electron microscopy methods for S . cerevisiae OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 424 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 10 . Mulholland J , Botstein D . ( 2002 ) . Immunoelectron microscopy of aldehyde - fixed yeast cells . Methods Enzymol . 35150 - 81 . 11 . Gareth Griffith ( 1993 ) . Fine Structure Immuno - cytochemistry . 1st ed . Berlin : Springer - Verlag 12 . Lesage G , Bussey H . ( 2006 ) . Cell wall assembly in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 70 ( 2 ) : 317 - 343 . 13 . van Tuinen E , Riezman H . ( 1987 ) . Immunolocalization of glycer - aldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase , hexokinase , and carboxypep - tidase Y in yeast cells at the ultrastructural level . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 35 ( 3 ) : 327 - 333 . 14 . Byers B . ( 1981 ) . Cytology of the yeast life cycle . Cold Spring Har - bor Monograph Archive 1159 - 96 . 15 . John J Bozzola , Lonnie D Russell ( 1992 ) Electron Microscopy . 2nd Edition ed . Massachusetts : Jones & Bartlett Publishers . 16 . Bowes JH , Cater CW . ( 1966 ) . The reaction of glutaraldehyde with proteins and other biological materials . Journal of the Royal Micro - scopical Society 85 ( 2 ) : 193 - 200 . 17 . Schwab DW , Janney AH , Scala J , Lewin LM . ( 1970 ) . Preservation of fine structures in yeast by fixation in a dimethyl sulfoxide - acrolein - glutaraldehyde solution . Stain Technol . 45 ( 4 ) : 143 - 147 . 18 . Luft JH . ( 1956 ) . Permanganate ; a new fixative for electron micros - copy . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 2 ( 6 ) : 799 - 802 . 19 . Maclean N . ( 1964 ) . Electron Microscopy of a Fission Yeast , Schiz - osaccharomyces Pombe . J . Bacteriol . 881459 - 1466 . 20 . Kreger - van Rij NJ , Veenhuis M . ( 1971 ) . Bipolar budding in yeasts - an electron microscope study . Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 37 ( 1 ) : 125 - 136 . 21 . Osumi M . ( 2012 ) . Visualization of yeast cells by electron microsco - py . J . Electron . Microsc . 61 ( 6 ) : 343 - 365 . 22 . Ding R , McDonald KLMcIntosh JR . ( 1993 ) . Three - dimensional re - construction and analysis of mitotic spindles from the yeast , Schiz - osaccharomyces pombe . J . Cell Biol . 120 ( 1 ) : 141 - 151 . 23 . Hirsch M , Montcourrier P , Pouliquen Y , Escaig J . ( 1982 ) . Quick - freezing technique using a ' slamming ' device for the study of corneal stromal morphology . Exp . Eye Res . 34 ( 5 ) : 841 - 845 . 24 . Han HM , Huebinger J , Grabenbauer M . ( 2012 ) . Self - pressurized rapid freezing ( SPRF ) as a simple fixation method for cryo - electron microscopy of vitreous sections . J . Struct . Biol . 178 ( 2 ) : 84 - 87 . 25 . McDonald K , Muller - Reichert T . ( 2002 ) . Cryomethods for thin section electron microscopy . Methods Enzymol . 35196 - 123 . 26 . McDonald K . ( 2007 ) . Cryopreparation methods for electron mi - croscopy of selected model systems . Methods Cell Biol . 7923 - 56 . 27 . Murray S . ( 2008 ) . High pressure freezing and freeze substitution of Schizosaccharomyces pombe and Saccharomyces cerevisiae for TEM . Methods Cell Biol . 883 - 17 . 28 . Moor H . ( 1987 ) . Theory and practice of high pressure freezing . Cryotechniques in biological electron microscopy 175 - 191 . Springer Berlin Heidelberg . 29 . Moor H , Muhlethaler K . ( 1963 ) . Fine structure in frozen - etched yeast cells . J . Cell Biol . 17 ( 3 ) : 609 - 628 . 30 . Dubochet J . ( 1995 ) . High - pressure freezing for cryoelectron mi - croscopy . Trends Cell Biol . 5 ( 9 ) : 366 - 368 . 31 . McDonald K , Schwarz H , Muller - Reichert T , Webb R , Buser C , Morphew M . ( 2010 ) . " Tips and tricks " for high - pressure freezing of model systems . Methods Cell Biol . 96671 - 693 . 32 . Fernandez - Moran H . ( 1960 ) . Low - temperature preparation tech - niques for electron microscopy of biological specimens based on rapid freezing with liquid helium II . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 85689 - 713 . 33 . Nicolas MT , Bassot JM , Nicolas G . ( 1989 ) . Immunogold labeling of luciferase in the luminous bacterium Vibrio harveyi after fast - freeze fixation and different freeze - substitution and embedding procedures . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 37 ( 5 ) : 663 - 674 . 34 . Schwarz H , Humbel BM . ( 1989 ) . Influence of fixatives and embed - ding media on immunolabelling of freeze - substituted cells . Scanning Microsc . Suppl . 357 - 63 ; discussion 63 - 4 . 35 . McDonald KL , Webb RI . ( 2011 ) . Freeze substitution in 3 hours or less . J . Microsc . 243 ( 3 ) : 227 - 233 . 36 . Behrman E . ( 1983 ) . The chemistry of osmium tetroxide fixation . The Science and Biology of Specimen Preparation for Microscopy and Microanalysis 1 - 5 . 37 . Giddings TH . ( 2003 ) . Freeze - substitution protocols for improved visualization of membranes in high - pressure frozen samples . J . Microsc . 212 ( Pt 1 ) : 53 - 61 . 38 . Torres - Fernandez O , Ordonez N . ( 2003 ) . Comparative effect of osmium tetroxide and ruthenium tetroxide on Penicillium sp . hyphae and Saccharomyces cerevisiae fungal cell wall ultrastructure . Biomedi - ca 23 ( 2 ) : 225 - 231 . 39 . Osumi M , Konomi M , Sugawara T , Takagi T , Baba M . ( 2006 ) . High - pressure freezing is a powerful tool for visualization of Schizosaccha - romyces pombe cells : ultra - low temperature and low - voltage scanning electron microscopy and immunoelectron microsco - py . J . Electron . Microsc . 55 ( 2 ) : 75 - 88 . 40 . Luft JH . ( 1961 ) . Improvements in epoxy resin embedding methods . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 9409 - 414 . 41 . Glauert AM , Glauert RH , Rogers GE . ( 1956 ) . A new embedding medium for electron microscopy . Nature 178 ( 4537 ) : 803 . 42 . Bertin A , McMurray MA , Pierson J , Thai L , McDonald KL , Zehr EA , Garcia G , Peters P , Thorner J , Nogales E . ( 2012 ) . Three - dimensional ultrastructure of the septin filament network in Saccharomyces cere - visiae . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 ( 3 ) : 423 - 432 . 43 . Roberts P , Moshitch - Moshkovitz S , Kvam E , O ' Toole E , Winey M , Goldfarb DS . ( 2003 ) . Piecemeal microautophagy of nucleus in Saccha - romyces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 ( 1 ) : 129 - 141 . 44 . Prinz A , Hartmann E , Kalies KU . ( 2000 ) . Sec61p is the main ribo - some receptor in the endoplasmic reticulum of Saccharomyces cere - visiae . Biol . Chem . 381 ( 9 - 10 ) : 1025 - 1029 . 45 . Morin - Ganet MN , Rambourg A , Clermont Y , Kepes F . ( 1998 ) . Role of endoplasmic reticulum - derived vesicles in the formation of Golgi elements in sec23 and sec18 Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutants . An - at . Rec . 251 ( 2 ) : 256 - 264 . 46 . Spurr AR . ( 1969 ) . A low - viscosity epoxy resin embedding medium for electron microscopy . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 26 ( 1 ) : 31 - 43 . 47 . Hermann GJ , Thatcher JW , Mills JP , Hales KG , Fuller MT , Nunnari J , Shaw JM . ( 1998 ) . Mitochondrial fusion in yeast requires the trans - membrane GTPase Fzo1p . J . Cell Biol . 143 ( 2 ) : 359 - 373 . 48 . Bleazard W , McCaffery JM , King EJ , Bale S , Mozdy A , Tieu Q , Nun - nari J , Shaw JM . ( 1999 ) . The dynamin - related GTPase Dnm1 regulates mitochondrial fission in yeast . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 ( 5 ) : 298 - 304 . 49 . Cheong H , Yorimitsu T , Reggiori F , Legakis JE , Wang CW , Klionsky DJ . ( 2005 ) . Atg17 regulates the magnitude of the autophagic re - sponse . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 ( 7 ) : 3438 - 3453 . A . Frankl et al . ( 2015 ) Electron microscopy methods for S . cerevisiae OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 425 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 50 . Sekiya - Kawasaki M , Groen AC , Cope MJ , Kaksonen M , Watson HA , Zhang C , Shokat KM , Wendland B , McDonald KL , McCaffery JM , Drubin DG . ( 2003 ) . Dynamic phosphoregulation of the cortical actin cytoskel - eton and endocytic machinery revealed by real - time chemical genetic analysis . J . Cell Biol . 162 ( 5 ) : 765 - 772 . 51 . Saito K , Ohtomo R , Kuga - Uetake Y , Aono T , Saito M . ( 2005 ) . Direct labeling of polyphosphate at the ultrastructural level in Saccharomy - ces cerevisiae by using the affinity of the polyphosphate binding do - main of Escherichia coli exopolyphosphatase . Appl . Environ . Microbiol . 71 ( 10 ) : 5692 - 5701 . 52 . Pan X , Roberts P , Chen Y , Kvam E , Shulga N , Huang K , Lemmon S , Goldfarb DS . ( 2000 ) . Nucleus - vacuole junctions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae are formed through the direct interaction of Vac8p with Nvj1p . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 ( 7 ) : 2445 - 2457 . 53 . Darsow T , Rieder SE , Emr SD . ( 1997 ) . A multispecificity syntaxin homologue , Vam3p , essential for autophagic and biosynthetic protein transport to the vacuole . J . Cell Biol . 138 ( 3 ) : 517 - 529 . 54 . Wright R , Basson M , D ' Ari L , Rine J . ( 1988 ) . Increased amounts of HMG - CoA reductase induce " karmellae " : a proliferation of stacked membrane pairs surrounding the yeast nucleus . J . Cell Biol . 107 ( 1 ) : 101 - 114 . 55 . Rieder SE , Banta LM , Kohrer K , McCaffery JM , Emr SD . ( 1996 ) . Multilamellar endosome - like compartment accumulates in the yeast vps28 vacuolar protein sorting mutant . Mol . Biol . Cell 7 ( 6 ) : 985 - 999 . 56 . Melo RC , Morgan E , Monahan - Earley R , Dvorak AM , Weller PF . ( 2014 ) . Pre - embedding immunogold labeling to optimize protein localization at subcellular compartments and membrane microdo - mains of leukocytes . Nat . Protoc . 9 ( 10 ) : 2382 - 2394 . 57 . Acetarin JD , Carlemalm E , Villiger W . ( 1986 ) . Developments of new Lowicryl resins for embedding biological specimens at even lower temperatures . J . Microsc . 143 ( Pt 1 ) : 81 - 88 . 58 . Petsko GA . ( 1975 ) . Protein crystallography at sub - zero tempera - tures : cryo - protective mother liquors for protein crystals . J . Mol . Biol . 96 ( 3 ) : 381 - 392 . 59 . Kellenberger E , Durrenberger M , Villiger W , Carlemalm E , Wurtz M . ( 1987 ) . The efficiency of immunolabel on Lowicryl sections com - pared to theoretical predictions . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 35 ( 9 ) : 959 - 969 . 60 . Weibull C , Christiansson A , Carlemalm E . ( 1983 ) . Extraction of membrane lipids during fixation , dehydration and embedding of Acholeplasma laidlawii - cells for electron microscopy . J . Microsc . 129 ( Pt 2 ) : 201 - 207 . 61 . Sagt CM , Muller WH , van der Heide L , Boonstra J , Verkleij AJ , Verrips CT . ( 2002 ) . Impaired cutinase secretion in Saccharomyces cerevisiae induces irregular endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) membrane proliferation , oxidative stress , and ER - associated degradation . Appl . Environ . Microbiol . 68 ( 5 ) : 2155 - 2160 . 62 . Causton BE . ( 1984 ) . Improved bonding of composite restorative to dentine . A study in vitro of the use of a commercial halogenated phosphate ester . Br . Dent . J . 156 ( 3 ) : 93 - 95 . 63 . Aris JP , Blobel G . ( 1989 ) . Yeast nuclear envelope proteins cross react with an antibody against mammalian pore complex proteins . J . Cell Biol . 108 ( 6 ) : 2059 - 2067 . 64 . Popolo L , Vai M , Gatti E , Porello S , Bonfante P , Balestrini R , Al - berghina L . ( 1993 ) . Physiological analysis of mutants indicates in - volvement of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae GPI - anchored protein gp115 in morphogenesis and cell separation . J . Bacteriol . 175 ( 7 ) : 1879 - 1885 . 65 . Prescianotto - Baschong C , Riezman H . ( 1998 ) . Morphology of the yeast endocytic pathway . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 ( 1 ) : 173 - 189 . 66 . Prescianotto - Baschong C , Riezman H . ( 2002 ) . Ordering of com - partments in the yeast endocytic pathway . Traffic 3 ( 1 ) : 37 - 49 . 67 . Mulholland J , Konopka J , Singer - Kruger B , Zerial M , Botstein D . ( 1999 ) . Visualization of receptor - mediated endocytosis in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 ( 3 ) : 799 - 817 . 68 . Mulholland J , Preuss D , Moon A , Wong A , Drubin D , Botstein D . ( 1994 ) . Ultrastructure of the yeast actin cytoskeleton and its associa - tion with the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 125 ( 2 ) : 381 - 391 . 69 . Bernales S , McDonald KL , Walter P . ( 2006 ) . Autophagy counterbal - ances endoplasmic reticulum expansion during the unfolded protein response . PLoS Biol . 4 ( 12 ) : e423 . 70 . Cid VJ , Shulewitz MJ , McDonald KL , Thorner J . ( 2001 ) . Dynamic localization of the Swe1 regulator Hsl7 during the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell cycle . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 ( 6 ) : 1645 - 1669 . 71 . Tokuyasu KT . ( 1978 ) . A study of positive staining of ultrathin fro - zen sections . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 63 ( 3 ) : 287 - 307 . 72 . Tokuyasu KT . ( 1973 ) . A technique for ultracryotomy of cell suspen - sions and tissues . J . Cell Biol . 57 ( 2 ) : 551 - 565 . 73 . Cortese K , Diaspro A , Tacchetti C . ( 2009 ) . Advanced correlative light / electron microscopy : current methods and new developments using Tokuyasu cryosections . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 57 ( 12 ) : 1103 - 1112 . 74 . Griffith J , Mari M , De Maziere A , Reggiori F . ( 2008 ) . A cryosection - ing procedure for the ultrastructural analysis and the immunogold labelling of yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Traffic 9 ( 7 ) : 1060 - 1072 . 75 . Honscher C , Mari M , Auffarth K , Bohnert M , Griffith J , Geerts W , van der Laan M , Cabrera M , Reggiori F , Ungermann C . ( 2014 ) . Cellular metabolism regulates contact sites between vacuoles and mitochon - dria . Dev . Cell . 30 ( 1 ) : 86 - 94 . 76 . Harner M , Korner C , Walther D , Mokranjac D , Kaesmacher J , Welsch U , G riffith J , Mann M , Reggiori F , Neupert W . ( 2011 ) . The mitochondrial contact site complex , a determinant of mitochondrial architecture . EMBO J . 30 ( 21 ) : 4356 - 4370 . 77 . Cabrera M , Langemeyer L , Mari M , Rethmeier R , Orban I , Perz A , Brocker C , Griffith J , Klose D , Steinhoff HJ , Reggiori F , Engelbrecht - Vandre S , Ungermann C . ( 2010 ) . Phosphorylation of a membrane curvature - sensing motif switches function of the HOPS subunit Vps41 in membrane tethering . J . Cell Biol . 191 ( 4 ) : 845 - 859 . 78 . Markgraf DF , Ahnert F , Arlt H , Mari M , Peplowska K , Epp N , Griffith J , Reggiori F , Ungermann C . ( 2009 ) . The CORVET subunit Vps8 cooper - ates with the Rab5 homolog Vps21 to induce clustering of late endo - somal compartments . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 ( 24 ) : 5276 - 5289 . 79 . Moreira KE , Schuck S , Schrul B , Frohlich F , Moseley JB , Walther TC , Walter P . ( 2012 ) . Seg1 controls eisosome assembly and shape . J . Cell Biol . 198 ( 3 ) : 405 - 420 . 80 . Chadrin A , Hess B , San Roman M , Gatti X , Lombard B , Loew D , Barral Y , Palancade B , Doye V . ( 2010 ) . Pom33 , a novel transmembrane nucleoporin required for proper nuclear pore complex distribution . J . Cell Biol . 189 ( 5 ) : 795 - 811 . 81 . Sawa - Makarska J , Abert C , Romanov J , Zens B , Ibiricu I , Martens S . ( 2014 ) . Cargo binding to Atg19 unmasks additional Atg8 binding sites to mediate membrane - cargo apposition during selective autophagy . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 ( 5 ) : 425 - 433 . 82 . Nair U , Jotwani A , Geng J , Gammoh N , Richerson D , Yen WL , Grif - fith J , Nag S , Wang K , Moss T , Baba M , McNew JA , Jiang X , Reggiori F , Melia TJ , Klionsky DJ . ( 2011 ) . SNARE proteins are required for macro - autophagy . Cell 146 ( 2 ) : 290 - 302 . A . Frankl et al . ( 2015 ) Electron microscopy methods for S . cerevisiae OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 426 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 83 . Mari M , Griffith J , Reggiori F . ( 2010 ) . Investigation of the ultra - structure of yeast using cryo - immuno - electron microscopy . Microsco - py : Science , Technology , Applications and Education 1 ( 4 ) : 11 - 18 . 84 . van Donselaar E , Posthuma G , Zeuschner D , Humbel BM , Slot JW . ( 2007 ) . Immunogold labeling of cryosections from high - pressure fro - zen cells . Traffic 8 ( 5 ) : 471 - 485 . 85 . Afzelius BA . ( 1992 ) . Section staining for electron microscopy using tannic acid as a mordant : a simple method for visualization of glyco - gen and collagen . Microsc . Res . Tech . 21 ( 1 ) : 65 - 72 . 86 . Frasca JM , Parks VR . ( 1965 ) . A Routine Technique for Double - Staining Ultrathin Sections using Uranyl and Lead Salts . J . Cell Biol . 25 : 157 - 161 . 87 . Sato T . ( 1968 ) . A modified method for lead staining of thin sec - tions . J . Electron . Microsc . ( Tokyo ) 17 ( 2 ) : 158 - 159 . 88 . Horne RW . ( 1967 ) . The effects of negative stains on lipids and proteins observed in the electron microscope . Protoplasma 63 ( 1 ) : 212 - 213 . 89 . Namiki Y , Ueno K , Mitani H , Virtudazo EV , Ohkusu M , Shimizu K , Kawamoto S , Chibana H , Yamaguchi M . ( 2011 ) . Scanning and negative - staining electron microscopy of protoplast regeneration of a wild - type and two chitin synthase mutants in the pathogenic yeast Candida glabrata . J . Electron . Microsc . ( Tokyo ) 60 ( 2 ) : 157 - 165 . 90 . Busygina V , Gaines WA , Xu Y , Kwon Y , Williams GJ , Lin SW , Chang HY , Chi P , Wang HW , Sung P . ( 2013 ) . Functional attributes of the Sac - charomyces cerevisiae meiotic recombinase Dmc1 . DNA Repair ( Amst ) 12 ( 9 ) : 707 - 712 . 91 . Mizuhira B , Amakawa T . ( 1972 ) . Electron microscopic studies on the histocytochemistry and the physiological function of the kidney . Nihon Rinsho . 30 ( 6 ) : 1307 - 1321 . 92 . Kilmartin JV . ( 1981 ) . Purification of yeast tubulin by self - assembly in vitro . Biochemistry 20 ( 12 ) : 3629 - 3633 . 93 . Kiseleva E , Richardson AC , Fiserova J , Strunov AA , Spink MC , John - son SR , Goldberg MW . ( 2014 ) . Imaging yeast NPCs : from classical electron microscopy to iImmuno - SEM . Methods Cell Biol . 12259 - 79 . 94 . Shimoni Y , Kurihara T , Ravazzola M , Amherdt M , Orci L , Schekman R . ( 2000 ) . Lst1p and Sec24p cooperate in sorting of the plasma mem - brane ATPase into COPII vesicles in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 151 ( 5 ) : 973 - 984 . 95 . Wilson SM , Bacic A . ( 2012 ) . Preparation of plant cells for transmis - sion electron microscopy to optimize immunogold labeling of carbo - hydrate and protein epitopes . Nat . Protoc . 7 ( 9 ) : 1716 - 1727 . 96 . Frey TG , Perkins GA , Ellisman MH . ( 2006 ) . Electron tomography of membrane - bound cellular organelles . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 35199 - 224 . 97 . Perktold A , Zechmann B , Daum G , Zellnig G . ( 2007 ) . Organelle association visualized by three - dimensional ultrastructural imaging of the yeast cell . FEMS Yeast Res . 7 ( 4 ) : 629 - 638 . 98 . Yamaguchi M , Okada H , Namiki Y . ( 2009 ) . Smart specimen prepa - ration for freeze substitution and serial ultrathin sectioning of yeast cells . J . Electron . Microsc . ( Tokyo ) 58 ( 4 ) : 261 - 266 . 99 . Osumi M . ( 1998 ) . The ultrastructure of yeast : cell wall structure and formation . Micron 29 ( 2 - 3 ) : 207 - 233 . 100 . Yamaguchi M , Namiki Y , Okada H , Mori Y , Furukawa H , Wang J , Ohkusu M , Kawamoto S . ( 2011 ) . Structome of Saccharomyces cere - visiae determined by freeze - substitution and serial ultrathin - sectioning electron microscopy . J . Electron . Microsc . ( Tokyo ) 60 ( 5 ) : 321 - 335 . 101 . Pichler H , Gaigg B , Hrastnik C , Achleitner G , Kohlwein SD , Zellnig G , Perktold A , Daum G . ( 2001 ) . A subfraction of the yeast endoplasmic reticulum associates with the plasma membrane and has a high capac - ity to synthesize lipids . Eur . J . Biochem . 268 ( 8 ) : 2351 - 2361 . 102 . Achleitner G , Gaigg B , Krasser A , Kainersdorfer E , Kohlwein SD , Perktold A , Zellnig G , Daum G . ( 1999 ) . Association between the endo - plasmic reticulum and mitochondria of yeast facilitates interorganelle transport of phospholipids through membrane contact . Eur . J . Biochem . 264 ( 2 ) : 545 - 553 . 103 . Lucic V , Forster F , Baumeister W . ( 2005 ) . Structural studies by electron tomography : from cells to molecules . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 74833 - 865 . 104 . Eileen O ' Toole , Mark Winey , J . Richard McIntosh , David N . Mas - tronarde . ( 2002 ) . Electron tomography of yeast cells . Methods in Enzymology 35181 - 95 . 105 . Winey M , Mamay CL , O ' Toole ET , Mastronarde DN , Giddings TH , McDonald KL , McIntosh JR . ( 1995 ) . Three - dimensional ultrastructural analysis of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitotic spindle . J . Cell Biol . 129 ( 6 ) : 1601 - 1615 . 106 . Nazarova E , O ' Toole E , Kaitna S , Francois P , Winey M , Vogel J . ( 2013 ) . Distinct roles for antiparallel microtubule pairing and overlap during early spindle assembly . Mol . Biol . Cell 24 ( 20 ) : 3238 - 3250 . 107 . Melloy P , Shen S , White E , McIntosh JR , Rose MD . ( 2007 ) . Nuclear fusion during yeast mating occurs by a three - step pathway . J . Cell Biol . 179 ( 4 ) : 659 - 670 . 108 . Nickerson DP , West M , Odorizzi G . ( 2006 ) . Did2 coordinates Vps4 - mediated dissociation of ESCRT - III from endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 175 ( 5 ) : 715 - 720 . 109 . McNatt MW , McKittrick I , West M , Odorizzi G . ( 2007 ) . Direct binding to Rsp5 mediates ubiquitin - independent sorting of Sna3 via the multivesicular body pathway . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 ( 2 ) : 697 - 706 . 110 . Richter C , West M , Odorizzi G . ( 2007 ) . Dual mechanisms specify Doa4 - mediated deubiquitination at multivesicular bodies . EMBO J . 26 ( 10 ) : 2454 - 2464 . 111 . Friedman JR , Lackner LL , West M , DiBenedetto JR , Nunnari J , Voeltz GK . ( 2011 ) . ER tubules mark sites of mitochondrial division . Science 334 ( 6054 ) : 358 - 362 . 112 . Hoppins S , Collins SR , Cassidy - Stone A , Hummel E , Devay RM , Lackner LL , Westermann B , Schuldiner M , Weissman JS , Nunnari J . ( 2011 ) . A mitochondrial - focused genetic interaction map reveals a scaffold - like complex required for inner membrane organization in mitochondria . J . Cell Biol . 195 ( 2 ) : 323 - 340 . 113 . Murley A , Lackner LL , Osman C , West M , Voeltz GK , Walter P , Nunnari J . ( 2013 ) . ER - associated mitochondrial division links the dis - tribution of mitochondria and mitochondrial DNA in yeast . Elife 2e00422 . 114 . Kukulski W , Schorb M , Kaksonen M , Briggs JA . ( 2012 ) . Plasma membrane reshaping during endocytosis is revealed by time - resolved electron tomography . Cell 150 ( 3 ) : 508 - 520 . 115 . Wolinski H , Kolb D , Hermann S , Koning RI , Kohlwein SD . ( 2011 ) . A role for seipin in lipid droplet dynamics and inheritance in yeast . J . Cell . Sci . 124 ( Pt 22 ) : 3894 - 3904 . 116 . Sokol E , Kramer D , Diercks GF , Kuipers J , Jonkman MF , Pas HH , Giepmans BN . ( 2015 ) . Large - Scale Electron Microscopy Maps of Pa - tient Skin and Mucosa Provide Insight into Pathogenesis of Blistering Diseases . J . Invest . Dermatol . 135 ( 7 ) : 1763 - 1770 . 117 . Escovitz WH , Fox TR , Levi - Setti R . ( 1975 ) . Scanning transmission ion microscope with a field ion source . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 72 ( 5 ) : 1826 - 1828 . A . Frankl et al . ( 2015 ) Electron microscopy methods for S . cerevisiae OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 427 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 118 . Villinger C , Gregorius H , Kranz C , Hohn K , Munzberg C , von Wichert G , Mizaikoff B , Wanner G , Walther P . ( 2012 ) . FIB / SEM tomog - raphy with TEM - like resolution for 3D imaging of high - pressure frozen cells . Histochem . Cell Biol . 138 ( 4 ) : 549 - 556 . 119 . Wei D , Jacobs S , Modla S , Zhang S , Young CL , Cirino R , Caplan J , Czymmek K . ( 2012 ) . High - resolution three - dimensional reconstruction of a whole yeast cell using focused - ion beam scanning electron mi - croscopy . BioTechniques 53 ( 1 ) : 41 - 48 . 120 . Miyazaki N , Esaki M , Ogura T , Murata K . ( 2014 ) . Serial block - face scanning electron microscopy for three - dimensional analysis of mor - phological changes in mitochondria regulated by Cdc48p / p97 ATPase . J . Struct . Biol . 187 ( 2 ) : 187 - 193 . 121 . Ngamskulrungroj P , Chang Y , Hansen B , Bugge C , Fischer E , Kwon - Chung KJ . ( 2012 ) . Characterization of the chromosome 4 genes that affect fluconazole - induced disomy formation in Cryptococcus neofor - mans . PLoS One 7 ( 3 ) : e33022 . 122 . Hayles MF , de Winter DA , Schneijdenberg CT , Meeldijk JD , Luecken U , Persoon H , de Water J , de Jong F , Humbel BM , Verkleij AJ . ( 2010 ) . The making of frozen - hydrated , vitreous lamellas from cells for cryo - electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 172 ( 2 ) : 180 - 190 . 123 . Bo T , Liu M , Zhong C , Zhang Q , Su QZ , Tan ZL , Han PP , Jia SR . ( 2014 ) . Metabolomic analysis of antimicrobial mechanisms of epsilon - poly - L - lysine on Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Agric . Food Chem . 62 ( 19 ) : 4454 - 4465 . 124 . Bennis S , Chami F , Chami N , Bouchikhi T , Remmal A . ( 2004 ) . Sur - face alteration of Saccharomyces cerevisiae induced by thymol and eugenol . Lett . Appl . Microbiol . 38 ( 6 ) : 454 - 458 . 125 . Coluccio A , Neiman AM . ( 2004 ) . Interspore bridges : a new fea - ture of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae spore wall . Microbiology 150 ( Pt 10 ) : 3189 - 3196 . 126 . Ferreira C , Silva S , van Voorst F , Aguiar C , Kielland - Brandt MC , Brandt ALucas C . ( 2006 ) . Absence of Gup1p in Saccharomyces cere - visiae results in defective cell wall composition , assembly , stability and morphology . FEMS Yeast Res . 6 ( 7 ) : 1027 - 1038 . 127 . Timmermans FJ , Otto C . ( 2015 ) . Contributed Review : Review of integrated correlative light and electron microscopy . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 86 ( 1 ) : 011501 . 128 . de Boer P , Hoogenboom JP , Giepmans BN . ( 2015 ) . Correlated light and electron microscopy : ultrastructure lights up ! Nat . Methods 12 ( 6 ) : 503 - 513 . 129 . Loussert FC , Humbel BM . ( 2015 ) . Correlative microscopy . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 581 : 98 - 110 . 130 . Schirra R , Zhang P . ( 2014 ) . Correlative fluorescence and electron microscopy . Curr . Protoc . Cytom 7012 . 36 . 1 - 12 . 36 . 10 . 131 . Buser C , McDonald K . ( 2010 ) . Correlative GFP - immunoelectron microscopy in yeast . Methods Enzymol . 470 : 603 - 618 . 132 . Viswanathan S , Williams ME , Bloss EB , Stasevich TJ , Speer CM , Nern A , Pfeiffer BD , Hooks BM , Li WP , English BP , Tian T , Henry GL , Macklin JJ , Patel R , Gerfen CR , Zhuang X , Wang Y , Rubin GM , Looger LL . ( 2015 ) . High - performance probes for light and electron microsco - py . Nat . Methods 12 ( 6 ) : 568 - 576 . 133 . de Winter DA , Mesman RJ , Hayles MF , Schneijdenberg CT , Mathisen C , Post JA . ( 2013 ) . In - situ integrity control of frozen - hydrated , vitreous lamellas prepared by the cryo - focused ion beam - scanning electron microscope . J . Struct . Biol . 183 ( 1 ) : 11 - 18 . 134 . Studer D , Klein A , Iacovache I , Gnaegi H , Zuber B . ( 2014 ) . A new tool based on two micromanipulators facilitates the handling of ul - trathin cryosection ribbons . J . Struct . Biol . 185 ( 1 ) : 125 - 128 . 135 . Walther P , Muller M . ( 1999 ) . Biological ultrastructure as revealed by high resolution cryo - SEM of block faces after cryo - sectioning . J . Microsc . 196 ( Pt 3 ) : 279 - 287 . 136 . Bos E , Hussaarts L , van Weering JR , Ellisman MH , de Wit H , Koster AJ . ( 2014 ) . Vitrification of Tokuyasu - style immuno - labelled sections for correlative cryo light microscopy and cryo electron tomography . J . Struct . Biol . 186 ( 2 ) : 273 - 282 . 137 . Kawai - Noma S , Pack CG , Kojidani T , Asakawa H , Hiraoka Y , Kinjo M , Haraguchi T , Taguchi HHirata A . ( 2010 ) . In vivo evidence for the fibrillar structures of Sup35 prions in yeast cells . J . Cell Biol . 190 ( 2 ) : 223 - 231 . 138 . Michel M , Hillmann T , Müller M . ( 1991 ) . Cryosectioning of plant material frozen at high pressure . J . Microsc . 163 ( 1 ) : 3 - 18 . 139 . Matias VR , Al - Amoudi A , Dubochet J , Beveridge TJ . ( 2003 ) . Cryo - transmission electron microscopy of frozen - hydrated sections of Esch - erichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa . J . Bacteriol . 185 ( 20 ) : 6112 - 6118 . 140 . Al - Amoudi A , Chang JJ , Leforestier A , McDowall A , Salamin LM , Norlen LP , Richter K , Blanc NS , Studer D , Dubochet J . ( 2004 ) . Cryo - electron microscopy of vitreous sections . EMBO J . 23 ( 18 ) : 3583 - 3588 . 141 . Al - Amoudi A , Norlen LP , Dubochet J . ( 2004 ) . Cryo - electron mi - croscopy of vitreous sections of native biological cells and tissues . J . Struct . Biol . 148 ( 1 ) : 131 - 135 . 142 . Rigort A , Villa E , Bauerlein FJ , Engel BD , Plitzko JM . ( 2012 ) . Inte - grative approaches for cellular cryo - electron tomography : correlative imaging and focused ion beam micromachining . Methods Cell Biol . 111259 - 281 . 143 . Larabell CA , Le Gros MA . ( 2004 ) . X - ray tomography generates 3 - D reconstructions of the yeast , Saccharomyces cerevisiae , at 60 - nm resolution . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 ( 3 ) : 957 - 962 . 144 . Weiss D , Schneider G , Niemann B , Guttmann P , Rudolph D , Schmahl G . ( 2000 ) . Computed tomography of cryogenic biological specimens based on X - ray microscopic images . Ultramicroscopy 84 ( 3 - 4 ) : 185 - 197 . 145 . Le Gros MA , McDermott G , Larabell CA . ( 2005 ) . X - ray tomogra - phy of whole cells . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 15 ( 5 ) : 593 - 600 . 146 . McDermott G , Le Gros MA , Knoechel CG , Uchida M , Larabell CA . ( 2009 ) . Soft X - ray tomography and cryogenic light microscopy : the cool combination in cellular imaging . Trends Cell Biol . 19 ( 11 ) : 587 - 595 . 147 . Uchida M , McDermott G , Wetzler M , Le Gros MA , Myllys M , Knoechel C , Barron AE , Larabell CA . ( 2009 ) . Soft X - ray tomography of phenotypic switching and the cellular response to antifungal peptoids in Candida albicans . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 ( 46 ) : 19375 - 19380 . 148 . Cinquin BP , Do M , McDermott G , Walters AD , Myllys M , Smith EA , Cohen - Fix O , Le Gros MA , Larabell CA . ( 2014 ) . Putting molecules in their place . J . Cell . Biochem . 115 ( 2 ) : 209 - 216 . 149 . Burnett TL , McDonald SA , Gholinia A , Geurts R , Janus M , Slater T , Haigh SJ , Ornek C , Almuaili F , Engelberg DL , Thompson GE , Withers PJ . ( 2014 ) . Correlative tomography . Sci . Rep . 44711 . 150 . Uchida M , Sun Y , McDermott G , Knoechel C , Le Gros MA , Parkin - son D , Drubin DG , Larabell CA . ( 2011 ) . Quantitative analysis of yeast internal architecture using soft X - ray tomography . Yeast 28 ( 3 ) : 227 - 236 . 151 . Huang X , Nelson J , Kirz J , Lima E , Marchesini S , Miao H , Neiman AM , Shapiro D , S teinbrener J , Stewart A , Turner JJ , Jacobsen C . ( 2009 ) . Soft X - ray diffraction microscopy of a frozen hydrated yeast cell . Phys . Rev . Lett . 103 ( 19 ) : 198101 . A . Frankl et al . ( 2015 ) Electron microscopy methods for S . cerevisiae OPEN ACCESS | www . microbialcell . com 428 Microbial Cell | November 2015 | Vol . 2 No . 11 152 . Walters AD , May CK , Dauster ES , Cinquin BP , Smith EA , Robellet X , D ' Amours D , Larabell CA , Cohen - Fix O . ( 2014 ) . The yeast polo kinase Cdc5 regulates the shape of the mitotic nucleus . Curr . Biol . 24 ( 23 ) : 2861 - 2867 . 153 . Howard CV , Reed MG . ( 2005 ) . Unbiased stereology : Three - dimensional measurement in microscopy . 2nd ed . New York : Garland Science / BIOS Scientific Publishers . 154 . Mayhew TM , Lucocq JM , Griffiths G . ( 2002 ) . Relative labelling index : a novel stereological approach to test for non - random immu - nogold labelling of organelles and membranes on transmission elec - tron microscopy thin sections . J . Microsc . 205 ( Pt 2 ) : 153 - 164 . 155 . Rabouille C . ( 1999 ) . Quantitative aspects of immunogold labeling in embedded and nonembedded sections . Methods Mol . Biol . 117125 - 144 . 156 . Longtine MS , McKenzie A , Demarini DJ , Shah NG , Wach A , Bra - chat A , Philippsen P , Pringle JR . ( 1998 ) . Additional modules for versa - tile and economical PCR - based gene deletion and modification in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Yeast 14 ( 10 ) : 953 - 961 . 157 . Binder M , Hartig AT . ( 1996 ) . Immunogold labeling of yeast cells : an efficient tool for the study of protein targeting and morphological alterations due to overexpression and inactivation of genes . Histo - chem . Cell Biol . 106 ( 1 ) : 115 - 130 . 158 . Cabrera M , Arlt H , Epp N , Lachmann J , Griffith J , Perz A , Reggiori F , Ungermann C . ( 2013 ) . Functional separation of endosomal fusion factors and the class C core vacuole / endosome tethering ( CORVET ) complex in endosome biogenesis . J . Biol . Chem . 288 ( 7 ) : 5166 - 5175 . 159 . Mari M , Griffith J , Rieter E , Krishnappa L , Klionsky DJ , Reggiori F . ( 2010 ) . An Atg9 - containing compartment that functions in the early steps of autophagosome biogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 190 ( 6 ) : 1005 - 1022 .