Current Biology Vol 24 No 11 R510 makes it less effortful and automatic . To find the type of learning that has reliably produced exceptionally high performance for centuries , Ericsson , Krampe , and Tesch - Römer turned to the domain of music ( Figure 1 ) . They found that the key to improvement is ‘deliberate practice’ , namely engaging in practice activities assigned by a teacher with a clear , specific goal of improvement and where the practice activities provide immediate feedback and opportunities for repetitions to attain gradual improvements . They found that professional violinists and the best students at an international music academy in Berlin had spent an average of 10 , 000 hours of solitary deliberate practice by age 20 , which was around 2 , 500 and 5 , 000 hours more than two groups of less accomplished violinists at the same academy . This finding rejected the popular view that more ‘gifted’ musicians needed less practice . In the last 20 years the search for deliberate practice activities has been extended to numerous domains , such as medicine , nursing , ballet , sports , SCRABBLE , scientific research , psychotherapy and teaching . Current research is now finding relations between the amount of engagement in particular intensive practice activities and desired beneficial changes in the brain and other parts of the body . Future research aims to develop a detailed understanding of how designed practice activities can build complex physiological adaptations and mental representations that are associated with increased superior performance among professionals and increased achievement among amateurs . Where can I find out more ? Ericsson , K . A . ( 2013 ) . Why expert performance is special and cannot be extrapolated from studies of performance in the general population : a response to criticisms . Intelligence In Press , http : dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intell 2013 . 12 . 001 . Ericsson , K . A . , Charness , N . , Feltovich , P . , and Hoffman , R . R . ( 2006 ) . Cambridge Handbook of Expertise and Expert Performance . ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) . Ericsson , K . A . , Krampe , R . T . , and Tesch - Römer , C . ( 1993 ) . The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance . Psychol . Rev . 100 , 363 – 406 . Simon , H . A . , and Simon , P . A . ( 1962 ) . Trial and error search in solving difficult problems : evidence from the game of chess . Behav . Sci . 7 , 425 – 429 . Tetlock , P . E . ( 2005 ) . Expert Political Judgment . ( Princeton : Princeton University Press ) . Department of Psychology , Florida State University , Tallahassee , FL 32306 - 4301 , USA . E - mail : ericsson @ psy . fsu . edu quantitative signatures of attention in humans . In this Primer we shall consider the evidence for selective attention in birds , and outline what we know of the underlying neural mechanisms and behavioral advantages of such selective attention . Behavioral evidence for selective attention Given that selective attention serves the basic function of enabling animals to behave intelligently in a complex , unpredictable world , it is likely that this capacity appeared early in evolution . It has been well documented that our close relatives , old world monkeys such as macaques ( Macacca mulatta ) , have this capacity . How about our more distant relatives ? Do birds ( class Aves ) , for example , which diverged from us more than 250 million years ago , also have selective attention ? Birds certainly exhibit a variety of behaviors that apparently require selective attention . For example , birds of prey , such as falcons ( Falconiformes ) , eagles ( Accipitriformes ) and owls ( Strigiformes ) , display impressive abilities to locate and track well - camouflaged prey across large distances , and capture it ‘on - the - wing’ with remarkable precision in both space and time . Alternatively , birds that forage on the ground , such as chickens ( Galliformes ) and pigeons ( Columbiformes ) , as well as tree - foragers , such as songbirds ( Passeriformes ) , exhibit similarly remarkable feats of selective spatiotemporal stimulus processing , as they repeatedly make rapid , accurate decisions about the next target for pecking while searching highly cluttered environments for food . In both cases , birds must select one out of many potential targets , analyze the target’s identity and location , and ignore irrelevant , distracting stimuli . Surprisingly , laboratory studies that have investigated the capacity of birds for selective attention have produced controversial or inconclusive results . A large body of early studies investigated the capacity of birds to attend to stimulus features ( feature - based attention ) . For example , in highly cited work ( Reynolds , 1961 ) , pigeons Selective attention in birds Devarajan Sridharan , Jason S . Schwarz , and Eric I . Knudsen The natural world constantly inundates our senses with an abundance of information . Selective attention enables us to navigate this abundance intelligently by selecting the information that is most relevant , at each moment in time , for differential processing and decision - making . The attributes of attention have been studied in humans for over a century . In his influential 19 th century treatise , The Principles of Psychology , philosopher and psychologist William James defined attention as : “… the taking possession by the mind , in clear and vivid form , of one out of what seem several simultaneously possible objects or trains of thought … It implies withdrawal from some things in order to deal effectively with others . ” ( James , 1890 ) . James’ definition elegantly captures two key hallmarks of attention : the enhanced processing of task - relevant information ( target information ) and the suppression of task - irrelevant information ( distracting information ) . Over the past decades , behavioral scientists have developed sophisticated psychophysical tasks that quantify these hallmarks of attention . One popular task involves cueing a subject to attend to a particular location , and comparing her ability to detect or discriminate stimuli at the cued location ( ‘targets’ ) versus stimuli at other , uncued locations . The consistent observation across many studies is that spatial cueing increases perceptual accuracy ( d’ , a performance measure based on signal detection theory ) in detecting or discriminating targets and decreases the reaction time to respond to targets at the cued location versus at other , uncued locations . Consequently , these two metrics ( increased accuracy and decreased reaction time ) have become recognized as the Primer Magazine R511 were reinforced for pecking on targets that combined two features ( for example , color and shape ) . In later trials , when the features were presented individually , birds pecked almost exclusively on targets with only one of the two features ( for example , color ignoring shape ) . The results were interpreted as indicating that the birds had attended selectively to only one of the two features ( color , for example ) . However , a follow - up study has questioned this interpretation ( Wilkie and Masson , 1976 ) . Other studies have attempted to investigate the capacity of birds to select particular locations ( spatial attention ) . For example , pigeons were shown to be able to anticipate the location of an upcoming target based either on the statistics of target presentation or on the validity of a spatial cue . However , these studies measured the effects of cues in terms of faster reaction times to the cued location , rather than as improvements in perceptual accuracy ( d’ ) . Crucially , faster reaction times do not distinguish the effects of selective attention from those of motor preparation to respond to the cued location . Thus , the evidence for attentional phenomena in birds was tenuous , at best . The controversy remained unresolved until recently , when quantitative behavioral protocols for measuring d’ , modeled on protocols developed for measuring attention in primates , were applied to birds ( Sridharan et al . , 2014 ) . Chickens were trained to perform a spatially cued localization task ( Figure 1A ) . The task required the birds to localize and report the vertical position of a visual target in the presence of a task - relevant distracter . The behavioral effects of cueing resembled signature effects of attention in primates : target localization accuracy ( d’ ) increased and response times decreased in a space - specific manner ( Figure 1B ) . Spatial cueing also greatly reduced the performance deficits induced by distracting stimuli and , furthermore , significantly increased the bird’s confidence in its decisions . Thus , consistent with our intuition , birds do , indeed , have selective attention , and the behavioral phenomenology of spatial selective attention is remarkably similar in birds and primates . Neural circuits and mechanisms for controlling attention The similarities in spatial attention between birds and primates , measured behaviorally , suggest that the neural mechanisms underlying attention appeared early and have been conserved through evolution . Is there evidence for this ? Extensive literature on the neural circuits that control attention in the primate brain has identified two key systems : a forebrain system comprising the prefrontal cortex ( including the frontal eye field ; FEF ) and the posterior parietal cortex , and a midbrain system comprising the superior colliculus ( SC ) and a set of A Time Peck + Valid cue ( 800 - 1600 ) ms + Delay Start ( 350 - 550 ) ms Peck Stimuli 50 ms Response + 2500 ms + Interval 250ms + No cue + Invalid cue + + Peck Zeroing cross Potentialtarget location + B Relative target strength ( T / D contrast ) A cc u r a cy ( d ’ ) 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 100 0 . 01 600 800 1000 1200 T > D D > T R e s pon s e t i m e ( m s ) * * * * 100 0 . 01 Equal T > D D > T Equal Valid cue No cue Current Biology Figure 1 . Behavioral evidence for selective attention . ( A ) Chickens were trained on a target localization task that required them to report the vertical location of a target stimulus in the presence of a task - relevant , distracting stimulus . The bird initiated a trial by pecking on a ‘zeroing cross’ at the center of a touch - sensitive video screen . After a variable delay , the bird pecked again to trigger the appearance of a stimulus array consisting of two briefly flashed ( 50 ms ) stimuli ( positive contrast 3° dots ) in opposite hemifields , one to the left , the other to the right . The location of each stimulus varied randomly between two pos - sible locations , above or below the visual horizon . The locations of the two stimuli were independently sampled , and upper and lower locations were tested with equal probability . The two stimuli were identical except in contrast , which was varied randomly and independently for each stimulus . After the stimulus array was extinguished ( 250 ms interval ) , two response boxes appeared to one side . The side of the response boxes designated post - hoc which of the stimuli was the ‘target’ and which the ‘distracter’ ; such tasks are referred to as ‘filtering’ tasks . In filtering tasks , the distracter is always a potentially task - relevant stimulus , so that an additional stimulus ( here , the response boxes ) is necessary to distinguish the target from the distracter . Birds were rewarded for indicating the location of the target by pecking on the response box closest to the target’s location ( red arrow ) . On interleaved trials , a spatial cue ( middle panel ) was presented on the horizon for a variable duration and was extinguished before the stimulus array appeared . The cue predicted the side of the upcoming response boxes and , therefore , identified the target stimulus with 100 % validity . However , the cue was completely uninformative about the vertical location ( elevation ) of the target . In other sessions , behavioral performance was measured with 90 % valid and 10 % invalid cues ( bottom panel ) . ( B ) ( Left ) Psychometric functions of locali - zation accuracy ( quantified as d’ , a signal detection theory measure ) without and with a valid spatial cue , as a function of relative target strength ( target to distracter contrast ratio ) . Gray symbols : performance in uncued trials ; red symbols : performance in cued trials ( N = 199 sessions in three birds ) . Lines : cumulative Gaussian fits ; error - bars : standard error of the mean . ( Right ) Response times without and with a spatial cue , for correctly localized trials as a function of relative target strength . Lines : Power law fits . In both panels , asterisks denote significant differences ( in accuracy or response time ) between the cued and uncued trials ( p < 0 . 01 ) . Figure modified with permission from Sridharan et al . ( 2014 ) . Current Biology Vol 24 No 11 R512 interconnected nuclei in the midbrain tegmentum . The vast majority of research on primate attention has centered on the forebrain ( frontoparietal ) system . In contrast , the forebrain attention system in birds has not yet been studied as intensively . Brain areas in birds thought to be equivalent to prefrontal and extrastriate visual areas in mammals have been proposed based on anatomical connectivity , neurotransmitters , and effects of lesions on behavior . But none of these structures has been studied electrophysiologically in birds that are engaged in attention - demanding tasks . The most thoroughly understood structure in the avian forebrain attention system is the forebrain gaze field , called the archipallial gaze field ( AGF ) in birds , analogous to the FEF in mammals . The avian AGF and mammalian FEF exhibit similar patterns of anatomical connections with sensorimotor and premotor structures . Both the avian AGF and mammalian FEF play a necessary role in working - memory - dependent gaze control . Electrical microstimulation of either the AGF or FEF evokes saccadic changes in gaze direction ( overt movements of the head or eye ) . In addition , sub - saccadic electrical microstimulation of either structure causes space - specific , attention - like modulation of sensory neural responses . Finally , electrical microstimulation of the FEF shifts the locus of spatial attention in behaving monkeys ; the equivalent experiment has not been conducted in birds . Although research on the forebrain system in mammals has elucidated the phenomenology of neural activity during attention tasks , it has provided little insight into how attention actually works at the level of specific neural circuits and computations . In contrast , research on the midbrain system , which has been highly conserved across vertebrate evolution , has yielded circuit level , mechanistic insights . The contribution of the midbrain system to the control of spatial attention has been demonstrated in monkeys . The superior colliculus ( SC ) , the major node in the midbrain network , is a multimodal integration center that receives both ascending sensory information and descending sensory , decision , and motor planning information from the forebrain , and it combines this information into a unified topographic map of space . It sends descending output to premotor structures in the brainstem that orient gaze and ascending output to structures in the forebrain that influence target selection for attention . In monkeys , there is growing evidence , based on focal electrical microstimulation and pharmacological inactivation , for the causal involvement of the SC in the performance of spatial attention tasks . The structure in birds that is homologous to the mammalian SC is called the optic tectum ( OT ; Figure 2A ) . The OT and all other components of the midbrain selection network are far more differentiated in birds than in mammals , reflecting a spatial segregation of specialized neural circuits into separate layers in the OT and into separate nuclei in the midbrain tegmentum ( Figure 2B ) . This high degree of architectural differentiation and organization in birds may reflect the adaptive advantage of being able to make rapid and reliable decisions during flight and landing . For investigating the mechanistic role of the midbrain in attention , the spatial segregation of these specialized circuits provides unique advantages in terms of recording from , manipulating , and analyzing the computational contributions of the various circuits . Two specialized circuits in the avian midbrain network have been particularly well studied . One circuit comprises the OT and the Imc ( nucleus isthmi pars magnocellularis ) , an inhibitory tegmental nucleus that uses GABA ( gamma - amino - butyric - acid ) as its neurotransmitter ( Figure 2C ) . This circuit mediates the competitive selection of the highest priority stimulus as well as the global suppression of neural responses to all other , non - selected stimuli . Another circuit comprises the OT and the Ipc ( nucleus isthmi pars parvocellularis ) , a cholinergic tegmental nucleus ( Figure 2D ) . This circuit enhances neural responses to selected stimuli and amplifies rhythmic neural activity at gamma ( 25 – 90 Hz ) frequencies , the same range of frequencies that is modulated in the mammalian frontoparietal system during attention tasks . These circuits perform distinctive spatial and temporal transformations on neural activity that may underlie the behavioral hallmarks of attention : distracter suppression and target enhancement . A Ipc Imc Imc OT OT OT OT Dorsal Lateral 1 mm B C D Ipc Current Biology Figure 2 . Neural circuits and mechanisms for controlling attention . ( A ) A schematic , lateral view of the chicken brain comprising the forebrain , midbrain ( includ - ing the optic tectum , OT ) and the cerebellum . ( B ) A brain section , cut in the transverse plane ( dotted line in panel A ) , showing the tegmental nuclei Ipc and Imc relative to the multi - layered OT . Rectangle : portion of the OT – Imc – Ipc circuit that is schematized in panels C and D . ( C ) In one specialized circuit , Imc neurons receive topographic , multimodal input from layer 10b in the OT space map and send high - rate , GABAergic inhibitory output ( blue ) to all portions of the space maps in both the OT and the Ipc , except the portion of the OT that provides input . This unusual pattern of interconnections enables each focus of activity in the OT space map to powerfully suppress responses in all other portions of the space map and , thereby , gener - ate a spatially localized representation of the highest priority location in the environment . ( D ) In another specialized circuit , Ipc neurons , which are cholinergic ( red ) , receive topographic input from layer 10b neurons in the OT space map , and they project topographically back to the OT . Ipc input increases the gain of sensory responses , in a space - specific manner , across OT layers , including those that provide ascending activity to the forebrain . When activated by a salient stimulus , the recurrent OT - Ipc circuit generates rhythmic oscillations in the local field potential ( LFP ) at gamma frequencies ( 25 – 90 Hz ) . This midbrain - generated gamma rhythm is regulated by mechanisms that are remarkably similar to those observed in the mamma - lian forebrain , and may constitute a selection signal that powerfully influences information processing in the forebrain pathway . Magazine R513 Advantages of birds for studies of visual attention Birds provide unique advantages for studying the neural mechanisms of visual attention . The specialized circuits of the midbrain network , which are best studied in birds , have been conserved across vertebrate evolution . In addition , diurnal ground - foraging birds , such as chickens and pigeons , possess highly developed visual systems . The eye of these species contains four or five cone opsins ( depending on the species ) for color vision , and the spectral sensitivity range ( visual wavelengths ~ 400 – 600 nm ) is similar to that of the human eye . The spatial acuity of birds is also comparable to that of humans , although raptors , such as eagles and hawks , exceed this capacity by at least an order of magnitude . Because of their excellent spatial acuity and color vision , birds can be trained on visual attention tasks that employ complex stimulus arrays . Moreover , birds exhibit a natural behavior that enables decisions to be reported rapidly and precisely in space and time . Ground and tree - foraging birds use pecking to obtain food and to explore objects in the environment . They engage in this behavior repeatedly , hundreds of times each day . Operant conditioning of pecking behavior is simple and enables precise quantification of perceptual decisions in birds , comparable to the quantification of foveating eye saccades in primates . Among birds , chickens are particularly advantageous as a model for research . Chickens have been domesticated , making them easy to handle even as adults . They are inexpensive and readily available in large numbers . In addition , they are a precocial species , and even newborn hatchlings exhibit complex visual discrimination and attention - dependent behaviors that can be readily conditioned ( see Supplemental Movie S1 ) . These properties enable research not only into the various aspects of attention , but also into the developmental maturation of these capacities and the neural circuits that underlie them . Finally , the Trans - NIH Gallus initiative describes the domesticated chicken as “the premier non - mammalian research model organism” ( http : / / www . nih . gov / science / models / gallus / ) . The complete chicken genome has been sequenced , leading to the availability of a variety of cutting - edge molecular and genomic resources , and creating unprecedented opportunities to develop a fine - grained map of the molecular architecture of the chicken brain . Together , these emerging research tools and the amenable behavioral and neural characteristics of the domestic chicken offer a powerful model system for linking molecules and circuits to high - level functions , including selective attention . At the same time , measuring spatial vision and attention behavior in birds poses unique technical challenges . Unlike primates , birds lack dexterous forelimbs and they do not execute consistent orienting eye - movements independently of head movements . Instead , as mentioned previously , they orient their beaks . Thus , behavioral measurements that require spatially accurate reporting of decisions cannot be easily performed with the head immobilized , as in primates . As a result , when the head and eyes are free to move , their positions must be monitored in real time to ensure that stimuli are presented at consistent spatial locations in the visual field . Strategies for stimulus presentation in head - free visual tasks include adjusting stimulus position and size relative to the bird’s direction of gaze monitored in real - time , or synchronizing the presentation of stimuli during stable and stereotyped epochs of gaze fixation that occur naturally following a peck . Concluding remarks Over the past century , major strides have been made in characterizing the phenomenology of attention in humans . As a result of this research , a variety of attention disorders , such as attention deficit disorder , autism and schizophrenia , can now be reliably diagnosed . However , the etiologies of these disorders remain poorly understood . Developing targeted therapies for treating such disorders requires a mechanistic understanding of how attention works at the level of cells and circuits . The demonstration that the phenomenology of spatial selective attention is remarkably similar in birds and primates opens up new avenues for research into the neural mechanisms that control attention . The brains of birds and primates share many neuroanatomical and functional features . Like primates , birds ( especially chickens ) are readily trained to perform behavioral tasks that yield precise , quantitative measures of decision - making . In contrast to primates , they are readily available and , hence , tractable for developing and applying cutting - edge experimental techniques . We expect , therefore , that research on avian species will greatly accelerate the discovery of neural mechanisms that underlie attention . Supplemental Information Supplemental Information includes a sup - plemental movie and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 12 . 046 . Acknowledgments We thank C . Alex Goddard for his comments on a preliminary version of this manuscript , and Phyllis Knudsen for figure preparation . Further reading Bisley , J . W . , and Goldberg , M . E . ( 2010 ) . Attention , intention , and priority in the parietal lobe . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 33 , 1 – 21 . Carrasco , M . ( 2011 ) . Visual attention : the past 25 years . Vision Res . 13 , 1484 – 1525 . Froehlich , A . L . , Herbranson , W . T . , Loper , J . D . , Wood , D . M . , and Shimp , C . P . ( 2004 ) . Anticipating by pigeons depends on local statistical information in a serial response time task . J . Exp . Psychol . Gen . 1 , 31 – 45 . James , W . ( 1890 ) . The Principles of Psychology , 1981 Reprint ( Cambridge : Harvard University Press ) . Knudsen , E . I . ( 2011 ) . Control from below : the role of a midbrain network in spatial attention . Eur . J . Neurosci . 11 , 1961 – 1972 . Krauzlis , R . J . , Lovejoy , L . P . , and Zenon , A . ( 2013 ) . Superior colliculus and visual spatial attention . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 36 , 165 – 182 . Reynolds , G . S . ( 1961 ) . Attention in the pigeon . J . Exp . Anal . Behav . 4 , 203 – 208 . Schwarz , J . S . , Sridharan , D . , and Knudsen , E . I . ( 2013 ) . Magnetic tracking of eye position in freely behaving chickens . Front . Syst . Neurosci . 91 , 1 – 8 . Shimp , C . P . , and Friedrich , F . J . ( 1993 ) . Behavioral and computational models of spatial attention . J . Exp . Psychol . Anim . Behav . Process . 1 , 26 – 37 . Squire , R . F . , Noudoost , B . , Schafer , R . J . , and Moore , T . ( 2013 ) . Prefrontal contributions to visual selective attention . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 36 , 451 – 466 . Sridharan , D . , Ramamurthy , D . L . , Schwarz , J . S . , and Knudsen , E . I . ( 2014 ) . Visuospatial selective attention in chickens . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . Epub 21st April ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1316824111 . Wilkie , D . M . , and Masson , M . E . ( 1976 ) . Attention in the pigeon : a reevaluation . J . Exp . Anal . Behav . 2 , 207 – 212 . Zeigler , H . P . , and Bischof , H . ( 1993 ) . Vision , Brain , and Behavior in Birds ( Cambridge : MIT Press ) . Department of Neurobiology , Stanford University School of Medicine , Stanford , CA 94305 , USA . E - mail : dsridhar @ stanford . edu , eknudsen @ stanford . edu