Seeing is Believing ( or at Least Changing Your Mind ) : The Inﬂuence of Visibility and Task Complexity on Preference Changes in Computer - Supported Team Decision Making Babajide Osatuyi Department of Information Systems , College of Business and Entrepreneurship , University of Texas Rio Grande Valley , 1201 W University Drive , Edinburg , TX 78539 , USA . E - mail : babajide . osatuyi @ utrgv . edu Starr Roxanne Hiltz Department of Information Systems , College of Computing Sciences , New Jersey Institute of Technology , University Heights , Newark , NJ 07102 , USA . E - mail : hiltz @ njit . edu Katia Passerini School of Management , New Jersey Institute of Technology , University Heights , Newark , NJ 07102 , USA . E - mail : katia . passerini @ njit . edu This article describes an experimental study that exam - ines the extent to which a group decision support system ( GDSS ) , which allows team members to view other members’ preference ratings , can encourage changes in individual preferences . We studied 22 , four - person teams performing 2 hidden proﬁle tasks—simple and complex—in a controlled setting . Transparency of the interactions , achieved through the visibility of ratings , inﬂuenced changes in participants’ preferences as measured before , during and after the team discus - sion . Visibility of team scores could then offer an effec - tive way to reach consensus , despite individual incumbent preferences . Changes between individuals’ initial preferences and team preferences were found to be larger for members working on a complex task com - pared to a simple task , as were changes between indi - viduals’ prediscussion and postdiscussion preferences . Although prior studies established that the initial pref - erences of individual team members are rather sticky , this study reveals that individuals adjusted their initial preferences to reach a team consensus , as well as modi - ﬁed their preferences after team discussions . Despite the mixed earlier research results on the impact of GDSS on efficient decision making , ﬁndings from this study suggest that in complex decision - making contexts , GDSS tools can be effective in enabling consensus building in groups . Introduction There is a longstanding belief that “two heads are better than one , ” hence the tendency for organizations to assemble teams to make decisions on projects , with the expectation that teams have access to a larger pool of expertise and knowledge than an individual ( A . R . Dennis , 1996a ; Mennecke , 1997 ; Stasser & Titus , 1985 ) . Contrary to this belief , teams have been found to seldom perform as expected , as a result of ineffective exchange and use of the unique expertise that each member possesses ( A . R . Dennis , 1996a ; Hollingshead , 1996a ; Stasser & Titus , 1985 ) . Extensive research studies have been conducted to under - stand the factors responsible for the tendency of teams to ineffectively use all the information available to them during discussion ( Hightower & Sayeed , 1995 ; Mesmer - Magnus & DeChurch , 2009 ; Stasser , Stewart , & Wittenbaum , 1995 ; Toma & Butera , 2009 ; Valacich , Dennis , & Nunamaker , 1992 ) . These studies are called “hidden proﬁle” studies , because the distribution of information among group members is controlled in such a manner that no member has all of the information needed to make an optimal decision , and the partial information possessed by most or all of the members leads them to an incorrect preference . Thus the “proﬁle” or optimal choice is hidden from each of the team members when working in isolation ( Stasser & Titus , 1985 , 1987 ) . To make the best decision , the group members need to exchange important unshared information ( also identiﬁed as unique information in other studies ) and also change their initial preferences to reach a consensus . Received May 23 , 2014 ; revised March 30 , 2015 ; accepted March 31 , 2015 © 2015 ASIS & T (cid:129) Published online in Wiley Online Library ( wileyonlinelibrary . com ) . DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi . 23555 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY , (cid:129)(cid:129) ( (cid:129)(cid:129) ) : (cid:129)(cid:129) – (cid:129)(cid:129) , 2015 A majority of the earlier studies of hidden proﬁle tasks were conducted without computer - mediated communication support that enables parallel communication ( meaning that more than one person can be “talking” at the same time ) , group memory ( also called “reprocessability , ” meaning that the conversation is recorded and retrievable ) and anonymity , and can provide decision support tools ( A . R . Dennis , Fuller , & Valacich , 2008 ; Stasser et al . , 1995 ; Stasser , Taylor , & Hanna , 1989 ; Stasser & Titus , 1985 , 1987 ) . The studies that have focused on the use of group decision support systems ( GDSS ) to facilitate information exchange have shown that GDSS allow teams to exchange more information during discussions , but they do not necessarily “use” this informa - tion to change their preferences or to make better decisions ( A . R . Dennis , 1996b ; Hightower & Sayeed , 1995 ; Todd & Benbasat , 1992 ) . There is a lack of theoretically sound explanations for why team members make poorly informed ( nonoptimal ) decisions even when they use GDSS . In a study of group processes that affect group decision outcomes in GDSS , Huang and Li ( 2007 ) recognized that the GDSS literature yielded inconsistent results on the impact of computer - mediation on decision making . They explain that many studies focus on the type of information sharing ( unshared or unique , shared or common , and par - tially shared information ) rather than the actual group pro - cesses , and that such processes inﬂuence consensus building . In particular , they observed signiﬁcant mediation effects of group - led processes such as inﬂuence equality ( ability of all participants to share their views on the GDSS system ) , informational inﬂuence ( acceptance of information from others ) , and normative inﬂuence ( desire to conform to expectations ) as factors that can improve group consensus in the decision - making process . Huang and Li ( 2007 ) found that in preference tasks , normative inﬂuence was lower in GDSS groups compared to face - to - face groups . Compared to face - to - face studies where individuals remain attached to their original preferences even when they conform to the group in the ﬁnal solution , this ﬁnding of lower normative inﬂuence in GDSS leads us to expect a shift in individual judgments before and after the team discussions , because there will be less pressure to defend one’s opinions in the GDSS condition . That is , the lower normative inﬂuence occurring in an anonymous GDSS context may lead to a seamless change in individual preferences as a natural outcome of the group discussion , whereby participants are more convinced of others’ opinions and not defensive about “giving in” or pressured into social comparisons . Changes in individual preferences have been shown to correlate with team performance ( Brodbeck , Kerschreiter , Mojzisch , Frey , & Schulz - Hardt , 2002 ; Winquist & Larson , 1998 ) . Therefore , if we are able to inﬂuence real changes in individual preferences , we will ultimately impact the quality of the team decision - making process . One way of achieving this goal in a GDSS setting is by providing information equality , which is giving open access to the decision - making choices of others by observing how other participants cast their preference ratings . One type of tool that can be provided by GDSS is rating or voting on preferences , with feedback to all group members to make preferences visible or transparent without each member having to verbally describe their preferences to the others . However , there is a dearth of studies that have looked at how such a feature in a GDSS may encourage preference changes in addition to facilitating the exchange of information in team discussions . The complexity of the task worked on by the team has also been highlighted as a factor that may affect the exchange of information in teams without GDSS support ( Parks & Cowlin , 1995 ; Wood , 1986 ) . In particular , Men - necke , Valacich , and Wheeler ( 2000 ) found that teams without GDSS support will perform better in negotiation tasks ( those tasks that involve potential conﬂicts and diver - gence ) , whereas GDSS will better support intellective tasks ( those tasks where one solution is possible , that is a task that requires consensus and convergence ) . Generally however , task complexity is an under - researched variable in studies of group decision making . In a review of over 200 experiments on GDSS , Fjermestad and Hiltz ( 1999 ) found only ﬁve that looked at task complexity as a variable . In addition , no systematic research effort has examined these variables in combination ( task complexity , and transparency , deﬁned as the visibility of individual and team preferences ) . Similar to the ﬁndings in Huang and Li ( 2007 ) , we need to also identify whether a relationship may exist among variables that affect decision making , such as visibility of ratings of decision items and task complexity . There may well be an interaction such that for complex tasks involving many pieces of infor - mation , automatic display of preference voting would be especially helpful in encouraging group members to recon - sider their preferences and thus helping them to make better decisions . A systematic examination of these issues in the context of a GDSS - supported meeting is important because both task complexity and preference changes have been shown to be signiﬁcant in non - GDSS settings when consid - ered separately ( Wood , 1986 ) . In a GDSS context , the impact of working on varying types of tasks has shown contradictory outcomes in affecting decision quality . For example , Mennecke , Valacich , and Wheeler ( 2000 ) expected that computer - mediated commu - nications would generate higher quality decisions in intel - lective tasks ( those with a correct answer ) in a shorter time , whereas their study showed that face - to - face groups reached higher quality decisions in a shorter time . Because GDSS tools offer the possibility to display preferences systemati - cally and completely , and thus to indirectly encourage pref - erence changes through transparency , it is important to revisit the impact of task complexity and visibility in the still undecided debate on the effectiveness of GDSS tools on efﬁcient decision making . To deﬁne these issues more fully , the next section includes a review of the literature , the hypotheses and research question to be examined in this article . Following this , the results are reported , and the article concludes with a discussion of the ﬁndings and suggestions for future research . 2 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi Prior Research and Hypotheses Earlier studies on team decision making have shown that team members tend to be reluctant to disconﬁrm their initial preferences during team discussions ( Toma & Butera , 2009 ) . For example , biased information recall favored the initial preference of team members in a study that sought to ﬁnd previously unidentiﬁed factors related to the discovery of hidden proﬁles ( Lightle , Kagel , & Arkes , 2009 ) . Simi - larly , studies have shown that hidden proﬁles are hardly ever solved , as a result of the persistence of individual prediscus - sion preferences ( Greitemeyer & Schulz - Hardt , 2003 ) . Such persistence of original opinions is generally perceived as one of the reasons why group decision making is not as effective as initially thought . In both face - to - face and GDSS - based team activities , several studies using hidden proﬁle tasks have found that although a team will converge on a decision , team members will mostly continue to share common infor - mation already known to many participants rather than sharing unique information possessed by individuals ( A . R . Dennis , 1996b ; Hightower & Sayeed , 1995 ; Todd & Benbasat , 1992 ) . In one study , although GDSS teams were found to share more information than face - to - face groups , the pieces of information shared were still prevalently common or partially known information , rather than the unique pieces on information that were essential to good decision making . In addition , the GDSS group members seemed to persist more on their original preferences ( Vathanophas & Liang , 2007 ) . Social motivation has also been offered to explain behav - ioral considerations to exchange information during team discussion ( A . R . Dennis , 1996a ) . Participants in a team discussion are often motivated to exchange information that defends or supports their initial preference ( Stasser & Titus , 1985 ) . At the same time , participants may fear receiving a negative evaluation of their input , and agree with the team decision during discussion , enabling reaching a consensus . Nevertheless , they hold onto their preference after the dis - cussion ( Diehl & Stroebe , 1987 ; Lamm & Trommsdorff , 1973 ) . The ﬁndings of these prior studies guide the research question in this computer - mediated discussion setting . Speciﬁcally : Research Question : RQ : In computer - supported team decision making , to what extent are preference changes affected by ratings visibility and task complexity ? Preference Changes Preference changes during team discussions have been attributed to social and behavioral characteristics that shape how individuals interact with information ( e . g . , De Vries , Van Den Hoof , & De Ridder , 2006 ; Fulk , Heino , Flanagin , Monge , & Bar , 2004 ) . Normative inﬂuence theory , also referred to as social comparison theory , offers an explana - tion for why information may not be fully exchanged in a team setting . The theory stipulates that team members may be socially motivated to conform to others’ ideas to preserve a favorable self - presentation ( Myers & Lamm , 1976 ) . This motivation may suggest a change in team members’ initial preference to more closely match that of the others , either through coercion from others or choice by the individual team member ( Hackman & Kaplan , 1974 ) . Information inﬂuence theory posits that individuals change their preferences when they cognitively process factual information available to them ( Shaw , 1981 ) . When individuals working in a team are introduced to new infor - mation from others , they tend to consider this information in light of their existing information , which might result in a change in preference ( Burnstein & Vinokur , 1973 ) . Because in a GDSS setting , teams are able to access more informa - tion and such information is retrievable during the discus - sion , it is reasonable to expect that individuals may be more likely to change their initial preferences based on their eased access to information and additional information processing and retrieval features ( Vathanophas & Liang , 2007 ) . Based on the explanations from normative inﬂuence theory ( social comparison theory ) and information inﬂuence theory , it is established that participants engaging in a team discussion to solve a problem are likely to experience a change in their preferences both in favor of the team deci - sion as well as to adjust their mental models after the dis - cussion ( Kelly & Karau , 1999 ; Winquist & Larson , 1998 ) . Based on these studies , which show consistent results both in face - to - face and GDSS settings , it is expected that team members will tend to agree on the team decision after dis - cussion . However , conﬁrming this outcome within the context of a GDSS system that supports transparency , ano - nymity , and parallel discussions to support complex tasks , leads us to the ﬁrst set of general hypotheses : Hypothesis 1a : There will be a change in preferences between team members’ initial individual preferences and the team decision after discussion . Hypothesis 1b : There will be a change in team members’ individual preferences when comparing their prediscussion preferences to postdiscussion preferences . Though it is expected based on studies of face - to - face groups and GDSS groups solving hidden proﬁle tasks that there will be such preference changes in favor of group consensus ( Huang and Li , 2007 ) , it is important to conﬁrm that these changes occur in the GDSS context of this study , which uses transparency and task complexity , to establish a foundation for the subsequent analyses . If there are no sig - niﬁcant preference changes , then we will not be able to test our subsequent hypotheses of how transparency of the pref - erence ratings and complexity of the task affect such changes . Group Decision Support Systems The use of group decision support systems ( GDSS ) to mediate team discussion processes has been found to be positively associated with effective information exchange JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 3 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi ( e . g . , A . R . Dennis , 1996a ; Greitemeyer & Schulz - Hardt , 2003 ; Toma & Butera , 2009 ; Winquist & Larson , 1998 ) . Dennis ( 1996a ) investigated teams solving a hidden proﬁle task and found that teams that used GDSS exchanged 50 % more information than non - GDSS teams , providing sufﬁ - cient information to enable them to identify the optimal decision . However , only one of the GDSS teams in the study came to the optimal decision , putting into question the way the GDSS was used ( A . R . Dennis , 1996a ) . Prior studies report that members in GDSS teams tend to experience a strong preference shift toward the team con - sensus decision ( Lam & Schaubroeck , 2000 ) , possibly based on normative inﬂuences ( such as social comparison theory ) . A study that explored the effect of information presentation on negotiation processes and outcomes in groups shows that graphical information presentation ( i . e . , displaying feed - back ) supports integrative behavior among team members ( Gettinger , Koeszegi , & Schoop , 2012 ) . In this study , we use the ﬁndings about the positive inﬂuence of displaying feed - back such as rating preferences to affect the design of the GDSS . Because the visibility of preference ratings appears to be a key aspect of GDSS that affects the probability of preference changes among group members , the GDSS system can display ratings and rankings of each team par - ticipant and make this information accessible to others in selected study conditions . Thus , one of the variables that we manipulated in this experiment is whether team members were able to view the preferences of the others at the three points in time when preferences were recorded ( pre discus - sion , as a team decision after discussion , and post , the individual preference ratings and rankings after the discus - sion and decision ) . Based on ﬁndings from previous research , it is expected that participants who are able to see other team members’ preference ratings would be more likely to change their preference toward the team consensus after discussion . Thus it is hypothesized : Hypothesis 2a : Preference changes will be larger for team members that are able to view other team members’ ratings compared to those that are unable to view others’ ratings when comparing individual prediscussion preferences with the team decision after discussion . If the change just described were conﬁrmed in the context of this study , we would expect that the impact of visibility might extend beyond the traditional change between indi - vidual and team preference . It may also affect change in individual preferences before and after discussion . That is , participants who see and read the rationale or arguments of other decision makers may be inﬂuenced to change their opinion by the additional information received and the extended information retrieval and processing time that the tool offers . Thus , we also hypothesize : Hypothesis 2b : Preference changes will be larger for team members who are able to view other team members’ ratings compared to those that are unable to view others’ ratings when comparing individual prediscussion preferences to postdiscussion preferences . Task Complexity Task complexity has been found to be “one of the most essential factors that affect task performance , ” as observed in psychological experiments , organizational studies , and information - seeking studies ( Byström & Järvelin , 1995 , p . 192 ) . Task complexity is multidimensional , with the litera - ture suggesting several task characteristics that determine it , including repetitivity , analyzability , a priori determinability , the number of alternative paths of task performance , uncer - tainties between performance and goals , cognitive and skill requirements , and number of inputs ( ibid . , p . 193 ; Campbell , 1988 ) . In an information - seeking ﬁeld study using diary accounts of actual information - seeking and retrieval behav - ior by individuals , Byström and Järvelin ( 1995 ) used ﬁve categories of tasks performed by the subjects as part of their jobs , ranging from “automatic” information - processing tasks that could be done by a robot , through “genuine deci - sion tasks” that are unexpected , new and unstructured , and found that the more complex types of tasks resulted in more information seeking and information retrieval , and from dif - ferent types of sources . Similarly , Vakkari ( 1999 ) found that individual information - retrieval activities are related to the complexity of the problem at hand . Payne ( 1976 ) deﬁned task complexity as a function of both the number of alternatives facing the decision maker and the number of attributes on which each alternative was compared . Steinmann ( 1976 ) suggested seven sources of complexity , including number of cues . In the context of group decision making , task features that have been explored include task demonstrability or the number of decision alternatives ( Wittenbaum , Hollingshead , & Botero , 2004 ) . Task demonstrability is deﬁned as the extent to which the decision task is solvable ( i . e . , intellec - tive ) or requires the judgment call of team members ( i . e . , judgmental ) ( Laughlin , 1980 ) . Studies have found that team members tend to exchange more information when solving intellective tasks compared to judgmental tasks ( Stasser & Stewart , 1992 ) . Other related studies have also shown that ranking decision alternatives before making decisions inﬂuences information exchange during team discussion ( Hollingshead , 1996b ) . In practice , the load of information that teams in organi - zations are exposed to may affect their performance ( Rutkowski & Saunders , 2010 ) . For instance , it has been noted that information overload , a state in which informa - tion processing capabilities and the information loads encountered are mismatched , causes a reduction in informa - tion processing ( M . Turoff , Chumer , van de Walle , & Yao , 2004 ; M . Turoff & Hiltz , 2009 ) . Hence , when working on complex tasks , individuals whose information - processing capabilities are mismatched because of the overload , might be less likely to use all pieces of information for lack of effective processing capabilities . In these complex tasks , initial preferences might have been set without considering all of the information , working with a team through GDSS - supported exchanges and discussion might then lead to more 4 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi changes in complex tasks , as more cues are processed mul - tiple times within the discussion . It is therefore vital to explore how the complexity of tasks is related to the type of GDSS tool and how preferences change during team discussions . It is reasonable to expect that task com - plexity may inﬂuence the information - seeking behaviors of individuals who , when dealing with a high number of alter - natives and many pieces of information , may have made individual decisions with more limited information and , therefore , may be more prone to change their preferences after exchanging and reviewing information in the GDSS or reviewing preferences of other group members . Thus , we hypothesize : Hypothesis 3a : Preference changes will be larger for team members working on the complex task than for those working on the simple task , when comparing the individual prediscussion preference to the team decision after the team discussion . Hypothesis 3b : Preference changes will be larger for team members working on the complex task than those working on the simple task , when comparing the individual prediscus - sion preference to the individual postdiscussion preference after the team discussion . Wood and Nosek ( 1994 ) found that as task complexity increases , GDSS groups achieve signiﬁcantly higher outcome quality when compared to face - to - face groups . In other words , GDSS support seems to be more helpful when tasks are more complex . Though there have been no prior studies of preference changes as affected by task complexity and visibility of group members’ ratings and ranking , based on expectations from information overload impact , we expect that the more complex the task in terms of the amount of information available to team members , the more valuable and necessary it will be to have a GDSS tool to help members identify and keep track of decision preferences . More complex tasks involve more factors , more information , and / or more uncertainty ; without support tools and display / visibility of summary ratings and rankings , information overload may set in and group members may not be able to keep track of everything . Thus , we hypothesize : Hypothesis 4a : There will be an interaction effect between visibility of preference ratings and task complexity such that the preference change between the individual prediscussion and team decision preference will be greater for the more complex task in the visible condition . Based on the expectations in the earlier hypotheses that such changes may also extend to individual preference changes both in the case of visibility of ratings and task complexity , we also hypothesize : Hypothesis 4b : There will be an interaction effect between visibility of preference ratings and task complexity such that the preference change between the individual prediscussion and individual postdiscussion preference will be greater for the more complex task in the visible condition Method Participants All participants were graduate students with an average working experience of 8 years . Participants were taking management classes in an AACSB - accredited business school at a large university on the East coast of United States . They were assigned in a controlled form to four - person teams based on their availability as well as consid - erations of balancing the team composition to avoid potential confounding effects . For instance , participants from the same class were not assigned to the same group , and if possible , teams with only males or females were avoided . There were a total of 88 participants , in 22 groups , working on two different tasks . About 33 % were above 30 years old and the rest were in the 21 – 30 year old range ; 71 % were male . About 73 % of the participants indicated that they have worked in an information technology ( IT ) - related posi - tion for up to 2 years , 15 % for about 3 – 5 years , and the remaining 11 % for more than 5 years . Tasks In line with several previous experiments where task complexity was manipulated , the number of information pieces available to team members to process is used as a measure for the complexity of task in this study ( Wood , 1986 ) ; our more complex task has twice as many attributes on which the alternatives are compared , and thus twice as many pieces of information as the simple task . Speciﬁcally , the tasks used in this study consisted of “hiring” and “ﬁring” decisions that had to be made based on limited information available to the team . The decisions involved IT positions . In each case , there were three candidates ( e . g . , Amy , Bob , and Chris ) and various pieces of information about each of these candidates . For the simpler “hiring” task ( task 1 ) , there were eight pieces of information on each candidate ( 24 total ) , and for the more complex “ﬁring” task ( task 2 ) , there were 16 for each ( 48 total ) . The tasks are shown in the Appendix A , along with an example of the actual pieces of information distributed among the four - person team members ( the example is for the simpler hiring task ) . Repeated measures were used , with each team working on each of the two tasks . The order of task was counterbal - anced , that is , each task was ﬁrst or second for half of the teams . A hidden proﬁle task approach was used . For instance , in the simpler task , which contained eight pieces of infor - mation per candidate , the information was distributed such that all members had three of the characteristics or categories of information in Table A1 in the Appendix A ( referred to in the literature on hidden proﬁle tasks as “shared” information ) ; only one member had the informa - tion for each of four categories ( referred to as “unshared” information ) ; and two of the four had the information on the remaining category ( referred to as “partially shared” information ) . JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 5 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi Expert Ratings and Pilot Studies Eight subject matter experts ( SMEs ) ( ﬁve males , three females ) assessed reliability and validity of the initial set of tasks , rated the importance of each category of infor - mation for each task , and ranked candidates based on all the information for each case . The experts were chosen based on their record in an IT - related capacity in which they served or were currently serving . The average expe - rience of each subject matter expert in IT - related capacity was 14 . 5 years . The Cohen’s kappa ( 1960 ) statistic was used to determine agreement among the eight subject matter experts ( ≥ 0 . 7 recommended ) . There was a high level of agreement ( Cohen’s kappa = 0 . 91 ) among SMEs in their ranking of candidates , suggesting that individuals are likely to agree when all the information required for making the decisions in these tasks is provided to them . Because there was a high level of agreement among the experts on the choice of candidates for the two tasks , they can be considered “intellective” type tasks ( McGrath , 1984 ) , with an optimal solution . Several pilot studies were conducted prior to the main experiment , to test and reﬁne the tasks , instructions , procedures , questionnaires , and software . Experimental Design A controlled laboratory experiment employing a 2 ( vis - ibility of preference ratings : visible vs . invisible ) by 2 ( task complexity : complex vs . simple ) factorial design was used . Because we hypothesized an interaction between the two variables , this dictated the factorial design . For this article , we are speciﬁcally interested in analyzing the effects of task complexity on preference shifts . We are also interested in the impact of the GDSS tool that controls whether preference ratings are transparent to other team members before dis - cussion through being made visible and accessible to all participants . The GDSS Tool and Manipulation of Visibility The group support system developed for this research is called Team Information Exchange System ( TIES ) . Anonymity is maintained in this study by randomly assign - ing a pseudo - name ( P1 , P2 , P3 , and P4 ) to participants , with team members knowing that P1 is the team leader , whose leadership role determination will be explained in the Pro - cedure section . In order to avoid trust issues during discus - sion , team members meet and agree on the group leader before going into discussion . The use of a team leader in a GDSS setting is strongly supported by studies such as Vathanophas and Liang ( 2007 ) who , based on the positive effect of team - role assignments in face - to - face teams , dem - onstrated that in GDSS teams the assignment of a leader led to both sharing and retaining more unique information after the team discussion . The full TIES system also enables teams to rate or rank items on a list , as well as state reasons for their votes . In this study , participants chose from a list of three decision alternatives and used a rank ordering approach to vote before the group discussion , and then after , at the conclu - sion of the group discussion . For the list of types of pieces of information , a 7 - point Likert scale of importance of each information category was provided where 1 is least important and 7 is most important . Both the discussion window and a rating or ranking window were opened on the screen . TIES , which is simple to learn , is designed for discussing a set of alternatives . It is menu driven with all the menu items needed for this study on the navi - gation bar . Skype chat , an electronic communication system with parallelism and group memory was a good ﬁt for the task and useful for conducting the discussion of the alternatives as it enables structuring communication as suggested in prior studies . For example , one study ( Reid & Levy , 2008 ) reported that lack of structuring ( i . e . , running text instead of tallying pieces of information describing each alternative ) could make it more difﬁcult for partici - pants to relate the decision - relevant pieces of information to each other . Related to this , it has been shown ( Reis , Sheldon , Gable , Roscoe , & Ryan , 2000 ) that preference - consistent information processing is stronger if information is presented sequentially as compared to simultaneously , and a discussion is a prototype of a sequential information presentation format . Skype chat permits teams to deﬁne a series of topics in an outline structure and enter comments about each topic . For this study , the discussion topics were structured and participants were not allowed to create new topics . To enter or read comments , partici - pants clicked on the topic they wished to discuss and joined the conversation . This opened a screen that dis - played all comments made by others in a scrollable window on the top of the screen , with a window for enter - ing comments on the bottom . Figure 1 is a screenshot of the discussion board that allowed participants to discuss each candidate . Because TIES is easy to use , participants received only about 10 minutes of training on how to use the GDSS ; they each sent at least one practice message and voted on choice alternatives in a practice problem before beginning to use it for the experiment ( see Figures 2 – 5 ) . This practice entailed ranking dessert choices ( apple pie , chocolate cake , fresh fruit salad ) based on previously rated nutritional information characteristics or categories ( gluten content , quantity in stock , calorie content , cost per serving , sugar content ) . Figure 2 shows the interface for the rating module that allows individual participants to rate charac - teristics on a Likert - type scale . This interface is in the invisible condition where participants are not able to see how other team members rate items . Figure 3 shows the same rating module interface as in Figure 2 , in the visible condition mode , which allows participants to view how other team members rate items in real time . Figures 4 and 5 show the interface for the ranking module for the invis - ible and visible mode , respectively . 6 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi Procedure and Measures To begin the experiment , participants ﬁlled out a consent form , after which they were trained on how to use the tools designed for the study by participating in the “dessert” prac - tice case very similar to the experimental tasks . Team members were asked to select the team coordinator after a brief introduction , in line with Shelley’s ( 1960 ) ﬁnding that having a team leader has a positive effect on team performance only when the members of the team accept the individual as their leader . Other positions in the team were randomly assigned to the rest of the team members . After the training task , the team had refreshments together ; this infor - mal interaction period assured at least a minimal level of group cohesion before the sessions . Participants were seated in four separate cubicles with a PC workstation such that they were unable to see or speak to other team members . Communication was done via instant messaging ( Skype ) and the GDSS tool . Teams were told that they would par - ticipate in two tasks . Teams were then randomly assigned a ﬁrst task , followed by the second task . In each task , there were two stages and three steps . In the ﬁrst stage ( illustrated in Figures 2 and 3 ) , participants worked independently to rate information characteristics as either important or less important ( step 1 ) , then participants worked as a team to discuss and rate information character - istics as either important or less important ( step 2 ) . Finally , participants re - rated information characteristics as either important or less important after team discussion ( step 3 ) . The same number of steps was repeated for stage 2 ( illus - trated in Figures 4 and 5 ) , only in this stage , participants ranked candidates ( decision alternatives ) rather than rating information characteristics . At the end of each task , partici - pants ﬁlled out a postcase questionnaire . All the participants were debriefed at the end of the experiment and thanked for participating . Participants’ preference ratings across the steps consti - tute the data analyzed in this article . To measure preference change in individual ratings before and after discussion , ratings from steps 1 and 3 were compared , whereas to compare preference changes between an individual and the group , ratings from steps 1 and 2 were compared . The same team preference ratings were recorded for each team member in step 2 because it was a unanimous decision by the team . For instance , suppose a team participant rated an applicant’s GPA as 4 before the team discussion ( A ) and during the team discussion , the team decided the appropriate rating was 6 ( B ) , and he later decided to change his indi - vidual rating to 3 after the team discussion ( C ) , the prefer - ence change before - team for that item ( i . e . , GPA ) would be ( A - B = 4 − 6 = − 2 ) , and the preference change before - after would be ( A - C = 4 − 3 = 1 ) . Because preference changes could be positive for some items and negative for others , the absolute difference in ratings was therefore used for calcu - lating preference changes in this study ; so in the example just given , preference changes were recorded as 2 and 1 , respectively for preteam and prepost changes . Similarly , say ratings for programming skills for the same participants were as follows ; A = 3 , B = 7 , and C = 6 , and preference changes were stored as 4 and 3 for preteam and prepost ratings , respectively . The average preteam preference change for both items would then be ( 2 + 4 ) / 2 = 3 and the average prepost preference change would be ( 1 + 3 ) / 2 = 2 . Table 1 presents a summary of the manipulation or measures of the variables described in Method . FIG . 1 . Discussion interface of Team Information Exchange System . [ Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue , which is available at wileyonlinelibrary . com . ] FIG . 2 . Individual rating interface of Team Information Exchange System . [ Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue , which is available at wileyonlinelibrary . com . ] JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 7 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi Data Analysis and Results Three different analyses were conducted to test the hypotheses proposed in this article . First , a paired t - test was used to test the ﬁrst set of hypotheses ; H1a and H1b . A paired t - test is suitable because it allows the comparison of a sample’s scores before and after an intervention as is commonly performed in human - computer interaction studies ( Tang , Owen , Biocca , & Mou , 2003 ) . Comparison is FIG . 3 . Group rating interface of Team Information Exchange System . [ Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue , which is available at wileyonlinelibrary . com . ] FIG . 4 . Individual ranking interface of Team Information Exchange System . [ Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue , which is available at wileyonlinelibrary . com . ] 8 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi performed by subtracting the mean after an intervention from the mean before an intervention . In the case of this study , preference ratings before team discussions ( A ) are compared with team ratings ( B ) and individual preference ratings after the team discussion ( C ) across both visibility and task complexity conditions . Signiﬁcance of the paired t - test with 95 % conﬁdence was assessed using 1 - tailed sig - niﬁcance level ( t - statistic > 0 . 98 ) as the studied changes in preference ratings or rankings are not in an expected direc - tion and we are primarily concerned with the amount of change rather than the optimal solution ( whether the change is in a direction closer to the optimal solution ) . Second , analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) was used to test Hypotheses 2a , 2b , 3a , and 3b . ANOVA was chosen because it is useful in explaining the variability in preference changes as a function of the experimental variables ( visible or not visible ; complex or simple ) . Third , analysis of cova - riance ( ANCOVA ) was used to test the interaction effects in Hypotheses 4a and 4b . ANCOVA was used to identify the impact of visibility as a covariate of complexity when com - paring preference changes . Hypothesis Testing Hypothesis 1a predicted a change in preferences between individuals and the team decision after the discussion and Hypothesis 1b predicted a change in individual preferences between prediscussion and postdiscussion preferences . The paired t - test for both hypotheses indicate a signiﬁcant result for H1a , t ( 2519 ) = 1 . 93 , p < 0 . 001 and H1b , t ( 2519 ) = 1 . 80 , p < 0 . 001 , therefore providing support for H1a and H1b . Support for H1a and H1b provide the validation needed to proceed with other hypotheses . Hypothesis 2a predicted that preference changes between team members’ prediscussion ratings and the team ratings would be greater for teams in the visible condition compared to teams in the invisible condition . A two - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) yielded a main effect for the visibility condition , F ( 1 , 2519 ) = 45 . 99 , p < 0 . 001 , such that the mean preference change between team members’ prediscussion ratings and team ratings was signiﬁcantly greater for teams in the visible condition ( M = 1 . 18 , SD = 1 . 23 ) than for those in the invisible condition ( M = 0 . 74 , SD = 0 . 78 ) . Hypothesis 2b predicted that preference changes between team members’ prediscussion and postdiscussion ratings would be different for teams in the visible condition compared to FIG . 5 . Group ranking interface of Team Information Exchange System . [ Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue , which is available at wileyonlinelibrary . com . ] TABLE 1 . Summary of study measures . Measure Description Operationalization Task complexity The number ( n ) of information cues ( p ) required for solving each task For simple task , n = p For complex task , n = 2 p Visibility ( transparency ) The ability for team members to view other team members’ ratings before , during , and after team discussion Invisible = team members are unable to view other members’ ratings Visible = team members are able to view other members’ ratings Preferencechange Measures team members’ preference ratings before team discussion ( A ) , during team discussion ( B ) , and after team discussion ( C ) Δ ( A - B ) Δ ( A - C ) JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 9 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi those in the invisible condition . A two - way ANOVA yielded a main effect for the visibility condition , F ( 1 , 2519 ) = 29 . 60 , p < 0 . 001 , such that the mean preference change between team members’ prediscussion and postdiscussion ratings was signiﬁcantly greater for teams in the visible condition ( M = 0 . 99 , SD = 1 . 14 ) than for those in the invisible condi - tion ( M = 0 . 66 , SD = 0 . 77 ) . Therefore both Hypotheses 2a and 2b were supported . Finding support for both hypotheses suggests that transparency ( visibility of other team members’ preference ratings ) has an effect on preference changes during team discussions and the group decision - making process in a computer - mediated environment . The next set of hypotheses tests for the effect of task complexity on preference changes . Hypotheses 3a and 3b posit that there will be greater preference changes between individuals’ prediscussion ratings and team ratings ( H3a ) as well as between individuals’ pre - and postdiscussion ratings ( H3b ) for teams working on the complex task compared to those working on the simple task . A two - way ANOVA yielded a main effect for the task complexity condition , F ( 1 , 2519 ) = 11 . 97 , p = 0 . 001 , such that the mean preference change between team members’ prediscussion ratings and team ratings was signiﬁcantly greater for teams working on the complex task ( M = 1 . 19 , SD = 1 . 24 ) than for those working on the simple task ( M = 0 . 92 , SD = 1 . 02 ) . Similarly for H3b , a two - way ANOVA yielded a main effect for the task complexity condition , F ( 1 , 2519 ) = 6 . 89 , p = 0 . 009 , such that the mean preference change between team members’ prediscussion and postdiscussion ratings was sig - niﬁcantly greater for teams working on the complex task ( M = 1 . 00 , SD = 1 . 12 ) than for those working on the simple task ( M = 0 . 80 , SD = 1 . 01 ) . Hypotheses 3a and 3b were therefore supported . The higher magnitude of preference changes for teams working on the complex task compared to the simple task suggests that team members learned more about the task information during team discussion so as to change their initial and perhaps incomplete understanding of the importance of the information cues . Finally , the interaction effect of transparency ( visibility ) and task complexity is examined on preference changes during team discussion . Hypothesis 4a posited that the inter - action between the visibility of preference ratings ( transpar - ency ) and task complexity would be such that the change between the individual prediscussion and team decision preference will be greater in the visible condition for the more complex task . A one - way analysis of covariance ( ANCOVA ) was conducted to determine a statistically sig - niﬁcant interaction effect of visibility and task complexity on changes between team members’ prediscussion ratings and team ratings . The result indicates that there is a signiﬁ - cant interaction effect of visibility and task complexity on preference changes between team members’ prediscussion ratings and team ratings , F ( 2 , 2519 ) = 37 . 92 , p < 0 . 001 , such that the effect of visibility on preference change is stronger in more complex tasks ( M = 1 . 27 , SD = 1 . 29 ) compared to the simpler tasks ( M = 1 . 01 , SD = 1 . 09 ) , ( see Figure A1 ) . Hence , Hypothesis 4a is supported . Hypothesis 4b predicted that there would be a combined inﬂuence on individual preferences from visibility of preference ratings and com - plexity of the task such that there will be a greater preference change between the individual prediscussion and individual postdiscussion preference . A one - way ANCOVA was con - ducted to determine if there is a statistically signiﬁcant inter - action effect of visibility and task complexity on changes between team members’ prediscussion and postdiscussion ratings . The result indicates that there is a signiﬁcant inter - action effect of visibility and task complexity on preference changes between team members’ prediscussion ratings and postdiscussion ratings , F ( 2 , 2519 ) = 24 . 09 , p < 0 . 001 , such that the effect of visibility on preference changes is stronger in more complex tasks ( M = 1 . 06 , SD = 1 . 17 ) compared to the simpler tasks ( M = 0 . 86 , SD = 1 . 09 ) , ( see Figure A2 ) . This result provides empirical support for Hypothesis 4b . A summary of the hypotheses tested is presented in Table 2 . 1 Based on the conﬁrmation of all the hypotheses posited in this study , implications of the study results will be discussed in the following section . Discussion This study explored the impacts of a visibility feature implemented in a GDSS and task complexity on hypoth - esized changes in participants’ preferences , comparing before , during ( team ) , and after team discussions . All the hypotheses tested were supported , providing answers to the research question that this study sought to investigate . The support of Hypotheses 1a and 1b conﬁrms prior research ﬁndings that GDSS - supported teams tend to shift their preference to match that of the team decision ( Lam & Schaubroeck , 2000 ) . In addition to conﬁrming prior research , the results show that changes in individual prefer - ences before and after team discussion are signiﬁcant . This means that individuals tend to adjust their original opinion on ideas , after discussing them with other team members in a computer - supported cooperative communication environ - ment . It may be concluded that GDSS therefore helps team members with the opportunity to process information exchanged in great detail to the extent that they change their initial preferences after team discussions . In addition to the conﬁrmatory results presented , there are three key ﬁndings from this study . First , this research found support for the impact of the visibility of team members’ ratings on changes in their preferences . The results show that changes between individual prediscussion and team preference in the visible condition are larger than those in the invisible condition . Furthermore , on the com - parison between team members’ pre - and postdiscussion preference changes , teams in the visible condition show a larger difference compared to those in the invisible condi - tion . One may interpret these results to mean that team 1 The tables of results for the hypotheses tests are presented in the Appendix B . 10 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi members that are able to view others’ ratings before , during , and after team discussions get to learn more about the task information during discussion and therefore change their opinion as a result . Second , drawing on theory and prior evidence in the literature , this study investigated the inﬂuence of task complexity on team members’ preference changes . That is , we examined how one’s preferences may change as a result of working on either a simple or complex task . The results indicate that changes between team members’ pre - discussion preferences and team preferences are larger when individuals are working on complex tasks compared to when working on simple tasks . Similarly , we found that for the visible condition , changes between team members’ prediscussion and postdiscussion preferences are larger when individuals are working on complex tasks compared to when working on simple tasks . Together , these results conﬁrm our prediction that when individuals are working on complex tasks , they are more likely to be overloaded and not process all the information effectively . Hence , they ( team members working on complex tasks ) get to learn about a large amount of new information during the team discussion and therefore update their preferences more than their counterparts [ team members working on simple tasks ] . As noted in prior research ( Wood , 1986 ) , simple tasks are easier to analyze compared to complex tasks that may need to be broken down into simpler tasks for better analysis and processing . While these results are helpful , it is important to know how GDSS may be useful for breaking down complex tasks in order to improve the team decision - making process , which leads to the third key ﬁnding in this study . We exam - ined the interaction effect of visibility and task complexity on preference changes among team members and found that the magnitude of preference changes between teams that were able to see other team members’ ratings ( i . e . , between visible and invisible conditions ) , was signiﬁcantly larger in the visible condition . These results suggest that the use of TABLE 2 . Summary of hypothesis testing for study variables . Hypothesis ( H ) Test Test result H supported ? H1a There will be a change in preferences between team members’ initial individual preferences and the team decision after discussion t - test ( Table A2 ) t ( 2519 ) = 1 . 93 , p < 0 . 05 Yes H1b There will be a change in team members’ individual preferences when comparing their prediscussion preferences to postdiscussion preferences t - test ( Table A2 ) t ( 2519 ) = 1 . 80 , p < 0 . 05 Yes H2a Preference changes will be larger for team members that are able to view other team members’ ratings compared to those that are unable to view others’ ratings when comparing individual prediscussion preferences with the team decision after discussion . ANOVA ( Tables A3 / A5 ) F ( 1 , 2519 ) = 45 . 99 , p < 0 . 001 Yes H2b Preference changes will be larger for team members that are able to view other team members’ ratings compared to those that are unable to view others’ ratings when comparing individual prediscussion preferences to postdiscussion preferences . ANOVA ( Tables A4 / A5 ) F ( 1 , 2519 ) = 29 . 60 , p < 0 . 001 Yes H3a Preference changes will be larger for team members working on the complex task than for those working on the simple task , when comparing the individual prediscussion preference to the team decision after the team discussion . ANOVA ( Tables A3 / A6 ) F ( 1 , 2519 ) = 11 . 97 , p = . 001 Yes H3b Preference changes will be larger for team members working on the complex task than those working on the simple task , when comparing the individual prediscussion preference to the individual postdiscussion preference after the team discussion . ANOVA ( Tables A4 / A6 ) F ( 1 , 2519 ) = 6 . 89 , p = 0 . 009 Yes H4a There will be an interaction effect between visibility of preference ratings and task complexity such that the preference change between the individual prediscussion and team decision preference will be greater for the more complex task in the visible condition . ANCOVA ( Table A7 ) F ( 2 , 2519 ) = 37 . 92 , p < 0 . 001 Yes H4b There will be an interaction effect between visibility of preference ratings and task complexity such that the preference change between the individual prediscussion and individual postdiscussion preference will be greater for the more complex task in the visible condition ANCOVA ( Table A8 ) F ( 2 , 2519 ) = 24 . 09 , p < 0 . 001 Yes JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 11 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi GDSS that supports transparency promotes effective infor - mation processing during group decision making and team discussions . Limitations This study suffers from the limitations of laboratory experiments ( McGrath , 1984 ) such as the inability to per - fectly represent natural tasks . For instance , we were unable to examine effects beyond the laboratory conditions , such as the inﬂuence of uncertainty associated with both the information possessed and decision alternative selected by participants on changes in their preferences . The literature suggests that such variables might be important . Secondly , as a laboratory experiment using student subjects who had not previously worked together as a team , the generalizability to organizational teams is unknown . There may be contextual factors ( e . g . , domain and expertise of participants different from the proﬁles of those making hiring and ﬁring decisions in organizations ) that could affect how preference changes occur in teams , which may result in different ﬁndings from those presented in this study . Other limitations may be related to the interaction effects of the instrument or tool used . We manipulated how the GDSS was used ( visible or not visible preferences ) but we did not compare this GDSS to other systems . Hence , we are not able to fully determine the impact of the speciﬁc GDSS conﬁguration or features . Another limitation is related to the use of a quasi - experiment , where the assignment of partici - pants to a team was not random , but stratiﬁed ( and the criteria for such stratiﬁcation may introduce other biases ) . Finally , it should be noted that this experiment focuses only on a “hidden proﬁle” situation where none of the partici - pants had all of the information needed for an optimal deci - sion , before information exchange . The results may be different in situations where the majority of individuals have all of the needed information to begin with . Last , although the context of this study was at the group level , statistical analyses were generally conducted at the individual level without looking at changes within speciﬁc groups ( i . e . , controlling for preference changes by group ) . This approach was linked to the fact that the dependent variable explored ( preference changes ) was captured at the individual level ( changes of the individual preference mea - sured against the group preference and change to individual preference measured against the same individual pre - and postgroup discussion ) . However , belonging to a speciﬁc group could have inﬂuenced ﬁnal preference changes . To capture whether belonging to a speciﬁc group has an impact , future studies should conduct additional analyses control - ling for group membership or type . Implications for Practice In practice , the effectiveness of team decision processes has become an increasingly important organizational concern , especially in an environment with a geographically dispersed and diverse work force ( Williams & O’Reilly , 1998 ) . Project managers need to ensure the adequate use of computer - supported communication to allow team members to express their preferences based on information emerging from an ongoing discourse . Proper information exchange and use is critical , for instance , in cross - functional teams where representatives of different organizational functions and expertise are com - bined to ensure diversity in knowledge and perspectives for effective decision making and problem solving ( Gruenfeld , Mannix , Williams , & Neale , 1996 ) . Understanding how GDSS can be used to provide transparency in the team discussions might be useful for organizations to utilize meeting times effectively , whereas achieving their objec - tives . So , if higher visibility generates a higher agreement on individual and team decisions , making individual and team preferences clearly visible may help organizations by increasing the efﬁciency and effectiveness of team decision making . Implications for Research The ﬁndings of the empirical analysis in this study pave the way for future research directions . For example , addi - tional research is needed to explore how changes in prefer - ences combined with task complexity might inﬂuence performance , whether measured in terms of exchange per - formance or outcome , in GDSS - supported team discussions . Did the team members actually make better decisions other than changing their mind ? Additional studies needed should explore the use of GDSS that allows team members to see other team members’ preferences in other domains . Prior research focused mainly on the dynamics of the distribution of information that impacts its exchange . Find - ings from this study suggest that additional research is needed to investigate and understand various ways in which GDSS can be designed to inﬂuence the cognitive consider - ations of individuals in teams to foster information process - ing during discussions . For example , recent research suggests that a graphical “dancing” display may be more inﬂuential than a table display to inﬂuence changes in pref - erences ( Gettinger et al . , 2012 ) . We do not really know how many pieces of information individuals and teams used when ﬁnalizing their preferences , and more insights on the optimal amount ( after which the quantity of information becomes too cumbersome ) may open up additional research areas . Conclusions and Contributions Transparency in GDSS and task complexity as they affect group decision making have been under - researched in the literature . This study found consistent inﬂuences of visibil - ity of ratings in GDSS and task complexity on preference changes by individuals working collaboratively . Findings from this study provide empirical evidence for the inﬂuence of transparency in GDSS and task complexity on informa - 12 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi tion exchange in teams , and especially in distributed teams . In addition , this study is the ﬁrst to demonstrate an interac - tion between task complexity and the provision of a GDSS tool that makes preference ratings and rankings visible to other team members . As such , this study contributes to the literature by providing insight into how task characteristics can interact with GDSS tools to inﬂuence information exchange in team information processing , and it shows that such exchange can impact individual preferences . Seeing the team preferences helps team members change their opinions and reach a consensus . In a few words , seeing is believing or , at least it fosters preference changes , especially when complex tasks are being worked on . Acknowledgments We thank our reviewers for their many helpful sugges - tions that improved this article . Thanks also to Drs . Jerry Fjermestad , Murray Turrof , Robert Briggs , and Koﬁ Andoh - Baidoo for their input and recommendations on earlier drafts of this manuscript . References Brodbeck , F . C . , Kerschreiter , R . , Mojzisch , A . , Frey , D . , & Schulz - Hardt , S . ( 2002 ) . The dissemination of critical unshared information in decision - making groups : The effect of prediscussion dissent . European Journal of Social Psychology , 32 ( 1 ) , 35 – 56 . Burnstein , E . , & Vinokur , A . ( 1973 ) . Testing two classes of theories about group induced shifts in individual choice . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 9 ( 2 ) , 123 – 137 . Byström , K . , & Järvelin , K . ( 1995 ) . Task complexity affects information seeking and use . Information processing & management , 31 ( 2 ) , 191 – 213 . Campbell , D . J . ( 1988 ) . Task complexity : A review and analysis . Academy of management review , 13 ( 1 ) , 40 – 52 . Cohen , J . ( 1960 ) . A coefﬁcient of agreement for nominal scales . Educa - tional and Psychological Measurement , 20 ( 1 ) , 37 – 46 . De Vries , R . E . , Van Den Hoof , B . , & De Ridder , J . A . ( 2006 ) . Explaining knowledge sharing : The role of team communication styles , job satisfac - tion , and performance beliefs . Communication Research , 33 ( 2 ) , 115 – 135 . Dennis , A . R . ( 1996a ) . Information exchange and use in group decision making : You can lead a group to information , but you can’t make it think . MIS Quarterly , 20 ( 4 ) , 433 – 457 . Dennis , A . R . ( 1996b ) . Information exchange and use in small group deci - sion making . Small Group Research , 27 ( 4 ) , 532 – 550 . Dennis , A . R . , Fuller , R . M . , & Valacich , J . S . ( 2008 ) . Media , tasks , and communication processes : A theory of media synchronicity . MIS Quar - terly , 32 ( 3 ) , 575 – 600 . Diehl , M . , & Stroebe , W . ( 1987 ) . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : Toward the solution of a riddle . Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 53 ( 3 ) , 497 – 509 . Fjermestad , J . , & Hiltz , S . R . ( 1999 , January ) . An assessment of group support systems research : results . In Systems Sciences , 1999 . HICSS - 32 . Proceedings of the 32ndAnnual Hawaii International Conference on ( pp . 8 – pp ) . IEEE . Fulk , J . , Heino , R . , Flanagin , A . , Monge , P . R . , & Bar , F . O . ( 2004 ) . Atest of the individual action model for organizational information commons . Organization Science , 15 ( 5 ) , 569 – 585 . Gettinger , J . , Koeszegi , S . T . , & Schoop , M . ( 2012 ) . Shall we dance ? —The effect of information presentations on negotiation processes and out - comes . Decision Support Systems , 53 ( 1 ) , 161 – 174 . Greitemeyer , T . , & Schulz - Hardt , S . ( 2003 ) . Preference - consistent evalua - tion of information in the hidden proﬁle paradigm : Beyond group - level explanations for the dominance of shared information in group decisions . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 84 ( 2 ) , 322 – 339 . Gruenfeld , D . H . , Mannix , E . A . , Williams , K . Y . , & Neale , M . A . ( 1996 ) . Group composition and decision - making : How member famil - iarity and information distribution affect process and performance . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 67 ( 1 ) , 1 – 15 . Hackman , J . R . , & Kaplan , R . E . ( 1974 ) . Interventions into group process : An approach to improving the effectiveness of groups . Decision Sci - ences , 5 ( 3 ) , 459 – 480 . Hightower , R . , & Sayeed , L . ( 1995 ) . The impact of computer mediated communication systems on biased group discussion . Computers in Human Behavior , 11 ( 1 ) , 33 – 44 . Hollingshead , A . B . ( 1996a ) . Information suppression and status persistence in group decision making : The effects of communication media . Human Communications Research , 23 ( 2 ) , 193 – 219 . Hollingshead , A . B . ( 1996b ) . The rank - order effect in group decision making . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 68 ( 3 ) , 181 – 193 . Huang , W . , & Li , D . ( 2007 ) . Opening up the black box in GSS research : explaining group decision outcome with group process . Computers in human behavior , 23 ( 1 ) , 58 – 78 . Kelly , J . R . , & Karau , S . J . ( 1999 ) . Group decision making : The effects of initial preferences and time pressure . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 25 ( 11 ) , 1342 – 1354 . Lam , S . S . K . , & Schaubroeck , J . ( 2000 ) . Improving group decisions by better pooling information : A comparative advantage of group decision support systems . Journal of Applied Psychology , 85 ( 4 ) , 565 – 573 . Lamm , H . , & Trommsdorff , G . ( 1973 ) . Group versus individual perfor - mance on tasks requiring ideational proﬁciency ( brainstorming ) : A review . European Journal of Social Psychology , 3 ( 4 ) , 361 – 388 . Laughlin , P . R . ( 1980 ) . Social combination processes of cooperative problem solving groups on verbal intellective tasks . Hillsdale , NJ : Law - rence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Lightle , J . P . , Kagel , J . H . , & Arkes , H . R . ( 2009 ) . Information exchange in Group decision making : The hidden proﬁle problem reconsidered . Man - agement Science , 55 ( 4 ) , 568 – 581 . McGrath , J . E . ( 1984 ) . Groups : Interaction and performance . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Mennecke , B . E . ( 1997 ) . Using group support systems to discover hidden proﬁles : An examination of the inﬂuence of group size and meeting structures on information sharing and decision quality . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 47 ( 3 ) , 387 – 405 . Mennecke , B . E . , Valacich , J . S . , & Wheeler , B . C . ( 2000 ) . The effects of media and task on user performance : A test of the task - media ﬁt hypoth - esis . Group Decision and Negotiation , 9 ( 6 ) , 507 – 529 . Mesmer - Magnus , J . R . , & DeChurch , L . A . ( 2009 ) . Information sharing and team performance : A meta - analysis . Journal of Applied Psychology , 94 ( 2 ) , 535 – 546 . Myers , D . G . , & Lamm , H . ( 1976 ) . The group polarization phenomenon . Psychological Bulletin , 83 ( 4 ) , 602 – 627 . Parks , C . D . , & Cowlin , R . ( 1995 ) . Group discussion as affected by number of alternatives and by a time limit . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 62 ( 3 ) , 267 – 275 . Payne , J . W . ( 1976 ) . Task complexity and contingent processing in decision making : An information search and protocol analysis . Organizational behavior and human performance , 16 ( 2 ) , 366 – 387 . Reid , M . , & Levy , Y . ( 2008 ) . Integrating trust and computer self - efﬁcacy with TAM : An empirical assessment of customers’ acceptance of banking information systems ( BIS ) in Jamaica . Journal of Internet Banking and Commerce , 12 ( 3 ) , 2008 – 2012 . Reis , H . T . , Sheldon , K . M . , Gable , S . L . , Roscoe , J . , & Ryan , R . M . ( 2000 ) . Daily well - being : The role of autonomy , competence , and relat - edness . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 26 ( 4 ) , 419 – 435 . JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 13 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi Rutkowski , A . F . , & Saunders , C . S . ( 2010 ) . Growing pains with information overload . Computer , 43 ( 6 ) , 94 – 96 . Shaw , M . ( 1981 ) . Group dynamics : The psychology of small group behav - ior ( 3rd ed . ) . New York : McGraw Hill . Shelley , H . P . ( 1960 ) . Status , consensus , leadership , and satisfaction with the group . Journal of Social Psychology , 51 ( 1 ) , 157 – 164 . Stasser , G . , & Stewart , D . ( 1992 ) . Discovery of hidden proﬁles by decision - making groups : Solving a problem versus making a judgment . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 63 ( 3 ) , 426 – 434 . Stasser , G . , & Titus , W . ( 1985 ) . Pooling of unshared information in group decision making : Biased information sampling during discussion . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 48 ( 6 ) , 1467 – 1478 . Stasser , G . , & Titus , W . ( 1987 ) . Effects of information load and percentage of shared information on the dissemination of unshared information during group discussion . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 53 ( 1 ) , 81 – 93 . Stasser , G . , Taylor , L . A . , & Hanna , C . ( 1989 ) . Information sampling in structured and unstructured discussions of three - and six - person groups . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 57 ( 1 ) , 67 – 78 . Stasser , G . , Stewart , D . D . , & Wittenbaum , G . M . ( 1995 ) . Expert roles and information exchange during discussion : The importance of knowing who knows what . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 31 ( 3 ) , 244 – 265 . Steinmann , D . O . ( 1976 ) . The effects of cognitive feedback and task com - plexity in multiple - cue probability learning . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 15 ( 2 ) , 168 – 179 . Tang , A . , Owen , C . , Biocca , F . , & Mou , W . ( 2003 ) . Comparative effective - ness of augmented reality in object assembly . Paper presented at the Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . Todd , P . , & Benbasat , I . ( 1992 ) . The use of information in decision making : An experimental investigation of the impact of computer - based decision aids . MIS Quarterly , 16 ( 3 ) , 373 – 393 . Toma , C . , & Butera , F . ( 2009 ) . Hidden proﬁles and concealed information : Strategic information sharing and use in group decision making . Person - ality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 35 ( 6 ) , 793 – 806 . Turoff , M . , & Hiltz , S . R . ( 2009 ) . The future of professional communities of practice . Berlin Heidelberg : Springer - Verlag . Turoff , M . , Chumer , M . , van de Walle , B . , & Yao , X . ( 2004 ) . The design of a Dynamic Emergency Response Management Information System ( DERMIS ) . Journal of Information Technology Theory and Application ( JITTA ) , 5 ( 4 ) , 1 – 36 . Valacich , J . S . , Dennis , A . R . , & Nunamaker , J . F . ( 1992 ) . Electronic meeting support : The GroupSystems concept . International Journal of Man - Machine Studies , 34 ( 2 ) , 261 – 282 . Vakkari , P . ( 1999 ) . Task complexity , problem structure and information actions : Integrating studies on information seeking and retrieval . Infor - mation processing & management , 35 ( 6 ) , 819 – 837 . Vathanophas , V . , & Liang , S . Y . ( 2007 ) . Enhancing information sharing in group support systems ( GSS ) . Computers in Human Behavior , 23 ( 3 ) , 1675 – 1691 . Williams , K . Y . , & O’Reilly , C . A . I . ( 1998 ) . Demography and diversity in organizations : A review of 40 years of research . Research in Organiza - tional Behavior , 20 ( S 77 ) , 77 – 140 . Winquist , J . R . , & Larson , J . R . ( 1998 ) . Information pooling : When it impacts group decision making . Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 74 ( 2 ) , 371 – 377 . Wittenbaum , G . M . , Hollingshead , A . B . , & Botero , I . C . ( 2004 ) . From coop - erative to motivated information sharing in groups : Moving beyond the Hidden proﬁle paradigm . Communication Monographs , 71 ( 3 ) , 286 – 310 . Wood , R . E . ( 1986 ) . Task complexity : Deﬁnition of the construct . Organi - zational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 37 ( 1 ) , 60 – 82 . Wood , J . , & Nosek , J . ( 1994 ) . Discrimination of structure and technology in a group support system : the role of process complexity . Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Systems ( ICIS 1994 ) , 15 . Appendix A : Task Descriptions Task 1 : Hiring Task Job Description Codebitz is an IT ﬁrm that specializes in installing and managing IT systems such as library computers , ATMs , and vending machines . The ﬁrm is in need of a systems analyst to help with the development of a new technology that will allow the ﬁrm to better manage its processes . An ideal candidate for this job will have the following qualiﬁ - cations : Knowledge of Java programming language , experi - enced programmer , database designer and administrator , system architecture , and usability designer . Management skill and experience with gathering user requirements are necessary . Task 2 : Laying off a member of a web development team in a software company As a result of budget cuts in a software development company , one of three programmers in the web develop - ment team needs to be ﬁred in order to continue business and prevent bankruptcy . An ideal candidate to ﬁre will be one with the least impact on the performance of the business . TABLE A1 . Job candidate characteristics : hiring task ( task 1 ) . Characteristic / Category Candidates Amy Bob Chris Education , school , major , year of graduation BSc , University of Michigan , Information Systems , May 2010 BSc , Carnegie Mellon Uni . , Information Tech . , June 2007 BSc , Monroe County College , Computer Science , March 2009 Programming language Java , C + + , DB Admin Pascal , C , Fortran C / C + + , DB Admin , Java Personality Quiet Friendly Great communicator Age 21 26 25 GPA 3 . 9 3 . 0 2 . 2 Last 2 positions held , duration Customer Service , Jan08 - Dec08 ; IT Helpdesk , Jun10 – Present System Admin , Feb07 – Mar09 ; IT Manager , April 09 – Present Web Designer , Jan09 – Mar09 ; Tech . Support , July10 – Present Hobbies Biking Poker Bird - watching Community service Emergency Rescue Squad City council Habitat for humanity 14 JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi Appendix B : Hypotheses Test Results TABLE A2 . Paired sample t - test results for mean changes in individual before ( A ) , team preference ( B ) , and after ( C ) ratings . Mean difference Std . deviation t - statistic Sig . ( 1 - tailed ) A – B . 062 1 . 60 1 . 93 . 000 A – C . 051 1 . 43 1 . 80 . 000 TABLE A3 . ANOVA result for preference changes between individual before ( A ) and team ( B ) preference ratings . Variable F ( 1 , 2519 ) Sig . Intercept 1 , 049 . 50 . 000 Visibility 45 . 99 . 000 Complexity 11 . 97 . 001 TABLE A4 . ANOVA result for preference changes between individual before ( A ) and after ( C ) preference ratings . Variable F ( 1 , 2519 ) Sig . Intercept 1 , 049 . 50 . 000 Visibility 45 . 99 . 000 Complexity 11 . 97 . 001 TABLE A5 . Posthoc analysis for mean changes in individual before ( A ) , team ( B ) , and individual after ( C ) preference ratings across visibility conditions . A – B A – C Visible ( Mean = 1 . 18 , Std . deviation = 1 . 23 ) Visible ( Mean = 0 . 99 , Std . Deviation = 1 . 14 ) Invisible ( Mean = 0 . 74 , Std . deviation = 0 . 78 ) Invisible ( Mean = 0 . 66 , Std . Deviation = 0 . 77 ) Mean difference ( Visible— Invisible ) = 0 . 394 , p = 0 . 000 Mean Difference ( Visible— Invisible ) = 0 . 295 , p = 0 . 000 TABLE A6 . Posthoc analysis for mean changes in individual before ( A ) , team ( B ) , and individual after ( C ) preference ratings across task complexity conditions . A—B A – C Simple ( Mean = 0 . 92 , Std . deviation = 1 . 02 ) Simple ( Mean = 0 . 80 , Std . Deviation = 1 . 01 ) Complex ( Mean = 1 . 19 , Std . deviation = 1 . 24 ) Complex ( Mean = 1 . 00 , Std . Deviation = 1 . 12 ) Mean difference ( Complex— Simple ) = 0 . 201 , p = 0 . 001 Mean Difference ( Complex— Simple ) = 0 . 142 , p = 0 . 009 TABLE A7 . ANCOVA interaction effect result for preference changes between individual prediscussion and team preference ratings . Variable F ( 2 , 2519 ) Sig . Intercept 450 . 19 0 . 000 Visibility * Complexity 37 . 92 0 . 000 TABLE A8 . ANCOVA interaction effect result for preference changes between individual pre - and postdiscussion ratings . Variable F ( 2 , 2519 ) Sig . Intercept 346 . 58 0 . 000 Visibility * Complexity 24 . 09 0 . 000 FIG . A1 . Interaction effect plot for preference changes : before and team discussion . [ Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue , which is available at wileyonlinelibrary . com . ] FIG . A2 . Interaction effect plot for preference changes : before and after discussion . [ Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue , which is available at wileyonlinelibrary . com . ] JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—(cid:129)(cid:129) 2015 15 DOI : 10 . 1002 / asi