Both pathogenic and commensal Gram - negative bacteria produce outer membrane vesicles ( OMVs ) as part of their normal growth . OMVs range from approximately 20 nm to 250 nm in size , and they are released from the bacterial membrane in a process that may be regulated by bacte - rial membrane proteins ( reviewed in REF . 1 ) . Proteomic and biochemical analyses have revealed that OMVs con - tain numerous bacterial components , including DNA , RNA , lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) , proteins , enzymes and peptido glycan ( BOX 1 ) . Therefore , OMVs contain much of the biological material that is found within the parent bacterium , but in a non - replicative form . OMVs were discovered approximately 40 years ago as membrane sacs produced by Vibrio cholerae 2 and Neisseria meningitidis 3 during natural growth in vitro . Subsequently , OMV production was detected within the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with meningococcal infections , and it was suggested that OMVs might con - tribute to disease pathogenesis and progression 4 . Despite these early findings , OMVs were viewed by some as an artefact of bacterial growth with no immediate rele - vance to bacterial survival , evolution or pathogenesis . However , seminal studies by Beveridge and colleagues established that OMVs confer a selective advantage to the parent bacterium by contributing to the formation of biofilms 5 and the transfer of virulence factors 6 and DNA to other bacteria 7 . Moreover , the recent identi - fication of OMVs within marine ecosystems suggests that they function in a wide range of environments to support bacterial survival 8 . Most importantly to the fields of infection and immunity , recent studies have found that OMVs pro - duced by commensal bacteria have fundamental roles in supporting the maturation of the immune system 9 and that OMVs from bacterial pathogens facilitate the establishment of infection and inflammation in the host . Indeed , OMVs have been identified in a range of infected host tissues , including the nasopharynx of asymptomatic carriers of N . meningitidis 4 , 10 , the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with meningococcal disease 4 , 11 , the gastric tis - sue of individuals infected with Helicobacter pylori 12 , 13 , the sinuses of a child with Moraxella catarrhalis - induced sinusitis 14 and the lungs of patients with nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae infections 15 . This reinforces the idea that OMVs contribute to the onset and progres - sion of disease . Moreover , multiple studies propose that pathogens use OMVs to deliver virulence determinants into host cells at local and distal sites 16 , which can drive the generation of innate and adaptive immune responses but can also mediate vascular damage . Despite our awareness that OMVs initiate inflamma - tion in a range of host tissues , the mechanisms involved have historically not been well studied . However , recent innovative studies have expanded our know ledge of how OMVs shape the immune response . In this Review , we discuss the key mechanisms through which OMVs induce inflammation and pathology in the host , with a particular focus on the involvement of host pattern recognition receptors ( PRRs ) in these responses . Collectively , these emerging data reinforce the idea of OMVs as bona fide virulence factors that are used by bacteria to initiate disease pathogenesis and progres - sion in the host . Finally , we discuss the rapidly grow - ing field of OMV - based therapeutics and highlight the potential of OMVs as novel tools for vaccine design and nanoparticle - based therapeutics . Pattern recognition receptors ( PRRs ) . Germline - encoded immune receptors that detect conserved microorganism - associated molecular patterns and function to initiate immune signalling and the development of a pro - inflammatory innate immune response . Immune modulation by bacterial outer membrane vesicles Maria Kaparakis - Liaskos and Richard L . Ferrero Abstract | Gram - negative bacteria shed extracellular outer membrane vesicles ( OMVs ) during their normal growth both in vitro and in vivo . OMVs are spherical , bilayered membrane nanostructures that contain many components found within the parent bacterium . Until recently , OMVs were dismissed as a by‑product of bacterial growth ; however , findings within the past decade have revealed that both pathogenic and commensal bacteria can use OMVs to manipulate the host immune response . In this Review , we describe the mechanisms through which OMVs induce host pathology or immune tolerance , and we discuss the development of OMVs as innovative nanotechnologies . MIMR - PHI Institute of Medical Research , Monash University , Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases , 27 – 31 Wright Street , Clayton , Melbourne , Victoria 3168 , Australia . Correspondence to M . K . - L . e - mail : maria . liaskos @ monash . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nri3837 Published online 15 May 2015 R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 15 | JUNE 2015 | 375 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Immunology Outer membrane protein LPS Enzyme Toxin Periplasmicprotein DNA Peptidoglycan Tol – Pal system A system encoded by a cluster comprising 5 – 7 genes that is conserved across most Gram - negative microorganisms . These genes encode inner membrane and periplasmic proteins , as well as a peptidoglycan - associated protein . Disruption of these genes may result in phenotypic changes , including changes in cell morphology . Microorganism - associated molecular patterns ( MAMPs ) . Conserved microbial determinants that are detected by host pattern recognition receptors , resulting in the induction of immune signalling in the host . OMV interactions with epithelial cells The mucosal epithelial surface is a contiguous site of exchange between luminal contents and is the first line of defence in the host . It is at this location that OMVs from various mucosal pathogens engage with host epithelial cells , resulting in the production of cytokines and chemokines and the generation of a pro - inflammatory response . Induction of cytokines . One of the first studies reporting that OMVs could modulate pro - inflammatory epithelial cell responses to promote chronic pathology involved stimulating human gastric epithelial cells with H . pylori OMVs , which resulted in the dose - dependent production of the pro - inflammatory chemokine CXC - chemokine ligand 8 ( CXCL8 ; also known as IL - 8 ) 17 . Similarly , OMVs generated from Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains that were isolated from patients with cystic fibrosis were found to stimulate CXCL8 production by primary human bron - chial epithelial cells 18 . Incubation of human alveolar epithelial cells with OMVs from Legionella pneumophila induced the production of CC - chemokine ligand 2 ( CCL2 ; also known as MCP1 ) , CXCL8 , granulocyte colony - stimulating factor ( G - CSF ) , interferon - β ( IFNβ ) , IL - 6 , IL - 7 and IL - 13 ( REF . 19 ) . Klebsiella pneumoniae OMVs induced the expression of IL1B ( which encodes IL - 1β ) and CXCL8 in epithelial cells 20 , and OMVs from the oppor - tunistic nosocomial pathogen Acinetobacter baumannii upregulated the expression of IL1B , IL6 , CXCL8 , CCL2 and CCL3 ( also known as MIP1A ) in human epithelial cells 21 . The immunostimulatory abilities of OMVs have also been seen in animal models . For example , Il1b , Il6 , Ccl2 and Ccl3 were upregulated in the lungs of mice administered A . baumannii OMVs intratracheally 21 , and gastric expression of Cxcl2 was detected in mice admin - istered H . pylori OMVs 22 . Although these studies provide further evidence of the immunostimulatory capabilities of OMVs from numerous mucosal human pathogens , the mechanisms involved are not completely known . Induction of PRR signalling . OMVs contain numerous microorganism - associated molecular patterns ( MAMPs ) , including DNA , RNA , lipoproteins , LPS and peptido - glycan 22 , 23 . The MAMP content of OMVs enables them to engage with host PRRs to initiate pro - inflammatory signalling cascades that lead to the production of cytokines , chemokines and antimicrobial peptides . As the content and composition of OMVs vary between bacte - rial species , the mechanisms through which OMVs from different bacteria initiate PRR signalling differ . The extra - cellular PRR that has been extensively reported to interact with OMVs is Toll - like receptor 4 ( TLR4 ) . Escherichia coli OMVs contain LPS that can drive TLR4 - dependent CXCL8 production in human epithelial cells 24 . Similarly , P . aeruginosa OMVs engage TLR4 that is expressed by human epithelial cells , resulting in increased expression of TLR4 , the TLR adaptor myeloid differentiation pri - mary response protein 88 ( MYD88 ) , the transcription factor nuclear factor - κB ( NF - κB ) and IL - 1β 25 . Box 1 | Structure and content of outer membrane vesicles Outer membrane vesicles ( OMVs ) are bilayered lipid membrane nanostructures that range from 20 nm to 250 nm in size and are naturally produced by Gram - negative bacteria 1 . OMVs are produced by both pathogenic and commensal bacteria 9 , as well as by bacteria within the marine environment 8 . OMVs are proposed to provide an advantage to the parent bacterium by facilitating bacterial communication and the transfer of DNA , proteins and enzymes , and they promote the survival and maintenance of bacterial communities , for example , during biofilm formation 5 , 6 , 7 , 130 . Our understanding of how OMVs contribute to the initiation and maintenance of bacterial pathogenesis is also rapidly expanding . Moreover , recent reports on the formation of membrane vesicles by pathogenic Gram - positive bacteria have broadened our appreciation of the contribution of bacterial vesicles to disease pathogenesis . OMVs can be considered as bacterial ‘sample packs’ that contain much of the biological content found within the parent bacterium but in a non - replicative form . Detailed proteomic and biochemical analyses have shown that OMVs contain lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) 131 , periplasmic and membrane - bound proteins 90 , enzymes ( such as autolysins ) , toxins 60 , DNA 7 , 22 , 132 , RNA 132 and peptidoglycan 22 , 72 ( see the figure ) . The formation of OMVs is proposed to occur by budding from the bacterial surface , and although electron microscopy has visualized OMVs associated with bacterial membranes 3 , the exact process of OMV formation from the bacterial surface has not been visualized using live - cell imaging . OMV formation may be regulated by the Tol – Pal system of bacteria 90 , 133 , and it is enhanced during conditions in which the bacterium is undergoing stress , such as in the presence of antibiotics 6 or during bacterial envelope or sublethal physiological stress 134 , 135 . Specific details regarding the content of OMVs , in addition to the mechanisms of their generation and their selective advantage to their parent bacterium and the microbial community , are discussed elsewhere 1 . R E V I E W S 376 | JUNE 2015 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Immunology ↑ IL - 1 β , MYD88 , NF - κ B and TLR4 ↑ CCL3 , CCL4 , CXCL8 , IL - 1 β , NETs and TNF ↑ Activation by inducing expression of CD40 , CD80 , CD86 and MHC class II ↑ CCL2 , IFN γ , IL - 12p40 , IL - 12p70 , IL - 16 and TNF ↓ CCL2 , IFN γ , IL - 12p40 , IL - 12p70 , IL - 16 and TNF ↓ Phagocytic and chemotactic activities ↓ Phagocytic and chemotactic activities ↑ Activation by inducing expression of CD80 , CD86 , HLA - DR and ICAM1 ↑ CCL2 , CCL3 , CCL5 , CXCL8 , IL - 1 β , IL - 6 , IL - 10 , IL - 12p40 , IL - 12p70 and TNF ↓ CD14 expression and LPS - mediated responses ↑ CCL2 , CCL3 , CXCL1 , CXCL2 , CXCL8 , G - CSF , IFN β , IL - 1 β , IL - 6 , IL - 7 and IL - 13 ↑ Antimicrobials : HBD2 , HBD3 and LL - 37 ↓ Inﬂammation by producing IL - 4 , IL - 10 and IL - 13 Facilitate bacterial infections ↑ CCL3 , CCL4 , CXCL8 , IL - 1 β and TNF TLR4 Epithelial cell Submucosa Dendritic cells ↑ IL - 10 Disruption of epithelial cell barrier integrity Neutrophils Macrophages Lumen IFN γ and OMVs Nucleotide - binding oligomerization domain - containing protein 1 ( NOD1 ) . A host cytoplasmic innate immune pattern recognition receptor that specifically detects a conserved structural motif within the peptidoglycan of almost all Gram - negative bacteria . Human β - defensins Small , cationic antimicrobial peptides that are produced by epithelial cells in response to pro - inflammatory cytokines or bacteria . We reported that H . pylori OMVs initiate mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) and activator pro - tein 1 ( AP - 1 ) signalling in human gastric epithe - lial cells , which suggests that OMVs induce PRR signalling 26 . Subsequently , we showed that OMVs from Neisseria gonorrhoeae , P . aeruginosa and H . pylori induced the production of pro - inflammatory cytokines and chemokines by human cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( MEFs ) in a TLR2 - and TLR9 - independent manner 22 . Experiments using MEFs from nucleotide - binding oligomerization domain - containing protein 1 ( NOD1 ) - deficient mice revealed that OMVs from N . gonorrhoeae , P . aeruginosa and H . pylori activate pro - inflammatory signalling via NOD1 ( REF . 22 ) . Furthermore , oral administration of H . pylori OMVs to NOD1 - and MYD88 - deficient mice revealed that it is not the TLRs but NOD1 that is essential for the induction of innate and H . pylori OMV - specific immune responses in vivo 22 . Similarly , TLR9 signalling was not required for mediating pro - inflammatory responses to OMVs from L . pneumophila 19 , P . aeruginosa 25 and nontypeable H . influenzae infections 27 . In addition to initiating the production of pro - inflammatory cytokines , OMV - mediated PRR signalling can induce the production of antimicrobial peptides by host epithelial cells , which facilitates bacterial clearance ( FIG . 1 ) . OMVs from N . gonorrhoeae , P . aeruginosa and H . pylori induce epithelial cell expression of the human β - defensins HBD2 ( also known as DEFB4A ) and HBD3 ( also known as DEFB103A ) 22 , which have direct anti - microbial effects 28 , 29 . Similarly , OMVs from Campylobacter jejuni and nontypeable H . influenzae induce the produc - tion of the antimicrobial peptides HBD3 ( REF . 30 ) and LL - 37 ( also known as CAMP ) , respectively 27 ( FIG . 1 ) . Figure 1 | Interactions of outer membrane vesicles with epithelial and innate immune cells . Outer membrane vesicles ( OMVs ) from multiple pathogens interact with epithelial cells and innate immune cells in various ways to either facilitate ( red boxes ) or limit ( yellow boxes ) inflammation and the recruitment of inflammatory cells to the mucosal epithelial cell surface . The interactions induced by OMVs are dependent on their bacterial origin and their content . OMVs can interact directly with epithelial cells or they may interact with pattern recognition receptors , such as Toll - like receptor 4 ( TLR4 ) , to either induce or limit epithelial cell production of cytokines and chemokines . In this way , OMVs regulate the recruitment of inflammatory cells to the mucosal epithelial cell surface . Epithelial cell interactions with OMVs can also result in the disruption of tight junctions , facilitating the transfer of OMVs and their content of bacterial virulence factors into the submucosa , where they can directly interact with neutrophils , dendritic cells and macrophages . When directly interacting with these myeloid cell subsets , OMVs further modulate pathology by either upregulating or suppressing the activation of these cells , their cytokine and / or chemokine production and their chemotactic activities , as well as decreasing their phagocytic abilities and responses to secondary bacterial infections and their products . CCL , CC‑chemokine ligand ; CXCL , CXC‑chemokine ligand ; G‑CSF , granulocyte colony‑stimulating factor ; HBD , human β - defensin ; ICAM1 , intercellular adhesion molecule 1 ; IFN , interferon ; IL , interleukin ; LPS , lipopolysaccharide ; MYD88 , myeloid differentiation primary response protein 88 ; NET , neutrophil extracellular trap ; NF‑ κ B , nuclear factor - κ B ; TNF , tumour necrosis factor . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 15 | JUNE 2015 | 377 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Neutrophil extracellular traps ( NETs ) . Structures containing DNA , antimicrobial peptides and histones that form extracellular fibres that trap and degrade virulence factors , in addition to killing extracellular pathogens . Modulation of epithelial cell cytokine production . Although OMVs initiate inflammatory responses , they can also limit the production of pro - inflammatory mol - ecules such as CXCL8 , which recruits neutrophils to the site of inflammation . CXCL8 is produced in two isoforms and exists as a protein of 72 or 77 amino acids in length ; the 77 amino acid isoform that is produced by epithelial cells is less biologically active 31 . OMVs from Porphyromonas gingivalis — the causative agent of perio dontitis — contain the cysteine proteinase gingipain that , in addi - tion to degrading CXCL8 , converts the 77 amino acid form of CXCL8 to the more pro - inflammatory 72 amino acid form 32 . Therefore , P . gingivalis OMVs modulate the immune response by enhancing initial neutrophil recruit - ment to the site of infection but then subsequently by limiting inflammation , which contributes to the inability of the host to clear the pathogen 32 . Furthermore , OMVs from various pathogens can limit cytokine responses to secondary stimuli in various cell types . For example , pre - incubation of myeloid cells from the THP - 1 human monocytic cell line with Brucella abortus OMVs limited their production of tumour necrosis factor ( TNF ) and CXCL8 in response to stimulation with various TLR ligands , including E . coli LPS , the TLR1 – TLR2 agonist Pam3Cys and flagellin 33 . In the case of H . pylori , host cell responses to OMVs are dose dependent 17 . Stimulation of human gastric epi - thelial cells with low doses of H . pylori OMVs increased their proliferation , whereas stimulating these cells with higher amounts of OMVs led to growth arrest and increased CXCL8 production 17 . In addition to limiting immune responses in epithelial cells , OMVs can regu - late immune responses in whole human blood . OMVs from N . meningitidis induce the production of the anti - inflammatory type 2 cytokines IL - 4 , IL - 10 and IL - 13 by human immune cells , thereby limiting inflammation 34 . However , these OMVs also induce the production of the pro - inflammatory cytokines CXCL8 , IL - 1β , IL - 6 and TNF in a human blood model 34 , indicating that there is constant interplay between OMV - induced inflammation and OMV - induced immuno suppression . Collectively , these studies suggest that OMVs are able to modulate host immune responses and that the type of response they initiate is dependent in part on the over - all amount of OMVs , in addition to their pathogenic content ( FIG . 1 ) . Disruption of epithelial barrier integrity . Based on the in vitro activities of OMVs , pathogens may use OMVs to disrupt the integrity of the mucosal epi - thelium , enabling bacterial components to enter the sub mucosa and promote further pathology . The perio - dontal pathogens Treponema denticola and P . gingivalis produce OMVs that cause disruption and detachment of epithelial cell monolayers , which enables OMVs and their pathogenic cargo to cause further damage to the underlying tissue 35 , 36 . These examples highlight that OMVs are used by Gram - negative pathogens to facilitate the transfer of antigens and virulence deter - minants into the submucosa to maintain a chronic inflammatory state in the host . OMV interactions with immune cells When OMVs have gained access beyond the host’s epithelial cell barrier into the submucosa , they can directly interact with various immune cell populations , including neutrophils , macrophages and dendritic cells ( DCs ) . Some of the various interactions of OMVs with immune cells are discussed below . Effects of OMVs on neutrophils . OMVs modulate neutro - phil function in different ways depending on their bacterial origin and virulence determinant composition ( FIG . 1 ) . For example , stimulation of human neutrophils with OMVs from N . meningitidis results in their production of TNF and IL - 1β , and their upregulation of CXCL8 , CCL3 and CCL4 expression 37 . These responses can be further potentiated by IFNγ , suggesting that immune responses to N . meningitidis OMVs can be increased during a chronic inflammatory state in which IFNγ is present 37 . Conversely , OMVs from uropathogenic E . coli contain cytotoxic necrotizing factor type 1 ( CNF1 ) , which is a bacterial toxin that impairs the phagocytic and chemotactic abilities of neutrophils 38 . One of the hallmarks of neutrophil cell death is the production of neutrophil extracellular traps ( NETs ) , which contain DNA , antimicrobial peptides and histones that form extracellular fibres to trap and kill extracellular pathogens 39 . OMVs from N . meningitidis and Histophilus somni induce NET formation that results in the killing of these pathogens 40 , 41 . However , NET formation induced by N . meningitidis OMVs also facilitates bacterial coloniza - tion and may account for the high numbers of OMVs that are detected in patients with meningococcal disease 40 . Macrophages and OMVs . The mechanisms by which OMVs can induce macrophage - mediated disease are manifold . First , OMVs drive pro - inflammatory cytokine production by macrophages . Examination of lung tissue from patients infected with L . pneumophila revealed OMVs within the cytoplasm of infected macro phages , suggesting that OMVs directly interact with macro phages in vivo 42 . Stimulation of monocytes and macrophages with N . meningitidis OMVs induces their production of CCL2 , CCL3 and CCL5 ( also known as RANTES ) , CXCL8 , IL - 1β , IL - 6 , IL - 10 , IL - 12p40 , IL - 12p70 and TNF 43 . Similarly , H . pylori OMVs promote IL - 6 production by human peripheral blood mononuclear cells 44 , and Salmonella spp . OMVs induce the production of TNF and nitric oxide ( NO ) by mouse macrophages 45 . Second , OMVs activate macrophages to induce adaptive immune responses , as N . meningitidis OMVs upregulate the expression of HLA - DR , the co - stimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86 , and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 ( ICAM1 ) by macro phages 43 . Third , OMVs can exacerbate disease states , as P . gingivalis OMVs induce the production of NO and the expression of inducible nitric oxide syn - thase ( iNOS ) by mouse macrophages to further potenti - ate disease 46 . Similarly , N . meningitidis OMVs induce the production of the monocyte - derived thrombotic factors tissue factor and plasminogen activator inhibitor 2 to facilitate the development of intravascular coagulation , microthrombosis and organ dysfunction that is observed during meningococcal septicaemia 47 . R E V I E W S 378 | JUNE 2015 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Immunology OMVs Endothelial cell Platelets Synovialcell Bone ↑ GM - CSF and IL - 6 OMV internalization by osteoblasts and synovial cells Osteoblast ↑ Platelet – platelet aggregation , platelet degranulation and binding to leukocytes ↑ P - selectin , E - selectin , ICAM1 , VCAM1 and coagulation mediators ↓ Expression of MHC class II In addition to having pro - inflammatory effects , OMVs can have an anti - inflammatory role that benefits the pathogen of origin or that promotes secondary bac - terial infections . For example , H . pylori OMVs induce the production of the immunosuppressive cytokine IL - 10 by human peripheral blood mononuclear cells to limit inflammation and facilitate bacterial survival 44 . P . gingivalis OMVs facilitate the loss of CD14 expression on macrophages , rendering these cells unresponsive to TLR4 signalling induced by secondary E . coli LPS stimu - lation 48 . B . abortus OMVs inhibit TLR2 , TLR4 and TLR5 responses , limit IFNγ - induced MHC class II expression and promote the internalization of B . abortus bacteria by THP - 1 cells 33 . Therefore , OMVs can limit inflammation to promote bacterial survival in the host ( FIG . 1 ) . Modulation of DCs by OMVs . OMVs from multiple pathogens induce the maturation of DCs and their pro - duction of cytokines . OMVs from Salmonella spp . induce the expression of CD86 and MHC class II molecules on DCs and the production of TNF and IL - 12 ( REF . 45 ) , and they also promote the development of protective B cell and T cell responses 45 . Similarly , N . meningitidis OMVs induce DC maturation , which is characterized by their upregulation of MHC class II and co - stimulatory molecules and their production of pro - inflammatory cytokines and chemokines 49 . N . meningitidis OMVs are able to facilitate their delivery to and internaliza - tion by DCs by binding to the host factor bactericidal permeability - increasing protein ( BPI ) 50 . BPI is a host immune factor that binds and neutralizes endotoxin , in addition to promoting bacterial clearance 51 . Collectively , these studies show that OMVs modulate DCs by inducing their maturation and facilitating antigen presentation , as well as by suppressing their cytokine responses to either OMVs or secondary bacterial antigens ( FIG . 1 ) . OMV interactions with other host cells In addition to interacting directly with epithelial cells at mucosal surfaces and with immune cells present in the immediate vicinity , disseminating OMVs can interact with cells that are distant from the site of infection . Endothelial cells and OMVs . OMVs induce the expres - sion of adhesins and cytokines by endothelial cells dur - ing sepsis . E . coli OMVs induce the production of IL - 6 ( REF . 52 ) , tissue factor , thrombomodulin , and the adhesion molecules P - selectin and E - selectin 53 by human endothelial cells , which leads to the recruitment of pro - inflammatory leukocytes , platelet aggregation and coagu - lation 52 . Similarly , E . coli OMVs upregulate the expression of E - selectin , ICAM1 and vascular cell adhesion mol - ecule 1 ( VCAM1 ) on the surface of human microvascular endothelial cells 54 . When administered intraperitoneally to mice , these OMVs induce neutrophil aggregation in the lung endothelium in an ICAM1 - and TLR4 - dependent manner , suggesting that OMVs are used by pathogens to sequester leukocytes in the endothelium 54 . OMVs can also limit inflammatory responses at the endothelium , as the addition of P . gingivalis OMVs to IFNγ - stimulated endothelial cells inhibited the upregulation of MHC class II molecules on their surface , thus modulating anti - gen presentation and favouring survival of the pathogen 55 . Therefore , similar to the effects that are observed in many other cell types , OMVs have immunostimulatory and immunomodulatory effects on endothelial cells ( FIG . 2 ) . Platelets and OMVs . N . meningitidis OMVs contribute to thrombosis via OMV - induced platelet – platelet aggrega - tion and degranulation , in addition to increased binding of platelets to leukocytes 56 . Platelet – platelet aggregation is also induced by P . gingivalis OMVs 57 ( FIG . 2 ) . Osteoblasts and synovial cells . OMVs can interact with osteoblasts and synovial cells , and thus contribute to arthritis - related and pathogen - induced bone inflamma - tion . Kingella kingae colonizes the human oropharyngeal tract and can systemically spread to distal organs and the skeletal system , causing osteoarticular infections in children 58 . Osteoblasts and synovial cells can internalize K . kingae OMVs and this results in the production of granulocyte – macrophage colony - stimulating factor ( GM - CSF ) and IL - 6 , both of which are implicated in pathogen - induced bone and tissue inflammation and destruction 58 ( FIG . 2 ) . Figure 2 | Outer membrane vesicle interactions with non - immune cells . When they are present beyond the mucosal epithelial cell surface and within the periphery , outer membrane vesicles ( OMVs ) can circulate and interact with various host cells including platelets , synovial cells and endothelial cells . Direct interaction of OMVs with platelets facilitates platelet – platelet interactions and their interactions with leukocytes , promoting bacteria - induced thrombosis . OMV interactions with synovial cells in joints can promote the pro - inflammatory effects observed during arthritis and bone disease . Furthermore , the direct interaction of OMVs with endothelial cells promotes platelet aggregation and coagulation via the upregulation of the adhesion molecules P‑selectin , E - selectin , intercellular adhesion molecule 1 ( ICAM1 ) and vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 ( VCAM1 ) on the surface of human microvascular endothelial cells , in addition to inducing the production of coagulation mediators to further promote pathology . Conversely , OMVs can limit endothelium - mediated inflammation by inhibiting the upregulation of MHC class II molecules on the endothelial surface and thereby reducing the presentation of OMV - containing antigens to antigen - presenting cells ( not shown ) . Therefore , OMVs have immunostimulatory ( red boxes ) and immunomodulatory ( yellow boxes ) effects on platelets , synovial cells and endothelial cells . GM‑CSF , granulocyte – macrophage colony‑stimulating factor ; IL‑6 , interleukin‑6 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 15 | JUNE 2015 | 379 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Immunology Macropinocytosis Autophagy Lipid raft fusion Lipid raft OMV TLR2 EEA1 - labelled endosome V . cholerae and A . actinomycetemcomitans OMV RIP2 NOD2 NOD1 Clathrin Caveolin Nucleus Epithelial cell p50 p65 NF - κ B AP - 1 p38 ERK p65 NOD1 - dependent production of CCL2 , CCL20 , CXCL1 , CXCL2 , CXCL8 and IL - 6 NOD - dependent activation of dendritic cells , and upregulation of CD80 , CD83 and HLA - DR Induction of T H 2 and T H 17 cell response Production of IL - 4 , IL - 13 and IL - 17 HBDs Mechanisms of OMV entry In the sections above , we have described the biological effects of OMVs on different cell types . In the follow - ing sections , we discuss the mechanisms through which OMVs interact with host cells to trigger these effects . Notably , OMVs express various MAMPs on their surface that can initiate PRR signalling and that may facilitate their entry into host cells . Immune signalling facilitates OMV entry . In addition to initiating an immune response to OMVs , extra - cellular PRRs can facilitate OMV entry into host cells . M . catarrhalis — a human respiratory pathogen impli - cated in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease — produces OMVs that enter alveolar epithelial cells fol - lowing their interaction with TLR2 , further promoting pulmonary disease 59 . Lipid rafts facilitate OMV entry . The most frequently reported mode of OMV entry into non - phagocytic host cells involves lipid rafts ( FIG . 3 ) . Initial studies showed that enterotoxigenic E . coli OMVs enter host cells via lipid rafts in a temperature - dependent manner that is possibly facilitated by caveolin and the enterotoxin receptor con - tained within lipid rafts 60 . OMVs from other pathogens — including H . influenzae 27 , P . aeruginosa 61 , P . gingivalis and C . jejuni — also enter host epithelial cells via lipid rafts 62 , 30 . We showed that lipid rafts are required for the entry of H . pylori OMVs into host epithelial cells and for mediating NF - κB activation and cytokine production by epithelial cells in response to H . pylori , P . aeruginosa and N . gonorrhoeae OMVs 22 . A second study also identified a cholesterol - dependent mecha - nism of H . pylori OMV entry into host cells 63 . In the case of OMVs from P . aeruginosa and Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans , both of which are pathogens implicated in aggressive periodontitis , OMVs fuse with lipid rafts to facilitate their entry into host cells 64 , 65 . Therefore , OMVs use a range of mechanisms to enter host epithelial cells via lipid rafts . Other modes of OMV entry . OMVs can also enter host cells via processes that are independent of lipid rafts . For example , enterohemorrhagic E . coli OMVs enter human epithelial and endothelial cells using dynamin - dependent , cholesterol - independent endocytosis 66 . H . pylori OMVs can also enter human gastric epithelial cells via cholesterol - independent , clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis 67 . We propose that OMV particle size predisposes their mechanism of endocytosis into host cells and that OMVs can enter human gastric epithelial cells via multi - ple mechanisms of endocytosis and macro pinocytosis in a size - dependent manner ( L . Turner , R . L . F . and M . K . - L . , unpublished observations ) . Furthermore , smaller OMVs produced by H . pylori seem to be more immunogenic than larger OMVs , owing to their ability to induce a greater NF - κB response in epithelial cells 22 . Therefore , OMVs use multiple mechanisms to enter host cells , which may be regulated by the size and heterogeneity of the OMV preparation , and these factors should be considered when examining the mechanism of OMV entry into host cells . Figure 3 | Mechanisms of entry into epithelial cells and intracellular effects of outer membrane vesicles . Outer membrane vesicles ( OMVs ) enter host epithelial cells using various endocytic routes including macropinocytosis , lipid raft - dependent and lipid raft - independent endocytosis , and clathrin - , caveolin - and dynamin - dependent entry . OMV size may also determine the route used by OMVs to enter epithelial cells . Following entry into host cells , OMVs migrate to early endosome antigen 1 ( EEA1 ) - labelled endosomes where they interact with and are detected by nucleotide‑binding oligomerization domain‑containing protein 1 ( NOD1 ) and the adaptor protein receptor‑interacting protein 2 ( RIP2 ) . This NOD1 signalling mediates activation of the transcription factors nuclear factor - κ B ( NF‑ κ B ) and activator protein 1 ( AP‑1 ) . In addition , OMVs from the pathogens Vibrio cholerae and Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans can also mediate inflammatory signalling via the host receptor NOD2 . When they are inside the host cell , OMVs are degraded by the NOD1‑dependent degradation pathway of autophagy . Detection and degradation of intracellular OMVs results in the generation of a pro - inflammatory response ( red boxes ) that is mediated by the production of cytokines and chemokines , as well as the production of host antimicrobial human β - defensin ( HBD ) peptides . These responses ultimately result in the recruitment and activation of dendritic cells to facilitate the development of T cell immunity . CCL , CC‑chemokine ligand ; CXCL , CXC‑chemokine ligand ; ERK , extracellular signal‑regulated kinase ; IL , interleukin ; T H , T helper ; TLR2 , Toll‑like receptor 2 . R E V I E W S 380 | JUNE 2015 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Lipid rafts Cholesterol - and sphingolipid - rich microdomains located on the surface of the plasma membranes of host cells that can be used by outer membrane vesicles as a portal of entry . Autophagy A host intracellular degradation process that can be induced by NOD1 - mediated detection of Gram - negative bacterial peptidoglycan . Immune masking facilitates host damage . Pathogens can modulate host immune responses to prevent immune cell clearance . In the case of Borrelia burg - dorferi — the causative agent of Lyme disease — host cell cholesterol is incorporated into the bacterial cell surface , enabling the subsequent release of OMVs that contact host cholesterol and lipids 68 . B . burgdorferi uses these OMVs to incorporate bacteria - derived lipids and cholesterol into the eukaryotic cell membrane , which potentially promotes the development of the host - mediated cellular damage that is observed during Lyme disease 68 . Intracellular effects of OMVs Until recently , very little was known about the intra - cellular fate of OMVs and how they engage intra cellular PRRs . In this section , we discuss recent advances regarding the intracellular fate of OMVs in host cells . Engagement of intracellular PRRs . OMVs that have entered a host cell are detected by cytoplasmic PRRs , which results in the rapid phosphorylation of kinase signalling proteins , NF - κB transactivation and the induction of cytokines . As mentioned above , NOD1 ( rather than intracellular TLRs ) seems to be the key intracellular PRR that is responsible for the detec - tion and establishment of OMV - dependent immune responses to H . pylori , P . aeruginosa and N . gonorrhoeae OMVs 22 . Furthermore , NOD1 is essential for the generation of immune responses to H . pylori OMVs in vivo 22 . Subsequently , V . cholerae OMVs were reported to induce pro - inflammatory responses medi - ated by both NOD1 ( REFS 69 , 70 ) and NOD2 ( REF . 69 ) . Similarly , A . actinomycetemcomitans OMVs induce NOD1 - and NOD2 - dependent responses in HEK293 cells and NOD1 - driven inflammation in THP - 1 myeloid cells 71 . Furthermore , V . cholerae OMVs induce NOD1 - dependent production of CCL2 and CCL20 by epithelial cells 70 . The exact intracellular fate of OMVs and how they interact with intracellular PRRs have been unclear , although P . gingivalis and enterohemorr - hagic E . coli OMVs have previously been detected within lyso somal compartments of host cells 62 , 66 . We recently traced the intracellular fate of OMVs and detailed their interaction with the immune recep - tor NOD1 ( REF . 72 ) . Following endocytosis into host cells , OMVs from H . pylori and P . aeruginosa migrate to early endosome antigen 1 ( EEA1 ) - labelled endosomes , where they engage with NOD1 and its adaptor protein receptor - interacting protein 2 ( RIP2 ; also known as RIPK2 ) to induce NOD1 - dependent autophagy and inflammation 72 . OMVs could not induce NOD1 - dependent autophagy in myeloid cells , and we speculate that this is due to a difference in the mechanism of OMV entry between epithelial cells and phagocytic immune cells 72 . Therefore , fol - lowing entry into epithelial cells , OMVs migrate into early endosomes where they interact with NOD1 and RIP2 to initiate inflammation and undergo NOD1 - dependent degradation by autophagy 72 ( FIG . 3 ) . Genotoxic effects . OMVs can enhance genotoxic effects in host cells as they contain toxigenic bacterial cargo . H . pylori OMVs inhibit cellular proliferation and induce genomic instability and the formation of micronuclei within the gastric epithelium ; these effects are medi - ated by their vacuolating cytotoxin ( VacA ) cargo 73 . Intracellular recombinant Salmonella enterica subsp . enterica serovar Typhimurium produces OMVs contain - ing the genotoxic cytolethal distending toxin that , when secreted from infected host cells , enters neighbouring cells and causes DNA damage 74 . Similarly , E . coli OMVs increase the proliferation of human epithelial cells , the induction of reactive oxygen species , DNA damage , aneuploidy and chromosomal instability 75 . Presentation of OMV antigens Generation of protective immune responses . Immunization with OMVs generates strong antigen - specific IgG and / or IgA antibody responses in the serum and in mucosal compartments 22 , 76 – 81 . When introduced into the body , OMV antigens are presented by antigen - presenting cells ( APCs ) to CD4 + T cells 45 , 70 , 81 , 82 , which leads to the generation of antigen - specific B cell responses 45 , 78 , 82 , 83 . OMVs can induce protective immune responses during infection with a variety of pathogens — including V . cholerae 81 , H . pylori 80 , S . Typhimurium 45 and Shigella flexneri 84 — and this decreases bacterial burdens 85 – 87 and protects mice from sepsis or death 25 , 77 , 79 , 84 , 88 ( TABLE 1 ) . Adoptive transfer experiments have shown that CD4 + T cells express - ing IFNγ and IL - 17 were required for OMV - mediated protection in an E . coli - induced sepsis model , which suggests that T helper 1 ( T H 1 ) and T H 17 cell responses may be responsible for protection in this model 88 . In another study , polymorphonuclear leukocytes from volunteers who had been immunized with OMVs were highly efficient at killing N . meningitidis , suggesting that neutro phils may contribute to OMV - mediated protection against this pathogen 89 . Suppression of T cells . Emerging evidence suggests that OMVs can suppress T cell responses . For example , H . pylori OMVs suppress T cell responses by inducing apoptosis through a pathway that involves caspase 3 and caspase 7 ( REF . 44 ) . The authors demonstrated that the VacA toxin associated with H . pylori OMVs 12 , 67 , 90 enhanced , but was not essential for , the induction of apoptosis in T cells from a Jurkat cell line 44 . Similarly , opacity - associated ( Opa ) proteins in N . meningitidis OMVs inhibit T cell activation and proliferation by binding to human carcinoembryonic antigen - related cell adhesion molecule 1 ( CEACAM1 ) on CD4 + T cells to create a zone of immunosuppression at the site of infection 91 . However , a subsequent study reported that N . meningitidis Opa binding to CEACAM1 was insufficient to inhibit T cell function 92 . Modulation of B cell responses . M . catarrhalis OMVs activate B cell responses through a mechanism that is dependent on the superantigen Moraxella IgD - binding protein ( MID ) and on unmethylated CpG DNA 14 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 15 | JUNE 2015 | 381 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Table 1 | Outer membrane vesicle - mediated protection against infection and / or death in mouse models OMV source Challenge model * Route of OMV administration Adjuvant used Time post - immunization at which mice challenged Time post - challenge at which protection was assessed Adaptive immune responses generated Protection Refs A . baumannii Sepsis Intramuscular ( active ) Alum 11 days 1 – 7 days Serum IgG 73 % survival ( compared with 7 % in controls ) 79 Intravenous ( passive ) None 1 hour ‡ 1 – 9 days N . D . 100 % survival ( compared with 20 % in controls ) Acute pneumonia Intramuscular ( active ) Alum 11 days 1 – 9 days BALF IgA and IgG Reduced bacterial burden in the lungs , spleen and BALF B . pseudomallei Infection , sepsis Subcutaneous prime or intranasal None 30 days 14 days Serum IgG and T H 1 cell response ( IFN γ - secreting T cells ) 50 % survival ( compared with 0 % in controls ) 87 30 days Reduced bacterial burden in the liver and spleen E . coli expressing streptococcal antigens Sepsis ( group A streptococci ) Intraperitoneal Alum 3 weeks 7 days Serum IgG1 and IgG2a 100 % survival ( compared with 20 % in controls ) 77 E . coli Sepsis Intraperitoneal None 1 week 0 – 5 days Serum IgG and T H 1 or T H 17 cell responses ( IFN γ - and IL - 17 - secreting T cells ) 80 – 100 % survival ( compared with 20 % in controls ) 88 6 weeks 0 – 5 days N . D . • 100 % survival ( compared with 20 % in controls ) • Reduced bacterial burden in blood and BALF Nontypeable H . influenzae Infection Intranasal None 10 days 1 day Serum IgA , IgG1 and IgM Reduced bacterial burden in the nasopharynx 85 Intraperitoneal Serum IgG1 H . pylori Infection Intragastric Cholera toxin 7 days 28 days Serum IgG 100 % protection ( compared with 20 % in controls ) 80 N . meningitidis and inactivated RSV Infection ( RSV ) Intranasal OMVs 10 days to 8 weeks 5 days • IgA + plasma cells in NALT • Lung IgA , IgG1 , IgG2a and IgG2b • Serum IgG1 , IgG2a and IgG2b 100 % protection , as measured by viral load ( compared with 0 % in controls ) 76 P . multocida ( and M . haemolytica ) Infection Intranasal None 10 days 1 day • Serum IgA , IgG1 and IgM • Faecal IgA Decreased bacterial burden in the nasopharynx 86 P . aeruginosa Infection ( lethal dose ) Intranasal None 1 day 1 – 10 days N . D . • 80 – 100 % protection ( compared with 0 % in controls ) • Decreased bacterial burden in BALF 25 S . Typhimurium Infection Intraperitoneal None 1 week 0 – 14 days Serum IgG and IFN γ - producing CD4 + T cells Reduced bacterial burden in spleen , liver , MLNs and Peyer’s patches 45 R E V I E W S 382 | JUNE 2015 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Exosomes Small extracellular vesicles that are derived from multivesicular bodies or from the plasma membrane of eukaryotic cells . OMVs from this respiratory pathogen induced IgD B cell receptor ( BCR ) clustering and Ca 2 + mobilization , which led to BCR internalization , activation of tonsillar CD19 + IgD + lymphocytes , and increased surface expres - sion of HLA - DR and CD86 ( REF . 14 ) . The authors of this study proposed that M . catarrhalis uses OMVs as decoys to divert host humoral immune responses 14 . A similar strategy is used by nontypeable H . influenzae to promote bacterial survival , as B cells stimulated with H . influenzae OMVs are sensitized to B lymphocyte activation factor ( BAFF ; also known as TNFSF13B ) and produce more IgM and IgG , but these antibodies do not recognize H . influenzae 93 . Furthermore , Neisseria lactamica OMVs induce B cell proliferation 94 and poly - clonal antibody production 95 in a manner independ - ent of T cell help , highlighting the mitogenic role of these OMVs . Release of OMV antigens in exosomes . To induce OMV - specific responses , OMV - associated antigens need to be presented to T cells and this probably occurs through the canonical MHC class I or MHC class II antigen presentation pathway . In the case of mucosal OMV administration , non - myeloid cells may be involved in OMV antigen presentation . Intestinal epithelial cells release small vesicles known as exosomes . These exosomes are enriched in tetraspanin molecules 96 and MHC class II – peptide complexes that are able to potenti - ate antigen presentation by DCs 96 , 97 . A study examining myeloid cell - derived exosomes revealed that they may contain bacterial antigens and can stimulate CD4 + and CD8 + T cell responses 98 . It is proposed that exosomes from intestinal epithe - lial cells may transfer luminal antigens to APCs as a mechanism to generate adaptive immune responses to intestinally delivered antigens 96 , 97 . Circumstantial evi - dence for this proposal comes from studies in a cell co - culture model which showed that the exposure of DCs to conditioned medium from OMV - treated epithelial cells resulted in polarization to a mixed T H 2 - type and T H 17 - type response 70 . Further support - ive evidence comes from our own studies in which exosomes purified from the basolateral compart - ment of OMV - stimulated epithelial cells were found to contain OMV - derived proteins ( L . Turner , M . K . - L . and R . L . F . , unpublished observations ) . Protein - loaded exosomes from OMV - stimulated , but not from non - stimulated , epithelial cells could deliver antigen to APCs to promote antigen - specific T cell proliferation . We propose that epithelial cell - derived exosomes may have an important role in generating antigen - specific immune responses to OMVs during mucosal infection and immunization ( FIG . 4 ) . Clinical implications OMVs have been implicated in the pathogenesis of a broad range of infectious diseases , including perio - dontitis 99 , gastritis 12 , 13 , 22 , Crohn disease 100 , salpingitis 101 , meningitis 11 , 102 , sepsis 103 , and cardiovascular 104 and pulmonary disease 64 . Electron microscopy analyses have shown OMVs budding from bacteria within the gastric epithelium 12 , 13 , gingival plaque 105 , cerebrospinal fluid 11 , 102 and plasma 106 . Further studies are required to demon - strate the effects of OMVs on tissue inflammation or damage in the host . OMVs in chronic inflammatory diseases . Chronic bac - terial colonizers , such as P . gingivalis and H . pylori , pro - duce OMVs with potent effects on host cells 13 , 22 , 55 , 72 , 99 , 107 . In addition to periodontal disease , P . gingivalis has been linked to various systemic diseases , including athero - sclerosis 108 . Similarly , OMVs produced by adherent - invasive E . coli that colonize the ileal lesions of patients with Crohn disease contribute to further invasion of the ileal mucosa by these bacteria , thereby promoting intestinal pathology 100 . Table 1 ( cont . ) | Outer membrane vesicle - mediated protection against infection and / or death in mouse models OMV source Challenge model * Route of OMV administration Adjuvant used Time post - immunization at which mice challenged Time post - challenge at which protection was assessed Adaptive immune responses generated Protection Refs S . flexneri Infection ( lethal dose ) Nasal or oral Poly ‑ anhydride nano - particles 56 days 0 – 15 days • Serum IgG1 and IgG2a ( weak ) • Faecal IgA 80 – 100 % protection ( compared with 0 % in controls ) 84 V . cholerae Infection ( neonates ) § Intraperitoneal , intragastric or intranasal ( dams ) None 33 – 47 days and 89 – 107 days 1 day • Serum IgA ( intragastric and intranasal routes only ) • IgG1 , IgG2 and IgM Infectious dose 50 increased 700 - fold 81 A . baumannii , Acinetobacter baumannii ; BALF , bronchoalveolar lavage fluid ; B . pseudomallei , Burkholderia pseudomallei ; E . coli , Escherichia coli ; H . influenzae , Haemophilus influenzae ; H . pylori , Helicobacter pylori ; IFN γ , interferon - γ ; IL‑17 , interleukin‑17 ; M . haemolytica , Mannheimia haemolytica ; MLN , mesenteric lymph node ; NALT , nasal‑associated lymphoid tissue ; N . D . , not determined ; N . meningitidis , Neisseria meningitidis ; OMV , outer membrane vesicle ; P . aeruginosa , Pseudomonas aeruginosa ; P . multocida , Pasteurella multocida ; RSV , respiratory syncytial virus ; S . flexneri , Shigella flexneri ; S . Typhimurium , Salmonella enterica subsp . enterica serovar Typhimurium ; T H , T helper ; V . cholerae , Vibrio cholerae . * Unless stated otherwise , mice were challenged with the same bacterium from which OMVs had been purified . ‡ Mice were passively immunized with serum from OMV‑immunized animals 1 day before challenge . § A neonate infection model in which newborn mice were fed by controls or by dams that were immunized with OMVs . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 15 | JUNE 2015 | 383 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Immunology OMV OMV peptide Antigen - presenting cell CD28 TCR CD4 + T cell T H cells B cell BCR Plasma cell Antibodies CD80 CD40L CD40 Earlyendosome Epithelial cell Exosome MHC class II Autophagicvacuole Endocytosis Lumen OMVs regulate immune tolerance . Aside from their roles in bacterial pathogenesis , it is now recognized that OMVs can benefit the host . This was shown for the gut commensal Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron , which uses OMVs to deliver BtMinpp ( a bacterial homologue of eukaryotic multiple inositol polyphosphate phosphatase 1 ( MINPP1 ) ) into host cells 109 . BtMinpp has beneficial effects for both the host and the bacterial community by providing nutrients and by removing potentially carcinogenic metabolites from the gut 109 . Furthermore , immunomodulatory functions were described for OMVs from the related gut commensal Bacteroides fragilis 9 . DC sensing of B . fragilis OMVs resulted in enhanced regula - tory T cell responses and increased anti - inflammatory cytokine production , which provided protection against experimental colitis 9 . These responses were depend - ent on TLR2 - mediated recognition of a capsular poly - saccharide ( PSA ) within B . fragilis - derived OMVs , and induced forkhead box P3 ( Foxp3 ) expression and IL - 10 production in CD4 + T cells 9 . Similarly , H . pylori VacA and γ - glutamyl transpeptidase ( GGT ) protein , which are associated with H . pylori OMVs 90 , were capable of inducing DC tolerance characterized by T cell expres - sion of FOXP3 and CD25 ( also known as IL - 2RA ) 110 . These tolerogenic responses were important for bacterial persistence and protection against allergic asthma 110 . Development of vaccines using OMVs . OMVs have several intrinsic properties that make them appealing as vaccine candidates . OMVs are highly stable when exposed to different temperatures and treatments 111 , they are non - replicative and hence safe , and they con - tain many of the immunogenic surface - associated and membrane - associated components of their parent bac - terium 45 , 90 , 99 , 112 , 113 . Furthermore , the ability of OMVs to activate the innate immune system 14 , 20 , 22 , 24 , 25 , 69 , 114 , together with their particulate nature , provides these nano particles with their own adjuvant activity , as they are able to enhance antibody and T cell responses to antigens 76 , 83 , 87 , 115 . Finally , OMVs are very versatile as they can be bioengineered to express any chosen antigen 77 , 112 , 116 – 118 and they can be manipulated to reduce their endotoxicity 119 – 121 . Despite the enormous vaccine potential of OMVs , it has taken more than 20 years for an OMV - based vaccine to be licensed for human use . In initial trials , OMV - based vaccines were only effective for control - ling national epidemics of meningococcal serogroup B disease caused by clonal populations of isolates 89 , 122 . The major breakthrough in the field arose from the development of a vaccine displaying broad protective efficacy against different N . meningitidis serogroup B isolates 123 . The OMV - based 4CMenB vaccine con - tains three highly immunogenic proteins that induce protective antibody responses against N . meningitidis serogroup B isolates 124 . This vaccine was approved by the European Commission for use in individuals who are 2 months of age and older 124 . Other OMV - based vaccines are currently being developed for use in Gram - negative infections , but none of these has advanced to the clinical trial stage . Conclusion Despite the identification of OMVs almost 40 years ago , advances within the past decade have clarified our under - standing of the mechanisms by which pathogens use OMVs to contribute to the induction of inflammation Figure 4 | A model for outer membrane vesicle antigen presentation to immune cells . Outer membrane vesicles ( OMVs ) are highly adept at entering non - immune cells , such as epithelial cells lining the gastrointestinal tract . Cell entry is mediated via one or more endocytosis pathways , resulting in OMV trafficking to early endosomes . OMV proteins are processed within non - immune cells by a mechanism that is yet to be defined but possibly involves autophagy . The processed OMV peptides then traffic from autophagic vacuoles to exosomes that , in turn , are released from the basolateral compartment of host cells . These peptides may be either unloaded or already loaded onto MHC class II molecules before their presentation to professional antigen‑presenting cells in tissues . Activated antigen‑presenting cells express MHC class II molecules that interact with the T cell receptor ( TCR ) on CD4 + T cells to drive antigen‑specific T cell responses . Furthermore , co‑stimulatory signals mediated by the CD80 – CD28 interaction promote T cell survival and activation , resulting in T helper ( T H ) cell proliferation . CD40 ligand ( CD40L ) on these activated T H cells interacts with its cognate receptor on B cells . Binding of antigen to the B cell receptor ( BCR ) promotes the proliferation of B cells and their differentiation into antibody‑secreting plasma cells and memory B cells , thereby generating antigen - specific antibodies in various host tissues . R E V I E W S 384 | JUNE 2015 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Adjuvant An agent or compound that when administered with an antigenic preparation ( for example , a vaccine ) , provides stronger and more long - lasting immune responses to the antigen . and pathology , in addition to their ability to modulate the immune system by suppressing inflammation and facili - tating the survival of their parent bacterium in the host . However , future research into the mechanisms by which OMVs modulate presentation of their immuno genic con - tents to the host to facilitate the induction of innate and adaptive immunity will enable us to further understand their role in bacterial pathogenesis and in host – patho - gen interactions . The recent identification of membrane vesicles produced by the Gram - positive bacteria Bacillus anthracis 125 and Mycobacteria spp . 126 , which have immu - nopathological and potentially immuno modulatory roles similar to those of OMVs , suggests that there is still much to learn about the involvement of bacterial vesicles in dis - ease . Furthermore , the implication that OMVs present in indoor dust can contribute to airway disease 127 suggests that OMVs may have a broader role in inducing allergy and inflammation that should be further explored . It is anticipated that future endeavours may focus on expanding our knowledge regarding the contribution of both OMVs produced by Gram - negative bacteria and membrane vesicles from Gram - positive bacteria to chronic and acute diseases in the host . There is renewed interest in the contribution of the host microbiota to the development of immunity to gastrointestinal diseases 128 . The finding that OMVs produced by commensal bacteria can provide a selec - tive advantage to the host by facilitating the development of mucosal tolerance and protecting against the onset of experimental colitis 9 is promising . Obtaining a better understanding of the beneficial contribution of com - mensal OMVs to gastrointestinal integrity and potential protection against pathogens is also an important goal for future research . Moreover , there has been limited use of OMV - based technologies and of the self - adjuvanting and vaccine capabilities of OMVs to confer protection against patho gens . Recently , OMVs were bioengineered to facilitate their binding to target receptors expressed by tumour cells , and upon engagement with these cells , these OMVs delivered antitumorigenic cargo that led to cell death and tumour regression in mice 129 . This finding has broadened our potential use of OMVs beyond self - adjuvanting , non - replicative vaccines . However , the field of bioengineering OMVs is still in its infancy , and further studies focusing on the com - position of OMVs and their mechanisms of immuno - genicity are needed to harness this technology . In addition to exploiting their cargo - carrying ability , the current use of OMVs in licensed human vaccines emphasizes the enormous potential of using OMVs as a highly innovative technology . Advances that will enable us to differentially activate the immune response based on our ability to modify the composition of OMVs , and therefore harness the full potential of OMV - based and membrane vesicle - based technology , will have broad therapeutic and prophylactic implications for human and veterinary health . 1 . Kulp , A . & Kuehn , M . J . Biological functions and biogenesis of secreted bacterial outer membrane vesicles . Annu . Rev . Microbiol . 64 , 163 – 184 ( 2010 ) . 2 . Chatterjee , S . N . & Das , J . Electron microscopic observations on the excretion of cell - wall material by Vibrio cholerae . J . General Microbiol . 49 , 1 – 11 ( 1967 ) . 3 . DeVoe , I . W . & Gilchrist , J . E . Release of endotoxin in the form of cell wall blebs during in vitro growth of Neisseria meningitidis . J . Exp . Med . 138 , 1156 – 1167 ( 1973 ) . 4 . DeVoe , I . W . & Gilchrist , J . E . Pili on meningococci from primary cultures of nasopharyngeal carriers and cerebrospinal fluid of patients with acute disease . J . Exp . Med . 141 , 297 – 305 ( 1975 ) . 5 . Schooling , S . R . & Beveridge , T . J . Membrane vesicles : an overlooked component of the matrices of biofilms . J . Bacteriol . 188 , 5945 – 5957 ( 2006 ) . 6 . Kadurugamuwa , J . L . & Beveridge , T . J . Virulence factors are released from Pseudomonas aeruginosa in association with membrane vesicles during normal growth and exposure to gentamicin : a novel mechanism of enzyme secretion . J . Bacteriol . 177 , 3998 – 4008 ( 1995 ) . 7 . Renelli , M . , Matias , V . , Lo , R . Y . & Beveridge , T . J . DNA - containing membrane vesicles of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 and their genetic transformation potential . Microbiology 150 , 2161 – 2169 ( 2004 ) . 8 . Biller , S . J . et al . Bacterial vesicles in marine ecosystems . Science 343 , 183 – 186 ( 2014 ) . 9 . Shen , Y . et al . Outer membrane vesicles of a human commensal mediate immune regulation and disease protection . Cell Host Microbe 12 , 509 – 520 ( 2012 ) . This is the first identification of commensal OMVs having a protective and immunoregulatory role at the host mucosal surface , showing that the gut commensal B . fragilis releases OMVs with immunomodulatory and protective effects against colitis . 10 . Craven , D . E . et al . Adherence of isolates of Neisseria meningitidis from patients and carriers to human buccal epithelial cells . J . Infect . Dis . 142 , 556 – 568 ( 1980 ) . 11 . Stephens , D . S . , Edwards , K . M . , Morris , F . & McGee , Z . A . Pili and outer membrane appendages on Neisseria meningitidis in the cerebrospinal fluid of an infant . J . Infect . Dis . 146 , 568 ( 1982 ) . 12 . Fiocca , R . et al . Release of Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin by both a specific secretion pathway and budding of outer membrane vesicles . Uptake of released toxin and vesicles by gastric epithelium . J . Pathol . 188 , 220 – 226 ( 1999 ) . 13 . Keenan , J . et al . A role for the bacterial outer membrane in the pathogenesis of Helicobacter pylori infection . FEMS Microbiol . Lett . 182 , 259 – 264 ( 2000 ) . 14 . Vidakovics , M . L . et al . B cell activation by outer membrane vesicles — a novel virulence mechanism . PLoS Pathog . 6 , e1000724 ( 2010 ) . 15 . Ren , D . et al . Characterization of extended co - culture of non - typeable Haemophilus influenzae with primary human respiratory tissues . Exp . Biol . Med . 237 , 540 – 547 ( 2012 ) . 16 . Ellis , T . N . & Kuehn , M . J . Virulence and immunomodulatory roles of bacterial outer membrane vesicles . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 74 , 81 – 94 ( 2010 ) . 17 . Ismail , S . , Hampton , M . B . & Keenan , J . I . Helicobacter pylori outer membrane vesicles modulate proliferation and interleukin - 8 production by gastric epithelial cells . Infect . Immun . 71 , 5670 – 5675 ( 2003 ) . This is one of the earliest reports showing that OMVs can induce IL‑8 production in human epithelial cells . 18 . Bauman , S . J . & Kuehn , M . J . Purification of outer membrane vesicles from Pseudomonas aeruginosa and their activation of an IL - 8 response . Microbes Infect . 8 , 2400 – 2408 ( 2006 ) . 19 . Galka , F . et al . Proteomic characterization of the whole secretome of Legionella pneumophila and functional analysis of outer membrane vesicles . Infect . Immun . 76 , 1825 – 1836 ( 2008 ) . 20 . Lee , J . C . et al . Klebsiella pneumoniae secretes outer membrane vesicles that induce the innate immune response . FEMS Microbiol . Lett . 331 , 17 – 24 ( 2012 ) . 21 . Jun , S . H . et al . Acinetobacter baumannii outer membrane vesicles elicit a potent innate immune response via membrane proteins . PLoS ONE 8 , e71751 ( 2013 ) . 22 . Kaparakis , M . et al . Bacterial membrane vesicles deliver peptidoglycan to NOD1 in epithelial cells . Cell . Microbiol . 12 , 372 – 385 ( 2010 ) . This study shows that NOD1 detects peptidoglycan contained within OMVs and that this is essential for the induction of innate and OMV‑specific adaptive immune responses in vivo . 23 . Kuehn , M . J . & Kesty , N . C . Bacterial outer membrane vesicles and the host - pathogen interaction . Genes Dev . 19 , 2645 – 2655 ( 2005 ) . 24 . Soderblom , T . et al . Effects of the Escherichia coli toxin cytolysin A on mucosal immunostimulation via epithelial Ca 2 + signalling and Toll - like receptor 4 . Cell . Microbiol . 7 , 779 – 788 ( 2005 ) . 25 . Zhao , K . , Deng , X . , He , C . , Yue , B . & Wu , M . Pseudomonas aeruginosa outer membrane vesicles modulate host immune responses by targeting the Toll - like receptor 4 signaling pathway . Infect . Immun . 81 , 4509 – 4518 ( 2013 ) . 26 . Allison , C . C . , Kufer , T . A . , Kremmer , E . , Kaparakis , M . & Ferrero , R . L . Helicobacter pylori induces MAPK phosphorylation and AP - 1 activation via a NOD1 - dependent mechanism . J . Immunol . 183 , 8099 – 8109 ( 2009 ) . 27 . Sharpe , S . W . , Kuehn , M . J . & Mason , K . M . Elicitation of epithelial cell - derived immune effectors by outer membrane vesicles of nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae . Infection Immun . 79 , 4361 – 4369 ( 2011 ) . 28 . Grubman , A . et al . The innate immune molecule , NOD1 , regulates direct killing of Helicobacter pylori by antimicrobial peptides . Cell . Microbiol . 12 , 626 – 639 ( 2010 ) . 29 . Bauer , B . et al . The Helicobacter pylori virulence effector CagA abrogates human β - defensin 3 expression via inactivation of EGFR signaling . Cell Host Microbe 11 , 576 – 586 ( 2012 ) . 30 . Elmi , A . et al . Campylobacter jejuni outer membrane vesicles play an important role in bacterial interactions with human intestinal epithelial cells . Infect . Immun . 80 , 4089 – 4098 ( 2012 ) . 31 . Nourshargh , S . et al . A comparative study of the neutrophil stimulatory activity in vitro and pro - inflammatory properties in vivo of 72 amino acid and 77 amino acid IL - 8 . J . Immunol . 148 , 106 – 111 ( 1992 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 15 | JUNE 2015 | 385 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 32 . Mikolajczyk - Pawlinska , J . , Travis , J . & Potempa , J . Modulation of interleukin - 8 activity by gingipains from Porphyromonas gingivalis : implications for pathogenicity of periodontal disease . FEBS Lett . 440 , 282 – 286 ( 1998 ) . 33 . Pollak , C . N . , Delpino , M . V . , Fossati , C . A . & Baldi , P . C . Outer membrane vesicles from Brucella abortus promote bacterial internalization by human monocytes and modulate their innate immune response . PLoS ONE 7 , e50214 ( 2012 ) . 34 . Mirlashari , M . R . , Høiby , E . A . , Holst , J . & Lyberg , T . Outer membrane vesicles from Neisseria meningitidis : effects on cytokine production in human whole blood . Cytokine 13 , 91 – 97 ( 2001 ) . 35 . Chi , B . , Qi , M . & Kuramitsu , H . K . Role of dentilisin in Treponema denticola epithelial cell layer penetration . Res . Microbiol . 154 , 637 – 643 ( 2003 ) . 36 . Nakao , R . et al . Effect of Porphyromonas gingivalis outer membrane vesicles on gingipain - mediated detachment of cultured oral epithelial cells and immune responses . Microbes Infect . 16 , 6 – 16 ( 2014 ) . 37 . Lapinet , J . A . , Scapini , P . , Calzetti , F . , Perez , O . & Cassatella , M . A . Gene expression and production of tumor necrosis factor alpha , interleukin - 1 β ( IL - 1 β ) , IL - 8 , macrophage inflammatory protein 1 α ( MIP - 1 α ) , MIP - 1 β , and gamma interferon - inducible protein 10 by human neutrophils stimulated with group B meningococcal outer membrane vesicles . Infect . Immun . 68 , 6917 – 6923 ( 2000 ) . 38 . Davis , J . M . , Carvalho , H . M . , Rasmussen , S . B . & O’Brien , A . D . Cytotoxic necrotizing factor type 1 delivered by outer membrane vesicles of uropathogenic Escherichia coli attenuates polymorphonuclear leukocyte antimicrobial activity and chemotaxis . Infect . Immun . 74 , 4401 – 4408 ( 2006 ) . 39 . Brinkmann , V . et al . Neutrophil extracellular traps kill bacteria . Science 303 , 1532 – 1535 ( 2004 ) . 40 . Lappann , M . et al . In vitro resistance mechanisms of Neisseria meningitidis against neutrophil extracellular traps . Mol . Microbiol . 89 , 433 – 449 ( 2013 ) . 41 . Hellenbrand , K . M . , Forsythe , K . M . , Rivera - Rivas , J . J . , Czuprynski , C . J . & Aulik , N . A . Histophilus somni causes extracellular trap formation by bovine neutrophils and macrophages . Microb . Pathog . 54 , 67 – 75 ( 2013 ) . 42 . Jager , J . et al . Human lung tissue explants reveal novel interactions during Legionella pneumophila infections . Infect . Immun . 82 , 275 – 285 ( 2013 ) . 43 . Tavano , R . et al . The membrane expression of Neisseria meningitidis adhesin A ( NadA ) increases the proimmune effects of MenB OMVs on human macrophages , compared with NadA - OMVs , without further stimulating their proinflammatory activity on circulating monocytes . J . Leukoc . Biol . 86 , 143 – 153 ( 2009 ) . 44 . Winter , J . , Letley , D . , Rhead , J . , Atherton , J . & Robinson , K . Helicobacter pylori membrane vesicles stimulate innate pro - and anti - inflammatory responses and induce apoptosis in Jurkat T cells . Infect . Immun . 82 , 1372 – 1381 ( 2014 ) . 45 . Alaniz , R . C . , Deatherage , B . L . , Lara , J . C . & Cookson , B . T . Membrane vesicles are immunogenic facsimiles of Salmonella typhimurium that potently activate dendritic cells , prime B and T cell responses , and stimulate protective immunity in vivo . J . Immunol . 179 , 7692 – 7701 ( 2007 ) . This study identifies the ability of OMVs derived from Salmonella spp . to induce activation of DCs and promote the development of protective B cell and T cell responses in vivo . 46 . Imayoshi , R . , Cho , T . & Kaminishi , H . NO production in RAW264 cells stimulated with Porphyromonas gingivalis extracellular vesicles . Oral Dis . 17 , 83 – 89 ( 2011 ) . 47 . Mirlashari , M . R . , Hoiby , E . A . , Holst , J . & Lyberg , T . Outer membrane vesicles from Neisseria meningitidis : effects on tissue factor and plasminogen activator inhibitor - 2 production in human monocytes . Thromb . Res . 102 , 375 – 380 ( 2001 ) . 48 . Duncan , L . , Yoshioka , M . , Chandad , F . & Grenier , D . Loss of lipopolysaccharide receptor CD14 from the surface of human macrophage - like cells mediated by Porphyromonas gingivalis outer membrane vesicles . Microb . Pathog . 36 , 319 – 325 ( 2004 ) . 49 . Durand , V . et al . Role of lipopolysaccharide in the induction of type I interferon - dependent cross - priming and IL - 10 production in mice by meningococcal outer membrane vesicles . Vaccine 27 , 1912 – 1922 ( 2009 ) . 50 . Schultz , H . , Hume , J . , Zhang de , S . , Gioannini , T . L . & Weiss , J . P . A novel role for the bactericidal / permeability increasing protein in interactions of gram - negative bacterial outer membrane blebs with dendritic cells . J . Immunol . 179 , 2477 – 2484 ( 2007 ) . 51 . Weiss , J . et al . Human bactericidal / permeability - increasing protein and a recombinant NH2 - terminal fragment cause killing of serum - resistant gram - negative bacteria in whole blood and inhibit tumor necrosis factor release induced by the bacteria . J . Clin . Invest . 90 , 1122 – 1130 ( 1992 ) . 52 . Soult , M . C . et al . Outer membrane vesicles from pathogenic bacteria initiate an inflammatory response in human endothelial cells . J . Surg . Res . 184 , 458 – 466 ( 2013 ) . 53 . Soult , M . C . , Dobrydneva , Y . , Wahab , K . H . , Britt , L . D . & Sullivan , C . J . Outer membrane vesicles alter inflammation and coagulation mediators . J . Surg . Res . 192 , 134 – 142 ( 2014 ) . 54 . Kim , J . H . et al . Outer membrane vesicles derived from Escherichia coli up - regulate expression of endothelial cell adhesion molecules in vitro and in vivo . PLoS ONE 8 , e59276 ( 2013 ) . 55 . Srisatjaluk , R . , Kotwal , G . J . , Hunt , L . A . & Justus , D . E . Modulation of γ interferon - induced major histocompatibility complex class II gene expression by Porphyromonas gingivalis membrane vesicles . Infect . Immun . 70 , 1185 – 1192 ( 2002 ) . 56 . Mirlashari , M . R . , Hagberg , I . A . & Lyberg , T . Platelet – platelet and platelet – leukocyte interactions induced by outer membrane vesicles from N . meningitidis . Platelets 13 , 91 – 99 ( 2002 ) . 57 . Sharma , A . et al . Porphyromonas gingivalis platelet aggregation activity : outer membrane vesicles are potent activators of murine platelets . Oral Microbiol . Immunol . 15 , 393 – 396 ( 2000 ) . 58 . Maldonado , R . , Wei , R . , Kachlany , S . C . , Kazi , M . & Balashova , N . V . Cytotoxic effects of Kingella kingae outer membrane vesicles on human cells . Microb . Pathog . 51 , 22 – 30 ( 2011 ) . 59 . Schaar , V . et al . Multicomponent Moraxella catarrhalis outer membrane vesicles induce an inflammatory response and are internalized by human epithelial cells . Cell . Microbiol . 13 , 432 – 449 ( 2010 ) . 60 . Kesty , N . C . , Mason , K . M . , Reedy , M . , Miller , S . E . & Kuehn , M . J . Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli vesicles target toxin delivery into mammalian cells . EMBO J . 23 , 4538 – 4549 ( 2004 ) . This is the earliest report identifying the ability of OMVs to enter non‑phagocytic host epithelial cells in a lipid raft‑dependent manner . 61 . Bauman , S . J . & Kuehn , M . J . Pseudomonas aeruginosa vesicles associate with and are internalized by human lung epithelial cells . BMC Microbiol . 9 , 26 ( 2009 ) . 62 . Furuta , N . et al . Porphyromonas gingivalis outer membrane vesicles enter human epithelial cells via an endocytic pathway and are sorted to lysosomal compartments . Infect . Immun . 77 , 4187 – 4196 ( 2009 ) . 63 . Olofsson , A . , Nygard Skalman , L . , Obi , I . , Lundmark , R . & Arnqvist , A . Uptake of Helicobacter pylori vesicles is facilitated by clathrin - dependent and clathrin - independent endocytic pathways . mBio 5 , e00979 - 14 ( 2014 ) . 64 . Bomberger , J . M . et al . Long - distance delivery of bacterial virulence factors by Pseudomonas aeruginosa outer membrane vesicles . PLoS Pathog . 5 , e1000382 ( 2009 ) . 65 . Rompikuntal , P . K . et al . Perinuclear localization of internalized outer membrane vesicles carrying active cytolethal distending toxin from Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans . Infect . Immun . 80 , 31 – 42 ( 2012 ) . 66 . Bielaszewska , M . et al . Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli hemolysin employs outer membrane vesicles to target mitochondria and cause endothelial and epithelial apoptosis . PLoS Pathog . 9 , e1003797 ( 2013 ) . 67 . Parker , H . , Chitcholtan , K . , Hampton , M . B . & Keenan , J . I . Uptake of Helicobacter pylori outer membrane vesicles by gastric epithelial cells . Infect . Immun . 78 , 5054 – 5061 ( 2010 ) . 68 . Crowley , J . T . et al . Lipid exchange between Borrelia burgdorferi and host cells . PLoS Pathog . 9 , e1003109 ( 2013 ) . 69 . Bielig , H . et al . NOD - like receptor activation by outer membrane vesicles from Vibrio cholerae non - O1 non - O139 strains is modulated by the quorum - sensing regulator HapR . Infect . Immun . 79 , 1418 – 1427 ( 2011 ) . 70 . Chatterjee , D . & Chaudhuri , K . Vibrio cholerae O395 outer membrane vesicles modulate intestinal epithelial cells in a NOD1 protein - dependent manner and induce dendritic cell - mediated Th2 / Th17 cell responses . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 4299 – 4309 ( 2013 ) . 71 . Thay , B . , Damm , A . , Kufer , T . A . , Wai , S . N . & Oscarsson , J . Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans outer membrane vesicles are internalized in human host cells and trigger NOD1 - and NOD2 - dependent NF - κ B activation . Infect . Immun . 82 , 4034 – 4046 ( 2014 ) . 72 . Irving , A . T . et al . The immune receptor NOD1 and kinase RIP2 interact with bacterial peptidoglycan on early endosomes to promote autophagy and inflammatory signaling . Cell Host Microbe 15 , 623 – 635 ( 2014 ) . This is the first report showing that when they are present inside cells , OMVs migrate to early endosomes , where they are detected by NOD1 and subsequently degraded by NOD1‑dependent autophagy , resulting in the initiation of an inflammatory response . 73 . Chitcholtan , K . , Hampton , M . B . & Keenan , J . I . Outer membrane vesicles enhance the carcinogenic potential of Helicobacter pylori . Carcinogenesis 29 , 2400 – 2405 ( 2008 ) . 74 . Guidi , R . et al . Salmonella enterica delivers its genotoxin through outer membrane vesicles secreted from infected cells . Cell . Microbiol . 15 , 2034 – 2050 ( 2013 ) . This study shows that Salmonella enterica ‑infected host cells secrete OMVs containing cytolethal distending toxin , which is genotoxic , and that they subsequently enter neighbouring cells , causing secondary bystander effects . 75 . Tyrer , P . C . , Frizelle , F . A . & Keenan , J . I . Escherichia coli - derived outer membrane vesicles are genotoxic to human enterocyte - like cells . Infect . Agents Cancer 9 , 2 ( 2014 ) . 76 . Etchart , N . et al . Intranasal immunisation with inactivated RSV and bacterial adjuvants induces mucosal protection and abrogates eosinophilia upon challenge . Eur . J . Immunol . 36 , 1136 – 1144 ( 2006 ) . 77 . Fantappiè , L . et al . Antibody - mediated immunity induced by engineered Escherichia coli OMVs carrying heterologous antigens in their lumen . J . Extracell . Vesicles 3 , 24015 ( 2014 ) . 78 . Guthrie , T . et al . Local and systemic antibody responses in mice immunized intranasally with native and detergent - extracted outer membrane vesicles from Neisseria meningitidis . Infect . Immun . 72 , 2528 – 2537 ( 2004 ) . 79 . Huang , W . et al . Immunization against multidrug - resistant Acinetobacter baumannii effectively protects mice in both pneumonia and sepsis models . PLoS ONE 9 , e100727 ( 2014 ) . 80 . Keenan , J . et al . Immune response to an 18 - kilodalton outer membrane antigen identifies lipoprotein 20 as a Helicobacter pylori vaccine candidate . Infect . Immun . 68 , 3337 – 3343 ( 2000 ) . 81 . Schild , S . , Nelson , E . J . & Camilli , A . Immunization with Vibrio cholerae outer membrane vesicles induces protective immunity in mice . Infect . Immun . 76 , 4554 – 4563 ( 2008 ) . 82 . Davenport , V . et al . Mucosal immunity in healthy adults after parenteral vaccination with outer - membrane vesicles from Neisseria meningitidis serogroup B . J . Infect . Dis . 198 , 731 – 740 ( 2008 ) . 83 . Aghasadeghi , M . R . et al . Application of outer membrane vesicle of Neisseria meningitidis serogroup B as a new adjuvant to induce strongly Th1 - oriented responses against HIV - 1 . Curr . HIV Res . 9 , 630 – 635 ( 2011 ) . 84 . Camacho , A . I . , Irache , J . M . , de Souza , J . , Sánchez - Gómez , S . & Gamazo , C . Nanoparticle - based vaccine for mucosal protection against Shigella flexneri in mice . Vaccine 31 , 3288 – 3294 ( 2013 ) . 85 . Roier , S . et al . Intranasal immunization with nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae outer membrane vesicles induces cross - protective immunity in mice . PLoS ONE 7 , e42664 ( 2012 ) . 86 . Roier , S . et al . Immunogenicity of Pasteurella multocida and Mannheimia haemolytica outer membrane vesicles . Int . J . Med . Microbiol . 303 , 247 – 256 ( 2013 ) . 87 . Nieves , W . et al . A naturally derived outer - membrane vesicle vaccine protects against lethal pulmonary Burkholderia pseudomallei infection . Vaccine 29 , 8381 – 8389 ( 2011 ) . R E V I E W S 386 | JUNE 2015 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / immunol © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 88 . Kim , O . Y . et al . Immunization with Escherichia coli outer membrane vesicles protects bacteria - induced lethality via Th1 and Th17 cell responses . J . Immunol . 190 , 4092 – 4102 ( 2013 ) . 89 . Perez , O . et al . Immune response induction and new effector mechanisms possibly involved in protection conferred by the Cuban anti - meningococcal BC vaccine . Infect . Immun . 69 , 4502 – 4508 ( 2001 ) . 90 . Turner , L . et al . Increased outer membrane vesicle formation in a Helicobacter pylori tolB mutant . Helicobacter http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / hel . 12196 ( 2015 ) . 91 . Lee , H . S . et al . Neisserial outer membrane vesicles bind the coinhibitory receptor carcinoembryonic antigen - related cellular adhesion molecule 1 and suppress CD4 + T lymphocyte function . Infect . Immun . 75 , 4449 – 4455 ( 2007 ) . 92 . Youssef , A . R . et al . Opa + and Opa – isolates of Neisseria meningitidis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae induce sustained proliferative responses in human CD4 + T cells . Infection Immun . 77 , 5170 – 5180 ( 2009 ) . 93 . Deknuydt , F . , Nordstrom , T . & Riesbeck , K . Diversion of the host humoral response : a novel virulence mechanism of Haemophilus influenzae mediated via outer membrane vesicles . J . Leukoc . Biol . 95 , 983 – 991 ( 2014 ) . 94 . Vaughan , A . T . et al . Neisseria lactamica selectively induces mitogenic proliferation of the naive B cell pool via cell surface Ig . J . Immunol . 185 , 3652 – 3660 ( 2010 ) . 95 . Vaughan , A . T . , Gorringe , A . , Davenport , V . , Williams , N . A . & Heyderman , R . S . Absence of mucosal immunity in the human upper respiratory tract to the commensal bacteria Neisseria lactamica but not pathogenic Neisseria meningitidis during the peak age of nasopharyngeal carriage . J . Immunol . 182 , 2231 – 2240 ( 2009 ) . 96 . Mallegol , J . et al . T84 - intestinal epithelial exosomes bear MHC class II / peptide complexes potentiating antigen presentation by dendritic cells . Gastroenterology 132 , 1866 – 1876 ( 2007 ) . 97 . Van Niel , G . et al . Intestinal epithelial exosomes carry MHC class II / peptides able to inform the immune system in mice . Gut 52 , 1690 – 1697 ( 2003 ) . 98 . Giri , P . K . & Schorey , J . S . Exosomes derived from M . bovis BCG infected macrophages activate antigen - specific CD4 + and CD8 + T cells in vitro and in vivo . PLoS ONE 3 , e2461 ( 2008 ) . 99 . Veith , P . D . et al . Porphyromonas gingivalis outer membrane vesicles exclusively contain outer membrane and periplasmic proteins and carry a cargo enriched with virulence factors . J . Proteome Res . 13 , 2420 – 2432 ( 2014 ) . 100 . Rolhion , N . et al . Abnormally expressed ER stress response chaperone Gp96 in CD favours adherent - invasive Escherichia coli invasion . Gut 59 , 1355 – 1362 ( 2010 ) . This study identifies the ability of OMVs to facilitate bacterial colonization , potentially contributing to further pathology in patients with Crohn disease . 101 . Gregg , C . R . , Melly , M . A . , Hellerqvist , C . G . , Coniglio , J . G . & McGee , Z . A . Toxic activity of purified lipopolysaccharide of Neisseria gonorrhoeae for human fallopian tube mucosa . J . Infect . Dis . 143 , 432 – 439 ( 1981 ) . 102 . Namork , E . & Brandtzaeg , P . Fatal meningococcal septicaemia with “blebbing” meningococcus . Lancet 360 , 1741 ( 2002 ) . 103 . Shah , B . et al . Circulating bacterial membrane vesicles cause sepsis in rats . Shock 37 , 621 – 628 ( 2012 ) . 104 . Kuramitsu , H . K . , Qi , M . , Kang , I . C . & Chen , W . Role for periodontal bacteria in cardiovascular diseases . Ann . Periodontol . 6 , 41 – 47 ( 2001 ) . 105 . Halhoul , N . & Colvin , J . R . The ultrastructure of bacterial plaque attached to the gingiva of man . Arch . Oral Biol . 20 , 115 – 118 ( 1975 ) . 106 . Brandtzaeg , P . et al . Meningococcal endotoxin in lethal septic shock plasma studied by gas chromatography , mass - spectrometry , ultracentrifugation , and electron microscopy . J . Clin . Invest . 89 , 816 – 823 ( 1992 ) . 107 . Srisatjaluk , R . , Doyle , R . J . & Justus , D . E . Outer membrane vesicles of Porphyromonas gingivalis inhibit IFN - γ - mediated MHC class II expression by human vascular endothelial cells . Microb . Pathog . 27 , 81 – 91 ( 1999 ) . 108 . Slocum , C . et al . Distinct lipid A moieties contribute to pathogen - induced site - specific vascular inflammation . PLoS Pathog . 10 , e1004215 ( 2014 ) . 109 . Stentz , R . et al . A bacterial homolog of a eukaryotic inositol phosphate signaling enzyme mediates cross - kingdom dialog in the mammalian gut . Cell Rep . 6 , 646 – 656 ( 2014 ) . 110 . Oertli , M . et al . Helicobacter pylori γ - glutamyl transpeptidase and vacuolating cytotoxin promote gastric persistence and immune tolerance . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 3047 – 3052 ( 2013 ) . 111 . Arigita , C . et al . Stability of mono - and trivalent meningococcal outer membrane vesicle vaccines . Vaccine 22 , 629 – 642 ( 2004 ) . 112 . Baker , J . L . , Chen , L . , Rosenthal , J . A . , Putnam , D . & DeLisa , M . P . Microbial biosynthesis of designer outer membrane vesicles . Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 29 , 76 – 84 ( 2014 ) . 113 . Tani , C . et al . Quantification by LC - MS E of outer membrane vesicle proteins of the Bexsero® vaccine . Vaccine 32 , 1273 – 1279 ( 2014 ) . 114 . Ellis , T . N . , Leiman , S . A . & Kuehn , M . J . Naturally produced outer membrane vesicles from Pseudomonas aeruginosa elicit a potent innate immune response via combined sensing of both lipopolysaccharide and protein components . Infect . Immun . 78 , 3822 – 3831 ( 2010 ) . 115 . Sanders , H . & Feavers , I . M . Adjuvant properties of meningococcal outer membrane vesicles and the use of adjuvants in Neisseria meningitidis protein vaccines . Expert Rev . Vaccines 10 , 323 – 334 ( 2011 ) . 116 . Chen , D . J . et al . Delivery of foreign antigens by engineered outer membrane vesicle vaccines . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 3099 – 3104 ( 2010 ) . This paper provides proof‑of‑concept evidence for the use of OMVs as a vaccine platform , reporting that adjuvant‑free immunization with E . coli OMVs expressing green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) elicited strong GFP‑specific antibody responses in mice . 117 . Daleke - Schermerhorn , M . H . et al . Decoration of outer membrane vesicles with multiple antigens by using an autotransporter approach . Appl . Environ . Microbiol . 80 , 5854 – 5865 ( 2014 ) . 118 . Schild , S . , Nelson , E . J . , Bishop , A . L . & Camilli , A . Characterization of Vibrio cholerae outer membrane vesicles as a candidate vaccine for cholera . Infect . Immun . 77 , 472 – 484 ( 2009 ) . 119 . Asensio , C . J . et al . Outer membrane vesicles obtained from Bordetella pertussis Tohama expressing the lipid A deacylase PagL as a novel acellular vaccine candidate . Vaccine 29 , 1649 – 1656 ( 2011 ) . 120 . Lee , D . H . et al . Adjuvant effect of bacterial outer membrane vesicles with penta - acylated lipopolysaccharide on antigen - specific T cell priming . Vaccine 29 , 8293 – 8301 ( 2011 ) . 121 . Weynants , V . et al . Genetically modified L3 , 7 and L2 lipooligosaccharides from Neisseria meningitidis serogroup B confer a broad cross - bactericidal response . Infect . Immun . 77 , 2084 – 2093 ( 2009 ) . 122 . Oster , P . et al . MeNZB : a safe and highly immunogenic tailor - made vaccine against the New Zealand Neisseria meningitidis serogroup B disease epidemic strain . Vaccine 23 , 2191 – 2196 ( 2005 ) . 123 . Vesikari , T . et al . Immunogenicity and safety of an investigational multicomponent , recombinant , meningococcal serogroup B vaccine ( 4CMenB ) administered concomitantly with routine infant and child vaccinations : results of two randomised trials . Lancet 381 , 825 – 835 ( 2013 ) . 124 . Andrews , S . M . & Pollard , A . J . A vaccine against serogroup B Neisseria meningitidis : dealing with uncertainty . Lancet Infect . Dis . 14 , 426 – 434 ( 2014 ) . 125 . Rivera , J . et al . Bacillus anthracis produces membrane - derived vesicles containing biologically active toxins . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 19002 – 19007 ( 2010 ) . 126 . Prados - Rosales , R . et al . Mycobacteria release active membrane vesicles that modulate immune responses in a TLR2 - dependent manner in mice . J . Clin . Invest . 121 , 1471 – 1483 ( 2011 ) . 127 . Kim , Y . S . et al . Extracellular vesicles , especially derived from Gram - negative bacteria , in indoor dust induce neutrophilic pulmonary inflammation associated with both Th1 and Th17 cell responses . Clin . Exp . Allergy 43 , 443 – 454 ( 2013 ) . 128 . Kamada , N . , Seo , S . U . , Chen , G . Y . & Nunez , G . Role of the gut microbiota in immunity and inflammatory disease . Nature Rev . Immunol . 13 , 321 – 335 ( 2013 ) . 129 . Gujrati , V . et al . Bioengineered bacterial outer membrane vesicles as cell - specific drug - delivery vehicles for cancer therapy . ACS Nano 8 , 1525 – 1537 ( 2014 ) . This is the first report that harnesses OMV‑based technology to deliver targeted and effective cancer therapy agents to animals . 130 . Whitchurch , C . B . , Tolker - Nielsen , T . , Ragas , P . C . & Mattick , J . S . Extracellular DNA required for bacterial biofilm formation . Science 295 , 1487 ( 2002 ) . 131 . Keenan , J . I . , Davis , K . A . , Beaugie , C . R . , McGovern , J . J . & Moran , A . P . Alterations in Helicobacter pylori outer membrane and outer membrane vesicle - associated lipopolysaccharides under iron - limiting growth conditions . Innate Immun . 14 , 279 – 290 ( 2008 ) . 132 . Dorward , D . W . , Garon , C . F . & Judd , R . C . Export and intercellular transfer of DNA via membrane blebs of Neisseria gonorrhoeae . J . Bacteriol . 171 , 2499 – 2505 ( 1989 ) . 133 . Bernadac , A . , Gavioli , M . , Lazzaroni , J . C . , Raina , S . & Lloubes , R . Escherichia coli tol - pal mutants form outer membrane vesicles . J . Bacteriol . 180 , 4872 – 4878 ( 1998 ) . 134 . Macdonald , I . A . & Kuehn , M . J . Stress - induced outer membrane vesicle production by Pseudomonas aeruginosa . J . Bacteriol . 195 , 2971 – 2981 ( 2013 ) . 135 . McBroom , A . J . & Kuehn , M . J . Release of outer membrane vesicles by Gram - negative bacteria is a novel envelope stress response . Mol . Microbiol . 63 , 545 – 558 ( 2007 ) . Acknowledgements The work was supported by the Australian Research Council ( M . K . - L . ) , the National Health and Medical Research Council ( NHMRC ; R . L . F . ) and the Victorian Government’s Operational Infrastructure Support Program to the MIMR - PHI Institute of Medical Research . R . L . F . is an NHMRC Senior Research Fellow . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing interests . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 15 | JUNE 2015 | 387 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved