Journal of Educational Leadership in Action Journal of Educational Leadership in Action Volume 9 Issue 1 Article 4 12 - 18 - 2023 The Virtual Counseling Transition and its Influence on School The Virtual Counseling Transition and its Influence on School Counselor Self - Efficacy Counselor Self - Efficacy Tara Hornor The Citadel , tara . hornor @ citadel . edu Lee A . Westberry The Citadel , mcnealyt1 @ citadel . edu Follow this and additional works at : https : / / digitalcommons . lindenwood . edu / ela Part of the Curriculum and Instruction Commons , Educational Administration and Supervision Commons , and the Educational Assessment , Evaluation , and Research Commons Recommended Citation Recommended Citation Hornor , Tara and Westberry , Lee A . ( 2023 ) " The Virtual Counseling Transition and its Influence on School Counselor Self - Efficacy , " Journal of Educational Leadership in Action : Vol . 9 : Iss . 1 , Article 4 . Available at : https : / / digitalcommons . lindenwood . edu / ela / vol9 / iss1 / 4 This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Journals at Digital Commons @ Lindenwood University . It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal of Educational Leadership in Action by an authorized editor of Digital Commons @ Lindenwood University . For more information , please contact phuffman @ lindenwood . edu . SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 1 The Virtual Counseling Transition and its Influence on School Counselor Self - Efficacy Tara Hornor and Lee A . Westberry Abstract The purpose of this qualitative study was to examine school counselors’ experiences transitioning to virtual counseling during the Covid - 19 pandemic , the factors influencing their sense of confidence , and successes and challenges associated with the transition to virtual counseling . Study participants characterized the transition to virtual counseling as challenging and reported the process decreased their self - efficacy . Participants identified four salient categories of challenges associated with the transition to virtual counseling , including difficulty maintaining accountability and contact with students , decreased work / life balance , diminished sense of connection with students , and lack of preparation to conduct virtual school counseling . Successes resulting from the transition to virtual counseling , included enhanced technology skills and utilization of technology to expand virtual services to students and families . Introduction The COVID - 19 Pandemic impacted all sectors of society : family , industry , health , and education . In response , the world is learning to live with new and enduring strains of the COVID - 19 virus . . Federal and state governments issued a number of mandates : stay at home ( Kassinger , 2021 ) , indoor versus outdoor regulations ( Marchiori , 2020 ) , masking ( Chan , 2020 ; Kai et al . , 2020 ) , and quarantine regulations ( Memon et al . , 2021 ; Parmet & Sinha , 2020 ) . All of these mandates have had a direct impact on every element of society , especially school - aged children . Recent educational research has focused on the COVID - 19 impact on students’ educational loss ( Black et al . , 2020 ; Praghopapati , 2020 ) and emotional well - being ( Buckner et SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 2 al . , 2021 ; Cao et al , 2020 ; Elmer et al . , 2020 ) as well as the impact on teachers ( Barton , 2020 ; Kaden , 2020 ) . The recent statement by U . S . Surgeon General Murthy highlighted the negative impact some pandemic policies have had on the mental health of children ( Powell , 2022 ) ; consequently , school counselors are going to become more integral in supporting children in school . Published reports from the Centers for Disease Control suggest that students who participated in virtual instructional delivery during COVID - 19 may be at higher risk for negative emotional and physical health outcomes and may need additional support to overcome pandemic experiences ( Vernlenden , et al . , 2021 ) . However , very little research exists on the Covid - 19 impact on school counselors . The purpose of this research is to study the influence of COVID - 19 on P - 12 school counselors . Specifically , the focus of the qualitative study is to study the influence on school counselor self - efficacy . The pandemic has impacted all other sectors of schooling and with the new focus on increased mental health issues , school counselors’ beliefs in their abilities during this time will be integral to successful school transitions for children and parents . The study aims to answer the following research questions : 1 . How do school counselors describe their transition to virtual counseling ? 2 . How did the transition to virtual counseling influence school counselors’ confidence levels ? 3 . How do school counselors describe the successes and challenges associated with their transition to virtual counseling ? Literature Review The rate of mental health issues among school - aged youth is increasing at an alarming rate ( Lambie et al . , 2019 ) especially with the impact of COVID - 19 ( Ahmed & Firdous , 2020 ; SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 3 Pincus , et al . , 2020 ) . In fact , school closures withdrew a layer of mental health support during a time of social isolation and loneliness due to stay - at - home and quarantine orders ( Thakur , 2020 ; Viner et al . , 2022 ) . As a result , school - aged children today face more mental health challenges than ever before ( Benton et al . , 2022 ) . Not only have children suffered a learning loss , but they have suffered a counseling loss as well . Now that schools are reopening , school personnel are faced with dealing with the increased manifestations of those mental health issues : anxiety , depression , aggression , irritability , substance abuse , and suicidal ideations ( Bera , et al . , 2022 ; Shirotsuki et al . , 2022 ) . School administrators , teachers , and school counselors are now left with managing the increase in negative behaviors as well as the self - destructive internalized behaviors of students . School counselors have historically experienced difficulty in fulfilling their roles in the actual counseling realm due to increased non - counseling duties ascribed to them that reduce the time spent with students and increased caseloads ( Blake , 2020 ) . According to the American School Counselor Association ( ASCA , 2023 ) , school counselors should help all students do the following : - Apply academic strategies for success - Manage emotions - Develop and apply interpersonal skills - Plan for post - secondary pathways ( ASCA , 2023 , p . 1 ) However , many counselors find they are assigned non - counseling duties that are traditionally considered administrative tasks such as scheduling , test coordination , or bus supervision duties ( Fye , et al . , 2020a ; Kim & Lambie , 2018 ) . SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 4 Due to these factors , school counselors are already at risk of burnout , prior to the pandemic setting ( Fye et al . , 2020b ; Kim & Lambie , 2018 ; Mullen et al . , 2021 ) . Sandhu and Singh ( 2021 ) state , “Counselors work in emotionally charged interpersonal settings which make them susceptible to stress that can ultimately lead to burnout” ( p . 258 ) . The authors continue to underscore the augmented risk of burnout in the face of the pandemic . School counselors feel most effective and less stressed when their job expectations are aligned to the ASCA National Model ( 2012 ) guidelines ( Cervoni & DeLucia - Waack , 2011 ; Mullen et al . , 2021 ) . However , during the pandemic , ASCA guidelines were not followed because counselors had limited access to students . Counselors are needed front and center to address the mental health and social emotional support of students in schools ( Cook et al . , 2019 ) , but the pandemic moved the front line for many . In fact , many counselors initially felt less effective when they were needed the most ( Strear et al . , 2021 ) . Self - Efficacy The link between counseling behaviors and effectiveness may be found in the concept of counselor self - efficacy . Lee and Bobko ( 1994 ) studied Bandura’s ( 1986 ) concept of self - efficacy and stated , Those who have a strong sense of self - efficacy in a particular situation will devote their attention and effort to the demands of the situation , and when faced with obstacles and difficult situations , these individuals will try harder and persist longer ( p . 364 ) . In essence , self - efficacy is a social cognitive theory ( SCT ) that states the degree to which an individual believes in his / her abilities will dictate his / her effectiveness accordingly ( Bandura , 1997 ) . Three major assumptions exist with this SCT : 1 . People can learn through observing others , even if initial prior experience is lacking . SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 5 2 . Reinforcement is the key to learning , both externally and internally . The mental preparedness to learn is achieved through intrinsic motivation . 3 . Self - regulation is necessary for change to occur and be sustained ; changed behaviors do not necessarily result from new learning . ( Bandura , 1991 ) In the context of the COVID - 19 Pandemic , which constitutes new territory for many , these three assumptions must be examined . First , many schools across the world altered the modality of instruction and the time in school due to the pandemic . “Close to 80 % of the world’s student population is affected by school closures in 138 countries” ( Chang & Yano , 2020 , p . 1 ) . Consequently , traditional , face - to - face teaching and learning was shifted to some form of virtual learning ( Black et al . , 2020 ; Kim et al . , 2020 ; Stage et al . , 2020 ) , and this drastically impacted access to children . Because of the decisions made by state and federal officials , counselors were forced to adapt . Many have never had the opportunity to observe how to effectively provide counseling services in a virtual environment . The second assumption addresses counselors’ intrinsic motivation to learn . School counselors , under increasing pressure , have succeeded in serving schools in progressively needful environments with fewer resources ( Cosner & Jones , 2016 ; Weiner & Holder , 2018 ) . However , school counselors have been noted to have a higher level of dissatisfaction with their role ambiguity and increased burnout ( Blake , 2020 ; Fye et al . , 2020a ) . This increased frustration with a job description and expectations as well as burnout may have an impact on motivation ( Holman et al . , 2019 ) . The last assumption rests in that fact that counselors must self - regulate learning to impact self - efficacy and create any real change . Bandura ( 1991 ) states to self - regulate , one must monitor one’s own behavior , make judgements about those behaviors in relation to personal norms and SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 6 environmental factors , and influence self - reaction . This self - regulation helps facilitate the pursuit of personal goals ( Inzlicht et al . , 2021 ) . The question remains if counselors have the supervisory support to formulate those personal goals . Vast research has been conducted on teacher self - efficacy , and the research shows that teacher engagement and job satisfaction are positively related to self - efficacy ( Kasalak & Dagyar , 2020 ) . However , a paucity of research has been conducted on school counselor self - efficacy when considering the domains of the ASCA National Model ( 2012 ) that keep the development of the whole student at the forefront to bridge counseling and education . Therefore , it is important to investigate how the pandemic influenced counselor self - efficacy . counseling program that meets the ASCA recommendations for a program achieves the following : - Touches every student and is delivered systemically . - Uses data to make programmatic decisions . - Identifies measurable student competency deficiencies based on local data in the areas of academic , social / personal , and career domains . - Includes comprehensive programming that works to close the achievement and opportunity gaps . - Includes school counseling curriculum , individual counseling , responsive services , and system support that yields results in improved student achievement , attendance , and discipline . ( ASCA , 2012 , p . 1 ) During the pandemic , counseling programs struggled to meet one much less all of these recommendations . With the diminished student contact and learning losses suffered , academic and opportunity gaps widened ( Blasko et al . , 2021 ; Kaffenberger , 2021 ; Werner & Woessmann , 2021 ) . Virtual school student attendance remained an issue , either because of motivation , SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 7 internet connectivity ( Rizvi & Nabi , 2021 ) , or illness ( Chernozhukov et al . , 2021 ) , and this made student contact even more difficult . Growth Mindset The transition to virtual counseling required an openness to new ways of operating . School counselors , to be successful , needed to navigate these challenges with a growth mindset ( Hochanadel & Finamore , 2015 ) . Dweck ( 2006 ) presents the concepts of two opposing ways of conceptualizing and navigating challenges : with a fixed mindset or a growth mindset . In a fixed mindset , school counselors view their knowledge , skills , and abilities in a static way . Meaning , school counselors try to make the new challenge fit old modes of operation . Whereas , in a growth mindset , counselors view their knowledge , skills , and abilities as dynamic with conceivable improvement through new opportunities ( Dweck , 2006 ; Patrick & Joshi , 2019 ) . These prospects provide the chance for school counselors to learn new skills and adapt to the changing situation . “ Growth mindset is based on the belief that your basic qualities are things you can cultivate through your efforts , your strategies , and help from others . ” – Dweck ( 2016 ) , Mindset : The New Psychology of Success ( p . 7 . ) School counselors play a critical role in helping students navigate change ( King - White , 2019 ; Lewis et al . , 2020 ) . The shift to virtual counseling prompted school counselors to reflect on how they would navigate new challenges . School counselors essentially had to ask themselves how to effectively support students virtually . Personal reflections on avoiding challenges to prevent potential failures or taking risks were prevalent . Did counselors view the new terrain as an opportunity to hone skills ? SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 8 How school counselors view their own intelligence and abilities matters . School counselors’ perceptions about their own abilities guide how they perceive and approach challenges as well as how they model a growth mindset to the students they aim to serve . In essence , growth spurs growth , and confidence bestows confidence . Students were also embarking on new terrain and needed more support than ever ( Pincus et al . , 2020 ; Talmus , 2019 ) . Therefore , the growth mindset exhibited by the adults in the building could have a tremendous impact on student success as well ( Larberg & Sherlin , 2021 ) . Methodology Numerous research designs and assessment techniques have been utilized to investigate teacher self - efficacy in providing virtual instruction . However , few research studies have focused on school counselors’ self - efficacy and experiences transitioning to virtual counseling . The complexity of the transition to virtual counseling , as well as the myriad of challenges associated with counseling in a virtual environment , necessitate a thoughtful construction of the research design ( Leavy , 2017 ) . For these reasons , this study employs a basic qualitative research design , including qualitative structured interviews to gain in - depth insight about school counselors’ experiences transitioning to virtual counseling . A basic qualitative design was utilized in this research study because the research questions focused on school counselors’ experiences transitioning to virtual counseling , how the transition influenced their confidence , and the successes and challenges they experienced . Levy ( 2017 ) asserts that utilizing a basic qualitative research strategy with structured interviews is particularly powerful in gaining a more comprehensive understanding of participants’ perceptions , which was integral to this study . This research strategy enabled individual school SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 9 counselors’ rich personal reflections on their own experiences to be compared with other participants in the study ( Creswell , 2018 ; Leavy , 2017 ; Strauss & Corbin , 2015 ) . The interviews utilized five structured questions which aligned to one of the study’s three overarching research questions and utilized an open - ended question structure to encourage research participants to elaborate on their own perceptions of the transition to virtual school counseling . The interview questions focused upon four important areas including , the transition to virtual school counseling , how the transition influenced their confidence level , successes and challenges they experienced , as well as advice they would give other school counselors . By purposefully constructing the interview questions to be open - ended , informed by research literature , and aligned with one of the study’s overarching research questions , the researchers ensured the interview questions were relevant and appropriate ( Strauss & Corbin , 2015 ) . Each interview was recorded and transcribed to increase data trustworthiness ( Creswell , 2018 ) . The research interviews were conducted utilizing video conferencing software spanning a two - week period . Research Participants School counselors in a southeastern state in the United States were invited to share their perspective in individual research interviews . Eleven school counselors agreed to participate in the study . Percy et al . ( 2015 ) asserted that even a research sample that is small may provide great insight and information on the research topic . The research participants shared one critical characteristic which met the inclusion criteria for the research study – employment as a school counselor who transitioned to virtual counseling during the COVID - 19 pandemic . The participants in this study were diverse in years of school counseling experience , school counseling grade level , gender , and race and ethnicity , increasing the likelihood of the SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 10 representativeness of the sample . Additionally , the interview participants geographically spanned the state . Interview participant pseudonyms and demographics are provided in Table 1 . Pseudonyms are used throughout the article for the research participants . Data Analysis Creswell ( 2018 ) states , The process of data analysis involves making sense out of text and image data . It involves preparing the data for analysis , conducting different analyses , moving deeper and deeper into understanding the data , representing the data , and making an interpretation of the larger meaning of the data . ( p . 183 ) Following the conclusion of the first research interview , the researchers utilized a thematic , constant - comparison analysis ( Merriam & Grenier , 2019 ) . Using a thematic analytic strategy , the researchers engaged in multiple stages of coding , clustering , and classifying words to ensure saturation was reached and to gain insight about developing themes , categories , and patterns associated with school counselors’ transition to virtual counseling ( Braun & Clarke , 2006 ) . Table 1 Participant Demographic Characteristics Participants ( n = 11 ) School Counseling Experience Gender Race 1 . Brenda 10 Years , High School Female Caucasian 2 . Amy 20 Years , High School Female Caucasian 3 . Blake 15 Years , High School Male Caucasian 4 . Emily 22 Years , High School Female African American 5 . Hanna 17 Years , High School Female African American 6 . Sabrina 28 Years , High School Female Caucasian 7 . Sofia 1 Year , High School Female African American 8 . Sally 25 Years , Elementary School Female Caucasian 9 . Sam 8 Years , Middle School Male Caucasian 10 . Scott 2 Years , High School Male African American SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 11 11 . Wendy 20 Years , High School Female Caucasian Table 1 illustrates the participant pseudonyms , years of school counseling experience , gender , and race The researchers frequently revisited the participants’ interview data utilizing a constant comparison analysis technique . This inductive analysis led to six themes emerging from the data that answered the study’s overarching research questions and provided insight into school counselors’ experiences . While thematic analysis was a critically important component , the analysis of published research literature was also a key component of the analytic process . Previous research literature on school counseling and self - efficacy was instrumental in assessing the data collected in the individual interviews and evaluating the research findings . Research literature assisted in better understanding and recognizing emerging themes , categories , and patterns in the study’s data and helped in contextualizing the research findings . Results School counselors participating in this study answered a variety of interview questions designed to generate insight about the following three overarching research questions : 1 ) How do school counselors describe their transition to virtual counseling ? 2 ) How did the transition to virtual counseling influence counselors’ confidence levels ? 3 ) How do school counselors describe the successes and challenges associated with their transition to virtual counseling ? Research participant responses were strikingly similar despite differences in years of experience , gender , race and ethnicity . An analysis of the individual interview data highlights all the participants interviewed in this research study reported the transition to virtual counseling initially rattled their confidence level and effectiveness as a school counselor . In fact , all of the school counselors participating in this study viewed the transition to virtual counseling as more difficult than in traditional SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 12 environments , requiring different knowledge , skills , and abilities in several key areas . Most interview participants also characterized the transition to virtual counseling as “challenging , ” “very ineffective , ” “difficult , ” “terrible , ” and more “time - intensive” than counseling in traditional face - to - face educational environments . Most participants also shared that the experience of transitioning to virtual counseling felt isolating . For example , when asked about the transition to virtual counseling , Amy , a high school counselor with over 20 years of experience shared , It was bumpy . When you are in a brick and mortar school , you are never alone . There ' s always a child in your office . There ' s always a colleague at your door . There ' s always interaction . And if you need something , you get on your feet and you walk and you get something or somebody . Or if there ' s an issue you need to address , you have all the resources you need right there in that building to take care of that at that moment . All 11 participants in the study also shared that the challenges of transitioning to virtual school counseling decreased their own sense of confidence and self - efficacy . For example , Amy , a high school counselor with over 20 years of experience stated her sense of self confidence , Went way down , because we felt like we weren ' t reaching the students we needed to reach . And we could not do what we had done in the past to get the results that we had in the past . Similarly , Sabrina , a veteran high school counselor with over 28 years of experience shared , It made me feel less important at the time , because the teachers , they got the focus , which they should , the academic courses . And I would pop into their Zoom SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 13 classes and say hey to the kids before or at the end and reach out to them . But I had never felt so irrelevant as I did during those Zoom times . Several study participants also perceived the lack of preparation and professional development for the shift to virtual counseling also exerted an influence on their sense of self - efficacy . For example , Scott , a second - year high school counselor commented , It was very challenging for me . Transition wise , I think that I did a fairly decent job , but my confidence was not there at first . I ' m going to be honest because there was no training on how to make those transitions . I kind of had to do it on the fly . Virtual School Counseling Challenges Research participants passionately recounted numerous challenges they encountered in the transition to virtual counseling . Interview participants identified four salient categories of challenges that emerged from the transition to virtual counseling : 1 ) difficulty maintaining accountability and contact with students 2 ) achieving an effective work and life balance due to new work expectations and responsibilities ; 3 ) diminished sense of connection with students ; 4 ) and lack of preparation to conduct school counseling virtually . The following sections present the data gained relating to each of the aforementioned areas to provide insight on school counselors’ perceptions about challenges associated with transitioning to a virtual counseling role . Maintaining Accountability and Contact of Students All the study’s participants rated the difficulty in maintaining accountability and staying in contact with students as one of the most significant challenges they experienced in the transition to virtual counseling . Amy , a high school counselor with over 20 years of experience SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 14 shared she was “not able to contact students . And the ones that you couldn ' t contact were the ones you needed to contact . ” Similarly , Sofia , a first - year high school counselor commented , It ' s hard to reach students when they are virtual versus when they are at school and you can have that face to face interaction with them . When they went virtual , it was hard getting in touch with them . And now that some are back , the majority ' s back , it just seems like it has created a wedge in between the counselor - student relationship because they haven’t had any structure , they haven’t had guidance , and they ' re just lost . This difficulty in contacting and maintaining accountability for students during the COVID - 19 pandemic was a major source of stress for many virtual counselors . For example , Hanna , a high school counselor with 17 years of experience shared her main concern was , Losing a child and not being able to get in touch with students , which did happen . We put in a lot of systems into place where having a spreadsheet - if one teacher heard from one child , we indicated that on the spreadsheet . And so we knew somebody had some contact with the child . But in cases where there were kids where there was no one in contact , then we went to different levels of getting a social worker involved . But my main concern was losing a child . Similarly , Emily , a high school counselor with 22 years of experience confided one of her greatest challenges was , How to keep in contact with students , how to stay connected and making sure that they felt like that we were still there for them , that they could not reach us . So as many channels as possible between that Google Classroom , between that Google voice , email , Google Meet , just wanted to make sure that they didn ' t lose sight of SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 15 the message “We are still here for you . We are still here to support you . " I think that was a major challenge . Because a lot of students and parents felt like they were just on their own . Fostering an Effective Work / Life Balance Research participants also found the transition to virtual counseling resulted in expanded job responsibilities and counseling expectations . The shift to virtual work blurred the time boundaries of their usual workday , expanding work into the evenings and weekends . For example , Emily , a high school counselor with 22 years of experience confided , I think one of the main things that we did is we became available after hours , which was very hard on us . And not all the time , but I felt like when we were out , I was answering my emails sometimes eight , nine o ' clock . Just trying to be available because people ' s stress levels were so high and just trying to just meet those needs . These expanded hours and expectations for evening and weekend counseling services exerted a toll on maintaining an effective work / life balance for many virtual counselors . This sentiment is expressed by Emily , a high school counselor with 22 years of experience who confided , It impacted my stress , because we were working from home , so I was so glad when we were finally able to come back in the building at one point , even though students weren ' t here , we were able to come back in the building because then it was hard to separate personal from professional . They were always lumped together . And I felt like I was just always working . Likewise , Scott , a second - year high school counselor commented , SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 16 I find myself taking a lot more work home . Typically , when my day was over , no matter if I stayed a little later or came a little early , that day was over . Now , I have to work on the weekends to get things typed out , and written out , and done correctly . Diminished Sense of Connection with Students Most of the study participants expressed that the transition to virtual counseling created a diminished sense of connection with students . For example , Wendy , an experienced high school counselor with over 20 years of experience confided , I don ' t particularly like working with the kids online . I don ' t get a feel for them . I feel like you can kind of hide behind the camera . Getting kids to turn on cameras , getting parents to understand we ' re not there to view your home . But I think you lose a little bit in conversation with the kids . It ' s easy for them to turn it off and kind of just put this little facade up . Like when they ' re sitting here , I can see them fidgeting or it ' s just a little different . It ' s just a different feeling . I don ' t feel like it ' s as personal . Similarly , Sabrina , a veteran high school counselor with over 28 years of experience shared the perception that virtual counseling was , Very ineffective . I would have to call kids if they needed to talk about anything . If it was personal or social , it was a phone conversation . And you ' re not connected . So , it was very hard to be a counselor in that atmosphere . Likewise , Blake , a high school counselor with 15 years of experience reinforced the importance of establishing a human connection and rapport in the following statement , SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 17 To me , we did the best we could . There ' s no doubt about it . Is it effective ? No . But for counseling , it takes away that connection . The whole idea is human connection . Amy , a high school counselor with over 20 years of experience , also highlighted the difficulty of interpreting non - verbal communications in the virtual environment , stating , I just , I still feel like I couldn ' t get them . It ' s really hard to read body language on Zoom . It ' s really hard . A lot of them didn ' t want to turn their camera on because they did not want me to see their house . I mean , so much of my counseling is visual . And I want them to see me too . Virtual Counseling Skills Study participants also quickly discovered that virtual counseling necessitated different skills and abilities than counseling in a traditional school environment . All of the school counselors in this study expressed that they initially felt unprepared to conduct virtual school counseling sessions and activities given the quick unanticipated shift to virtual counseling . Many of the participants expressed concern with how their counseling skills and processes translated to virtual settings . For example , Wendy , an experienced high school counselor with over 20 years of experience confided , Being able to read people just through the camera , being able to look at somebody and kind of decipher whether they ' re being truthful or they ' re putting this little facade up . I think you need to be more aware of their mannerisms , things like that , to try to get through it . Some of it is communication pieces too , knowing when to pause and let kids talk , because you can read that sometimes in an office , but it ' s hard on a camera , right ? Because you ' re just not getting that feel . SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 18 Similarly , Sally , an experienced elementary school counselor with over 25 years of experience shared , It was a pretty big impact on knowing how to reach kids and how to best meet their needs now because when they ' re face - to - face , you can see them , you know what ' s happening . You can tell when they ' re having a bad day , you can reach out to them and you didn ' t know that when they were off wherever . I had to do a suicidal risk assessment via the phone with a kid and a parent at 10 o ' clock at night , so it was hard because you can ' t actually see them and gauge how they ' re feeling . Confidentiality in the virtual environment was an additional concern expressed by eight of the 11 participants . For example , Sam , a middle school counselor with over 8 years of experience stated , My first concern was confidentiality . Typically , that ' s such a bedrock of the counseling relationship and to be able to provide confidentiality in an online forum was difficult . Just not knowing that my own children were at home and even though I ' m in a separate room , if my nine - year - old was going to walk in and need something . I had a student talk to me about an issue of sensitive nature that required me to seek out DSS . And while having that conversation via Zoom , I was very concerned that that person ' s parent guardian could come in the back door where they were talking . Similarly , Amy , a high school counselor with over 20 years of experience shared , A lot of times , whereas in a brick - and - mortar building , you ' d have the student and have your door closed , and you felt like that conversation was private and you had SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 19 no idea if it was private or not on Zoom . And I think I felt that more from the students than on my side because I could feel they ' re like , " No , my mom ' s right over there . " But even me in my house . I have an older son and daughter and a husband . I didn ' t want them hearing what I was talking about . So , it was a lot of confidentiality issues that were hard to overcome . Likewise , Sam , a middle school counselor with over 8 years of experience stated , One of the students definitely needed to divulge information that was going on within the home . And that student had a very difficult time trying to divulge what was going on with four siblings and their parents still in the house . Dealing with that very sensitive nature information confidentially via virtual counseling was very difficult . Virtual School Counseling Successes Each of the interview participants also asserted the transition to virtual counseling offered several silver linings and unexpected areas of personal and organizational growth . Interview participants identified two distinct advantages that emerged because of transitioning to virtual counseling , including : 1 ) enhanced technology skills and 2 ) utilization of technology to expand virtual services to students and families . The following sections present the data gained relating to each of the aforementioned areas to provide insight on school counselors’ perceptions about enhancements gained through the transition to virtual counseling . Enhanced Technology Skills All the study participants reported enhancing their technology skills as a result of transitioning to virtual school counseling . Several participants shared how they adopted growth SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 20 mindsets to overcome technology challenges in the transition to virtual counseling . For example , Hanna , a high school counselor with 17 years of experience stated , I was very , very proud and it increased my confidence in our resilience to figure it out and get it done . But it also showed me that we all needed some level of support , no matter where we were in this , that we had to support each other as well . Because just like a lot of the teachers , we were thrust into learning a lot of technology real fast . So if I created something , sharing it , it was matter of , okay , what do you have that I can use ? Similarly , Amy , a high school counselor with over 20 years of experience shared a technology related growth mindset in the following statement , I think the lessons that we learned about video conferencing has opened up a lot more opportunity for us to get professional development or to have meetings…So I think it forced me to start thinking about different ways to interact , different ways to collaborate . This sense of accomplishment was also expressed by Sabrina , a veteran high school counselor with over 28 years of experience who shared , Having to learn Zoom and do IGPs through Zoom and Google Meet and all of that , that was probably my biggest fear and challenge . But I think that was probably my biggest takeaway from that is my ability to take it online if I have to do so . And I ' m still doing stuff online all the time , and I feel much more comfortable in doing it , and effective . Utilization of Technology to Expand Services SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 21 Another silver lining found in the transition to virtual counseling was the utilization of technology to expand virtual services to students and families . Many participants in the study noted that even after in - person instruction resumed in brick - and - mortar buildings , virtual counseling services were here to stay . For example , Wendy , an experienced high school counselor with over 20 years of experience confided , We became electronic . We took all of our forms and have everything converted so we can easily shoot a parent out documentation , things that they need . The parents really liked it and I think they still do . We are still doing our IGPs totally virtually . The kids are coming down [ to the counseling office ] , but the parents are joining us in their offices . And so that ' s helpful . We can talk about it . They don ' t have to take the time off from work to drive all the way over here to come in , to meet with us . Likewise , Sally , an experienced elementary school counselor with over 25 years of experience shared , We have parents that now will do a Google Meet for their conference during their lunch hour , whereas before they had to get off work and come in . Now they can just go hop on their phone and we have a conference . Virtual School Counselor Recommendations Reflecting on both the challenges and successes in transitioning to being a virtual counselor , each of the interview participants offered recommendations for other school counselors . The recommendations focused on the importance of seeking support from colleagues , maintaining a focus on serving students , and adopting a growth mindset . The SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 22 following sections present additional insights on school counselors’ recommendations for other counselors . Seek Support from Colleagues Most of the study participants expressed the importance and value of seeking support from colleagues . School counselors described the networks they utilized to develop best practices during the transition to virtual counseling . For example , Sally , an experienced elementary school counselor with over 25 years of experience shared , Have lots of tricks in the tool bag . I mean , just be open and reach out to your colleagues because we were all panicking at the same time . How do we do this ? So I was reaching out to counselors I ' d worked with previously and saying , " okay , how are y ' all doing this at your school ? Because we aren ' t real sure which way to go . " Wendy , an experienced high school counselor with over 20 years of experience also recommended , Observe multiple counselors . We ' re all different . Everybody does it a different way . As long as we ' re getting to the same end result , we ' re okay . And just find what works for you . Focus on Serving Students School counselors also emphasized the importance of keeping the focus on serving students in sustaining momentum and effective student services . For example , Scott , a second - year high school counselor shared , “You have to get to know your individual students . ” Similarly , Brenda , a high school counselor with over 10 years of experience stated , SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 23 I think just kind of staying on top of what your students are doing . Knowing who is missing a lot of days , if you ' re able to have the information about who is out on quarantine , so that you ' re kind of checking in with those students . Emily , a high school counselor with 22 years of experience asserted , You have to remember when you chose to go into this field , well you chose to work with children . You chose to help children . You ' re preparing them for tomorrow , you ' re preparing them for the future . So sometimes we have to go back and remember why we chose what we chose . You didn ' t choose it to be , I don ' t know , famous , popular , or to be into a certain group . You chose to help kids . But if you can just remember that you ' re touching the lives of these kids , you ' re helping these parents who need support , who some of them don ' t have the support . You ' re making a difference , even when you don ' t see it . Several counselors in the study described how maintaining a focus on students during this time of uncertainty helped them to personalize their outreach to students . For example , Sofia , a first - year high school counselor shared , Be patient . Not every student is the same . And I ' m telling you , when I came to this school , that opened my eyes immediately . Every student is not the same . You cannot approach each student the same way . You can ' t expect for all the students to want the same thing . Not all students want to go to college and that ' s okay . Not all students want to go to the military . That ' s okay . Every student is unique and you just have to adjust . You believe in them and just start helping them to believe in themselves and just guide from behind . Maintain a Growth Mindset SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 24 The importance of maintaining a growth mindset was described by most participants in the study as an essential element of their success in transitioning to the virtual counseling role . Study participants also expressed the need to maintain a growth mindset to continue to make school counseling improvements . For example , Hanna , a high school counselor with 17 years of experience stated , I tell new counselors is that we need you . We need your ideas . Do not be afraid to share what you know and to share how you might do something different . Don ' t sit back . Don ' t be the person to wait and see if someone else is going to do it or have an idea . Bring the idea to the table . We need to hear what you got to say . Similarly , Scott , a second - year high school counselor commented , I would give them the advice of number one , being a lot more flexible . Continue to work on your flexibility and not being rigid on things that may seem a one plus one . I would also ask that they continue to develop professionally , because we don ' t know what the future may hold . I know that COVID exposed a lot of holes in things that we thought we were doing right , so I would ask them to not just rely on their program , to continue to develop professionally on their own , and through their district , and through their school , and through their administration , because it ' s different specifically for each school , and each student , and each parent . So continue to develop and continue to be a lot more flexible . Additionally , Emily , a high school counselor with 22 years of experience recommended , You need to find out what is the vision of the leadership of your school . Meaning the principal administration , that is key . In order for your counseling program to be effective , you have to find out what is the vision of leadership . And implement SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 25 services , implement programs that will support that person ' s or that team ' s vision . Because when you fall in line with what that school improvement plan is and what the administrative team sees , then there will be a greater respect for the counseling program and the services that you offer and the support to go along with it . Having an open mindset , you have to be a team player . Discussion School counselors participating in this study characterized the transition to virtual counseling during the COVID - 19 pandemic as extremely challenging and stressful . The findings from this study indicate the COVID - 19 pandemic had a powerful influence on school counselor confidence and self - efficacy . It is noteworthy that all of the study participants reported the shift to virtual counseling initially decreased their self - efficacy and confidence in their own school counseling skills . Insights shared by school counselors about the challenges they encountered as well as how adoption of a growth mindset produced silver linings , provide valuable and actionable continuous improvement steps for enhancing counselor self - efficacy in virtual counseling . It is critically important to consider how administrators can support their P12 school counselors in strengthening their virtual counseling skills as well as their own confidence working in virtual counseling environments . School counselors noted several common challenges in virtual counseling environments , including difficulty maintaining accountability and contact with students , decreased sense of work / life balance , diminished sense of connection with students , and lack of preparation to conduct virtual school counseling . Administrators can utilize these findings and implications for practice to support school counselors in several substantive ways . SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 26 1 . Utilizing strategic planning and budgeting to meaningfully reduce school counselor - to - student case load size . The shift to virtual counseling further emphasized the time intensive work required to sustain relationships and meaningful connections with students . Counseling in virtual environments necessitates reduction of school counselor student case loads for effective provision of services . 2 . Collaborating with school counselors to better define their roles , decrease role ambiguity , and remove non - counseling related tasks from their job responsibilities consistent with the ASCA model . This role definition will also help counselors find a better work / life balance . 3 . Providing time for collaboration with other school counselors to practice counseling skills and processes in virtual counseling settings . Findings from this study indicate that school counselors felt unprepared for the transition to virtual counseling . Providing the necessary time for skill development and reflection will enhance counselor confidence in their virtual counseling skills . 4 . Investing in continuing professional development and learning opportunities in virtual counseling . Findings from this study indicate school counselors are concerned about confidentiality in virtual counseling environments . Providing professional development and the opportunity to explore best practices in ensuring confidentiality can address these concerns . Conferring with district legal counsel will help alleviate some counselor concerns . 5 . Ensuring school counselors are recognized as a valuable member of the administrative leadership team . The transition to virtual work environments for principals , teachers and school counselors involved different experiences . However , there may be great synergies SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 27 and learning opportunities afforded by comparing lessons learned and continuous improvement recommendations . 6 . Recognizing how growth mindsets enhanced the transition to virtual school counseling and counselor self - efficacy . Administrators can foster a continued focus on adopting and exercising growth mindsets through encouraging team learning and collaboration . Study Limitations and Future Research Recommendations While this study found strong consistency in the challenges and successes school counselors experienced as they transitioned to virtual counseling , an analysis of the study’s methodology indicates several potential limitations and recommendations for future research . The study was conducted within one southeastern state using a basic qualitative approach which may limit the extent to which the results can be generalized . Future research studies incorporating multiple states , a larger and more diverse sample of school counselors , and different methodological techniques may improve the generalizability of the findings . Conclusion The examination of school counselors’ experiences transitioning to virtual counseling during the COVID - 19 pandemic , including the factors influencing their self - efficacy as well as the successes and challenges they experienced provide valuable insights for how schools can foster growth mindsets and support the enhancement of virtual counseling experiences . The successes resulting from the transition to virtual counseling , including strengthening of technology skills and expanding virtual services to students and families highlight the powerful impact adopting growth mindsets can have within educational environments . References Ahmed , A . , & Firdous , H . ( 2020 ) . The transformational effects of COVID - 19 Pandemic on SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 28 guidance and counseling . International Journal of Advance Research and Innovative Ideas in Education , 6 ( 6 ) , 172 - 179 . American School Counselor Association ( 2023 ) . The Role of the School Counselor . https : / / schoolcounselor . org / getmedia / ee8b2e1b - d021 - 4575 - 982c - c84402cb2cd2 / Role - Statement . pdf American School Counselor Association . ( 2012 ) . ASCA National Model : A framework for school counseling programs ( 3rd ed . ) . Virginia . Bandura , A . ( 1991 ) . Social cognitive theory of self - regulation . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 50 ( 2 ) , 248 - 287 . Bandura A . ( 1997 ) . Self - efficacy : The exercise of control . Freeman Press . Bandura , A . ( 1986 ) . Social foundations of thought and action : A social cognitive theory . Prentice Hall . Barton , D . C . ( 2020 ) . Impacts of the COVID‐19 pandemic on field instruction and remote teaching alternatives : Results from a survey of instructors . Ecology and Evolution , 10 ( 22 ) , 12499 - 12507 . Benton , T . , Njoroge , W . , Warren , F . , & Ng , W . ( 2022 ) . Sounding the alarm for children’s mental Health during the Covid - 19 pandemic . JAMA pediatric Bera , L . , Souchon , M . , Ladsous , A . , Colin , V . , & Lopez - Castroman , J . ( 2022 ) . Emotional and Behavioral Impact of the COVID - 19 Epidemic in Adolescents . Current Psychiatry Reports , 1 - 10 . Black , E . , Ferdig , R . , & Thompson , L . A . ( 2020 ) . K - 12 virtual schooling , COVID - 19 , and student success . JAMA Pediatrics . Blake , M . K . ( 2020 ) . Other duties as assigned : The ambiguous role of the high school SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 29 counselor . Sociology of Education , 93 ( 4 ) , 315 - 330 . Blaskó , Z . , da Costa , P . , & Schnepf , S . V . ( 2021 ) . Learning loss and educational inequalities in Europe : Mapping the potential consequences of the COVID - 19 crisis . Braun , V . , & Clarke , V . ( 2006 ) . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology , 3 ( 2 ) , 77 - 101 . Buckner , J . , Abarno , C . , Lewis , E . , Zvolensky , M . , & Garey , L . ( 2021 ) . Increases in distress during stay - at - home mandates during Covid - 19 pandemic : A longitudinal study . Psychiatry Research , 298 . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . psychres . 2021 . 113821 Cao , W . , Fang , Z . , Hou , G . , Han , M . , Xu , X . , Dong , J . & Zheng , J . ( 2020 ) . The psychological impact of the COVID - 19 epidemic on college student in China . Psychiatry Research , 287 , 112934 . Chan , T . K . ( 2020 ) . Universal masking for COVID - 19 : evidence , ethics and recommendations . BMJ Global Health , 5 ( 5 ) , e002819 . Chang , G . C . , & Yano , S . ( 2020 ) . How are countries addressing the Covid - 19 challenges in education ? A snapshot of policy measures . UNESCO . Cervoni , A . , & DeLucia - Waack , J . ( 2011 ) . Role Conflict and Ambiguity as Predictors of Job Satisfaction in High School Counselors . Journal of School Counseling , 9 ( 1 ) , n1 . Chernozhukov , V . , Kasahara , H . , & Schrimpf , P . ( 2021 ) . The association of opening K - 12 schools and colleges with the spread of COVID - 19 in the United States : County - level panel data analysis . CESifo Working Paper No . 8929 . Cook , J . M . , Newman , E . , & Simiola , V . ( 2019 ) . Trauma training : Competencies , initiatives , and resources . Psychotherapy , 56 ( 3 ) , 409 – 421 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / pst0000233 Cosner , S . , & Jones , M . F . ( 2016 ) . Leading school - wide improvement in low - performing SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 30 schools facing conditions of accountability , Journal of Educational Administration , ( 54 ) 1 , 41 - 57 . Creswell , J . W . ( 2018 ) . Research design : Qualitative , quantitative , and mixed methods Approaches . Sage Publications . Dweck , C . ( 2006 ) Mindset : The psychology of success . Ballentine Books . Elmer , T . , Mepham , K . , & Stadtfeld , C . ( 2020 ) . Students under lockdown : Comparisons of students’ social networks and mental health before and during the COVID - 19 crisis in Switzerland . Plos one , 15 ( 7 ) . Fye , H . J . , Bergen , S . , & Baltrinic , E . R . ( 2020a ) . Exploring the relationship between school counselors’ perceived ASCA National Model implementation , supervision satisfaction , and burnout . Journal of Counseling & Development , 98 ( 1 ) , 53 - 62 . Fye , H . , Cook , R . , Baltrinic , E . , Baylin , A . ( 2020b ) . Examining individual and organizational factors of school counselor burnout . Professional Counselor , 10 ( 2 ) , 235 - 250 . Holman , L . F . , Nelson , J . , & Watts , R . ( 2019 ) . Organizational variables contributing to school counselor burnout : An opportunity for leadership , advocacy , collaboration , and systemic change . Professional Counselor , 9 ( 2 ) , 126 - 141 . Hochanadel , A . , & Finamore , D . ( 2015 ) . Fixed and growth mindset in education and how grit Helps students persist in the face of adversity . Journal of International Education Research , 11 ( 1 ) , 47 - 50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 19030 / jier . v11i1 . 9099 Inzlicht , M . , Werner , K . M . , Briskin , J . L . , & Roberts , B . W . ( 2021 ) . Integrating models of self - regulation . Annual Review of Psychology , 72 , 319 - 345 . Kaden , U . ( 2020 ) . COVID - 19 school closure - related changes to the professional life of a K – 12 teacher . Education Sciences , 10 ( 6 ) , 165 . SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 31 Kaffenberger , M . ( 2021 ) . Modelling the long - run learning impact of the Covid - 19 learning shock : Actions to ( more than ) mitigate loss . International Journal of Educational Development , 81 , 102326 . Kai , D . , Goldstein , G . P . , Morgunov , A . , Nangalia , V . , & Rotkirch , A . ( 2020 ) . Universal masking is urgent in the COVID - 19 pandemic : SEIR and agent based models , empirical validation , policy recommendations . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2004 . 13553 . Kasalak , G . , & Dagyar , M . ( 2020 ) . The Relationship between teacher self - efficacy and teacher job satisfaction : A meta - analysis of the teaching and learning international survey ( TALIS ) . Educational Sciences : Theory and Practice , 20 ( 3 ) , 16 - 33 . Kassinger , C . ( 2021 ) . U . S . State , Territorial , and County Stay - At - Home Orders : March 15 - May 5 Counting by Day . Centers for Disease Control . https : / / data . cdc . gov / Policy - Surveillance / U - S - State - Territorial - and - County - Stay - At - Home - Orde / qz3x - mf9n Kim , S . , Kim , Y . J . , Peck , K . R . , & Jung , E . ( 2020 ) . School opening delay effect on transmission dynamics of Coronavirus disease 2019 in Korea : Based on mathematical modeling and simulation study . Journal of Korean Medical Science , 35 ( 13 ) . Kim , N . , & Lambie , G . W . ( 2018 ) . Burnout and Implications for Professional School Counselors . Professional Counselor , 8 ( 3 ) , 277 - 294 . King - White , D . L . ( 2019 ) . The role of school counselors in supporting mental health dodels in schools . Journal of School Counseling , 17 ( 4 ) , n4 . Lambie , G . W . , Stickl Haugen , J . , Borland , J . R . , & Campbell , L . O . ( 2019 ) . Who Took " Counseling " out of the Role of Professional School Counselors in the United States ? . Journal of School - Based Counseling Policy and Evaluation , 1 ( 3 ) , 51 - 61 . SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 32 Larberg , J . & Sherlin , L . ( 2021 ) . Grit and growth mindset contribution to school counseling services . SAGE Open , 11 ( 2 ) , doi : 10 . 1177 / 21582440211014512 Lee , C . , & Bobko , P . ( 1994 ) . Self - efficacy beliefs : Comparison of five measures . Journal of Applied Psychology , 79 ( 3 ) , 364 - 369 . Leavy , P . ( 2017 ) . Research design : Quantitative , qualitative , mixed methods , arts - based , and community - based participatory research approaches . Guilford Publications . Lewis , T . , Jones , K . , Militello , M . & Meisenhelder , R . ( 2022 ) . A clear consistent focus on Students : Principal’s perceptions of the role of school counselors . Journal of School Leadership , 32 ( 1 ) , 3 - 26 . Marchiori , M . ( 2020 ) . COVID - 19 and the social distancing paradox : Dangers and solutions . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2005 . 12446 . Memon , Z . , Qureshi , S . , & Memon , B . R . ( 2021 ) . Assessing the role of quarantine and isolation as control strategies for COVID - 19 outbreak : a case study . Chaos , Solitons & Fractals , 144 , 110655 . Merriam , S . B . , & Grenier , R . S . ( 2019 ) . Qualitative research in practice : Examples for discussion and analysis . John Wiley & Sons Mullen , P . R . , Chae , N . , Backer , A . , & Niles , J . ( 2021 ) . School counselor burnout , job stress , and job satisfaction by student caseload . NASSP Bulletin , 105 ( 1 ) , 25 - 42 . Parmet , W . E . , & Sinha , M . S . ( 2020 ) . Covid - 19—the law and limits of quarantine . New England Journal of Medicine , 382 ( 15 ) , e28 . Patrick , S . , & Joshi , E . ( 2019 ) . “Set in stone” or “willing to grow” ? Teacher sensemaking during a growth mindset initiative . Teaching and Teacher Education , 83 , 156 - 167 . Percy , W . , Kostere , K . , & Kostere , S . ( 2015 ) . Generic qualitative research in psychology . The SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 33 Qualitative Report , 20 ( 2 ) , 76 - 85 . Pincus , R . , Hannor - Walker , T . , & Wright , L . ( 2020 ) . COVID - 19’s effect on students : How school counselors rise to the rescue . NASSP Bulletin , 104 ( 4 ) , 241 - 256 . Powell , H . ( 2022 ) . US Surgeon General weighs in on omicron , masks and mental health . Associated Press . https : / / bangordailynews . com / 2022 / 02 / 11 / news / nation / surgeon general - vivek - murthy - weighs - in - on - covid / Pragholapati , A . ( 2020 ) . COVID - 19 impact on students . Doi : 10 . 17605 / OSF . IO / NUYJ9 Rizvi , Y . S . , & Nabi , A . ( 2021 ) . Transformation of learning from real to virtual : an exploratory descriptive analysis of issues and challenges . Journal of Research in Innovative Teaching & Learning , 14 ( 1 ) , 5 - 17 . Sandhu , T . , & Singh , H . ( 2021 ) . Counselor Burnout during COVID - 19 : Predictive Role of Cognitive Emotion Regulation . Indian Journal of Positive Psychology , 12 ( 3 ) , 258 - 262 . Shirotsuki , K . , Sugaya , N . , & Nakao , M . ( 2022 ) . Descriptive review of internet - based cognitive behavior therapy on anxiety - related problems in children under the circumstances of COVID - 19 . BioPsychoSocial Medicine , 16 ( 1 ) , 1 - 6 . Stage , H . B . , Shingleton , J . , Ghosh , S . , Scarabel , F . , Pellis , L . , & Finnie , T . ( 2020 ) . Shut and re - open : the role of schools in the spread of COVID - 19 in Europe . Strauss , A . , & Corbin , J . ( 2015 ) . Basics of qualitative research : Techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory . Sage Publications . Strear , M . , Duffy , H . , & Sunde , A . ( 2021 ) . When Schools Go Dark , School Counselors Shine : School Counseling during a Global Pandemic . Brief . American Institutes for Research . Talmus , L . ( 2019 ) . Tackling social isolation in middle school . Childhood Education , 95 ( 6 ) , 42 - 49 . SCHOOL COUNSELING SELF - EFFICACY 34 Thakur , A . ( 2020 ) . Mental health in high school students at the time of COVID - 19 : A student’s perspective . Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry , 59 ( 12 ) , 1309 . Verlenden , J . V . , Pampati , S . , Rasberry , C . N . , Liddon , N . , Hertz , M . , Kilmer , G . , Viox , M . H . , Lee , S . , Cramer , N . K . , Barrios , L . C . , & Ethier , K . A . Association of Children ' s Mode of School Instruction with Child and Parent Experiences and Well - Being During the COVID - 19 Pandemic - COVID Experiences Survey , MMWR , 70 ( 11 ) : 369 - 376 . Doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm7011a1 . Viner , R . , Russell , S . , & , Croker , H . , Stansfield , C . , Packer , J . , . . . & Minozzi , S . ( 2022 ) . School closures during social lockdown and mental health , health behaviors , and well - being among children and adolescents during the first COVID - 19 wave : A systematic review . JAMA pediatrics . Weiner , J . M . , & Holder , S . ( 2018 ) . Why lead ? Using narrative to explore the motivations of those aspiring to be principals in high needs schools . International Journal of Leadership in Education , 22 ( 5 ) , 555 - 572 . Werner , K . , & Woessmann , L . ( 2021 ) . The legacy of covid - 19 in education . Collaborative Research Center Transregio 190 , Discussion Paper No . 291 .