Lynne C . Howarth — University of Toronto Creating Pathways to Memory Enhancing Life Histories through Category Clusters Abstract For individuals whose memory and language are intact , making sense of unfamiliar information or objects is a process of matching what is unknown , to what is known through previous learning or experience . The unfamil - iar is linked to clusters or categories of the familiar , identifying what is “like” or “nearly like” and excluding all others ( De Mey 1982 ) . Most commonly , these are categories on which there is general agreement , sometimes collocated under established terms , labels , or shared naming devices . Classiﬁ cation systems are built on the basis of shared understandings of human knowledge and culture . When memory and / or language are impaired , how does such contextualizing and categorizing occur ? Since perception is individual , can a person with cogni - tive impairment “make sense” of information , an object , a situation , using alternative modes of expression that are less or not language - dependent ? This paper reports on preliminary results from a pilot study undertaken as part of exploratory mixed methods research examining the sense - making , sorting , categorization , and recall strategies of individuals with mild cognitive impairment ( MCI ) resulting from early stage dementia . Introduction and Background to the Study Alzheimer’s Disease International ( ADI ) describes dementia as a condition that affects memory , thinking , behaviour , and emotion . Declining memory , especially short - term memory , is the most common early symptom of dementia . Other symptoms include dif - ﬁ culty performing familiar tasks , disorientation to time and place , poor or decreased judgment , and changes in personality . Alzheimer’s disease is the most common cause of dementia ( ADI 2007 ) . As part of the Cognitive and Emotional Health Project ( CEHP ) ( USA ) , a critical evaluation study committee was charged with assessing the state of epi - demiological research on demographic , social , and biological determinants of cognitive and emotional health ( Hendrie et al . 2006 ) . Their review of large , longitudinal cohort studies ( n = 36 ) noted that the majority were disease - focused , with research on healthy brain aging lagging noticeably behind . Descriptions of drug and ( other ) medical inter - ventions to maintain cognitive health or prevent decline were well represented in the lit - erature . Possible lifestyle interventions received less attention , but , nonetheless , revealed several protective factors , including higher education levels , occupational attainment , higher socioeconomic status , speciﬁ c cognitive activities ( e . g . , playing board games , singing , playing a musical instrument , reading ) , social engagement , emotional support , instrumental mastery and self - efﬁ cacy , resilience , and vitality ( Bain 2006 ; Hendrie et al . 2006 ; Jedrziewski , Lee , and Trojanowski 2005 ; Morrison - Bogorad , Cahan , and Wagster 2007 ; Cherry and Reed 2007 ) . The critical review committee concluded that , “There is now widespread public interest in developing strategies to maintain or enhance cognitive and emotional health in the elderly” ( Hendrie et al . 2006 : 26 ) . Emphasizing the need for future research that considers brain health maintenance , as well as disease prevention , the committee recommended that biomedical investigators join forces with other disciplines , such as social sciences and bioethics , to “change the paradigm of successful cognitive and emotional aging . ” ( Hendrie et al . , 2006 : 28 ) . In a documentary on memory and the brain aired on the Canadian Broadcasting Cor - poration , or CBC Radio program , Ideas , Marilyn Powell observed that , “Memory is lost because we cannot ﬁ nd our way back to it . ” ( Powell , Oct . 3 , 2007 ) . proceedings _ isko _ vol - 11 . indd Paper50 : 326 2008 - 05 - 04 08 : 07 : 32 327 Figure 1 . Memory consolidation and reconsolidation As Figure 1 illustrates , as the human brain receives sensory input , that information is stored temporarily in the hippocampus , and slowly moved , or ‘consolidated’ , into the neocortex . Memory consolidation is the process by which recent or short - term mem - ories , comprised of sensory fragments , are crystallized into long - term memory . The more numerous or frequent the recall , or ‘rehearsal’ of that information ( a process one might associate with ‘memorizing’ ) , the more that memory is reinforced , or ‘reconsolidated’ . With the stimulus of a cue or trigger , stored fragments from our experiences of people , places , events , and objects are reconstructed as part of our personal reminiscences or life histories . Mild , moderate or severe cognitive impairment , whether from disease , trauma , disability , or genetic predisposition , can disrupt the reassembly process , impeding access to memory . Tulving ( 1972 ) was ﬁ rst to identify two primary types of memory , namely episodic , and semantic . Episodic memory involves recalling personal episodes ( “autobiographical memory” ) , events , or experiences that are speciﬁ c to time and place . In contrast , semantic memory , loosely described as the sum total of everything we know , “… includes knowl - edge of facts , concepts , moral and social cognition , as well as words and their meaning . ” ( Kazui et al . 2003 : 983 ) . It is shared culturally , is not time - dependent , and supports more complex “sorting” activities of categorization and association . While it is possible to have semantic memory without episodic memory , the reverse is not true — underscoring the importance of context or perceived meaning to the experience of day - to - day people , places , events , and things ( Powell 2007 ) . As personal semantic memories are repeatedly recalled in different contexts , their link to speciﬁ c episodic information obtained in earlier contexts weakens while their semantic richness increases . For those experiencing mild cognitive impairment ( MCI ) through the onset of ear - ly stage dementia , brain injury , or other neurodegenerative causes , drug and alternative clinical interventions have been devised to slow decline in cognition , or , as in dementia , speciﬁ c memory loss . The theoretical and applied research literatures of gerontology , nursing , social work , and cognitive psychology / cognitive science describe approaches to reinforcing an individual’s “cognitive reserve , ” deﬁ ned as , “increased numbers of syn - apses , or and increased ability of the brain to cope with physiological insults , e . g . , as a result of neural plasticity or neural compensation” ( Bain 2006 : 247 ) . In short , healthy aging nerve cells can regenerate ( Khachaturian 2007 ) . Intelligence , educational level , occupation attainment , and ( cognitive ) leisure activities have been associated with re - duced risk of dementia and cognitive decline , and are , consequently , used as proxy mea - sures of cognitive reserve ( Bain 2006 ) . Speciﬁ c clinical interventions may include music Short - term Memory Long - term Memory Hippocampus Neocortex Consolidation Rehearsal Sensory Information proceedings _ isko _ vol - 11 . indd Paper50 : 327 2008 - 05 - 04 08 : 07 : 32 328 programming ( Topo et al . 2004 ) , art therapy ( Motram 2003 ) , life story / life review work ( Haight , Gibson , Michel , 2000 ; McKeown , Clarke , and Repper , 2005 ; Meininger 2005 ; Parker 2001 ) , and reminiscence therapy ( Cohen and Taylor 1998 ; Kim et al . , 2006 ; Moss et al . , 2002 ) . Websites , such as BiFolkal and Memory Lane , TM offer products ( videos , au - dio CDs , memory books , photographs and slides , tactile objects ) and programs to “sup - port remembering and reminiscing in people with mild cognitive impairment and mild to mid - stage AD” ( Dishman and Carrillo 2007 ) . Multimedia DVDs that store and play client ( patient ) biographies are currently under development . With its focus on linking individuals with a particular information need to appropriate , speciﬁ c information objects knowledge organization as a discipline seems well - situated to partner with researchers and clinicians focused on “healthy brain” initiatives ( Cherry and Reed 2007 ) . While there is a body of Library and Information Science / Information Studies ( LIS / IS ) literature dealing with developing collections to support research in ger - ontology and life course ( aging ) , as well as to address the information needs of older adults , there is scant reference to LIS / IS research focused on aspects of mild cognitive impairment , dementia , or Alzheimer’s . Bath and Bouchier ( 2003 ) have developed tools for evaluating Internet information resources speciﬁ c to Alzheimer’s . Nonetheless , this overall paucity of research stands in sharp contrast to , for example , studies of children’s design of Internet portals to satisfy their information needs ( Large et al . , 2007 ; 2006 ) , or to explorations of information use among less advantaged or marginalized populations ( Chatman 1992 ; 1990 ; 1987 ) . Studies concerning information needs , uses , and search tools among adult populations , generally , are too numerous to cite ; this segment of the broad demographic is well served by LIS / IS research . Study Objectives and Research Questions Building on previous research on the use of category clusters for grouping information in topic map displays for use in language - neutral situations ( Howarth and Miller 2006a ; 2006b ) , a broader exploratory , mixed methods study has been undertaken to examine the sense - making , sorting , categorization , and recall strategies of individuals experiencing mild cognitive impairment ( MCI ) resulting from early stage dementia . Speciﬁ cally , the overall study seeks to provide baseline data for the following three research questions : ( 1 ) How do individuals diagnosed with MCI make sense of , organize , and categorize their childhood and adult life histories ? ( 2 ) Are there differences between whether a standard ( generic or icon ) representation , or a personalized representation of a category is used to gather together an individual’s memories in a life history ? and ( 3 ) How and how well do multi - modal expressions of information , e . g . , music , drawings , physical objects , move - ment , serve as alternate means of creating context , thereby facilitating collocation of like information ( category clusters ) to assist with ﬁ nding , organizing , and interpreting life memories ? Pilot Study : Methods , Interpretive Frameworks , Preliminary Findings This ISKO 2008 conference paper reports on preliminary outcomes from a pilot study undertaken to examine the “sense making , ” sorting , categorizing , and recall strategies of four residents living in an assisted - care facility in Toronto , Canada , for individuals with early stage dementia . Using the interpretive biographical methodology ( Bruce et al . 2002 ; Surr 2006 ) , unstructured tape - recorded interviews were conducted to gather individual narratives covering childhood , family , home , and adulthood . Follow - up sessions were proceedings _ isko _ vol - 11 . indd Paper50 : 328 2008 - 05 - 04 08 : 07 : 33 329 held to conﬁ rm recollections , to put together life history books , to identify / derive mean - ingful categories and category names for groupings of experiences , and to determine with participants effective cues or clues for recalling memory ( e . g . , photograph as substitute ; musical cue ; etc . ) . At a subsequent session , each of the four residents were provided , in turn , with a standard ( generic or icon ) representation of a life history category ( e . g . , com - mercial memory - evoking products use a photograph of a wedding to stimulate recollec - tions of an individual’s own marriage ) , then with a personally - customized category cue and asked to talk about an associated memory or memories . The modality of cues , though aligned , were varied — i . e . , an audio recording of the “wedding march” ; the participant’s self - determined audio cue — for example , a song that the participant connected with the speciﬁ c event or time period in which the event occurred . De Mey’s ( 1982 , 4 ) observation that , “The central point of the cognitive view is that any such information processing , whether perceptual ( such as perceiving an object ) or symbolic ( such as understanding a sentence ) is mediated by a system of categories or concepts which for the information processor constitutes a representation or a model of his world . ” [ emphasis in original ] offered a useful conceptual framework for considering “sense - making” in the context of mild cognitive impairment , and for addressing the ﬁ rst research question in this study . Comparing the use of standard or personalized category representations ( Research question # 2 ) was informed by the work of Joubert et al . ( 2004 ) who determined that memory recall was enhanced by visual material , such as family pic - tures , rather than by verbal descriptions . Finally , Davidoff and De Blesser’s ( 1994 : 2 ) , ﬁ ndings that “Naming of real objects presented either visually or for tactile inspection was reliably better than naming photographs or line drawings of the same objects” pro - vided a framework for exploring the use of multi - modal cues as alternate representations for participant categories ( Research question # 3 ) . The identiﬁ cation / derivation of meaningful categories and category names for group - ings of experiences proved to be highly individualized , and sometimes problematic for the pilot study participants . This may have been as a result of categorizing tending to the abstract , where recall more usually required the concrete . The process of aggregating , which necessitated decisions as to ( 1 ) what to include in , and exclude from a grouping , and ( 2 ) what to name or label the aggregate , was , at times , challenging , with difﬁ culties experienced relative to ambiguous or overlapping experiences . For example , travel fea - tured prominently in the childhood of one participant . In putting together her life history , this participant sometimes favoured the category , ‘places’ , while other times choosing to associate a travel experience with ‘people’ ( normally family ) . In recall , probing for mem - ories by use of the category , ‘places’ , evoked recollections of geographic locations where the participant had lived or vacationed ( e . g . , a family cottage ) , rather than travel destina - tions and experiences . In contrast , cueing ( i . e . , in this instance , by means of a map ) specif - ic locales , such as “Norway” , resulted in quite thick descriptions of a trip there . Likewise , recall by means of the aggregated category , ‘people’ , did not lead to mention of particular travel experiences . While ( 1 ) initial grouping of like experiences , and ( 2 ) the identiﬁ ca - tion / derivation and naming of categories were completed as activities in the course of creating life histories , recalling particular memories associated with a labelled aggregate was more problematic , sometimes disconnected . The use of named categories , both for grouping and recalling like experiences proved less reliable for reinforcing memory than did different modal representations identiﬁ ed and favoured by a participant . proceedings _ isko _ vol - 11 . indd Paper50 : 329 2008 - 05 - 04 08 : 07 : 33 330 Preliminary ﬁ ndings suggest further that , standard , iconic representations more usually resulted in a generalized memory ( i . e . , talking about weddings as events ) , or a personal memory derived indirectly from the cue ( i . e . , talking about weddings , in general , fol - lowed by the individual’s experience , in particular ) , as opposed to speciﬁ c , detailed rec - ollections of the event . This ﬁ nding carried over to multi - modal clues that had been self - selected by participants . Personalized category cues thus provided more direct access to life histories , and , as compared with standard icons , little or no confusion as to the mean - ing of the representation , per se . Outcomes may suggest that , while generic representa - tions may evoke semantic memory , self - determined category markers may be necessary to facilitating episodic memory . Conclusion The design of the larger research project necessitated a pilot study for validating ap - proaches , and identifying directions in which preliminary ﬁ ndings from examination of the sense - making , sorting , categorizing , and recall strategies of four participants diag - nosed with MCI might lead . While outcomes are preliminary and warrant further scru - tiny , they do reinforce that , while day - to - day people , places , events , and objects can exist in common , perception or the experiencing of them is individual , and contextualized uniquely by each observer or participant . A growing body of literature conﬁ rms that the human brain can adapt to trauma caused by injury or disease , that it can regenerate , and compensate . Neural plasticity ensures that other parts of the brain can “learn” and assume some function ( s ) that affected areas can no longer do . Research has also suggested that reinforcing cognitive reserve can slow speciﬁ c memory loss resulting from the onset of dementia . The pilot study offers preliminary insights into the role that sense - making , sort - ing , and categorizing play in the recall and reconstruction of long - term memories , and the degree to which alternate modes of evoking aggregated or single memories can be used to compensate for the loss of other reminiscence strategies . At the least , the research will yield baseline data in a largely unexplored area of knowledge organization . More import - ant to those with MCI and their care - givers , if information targeted to the particular needs of an individual can be delivered in a meaningful way , in a manner that makes sense to its recipient , in whatever mode expressed and communicated , then prospects for continued independence as well as opportunities for extending memory and language capabilities may be optimized . References Alzheimer’s Disease International Website . http : / / www . alz . co . uk / media / nr070416 . html . ( Accessed Mar . 7 , 2008 . ) Bain , Lisa J . 2006 . “A review of the ‘state of the art’ on mild cognitive impairment : the fourth an - nual symposium . ” Alzheimer’s & Dementia 2 ( 2006 ) : 246 – 256 . Bath , Peter A . , and Bouchier , H . 2003 . “Development and application of a tool designed to evalu - ate web - sites providing information on Alzheimer’s disease . ” Journal of Information Science 20 : 160 – 171 . BiFolkal Productions Website . http : / / www . bifolkal . org . ( Accessed Mar . 7 , 2008 . ) Bruce , Errollyn et al . 2002 . “Moving towards a special kind of care for people with dementia living in care homes . ” Nursing Times Research 7 ( 5 ) : 335 – 347 . Chatman , Eldreda A . 1992 . The Information World of Retired Women . Westport , Conn . : Greenwood Press . proceedings _ isko _ vol - 11 . indd Paper50 : 330 2008 - 05 - 04 08 : 07 : 33 331 Chatman , Eldreda A . 1990 . “Alienation theory : application of a conceptual framework to a study of information among janitors . ” RQ 29 ( 3 ) : 355 – 368 . Chatman , Eldreda A . 1987 . “The information world of low - skilled workers . ” Library & Informa - tion Science Research 9 : 265 – 283 . Cherry , Debra L . and Reed , Peter . 2007 . “Commentary of ‘The Healthy Brain Initiative’ : a com - munity - based perspective . ” Alzheimer’s & Dementia 3 ( 2007 ) : S74 – S79 . Cohen , Gillian , and Taylor , Stephanie . 1998 . “Reminiscence and aging . ” Aging and Society 18 : 601 – 610 . Davidoff , J . , and De Blesser , R . “Impaired picture recognition with preserved object naming and reading . ” 1994 . Brain and Cognition 24 : 1 – 23 . De Mey , M . 1982 . The Cognitive Paradigm . Dordrecht : D . Reidel . Dishman , Eric , and Carrillo , Maria C . 2007 . “Perspectives on everyday technologies for Alz - heimer’s care : research ﬁ ndings , directions , and challenges . ” Alzheimer’s & Dementia 3 ( 2007 ) : 227 – 234 . Haight , Barbara K . , Gobson , Faith , Michel , Yvonne . 2004 . “The Northern Ireland life - review / life storybook project for people with dementia . ” Alzheimer’s & Dementia 2 ( 2004 ) : 56 – 58 . Hendrie , High C . et al . 2006 . “The NIH cognitive and emotional health project : report of the critical evaluation study committee . ” Alzheimer’s & Dementia 2 ( 2006 ) : 12 – 32 . Howarth , Lynne C . , and Miller , Thea . 2006a . “Visualizing Search Results from Metadata - Enabled Repositories in Cultural Domains . ” In Charting the Topic Map Research and Applications Land - scape : First International Workshop on Topic Map Research and Applications , TMRA 2005 , Leipzig , Germany , October 6 – 7 , 2005 , Revised Selected Papers . Luta Maicher and Jack Park , eds . Berlin : Springer - Verlag . Series : Lecture Notes in Artiﬁ cial Intelligence ; 3873 ( Subseries of Lecture Notes in Computer Science ) : pp . 262 – 270 . Howarth , Lynne C . , and Miller , Thea . 2006b . “Assessing Metadata Categories and Visual Displays for Retrieving Digital Cultural Resources . ” In Proceedings of the 34 th Conference of the Can - adian Association for Information Science / Association canadienne des sciences de l’information — held with the Congress for the Social Sciences and Humanities of Canada , York University , Toronto , Ontario . 1 – 3 June , 2006 . Paper published online at http : / / www . cais - acsi . ca / proceed - ings / 2006 / howarth _ 2006 . pdf . ( Accessed Mar . 12 , 2008 . ) Jedrziewski , M . Kathryn , Lee , Virginia M . - Y . , and Trojanowski , John Q . 2005 . “Lowering the risk of Alzheimer’s disease : evidence - based practices emerge from new research , ” Alzheimer’s & Dementia 1 ( 2005 ) : 152 – 160 . Joubert , Sven et al . 2004 . “The role of context in remembering familiar persons : insights from semantic dementia . ” Brain and Cognition 55 : 254 – 261 . Kazui , Hiroaki et al . 2003 . “Nature of personal semantic memory : evidence from Alzheimer’s dis - ease . ” Neuropsychologia 41 : 981 – 988 . Khachaturian , Zaven S . 2007 . “Alzheimer’s 101 . ” Alzheimer’s & Dementia 3 ( 2007 ) : 1 – 2 . Kim , Esther S . et al . 2006 . “Evidence - based practice recommendations for working with individ - uals with dementia : group reminiscence therapy ( care and treatment of dementia ) . ” Journal of Medical Speech - Language Pathology 14 ( 3 ) : 17 p . Large , Andrew et al . 2007 . “Children’s Web portals : can an intergenerational design team deliver the goods ? ” in Chelton , Mary K . , and Cool , Colleen , eds . Youth Information - Seeking Behavior , Volume 2 . Lanham , MD : Scarecrow Press . p . 279 – 311 . Large , Andrew et al . 2006 . “‘Bonded Design’ : a novel approach to intergenerational information technology design . ” Library and Information Science Research 28 ( 1 ) : 64 – 82 . McKeown , Jane , Clarke , Amanda , and Repper , Julie . 2006 . “Life story work in health and social care : systematic literature review . ” Journal of Advanced Nursing 55 ( 2 ) : 237 – 247 . Meininger , Herman P . 2005 . “Narrative ethics in nursing for persons with intellectual disabilities . ” Nursing Philosophy 6 : 106 – 118 . Memory Lane TM Website . http : / / www . memorylanemedia . com / index . html . ( Accessed Mar . 7 , 2008 . ) proceedings _ isko _ vol - 11 . indd Paper50 : 331 2008 - 05 - 04 08 : 07 : 33 332 Morrison - Bogorad , Marcelle , Cahan , Vicky , and Wagster , Molly V . 2007 . “Brain health interven - tions : the need for further research . ” Alzheimer’s & Dementia 3 ( 2007 ) : S80 – S85 . Moss , Sharon E . et al . 2002 . “Reminiscence group activities and discourse interaction in Alz - heimer’s disease . ” Journal of Gerontological Nursing 28 ( 8 ) : 36 – 44 . Motram , Pauline . 2003 . “Art therapy with clients who have dementia . ” Dementia 2 ( 2 ) : 272 – 277 . Parker , Jonathan . 2001 . “Interrogating person - centred dementia care in social work and social care practice . ” Journal of Social Work 1 ( 3 ) : 329 – 345 . Powell , Marilyn . 2007 . “Committed to memory . ” Part 3 of The Once and Future Memory . Can - adian Broadcasting Corporation . Available at : http : / / www . cbc . ca / ideas / calendar / 2007 / 10 _ octo - ber . html . ( Accessed Apr . 15 , 2008 . ) Surr , Claire . 2006 . “The role of interpretive biographical methodology in dementia research . ” De - mentia 5 ( 2 ) : 284 – 290 . Topo , Paivi et al . 2004 . “Assessment of a music - based multimedia program for people with demen - tia . ” Dementia 3 ( 3 ) : 331 – 350 . Tulving , Endel . 1972 . “Episodic and semantic memory . ” In Tulving , Endel , and Donaldson , Wayne , eds . 1972 . Organization of Memory . New York : Academic Press . Pp . 381 – 403 . proceedings _ isko _ vol - 11 . indd Paper50 : 332 2008 - 05 - 04 08 : 07 : 34