ARTICLE Analysis of actin dynamics at the leading edge of crawling cells : implications for the shape of keratocyte lamellipodia Received : 16 October 2002 / Revised : 11 December 2002 / Accepted : 11 December 2002 / Published online : 9 May 2003 (cid:1) EBSA 2003 Abstract Leading edge protrusion is one of the critical events in the cell motility cycle and it is believed to be driven by the assembly of the actin network . The con - cept of dendritic nucleation of actin ﬁlaments provides a basis for understanding the organization and dynamics of the actin network at the molecular level . At a larger scale , the dynamic geometry of the cell edge has been described in terms of the graded radial extension model , but this level of description has not yet been linked to the molecular dynamics . Here , we measure the graded distribution of actin ﬁlament density along the leading edge of ﬁsh epidermal keratocytes . We develop a mathematical model relating dendritic nucleation to the long - range actin distribution and the shape of the lead - ing edge . In this model , a steady - state graded actin dis - tribution evolves as a result of branching , growth and capping of actin ﬁlaments in a ﬁnite area of the leading edge . We model the shape of the leading edge as a product of the extension of the actin network , which depends on actin ﬁlament density . The feedback between the actin density and edge shape in the model results in a cell shape and an actin distribution similar to those experimentally observed . Thus , we explain the stability of the keratocyte shape in terms of the self - organization of the branching actin network . Keywords Actin dynamics Æ Cell motility Æ Dendritic nucleation model Æ Keratocyte Æ Lamellipodium Introduction The crawling motion of animal cells over a substrate has been described as the succession of protrusion , attach - ment and retraction ( Abercrombie 1980 ) . The ﬁrst step in this sequence , protrusion , is believed to be driven by polymerization of actin at the leading edge of the cell ( Condeelis 1993 ; Mogilner and Oster 1996 ; Miyata et al . 1999 ) . One of the common types of protrusive special - ization of the edge of the cell is the lamellipodium : a ﬂat , leaf - like extension ﬁlled with a dense actin network . Recently , signiﬁcant progress has been made in under - standing the molecular events of protrusion and the ultrastructural organization of the growing actin net - work in the lamellipodia ( Borisy and Svitkina 2000 ; Pollard et al . 2000 ) . A crucial factor for protrusion is actin polarity . The two ends of an actin ﬁlament are structurally and functionally diﬀerent , one termed barbed ( with fast dynamics , favored for polymerization ) and the opposite , termed pointed . The principal reactions constituting the cycle of turnover of the lamellipodial actin network are dendritic nucleation , elongation , capping and disassem - bly of actin ﬁlaments . First , proteins of the WASP / Scar families activate Arp2 / 3 protein complexes . These com - plexes nucleate new actin ﬁlaments at the sides or tips of existing ﬁlaments . Nucleation is sterically precise , so the nascent ﬁlaments in the network arise in the form of branches oﬀ preexisting ﬁlaments with the barbed end being free ( Welch et al . 1997 ; Svitkina and Borisy 1999 ; Borisy and Svitkina 2000 ; Pollard et al . 2000 ) . The newly formed ﬁlaments elongate at their barbed ends , pushing the membrane at the leading edge forward until they are capped . This involves capping proteins that bind to barbed ﬁlament ends and block further addition of actin monomers , thus eliminating these ends from the process of protrusion . Actin subunits for the elongation of the uncapped barbed ends are produced in the process of disassembly at the opposite , pointed ends . The disas - sembly is slow in vitro , but is accelerated in cells by Eur Biophys J ( 2003 ) 32 : 563 – 577 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00249 - 003 - 0300 - 4 H . P . Grimm Æ A . B . Verkhovsky Æ A . Mogilner J . - J . Meister A . Mogilner ( & ) Department of Mathematics and Center for Genetics and Development , University of California , Davis , CA 95616 , USA E - mail : mogilner @ math . ucdavis . edu Fax : + 1 - 530 - 7526635 H . P . Grimm Æ A . B . Verkhovsky Æ J . - J . Meister Cellular Biophysics and Biomechanics Laboratory , Swiss Federal Institute of Technology , 1015 Lausanne , Switzerland proteins of the ADF / coﬁlin family . These proteins increase the number of depolymerizing minus ends in the actin network , resulting in a more eﬃcient replenishing of the subunit pool for ﬁlament elongation . Note that the reactions of barbed ends elongation and minus ends depolymerization for a ﬁlament are separated in time and space . Capping is believed to further increase the subunit pool by a funnelling eﬀect , restricting the number of growing ﬁlament ends , and thus makes the elongation of the remaining uncapped ﬁlaments more eﬃcient ( Carlier and Pantaloni 1997 ; Pantaloni et al . 2001 ; Mogilner and Edelstein - Keshet 2002 ) . Dur - ing steady locomotion , elongation / disassembly and branching / capping reactions are expected to be balanced , so that the total concentration of polymerized actin as well as the average number of actin ﬁlaments does not change . The turnover of the branching actin network is eventually translated into advancement of the leading edge . Experimentally , it was shown that the polymeri - zation of actin ﬁlaments is able to deform vesicles ( Cor - tese et al . 1989 ) or liposomes ( Miyata et al . 1999 ) and to drive the motion of bacteria and plastic beads in a solution containing puriﬁed components of actin - poly - merizing machinery ( Loisel et al . 1999 ; Cameron et al . 2001 ) . The elastic polymerization ratchet model ( Mogil - ner and Oster 1996 ) describes the protrusion mechanism based on the idea that a ﬁlament is involved in Brownian motion and consequently undulates and bends very fre - quently . When a ﬁlament is bent , a gap appears between its tip and the cell membrane . If a large enough gap persists for a suﬃciently long time interval , a monomer can intercalate into the gap and assemble onto the tip of the growing polymer . This increases ﬁber length so that when the longer polymer’s tip contacts the membrane again , the ﬁber remains bent and the corresponding elastic force pushes the membrane forward . The model provides the corresponding force – velocity relation and predicts that the ﬁlament growth and membrane advance are optimal when the ﬁlaments are oriented at an oblique angle to the membrane interface ( Mogilner and Oster 1996 ) . The model is supported by a few experiments establishing correlations between the rate of protrusion and the morphology of actin network as well as concentrations of speciﬁc molecules involved in actin polymerization ( Rinnerthaler et al . 1991 ; Abraham et al . 1999 ; Dai and Sheetz 1999 ; Loisel et al . 1999 ; Rottner et al . 1999 ; McGrath et al . 2000 ; Cameron et al . 2001 ) . Recently , the theory of protrusion mechanics was developed further : both conﬁgurations of actin network growing against an obstacle and force – velocity rela - tionships for diﬀerent branching and capping models were analyzed ( Carlsson 2001 ) , and eﬀects of the actin network elasticity were investigated ( Gerbal et al . 2000 ) . Maly and Borisy ( 2001 ) analyzed the competition between elongation and capping using a population dynamics theory applied to families of branching ﬁlaments oriented at diﬀerent angles to the leading edge . They showed theoretically and conﬁrmed experimentally that ﬁlament families with mother and daughter ﬁlaments oriented symmetrically with respect to the direction of the protrusion have the best chances to ‘‘survive’’ . Given the branching angle of (cid:1) 70 (cid:2) ( Bo - risy and Svitkina 2000 ; Pollard et al . 2000 ) , the pre - dominant ﬁlament family is the one with ﬁlaments oriented at ±35 (cid:2) to the direction of protrusion . Thus , the dynamics and organization of the advancing lamellipodia can be schematically described as rapid turnover of the dendritic actin network , in which the ﬁlaments are preferentially oriented at ±35 (cid:2) to the direction of protrusion . The microscopic description of actin organization and dynamics is not suﬃcient to understand the orga - nization and dynamics of the leading edge at a larger scale , e . g . it does not explain how the overall shape of the leading edge evolves and is controlled by the cell . Relation of the actin dynamics to the geometry of a rigid surface on which the actin network is growing was investigated by Bernheim - Groswasser et al . ( 2002 ) . However , no analysis is available for the advancing lamellipodium of the moving cell . To answer the ques - tion about the relationship between actin dynamics and cell shape , it is useful to consider a model system with well - deﬁned leading edge dynamics . The cells of choice are ﬁsh epidermal keratocytes which crawl on surfaces with remarkable speed and persistence while almost perfectly maintaining their characteristic fan - like shape ( Lee et al . 1993a ) ( see also Figs . 2 , 3 ) . The front , advancing part of the keratocyte is represented by the lamellipodium , which is only a few tenths of a micro - meter thick but stretches for several tens of micrometers from side to side and for about ten micrometers from front to back . The actin network in the major part of the keratocyte lamellipodium is stationary with respect to the substra - tum while the cell moves forward . This implies that the rate of the protrusion equals the rate of actin polymeri - zation at the front edge ( Theriot and Mitchison 1991 ; Mitchison and Cramer 1996 ) . In the moving coordinate system of the cell , actin ﬁlaments move back from the leading edge , and the barbed ends of the ﬁlaments ori - ented obliquely to the leading edge experience lateral drift along the edge ( Small 1994 ) . The density of the actin network decreases from the front to the back of the lamellipodium due to gradual depolymerization of actin as it moves away from the edge ( Svitkina et al . 1997 ; Edelstein and Ermentrout 2000 ) . Only at the lateral and rear extremities of the lamellipodium do actin ﬁlaments move with respect to the substratum and to each other . This occurs when they participate in myosin - driven con - traction , which has been implicated in forward translo - cation of the rear part of the keratocyte and in limiting the lateral spreading of the cell ( Lee et al . 1993b ; Svitkina et al . 1997 ; Anderson and Cross 2000 ) . Thus , the processes of actin polymerization and the subsequent contraction of the network are spatially separated , and the shape of the front part of the lamellipodium may be considered to be the result of the polymerization - driven protrusion . 564 Geometrically , the advancing lamellipodium can be described by attributing the normal velocity of protrusion to every point of the leading edge ( Lee et al . 1993b ) . For the shape of a convex lamellipodium to be conserved in the process of locomotion , this normal velocity has to be precisely controlled in space : maximum velocity is expected at the center of the leading edge , with gradual decrease towards the lateral edges . This behavior has been described as graded radial extension ( Lee et al . 1993b ) , but the control of the protrusion rate has yet to be related to the molecular dynamics of actin polymerization . In the present paper , we mathematically model the population of polymerizing actin ﬁlaments at the leading edge of a lamellipodium , taking into account branching and capping as well as the lateral drift of the barbed ends . We also measure the actin density , validate the model by comparing theoretical predictions with the experimental data , and estimate the capping rate using this comparison . Then , we investigate the relation be - tween actin density and rate of protrusion at the leading edge . Finally , we derive and simulate a self - consistent model of coupled density and shape regulation of the lamellipod , which explains the nature of stability and persistence of cell migration . Methods Cell culture and microscopy Epidermal keratocytes of the black tetra ( Gymnocorymbus ternetzi ) were cultured and stained for F - actin with rhodamine phalloidin after glutaraldehyde ﬁxation as described previously ( Svitkina et al . 1997 ) . Phase contrast images of locomoting living cells and ﬂuo - rescence images of ﬁxed cells were taken using a Nikon Eclipse T300 inverted microscope and a Micromax PB1300 cooled CCD camera ( Roper Scientiﬁc , Trenton , NJ , USA ) operated by Meta - morph imaging software ( Universal imaging , West Chester , Pa . , USA ) . Sixteen - bit phase contrast and ﬂuorescence images were background - subtracted and ﬂuorescence images were also corrected for the non - uniformity of the illumination ﬁeld before converting to 8 - bit format for further analysis . Measuring actin densities and shapes of the leading edge Eight - bit gray scale images of the cells were rotated in order to align the direction of locomotion to the y - axis ( used for the mathematical model ) and then imported into Matlab . The images were used to detect and digitize the leading edge and to measure ﬂuorescence intensity of stained actin along the leading edge . The detection of the edge in phase contrast images was performed using an active contour ( ‘‘snakes’’ ) algorithm implemented in Matlab . In ﬂuorescence images , the leading edge was detected using a threshold of 10 % of maximal intensity . Subsequently , noise was removed using three dilatation steps followed by the same number of erosion steps . A smooth representation of the leading edge was obtained by ﬁtting a 10th - order polynomial to the pixel coordi - nates ; this was done on a domain of 95 % of the total width of the cell , i . e . lateral edges were not included . The intensity of the ﬂuorescence image ( which is proportional to the F - actin density ) was evaluated by averaging over patches of 5 · 5 pixels ( pixel size 0 . 08 l m ) . One hundred such patches were evaluated along the leading edge at a distance of 0 . 8 l m from the edge , the x - coordinates of the centers of the patches being equally spaced . Mathematical modeling and comparison to experimental data F - actin density proﬁles In the limiting cases of slow and fast capping , the ordinary diﬀerential equations of the ‘‘Mathematical model of actin dynamics’’ section ( below ) , which describe the stationary F - actin density at the ﬂat leading edge , were solved analytically with the help of standard methods of applied mathematics ( Logan 1997 ) . We numerically solved the hyperbolic partial diﬀerential equations of the ‘‘Mathematical model of actin dynamics’’ section ( below ) , which describe the F - actin density for a stationary shape of the leading edge . The function f ( x ) describing the leading edge shape was obtained by scaling the measurements described above . The equations were non - dimensionalized as described in the Appendix . The non - dimensional domain ) 1 < x < 1 was discretized by 40 equidistant grid points . We solved the equations using an explicit forward - time numerical scheme . In order to have numerical sta - bility , the equations describing the left - pointing ﬁlaments were solved with a forward - diﬀerence scheme , the equations for the right - pointing ﬁlaments with a backward - diﬀerence scheme ( Gar - cia 1994 ) . The time step was small enough to satisfy the Courant – Friedrichs – Lewy condition for stability of the numerical scheme . Initial actin density was zero . We simulated the model long enough for the asymptotically stable stationary density proﬁle to develop . We compared the results of the measurements and model by ﬁtting the theoretical density proﬁle over the experimental one and using the ‘‘eyeball’’ norm ( i . e . no formal optimization algorithm was used ) . More formal methods , i . e . the numerical least squares ﬁt , proved inconclusive . Shape of the leading edge We computed local protrusion rates from the measured shapes using the graded radial extension model and plotted the experimental density – velocity results . The density – velocity relation of the elastic polymerization ratchet model was ﬁtted over the experimental data using the discrete least - squares approximation ( Garcia 1994 ) . Evolution and stability of actin density and leading edge shape We simulated the coupled dynamics of the actin density and leading edge shape using the following explicit iterative procedure . At each computational step : ( 1 ) the actin density was updated using the shape of the front and the ﬁnite diﬀerence approximation to the partial diﬀerential equations of the ‘‘Mathematical model of actin dynamics’’ section ( below ) ; ( 2 ) the local protrusion velocity was computed using the updated actin density and the formula from the elastic polymerization model ; ( 3 ) the shape of the leading edge was updated using the graded radial extension formula . We ran these simulations on the grid described above using model parameters that generated good ﬁts to the experimental data . We used a ran - dom number generator to simulate the stochasticity of the branching and capping processes . Mathematical model of actin dynamics We use mathematical modeling to relate the observed features of the actin density to both the polymerization dynamics of actin ﬁl - aments and the shape of the lamellipodia . The model is based on the following simplifying assumptions : 1 . The lamellipodium is eﬀectively a two - dimensional domain . The shape of its leading edge is convex . The slope of the leading edge is not steep ( in the sense explained below ) . 2 . Contraction at the rear and sides of the cell is separated from the protrusion at the front . Speciﬁcally , the movement of actin ﬁl - aments with respect to the substrate near the leading edge is negligible and the actin network at the front can be considered ﬁxed with respect to the surface . 565 3 . Individual actin ﬁlaments are straight and oriented at ±35 (cid:2) to the direction of the cell movement . Note that the ﬁlament’s thermal bending required for the elastic polymerization ratchet model is small and can be neglected . We assume that the ﬁlament orientation is the same across the central part of the lamellipod : orientation does not depend on the local normal direction to the cell boundary . The results change little if this assumption is changed in the case of relatively ﬂat cell edge . 4 . In the absence of speciﬁc indications to the contrary , we assume that the concentration of actin monomers available for poly - merization , branching / nucleation complexes ( Arp2 / 3 ) , capping proteins and their activity are distributed uniformly along the leading edge . To account for the ﬁnite size of the lamellipodium , we assume that no ﬁlaments are nucleated outside of the leading edge interval . We consider the lamellipodium in a coordinate system moving with the cell . The y - axis is oriented forward , parallel to the direc - tion of motion , and the x - axis is parallel to the leading edge at the center of the lamellipodium ( Fig . 1 ) . The point x = 0 corresponds to the center of the cell , and x = ± L are the coordinates of the inner boundaries of the lateral edges of the lamellipodium . The leading edge proﬁle is described by the function y = f ( x , t ) in this coordinate system . Straight actin ﬁlaments can be labelled by their angle with respect to the forward direction ( measured clockwise ) , h . The angular distribution of actin ﬁlaments at the front of the keratocyte measured and modeled in Maly and Borisy ( 2001 ) consists of F - actin at all angles , from ) 90 (cid:2) to + 90 (cid:2) . However , this angular distribution reveals two prominent peaks , at approximately h ± = ±35 (cid:2) . As a simpliﬁcation for modelling purposes , we assume a perfect angular order in the actin network , with each ﬁlament oriented at h ± = ±35 (cid:2) relative to the direction of motion of the cell . Mathematically , we describe the actin network with the den - sities p + ( x , t ) and p – ( x , t ) , ( l m ) 1 ) , of right - ( + 35 (cid:2) ) and left - ( ) 35 (cid:2) ) pointing actin ﬁlaments with uncapped barbed ends at the lead - ing edge . Note that p ± ( x , t ) is not the number of uncapped leading barbed ends per unit arc length of the cell boundary , but the number of ﬁlaments of given orientation crossing the segment [ x , x + D x ] near the front divided by D x ( Fig . 1 ) . We also intro - duce the total density of actin ﬁlaments , p ( x , t ) = p + ( x , t ) + p – ( x , t ) , and the total number of leading edge ﬁlaments with uncapped barbed ends : (cid:1) PP t ð Þ ¼ R L (cid:2) L p þ x ; t ð Þ þ p (cid:2) x ; t ð Þ ð Þ d x . The intensity measured by rhodamine staining is proportional to the number of polymerized actin monomers per unit area . In our model , this number of polymerized actin monomers per unit area is p ( x , t ) / cos ( 35 (cid:2) ) , so the experimentally measured actin density is pro - portional to the number density , p ( x , t ) . Model equations for actin density The following equation governs the dynamics of the actin density at the leading edge : @ p (cid:3) @ t | { z } density change ¼ (cid:4) @ @ x v (cid:3) p (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:2) | ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ { zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ } lateral flow þ b b 1 ; 2 p (cid:4) ð Þ | ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ { zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ } branching (cid:2) c p (cid:3) | { z } capping ð 1 Þ The ﬁrst term on the right - hand side describes the lateral drift of the growing barbed ends along the leading edge . This drift is due to the fact that when the lamellipodial boundary extends for - ward , a tip of a straight ﬁlament tilted relative to the boundary glides along the edge , assuming that the tip keeps up with the edge ( Small 1994 ) . ( This assumption is justiﬁed using the fol - lowing mechanical argument : an uncapped barbed end lagging behind would grow without resistance and would catch up with the boundary , where the ﬁlaments are slowed down by the membrane resistance . ) The corresponding rate of the ﬂow , v ± ( l m s ) 1 ) , is easy to ﬁnd from the geometric considerations ( see Fig . 1 ) : v (cid:3) x ; t ð Þ ¼ (cid:4) @ f = @ t ð Þ @ f = @ x ð Þ (cid:2) cot h (cid:3) ð Þ ð 2 Þ In the special case of the steady protrusion of the leading edge with constant shape and velocity V : Fig . 1 Mathematical model . The leading edge is described by the solid curve y = f ( x ) . We describe the actin network along the cell front between the lateral edges , ) L < x < L . When the cell movement is steady , the shape of the leading edge is constant ( solid and dashed curves ) . According to the graded radial extension model , the local protrusion rate is normal to the boundary and graded spatially , so that it decreases toward the sides . The barbed ends of the straight growing actin ﬁlaments ( solid segments ) push the leading edge forward . Before a ﬁlament gets capped and disappears from the leading edge , its tip remains localized at the leading edge along which it glides laterally while growing ( dashed segments ) . Nascent ﬁlaments nucleated with the help of Arp2 / 3 complexes and branching out from the existing ﬁlaments substitute for those lost due to capping . The branching angle between ‘‘mother’’ and ‘‘daughter’’ ﬁlaments is approximately 70 (cid:2) . We approximate the angular distribution of the actin network by two populations of left - ( ) 35 (cid:2) ) and right - ( 35 (cid:2) ) pointing ﬁlaments . The ﬁlament number density , p ( x , h ) , is deﬁned as the number of ﬁlaments of a given orientation divided by the length of the segment parallel to the x - axis which they intersect 566 v (cid:3) ð x Þ ¼ V 1 : 42 (cid:4) f 0 x ð Þ ð 3 Þ Here f’ ( x ) = d f / d x is the slope of the leading edge , and cot ( 35 (cid:2) ) (cid:5) 1 . 42 . Our observations show that the slope of the leading edge of the keratocyte is not steep : | f ¢¢ ( x ) | < 1 . 42 for all x , and the lateral velocity is always ﬁnite . The second term on the right - hand side is responsible for the nucleation of nascent growing barbed ends as a result of branching with the rate constant b ( s ) 1 l m ) 1 ) . ( The indices 1 , 2 and functions b 1 , 2 correspond to two diﬀerent models of branching , discussed below . ) Note that in the branching process , nascent right - ( left - ) pointing ﬁlaments appear on the left - ( right - ) pointing existent ﬁlaments ; thus the rate of change of density , p ± , is proportional to p « . The last term on the right - hand side de - scribes the loss of the growing barbed ends due to capping with the rate constant c ( s ) 1 ) . The boundary conditions to accompany Eq . ( 1 ) are based on the model assumption that no right - ( left - ) pointing ﬁlaments emerge from the left ( right ) lateral edge : p (cid:2) L ð Þ ¼ 0 ; p þ (cid:2) L ð Þ ¼ 0 ð 4 Þ ‘‘Global’’ and ‘‘local’’ regulation of actin dynamics The capping and branching processes are mediated by capping proteins and the Arp2 / 3 complexes , respectively . These proteins associate with F - actin at the front and are subsequently released elsewhere in the lamellipodium in the process of ﬁlament disas - sembly . After that they are recycled to the front , either by diﬀusion or by molecular motors or both , and interact transiently with other signalling molecules at the leading edge . In the absence of detailed information about these processes , we have to use theoretical arguments to specify the capping and branching rates . Simulations of the model equations ( 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ) show that these rates cannot be uncoupled from the actin density . If b 1 , 2 ( p « ) = p « ( then the dimension of b is s ) 1 ) and b < c , then the ﬁlaments are capped faster than they branch , and they go extinct . On the other hand , if b > c , the ﬁlaments proliferate without limit , and even the lateral ﬂow does not bind the actin density from above . The most natural assumption is that the cell regulates the eﬀective rates to achieve a stable equilibrium : either the capping rate increases at high F - actin density , or the branching rate decreases , or both . Let us consider two simple scenarios . We will assume that the capping rate is constant , while the branching rate is limited by an eﬀective rate of activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex at the leading edge . In the ﬁrst , local scenario , a constant number b of nascent ﬁlaments are nucleated per second per micron of the cell boundary . Assuming that there is an equal probability for an activated Arp2 / 3 complex to bind to a ﬁlament of any orientation , the following formula deﬁnes the function b 1 introduced in Eq . ( 1 ) : b 1 p (cid:4) ð Þ ¼ p (cid:4) p þ x ; t ð Þ þ p (cid:2) x ; t ð Þ ð 5 Þ In the second , global scenario , a constant number b L of nascent ﬁlaments are nucleated per second over the whole leading edge . Also , each ﬁlament has an equal probability of branching per unit length , independently of the ﬁlament’s location . In this case , the following formula deﬁnes function b 2 introduced in Eq . ( 1 ) : b 2 p (cid:4) ð Þ ¼ Lp (cid:4) (cid:1) PP ; (cid:1) PP ¼ Z L (cid:2) L p þ x ð Þ þ p (cid:2) x ð Þ ð Þ d x ð 6 Þ where (cid:1) PP is the total number of growing ﬁlaments at the cell’s front . Note that in both cases the average length of a capped ﬁlament is : l ¼ V = c cos 35 (cid:6) ð Þ ð Þ ð 7 Þ because when the cell glides steadily with velocity V , each ﬁlament elongates at the rate V / cos ( 35 (cid:2) ) , and the elongation terminates on average in 1 / c seconds . The global scenario predicts that in the steady state each ﬁlament has on average one branching point . On the other hand , according to the local scenario , branching points are distributed uniformly over the leading edge , so there will be more branching points per ﬁlament at locations with lower F - actin density . The local model would be true if , for example , b Arp2 / 3 com - plexes are activated per second at one micron of the leading edge and are immediately associated with the growing ﬁlaments ( and the length of the ﬁlaments is not rate limiting ) . On the other hand , the global model would be valid if , upon activation , the Arp2 / 3 com - plexes are spread evenly along the leading edge ( by diﬀusion or otherwise ) before associating with F - actin ( again , the length of the ﬁlaments is not rate limiting ) . Let us mention that in this work we do not hypothesize any explicit scenario , but rather assume a highly plausible yet unidentiﬁed regulation mechanism maintaining dy - namic equilibrium for the actin population . We investigate two of the simplest mathematical formulations implying some such mechanism . Model equations for leading edge dynamics Under physiological conditions , the elastic polymerization ratchet model gives the following formula for the rate of protrusion of the leading edge : V n (cid:5) V 0 exp ( ) f r d / k B T ) , where V 0 is the free polymer - ization velocity , f r is the membrane resistance force per ﬁlament , d is the length increment of the ﬁber at one instance of monomer assembly , and k B T is the thermal energy ( Mogilner and Oster 1996 ) . Here we assume that the protrusion is locally normal to the edge ( Lee et al . 1993b ) , and neglect the dependence of d on the slope of the leading edge , which is justiﬁed when the slope is not steep . We will also assume that eﬀective membrane resistance to protrusion , F ( pN l m ) 1 ) , is constant along the leading edge and is independent of density and velocity . This is likely since some part of the F - actin density , p 0 , participating neither in the force gener - ation nor in resistance , exists at the cell front . Capped ﬁlaments with their capped ends close to the front could contribute to this density . We will assume that p 0 = const . This density has to be subtracted from the total density . The parameter p 0 will be found from comparison with the experimental data . We will also assume that the load is equally divided amongst the force - generating ﬁla - ments , each bearing a share f r = F / ( p ( x ) – p 0 ) , where we neglect the insigniﬁcant dependence on the slope of the leading edge . Intro - ducing the notation x = F d / ( k B T ) for the scaled resistance per unit length of the leading edge , we can re - write the theoretical density – velocity relation in the form : V n x ð Þ (cid:5) V 0 exp (cid:2) x p x ð Þ (cid:2) p 0 (cid:4) (cid:5) ð 8 Þ The density – velocity relation depends on three non - dimensional model parameters , ( V 0 / V ) , w = x / p ( 0 ) and w 0 = p 0 / p ( 0 ) . In terms of these parameters , the theoretical density – velocity relation can be written in the form : ( V n ( w ) / V ) = ( V 0 / V ) exp ( ) w / ( w – w 0 ) ) , where w = p ( x ) / p ( 0 ) . This formula deﬁnes the graded rate of change of the leading edge shape as a function of the local actin density . Characteristic scales The natural spatial scale in the system is the distance from the center to the lateral edge of the lamellipodium , L . We choose the average time of the nascent ﬁlament growth before capping , 1 / c , as the time scale for computations . The actin density scale is deﬁned by the balance between the branching and capping , b / c . In the Appendix we scale and non - dimensionalize the model equations . The important conclusion of the scaling procedure is that the actin density proﬁle is determined by the single non - dimensional parameter e = V / ( c L ) . This parameter can be interpreted either as 567 the ratio of the average ﬁlament’s length ( Eq . 7 ) to the cell size , or as the ratio of the rate of the barbed end disappearance due to the lateral ﬂow , V / L , to the capping rate , c . Only the amplitude , but not the shape , of the actin density depends on the branching rate . At the observed cell speed and size ( L (cid:5) 20 l m , V (cid:5) 0 . 25 l m s ) 1 ) , V / L (cid:5) 0 . 0125 s ) 1 . Then , comparing the model’s solutions to the experimental data , we can estimate e and the capping rate c = V / e L . Results The description of the results is organized as follows . In the ﬁrst two subsections ( ‘‘Shape and motion of the cell are steady : experiment’’ and ‘‘Actin ﬁlament den - sity at the leading edge : experiment’’ ) we report experimental observations of cell shape and actin den - sity at the leading edge . In the following subsection ( ‘‘Flat leading edge : theory’’ ) we describe analytical and numerical stationary solutions of the actin density equations in the simple hypothetical case of the ﬂat leading edge . These solutions allow us to build an understanding of the actin density behavior and to choose the local branching model over the global one . We analyze theoretically the eﬀect of the steady leading edge shape on the actin density in the next subsection ( ‘‘How shape of the leading edge determines the actin density : theory’’ ) , which gives us clues about the stability of protrusion . We use the experimentally observed cell shape and computer simulations to derive steady actin density distributions and compare them to the corresponding experimental results in the following subsection ( ‘‘Comparison of theory and experiment’’ ) . This comparison allows us to estimate the eﬀective capping rate . In the next subsection ( ‘‘How actin den - sity shapes the leading edge : theory and experiment’’ ) we estimate unknown model parameters by ﬁtting the density – velocity relation ( Eq . 8 ) to local protrusion rates found from the observed cell shapes and the graded radial extension theory . Finally , we use the estimates of the model parameters in the last subsection ( ‘‘Evolution and stability of the coupled ( actin density / cell shape ) system : theory’’ ) to solve numerically the coupled dynamic model equations for the actin density and cell shape . Shape and motion of the cell are steady : experiment Two of the most important features of keratocytes for the purposes of this study are the permanence of their ‘‘fan - like’’ shape and the persistent character of their ‘‘gliding’’ motion ( Lee et al . 1993a ) . Since these features are crucial for our model , we explored them quantita - tively . From cell contours , variations of the shape of the leading edge were hardly detectable by inspection ( Fig . 2a ) . Fluctuations in the shape can be measured by recording the diﬀerence in area , D F i , between the leading edge of the cell at time t i and the leading edge of the time averaged cell shape ( Fig . 2b ) . During the movement , the cells exhibited slight lateral displacements , so the posi - tions of their lateral boundaries changed irregularly with time . To record the changes of area at the leading edge only and to exclude the changes due to the lateral dis - placement of the cell and the retraction at the rear , the measurement was restricted to a strip ( dashed vertical lines in Fig . 2 ) parallel to the direction of motion and between the rightmost position of the left boundary of the cell and the leftmost position of the right boundary of the cell . The ( temporal ) average of the area diﬀerences for the cell shown turned out to be just 1 . 85 % of the total area of the cell of average shape . Freely locomoting cells with smooth lamellipodia lacking folds and ruﬄes usually exhibited diﬀerence areas below 3 % of the total Fig . 2 Persistence of the shape and velocity of keratocyte . ( a ) Contours of a ﬁsh keratocyte taken from phase images at time intervals of 4 s . Variations of the shape are particularly small at the leading edge . ( b , c ) Using the images in ( a ) we derived the time - averaged cell contour ( solid curve ) and measured diﬀerence areas D F ( shaded ) between the average contour and successive frames shown in ( a ) ( the dashed curve is one example ) . The dashed straight lines indicate the positions of the lateral edges of the lamellipodium . To disregard the shape changes due to lateral displacement of the cell , D F is evaluated for the portion of the leading edge between these lines . This area ﬂuctuates about 1 . 85 % ( and never exceeds 3 . 5 % ) of the total cell area 568 average area . To compare : for a ﬂat leading edge con - structed in such a way as to minimize D F , the corre - sponding value would be 8 . 5 % . Thus , the temporal variation of the shape of the leading edge is smaller than the diﬀerence between the average shape and the ﬂat leading edge , indicating that the speciﬁc curved shape of the edge is conserved with a high degree of precision . Variations of D F with time are shown in Fig . 2c . No systematic deviations from the average were detected . Actin ﬁlament density at the leading edge : experiment Since protrusion is believed to be driven by actin poly - merization , the actin density pattern at the leading edge is likely to provide an insight into the mechanism of shape stability . Fluorescence microscopy revealed that actin ﬁlament density at the leading edge of a keratocyte exhibited a maximum in the central part of the cell and decreased towards the lateral edges ( Fig . 3a , c ) . Actin density proﬁles showed signiﬁcant local ﬂuctuations and variability from cell to cell , comparable to the variability in cell shape and size ( Fig . 3b , c ) . Nevertheless , the overall shape of the actin density proﬁle with the max - imum in the middle was characteristic for most regularly shaped keratocytes . In order to test if the observed actin density proﬁles are related to the dynamics of actin polymerization , the cells were treated with a low concentration ( 0 . 2 l M ) of cyto - chalasin D , a drug that , similar to actin - capping proteins , blocks actin polymerization at the barbed ﬁlament end . At the given concentration of the drug , actin polymerization was not inhibited completely and the rate of advance of the lamellipodia was only reduced by about 30 % as compared to the control . However , the actin density proﬁles became ﬂat , without the maximum at the middle , and the shape of the leading edge became irregular ( Fig . 4 ) . This experiment suggested a close relationship between actin polymerization dynamics , ﬁlament density distribution and the shape of the leading edge . Fig . 4 Actin distribution in the cytochalasin treated cells . ( a ) Fish keratocyte treated with cytochalasin and stained for F - actin with rhodamine phalloidin . The leading edge contours ( b , dashed ) and the actin density ( c , dots ) for eight cells treated with a low concentration ( 0 . 2 l M ) of cytochalasin D . ( x , y , u are as in Fig . 3 . ) Solid lines show the data for one of the cells . Both cell boundary and actin density are less regular than those in Fig . 3 . The average density proﬁle is ﬂat Fig . 3 Actin distribution in keratocyte lamellipodia . ( a ) Fish keratocyte stained for F - actin with rhodamine phalloidin . ( b ) Contours of the leading edges are plotted for 15 cells ( dashed curves ) between the lateral edges ( x = ±1 ; the length scale is half the width of the cell , L ; the y - coordinate is also scaled by L ) . The solid curve is the leading edge proﬁle of the cell shown in ( a ) . ( c ) Along the leading edge , the intensity ( proportional to the actin density , u ; normalized so that the maximal observed density is 1 ) is plotted for 15 cells ( dots ) . Despite signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations , it is seen that the density is highest in the middle of the cell and decreases toward the lateral edges . The solid line is the measured intensity for the cell shown in ( a ) 569 Flat leading edge : theory Let us consider a case of the ﬂat leading edge moving forward with constant velocity . This example can be analyzed easily and helps us to develop an understand - ing of the actin dynamics . In the limiting cases of very fast and very slow capping , we ﬁnd approximate sta - tionary solutions of the model equations ( 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 ) ( see Appendix ) : 1 . Slow capping : c (cid:7) 0 . 01 s ) 1 , e (cid:8) 1 ; actin density has the following form ( Fig . 5a ) : p (cid:5) b L ﬃﬃﬃ 2 p V ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 (cid:2) x 2 L (cid:7) (cid:8) 2 ; r | ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ { zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ } local model p (cid:5) b L ﬃﬃﬃ 2 p V cos p x 4 L (cid:7) (cid:8) | ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ { zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ } global model ð 9 Þ 2 . Fast capping : c (cid:8) 0 . 01 s ) 1 , e (cid:7) 1 ; actin density has the following form ( Fig . 5c ) : p (cid:5) b c | ﬄﬄ { zﬄﬄ } local model ; p (cid:5) pb 4 c | ﬄﬄﬄ { zﬄﬄﬄ } global model cos p x 2 L (cid:7) (cid:8) ; at (cid:2) L þ e \ x \ L (cid:2) e ð 10 Þ 3 . In the intermediate case of c (cid:5) 0 . 01 s ) 1 , e (cid:5) 1 , we solved the model equations numerically . The corresponding actin density is shown in Fig . 5b . At all values of the model parameters ( Table 1 ) , the following features characterize actin density , p ( x ) : ( 1 ) actin density is symmetric , p ( x ) = p ( ) x ) ; ( 2 ) actin density has a maximum at the center of the leading edge ; the density decreases to the sides , because according to the boundary conditions there are very few right - ( left - ) pointing ﬁlaments at the left ( right ) side ; ( 3 ) the actin density proﬁle is convex . All these properties compare favorably with the experimental data ( Fig . 2c ) . The most notable diﬀerence in the density proﬁles evolving at diﬀerent capping rates is the ratio of the density at the Fig . 5 Actin density proﬁles for the ﬂat leading edge moving forward with constant velocity ( x , u are as in Fig . 3 ) . Asymptotically stable stationary solutions of the model equations for the density of the right - pointing ( dashed ) and left - pointing ( dash - dotted ) ﬁlaments and total density ( solid ) are plotted . The densities are normalized so that the total density at the center is unity . The left and right columns illustrate the solutions of the global and local models , respectively . Total actin density is symmetric , convex down , has a maximum at the center , and decreases to the sides . The ratio of the total actin density at the center to that at the sides increases with the growth of the capping rate . The actin proﬁles are qualitatively similar in the global and local models at slow and intermediate capping rates ( a , b ) . When the capping rates are fast , the total actin density in the global model has a steep slope along the leading edge , while in the local model the density has a ﬂat proﬁle with sharp drops at the sides 570 center to that at the lateral edges , p ( 0 ) / p ( ±1 ) . This ratio is the lowest , p ( 0 ) / p ( 1 ) = (cid:3) 2 , in the limit of slow capping ( Fig . 5a ) , because the long actin ﬁlaments extend across the whole lamellipodium in this case and attenuate local density variations . This ratio increases at intermediate values of the capping rate , and in the limit of fast cap - ping it becomes very large , of the order of 1 / e ( Fig . 5c ) . The reason is that when capping is fast , the ﬁlaments are short , actin growth has a local character , and the amount of nucleated F - actin is small near the lateral edges because of the boundary conditions and branching dynamics . The actin proﬁles are qualitatively similar in the global and local models at slow and intermediate capping rates ( Fig . 5a , b ) , because the long actin ﬁlaments in these cases ‘‘globalize’’ the actin dynamics . However , at fast capping rates the proﬁles are very diﬀerent ( Fig . 5c ) . In the local model , the actin density along the edge is determined by the balance between constant nucleation and capping rates , and is thus constant ( other than closer than e to the edges , where the density is not built up ) . However , in the global model , the nucleation is not distributed uni - formly along the leading edge . A greater number of ﬁlaments at the center consumes a greater part of the nucleation factors , and the density decreases steadily and signiﬁcantly from the center toward the sides . Our observation of the eﬀect of cytochalasin D on actin density can be interpreted as an indication that a greater rate of capping maintains a ﬂatter density proﬁle ( providing that the drug’s inhibitory eﬀect is equivalent to capping ) . This interpretation supports the local model over the global one . In what follows , we use the local model to generate theoretical results that we compare with the experimental results . Note that the fast capping limit is biologically relevant , according to previous estimates of the capping rates ( see Pollard et al . 2000and references therein ) . Intermediate and slow capping rates ( in the mathematical sense ) corre - spond to ﬁlaments stretching across the whole cell and not being capped , but rather terminated at the lateral sides . Such rates are unlikely . How shape of the leading edge determines the actin density : theory We used computer simulations to analyze the eﬀect of the steady shape of the leading edge on the actin density . At fast capping rates , the smooth convex shape of the leading edge changes the actin density only slightly , making it more convex ( Fig . 6a ) . Figure 6b gives an example of the inﬂuence of a perturbation of the shape at diﬀerent capping rates on the density proﬁle . At high capping rates the actin density increases at places of leading edge outgrowth , and decreases at indentations . The lower capping rates result in generally smoother actin density proﬁles . As mentioned earlier , we hypothesize that there is a positive correlation between actin density and the local protrusion rate : greater actin density leads to faster protrusion . This has important consequences for the stability of the lamellipodial shape . If actin ﬁlaments are depleted locally as a result of a ﬂattened or indented leading edge , then the protrusion rate is reduced at this place causing the indentation to increase , which further Table 1 Model variables and parameters Symbol Range of values Meaning t Tens of seconds Time x Tens of l m Coordinate parallel to the leading edge y Few l m Coordinate parallel to the direction of protrusion y = f ( x , t ) Few l m Function describing the proﬁle of the leading edge h ± ±35 (cid:2) Orientation of actin ﬁlaments relative to the direction of protrusion L Tens of l m Coordinate of the inner boundaries of the lateral edges of the lamellipod p ± ( x , t ) Hundreds per l m Densities of right - and left - pointing actin ﬁlaments with uncapped barbed ends at the leading edge P ( t ) Thousands Total number of the leading edge actin ﬁlaments v ± Tenths of l m per second Rate of the lateral ﬂow of the leading edge actin ﬁlaments V Tenths of l m per second Rate of cell protrusion V 0 Tenths of l m per second Free polymerization rate V n Tenths of l m per second Local rate of cell protrusion b ( p ± ) – Functional dependence of branching on the actin density b Tens per l m per second Branching rate c Tenths per second Capping rate l l m Average ﬁlament length F Tens of pN per l m Eﬀective membrane resistance f r Tenths of pN Eﬀective membrane resistance per ﬁlament d Few nm Filament length increment at one monomer assembly k B T 4 . 1 pN nm Thermal energy p 0 Tens per l m Threshold actin density below which no protrusion occurs x , w – Scaled membrane resistance w , w 0 – Scaled actin density 571 decreases the density . A similar argument in the case of an outgrowth at the leading edge suggests the existence of a positive feedback , which could destabilize the front . ( Of course , more adequate modeling has to take into account the eﬀect of membrane tension , which stabilizes the cell front . ) As Fig . 6b demonstrates , this is the case for high capping rates . On the other hand , at low cap - ping rates the density distribution is smoother , which helps to maintain a regular shape of the leading edge . A possible connection could be made to the irregular shape of cells that were treated with cytochalasin D , which eﬀectively increases the capping rate : we observed that the lamellipodial shape is much less stable and under - goes large ﬂuctuations ( Fig . 4 ) . Comparison of theory and experiment For a set of 15 ﬁsh keratocyte cells , we evaluated the shapes of the leading edges of the lamellipodia ( y = f ( x ) ) Fig . 6 Inﬂuence of the shape of the leading edge on the actin density ( x , y , u are as in Fig . 3 ) . Asymptotically stable stationary solutions of the model equations for the total ﬁlament density in the local model are plotted . ( a ) The actin density proﬁle ( dashed ) near the ﬂat leading edge ( not shown ) is less convex than the proﬁle ( solid ) near the curved , convex leading edge ( stars ) . ( b ) The leading edge is perturbed by the outgrowth at the left ( stars ) . At a higher capping rate ( dashed curve ) an indentation of the leading edge leads to a local depletion of ﬁlaments , while a front’s outgrowth causes an accumulation of actin . The correlation between the density and extension rate can lead to the instability of the cell front in this case . At a low capping rate ( solid curve ) the actin density is less perturbed , suggesting that the shape of the lamellipodium is more stable at low capping rates Fig . 7 Comparison of theory and experiment . The local model equations for the actin density were solved at diﬀerent values of the capping rate for the steady shape of the leading edge shown in Fig . 3b . The asymptotically stable stationary density proﬁles ( curves 1 , 2 , and 3 normalized as explained in the text ) are ﬁtted over the measured density ( Fig . 3c ) ( x , u are as in Fig . 3 ) 572 and the actin ﬁlament density ( Fig . 3b , c ) . We ﬁtted the theoretical density curves for diﬀerent capping rates over the characteristic experimental proﬁles ( Fig . 7 ) . Theo - retical results were normalized so that the theoretical density amplitude at the center is the same as the experimental density averaged over central region of the lamellipodium ( in the interval ) 0 . 25 < x < 0 . 25 ) . Rates of capping of the order of c (cid:5) 0 . 1 s ) 1 gave the best ﬁt . Faster ( slower ) capping rates result in too ﬂat ( convex ) density proﬁles . Note that our data allow only a very rough order of magnitude estimate of the capping rate . The visual impression from Fig . 7 is that c = 0 . 08 s ) 1 gives a better ﬁt than c = 0 . 05 or 0 . 25 s ) 1 . More rigorous sta - tistical analysis was not conclusive . How actin density shapes the leading edge : theory and experiment According to the graded radial extension model ( Lee et al . 1993b ) , the boundary of the steadily gliding kera - tocyte extends locally in the direction normal to the boundary . In order to maintain constant cell shape , the extension rate has to be constant in time and graded in space according to the following formula : v n x ð Þ ¼ V = ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 þ f 0 x ð Þ ð Þ 2 q ð 11 Þ Here V n ( x ) is the rate of normal protrusion at the point of the leading edge with coordinates ( x , y = f ( x ) ) . We measured the shape of the leading edge y = f ( x ) and took its numerical derivative to use Eq . ( 11 ) and obtain an approximation for the normal velocity ( Fig . 8b ) . In or - der to investigate the relation between actin density and protrusion velocity , we plotted these values of the nor - mal velocity and experimental values of the actin density ( proﬁles shown in Fig . 8a , b ) at the grid points in the non - dimensional interval ) 1 < x < 1 . The corresponding density – velocity data points are plotted in Fig . 8c . Given that the leading edge is rela - tively ﬂat in its middle part , most points are gathered in a region near maximal velocity and maximal density . These data suggest that velocity is an increasing func - tion of density saturating to an upper limit at high values of density , which is in agreement with our model ( Eq . 8 ) . ( When p increases , the power x / p of the exponential factor converges to zero , and V ﬁ V 0 . ) We estimate the model parameters ( V 0 / V ) , w 0 and w from Eq . ( 8 ) by comparing the experimental density – velocity data with theoretical predictions . Figure 8c shows the theoretical density – velocity curve obtained using Eq . ( 8 ) ﬁtted over the data from one cell . Figure 8d shows a plot of two of the three ﬁtting parameters for the cells investigated . The ﬁtting procedure did not converge for 3 out of the 16 cells considered . Removing one outlier , we obtained the following averages for the ﬁtting parameters : V 0 / V = 1 . 07±0 . 04 , w = 0 . 033±0 . 017 and w 0 = 0 . 47±0 . 1 . The small variations of parameters w 0 and of V 0 support the model assumptions . The low estimated value of the parameter w / p ( 0 ) ( equivalently , closeness of V 0 / V to unity ) implies that the membrane resistance to protrusion in ﬁsh kerato - cytes is relatively low . A rough estimate for the resis - tance can be obtained if we use the observation ( Abraham et al . 1999 ) that there are a few hundred ﬁlaments per micron of the leading edge . Then , the membrane resistance is F (cid:5) ( x k B T / d ) · ( 200 l m ) 1 ) (cid:5) 10 pN l m ) 1 ( k B T (cid:5) 4 pN nm , d (cid:5) 2 nm ) . This value agrees with the value of the membrane resistance determined by the splay of the outer membrane leaﬂet and compression of the inner leaﬂet ( Evans and Skalak 1980 ) . Higher values of the membrane resistance Fig . 8 Density – velocity relation . ( a ) Measured actin density normalized so that the maximal density is 1 ( Fig . 3c ; x , u are as in Fig . 3 ) . ( b ) Local normal protrusion velocity ( V n scaled by V ) was computed from the leading edge proﬁle , y = f ( x ) ( Fig . 3b ) using Eq . ( 10 ) of the graded radial extension model . ( c ) Measured actin density ( a ) and the normal velocity ( b ) are compared at the grid points and plotted as dots . The theoretical result ( solid curve ) is ﬁtted over the experimental data ( dots ) . ( d ) Parameter values ( for two of the three parameters ; for 13 cells ) . V 0 is the free polymerization rate , w = x / p ( 0 ) is the scaled membrane resistance , and w 0 = p 0 / p ( 0 ) is the scaled fraction of the ‘‘background’’ F - actin 573 measured in diﬀerent cells ( Dai and Sheetz 1999 ) can be explained by binding energy dissipation when the links between the actin cortex and membrane are broken as the membrane is pushed forward . These links are probably weak in motile keratocytes . Evolution and stability of the coupled ( actin density / cell shape ) system : theory Equations for actin dynamics depending on the shape of the leading edge ( Eqs . 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 ) , together with Eq . ( 8 ) for the normal extension rate of the cell boundary as a function of the actin density , form a closed system for the computation of the evolving actin density and shape of the leading edge . To simulate the density and shape , we used the iterative numerical procedure described in the section ‘‘Mathematical modeling and comparison to experimental data’’ and the parameter values e = 0 . 2 , V 0 / V = 1 . 07 , x / p ( 0 ) = 0 . 033 and p 0 / p ( 0 ) = 0 . 37 ( found to provide good ﬁts to the experimental data ) . The simulations demonstrated that asymptotically stable proﬁles of the density and leading edge evolve ( Fig . 9 ) . These proﬁles are comparable to those observed ( Fig . 3 ) , so the suggested scenario of the maintenance of the lamellipodial shape is plausible . Numerical experiments with stochastic ﬂuctuations of the branching and capping rates showed that lower capping rates ( longer ﬁlaments ) support a more regular and stable cell boundary . Discussion Cell motility is ultimately a mechanical phenomenon , and , as such , has been a subject of biophysical studies and mathematical modeling for a long time . These studies have concentrated either on features of macro - molecular assemblies and individual reactions involved in motility ( e . g . , actin network assembly , rheology of polymer gels ) ( Janmey et al . 1994 ; Carlsson 2001 ; Maly and Borisy 2001 ; Mogilner and Edelstein - Keshet 2002 ) , or on phenomenological descriptions and modeling of the behavior of the cell as a whole ( Huang et al . 1997 ) . However , there have been only a few attempts to con - nect the molecular and cellular levels of description ( Bottino et al . 2002 ) . Perhaps the most natural system in which these levels can be bridged is the leading edge of rapidly moving cells , where actin dynamics are well studied ( Borisy and Svitkina 2000 ; Pollard et al . 2000 ; Bray 2001 ) . The ﬁsh epidermal keratocyte is perfectly suitable for such modeling because of the stability of its smoothly curved shape , the ﬂatness of the lamellipodium and the steady and persistent character of its locomotion . In keratocytes , the protrusion and contraction events of the motility cycle occur continuously and simultaneously , but there is a clear spatial separation between the two : protrusion is conﬁned to the front of the cell , while contraction occurs at the rear and the extreme lateral edges ( Svitkina et al . 1997 ; Anderson and Cross 2000 ) . Therefore , it is reasonable to hypothesize that the shape of the leading edge of a keratocyte represents the basic shape of the protrusive edge in its purest form , deter - mined solely by the dynamics of the assembling actin network . In other cells the same basic determinants of shape may exist , but the actual shape may be the result of mixed inﬂuences of protrusion and retraction pro - cesses and thus more diﬃcult to analyze . The stability of the shape of keratocytes has been phenomenologically described in terms of the graded radial extension model ( Lee et al . 1993b ) , but the mechanism of ﬁne tuning of the extension rate has not been uncovered . The present study is , to our knowledge , the ﬁrst attempt to analyze the dynamics of the actin ﬁlament population in the context of a realistic geometry of the lamellipodium of a motile cell . Making simple geometric and physical assumptions and considering the ﬁlament tips’ linear elongation and lateral drift along the cell’s front , we modeled the dependence of the actin density proﬁle on the rates of capping and on the shape Fig . 9 Self - organization of the lamellipodial shape and actin density : Equations for actin ﬁlament density coupled with equations describing graded protrusion velocity and leading edge extension were solved simultaneously . We plotted fully evolved asymptotically stable proﬁles of the leading edge ( top ) , actin density ( middle ) and protrusion velocity ( bottom ) . In the simulations , we used parameter values e = 0 . 2 , V 0 / V = 1 . 07 , x / p ( 0 ) = 0 . 033 and p 0 / p ( 0 ) = 0 . 37 574 of the leading edge . For a wide range of capping rates and for realistic cell shapes , the model predicted convex actin density proﬁles with the maximum in the middle of the leading edge . We measured similar actin density distributions experimentally . Fitting the simulated den - sity proﬁles to the experimental data , we estimated the order of magnitude of the capping rate as (cid:1) 0 . 1 s ) 1 . At the observed rate of migration (cid:1) 0 . 25 l m s ) 1 , this pre - dicts that the average length of actin ﬁlaments is of the order of a few microns . Although statistical analysis shows that this ﬁtting cannot give a decisive answer about the value of the eﬀective capping rate , best ﬁts were generally achieved at relatively low rates . Our analysis showed that much higher capping rates resulted in ﬂat actin density proﬁles , which was at odds with experimental observations . Furthermore , treatment with cytochalasin D , expected to increase the eﬀective cap - ping rate , was found experimentally to result in ﬂatten - ing of the actin density proﬁles . This is consistent with the trend predicted by our model and thus provides further validation to the model . Our simulations demonstrated that lower capping rates ( equivalently , longer ﬁlaments ) resulted in greater stability of the cell’s shape . Qualitatively , this can be explained by the fact that the lateral drift of growing ﬁlaments ‘‘averages out’’ local ﬂuctuations of actin density . Thus , lower capping rates could be favorable for persistent steady locomotion : an important preliminary conclusion that has to be tested further by more detailed studies . Some previous studies suggested that actin capping rates are about one order of magnitude greater than that predicted by our model ( (cid:1) 1 s ) 1 ; see review in Pollard et al . 2000 ) . This could be an indication that the model did not take into account some other factors controlling actin dynamics . However , the estimates of capping from biochemical experiments , as well as electron microscopic images of branching actin networks , have been obtained mostly under transient conditions . Some electron microscopic studies suggested that actin ﬁlaments in steadily moving keratocytes could be rather long ( Small et al . 1995 ) . In a steadily migrating cell the ends of growing actin ﬁlaments remain in the vicinity of the leading edge for a long time , where a number of mecha - nisms can protect the barbed ends from capping ( Hartwig et al . 1995 ; Schafer et al . 1996 ; Huang et al . 1999 ) . Our model predicts that ﬁlament length is in the mi - cron range , while an order of magnitude higher capping rates support tenths of a micron long ﬁbers . It has been argued that shorter ﬁlaments produce a more branched and robust network . Another argument , from the elastic polymerization ratchet model , is that a single ﬁlament longer than 200 nm is too ﬂexible and buckles under membrane resistance ( Mogilner and Oster 1996 ) . How - ever , the crosslinking and / or entanglement of long ﬁla - ments can produce a stiﬀ interconnected network with only the short tips of a ﬁber bending signiﬁcantly , and thus withstanding greater resistance . Another important implication of greater ﬁlament length is for the turnover of actin . Very fast turnover rates needed for rapidly migrating cells require many F - actin minus ends ( Carlier and Pantaloni 1997 ) . Fewer and longer ﬁlaments mean less minus ends , so mechanisms of creating minus ends , such as severing ( McGrath et al . 2000 ) , could be very important . Our model would have to be changed drastically if regulatory factors controlling actin assembly ( e . g . , Arp2 / 3 complexes , capping proteins , G - actin and actin accessory proteins ) were distributed along the leading edge in a non - uniform , graded manner . However , if this is true , the next question arises : how is the distribution of these factors controlled and maintained ? In our model , rather than hypothesize about corresponding plausible mechanisms , we made a much simpler geo - metric assumption of existence of the lateral boundaries at the leading edge , such that there is no inﬂux of F - actin to the cell’s center from the sides . The fact that our modeling and experimental results agree qualita - tively does not exclude the possibility of more complex spatial regulation , but it shows that even the minimal system lacking such factors can develop a realistic motility pattern . Further investigation of possible coupling of protru - sion and contraction forces , as well as the relation between actin density and protrusion velocity , is neces - sary to test the validity of our model . In a generic cell , where contraction is not spatially separated from pro - trusion , both protrusion and contraction velocities may be coupled to actin density , resulting in a more complex relationship between density and shape . Also , careful electron micrography is needed to measure the depen - dence of angular distribution and branching pattern of the actin network as a function of position along the leading edge . The present study is an initial attempt to combine mathematical modeling with cell biological and biophysical methods in order to dissect the mystery of cell motility . Acknowledgements The work is supported by Swiss Science Foundation grant 31 - 61589 to H . P . G . , A . B . V . , and J . J . M . A . M . is supported by a UCD Chancellor’s Fellowship , a NSF grant and a NIH GLUE grant ‘‘Cell Migration Consortium’’ . We are grateful to Gary G . Borisy , Tatyana Svitkina , Gaudenz Danuser , Eric Cytrynbaum , and Angela Gallegos for fruitful discussions . Appendix : asymptotic analysis of the model equations Scaling and non - dimensionalization Introducing the non - dimensionalized variables x / L , c t and p / ( b / c ) , we can write the model equations in the case of the steady locomotion in the form : @ p (cid:3) @ t ¼ (cid:4) 2 @ @ x v (cid:3) p (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:2) þ p (cid:4) p (cid:2) p (cid:3) ; p ¼ p þ þ p (cid:2) ; ½ local model (cid:9) ð 12 Þ 575 @ p (cid:3) @ t ¼ (cid:4) 2 @ @ x v (cid:3) p (cid:3) (cid:1) (cid:2) þ p (cid:4) (cid:1) PP (cid:2) p (cid:3) ; (cid:1) PP ¼ Z 1 (cid:2) 1 p d x ½ global model (cid:9) ð 13 Þ v (cid:3) x ð Þ ¼ 1 1 : 42 (cid:4) f 0 x ð Þ ; 2¼ V L c ; p þ (cid:2) 1 ð Þ ¼ 0 ; p (cid:2) 1 ð Þ ¼ 0 ð 14 Þ Here , for simplicity , we keep the same notations for non - dimensional variables . In what follows , we investigate the steady - state solutions of these equations , i . e . when the time derivative is equal to zero . We also concentrate on the case of the ﬂat leading edge , f ¢¢ ( x ) = 0 . In this last case , without loss of generality we assume that v ± = 1 , which can be justiﬁed by re - scaling the protrusion velocity ( f ¢¢ ( x ) = 0 ) . Slow rate of capping In this case ( c (cid:7) V / L , e (cid:8) 1 ) , the scale of the actin density is deﬁned by the ratio of the branching rate b over the eﬀective rate of ﬁber disappearance due to the lateral ﬂow , V / L . In the non - dimensional system this means that the scale of actin density is (cid:1) 1 / e . Substituting this new scale into Eqs . ( 12 ) and ( 13 ) and dropping the negligible capping term ( the third term on the right - hand side ) , we obtain the following steady - state equations : (cid:2) d p (cid:3) d x þ p (cid:4) ~ pp ¼ 0 ; ~ pp ¼ (cid:1) PP ; global model p ; local model (cid:9) ð 15 Þ Let us introduce the function s = p + ) p – . Adding and subtracting Eqs . ( 15 ) , we obtain the equations : (cid:2) d s d x þ 1 ¼ 0 ; d p d x þ s p ¼ 0 ð 16 Þ for the local model . The solutions of these equations can be found easily by ﬁrst solving the ﬁrst equation of ( 16 ) , and then the second one , and by using the conditions that s ( x ) is an odd function , p ( x ) is an even function , and p ( 1 ) = s ( 1 ) : s ¼ x ; p ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 (cid:2) x 2 p ð 17 Þ The dimensional form of these solutions is given by Eq . ( 8 ) . For the global model , adding and subtracting Eqs . ( 15 ) , we obtain : (cid:2) d s d x þ p (cid:1) PP ¼ 0 ; d p d x þ s (cid:1) PP ¼ 0 ð 18 Þ Diﬀerentiating these equations a second time , we ﬁnd : d 2 s ; p ð Þ d x 2 þ s ; p ð Þ (cid:1) PP 2 ¼ 0 ð 19 Þ Using symmetry properties of functions s ( x ) and p ( x ) , we have : p ¼ A cos p (cid:1) PP (cid:7) (cid:8) ; s ¼ A sin x (cid:1) PP (cid:7) (cid:8) ð 20 Þ Using the condition p ( 1 ) = s ( 1 ) , we ﬁnd that 1 / P = p / 4 . Finally , integrating p ( x ) from ) 1 to 1 , we obtain the value of A : (cid:1) PP ¼ Z 1 (cid:2) 1 p x ð Þ d x ¼ 2 A (cid:1) PP sin ð 1 = (cid:1) PP Þ ; A ¼ 1 = ﬃﬃﬃ 2 p ð 21 Þ The dimensional form of these solutions is given by Eq . ( 9 ) . Fast rate of capping In this case ( c (cid:8) V / L , e (cid:7) 1 ) , singular perturbation theory can be used to investigate the local model ( Eq . 12 ) . Simple analysis shows that away from two boundary layers of width O ( e ) at the spatial domain’s edges , the constant ‘‘outer’’ solution , p ± ( x ) = 0 . 5 , p ( x ) = 1 , gives the leading order approximation . Near the boundaries , re - scaling the spatial variable , x ﬁ e x , leads to a non - linear system , which cannot be solved analytically . A qualitative analysis shows that the corresponding ‘‘inner’’ solution for p ( x ) decreases from p = 1 inside the spatial interval to p = O ( e ) at the boundaries . Unlike the local model , the global model ( Eq . 13 ) is not characterized by the boundary layers and has an approximate analytical solution in this limit . Adding and subtracting Eqs . ( 13 ) , we ﬁnd : 2 d s d x þ 1 (cid:2) 1 (cid:1) PP (cid:4) (cid:5) p ¼ 0 ; 2 d p d x þ 1 þ 1 (cid:1) PP (cid:4) (cid:5) s ¼ 0 ð 22 Þ Diﬀerentiating these equations a second time , we derive : d 2 s ; p ð Þ d x 2 ¼ (cid:2) j 2 e 2 s ; p ð Þ ; j 2 ¼ (cid:2) 1 (cid:2) 1 (cid:1) PP (cid:4) (cid:5) 1 þ 1 (cid:1) PP (cid:4) (cid:5) ð 23 Þ Solving these equations and using symmetry properties of functions s ( x ) and p ( x ) gives : p ¼ A cos j x e (cid:7) (cid:8) ; s ¼ B sin j x e (cid:7) (cid:8) ð 24 Þ Substituting these solutions into Eq . ( 22 ) and using the condition p ( 1 ) = s ( 1 ) , we ﬁnd that (cid:1) PP (cid:5) 1 (cid:2) ð p 2 e 2 = 8 Þ , j (cid:5) ( pe / 2 ) , A (cid:5) p / 4 and B (cid:5) p 2 e / 16 . Thus , the non - dimen - sional approximate solution of the local model in this limit is p = ( p / 4 ) cos ( p x / 2 ) . The dimensional form of the solutions of the global and local models in the fast capping rates limit are given by Eq . ( 10 ) . References Abercrombie M ( 1980 ) The crawling movement of metazoan cells . Proc R Soc Lond ( Biol ) 207 : 129 – 147 Abraham VC , Krishnamurthi V , Taylor DL , Lanni F ( 1999 ) The actin - based nanomachine at the leading edge of migrating cells , Biophys J 77 : 1721 – 1732 Anderson KI , Cross R ( 2000 ) Contact dynamics during keratocyte motility . Curr Biol 10 : 253 – 260 576 Bernheim - Groswasser A , Wiesner S , Golsteyn RM , Carlier MF , Sykes S ( 2002 ) The dynamics of actin - based motility depend an surface parameters . Nature 417 : 308 – 311 Borisy GG , Svitkina TM ( 2000 ) Actin machinery : pushing the envelope . Curr Opin Cell Biol 12 : 104 – 112 Bottino D , Mogilner A , Roberts T , Stewart M , Oster G ( 2002 ) How nematode sperm crawl . J Cell Sci 115 : 367 – 384 Bray D ( 2001 ) Cell movements . Garland , New York Cameron LA , Svitkina TM , Vignjevic D , Theriot JA , Borisy GG ( 2001 ) Dendritic organization of actin comet tails . Curr Biol 11 : 130 – 135 Carlier MF , Pantaloni D ( 1997 ) Control of actin dynamics in cell motility . J Mol Biol 269 : 459 – 467 Carlsson AE ( 2001 ) Growth of branched actin networks against obstacles . Biophys J 81 : 1907 – 1923 Condeelis J ( 1993 ) Life at the leading edge : the formation of cell protrusions . Annu Rev Cell Biol 9 : 411 – 444 Cortese JD , Schwab B , Frieden C , Elson EL ( 1989 ) Actin poly - merization induces shape change in actin - containing vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86 : 5773 – 5777 Dai JW , Sheetz MP ( 1999 ) Membrane tether formation from blebbing cells . Biophys J 77 : 3363 – 3370 Edelstein - Keshet L , Ermentrout GB ( 2000 ) Models for spatial polymerization dynamics of rod - like polymers . J Math Biol 40 : 64 – 96 Evans E , Skalak R ( 1980 ) Mechanics and thermodynamics of biomembranes . CRC Press , Boca Raton , Fla . , USA Garcia AI ( 1994 ) Numerical methods for physicists . Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliﬀs , NJ , USA Gerbal F , Chaikin P , Rabbin Y , Prost J ( 2000 ) Elastic model of Listeria propulsion . Biophys J 79 : 2259 – 2275 Hartwig JH , Bokoch GM , Carpenter CL , Janmey PA , Taylor LA , Toker A , Stossel TP ( 1995 ) Thrombin receptor ligation and activated rac uncap actin ﬁlament barbed ends through phos - phoinositide synthesis in permeabilized human platelets . Cell 82 : 643 – 643 He H , Dembo M ( 1997 ) On the mechanics of the ﬁrst cleavage division of the sea urchin egg . Exp Cell Res 233 : 252 – 273 Huang M , Yang C , Schafer DA , Cooper JA , Higgs HN , Zigmond SH ( 1999 ) Cdc42 - induced actin ﬁlaments are protected from capping protein . Curr Biol 9 : 979 – 982 Janmey PA , Hvidt S , Kas J , Lerche D , Maggs A , Sackmann E , Schliwa M , Stossel TP ( 1994 ) The mechanical properties of actin gels , elastic modulus and ﬁlament motions . J Biol Chem 269 : 32503 – 32513 Lee J , Ishiara A , Jacobson K ( 1993a ) The ﬁsh epidermal keratocyte as a model system for the study of cell locomotion . In : Jones G , Wigley C , Warn R ( eds ) Cell behavior : adhesion and motility . Company of Biologists , Cambridge , UK , pp 73 – 89 Lee J , Ishihara A , Theriot J , Jacobson K ( 1993b ) Principles of locomotion for simple - shaped cells . Nature 362 : 467 – 471 Logan JD ( 1997 ) Applied mathematics . Wiley , New York Loisel TP , Boujemaa R , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF ( 1999 ) Recon - stitution of actin - based motility of listeria and shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 : 613 – 616 Maly IV , Borisy GG ( 2001 ) Self - organization of a propulsive actin network as an evolutionary process . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98 : 11324 – 11329 McGrath JL , Osborn EA , Tardy YS , Dewey CF , Hartwig JH ( 2000 ) Regulation of the actin cycle in vivo by actin ﬁlament severing . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97 : 6532 – 6537 Mitchison TJ , Cramer LP ( 1996 ) Actin - based cell motility and cell locomotion . Cell 84 : 371 – 379 Miyata H , Nishiyama S , Akashi KI , Kinosita K ( 1999 ) Protrusive growth from giant liposomes driven by actin polymerization . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 : 2048 – 2053 Mogilner A , Edelstein - Keshet L ( 2002 ) Regulation of actin dynamics in rapidly moving cells : a quantitative analysis . Bio - phys J 83 : 1237 – 1258 Mogilner A , Oster G ( 1996 ) Cell motility driven by actin poly - merization . Biophys J 71 : 3030 – 3045 Pantaloni D , Clainche CL , Carlier MF ( 2001 ) Mechanism of actin - based motility . Science 292 : 1502 – 1506 Pollard TD , Blanchoin L , Mullins RD ( 2000 ) Molecular mecha - nisms controlling actin ﬁlament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 29 : 545 – 576 Rinnerthaler G , Herzog M , Klappacher M , Kunka H , Small JV ( 1991 ) Leading edge movement and ultrastructure in mouse macrophages . J Struct Biol 106 : 1 – 16 Rottner K , Behrendt B , Small JV , Wehland J ( 1999 ) Vasp dynamics during lamellipodia protrusion . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 321 – 322 Schafer DA , Jennings PB , Cooper JA ( 1996 ) Dynamics of capping protein and actin assembly in vitro : uncapping barbed ends by polyphosphoinositides . J Cell Biol 135 : 169 – 179 Small JV ( 1994 ) Lamellipodia architecture : actin ﬁlament turnover and the lateral ﬂow of actin ﬁlaments during motility . Semin Cell Biol 5 : 157 – 163 Small JV , Herzog M , Anderson K ( 1995 ) Actin ﬁlament organi - zation in the ﬁsh keratocyte lamellipodium . J Cell Biol 129 : 1275 – 1286 Svitkina TM , Borisy GG ( 1999 ) Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depo - lymerizing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and tread - milling of actin ﬁlament array in lamellipodia . J Cell Biol 145 : 1009 – 1026 Svitkina TM , Verhovsky AB , McQuade KM , Borisy GG ( 1997 ) Analysis of the actin - myosin 11 system in ﬁsh epidermal kera - tocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J Cell Biol 139 : 397 – 415 Theriot JA , Mitchison TJ ( 1991 ) Actin microﬁlament dynamics in locomoting cells . Nature 352 : 126 – 131 Welch MD , Mallavarapu A , Rosenblatt J , Mitchison TJ ( 1997 ) Actin dynamics in vivo . Curr Opin Cell Biol 9 : 54 – 61 577