Right temporal alpha oscillations as a neural mechanism for inhibiting obvious associations Caroline Di Bernardi Luft a , b , 1 , 2 , Ioanna Zioga a , b , Nicholas M . Thompson b , c , Michael J . Banissy b , and Joydeep Bhattacharya b a School of Biological and Chemical Sciences , Queen Mary University of London , London E1 4NS , United Kingdom ; b Department of Psychology , Goldsmiths , University of London , London SE14 6NW , United Kingdom ; and c School of Psychology and Clinical Language Sciences , University of Reading , Reading RG6 6AH , United Kingdom Edited by Ranulfo Romo , Universidad Nacional Autonóma de México , Mexico City , Mexico , and approved November 12 , 2018 ( received for review July 3 , 2018 ) Creative cognition requires mental exploration of remotely con - nected concepts while suppressing dominant ones . Across four experiments using different samples of participants , we provide evidence that right temporal alpha oscillations play a crucial role in inhibiting habitual thinking modes , thereby paving the way for accessing more remote ideas . In the first experiment , participants completed the compound remote associate task ( RAT ) in three separate sessions : during right temporal alpha ( 10 Hz ) transcranial alternating current brain stimulation ( tACS ) , left temporal alpha tACS , and sham tACS . Participants performed better under right tACS only on RAT items in which two of the three words shared misleading semantic associations . In the second experiment , we measured EEG while the participants solved RAT items with or without shared misleading associations . We observed an increase in right temporal alpha power when participants correctly solved RAT items with misleading semantic associations . The third exper - iment demonstrated that while solving divergent thinking tasks participants came up with more remote ideas when stimulated by right temporal alpha tACS . In the fourth experiment , we found that participants showed higher right temporal alpha power when generating more remote uses for common objects . These studies altogether indicate that right temporal alpha oscillations may support creativity by acting as a neural mechanism for an active inhibition of obvious semantic associations . alpha oscillations | creativity | active inhibition | EEG | brain stimulation A long - standing theory of creativity postulates that the ability to come up with remote and less - expected semantic asso - ciations is a key characteristic of creative individuals ( 1 ) . These semantic associations can be represented as edges between dif - ferent nodes ( concepts ) , linked through their proximity or com - mon use ( 2 ) . According to the spreading activation theory of semantic processing ( 3 ) , every time we search for concepts asso - ciated with a word , we start from stronger associations to move progressively , in the order of strength of semantic associations , toward weaker or more remote ones ( e . g . , cat > dog > animal > pet > human > people > family ) . That is to say , the activation ( concept ’ s retrieval ) spreads from strongly connected nodes ( concepts ) to less - connected ones . Creativity requires reaching those more remote associations on the less - connected concepts . Using graph theory and an insightful analytical approach , it has been shown that highly creative individuals , compared with less - creative ones , show broader and less modular semantic networks ( 4 , 5 ) . Nonetheless , we do not know what the neural mechanisms are which enable to inhibit strongly connected concepts to reach the most remote ones . A key question is how creative individuals are able to engage flexibility of thought to avoid the “ most traveled paths ” to get to their alternative routes and draw more remote associations . For instance , more creative individuals are shown to avoid taking obvious routes when solving creative problems ( 6 ) . Further , a study showed that under low cognitive load individuals tend to explore alternative routes or more remote associations ( 7 ) . The authors suggested that inhibition mediates this exploration by actively and naturally inhibiting most immediate associations , which could explain why we expand our semantic networks as we work on a problem . Creative thinking involves searching through a clutter of asso - ciated concepts or ideas , and the presence of obvious associations is a distraction from the desired creative solution ( e . g . , finding unusual uses for an object or finding a remote association ) ; such obvious but misleading associations need to be actively inhibited for producing more creative associations . Here we tested the hy - pothesis that alpha oscillatory activity enables us to inhibit the most obvious associations to get to more remote ideas . Consid - ering the key role of alpha oscillations in the active inhibition of distractions in both visual search ( 8 , 9 ) and working memory tasks ( 10 ) , we hypothesized that this process of actively inhibiting ob - vious or strong associations could be mediated by an increase in alpha oscillations as it occurs when inhibiting other internal or external distractors . We suggest that this hypothesis could potentially explain a wide range of findings with regard to the role of alpha oscillations ( especially right - lateralized ) in creative problem solving ( 11 ) . For example , alpha power increases during both divergent ( i . e . , ability to come up with a large number of original ideas ) and convergent ( i . e . , ability to come up with one appropriate correct solution ) creative thinking processes under higher internal attentional de - mand ( 12 ) . Right - lateralized alpha oscillations have also been Significance “ Taking a less - traveled path ” is often considered an effective approach to creativity ( i . e . , creative thinking calls for a break from habitual thinking and associations ) , yet little is known about its underlying neural mechanism . In a series of four in - dependent experiments involving electrophysiological and brain stimulation methods we provide evidence that this pro - cess is mediated by the right temporal alpha oscillations . Alpha oscillations are known to represent a process of active in - hibition to suppress irrelevant information , such as inhibiting distractions during visual search . Through monitoring the brain ’ s electrical activity during different creativity tasks and by stimulating the right temporal brain region at the alpha frequency we show that a similar process of active inhibition is also key to creative thinking . Authorcontributions : C . D . B . L . , M . J . B . , andJ . B . designedresearch ; C . D . B . L . , I . Z . , andN . M . T . performed research ; C . D . B . L . , I . Z . , N . M . T . , and J . B . contributed new reagents / analytic tools ; C . D . B . L . and I . Z . analyzed data ; and C . D . B . L . , M . J . B . , and J . B . wrote the paper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . Published under the PNAS license . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . Email : c . luft @ qmul . ac . uk . 2 Permanent address : School of Biological and Chemical Sciences , Queen Mary University of London , London E1 4NS , United Kingdom . Thisarticlecontainssupportinginformationonlineatwww . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1811465115 / - / DCSupplemental . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1811465115 PNAS Latest Articles | 1 of 9 P S Y C H O L O G I C A L A ND C O GN I T I V E S C I E N C E S N E U R O S C I E N C E shown to be higher during the generation of more original ideas in a divergent thinking task ( 13 ) . Further , modulating frontal alpha oscillations with transcranial alternating current brain stimulation ( tACS ) increased performance on divergent thinking tasks ( 14 ) . Finally , right - lateralized alpha oscillations increased before cog - nitive insight ( 15 – 17 ) . Here , across four experiments with independent samples , we investigated how alpha oscillations contribute to both convergent and divergent creative cognition and provided a neural mecha - nism linking these two distinct cognitive processes . For brain stimulation , we targeted the right temporal region due to its key role in semantic processing ( 18 – 20 ) , integration of associated information ( 21 ) , and recognizing associations between different concepts ( 22 ) . The first experiment aimed at understanding the effects of the right temporal alpha ( 10 Hz ) tACS on the remote associates task ( RAT ) , a classical convergent thinking task , re - lying on the remote associations between presented cues . We predicted that right alpha tACS would improve performance on RAT items containing a shared but wrong semantic association , as these require stronger active inhibition to find the remote association . In the second experiment , by recording EEG we investigated the brain oscillatory responses to the RAT items that contained shared wrong associations compared with the ones that did not . In the third experiment , we applied tACS at the individual alpha peak frequency ( IAF ) over the same brain regions of Exp . 1 before , during , and after an alternative uses task , a classical divergent thinking task . We predicted that the right temporal alpha tACS would be associated with the generation of more remote ideas . In the fourth experiment , by recording EEG we investigated the IAF power during the alternative uses task . We predicted that more - remote ideas would be associated with higher individual alpha power compared with less - remote ideas . There - fore , across all four experiments our common binding hypothesis was that the right temporal alpha oscillations play a key role in creative cognition , by inhibiting the obvious semantic associations which can pave the way to more remote and creative ideas . Experiment 1 Mednick ’ s RAT ( 1 , 23 ) is a typical convergent thinking task which emphasizes the importance of association of remote concepts in creative cognition . In the RAT ’ s compound - word version ( 24 ) participants are presented with three cue words ( e . g . , walker / main / sweeper ) and are asked to find a solution or target word which makes a compound word with each of these three words ( e . g . , solution is street : streetwalker / main street / street sweeper ) . People tend to seek the solution word by searching in the pool of semantically related words to the pre - sented cues ( 25 – 27 ) . However , there is a trap in this habitual thinking : When two cue words have close semantic association with a word that is not the correct solution this can get in the way of the true solution , thereby acting as an important distractor which attracts internal attention ( 6 ) . For example , the two cues ( ear and tone ) of the RAT item ear / tone / finger share a dominant but misleading association ( sound ) , which needs to be inhibited to reach the solution ( ring ) . In contrary , the cues of the RAT item high / teacher / mate ( solution : school ) do not share any strong common association . The ability to inhibit the most ob - vious but misleading semantic association is therefore of par - ticular benefit for solving difficult remote associate problems ( 28 ) , and more creative individuals are found to successfully avoid most common but incorrect candidate solutions ( 6 ) . However , the neural mechanism underlying this process of inhibiting the habitual , most - obvious associations and promoting the remote , less - dominant associations during creative problem solving has largely been uncharacterized . Considering that right temporal alpha oscillations have been consistently found to be involved in the insightful solutions of these problems ( 15 – 17 ) and in coming up with original ideas ( 11 , 13 ) , we tested the role of alpha oscillations in the temporal re - gions ( right , left , and sham ) . By stimulating alpha oscillations through tACS during the RAT , we tested whether alpha oscil - lations are involved in establishing weak or distant associations or in helping to inhibit dominant , but misleading , semantic as - sociations . tACS can be used to modulate brain oscillations in a frequency - specific manner ( e . g . , ref . 29 ) and is a powerful tool to examine the role of cortical oscillations in human behavior by directly manipulating brain states in a controlled fashion . Considering the key role of alpha oscillations in the active in - hibition of distractions ( 8 , 30 ) , we predicted that , rather than boosting creative problem solving in general , right temporal alpha would be specifically involved in inhibiting the most - obvious associations . Using a large dataset of semantic associations ( 31 , 32 ) , we considered the RAT items as having a “ shared wrong associa - tion ” if two out of the three cues were strongly associated with a word which was not the solution ( Materials and Methods ) . Thirty participants received right temporal , left temporal , and sham 10 - Hz tACS in three separate sessions while solving RAT items with or without shared wrong semantic associations . We en - tered the proportion of correct solutions to those problems in a 2 ( shared wrong association : yes vs . no ) × 3 ( stimulation condi - tion : left , sham , and right tACS ) within - subjects ANOVA . The results ( Fig . 1 A ) revealed a significant effect of stimulation condition , F ( 2 , 28 ) = 4 . 52 , P = 0 . 015 , η 2 = 0 . 139 . Importantly , we observed a significant interaction between shared wrong associ - ation and stimulation condition , F ( 2 , 28 ) = 3 . 22 , P = 0 . 047 , η 2 = 0 . 10 , since the proportion of correct solutions was higher during right tACS compared with both sham , t ( 28 ) = 2 . 27 , P = 0 . 031 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 450 , and left tACS , t ( 28 ) = 2 . 99 , P = 0 . 006 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 555 , only for the RAT items with shared wrong associations ; there was no significant difference between these conditions for the items without shared wrong associations ( P > 0 . 2 ) . There was no difference between left tACS and sham for either shared or nonshared items ( P > 0 . 2 ) . Unsurprisingly , there was a significant main effect for shared wrong association , F ( 1 , 28 ) = 8 . 17 , P = 0 . 008 , η 2 = 0 . 226 , since the accuracy was expectedly higher for items which did not have a shared wrong association . To compare how successful the stimulation was for each of the RAT items according to their semantic associations , we calcu - lated the relative efficacy index for each RAT item ( Materials and Methods ) as the difference between the proportion of correct solutions in one condition ( e . g . , right tACS ) and the average of the proportion of correct solutions in the other two conditions ( e . g . , sham and left tACS ) . Positive ( negative ) values of the index indicate a larger ( smaller ) proportion of correct solutions under a given stimulation / sham condition in relation to the average of the other two . The mean efficacy index for each condition is presented in Fig . 1 B . A repeated - measures ANOVA with stim - ulation condition ( left tACS , sham , and right tACS ) as a factor revealed that more RAT items were correctly solved during the right tACS stimulation compared with the left tACS and sham , F ( 2 , 268 ) = 3 . 593 , P = 0 . 029 , η 2 = 0 . 026 . Further , we observed a significant linear trend in solved RAT items from left , sham , to right , F ( 2 , 268 ) = 6 . 04 , P = 0 . 015 , η 2 = 0 . 043 , tACS . Participants correctly solved more RAT items during right than during left stimulation ( P = 0 . 015 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 425 ) and sham ( P = 0 . 029 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 381 ) , but there was no difference between left tACS and sham ( P = 0 . 612 ) . Next , we probed whether the items with shared wrong asso - ciations were more likely to be solved during right tACS com - pared with left tACS and sham , and whether this effect was stronger on items with more shared wrong associations . The relative efficacy index was analyzed in a 3 ( shared wrong asso - ciation : 0 , 1 , ≥ 2 ) × 3 ( stimulation condition ) mixed - design ANOVA . We observed a significant main effect of stimulation condition , F ( 2 , 242 ) = 6 . 06 , P = 0 . 002 , η 2 = 0 . 052 , as well as a 2 of 9 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1811465115 Luft et al . significant interaction between stimulation condition and shared wrong association , F ( 4 , 242 ) = 2 . 57 , P = 0 . 038 , η 2 = 0 . 041 . The effectiveness of right tACS increased with the number of shared wrong associations ( Fig . 1 D ) , whereas the opposite was true for left tACS : within - subject effects for the interaction between stimula - tion condition and shared wrong association , F ( 2 , 121 ) = 4 . 894 , P = 0 . 009 , η 2 = 0 . 075 . The right tACS efficacy was higher on RAT items with two or more associations , as evidenced by a large effect size : ≥ 2 vs . 0 shared wrong associations ( Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 848 , CI : 0 . 811 – 0 . 886 ) , t ( 73 ) = 4 . 59 , P < 0 . 001 . Sham stimulation efficacy was independent of the items ’ semantic associations ( P > 0 . 3 ) . Experiment 2 The second experiment was designed to investigate the role of alpha oscillations in inhibiting strong misleading associations in a new group of participants . Based on the semantic analysis we performed for Exp . 1 , we selected a set of 45 RAT items , which share a misleading semantic association , and another set of 45 RAT items , which do not . Of note , these two sets were matched for difficulty based on the performance accuracy in Exp . 1 . We con - ducted an EEG study comparing IAF oscillatory power in response to RAT items containing shared versus nonshared associations . This experiment was also designed to analyze the frequency and spatial specificity of the differences between shared versus non - shared RAT items . We hypothesized that , to solve RAT items with a shared wrong association , participants would need to actively inhibit the prominent , but incorrect association to reach the de - sired solution . Therefore , on the neural level , we predicted that RAT items with shared wrong associations would elicit stronger right temporal IAF power compared with the nonshared RAT items . Further , correct responses to shared items were predicted to be associated with higher IAF power than incorrect responses , due to successful inhibition of the wrong association . At the be - havioral level , we predicted that shared RAT items would induce a higher rate of false alarms ( incorrect responses ) , as suggested previously ( 6 ) . Fig . 2 A shows the proportion of correct solutions with or without shared wrong association ; no difference between the two was observed , t ( 56 ) = − 1 . 041 , P = 0 . 302 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 138 , showing that the shared and nonshared categories are matched for difficulty , as expected since the two sets of items ( shared and nonshared ) were earlier matched for accuracy . Fig . 2 B shows the proportion of incorrect solutions for the two types of RAT items ; as predicted , the participants made more mistakes on items with shared wrong associations compared with nonshared ( paired t test ) , t ( 56 ) = − 3 . 756 , P < 0 . 001 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 498 , suggesting that shared items induced more false alarms compared with nonshared items . Fig . 2 C shows the proportion of no responses or time - out trials ; a paired t test revealed that participants tended to answer more to the items with shared associations , t ( 56 ) = 3 . 865 , −0 . 04 −0 . 03 −0 . 02 −0 . 01 0 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 03 0 . 04 0 . 05 r e l a t i v e e ff i c a cy i nde x A B * * left sham right 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 left sham right p r opo r t i on c o rr e c t left sham right Without wrong association Shared wrong association C −0 . 04 −0 . 02 0 0 . 02 0 . 04 0 . 06 * * Without wrong association Shared wrong association left sham right r e l a t i v e e ff i c a cy i nde x D −0 . 2 −0 . 15 −0 . 1 −0 . 05 0 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 15 0 . 2 number of shared wrong associations 0 1 ≥ 2 0 1 ≥ 2 0 1 ≥ 2 r e l a t i v e e ff i c a cy i nde x * * * * * * * left tACS right tACS sham tACS Fig . 1 . Effects of tACS on performance in the RAT . ( A ) Proportion of correct solutions during left , sham , and right tACS averaged over items with vs . without shared wrong semantic associations . ( B ) Relative efficacy index during each stimulation condition ( left , sham , and right temporal tACS ) . ( C ) Relative efficacy index for each condition for items which have a shared wrong associated word between two of the cues vs . the ones that did not ( without shared wrong association ) . ( D ) Relative efficacy index for items with zero , one , and two or more shared wrong associations for left ( Left ) , sham ( Middle ) , and right ( Right ) tACS stimulation . Error bars represent ± 1 SEM . * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * P < 0 . 001 . Luft et al . PNAS Latest Articles | 3 of 9 P S Y C H O L O G I C A L A ND C O GN I T I V E S C I E N C E S N E U R O S C I E N C E P < 0 . 001 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 512 , which is not surprising since misleading associations might cause the participants to provide the associate word as a solution . For EEG data , we compared relative power of the IAF in response to RAT with versus without shared wrong associations for correct and incorrect solutions ( Fig . 3 ) . IAF power values were analyzed by a three - way repeated measures ANOVA with shared wrong association ( yes , no ) , accuracy ( correct , incorrect ) , and region of interest ( ROI ) ( right frontal , RF ; left frontal , LF ; right temporal , RT ; left temporal , LT ; right parietal , RP ; left parietal , LP ; and midcentral , MC ) as factors . We found that IAF power was higher for shared compared with nonshared items but the effect was dependent on the ROI : interaction between shared wrong association and ROI , F ( 6 , 246 ) = 3 . 775 , P = 0 . 001 , η 2 = 0 . 084 ; and a three - way interaction between shared wrong association , ROI , and accuracy , F ( 6 , 246 ) = 2 . 251 , P = 0 . 039 , η 2 = 0 . 052 . There was no main effect for accuracy , F ( 1 , 41 ) = 2 . 432 , P = 0 . 127 , η 2 = 0 . 056 ; or shared wrong association alone , F ( 1 , 41 ) = 0 . 185 , P = 0 . 669 , η 2 = 0 . 005 ; or interactions between the two , F ( 1 , 41 ) = 0 . 431 , P = 0 . 515 , η 2 = 0 . 010 , indicating that the effects of shared wrong associations on alpha power was specific to the ROIs and dependent on whether the item was solved correctly . To investigate the interaction further , we compared alpha power between shared and nonshared on each of these ROIs ( t maps shown in Fig . 3 A ) . We observed that for correctly solved trials , individualized frequency alpha power was higher when the participants were solving shared compared with nonshared items : RT , t ( 41 ) = 2 . 685 , P = 0 . 010 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 416 . IAF power at the right temporoparietal electrode was also higher during RAT items with shared associations , t ( 41 ) = 2 . 395 , P = 0 . 021 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 369 , but not at the RP region , t ( 41 ) = 1 . 904 , P = 0 . 064 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 293 ( see Materials and Methods for ROI definition ) . To investigate whether this effect was specific to alpha oscil - lation , we conducted the same analysis on the average power over alpha band power ( 8 – 12 Hz ) and also over the traditional frequency bands , including theta ( 4 – 8 Hz ) , beta ( 13 – 30 Hz ) , and gamma ( 30 – 40 Hz ) . The results showed that the effects were nonsignificant in other frequency bands ( P > 0 . 05 ) except for the alpha frequency band , in which we observed similar effects compared with the IAF ( SI Appendix , Fig . S2 ) . Experiment 3 Exps . 1 and 2 focused on investigating the role of alpha oscilla - tions in inhibiting strong associations in a RAT task . However , if right temporal alpha oscillations are indeed associated with the inhibition of obvious associations in general , we expected that they would also promote more remote responses in other tasks involving creative cognition . Therefore , we conducted a third experiment to investigate the effects of right temporal tACS on the alternative uses task ( 34 ) , a commonly employed measure of divergent thinking ( i . e . , capacity to generate a number of original ideas ) . A new sample of participants was asked to generate al - ternative uses to commonly used objects while receiving either sham , left tACS , or right tACS at their IAF ( Materials and Methods ) based on their resting - state EEG . Three raters , blind to the conditions ( double - blinded ) , rated each response for general creativity , remoteness , and cleverness . The ratings were based on items generated before , during , and after tACS ( left , sham , and right IAF ) . We tested each period separately because the objects used during the stimulation were different ( Materials and Methods ) . As the effects of tACS are mainly limited to the stimulation period , we expected that the effects of right IAF tACS would be significant during stimula - tion . For each participant , we calculated the average fluency ( number of nonobvious responses ) and the average ratings for general creativity , remoteness , and cleverness ( Materials and Methods ) . Since we expected the effects to be most significant for remoteness ratings , we analyzed each rating separately by a one - way ANOVA with stimulation condition as a within - subjects factor . We predicted that the participants would come up with more remote responses during the right temporal alpha stimulation . A Shared wrong association P r opo r t i on o f c o rr e c t s o l u t i on s 0 . 26 0 . 24 0 . 22 0 . 20 0 . 18 0 . 16 yes no P r opo r t i on o f i n c o rr e c t s o l u t i on s 0 . 22 0 . 20 0 . 18 0 . 16 0 . 14 0 . 12 * * * yes no B P r opo r t i on o f t i m e ou t s 0 . 64 0 . 62 0 . 60 0 . 58 0 . 56 0 . 54 0 . 52 * * * yes no C Fig . 2 . RAT performance accuracy . Proportion of ( A ) correct solutions , ( B ) incorrect solutions , and ( C ) time - outs ( nonresponses ) for nonshared ( blue ) and shared ( red ) items . Error bars represent ± 1 SEM . * * * P < 0 . 001 . A No Yes Shared wrong association t - v a l ue s shared non - shared - 2 . 5 2 . 5 0 . 25 0 . 3 0 . 35 0 . 4 Correct Incorrect r e l a t i v e I A F po w e r ( w ho l e t r i a l ) * * B Shared vs . Non - Shared Correct Shared vs . Non - Shared Incorrect Fig . 3 . Individual alpha power during remote associate items with and without wrong shared associations . ( A ) Topographical distribution of the differences represented as t values in the relative individual alpha power ( IAF , log10 ) . ( B ) Average relative individual alpha power ( IAF , log10 ) at the right temporal electrode ( highlighted in A ) averaged over the whole trial , separately for correct and incorrect responses in RAT items with shared wrong associations ( red ) and without ( blue ) . * * P < 0 . 025 . 4 of 9 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1811465115 Luft et al . We did not run a mixed ANOVA due to the fact that the items in the pretest and posttest were counterbalanced but the items during the stimulation were always the same ( see Materials and Methods for more details ) . First , we observed no significant differences between groups in the pretest for any of the measures , including fluency , F ( 2 , 33 ) = 0 . 38 , P = 0 . 688 ; general creativity , F ( 2 , 33 ) = 1 . 66 , P = 0 . 206 ; re - moteness , F ( 2 , 33 ) = 0 . 42 , P = 0 . 663 ; and cleverness , F ( 2 , 33 ) = 0 . 73 , P = 0 . 489 , suggesting no preexisting differences between groups . Second , during tACS , we observed , as predicted , a signif - icant effect of stimulation condition on the remoteness of the uses , F ( 2 , 33 ) = 5 . 27 , P = 0 . 010 , partial η 2 = 0 . 24 , but not on their general creativity , F ( 2 , 33 ) = 0 . 94 , P = 0 . 401 , partial η 2 = 0 . 054 ; fluency , F ( 2 , 33 ) = 0 . 89 , P = 0 . 421 , partial η 2 = 0 . 051 ; or cleverness , F ( 2 , 33 ) = 0 . 48 , P = 0 . 623 , partial η 2 = 0 . 028 . Post hoc contrasts revealed that the right IAF tACS group came up with significantly more remote items compared with both left IAF tACS ( P = 0 . 003 , Cohen ’ s d = 1 . 3 , CI = 1 . 18 – 1 . 39 ) and sham ( P = 0 . 030 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 92 , CI = 0 . 82 – 1 . 03 ) groups ( Fig . 4 ) . There was no significant difference between sham and left IAF tACS ( P = 0 . 385 ) . Third , we observed that these effects vanished in the posttest period ( i . e . , after stimulation had ended ) as there was no difference between groups in relation to the remoteness of the ideas , F ( 2 , 33 ) = 0 . 33 , P = 0 . 724 , partial η 2 = 0 . 019 , or in any other measure including fluency , F ( 2 , 33 ) = 0 . 80 , P = 0 . 458 , partial η 2 = 0 . 046 ; general creativity , F ( 2 , 33 ) = 0 . 129 , P = 0 . 879 , partial η 2 = 0 . 008 ; and cleverness , F ( 2 , 33 ) = 0 . 46 , P = 0 . 955 , partial η 2 = 0 . 003 . Experiment 4 In Exp . 3 we demonstrated that stimulating right temporal alpha at the IAF is associated with an increase in remoteness of the responses ( or ideas ) generated during a divergent thinking task . Since the stimulation was delivered during the task , we tested whether IAF would be higher for more remote items . To address this question , we measured EEG while a new sample of partici - pants generated a number of different ideas in an alternative uses task ( AUT ) . We measured power at each participant ’ s IAF peak during the generation of each separate idea . All responses were judged by raters blind to the experimental conditions ( Materials and Methods ) . We compared IAF power on trials with average ratings above ( high ) or below ( low ) the median using a 3 ( rating type : re - moteness , cleverness , general creativity ) × 2 ( performance : high vs . low ) × 7 ( ROI : LF , LT , LP , ML , RF , RT , RP ) within - subjects ANOVA . We observed a significant three - way interaction be - tween rating type , performance , and ROI , F ( 12 , 1476 ) = 2 . 030 , P = 0 . 019 , partial η 2 = 0 . 020 , since we only observed significant differences in IAF between high and low remoteness ratings . To investigate the interaction further , we ran additional 2 ( perfor - mance : high vs . low ) × 7 ( ROI : LF , LT , LP , MC , RF , RT , RP ) ANOVAs per rating type . We observed a significant interaction between performance and ROI only for remoteness ratings , F ( 6 , 774 ) = 3 . 454 , P = 0 . 002 , partial η 2 = 0 . 026 , but not for cleverness , F ( 6 , 774 ) = 1 . 349 , P = 0 . 233 , partial η 2 = 0 . 010 , or for general creativity , F ( 6 , 774 ) = 0 . 738 , P = 0 . 619 , partial η 2 = 0 . 006 . The topography of the differences between high and low performance on each rating ( Fig . 5 ) provides evidence that the differences between items with high vs . low remoteness peaked at the right temporal electrode , t ( 123 ) = 2 . 756 , P = 0 . 007 , Cohen ’ s d = 0 . 247 . There was no statistically significant difference in IAF power be - tween high and low performance on cleverness and general cre - ativity in any of the ROIs ( all contrasts P > 0 . 1 ) . Furthermore , there was no main effect of rating performance , F ( 1 , 123 ) = 0 . 092 , P = 0 . 762 , partial η 2 = 0 . 001 , indicating that the differences were not a result of a better performance in general . We conducted the same analysis in the traditional frequency bands ( theta : 4 – 8 Hz , alpha : 8 – 12 Hz , beta : 12 – 30 Hz , and gamma : 30 – 40 Hz ) but ob - served no significant three - way interaction in any of them or a main effect of rating performance ( for more details of the analysis and the topoplots of the contrasts see SI Appendix ) . Discussion In this paper we provide evidence supporting the role of right temporal alpha oscillations in creative cognition . We suggest that alpha oscillations in the right temporal brain region shape in - hibition of the most common or obvious associations . We pre - sented evidence in support of this hypothesis in four separate Creativity * 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 left sham right tACS ( IAF ) left sham right c r e a t i v i t y ( a v g ) c r ea t i v i t y ( a v g ) c r ea t i v i t y ( a v g ) Remoteness Before Stimulation 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 r e m o t ene ss ( a v g ) right sham left During Stimulation During Stimulation 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 * * left sham right tACS ( IAF ) Cleverness 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 c l e v e r ne ss ( a v g ) r e m o t ene ss ( a v g ) 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 c l e v e r ne ss ( a v g ) left sham right After Stimulation 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 r e m o t en e ss ( a v g ) 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 c l e v e r ne ss ( a v g ) left sham right tACS ( IAF ) A B C Fig . 4 . Average ratings for AUT responses before , during , and after tACS ( vs . sham ) . ( A ) Averaged creativity ratings for items before ( Top , blue ) , during ( Middle , red ) , and after ( Bottom , blue ) left , sham , and right IAF tACS . ( B ) The same analysis as in A for remoteness . ( C ) The same analysis as in A and B for the cleverness ratings . The error bars represent ± 1 SEM . * * P < 0 . 01 , * P < 0 . 05 . Luft et al . PNAS Latest Articles | 5 of 9 P S Y C H O L O G I C A L A ND C O GN I T I V E S C I E N C E S N E U R O S C I E N C E experiments . In our first experiment , we observed that right temporal alpha tACS was most beneficial for those RAT items that required participants to override prominent but wrong candidate solutions , indicating that right temporal alpha oscil - lations play a critical role in the ability to override habitual , but misleading , associations . In a second experiment , we observed higher right temporal alpha power while the subjects were trying to solve RAT items with shared wrong associations . In a third experiment , we observed that the right temporal tACS at the IAF was associated with an increase in remoteness of uses in an alternative uses task , but not in cleverness or general creativity . In a fourth experiment , we observed that the participants showed higher right temporal IAF when they were generating items with higher compared with lower remoteness . Altogether , our results provided robust evidence supporting the hypothesis that right temporal alpha oscillations are involved in actively inhibiting strong semantic associations in both convergent and divergent thinking tasks . In the remainder of this discussion , we consider the principal ways our findings critically advance our understanding of the role of alpha oscillations in creative cognition , its neurophys - iological mechanisms , and the limitations in our approach . First , our findings support the hypothesis that right - lateralized alpha is a core feature of creative cognition , which might un - derlie our capacity to override strong semantic associations that are shaped by prior experience . Our results also support the hypothesis that exploration is mediated through active inhibition . This idea was put forward by Baror and Bar ( 7 ) , who observed that when the cognitive load was high participants tended to fail in suppressing stronger semantic associations . Alpha oscillations have earlier been linked to the process of active inhibition ( 35 ) : They do not merely signalize idle activity , but an energy con - suming suppression process . Our study provides evidence sug - gesting that right temporal alpha oscillations may be critical to the inhibition of strong semantic associations . Second , our results shed light on our understanding of both convergent and divergent creativity . Although the neuroscience of creativity has shown some inconsistent results in relation to its neural mechanisms ( 36 ) , most of the EEG research on the topic showed a robust association between alpha oscillations and creativity both during task and at rest ( for a review see ref . 11 ) . This involvement with alpha oscillations is evident in a number of studies showing increases in right hemispheric alpha during creative ideation ( 12 , 13 , 37 – 39 ) . For example , alpha oscillations increase over the right hemisphere during idea generation and this increase is higher for more creative ideas ( 13 ) . Higher alpha oscillations are also predictive of cognitive insight ( 17 ) . Fur - thermore , right hemispheric alpha power previous to a hint presentation in a RAT task was predictive of whether the par - ticipants would successfully use the hint to correctly solve the problem ( 16 ) . These studies , though informative , have no control over how much the RAT items or specific tasks required the participants to override immediate semantic associations , yet this process is crucial in both divergent and convergent creative prob - lem solving ( 40 ) . For instance , if we need to generate alternative uses of a glass , first we must inhibit our past experience leading to think of a glass as a container . Our study demonstrates that right temporal alpha oscillations are linked with overriding these strong associations in both convergent and divergent thinking . Third , by providing a fine - grained analysis of two well - known creativity tasks ( RAT and AUT ) , we offer an approach for the investigation of higher - order cognition and how it links to more basic neurophysiological processes . For instance , our findings support the account that right hemispheric alpha is involved in inhibiting common or more obvious associations which might get in the way of generating nonobvious creative solutions ( i . e . , re - mote associations ) . We provide evidence that inhibiting wrong semantic associations can be facilitated by alpha tACS on the right , but not left , temporal area . Previous tACS work ( 14 ) showed a general effect of frontal alpha ( F3 , F4 , and Cz ) on creativity , which could be related to general top - down mechanisms necessary to complete the task rather than specific cognitive processes as - sociated with higher originality of the responses . This is consistent with a previous EEG study ( 12 ) showing that both convergent and divergent creativity were associated with higher prefrontal alpha oscillations when these tasks are done under higher internal at - tentional demand . It is possible that alpha oscillatory activity could represent different processes depending on the brain regions where they occur during creative ideation . Alpha synchronization is known to represent a process of heightened attention by blocking both external and internal distractions , which is necessary for creativity and consistent with the role of alpha oscillations in active inhibition of distractions ( 8 , 9 ) . Previous studies showed that higher alpha - band power is associated with the suppression of distracting information in both working memory ( e . g . , ref . 10 ) and attentional tasks ( e . g . , ref . 30 ) . For creative cognition , we suggest prominent associa - tions between two cues ( i . e . , wrong candidate solutions ) or be - tween an object and its common use need to be inhibited to reach more remote ones . Our findings suggest that this inhibitory process is stronger in the right temporal area , which is a key region for processing semantic associations ( 18 , 19 , 21 , 22 ) . This is relevant since here we show the role of alpha oscillations in a task - relevant area . Considering that alpha oscillations were found to coordinate the timing of the action potentials ( 41 ) , it has been suggested ( 35 ) that higher alpha frequency power leads to more precise timing of neuronal activity , and therefore re - flects the temporal structure for the processes controlling the access to information stored in complex knowledge systems . Selective access to higher - order information would depend on inhibiting task - irrelevant memory entries . In our study , both tasks required semantic search for remote associations that might be facilitated by sustained inhibition of stronger associa - tions , which could be considered as task - irrelevant memories . According to Klimesh et al . ( 35 ) , higher alpha amplitude in task - relevant areas promotes inhibition by silencing weakly excited cells , inducing a pulsed pattern of action potentials in cells with higher excitation level ( threshold ) , a process which would in - crease the signal - to - noise ratio in the region , shaping the access to the knowledge systems . Here we speculate that the inhibition A Low High t - v a l ue s highestrating lowestrating - 2 . 5 2 . 5 r e l a t i v e I A F po w e r a t T 8 General Creativity Remoteness Cleverness * * 0 . 1 0 . 12 0 . 14 0 . 16 0 . 18 0 . 2 0 . 22 * * * * B High vs . Low Remoteness High vs . Low Cleverness High vs . Low Creativity Fig . 5 . Differences between AUT answers rated as high vs . low in three rating dimensions . ( A ) Topographical distribution of the differences ( paired t tests ) between IAF power during the generation of ideas which were rated as high ( above the median ) vs . low ( below the median ) in remoteness , cleverness , and general creativity . ( B ) Mean and variability of IAF power at the right temporal electrode T8 during the generation of ideas rated as high and low in the three criteria . The error bars represent ± 1 SEM . * * P < 0 . 01 . 6 of 9 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1811465115 Luft et al . of the obvious associations requires a similar tuning of semantic association brain regions . We suggest future studies to combine EEG and fMRI to investigate how alpha oscillations shape the inhibition of the semantic association networks , as in our study we did not have enough spatial resolution to understand the anatomo - functional substrates of this process . It is important to notice that the strongest effects were observed in the individual alpha frequency which we measured based on the peak power at the right temporal region . Although the effects were similar in the traditional alpha frequency band and also pronounced when we stimulated at 10 Hz , we cannot rule out that different findings could have emerged if we had compared the conditions using the individual alpha frequency of other regions or stimulated other regions at their own individual peak frequencies . In summary , we provided robust evidence that the right tem - poral alpha oscillations play a critical role in the ability to override habitual , but misleading , associations during creative problem solving . Taking a less - traveled path is often considered an effective path to creativity ( i . e . , creative thinking calls for a break from habitual thinking and associations ) , and our findings support that the underlying cognitive mechanisms are served by the temporal alpha oscillations . To understand the processes underlying the production of novel and adequate ideas , we need to break down its constituent processes , dissecting creativity as much as possible at first , and then analyzing them in context , putting them back together through careful consilience . Materials and Methods All participants across four experiments gave written informed consent be - fore the beginning of each experiment . The study protocols of Exps . 1 and 3 were approved by the local ethics committee at Goldsmiths , University of London . The study protocols of Exps . 2 and 4 were approved by the local ethics committee at Queen Mary University of London . All experiments were conducted in accordance with the World Declaration of Helsinki ( 1964 ) . Experiment 1 . Participants . Thirty ( 15females ) right - handed participants wererecruitedfrom the student population at Goldsmiths , University of London . Participants re - ceived course credit or monetary reimbursement at a rate of £10 per hour . Exclusion criteria were a personal or family history of epilepsy and / or neuro - psychiatric disorders , pregnancy , and the presence of any metallic or medical implants . Participants were also excluded if they took any recreational drugs within the past month or consumed any alcohol within 24 h preceding each experimental session . One participant took part in another experiment on RAT before completing this study and was excluded from analysis . The final sample ( n = 29 ) was aged between 18 – 46 y ( 24 . 6 ± 5 . 9 y , mean ± SD ) . Experimental design and task . A counterbalanced , within - participants design was adopted ; participants attended three separate stimulation sessions on three different days with an intersession interval of 7 d . In each session , participants completed a computerized version of the compound word version ( 24 ) of the remote associate task ( 1 , 23 ) under one of three online tACS stimulation conditions : 10 - Hz RT , 10 - Hz LT , and sham stimulation . Participants were blind to the condition . On each RAT trial ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 A ) , participants were shown three cue words ( e . g . , line / house / palm ) and had to come up with the solution word ( tree ) , which would form a valid compound word with each of the three cue words ( treeline , treehouse , palm tree ) . The solution word can be joined either at the beginning or end of the cue words , and the resultant compound word may be one that would be written as one word , or as two separate words ( with or without a hyphen ) . There were 45 trials per stimulation condition ( counterbalanced ; see SI Ap - pendix , Supplementary Material and Methods for details ) . Semantic word association . We extracted the word association measures based on the largest database for word associations ( 31 , 32 ) , available online at www . smallworldofwords . com / new / visualize / # . This database draws word associations based on a large corpus of English words ( 12 , 000 English words , with over 70 , 000 participants ) and was built based on primed associations by asking participants to give the strongest three associated words for a given word ( 32 ) . For each cue and solution word of each RAT item ( i . e . , triplet or triad ) , we checked the top 20 associated words as listed in the database . To observe if there was a shared wrong association , we looked into the first 20 associated words for each cue and found whether the cues shared a same word as top association . Subsequently , we classified the RAT items according to whether or not they shared a wrong candidate solution ( yes = 59 / no = 65 ) . Two additional measures ( cue - solution and solution - cue association ) were also employed as a control measure ( SI Appendix , Supplementary Material and Methods and Additional Analyses Experiment 1 ) . tACS . tACS was delivered using a Neuroconn DC - Plus Stimulator , a constant current device ( NeuroConn Ltd . ) . Electrodes were positioned based on the in - ternational 10 – 20 EEG electrode placement system , with one electrode ( 5 cm × 7 cm ) positioned over the vertex ( Cz ) , and the target electrode ( 5 cm × 5 cm ) positioned over either the left ( T7 ) or right ( T8 ) anterior temporal lobe , depending on the stimulation condition ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 B ) . In each session , a 10 - Hz sinusoidal current ( 1mA peakto peak ) , with a zero - degree phase offset and no dc offset , was delivered via two saline - soaked sponge - covered rubber electrodes , attached to participants ’ scalps with rubber head straps . The current was ramped up and down over 10 s at the beginning and end of stimulation . In both active stimulation sessions participants received 30 min of online stimu - lation . For the sham condition , the stimulation was delivered for just 30 s at the start and the current was subsequently ramped down and remained off for the remainder of the session . In both active sessions , stimulation began 5 min be - fore commencement of the experimental task and then continued for the subsequent 25 min duringwhich participants completedthecomputerizedRAT . Across all sessions , electrode impedance was kept below 20 k Ω throughout . Data analysis . We calculated the accuracy as the percentage of correct solu - tionsforeachparticipant ineachcondition . Toquantifytheeffectivenessofa stimulation condition on individual RAT item performance , we calculated an index , termed as the relative efficacy index , which was the difference be - tween the proportion of correct solutions for the stimulation condition ( e . g . , right tACS ) and the average of the proportion of correct solution for the other two conditions ( left tACS and sham ) . Experiment 2 . Participants . Sixty - twoneurologicallyhealthyadults ( 39female ) agedbetween 18 and 27 y ( 20 . 47 ± 0 . 25 y , mean ± SD ) took part in this experiment . All participants were native speakers of English and right - handed ( self - reported ) . Three participants were excluded due to technical problems ( computer crashed at the end and data were not recorded ) and two more due to poor perfor - mance ( < 10 correct responses ) , resulting in 57 participants used for the be - havioral analysis . For the EEG analysis , five participants were further excluded due to noisy EEG recording ( coughing or muscle artifacts ) , resulting in a totalof 52 participants ( 5 excluded due to behavioral data and 5 due to poor EEG quality ) . Because we focused on the comparisons between items with versus without shared associations which were correctly responded ( vs . incorrect ) , we included in the analysis only participants who had at least five valid trials in each condition , resulting in a total number of 42 participants . All participants received a monetary compensation of £10 per hour for their participation . Experimental task and procedures . The task was identical to the one in Exp . 1 ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 A ) except that there were 90 RAT items in total . There were 45 items with one or two shared wrong associations and 45 items with no shared associations ( Experiment 1 ) . We selected these 90 items strategically by excluding items that presented ceiling ( > 90 % correct ) or floor ( < 10 % correct ) effects to control for difficulty . Further , two categories were matched for difficulty ( P > 0 . 05 ; i . e . , no significant differences between the accuracy of the shared versus nonshared items based on participants ’ performance in Exp . 1 ) . The presentation order of RAT items was randomized across participants . EEGrecordingandanalysis . TheEEGwasrecordedusingaStarstim20 ( Neuroelectrics ) and preprocessed according to standard procedures ( SI Appendix , Supplementary Material and Methods ) . To compute the time - frequency representation ( TFR ) , the EEG signal ( entire duration from stimulus presentation to response ) was con - volved with a complex Morlet wavelet on a trial - by - trial basis . The TFR was cal - culatedfrom2 to 40 Hz , in steps of 0 . 5 Hz , using six - cyclewavelets . TheTFR values were averaged for each of the four conditions — correct shared , correct non - shared , incorrect shared , and incorrect nonshared — for each participant over the whole epoch . The IAF was calculated as the frequency with the highest power from 8 to 12 Hz at the right temporal electrode ( T8 ) . The mean IAF was 10 . 02 Hz ( SD = 1 . 05 ) . Dataanalysis . For behavioraldata , wecomparedtheproportionofcorrectand incorrect ( false alarms ) responses , reaction times , and insight ratings of each participant for shared versus nonshared items . For EEG data , we compared brainresponsestosharedandnonsharedRATitemsseparatelyforcorrectand incorrect solutions ; time - out trials were excluded from future analysis . Spectral power in each frequency immediately following the RAT item presentation ( whole trial and also 0 – 1 s ) was log - transformed ( base 10 ) due to its positively skewed distribution and divided by the total ( average ) ( 2 – 40 Hz ) . Therefore , we analyzed relative power in each frequency band , theta ( 4 – 8 Hz ) , alpha ( 8 – 12 Hz ) , beta ( 12 – 30 Hz ) , and gamma ( 30 – 40 Hz ) , as well as the IAF , defined as the fre - quency with the highest power from 8 to 12 Hz ( ± 2 Hz ) . Luft et al . PNAS Latest Articles | 7 of 9 P S Y C H O L O G I C A L A ND C O GN I T I V E S C I E N C E S N E U R O S C I E N C E Experiment 3 . Participants . Thirty - six participants aged between 19 and 35 y ( 23 . 9 ± 4 . 45 y , mean ± SD ) took part in this study in exchange for course credit or a monetary reimbursement at £10 per hour . Participants were randomly assigned to one of the three conditions : left , sham , and right tACS . There were no differences between age and sex distribution between groups . Standard exclusion criteria were applied ( the same criteria for Exps . 1 and 2 ) . AUT . In this divergent thinking task ( 34 ) , participants were asked to come up with unusual uses for an everyday object within a time period of 2 min per object . There were two sets , one containing four objects ( set 1 : tin can , newspaper , spoon , baseball cap ) and another containing three objects ( set 2 : brick , shoe , cardboard box ) . The first set was used before and after the stimulation ( two objects each , counterbalanced across participants ) , and the second set was used during the stimulation ( presented in random order ) . Additionally , in the poststimulation period , the objects presented before the stimulation were presented again , to check for changes in performance of the new versus old objects . The order of the objects was alternated ( each subsequent participant started with a different order ) . Creativity ratings . Responses were rated by three independent evaluators who wereblindtotheconditionsandtotheobjectivesoftheexperiment . Weused the consensual assessment technique , CAT ( 42 ) , which is considered by some as the gold - standard method for assessing creativity ( 43 ) . CAT relies on in - tuitive ratings by two or more trained evaluators and has been successfully used to evaluate creativity in previous studies ( e . g . , refs . 44 and 45 ) . Ratings of creativity have been based on the idea that creativity depends on three core factors : uncommonness , remoteness , and cleverness ( 46 , 47 ) . According to the three - factor definition , uncommonness relates to how unique ideas are ( inversely related to their frequency ) , whereas remoteness refers to how far the suggested use for an object is from its common or everyday use ( 48 ) . Cleverness in this context refers to how insightful , ironic , humorous , fitting , or smart a given use is . To investigate how alpha oscillatory activity relates to each of these factors , the judges provided ratings of all responses ( presented in random order ) on three attributes separately : ( i ) general creativity , how creative they felt that response was based on intuition and their own ideas of creativity ; ( ii ) remoteness , how remote they thought that the idea was from the original use ; and ( iii ) cleverness , how clever or appropriate the idea was . We observed a reasonable agreement between the three raters ( intraclass correlation , IC ) for general creativity ( IC = 0 . 67 ; CI : 0 . 64 – 0 . 70 ) and remoteness ( IC = 0 . 70 ; CI : 0 . 68 – 0 . 72 ) and a slightly reduced agreement on the cleverness judgments ( IC = 0 . 56 ; CI : 0 . 50 – 0 . 62 ) . The ratings of three judges were z - scored ( all responses , per object ) and averaged for analysis . EEG and tACS protocol . EEG was recorded before the brain stimulation session using a StarStim ( Neuroelectrics ) with eight channels . The EEG was recorded at a sampling frequency of 500 Hz , referenced to the arithmetic average of theleftandrightmastoids , high - pass - filteredat1Hz , andlow - pass - filteredat 45 Hz . Automatic artifact rejection was applied at ± 85 μ V . Power was esti - mated in each frequency from 1 to 45 Hz in steps of 0 . 5 Hz using Welch ’ s periodogram ( 50 % overlap ) . For tACS , the stimulation frequency was set at the alpha peak frequency ( largest power during eyes - closed resting period , from 8 to 12 Hz ) at the stimulated region ( LT or RT ) and the current was 1 mA ( peak to peak ) . For the sham group , half were stimulated ( only ramp up ) at the IAF on the LT and the other half at the RT . The mean IAF for the left tACS group was 10 . 00 ( SD = 0 . 64 ) and for the right tACS it was 9 . 99 ( SD = 1 . 16 ) . There was no significant difference in the IAF between the left and the right tACS groups , t ( 22 ) = 0 . 027 , P = 0 . 979 . Procedures . At the beginning , participants were instructed to keep their eyes closedforaperiod of3minwhiletheirEEGswererecorded ; weestimatedthe IAFfromthisEEGrecording . Subsequently , theparticipantsrespondedtotwo practice items and carried on with the pretest task . Following the pretest , the EEG electrode corresponding to the stimulation condition ( left or right ) was replaced by a round rubber stimulation electrode ( 25 cm 2 ) soaked in saline solution . In each session , a sinusoidal current ( 1 mA peak to peak ) at the individual alpha peak frequency , with a zero - degree phase offset and no dc offset , was delivered via two saline - soaked sponge - covered rubber elec - trodes . One electrode was positioned on either T8 ( RT ) or T7 ( LT ) and the other was always positioned at Fz . During sham , half of the participants had the electrodes positioned at T8 - Fz and the other half at T7 - Fz . The partici - pants were blind to the stimulation condition . The AUT started after 5 min of the start of the stimulation . The total duration of the stimulation was 25 min , during which the participants performed three AUT items and two figural creativity tasks ( not analyzed in this paper ) . Following the stimula - tion , the stimulation electrode ( T7 or T8 ) was removed , the area was cleaned , and the EEG electrodes were placed . The signal was visually inspected to ensure good quality . The EEG was recorded immediately after the signal passed this check , including 3 - min eyes - closed and 3 - min eyes - open ( fixating on a cross on the wall ) recordings . Following the EEG , the participants completed the AUT and figural creativity tasks . Experiment 4 . Participants . One - hundred thirty participants ( 67 females ) aged between 18 and 32 y ( 21 . 2 ± 2 . 63 y , mean ± SD ) took part in this experiment in ex - change for course credit or a monetary reimbursement at a rate of £7 . 5 per hour . The exclusion criteria were the same as in the previous experiments . AUT . The experimental task was the same as in Exp . 3 . The participants were presented with one object ( e . g . , a table ) and were asked to generate unusual uses for it within a 2 - min time period . The participants were instructed to fixate at the center of the screen while thinking and press a button to enter anidea . Oncetheytypedandconfirmed thisidea , theykept generatingother ideas until the 2 min were finished . In total , participants were presented with four objects ( table , shoe , tin can , and umbrella ) and provided an average of 25 ideas for all of the objects ( SD = 11 . 8 , range : 2 – 67 ) . EEG recording and analysis . The EEG was recorded using a Starstim 20 ( Neuroelectrics ) and preprocessed according to standard procedures ( SI Appendix , Sup - plementary Material and Methods ) . The IAF was estimated as with pro - cedures identical to Exps . 2 and 3 . For estimating the power spectrum during the generation of ideas in the AUT trials , we used the whole epoch , from the word presentation to the button press ( to type the response ) . We only used those epochs which contained more than 2 s of usable data . We estimated alpha power using Welch periodogram with 1 - s time windows with an overlap of 50 % . The spectrum was first estimated from 4 to 40 Hz in steps of 1 Hz . The IAF was defined as earlier . The mean IAF was 9 . 73 ( SD = 1 . 15 ) . For normali - zation , we divided the power in the IAF adjusted band power ( peak ± 2 Hz ) by the average power ( log10 ) of the whole spectrum ( 4 – 40 Hz ) . Creativity ratings . As in Exp . 3 , each response to the AUT was rated for general creativity , remoteness , andcleverness , onascalefrom0 ( least ) to10 ( most ) , as described in Experiment 3 . Due to the large number of responses ( 130 par - ticipants , 4 , 810 responses in total ) , two raters rated all responses related with two objects , and other two raters another two objects . Another two raters rated the entire pool of responses . The ratings were subsequently z - scored separately , per item and per rater . This procedure resulted in a good agreement ( IC ) between raters for the creativity ( α = 0 . 88 ) , remoteness ( α = 0 . 89 ) , and cleverness ( α = 0 . 84 ) . This procedure resulted in an average of 12 ideas per condition ( high and low ) , with the average idea ( ± SD ) of 12 . 8 ( SD = 6 ) for high and 12 . 6 ( SD = 5 . 88 ) for low remote , 12 . 8 ( SD = 5 . 9 ) for high and 12 . 7 ( SD = 5 . 9 ) for low cleverness , and 12 . 8 for high ( SD = 6 ) and 12 . 6 ( SD = 5 . 9 ) for low creativity . There was no difference in the number of trials between any of the conditions ( P > 0 . 8 ) . However , because some participants had a low number of ideas , we conducted the main analysis using data of the participants who had a minimum of five ideas per condition ( n = 124 ) . Nonetheless , we present the analysis with all participants in SI Appendix . Data Analysis . We compared the whole - epoch alpha band power ( IAF ± 2 Hz ) during the idea generation phase ( or “ thinking time ” ) , that is , when the sub - jects were engaged with generating ideas . For each participant , we selected the trials with ratings higher or lower than the median for each rating individually ( remoteness , cleverness , and general creativity ) . Wecalculated therelative alpha power on the individual alpha frequency band ( as in Exps . 2 and 3 ) in the low versus high rating trials of each subject . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank Francesca Zingales , Rawan Hassan , Leyla Al - Ashaab Mendiolea , Naml Hussain , Ellie York , and Ayesha Khan for helping to collect EEG data . We were supported by the CREAM project funded by European Commission Grant 612022 . This publication reflects the views only of the authors , and the European Commission cannot be held responsible for any use which may be made of the information contained therein . 1 . Mednick SA ( 1962 ) The associative basis of the creative process . Psychol Rev 69 : 220 – 232 . 2 . Borge - Holthoefer J , Arenas A ( 2010 ) Semantic networks : Structure and dynamics . Entropy ( Basel ) 12 : 1264 – 1302 . 3 . Collins AM , Loftus EF ( 1975 ) A spreading - activation theory of semantic processing . Psychol Rev 82 : 407 – 428 . 4 . Kenett YN , Anaki D , Faust M ( 2014 ) Investigating the structure of semantic networks in low and high creative persons . Front Hum Neurosci 8 : 407 . 5 . Kenett YN , et al . ( 2018 ) Flexibility of thought in high creative individuals represented by percolation analysis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 115 : 867 – 872 . 6 . Gupta N , Jang Y , Mednick SC , Huber DE ( 2012 ) The road not taken : Creative solutions require avoidance of high - frequency responses . Psychol Sci 23 : 288 – 294 . 8 of 9 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1811465115 Luft et al . 7 . Baror S , Bar M ( 2016 ) Associative activation and its relation to exploration and ex - ploitation in the brain . Psychol Sci 27 : 776 – 789 . 8 . BonnefondM , Jensen O ( 2013 ) The role of gamma and alpha oscillations for blocking out distraction . Commun Integr Biol 6 : e22702 . 9 . Haegens S , et al . ( 2015 ) Laminar profile and physiology of the α rhythm in primary visual , auditory , andsomatosensory regionsof neocortex . J Neurosci 35 : 14341 – 14352 . 10 . Sauseng P , et al . ( 2009 ) Brain oscillatory substrates of visual short - term memory ca - pacity . Curr Biol 19 : 1846 – 1852 . 11 . Fink A , Benedek M ( 2014 ) EEG alpha power and creative ideation . Neurosci Biobehav Rev 44 : 111 – 123 . 12 . Benedek M , Bergner S , Könen T , Fink A , Neubauer AC ( 2011 ) EEG alpha synchroni - zation is related to top - down processing in convergent and divergent thinking . Neuropsychologia 49 : 3505 – 3511 . 13 . Schwab D , Benedek M , Papousek I , Weiss EM , Fink A ( 2014 ) The time - course of EEG alpha power changes in creative ideation . Front Hum Neurosci 8 : 310 . 14 . Lustenberger C , Boyle MR , Foulser AA , Mellin JM , Fröhlich F ( 2015 ) Functional role of frontal alpha oscillations in creativity . Cortex 67 : 74 – 82 . 15 . Sheth BR , Sandkühler S , Bhattacharya J ( 2009 ) Posterior beta and anterior gamma oscillations predict cognitive insight . J Cogn Neurosci 21 : 1269 – 1279 . 16 . Sandkühler S , Bhattacharya J ( 2008 ) Deconstructing insight : EEG correlates of in - sightful problem solving . PLoS One 3 : e1459 . 17 . Jung - BeemanM , et al . ( 2004 ) Neural activity when peoplesolve verbal problems with insight . PLoS Biol 2 : E97 . 18 . TranelD , DamasioH , DamasioAR ( 1997 ) Aneuralbasisforthe retrievalof conceptual knowledge . Neuropsychologia 35 : 1319 – 1327 . 19 . Lambon Ralph MA , Cipolotti L , Manes F , Patterson K ( 2010 ) Taking both sides : Do unilateral anterior temporal lobe lesions disrupt semantic memory ? Brain 133 : 3243 – 3255 . 20 . Binder JR , Desai RH , Graves WW , Conant LL ( 2009 ) Where is the semantic system ? A critical review and meta - analysis of 120 functional neuroimaging studies . Cereb Cortex 19 : 2767 – 2796 . 21 . St George M , Kutas M , MartinezA , Sereno MI ( 1999 ) Semantic integrationin reading : Engagement of the right hemisphere during discourse processing . Brain 122 : 1317 – 1325 . 22 . Jung - Beeman M ( 2005 ) Bilateral brain processes for comprehending natural lan - guage . Trends Cogn Sci 9 : 512 – 518 . 23 . Mednick SA , Mednick MT ( 1967 ) Examiner ’ s Manual : Remote Associates Test ( Houghton Mifflin , Boston ) . 24 . Bowden EM , Jung - Beeman M ( 2003 ) Normative data for 144 compound remote as - sociate problems . Behav Res Methods Instrum Comput 35 : 634 – 639 . 25 . Benedek M , Neubauer AC ( 2013 ) Revisiting Mednick ’ s model on creativity - related differences in associative hierarchies . Evidence for a common path to uncommon thought . J Creat Behav 47 : 273 – 289 . 26 . Davelaar EJ ( 2015 ) Semantic search in the remote associates test . Top Cogn Sci 7 : 494 – 512 . 27 . Smith KA , Huber DE , Vul E ( 2013 ) Multiply - constrained semantic search in the remote associates test . Cognition 128 : 64 – 75 . 28 . KleinA , RadiaT ( 2014 ) Theusualandtheunusual : Solvingremoteassociatestesttasks using simple statistical natural language processing based on language use . J Creat Behav 49 : 13 – 37 . 29 . Helfrich RF , et al . ( 2014 ) Entrainment of brain oscillations by transcranial alternating current stimulation . Curr Biol 24 : 333 – 339 . 30 . Kelly SP , Lalor EC , Reilly RB , Foxe JJ ( 2006 ) Increases in alpha oscillatory power reflect an active retinotopic mechanism for distracter suppression during sustained visuo - spatial attention . J Neurophysiol 95 : 3844 – 3851 . 31 . De Deyne S , Storms G ( 2008 ) Word associations : Network and semantic properties . Behav Res Methods 40 : 213 – 231 . 32 . De Deyne S , Navarro DJ , Storms G ( 2013 ) Better explanations of lexical and semantic cognition using networks derived from continued rather than single - word associa - tions . Behav Res Methods 45 : 480 – 498 . 33 . Harkins SG ( 2006 ) Mere effort as the mediator of the evaluation - performance re - lationship . J Pers Soc Psychol 91 : 436 – 455 . 34 . Guildford JP ( 1967 ) The Nature of Human Intelligence ( McGraw - Hill , New York ) . 35 . Klimesch W , Sauseng P , Hanslmayr S ( 2007 ) EEG alpha oscillations : The inhibition - timing hypothesis . Brain Res Brain Res Rev 53 : 63 – 88 . 36 . Dietrich A , Kanso R ( 2010 ) A review of EEG , ERP , and neuroimaging studies of crea - tivity and insight . Psychol Bull 136 : 822 – 848 . 37 . FinkA , GraifB , NeubauerAC ( 2009 ) Braincorrelatesunderlyingcreativethinking : EEG alpha activity in professional vs . novice dancers . Neuroimage 46 : 854 – 862 . 38 . Fink A , et al . ( 2009 ) The creative brain : Investigation of brain activity during creative problem solving by means of EEG and FMRI . Hum Brain Mapp 30 : 734 – 748 . 39 . Grabner RH , Fink A , Neubauer AC ( 2007 ) Brain correlates of self - rated originality of ideas : Evidence from event - related power and phase - locking changes in the EEG . Behav Neurosci 121 : 224 – 230 . 40 . KoutstaalW , BinksJ ( 2015 ) InnovatingMinds : RethinkingCreativitytoInspireChange ( Oxford Univ Press , Oxford ) . 41 . Haegens S , Nácher V , Luna R , Romo R , Jensen O ( 2011 ) α - Oscillations in the monkey sensorimotor network influence discrimination performance by rhythmical inhibition of neuronal spiking . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 : 19377 – 19382 . 42 . Amabile TM ( 1982 ) Social psychology of creativity : A consensual assessment tech - nique . J Pers Soc Psychol 43 : 997 – 1013 . 43 . Baer J , McKool SS ( 2014 ) The gold standard for assessing creativity . Int J Qual Assur Eng Technol Educ 3 : 81 – 93 . 44 . Beaty RE , et al . ( 2018 ) Robust prediction of individual creative ability from brain functional connectivity . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 115 : 1087 – 1092 . 45 . Benedek M , et al . ( 2014 ) Creating metaphors : The neural basis of figurative language production . Neuroimage 90 : 99 – 106 . 46 . Christensen PR , Guilford JP , Wilson RC ( 1957 ) Relations of creative responses to working time and instructions . J Exp Psychol 53 : 82 – 88 . 47 . Wilson RC , Guilford JP , Christensen PR ( 1953 ) The measurement of individual differ - ences in originality . Psychol Bull 50 : 362 – 370 . 48 . Silvia PJ , et al . ( 2008 ) Assessing creativity with divergent thinking tasks : Exploring the reliability and validity of new subjective scoring methods . Psychol Aesthetics Creativity Arts 2 : 68 – 85 . Luft et al . PNAS Latest Articles | 9 of 9 P S Y C H O L O G I C A L A ND C O GN I T I V E S C I E N C E S N E U R O S C I E N C E