450 Copyright © 2011 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . Chapter 33 E - Business : Concepts and Context with Illustrative Examples of E - Business and E - Commerce in Education Raid Al Dabbagh Mosul University , Iraq INTRODUCTION The daily growth of the internet and e - commerce has changed the way of marketing and selling products and services . As a result of develop - ment in electronic information resources and the evolution of the “digital age” product sellers and information service providers face many new chal - lenges . Internet is changing the way corporations conduct business with their consumers who are increasingly expecting higher services , becoming time saved , and wanting more convenience . In ad - dition e - service quality is an essential strategy to gain success , according to the results of previous literatures , probably more important than a low price for online companies . Since one of the main duties of the internet as a communication channel is how to manage service quality , which holds a significant importance to customer satisfaction , the purpose of this research is to gain a better understanding of the impact of web site quality factors on customer satisfaction . ABSTRACT This chapter outlines the important of e - business in today’s world and how one thinks it affects decision making . In today’s world e - business is extremely important for many reasons , some of which are due to the fact that it can speed up the whole process of ordering . This means that the lead time can be de - creased because the ordering of products can be done much more quickly because the Internet is a fast running wide area network . This chapter shows how better procurement and supply chains make sales teams more effective . The ability to outsource functions such as , accounting , remote access to systems , linking management teams in different locations , being able to locate the lowest cost supplier improve customer services , improved collection of customer information for databases and more effective man - agement of remote manufacturing sites . DOI : 10 . 4018 / 978 - 1 - 61520 - 789 - 3 . ch033 451 E - Business : Concepts and Context On the above idea , we explore the theoreti - cal foundations of value creation in e - business , Electronic Business , commonly referred to as “ eBusiness ” or “ e - Business ” , may be defined as the utilization of information and communication technologies ( ICT ) in support of all the activities of business . Commerce constitutes the exchange of products and services between businesses , groups and individuals and hence can be seen as one of the essential activities of any business . Hence , electronic commerce or eCommerce focuses on the use of ICT to enable the external activities and relationships of the business with individuals , groups and other businesses . Electronic business methods enable companies to link their internal and external data processing systems more efficiently and flexibly , to work more closely with suppliers and partners , and to better satisfy the needs and expectations of their customers . Information Technology and Business When computer and communications technologies are combined , the result is information technology , or “infotech” . Information Technology ( IT ) is a general term that describes any technology that helps to produce , manipulate , store , communicate , and / or disseminate information . Presumably , when speaking of Information Technology ( IT ) as a whole , it is noted that the use of computers and information are associated . This has been contributed to make all business process available to all beneficiaries possible . As such , The United States Census Bureau defines e - business as “any process that a business organiza - tion conducts over a computer mediated network . Business organizations include any for profit , governmental , non - profit entity . Their processes include production - , customer - , and internal or management - focused business processes . ” In a shorter broader sense , e - business is the process of conducting business electronically or over the internet . Electronic mail is e - mail , electronic commerce is e - commerce , and following this formula , electronic business is e - business . Every time business is conducted over the internet , e - business takes place and as the internet grows , so grows e - business . Considerations in Defining E - Business and E - Commerce As discussed in the sections above , contemporary definitions of e - business and e - commerce are problematic . They create confusions and hinder advancements in the discipline . Porter ( 2001 ) and Tapscott ( 2001 ) presented two different views on impacts of the Internet on business . Porter ( 2001 ) suggested that organizations should integrate the application of the Internet to their traditional business process while Tapscott ( 2001 ) advocated changes to business process based on applications of the Internet . Porter focused on existing organi - zations that use technologies to enhance business processes while Tapscott was concerned about new organizations that use technologies to create value in new ways . They provided valuable insight on impacts of the Internet from different perspec - tives . However , under contemporary definitions of e - business and e - commerce , all organizations using the Internet to perform similar functions are considered the same irrespective of their strategies of Internet usage . Porter and Tapscott would be considered as discussing e - business ( or e - commerce ) in the same context and confusion might arise from the apparently contradictory conclusions . Creating another set of definitions using the perception - based approach does not help to improve the situation . Individual perceptions cannot provide a solid ground in explaining the rationale of the definitions . A more rigorous ap - proach should be adopted in defining ebusiness and e - commerce . Definitions should be derived through logical reasoning rather than individual perceptions . 11 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / chapter / business - concepts - context - illustrative - examples / 46281 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - E - Government , InfoSci - Books , Business - Technology - Solution , Business , Administration , and Management , InfoSci - Government Science and Technology . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 15 Related Content Employees’ Perceptions on Organisational Justice , Job Control and Job Demands : Do Ownership and Human Resource Management Practices Matter ? Liina - Kaisa Tynkkynen , Timo Sinervo , Marko Elovainio , Juhani Lehto , Anna - Maija Koivisto , Anja Noro and Harriet Finne - Soveri ( 2013 ) . Healthcare Management and Economics : Perspectives on Public and Private Administration ( pp . 124 - 140 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / employees - perceptions - organisational - justice - job / 75013 ? camid = 4v1a Guidelines for Successful Public Internet Access Points ( PIAPs ) Implementation Ali Arifoglu , Gülgün Afacan and Erkan Er ( 2012 ) . Public Sector Reform Using Information Technologies : Transforming Policy into Practice ( pp . 372 - 391 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / guidelines - successful - public - internet - access / 56402 ? camid = 4v1a How Would a Ban on Prescriber - Identifying Information Impact Pharmaceutical Marketing ? Doug Walker ( 2011 ) . International Journal of Public and Private Healthcare Management and Economics ( pp . 38 - 52 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / would - ban - prescriber - identifying - information / 62651 ? camid = 4v1a Health Expenditures in Latin America 1995 - 2010 Jesus Salgado - Vega and Fatima Y . Salgado - Naime ( 2013 ) . International Journal of Public and Private Healthcare Management and Economics ( pp . 46 - 63 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / health - expenditures - in - latin - america - 1995 - 2010 / 96888 ? camid = 4v1a