DESIGN PROTOTYPING OF SYSTEMS Camburn , Bradley Adam ( 1 , 2 ) ; Arlitt , Ryan ( 1 ) ; Perez , K . Blake ( 1 ) ; Anderson , David ( 1 ) ; Choo , Pui Kun ( 1 ) ; Lim , Terry ( 2 ) ; Gilmour , Adam ( 2 ) ; Wood , Kristin ( 1 ) 1 : Singapore University of Technology and Design , Singapore ; 2 : Gilmour Space Technologies , Singapore Abstract In recent years , groundbreaking work in design science has identified that prototyping is one of the most critical factors leading to successful development . Many decisions regarding the detail of a design and the allocation of resources are made during design prototyping . Extant studies provide foundational insights in strategic prototyping . This work explores prototypes for developing services and systems that are complex . A framework is proposed to visualise strategic prototyping to search design spaces that span multiple domains . We define three phases of system prototyping : partitioning , search , and implementation . The framework illustrates the relationship between individual techniques and associated cost versus performance outcome . This new framework is supported through two commercial development case studies that demonstrate the approach . The first is a subsystem from a hybrid launch vehicle development effort at Gilmour Space Technologies , the second is a service centre design case from the SUTD - MIT International Design Centre . Keywords : Design costing , Complexity , Design methods , Systems Engineering ( SE ) , Product - Service Systems ( PSS ) Contact : Dr . Bradley Adam Camburn Singapore University of Technology and Design SUTD - MIT International Design Centre Singapore bradley _ camburn @ sutd . edu . sg 21 ST INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON ENGINEERING DESIGN , ICED17 21 - 25 AUGUST 2017 , THE UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA , VANCOUVER , CANADA Please cite this paper as : Surnames , Initials : Title of paper . In : Proceedings of the 21 st International Conference on Engineering Design ( ICED17 ) , Vol . 3 : Product , Services and Systems Design , Vancouver , Canada , 21 . - 25 . 08 . 2017 . 211 ICED17 1 INTRODUCTION Prototyping is one of the most critical factors in successful design ( Otto and Wood 2001 ) . Many decisions regarding the detail of a design and the allocation of resources are made during the prototyping phase of design ( Gero 1990 ) . Previous research has identified strategies for planning individual prototypes ( Bradley Camburn et al . 2015 , Bradley A . Camburn et al . 2015 ) . However complex products , services , or systems often require multiple streams of prototyping efforts to be co - ordinated . This paper provides a graphical framework for visualizing complex search strategies . In this work , we define three phases of systems prototyping : partitioning , search , and implementation . The framework illustrates a relationship between techniques used in each these phases with associated cost and performance outcome . This approach to model systems prototyping efforts is then demonstrated through two case studies in systems design . One is for an integrated medical service facility . The second is for one subsystem of a commercial hybrid launch vehicle from Gilmour Space Technologies . This work explores the following research questions : 1 . What are the relationships between prototyping techniques , cost , and performance ? 2 . Can traditional ( and more complex ) prototyping strategies be viewed in a graphical way ? 3 . Is the given mapping approach applicable to both service and system prototyping efforts ? A model of the way that designers prototype is presented . This is supported by quantitative cost and performance based models for individual prototyping techniques , and validated through systems design case studies . The modeling approach is provided to visualize the embodiment of systems prototyping and the relationship between multiple prototypes in a design effort . This tool , alongside the empirically validated cost and performance models provides a platform for comparing various possible ‘search strategies’ to explore the space of possible designs . 2 PARTITIONING For the design of systems , it is often necessary to segment the design problem in some way ( Reed Doke 1990 , Drezner and Huang 2009 ) . With what are referred to as ‘wicked problems’ solutions are typically multi - faceted or complex and it is infeasible to develop the entire design in one effort . This segmentation can be implemented in various ways . By key function ( group ) , by key subsystem , or by domain are typical approaches , Figure 1 . Performance and cost targets are set for each partition . Once the design team is confident that each partitioned solution will meet performance the system is re - integrated ( if applicable ) then deployed . Figure 1 : Partitioning of a system , there are numerous approaches to partitioning a complex system . Three common approaches are either by function , subsystem , or domain . 3 SEARCH TECHNIQUES There are two core techniques for searching the design space of solutions for each partition of the design problem , via testing with prototypes . These involves either the iterative , temporally sequential , testing of overlapping design concepts , or the parallel testing of multiple concepts at a single point in time ( Dahan and Mendelson 2001 , Thomke and Bell 2001 ) . Other strategies have been presented ( Hannah et al . 2008 , da Silva and Kaminski 2016 ) , there work herein helps to quantify differences and to explore how single prototypes fit in a larger problem scheme . 212 ICED17 Figure 2 : The most common techniques for searching a design space are iteration ( left ) and parallel testing ( right ) Expanding work from ( Bradley Adam Camburn et al . 2015 ) we extract empirically a new model of the effect of iterative testing on performance . Based on additional data from the empirical study of a design challenge , reported in this previous work . We also extract a new model of the impact of parallel testing on performance . A key insight is the distinct difference between the gradual performance increase of iteration and the discontinuous performance leaps associated with parallel concept testing . Equations 1 and 2 , below , depict the expected performance of iteration and parallel testing . Π ∝ Π 0 e ∆∙n ( 1 ) where 𝛱 is design performance , 𝛱 0 is the initial performance , n is the number of iterations on a single concept , ∆ is the gradient of the local design space Π ∝ max i ∈ m [ Π i ] ( 2 ) where 𝛱 is design performance , 𝛱 𝑖 is the performance of a concept i , m is the set of distinct design concepts tested . Figure 3 , below , visually depicts the performance results of iteration and parallel testing from the results of the experiment reported in previous work ( Bradley Adam Camburn et al . 2015 ) . An exponential equation of best fit , to the iteration performance results , had the highest R 2 value as compared to linear , or polynomial equation fitting results ( R 2 = 0 . 91 ) computed using all test data in the given study . These results reiterate the critical insight that parallel prototyping allows for large , discontinuous leaps in performance . The sample data was taken from a study in which participants produced a simple transport mechanism . Performance is measured by distance . Figure 3 : Empirical data for iteration versus parallel testing , performance effects . Values are averaged across all teams . For the parallel concepts , values are average for the first test only . + / - 1 standard error shown . Consider the following example . If a hypothetical team applied parallel testing of four different concepts , then they will roughly achieve a performance of 31 ft . Conversely , if the design team chose a single concept and constructed four iterations , the performance could be as high as 38 ft . or as low as 12 ft . , depending on which concept was chosen initially . This exercise highlights the risk of an iterative single - concept testing strategy . Note that , these given numerical values are one example only . The constants of performance likely vary by context . Qualitative observation of these experiments suggests 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 P e r f r o m a n c e ( d i s t a n c e , f t . ) Iterations - > 0 10 20 30 40 50 A B C D p e r f o r m a n c e ( d i s t a n c e , f t . ) Parallel Concepts 213 ICED17 that when an ineffective concept is chosen , multiple iterations will not recover performance until a new concept is adopted . Table 1 : Example equations for performance ( units are of distance , d , in this case measured in feet ) using iteration , and parallel testing data . Iteration Π ( d ) = Π 0 e 0 . 05∗n Parallel Π ( d ) = max [ 21 , 10 , 25 , 31 ] 4 IMPLEMENTATION TECHNIQUES There are numerous prototyping strategies that can be applied to reduce cost ( Gordon and Bieman 1995 , Buchenau and Suri 2000 , Moe et al . 2004 , Dutson and Wood 2005 , Drezner and Huang 2009 , Bradley Camburn et al . 2015 ) . Herein , key techniques have ben synthesized to form three conceptually distinct cost reduction techniques . These are scaling , the reduction of cost by reducing the size or functional order of a design ; isolation , the selection of a particular key subsystem to be prototyped , in isolation from the rest of the system ; and abstraction , the representation of a meta - function without consideration of internal functionality . Figure 4 : Three core techniques for implementing a single prototype test embodiment are scaling ( left ) , isolation ( middle ) , and abstraction ( right ) . Equation 3 , which is based on expanded analysis from ( Bradley Adam Camburn et al . 2015 ) , demonstrates that these three techniques result in a co - operative , proportional reduction of prototype cost . ℂ 𝑟 ∝ ℂ 𝑆 𝑐 ∙𝐼 𝑠 ∙𝐴 𝑏 ( 3 ) where ℂ is the full system cost , ℂ 𝑟 is the reduced implementation cost of a prototype , and 𝑆 𝑐 is the scaling factor 𝐼 𝑠 is the isolation factor 𝐴 𝑏 is the abstraction factor . A key insight is that multiple techniques can be applied and the cost of a prototype can be radically reduced . Hybrid techniques reduce cost of the overall prototyping effort . They enable a greater number of iterations or parallel tests . Figure 5 graphically depicts the interaction of scaling and isolation quantitatively . The results are based on empirical data from ( Bradley Adam Camburn et al . 2015 ) . The empirical data fits this equation closely , ( R 2 value > 0 . 9 ) based on the given data set . Exact values for the constants are to be considered with caution as they are likely highly dependent on the specific design task , they are reported in Table 2 for completeness . Figure 5 : Average prototype cost given scaling versus isolation . Area of bubble is proportional to average cost of prototypes in that category across all teams ( e . g . 0 , 0 is a full prototype , 1 , 1 is a scaled and isolated subsystem ) . Red outline shows + 1 standard deviation . S c a li n g - > Isolation - > 214 ICED17 The impact factors also seem intuitive ; as abstracted models can be extremely low fidelity ( e . g . a folded piece of paper ) . Conversely , an isolated prototype is typically of near full functional and may only result in a marginal cost reduction . Table 2 : Sample factors values extracted Abstraction , Ab 7 . 4 Scaling , Sc 3 . 2 Isolation , Is 1 . 6 5 SEARCH STRATEGIES When designers develop new products , services , and systems they may often employ complex search strategies that cannot be simply captured with the terms ‘iteration’ and ‘parallel testing’ as they are a of multiple techniques . This section explores the parameterization of designs into a topological vector space ( Figure 6 ) , and how this may aid in the visualization and analysis of complex prototyping strategies . A prototyping strategy can be seen as a search effort in a topological space ( Figure 7 ) . In reality , actual design spaces may contain hundreds of variables and be impractical to model in this manner . The example is given for visualistion . A prototyping effort can be represented as in ( Figure 8 ) with simplified maps showing the testing sequence . The wireframe strategy is presented in case studies below as it is infeasible to represent complex spaces graphically . This kind of segmentation is common in set - based design ( Schäfer and Sorensen 2010 , Yannou et al . 2013 ) . This approach helps to visualize the impact of lean strategies ( Ward et al . 1995 , Ward and Sobek II 2014 ) , and complements such approaches by highlighting a critical inter - relationship of parallel designs . They allow the team to map a design space , i . e . reduce local uncertainty accumulatively . 𝐷⃗⃗ = { 𝐿 1 𝐿 2 } 5 Figure 6 : Illustration on parametric design model of staircase . ( left ) simple staircase of two steps between the landings . ( center ) parametric representation of the design , L 1 is the first step height , L 2 is the second step height . ( right ) Topological map to visualize user preference Figure 7 : Figurative representation of hypothetical prototyping strategies . Numbers indicate test sequence . ( left ) ‘Proof - of - Concept , Alpha , Beta’ testing . ( center ) mixed strategy ( right ) multiple , diverse , low fidelity parallel tests . Figure 8 : Simplification of the strategies shown in Figure 8 , ( left ) ‘Proof - of - Concept , Alpha , Beta’ testing . ( center ) A mixed strategy . ( right ) Parallel tests . 215 ICED17 Search strategies have a direct relationship with cost and performance . As depicted in Figures 7 and 8 a higher fidelity model allows for clearer understanding of the design performance in the local space , but this information comes at a higher cost . By contrast , low fidelity models afford less information about the local design space , but may be critical in understanding global design space topology . As a key insight for designers , higher fidelity models should come later in design efforts to reduce overall cost , once the global performance topology is better understood . In summary , to maximize value ( Equation 4 ) , or the ratio of final performance to total cost , it is beneficial to explore many conceptually diverse low fidelity prototypes early in the design effort . 𝑉 ∝ max i , j ∈ n , m [ Π 𝑖 , 𝑗 ] ∑ ℂ𝑖 [ 𝑆𝑐∙𝐼𝑠∙𝐴𝑏 ] 𝑖 , 𝑗 𝑛 , 𝑚 𝑖 , 𝑗 = 1 ( 4 ) where 𝑉 is the value of a prototyping effort , 𝛱 𝑖 , 𝑗 is the performance of iteration j of concept i . n is the number of iterations ( of each concept ) and m is the set of concepts , ℂ 𝑖 is the cost of a full system of concept i , and [ 𝑆 𝑐 ∙ 𝐼 𝑠 ∙ 𝐴 𝑏 ] 𝑖 , 𝑗 is the reduction factor for each iteration j of each concept i The above modeling approach can clearly capture traditional approaches such as ‘proof of concept’ , ‘alpha’ , and ‘beta’ ( Figures 7 & 8 - left ) . It also could be used to understand why hackathons are effective in rapid solution development , as participants often rapidly produce many distinct low - fidelity prototypes to explore a wide space . This modeling approach extends previous work by the authors and extends this perspective of prototyping to incorporate systems development . 6 CASE STUDY : MEDICAL CENTRE To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed modeling approach a service case study is supplied . The design effort was partitioned by function ( Figure 9 ) . We report the strategy employed for two key system functions . Service prototyping is a well - explored research topic ( Passera et al . 2012 ) . This work aims to demonstrate that a similar core approach can be applicable to both service and system design prototyping . The design team was working to redesign a series of working service centers for improved user experience . Figure 9 : Overview of medical center system prototyping strategy , partitioned by function . One key function was to provide visitors with a mechanism to reduce front - end loading at reception . The design solution was a pre - registration app . A series of iterations and low fidelity parallel tests were employed . Note , each prototype shown in Figures 10 and 11 is coded to the overall strategy map provided in Figure 9 . r . 1 : initial pre - screening concept r . 2 : app and control station detail r . 3 . 1 : user testing , interface one r . 3 . 2 : user testing , interface two r . 4 : low fidelity paper prototypes , final app Figure 10 : Search strategy for patient registration function . The relationship between perceived service quality and the waiting area layout was also explored . Numerous mockup prototypes supported the overall service prototype as well as scenario action cards for participants . The final prototyping effort involved deploying a prototype in the facility itself . A key 216 ICED17 insight of this effort was to discover the difficulty of way - finding in the facility through low - cost user testing . This insight was not initially reported by users , and allowed for valuable design enhancements . Notice that the effort includes a mixture of parallel and iterative testing with gradually higher fidelity . w . 1 : initial layout concept w . 2 : detailed layout concept w . 3 . 1 : first layout , mockup w . 3 . 2 : second layout , mockup w . 4 . 1 : first layout , user test w . 4 . 2 : second layout , user test Figure 11 : Search strategy for waiting area function . 7 CASE STUDY : HYBRID PROPULSION SYSTEM A second case study is the development of a launch vehicle using hybrid propulsion . This complex system requires numerous prototypes and is sequentially partitioned by domain , then subsystem , and again by domain ( Figure 12 ) . The prototyping strategies for several key subsystems are reported . In this case , the design team was working to develop a custom additive manufacturing capability . Figure 12 : Overview of hybrid propulsion system prototyping strategy , partitioned by subsystem and then by domain . We report the strategies employed for a small subset of the critical fuel generation system . One of the most critical systems in this launch system was a multi - material 3D printer . This printer produces a key component of the engines and is not available commercially . Figure 13 depicts a sequential design and testing strategy for the Fused - Deposition - Modeling ( FDM ) extruder head , which is a key subsystem . The alternating use of low cost CAD models , and high fidelity physical models allows for reduced cost . There were nearly twenty iterations of the extruder , three are shown . e . 1 : initial design , CAD e . 2 : initial design , functional e . 3 : mid - point design , CAD e . 4 : mid - point design , functional e . 5 : final design , CAD e . 6 : final design test results - > failed print structural warp improved print thermal analysis final print Figure 13 : Search strategy for FDM extruder sub - function Figure 14 shows prototypes from another key subsystem , the X - Y - Z motion stage . Two radically distinct stage concepts were compared using low fidelity models before iterating on a higher fidelity model of the chosen stage type . propulsionstructureaerodynamicsfuelavionicsguidancenavigationground control launch e . 2 plastic wax oxidiser extrudersoftwarestageelectronics stageextrudersoftwareelectronics e . 1 e . 4 e . 3 e . 6 e . 5 s . 1 s . 2 s . 3 s . 4 x . 2 x . 1 x . 3 x . 5 . 1 x . 4 . 1 x . 5 . 2 x . 4 . 2 217 ICED17 s . 1 : H bridge XY stage mockup s . 2 : stacked XY stage s . 3 : 2 - rod z axis , integrated stage s . 4 : 3 - rod z axis , final stage design Figure 14 : Search strategy for FDM x - y - z motion stage Figure 15 highlights prototypes from the secondary emulsion extrusion system . Since this was a relatively new concept , several low fidelity tests were employed to evaluate the design space . These allowed the designers to identify the valve as a critical subsystem . Two competing valve designs were developed and tested in CAD and then in physical prototypes before the simpler butterfly valve design was selected . x . 1 : material characterization x . 2 : tube flow characterization x . 3 scale extruder model x . 4 . 1 : ball valve design CAD x . 5 . 1 : ball valve physical test x . 4 . 2 : butterfly valve design CAD x . 5 . 1 : butterfly valve physical test Figure 15 : Search Strategy for emulsion extruder sub function Figure 16 shows the final , integrated , system design alongside a sample multi - material print . This print sample will be employed in the launch system . It is critical to note that only a demonstrative subset of the total prototyping effort has been shown here to highlight several exemplar strategies . It is critical that a system prototyping effort include each subsystem at some level of testing , or there may be unexpected behaviors in the final design . Figure 16 : Integrated multi - phase engine printer . ( left ) Final system CAD . ( right ) Final system physical construction . 8 DISCUSSION The paper presents a number of observations on the relationship of prototyping techniques ( iteration , parallel testing , scaling , isolation , and abstraction ) in the form of representative equations . The provides an initial response to the first research question , “What are the relationships between prototyping techniques , cost , and performance ? ” A simple graphical representation of a sample design is given , and used to illustrate prototyping strategies . This map example is then revised as a simplified linear model for compact representation of prototyping strategies . This provides preliminary response to the second research question , “Can traditional ( and more complex ) prototyping strategies be viewed in a graphical way ? ” 218 ICED17 Finally , two case studies are supplied in which the given tool is used to help build a relationship between a large number of prototypes explored in these exemple design efforts . This provides a first answer to the third research question 3 , “Is the given mapping approach applicable to both service and system prototyping efforts ? ” These results open additional questions for future consideration . The following observation is made , higher fidelity prototypes allow for better insight into the design performance in the local space , but capturing this information is costly . In contrast , low fidelity prototypes provide less information on the performance in the local design space but the global design space topology is widely explored . We may draw analogies to searching the hypothetically depicted spaces and formal search algorithms . Design of experiments literature provides insight into potentially innovative design prototyping search strategies to handle this tradeoff between information cost and value in the context of engineered systems . Established , quantitative search strategies that typically rely on a well - established set of design and response variables ( e . g . , Latin hypercube sampling ) , could be adapted to more holistic design concept testing . In such methods iterative experiment informs the next experiment such that information value per trial is high . Computational search algorithms also balance this tradeoff . For example , simulated annealing ( Kirkpatrick 1984 ) places a high value on divergent solutions . It begins with a high probability of accepting a divergent solution and decreases this probability as the number of iterations increases . For example , rather than directly iterating the design team may explore many distinct low fidelity concepts early on and then converge toward a series of higher fidelity directed tests around a well - performing concept . This is well matched to the concept of Lean manufacturing that encourages extensive information gathering early on in the design process ( Ward et al . 1995 ) . Particle swarm optimization uses many simultaneous agents that share information to guide search locally and globally , this for example may also be analogous to hackathons in which multiple agents explore the design space using many low fidelity design prototypes . Again it is easy to visualize this strategy using the given visual approach . One risk of low fidelity prototyping is that the design team may walk past a so - called “activity cliff” . These are regions of sharp sudden gradient in performance . A recurrent observation in drug design studies . Wherein small changes in chemical structure lead to large discontinuities in activity or other properties . These discontinuities introduce challenges in predicting how changes to a drug’s structure will alter its behavior . A variety of techniques have been developed to detect these discontinuities in order to produce a mapping between the structure and behavior spaces ( Stumpfe et al . 2013 ) including random forests ( Guha 2012 ) support vector machines ( Heikamp et al . 2012 ) , and particle swarm optimization ( Namasivayam and Bajorath 2012 ) . Future work could explore engaging such methods with prototypes to identify activity cliffs . However , the challenges of directly adapting search algorithms is that the design variables may be inherently unknown . This means that quantitative search strategies are only applicable by analogy . In summary , there is an opportunity to draw analogies to other means of searching design spaces and adapt them to the current approach . Prototyping is a framework into which many potential search strategies can be injected . REFERENCES Buchenau , M . and Suri , J . F . ( 2000 ) , “Experience prototyping” , in Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Designing interactive systems : processes , practices , methods , and techniques , ACM , 424 - 433 . Camburn , B . , Dunlap , B . , Gurjar , T . , Hamon , C . , Green , M . , Jensen , D . , Crawford , R . , Otto , K . and Wood , K . ( 2015 ) , “A Systematic Method for Design Prototyping” , Journal of Mechanical Design , 137 ( 8 ) . Camburn , B . A . , Jensen , D . , Crawford , R . , Otto , K . and Wood , K . ( 2015 ) , “Evaluation of a Strategic Method to Improve Prototype Performance with Reduced Cost and Fabrication Time” , in DS 80 - 4 Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Engineering Design ( ICED 15 ) Vol 4 : Design for X , Design to X , Milan , Italy , 27 - 30 . 07 . 15 . Camburn , B . A . , Sng , K . H . E . , Perez , K . B . , Otto , K . , Jensen , D . , Crawford , R . and Wood , K . L . ( 2015 ) , “The Way Makers Prototype : Principles of DIY Design” , in International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference , Boston , MA . da Silva , G . C . and Kaminski , P . C . ( 2016 ) , “Selection of virtual and physical prototypes in the product development process” , The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology , 84 ( 5 - 8 ) , 1513 - 1530 . Dahan , E . and Mendelson , H . ( 2001 ) , “An extreme - value model of concept testing” , Management Science , 47 ( 1 ) , 102 - 116 . Drezner , J . A . and Huang , M . ( 2009 ) , On Prototyping : Lessons from RAND Research , RAND . 219 ICED17 Dutson , A . J . and Wood , K . L . ( 2005 ) , “Using rapid prototypes for functional evaluation of evolutionary product designs” , Rapid Prototyping Journal , 11 ( 3 ) , 125 - 131 . Gero , J . S . ( 1990 ) , “Design Prototypes : A Knowledge Representation Schema for Design” , AI Magazine , 11 ( 4 ) . Gordon , V . S . and Bieman , J . M . ( 1995 ) , “Rapid prototyping : lessons learned” , IEEE software , 12 ( 1 ) , 85 - 95 . Guha , R . ( 2012 ) , “Exploring Uncharted Territories - Predicting Activity Cliffs in Structure - Activity Landscapes” , Journal of chemical information and modeling , 52 ( 8 ) , 2181 . Hannah , R . , Michaelraj , A . and Summers , J . D . ( 2008 ) , “A proposed taxonomy for physical prototypes : structure and validation” , in ASME 2008 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference , American Society of Mechanical Engineers , 231 - 243 . Heikamp , K . , Hu , X . , Yan , A . and Bajorath , J . r . ( 2012 ) , “Prediction of activity cliffs using support vector machines” , Journal of chemical information and modeling , 52 ( 9 ) , 2354 - 2365 . Kirkpatrick , S . ( 1984 ) , “Optimization by simulated annealing : Quantitative studies” , Journal of statistical physics , 34 ( 5 ) , 975 - 986 . Moe , R . , Jensen , D . D . and Wood , K . L . ( 2004 ) , “Prototype partitioning based on requirement flexibility” , in ASME - IDETC , American Society of Mechanical Engineers , 65 - 77 . Namasivayam , V . and Bajorath , J . r . ( 2012 ) , “Searching for coordinated activity cliffs using particle swarm optimization” , Journal of chemical information and modeling , 52 ( 4 ) , 927 - 934 . Otto , K . and Wood , K . ( 2001 ) , “Product design : techniques in reverse engineering and new product design” . Passera , S . , Kärkkäinen , H . and Maila , R . ( 2012 ) , “When , how , why prototyping ? A practical framework for service development” , in ISPIM Conference Proceedings , The International Society for Professional Innovation Management ( ISPIM ) , 1 . Reed Doke , E . ( 1990 ) , “An industry survey of emerging prototyping methodologies” , Information & Management , 18 ( 4 ) , 169 - 176 . Schäfer , H . and Sorensen , D . J . ( 2010 ) , “Creating options while designing prototypes : value management in the automobile industry” , Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management , 21 ( 6 ) , 721 - 742 . Stumpfe , D . , Hu , Y . , Dimova , D . and Bajorath , J . r . ( 2013 ) , “Recent progress in understanding activity cliffs and their utility in medicinal chemistry : miniperspective” , Journal of medicinal chemistry , 57 ( 1 ) , 18 - 28 . Thomke , S . and Bell , D . E . ( 2001 ) , “Sequential testing in product development” , Management Science , 47 ( 2 ) , 308 - 323 . Ward , A . , Liker , J . K . , Cristiano , J . J . and Sobek , D . K . ( 1995 ) , “The second Toyota paradox : How delaying decisions can make better cars faster” , Sloan Management Review , 36 ( 3 ) , 43 . Ward , A . C . and Sobek II , D . K . ( 2014 ) , Lean product and process development , Lean Enterprise Institute . Yannou , B . , Yvars , P . - A . , Hoyle , C . and Chen , W . ( 2013 ) , “Set - based design by simulation of usage scenario coverage” , Journal of Engineering Design , 24 ( 8 ) , 575 - 603 . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work is supported by the Singapore University of Technology and Design and the SUTD - MIT International Design Centre ( https : / / idc . sutd . edu . sg / ) . This material is also based in part on research sponsored by the United Sates Air Force Academy under agreement number FA7000 - 12 - 2 - 2005 . The US Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation thereon . The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements , either expressed or implied , of the United States Air Force Academy or the US government . The authors would like to thank Gilmour Space Technologies for providing documentation of the exemplar design of a hybrid propulsion system . 220