© 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1326 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . IntroDuctIon In situ hybridization allows qualitative mRNA detection in intact tissues and has been a tool of choice for studying the distribution of mRNAs in biological samples for nearly 40 years . However , since the development of smFISH—in combination with a subse - quent optimization in 1998 that allows for the counting of single mRNAs 1 —interest in detecting and quantifying all aspects of mRNA biology in individual cells with single - mRNA sensitivity has rapidly increased . This mounting interest was further augmented in 2008 by the development of an smFISH protocol that used a mix of short , singly labeled DNA probes ( single - stranded DNA oligos ) to detect individual mRNAs in single cells 2 , which was accompanied by the subsequent launch of custom - designed , commercially available and affordable Stellaris RNA probes . The year 2015 alone recorded 133 publications that used these commercially available smFISH probes to detect mRNAs 3 ; strikingly , nearly half of these studies character - ized mRNA expression quantitatively rather than qualitatively . These publications demonstrate that the broader scientific community is interested in not only whether the mRNA is present in the cell but also in how much of it is present and where in the cell it is located . Indeed , several groups have developed algorithms to quantify vari - ous aspects of mRNA biology with single - molecule sensitivity in , for instance , Drosophila 4 – 8 . Although use of a spot - detection algo - rithm for detection and counting of single smFISH - labeled mRNA molecules in Drosophila embryos is a critical part of quantitative smFISH , a step - by - step protocol describing this aspect of quantita - tive smFISH has been absent from the Drosophila literature . As the field is rapidly evolving , we describe here an up - to - date protocol for quantitative smFISH—used with cutting - edge microscopy and data analysis software—that will be easy for a broad audience to use . Overview of the procedure The smFISH labeling and counting protocol described here is composed of four parts : embryo collection and fixation ( Steps 1 – 9 ) , embryo hybridization with smFISH probes ( Steps 10 – 26 ) , imaging ( Step 27 ) and single - mRNA detection and counting ( Steps 28 – 42 ) . Drosophila embryos are collected , dechorionated and fixed with paraformaldehyde and paraformaldehyde - saturated hep - tane . Fixative is then removed and methanol is added , which helps to remove the vitelline membrane surrounding the embryo and allows penetration of smFISH probes into the sample . After the vitelline membrane is removed , embryos are washed with methanol and stored overnight at 4 °C in methanol . The next day , the embryos are rehydrated and postfixed with paraformaldehyde , followed by permeabilization with detergent . The embryos are then treated with Proteinase K to allow the smFISH probe to penetrate deeper into the embryo volume ; this is followed by an additional fixation with paraformalde - hyde . During a prehybridization step , embryos are incubated in deionized formamide , which equilibrates the sample for a subsequent hybridization with smFISH probes . Embryos are then resuspended in the hybridization mix containing smFISH probes and left to incubate overnight at 37°C . The next day , the embryos are mounted onto coverslips and imaged using either a wide - field epifluorescence , confocal or iSIM instrument ( a super - resolution imaging approach ; see the ‘Equipment’ section ) . Afterward , 3D images are deconvolved and single mRNAs are detected and counted using a freely available spot - detection algorithm , Airlocalize , which was developed in the MATLAB programming language ( MathWorks ) 9 ( see the ‘Equipment’ section ) . Development of the protocol Our groups have previously published articles on the biologi - cal applications of mRNA labeling using commercially available smFISH probes in Drosophila 5 , the development of the iSIM mRNA quantification using single - molecule FISH in Drosophila embryos Tatjana Trcek 1 , 5 , Timothée Lionnet 2 , 4 , 5 , Hari Shroff 3 , 5 & Ruth Lehmann 1 1 Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine , Department of Cell Biology , NYU School of Medicine , New York , New York , USA . 2 Transcription Imaging Consortium , Janelia Research Campus , Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Ashburn , Virginia , USA . 3 Section on High Resolution Optical Imaging , National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland , USA . 4 Present address : Institute for Systems Genetics , Department of Cell Biology , NYU School of Medicine , New York , USA . 5 These authors contributed equally to this work . Correspondence should be addressed to T . T . ( tatjana . trcekpulisic @ med . nyu . edu ) . Published online 8 June 2017 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2017 . 030 spatial information is critical to the interrogation of developmental and tissue - level regulation of gene expression . However , this information is usually lost when global mrna levels from tissues are measured using reverse transcriptase pcr , microarray analysis or high - throughput sequencing . By contrast , single - molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization ( smFIsH ) preserves the spatial information of the cellular mrna content with subcellular resolution within tissues . Here we describe an smFIsH protocol that allows for the quantification of single mrnas in Drosophila embryos , using commercially available smFIsH probes ( e . g . , short fluorescently labeled Dna oligonucleotides ) in combination with wide - field epifluorescence , confocal or instant structured illumination microscopy ( isIM , a super - resolution imaging approach ) and a spot - detection algorithm . Fixed Drosophila embryos are hybridized in solution with a mixture of smFIsH probes , mounted onto coverslips and imaged in 3D . Individual fluorescently labeled mrnas are then localized within tissues and counted using spot - detection software to generate quantitative , spatially resolved gene expression data sets . With minimum guidance , a graduate student can successfully implement this protocol . the smFIsH procedure described here can be completed in 4 – 5 d . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1327 super - resolution system 10 , 11 , and the application of Airlocalize , the algorithm that enables detection and counting of smFISH - hybridized mRNAs 5 , 9 , 12 . The current protocol covers all steps in sufficient detail to guide nonspecialist users , and has an emphasis on single - molecule counting , arguably the most complex step . Our fluorescence staining protocol for mRNAs in Drosophila embryos is robust , reproducible and easy to implement . The pro - tocol detailing embryo fixation and collection , followed by embryo hybridization with smFISH probes , is a modification of protocols by Lecuyer et al . 13 , Lionnet et al . 9 , Femino et al . 1 and Raj et al . 2 . To count individual mRNAs in Drosophila embryos , we use multiple short , singly labeled commercially available smFISH probes 2 , 5 , rather than the one long and heavily fluorescently labeled RNA probe traditionally used in whole - mount in situ studies 13 . In a whole - mount in situ approach , a single antisense RNA probe is transcribed from a DNA template in vitro in the presence of digoxigenin - UTP ( DIG - UTP ) . The resulting FISH probe is sub - sequently hybridized to the target mRNA . DIG - modified FISH probes are not readily visualized per se . Rather , DIG is detected with enzyme - coupled anti - DIG antibodies . These enzymes , such as alkaline phosphatase , react with chromogenic substrates to reveal the spatial distribution of target mRNAs 14 . The chromog - enic dyes produced by alkaline phosphatase , however , rapidly diffuse away from the target mRNA , thereby reducing the spatial resolution of the technique 13 – 15 . This shortcoming was mitigated by the introduction of horseradish - peroxidase - mediated deposi - tion of tyramide radicals labeled with fluorescent dyes ( such as Cyanine - 3 ) , which covalently react with the proteins at the site of horseradish peroxidase activity . The fluorescent signal becomes localized and the spatial resolution of the technique increases 13 , 15 . Whole - mount in situ approaches have been widely adopted to visualize mRNAs , particularly in the fruit fly . In Drosophila , initial , critical steps of the fly development rely entirely on post - transcriptional regulation . Strikingly , almost 1 , 700 maternally deposited mRNAs are localized within a developing embryo 16 . Because of its strong staining potential ( every 20th – 25th nucle - otide in the RNA FISH probe is a DIG - UTP whose detection is further enzymatically amplified ) , whole - mount in situ studies have become an invaluable tool for studying how post - transcrip - tional gene expression such as mRNA localization drives early Drosophila development . However , all FISH probes also non - specifically bind to the cellular background 17 – 19 ( see below and also the ‘smFISH probes’ section in the ‘Experimental design’ ) . Without the ability to distinguish between a bona fide hybridiza - tion of the probe to the target mRNA versus the cellular back - ground , whole - mount in situ studies can provide only qualitative rather than quantitative information . Our protocol uses multiple short , singly labeled smFISH probes 2 , 5 that bind to different posi - tions on the target mRNA to fluorescently label mRNAs in situ . As a result , the right combination of smFISH probes can be found only on the target mRNA and not on other mRNAs or the cellular background . Thus , target mRNAs will always appear as bright fluorescent spots against a uniform fluorescent background . This approach allows us to readily distinguish between specific binding to the target mRNA and nonspecific sticking of the probe to the cellular background ( see below ) . The commercial availability of the probes and the relative ease of their synthesis make it possible to adapt our protocol to quantify various aspects of mRNA biol - ogy in Drosophila embryos with subcellular resolution 5 – 8 , 20 , 21 . Stained Drosophila embryos are imaged in 3D to allow quan - tification of uniformly distributed and localized mRNAs in a volume 5 , 9 . Our smFISH staining protocol is compatible with a range of imaging modalities , including wide - field and confo - cal microscopy , as well as structured illumination microscopy ( SIM ) , a super - resolution method . SIM offers a more modest two - fold resolution improvement relative to other super - resolution microscopy techniques ( e . g . , localization microscopy or stimu - lated emission depletion microscopy ) but is much faster , requires much less illumination ( causing less photobleaching ) and does not require special fluorophores or sample preparation . These advantages make SIM particularly well suited for our protocol . Here we describe the application of a variation of SIM called iSIM 10 , 11 . Unlike conventional SIM , iSIM offers very rapid imaging ( no loss of speed relative to wide - field epifluorescence microscopy , achieved by performing resolution enhancement optically in the microscope hardware ) and enables superior imag - ing in thick samples because of better background rejection ( due to pinholes that reject out - of - focus light ) . iSIM therefore provides superior detection sensitivity , as well as superior localization pre - cision during fluorescent mRNA detection . When coupled with smFISH , iSIM allows a highly detailed quantification of the spatial distribution of transcripts within a complex protein environment such as an mRNA - bound germ granule 5 , otherwise unattainable with wide - field epifluorescence or confocal microscopy . 3D images are analyzed with a MATLAB - based custom spot - detection algorithm , Airlocalize 5 , 9 , to detect and count single , smFISH - labeled mRNAs . Individual , fluorescently labeled tran - scripts can be detected with subpixel resolution in 2D images , as well as in 3D stacks ( available upon request ) . A local affine baseline subtraction step computes and subtracts the background fluorescence pattern surrounding each mRNA spot . As a result , the intensity measurements are robust even in the presence of high fluorescence background , as is often encountered in tissue . By providing a comprehensive guide to single - molecule detection and counting , Airlocalize can be implemented to quantify the cellular mRNA content in any context 5 , 9 , 12 . Application of the method Although we showcase the Drosophila embryo as an example in this protocol , the mRNA staining with smFISH probes , imaging and image analysis techniques can be implemented to quantify cellular mRNAs in a variety of tissues and organisms . Unlike the long , in vitro - transcribed RNA probes used in whole - mount in situ studies , the smFISH probes used in this protocol are short and thus easily penetrate Drosophila oocytes , regardless of their devel - opmental age . After oocytes are extracted from the female fruit flies , the smFISH staining protocol outlined here can be easily implemented to fluorescently label mRNAs expressed during all oogenic stages ( Box 1 ) . smFISH has been implemented to characterize mRNA transcription 2 , 4 , 7 , 22 – 31 , splicing 32 – 34 , nuclear export 34 , 35 , localization 5 , 6 , 8 , 17 , 21 , 29 , 36 – 41 and decay 35 , 42 – 44 in sin - gle cells or in developing organisms using a variety of imaging approaches . It has also been used to quantify expression and local - ization of long noncoding mRNAs 45 , 46 , to visualize genomic loci in fixed cells 47 and to identify sites of active mRNA translation 12 . The mRNA staining protocol described here is compatible with a range of imaging modalities , including conventional wide - field epifluorescence and confocal microscopy , as well as SIM 5 , 9 , 12 . Our © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1328 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . image analysis protocol can be used in diverse cell types , tissues and organisms 5 , 9 , 12 to quantify uniformly distributed 5 , 9 , 12 , local - ized 5 , 9 and translating mRNAs 12 ( Anticipated Results ) . By using smFISH probes hybridizing to introns of nascent mRNAs , our smFISH protocol also enables quantification of transcriptional dynamics by direct visualization of active transcription sites within individual nuclei throughout Drosophila development ( Anticipated Results ) . The analysis protocol relies on our freely available spot - detection algorithm ( Airlocalize ) , which localizes individual , fluorescently labeled transcripts with a precision greatly superior to the dif - fraction limit in 2D or 3D data sets . With a built - in ‘Batch mode’ option , Airlocalize makes it possible to process a large series of images in sequence , automating the analysis process . The algo - rithm also allows the analysis of 3D regions of interest ( ROIs ) of a known volume ; this speeds up the analysis when the sig - nal is restricted to specific regions of large data sets , or when one uses a representative region as a proxy for the concentra - tion of homogeneously distributed mRNAs across the entire embryo 5 . The absolute number of localized mRNAs clustered in a diffraction - limited spot ( e . g . , germ - granule - localized mRNAs 5 ) can also be determined by measuring the cumulative fluorescence intensity of an individual mRNA cluster and normalizing it by the fluorescence intensity value of a single mRNA . Concurrently with the quantification of the absolute number of transcripts , Airlocalize also determines the spatial position of clusters with subpixel resolution . Specifically for mRNA clusters localized in Drosophila germ granules and imaged with iSIM , the precision with which we are able to determine the position of smFISH - labeled mRNA clusters in granules ranges between 9 . 1±2 . 9 and 14 . 7±1 . 6 nm 5 . As single - mRNA counting techniques are being increasingly used to study the mechanisms of gene expression in unperturbed cells and tissues , this approachable user interface , combined with the potential to scale the analysis up to larger data sets , constitutes a unique resource for the smFISH community . Limitations When quantifying uniformly dispersed , unlocalized mRNAs , our quantitative smFISH performs exceptionally well , unless the abundance of transcripts exceeds the concentration at which Box 1 | Preparation of late - stage Drosophila oocytes for staining with smFISH probes ● tIMInG up to 1 h To prepare oocytes for smFISH , the ovaries of well - fed , 3 - to – 4 - d - old female flies are dissected under a dissection microscope on a Petri dish and in cold 1× PBS . After several ovaries are collected , they are immediately resuspended in 1 ml of fixative containing 4 % ( vol / vol ) paraformaldehyde and 1× PBS dissolved in ddH 2 O , and are incubated for 20 min at RT . Unlike for embryos , saturated heptane is not needed to fix oocytes . Ovaries are then washed three to five times in 1× PBS , each time for 5 min at RT . Ovaries can then be further dissected to release individual ovarioles or oocytes from the ovary . Before smFISH can precede , ovaries , ovarioles or oocytes must be resuspended in 100 % ( vol / vol ) methanol and incubated overnight ( or longer ) to allow smFISH probe penetration into the oocytes 6 , 8 . Afterward , the smFISH staining continues as described for embryos in this protocol , starting with Step 11 . However , oocytes are susceptible to proteinase K overdigestion and can quickly lose their morphology during treatment . It is preferable , therefore , that the duration and potency of the proteinase K treatment for oocytes is reduced or that the treatment is omitted during smFISH staining ( omitting Steps 16 – 20 ) ( Fig . 5f , g ) . a b c d Figure 1 | Collection and fixing of fly embryos for smFISH . ( a ) Egg - collection cage housing fruit flies , with an apple juice plate containing yeast paste . ( b ) Apple juice plate with yeast paste and laid embryos . ( c , d ) The egg - collection basket before ( c ) and after ( d ) assembly . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1329 the individual transcripts are no longer discernible as diffrac - tion - limited spots ( Anticipated Results ) . An example of such a high - abundant mRNA in the Drosophila embryo is cycB . Using wide - field epifluorescence , confocal or SIM , cycB transcripts are not discernible as single molecules , and the somatic regions of young wild - type ( WT ) embryos stain with uniform yet intense fluorescence 5 . We have determined experimentally that in WT embryos and within the resolution of iSIM , quantification of mRNA levels with smFISH meets the limit when the concentra - tion of the expressed mRNA target reaches ~ 4 nM ( ~ 17 million copies per WT embryo ) 5 . Above this concentration , the algorithm begins undercounting the number of mRNA molecules expressed in the sample . In addition , smFISH is not a whole - transcriptome approach . Rather , the number of mRNAs that can be simultane - ously imaged is limited by the number of spectrally distinct dyes that covalently label the probes , as well as by the number of fil - ters , detectors and laser lines accommodated by the microscope ( typically up to 3 ) . This limit can be extended to characterize up to tens of distinct mRNAs simultaneously by using a defined color combination of spectrally distinct smFISH probes hybrid - izing to specific target mRNAs ( spectral barcoding using smFISH or sequential hybridization ) 48 – 51 . Recently , a highly multiplexed smFISH imaging method called multiplexed error - robust fluores - cence in situ hybridization was developed to enable simultaneous visualization , counting and cellular localization of 140 different mRNAs 29 . This is a true high - throughput approach that will find numerous applications in cultured cells , as well as in tissues . As with any resolution - enhancing implementation of SIM , achieving the full resolution gain ( typically twofold better than diffraction - limited microscopy ) is dependent on appropriate decon - volution . Such deconvolution relies critically on the nature of the algorithm and point - spread function ( PSF , e . g . , experimental or the - oretical ) . We have obtained good results with an assumed Gaussian PSF and the Richardson – Lucy deconvolution algorithm 52 , 53 ( as well as with the commercially supported Huygens software ) , as these choices describe the iSIM PSF sufficiently . However , we note that refractive index mismatch , mounting media and the details of the microscope directly influence the PSF—and thus we urge the reader to verify that the assumed PSF indeed matches the experimentally measured PSF before attempting deconvolution . Suboptimal deconvolution can lead to image artifacts and loss of the spatial resolution / localization precision of this method . Finally , we note that optical aberrations and the working dis - tance of the objective lens limit the effective imaging depth when using iSIM for this application . We recommend taking care to match the refractive index of the immersion oil , the numeri - cal aperture ( NA ) of the objective , the refractive index of the mounting medium and the coverslip thickness ( no . 1 . 5 ) to limit spherical aberration , which would otherwise lower the effective signal - to - noise ratio and spatial resolution . When using a high - index mounting medium and a high - NA oil - immersion lens , the working distance of the objective lens also limits the depth of smFISH—we conducted all experiments up to 40 µ m from the coverslip when using a 1 . 45 NA oil - immersion lens . Comparison with alternative methods An alternative to single mRNA detection using the smFISH probes described here is the use of molecular beacons . These are fluorescently labeled probes that fluoresce only upon hybridization to their target mRNA 54 , 55 . Molecular beacons are typically short and single - stranded DNA sequences that contain a stem – loop structure . The loop portion of the molecular beacon contains a sequence perfectly complementary to a target mRNA . The stem , which is only present when the molecular beacon is not bound to its target mRNA , is formed upon annealing of com - plementary sequences in the probe flanking the loop . A fluoro - phore and a quencher are covalently coupled to each end of the molecular beacon . In the absence of hybridization , the formation of the stem – loop brings the fluorophore and the quencher into close proximity , thereby quenching the fluorescence of the fluoro - phore . This is a particular advantage of this approach , as it elimi - nates fluorescence originating from nonspecific probe binding and thereby increases the accuracy of detecting bona fide mRNA gcl mRNA CAP AAAAA T GAT TTT CTA AAC CTC TCG 5 ′ a g c l m RN A g c l m RN A c g c l m RN A gcl mRNA 5 ′ CAP AAAA 3 ′ CAL Fluor590 Quasar 670 b gcl mRNA nos mRNA WT embryos gcl mRNA nos mRNA ∆ gcl embryos Merged 3 ′ Figure 2 | Detection of single , smFISH - hybridized mRNAs in Drosophila embryos . ( a , top ) Schematic of a germ - cell - less ( gcl ) mRNA hybridized with a mix of fluorescently labeled , commercially available smFISH probes . ( center ) gcl mRNA , hybridized with 32 smFISH probes ; it appears as a bright fluorescent spot ( red box ) against a uniform autofluorescent embryo background . ( Bottom ) Uniformly dispersed , single gcl mRNAs located ventrally ( orange box ) in the Drosophila embryo . Nearly 3 % of all gcl mRNA localizes to the embryo’s posterior 5 ( green box ) . ( b ) Specificity of smFISH probes to their target RNA ; in the absence of gcl mRNA expression ( in embryos laid by mothers mutated for gcl gene expression ( ∆ gcl embryos ) ) , the gcl smFISH signal cannot be detected , whereas the fluorescence of a control nanos ( nos ) mRNA , also enriched at the posterior pole , remains unaffected . ( c ) gcl mRNA hybridized with interchanging spectrally distinct CAL Fluor590 ( left ) and Quasar 670 ( center ) probes . The right panel shows an overlay of the two fluorescent signals ( merged ) . Scale bars , 5 µ m ( a ( center ) , c ) ; 10 µ m ( b ) ; 50 µ m ( a ( bottom ) ) . Images in a were acquired with a wide - field epifluorescence microscope ; those in b and c were acquired with a laser scanning confocal microscope . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1330 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . targets . When injected into live Drosophila oocytes , molecular beacons also enable quantification of mRNAs in live tissue 55 , 56 . As smFISH is carried out in fixed tissue , it typically provides only a snapshot of an mRNA life cycle . To detect individual mRNAs with a detailed temporal and spatial resolution in living tissue , one can genetically tag mRNAs such that they will bind fluorescent proteins to allow single - molecule detection . Currently , two such systems are most commonly used : the MS2 and the PP7 systems . They are based on the MS2 - and PP7 - bacteriophage - derived nucleic sequences , respectively 57 , 58 . These sequences are repeated up to 24 times and are typically inserted into the 3 ′ untranslated region ( UTR ) of a gene . Once the mRNA is tran - scribed , these sequences form stem – loops that enable binding of the MS2 or PP7 bacteriophage capsid proteins , tagged with a fluo - rescent protein such as GFP . Because a single transcript is tagged with multiple stem – loops , which will each bind a fluorescently tagged capsid protein , the mature mRNA is strongly fluorescently labeled . This multiplication of fluorescent signal on a single mRNA enables single mRNA detection in single living cells , as well as in live Drosophila tissue 8 , 12 , 58 – 64 . Development of addi - tional tags such as U1A and λ N makes it possible to visualize multiple mRNAs in live tissue concurrently 12 , 57 , 58 , 65 . For some mRNAs , genetic tagging of the 3 ′ UTR of the gene with 24 MS2 or PP7 repeats seems to not affect the life cycle of the mRNA 9 , 58 , whereas for others , the insertion of repeats affects mRNA stability of the target mRNA 66 . Thus , before using MS2 - or PP7 - like strate - gies to visualize mRNA , care must be taken to ascertain whether this genetic tagging affects the mRNA’s life cycle . Experimental design smFISH probes . This protocol uses commercially available Stellaris FISH probes to detect individual mRNA molecules in Drosophila embryos . It follows a strategy introduced by Raj et al . 2 that was later commercialized by Biosearch Technologies . In short , a e f z y x c y a x i s ( p i x e l s ) x a x i s ( p i x e l s ) z a x i s ( F l uo r e sc en c e i n t en s i t y ( a . u . ) ) 12 6 3 9 0 0 1 2 3 6 9 0 2 , 400 1 , 200 600 1 , 800 b x axis y a x i s d g h g c l m RN A D e t e c t ed g c l m RN A Figure 3 | Workflow of the single mRNA molecule detection using Airlocalize . ( a ) Definition of the microscope parameters for single mRNA detection . ( b ) A heat map demonstrating the spatial distribution of the fluorescence intensity for a single smFISH - labeled gcl mRNA , reported in arbitrary units ( a . u . ) . The inset demonstrates a single - plane close - up of a gcl mRNA hybridized with 32 smFISH probes acquired on a wide - field epifluorescence microscope . ( c , d ) An example of a single fluorescently labeled mRNA ( c , red box ) and its intensity profile ( d ) . Blue line in d indicates the profile of a fluorescent mRNA along the x and y axis ; red line is the Gaussian fit to the PSF . ( e ) Green spots are smFISH - labeled gcl mRNAs . Red spots are gcl mRNAs that have a fluorescence intensity greater than the specified detection threshold intensity . Yellow indicates colocalization between smFISH - labeled gcl and thresholded gcl fluorescent signal . ( f ) Blue lines in profiles indicate the intensity of a fluorescent mRNA along the x , y and z axes , and red lines are the Gaussian fits to the 3D profiles . The five images in f are x , y images of a single smFISH - stained gcl mRNA from c ( red box ) imaged at different positions . ( g , h ) Images showing smFISH - labeled gcl mRNAs found in the middle of the embryo ( Fig . 2b ) before ( g ) and after ( h ) spot detection using Airlocalize . In h , detected single gcl mRNAs are marked as red spots . Scale bar , 5 µ m . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1331 a typical smFISH probe is designed as a 20 - nucleotide - long DNA primer with a GC composition of ~ 50 % ( vol / vol ) such that the minimal distance among neighboring probes is two nucleotides . Each probe is covalently conjugated to a single fluorophore via the 5 ′ - most nucleotide and HPLC - purified to remove free dye and unconjugated probes . This purification step is important because it ensures that the uncoupled dye does not contribute to the autofluorescent background during hybridization ( non - specific sticking of unconjugated dye in the sample ) . Unlabeled smFISH probes ( those that did not become covalently coupled to a fluorescent dye and are included in the hybridization ) will also bind to the target mRNA but will not increase the fluorescence intensity of the target mRNA . mRNAs hybridized with coupled and uncoupled probes will be dimmer and harder to distinguish from the cellular background . In addition , unlabeled smFISH probes will also increase the heterogeneity in the fluorescence intensity among individual mRNA , making the process of detect - ing single mRNAs less accurate . To improve the specificity of probe binding , stringent masking levels can be implemented to design organism - specific probes and to avoid problematic RNA sequences ( https : / / www . biosearchtech . com / stellarisdesigner ) . Hybridization of target mRNAs with smFISH probes is carried out in the presence of 10 % ( vol / vol ) formamide and 2× saline - sodium citrate ( SSC ) buffer at 37 °C , conditions that are optimized to allow optimal hybridization of a 20 - nucleotide - long probe with a 50 % ( vol / vol ) GC composition . Changes in the length and GC composition of the probe , as well as changes in the composition of the hybridization mix and in the hybridization temperature , can affect the efficiency of smFISH probe binding to the target mRNA ( see the ‘Parameters affecting single - molecule detection’ section below and the Troubleshooting section where ‘No or low smFISH design’ is discussed ) . smFISH probes are purchased as a mix containing up to 48 individual smFISH probes targeting dif - ferent positions along the target mRNA for each probe ( Fig . 2a ) . We most often use probes conjugated to CAL Fluor590 , Quasar 570 or Quasar 670 . smFISH probes in each probe mix designed to hybridize to the same target mRNA are combined in an equimolar ratio . Applying a mix of smFISH probes that anneal to different positions on the target mRNA strongly improves the signal - to - noise ( S / N ) ratio and therefore increases detection sensitivity dur - ing single - molecule counting . Typically , more probes per target mRNA are desirable for detecting single mRNAs in the embryo ; however , one can reliably detect individual transcripts with < 48 probes . We have successfully quantified single polar granule com - ponent ( pgc ) mRNAs hybridized with 17 smFISH probes conju - gated in the laboratory with Alexa488 dye and imaged with iSIM 5 . Similarly , germ - cell - less ( gcl ) mRNAs hybridized with 32 Quasar 670 - labeled smFISH probes , imaged using a wide - field micro - scope , followed by deconvolution , produced adequate signals to reliably quantify the absolute number of this mRNA in the early embryo ( Fig . 4b , c ) . Instant structured illumination microscopy . As mRNAs hybrid - ized with smFISH probes appear as diffraction - limited spots , the ability to resolve features at or below the diffraction limit ( ‘super - resolution’ ) is helpful when attempting to count spots , particu - larly for spots in close ( < 250 nm ) proximity . Among the plethora of available super - resolution microscopy techniques , linear SIM 67 stands out because of its high speed , compatibility with standard fluorescent probes and relatively low photon dose ( 10 2 – 10 6 lower than other methods , resulting in far less photobleaching ) . In SIM , higher spatial resolution ( usually twofold improvement over the diffraction limit ) is obtained via multiplication of excitation and emission PSF . In practice , this is achieved by exciting the sample with a series of sharp illumination patterns , recording one or more diffraction - limited images and mathematically processing these images . In this protocol , we use a variant of SIM , iSIM 10 . iSIM enables much faster imaging ( by a factor of 10 – 100 ) than conventional SIM because only a single image is recorded and most of the requisite image processing occurs during image for - mation ( so less digital postprocessing is needed ) . In addition , and importantly for Drosophila samples , iSIM uses a pinhole array to block out - of - focus fluorescence , thus improving background rejection and the signal - to - noise ratio relative to conventional SIM in these thick , densely labeled samples . 0 50 100 150 200 Integrated fluorescence intensity ( a . u . ) % o f s po t s 0 20 40 60 smFISHGaussian fit a 5 ′ UTR 3 ′ UTR gcl ORF 32 probes 63 probes 91 probes b c gcl fluorescence intensity ( a . u . ) : 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 15 . 4±0 . 2 31 . 8±0 . 3 44 . 7±1 . 5 No . of smFISH probes per gcl mRNA g c l m RN A c on c . i n e m b r y o ( n M ) Figure 4 | Determining the fluorescence intensity of a single mRNA molecule . ( a ) The integrated fluorescence intensities of all detected spots from Figure 3h are plotted as a histogram ( black circles ) and fitted to a Gaussian curve ( red line ) . The peak of the Gaussian fit determines the average integrated fluorescence intensity of a single gcl mRNA , here hybridized with 32 singly labeled Quasar 670 probes , which , with given imaging and microscope parameters , was 15 . 4 ± 0 . 2 a . u . ( R 2 = 0 . 99 ) . ( b , c ) gcl was labeled with 32 ( gcl first third ( smFISH probes annealing to the first one third of gcl mRNA ) probe mix ) , 63 ( gcl first third and second third smFISH probe mix ) or 91 ( gcl first third , second third and third smFISH probe mix ) Quasar 670 smFISH probes ( b ) . ( c ) An average integrated fluorescence intensity of a single gcl mRNA determined ventrally in the early embryo for each probe mix , as described above , and the concentration of gcl mRNA detected for each smFISH probe mix . For each probe mix , an average of three embryos ± s . e . m . is shown . Red circles , squares and triangles represent individual measurements performed on embryos stained with 32 , 63 and 91 gcl smFISH probes , respectively . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1332 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Spot - detection algorithm Airlocalize . mRNAs hybridized with smFISH probes appear as bright fluorescent spots that are either uniformly dispersed throughout the embryo or localized to a subembryonic region . To automate the spot detection , an algo - rithm is used that is capable of detecting individual spots and measuring the number , positions and intensities of these fluores - cently labeled mRNAs in a 2D or 3D image . We use an algorithm called Airlocalize , which was developed in the MATLAB pro - gramming language ( MathWorks ) 9 . An image of a fluorescently labeled mRNA corresponds to a diffraction - limited image of a subresolution object ( an object with spatial extent less than the resolution of the light microscope ) . Thus , the size of an mRNA labeled with smFISH probes is determined by the optical proper - ties of the microscope ( known as the PSF ) and not the physical size of the mRNA molecule . The spot - detection algorithm uses a 3D Gaussian kernel to find the center and intensity of each spot ( the kernel is calculated based on the average PSF shape ) 9 . The robustness of spot identification and its localization against a high autofluorescent background ( for example , created by neighboring fluorescent particles in a crowded environment ) is enhanced by an affine local background subtraction before applying the Gaussian kernel . Detection and quantification of smFISH - labeled mRNAs proceeds through the following steps ( Fig . 3 ) : ( i ) a spatial band - pass filter is implemented to identify candidate spots for further analysis , ( ii ) the local background surrounding the fluorescent spots is subtracted from the integral fluorescence intensity of a spot to remove any residual offset or unevenness in the image , ( iii ) 2D ( for 2D images ) or 3D ( for 3D images ) Gaussian mask fit - ting of each fluorescent spot is implemented to find the center and the intensity of each spot and ( iv ) spots are culled based on dupli - cation and / or an intensity threshold . Spot intensities and positions are written to a data file for further analysis ( Figs . 3 and 4 ) . Parameters affecting single - molecule detection . Typically , fluo - rescence intensity is the critical parameter for differentiating spe - cific signal from background originating from nonspecific probe binding , and thus care must be taken in any algorithm to ensure the best possible recovery of the spot intensity from the image . A number of controls described in the ‘Experimental design’ and ‘Anticipated Results’ sections can be used to differentiate between specific and nonspecific fluorescence signal during the spot detection step . Often , mRNAs are grouped to form a cluster in a smaller volume such that individual smFISH - labeled mRNAs within a cluster cannot be individually resolved 5 . To determine the absolute number of mRNAs grouped within a smaller vol - ume ( clustered mRNAs ) , the integrated fluorescence intensity of a spot is first determined , and is then calibrated by the fluorescence intensity value of a single mRNA located outside of the cluster ( Fig . 5d ) . When mRNAs labeled with smFISH probes are par - ticularly heavily clustered in a small volume ( as is the case with germ granule localized mRNAs 5 ) , the abundance of fluorescent signal emanating from the cluster can saturate the dynamic range of the camera or the detector of the microscope . For example , a charge - coupled device ( CCD ) camera mounted on a wide - field epifluorescence microscope typically does not provide enough dynamic range to concurrently image single and heavily clustered transcripts such as nanos ( nos ) mRNA . Because nos forms clusters that can contain more than 45 mRNAs packed into a volume com - parable to the resolution limit of the wide - field epifluorescence microscope , the multitude of smFISH probes within a cluster produces enough signal to saturate the camera . Such images are not quantifiable . This problem can be mitigated by reducing the number of probes in the probe mix while making sure that the single mRNAs are labeled with enough probes that they are still observable as single mRNAs ( see above , ‘smFISH probes’ in the ‘Experimental design’ section ) . Alternatively , a detector or a camera with increased dynamic range can be selected to better match the sample . For example , the ~ 30 , 000 : 1 dynamic range of the scientific complementary - metal - oxide - semiconductor ( cMOS ) camera mounted on our iSIM ( see the ‘Microscope’ sec - tion in the ‘Equipment Setup’ section ) reliably captures the full fluorescence intensity profile of a single and of clustered nos tran - scripts without signal saturation and without the need to reduce the number of smFISH probes during hybridization . In addition , there are two main sources of background that deteriorate image quality and reduce the S / N ratio and single - molecule sensitivity in the fly embryo . First is a very high autoflu - orescence originating from the embryo’s yolk , particularly in the green and red channels . Second is the fluorescence originating from nonspecific smFISH probe hybridization to cellular back - ground . To overcome autofluorescent background and to achieve single mRNA detection sensitivity , our protocol uses multiple short , singly labeled smFISH probes to fluorescently label mRNAs in situ ( Fig . 2a ( top ) ) rather than one long in vitro - transcribed RNA probe labeled with multiple fluorescent dyes to enhance detection capability traditionally used in whole - mount in situ studies to detect transcripts in Drosophila 13 . This probe itera - tion strongly amplifies the fluorescent signal of labeled mRNAs , which afterward appear as bright fluorescent spots against a uniform autofluorescent background ( Fig . 2a ( center ) ) . We find that reducing the autofluorescent signal is particularly chal - lenging , and efforts to reduce it result only in minor changes in its intensity . When the autofluorescent signal is particularly high , multiple smFISH probe mixes can be designed to hybridize to 5 ′ and 3 ′ untranslated regions ( UTRs ) , as well as the open read - ing frame ( ORF ) , to further augment the fluorescence intensity of the smFISH - hybridized mRNA relative to the autofluorescent background . smFISH probes also nonspecifically hybridize to cellular background 17 , 18 . The length and the GC content of the smFISH probes we use ( ‘Reagent Setup’ ) are designed such that all the probes in a probe mix optimally hybridize to the target mRNA at 37 °C in the presence of 10 % ( vol / vol ) formamide and 2× SSC . Care must be taken to prepare a prehybridization solution with 10 % ( vol / vol ) formamide and 2× SSC and to make sure that the hybridization of the sample with the probe mix proceeds at 37 °C . Lower formamide concentration and lower hybridization tem - perature will encourage nonspecific probe binding and increase background fluorescence . A higher formamide concentration and a higher hybridization temperature will prevent hybridization of the probe to the target mRNA . Exposed to air , deionized for - mamide also quickly hydrolytically breaks down to formic acid and ammonium formate , and acidifies . Acidified formamide quenches ( inhibits ) the fluorescence of certain organic dyes such as Quasar 670 during hybridization . To prevent acidifica - tion , formamide can be divided into aliquots and stored at −80 °C until use . Monitor the pH of the stored deionized formamide using a pH strip . A pH between 7 . 5 and 8 indicates good - quality deionized formamide . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1333 Control experiments . A series of control experiments can be per - formed to assay the specificity of smFISH probe hybridization to the target mRNA . First , the hybridization specificity can be monitored by perturbing gene expression of a target mRNA and determining whether changes have occurred in the expression pattern of a target mRNA . For example , deletion of a gene should result in the specific loss in smFISH fluorescence of a target mRNA ( Fig . 2b ) . Similarly , gene expression of a target mRNA can be reduced using fly lines expressing interfering mRNAs specifically designed to downregulate a target mRNA ( available through the Bloomington Stock Center ) . In this case , one should expect a reduction in the number of fluores - cently labeled target mRNAs in response to RNAi treatment . a 1 mRNA 2 mRNAs 3 mRNAs 4 mRNAs ≥ 5 mRNAs d c g c l m RN A g c l m RN A D AP I g c l m RN A b f osk mRNA VasaGFP DAPI Nascent gcl chains 3 ′ UTR Intron Exon Exon h k j i DAPI gcl 3 ′ UTR Quasar 570 gcl intron Quasar 670 gcl intron Quasar 670 gcl 3 ′ UTR Quasar 570 e gcl mRNA V a s a G F P nos mRNA cycB mRNA V a s a G F P V a s a G F P nos mRNA VasaGFP Merged g Figure 5 | smFISH enables spatial and quantitative characterization of gene expression in the fly tissue . ( a – c ) Images of gcl ( red ) localized at the posterior pole of an embryo forming crescents around the nuclei ( labeled with DAPI , blue ) of the newly formed primordial germ cells during the 13th nuclear cycle of the embryonic development ( a ) . The inset marked with a red box in b highlights unlocalized , somatic gcl mRNA , which is further magnified and contrast - adjusted in c . ( d ) Heat map of gcl mRNA . In all panels , three consecutive Z planes ( z = 400 nm ) were maximally projected and subsequently analyzed . All images were acquired with a wide - field microscope in 3D and subsequently deconvolved using Huygens . ( e ) iSIM super - resolution imaging reveals a detailed spatial organization of germ - granule - localized gcl , nos and cycB mRNAs into homotypic mRNA clusters . Images show germ granules in the 10th nuclear cycle of early embryonic development . Images were acquired in 3D using iSIM and afterward deconvolved using Huygens . ( f , g ) Images demonstrating accumulation of oskar ( osk ) and nanos ( nos ) mRNA ( red ) at the posterior pole of a developing oocyte through oogenesis . Germ plasm was visualized with a Vasa transgene tagged with a GFP 5 . In f , the first ten oogenic stages are shown . In g , an oocyte in late oogenic stage 14 is shown . Nuclei in f were stained with DAPI ( blue ) . Images in f and g ( left panel in g ) were acquired with a laser scanning confocal microscope . An image of the germ plasm shown under ‘Merged’ was acquired with iSIM . ( h ) A schematic depicting detection of a gcl mRNA transcription site using smFISH probes hybridizing to either gcl introns ( green dots ) or the gcl 3 ′ UTR ( red dots ) . ( i ) An image of a DAPI - stained embryo to visualize nuclei . ( j , k ) Before being spliced , smFISH - hybridized introns ( green ) colocalize with the smFISH probes hybridizing to the gcl 3 ′ UTR ( red ) at the site of transcription ( inset in k , yellow spot ) . Mature gcl mRNAs do not bind intronic probes ( inset in k , arrowheads ) . Scale bars , 2 . 5 µ m ( e ) ; 5 µ m ( c , g ( right panel ) , j , k ) ; 10 µ m ( a , b ) ; and 50 µ m ( f , g ( left panel ) , i ) . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1334 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . A good way of determining whether the observed fluorescent signal originates from an mRNA hybridized with smFISH probes rather than from nonspecific background accumulation of smFISH probes is to colabel a target mRNA with two sets of spectrally distinct smFISH probe sets ( Fig . 2c ) . Here , the two signals should colocalize and quantification of the number of mRNA molecules detected in both channels should give similar numbers . In addition , several sets of probes with increasing numbers of probes per set can be used to label a target mRNA . In this case , the average integrated fluorescence intensity of a single mRNA should increase but the absolute number of detected mRNAs should not change ( Fig . 4b , c ) . Up to 200 different mRNAs are estimated to be localized to the posterior pole in an early Drosophila embryo 16 , 68 ; some of these have been shown to play important roles in embryonic pattern formation 69 , and germ cell formation and specification 70 . We and others have characterized several maternally deposited mRNAs for their ability to localize to the posterior pole and found that unlocalized mRNA counterparts found in the somatic regions of the embryo are not packaged into larger ribonucleoprotein but are mostly found as single mRNAs 5 , 6 . For these mRNAs , the average integrated fluorescence intensity of a single mRNA can be unam - biguously determined by fitting the distribution of integrated fluorescent intensities of all identified fluorescent spots to a Gaussian curve and calculating the peak of the Gaussian fit ( Fig . 4a ) . An exception is oskar ( osk ) mRNA . Approximately 50 % of unlocalized osk mRNA is present in clusters containing more than one osk mRNA 5 , 6 , 41 , 71 , and the peak of the distribution of fluorescence intensity of spots containing a single osk mRNA is not easily identifiable . To troubleshoot quantification of clustered mRNAs such as osk , the mRNA expression levels determined for osk with smFISH can be compared with the relative mRNA expres - sion levels determined by mRNA seq 5 ( freely available through FlyBase 72 ) . For example , we have previously quantified mRNA levels of ccr4 , nos , gcl , pgc and osk in early embryos laid by WT mothers and compared them with the relative mRNA levels deter - mined for these mRNAs with mRNA - seq . The two measurements correlated exceptionally well ( r = 0 . 95 ) , indicating that mRNA levels , including osk m RNA levels , determined by smFISH were in a good agreement with relative mRNA expression levels deter - mined for these mRNAs by RNA - seq 5 . This control provided a strong indication that appropriate spot - detection parameters were used during spot detection , which enabled identification of single smFISH - labeled osk mRNAs within a heterogeneous population of fluorescent spots containing multiple osk mRNA particles . MaterIals REAGENTS Wild - type fruit flies ( Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center ) or the flies specified by the experiment Dry fine yeast ( Lab Scientific , cat . no . FLY - 8040 - 20F ) Clorox Ultra Germicidal Liquid Bleach ( Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 50371500 ) Heptane ( Fisher Chemical , cat . no . O3008 - 4 ) 20 % ( vol / vol ) Paraformaldehyde ( Electron Microscopy Sciences , cat . no . 15713 ) ! cautIon Paraformaldehyde is a toxic cross - linking agent . Wear protective gloves and handle it in the fume hood . Discard according to the relevant environmental health and safety instructions . 100 % ( vol / vol ) Methanol ( Fisher Chemical , cat . no . A412 - 4 ) Triton X - 100 ( 250 ml ; Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . T8787 ) Tween - 20 ( 500 ml ; Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . P2287 ) 10× PBS , pH 7 . 4 ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , cat . no . AM 9624 ) Proteinase K ( Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . 03 115879 001 ) Glycine ( 1 kg ; Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . G8790 ) 20× Saline - sodium citrate buffer ( SSC ) containing 3 M NaCl in 0 . 3 M sodium citrate ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , cat . no . AM 9770 ) Deionized formamide ( 100 ml ; Amresco , cat . no . 0606 ) ! cautIon Formamide is toxic and should be handled with protective gloves under a hood and discarded according to the relevant environmental health and safety instructions . Ribonucleoside vanadyl complex ( VRC ; New England BioLabs , cat . no . S1402S ) smFISH probe mix ( Biosearch Technologies , commercially available and custom designed Stellaris RNA FISH Probe Sets ) Sheared salmon sperm DNA ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , cat . no . AM9680 ) E . coli tRNA ( Roche , cat . no . 1010951001 ) BSA ( Roche , cat . no . 10711454001 ) Dextran sulfate sodium salt ( Acros Organics , cat . no . 433241000 ) 4 ′ , 6 - Diamidine - 2 ′ - phenylindole dihydrochloride ( DAPI ; Roche , cat . no . 10 236 276 001 ) ProLong Gold Antifade Reagent ( Invitrogen ( Molecular Probes ) , cat . no . P36934 ) Prolong Diamond Antifade Reagent ( Invitrogen ( Molecular Probes ) , cat . no . P36961 ) Vectashield ( Vector Labs , cat . no . H - 1000 ) Immersion oil ( see ‘Equipment Setup’ section ) • •• •• ••••••• • • • ••••• • • • • EQUIPMENT 25 °C incubator ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , Forma Environmental Chamber ) Embryo collection cage ( large : 8 . 75 cm × 14 . 8 cm ; Flystuff . com , cat . no . 59 - 101 ) ( Fig . 1a ) . The cage accommodates a Petri dish containing an apple juice plate that is securely attached to the cage with a plastic cap . The top of the cage is covered with a stainless - steel mesh to allow ample breathability while eliminating condensation  crItIcal After each use , the cage must be cleaned with cold soapy water , not with ethanol or other alcohols . BD Falcon Petri dishes , 60 × 15 mm , for small apple juice plates ( Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 25373 - 085 ) Wooden tongue depressors ( Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 11 - 700 - 555 ) Plastic scintillation vials ( Wheaton 20 - ml HDPE Liquid Scintillation Vials with Polypropylene Caps ; Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 986700 ) Nitex mesh ( Dynamic Aqua - Supply , cat . no . NTX100 ) Dumont tweezers ( no . 5 , 11 cm , straight , 0 . 1 × 0 . 06 - mm tips ; Dumostar , cat . no . 500233 ) Dissecting microscope ( Zeiss , model no . Stemi SV 11 , equipped with a light source ) Squirt bottle ( VWR , cat . no . 16650 - 028 ) Pyrex glass flask ( Corning , cat . no . 1395 - 500 ) Glass scintillation vial , Wheaton glass 20 - ml scintillation vial with urea cap ( Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 03 - 341 - 25J ) Glass Pasteur pipette ( Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 13 - 687 - 20C ) 1 . 7 - ml Super - clear microcentrifuge tubes ( Crystalgen , cat . no . L - 2052 ) NanoDrop spectrophotometer ( Thermo Scientific , model no . ND - 1000 UV / Vis ) pH - indicator strips , pH 5 . 0 – 10 . 0 ( colorpHast ; EMD , cat . no . 9588 ) Vortex , standard mini vortex ( VWR ) Falcon 15 - ml Conical Centrifuge Tubes ( Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 14 - 959 - 53A ) Tabletop centrifuge ( Eppendorf , cat . no . 5424 ) 37 °C incubator ( Isotemp standard lab incubator ; Fisher Scientific ) Microscope Slides ( Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 12 - 544 - 2 ) Microscope coverslips , 22 × 22 mm , category 1 . 5 ( thickness 0 . 16 – 0 . 19 mm ; Fisher Scientific , cat . no . 12 - 544 - D ) Wide - field epifluorescence , confocal or instant structured illumination microscope ( iSIM ) with a super - resolution imaging system ( see ‘Equipment Setup’ and Procedure Steps 27 and 28 ) •• • •• •• • ••• ••• ••• •••• • © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1335 Huygens deconvolution software ( Scientific Volume Imaging , https : / / svi . nl / HuygensSoftware ) Single - molecule detection algorithm ( Airlocalize , can be downloaded from http : / / www . timotheelionnet . net / software / ) . See ‘Equipment Setup’ and Procedure Steps 29 – 42 . SigmaPlot ( Systat Software , https : / / systatsoftware . com / products / sigmaplot / ) Dissection microscope ( Zeiss , model no . SteREO Discovery . V8 ) equipped with a light source ( Zeiss , model no . KL1500 LCD ) and a flypad ( Flystuff , standard Size ( 8 . 1 × 11 . 6 - cm ) ) connected to a CO 2 tank to anesthetize the flies REAGENT SETUP  crItIcal Maintain DNase - and RNase - free conditions and use DNase - and RNase - free reagents to prepare solutions used during smFISH hybridization . Fruit flies Place between 200 and 400 2 - d - old flies with a 2 : 1 female / male ratio in a bottle containing fly food ( for a detailed protocol on how to prepare bottles containing fly food , refer to Ashburner 73 ) . Maintain the flies in a 25 °C incubator ( or at the temperature specified by the experiment ) for 2 d . Each morning and evening , provide additional dry yeast to the flies to stimulate egg laying . After 2 d , transfer the flies to the embryo collection cage mounted with an apple juice plate that contains a dollop of fresh yeast paste . Maintain the flies in the cage for 1 d at 25 °C ( or the temperature specified by the experiment ) so that they become used to the new food source and egg - laying environment . Yeast paste Dissolve 30 g of fine dry yeast powder in 20 ml of H 2 O . Stir frequently while incubating at room temperature ( RT ; 20 – 22 °C ) for several hours and adjusting with H 2 O until the yeast paste achieves a consistency similar to that of peanut butter . Store it at 4 °C for up to 2 weeks . Apple juice plates These are Petri dishes filled half - way with agar mixed with apple juice . For a detailed protocol on how to prepare apple juice plates , refer to Ashburner 73 . A dollop of yeast paste is placed in the middle of the apple juice plate to provide food for the flies while they lay eggs on the surface of the apple juice plate . Apple juice plates are stored at 4 °C for 1 month . The yeast paste is placed on the juice plates immediately before use . Fixative To prepare 10 ml of fixative , combine 2 ml of 20 % ( vol / vol ) paraformaldehyde , 1 ml of 10× PBS and 7 ml of ddH 2 O .  crItIcal Freshly prepare the fixative before use . Saturated heptane Combine equal volumes of heptane and fixative ( see above ) in a glass flask to make a combined mixture of 10 ml . Close the flask and shake the mixture vigorously for 15 s . Let the solution set - tle into two phases . Repeat this mixing several times through the day and let it settle overnight ( ON ) to ensure that the heptane becomes saturated with paraformaldehyde . The saturated heptane is the upper phase in the 1 : 1 heptane / paraformaldehyde mixture . Wrap the flask in aluminum foil and store it at RT for up to 2 months . Bleach solution Prepare 200 ml of 50 % ( vol / vol ) bleach solution by mixing equal amounts of Clorox Ultra Germicidal Liquid Bleach and H 2 O . Store the solution at RT for up to 2 weeks . PBS – Tween ( PBT ) solution To make 1 , 000 ml of PBT , combine 100 ml of 10× PBS , 1 ml of Tween - 20 and 899 ml of ddH 2 O . Mix thoroughly and store the solution at RT for several months . 1× PBS solution To make 1 , 000 ml of 1× PBS solution , combine 100 ml of 10× PBS and 900 ml of ddH 2 O . Store the solution at RT for up to several months .  crItIcal Maintain RNase - free conditions and use RNase - free reagents to prepare PBS solution . 3 m g / ml Proteinase K A 1 mg / ml stock proteinase K solution is prepared by dissolving 10 mg of lyophilized powder in 10 ml of ddH 2 O ; this solution can be stored at −20 °C for up to 12 months . To prepare 10 ml of working ( 3 µ g / ml ) proteinase K solution , combine 30 µ l of stock ( 1 mg / ml ) proteinase K solution with 10 ml of PBT . Freshly prepare the working ( 3 µ g / ml ) proteinase K solution . 2 mg / ml glycine solution Prepare 50 ml of 20 mg / ml glycine solution as a stock solution and keep it at 4 °C . Dilute tenfold with ddH 2 O to obtain the working ( 2 mg / ml ) glycine solution . Both solutions can be stored at RT for several months . Prehybridization solution 10 ml of prehybridization solution contains 1 ml of 100 % ( vol / vol ) deionized formamide ( 10 % ( vol / vol ) final concentration ) , 1 ml of 20× SSC ( 2× SSC final concentration ) and 8 ml of ddH 2 0 .  crItIcal Freshly prepare the solution . • • •• TE buffer To make 100 ml of TE buffer , pH 8 . 0 , combine 1 ml of 1 M Tris - HCl ( pH 8 . 0 ) and 0 . 2 ml of 0 . 5 M EDTA and make up the volume to 100 ml with ddH 2 O . Adjust the pH to 8 . 0 . Store the solution at RT for several months . Competitor DNA To make 200 µ l of 10 mg / ml of competitor DNA , combine 100 µ l of 10 mg / ml sheared salmon sperm DNA with 100 µ l of 10 mg / ml E . coli tRNA . The tRNA is prepared by dissolving 10 mg of powder in 1 ml of ddH 2 O . Store it at −20 °C for up to a year . smFISH probe mix Commercially available Stellaris FISH Probes were custom - designed against gcl , nos and osk by using the Stellaris RNA FISH Probe Designer ( Biosearch Technologies ) available online at http : / / www . biosearchtech . com / stellarisdesigner ( Supplementary Table 1 ) . Each smFISH probe mix is shipped as a dried set containing up to 48 individual smFISH probes hybridizing to different positions along the target mRNA ( Fig . 2a ) . We most often use probes conjugated to CAL Fluor590 , Quasar 570 or Quasar 670 . Probes in each probe set are mixed in an equimolar ratio . The probe mix is resuspended in TE buffer to a final concentration of 40 ng / µ l and can be stored at −20 °C for several years . Hybridization mix To hybridize ~ 20 µ l of embryos with a single smFISH probe mix , prepare 60 µ l of hybridization mix . This mix contains 6 µ l of 100 % ( vol / vol ) deionized formamide ( 10 % ( vol / vol ) final ) , 1 µ l of competitor DNA , 2 µ l of 40 ng / µ l probe mix , 30 µ l of 20 % ( vol / vol ) dextran sulfate ( 10 % ( vol / vol ) final concentration , see below ) , 5 µ l of BSA ( 2 mg / ml final concentration ) , 5 µ l of 20× SSC ( 2× SSC final concentration ) , 2 . 5 µ l of 200 mM ribonucleoside vanadyl complex ( 10 mM final concentration ) and 8 . 5 µ l of ddH 2 O . To hybridize multiple mRNA targets simultaneously using spectrally distinct probes , add 2 µ l of 40 ng / µ l probe mix for each target mRNA and adjust the total amount of ddH 2 O accordingly .  crItIcal Freshly prepare the hybridization mix . 20 % ( vol / vol ) Dextran sulfate To prepare 50 ml of 20 % ( vol / vol ) dextran sulfate , combine 10 g of dextran sulfate with ddH 2 O to obtain 50 ml . Store the solution at 4 °C for up to several months . DAPI solution Prepare a 0 . 5 µ g / ml DAPI solution in 1× PBS . Stir for several hours at RT in a flask wrapped in aluminum foil . Store the solution at 4 °C for up to several months . EQUIPMENT SETUP Embryo collection basket To make an embryo collection basket , cut the bottom off a plastic scintillation vial ( Fig . 1c , d ) . Remove the plastic cap and cut a hole into the cap using a power tool or a flamed knife . Cut a circle the size of the plastic cap from the Nitex mesh and place it into the cap of the scintillation vial . Attach the cap with the mesh to the tube of the scintillation vial . Wide - field epifluorescence microscope To acquire images with a wide - field epifluorescence microscope , an API DeltaVision personal DV system equipped with an Olympus IX - 71 inverted microscope , Nomarski differential interference contrast optics and a Photometrics CoolSNAP HQ2 CCD camera with a pixel size of 6 . 45 µ m ( which meets the Nyquist criterion with a 60× magnification objective ) was used . The microscope was guided by a SoftWorx suite . A xenon lamp and fiber optic module enabled uniform illumination of the field . A high - NA microscope objective such as the Olympus PlanApo N 60× / 1 . 42 oil objective is desirable for collecting the maximum number of photons . This objective is optimized for imaging with no . 1 . 5 microscope coverslip with a working distance of 0 . 15 mm . To minimize spherical aberration , it is important to use an immersion oil that closely matches the refractive index of the objective lens . We used Olympus Type - F immersion oil ( NA 1 . 516 ; Thorlabs , cat . no . MOIL - 30 ) . The customized DeltaVision fluorescence filter set , which includes a DAPI filter , a Tritc filter ( for Quasar 570 and CAL Fluor590 detection ) and a Cy5 filter ( for Quasar 670 detection ) , maximizes emission collection and minimizes the spectral overlap in case of multicolor smFISH . Scanning confocal microscope To acquire images using a laser scanning confocal microscope , a Zeiss LSM780 Axio Observer microscope equipped with a 32 - channel GaAsp detector and two PMT detectors , a multiline 25 mW argon laser , a HeNe 633 laser , a 30 - mW diode 405 laser , a DPSS 561 - 10 laser , and Plan - Apo 40× / 1 . 4 Oil DIC ( microscope coverslip no . 1 . 5 and working distance of 0 . 13 mm ) and EC Plan - Neofluar 10× / 0 . 30 ( microscope coverslip no . 1 . 5 and working distance of 5 . 2 mm ) objectives were used . We used Zeiss Immersol 518 F ( NA 1 . 518 ) immersion oil ( Fisher Scientific , cat . no . ISO 8036 - 1 / 2 ) . The microscope was guided by a Zeiss ZEN system . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1336 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . iSIM system To obtain super - resolution images of smFISH - labeled mRNAs , we used the iSIM 10 , 11 , which was equipped with a 60× ( note that the full magnification from sample to cameras was ~ 117× , however , because a 350 - mm tube lens was used ) NA 1 . 45 oil objective ( Olympus ) ( with a working distance of 0 . 10 mm ) and accompanying oil ( type DF , refractive index 1 . 515 , Cargille , cat . no . 410LDF - AB ) , and acquired images in green or red channels with 488 - nm and 561 - nm excitation lasers 5 , 10 and a filtering pump light with emission filters using a filter wheel ( Sutter , FG - LB10 - BIQ and FG - LB10 - NW ) and notch filters ( Semrock , NF03 - 488E - 25 and NF03 - 561E - 25 ) 10 , 11 . These were placed immediately before the cameras to reject excitation laser light . Images were captured on a scientific CMOS camera with 6 . 5 - µ m pixels ( pco , model no . edge 5 . 5 ) —the final imaging pixel size is 55 . 5 nm ( = 6 . 5 µ m / 117 ) . Images are integrated from 5 to 20 20 - ms ‘sweeps’ of the galvanometric mirror that scans the structured illumination through the sample , for an average exposure time of 100 – 400 ms per image . Stacks were assembled by acquiring data with a piezoelectric stage ( Applied Scientific Instrumentation , 200 - µ m axial travel ) affixed to the microscope body ; typical step sizes range from 150 to 200 nm . We have previously fully described the alignment of the system 11 . Since its development in 2013 , iSIM has become commercially available through VTi VisiTech International . Deconvolution algorithm Microscopy images unavoidably suffer from artifacts such as blurring , which arises because of the optics of the microscope , and noise , which is typically dominated by Poisson statistics arising from the recording of fluorescence emissions . We use Huygens deconvolution software ( v16 . 05 ; Scientific Volume Imaging ) to reduce these imaging artifacts . Specifically , we use the iterative classic maximum likelihood estimation ( CMLE ) algorithm in Huygens , which is a restoration method that optimizes the likelihood of an estimate of an object given the measured image and PSF . The object estimate is in the form of a regular 3D image . The likelihood in this procedure is computed by a Quality Criterion under the assumption that the photon noise is governed by Poisson statistics . For this reason , it is well suited to increasing the signal - to - noise ratio and the effective resolution of an image , which facilitates the detection and counting of fluorescently labeled single mRNAs and , importantly , markedly increases the precision with which individual molecules can be localized ( Fig . 5a – d ) . Settings used with the CMLE deconvolution algorithm are 50 iterations , a quality threshold of 0 . 01 and an SNR value of 40 . We typically use the Huygens software to deconvolve our data , although a much simpler iterative Richardson – Lucy algorithm also worked well on our type of image data 5 . This algorithm is freely available and can be downloaded from https : / / code . google . com / archive / p / msim / source / default / source or http : / / bigwww . epfl . ch / deconvolution / deconvolutionlab2 / . Spot - detection algorithm Airlocalize When imaged with an epifluores - cent , confocal or structured illumination microscope , mRNA molecules hybridized with smFISH probes appear as bright fluorescent spots against a uniform autofluorescent background . A spot - detection algorithm is used to automate spot detection and to measure the number , position and intensity of individual fluorescently labeled mRNAs in a 2D or 3D image . We use an algorithm called Airlocalize , which was developed in the MATLAB program - ming language ( MathWorks ) 9 . Download the Airlocalize script together with the MCRInstaller , which allows one to run a MATLAB algorithm without separately installing MATLAB onto the computer . SigmaPlot SigmaPlot is a graphing and data analysis algorithm provided by Systat Software . It is used to calculate the average fluorescence intensity of fluorescently labeled mRNAs by fitting the distribution of the integrated fluorescence intensity of detected spots to a Gaussian curve , where the peak of the Gaussian curve determines the average fluorescence intensity of a single mRNA ( Fig . 4a ) . proceDurecollection and fixing of fly embryos for smFIsH ● tIMInG up to 1 d 1 | Place 200 – 400 flies with a 2 : 1 female / male ratio into an egg - collection cage ( Fig . 1a ) mounted with an apple juice plate containing a dollop of yeast paste and prewarmed to 25 °C ( or the temperature required for the specific experiment ) . 2 | Place the egg - collection bottles into a 25 °C ( or the temperature required for the specific experiment ) incubator and allow the flies to lay eggs onto the apple juice plate . ? trouBlesHootInG 3 | Remove the apple juice plate from the egg - collection cage ( Fig . 1b ) , scrape off the yeast paste with a wooden tongue depressor and remove trapped flies with tweezers . 4 | Fill the apple juice plate half - way with a bleach solution and incubate at RT for up to 2 min to dechorionate the embryos . Immediately proceed to Step 5 .  crItIcal step The potency of bleach can vary . Monitor dechorionation on a dissecting microscope to prevent embryo damage by overexposure to bleach . ? trouBlesHootInG 5 | Pour the embryos with the bleach solution into the egg - collection basket ( Fig . 1c , d ) and immediately wash the embryos with water using a squirt bottle . Wash the inner edges of the basket as well , so that all the embryos assemble in the center of the Nitex mesh . ? trouBlesHootInG 6 | Remove the mesh with the dechorionated embryos from the egg - collection basket and use tweezers to place the mesh into a scintillation vial filled with 5 ml of saturated heptane and 5 ml of fixative . ! cautIon Paraformaldehyde and heptane are toxic and should be handled with protective gloves under a fume hood and discarded according to the relevant environmental and safety instructions . 7 | Shake the vial vigorously for 15 s . Let the vial stand at RT for 20 min . The embryos will settle at the interface between the lower paraformaldehyde and upper heptane layer . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1337 8 | Using a glass pipette , remove the bottom paraformaldehyde layer . Remove as much fixative as possible without removing the embryos . Add 5 ml of 100 % ( vol / vol ) methanol , cap the vial , shake vigorously for 15 s and let the embryos settle at RT to devitellinize them . Devitellinized embryos will settle at the bottom of the vial while embryos with a vitelline membrane will remain at the interphase between the two solutions . ! cautIon Methanol is toxic when ingested or when in contact with skin or eyes . It is highly flammable . Handle it with protective gloves under a fume hood and discard according to the relevant environmental and safety instructions .  crItIcal step Only devitellinized embryos will hybridize smFISH probes . ? trouBlesHootInG 9 | Collect and transfer the devitellinized embryos to a 1 . 7 - ml tube using a glass Pasteur pipette or a cutoff pipette tip . Wash the embryos three times with 1 ml of 100 % ( vol / vol ) methanol .  crItIcal step It is critical that a cutoff tip or a glass Pasteur pipette be used to preserve the embryos’ integrity . ? trouBlesHootInG  pause poInt Devitellinized embryos can be stored in 1 ml of 100 % ( vol / vol ) methanol at 4 °C until further use ( for up to several weeks ) . performing of smFIsH ● tIMInG 2 – 3 d  crItIcal Drosophila oocytes can also be stained following Steps 10 – 26 of this protocol . The procedure for dissection of female fruit flies to extract oocytes is shown in Box 1 . 10 | Transfer 20 µ l of fixed embryos to a 1 . 7 - ml tube .  crItIcal step Use a cutoff tip or a glass Pasteur pipette . ? trouBlesHootInG 11 | Wash the embryos with 1 ml of 100 % ( vol / vol ) methanol and incubate for 5 min at RT . 12 | Wash the embryos twice with 1 ml of a 1 : 1 mixture of 100 % ( vol / vol ) methanol / PBT , and incubate for 5 min at RT each time . 13 | Wash the embryos twice with 1 ml of PBT and incubate at RT for 5 min each time .  pause poInt Once rehydrated , the embryos can be stored in PBT for several hours at RT or for several days at 4 °C before continuing with Step 14 . 14 | Remove the PBT and postfix the embryos with 1 ml of fixative for 20 min at RT . 15 | Remove the fixative and wash the embryos three times with 1 ml of PBT at RT , each time incubating for 2 min . 16 | Remove the PBT , add 1 ml of proteinase K and incubate at RT for 13 min , inverting the tube frequently . Incubate the tube on ice for 1 h , inverting the tube every 15 min .  crItIcal step Proteinase K treatment is needed to ensure uniform smFISH probe penetration into the tissue and to ensure efficient probe binding to the mRNA . It is particularly recommended when an mRNA is assumed to be tightly packed with proteins ( masked ) 17 such that masking would preclude probe hybridization . The prolonged incubation on ice at low proteinase K concentrations ensures slow and uniform penetration and activity of proteinase K without overdigesting the tissue 13 . ? trouBlesHootInG 17 | Remove the proteinase K and inactivate the remaining proteinase K by washing the embryos with 1 ml of glycine and incubating at RT for 2 min . Repeat this step .  crItIcal step Thoroughly inactivate and remove the proteinase K to prevent overdigestion of the sample . ? trouBlesHootInG 18 | Wash the embryos twice with 1 ml of PBT , incubating each time for 2 min at RT . 19 | Remove the PBT and postfix the embryos with 1 ml of fixative for 20 min at RT . 20 | Remove the fixative and wash the embryos five times with 1 ml of PBT at RT , incubating the embryos each time for 2 min to remove all traces of the fixative . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1338 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 21 | Completely remove the PBT , add 1 ml of prehybridization solution and incubate the embryos at RT for 10 min . ! cautIon Formamide is toxic and should be handled with protective gloves under a fume hood and discarded according to the relevant environmental and safety instructions .  crItIcal step To ensure efficient probe hybridization and to minimize nonspecific probe binding , care must be taken to prepare a prehybridization solution with 10 % ( vol / vol ) formamide and 2× SSC and to make sure that the hybridization of the sample with the probe mix will proceed at 37 °C . ? trouBlesHootInG 22 | Remove the prehybridization solution and add 60 µ l of hybridization solution containing the smFISH probe mix . Mix by gently flicking the tube with a finger , and incubate the tube , protected from light , at 37 °C ON in an incubator .  crItIcal step Do not spin the sample with a centrifuge . This will disintegrate the embryos . It is preferred to incubate the embryos in an incubator to prevent excessive evaporation of water into the cap of the tube . This will ensure that the concentration of formamide does not change during hybridization . ? trouBlesHootInG 23 | Remove the hybridization solution and wash the embryos twice with 1 ml of prehybridization solution prewarmed to 37 °C , incubating each time for 15 min in a 37 °C incubator . ? trouBlesHootInG 24 | Remove the prehybridization solution and wash the embryos twice with 1 ml of 1× PBS , incubating each time for 1 h at RT and protected from light . ? trouBlesHootInG 25 | ( Optional ) To stain the nuclei , incubate with 1 ml of DAPI for 1 min at RT , protected from light . Afterward , remove the DAPI and incubate with 1 ml of 1× PBS for 5 min at RT . ? trouBlesHootInG 26 | Transfer the embryos onto a microscope slide using a pipette with a cutoff tip . Then remove as much PBS as possible without drying the embryos . Add a few drops of mounting medium onto the embryos and cover them with a microscope coverslip . Seal the edges of the coverslip with nail polish or allow the mounting medium to cure according to the manufacturer’s instructions .  crItIcal step Use a cutoff pipette tip or glass Pasteur pipette to transfer the embryos onto the microscope slide to prevent embryo disintegration . Do not dry the embryos , as this increases autofluorescence . Certain commercially available mounting media , such as Prolong Gold and Prolong Diamond , must be cured for ~ 24 h at RT in the dark before the samples can be imaged . Water - based mounting media such as Vectashield do not require this step , and samples can be imaged immediately after the microscope coverslip is sealed to the microscope slides with nail polish . ? trouBlesHootInG  pause poInt Once mounting is completed , the slides can be stored at −20 °C for several months before being imaged . Imaging of smFIsH - stained embryos ● tIMInG ~ 1 – 2 h 27 | Embryos are imaged in 3D using a wide - field epifluorescence microscope , laser scanning confocal microscope or iSIM ( Equipment Setup ) . Using a wide - field epifluorescence microscope or a laser scanning confocal microscope , 3D images of embryos are acquired with a 200 - to 400 - nm Z - step size , spanning a 2 . 5 - to 5 . 0 - µ m depth . When iSIM is used , 3D images of embryos are acquired with a finer Z step ( because of the superior optical sectioning of this approach ) , typically with a 150 - to 200 - nm Z step size , spanning a 2 . 5 - to 5 . 0 - µ m depth . Whenever possible , exposure times , laser powers , and numbers of scans and sweeps are chosen such that the range of fluorescence intensities of collected light occupies 90 % of the dynamic range of the camera or the detector while also making sure to minimize bleaching of the sample .  crItIcal step Long exposure , high laser powers , and multiple scans and sweeps can rapidly bleach the fluorescent signal . To increase the fluorescence intensity of a single mRNA during imaging , it is better to increase the number of probes hybridizing to an mRNA or to choose probes coupled to a brighter and more photostable dye , rather than increasing the exposure time or laser strength during imaging . ? trouBlesHootInG  pause poInt Proceed to Step 28 or pause until time permits continuing with image preparation and analysis . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1339 Deconvolution of 3D image stacks ● tIMInG ~ 1 – 2 h 28 | Deconvolve the 3D - acquired wide - field epifluorescence or iSIM images using the Huygens deconvolution software , Richardson – Lucy algorithm or similar software . If the images were acquired with a laser scanning confocal microscope , proceed to Step 29 . ? trouBlesHootInG  pause poInt Proceed to Step 29 or pause until time permits continuing with image preparation and analysis . smFIsH detection and counting using airlocalize ● tIMInG ~ 1 d , scales with proficiency of the user 29 | Launch Airlocalize . ? trouBlesHootInG 30 | Select ‘File Mode’ . Choose ‘2D single image file’ .  crItIcal step As a proof of principle , we provide here a step - by - step protocol of detection and counting of smFISH - labeled mRNAs in a single 2D image . However , a single 3D image file can be similarly analyzed . To further automate and speed up quantifica - tion , multiple 2D or 3D image files can be analyzed in a batch mode option by choosing the ‘2D or 3D images , batch mode’ option . ? trouBlesHootInG 31 | Select ‘Detection and Quantification’ parameters ( Fig . 3a ) . Define the spatial characteristics of the PSF , whether a ROI or an entire image is analyzed , and define how the detection threshold is determined . A priori knowledge of the PSF is not required : the PSF parameters can be estimated from the single - mRNA data within the Airlocalize interface by checking the ‘Set Manually’ radio button within the ‘PSF width ( Pix ) ’ box ( Steps 34 – 37 ) . ? trouBlesHootInG 32 | Select the ‘Output Image of Spots’ option if an image of detected smFISH - labeled mRNAs is desired ( Fig . 3g , h ) . ? trouBlesHootInG 33 | The ‘Advanced Parameters’ section consists of software parameters that typically do not need to be modified ; the defaults are well adapted to most single - molecule detection applications . These parameters include the maximum number of spots to consider in the image , the minimum distance allowed between spots ( spots closer than this distance will be reduced to a single spot ) , the shape of the band - pass filter ( ‘High pass Length Cutoff’ , ‘Low pass Length Cutoff’ , ‘Cutoff Width’ ) , the PSF model used ( ‘PSF type’ , default : ‘Gaussian Kernel Integrated over the pixel / voxel’ ) , the fitting algorithm ( ‘Quantification Method’ , default : ‘Gaussian Mask’ ) , the size of the region around each spot used to compute position and intensity ( ‘Local Fit Size’ ) , the thickness of the area surrounding the fitting region used to estimate the background ( ‘Local Background Thickness’ ) , the algorithm used to compute the background value ( default : ‘local plane’ ) and the maximum number of iterations allowed for the mask to converge . Once all the parameters are defined , select ‘next’ . ? trouBlesHootInG 34 | Define the shape of a 3D Gaussian mask by executing Steps 34 – 37 . This mask will be used to quantify the integrated fluorescence intensity of smFISH - labeled mRNAs ( Fig . 3b ) . Scroll over the image located in the left panel and choose a representative fluorescent spot of the smFISH - labeled mRNA . Find the center of the spot and left - click to select the spot ( a close - up of the image is located in the bottom right panel in the software , which helps in selecting the center of the fluorescent spot ) ( Fig . 3c ) . A 2D fluorescence profile of the spot will appear in the upper right two panels ( Fig . 3d ) , demonstrating the distribution of the fluorescence intensity of the spot ( y axis ; arbitrary units ( a . u . ) ) along the x ( x axis in pixels ; upper panel ) and along the y ( x axis in pixels ; lower panel ) axes in an image . ? trouBlesHootInG 35 | Click ‘local gaussian fit’ ( Fig . 3c ) to calculate the shape of the 3D Gaussian mask overlaying the fluorescent spot ( Fig . 3d ) . The shape of the calculated mask will be indicated as a red curve overlaying the recorded fluorescence intensity profile of the fluorescent spot ( marked with a blue line ) ( Fig . 3d ) . ? trouBlesHootInG 36 | Click ‘Record Fit Results’ .  crItIcal step A good PSF is critical in making sure that the Gaussian mask will optimally fit the fluorescently labeled mRNAs , calculate their integrated fluorescence intensity and determine the center of mass of the smFISH - labeled mRNA with a subpixel resolution . Therefore , it is important that the fit ( red curve ) deviate minimally from the measured data ( blue curve ) and thus appropriately describe the PSF of the fluorescent spot . ? trouBlesHootInG © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1340 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 37 | Repeat Steps 34 – 36 on five to ten individual spots to obtain an average 3D Gaussian mask , which will be used to detect and quantify the fluorescence intensity of smFISH - labeled mRNAs in subsequent steps . Click ‘done’ . ? trouBlesHootInG 38 | Specify the fluorescence intensity threshold for detection of smFISH - labeled mRNAs ( Fig . 3e ) . The pixels whose fluorescence intensity is above the specified threshold are marked in red , pixels of the input image are marked in green and colocalized pixels are yellow . ? trouBlesHootInG 39 | Chose ‘Done’ . Airlocalize provides three files important for further analysis and stores them in the folder from which the analyzed image originates . The first is a TIF file corresponding to the ‘Output Image of Spots’ . This is an image in which the x , y and z positions of the centers of mass ( the peaks of fluorescence intensity ) of all detected fluorescent spots in an original image ( Fig . 3g ) are marked in red ( Fig . 3h ) . The second is a localization ( a . loc file or a . loc3 file , for 3D images , consisting of ASCII text ) file that lists the spatial and quantitative information for all detected fluorescent spots . On this list , each spot is listed in a row , with its position specified with a subpixel resolution ( x , y , z in units of pixels in columns A , B and C , respectively ) and its integrated fluorescence intensity ( a . u . ) encompassed by the 3D Gaussian mask provided ( column D ) . The third ( a . par file , consisting of ASCII text ) file lists all the parameters specified during the analysis . ? trouBlesHootInG 40 | Using SigmaPlot or a similar graphing and data analysis algorithm , plot the distribution of integrated fluorescence intensities of all detected mRNAs as a histogram . To calculate the average fluorescence intensity of a single mRNA , fit the data ( black dots ) to a Gaussian function ( red curve ) ( Fig . 4a ) using a curve - fitting algorithm such as SigmaPlot . The peak of the Gaussian fit determines the average florescence intensity of a single smFISH - labeled mRNA .  crItIcal step When a large fraction of mRNAs is in clusters , a Gaussian fit with a single peak to determine the average fluorescence intensity of a single mRNA is not always possible . In this case , two ( or more ) populations of fluorescent spots that contain two ( or more ) mRNAs per spot will be revealed in the graph . Here , a Gaussian fit with two ( or more ) peaks should be used ; otherwise , an average spot intensity will be skewed if these distinct mRNA populations are combined into one average . ? trouBlesHootInG 41 | To determine the absolute number of mRNAs within a cluster , the cumulative fluorescence intensity of each fluorescent cluster is normalized against the average fluorescence intensity of a single mRNA determined by the Gaussian fit ( Fig . 5a – d ) . Clusters with a normalized fluorescence intensity ranging between 0 . 51 and 1 . 50 are considered to contain 1 smFISH - labeled mRNA ; those with a normalized fluorescence intensity ranging between 1 . 51 and 2 . 50 are considered to contain two smFISH - labeled mRNAs ; those with a normalized fluorescence intensity ranging between 2 . 51 and 3 . 50 are considered to contain three smFISH - labeled mRNAs ; and so on ( Fig . 5d ) . To demonstrate the spatial distribution of mRNAs within the embryo as a heat map , the average integrated fluorescence intensity of a single mRNA—in this case a sin - gle gcl mRNA—was first determined ( Figs . 3 and 4a ) , after which this value was used to calibrate the intensities of clustered gcl spots at the posterior pole . During spot detection , Airlocalize determines the position of each single mRNA and mRNA cluster in 2D and 3D with subpixel resolution . These coordinates are then used to plot the spatial distribution of individual mRNAs and clusters in the embryo and to create the heat map . ? trouBlesHootInG 42 | When analyzing multiple images acquired in the same condition , it is critical to ensure consistency of the detection parameters . The number of spots detected , as well as their intensity , can be sensitive to the choice of PSF size and threshold . To ensure consistent analysis , the PSF size and threshold can be set manually on an initial pilot image ; the values can then be extracted from the resulting . par file ( listed under ‘sigma _ xy’ or ‘sigma _ z’ ( for 3D images ) and ‘thresh . level’ ) and typed into the corresponding dialog boxes ( Fig . 3a ) when analyzing subsequent images or launching a batch analysis . The ‘Set Manually’ buttons must be unchecked in this case in order to bypass Steps 34 – 38 and ensure consistent settings across images . ? trouBlesHootInG ? trouBlesHootInG Troubleshooting advice can be found in table 1 . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1341 taBle 1 | Troubleshooting table . step problem possible reason solution 2 Flies lay few eggs ( i ) Not enough flies in the cage ( ii ) Apple juice plates are cold ( iii ) No surface for flies to lay eggs ( iv ) Flies are too old ( v ) Flies are not acclimated to the apple juice plate ( vi ) Flies are not well fed ( vii ) Eggs are not collected at the appropriate time of the day ( i ) This can be fly - line - dependent , as some flies are not as fecund . Add more flies to the cage ( ii ) Apple juice plates must be prewarmed to 25 °C ( or the temperature at which the eggs are collected ) , as the cold shock reduces egg - laying ( iii ) Place the yeast paste in the middle of the plate to allow the flies to lay eggs away from food or reduce the number of flies . Add filter paper to the cage , so that flies do not get stuck on the plate ( iv ) Use flies that are at the peak of their fecundity ( 3 – 7 - d - old flies ) ( v ) Acclimate flies to apple juice plates by keeping them in an egg - collection cage for one day before collecting eggs ( vi ) Feed the flies well with yeast paste to stimulate egg production ( vii ) Flies grow on a 12 - h light cycle . Flies lay eggs best toward dusk and worst at dawn . Collect later in the day or use an incubator with a controlled 12 - h light cycle 4 , 5 Embryos disintegrate or have impaired morphology Bleach times are too long or the potency of the bleach is too high As a rule of thumb , the embryos are dechorionated after they detach from an apple juice plate and start floating in the bleach solution . Monitor the efficiency of dechorionation under the dis - secting microscope . When the dorsal appendages have dissolved in 80 % of the embryos ( ~ 2 min ) , remove the bleach and wash the embryos with water 8 , 9 Younger embryos did not devitellinize Methanol cracking was used to devitellinize embryos Younger embryos found in nuclear cell cycles 1 – 10 do not devitellinize efficiently using methanol cracking . Try hand - devitellinization instead Embryos of various stages poorly devitellinize Fixative was not completely removed It is important to remove as much fixative as possible , as it inhibits devitellinization of the embryos . When fixing larger numbers of embryos , larger vials with larger methanol / heptanol volumes are preferred . By increasing the methanol surface , the embryos will crack their vitelline membrane more readily . Remove the devitellinized embryos from the bottom of the vial and add 5 ml of fresh 100 % ( vol / vol ) methanol and repeat methanol cracking 9 , 10 , 22 , 26 , 27 Embryos disintegrate or have impaired morphology ( i ) Too much mechanical force was applied when transferring the embryos ( ii ) Embryos are insufficiently fixed ( ii ) Use only cutoff pipette tips or glass Pasteur pipettes to prevent shearing the embryos . Do not spin embryos with a centrifuge . This will disintegrate the embryos , particularly after they have been treated with proteinase K and formamide ( ii ) Increase the duration of fixation with fixative to 45 min . Autofluorescent background does not increase significantly with longer fixation times . When fixing for 20 min with 4 % ( vol / vol ) paraformaldehyde , heptane must first be saturated with 4 % ( vol / vol ) paraformaldehyde to ensure even and fast fixation . Saturated heptane must be prepared at least one day before and must be frequently shaken throughout the day to promote saturation 9 , 10 , 26 Embryos stick to Pasteur pipettes and pipette tips Embryos are resuspended in 1× PBS Wet the glass Pasteur pipette or cutoff pipette tip with methanol or PBT before pipetting the embryos . Alcohols and detergents prevent embryos from sticking to glass and plastic . If embryos are sticking too much , PBS can be replaced with PBT ( continued ) © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1342 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . taBle 1 | Troubleshooting table ( continued ) . step problem possible reason solution 9 , 21 – 42 Autofluorescence is too high ( i ) Embryos have been stored for too long ( ii ) Embryos became dried during smFISH labeling , leading to increased autofluorescence ( iii ) Staining with DAPI was excessive ( iv ) The embryos’ autofluorescence is too high ( v ) Embryos were stored in 1× PBS ( i ) Avoid using embryos that have been stored for too long , as prolonged storage can increase autofluorescence ( ii ) Keep the embryos hydrated during the smFISH labeling ( iii ) Reduce the time and the concentration of DNA staining with DAPI . DAPI has a broad emission spectrum that can cause bleed - through of signal into other channels when images of multiple channels are captured simultaneously ( iv ) Use TrueBlack Lipofuscin Autofluorescence Quencher ( Biotium ) to reduce the autofluorescent background ( v ) Store embryos in 100 % ( vol / vol ) methanol rather than 1× PBS or PBT . Methanol perforates the embryos and washes some autofluorescence away 16 , 17 Embryos disintegrate or have impaired morphology Embryos are overdigested The duration of proteinase K treatment is too long or the concentration of proteinase K is too high . Adjust the time and concentration of proteinase K treatment Oocytes disintegrate or have impaired morphology Oocytes are overdigested Oocytes can be susceptible to proteinase K overdigestion and can lose their morphology during treatment . The duration and the potency of the proteinase K treatment can be reduced or omitted during smFISH staining of oocytes 21 – 24 27 , 29 – 42 No or low smFISH signal The number of smFISH probes is insufficient to detect single mRNAs Design more smFISH probes against the target mRNA . The probes can cover 5 and 3 untranslated regions ( UTRs ) , as well as the ORF Inappropriate formamide concentration Formamide concentrations > 10 % ( vol / vol ) prevent probe binding . Adjust the formamide concentration to a final concentration of 10 % ( vol / vol ) . It is preferable to incubate the embryos in an incubator to prevent excessive evaporation of water into the cap of the tube . This will ensure that the concentration of formamide does not change during hybridization ( an increase in the formamide concentration could prevent efficient probe hybridization ) Inappropriate hybridization temperature Temperature during hybridization is > 37 °C , which prevents probe binding Inappropriate formamide pH The pH of the formamide is too acidic or the formamide is not deionized . When exposed to air , formamide becomes acidified and quenches ( inhibits ) fluorescence of certain organic dyes such as Quasar 670 . Prepare aliquots of fresh formamide in 1 . 7 - ml tubes and store them at −80 °C until use . Over time , monitor the quality of the stored deionized formamide using a pH strip . A pH between 7 . 5 and 8 indicates high - quality deionized formamide smFISH probes did not penetrate the embryo It is necessary to incubate embryos in 100 % ( vol / vol ) methanol before hybridization for at least a couple of hours to ensure that smFISH probes will penetrate the embryo during hybridization . If methanol is avoided , 1× PBS containing 1 % ( vol / vol ) Triton X - 100 must be used instead to perforate the embryos . PBT containing 0 . 1 % ( vol / vol ) Tween - 20 does not have sufficient detergent strength to perforate the embryos . Alternatively , embryos are not devitellinized . Repeat methanol cracking ( continued ) © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1343 taBle 1 | Troubleshooting table ( continued ) . step problem possible reason solution Dyes coupled to smFISH probes are not bright or photostable Choose smFISH probes coupled to a bright and photostable dye . We most often use probes labeled with CAL Fluor590 , Quasar 570 and Quasar 670 . Quasar 670 is bright ; however , when imaged with a laser scanning confocal microscope , Quasar 670 does not excite well and bleaches rapidly . It is also sensitive to the pH of the formamide ( see above ) . Quasar 570 is not as bright as Quasar 670 or CAL Fluor 590 Proteinase K treatment did not work Prepare fresh proteinase K solution DNases and RNases contaminated the smFISH probe mix and / or sample and degraded probes and / or mRNAs in the sample Although we have not experienced signal loss because of smFISH probe or mRNA degradation during our smFISH staining ( smFISH probes are DNA primers that are fairly resistant to degradation , whereas mRNAs in the embryos are fixed before hybridization and samples are treated with VRC RNase inhibitor during hybridization ; both treatments stabilize mRNAs during hybridization ) , care must be taken by using DNase - and RNase - free reagents and laboratory practices 26 , 27 Oocytes disintegrate or have impaired morphology Too much mechanical force was applied when transferring the oocytes Use only cutoff pipette tips or glass Pasteur pipettes to prevent shearing of the oocytes . Do not spin oocytes with a centrifuge , as they will disintegrate 22 , 23 , 24 , 27 , 29 – 42 Background smFISH fluorescence is too high Too much smFISH probe was used Reduce the amount of probe used Hybridization times were too long Implement shorter hybridization periods The frequency and the duration of washes was too short Increase the frequency and the duration of washes with the prehybridization solution and PBS The concentration of BSA or DNA competitor was too low Increase the concentration of BSA and competitor DNA Inappropriate formamide concentration Increase the formamide concentration to > 10 % ( vol / vol ) to pre - vent nonspecific probe binding Inappropriate hybridization temperature Decrease the hybridization temperature during hybridization to 37 °C to prevent nonspecific probe binding 24 , 26 , 27 , 29 – 42 Fluorescent signal bleaches An inappropriate mounting medium was used Use an appropriate mounting medium that is an efficient scavenger of oxygen radicals . These can cause bleaching of the fluorophores . We regularly use Vectashield , Prolong Gold and Prolong Diamond Exposure time was too long and / or the power of the light or laser was too high ; the number of sweeps was too high Reduce the exposure time and / or the power of the light ( wide - field microscope ) , reduce laser power ( confocal microscope , iSIM ) , reduce the number of scanned lines ( confocal microscope ) , reduce the number of sweeps ( iSIM ) and reduce the number of optical Z sections ( all microscopes ) Dyes coupled to smFISH probes are not bright or photostable Use a photostable fluorophore . CAL Fluor 590 is very photosta - ble , whereas Quasar 690 bleaches more rapidly , particularly when a laser scanning confocal microscope is used in which a focused , high - intensity laser line excites the fluorophores . To reduce the rate of photobleaching during imaging , add 1 mM Trolox antioxi - dant to the PBS washes ( Step 24 ) . Curing mounting media might not diffuse deeply into the embryo before they solidify to pre - vent photobleaching . By adding Trolox during PBS washes , the embryo is thoroughly perfused with the anti - bleaching reagent ( continued ) © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1344 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . taBle 1 | Troubleshooting table ( continued ) . step problem possible reason solution 27 No or low smFISH signal Imaging of mRNAs too deep in tissue The smFISH signal might be visible at the surface of the embryo but not deeper in tissue . This occurs because of photon loss when emitted light scatters during image capture Samples move during imaging A water - based mounting medium was used Use a curing mounting medium . We use Prolong Gold and Prolong Diamond . These media cross - link and fix the embryos on the coverslip and the embryos do not move during the imaging 27 , 29 – 42 Reduced resolution of iSIM Imaging too deep The optimal imaging depth of an iSIM microscope is sample - dependent , but typically no more than 50 – 60 µ m in transparent tissue ( and in Drosophila tissue when using a 60× 1 . 45 NA objective and imaging mRNA - bound germ granules located immediately beneath the surface of the embryo’s posterior pole , it is no more than 40 µ m from the cov - erslip ) . Ensure that the working distance of the objective is suf - ficient to image at the chosen depth from the coverslip Wrong microscope coverslip It is important that the coverslip is a no . 1 . 5 ( thickness 0 . 16 – 0 . 19 mm ) The refractive index of the mounting medium does not match the refractive index of glass , or the objective We typically use Vectashield , Prolong Gold and Prolong Diamond to mount our samples ; it is therefore important to select an oil objective designed to work with an oil of similar refractive index 28 Deconvolution artifacts Acquired images are not suitable for deconvolution 3D images acquired on a wide - field microscope or iSIM are typically deconvolved before being analyzed to count single mRNAs . There are no problems intrinsic to wide - field or iSIM deconvolution . 3D stacks acquired on a laser scanning confocal microscope are typically not deconvolved . If the fluorescent signals of smFISH - labeled mRNAs are strong enough , images can be analyzed without prior deconvolution . In this case , deconvolution facilitates only the detection and counting , as it makes fluorescently labeled mRNAs brighter . However , because of an increase in contrast and signal assigned to the spot , properly applied deconvolution mark - edly increases the precision with which individual fluorescent mol - ecules can be localized . Thus , when one wishes to determine where in a 3D space particular mRNAs lie ( with a subpixel resolution ) , deconvolution of image stacks before analysis is strongly advised Deconvolved images contain ringing artifacts ( black regions in images or in axial reslices of volume ) Check that the parameters of the experiment properly match the settings in the deconvolution software . Magnification and axial step size are particularly important . Also check that the axial step size is set to properly sample the axial extent of the PSF ( ideally at Nyquist sampling size or better ) Deconvolved images display degraded resolution relative to raw data Verify that the model of PSF used in the deconvolution software ( e . g . , Gaussian , theoretical ) well approximates the experimental PSF . If not , the model of the PSF needs to be revised for better agreement , or an experimental PSF should be used in the decon - volution software . If the latter option is pursued , ensure that the PSF is as noise - free as possible 31 Spot detection with Airlocalize is slow The duration of spot detection analysis increases with increasing data set size and can become very long for large image volumes To circumvent imaging and analysis of very large image data sets , a 3D ROI of a known volume can be used as a proxy for the concentration of unlocalized mRNAs across the entire embryo . Single mRNAs are then counted in the 3D image stack as described in the Steps 29 through 41 and the concentration of mRNAs determined by extrapolating to the known embryo vol - ume 5 . Alternatively , data sets can be truncated using standard image analysis tools ( e . g . , Fiji ) before Airlocalize processing ( continued ) © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1345 ● tIMInG Steps 1 – 9 , collection and fixing of fly embryos for smFISH : up to 1 d Steps 10 – 26 , performing of smFISH : 2 – 3 d Step 27 , imaging of smFISH - stained embryos : ~ 1 – 2 h Step 28 , deconvolution of 3D image stacks : ~ 1 – 2 h Steps 29 – 42 , smFISH detection and counting using Airlocalize : ~ 1 d , scales with the proficiency of the user Box 1 , preparation of late - stage Drosophila oocytes for staining with smFISH probes : up to 1 h antIcIpateD results This protocol can be used to stain and image Drosophila embryos , followed by the analysis of 3D images with Airlocalize to detect and count single smFISH - labeled mRNAs within a volume . Labeled mRNA molecules are observed as discrete bright fluorescent spots surrounded by a uniform autofluorescent background of lower intensity ( Figs . 2a , c ( middle ) , 3g and 5c , d ) . The average integrated fluorescence intensity of a single smFISH - labeled mRNA scales linearly with the number of smFISH probes used in the hybridization mix ( Fig . 4b , c ) ; however , the number of detected mRNAs per embryos does not change ( Fig . 4b , c ) . This experiment provides a good control to determine whether the observed fluorescent signal originates from an mRNA hybridized with smFISH probes or from nonspecific accumulation of smFISH probes . It is also important to note here that the accuracy in detecting the true number of mRNAs increases with the number of smFISH probes used ( note the diminishing error bars in Fig . 4c ) . To bypass issues associated with analyzing large image data sets , a representative 3D ROI of a known volume can be analyzed to serve as a proxy for the concentration of unlocalized mRNAs across the entire embryo . After determining the volume of a representative 3D ROI within an embryo 74 and the number of mRNA molecules within this ROI ( and hence the mRNA concentration ) , information can be extrapolated to the entire embryo 5 . taBle 1 | Troubleshooting table ( continued ) . step problem possible reason solution 31 Inefficient spot detection Inappropriate definition of PSF for spot detection Visual aids ( profile along x , y , z in Fig . 3d , f ) can be checked to ensure that the software appropriately fits the intensity of the spots in the image . The program can fail to converge if the spots are extremely dim or the background is very high . In this case , the PSF parameters can be computed using diffraction - limited beads imaged under identical conditions ( objective , filter sets ) 39 , 41 , 42 Detection algorithm over / undercounts ( i ) Threshold parameters are not optimized ( ii ) Spots are difficult to observe when running Airlocalize ( i ) Fluorescence intensities of the fluorescent mRNAs / probes change with the exposure time . For each imaged condition , determine the threshold parameters separately . Threshold parameters will determine which fluorescent spots will be included as single mRNAs ; optimizing threshold parameters is critical to achieving successful single mRNA analysis . If the threshold is set too high , the algorithm will detect only the brightest fluorescent spots ( those that contain multiple mRNAs in the same pixel ) , which will skew the center of the Gaussian fit toward higher fluorescence intensities . If it is set too low , pixels with higher background fluorescence will also be detected , skewing the Gaussian fit toward lower fluorescence intensities . It is critical to use biological controls to confirm selectivity ( using fluorescent probes that have no reactivity with any mRNA in the tissue—e . g . , using a knockout sam - ple ; Fig . 2d ) and sensitivity ( by comparing absolute counts to known abundance calculated by other means ( Anticipated Results ) , or performing a double - labeling experiment , Fig . 2e ) . The threshold can be set as absolute or as a standard deviation . An absolute threshold ( i . e . , threshold in units of fluorescence counts ) should be used when analyzing FISH data . It is critical to analyze all images from the same data set with the same threshold value to avoid biases ( ii ) Adjust minimal ( min ) and maximal ( max ) fluorescence intensity ( Int . ) settings located above the image panel © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1346 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . spatial distribution of mrnas within germ granules in early Drosophila embryos Once an average integrated fluorescence intensity of a single smFISH - labeled mRNA is determined ( Fig . 4a ) , it is used to calibrate the fluorescence intensities of all fluorescent spots identified by the spot - detection algorithm in an image and to determine the absolute number of mRNAs clustered in each fluorescent spot . mRNA clusters whose normalized fluorescence intensity ranges between 0 . 51 and 1 . 50 are considered to contain 1 smFISH - labeled mRNA ; those whose normalized fluorescence intensity ranges between 1 . 51 and 2 . 50 are considered to contain two smFISH - labeled mRNAs ; those whose normalized fluorescence intensity ranges between 2 . 51 and 3 . 50 are considered to contain three smFISH - labeled mRNAs ; and so on ( Fig . 5a – d ) 5 . A particular advantage of smFISH is that the position of a labeled mRNA in 2D and 3D can be determined with a subpixel resolution simply by measuring the center of mass of an mRNA hybridized with smFISH probes ( Fig . 3b , c ) . The accuracy with which the center of mass can be measured is determined by the signal - to - noise ratio of an image . We have empirically determined that for mRNA clusters localized to Drosophila germ granules in an early embryo and imaged with iSIM 5 the precision with which we are able to determine the position of smFISH - labeled mRNA clusters ranges between 9 . 1±2 . 9 nm and 14 . 7±1 . 6 nm . The subpixel position of each mRNA can be combined with the number of mRNAs located in each fluorescent spot to spatially quantify gene expression in the fly tissue in 3D . An example of such an analysis is provided in Figure 5a – d , which shows the distribution of gcl mRNA at the posterior pole during the 13th nuclear cycle of embryonic development in WT embryos . Approximately 3 % of maternally deposited gcl mRNA is localized to the posterior pole of an embryo , where multiple gcl mRNAs group to form homotypic gcl mRNA clusters that have higher fluorescence intensities and therefore contain multiple gcl mRNAs in a diffraction - limited volume ( Figs . 2a ( bottom ) and 5a – d ) 5 . The gcl mRNA heat map depicted in Figure 5d demonstrates that outside of the posterior pole the majority of gcl transcripts are found as single mRNAs and only organize into clusters once they are localized at the posterior pole , consistent with the literature 5 , 6 . At the posterior pole , localized mRNAs interact with proteins assembled into membrane - less organelles called germ granules 5 , 6 , 68 , 75 – 77 . When smFISH was combined with iSIM , we revealed that gcl , nos and cycB form homotypic mRNA clusters that are asymmetrically distributed within germ granules . Specifically , gcl clusters are located at the periphery of the granule , cycB clusters are located in the center of the granule and nos clusters occupy an intermediate space between gcl and cycB clusters 5 ( Fig . 5e ) . Such spatial sensitivity cannot be obtained with conventional wide - field epifluorescence or laser scanning confocal microscopy . mrna localization during Drosophila oogenesis In addition to studying early embryogenesis , our staining , imaging and spot - detection protocol can also be implemented to image mRNA localization during other Drosophila developmental stages such as oogenesis ( Fig . 5f , g ) . Historically , detection of mRNAs during late fly oogenesis ( stages 11 – 14 ) using whole - mount in situ studies has been challenging because of poor probe penetration into tissue during hybridization . The vitelline membrane , which forms by the end of oogenic stage 10 ( ref . 78 ) , represents an impenetrable barrier for the longer FISH probes used in whole - mount in situ studies and prevents access of these probes to target mRNAs . To ensure that long RNA probes hybridize to transcripts expressed in oocytes during late oogenesis , the vitelline membrane must be removed before staining 15 . This is typically achieved by rolling of fixed oocytes on a ‘rough’ surface such as the frosted portion of the microscope slide 15 . This process , however , is laborious and can damage oocytes when excessive mechanical force is applied during rolling . Short smFISH probes , on the other hand , easily penetrate oocyte tissue even without rolling and readily hybridize to target mRNAs during all oogenic stages 6 , 8 , 20 , 21 ( Box 1 , Fig . 5f , g ) . Identifying active sites of transcription in Drosophila embryos The protocol described here can also be implemented to detect active sites of transcription in Drosophila embryos undergoing zygotic gene expression ( Fig . 5h – k ) . It has been shown that active transcription sites are often bigger and brighter than single cytoplasmic transcripts or mature nuclear transcripts that have diffused away from the transcription site , indicating that multiple RNA polymerases II were actively transcribing a gene at the time of fixation and smFISH probe hybridization 1 , 22 , 23 , 79 , 80 . When several nascent mRNA chains are associated with an active site of transcription , they accommodate binding of multiple smFISH probes , resulting in a high smFISH probe intensity at an active transcription site ( Fig . 5h ) . For this reason , one can identify active sites of transcription simply by looking for the brightest nuclear signal , as has been shown in Drosophila embryos , mammalian cells and tissue , and budding yeast 4 , 7 , 22 , 23 , 44 , 51 , 80 – 83 . As the transcription proceeds , the intronic regions in the pre - mRNA are also transcribed and can be detected by designing smFISH probes that hybridize specifically to the intronic regions in the unspliced nascent mRNA . Because a typical Drosophila gene contains multiple introns and because an entire intron must be transcribed before it can be spliced , some proportion of the nascent mRNAs will contain introns and bind intronic smFISH probes . On the other hand , smFISH probes targeting mRNA exons will label both nascent and spliced transcripts . The latter are generally smaller and have lower total fluorescence than active transcription sites ( Fig . 5h , k , red dots ) 4 , 7 , 22 , 23 , 44 , 51 , 80 , 81 , 84 . Larger size , increased total fluorescence and the ability to bind smFISH probes designed against the intronic pre - mRNA regions are suitable markers that distinguish active transcription sites from mature freely diffusing nuclear or cytoplasmic transcripts ( Fig . 5h , k , green dots ) 1 , 32 , 33 , 51 , 84 , 85 . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1347 However , it must be noted that some transcripts are being spliced only once they diffuse away from the transcription site . These pre - mRNAs are easily identified as they retain their introns , and thus their intronic and exonic smFISH signals colocalize in multiple discrete fluorescent spots of similar size and brightness in the nucleoplasm away from transcription site or in the cytoplasm 32 , 33 . Note : Any Supplementary Information and Source Data files are available in the online version of the paper . acknoWleDGMents We thank the NYU Langone Medical Center ( NYULMC ) Microscopy Laboratory for providing the API DeltaVision personal DV microscope , particularly Y . Deng and M . Cammer for help with the wide - field epifluorescence microscope . We thank V . Schoonderwoert ( Scientific Volume Imaging ) for his help with the Huygens deconvolution software . This work was supported by the Intramural Research Programs of the US National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering . T . T . is a Howard Hughes Medical Institute ( HHMI ) fellow of the Jane Coffin Childs Memorial Fund . R . L . is an HHMI investigator . Funding for T . L . was provided by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute . autHor contrIButIons T . T . and R . L . implemented quantitative smFISH in Drosophila tissue . H . S . developed iSIM . T . L . developed Airlocalize . All the authors wrote and approved the final version of the manuscript . coMpetInG FInancIal Interests The authors declare competing financial interests : details are available in the online version of the paper . Reprints and permissions information is available online at http : / / www . nature . com / reprints / index . html . Publisher’s note : Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . 1 . Femino , A . M . , Fay , F . S . , Fogarty , K . & Singer , R . H . Visualization of single RNA transcripts in situ . Science 280 , 585 – 590 ( 1998 ) . 2 . Raj , A . , van den Bogaard , P . , Rifkin , S . A . , van Oudenaarden , A . & Tyagi , S . Imaging individual mRNA molecules using multiple singly labeled probes . Nat . Methods 5 , 877 – 879 ( 2008 ) . 3 . Eswaramoorthy , P . et al . Asymmetric division and differential gene expression during a bacterial developmental program requires DivIVA . PLoS Genet . 10 , e1004526 ( 2014 ) . 4 . Little , S . C . , Tikhonov , M . & Gregor , T . Precise developmental gene expression arises from globally stochastic transcriptional activity . Cell 154 , 789 – 800 ( 2013 ) . 5 . Trcek , T . et al . Drosophila germ granules are structured and contain homotypic mRNA clusters . Nat . Commun . 6 , 7962 ( 2015 ) . 6 . Little , S . C . , Sinsimer , K . S . , Lee , J . J . , Wieschaus , E . F . & Gavis , E . R . Independent and coordinate trafficking of single Drosophila germ plasm mRNAs . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 558 – 568 ( 2015 ) . 7 . Xu , H . , Sepulveda , L . A . , Figard , L . , Sokac , A . M . & Golding , I . Combining protein and mRNA quantification to decipher transcriptional regulation . Nat . Methods 12 , 739 – 742 ( 2015 ) . 8 . Trovisco , V . et al . icoid mRNA localises to the Drosophila oocyte anterior by random Dynein - mediated transport and anchoring . Elife http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 17537 ( 2016 ) . 9 . Lionnet , T . et al . A transgenic mouse for in vivo detection of endogenous labeled mRNA . Nat . Methods 8 , 165 – 170 ( 2011 ) . 10 . York , A . G . et al . Instant super - resolution imaging in live cells and embryos via analog image processing . Nat . Methods 10 , 1122 – 1126 ( 2013 ) . 11 . Curd , A . et al . Construction of an instant structured illumination microscope . Methods 88 , 37 – 47 ( 2015 ) . 12 . Halstead , J . M . et al . Translation . An RNA biosensor for imaging the first round of translation from single cells to living animals . Science 347 , 1367 – 1671 ( 2015 ) . 13 . Lecuyer , E . , Necakov , A . S . , Caceres , L . & Krause , H . M . High - resolution fluorescent in situ hybridization of Drosophila embryos and tissues . CSH Protoc . 2008 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / pdb . prot5019 ( 2008 ) . 14 . Lecuyer , E . , Parthasarathy , N . & Krause , H . M . Fluorescent in situ hybridization protocols in Drosophila embryos and tissues . Methods Mol . Biol . 420 , 289 – 302 ( 2008 ) . 15 . Wilkie , G . S . & Davis , I . Visualizing mRNA by in situ Hybridization Using ‘High Resolution’ and Sensitive Tyramide Signal Amplification 94 – 97 ( Academic Press , 1994 ) . 16 . Lecuyer , E . et al . Global analysis of mRNA localization reveals a prominent role in organizing cellular architecture and function . Cell 131 , 174 – 187 ( 2007 ) . 17 . Buxbaum , A . R . , Wu , B . & Singer , R . H . Single β - actin mRNA detection in neurons reveals a mechanism for regulating its translatability . Science 343 , 419 – 422 ( 2014 ) . 18 . Trcek , T . et al . Single - mRNA counting using fluorescent in situ hybridization in budding yeast . Nat . Protoc . 7 , 408 – 419 ( 2012 ) . 19 . Zenklusen , D . & Singer , R . H . Analyzing mRNA expression using single mRNA resolution fluorescent in situ hybridization . Methods Enzymol . 470 , 641 – 659 ( 2010 ) . 20 . Sinsimer , K . S . , Lee , J . J . , Thiberge , S . Y . & Gavis , E . R . Germ plasm anchoring is a dynamic state that requires persistent trafficking . Cell Rep . 5 , 1169 – 1177 ( 2013 ) . 21 . Davidson , A . , Parton , R . M . , Rabouille , C . , Weil , T . T . & Davis , I . Localized translation of gurken / TGF - α mRNA during axis specification is controlled by access to Orb / CPEB on processing bodies . Cell Rep . 14 , 2451 – 2462 ( 2016 ) . 22 . Gandhi , S . J . , Zenklusen , D . , Lionnet , T . & Singer , R . H . Transcription of functionally related constitutive genes is not coordinated . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 18 , 27 – 34 ( 2011 ) . 23 . Zenklusen , D . , Larson , D . R . & Singer , R . H . Single - RNA counting reveals alternative modes of gene expression in yeast . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 15 , 1263 – 1271 ( 2008 ) . 24 . Nair , G . , Walton , T . , Murray , J . I . & Raj , A . Gene transcription is coordinated with , but not dependent on , cell divisions during C . elegans embryonic fate specification . Development 140 , 3385 – 3394 ( 2013 ) . 25 . Castelnuovo , M . et al . Bimodal expression of PHO84 is modulated by early termination of antisense transcription . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 20 , 851 – 858 ( 2013 ) . 26 . Larkin , J . D . & Cook , P . R . Super - resolution measurement of distance between transcription sites using RNA FISH with intronic probes . Methods 98 , 150 – 157 ( 2016 ) . 27 . Skinner , S . O . , Sepulveda , L . A . , Xu , H . & Golding , I . Measuring mRNA copy number in individual Escherichia coli cells using single - molecule fluorescent in situ hybridization . Nat . Protoc . 8 , 1100 – 1113 ( 2013 ) . 28 . Itzkovitz , S . et al . Single - molecule transcript counting of stem - cell markers in the mouse intestine . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 106 – 114 ( 2012 ) . 29 . Chen , K . H . , Boettiger , A . N . , Moffitt , J . R . , Wang , S . & Zhuang , X . RNA imaging . Spatially resolved , highly multiplexed RNA profiling in single cells . Science 348 , aaa6090 ( 2015 ) . 30 . Taniguchi , Y . et al . Quantifying E . coli proteome and transcriptome with single - molecule sensitivity in single cells . Science 329 , 533 – 538 ( 2010 ) . 31 . Battich , N . , Stoeger , T . & Pelkmans , L . Image - based transcriptomics in thousands of single human cells at single - molecule resolution . Nat . Methods 10 , 1127 – 1133 ( 2013 ) . 32 . Vargas , D . Y . et al . Single - molecule imaging of transcriptionally coupled and uncoupled splicing . Cell 147 , 1054 – 1065 ( 2011 ) . 33 . Dong , S . et al . YRA1 autoregulation requires nuclear export and cytoplasmic Edc3p - mediated degradation of its pre - mRNA . Mol . Cell 25 , 559 – 573 ( 2007 ) . 34 . Hoyle , N . P . & Ish - Horowicz , D . Transcript processing and export kinetics are rate - limiting steps in expressing vertebrate segmentation clock genes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , E4316 – E4324 ( 2013 ) . 35 . Trcek , T . , Sato , H . , Singer , R . H . & Maquat , L . E . Temporal and spatial characterization of nonsense - mediated mRNA decay . Genes Dev . 27 , 541 – 551 ( 2013 ) . 36 . Batish , M . , van den Bogaard , P . , Kramer , F . R . & Tyagi , S . Neuronal mRNAs travel singly into dendrites . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 4645 – 4650 ( 2012 ) . 37 . Weil , T . T . et al . Drosophila patterning is established by differential association of mRNAs with P bodies . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 1305 – 1313 ( 2012 ) . 38 . Colak , D . , Ji , S . J . , Porse , B . T . & Jaffrey , S . R . Regulation of axon guidance by compartmentalized nonsense - mediated mRNA decay . Cell 153 , 1252 – 1265 ( 2013 ) . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1348 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols 39 . Park , H . Y . , Trcek , T . , Wells , A . L . , Chao , J . A . & Singer , R . H . An unbiased analysis method to quantify mRNA localization reveals its correlation with cell motility . Cell Rep . 1 , 179 – 184 ( 2012 ) . 40 . Campbell , P . D . , Chao , J . A . , Singer , R . H . & Marlow , F . L . Dynamic visualization of transcription and RNA subcellular localization in zebrafish . Development 142 , 1368 – 1374 ( 2015 ) . 41 . Besse , F . , Lopez de Quinto , S . , Marchand , V . , Trucco , A . & Ephrussi , A . Drosophila PTB promotes formation of high - order RNP particles and represses oskar translation . Genes Dev . 23 , 195 – 207 ( 2009 ) . 42 . Bahar Halpern , K . & Itzkovitz , S . Single molecule approaches for quantifying transcription and degradation rates in intact mammalian tissues . Methods 98 , 134 – 142 ( 2016 ) . 43 . Messier , V . , Zenklusen , D . & Michnick , S . W . A nutrient - responsive pathway that determines M phase timing through control of B - cyclin mRNA stability . Cell 153 , 1080 – 1093 ( 2013 ) . 44 . Trcek , T . , Larson , D . R . , Moldon , A . , Query , C . C . & Singer , R . H . Single - molecule mRNA decay measurements reveal promoter - regulated mRNA stability in yeast . Cell 147 , 1484 – 1497 ( 2011 ) . 45 . Cabili , M . N . et al . Localization and abundance analysis of human lncRNAs at single - cell and single - molecule resolution . Genome Biol . 16 , 20 ( 2015 ) . 46 . van Werven , F . J . et al . Transcription of two long noncoding RNAs mediates mating - type control of gametogenesis in budding yeast . Cell 150 , 1170 – 1181 ( 2012 ) . 47 . Deng , W . , Shi , X . , Tjian , R . , Lionnet , T . & Singer , R . H . CASFISH : CRISPR / Cas9 - mediated in situ labeling of genomic loci in fixed cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 11870 – 11875 ( 2015 ) . 48 . Lubeck , E . & Cai , L . Single - cell systems biology by super - resolution imaging and combinatorial labeling . Nat . Methods 9 , 743 – 748 ( 2012 ) . 49 . Levsky , J . M . , Shenoy , S . M . , Pezo , R . C . & Singer , R . H . Single - cell gene expression profiling . Science 297 , 836 – 840 ( 2002 ) . 50 . Lubeck , E . , Coskun , A . F . , Zhiyentayev , T . , Ahmad , M . & Cai , L . Single - cell in situ RNA profiling by sequential hybridization . Nat . Methods 11 , 360 – 361 ( 2014 ) . 51 . Levesque , M . J . & Raj , A . Single - chromosome transcriptional profiling reveals chromosomal gene expression regulation . Nat . Methods 10 , 246 – 248 ( 2013 ) . 52 . Lucy , L . B . Iterative technique for rectification of observed distributions . Astron . J . 79 , 745 – 754 ( 1974 ) . 53 . Richardson , W . H . Bayesian - based iterative method of image restoration . J . Opt . Soc . Am . 62 , 55 – 59 ( 1972 ) . 54 . Tyagi , S . & Kramer , F . R . Molecular beacons : probes that fluoresce upon hybridization . Nat . Biotechnol . 14 , 303 – 308 ( 1996 ) . 55 . Bratu , D . P . Molecular beacons light the way : imaging native mRNAs in living cells . Discov . Med . 3 , 44 – 47 ( 2003 ) . 56 . Mhlanga , M . M . et al . In vivo colocalisation of oskar mRNA and trans - acting proteins revealed by quantitative imaging of the Drosophila oocyte . PLoS One 4 , e6241 ( 2009 ) . 57 . Chao , J . A . , Patskovsky , Y . , Almo , S . C . & Singer , R . H . Structural basis for the coevolution of a viral RNA - protein complex . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 15 , 103 – 105 ( 2008 ) . 58 . Hocine , S . , Raymond , P . , Zenklusen , D . , Chao , J . A . & Singer , R . H . Single - molecule analysis of gene expression using two - color RNA labeling in live yeast . Nat . Methods 10 , 119 – 121 ( 2013 ) . 59 . Abbaszadeh , E . K . & Gavis , E . R . Fixed and live visualization of RNAs in Drosophila oocytes and embryos . Methods 98 , 34 – 41 ( 2016 ) . 60 . Park , H . Y . , Buxbaum , A . R . & Singer , R . H . Single mRNA tracking in live cells . Methods Enzymol . 472 , 387 – 406 ( 2010 ) . 61 . Buxbaum , A . R . , Haimovich , G . & Singer , R . H . In the right place at the right time : visualizing and understanding mRNA localization . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 , 95 – 109 ( 2015 ) . 62 . Forrest , K . M . & Gavis , E . R . Live imaging of endogenous RNA reveals a diffusion and entrapment mechanism for nanos mRNA localization in Drosophila . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1159 – 1168 ( 2003 ) . 63 . Tyagi , S . Imaging intracellular RNA distribution and dynamics in living cells . Nat . Methods 6 , 331 – 338 ( 2009 ) . 64 . Bertrand , E . et al . Localization of ASH1 mRNA particles in living yeast . Mol . Cell 2 , 437 – 445 ( 1998 ) . 65 . Daigle , N . & Ellenberg , J . ambda ( N ) - GFP : an RNA reporter system for live - cell imaging . Nat . Methods 4 , 633 – 636 ( 2007 ) . 66 . Garcia , J . F . & Parker , R . MS2 coat proteins bound to yeast mRNAs block 5 ′ to 3 ′ degradation and trap mRNA decay products : implications for the localization of mRNAs by MS2 - MCP system . RNA 21 , 1393 – 1395 ( 2015 ) . 67 . Gustafsson , M . G . Surpassing the lateral resolution limit by a factor of two using structured illumination microscopy . J . Microsc . 198 , 82 – 87 ( 2000 ) . 68 . Frise , E . , Hammonds , A . S . & Celniker , S . E . Systematic image - driven analysis of the spatial Drosophila embryonic expression landscape . Mol . Syst . Biol . 6 , 345 ( 2010 ) . 69 . Gavis , E . R . & Lehmann , R . Localization of nanos RNA controls embryonic polarity . Cell 71 , 301 – 313 ( 1992 ) . 70 . Lehmann , R . Germ plasm biogenesis - - an oskar - centric perspective . Curr . Top . Dev . Biol . 116 , 679 – 707 ( 2016 ) . 71 . Jambor , H . , Brunel , C . & Ephrussi , A . Dimerization of oskar 3 ′ UTRs promotes hitchhiking for RNA localization in the Drosophila oocyte . RNA 17 , 2049 – 2057 ( 2011 ) . 72 . modEncode Consortium . Identification of functional elements and regulatory circuits by Drosophila modENCODE . Science 330 , 1787 – 1797 ( 2010 ) . 73 . Ashburner , M . Drosophila ( Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , 1989 ) . 74 . Markow , T . A . , Beall , S . & Matzkin , L . M . Egg size , embryonic development time and ovoviviparity in Drosophila species . J . Evol . Biol . 22 , 430 – 434 ( 2009 ) . 75 . Gao , M . & Arkov , A . L . Next generation organelles : structure and role of germ granules in the germline . Mol . Reprod . Dev . 80 , 610 – 623 ( 2013 ) . 76 . Mahowald , A . P . Fine structure of pole cells and polar granules in Drosophila melanogaster . J . Exp . Zool . 151 , 201 – 215 ( 1962 ) . 77 . Voronina , E . , Seydoux , G . , Sassone - Corsi , P . & Nagamori , I . RNA granules in germ cells . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a002774 ( 2011 ) . 78 . Mahowald , A . P . Ultrastructural observations on oogenesis in Drosophila . J . Morphol . 137 , 29 – 48 ( 1972 ) . 79 . Cho , W . K . et al . RNA polymerase II cluster dynamics predict mRNA output in living cells . Elife 5 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 13617 ( 2016 ) . 80 . Raj , A . , Peskin , C . S . , Tranchina , D . , Vargas , D . Y . & Tyagi , S . Stochastic mRNA synthesis in mammalian cells . PLoS Biol . 4 , e309 ( 2006 ) . 81 . Lagha , M . et al . Paused Pol II coordinates tissue morphogenesis in the Drosophila embryo . Cell 153 , 976 – 987 ( 2013 ) . 82 . Levsky , J . M . , Shenoy , S . M . , Pezo , R . C . & Singer , R . H . Single - cell gene expression profiling . Science 297 , 836 – 840 ( 2002 ) . 83 . Pezo , R . C . et al . Single - cell transcription site activation predicts chemotherapy response in human colorectal tumors . Cancer Res . 68 , 4977 – 4982 ( 2008 ) . 84 . Bothma , J . P . , Magliocco , J . & Levine , M . The snail repressor inhibits release , not elongation , of paused Pol II in the Drosophila embryo . Curr . Biol . 21 , 1571 – 1577 ( 2011 ) . 85 . de Turris , V . , Nicholson , P . , Orozco , R . Z . , Singer , R . H . & Muhlemann , O . Cotranscriptional effect of a premature termination codon revealed by live - cell imaging . RNA 17 , 2094 – 2107 ( 2011 ) .