416 Biochemical Society Transactions ( 2004 ) Volume 32 , part 3 Hierarchical assembly of cell – matrix adhesion complexes R . Zaidel - Bar * , M . Cohen * , L . Addadi† and B . Geiger * 1 * Department of Molecular Cell Biology , the Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot , Israel , and † Department of Structural Biology , the Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot , Israel Abstract The adhesion of cells to the extracellular matrix is a dynamic process , mediated by a series of cell - surface and matrix - associated molecules that interact with each other in a spatially and temporally regulated manner . These interactions play a major role in tissue formation , cellular migration and the induction of adhesion - mediated transmembrane signals . In this paper , we show that the formation of matrix adhesions is a hierarchical process , consisting of several sequential molecular events . One of the earliest steps in surface recognition is mediated , in some cells , by a 1 µ m - thick cell - surface hyaluronan coat , which precedes the establishment of stable , cytoskeleton - associated adhesions . The earliest forms of these integrin - mediated contacts are dot - shaped FXs ( focal complexes ) , which are formed under the protrusive lamellipodium of migrating cells . These adhesions recruit , sequentially , different anchor proteins that are involved in binding the actin cytoskeleton to the membrane . Conspicuous in its absence from FXs is zyxin , which is recruited to these sites only on retraction of the leading edge and the transformation of the FXs into a focal adhesion . Continuing application of force to focal adhesions results in the formation of ﬁbrillar adhesions and reorganization of the extracellular matrix . The formation of these adhesions depends on actomyosin contractility and matrix pliability . Introduction Cell adhesion to the ECM ( extracellular matrix ) plays key roles in the assembly of cells into functional multicellular organisms . At the same time , such adhesions are involved in transmembranal signalling processes that regulate cell behaviour and fate . Adhesive interactions occur via a variety of molecular systems . These include different integrin receptors that bind to ECM molecules via their extracellular domains and interact via their cytoplasmic moieties with the actin cytoskeleton [ 1 , 2 ] . Adhesive interactions are mediated by a network of ‘anchor proteins’ , some of which directly mediate the linkage between the actin and the membrane , whereas others play a regulatory role ( reviewed in [ 3 – 5 ] ) . Adhesion is also mediated via a variety of membrane - or matrix - bound glycosaminoglycan molecules [ 6 , 7 ] . Integrin - mediated adhesions are molecularly hetero - geneous , appearing in different forms such as ‘classical’ FAs ( focal adhesions ) , FBs ( fibrillar adhesions ) and FXs ( focal complexes ) . Each one of these has a typical morphology and molecular composition ( see [ 8 ] and Figure 1 ) . In motile cells , the spatially and temporally regulated formation and dissociation of matrix adhesions play a central role in the motile process . In this paper , we will consider the molecular steps involved in cell – matrix adhesion , including hyaluronan - mediated Key words : cell adhesion , ﬁbrillar adhesion , focal adhesion , focal complex . Abbreviations used : ECM , extracellular matrix ; ESEM , environmental scanning electron microscopy ; FA , focal adhesion ; FB , ﬁbrillar adhesion ; FX , focal complex ; GFP , green ﬂuorescent protein . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed ( email benny . geiger @ weizmann . ac . il ) . attachment and the sequential formation of FX , FA and FB . We will discuss the mechanisms underlying the formation of each of these adhesion sites and the interdependence between them . Hyaluronan - mediated adhesions : the ﬁrst encounters ECM consists of a rich variety of macromolecules that are recognized by a comparably large variety of cell - surface re - ceptors . Whereas integrins and their ligands appear to play a major role in the formation of cell – matrix adhesion , other adhesive systems have also been described , including matrix - and membrane - bound glycosaminoglycans . Recently , we have shown that cell - associated hyaluronan plays a central role in mediating early stages in the attachment of cells to external surfaces [ 9 – 13 ] . In a series of studies on cell adhesion to molecularly defined crystal surfaces and to conventional cell adhesion substrates ( glass and tissue culture dishes ) , it was found that rapid ( time scale of seconds ) attachment of A6 epithelial cells was mediated by cell - associated hy - aluronan [ 13 ] . This glycosaminoglycan is a large linear polymer of [ D - N - acetylglucosamine - β - D - glucuronate ] that can be associated either with the ECM or with the plasma membrane . Its role in surface adhesion was demonstrated by the drastic inhibition of the rapid attachment to compatible crystal surfaces , observed after treating the cells with hyaluronidase . Subsequent addition of pure hyaluronan to the hyaluronidase - treated cells or to the matrix could restore adhesion . Interestingly , the presence of hyaluronan on both the surfaces inhibited cell adhesion [ 13 ] . C (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society Molecular Environment of Integrins 417 Figure 1 Immunoﬂuorescence microscopy of integrin - mediated adhesion structures Porcine aortic endothelial ( a , c ) and rat embryonic ﬁbroblast ( b ) cells cultured on glass coverslips were ﬁxed and double - labelled with phalloidin - FITC ( green ) to visualize the actin cytoskeleton and a prominent component of the adhesion plaque . Highly phosphorylated FX at the leading edge are seen by labelling for PY ( a ) , vinculin staining reveals large FA at the ends of thick actin cables ( b ) and tensin labelling ( c ) emphasizes the long streaks of FB in central regions of the cell . Scale bar , 5 µ m ; insets enlarged × 3 . Figure 2 Visualization of hyaluronan pericellular coat using ESEM Chondrocytes were ﬁxed and incubated with uranyl acetate in suspension , then examined using ESEM . ( a ) Untreated cells have 4 . 4 ± 0 . 7 - µ m - thick halos around them ( arrow ) . ( b ) Hyaluronidase - treated cells are not surrounded by such halos . Scale bar , 5 µ m . To visualize hyaluronan associated with the cell surface , we have chosen to examine chondrocytes , which are known to produce large amounts of this glycosaminoglycan , using ESEM ( environmental scanning electron microscopy ) . Cells were fixed in suspension , incubated with uranyl acetate , and deposited on glass coverslips . A 4 . 4 ± 0 . 7 µ m wide , sharply defined halo was seen around the cells ( Figure 2a ) . Treatment with hyaluronidase destroyed this halo ( Fig - ure 2b ) . Using a particle exclusion assay , we then recon - structed the three - dimensional features of the cell - bound hyaluronan coat . This was performed by immersing rhodamine - labelled chondrocytes in a suspension of 0 . 4 µ m silica beads , coated with fluorescein . Three - dimensional microscopic examination indicated that the beads are excluded from a several - µ m - thick zone surrounding the entire cell [ 9 ] , whereas hyaluronidase - treated chondrocytes lack this coat . It was further demonstrated that the initial phase of matrix adhesion of chondrocytes is hyaluronan - dependent , similar to what was observed for A6 cells . Cells were allowed to adhere to glass surfaces for 10 – 25 min , and then subjected to flow exerting shear force of 6 . 5 dyn / cm 2 . Cell movements were recorded by time - lapse phase - contrast microscopy . It was found that chondrocytes drifted under flow by 43 . 10 ± 10 . 79 µ m before detaching from the surface . Using biotinylated hyaluronan - binding protein and streptavidin CY3 labelling , hyaluronan - rich ‘footprints’ were visualized attached to the substrate behind them . In contrast , hyaluronidase - treated cells were washed away immediately after applying the flow [ 9 ] . These results indicate that chondrocytes establish , initially , ‘soft contacts’ with the sur - face through a hyaluronan - based coat . The surface adhesion , mediated by the hyaluronan coat , occurs within seconds after the cell first encounters the external surface . This was C (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society 418 Biochemical Society Transactions ( 2004 ) Volume 32 , part 3 Figure 3 Evolution of matrix adhesion This scheme depicts temporal stages in the formation and reorganization of cell – matrix adhesions , starting with hyaluronan - mediated attachment ( left ) to FXs , FAs and FBs . The characteristic molecular components of each form of adhesion are listed ( see Discussion and conclusion section and [ 8 , 9 , 14 ] for details ) . demonstrated by studies in which A6 epithelial cells were trapped in laser tweezers and brought to the proximity of a hyaluronan - binding surface [ the { 011 } faces of calcium - ( R , R ) - tartratetetrahydratecrystals ] . Itwas foundthatassoon as the cell approached the crystal surface it was essentially immobilized , and could not be detached from the crystal by the laser tweezers . The time required for the establishment of this strong attachment was , apparently , < 1 s ( E . Zimmerman , L . Addadi , B . Geiger and M . Elbaum , unpublished work ) . Formation of FX during protrusion of the leading edge The hyaluronan - mediated adhesion described above appears to be rather transient , and is replaced , within a few tens of seconds - to - minutes by integrin - containing contacts . To study early stages in integrin - based adhesion , we have examined the formation of FXs under the advancing leading edge ( Figure 1a ) . The experimental system used in the present paper consisted of pig aortic endothelial cells , migrating into an ‘ in vitro wound’ , introduced into the confluent monolayer . Monitoring the migration of the cells into the wound by phase - contrast microscopy , followed by immuno - fluorescence microscopy for various FA proteins , enabled us to determine the molecular composition of the newly formed FX . Comparison between leading edge dynamics and FX composition indicated that the incorporation of the different components into nascent adhesion sites is a hierarchical process . The earliest observed molecules were α v β 3 - integrin and phosphotyrosine , closely followed by talin and paxillin . Later , vinculin and α - actinin entered the developing FX , along with FAK and VASP . Thus the exact composition of an FX depends on its age , which inversely correlates with the rate of protrusion of the near - by leading edge . Interestingly , two components of FA , zyxin and tensin , were absent from FX , regardless of their age [ 14 ] . Retraction - induced transformation of FX into FA Time - lapse video microscopy of migrating cells , expressing fluorescent derivatives of FA proteins [ e . g . GFP ( green fluor - escent protein ) – paxillin ] , revealed that during the forward movement of the lamellipodium , FX , with typical area of 0 . 25 µ m 2 , are formed and persist for a few minutes , until the leading edge further advances and new FX are formed in front of them [ 14 – 16 ] . These cycles of FX formation and dissociation persist as long as the lamellipodium advances . When the lamella retracts , or even stops protruding , many FX disappear , whereas a subset of these adhesions starts growing and transforms into definitive FA ( Figure 1b ) [ 14 ] . This transformation is not manifested just by a growth in size of the adhesion site , but also by changes in its mole - cular composition ( Figure 3 ) . Thus the formation of FA is accompanied by recruitment of zyxin to the membrane and the concomitant assembly of an actin bundle . This transition apparently depends on actomyosin - driven contractility , which applies force at cell – matrix adhesions . This is sup - ported by the observation that myosin light - chain kinase inhibitors enhance lamellipodial protrusions , induce an accumulation of FX close to the cell’s edge and block FA formation . The notion that local mechanical forces activate the growth of FA is in line with experiments in which local forces were directly applied to small matrix adhesions of serum - starved cells using a micropipette . It was found that this perturbation induced a rapid growth of the adhesion site [ 17 ] and that this growth was dependent on the presence of an active form of Rho - A in the cells . The development of FA was further shown to depend on two downstream targets of Rho , namely Rho kinase , which activates the cellular contractile machinery ( these forces were ‘replaced’ by the pipette pulling in the experiment described above ) and mDia , which is in - volved in the regulation of both actin and tubulin dynamics [ 17 ] . The nature of the ‘mechanosensor’ responsible for the force - activated assembly of FA is still poorly understood ( see [ 18 ] ) . Force - dependent matrix ﬁbrillogenesis and FB formation FAs seem to be rather robust structures , yet they are , in fact , highlydynamicstructures . Thisfeatureismanifestedatdiffer - ent levels . It was shown long ago , using FRAP ( fluorescence C (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society Molecular Environment of Integrins 419 recovery after photobleaching ) , that components of the submembrane plaque , such as actin , vinculin and α - actinin maintain a dynamic equilibrium between their FA - associated and cytoplasmic pools [ 19 , 20 ] . Moreover , FAs often appear to ‘migrate’ centripetally , relative to the substratum , due to a polar extension of the adhesion in the direction of the attached stress fibre , and dissociation at the other end [ 21 ] . Careful examination of the molecular heterogeneity of adhesion sites in cultured fibroblasts revealed an additional dynamic process , characterized by the formation of a new type of adhesions , termed ‘fibrillar adhesions’ ( FB ) , where α 5 β 1 integrin associates with fibronectin fibrils [ 22 ] . FBs differ from FAs in their characteristic morphology , consisting of elongated fibrils or array of dots , and their distribution in more central areas under the cells ( Figure 1c ) . As indicated in Figure 3 , FBs differ from classical FAs in the primary integrin receptors present in them ( α 5 β 1 compared with α v β 3 ) , as well as in the composition of the submembrane plaque . FAs contain high levels of phosphotyrosine and such proteinsaspaxillinandvinculin , butdisplayonlylowlevelsof tensin . FBs , on the other hand , contain relatively high levels of tensin and little or no phosphotyrosine [ 22 ] . Time - lapse video microscopy of cells expressing GFP – tensin revealed a continuous centripetal flow of tensin from FAs to FBs , suggesting that the latter adhesions are de - rived from FAs . Addition of kinase inhibitors that block actomyosin contractility , such as H - 7 , ML - 7 or Y - 76342 , inhibit the formation and translocation of these FBs [ 23 ] . It was further shown that the assembly of FB depends on the pliability of the ECM , suggesting a role for FB in matrix reorganization [ 24 ] . It was also shown that c - Src - null cells fail to form FB , indicating that this tyrosine kinase is involved in this process [ 25 ] . The mechanism underlying the effect of tyrosine phosphorylation on FA turnover and FB formation is still unclear . Discussion and conclusion In this paper , we have reviewed several temporal and interdependent steps in the adhesion of cells to solid surfaces . We showed that the adhesive interaction is a highly dynamic process , which involves a concerted and highly co - ordinated action of several molecular systems . The most extensively characterized family of matrix adhesions are those that utilize integrin as the primary ‘adhesion receptor’ . The ‘prototypic’ form of these adhesions are FAs that are large , robust and relatively stable adhesion sites , consisting of numerous ‘structural’ and ‘signalling’ molecules that participate in the assembly of this cytoskeleton - bound adhesive complex , and in its multiple regulatory effects on cell behaviour and fate . We chose to emphasize here the involvement of a pre - integrin adhesion system , based on the surface recognition and attachment , mediated by a membrane - bound hyaluronan coat . We describe here studies that demonstrate the presence of a thick gel - like layer , surrounding a wide variety of cells ( Figure 2 ) . The thickness of this coat can vary from approx . one to several micrometres , depending on the cell type . The pericellular coat consists primarily of hyaluronan , as deduced from its sensitivity to hyaluronidase treatment , and mediates rapid surface attachment ( time scale of seconds or less ) . The need for such a pre - integrin tethering system emerges also from a rough calculation of the probability of integrins to participate in the formation of the very first inter - actions between a cell and the external ECM . A rough estimate of the fraction of the cell surface occupied by integrin receptors in the proper orientation to bind their ECM ligands , and of the fraction of the external surface occupied by the RGD - binding site , leads to the conclusion that the probability of a successful integrin – RGD encounter , precursor to the formation of stable adhesion , is extremely low . An ideal mechanism for rapid cell tethering should involve molecules that ( i ) can bind specifically to the ECM , ( ii ) are highly prominent at the cell surface and ( iii ) are flexible enough to adapt to the irregular geometry of the matrix . The hyaluronan coat appears to be a good candidate to perform such activity . It has several partner ECM molecules ( e . g . chondroitin sulphate , heparan sulphate and aggrecan ) , and was shown to react in a highly stereospecific manner with well - defined surfaces . The long , linear chains of hyaluronan form a continuous gel - like layer on the membrane , which can efficiently interact with the ECM . The exact organization of hyaluronan in this coat is still unclear , and might vary from one cell type to the other . Thus when applying shear flow to chondrocytes , attached to a glass surface via the hyaluronan coat , they drift , leaving behind hyaluronan tracks , whereas the hyaluronan - dependent attachment of A6 epithelial cells is insensitive to such flow [ 9 ] . We propose that this difference may be attributed to the presence of entangled multilayers of hyaluronan on the chondrocytes , in contrast with a single , membrane - bound layer in the epithelial cells . This hypothesis is currently being investigated . It should be emphasized that irrespectiveoftheexactstructureofthehyaluronancoat , such a thick , membrane - bound layer probably affects not only adhesive interactions , but also essentially any interaction with external molecules , such as growth - or motility - regulating factors . The transition from hyaluronan - to integrin - mediated adhesion involves a significant change in the range of membrane - to - substrate distance , from a few micrometres to approx . 15 nm , which is the reported extracellular gap characteristic of FAs . How this transition occurs is still unclear . Is the hyaluronan gel condensed , degraded , re - shuffled laterally or endocytosed ? These possibilities are currently being explored . The three forms of integrin - mediated adhesions described in the present paper are molecularly distinct and functionally interdependent structures ( Figure 3 ) . FXs are the main precursors of FA , and are formed in the vicinity of the advancing lamella of motile cells . These small adhesions ( typical area of approx . 0 . 25 µ m 2 ) are short - lived ( usually just a few minutes ) and are stationary relative to the substrate . Their specific contribution to cell motility is not fully understood , although they might be involved in tethering C (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society 420 Biochemical Society Transactions ( 2004 ) Volume 32 , part 3 the ‘rear end’ of the actin meshwork at the leading edge of the cell to the solid substrate , thus directing the force producedbythepolymerizingfilamentstoproduceprimarily a forward protrusion of the lamellipodium . As shown by us and others [ 14 , 26 , 27 ] , the assembly of these small adhesions is a hierarchical molecular process whereby proteins are sequentially recruited to the newly formed FX . The transformation of FX into FA requires a new input , namely mechanical force , which apparently plays a central role in regulating the dynamic reorganization of integrin - mediated adhesions at large . It was shown that retraction of the leading edge due to internal contractile forces or external perturbation leads to growth of the adhesion site and ( for FX ) recruitment of zyxin . It is proposed that these matrix adhesions act as ‘mechanosensors’ , which respond to the local application by expanding and recruiting additional components . The mechanism of action of these sensors is not clear yet , but it appears to be activated directly by applying force to the transmembrane protein complex that form the adhesion site , rather than the local activation of stress - responsive channels , since an ‘assembly signal’ could be produced in detergent - extracted cells by stretching the matrix on which they grow [ 28 ] . Attempts to characterize the nature of the mechanosensor implicate different signalling systems in its action . Thus it was demonstrated that the activation of Rho - A is essential for FA growth , and that two of its downstream targets are involved , namely Rho - activated kinase ( which triggers actomyosin contractility ) , and mDia ( which is involved in polymerization dynamics of both actin and tubulin ) [ 17 ] . Additional signalling systems that might be associated with the stimulation of FA assembly involve protein tyrosine phosphatases [ 29 , 30 ] . Finally , mechanical force appears to be also involved in FA turnover and the formation of FB . These adhesions were shown to coincide with fibronectin fibrils and contain relatively high levels of tensin . Time - lapse video microscopy of cells expressing GFP - tensin demonstrated that FB emerge from FA and translocate centripetally . This segregation of the adhesion sites is driven by actomyosin forces , and can be blocked by myosin light - chain kinase or Rho - kinase inhibitors [ 23 ] . Itappearsthatcontractileforces , whenapplied to adhesion sites , may have two distinct responses , depending on the physical properties of the matrix . Pulling on an adhesion to a rigid matrix leads to the growth of the adhesion site , whereas pulling on an adhesion to a soft matrix can lead to the translocation of the receptor , along with the attached ECM . The formation of FB can thus be involved in ECM fibrillogenesis . In conclusion , the adhesion to external surfaces indeed appears to be a multistage process consisting of several tem - poral stages , starting with hyaluronan - mediated attachment and developing into the different forms of integrin - and cytoskeleton - mediated contacts . The development of these adhesion sites is regulated by Rho - family G - proteins and by mechanical forces , directly applied to the adhesion sites . This research was supported by The Minerva Foundation , Yad Abraham Center for Cancer Diagnosis and Therapy and the Israel Science Foundation . B . G . holds the E . Neter Chair in Cell and Tumor Biology . L . A . holds the Dorothy and Patrick Gorman Chair of Biological Ultrastructure . References 1 Hynes , R . O . ( 1992 ) Cell ( Cambridge , Mass . ) 69 , 11 – 25 2 Martin , K . H . , Slack , J . K . , Boerner , S . A . , Martin , C . C . and Parsons , J . T . ( 2002 ) Science 296 , 1652 – 1653 3 Critchley , D . R . ( 2000 ) Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 133 – 139 4 Geiger , B . , Bershadsky , A . , Pankov , R . and Yamada , K . M . ( 2001 ) Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 793 – 805 5 Petit , V . and Thiery , J . P . ( 2000 ) Biol . Cell 92 , 477 – 494 6 Wight , T . N . , Kinsella , M . G . and Qwarnstrom , E . E . ( 1992 ) Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 4 , 793 – 801 7 Woods , A . and Couchman , J . R . ( 1998 ) Trends Cell Biol . 8 , 189 – 192 8 Zamir , E . and Geiger , B . ( 2001 ) J . Cell Sci . 114 , 3583 – 3590 9 Cohen , M . , Klein , E . , Geiger , B . and Addadi , L . ( 2003 ) Biophys . J . 85 , 1996 – 2005 10 Hanein , D . , Sabanay , H . , Addadi , L . and Geiger , B . ( 1993 ) J . Cell Sci . 104 , 275 – 288 11 Hanein , D . , Geiger , B . and Addadi , L . ( 1994 ) Science 263 , 1413 – 1436 12 Hanein , D . , Geiger , B . and Addadi , L . ( 1995 ) Cells Mater . 5 , 197 – 210 13 Zimmerman , E . , Geiger , B . and Addadi , L . ( 2002 ) Biophys . J . 82 , 1848 – 1857 14 Zaidel - Bar , R . , Ballestrem , C . , Kam , Z . and Geiger , B . ( 2003 ) J . Cell Sci . 116 , 4605 – 4613 15 Ballestrem , C . , Hinz , B . , Imhof , B . A . and Wehrle - Haller , B . ( 2001 ) J . Cell Biol . 155 , 1319 – 1332 16 Rottner , K . , Hall , A . and Small , J . V . ( 1999 ) Curr . Biol . 9 , 640 – 648 17 Riveline , D . , Zamir , E . , Balaban , N . Q . , Schwarz , U . S . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . , Kam , Z . , Geiger , B . and Bershadsky , A . D . ( 2001 ) J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1175 – 1186 18 Geiger , B . and Bershadsky , A . ( 2001 ) Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 584 – 592 19 Kreis , T . E . , Geiger , B . and Schlessinger , J . ( 1982 ) Cell ( Cambridge , Mass . ) 29 , 835 – 845 20 Birchmeier , W . , Libermann , T . A . , Imhof , B . A . and Kreis , T . E . ( 1982 ) Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 46 , 755 – 767 21 Smilenov , L . B . , Mikhailov , A . , Pelham , R . J . , Marcantonio , E . E . and Gundersen , G . G . ( 1999 ) Science 286 , 1172 – 1174 22 Zamir , E . , Katz , B . Z . , Aota , S . , Yamada , K . M . , Geiger , B . and Kam , Z . ( 1999 ) J . Cell Sci . 112 , 1655 – 1669 23 Zamir , E . , Katz , M . , Posen , Y . , Erez , N . , Yamada , K . M . , Katz , B . Z . , Lin , S . , Lin , D . C . , Bershadsky , A . , Kam , Z . et al . ( 2000 ) Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 191 – 196 24 Katz , B . Z . , Zamir , E . , Bershadsky , A . , Kam , Z . , Yamada , K . M . and Geiger , B . ( 2000 ) Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 1047 – 1060 25 Volberg , T . , Romer , L . , Zamir , E . and Geiger , B . ( 2001 ) J . Cell Sci . 114 , 2279 – 2289 26 von Wichert , G . , Haimovich , B . , Feng , G . S . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2003 ) EMBO J . 22 , 5023 – 5035 27 Laukaitis , C . M . , Webb , D . J . , Donais , K . and Horwitz , A . F . ( 2001 ) J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1427 – 1440 28 Sawada , Y . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2002 ) J . Cell Biol . 156 , 609 – 615 29 Sastry , S . K . , Lyons , P . D . , Schaller , M . D . and Burridge , K . ( 2002 ) J . Cell Sci . 115 , 4305 – 4316 30 von Wichert , G . , Jiang , G . , Kostic , A . , De Vos , K . , Sap , J . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2003 ) J . Cell Biol . 161 , 143 – 153 Received 3 November 2003 C (cid:1) 2004 Biochemical Society