ORIGINAL ARTICLE Fer tyrosine kinase oligomer mediates and ampli ﬁ es Src - induced tumor progression C Oneyama 1 , Y Yoshikawa 1 , Y Ninomiya 1 , T Iino 1 , S Tsukita 2 and M Okada 1 c - Src is upregulated in various human cancers , suggesting its role in malignant progression . However , the molecular circuits of c - Src oncogenic signaling remain elusive . Here we show that Fer tyrosine kinase oligomer mediates and ampli ﬁ es Src - induced tumor progression . Previously , we showed that transformation of ﬁ broblasts is promoted by the relocation of c - Src to non - raft membranes . In this study , we identi ﬁ ed Fer and ezrin as non - raft c - Src targets . c - Src directly activated Fer by initiating its autophosphorylation , which was further ampli ﬁ ed by Fer oligomerization . Fer interacted with active c - Src at focal adhesion membranes and activated Fer - phosphorylated ezrin to induce cell transformation . Fer was also crucial for cell transformation induced by v - Src or epidermal growth - factor receptor activation . Furthermore , Fer activation was required for tumorigenesis and invasiveness in some cancer cells in which c - Src is upregulated . We propose that the Src – Fer axis represents a new therapeutic target for treatment of a subset of human cancers . Oncogene ( 2016 ) 35 , 501 – 512 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2015 . 110 ; published online 13 April 2015 INTRODUCTION The membrane - associated tyrosine kinase c - Src has key roles in signaling transduction that regulate cell proliferation , differentia - tion , adhesion and migration . 1 , 2 The kinase activity of c - Src is normally suppressed by phosphorylation of its regulatory tyrosine 527 ( Y529 in human c - Src sequence ) , which is catalyzed by the C - terminal Src kinase ( Csk ) . 2 – 5 Upon stimulation by extracellular signals , for example , growth factors and extracellular matrix proteins , c - Src is activated by autophosphorylation at tyrosine 416 ( Y418 in human ) . In some cancer cells , the expression and / or kinase activity of c - Src is upregulated even though Csk is expressed at normal levels and the c - src gene is not mutated . 6 , 7 Upregulation of c - Src activity has been implicated in malignant progression and stimulation of invasion and metastasis . 8 However , the mechanisms underlying the upregulation of c - Src remain unclear , and the signaling circuits leading to malignant progres - sion still need to be de ﬁ ned . The molecular mechanism of the induction of cell transforma - tion by Src has been extensively studied since its discovery . 9 – 12 That work revealed that Src induces transformation through many pathways , including the focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) – mitogen - activated protein kinase , phosphoinositide - 3 kinase , signal trans - ducer and activator of transcription factor 3 and Rho – Rho - associated protein kinase pathways . 8 , 13 However , many of those studies were performed using oncogenic v - Src or a constitutively active c - Src mutant ( c - SrcF527 ) , both of which have extremely strong kinase activity . Because such hyper - activated Src induces overactivation of multiple signaling pathways , it has been dif ﬁ cult to de ﬁ ne the most critical pathways leading to Src - induced cell transformation . To overcome these limitations , we previously developed a model system in which cell transformation is induced by c - Src in Csk - de ﬁ cient ( CskKO ) cells . 14 The lack of Csk leads to constitutive activation of c - Src and other Src family kinases ( SFKs ) ; nonetheless , CskKO cells are ordinarily not transformed , owing to substantial degradation of active form of SFKs by the ubiquitin – proteasome system . 15 , 16 However , CskKO cells can be transformed by slight overexpression of c - Src ( about twofold above the endogenous level ) or by translocation of endogenous c - Src from lipid raft membrane microdomains . 17 , 18 Under these conditions , fewer cellular proteins are phosphorylated than when v - Src or active c - Src mutant is overexpressed . 14 These observations suggested that c - Src - mediated cell transformation is initiated from non - raft compartments . However , the underlying molecular mechanisms and the critical non - raft substrates of c - Src remain unknown . In this study , we identi ﬁ ed the targets of c - Src in non - raft compartments and found that Fer tyrosine kinase serves an essential mediator of Src - induced cell transformation . Fer is a ubiquitously expressed non - receptor tyrosine kinase belonging to the Fps / Fes proto - oncogene family , consisting of F - BAR , Src homology 2 ( SH2 ) and kinase domains . Fer functions in regulating cell – cell adhesion , migration and proliferation . 19 – 22 Upregulation of Fer has been implicated in tumor progression in some human cancers . 23 – 27 Although these lines of evidence suggest that Fer has a crucial role in controlling malignant progression , the molecular mechanism of Fer activation and its precise functions remain unknown . We show here that relocation of c - Src to non - raft compartments induces autoactivation of Fer and that the activated Fer phosphorylates ezrin to induce cell transformation . c - Src directly triggers Fer autoactivation , which is further enhanced by membrane localization and oligomerization of the Fer protein . We also show that Fer is required for transformation induced by v - Src or epidermal growth - factor receptor ( EGFR ) activation , as well as for tumorigenesis and invasiveness , in some cancer cells in which c - Src is upregulated . These ﬁ ndings suggest that Fer is an 1 Department of Oncogene Research , Research Institute for Microbial Diseases , Osaka University , Suita , Osaka , Japan and 2 Laboratory of Biological Science , Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences and Graduate School of Medicine , Osaka University , Osaka , Japan . Correspondence : Dr C Oneyama , Department of Oncogene Research , Research Institute for Microbial Diseases , Osaka University , 3 - 1 Yamadaoka , Suita , Osaka 565 - 0871 , Japan . E - mail : coneyama @ biken . osaka - u . ac . jp Received 13 October 2014 ; revised 7 February 2015 ; accepted 27 February 2015 ; published online 13 April 2015 Oncogene ( 2016 ) 35 , 501 – 512 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 0950 - 9232 / 16 www . nature . com / onc essential mediator and / or ampli ﬁ er of Src - induced tumor progression . RESULTS Identi ﬁ cation of Fer and ezrin as c - Src targets in non - raft compartments As shown previously , 18 treatment of CskKO cells with methyl - β - cyclodextrin ( M β CD ) induced cell transformation ( Figure 1a and Supplementary Figure S1A ) , concurrent with the relocation of c - Src from detergent - resistant membranes ( DRMs , operationally de ﬁ ned as lipid rafts ) to non - DRM ( non - raft ) fractions ( Figure 1b ) . Under these conditions , total c - Src activity and the activity status of downstream Src effectors , such as FAK , extracellular signal – regulated kinase ( Erk ) and Akt , were not signi ﬁ cantly affected ( Supplementary Figure S1B ) . Moreover , there was no dramatic change in the tyrosine phosphorylation levels of total cellular protein ( Supplementary Figure S1B ) . However , a potent inhibitor of SFKs , dasatinib , signi ﬁ cantly suppressed cell transformation Figure 1 . Identi ﬁ cation of Fer and ezrin as c - Src targets in non - raft fractions . ( a ) Disruption of lipid rafts induces cell transformation in CskKO cells . Soft - agar colony - formation assay for CskKO cells treated with the indicated reagents . Average numbers of colonies / cm 2 ± s . d . are shown . * P o 0 . 05 and * * P o 0 . 01 ; n = 4 , compared with DMSO ( dimethyl sulfoxide ) control . ( b ) CskKO cells were treated with or without M β CD ( 3 m M ) for 1 h , and DRM and non - DRM fractions were separated . Each fraction was immunoblotted with antibodies against the indicated proteins . ( c ) Non - DRM fractions from CskKO cells treated with M β CD for the indicated times were immunoblotted ( IB ) with anti - Cbp pY314 ( pY314 ) . Arrowheads indicate major phosphorylated proteins , corresponding to Fer and ezrin . ( d ) Fer was immunoprecipitated ( IP ) from CskKO cells treated with or without M β CD for 1 h and then immunoblotted with anti - phosphotyrosine ( pY ; 4G10 ) and anti - Fer ( upper panels ) . CskKO cells treated with or without M β CD were immunoprecipitated with anti - pY314 , and the precipitates were immunoblotted with anti - ezrin ( lower left panel ) . Total cell lysates ( TCL ) were also immunoblotted with anti - ezrin and anti - pY314 ( lower right panels ) . ( e ) Total cell lysates and immunoprecipitated Fer from CskKO cells treated with M β CD for the indicated times were immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies . ( f ) Total cell lysates and immunoprecipitated Fer from CskKO cells treated with the indicated reagents were immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies . N : non - treated ; 0 time : treated with DMSO ( dimethyl sulfoxide ) . ( g ) Total cell lysates and immunoprecipitated Fer from CskKO and Csk + / + cells treated with or without M β CD were immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies . The asterisk indicates nonspeci ﬁ c signal ( f and g ) . Fer mediates Src - induced tumor progression C Oneyama et al 502 Oncogene ( 2016 ) 501 – 512 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited ( Figure 1a ) , indicating a requirement for the kinase activity of c - Src and / or its relatives . These observations suggest that the speci ﬁ c c - Src targets required for cell transformation are buried in non - raft compartments . Therefore , we searched for non - raft c - Src targets in the M β CD - treated cells using various antiphosphotyrosine antibodies . One of them , our original antiphosphotyrosine antibody ( anti - pY314 ) , detected M β CD - stimulated phosphorylation of two major proteins ( Figure 1c ) . Liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry ( LC - MS / MS ) analysis revealed that the major bands included Fer tyrosine kinase ( 95 kDa ) and ezrin ( 69 kDa ) ( Figure 1c ) . Immuno - precipitation assays con ﬁ rmed that tyrosine phosphorylation of Fer and ezrin was indeed induced by the M β CD treatment ( Figure 1d ) . The phosphorylation of both proteins occurred in parallel , suggesting a functional relationship between them ( Figure 1e and Supplementary Figure S1D ) . Furthermore , DRM separation analysis revealed that Fer and ezrin were predomi - nantly distributed in non - DRM fractions ( Supplementary Figure S1C ) . Together , these lines of evidence suggest that Fer and ezrin are candidates for the non - raft targets of c - Src . Next , we con ﬁ rmed the contribution of c - Src activity to the phosphorylation of Fer and ezrin . Inhibition of SFK activity using dasatinib , which does not inhibit Fer ( Supplementary Figure S4B ) , 28 completely suppressed the M β CD - dependent phosphor - ylation of Fer and ezrin ( Figure 1f ) . Inactivation of SFKs by Csk ( in Csk + / + cells ) also suppressed phosphorylation of both proteins ( Figure 1g ) . Furthermore , phosphorylation of both proteins was attenuated in SFC − cells , which lack c - Src , Fyn and Csk ( Supplementary Figure S1E ) . Consistent with this , M β CD treatment induced cell transformation in SFC − cells less ef ﬁ ciently than in CskKO cells ( Supplementary Figures S1F and G ) . These observa - tions suggest that c - Src and / or Fyn contributes to the phosphor - ylation of Fer and ezrin induced by M β CD treatment . Fer is required for Src - induced cell transformation We then performed knockdown experiments to evaluate the importance of Fer and ezrin in cell transformation . Knockdown of either Fer or ezrin signi ﬁ cantly suppressed M β CD - dependent induction of anchorage - independent cell growth ( Figure 2a ) . In addition , Fer knockdown dramatically reduced the phosphoryla - tion of ezrin ( Figure 2b ) and formation of podosome - like structure , which is characteristically observed in Src - transformed ﬁ broblasts ( Supplementary Figures S2A and B ) . These results indicate that Fer and ezrin are required for cell transformation and that Fer acts upstream of ezrin ( speci ﬁ cally , Fer phosphorylates ezrin ) . To determine whether Fer is indeed required for Src - induced cell transformation , we assessed the role of Fer in transformation induced by overexpression of c - Src in CskKO cells . 14 Fer knock - down in these cells did not appreciably affect total Src activity or tyrosine phosphorylation of cellular proteins ( Supplementary Figure S2E ) , but it signi ﬁ cantly suppressed anchorage - independent growth ( Figure 2c ) and formation of podosome - like structure ( Figure 2d ) , as well as tumor growth in nude mice ( Figure 2e ) . Knockdown of ezrin also suppressed colony formation and tumorigenicity ( Supplementary Figures S2C and D ) . These observations indicate that Fer is crucial for cell transformation induced by c - Src overexpression . Furthermore , Fer knockdown inhibited anchorage - independent growth of v - Src - transformed mouse embryonic ﬁ broblasts ( MEFs ; Csk + / + cells ) ( Figure 2f ) . Together , these results demonstrate that Fer is generally required for Src - induced cell transformation . Fer autoactivation is required for ezrin phosphorylation and Src transformation To investigate the function of Fer , we performed rescue experiments by the expression of shRNA - resistant Fer in Fer - knockdown cells ( Figures 3a and b ) . M β CD - induced phosphorylation of Fer and ezrin was rescued by the wild - type ( WT ) , SH2 mutant ( R483Q ) and Tyr402 mutant ( Y402F ) , indicating that the SH2 domain and the phosphorylation of Tyr402 are not crucial for this process . By contrast , a kinase - negative ( KN ) mutant of Fer failed to rescue either Fer or ezrin phosphorylation , suggesting that ef ﬁ cient phosphorylation of Fer requires auto - activation and that activated Fer phosphorylates ezrin . Indeed , an autophosphorylation - defective mutant ( Y714F ) also failed to rescue ezrin phosphorylation . Rescue experiments using site - directed mutants of ezrin identi ﬁ ed the phosphorylation site as Tyr477 ( Figure 3c ) , which has a crucial role in tumor progression . 29 , 30 Co - expression analysis con ﬁ rmed that Fer auto - activation is required for phosphorylation of ezrin Tyr477 ( Figure 3d ) . The importance of Fer autoactivation in c - Src - induced transformation was further veri ﬁ ed in c - Src - transformed CskKO cells ( Figure 3e ) . The autophosphorylation - defective mutants of Fer , KN and Y714F could not rescue the anchorage - independent growth of c - Src - transformed cells ( Figure 3f ) . These results suggest that c - Src - induced Fer autoactivation is crucial for cell transformation . Interaction between c - Src and Fer To elucidate the mechanism of c - Src - induced Fer autoactivation , we investigated the interaction between c - Src and Fer in cultured cells ( Figure 4a ) . Overexpressed Fer underwent autophosphoryla - tion , but the levels of phosphorylation ( pFer / Fer ) were further increased by co - expression with c - Src . Co - expression with KN c - Src decreased the level of Fer phosphorylation below the level obtained when Fer was singly expressed , indicating that c - Src KN exerts a dominant - negative effect . Inhibition of c - Src activity with dasatinib suppressed Fer autophosphorylation ( Supplementary Figure S4C ) . These results indicate that c - Src activity is required for autophosphorylation of Fer . In addition , the Y714F mutant was only slightly phosphorylated , even when co - expressed with c - Src , and c - Src co - precipitated only with the Fer Y714F mutant . These results suggest that c - Src interacts with and phosphorylates Fer at Tyr714 . Indeed , an in vitro kinase assay revealed that c - Src potentiated Fer WT autophosphorylation and directly phosphory - lated Fer KN , although this phosphorylation was not ampli ﬁ ed ( Figure 4b and Supplementary Figure S3A ) . Together , these ﬁ ndings suggest that c - Src directly phosphorylates Fer to trigger its full autophosphorylation . We further examined the c - Src – Fer interaction using an inducible c - Src expression system . 31 Immuno ﬂ uorescence analysis revealed that , before c - Src induction , Fer was diffusely distributed throughout the cells . By contrast , 6 h after induction , a sub - population of Fer became co - localized with active c - Src at focal adhesions ( Figure 4c ) . We also found that the c - Src – Fer interaction required Fer to be associated with membranes . Phosphorylation of Fer WT was increased by c - Src , but membrane - localization - defective mutants of Fer ( KKEE and KKQQ ) 20 were not auto - activated even in the presence of c - Src ( Figure 4d ) . Furthermore , the KKEE mutant did not co - localize with c - Src at focal adhesions ( Figure 4e ) , and cells expressing this mutant lost colony - forming ability ( Figure 4f ) . Overall , these ﬁ ndings suggest that active c - Src interacts with Fer at focal adhesion membranes and triggers Fer autoactivation , which is in turn required for cell transformation . Fer oligomerization is required for autoactivation Fer has the potential to form oligomers via its F - BAR domain . 19 To assess the role of Fer oligomerization in Src - induced autoactiva - tion , we performed chemical crosslinking assays in the inducible c - Src expression system . Fer was constantly oligomerized irre - spective of its autophosphorylation status ( Figure 5a ) . This ﬁ nding was con ﬁ rmed by immuno ﬂ uorescence analysis ( Supplementary Figure S3B ) and co - precipitation assays ( Supplementary Figure S3C ) using differentially tagged Fer constructs . Constitutive Fer mediates Src - induced tumor progression C Oneyama et al 503 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited Oncogene ( 2016 ) 501 – 512 oligomerization of Fer was also observed in EGF - stimulated A431 cells ( Supplementary Figure S3D ) . Gel ﬁ ltration chromato - graphy of recombinant Fer protein showed that it forms oligomer under native conditions ( Supplementary Figure S3E ) . We also noticed that oligomerization was crucial for the stable expression of Fer protein . When the oligomerization - defective mutant ( Oligo − ) 32 was transiently expressed , the protein level of the Oligo - mutant was substantially lower than those of other constructs , although its mRNA was expressed at normal levels ( Figure 5b ) . To investigate the role of oligomerization in Fer autoactivation , we overexpressed the Fer Oligo − mutants at a level comparable to those of the other mutants ( Figure 5c ) . Fer WT exhibited increased autophosphorylation by c - Src , whereas autophosphorylation Figure 2 . Fer is required for Src - induced cell transformation . ( a ) CskKO cells transfected with shRNA directed against Fer ( sh - Fer ) or ezrin sh - Ezr ) were treated with or without M β CD and subjected to a colony - formation assay for 21 days . Average numbers of colonies / cm 2 ± s . d . are shown . * P o 0 . 05 ; n = 4 , compared with shRNA control . Mix : mixture of transfected cells ; # : ID number of cloned line . Total cell lysates were immunoblotted with anti - Fer and anti - ezrin ( lower panels ) . ( b ) CskKO cells transfected with Fer shRNA were treated with or without M β CD and immunoprecipitated Fer , as well as total cell lysates , indicated in panel ( a ) were subjected to immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . ( c ) c - Src transformed CskKO cells were transfected with or without Fer shRNA and subjected to a colony - formation assay for 6 days . Average numbers of colonies / cm 2 ± s . d . are shown . * P o 0 . 05 ; n = 4 , compared with shRNA control . ( d ) The cell lines indicated in panel ( c ) were stained for F - actin ( green ) and phospho - cortactin ( pY421 ; red ) , as a marker of podosome - like structures . Arrowheads indicate podosome - like structures . Scale bar = 30 μ m . ( e ) Cells indicated in panel ( c ) were inoculated subcutaneously into nude mice . Averages ± s . d . of tumor volume ( mm 3 ) obtained from four mice are plotted vs time after inoculation ( days ) . * P o 0 . 05 ; n = 4 , compared with shRNA control . Tumorigenesis assay was independently performed at three times . ( f ) v - Src transformed MEFs ( Csk + / + ) were transfected with control or Fer shRNA , and total cell lysates were immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies ( left panels ) . These cell lines were subjected to a colony - formation assay for 6 days . Stained colonies were counted , and average colonies / cm 2 ± s . d . are shown ( right panel ) . * P o 0 . 05 ; n = 4 , compared with shRNA control . Fer mediates Src - induced tumor progression C Oneyama et al 504 Oncogene ( 2016 ) 501 – 512 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited of the Fer Oligo − mutant was not activated by c - Src . These results imply that Fer oligomerization is bene ﬁ cial not only for protein stabilization but also for autoactivation triggered by c - Src . Given that autophosphorylation is achieved by an inter - molecular interaction , oligomerization should favor ef ﬁ cient autophosphorylation by ensuring close molecular contacts within oligomers . Therefore , it is possible that Fer oligomers can amplify c - Src oncogenic signaling by promoting ef ﬁ cient autophosphorylation . Fer autoactivation is stimulated downstream of EGFR signaling To evaluate the physiological relevance of our model for Fer activation , we examined the effects of EGF stimulation on Fer autophosphorylation in MEFs . EGF stimulation induced an increase in Fer phosphorylation ( Figure 6a ) . Inhibition of c - Src with dasatinib almost completely blocked EGF - induced Fer phosphor - ylation , and Fer knockdown suppressed EGF - induced transforma - tion of cell morphology ( Figure 6b ) . Furthermore , PC9 cells , derived from a non - small cell lung carcinoma harboring an EGFR Figure 3 . Fer autoactivation is required for Src transformation . ( a ) Schematic structures of Fer and ezrin . Locations of mutated amino acids are indicated . PP : proline - rich motif . ( b ) The indicated shRNA - resistant myc - tagged Fer mutants were expressed in CskKO cells ( clone # 1 ) transfected with Fer shRNA . Cells were treated with or without M β CD . Anti - myc immunoprecipitates and total cell lysates were subjected to immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . The asterisk indicates nonspeci ﬁ c signal . The fold changes in phosphorylation due to M β CD treatment are shown for Fer and Ezrin . ( c ) The indicated shRNA - resistant myc - tagged ezrin mutants were expressed in CskKO cells ( clone # 18 ) transfected with ezrin shRNA . Cells were treated with or without M β CD . Anti - myc immunoprecipitates and total cell lysates were subjected to immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . ( d ) The indicated forms of myc - tagged Fer and HA - tagged ezrin were co - expressed in HEK293T cells , and anti - myc and anti - HA immunoprecipitates , as well as total cell lysates , were analyzed by immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . ( e ) The indicated HA - tagged Fer constructs were expressed in c - Src - transformed CskKO cells transfected with Fer shRNA . Anti - HA immunoprecipitates and total cell lysates were analyzed by immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . ( f ) Cells treated as in panel ( e ) were subjected to a colony - formation assay for 6 days . Stained colonies were counted , and average colonies / cm 2 ± s . d . are shown . * P o 0 . 05 ; n = 4 , compared with shRNA control or Fer WT - expressing cells . Fer mediates Src - induced tumor progression C Oneyama et al 505 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited Oncogene ( 2016 ) 501 – 512 mutation , exhibited constitutive phosphorylation of Fer ( Figure 6c ) . Ge ﬁ tinib , a potent EGFR inhibitor , suppressed the colony - forming activity of these cells ( Supplementary Figure S4A ) at a concentra - tion that did not directly inhibit Fer and c - Src ( Supplementary Figure S4C ) . Under these conditions , c - Src activity and Fer phosphorylation were inhibited ( Figure 6c ) , indicating that c - Src and Fer are downstream of EGFR . In addition , Fer knockdown signi ﬁ cantly suppressed the colony - forming activity and tumor - igenicity of PC9 cells ( Figure 6d and Supplementary Figure S4D ) . These observations indicate that the Src – Fer axis functions downstream of EGFR signaling as well and suggest that Fer may also be crucial for tumor progression induced by the upregulation of growth - factor receptors . Role of Fer in human colon cancer Finally , to address the role of Fer in human cancer , we examined Fer phosphorylation in several human colon cancer cells in which c - Src is upregulated . Although these cells expressed comparable amounts of Fer protein , phosphorylation of Fer Figure 4 . Interaction between c - Src and Fer . ( a ) The indicated forms of c - Src and myc - tagged Fer were co - expressed in HEK293T cells , and anti - myc and anti - Src immunoprecipitates , as well as total cell lysates , were analyzed by immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . For pY blots , blots of light and dark exposures are shown . c - Src and IgG are indicated by arrows . ( b ) Myc - tagged Fer was expressed in HEK293T , and anti - myc immunoprecipitates were incubated with the recombinant c - Src protein in the absence or presence of ATP . Anti - myc immunoprecipitates ( Fer - myc ) were analyzed by immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . ( c ) HA - tagged Fer was expressed in CskKO cells carrying Dox ( doxycycline ) - inducible c - Src expression system ( c - Src inducible system ) , and the cells were co - immunostained for HA - tagged Fer and active c - Src ( pY418 ) before and after Dox treatment . Arrowheads indicate focal adhesions . Scale bar = 30 μ m . ( d ) The indicated forms of myc - tagged Fer and c - Src were co - expressed in HEK293T cells , and total cell lysates were analyzed by immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . ( e ) HA - tagged Fer KKEE mutant was expressed in the c - Src inducible system , and the cells were co - immunostained for HA - tagged Fer and active c - Src ( pY418 ) before and after Dox treatment . Scale bar = 30 μ m . ( f ) The indicated shRNA - resistant HA - tagged Fer constructs were expressed in c - Src - transformed CskKO cells transfected with Fer shRNA , and the cells were subjected to a colony - formation assay for 6 days . Stained colonies were counted , and average colonies / cm 2 ± s . d . are shown . * P o 0 . 05 ; n = 4 , compared with shRNA control or Fer WT - expressing cells . Fer mediates Src - induced tumor progression C Oneyama et al 506 Oncogene ( 2016 ) 501 – 512 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited Y714 ( Supplementary Figure S5A ) was elevated in cancer cells , potentially in correlation with the activity of c - Src ( Figure 7a ) . In HCT116 cells , Fer knockdown signi ﬁ cantly suppressed anchorage - independent cell growth ( Figure 7b ) without affecting c - Src activity ( Supplementary Figure S5B ) . Notably , Fer knockdown potently suppressed tumorigenesis in nude mice ( Figure 7c ) and also suppressed the invasive activity of these cells ( Figure 7d ) . The importance of Fer phosphorylation in cancer was further assessed in clinical colon tumor samples . Fer phosphorylation was detected in 7 of the 10 tumor samples we tested , and c - Src was activated in 6 of the 7 Fer - positive samples ( Figure 7e ) . These ﬁ ndings raise the possibility that activation of the c - Src – Fer axis is associated with the progression of a subset of human colon cancers . DISCUSSION In this study , we showed that Fer serves as a crucial mediator and ampli ﬁ er of Src - induced tumor progression . A hypothetical model of Fer function is depicted in Figure 8 . In this model , c - Src is normally held in an inactive state by multiple mechanisms , including phosphorylation by Csk and binding to the lipid raft scaffold Cbp . If c - Src is upregulated or activated by growth - factor stimulations , active c - Src may be liberated from lipid rafts , allowing close access of c - Src to Fer in non - raft membranes , for example , focal adhesions . c - Src triggers Fer autoactivation via direct interaction , which is further ampli ﬁ ed by Fer oligomeriza - tion . Consequently , the activated Fer phosphorylates downstream effectors , such as ezrin , which execute cell transformation . Because Fer is required for tumor progression of some human cancers in which c - Src is upregulated , we propose that Fer mediates Src - induced tumor progression in general . c - Src activity is frequently upregulated in multiple types of human cancers . However , because c - Src activity is only moder - ately elevated in cancer cells relative to v - Src / c - SrcF527 trans - formed cells , it has been dif ﬁ cult to identify the critical pathway leading to the progression of human cancers . To address this issue , we used a minimal system for Src - dependent cell transformation ( that is , M β CD - induced cell transformation in CskKO cells ) and successfully identi ﬁ ed Fer as a novel mediator of the c - Src oncogenic signal . The upregulation of Fer has been implicated in progression of some cancers . 23 – 27 However , the mechanism of Fer activation and its functions in cancers remained Figure 5 . Fer oligomerization is required for autoactivation . ( a ) c - Src expression was induced in CskKO cells by Dox treatment for the indicated periods , and total cell lysates and anti - Fer immunoprecipitates were analyzed by immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies ( left panels ) . Total cell lysates treated with a crosslinking reagent were also immunoblotted with anti - Fer antibody ( right panel ) . Locations of monomer and oligomer are indicated . ( b ) The indicated forms of myc - tagged Fer constructs and c - Src were co - expressed in HEK293T cells , and total cell lysates were analyzed by immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . Expression levels of Fer protein were determined by quantitating immunoblots on an image analyzer ( black bars ) . Fer mRNA levels were quantitated by real - time PCR ( gray bars ) . Averages of relative values ± s . d . are shown . * * P o 0 . 01 ; n = 4 , compared with Fer WT - expressing cells . ( c ) The indicated forms of myc - tagged Fer constructs and c - Src were co - expressed in HEK293T cells , and total cell lysates treated with or without a crosslinking reagent were analyzed by immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . Fer mediates Src - induced tumor progression C Oneyama et al 507 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited Oncogene ( 2016 ) 501 – 512 unknown . Thus our identi ﬁ cation of the Src – Fer axis provides new insights into the role of Fer in the progression of human cancers . We showed that c - Src can directly phosphorylate Fer to initiate its autoactivation and that Fer may serve as an ampli ﬁ er of c - Src signaling by enabling ef ﬁ cient autophosphorylation within oligomers . The Fer - mediated ampli ﬁ cation of c - Src signaling explains our previous observation that a limited level of c - Src activity is suf ﬁ cient to induce cell transformation . 14 Moreover , the identi ﬁ cation of Fer as a c - Src ampli ﬁ er would underscore the important role of the modest upregulation of c - Src in human cancers . Fer is activated downstream of certain growth - factor rece - ptors , for example , EGF and platelet - derived growth - factor receptors . 22 , 33 – 35 However , the molecular mechanisms by which Fer is activated by these receptors remain unknown . Because SFKs are coordinately activated by growth - factor receptors , 36 it is possible that they are involved in growth - factor - induced Fer activation . This notion is supported by our observations that EGF - induced phosphorylation of Fer was accompanied by , and required , c - Src activation and that Fer knockdown suppressed EGF - induced morphological transformation . Furthermore , an EGFR - speci ﬁ c inhibitor suppressed the phosphorylation of Fer in PC9 cells , resulting in a marked reduction of anchorage - independent cell growth . These ﬁ ndings suggest that SFKs are involved in the activation of Fer downstream of EGFR and that Fer may also be important for tumorigenesis induced by the upregulation of growth - factor receptors . We found that activated Fer induces the phosphorylation of ezrin . Ezrin is a member of the ezrin – radixin – moesin protein family , 37 , 38 and it has a key role in cell adhesion and migration by physically linking adhesion machinery and cytoskeleton . Expres - sion pro ﬁ ling has revealed a marked increase in the expression of ezrin in a variety of human cancers , 39 suggesting a role for ezrin in cancer progression . Ezrin serves as a substrate of Src , and Src - mediated phosphorylation at Tyr477 is required for cell growth , invasion and metastasis of transformed and cancer cells . 29 , 30 , 40 However , under the conditions we used , in which c - Src activation was limited , phosphorylation of ezrin at Tyr477 was exclusively dependent on Fer . Because Fer interacts with components related to the cytoskeleton and cell adhesion , for example , β - catenin , p120 ctn and cortactin , 34 , 35 it seems reasonable to conclude that Fer mediates the phosphorylation of ezrin as a component of the cell - adhesion machinery . We showed that a subpopulation of Fer was colocalized with c - Src at focal adhesions when c - Src is upregulated . Therefore , it is possible that the Fer at focal adhesion phosphorylates ezrin and that the phosphorylated ezrin in turn perturbs the function of the cell - adhesion machinery in a way that is linked to tumor progression . Furthermore , because Fer has additional substrates , for example , cortactin , 41 , 42 activated Fer may also phosphorylate other proteins and thereby coordinately contribute to tumor progression by perturbing cell signaling originating from the cell - adhesion machinery . Despite the potential importance of Fer in regulating various cellular functions , targeted disruption of the mouse fer gene showed that Fer activity is not essential for normal development . 41 Mice lacking both Fps / Fes and Fer kinase activities also develop normally , although they exhibit reduced fertility and some defects in hematopoiesis . 43 These observations suggest that either Figure 6 . Fer autoactivation is stimulated downstream of EGFR signaling . ( a ) MEFs were treated with or without 1 μ M of dasatinib in the absence or presence of 50 ng / ml EGF for 30 min , and total cell lysates and immunoprecipitated Fer from these cells were immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies . ( b ) MEFs transfected with shRNA for control or Fer were treated with or without 50 ng / ml EGF for 4 days . The morphology of indicated cells was observed by phase - contrast microscopy at a magni ﬁ cation of ×200 . Scale bar = 100 μ m . ( c ) Lung adenocarcinoma PC9 cells were treated with the indicated concentration of ge ﬁ tinib for 2 h , and total cell lysates and immunoprecipitated Fer were immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies . ( d ) PC9 cells transfected with Fer shRNA were subjected to soft - agar colony - formation assay for 6 days , and the average numbers of colonies / cm 2 ± s . d . are shown . * P o 0 . 05 ; n = 4 , compared with shRNA control . Fer mediates Src - induced tumor progression C Oneyama et al 508 Oncogene ( 2016 ) 501 – 512 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited Figure 7 . Fer in human colon cancer cells . ( a ) Anti - Fer immunoprecipitates and total cell lysates from the indicated human colon cancer cell lines were analyzed by immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . The relative ratios of phosphorylated versus total forms of Fer are shown . ( b ) Soft - agar colony - formation assays of HCT116 cells transfected with control ( sh - cont ) or Fer shRNA ( sh - Fer # 1 and sh - Fer # 2 ) . Representative dishes from three independent experiments ( upper panels ) and average colonies / cm 2 ± s . d . ( lower graph ) are shown . * P o 0 . 05 ; n = 3 , compared with shRNA control . ( c ) HCT116 cells indicated in panels ( b ) were inoculated subcutaneously into nude mice . Averages ± s . d . of tumor volume ( cm 3 ) from ﬁ ve mice are plotted vs time after inoculation ( days ) . * P o 0 . 05 ; n = 5 , compared with shRNA control . Excised tumors are shown in the lower panel . Tumorigenesis assay was independently performed at three times . ( d ) Cells from panel ( b ) were seeded into Matrigel invasion chambers . After 48 h , membranes were detached and cells were stained ( lower panels ) and counted . Mean cells / mm 2 ± s . d . was obtained from ﬁ ve independent experiments . * P o 0 . 05 ; n = 5 , compared with shRNA control . ( e ) Anti - Fer immunoprecipitates and total tissue lysates from colon tumors ( T ) and adjacent non - cancerous tissues ( N ) were analyzed by immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . The relative fold changes of p - Fer and p - Src in tumor compared with those in non - cancerous tissues are presented . Fer mediates Src - induced tumor progression C Oneyama et al 509 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited Oncogene ( 2016 ) 501 – 512 isoform is dispensable for normal cell growth . Indeed , Fer knockdown had no effects on the growth of normal MEFs ( Supplementary Figures S5C and D ) . However , we observed that the phosphorylation levels of Fer in normal cells , such as MEFs and primary colon cells , were quite low , indicating that Fer is normally present in an inactive state and may function only when an upstream pathway , such as the EGFR – c - Src axis , is activated . Therefore , it seems possible that the oncogenic function of Fer becomes evident only under pathological conditions in which upstream kinases are constitutively upregulated . We also showed that Fer phosphorylation was elevated in a subset of human colon cancer cell lines / tissues . These observations raise the possibility that Fer activation is associated with the progression of some types of human colon cancers , although more extensive survey would be necessary to verify its roles in human cancers . Given that c - Src and / or EGFR are activated in various human cancers , Fer activation deserves further investigation in a wider range of human cancers , and activated Fer may serve as a target for anticancer drugs that can suppress tumor progression associated with the upregulation of c - Src and / or EGFR . MATERIALS AND METHODS Chemicals and antibodies M β CD was obtained from Sigma - Aldrich ( St Louis , MO , USA ) . FITC – phalloidin was obtained from Molecular Probes ( Eugene , OR , USA ) . Anti - pY314 antibody was developed to detect the Csk - binding site ( pY314 ) in Cbp / PAG1 , a lipid raft scaffold for active SFKs and Csk . 17 , 44 Because it cross - reacted with other phosphoproteins , we used it as an antiphosphotyrosine antibody . Anti - Fer pY714 polyclonal rabbit antibody was raised against a 14 amino - acid peptide of Fer , including phosphorylated Tyr714 ( residues 708 – 721 ) and then puri ﬁ ed using af ﬁ nity resin coupled to the target phosphopeptide . Anti - ezrin was generated as described previously . 37 All other antibodies were obtained commercially : anti - phosphotyrosine 4G10 ( Upstate Biotechnology , New York , NY , USA ) ; anti – phospho - Src pY418 , anti - phospho - FAK pY397 , and anti – phospho - cortactin pY421 ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA , USA ) ; anti - HA 9F1 ( Roche , Indianapolis , IN , USA ) ; anti - phospho - Erk1 / 2 pT202 / pY204 , anti - Erk1 / 2 , anti – phospho - EGFR pY1068 , anti - EGFR , anti – Myc - tag 9B11 , anti – phospho - Akt Ser473 , and anti - Akt ( Cell Signaling , Danvers , MA , USA ) ; anti – v - Src ab - 1 ( Merck Millipore , Darmstadt , Germany ) ; normal mouse IgG , anti - FAK C - 20 , anti - transferrin receptor , anti - Csk C - 20 , and anti - GAPDH 6C5 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Heidelberg , Germany ) ; anti - Paxillin , anti - caveolin1 , anti - ﬂ otillin , and anti - p130Cas ( BD Biosciences , Franklin Lakes , NJ , USA ) ; anti - vinculin ( Sigma , St Louis , MO , USA ) ; anti - Fer EP1842Y ( Abcam , Cambridge , MA , USA ) ; horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) - conjugated goat anti - rabbit IgG and HRP - conjugated goat anti - mouse IgG ( Invitrogen ) . Cell culture and immunoblotting Csk − / − ( CskKO ) , Csk − / − / c - Src , Csk + / + , SFC − and human colon cancer cell lines ( HT29 , HCT116 , HCT15 , SW480 and SW620 ) were cultured in Dulbecco ’ s modi ﬁ ed Eagle ’ s medium ( DMEM ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) . FHC ( normal human colon cells ) were cultured in DMEM / Ham ’ s F - 12 ( 1 : 1 ) with 10 % FBS , 5 μ g / ml insulin , 5 μ g / ml transferrin and 100 ng / ml hydrocortisone . Cells were grown at 37 °C in a humidi ﬁ ed atmosphere containing 5 % CO 2 . Total cell lysates were prepared in ODG buffer ( 50 m M Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 1 m M EDTA , 0 . 15 M NaCl , 5 % ( w / v ) glycerol , 1 % ( w / v ) NP - 40 , 20 m M NaF , 2 % n - octyl - β - D - glucoside ( ODG ) , 5 μ M β - mercaptoethanol , 1 m M sodium orthovanadate , 0 . 1 % leupeptin , 0 . 1 % aprotinin , and 1 m M phenylmethanesulfonyl ﬂ uoride ) . Equal amounts of total protein were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( SDS - PAGE ) and transferred onto nitrocellulose mem - branes . Membranes were blocked and incubated with primary antibodies and then incubated with HRP - conjugated secondary antibodies . Signals from immunopositive bands were visualized on X - ray ﬁ lm using an enhanced chemiluminescence system ( GE Healthcare , Littele Chalfont , UK ) or with an LAS - 4000mini ( GE Healthcare ) imaging analyzer . Immunoprecipitation and immunocytochemistry Immunoprecipitation and immunocytochemistry were performed as described previously . 45 For immunocytochemistry , cells were ﬁ xed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature . After washing with Tris - buffered saline containing 0 . 1 % Tween 20 ( TTBS ) , samples were blocked with bovine serum albumin / TTBS , followed by incubation in TTBS overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies and Alexa Fluor 488 – phalloidin ( to stain F - actin ) . After incubation with Alexa Fluor 594 – conjugated secondary antibodies for 30 min at room temperature , cover slips were mounted on glass slides . Specimens were examined by confocal laser scanning microscopy ( IX81 , Olympus , Tokyo , Japan ) at room temperature . DRM fractionation DRM and non - DRM fractions were isolated by sucrose gradient centrifuga - tion as described previously . 18 , 46 Cells were washed with phosphate - buffered saline , lysed in homogenization buffer ( 50 m M Tris - HCl ( pH 7 . 4 ) , 150 m M sodium chloride , 1 m M EDTA , 1 m M sodium orthovanadate , 20 m M sodium ﬂ uoride , 0 . 25 % Triton X - 100 , and protease inhibitor cocktail ) and separated on a discontinuous sucrose gradient ( 5 / 35 / 40 % ) by ultracen - trifugation at 150 000 g for 12 h at 4 °C using an Optima L - 100XP with a SW55Ti rotor ( Beckman Coulter , Brea , CA , USA ) . Eleven fractions were collected , with fraction numbers starting from the top of the sucrose gradient . LC - MS / MS analysis Non - DRM fractions were prepared from CskKO cells treated with M β CD , and tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins were immunoprecipitated with anti - Figure 8 . Hypothetical model of Fer function in Src - induced tumor progression . When active c - Src is liberated from lipid rafts , c - Src has close access to Fer in non - raft membranes , for example , focal adhesions , triggering of Fer autoactivation via direct phosphorylation and ampli ﬁ cation by oligomerization of Fer , which in turn induces tumor progression by phosphorylation of downstream effectors , such as ezrin . Fer mediates Src - induced tumor progression C Oneyama et al 510 Oncogene ( 2016 ) 501 – 512 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited Cbp pY314 using Protein G Sepharose beads . Protein samples were separated by SDS - PAGE . After visualization by silver staining , proteins were excised from the gel fragments and in situ digestion was performed with Trypsin Gold ( Promega , Fitchburg , WI , USA ) . Digested samples were analyzed by nanocapillary reversed - phase LC - MS / MS using a C18 column ( ϕ 75 mm ) on a nano LC system coupled to an ESI - MS / MS ( LTQ Orbitrap Velos , Thermo Scienti ﬁ c , Waltham , MA , USA ) . Direct injection data - dependent acquisition was performed using one MS channel for every three MS / MS channels and dynamic exclusion for selected ions . Proteins were identi ﬁ ed by database searching using Mascot Daemon ( Matrix Science , Boston , MA , USA ) . Gene expression and shRNA All gene - transfer experiments were carried out using pCX4 retroviral vectors . 47 cDNAs encoding wild - type and mutant versions of Fer 21 were kindly provided by Dr Naoki Mochizuki ( National Cerebral and Cardiovas - cular Center , Osaka , Japan ) . Ezrin wild - type and mutant cDNAs were PCR ampli ﬁ ed and subcloned into the pCX4 vector . Production of and infection with retroviral vectors were performed as previously described . 47 Lentiviral Fer and ezrin shRNA vectors were obtained from Sigma - Aldrich . For rescue experiments , silent mutations were introduced into ectopic expressed Fer or ezrin to confer resistance to shRNA . In vitro kinase assay Myc - tagged Fer constructs were transiently expressed in HEK293T cells and immunoprecipitated with anti - myc antibody . His - tagged c - Src was expressed in insect cells using the Bac - to - Bac baculovirus expression system ( Invitrogen ) , and puri ﬁ ed to near homogeneity using Ni - NTA Super ﬂ ow ( Qiagen , Hilden , Germany ) and gel ﬁ ltration ( Superdex S200 ) column chromatography . c - Src was also overexpressed in HEK293T cells and immunoprecipitated with anti - Src antibody . The immunoprecipitated Fer was incubated for 30 min at 30 °C with puri ﬁ ed c - Src protein in a kinase buffer ( Tris - HCl ( pH7 . 4 ) , 20 m M MgCl 2 , 0 . 5 m M Na 3 VO 4 , 1 m M β - mercap - toethanol ) in the presence or absence of 50 μ M ATP . The reaction was terminated by adding SDS sample buffer , and phosphorylation of Fer was detected by immunoblotting with antiphosphotyrosine antibody . Crosslinking HEK293T cells expressing myc - tagged Fer constructs were lysed in a crosslinking buffer ( 20 m M HEPES - KOH ( pH7 . 5 ) , 150 m M NaCl , 1 % Nonidet P - 40 , 0 . 5 % sodium deoxycholate , 1 m M Na 3 VO 4 , 50 m M NaF , 50 n M Na 2 MoO 4 , protease inhibitors ) , and the lysates were incubated with 1 m M ethylene glycol - bis ( succinic acid N - hydroxysuccinimide ester ) for 15 min on ice . The reaction was terminated by adding Tris - EDTA buffer and then analyzed by immunoblotting with anti - Fer antibody . Soft - agar colony - formation assay Soft - agar colony - formation assays were performed as described . 17 Single - cell suspensions of 2×10 4 cells were plated in six - well culture dishes in 1 . 5 ml of DMEM containing 10 % FBS and 0 . 36 % agar on a layer of 2 . 5 ml of the same medium containing 0 . 7 % agar . Six - to - 21 days after plating , colonies were stained with 3 - ( 4 , 5 - dimethylthiazol - 2 - yl ) - 2 , 5 - diphenyltetra - zolium bromide ( MTT ; Sigma ) , micrographs were collected and colonies were counted . Tumorigenesis assay Immunode ﬁ cient mice ( BALB / c AJc1 - nu / nu ; Japan CLEA , Tokyo , Japan ) were injected subcutaneously in the ﬂ ank with 1×10 6 cells suspended in 200 μ l of serum - free DMEM . Tumors were monitored every 2 or 3 days , and tumor volumes ( V ) were estimated using the following formula : V = 0 . 5× L × W 2 . At least three mice were used in each experiment . Mice were handled in strict adherence with local governmental and institutional animal - care regulations . Invasion assay Invasion assays were performed as described . 45 Brie ﬂ y , invasion assays were conducted using a BioCoat Matrigel Invasion Chamber ( BD Biosciences ) . Cell suspensions ( 1×10 5 cells ) in serum - free medium were added to inserts , and each insert was placed in the lower chamber of the invasion device , which contained NIH3T3 cell - conditioned medium . After 48 h of incubation , invasiveness was evaluated by staining the cells that migrated through the extracellular matrix layer . Invading cells were counted in ﬁ ve microscopic ﬁ elds per well at a magni ﬁ cation of ×100 , and the extent of invasion was expressed as the average number of cells per mm 2 . CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no con ﬂ ict of interest . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank T Akagi for pCX4 vector , N Mochizuki for a series of Fer expression vectors , A Imamoto for SFC − cells , K Saito for technical assistance with the LC - MS / MS analysis and JA Cooper for critical reading and editing of the manuscript . LC - MS / MS analysis was performed in the DNA - chip Development Centre for Infectious Diseases ( RIMD , Osaka University ) . This work was supported by the Exciting Leading - Edge Research Project and the MEET Project at Osaka University ; grants - in - aid from the Ministry of Education , Culture , Sports , Science and Technology of Japan for Young Scientists ( A ) ; and The Yasuda Medical Foundation . REFERENCES 1 Jove R , Hanafusa H . Cell transformation by the viral src oncogene . Annu Rev Cell Biol 1987 ; 3 : 31 – 56 . 2 Brown MT , Cooper JA . Regulation , substrates and functions of src . Biochem Biophys Acta 1996 ; 1278 : 121 – 149 . 3 Nada S , Okada M , MacAuley A , Cooper JA , Nakagawa H . Cloning of a com - plementary DNA for a protein - tyrosine kinase that speci ﬁ cally phosphorylates a negative regulatory site of p60c - src . Nature 1991 ; 351 : 69 – 72 . 4 Nada S , Yagi T , Takeda H , Tokunaga T , Nakagawa H , Ikawa Y et al . Constitutive activation of Src family kinases in mouse embryos that lack Csk . Cell 1993 ; 73 : 1125 – 1135 . 5 Okada M . Regulation of the SRC family kinases by Csk . Int J Biol Sci 2012 ; 8 : 1385 – 1397 . 6 Irby RB , Mao Y , Coppola D , Kang J , Loubeau JM , Trudeau W et al . Activating SRC mutation in a subset of advanced human colon cancers . Nat Genet 1999 ; 21 : 187 – 190 . 7 Irby RB , Yeatman TJ . Role of Src expression and activation in human cancer . Oncogene 2000 ; 19 : 5636 – 5642 . 8 Yeatman TJ . A renaissance for SRC . Nat Rev Cancer 2004 ; 4 : 470 – 480 . 9 Hunter T , Sefton BM . Transforming gene product of Rous sarcoma virus phos - phorylates tyrosine . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1980 ; 77 : 1311 – 1315 . 10 Rous P . A sarcoma of the fowl transmissible by an agent separable from the tumor cells . J Exp Med 1911 ; 13 : 397 – 411 . 11 Stehelin D , Varmus HE , Bishop JM , Vogt PK . DNA related to the transforming gene ( s ) of avian sarcoma viruses is present in normal avian DNA . Nature 1976 ; 260 : 170 – 173 . 12 Takeya T , Feldman RA , Hanafusa H . DNA sequence of the viral and cellular src gene of chickens . 1 . Complete nucleotide sequence of an EcoRI fragment of recovered avian sarcoma virus which codes for gp37 and pp60src . J Virol 1982 ; 44 : 1 – 11 . 13 Frame MC . Src in cancer : deregulation and consequences for cell behaviour . Biochem Biophys Acta 2002 ; 1602 : 114 – 130 . 14 Oneyama C , Hikita T , Nada S , Okada M . Functional dissection of transformation by c - Src and v - Src . Genes Cells 2008 ; 13 : 1 – 12 . 15 Hakak Y , Martin GS . Ubiquitin - dependent degradation of active Src . Curr Biol 1999 ; 9 : 1039 – 1042 . 16 Laszlo GS , Cooper JA . Restriction of Src activity by Cullin - 5 . Curr Biol 2009 ; 19 : 157 – 162 . 17 Oneyama C , Hikita T , Enya K , Dobenecker MW , Saito K , Nada S et al . The lipid raft - anchored adaptor protein Cbp controls the oncogenic potential of c - Src . Mol Cell 2008 ; 30 : 426 – 436 . 18 Oneyama C , Iino T , Saito K , Suzuki K , Ogawa A , Okada M . Transforming potential of Src family kinases is limited by the cholesterol - enriched membrane micro - domain . Mol Cell Biol 2009 ; 29 : 6462 – 6472 . 19 Greer P . Closing in on the biological functions of Fps / Fes and Fer . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2002 ; 3 : 278 – 289 . 20 Itoh T , Hasegawa J , Tsujita K , Kanaho Y , Takenawa T . The tyrosine kinase Fer is a downstream target of the PLD - PA pathway that regulates cell migration . Sci Signal 2009 ; 2 : ra52 . 21 Kogata N , Masuda M , Kamioka Y , Yamagishi A , Endo A , Okada M et al . Identi ﬁ - cation of Fer tyrosine kinase localized on microtubules as a platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule - 1 phosphorylating kinase in vascular endothelial cells . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 3553 – 3564 . Fer mediates Src - induced tumor progression C Oneyama et al 511 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited Oncogene ( 2016 ) 501 – 512 22 Lennartsson J , Ma H , Wardega P , Pelka K , Engstrom U , Hellberg C et al . The Fer tyrosine kinase is important for platelet - derived growth factor - bb - induced signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 ( STAT3 ) protein phosphorylation , colony formation in soft agar , and tumor growth in vivo . J Biol Chem 2013 ; 288 : 15736 – 15744 . 23 Allard P , Zoubeidi A , Nguyen LT , Tessier S , Tanguay S , Chevrette M et al . Links between Fer tyrosine kinase expression levels and prostate cell proliferation . Mol Cell Endocrinol 2000 ; 159 : 63 – 77 . 24 Kawakami M , Morita S , Sunohara M , Amano Y , Ishikawa R , Watanabe K et al . FER overexpression is associated with poor postoperative prognosis and cancer - cell survival in non - small cell lung cancer . Int J Clin Exp Pathol 2013 ; 6 : 598 – 612 . 25 Li H , Ren Z , Kang X , Zhang L , Li X , Wang Y et al . Identi ﬁ cation of tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins associated with metastasis and functional analysis of FER in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells . BMC Cancer 2009 ; 9 : 366 . 26 Menges CW , Chen Y , Mossman BT , Chernoff J , Yeung AT , Testa JR . A phosphotyrosine proteomic screen identi ﬁ es multiple tyrosine kinase signaling pathways aberrantly activated in malignant mesothelioma . Genes Cancer 2010 ; 1 : 493 – 505 . 27 Miyata Y , Kanda S , Sakai H , Greer PA . Feline sarcoma - related protein expression correlates with malignant aggressiveness and poor prognosis in renal cell carci - noma . Cancer Sci 2013 ; 104 : 681 – 686 . 28 Anastassiadis T , Deacon SW , Devarajan K , Ma H , Peterson JR . Comprehensive assay of kinase catalytic activity reveals features of kinase inhibitor selectivity . Nat Biotechnol 2011 ; 29 : 1039 – 1045 . 29 Heiska L , Melikova M , Zhao F , Saotome I , McClatchey AI , Carpen O . Ezrin is key regulator of Src - induced malignant phenotype in three - dimensional environment . Oncogene 2011 ; 30 : 4953 – 4962 . 30 Mak H , Naba A , Varma S , Schick C , Day A , SenGupta SK et al . Ezrin phosphorylation on tyrosine 477 regulates invasion and metastasis of breast cancer cells . BMC Cancer 2012 ; 12 : 82 . 31 Inoue K , Sone T , Oneyama C , Nishiumi F , Kishine H , Sasaki Y et al . A versatile nonviral vector system for tetracycline - dependent one - step conditional induction of transgene expression . Gene Ther 2009 ; 16 : 1383 – 1394 . 32 Craig AW , Zirngibl R , Greer P . Disruption of coiled - coil domains in Fer protein - tyrosine kinase abolishes trimerization but not kinase activation . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 19934 – 19942 . 33 Guo C , Stark GR . FER tyrosine kinase ( FER ) overexpression mediates resistance to quinacrine through EGF - dependent activation of NF - kappaB . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 ; 108 : 7968 – 7973 . 34 Kim L , Wong TW . The cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase FER is associated with the catenin - like substrate pp120 and is activated by growth factors . Mol Cell Biol 1995 ; 15 : 4553 – 4561 . 35 Kim L , Wong TW . Growth factor - dependent phosphorylation of the actin - binding protein cortactin is mediated by the cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase FER . J Biol Chem 1998 ; 273 : 23542 – 23548 . 36 Ishizawar R , Parsons SJ . c - Src and cooperating partners in human cancer . Cancer Cell 2004 ; 6 : 209 – 214 . 37 Tsukita S , Oishi K , Sato N , Sagara J , Kawai A , Tsukita S . ERM family members as molecular linkers between the cell surface glycoprotein CD44 and actin - based cytoskeletons . J Cell Biol 1994 ; 126 : 391 – 401 . 38 Tsukita S , Yonemura S . Cortical actin organization : lessons from ERM ( ezrin / radixin / moesin ) proteins . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 34507 – 34510 . 39 Yu Y , Khan J , Khanna C , Helman L , Meltzer PS , Merlino G . Expression pro ﬁ ling identi ﬁ es the cytoskeletal organizer ezrin and the developmental homeoprotein Six - 1 as key metastatic regulators . Nat Med 2004 ; 10 : 175 – 181 . 40 Elliott BE , Qiao H , Louvard D , Arpin M . Co - operative effect of c - Src and ezrin in deregulation of cell - cell contacts and scattering of mammary carcinoma cells . J Cell Biochem 2004 ; 92 : 16 – 28 . 41 Craig AW , Zirngibl R , Williams K , Cole LA , Greer PA . Mice devoid of fer protein - tyrosine kinase activity are viable and fertile but display reduced cortactin phosphorylation . Mol Cell Biol 2001 ; 21 : 603 – 613 . 42 Sangrar W , Gao Y , Scott M , Truesdell P , Greer PA . Fer - mediated cortactin phos - phorylation is associated with ef ﬁ cient ﬁ broblast migration and is dependent on reactive oxygen species generation during integrin - mediated cell adhesion . Mol Cell Biol 2007 ; 27 : 6140 – 6152 . 43 Senis YA , Sangrar W , Zirngibl RA , Craig AW , Lee DH , Greer PA . Fps / Fes and Fer non - receptor protein - tyrosine kinases regulate collagen - and ADP - induced platelet aggregation . J Thromb Haemost 2003 ; 1 : 1062 – 1070 . 44 Kawabuchi M , Satomi Y , Takao T , Shimonishi Y , Nada S , Nagai K et al . Trans - membrane phosphoprotein Cbp regulates the activities of Src - family tyrosine kinases . Nature 2000 ; 404 : 999 – 1003 . 45 Oneyama C , Morii E , Okuzaki D , Takahashi Y , Ikeda J , Wakabayashi N et al . MicroRNA - mediated upregulation of integrin - linked kinase promotes Src - induced tumor progression . Oncogene 2012 ; 31 : 1623 – 1635 . 46 Lingwood D , Simons K . Detergent resistance as a tool in membrane research . Nat Protoc 2007 ; 2 : 2159 – 2165 . 47 Akagi T , Sasai K , Hanafusa H . Refractory nature of normal human diploid ﬁ bro - blasts with respect to oncogene - mediated transformation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003 ; 100 : 13567 – 13572 . Supplementary Information accompanies this paper on the Oncogene website ( http : / / www . nature . com / onc ) Fer mediates Src - induced tumor progression C Oneyama et al 512 Oncogene ( 2016 ) 501 – 512 © 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited