Vol . 30 no . 22 2014 , pages 3268 – 3269 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE doi : 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btu497 Sequence analysis Advance Access publication July 30 , 2014 Basic4Cseq : an R / Bioconductor package for analyzing 4C - seq data Carolin Walter 1 , * , Daniel Schuetzmann 2 , Frank Rosenbauer 2 and Martin Dugas 1 1 Institute of Medical Informatics , University of M € unster , 48149 M € unster , Germany , and 2 Institute of Molecular Tumorbiology , University of M € unster , 48149 M € unster , Germany Associate Editor : Gunnar Ratsch ABSTRACT Summary : Basic4Cseq is an R / Bioconductor package for basic filter - ing , analysis and subsequent near - cis visualization of 4C - seq data . The package processes aligned 4C - seq raw data stored in binary alignment / map ( BAM ) format and maps the short reads to a corres - ponding virtual fragment library . Functions are included to create vir - tual fragment libraries providing chromosome position and further information on 4C - seq fragments ( length and uniqueness of the frag - ment ends , and blindness of a fragment ) for any BSGenome package . An optional filter is included for BAM files to remove invalid 4C - seq reads , and further filter functions are offered for 4C - seq fragments . Additionally , basic quality controls based on the read distribution are included . Fragment data in the vicinity of the experiment’s viewpoint are visualized as coverage plot based on a running median approach and a multi - scale contact profile . Wig files or csv files of the fragment data can be exported for further analyses and visualizations of inter - actions with other programs . Availability and implementation : Basic4Cseq is implemented in R and available at http : / / www . bioconductor . org / . A vignette with detailed descriptions of the functions is included in the package . Contact : Carolin . Walter @ uni - muenster . de Supplementary information : Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online . Received on March 24 , 2014 ; revised on June 6 , 2014 ; accepted on July 17 , 2014 1 INTRODUCTION Circular chromosome conformation capture combined with high - throughput sequencing ( 4C - seq ) is a method that allows the identification of chromosomal interactions between one po - tential interaction partner , called viewpoint , and virtually any other part of the genome ( Gheldof et al . , 2012 ) . Two rounds of digestion and ligation with two distinct restriction enzymes are performed to create a 4C - seq library . Unlike regular next - gener - ation sequencing data , valid 4C - seq reads can only originate from precisely defined points in the genome . Any 4C - seq read will map to the end of a so - called 4C - seq fragment , i . e . a genomic region flanked by two primary restriction sites . When a second - ary restriction site is not present , a fragment is called blind ; a fragment end is defined as the region between a primary restric - tion site and the nearest secondary restriction site ( van de Werken et al . , 2012a ) . Blind fragments are expected to yield less reads than non - blind fragments ; the length of a fragment end in general can cause variations in the read count . Any re - petitive fragment end is to be interpreted with caution ( van de Werken et al . , 2012a ) . Consequently , these properties have to be considered during the analysis of 4C - seq data to prevent biases or misinterpretation . van de Werken et al . ’s 4Cseqpipe is a pipe - line to analyze 4C - seq data , which respects these issues ( van de Werken et al . , 2012a ) . However , it is not embedded into the R / Bioconductor environment , has little transparency regarding internal data structures , limited output options and less flexibility for smaller interactions with a length of up to 10kb . The package r3Cseq ( Thongjuea et al . , 2013 ) works on regular binary align - ment / map ( BAM ) files and can detect and visualize interactions , but does not differentiate between fragment types , which is a source of bias . The recently published fourSig method ( Williams et al . , 2014 ) includes fragment filtering options and detects different types of interactions , but does not provide more complex visualization routines for the data profile in the viewpoint region . In contrast , Basic4Cseq offers routines for the analysis of 4C - seq fragment data that are easy to customize . Provided functionality includes fragment filtering , quality con - trol , explorative near - cis visualization and data export / import functions . 2 AVAILABLE FUNCTIONALITY 2 . 1 Preprocessing and virtual fragment library creation Basic4Cseq expects 4C - seq data stored in BAM format . SAMtools ( Li et al . , 2009 ) and BEDtools ( Quinlan and Hall , 2010 ) can be used to remove reads on very short or blind frag - ments directly from the BAM file . Basic4Cseq uses BSgenome packages to split a given genome at primary restriction sites . The resulting fragments are scanned for the presence of a secondary restriction site , and the ends of each fragment are checked for uniqueness . Fragment data are stored as a virtual fragment library file , which can be applied for 4C - seq experiments with the same underlying genome , restriction enzyme combination , and read length . 2 . 2 Filtering of 4C - seq data Owing to sequencing errors or SNPs , the alignment of raw 4C - seq data needs to allow a certain number of mismatches . However , mismatches in the first restriction enzyme sequence can lead to mapped reads outside the predefined 4C - seq frag - ment ends . Overlaps of these reads with valid fragment ends may * To whom correspondence should be addressed . 3268 (cid:2) The Author 2014 . Published by Oxford University Press . All rights reserved . For Permissions , please e - mail : journals . permissions @ oup . com D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / b i o i n f o r m a t i cs / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 30 / 22 / 3268 / 2389942 b y gue s t on 26 D e c e m be r 2018 distort the true 4C - seq signal . Basic4Cseq can optionally discard any read with mismatches in the restriction enzyme sequence , if this sequence is present . Additional filtering options are available for the virtual fragment library . Very short or long fragments as well as blind fragments can be discarded ; all repetitive fragment ends are removed per default to prevent ambiguous data . 2 . 3 Visualization After preprocessing , the aligned short reads are mapped to the virtual fragment library . Basic4Cseq analyzes per default data from non - blind , unique fragment ends to prevent bias . It pro - vides a visualization of the viewpoint region similar to the pipe - line from van de Werken et al . ( 2012a ) : Fragment - based data are reads per million ( RPM ) - normalized and smoothed to counter the effects of single , overrepresented fragment ends . Smoothing options include a running median and a running mean approach ; quantiles are further smoothed and interpolated with R’s loess function . Fragments adjacent to the viewpoint of the 4C - seq experiment are removed to prevent bias through overrepresented sequences caused by self - ligation . Basic4Cseq visualizes both raw fragment data and running medians , plus quantile data in a single plot . Additionally , multi - scale contact profiles of the chosen fragment data are created for running median or running mean windows with varying window sizes . Read counts per frag - ment are normalized to [ 0 , 1 ] , and the resulting intensity values are expressed on a log 2 scale to allow for better visibility of distant interactions . Basic4Cseq can annotate custom regions of interest for easier interpretation and comparison of experi - ments . Import and near - cis visualization of fragment - based data ( e . g . fourSig fragment data , which are easily convertible ) is possible as well . Figure 1 shows a near - cis interaction profile with the typical high coverage at the experiment’s viewpoint . Further peaks suggest high contact intensities between the under - lying genomic regions and the viewpoint . Comparisons between filter options and alternative tools are added as supplement . For regions located either more remote from the viewpoint or on other chromosomes , it is advisable to use a statistical enrich - ment approach for the analysis of the 4C - seq fragment data ( Splinter et al . , 2012 ) . Basic4Cseq can export filtered 4C - seq data as csv or wig files for use with other programs , e . g . Splinter et al . ’s domainogram and spider - plot functions ( Splinter et al . , 2012 ) . Additionally , a visualization routine based on RCircos ( Zhang et al . , 2013 ) is included for imported trans interaction data intervals . 2 . 4 Read distribution and quality control The distribution of reads throughout 4C - seq fragment ends can provide information on the quality of the experiment data ( van de Werken et al . , 2012b ) . Basic4Cseq provides the following quality control statistics : number of total reads , cis / overall ratio of reads and the percentage of covered fragment ends within a certain distance around the experiment’s viewpoint . Reference values for high - quality experiments are 4 1 million reads total , a cis / overall ratio of 4 40 % and a large fraction of covered fragment ends in the viewpoint’s vicinity ( van de Werken et al . , 2012b ) . 3 CONCLUSION Basic4Cseq enables users to analyze 4C - seq experimental data in the R / Bioconductor environment . Quality control statistics can be calculated , and virtual fragment libraries with relevant fragment data generated . Functions for near - cis visualizations are included ; both coverage profiles and heatmap - like multi - scale contact intensity visualizations allow the exploration of contact profiles around the viewpoint . The package allows users to import fragment data for visualization , and to export filtered 4C - seq reads as csv or wig files for visualization or fur - ther analysis of significant interactions . Conflicts of Interest : none declared . REFERENCES Gheldof , N . et al . ( 2012 ) Detecting long - range chromatin interactions using the chromosome conformation capture sequencing ( 4c - seq ) method . Methods Mol . Biol . , 786 , 212 – 225 . Li , H . et al . ( 2009 ) The Sequence alignment / map ( SAM ) format and SAMtools . Bioinformatics , 25 , 2078 – 2079 . Quinlan , A . and Hall , I . ( 2010 ) BEDTools : a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic features . Bioinformatics , 26 , 841 – 842 . Splinter , E . et al . ( 2012 ) Determining long - range chromatin interactions for selected genomic sites using 4C - seq technology : from fixation to computation . Methods , 58 , 221 – 230 . Stadhouders , R . et al . ( 2012 ) Dynamic long - range chromatin interactions control Myb proto - oncogene transcription during erythroid development . EMBO J . , 31 , 986 – 999 . Thongjuea , S . et al . ( 2013 ) r3Cseq : an R / Bioconductor package for the discovery of long - range genomic interactions from chromosome conformation capture and next - generation sequencing data . Nucleic Acids Res . , 41 , e132 . van de Werken , H . et al . ( 2012a ) Robust 4C - seq data analysis to screen for regula - tory DNA interactions . Nat . Methods , 9 , 969 – 971 . van de Werken , H . et al . ( 2012b ) 4C technology : protocols and data analysis . Methods Enzymol . , 513 , 89 – 112 . Williams , R . et al . ( 2014 ) fourSig : a method for determining chromosomal inter - actions in 4C - Seq data . Nucleic Acids Res , 42 , e68 . Zhang , H . et al . ( 2013 ) RCircos : an R package for Circos 2D track plots . BMC Bioinformatics , 14 , 244 . Fig . 1 . Coverage plot based on a running median approach of RPM - normalized fetal liver sample data around the experiment’s viewpoint ( annotated as ‘VP’ ) at the Myb promoter , with an additional multi - scale contact intensity profile . Fragment end - based resolution increases the visibility of small interactions . The corresponding raw data were taken from Stadhouders et al . ( 2012 ) 3269 Basic4Cseq D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / b i o i n f o r m a t i cs / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 30 / 22 / 3268 / 2389942 b y gue s t on 26 D e c e m be r 2018