935 P A R T I C I P A T I O N I N D I G I T A L C I T I Z E N S C I E N C E M a r i a V i c t o r i a P a l a c i n S i l v a PARTICIPATION IN DIGITAL CITIZEN SCIENCE Maria Victoria Palacin Silva ACTA UNIVERSITATIS LAPPEENRANTAENSIS 935 Maria Victoria Palacin Silva PARTICIPATION IN DIGITAL CITIZEN SCIENCE Acta Universitatis Lappeenrantaensis 935 Dissertation for the degree of Doctor of Science ( Technology ) to be presented with due permission for public examination and criticism in the Auditorium 1314 at Lappeenranta - Lahti University of Technology LUT , Lappeenranta , Finland on the 11 th of December , 2020 , at noon . Supervisors Professor Jari Porras LUT School of Engineering Science Lappeenranta - Lahti University of Technology LUT Finland PhD . Maria Angela Ferrario Department of Computer Science Lancaster University United Kingdom Reviewers Professor Alan Dix Computational Foundry Swansea University United Kingdom Professor Kaisa V¨a¨an¨anen Human - Centered Technology Unit Faculty of Information Technology and Communication Sciences Tampere University Finland Opponents Professor Professor Alan Dix Computational Foundry Swansea University United Kingdom Professor Tuuli Toivonen Department of Geosciences and Geography University of Helsinki Finland ISBN 978 - 952 - 335 - 590 - 3 ISBN 978 - 952 - 335 - 591 - 0 ( PDF ) ISSN - L 1456 - 4491 ISSN 1456 - 4491 Lappeenranta - Lahti University of Technology LUT LUT University Press 2020 Abstract Maria Victoria Palacin Silva Participation in Digital Citizen Science Lappeenranta 2020 100 pages Acta Universitatis Lappeenrantaensis 935 Diss . Lappeenranta - Lahti University of Technology LUT ISBN 978 - 952 - 335 - 590 - 3 , ISBN 978 - 952 - 335 - 591 - 0 ( PDF ) , ISSN - L 1456 - 4491 , ISSN 1456 - 4491 Digital platforms are playing an important role in shaping current scientiﬁc , social , and policy developments . Participatory science , in particular , has risen in popularity through the incorporation of digital citizen science platforms to facilitate the observation of so - cial and environmental phenomena . However , sustaining participatory actions in the long term remains a major challenge in citizen science projects . Prior research has focused on two main areas to overcome this : 1 ) investigations into people’s motivations to engage in citizen science initiatives and 2 ) the design of incentive mechanisms to support peo - ple’s engaged action . Yet , the former relies on self - reported data , thus missing the link between self - reported motives and concrete actions . The latter works on the assumption that reward - centric mechanisms may enhance participation , though the effectiveness of such mechanisms has been proven to undermine sustained participation in other types of volunteering initiatives . This doctoral thesis addresses this research gap by advancing our understanding of what motivates people to participate in a sustained manner in digital citizen science initiatives . This exploratory work was done through a critical analysis of literature and practice re - ports , and the design of case studies and localized action research interventions . This research ﬁnds that in order to sustain participation in digital citizen science , human val - ues must be considered when designing and evaluating the processes , tools , and incentive mechanisms . This thesis offers three key major contributions to human - computer interaction research and digital citizen science : a ) it illustrates the different forms of participation in digital citizen science ; b ) analyzes the use and limitations of incentive mechanisms in digital citizen science ; and c ) it advances the understanding of the motivations that drive par - ticipation in digital citizen science ( beyond self - reports ) by leveraging on theories and instruments from social psychology , thereby adding new evidence on the link between values’ orientations and online behaviors . Keywords : participatory science , digital citizen science , sustained participation , online behavior , incentive mechanisms , human - computer interaction Acknowledgments During this journey , I have had the privilege to work with many inspiring , and wise peo - ple . I would like to start recognizing foremost my supervisors Professors . Jari Porras and Maria Angela Ferrario , for their tireless support and guidance during my research . Without you , this journey would have never been possible . A doctoral thesis is an individual journey , but it is not an solitary one . For that , I want to thank my fellow friends and colleagues at the LUT software engineering team . Your contributions to my growth , will forever remain in my hearth . Thank you for your energy and wonderful conversations throughout the years . My special gratitude also goes to my co - authors , for their enjoyable company and for teaching me so much . Thank you for giving me the opportunity to work with you . Thank you Prof . Ethan Zuckerman , for welcoming me as a visiting scholar at the MIT Center for Civic Media . I cannot express in a single paragraph how enriching and won - derful that experience was for me . I will be forever thankful for this opportunity to you and to everyone in Civics . The backbone of everything in my life is my family , Francisca , Edmundo , and Piero . Alike branches on a tree , we have all grown in different directions , yet our root will al - ways remain as one . ¡Gracias por tanto ! There are certain people who make the world a better place just by being in it , and you , you all , are those people to me : Birgit , Rubez , Annika Wolff , Timoteo , Sakari Penttil¨a , Ville Myllynp¨a¨a , Leila & Arto , Sakari Jr . , Ornela , Jussi Saari , Mae Thomas , Lolita , Pavel & Marina , Antti Knutas , Arwa & Orestis , Pedrito Reynolds - Cu´ellar , Paolo & Gabriel Boni - Ramos , Edward Burnell , Irene Lebrusan , Zainab , Vivi , Henna J¨arvi , Arash , Eleni , Susanna Koponen , Anna Nikitina , Shola , Jiri and Erno . ”Criticism , like rain , should be gentle enough to nourish a person’s growth without de - stroying their roots” – Frank A . Clark . Kaisa V¨a¨an¨anen and Alan Dix did that brilliantly during my examination , thank you for feedback . Also , thank you Alan and Tuuli Toivonen for agreeing to be my opponents in this hybrid public examination . Despite the distance , I have no doubt that you will make this day memorable . Lastly , I would like to express my gratitude to : The Finnish Environment Institute , LUT University and the LUT Foundation , the KAUTE Foundation , the Tekniikan Edist¨amiss¨a¨ati¨o , Erasmus + and the Elisa Foundation , for their generous ﬁnancial support . Victoria Palacin Silva November 2020 Helsinki , Finland Dedico este trabajo a mis padres , Fransica y Edmundo , por todo su amor y apoyo incondicional . The most important outcome of your doctoral studies is not the thesis , it is YOU . Maria Victoria Palacin Silva Contents Abstract Acknowledgments List of publications 11 Nomenclature 13 1 Introduction 15 1 . 1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 1 . 2 Research Scope and Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 1 . 2 . 1 Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 1 . 2 . 2 Thesis Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 2 Related Research 21 2 . 1 Public participation : A Short History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 2 . 1 . 1 Public Participation in Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 2 . 2 Digital Citizen Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 2 . 2 . 1 Motivations to Volunteer in Digital Citizen Science . . . . . . . . 24 2 . 2 . 2 Incentive Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 2 . 3 Human Values , Motives and Digital Behaviors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 2 . 3 . 1 Human Values Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 2 . 3 . 2 Human Values and Online Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 2 . 3 . 3 The Self - Determination Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 2 . 3 . 4 Connecting Values and Motivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 3 Research Design and Methods 33 3 . 1 Research Gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 3 . 2 Research Philosophy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 3 . 3 Research Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 3 . 3 . 1 Stage 1 : Understanding the current state of practice in digital cit - izen science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 3 . 3 . 2 Stage 2 : Exploring the design of digital citizen science tools and incentive mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 3 . 3 . 3 Stage 3 : Understanding how motivational factors impact sustained participation in digital citizen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 3 . 3 . 4 Stage 4 : Exploring the co - design of digital citizen science tools and its impact on participation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 3 . 4 Research Ethics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 4 Explorations on Participation in Digital Citizen Science 45 4 . 1 Overview of the Publications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45 4 . 1 . 1 Publication I : Shut up and take my environmental data ! A study on ICT - enabled citizen science practices , participation approaches , and challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45 4 . 1 . 2 Publication II : The Role of Gamiﬁcation in Participatory Envi - ronmental Sensing : A Study In the Wild . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51 4 . 1 . 3 Publication III : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Sci - ence : Case Studies on J¨arviwiki and Safecast . . . . . . . . . . . 54 4 . 1 . 4 Publication IV : SENSEI : Harnessing Community Wisdom for Lo - cal Environmental Monitoring in Finland . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59 4 . 2 Further Explorations on The Role of Human Values in Digital Citizen Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 4 . 3 Summary of Design Reﬂections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70 5 Discussion 73 5 . 1 Revisiting the Research Questions and Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . 73 5 . 1 . 1 RQ1 . What are the current practices and challenges in digital citizen science ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 5 . 1 . 2 RQ2 . How does the design of processes , tools , and incentive mechanisms impact participation in digital citizen science ? . . . . 75 5 . 1 . 3 RQ3 . What motivational factors sustain participation in digital citizen science ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77 5 . 2 Assessment of the Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79 5 . 3 Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81 6 Conclusion 83 References 85 Appendix I : Informed Consents and Instruments 101 Publications 11 List of Publications This doctoral thesis consists of a summary and the following original publications . In this thesis , these publications are referred to as Publication I , Publication II , Publication III , and Publication IV . The publications are reproduced with the permission of the publish - ers . The candidate’s individual contributions to each publication are also presented below . Publication I : Palacin - Silva , M . , and Porras , J . ( 2018 ) . Shut up and take my environ - mental data ! A study on ICT - enabled citizen science practices , participation approaches , and challenges . In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Information and Communication Technology for Sustainability ICT4S , pp . 271 – 288 . Toronto , Canada : EPiC Series in Computing . The ﬁndings in this article are part of a larger research study carried by Victoria Palacin from 2015 – 2016 ( Palacin - Silva et al . , 2016 ) for the Finnish Environment Institute . Palacin conducted the data collection , the data analysis , and led the writing of the publication . Publication II : Palacin - Silva , M . V . , Knutas , A . , Ferrario , M . A . , Porras , J . , Ikonen , J . , and Chea , C . , ( 2018 ) . The Role of gamiﬁcation in participatory environmental sensing : A study in - the - wild . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1 – 13 , Montreal , Canada : ACM . Palacin led the planning of this study . The development of the artifact was part of a mas - ters’ thesis by MSc . Chandara Chea . Palacin led the data collection , data analysis , and writing of the article . The analysis results were validated by the co - authors . Publication III : Palacin , V . , Gilbert , S . , Orchard , S . , Eaton , A . , Ferrario , M . A , Happonen , A . ( 2020 ) . Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science : Case Studies on J¨arviwiki and Safecast . Citizen Science : Theory and Practice , Vol 5 ( 1 ) , No 22 , pp . 1 – 20 . Palacin led the planning and data collection of this study . Palacin , Gilbert , and Orchard carried the data analysis together to ensure the reliability of the results . She was the prin - cipal author of the publication . Publication IV : Palacin , V . , Ginnane , S . , Ferrario , M . A . , Happonen , A . , Wolff , A . , Piu - tunen , S . and Kupiainen , N . , ( 2019 ) . SENSEI : Harnessing community wisdom for local environmental monitoring in Finland . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1 – 8 , Glasgow , Scotland : ACM . Palacin led the planning , fundraising , and data collection of this study guided by her su - pervisors . Palacin was also responsible for the data analysis and led the writing of the article . 12 Related Publications ( not included in this thesis ) Palacin - Silva , M . V . ( 2018 ) . Understanding Civic Participation in Environmental Sens - ing : A Values Driven Approach . In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Doctoral Symposium Article . ACM . pp . 1 - 4 Palacin - Silva , M . , Seffah , A . , Heikkinen , K . , Porras , J . , Pyh¨alahti , T . , Sucksdorff , Y . , Anttila , S . , Alasalmi , H . , Bruun , E . and Junttila , S . , 2016 . State - of - the art study in cit - izen observatories : technological trends , development challenges and research avenues . ( 2016 ) . State - of - the art study in citizen observatories : technological trends , development challenges and research avenues . Reports of the Finnish Environment Institute 28 / 2016 . Palacin , V . , Nelimarkka , M . , Reynolds - Cu´ellar , P . , Becker , C . ( 2020 ) . The Design of Pseudo - Participation . In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory Design Conference 2020 - Participation ( s ) Otherwise . ACM . Vol . 2 , pp . 40 – 44 . Hajikhani , A . , Palacin - Silva , M . , Porras , J . ( 2018 ) . Crowd Intelligence Participation in Digital Ecosystem : Systematic Process for Driving Insight from Social Network Services Data . Academy of Management Global Proceedings , vol . 54 . Nomenclature FDR Bejamini - Hochbergh False Discovery Rate GDPR General Data Protection Regulation GLM Generalized Linear Model HCI Human - Computer Interaction IC Interval of Conﬁdence ICT4D Information and Communications Technologies for Development IRR Incidence Rate Ratios OR Odds Ratios PVQ Portrait Values Questionnaire SDT Self - Determination Theory TA Thematic Analysis TENK Tutkimuseettinen Neuvottelukunta UoM Units of Meaning UVT Universal Values Theory VFI Volunteers Function Inventory ViC Values in Computing 15 1 Introduction Digital citizen science platforms are prominent examples of modern volunteerism that provide people with opportunities to observe natural phenomena and to engage in sci - entiﬁc processes . Sustaining participation in these platforms is a well - known challenge for many initiatives . This doctoral thesis focuses on this issue through three different approaches , 1 ) a critical analysis of literature and practice reports , 2 ) in - depth case stud - ies , and 3 ) localized action research interventions . This chapter presents the background , scope , contributions , and structure of this thesis by compendium . 1 . 1 Background Technology enables public participation ( Ruge , 2015 ; Rotman et al . , 2014b ) , as it allows people to engage in initiatives that serve a breadth of purposes , such as open governance , community action , and participatory science . In particular , participatory science , has en - joyed considerable success in recent decades through a wide variety of digital citizen science projects , from millions of galaxies being classiﬁed through Galaxy Zoo , protein discoveries through the game FoldIt , to sustained fauna monitoring for a century through the bird count of the Audubon Society . At its core , citizen science is a research practice where members of the public collaborate with professional scientists to conduct scien - tiﬁc research ( Bonney et al . , 2009 ; Hand , 2010 ; Dickinson et al . , 2012 ) . Digital citizen science platforms have been designed to support citizen science activities through tech - nology ( Goldman et al . , 2009 ; Burke et al . , 2006 ; Ganti et al . , 2011 ; Guo et al . , 2014a ) . These platforms bring an opportunity to monitor social and environmental phenomena in large scales through technology ( Balestrini et al . , 2015 ; Newman et al . , 2012 ; Guo et al . , 2014a ) . Fundamentally , submitting observations through a digital citizen science plat - form is a deliberative act of modern public participation ( Palacin - Silva et al . , 2018 ) . Worldwide participation in citizen science is growing continuously ( Fritz et al . , 2019 ; Hoang , 2018 ) . Citizen science has become a pillar of the EU open science strategy ( Euro - pean Citizen Science Association , 2020 ; CitizenSData Science Hub , 2020 ; Hecker et al . , 2018 ) and it has been acknowledged as a relevant practice to advance the work of all Fed - eral Agencies in the United States through the Crowdsourcing and Citizen Science Act of 2016 ( CitizenScience . gov , 2020 ; United States Congress , 2016 ) . Citizen science has also been highlighted for its potential to support the achievement of sustainable development goals ( Fritz et al . , 2019 ) and institutions like the European Commission have increased the funding for citizen science in the previous decade through platforms such as FP7 , H2020 , and SWAFS ( European Commission , 2020 ) . Overall , it is estimated that in 2015 already , 1 . 3 to 2 . 3 million volunteers contributed $ 667 million to $ 2 . 5 billion in - kind annually to citizen science projects worldwide ( Sauermann and Franzoni , 2015 ; Theobald et al . , 2015 ) . In the midst of emergency situations , in particular , citizen science platforms have been on the frontline of emergency response . For example , during the 2020 COVID - 19 16 1 Introduction pandemic , the FoldIt platform 1 has sought to discover an antiviral protein to target and eradicate this disease with a community of 2 . 2 million citizen scientists ( FoldIt , 2020 ; Subreddit Stats , 2020 ) . Further , during the Fukushima power plant accident in 2011 , the Safecast platform and its members assembled devices to monitor radiation and collected the largest radiation records in human history ( over 40 million data points and counting ) ( Storey , 2014 ) . However , beyond the best - known digital citizen science platforms , medium - sized local digital citizen science initiatives face numerous challenges to sustain participation among their volunteers ( Foody et al . , 2017 ; Jennett and Cox , 2018 ; Orchard , 2019 ; Jackson , 2019 ; Preece , 2016 ) . This has motivated numerous studies in two main areas : 1 ) investigations into people’s motivations to engage in citizen science initiatives ( Jackson , 2019 ; Jennett and Cox , 2018 ; Jennett et al . , 2016 ; Orchard , 2019 ; Rotman et al . , 2012 ; Curtis , 2015 ) ; and 2 ) the design of incentive mechanisms to support the engaged action of people ( Restuccia et al . , 2016 ; Jaimes et al . , 2015 ; Duan et al . , 2017 ; Katmada et al . , 2016 ) . Yet , the former relies on self - reported data ( e . g . , surveys ) , thus , missing the link between self - reported motives and concrete actions . The latter functions on the assumption that reward - centric mechanisms ( e . g . , monetary incentives ) may enhance participation , although the effec - tiveness of such mechanisms has been proven to undermine sustained participation in volunteering initiatives ( Crompton , 2010 ; Knowles , 2013b ) . In human - computer interaction ( HCI ) , the challenge to sustain participation in digital cit - izen science has also motivated certain projects to become more open , participatory , and inclusive ( Balestrini et al . , 2017 , 2015 ; Vitos et al . , 2017 ; Preece , 2016 ) . For example , the Bristol Approach to citizen science is a people - led and issue - led method 2 , which emerged from a series of digital citizen science interventions in Europe . The approach provides tools to inform the design of participatory solutions to tackle issues of common interest . In this process , people can imagine , design , and build such solutions . Another project , called Sapelli ( Vitos et al . , 2017 ) , built collaborative data collection interfaces with non - literate forest communities in Congo , thereby demonstrating that a participatory approach to technology creation improves the experiences of volunteers and increases their willing - ness and conﬁdence to participate in science . This is part of a larger “civic turn” in HCI research , where scientists are increasingly col - laborating with communities in - the - wild , as they seek to better understand technology in our everyday lives ( Rogers , 2011 ; Rogers and Marshall , 2017 ; Balestrini et al . , 2014 ) . The ﬁeld is moving away from being conﬁned to the design and deployment of consultation technology ( Golsteijn et al . , 2016 ; Preece , 2016 ) toward a process of working alongside local communities to create and deploy community technologies that address matters of shared concern ( Wardle et al . , 2018 ; Simm et al . , 2013 ; Balestrini et al . , 2017 ; Coulson et al . , 2018 ; Wolff et al . , 2017 ) . This has resulted in a rich body of work that stud - ies the interplay between civics and technologies ( Johnson et al . , 2016 ; DiSalvo et al . , 1 FoldIt Solving Puzzles for Science : https : / / fold . it 2 The Bristol Approach to Citizen Sensing : www . bristolapproach . org 1 . 2 Research Scope and Approach 17 2016 ) that have enhanced our current understanding of human - technology interactions and supported the development of novel theories , technologies , and approaches . These approaches include research in the wild ( Rogers and Marshall , 2017 ) , participatory de - sign ( Wardle et al . , 2018 ) , speculative design ( DiSalvo et al . , 2016 ) , and action research interventions ( Balestrini et al . , 2014 ) . 1 . 2 Research Scope and Approach Extant research on digital citizen science has focused on understanding motivations to nurture sustained participation . However , sustaining concrete and long - term participa - tory actions in citizen science projects remains a major challenge for initiatives . Prior studies in social computing studies have evidenced that human values can be linked with online behaviors ( Chen et al . , 2014 ; Boyd et al . , 2015 ; Mukta et al . , 2016 ; Esau , 2018 ; Hsieh et al . , 2014 ) . These studies have revealed that personal values can be identiﬁed from language narratives ( Boyd et al . , 2015 ; Esau , 2018 ; Palacin et al . , 2020b ) , online content ( Chen et al . , 2014 ) , and digital interactions ( Mukta et al . , 2016 ; Kalimeri et al . , 2019 ) . Given this context , this thesis work argues that values research is key to the design of digital citizen processes , incentive mechanisms and technological platforms that foster sustained participation . This is because values underlie the motivations that drive volun - teering actions in digital citizen science . Throughout the research , a range of qualitative and quantitative methods were used . This work is exploratory in nature , as it focuses on understanding the motivation of volunteers in digital citizen science in different stages from the existing literature , case studies to empirical observation . The main research question of this thesis , What drives partici - pation in digital citizen science ? was answered through four stages aligned with three research questions ( See Figure 1 . 1 ) . These questions related to current practices in digital citizen science , the design of processes , tools and incentive mechanisms and the motiva - tional factors related with sustained participation . At the start of this doctoral research , a literature review was conducted to inform the research directions of this work . This was followed by four case studies : Jarvi , a study in - the - wild focused on exploring the effect of gamiﬁcation onto engagement with citizen science tools ; Jarviwiki and Safecast , which enabled the author to study the factors involved with long - term sustained participation in digital citizen science ; and SENSEI , a year long intervention with a local Finnish com - munity to create and use contextualized digital citizen science tools . These cases enabled the researcher to observe the phenomena , design interventions , and objectively measure the effect of such design decisions onto human - computer interactions . 18 1 Introduction Figure 1 . 1 : Research Approach Overview The understanding of motivation advanced with the research work . In the beginning , motivation was drawn from literature and practice reports ( publication II ) , then it was operationalized and measured through empirical observation in an in - the - wild experiment ( publication II ) . This led to an examination of different theories on social psychology regarding the motivations of volunteers in computer - mediated contexts . These theories were then employed as a framework to explore the motivations of long - term volunteers in digital citizen science ( publication III ) . Finally , a long - term intervention was designed ( publication IV ) to understand the role of human values’ orientations on digital actions in a digital citizen science case ( sub - chapter 4 . 2 ) . 1 . 2 . 1 Contributions The ultimate aim of this study is to advance our understanding of what motivates people to participate in a sustained manner in digital citizen science initiatives , so that the ﬁeld can advance towards using effective , validated , and theoretically based mechanisms to foster sustained participation . The contributions of this thesis are related to the three core topics : participation in digital citizen science , incentive mechanisms and values’ orientations . Figure 1 . 1 presents the relationship of the contributions in relation to the research questions , stages , and publications . Firstly , the “palette of participation” framework was designed and developed to illus - trate the different forms of participation in digital citizen science . The work is based on a systematic review of the practices , trends , volunteering motives , and challenges of 108 digital citizen projects ( publication I ) . 1 . 2 Research Scope and Approach 19 Secondly , the shortcomings of incentive mechanisms were identiﬁed through the em - pirical analysis of the role of gamiﬁcation on digital citizen science ( publication II ) ; and in - depth qualitative analyses of two outstanding digital citizen science cases , which were guided by two prominent social psychology theories ( Schwartz’s Human Values Theory and Self - Determination Theory ) ( publication III ) . Thirdly , the study of the relationship between values’ orientations and interactions was achieved through a qualitative mapping of values’ orientations among 15 volunteers of two outstanding digital citizen science cases ( publication III ) , and the quantitative anal - ysis of the relations between values orientations , sustained participation , and the number and quality of digital interactions in a year - long experimental study ( n = 85 ) in - the - wild ( publication IV and sub - chapter 4 . 2 ) . 1 . 2 . 2 Thesis Outline This thesis begins with an overview of related research on participatory science , digital citizen science , and volunteering motives ( in Chapter 2 ) . Chapter 3 presents the research methods , synthesizing all design activities , data collection and analysis procedures in the four research stages . The results of this work are presented through an overview of the publications in Chapter 4 . Further , chapter 4 also presents a summary of design reﬂections and leanings from each study by themes . Thereafter , these results are reﬂected upon in the discussion ( in Chapter 5 ) in light of current developments in the ﬁeld . Finally , the conclusion of this doctoral research is presented in Chapter 6 . 21 2 Related Research This chapter highlights the work used as basis to develop this thesis . Sub - chapter 2 . 1 describes the history of public participation in the context of science . Sub - chapter 2 . 2 draws from a multi - disciplinary body of knowledge to describe digital citizen science , volunteer’s motivations , and incentive mechanisms . Finally , sub - chapter 2 . 3 describes the theoretical work from social psychology used in this thesis , and its relation to HCI studies of online participation . 2 . 1 Public participation : A Short History Public participation has become a norm in policy and decision - making in most countries ( Quick and Bryson , 2016 ; Mapuva , 2015 ) and an irreplaceable part of the sustainable de - velopment agenda ( Brundtland et al . , 1987 ; United Nations , 1992 ) . This is a result of the signiﬁcant evolution of the relationship between governments and citizens in the past 60 years — from consciousness - raising in the 1960s the incorporation of local perspectives in the 1970s , the recognition of local knowledge in the 1980s , the participation as a norm as part of the sustainable development agenda of the 1990s , and the e - participation gover - nance in the 2000s ( United Nations , 1992 ; UNECE , 1998 ; Reed , 2008 ; Brundtland et al . , 1987 ; Wehn et al . , 2015 ; Le Blanc , 2020 ) . It has been widely recognized that “environmental issues are best handled with the partic - ipation of all concerned citizens” ( United Nations , 1992 ; UNECE , 1998 ) . This is particu - larly true for environmental decision - making , where public participation has been sought and embedded into environmental policy , from local to international scales , in an attempt to strive for improvement in the quality , acceptance , and durability of decisions ( Reed , 2008 ) . 2 . 1 . 1 Public Participation in Science Humans have a natural curiosity , to understand phenomena and the environment around us . This has led us to observe our surrounding nature and society since old times . For ex - ample , in ancient Egypt , there were professionals called “scribes” who , in collaboration with the people , were responsible for keeping records of the harvests and army numbers using hieroglyphics . The practice of cooperation between independent researchers and regular citizens has evolved through human history , becoming known as “citizen science” in the twentieth century . This term was ﬁrst coined by Irwin ( Irwin , 2002 ) , as a “scien - tiﬁc citizenship which foregrounds the necessity of opening up science and science policy processes to the public” . In the 1990s , Bonney and co - authors deﬁned it as deﬁned it as “public - participation engagement and science communication projects” ( Bonney et al . , 2009 ) . 22 2 Related Research An outstanding example of community participation is citizen science . Citizen science is a research practice where members of the public collaborate with professional scientists to conduct scientiﬁc research ( Bonney et al . , 2009 ; Hand , 2010 ; Dickinson et al . , 2012 ) . Digital citizen science 3 introduces the use of technology to help people to conduct activ - ities such as collecting , categorizing , transcribing , or analyzing scientiﬁc data regarding a phenomenon of interest ( Bonney et al . , 2014 ; Heggen , 2013 ; Burke et al . , 2006 ) . This practice has become extremely popular numerous many scientiﬁc disciplines in the pre - vious decade , as mobile technologies have spread rapidly in our lives ( Le Blanc , 2020 ; Dickinson et al . , 2012 ; Wehn et al . , 2015 ) . Certain citizen science projects have already achieved outstanding results , like the creation of the largest radiation records in history by Safecast ( Safecast , 2019 ) , large records of bird populations by eBird ( eBird , 2019 ) , iden - tifying new galaxy elements by GalaxyZoo ( Zoouniverse project , 2019 ) , and discoveries of different protein types by fold . it ( University of Washington Center for Game Science , 2020 ) . As societies increasingly require strong partnerships — mediated by technology — among people , communities , and authorities to enhance decision - making and the protection and maintenance of our commons ( Harding et al . , 2015 ; Gui and Nardi , 2015 ; DiSalvo et al . , 2016 ) , digital citizen science platforms have taken larger roles than solely that of scientiﬁc monitoring . Further , digital citizen science platforms also serve the public in solving daily problems ( e . g . , ﬁnding the best route home ) and enhancing decision - making in cities . Hence , people are at the very operational core of these applications for two main reasons : ﬁrst , because of the manner in which they are operated , any digital citizen science tool is doomed to fail if it has no participants ; and second , because of the great value of local knowledge and the intimate understanding the public has of the patterns and anomalies in their communities . This local knowledge can complement expert assessments , as it includes important contextual information ( Burke et al . , 2006 ) . 3 Also known as citizen sensing , collaborative mapping , community monitoring , science 2 . 0 , crowd - sourcing , contributed geographic information , crowdsensing and participatory sensing ( See et al . , 2016 ; Wehn et al . , 2015 ) . 2 . 2 Digital Citizen Science 23 2 . 2 Digital Citizen Science “Participatory sensing is data collection and interpretation enabled by technology” ( Burke et al . , 2006 ; Goldman et al . , 2009 ) Digital citizen science projects combine monitoring with participatory actions . They are rooted in citizen science practices and have become popular across scientiﬁc disciplines ( Rotman et al . , 2014b ) , because mobile technology has become pervasive and able to capture , classify , and transmit location , image , voice , and other data autonomously ( Ross , 2011 ; Chamberlain et al . , 2013 ; Estrin et al . , 2010 ; Goldman et al . , 2009 ) . In the early 2000s , city development , urban crime surveillance , and forest conserva - tion were highlighted as promising applications of digital citizen science ( Nyerges et al . , 2006 ) . Over two decades later , the applications in these domains ( among many others ) have widely spread among the public . For example , FixMyStreet 4 allows people to re - port city issues , for example , broken pavement ) to enhance city maintenance ; In 2007 Ushahidi 5 helped the Kenyan government to map violent acts across the country and has been used in over 10 countries since then ; eBird 6 was launched in 2002 to collect basic data on bird distribution across the globe . Thus far , eBird has collected hundreds of mil - lions of observations from most countries in the world . Finally , Safecast 7 was launched by the people as an initiative to monitor the radiation levels in Japan after the nuclear ac - cident in Fukushima in 2011 in the midst of major doubts of ofﬁcial government records regarding radiation levels . Currently , it has become the largest monitoring network in the history of the planet . With people regularly using technologies for different civic purposes from open gover - nance , community action , to participatory science ( e . g . , collective city monitoring , shar - ing of local knowledge , and orchestration of community actions ) . Massive digital citizen science platforms have emerged and engaged millions of people to observe various phe - nomena in nature and society . With environmental monitoring becoming its largest area of application ( some outstanding examples are summarized in table 2 . 1 ) . As a result , digital citizen science projects are playing an increasingly important role in scientiﬁc progress and raising public awareness , both of which help foster informed decision - making and strengthen democracies ( See et al . , 2016 ) . In addition , the data collected on these plat - forms can support data literacy activities within communities ( Coulson et al . , 2018 ; Wolff et al . , 2019 ) . 4 FixMyStreet : http : / / www . fixmystreet . com 5 Ushahidi : http : / / www . ushahidi . com 6 eBird website : http : / / www . ebird . org 7 Safecast website : http : / / blog . safecast . org 24 2 Related Research Table 2 . 1 : Examples of Environmental Digital Citizen Science Projects ( adapted from ( Palacin - Silva et al . , 2016 ) ) Monitoring focus Project examples Species eBird , Great SunFlower , Great Backyard Bird Count , iBats , Riista City FixMyStreet , SeeClickFix , VizWiz , Waze , CiclePhilly Water bodies J¨arviwiki , Brooklying Atlantis , LAKEWATCH , Creek Watch , CoCoRaHS Biota Plant Watch , Leaf Watch , iNatural , Mountain Watch , Nature’s Calendar UK , Scistarter , fold . it Air and radiation Making sense project , Safecast , Noise Tube , CitiSense , Bucket Brigades Astronomy and climate change Galaxy zoo , Spring watch , GLOBE at Night Disasters iShake , Did you feel it ? , Wesenseit Tools to create your own monitoring campaign Ushahidi , CitSci , Public Lab , Scistarter Digital citizen science platforms have been designed to support people - driven data col - lection of meaningful , located environmental data via mobile devices ( Goldman et al . , 2009 ; Burke et al . , 2006 ; Guo et al . , 2014a ; Ganti et al . , 2011 ) . These platforms represent an opportunity to monitor social and environmental phenomena on a large scale through technology ( Balestrini et al . , 2015 ; Newman et al . , 2012 ; Guo et al . , 2014b ) and have been used for a variety of purposes , including scientiﬁc research and crisis communication ( Es - trin et al . , 2010 ; Goldman et al . , 2009 ) . Whilst serving as an effective means for inclusive engagement , education , and civic outreach ( Bonney et al . , 2009 ; Hand , 2010 ; Dickinson et al . , 2012 ) . 2 . 2 . 1 Motivations to Volunteer in Digital Citizen Science Understanding what drives people to volunteer has been a focus of interest in social sci - ences . The volunteer functions inventory ( VFI ) , for instance , conceptualizes six motiva - tions that lead people to volunteer : values ( altruistic concerns for others ) , understanding ( acquiring new skills ) , enhancement ( self - development ) , career ( obtaining career beneﬁts from participation in volunteer work ) , social ( engaging in interactions according to social standards ) and protective ( ensuring own welfare ) ( Clary and Snyder , 1999 ; Clary et al . , 1998 ; Schrock et al . , 2000 ) . Another relevant study in this ﬁeld , points out that there are four types of drivers for community involvement : egoism , altruism , collectivism , and principlism ( Batson et al . , 2002 ) . These frameworks have also been used to explain why people volunteer in environmental conservation activities ( Bonneau et al . , 2003 ) . Yet , with the advance of technology and subsequent emergence of mass - used digital citi - zen science platforms , new studies relating to the motivations of online volunteering have been published in two main areas , a ) studies focused on identifying and reporting the motivations of participants from interviews and surveys ( Curtis , 2015 ; Jennett and Cox , 2018 ; Reed et al . , 2013 ; Rotman et al . , 2012 ; Orchard , 2019 ; Iacovides et al . , 2013 ) , and b ) the creation of reward - centric incentive mechanisms to increase volunteers’ engage - 2 . 2 Digital Citizen Science 25 ment ( Restuccia et al . , 2016 ; Jaimes et al . , 2015 ) . Field projects such as iSPEX ( Land - Zandstra et al . , 2016 ) , Zoouniverse ( Reed et al . , 2013 ) , Stardust @ home ( Nov et al . , 2011 ) , Happy Match ( Crowston and Prestopnik , 2013 ) , the Great Pollinator ( Domroese and Johnson , 2017 ) and online citizen science experi - ments ( Jackson , 2019 ) have reported that their participants are driven by a deep interest in contributing to science , followed by curiosity ( e . g . to try new devices or experiences ) , learning interests , enjoyment of the activities and social engagements ( e . g . sense of com - munity ) . In addition , research studies of Foldit ( Iacovides et al . , 2013 ) , Eyewire ( Curtis , 2015 ) and small - scale citizen science projects ( Rotman et al . , 2012 , 2014a ) have high - lighted that recognition is also a driver of participation . Some studies have also explored the temporality of volunteers’ motivations in citizen science ( Rotman et al . , 2014a , b ) . Despite these advances , digital citizen science initiatives continue to face numerous chal - lenges to sustain participation among their volunteers ( Foody et al . , 2017 ; Jennett and Cox , 2018 ; Orchard , 2019 ) and this is driving a deeper interest towards the understanding the ”user experiences” of volunteers in online spaces such as digital citizen science ( Jen - nett and Cox , 2018 ; Jackson , 2019 ; Preece , 2016 ; Gilbert , 2017 ; Skarlatidou et al . , 2019 ; Ceccaroni et al . , 2019 ) . 2 . 2 . 2 Incentive Mechanisms To meet the motivational needs of volunteers and nurture sustained participation behav - iors , citizen science projects may use incentive mechanisms . Incentive mechanisms have been proposed as a technique to build sustained participation behaviors in digital citi - zen science projects . Most of these incentive mechanisms focus on providing a reward to enhance participation . Table 2 . 2 summarizes 25 meta types of incentive mechanisms from two taxonomies ( Jaimes et al . , 2015 ; Restuccia et al . , 2016 ) . These mechanisms provide incentives that range from remuneration ( e . g . , through micropayments , gamiﬁ - cation , and reputation mechanisms ) to non - monetary incentives ( e . g . , social rewards and hedonism - enhancing features ) often aligned with auction theories and / or resource or pri - vacy awareness principles ( Jaimes et al . , 2015 ; Restuccia et al . , 2016 ; Khan et al . , 2012 ) . Some projects ( e . g . , FoldIt and Eyewire ) have reported that gamiﬁcation and “quid pro quo” approaches ( exchange of beneﬁts ) enhance volunteers’ engagement with the projects ( Iacovides et al . , 2013 ; Curtis , 2015 ) . 26 2 Related Research Table 2 . 2 : Taxonomies of Incentive Mechanisms in Digital Citizen Science ( Palacin et al . , 2020b ) Source Type Mechanism Taxonomy of IncentiveMechanisms for Citizen Science by Luis Jaimes and co - authors Jaimes et al . ( 2015 ) Monetary UniformmicropaymentsMacromicropaymentsRADP - VP - RC Credit satisfaction indexMultiinteractionRegretminimizationSteeredcrowdsensingPlatform - centric User centric VGC reverse Collective motives Noise Spy P - Sense Social reward : interaction NoisetubeCenceme Social reward : self interest LivecompareMobishop Intrinsic motives and fun ebirdingFloracaching Taxonomy of Incentive Mechanisms in Participatory Sensing by Francesco Restuccia and co - authors Restuccia et al . ( 2016 ) General purpose Non game theoreticalAuctionbasedtheoryNon - auction based theory Application speciﬁc Quid pro quo Information trade Gamiﬁcation 2 . 3 Human Values , Motives , and Digital Behaviors “Individual behavior is the result of a trade - off between values , motivations , traits , habits , ideologies , attitudes and life circumstances” ( Maio , 2016 , p . 51 - 126 ) . Research on digital citizen science has focused on understanding concrete actions ( i . e . , volunteering behaviors ) to nurture participatory behaviors ( Jennett and Cox , 2018 ; Land - Zandstra et al . , 2016 ; Reed et al . , 2013 ; Nov et al . , 2011 ; Crowston and Prestopnik , 2013 ; Domroese and Johnson , 2017 ; Rotman et al . , 2012 ; Iacovides et al . , 2013 ; Curtis , 2015 ; Orchard , 2019 ) . Yet , sustaining participation in citizen science projects remains a major challenge for initiatives ( See for example : publication II , ( Jennett and Cox , 2018 ; See et al . , 2016 ) . As Knowles highlights in her work ( Knowles , 2013b , p . 103 ) : “trying to af - fect behavior without affecting the underlying motivations for this behavior ( e . g . , values , frames , worldview ) is a Sisyphean task : no matter how much progress is made , there will continue to be powerful forces working against success . ” 2 . 3 Human Values , Motives and Digital Behaviors 27 Scholarly work in social psychology argues that behavior is the result of the trade - off between values and motivations alongside other individual differences , including traits , habits , ideologies , attitudes , and life circumstances ( Maio , 2016 , p . 51 - 126 ) , ( Grouzet et al . , 2005 ; Kasser and Ryan , 1996 ; Kasser , 2002 ) . In this doctoral thesis , we explore the be - havioral drivers ( values and motives ) that underlie initial and sustained participation in digital citizen science projects through two macro theories on human motivation — the Schwartz’s Human Values Theory ( Schwartz , 2012 ) and Self - determination Theory ( Ryan and Deci , 2000b ) . We focus on the Schwartz human values and the self - determination theory , ﬁrst , because these theories focus on understanding individual people instead of national cultures , and , second because they include values and goals that apply on dif - ferent life domains . Moreover , both theories have been validated in several domains and different countries and are considered prominent theories that investigate the concept of needs ( Maio , 2016 , p . 53 - 59 ) . However , in computer - mediated research , both theories have been studied in isolation to explain human - computer interactions ( Chen et al . , 2014 ; Snyder et al . , 2016 ) . 2 . 3 . 1 Human Values Theory “Every human has a set of values” Milton Rokeach ( Rokeach , 1973 , p . 5 ) Human values are considered to be guiding principles of life , that organize peoples’ atti - tudes , emotions , and behaviors , and typically endure across time and situations ( Schwartz , 2006 ) . Prior research has shown the correlation between people’s values and their ac - tions and behaviors ( see , for example , ( Crompton , 2010 ; Seddig and Davidov , 2018 ; Kingston , 2016 ; Bardi and Schwartz , 2003 ) . The theory of universal human values ( UVT ) by Schwartz is an established theory in social psychology that aims at capturing an indi - vidual’s values . It was developed and validated through surveys in 67 nations ( Schwartz , 2003 ) . Schwartz’s theory identiﬁes 10 basic human values that derive from three universal human needs : social interaction , biological needs , and survival needs of groups . These 10 basic human values map onto four higher - level value dimensions : 1 ) self - enhancement ( concerned about oneself ) ; 2 ) self - transcendence ( concerned about others’ well - being ) ; 3 ) openness to change ( readiness for change ) and ; 4 ) conservationist ( preservation of the current status and resistance to change ) ( Schwartz , 2003 , 2006 ) . This theory focuses on understanding individual people instead of national cultures ( Schwartz , 2003 ) . Human values , speciﬁcally Schwartz’s values , have shown to be predictive of participation deci - sions in online contexts ( Chen et al . , 2014 ; Boyd et al . , 2015 ; Mukta et al . , 2016 ; Esau , 2018 ; Hsieh et al . , 2014 ) . Moreover , Schwartz’s theory has been validated in several do - mains and in dozens of different countries ( Maio , 2016 , p . 53 - 59 ) . 28 2 Related Research Figure 2 . 1 : Schwartz’ Human Values circumplex ( redrawn from ( Schwartz , 2003 ) ) As depicted in Figure 2 . 1 , the circumplex structure in Schwartz’s values theory indicates the strengthening and suppressing dynamics between values . For example , the closer the values are to one another , the more similar their underlying motivations are . Moreover , the activation of a value has a strengthening effect on neighboring values ( known as the bleed - over effect ) . Further , values on opposing sides of the circumplex tend to suppress each other ( known as the see - saw effect ) ( Holmes et al . , 2012 ) . Below , we introduce these four values’ dimensions : • Openness - to - change includes two basic human values related to independence and excitement : a ) Stimulation , to pursue excitement , novelty , and challenge in life ; and b ) self - direction , to pursue independent thought and action , choosing , creating , exploring . • Self - transcendence includes two basic human values related with altruism : a ) uni - versalism , to pursue understanding , appreciation , tolerance , and protection for the well - being of everyone and for nature ; and b ) benevolence , to pursue the preserva - tion and enhancement of the welfare of the people we know . • Conservation includes three basic human values related to stable practices in life : a ) tradition , to pursue respect , commitment , and acceptance of traditional practices aligned with culture or religion ; b ) conformity , to pursue restraint of actions , incli - nations , and impulses likely to upset or harm others and violate social expectations or norms ; and c ) security , to pursue safety , harmony , and stability of society , of relations , and of self . 2 . 3 Human Values , Motives and Digital Behaviors 29 • Self - enhancement include three basic human values related with self - realization : a ) power , to pursue social status and prestige , control or dominance over people and resources ; b ) achievement , to pursue personal success through demonstrating competence according to social standards and , c ) hedonism , to pursue pleasure and sensuous gratiﬁcation for oneself . Prior research has shown the relationship between between people’s values and their cor - responding actions and behaviors ( see , for example , ( Crompton , 2010 ; Seddig and Davi - dov , 2018 ; Kingston , 2016 ; Bardi and Schwartz , 2003 ) . It is argued that people feel a sense of fulﬁlment when their actions are aligned with their most important values ( Rokeach , 1973 ) . This causes a conscious and / or unconscious pursuit for consistency between values and behavioral choices ( Bardi and Schwartz , 2003 ; Crompton , 2010 ) . Of - ten , values are grouped as intrinsic and extrinsic ( Crompton , 2010 , pg . 77 ) . Intrinsic values represent values related to caring about issues bigger than the self ( e . g . , benev - olence ) and the extrinsic values are those related to individual self - enhancement ( e . g . , power ) . However , it has been debated whether this grouping is an oversimpliﬁcation of values ( Foundation , 2014 ) , because some values may be seen as neither intrinsic nor ex - trinsic ( such as security ) and the binary grouping gives the mistaken impression of one being better than the other . SDT can offer some insights to inform this debate . 2 . 3 . 2 Human Values and Online Behavior Traditionally human values have been studied in several domains including social psy - chology ( Schwartz , 2006 ; Maio , 2016 ; Bilsky et al . , 2011 ) and political sciences ( Feld - man , 2003 ) . More recently , however , scholars in computing - related research areas such as human - computer interaction and software engineering have started centering this theory in their studies . For instance , the value - sensitive design approach ( Friedman and Hendry , 2019 ) uses human values to guide the design decisions of technology creators and ; the values - ﬁrst software engineering approach ( Ferrario et al . , 2016 ) studies how values af - fect software production ( Winter et al . , 2018 ) . Further , social computing studies have evidenced that human values can predict and ex - plain online behaviors ( Chen et al . , 2014 ; Boyd et al . , 2015 ; Mukta et al . , 2016 ; Esau , 2018 ; Hsieh et al . , 2014 ) . These studies have revealed that personal values can be iden - tiﬁed from language narratives ( See for example : publication III and ( Boyd et al . , 2015 ; Esau , 2018 ) ) online content ( Chen et al . , 2014 ) and digital interactions ( Mukta et al . , 2016 ; Kalimeri et al . , 2019 ) . For example , a study showed that words used on Reddit forums were indicative of personal value orientations ( Chen et al . , 2014 ) , while another study showed how digital interactions on social media can be predictors of human values ( Mukta et al . , 2016 ) . Moreover , prior work has shown how human values can predict topical interests when reading online content ( Hsieh et al . , 2014 ) . 30 2 Related Research 2 . 3 . 3 The Self - Determination Theory Self - determination theory ( SDT ) ( Ryan and Deci , 2000b ) is a macro - theory of motivation with a number of empirically testable instruments that have been widely validated across varied contexts , such as learning ( Ryan and Deci , 2000a ) , gaming and game design ( Ty - ack and Mekler , 2020 ) , and online peer production ( Benkler , 2011 ) . The theory addresses the source of underlying needs that give rise to activity , such as autonomy ( control over one’s goals and actions ) , competence ( sense of mastery at tasks and / or new learning ) , and relatedness ( experiencing a sense of social belonging ) , acknowledging that support and nutriments from the social context of the environment are sought to satisfy growth devel - opment ( Ryan and Deci , 2000a , b , 2017 ) . According to the SDT , motivations fall along a spectrum from intrinsic to extrinsic ac - cording to the level of self - determination ( see Figure 2 . 2 ) , where intrinsic motivations are inherently pleasing ( e . g . , reading for pleasure ) , while extrinsic motivations lead to an external reward ( e . g . , reading to do well on an exam ) . A beneﬁt of the SDT is that it untangles the binarity of prior understandings of motivation by evidencing the existence of six types of motivations that fall along a spectrum from intrinsic to extrinsic ( see Fig - ure 2 . 2 ) . Intrinsic motives have often been emphasized as key to sustaining engagement , whilst extrinsic motives have often been disregarded due to the assumption that they lead to resentfulness or disinterest ( Ryan and Deci , 2000b ) . Figure 2 . 2 : The spectrum of motivation according to the self - determination theory . ( re - drawn in a vertical form from ( Ryan and Deci , 2000b ) ) 2 . 3 Human Values , Motives and Digital Behaviors 31 SDT has evidenced that not all extrinsic motivators are the same ; rather , they have varying degrees of internalization and integration , where internalization refers to the process of taking a value as one’s own , and integration refers to the process by which individuals come to think of an externally motivated task as self - enforced . As extrinsic motivations are internalized , they move upwards in the continuum towards intrinsic motivation . Thus , while some extrinsic motivations could lead to resentment , others are positively motivat - ing and can drive people to perform tasks willingly and enthusiastically , so long as these extrinsic motivators are self - enforced and autonomous . The following list presents the scale of motivations as deﬁned by Ryan and Deci ( 2000a ) : 1 . Non - regulation , which describes lacking the intention to act , not feeling competent , and believing that acting will not yield the desired outcome . 2 . External regulation , which describes actions performed to satisfy a demand or ex - ternally imposed reward ( e . g . , my friends would be angry with me if I quit using Twitter ) . 3 . Introjected regulation , which describes actions performed due to pressure , to avoid guilt , or to enhance ego , self - esteem , and / or self - worth ( e . g . , I would feel guilty if I quit using Fitbit ) . 4 . Identiﬁed regulation , in which the goal is of personal importance , so activities con - ducted are accepted as one’s own ( e . g . , Using Excel to keep track of expenses ) . 5 . Integrated regulation , in which activities are fully assimilated to the self . These motivations share qualities with intrinsic motivation but are extrinsic because they are still conducted for an outcome that is separate from the behavior , even though it is valued by the self ( e . g . , using Twitter to keep apprised of current work in my ﬁeld ) . 6 . Intrinsic regulation , in which behavior is completely self - determined and , in con - trast to extrinsic motivation , not a means to an end but rather pursued for its own sake . Intrinsically motivated behavior is sustained by the experience of interest and enjoyment . Studying motivations provides key insights into why people freely devote their time and energy to volunteer projects . Benkler ( 2011 ) argues that participation in user - driven en - terprises , like digital citizen science , is because humans are largely selﬂess— - and while self - interest is a factor— people are driven to social and collaborative production . This argument makes the self - determination theory particularly compelling , as it focuses on the source of people’s motivations , whether internal or external , rather than on individ - ual motivations . Further , in providing a spectrum of motivations along a continuum from intrinsic to extrinsic , SDT provides a level of detail that cannot be derived when using a binary , intrinsic / extrinsic approach . 32 2 Related Research 2 . 3 . 4 Connecting Values and Motivations In 2017 , new ﬁndings in values research noted that “value instantiations” were the bridge between abstract values and speciﬁc actions ( Hanel et al . , 2017 ) . Researchers observed that even if the same level of importance is attributed to value , different people may per - form different actions for a speciﬁc value . This was attributed to the differences in con - texts and personal experiences across the world ( Hanel et al . , 2017 ) . Recent research studies conceptualize human values as mental constructs that can be stud - ied on at three different levels ( Maio , 2016 ; Winter et al . , 2018 ) ( See Figure 2 . 3 ) : System ( L1 ) , represented by a model of values relationships , extensively tested by empirical re - search ( Schwartz et al . , 2012 ) ; Abstract ( L2 ) , related to personal interpretations of each value ; and Instantiation ( L3 ) , the actual behaviours driven by different values . Figure 2 . 3 : Levels of Human Values as Mental Representations by ( Winter et al . , 2018 ) , with permission In this study , we acknowledge the feedback relationship between actions , motivations , and values ( See Figure 2 . 4 ) and see motivations as — highly contextual and temporal — value instantiations that drive actions ( Hanel et al . , 2017 ; Maio , 2016 ) . Figure 2 . 4 : Feedback relationship between values , motives , and actions ( combined three ﬁgures from ( Hanel et al . , 2017 , p . 176 ) , ( Palacin - Silva , 2018 , p . 4 ) and ( Knowles , 2013b , p . 103 ) 33 3 Research Design and Methods “Research is the creative and systematic work undertaken in order to increase the stock of knowledge — including knowledge of humankind , culture , and society — and to devise new applications of available knowledge” ( OECD , 2015 , pg . 44 ) This chapter details the research approach of this dissertation . The motivation of this re - search is presented in 3 . 1 through the research gap and research questions . The overall philosophies that guided the work are described in sub - chapter 3 . 2 . The research ap - proach is detailed in sub - chapter 3 . 3 . Lastly , the chapter ends with sub - chapter 3 . 4 , which focuses on the ethical considerations of this research . 3 . 1 Research Gap Beyond the best - known digital citizen science platforms , medium - sized local digital cit - izen science initiatives face numerous challenges to sustain participation among their volunteers ( Foody et al . , 2017 ; Jennett and Cox , 2018 ; Orchard , 2019 ) . This has mo - tivated numerous studies in two main areas : 1 ) investigations into people’s motivations to engage in citizen science initiatives ( Jackson , 2019 ; Curtis , 2015 ; Jennett and Cox , 2018 ; Reed et al . , 2013 ; Rotman et al . , 2012 ; Orchard , 2019 ; Iacovides et al . , 2013 ) ; and 2 ) the design of incentive mechanisms to support people’s engaged action ( Restuc - cia et al . , 2016 ; Jaimes et al . , 2015 ) . Yet , the former relies on self - reported data ( e . g . , surveys ) , thus missing the link between self - reported motives and concrete actions . The latter functions on the assumption that reward - centric mechanisms ( e . g . , monetary in - centives ) may enhance participation , although the effectiveness of such mechanisms has been proven to undermine sustained participation in volunteering initiatives ( Crompton , 2010 ; Knowles , 2013b ) . This context motivated the main research question of this thesis , What drives participation in digital citizen science ? The following four research sub - questions helped answer the main question : RQ1 : What are the current practices and challenges in digital citizen science ? RQ2 : How does the design of processes , tools , and incentive mechanisms impact partic - ipation in digital citizen science ? RQ3 : What motivational factors sustain participation in digital citizen science ? 34 3 Research Design and Methods 3 . 2 Research Philosophy This dissertation belongs to the ﬁeld of HCI . This is an academic and design discipline that focuses on the design of technology and , in particular , in the interaction between humans and technologies ( Interaction Design Foundation , 2020 ) . This ﬁeld incorporates the study of multiple disciplines , such as computer science , cognitive science , ethnography , and de - sign ( Carroll and Kjeldskov , 2013 ; Dix , 2020 ) . Given the multidisciplinarity of HCI , this ﬁeld inherits the dominant epistemologies of the disciplines that comprise it , such as the post - positivist epistemology of cognitive psychology and the constructionist perspective of designers and ethnographers . As a result , it is common that HCI researchers adopt an objective perspective for one project and a constructionist perspective for another ( Brey , 2005 ) . This work is exploratory in nature ( Dix , 2020 , p . 9 ) , as it ﬁrst focused on understanding the motivation of volunteers in digital citizen science in different stages from extant liter - ature ( publication I ) . This was followed by explorations on how to design digital citizen science tools that foster different types of participation ( publications II and IV ) and in - depth observation of sustained participation in outstanding digital citizen science projects ( publication III ) . This allowed the researcher to observe the phenomena , design interven - tions and objectively measure the effect of those design decisions onto human - computer interactions . As a result , knowledge has discovered some stages and constructed at an - other . 3 . 3 Research Approach This research argues that to foster sustained participation in digital citizen science , the un - derlying human values must be taken into account when designing and evaluating associ - ated initiatives , incentive mechanisms , and technological tools . This work has developed contributions related to : participation in digital citizen science , incentive mechanisms and values’ orientations through a 1 ) critical analysis of literature and practice reports , 2 ) case studies , and 3 ) localized action research interventions . The research approach consisted of four stages ( Figure 3 . 1 ) , using qualitative and quanti - tative methods to complement one another . The qualitative methods included interviews , workshops , focus groups , and surveys with open - ended questions . The quantitative meth - ods included usage data logging , data models ( logistic and negative binomial regressions ) , and scale - based questionnaires . The data collection was conducted during the years 2015 – 2018 . A total of 299 individuals participated in the studies ( 41 in publication II , 15 in publication III and 243 in publication IV ) . Publication I analyzed 70 papers in depth . Publication II analyzed 82 survey responses and 304 data logs regarding submissions . Publication III collected 15 interviews and analyzed 1517 units of meaning . Publica - tion IV analyzed 149 survey responses , 20 workshop notes , 15 interviews ( individual and focus groups ) , 300 data logs regarding submissions , and 5014 interactions logs . 3 . 3 Research Approach 35 Figure 3 . 1 : Research Approach Overview 36 3 Research Design and Methods The understanding of motivation advanced with the research work . In the beginning , motivation was extracted from literature and practice reports ( publication I ) , then it was operationalized and explored through empirical observation in an in - the - wild experiment ( publication II ) . This led to an examination of different theories on social psychology with regard to the motivations of volunteers in computer - mediated contexts . These the - ories were then used as a framework to explore the motivations of long - term volunteers in digital citizen science ( publication III ) . Finally , a long - term intervention was designed ( publication IV ) to understand how higher agency in technology design impacts partici - pation and factors such as human values sustain participation ( sub - chapter 4 . 2 ) . The following sections summarize each research stage , including an overview of its meth - ods for data collection and analysis , participants , and research processes . Appendix I con - tains the informed consents and instruments used in these studies . 3 . 3 . 1 Stage 1 : Understanding the current state of practice in digital citizen science The ﬁrst stage aimed at understanding the current state of practice in digital citizen sci - ence . For this purpose , a systematic literature review was performed to map the practices , trends , and challenges of citizen observatories globally ; for this , the study reviewed the last 10 years of citizen science literature . This resulted in the study of 108 digital citizen science projects extracted from a literature corpus of 70 articles ( publication I ) . • Procedure and methods : The overreaching methodological approach of this study was thematic analysis ( TA ) , which is “a method for identifying , analyzing and re - porting patterns ( themes ) within data” ( Braun and Clarke , 2006 ) . The study con - sisted of ﬁve phases : phase 1 . familiarization with the data ; phase 2 . generating initial codes ; phase 3 . searching for themes ; phase 4 . reviewing themes and ; phase 5 . deﬁning and naming themes , and sub - themes . • Data collection : The objective of this article was to ﬁnd literature reporting digital citizen science initiatives and to identify , analyze , and report their trends , practices , and challenges . Moreover , systematic review techniques ( Kitchenham , 2004 ; Keele et al . , 2007 ) were used as part of the TA phases to select relevant literature as the data source for the thematic analysis . This is because conducting a systematic litera - ture review is a logical ﬁrst step when beginning to research a new area , particularly for doctoral students , who are seeking to become experts in a research ﬁeld ( Keele et al . , 2007 ) . 3 . 3 Research Approach 37 3 . 3 . 2 Stage 2 : Exploring the design of digital citizen science tools and incentive mechanisms Stage two aimed at understanding how digital incentive mechanisms impact participation in digital citizen science . For this , an exploratory experiment that investigated the impact of a digital incentive mechanism ( gamiﬁcation ) on user engagement in a digital citizen science platform was designed . Publication II contains the details of this research stage . • Procedure and methods : This study designed an in - the - wild experiment with two versions ( gamiﬁed and non - gamiﬁed ) of a digital citizen science mobile application to monitor lake ice coverage . This tool was deployed with 41 participants for 3 weeks . Digital participation was observed through user engagement and user ex - perience variables , which were measured by quantitative indicators ( engagement : involvement , activeness , and dropout ; user experience : effectiveness , learnability , and satisfaction ) . Nonetheless , it is important to highlight that an indicator like en - gagement has a wider meaning in other contexts ( Wohlin et al . , 2012 ) . Gamiﬁcation elements were chosen as digital incentive mechanisms . Because gam - iﬁcation techniques are well documented and are appropriate for online activities such as digital citizen science . In addition , there had been calls for rigorous empiri - cal studies to be performed to better understand the effects of gamiﬁcation ( Dicheva et al . , 2015 ; Hamari et al . , 2014 ; Nacke and Deterding , 2017 ; Seaborn and Fels , 2015 ; Van Roy and Zaman , 2015 ) in different contexts . Hence , there was an oppor - tunity to address a research gap in the ﬁeld of gamiﬁcation while studying digital citizen science . The study was designed following the guidelines of Wohlin et al . ( Wohlin et al . , 2012 ) . Where the independent variable was gamiﬁcation elements and the depen - dent variables were a ) engagement and b ) user experience . Hypotheses were formu - lated in order to understand the effects of gamiﬁcation on the dependent variables . • Participants : The selection of participants followed a non - probabilistic conve - nience sampling where invitations to participate were sent to university students through mailing lists . A total of 41 volunteers ( a person who carries an activity without being paid ) signed up to participate in the experimental study , which took place from 24 March to 12 April 2017 ( 20 days ) . After signing an informed consent agreement , the participants were randomly divided into two groups : a ) the control group ( 20 participants ) received a non - gamiﬁed application and , b ) the experimen - tal group ( 22 participants ) received a gamiﬁed application . 38 3 Research Design and Methods • Data analysis : The source data for this study came from the application usage logs and pre - and post - questionnaires . Given the participant pool size , the indepen - dence of the test groups , and the ordinal and non - normal nature of the data set , the Mann - Whitney U test ( Wohlin et al . , 2012 ) — a nonparametric test for independent samples — was used to calculate the statistical signiﬁcance of the data sample and , thus , reject or accept the null hypothesis . Also , to protect from Type I error , a Bon - ferroni correction ( Dunn , 1961 ) was conducted . The pre and post surveys were designed to collect quantitative and qualitative data regarding the perception and experience of the participants during this study . Stan - dardized questionnaires such as the systems usability scale ( Brooke and others , 1996 ) , the IBM computer usability satisfaction questionnaire ( Lewis , 1995 ) , the user acceptance of information technology scale ( Venkatesh et al . , 2003 ) , and per - ceived playfulness questions ( Venkatesh , 2000 ) were included in the pre - and post - questionnaires . The overall data collected was participants’ demographics and en - vironmental interests and perceptions regarding user experience , usage habits , gam - iﬁcation features , enjoyment , and playfulness . 3 . 3 . 3 Stage 3 : Understanding how motivational factors impact sustained partici - pation in digital citizen This stage aimed at understanding what motivates sustained participation in successful digital citizen science projects ? Since this required an in - depth explanation of an ongoing social phenomenon , a case study approach ( plan , design , prepare , collect analyze , vali - date , and share ) was selected ( Campbell , 2018 ) . Publication III contains the details of this research stage . • Procedure and methods : This stage focused on two case studies , Safecast and J¨arviwiki . The criteria to select these cases was their national reach ( Finland and Japan ) , their use of technologies for data collection , and their achievement sustain - ing participation for over eight years . This was , therefore , an exploratory multiple case study with multiple embedded units of analysis ( Campbell , 2018 ) . The anal - ysis ( See Figure 3 . 2 ) used qualitative data from semi - structured interviews with long - term volunteers and involved three coders . The results emerged from two the - matic analysis rounds guided by codebooks grounded in theories and prior studies . • Participants and data collection : A total of 15 active volunteers ( J¨arviwiki : 8 , Safecast : 7 ) signed up for this study . Interviews were conducted between January and April 2018 . All communications — including emails , surveys , and interviews — with the participants were held in their native languages ( Japanese , Finnish , or English ) and translated after data collection . The nature of the interview with the volunteers was semi - structured and each interview lasted an average of 45 minutes . 3 . 3 Research Approach 39 Figure 3 . 2 : Overview of Data Analyses ( Taken from Publication III ( Palacin et al . , 2020b ) , with permission The questions and probes were organized into ﬁve major sections : participant por - trait , initial motivations , motivations to stay , motivations to leave , dreams . • Data analysis : The approach to data analysis followed a coding process based on the identiﬁcation of units of meaning ( UoMs = 1517 ) in relation to a priori concept of interest ( human values and motivations ) deﬁned within a codebook ( Boyatzis , 1998 ; Campbell et al . , 2013 ) . To improve data capture and consistency , we utilized two rounds of coding to allow for the contextualization and reﬁnement of codebook deﬁnitions ( Campbell et al . , 2013 ) . Two independent coders were involved in each analysis , and the inter - rater scores ( Krippendorff’s alpha ) were measured to ensure reliability ( Krippendorff , 2011 ) . 3 . 3 . 4 Stage 4 : Exploring the co - design of digital citizen science tools and its impact on participation The fourth stage aimed at collecting and analyzing data to investigate the link between hu - man values and online participation in a digital citizen science intervention . The context of this stage is set by a case of a year - long local initiative in Lappeenranta , Finland , which involved the co - designing and deployment of digital citizen science tools for environmen - tal monitoring with locals , researchers , community organizations , and decision - makers . The SENSEI initiative engaged a total of 243 participants , who generated over 100 ideas concerning issues of shared interest , 28 civic tech prototypes , and collected over 300 envi - ronmental observations . Publication IV presents the details of the case study , and chapter 4 . 2 in this thesis contains the data analysis of the behavioral exploration . • Procedure and methods : An in - the - wild deployment of SENSEI was studied through the lense of the human values theory to understand online participation in a digital citizen science case . The study was designed to explore human values at three levels : L1 ) universal , through the use of the Schwartz values instrument 40 3 Research Design and Methods to map the participants’ value orientations ; L2 ) personal , through the analysis of interviews , open surveys , and focus groups ; and L3 ) behavioral , through quantita - tive models such as logistic regressions 8 and negative binomial regressions 9 based on usage logs . The Bejamini - Hochbergh False Discovery Rate ( FDR ) procedure ( Benjamini and Hochberg , 1995 ) was applied to control and correct the results from the models . • Participants : At this stage , the behavior of 85 volunteers was studied , they were either full - time participants or drop - outs ( partial participants ) in the SENSEI initia - tive . The participants were 7 to 85 years old , who identiﬁed themselves as female ( 37 ) and male ( 48 ) . Breaking this down further , there were 44 participants between 25 and 34 , and 14 between 35 and 44 , showing that young adults make up most of the sample . • Data analysis : This stage used the quantitative and qualitative data sources to ex - plore human values at three levels : universal , personal , and behavioral ( Maio , 2016 ; Winter et al . , 2018 ) : – L1 : Universal level . In order to map the participants’ value orientations , the responses to the PVQ - 21 survey were analyzed ( N = 85 ) . The incomplete and inconsistent responses ( more than 5 missing on the 21 value items , and those who have given the same answer to more than 16 of the 21 value items ) ( Schwartz , 2016a ) were removed through standard quality checks , leading to 83 valid responses . Reliability analysis ( Cronbach’s alpha , see table 3 . 1 ) was run to evaluate the extent to which the indexes measure each value dimension that underlies all of its items . the value of tradition did not pass the Cronbach alpha cutoff ( See Table 3 . 1 ) , but the value dimension of conservation did . In order to minimize the possible effect tradition may have onto the other values that are part of the dimension ( security and conformity ) . The dimension of conservation is always presented detailing the effect of each value part of it onto the dependent variables 10 . The individual scale usage differences were then corrected by calculating the absolute value scores into scores that indicate the relative importance of each value in the individual’s whole value system . The centered scores were then used for the quantitative models . 8 The logistic regression is used to model the probability of certain event existing such as partici - pate / dropout or pass / fail given the particular value of a predictor variable ( Sommet and Morselli , 2017 ) 9 The negative binomial regression is a type of generalized linear model in which the dependent variable is a count of the number of times an event occurs ( Zwilling , 2013 ) . 10 “It is common that some of the internal reliabilities of several PVQ - 21 indexes can be relatively low . Because ; 1 ) the items in the indexes are constructed and selected to cover the different conceptual compo - nents of each value , not to be nearly redundant measures of a narrowly deﬁned concept and , 2 ) each index includes only two or three items . With so few items it is virtually impossible to obtain high alphas unless the items are very similar to one another . Considering the small number of items used to measure each of the ten values and their necessary heterogeneity , even reliabilities of 0 . 4 are reasonable” ( Schwartz , 2016b ) 3 . 3 Research Approach 41 – L2 : Personal level . Qualitative data sources from 15 interviews ( total 240 minutes ) , responses to open questions in online surveys ( N = 149 ) , and one focus group session , were analyzed to understand the individual meanings of human values . Thematic analysis was used as the approach to data analysis , which is a “qualitative research method for identifying , analyzing , and re - porting patterns ( themes ) within the data” ( Braun and Clarke , 2006 , p . 79 ) . It begins with a row - by - row coding process and the outcome is a set of themes that describe the phenomena under study and their relationships . We ana - lyzed responses to questions “Why did you join the environmental monitor - ing initiative ? ” and “What do you expect from this initiative ? ” . We gener - ated expectation - and motivation - based codes inductively and used the theory - based codes from the values theory ( Schwartz , 2006 ) . – L3 : Behavioral level . The quantitative methods were aimed at understanding the effects of the human value dimensions onto participation in the SENSEI initiative and the use of the SENSEI mobile app . These analyses enabled the author to see how the manifestation of the concrete representation of human values among the participants ( L3 ) . Two methods were utilized to explore the relationships between those variables . First , logistic regressions were em - ployed to understand participation types . Second , negative binomial regres - sions were used to understand the effect of these value dimensions on the use and interactions of participants . ∗ Logistic regression was used to analyze whether a participant stayed as part of the initiative , which is a type of generalized linear model ( GLM ) that assumes that the dependent variable is binary ( Allison , 2009 ; Os - borne , 2014 ) . The dependent variable is a function of the probability that the predicted variable will be in one of the categories ( coded as partici - pation = 1 ; drop - out = 0 ) . Instead of coefﬁcients , like in linear regres - sion , the effect of independent variables is often reported as conditional probabilities and as odds ratios . Odds ratios enable a comparison of the relative odds of the occurrence of the outcome of interest ( e . g . , partic - ipation ) ( Norton and Dowd , 2018 ) . For example , an odds ratio of two would mean that for each increase of an independent variable , the depen - dent variable would be twice as likely to occur . Logistic regression uses the maximum likelihood estimation and is a non - parametric technique . It does not require homoscedasticity , but does require the independence of observations , and independence of errors as well as assumes a linear re - lationship between the dependent and independent variables . For logistic regression , there is no simple , substantively interpreted measure of over - all model ﬁt such as R 2 ( Osborne , 2014 ) . Instead , a chi - square test is used for the overall model signiﬁcance and the Wald test for the signiﬁcance of independent variables ( Osborne , 2014 ) . 42 3 Research Design and Methods ∗ Negative binomial regression was used to analyze the digital interactions . This model is a type of GLM explicitly designed to model count data ( Allison , 2009 ) . The count variable is a speciﬁc case of variables that ex - press the number of something , such as the number of interactions , or the increasing number of participants . These variables are always discrete , have values of zero or above , and have often highly skewed distributions . We selected the negative binomial over Poisson regression to counter the potential effects of over - dispersion . In addition to regression coefﬁcients , the effect of independent variables in negative binomial regression is of - ten reported as Incidence Rate Ratios ( IRR ) . IRR functions in a manner like the odds ratio , thereby reporting the probability of an increase to the dependent count variable . As a GLM , negative binomial regression has similar assumptions and validity testing as logistic regression . Table 3 . 1 : Participants Values’ Orientations ( Pearson’s correlation signiﬁcance * = 0 . 01 ; * * = 0 . 05 ) . This table shows the signiﬁcance , mean , standard deviation , and correlation of the participating volunteers’ value dimensions . The correlation coefﬁcients ranged from moderate to strong strength , while moderate standard deviations indicate a healthy spread of values across our participants . The correlations support the circumplex theory structure between values , i . e . the opposing relationship between self - transcendence and self - enhancement ( corr = - . 11 ) and the proximity between openness - to - change and self - transcendence ( corr = . 45 ) . Value Dimension Cronbach α Mean Std Dev Correlation 2 SE 3 OTC 4 CON 1 . Self - Transcendence . 730 5 . 04 . 65 - . 113 . 451 * * . 307 * * 2 . Self - Enhancement . 851 3 . 67 1 . 1 - . 257 * . 068 3 . Openness to Change . 758 4 . 65 . 71 . 257 * - - . 028 4 . Conservation . 635 4 . 02 . 72 . 068 - . 028 - 3 . 4 Research Ethics 43 3 . 4 Research Ethics This study followed the ethical principles of research , as advised by the Finnish research ethics authority TENK ( Finnish Advisory Board on Research Integrity , 2012 ) . This im - plied that the principles that guided this work include 1 ) respect for the autonomy of subjects , 2 ) avoidance of harm and , 3 ) privacy and data protection . Also , this research was conducted in alignment with the European GDPR ( General Data Protection Regula - tion ) ( European Parliament , 2016 ) , which came into force during the time of this doctoral research . Prior to the data collection , all study participants were informed about the study’s goals , data collection , and handling procedures ( i . e . , anonymization ) , and received the research results . Publications III , IV received the ethical approval of the LUT University ethics board . Publication II was waived of the ethical review , but still provided informed consent to participants and fulﬁlled follow - up reciprocity rules ( like sharing the research results with the participants ) . Appendix I contains the informed consents and instruments used in these studies . 45 4 Explorations on Participation in Digital Citizen Science This chapter presents an overview of the research studies conducted as part of this dis - sertation . This thesis is based on four publications and sub - chapter 4 . 2 . In this section , each of these publications is discussed in brief , synthesizing their background , objectives , main contributions and relation to the entirety of the dissertation . The following sum - maries are a synthesis of each publication ; for more detailed discussions , one must refer to the original full publication . 4 . 1 Overview of the Publications 4 . 1 . 1 Publication I : Shut up and take my environmental data ! A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices , participation approaches , and challenges Background and objectives The ﬁndings in this article are part of a larger research study conducted by Victoria Palacin during 2015 - 2016 ( Palacin - Silva et al . , 2016 ) for the Finnish Environment Institute . This larger study sought to map the practices , trends , and challenges of citizen observatories worldwide , for this , the study reviewed the last 10 years of citizen science literature and carried surveys and interviews with key stakeholders . However , this state - of - the - art study is lengthy and contains over a hundred pages ; hence , the authors decided to summarize its key results in relation to this dissertation through this publication . Digital citizen science has been actively supporting citizen - driven data collection for a va - riety of purposes including scientiﬁc research and crisis communication ( Bourgeois et al . , 2014 ; Goldman et al . , 2009 ; Gharesifard and Wehn , 2016 ) , whilst serving as means for inclusive engagement , education , and public outreach ( Bonney et al . , 2009 ; Hand , 2010 ; Dickinson et al . , 2012 ) . However , despite the outstanding success of these monitoring ini - tiatives , there had been a limited attempt to study their day - to - day practices and their link with technology . This motivated the present study at the time , which had the following objectives : 1 ) to identify , analyze , and report trends , practices , and challenges in digi - tal citizen science projects and , 2 ) to identify , analyze , and report volunteering practices , motives , and challenges . The overreaching methodological approach of this study was a thematic analysis ( TA ) with systematic review techniques ( Kitchenham , 2004 ; Keele et al . , 2007 ) for data collection . Results and main contribution The contributions of this article are two - fold . First , this study systematically reviewed practices , trends , and challenges of 108 digital citizen projects mentioned in 70 academic articles . Second , it illustrated the different forms of participation in digital citizen science through a framework . The key ﬁndings in this study include the following aspects : 46 4 Explorations on Participation in Digital Citizen Science Figure 4 . 1 : Spectrum of Data Collection Tools ( Redrawn from Publication I ( Palacin - Silva and Porras , 2018 ) Monitoring domains : This study clas - siﬁed the purpose of 108 digital citi - zen science projects into 8 types of do - mains : a ) water , streams , snow , and sea ; b ) biodiversity , c ) air and spectrum , d ) global monitoring , e ) city manage - ment issues , f ) disasters , and g ) tools for creating monitoring projects from scratch . Technology use : The spectrum of tech - nologies utilized for data collection among the studied projects were linked with the levels of human interaction they require to capture data ( See Figure 4 . 1 ) . Data collection : This spectrum of tech - nologies ( See Figure 4 . 1 ) reﬂected the known modes of data collection ( oppor - tunistic and participatory ) ( Cohn , 2008 ; Tangmunarunkit et al . , 2015 ) . Our ﬁndings indicate a steady rise in the use of oppor - tunistic data collection approaches ( which use mostly automated means ) since the 2000s among the studied projects ( See Figure 4 . 2 ) . Figure 4 . 2 : Methods Used for Data Collection in The Studied Projects ( Redrawn from Publication I ( Palacin - Silva and Porras , 2018 ) 4 . 1 Overview of the Publications 47 Motivations to Participate : Six reasons for why participants joined the studied projects were identiﬁed : i ) drive to change , ii ) understand data beneﬁts , iii ) self - interest , iv ) tangi - ble gains , v ) social recognition , and vi ) challenge in life . Volunteer Participation : The different forms of volunteer participation in digital citizen science were illustrated through the “palette of participation” , ( presented in Figure 4 . 3 ) . Each tone represents a participatory approach , all of which are conceived as equally im - portant ; hence , there is lack of hierarchy in the palette . All forms of participation are understood to be temporal and context - based . In this palette , a person as a data consumer uses digital citizen science services but does not contribute to monitoring ; a person as a data provider is a person who actively provides data by using apps or sensors ; a collaborator is a person who works along scientists or decision - makers to design , improve , and disseminate a monitoring initiative ; a co - creator deﬁnes the monitoring priorities according to their own perception ( then , these opinions are weighted by decision - makers to deﬁne monitoring initiatives ) ; ﬁnally , a person in con - trol leads a campaign to monitor and improve an issue of common interest . Figure 4 . 3 : Palette of participation in digital citizen science projects taken from Publi - cation I ( Palacin - Silva and Porras , 2018 ) , with permission ( This palette was improved in later publications , see Figure 4 . 12 for the latest version ) 48 4 Explorations on Participation in Digital Citizen Science Practices : This study found 17 common practices ( See Table 4 . 1 ) across the sub - themes of ( i ) technology - intensive practices , created to facilitate the collection , analysis , and dis - semination of data ; and ( ii ) engagement - driven practices aimed to combine strategies to locate and motivate observers . Along these lines , ﬁve categories of stakeholders were identiﬁed in the studied projects according to their activities ( citizens , academy and gov - ernment , nature enthusiasts , households , and developers ) . This was used as a basis to illustrate a socio - technical vision of a digital citizen science initiative at that point in time ( See Figure 4 . 4 ) . Table 4 . 1 : Common Practices Among the Studied Digital Citizen Science Projects ( from ( Palacin - Silva et al . , 2016 ) ) Technology Intensive Practices Engagement Driven Practices 1 . Real time visualization 2 . Observatory component based 3 . Opportunistic data collection 4 . Provide training material 5 . Provide technology 6 . Data aggregation 1 . Co - Creation 2 . Feedback from observations 3 . Gamiﬁcation 4 . Identify stakeholders and their motivations5 . Participatory data collection 6 . Environmental campaigns in public spaces7 . Interest - based observatories 8 . Involve decision - makers 9 . Open data for engagement 10 . Measure motivation 11 . Set common protocols for observers Figure 4 . 4 : Socio - technical illustration of a digital citizen science project 4 . 1 Overview of the Publications 49 Challenges : Nine themes were identiﬁed as challenges that were faced in the studied projects included issues related with : 1 . Sustained participation ; The target stakeholders are not always ready for start con - tributing and often abandon the initiatives soon after their start . 2 . Data aggregation ; Information is obtained when multiple sources of information are combined . Hence , aggregating data from monitoring applications is important yet challenging due to the multiple data formats , metadata anthologies and data structures 3 . Quick changes / advancements in technology ; Devices’ size , weight , reliability , power consumption limitations , calibration and conﬁguration constraints pose a challenge to the studied projects . In addition to the lack of systematic / automatic methods to reject false and spam observations . 4 . Lack of standardization ; there is a current lack of reusable methods or frameworks for creating new digital citizen science platforms . Also there is a lack of standards for inter – communication among monitoring platforms due to semantic discrepan - cies . In addition to a lack of systematic or automatic means for evaluations of large data sets . 5 . Limited technical knowledge ; projects face issues because of the lack of knowledge about how to build and maintain technically a monitoring application . 6 . Limited resources ; The development of a digital citizen science platform tends to have limited resources that are mostly spent during the initial phases , creating a debt for the monitoring and maintenance phases . 7 . Privacy issues ; Understanding the concerns of stakeholder’s regarding the own - ership and use of their data is fundamental from the start of a monitoring project . Adequate technologies should be used to capture the volunteers’ concerns and pref - erences regarding their data . 8 . Balancing fair recognition for contribution ; There is a need for more social fairness when it comes to digital citizen science to avoid the exploitation of people . 9 . Data accessibility and maintainability ; Publishing raw data is not sufﬁcient , stake - holders should be able to access , explore and analyze relevant information ( ex - tracted from raw data ) in a simple and transparent fashion . 50 4 Explorations on Participation in Digital Citizen Science Relation to whole Figure 4 . 5 : Posterior research stages linked to the palette of participation from publica - tion I This work concluded that even when the underlying technology is still in an evolving stage , digital citizen science had already shown its great potential , not only as a tool for people to col - lect data but also as a vehicle for en - gaging a large public community in re - solving social and environmental chal - lenges . However , the success of digi - tal citizen science initiatives relies heavily on sustained participation and the compu - tational capacity to extract patterns from the data that is collected . This trans - lates into a need for interdisciplinary stud - ies . Publication I was the basis for this thesis work , as shown in Figure 4 . 6 . Its results enabled the researcher to understand the state - of - the - art on digital citizen science , their practices , and challenges . Speciﬁcally , this study identiﬁed that studying the participatory behaviors in digital citizen science tools , was a research opportunity . The following stages explored participation types according to the palette framework developed in this stage ( as shown in Figure 4 . 5 ) . Figure 4 . 6 : Relationship of Publication I with the Dissertation 4 . 1 Overview of the Publications 51 4 . 1 . 2 Publication II : The Role of Gamiﬁcation in Participatory Environmental Sens - ing : A Study In the Wild Background and objectives Despite the widespread popularity of digital citizen science , the link between motivations and digital actions in the context of digital citizen science remains unclear ( Massung et al . , 2013 ) and so is the role of gamiﬁcation ( Ross , 2011 ; Massung et al . , 2013 ; Knowles , 2013a ) . Gamiﬁcation is the application of game - like elements to non - game environments ( Deterding et al . , 2011 ) . It is a technique with a solid theoretical basis for impacting human behavior ( Seaborn and Fels , 2015 ) . Approaches that utilize certain elements of gamiﬁcation have been shown to increase user motivation and engagement in a variety of environments ( Seaborn and Fels , 2015 ) , including participatory sensing ( Morschheuser et al . , 2016 ) . However , it is still not clear how well gamiﬁcation works and in which digital citizen science contexts ( Dicheva et al . , 2015 ; Hamari et al . , 2014 ; Nacke and Deterding , 2017 ; Seaborn and Fels , 2015 ; Van Roy and Zaman , 2015 ) . For example , in digital citizen sci - ence , gamiﬁcation has been used to encourage ( Mason et al . , 2012 ; Massung et al . , 2013 ; Liu et al . , 2011 ) and improve ( Witt et al . , 2011 ) participation . The results in these stud - ies were either positive ( Liu et al . , 2011 ) or inconclusive ( Mason et al . , 2012 ; Massung et al . , 2013 ; Witt et al . , 2011 ) . Therefore , there had been calls for rigorous empirical studies to be performed to better understand the effects of gamiﬁcation ( Dicheva et al . , 2015 ; Hamari et al . , 2014 ; Nacke and Deterding , 2017 ; Seaborn and Fels , 2015 ; Van Roy and Zaman , 2015 ) . For these reasons , we conducted a user study in - the - wild . This study sought to observe the effects of gamiﬁcation on user engagement and user experience in the context of a digital citizen science intervention . We deﬁned two hypotheses in order to fulﬁll the study aim : 1 ) Hypothesis for Engagement Variable : • Null hypothesis H0 1 : The use of gamiﬁed elements in a lake monitoring application produces equal or less user engagement than a non - gamiﬁed application . • Alternative hypothesis H0 2 : The use of gamiﬁed elements in a lake monitoring application produces a greater user engagement than a non - gamiﬁed application . 2 ) Hypothesis for User Experience Variable : • Null hypothesis H0 2 : The use of gamiﬁed elements in a lake monitoring applica - tion produces the same or worse user experience as with a non - gamiﬁed application . • Alternative hypothesis H1 2 : The use of gamiﬁed elements in a lake monitoring application produces a better user experience than a non - gamiﬁed application . 52 4 Explorations on Participation in Digital Citizen Science Results and main contribution The user study involved 41 volunteers , who monitored ice coverage of sub - arctic lakes , by using two versions ( gamiﬁed and non - gamiﬁed ) of a bespoke mobile app . In to - tal , this study analyzed 304 applications usage logs and 82 responses to pre - and post - questionnaires . The main contribution of this paper are the following insights regarding the role of gamiﬁcation in digital citizen science : In terms of user engagement , we ﬁnd that adding gamiﬁcation to an environmental mon - itoring application signiﬁcantly increases participants’ involvement and activeness levels in digital citizen science . However , the dropout rate was similar in both applications . Given this result , the null hypothesis is rejected and the alternative hypothesis is accepted “H1 1 : The use of gamiﬁed elements in a lake monitoring application produces a greater user engagement than a non - gamiﬁed application . ” From the qualitative feedback of the study , we also note that an increased use of the application can have additional impact on participants’ attitudes and behaviors towards their local environment . In terms of user experience , the overall results indicate that the effectiveness among the participants who used the gamiﬁed application was twice as high compared to the ones who used the non - gamiﬁed application . On the other hand , there were no major dif - ferences on the learnability and satisfaction indicators between both applications , which means that participants were satisﬁed with both applications . Given this result , the null hypothesis is accepted and the alternative hypothesis is rejected ; “H2 0 : The use of gami - ﬁed elements in a lake monitoring application produces the same or worse user experience as with a non - gamiﬁed application” . In terms of perceptions regarding gamiﬁcation , the qualitative data indicates that partic - ipants paid particular attention to features such as points , leaderboard , and the story . We found qualitative evidence that certain participants tracked their points and reported issues that they considered relevant ( for example , trash on the lake ) . The leaderboard appeared to be a popular feature ; during the study , the researchers observed that some participants noticed the presence of their friends on the leaderboard . This triggered a healthy social competition in real life . In addition , the story mechanism appeared to be an effective means to raise awareness . In terms of the design reﬂections , this study provided six design reﬂections based on our experience to inform the design and evaluation of digital citizen science tools ( summa - rized by themes in Sub - Chapter 4 . 3 . ) 4 . 1 Overview of the Publications 53 Relation to whole In summary , this study found that the gamiﬁed features of the app increased participants’ submissions without affecting the perceived usability of the application . Moreover , this study provided a set of design reﬂections to inform the design and evaluation of digital cit - izen science tools . Through this investigation , the researcher was able to understand how a digital incentive mechanism can impact participation in digital citizen science . The most important takeaway from this study , for this thesis as shown in Figure 4 . 7 , was in terms of the re - imagination of the role of the volunteers , beyond users . The author concluded that there was an opportunity to involve the participants as co - creators of community tech - nologies ; this shaped the directions of the following studies . Figure 4 . 7 : Relationship of Publication II with the Dissertation 54 4 Explorations on Participation in Digital Citizen Science 4 . 1 . 3 Publication III : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science : Case Stud - ies on J¨arviwiki and Safecast Background and objectives Because of a gap in research studies focused on the role of psychological constructs in digital citizen science ( Jennett and Cox , 2018 ; Jackson , 2019 ; Rotman et al . , 2014b ) , this publication aimed to advance the understanding regarding the drivers of sustained partic - ipation in digital citizen science . This study explored the values and motives that underlie initial and sustained participation in two successful digital citizen science projects : J¨arvi - wiki , which is an environmental observatory maintained by the Finnish government in which volunteers log information regarding the state of lakes and water bodies across Finland ; and Safecast , which is a Japanese volunteer run initiative in response to the Fukushima power plant disaster where participants collect data regarding radiation by carrying Geiger devices . The in - depth analyses were guided by two theories from social psychology : the Univer - sal Values Theory ( UVT ) ( Schwartz , 2012 ) and the Self - Determination Theory ( SDT ) ( Ryan and Deci , 2000b ) . These theories were selected because it has been evidenced in the ﬁelds of social computing and HCI , that human values ( Chen et al . , 2014 ; Boyd et al . , 2015 ; Mukta et al . , 2016 ; Esau , 2018 ) and self - determined motivations ( Tyack and Mekler , 2020 ; Ryan and Deci , 2000a ; Benkler , 2011 ) play important roles in inﬂuenc - ing the digital behaviors . This article sought to answer the following questions : 1 ) What motivates participation in a digital citizen science initiative ? , 2 ) What are the values un - derpinning participation in a digital citizen science initiative ? , and 3 ) How do motivations align with values in the studied cases ? Results and main contribution This study is based on a total of 1517 units of meaning extracted from 15 interviews with long - term volunteers ( J¨arviwiki : 8 , Safecast : 7 ) through two rounds of thematic coding , which were validated by measuring the inter - rater reliability score ( Krippendorff’s alpha ) . The main contributions of this article are described below : Motivations for participation in J¨arviwiki and Safecast ; the ﬁrst research question fo - cused on exploring what motivates participation in the two cases . For Safecast partici - pants , volunteering was inﬂuenced by identiﬁed and integrated motivations , while J¨arvi - wiki participants were driven by intrinsic , identiﬁed , and integrated motivations . Inte - grated and identiﬁed motivations are the most - self determined type of motivation , which implies that their actions ( i . e . to submit an observation ) are either identiﬁed or assimilated as important activities for the self . Values underlying participation in J¨arviwiki and Safecast ; the second research question in this article explored the values that underpin participation in the two cases . Values such 4 . 1 Overview of the Publications 55 as self - direction and stimulation were important for both Safecast and J¨arviwiki volun - teers when they decided to begin their volunteering activities ( See Figure 4 . 8 ) . However , sustaining participation , was associated with a larger number of values , including uni - versalism , benevolence , conformity / tradition , and achievement ( See Figure 4 . 9 ) . These observations are in line with previous studies by ( Rotman et al . , 2014b , a ) which show that a self - directed personal interest is key to initial participation . But broader motiva - tions such as novelty ( Jackson , 2019 ) are required for sustaining long - term participation . Figure 4 . 8 : Values underlying initial participation among Safecast and J¨arviwiki partici - pants ( Taken from Publication III ( Palacin et al . , 2020b ) , with permission ) Figure 4 . 9 : Values underlying sustained participation among Safecast and J¨arviwiki par - ticipants ( Taken from Publication III ( Palacin et al . , 2020b ) , with permission ) 56 4 Explorations on Participation in Digital Citizen Science In summary , openness - to - change values , such as self - direction , are important for initial participation , yet a diverse range of values , except for power , play a role in sustaining participation . The power value appears to be the least inﬂuential in driving participa - tion in the case studies . Power refers to the pursuit of social status , prestige , control , or dominance over people or resources ( Schwartz , 2003 ) and is a self - enhancement type of value . Yet , we observe from the literature ( Restuccia et al . , 2016 ; Jaimes et al . , 2015 ) , that current incentive mechanisms are often focused mainly on rewards that provide “wealth” or “reputation” online or ofﬂine as a means to increase participation . Which means that these types of rewards rely on values centered around self - enhancement , like power . As we have shown in our analysis of values associated with participation in J¨arviwiki and Safecast , focusing on values that appeal to universalists and benevolence are key ele - ments of long - term sustained participation . Figure 4 . 10 : Interaction between values and motivations un - derlying participation among J¨arviwiki and Safecast partici - pants ( Taken from Publication III ( Palacin et al . , 2020b ) , with permission ) The link between values and motivations ; Re - search question 3 ex - plored how motivations align with values in the studied cases . Val - ues and motivations ex - ist together and operate alongside other individ - ual differences , such as culture , personality , and context ( Maio , 2016 ) . A common representa - tion of values has been the intrinsic / extrinsic di - chotomy ( Kasser and Ryan , 1996 ; Foundation , 2014 , p . 280 ) . However both UVT and SDT work on a contin - uum rather than in a po - larized dichotomy . In this publication , the dif - ferent types of motiva - tions are mapped in rela - tion to human values ( See Figure 4 . 10 ) , arguing that this is a valuable strategy to under - stand the particular effect of strategies , designs , and techniques used to build sustained participation at different stages in a digital citizen science project . 4 . 1 Overview of the Publications 57 For example , it could be understood that certain participants of a project value stimulation ( new experiences ) ; however , without knowing if that value is related with an introjected 11 or integrated 12 source of motivation , the engagement strategies that are designed could fail by not addressing participants’ needs and personal goals . Further exploring the dynam - ics of participation from the interplay lenses of both of these theories can be beneﬁcial to enhance the empirical understanding we have of the link between human experience and behavior and to explain enduring behaviors like sustained engagement ( Kasser , 2002 ; Grouzet et al . , 2005 ; Kasser et al . , 2004 ) . Integrated and identiﬁed motivations are important for sustained participation ; The analyses indicate that for Safecast participants , identiﬁed and integrated motivations drove volunteering , whereas J¨arviwiki participants were driven by intrinsic , identiﬁed , and inte - grated motivations . These three types of motivations are the most - self determined , which means that their corresponding actions ( e . g . to submit an observation ) are perceived as important activities for the self . Thereby evidencing that when extrinsic motivators are self - directed and autonomous , people will not only perform tasks willingly and enthusi - astically but also in a sustained manner . The shortcomings of incentive mechanisms centered around self - enhancement ; The ﬁndings in these cases are in line with previous studies by ( Rotman et al . , 2014b , a ) , which reveal that a self - directed personal interest is key to initial participation . But broader mo - tivations are required for sustaining long - term participation . However , we also observe that across both cases , the value of power seems to be the least inﬂuential . Power refers to pursue social status , prestige , control , or dominance over people or resources ( Schwartz , 2003 ) and is a self - enhancement type of value . Surprisingly , current incentive mecha - nisms are often focused mainly on rewards that provide “wealth” or “reputation” online or ofﬂine as a means to increase participation ( see , for example , the reward mechanisms listed in Table 2 . 2 in the related work chapter ) . These types of rewards rely on self - enhancement values , like power . Focusing on val - ues that appeal to power can cause people to become more self - interested and less likely to support pro - social or pro - environmental activities in the long term ( Crompton , 2010 , p . 37 ) . Despite this , the use of mechanisms that appeal to universalist and benevolent values by , for example , centering their core project recruitment campaigns with the well - being of the community appear to be more rare . A potential means to avoid this pitfall is to use self - enhancement mechanisms ( e . g . , rewards ) as part of a larger engagement strategy that fosters values like self - direction , stimulation , universalism , benevolence , se - curity , and achievement ; this is because , as our results show , when extrinsically motivated values , such as universalism and benevolence , are self - directed and autonomous , they can drive people to perform tasks willingly and enthusiastically in a sustained manner . 11 Actions performed due to pressure , to avoid guilt , or to enhance ego , self - esteem , and / or self - worth ( Ryan and Deci , 2000b ) . 12 Activities are fully assimilated to the self but they are still conducted for an outcome that is separate from the behavior ( Ryan and Deci , 2000b ) . 58 4 Explorations on Participation in Digital Citizen Science In terms of design reﬂections , this study provided four design reﬂections based on the lessons learned from the two case studies ( summarized by themes in Sub - Chapter 4 . 3 . ) Relation to whole In this study , the values and motives that underlie initial and sustained participation in suc - cessful digital citizen science projects are explored , from the perspectives of the UVT and SDT theories . In - depth analyses of two case studies of digital citizen science initiatives ( J¨arviwiki and Safecast ) , which have been collecting environmental data for a decade in Japan and Finland are presented . The goal of this publication was to explore in - depth the drivers of sustained participation in successful projects . The most important takeaways from this study ( as shown in Figure 4 . 11 ) , were linked with 1 ) guiding the use of incentive mechanisms and 2 ) providing evi - dence on the potential to study digital participation from the lenses of psychology theories such as the UVT . Both of these aspects informed the design of stage four in this doctoral research . Figure 4 . 11 : Relationship of Publication III with the Dissertation 4 . 1 Overview of the Publications 59 4 . 1 . 4 Publication IV : SENSEI : Harnessing Community Wisdom for Local Envi - ronmental Monitoring in Finland Background and objectives In the previous decade , HCI has seen a “civic turn” , with researchers increasingly collab - orating with communities in - the - wild as they seek to better understand technology in our everyday living ( Rogers , 2011 ; Rogers and Marshall , 2017 ; Balestrini et al . , 2014 ) . The ﬁeld is moving away from being conﬁned to the design and deployment of consultation technology ( Golsteijn et al . , 2016 ) towards a process of working alongside local commu - nities to create and deploy community technologies that address matters of shared concern ( Wardle et al . , 2018 ; Simm et al . , 2013 ; Balestrini et al . , 2017 ; Coulson et al . , 2018 ; Wolff et al . , 2017 ) . This has resulted in a rich body of work that studies the interplay between civics and technologies ( Johnson et al . , 2016 ; DiSalvo et al . , 2016 ) that have enhanced our current understanding of human - technology interactions and supported the develop - ment of novel theories , technologies , and approaches in the HCI , such as research in the wild ( Rogers and Marshall , 2017 ) , participatory design ( Wardle et al . , 2018 ) , speculative design ( DiSalvo et al . , 2016 ) , and action research interventions ( Balestrini et al . , 2014 ) . This publication describes the process of orchestrating a participatory action research in - tervention and presents the key reﬂections from it . SENSEI was a year - long digital citizen science initiative focused on environmental protection . Local community organizations , decision makers , families , individuals , and researchers worked together to co - create civic technologies to help them address environmental issues of shared interest , such as invasive plant species , abandoned items in the forests , and nice places ( for example , the location of places where wild blueberries grow ) . This publication aimed to : ( 1 ) outline the appli - cation of HCI approaches to inform the co - creation of digital citizen science initiatives ; ( 2 ) yield insights into the use of digital citizen science in nurturing and supporting long - term sustainable practices , ( 3 ) outline learnings that could be helpful for future co - created digital citizen science tools . Results and main contribution SENSEI was an environmental monitoring initiative aimed at co - designing digital citi - zen science tools for environmental protection with the local community . The initiative ( which lasted a year ) engaged a total of 243 participants who generated over 100 ideas concerning issues of shared interest , 28 civic tech prototypes , and dozens of sense - making artifacts , including data interactions , analysis of data sets and data sculptures . A dozen of open public events ( community events and workshops ) were run in English and Finnish in MEtalo ( community house ) , public squares , and LUT University . A platform for en - vironmental monitoring — which included sensing devices , websites , and apps — was built during this process . This platform was used for 3 months by volunteers to monitor environmental issues of shared concern in town , collecting a total of 300 environmental observations . The main contributions of this paper are described below : 60 4 Explorations on Participation in Digital Citizen Science An iteration of the palette of participation : The ﬁrst contribution of this publication is the iteration of the palette of participation ( See Figure 4 . 12 ) , developed in Publication I , from literature reports . This iteration was the result of observations and reﬂections , that resulted from the action research carried out in the initiative . In this version of the palette , public participation in digital citizen science can take six dif - ferent forms — from the person collecting data on predeﬁned issues ( data provider ) , the person collaborating with authorities to monitor issues predeﬁned by authorities ( collab - orator ) , the person co - creating solutions to address issues of shared concern ( co - creator ) , the person who ideates civic actions ( ideator ) , to the person who disrupts established pro - cesses by passive non - participation or negative participation ( disruptor ) . Figure 4 . 12 : Palette of Participation in Digital Citizen Science ( Iteration to the palette from Publication I ( Palacin - Silva and Porras , 2018 ) : citizen is in control replaced by ideator , disruptor level added An approach to the co - design of digital citizen science tools : This paper extends the knowledge regarding co - designing digital citizen science tools with communities . The approach combined two frameworks that draw inspiration from action research , design thinking , participatory design , agile development and an in - the - wild approach : i ) the city commons approach by ( Balestrini et al . , 2017 ) and ii ) the Speedplay framework by ( Fer - rario et al . , 2016 ) . 4 . 1 Overview of the Publications 61 Figure 4 . 13 : SENSEI Approach from Publication IV ( Palacin et al . , 2019 ) , with permission The city commons is a novel ap - proach to community engagement around issues of shared concern , en - hancing community ownership , open - ness , skills development , and prompt - ing discussions regarding data gover - nance ( Balestrini et al . , 2017 ) . On the other hand , the Speedplay framework enables the development of software in a rapid and agile manner with an emphasis on participatory reﬂection ( Ferrario et al . , 2016 ) . The orchestra - tion features from the city commons were combined with the agile advan - tages of Speedplay to engineer tech - nologies . Consequently , the initia - tive followed seven stages in an it - erative manner guided by action re - search principles ( See Figure 4 . 13 ) . The goals and outcomes for each of the stages are detailed in Table 4 . 2 . In terms of design reﬂections , this case study highlighted six key considerations linked with the process of designing digital citizen science initiatives , which are summarized by themes in Sub - Chapter 4 . 3 . 62 4 Explorations on Participation in Digital Citizen Science Table 4 . 2 : Phases , Goals , and Outcomes of the SENSEI Initiative Phase Goal Outcome Identify 1 . Identify matters of shared concern . 2 . Map out communities , decision - makers , organisations and other bodies that might be interested in working together to ﬁnd solutions . a ) Cross - cultural partnership agreement b ) Preliminary map of matters of shared concern c ) Action plan Frame 1 . Understand matters of shared concern . 2 . Map the individual motives of the participants to adjust the shared purpose of our initiative . 3 . Explore the possible uses of technology to address the matters of shared concern . a ) Map of framed matters of concern Imagine 1 . Understand aspirations and requirements . a ) Deﬁne requirements , b ) Design of prototypes Create 1 . Build and test the prototype system ( s ) . a ) Prototype v1 . 0 . . . vX . 0 Deploy 1 . Understand how people interact with the tools in their natural environments and without instructions . 2 . Collect feedback from participants to improve the prototype system . a ) Prototype improvement b ) Usage patterns c ) User feedback logs Orchestrate 1 . Enhance sense - making skills by demonstrating the usefulness of the co - created results . a ) Data literacy plan Sustain 1 . Reﬂect on the initative 2 . Release tools and open data 3 . Plan for future system development a ) Open report on learnings b ) Make tools accessible as open source d ) Open data e ) Follow - up bids 4 . 1 Overview of the Publications 63 Relation to whole Publication IV was part of the ﬁnal stage in this doctoral research ( See Figure 4 . 14 ) . It describes the SENSEI case study and its stages . This case study was a participatory action research intervention informed by the results and design reﬂections from publications I , II , and III . Sub - Chapter 4 . 2 is also based on this case study and it explores in - depth the relationship between values and interactions in digital citizen science . Figure 4 . 14 : Relationship of Publication IV with the Dissertation 64 4 Explorations on Participation in Digital Citizen Science 4 . 2 Further Explorations on The Role of Human Values in Digital Citizen Science In this sub - chapter , the author aims to address the missing link between motivation ( cap - tured in self - reported survey data ) and actions ( through behavioral traces captured in app usage logs ) . The relationship between people’s value orientations and their use of the SENSEI citizen science mobile application ( described in publication IV ) is studied at three levels ( Maio , 2016 ; Winter et al . , 2018 ) : L1 ) universal , through the use of the Schwartz values instrument to map the participant’s human values ( PVQ - 21 , N = 85 ) ; L2 ) personal , through the analysis of qualitative data from interviews and focus groups ( N = 15 ) , and open surveys ( N = 149 ) ; and L3 ) behavioral , through quantitative models based on usage logs ( useLogs = 5014 and submissions = 300 ) . As shown in the overview presented in Figure 4 . 15 , ﬁrst , logistic regressions were em - ployed to understand the relation between participation and values . Second , negative binomial regressions were used to understand the effect of these values on the way par - ticipants interacted with the SENSEI mobile app . Univariate regressions were performed with each human value dimension — where multivariate regressions 13 were carried out when two variables would pass the cutoff ( < 0 . 1 ) at the univariate level . Figure 4 . 15 : Overview of quantitative methods used for data analysis In addition to summarizing these analyses results , this chapter contributes to answering the last research question RQ3 . — What motivational factors sustain participation in digital citizen science ? — by providing empirical evidence on the link between values’ orientations , and digital volunteerism . The main exploratory results from these analyses are discussed below : 13 The UVT circumplex has multicollinearity issues ( Schwartz , 2016a ) and hence , multiple regressions with all value dimensions are not possible . 4 . 2 Further Explorations on The Role of Human Values in Digital Citizen Science65 Self - transcendence was related with initial participation in the digital citizen science initiative , As suggested by prior work — ( Hsieh et al . , 2014 ; Verplanken and Holland , 2002 ; Esau , 2018 ) — the results suggest that self - transcendence values ( universalism and benevolence ) are associated with initial participation in this case study ( See Figure 4 . 16 ) . However , those who valued self - transcendence more were also less likely to sustain their participation ( see Table . 4 . 3 ) . Participants with higher self - transcendence values were 70 % less likely to participate in a sustained manner in the initiative . This was evidenced by the odds ratio factor below 1 ( OR = 0 . 30 ) . These participants may have more compet - ing opportunities to engage in environmental activism ( for example , joining a march or a volunteering campaign ) . Figure 4 . 16 : Values’ Orientations of the Participants in the SENSEI Initative 66 4 Explorations on Participation in Digital Citizen Science Table 4 . 3 : Relation of participation ( a dichotomous outcome dropout / participate ) with values’ orientations Dependent variable Independent variables χ 2 OR Wald p - value BH p - value ( FDR 6 % ) CI ( 97 . 5 % ) Participation Security 5 , 5 2 , 19 0 , 019 0 , 114 4 , 4 Self - Transcendence . 5 , 0 0 , 3 0 , 025 0 , 075 . 7 , 9 Conformity 2 , 2 1 , 34 0 , 14 0 , 28 3 , 5 Openness - to - Change 2 , 2 0 , 53 0 , 14 0 , 21 1 , 1 Tradition 1 , 2 1 , 34 0 , 27 0 , 324 2 , 3 Self - Enhancement 0 , 81 0 , 8 0 , 37 0 , 37 1 , 2 Notes . Logistic regression analysis . Where : χ 2 , chi square ; OR , odds ratios ; BH , Benjamini - Hochberg adjustment ; FDR , false discovery rate ; CI , conﬁdence interval . ( * * * p < . 001 . * * p < . 01 . * p < . 05 . . p < . 1 ) Associating human values with a type of participation is vital to explore the factors af - fecting participation . In this case study , numerous participants indeed showed a strong interest towards the environment and their community ( “I am an environmentalist , I like good changes in the environment” ( P21 ) , “I’m a volunteer to create new things” ( P8 ) , “I like this city and I like to volunteer in actions to help it improve” ( P57 ) , “I wish environ - ment should be clean , that’s why I join this environmental monitoring” ( P55 ) ) . Hence , it is possible that those who dropped - out did not consider digital citizen science as some - thing aligned with their mental model on what an environmental action is ( or they may have had higher expectations of systems ) ; hence , they left . In this study , while partici - pants with strong self - transcendence were more willing to participate , they were also less likely to remain engaged . 4 . 2 Further Explorations on The Role of Human Values in Digital Citizen Science67 Security and openness - to - change were related with different usage patterns ; The re - sults — summarized in Table 4 . 4 — suggest that different value orientations are linked with different patters of use . For instance , participants with a higher openness - to - change value orientation — related to independence and curiosity — would interact with the sys - tem more times ( e . g . , browsing curiously through others’ submissions ) ( See Table 4 . 4b ) . On the other hand , participants with a higher value of security would have shorter goal - directed interactions ( e . g . , opening the system with the only goal of submitting an ob - servation ) ( See Table 4 . 4c ) . Interactions were measured with the three variables : 1 ) the number of interactions , which represented the platform use ; 2 ) duration of interactions , which represented the quality of use ; and 3 ) the number of submissions , which repre - sented the use efﬁcacy . The openness - to - change value dimension which comprises values such as stimulation , self - direction , and hedonism was associated with the number of interactions a volunteer would have with the digital citizen science platform . Participants with higher openness - to - change values were 78 % more likely to interact more with the platform ( IRR = 1 . 78 ) . On the other hand , the value of security was associated with the time participants would spend using the platform . Participants with a higher value of security were more likely to have shorter interactions with the platform . This meant that the duration of interactions decreased by approximately 55 % with everyone unit increase in security ( IRR = 0 . 46 ) . From the qualitative analysis , we observe that participants with higher openness - to - change values would use the technology to explore what others were submitting , even when they had nothing to submit ”I am always checking the observations of others users , looking for recommendations in my area” ( P37 ) , ”It was fun to use the app , learned new places near me and add my favorite places for people to use” ( P33 ) , ”I sometimes used it to see what others have submitted” ( P3 ) . Whereas , participants with higher security values were opening the application mostly when there was something relevant to submit . Hence , their interactions had a clear goal and were shorter ( ”as I understood it’s a platform to submit observations , so whenever I go out for a walk and ﬁnd something interesting then only use” ( P57 ) , ” [ In ] the usual route to work and home , I don’t have relevant things to re - port” ( P44 ) ) . Prior works have found that values can predict and explain usage behaviors , such as on - line reading interests ( Hsieh et al . , 2014 ) , forums word use ( Chen et al . , 2014 ) , and energy use ( Vogiatzi et al . , 2018 ) . This ﬁnding demonstrates that values also inﬂuence the man - ner in which digital citizen science systems are being used ( usage patterns ) . Therefore , it may be feasible to use values to support the design of digital citizen science tools and incentive mechanisms . Associating human values with digital interactions is important to understanding the relationship between technology design and behavior . The interactions were measured with the three following variables : 1 ) the number of interactions , which represented the platform use ; 2 ) duration of interactions , which represented the quality of use ; and 3 ) the number of submissions , which represented the use efﬁcacy . 68 4 Explorations on Participation in Digital Citizen Science Table 4 . 4 : Relation of interactions with values’ orientations Dependent variable Independent variables Anova P IRR BH P - value CI ( 97 , 50 % ) Number of submissions Self - Transcendence 0 , 12 1 , 97 0 , 74 1 , 53 Openness - to - Change 0 , 14 1 , 78 0 , 41 1 , 31 Conservation : Tradition 0 , 25 0 , 49 0 , 50 0 , 51 Conservation : Conformity 0 , 43 1 , 29 0 , 64 0 , 84 Self Enhancement 0 , 46 0 , 77 0 , 56 0 , 44 Conservation : Security 0 , 92 0 , 97 0 , 92 0 , 68 ( a ) Number of submissions and values’ orientations Dependent variable Independent variables Anova P IRR BH P - value CI ( 97 , 50 % ) Number of interactions Openness - to - Change * 0 , 0025 1 , 78 0 , 02 * 1 , 16 Conservation : Tradition 0 , 17 0 , 62 0 , 50 0 , 20 Self - Transcendence 0 , 25 1 , 97 0 , 49 0 , 91 Conservation : Security 0 , 49 1 , 20 0 , 74 0 , 69 Self Enhancement 0 , 60 0 , 77 0 , 72 0 , 52 Conservation : Conformity 0 , 84 1 , 04 0 , 84 0 , 44 ( b ) Number of interactions and values’ orientations Dependent variable Independent variables Anova P IRR BH P - value CI ( 97 , 50 % ) Duration of interactions Conservation : Security . 0 , 010 0 , 46 0 , 06 . - 0 , 20 Conservation : Tradition 0 , 152 2 , 06 0 , 46 1 , 64 Openness - to - Change 0 , 322 1 , 78 0 , 64 0 , 94 Self Enhancement 0 , 521 0 , 77 0 , 78 0 , 58 Conservation : Conformity 0 , 840 0 , 95 1 , 01 0 , 45 Self - Transcendence 0 , 929 1 , 97 0 , 93 0 , 68 ( c ) Duration of interactions and values’ orientations Notes . Negative binomial regression analysis . Where : IRR , incidence rate ratios ; BH , Benjamini - Hochberg adjustment ; FDR , false discovery rate ; CI , conﬁdence interval . ( * * * p < . 001 . * * p < . 01 . * p < . 05 . . p < . 1 ) 4 . 2 Further Explorations on The Role of Human Values in Digital Citizen Science69 Relation to Whole This sub - chapter along with publication IV was part of the ﬁnal stage in this doctoral research ( See Figure 4 . 17 ) . In it , the author explores the link between human values and user behavior in the SENSEI digital citizen science intervention from publication IV . This work builds on the lessons learned and design implications from prior publications ( II , III , and IV ) . The results from these analyses are particularly valuable due to the current research gap in the understanding we have of the role of human values in digital partici - pation ( Jennett and Cox , 2018 ; Rotman et al . , 2012 ; Palacin et al . , 2020b ; Esau , 2018 ) . The ﬁndings further demonstrate the feasibility of using values to support the design of digital citizen science tools and incentive mechanisms . Based on the results from this chapter in addition to the prior publications , Further understanding the inﬂuence of human values , such as security on participation in digital citizen science platforms contributes to ; a ) guide the design of incentive mechanisms ; b ) understand digital volunteering experi - ences ; and c ) to design , evaluate , and test these digital citizen science technologies . Figure 4 . 17 : Relationship of Sub - Chapter 4 . 2 with the Dissertation 70 4 Explorations on Participation in Digital Citizen Science 4 . 3 Summary of Design Reﬂections Publications II to IV contain ﬁfteen reﬂections for the design of digital citizen science processes , tools , and incentive mechanisms . These insights are driven from surveys , in - terviews , user studies , usage data , and observations from the designed studies . All these reﬂections are presented in accordance with ﬁve themes : recruitment , incentives , trust , feedback , data literacy ( See Figure . 4 . 18 ) and described in more detail below . Figure 4 . 18 : Summary of design reﬂections in publications II to IV ( organized by themes ) 4 . 3 Summary of Design Reﬂections 71 Reﬂections regarding recruitment : Shaping the directions of an initiative requires a shared understanding of our individual and common values , backgrounds , interests , and expectations . This reﬂection highlights the importance of creating spaces for conversa - tions on these factors from the beginning of an initiative to the day - to - day engagement mechanics . Examining our common values and motives and their impacts on recruitment campaigns and participation can organically foster a common understanding with all par - ticipants regarding an initiative’s purpose and activities . Techniques such as human values mapping ( Winter et al . , 2019 ; Holmes et al . , 2012 ) can inform such activities . Reﬂections regarding incentives : As projects strive to engage more people in their activ - ities , careful thought must be put into understanding the broader effect of the engagement mechanisms that are being designed . Incentives can be an effective means to renew the commitment of participants and to adjust the initiative goals and strategies , however , they can also damage engagement in the long term ( Crompton , 2010 , p . 37 ) . For this , de - signers need to understand the values and motives of participants so that they can create mechanisms to empower participation and mutual beneﬁt for both the researcher and the community ( Blake et al . , 2011 ) . Further , designing diverse and dynamic incentive mecha - nism aligned with values’ orientations can address the challenges posed by the temporality characteristic of motives . Reﬂections regarding trust : Reciprocity in any form can build mutual trust and more effective engagement ( Ssozi - Mugarura et al . , 2017 ) . Reciprocity can be fostered through designing mechanisms that enhance transparency , accountability , openness , and shared ownership of the commons , particularly by building collaborations that acknowledge and embrace different kinds of knowledge . This means that organizers need to spend a signif - icant amount of time nurturing relationships and trust with people through dialogues and open feedback ( Winschiers - Theophilus et al . , 2010 ) . Reﬂections regarding feedback : Technological devices do not serve a particular goal but provide new opportunities for people . Therefore , creating technological tools that are ﬂexible and adaptable is required in order to respond to the changing needs of people and their communities ( Ssozi - Mugarura et al . , 2017 ) . This can be enhanced by designing solutions that support unexpected use ( Dix , 2007 ) and creating dedicated channels to hear and incorporate participants’ feedback into the evolution of the solutions ( Ssozi - Mugarura et al . , 2017 ) . Reﬂections regarding data literacy : Digital citizen tools must not only enable people’s participation in data collection but must also create equitable beneﬁts . This means that these projects have the responsibility to nourish people’s ability to harness value from their own participation , data , and knowledge by opening the processes , outcomes , and ex - periences ( for example via data and technology commons ) . The data generated by people using digital citizen science platforms should become part of digital public infrastruc - tures , so that one day it can become a pivot for data commons movements , where people can control their data and generate public value ( Bria , 2018 ; Simm et al . , 2015 ) . 73 5 Discussion This chapter ﬁrst synthesizes the theoretical and practical contributions from each re - search question in this thesis work in relation to earlier scientiﬁc works in the ﬁeld . Thereafter the quality and validity of the research are assessed . Lastly , future directions for research in this area are suggested . 5 . 1 Revisiting the Research Questions and Contributions This section is organized according to the research questions . First , the contributions of each question are presented and then these are discussed in relation to prior research . 5 . 1 . 1 RQ1 . What are the current practices and challenges in digital citizen science ? This question was answered through the practical and theoretical contributions from pub - lication I 14 . In terms of the current practices in digital citizen science , seventeen common practices were mapped : from a ) technology - intensive practices , created to facilitate the collection , analysis , and dissemination of data to b ) engagement - driven practices aimed to combine strategies to locate and motivate observers ( See Figure 4 . 2 ) . Along these lines , ﬁve cate - gories of stakeholders were identiﬁed in the studied projects according to their activities ( citizens , academy and government , nature enthusiasts , households , and developers ) . This was used as a basis to illustrate a socio - technical vision of a digital citizen science initia - tive at that point in time ( See Figure 4 . 4 ) . These ﬁndings are in line with other studies such as the review on the state - of - the - art of crowdsourced geographic information ( See et al . , 2016 ) and the study of the role of the citizens in mapping ( Foody et al . , 2017 ) in that people have become an important source of contextualized observations regarding a wide range of environmental phenomena worldwide . This review documents show a steady growth in digital citizen science applications as , governments , research institutions and non - proﬁts are actively seeking to involve people in their design decisions . The mapping of the volunteers’ motives from publication I ( 1 : drive to change ; 2 : under - stand data beneﬁts ; 3 : the need for challenges ; 4 : self - interest gains and , 5 : social recog - nition ) is in line with prior reports from citizen science projects , such as iSPEX ( Land - Zandstra et al . , 2016 ) , Zoouniverse ( Reed et al . , 2013 ) , Stardust @ home ( Nov et al . , 2011 ) , Happy Match ( Crowston and Prestopnik , 2013 ) , and the Great Pollinator ( Domroese and Johnson , 2017 ) . These projects have highlighted that their participants are driven by a deep interest in contributing to science , followed by curiosity ( e . g . , to try new devices or experiences ) , learning interests , enjoyment of activities , and social engagements ( e . g . , sense of community ) . Further , the ﬁndings are in line with studies on small - scale citizen 14 The contributions of this article were two - fold . First , this study systematically reviewed practices , trends , and challenges of 108 digital citizen projects mentioned in 70 academic articles . Second , it illus - trated the different forms of participation in digital citizen science through a framework . 74 5 Discussion science projects ( Rotman et al . , 2012 , 2014a ; Jackson , 2019 ) , which have highlighted that recognition and novelty as a drivers of participation . As the motivations reported from literature and practice appeared to overlap , the map - ping of the ﬁndings regarding motivations in publication I was contrasted with a validated theory on volunteerism — the volunteers function inventory ( VFI ) ( Clary et al . , 1998 ) , which proposes that “acts of volunteerism that appear to be quite similar on the surface may reﬂect markedly different underlying motivational processes” ( Clary et al . , 1998 , p . 1517 ) . This theory proposes that people are driven to volunteer by six motivational functions ( a : altruistic values ; b : gain understanding ; c : enhance social relations ; d : in - crease career opportunities ; e : protect one - self and , f : self - enhancement ) . The theory was used to classify the mapped motivators and consequently , all six motivational functions explained the volunteers’ motives found in the 108 studied digital citizen science projects . Although , this ﬁnding indicates that the VFI is a potentially useful instrument to support the understanding of volunteers by digital citizen science projects . This ﬁnding , how - ever , has to be complemented by empirical studies using the VFI in digital citizen science projects . Furthermore , certain questions remain evolving research topics ( Rotman et al . , 2012 , 2014a , b ; Jennett and Cox , 2018 ) , such as the understanding of the temporality of volunteering motives , the different roles of volunteers within digital citizen science , and how design decisions in a digital citizen science project can nurture sustained participa - tion . In terms of the challenges , nine core challenges were identiﬁed in this ﬁeld , from i ) sus - tained participation , ii ) data aggregation , iii ) quick changes / advancements in technology , iv ) lack of standardization , v ) limited technical knowledge , vi ) limited resources , vii ) pri - vacy issues , viii ) balancing fair recognition for contribution , and ix ) data accessibility and maintainability . Lastly , the palette of participation was the main contribution related to this research question . This contribution was drawn from the results of publication I , and the action re - search observations and reﬂections from Publication IV . The palette of participation maps the types of roles people have in digital citizen science initiatives . This is a framework that portrays the current levels of participation when it comes to monitoring initiatives , where each tone represents a deliberative act of civic participation and where all tones are equally important . Hence the lack of a hierarchy in the palette as all forms of participation are important for a balanced society . This participation palette can be used for multiple purposes . We propose its use to 1 ) identify the motives of volunteers to assume different roles and the relationship these have with the design decisions in these initiatives ; 2 ) serve as the basis for user research to map the journey of a volunteer in a digital citizen science initiative ; 3 ) understand human - data interactions . 5 . 1 Revisiting the Research Questions and Contributions 75 5 . 1 . 2 RQ2 How does the design of processes , tools , and incentive mechanisms im - pact participation in digital citizen science ? The reﬂection on the shortcomings of incentive mechanisms was the main contribution related to this research question . The answers yielded in answering RQ2 are the practical outcomes from publication II : 1 ) empirical evidence on the effect of gamiﬁcation incen - tives on digital citizen science and 2 ) the design reﬂections regarding the use of gamiﬁca - tion in the design of digital citizen science technologies ; and the practical and theoretical outcomes from publication III : 3 ) qualitative evidence on the values and motives that un - derlie long - term participation in digital citizen science initiatives , 4 ) the design reﬂections linked with the design of initiatives that have sustained long - term engagement and , 5 ) a theoretical cross - analysis of the self - determination theory and the human values theory in the context of digital citizen science . In publication II , gamiﬁcation was selected as the incentive mechanism to study engage - ment , as it is a technique with a solid theoretical basis for impacting human behavior ( Seaborn and Fels , 2015 ) . Approaches that use certain elements of gamiﬁcation have been shown to increase user motivation and engagement in a variety of environments ( Seaborn and Fels , 2015 ) , including digital citizen science ( Morschheuser et al . , 2016 ) . However , the role of gamiﬁcation in engagement in digital citizen science had been unclear ( Ross , 2011 ; Massung et al . , 2013 ; Knowles , 2013a ) . As the studies where gamiﬁcation had been used to encourage ( Mason et al . , 2012 ; Massung et al . , 2013 ; Liu et al . , 2011 ) and improve ( Witt et al . , 2011 ) participation have found positive ( Liu et al . , 2011 ) or incon - clusive results ( Mason et al . , 2012 ; Massung et al . , 2013 ; Witt et al . , 2011 ) . The ﬁndings from publication II contribute to the current understanding of the role of gamiﬁcation in digital citizen science . Speciﬁcally , this study found that adding gam - iﬁcation to an environmental monitoring application signiﬁcantly increases the number of participants’ observations . However , the reﬂections from this study highlight the po - tential shortcoming using digital incentive mechanisms ( such as gamiﬁcation ) alone to understand volunteering behaviors ( actions ) or motivations alone without understanding the values that drive them . Publication III focused on this gap by studying the motiva - tional continuum nature of values through the lens of two social psychology theories . The results of the analyses show that openness - to - change values , like self - direction , are important for initial participation but , a diverse range of values plays a role in sustain - ing participation with the exception of power . Moreover , this study shows that integrated and identiﬁed motivations are important for sustained participation . These three types of motivations are the most - self determined , which means that their corresponding actions ( e . g . to submit an observation ) are perceived as important activities for the self . Thereby evidencing that when extrinsic motivators are self - directed and autonomous , people will not only perform tasks willingly and enthusiastically but also in a sustained manner . Although citizen science activities are a hobby for some , for most volunteers in these cases , monitoring is perceived as important because there is a direct beneﬁt to their own 76 5 Discussion interests . Both of the initiatives studied in Publication III have understood that support - ing the participants’ personal goals is key to sustaining participation . For instance , both J¨arviwiki and Safecast provide simple and readable visualizations based on the collected data . People can access , read , and understand the collected data in an open manner . Most importantly , they can understand what the data means for their own local contexts because they can ﬁnd information about their area in few steps . While certain researchers argue that to popularize citizen science activities , they must become volunteers’ hobbies ( Haklay , 2013 ; Preece , 2016 ) ; the ﬁndings in this doctoral thesis add to the existing evidence ( Jackson , 2019 ; Rotman et al . , 2014a ; Jennett and Cox , 2018 ) , showing that creating digital citizen science services focused on providing vol - unteers with what they need to pursue their own goals is important to sustain long - term participation . Thus , it is important for designers of such initiatives to understand the goals of volunteers through user research methods such as user journeys , card sorts , or afﬁnity maps ( IDEO , 2015 ) . Lastly , in publication III , a contrasting analysis of incentive mechanisms in light of the Schwartz human values theory revealed that most incentive mechanisms appeal to self - enhancement values , these mechanisms were based in providing “wealth” or “reputa - tion” online or ofﬂine as a means to increase participation by appealing to introjected motives . With few exceptions of mechanisms that appeal to self - transcendence by em - bracing universalist and benevolent values centering on the well - being of the community to the core of their project recruitment campaigns ( integrated motivations ) . This may have unintended consequences , such as driving people to become more self - interested and less likely to support volunteering activities in the longer term , as evidenced in the self - enhancement pitfall by the Common Cause Report ( Crompton , 2010 , p . 37 ) . The ﬁndings from publication III are contributing to advancing the conceptualization of the behavioral continuum that drives volunteering actions in digital citizen science ( Jen - nett and Cox , 2018 ; Jackson , 2019 ; Preece , 2016 ; Gilbert , 2017 ; Skarlatidou et al . , 2019 ; Ceccaroni et al . , 2019 ) . This could serve as a basis to inform digital citizen science design , guide the design of incentive mechanisms , map volunteering experiences , and evaluate and test technological platforms . Further , exploring the dynamics of participation from the interplay lenses of both of these theories can be beneﬁcial to enhance the empirical understanding we have of the link between human experience and behavior and to explain enduring behaviors like sustained engagement ( Kasser , 2002 ; Grouzet et al . , 2005 ; Kasser et al . , 2004 ) . 5 . 1 Revisiting the Research Questions and Contributions 77 5 . 1 . 3 RQ3 . What motivational factors sustain participation in digital citizen sci - ence ? The explorations on values’ orientations and interactions was the main contribution related to this research question . These were drawn from the practical outcomes from publication IV : 1 ) outline of a co - creation approach to digital citizen science and , the main theoretical outcomes from sub - chapter 4 . 2 in this thesis : 1 ) the mapping of value orientations among volunteers in a digital citizen science case and , 2 ) the study of the values’ orientations and interactions in a digital citizen science case . Although participatory approaches have been employed in HCI for many years , the way they are used can vary signiﬁcantly depending on the context they are being applied ( Duarte et al . , 2018 ) . For example , under classical user - centered design , people are seen as a passive object of study by a “knowledgeable” researcher . In participatory design , the technologist facilitates the process by which participants learn about technology and eventually take on design roles ( Winschiers - Theophilus et al . , 2010 ) . Whereas in co - design the users and researchers are both designers on equal footing ( Stanley et al . , 2015 ; Muashekele et al . , 2019 ) . Consequently , co - design approaches promote the use of appro - priate tools , methods , and design processes over a long - term multicultural engagement between technologists and communities using participatory approaches , thereby leading to new transcultural products ( Ssozi - Mugarura et al . , 2017 ; Kauhondamwa et al . , 2018 ) . The SENSEI initiative which is studied in publications IV and chapter 4 . 2 followed an approach to co - design combined two participatory frameworks a ) the city commons ap - proach by ( Balestrini et al . , 2017 ; Woods et al . , 2018 ) and b ) the Speedplay framework by ( Ferrario et al . , 2013 , 2014 ) with an in - the - wild deployment ( Rogers and Marshall , 2017 ) . The city commons framework is a novel approach to orchestrate community en - gagement around issues of shared concern , enhancing community ownership , openness , skills development , and prompting discussions about data governance ( Balestrini et al . , 2017 ) . On the other hand , the Speedplay framework enables the development of software with an emphasis on social innovation in tightly constrained environments ( Ferrario et al . , 2014 ) . In addition , the day - to - day practices within the initiative were informed by a re - view of the last ﬁve years of co - design and participatory design literature in the HCI and ICT4D ﬁelds . Three core principles were extracted from that body of knowledge to guide the intervention ( See Figure 5 . 1 ) : i ) sustainable community development practices related to the co - creation of locally appropriate solutions ; ii ) fairness practices linked to the co - creation of meaningful and fair relationships between the participants and designers ; and iii ) knowledge construction , practices related to the equitable access to production and consumption of knowledge ( Blake et al . , 2011 ; Ssozi - Mugarura et al . , 2017 ; Teli et al . , 2017 ; Dix , 2007 ; Winschiers - Theophilus et al . , 2010 ; Smith et al . , 2017 ; Sanders and Stappers , 2008 ; Muashekele et al . , 2019 ; Stanley et al . , 2015 ; Blake et al . , 2014 ; Steinfeld and Smith , 2012 ; David et al . , 2013 ; Winschiers - Theophilus et al . , 2013 ; Stanley et al . , 2016 ) . 78 5 Discussion Figure 5 . 1 : Key Elements of Community Co - design Sub - Chapter 4 . 2 focused on exploring the role of human values in a digital citizen science case by relating the participants’ values orientations to computer - mediated interactions . Associating human values with a type of participation is vital to explore the factors affect - ing participation . As suggested by prior work ( Hsieh et al . , 2014 ; Verplanken and Hol - land , 2002 ; Esau , 2018 ) , we ﬁnd that self - transcendence values ( universalism and benev - olence ) predict initial participation in this case study . This ﬁnding matches the initiative frame , which was linked with themes such as environmental action , civic participation , and community technologies . Therefore , it is possible that if we would have had a differ - ent initiative frame , for example , “earn money by mapping issues in the city” , the proﬁle of the participants would be different and so would be the observed behavior . Based on prior related work ( Hsieh et al . , 2014 ; Verplanken and Holland , 2002 ; Esau , 2018 ) , we expected self - transcendence also to predict sustained participation in the system ( we expected people who self - portray as environmentalists and benevolent to participate in a sustained manner ) . However , we ﬁnd that those who valued self - transcendence more were less likely to sustain their participation . We ﬁnd that these participants may have more competing opportunities to engage in environmental activism ( for example , joining a march or a volunteering campaign ) . In terms of use , we ﬁnd that different values are linked with different usage patterns . For instance , those with strong security have shorter , goal - directed interactions with the sys - tem . Whereas those with strong openness - to - change interact more frequently with the tools . This ﬁnding shows that different values are linked with different usages of a sys - tem . Prior works have found that values can predict and explain usage behaviors , such as online reading interests ( Hsieh et al . , 2014 ) , forums word use ( Chen et al . , 2014 ) , and energy use ( Vogiatzi et al . , 2018 ) . This ﬁnding demonstrates that values also inﬂuence 5 . 2 Assessment of the Research 79 the the manner in which digital citizen science systems are being used ( usage patterns ) . Therefore , it may be feasible to use values to support the design of digital citizen science tools and incentive mechanisms . The contributions detailed in here further advance our understanding regarding the in - ﬂuence of human values on participation in digital citizen science and could serve as a basis to , a ) guide the design of incentive mechanisms ; b ) understand user experiences in online communities , and c ) to inform the design and evaluation of digital citizen science technologies . 5 . 2 Assessment of the Research This section discusses the quality and limitations of this research in relation to the reliabil - ity and validity of the included publications . The research questions reﬂect the exploratory approach in the studies , most of which were conducted in close collaboration with local people , decision - makers , and non - proﬁts . Reliability refers to the replicability level of the results ( i . e . if others were to replicate the studies , how similar their ﬁndings and ours are ) ( Dubois and Gibbert , 2010 ) . The limitations associated with reliability are often linked with the descriptions and research documentations in the study reports ( publications ) . All the studies included in this the - sis in the form of publications have been systematically documented at a granular level . Moreover , the datasets related to these studies have been published openly when possible . Lastly , each publication contains a set of design reﬂections or guidelines that are linked with prior research in the form of related literature . Further , appendix I increases the re - liability of this thesis by disclosing all the informed consents and instruments used in the studies . Validity refers to the consistency between the research studies and their conclusions . The validity is assessed in terms of construct validity , internal validity , external validity , and ecological validity ( Dubois and Gibbert , 2010 ) : • Construct validity refers to the quality of the study investigating what it claims to investigate ( i . e . how well the research approach leads to accurate observations of reality ) ( Dubois and Gibbert , 2010 ; Schwandt et al . , 1994 ) . The RQ1 ( What are the current practices and challenges in digital citizen science ? ) was explored in the publication I and included a literature review that used systematic coding proce - dures to identify themes . The ﬁndings from this publication were explored and contrasted with theories and new research in the publications II , III , and IV . With regard to RQ2 ( How does the design of processes , tools , and incentive mechanisms impact participation in digital citizen science ? ) , two parallel studies were designed to answer this question . 1 ) one study identiﬁed an incentive mechanism ( gamiﬁcation ) and explored its impact on 80 5 Discussion engagement in digital citizen science through surveys and usage logs ; 2 ) the second study focused on mapping the incentive mechanisms currently in use in the ﬁeld of digital citizen science . The ﬁrst study is limited by the study data ( which is mainly quantitative from surveys ) and could be improved by using more usage logs statis - tics and qualitative data sources in future studies . Moreover , the ﬁrst study is limited by its short duration which was not enough to explore how participants’ behavior changes over time . The second study is lim - ited due to the fact that it was not a systematic review , it used taxonomies by prior research and studied it from the lenses of one of the social psychology theories we explore in this thesis . Further , the results of the second study are limited to qualitative evidence only given the exploratory case study nature of the publication III . Although limited to two case studies , these cases are remarkable examples of digital citizen science initiatives that have successfully run for a decade . Finally , regarding RQ3 ( What motivational factors sustain participation in digital citizen science ? ) , the results come from multiple data sources — qualitative ( interviews , ﬁeld observations ) and quantitative ( surveys , data models , and usage logs ) — pre - sented in publication IV and sub - chapter 4 . 2 . However , these results are limited by the participation frame , and a co - creation approach affected the the manner in which people participated in the initiative ( the user role ) . Another limitation is the instrument used to measure values ( which was selected given its length ) . This re - search used the Schwartz human values survey used in the European social survey ( ESS ) . However , Prof . Schwartz has a more recent survey that captures more gran - ular differences between values . Further , multiple validity measures ( such as the Bonferroni correction , the Mann - Whitney U test , the Krippendorff alpha , the Wald test and the Bejamini - Hochbergh FDR procedure ) were used in publications II , III , and sub - chapter 4 . 2 to validate the results . • Internal validity refers to the causality between the collected data and the results ( i . e . how well the logical reasoning of the research approach can defend the con - clusions ) ( Dubois and Gibbert , 2010 ; Campbell , 2018 ) . This thesis work is ex - ploratory in nature . Although , all the studies were exploratory and did not aim to prove causality , two experiments in - the - wild were designed to understand how certain digital citizen science approaches can affect participation ( i . e . , engagement levels ) ; these are reported in publication II and chapter 4 . 2 . When reporting the re - sults of these experiments , validity tests ( such as the Mann - Whitney U test and the Wald test ) and methods to correct the multiple testing problem ( such as the Bon - ferroni correction and the Bejamini - Hochbergh FDR procedure ) were employed to reduce threats to validity . In the case of the qualitative study in publication III , three coders were involved in the data analysis , and the inter - rater Krippendorff al - pha was used to validate the coding and reduce threats to validity . Further , when reporting design reﬂections or implications from the studies , they were supported with examples from the collected data ( i . e . quotations from interviews or surveys ) to clarify the reasoning underlying these . 5 . 3 Future Research 81 • External validity refers to the generalizability of the ﬁndings from the research into other settings ( Campbell , 2018 ; Lavrakas , 2008 ) . This research has multiple gen - eralizability limitations . From publication II , which was a small scale experiment which involved mainly students and staff in a university setting . Publication III re - ports on two case studies , which do not allow statistical generalization by nature but instead analytical generalizability was pursued by employing established and validated theories to guide the data analysis . The publication IV is limited by be - ing a medium - sized experiment in a Nordic context which used co - creation as the participation approach for volunteers . • Ecological validity refers to the relevance of the research results in the real world ( Brewer and Crano , 2000 ) . The data collected during this research work was col - lected in real - life contexts , including short and long interventions with the general public , decision - makers , and non - proﬁts . The case studies were selected due to their relevance in the current world in close collaboration with the coordinators of these digital citizen science initiatives . Hence , the ecological validity of the research is considered to be high . 5 . 3 Future Research This doctoral research has inspired several avenues to further this research work . Each of the following subsections discusses a possible topic for future research . Values in computing : It has been argued that human values play a role in digital partic - ipation ( See for example : Publication III and ( Esau , 2018 ) ) . However , we still have little understanding of how to connect values empirically to the design of digital participatory tools ( Esau , 2018 ) . More approaches to complement the evaluation and understanding of human values in computing - related contexts are emerging . For example , some scholars have proposed and used language to understand personal values ( e . g . , in online forums ) ( Chen et al . , 2014 ; Boyd et al . , 2015 ) and other initiatives such as the Values in Computing ( ViC ) has been creating tools that tap into the abstract ( personal ) and concrete ( behavior ) level of values understanding among software engineers ( Values in Computing , 2019 ; Winter et al . , 2019 ) . The research on the link between the values’ orientations and behav - ior is promising , but more tools to understand values instantiations ( beyond self - report ) in HCI are currently necessary ( Williams et al . , 2017 ) . Overcoming the self - transcendence biases in interventions : Human behavior can be primed by different factors such as places , rewards , language ( Kahneman , 2011 , p . 55 ) . As studies have shown , human values correlate with human behavior ( Maio , 2016 , p . 51 - 126 ) . Values are connected to the way we understand the world and often they manifest through the use of language frames 15 . Therefore , it is important to carefully choose the frames to be used when attempting to strengthen / nurture certain values , as these prime people . 15 Frames are both mental structures that order our ideas , and communicative tools that evoke these structures and shape our perceptions and interpretations over time . ( Darnton and Kirk , 2011 ) 82 5 Discussion For example , when attempting to encourage pro - environmental and / or pro - community be - haviors , advocating for status and wealth may encourage less environmentally - conscious behavior and lower concerns regarding others ( Holmes et al . , 2012 , p . 30 ) . As research projects strive to engage more people in their activities , careful thought must be put into understanding the role of values on the temporality and quality of engagement . Focusing on values that appeal to wealth or reputation can cause people to become more self - interested and less likely to support pro - social or pro - environmental activities in the long term ( Crompton , 2010 , p . 37 ) . Despite this , the use of mechanisms that appeal to self - transcendence by embracing universalist and benevolent values by , for example , centering their core project recruitment campaigns with the well - being of the community , appears to be rarer . Digital incentive mechanisms : Incentive mechanisms have been proposed as a means to build sustained participation behaviors in sensing projects ( Restuccia et al . , 2016 ; Jaimes et al . , 2015 ) . However , the broader effect of these mechanisms on engagement behaviors remains still unknown . The current incentive mechanisms in the ﬁeld are focused mainly on rewards ; they are centered around self - enhancement values such as power and achieve - ment , which can cause people to become more self - interested and less likely to support pro - social or pro - environmental activities in the long term . For this , explorations of un - derlying values and motivations , that incentive mechanisms appeal to , must be studied . The design of online pseudo - participation : Scholarship has recognized the value of dig - ital tools to support democracies ( Smith , 2009 ) . However , participation has always been a complex concept in practice ( Palacin et al . , 2020a ) . Digital tools and their construc - tion are inherently biased by the values and decisions from those in positions of power ( Nissenbaum , 2005 ; Winner , 1985 ; O’Neil , 2016 ; Broussard , 2018 ; Buolamwini and Ge - bru , 2018 ; Nelimarkka et al . , 2018 ) . Consequently , digital tools ( such as those studied in this thesis work ) can lead to pseudo - participation by design ( Palacin et al . , 2020a ) , by enabling digital participation without giving any real agency . For example , some mu - nicipal websites have been reported to mostly conﬁgure 16 their users as consumers or clients of municipal services — not as active citizens with political interests ( Liste and Sørensen , 2015 ) . Through the design and implementation of the website , city ofﬁcials embedded assumptions regarding the expected roles of the inhabitants of the city as part of the codebase . This is an aspect to consider when designing tools and strategies to support participation in digital citizen science contexts . A participatory democracy and a monitorial democracy are two different concepts ( Graeff , 2014 ; Keane et al . , 2009 ) , and it is worth to wonder , what is the future we are building through digital citizen science tools ? Further studies that examine technology and politics and in particular how users are being conﬁgured through online participation tools are currently necessary . 16 User conﬁguration refers to the way technologies deﬁne / limit people’s behaviors 83 6 Conclusion Research on digital citizen science has focused on understanding motivations to nurture sustained participation . However , sustaining concrete participatory actions for long - term in citizen science projects remains a major challenge for initiatives . This doctoral thesis addresses the research gap by advancing our understanding of participation in digital citi - zen science and could serve as basis for a ) guiding the design of incentive mechanisms , b ) understanding user experiences in digital citizen science communities , and c ) informing the design and evaluation of digital citizen science technologies . During this doctoral research , qualitative and quantitative methods were used to advance the understanding of what drives sustained participation in digital citizen science , so that the ﬁeld can advance towards using effective , validated , and theoretical based mechanisms to foster sustained participation . This exploratory work was done through a critical anal - ysis of literature and practice reports and , the design of case studies and localized action research interventions . This research explores a novel approach to study participation in digital citizen science from the lens of human - computer interaction and social psychol - ogy . Exploring the dynamics of digital participation using social psychology theories can be beneﬁcial to enhance the empirical understanding we have of the link between human experience and behavior and to explain enduring behaviors like sustained engagement . This research concludes that to motivate and engage digital citizen science volun - teers in a sustained manner , the personally held human values must be considered when designing and evaluating the initiatives and tools . This thesis offers three core contributions to HCI and the application domain , related to : participation in digital citi - zen science , incentive mechanisms and values’ orientations . The ﬁrst contribution of this thesis is the palette of participation framework , which was designed and developed to illustrate the different forms of participation in digital citizen . Based on a systematic re - view of the practices , trends , volunteering motives , and challenges of 108 digital citizen project ( publication I ) . The second contribution are the shortcomings of incentive mecha - nisms , which were identiﬁed through the empirical analysis of the effect of gamiﬁcation elements on digital citizen science ( publication II ) ; and in - depth qualitative analyses of two outstanding digital citizen science cases , which were guided by two prominent social psychology theories ( publication III ) . The third and last contribution is the exploration of the relationship between values’ orientations and interactions , which was achieved through a qualitative mapping of values’ orientations among 15 volunteers of two out - standing digital citizen science cases ( publication III ) , and the quantitative analysis of the relations between values orientations , sustained participation , and the number and quality of digital interactions in a year - long experimental study . 85 References Allison , P . D . ( 2009 ) . Fixed effects regression models , vol . 160 . SAGE publications . Balestrini , M . , Diez , T . , and Kresin , F . ( 2015 ) . From Participatory Sensing to making sense . In : Proceedings of the Workshop Environmental Infrastructures and Platforms 2015 - Infrastructures and Platforms for Environmental Crowd Sensing and Big Data . Balestrini , M . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Understanding Sustained Community Engagement : A Case Study in Heritage Preservation in Rural Argentina . Proceedings of the 2014 CHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Balestrini , M . , et al . ( 2017 ) . A city in common : a framework to orchestrate large - scale citizen engagement around urban issues . In : Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 2282 – 2294 . Bardi , A . and Schwartz , S . H . ( 2003 ) . Values and behavior : Strength and structure of relations . Personality and social psychology bulletin , 29 ( 10 ) , pp . 1207 – 1220 . Batson , C . D . , Ahmad , N . , and Tsang , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Four motives for community involve - ment . Journal of social issues , 58 ( 3 ) , pp . 429 – 445 . Benjamini , Y . and Hochberg , Y . ( 1995 ) . Controlling the false discovery rate : a practi - cal and powerful approach to multiple testing . Journal of the Royal statistical society : series B ( Methodological ) , 57 ( 1 ) , pp . 289 – 300 . Benkler , Y . ( 2011 ) . The penguin and the leviathan : How cooperation triumphs over self - interest . Crown Business . Bilsky , W . , Janik , M . , and Schwartz , S . H . ( 2011 ) . The structural organization of human values - evidence from three rounds of the European Social Survey ( ESS ) . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 42 ( 5 ) , pp . 759 – 776 . Blake , E . , Tucker , W . , and Glaser , M . ( 2014 ) . Towards communication and information access for Deaf people . South African Computer Journal , 54 ( Special issue 2 ) , pp . 10 – 19 . Blake , E . H . , Tucker , W . D . , Glaser , M . , and Freudenthal , A . ( 2011 ) . Deaf telephony : community - based co - design . Interaction design : beyond human - computer interaction , 3 , pp . 412 – 413 . Bonneau , L . A . , Legg , M . , Darville , R . , and Haggerty , M . ( 2003 ) . Texas master natural - ist program assessment : Changes in volunteer knowledge and attitudes as a result of training . Ph . D . thesis . Stephen F . Austin State University Nacogdoches , TX . Bonney , R . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Citizen Science : A Developing Tool for Expanding Science Knowledge and Scientiﬁc Literacy . BioScience , 59 ( 11 ) , pp . 977 – 984 . 86 References Bonney , R . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Next steps for citizen science . Science , 343 ( 6178 ) , pp . 1436 – 1437 . Bourgeois , J . , Van Der Linden , J . , Kortuem , G . , and Rimmer , C . ( 2014 ) . Using partic - ipatory data analysis to understand social constraints and opportunities of electricity demand - shifting . In : ICT for Sustainability 2014 ( ICT4S - 14 ) . Boyatzis , R . E . ( 1998 ) . Transforming qualitative information : Thematic analysis and code development . SAGE . Boyd , R . L . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Values in words : Using language to evaluate and understand personal values . In : Ninth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media . Braun , V . and Clarke , V . ( 2006 ) . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative re - search in psychology , 3 ( 2 ) , pp . 77 – 101 . Brewer , M . B . and Crano , W . D . ( 2000 ) . Research design and issues of validity . Handbook of research methods in social and personality psychology , pp . 3 – 16 . Brey , P . ( 2005 ) . The epistemology and ontology of human - computer interaction . Minds and Machines , 15 ( 3 - 4 ) , pp . 383 – 398 . Bria , F . ( 2018 ) . Our data is valuable . Here’s how we can take that value back . The Guardian . ( Accessed on 09 / 11 / 2019 ) . Brooke , J . and others ( 1996 ) . SUS - A quick and dirty usability scale . Usability evaluation in industry , 189 ( 194 ) , pp . 4 – 7 . Broussard , M . ( 2018 ) . Artiﬁcial unintelligence : how computers misunderstand the world . MIT Press . Brundtland , G . , et al . ( 1987 ) . Our Common Future . Technical report . ISBN 019282080X , ISSN 0748 - 8009 , 300 p . Buolamwini , J . and Gebru , T . ( 2018 ) . Gender shades : Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial gender classiﬁcation . In : Conference on fairness , accountability and transparency , pp . 77 – 91 . Burke , J . A . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Participatory sensing . In : Proceedings of the WSW’06 at SenSys ’06 . ACM . Campbell , J . L . , Quincy , C . , Osserman , J . , and Pedersen , O . K . ( 2013 ) . Coding in - depth semistructured interviews : Problems of unitization and intercoder reliability and agree - ment . Sociological Methods & Research , 42 ( 3 ) , pp . 294 – 320 . Campbell , Donald Thomas ; Yin , R . K . ( 2018 ) . Case study research and applications : design and methods , sixth edition . edn . SAGE Publications . References 87 Carroll , J . M . and Kjeldskov , J . ( 2013 ) . The encyclopedia of human - computer interaction . Human Computer Interaction - brief intro . Ceccaroni , L . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Opportunities and risks for citizen science in the age of arti - ﬁcial intelligence . Citizen Science : Theory and Practice , 4 ( 1 ) . Chamberlain , A . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Understanding mass participatory pervasive computing systems for environmental campaigns . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing , pp . 1 – 18 . ISSN 16174909 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 013 - 0756 - x . Chen , J . , Hsieh , G . , Mahmud , J . U . , and Nichols , J . ( 2014 ) . Understanding individuals’ personal values from social media word use . In : Proceedings of the 17th ACM confer - ence on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing , pp . 405 – 414 . CitizenScience . gov ( 2020 ) . About CitizenScience . gov . ( Accessed on 08 / 05 / 2020 ) . CitizenSData Science Hub ( 2020 ) . Examining the use and practices of Citizen Science for EU policies . ( Accessed on 08 / 03 / 2020 ) . Clary , E . G . and Snyder , M . ( 1999 ) . The motivations to volunteer : Theoretical and practi - cal considerations . Current directions in psychological science , 8 ( 5 ) , pp . 156 – 159 . Clary , E . G . , et al . ( 1998 ) . Understanding and assessing the motivations of volunteers : a functional approach . Journal of personality and social psychology , 74 ( 6 ) , p . 1516 . Cohn , J . P . ( 2008 ) . Citizen science : Can volunteers do real research ? BioScience , 58 ( 3 ) , pp . 192 – 197 . Coulson , S . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Stop the Noise ! Enhancing Meaningfulness in Participatory Sensing with Community Level Indicators . In : Proceedings of the 2018 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2018 . Crompton , T . ( 2010 ) . Common cause : The case for working with our cultural values . Technical report . WWF - UK’s Report . Crowston , K . and Prestopnik , N . R . ( 2013 ) . Motivation and data quality in a citizen science game : A design science evaluation . In : 2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , pp . 450 – 459 . Curtis , V . ( 2015 ) . Online citizen science projects : an exploration of motivation , contribu - tion and participation . Ph . D . thesis . The Open University . Darnton , A . and Kirk , M . ( 2011 ) . Finding Frames : New ways to engage the UK public in global poverty . Bond London . David , S . , Sabiescu , A . G . , and Cantoni , L . ( 2013 ) . Co - design with communities . A reﬂec - tion on the literature . In : Proceedings of the 7th International Development Informatics Association Conference , pp . 152 – 166 . 88 References Deterding , S . , Dixon , D . , Khaled , R . , and Nacke , L . ( 2011 ) . From Game Design Elements to Gamefulness : Deﬁning ”Gamiﬁcation” . In : Proceedings of the 15th International Academic MindTrek Conference : Envisioning Future Media Environments , MindTrek ’11 , pp . 9 – 15 . New York , NY , USA : ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0816 - 8 . Dicheva , D . , Dichev , C . , Agre , G . , and Angelova , G . ( 2015 ) . Gamiﬁcation in education : A systematic mapping study . Educational Technology & Society , 18 ( 3 ) , pp . 75 – 88 . Dickinson , J . L . , et al . ( 2012 ) . The current state of citizen science as a tool for ecological research and public engagement . Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment , 10 ( 6 ) , pp . 291 – 297 . ISSN 15409295 , doi : 10 . 1890 / 110236 . DiSalvo , C . , Jenkins , T . , and Lodato , T . ( 2016 ) . Designing speculative civics . In : Pro - ceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 4979 – 4990 . Dix , A . ( 2007 ) . Designing for appropriation . In : Proceedings of the 21st British HCI Group Annual Conference on People and Computers : HCI . . . but not as we know it - Volume 2 , pp . 27 – 30 . Dix , A . ( 2020 ) . Statistics for HCI : Making Sense of Quantitative Data . Synthesis Lectures on Human - Centered Informatics , 13 ( 2 ) , pp . 1 – 181 . Domroese , M . C . and Johnson , E . A . ( 2017 ) . Why watch bees ? Motivations of citizen science volunteers in the Great Pollinator Project . Biological Conservation , 208 , pp . 40 – 47 . Duan , Z . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Practical incentive mechanisms for IoT - based mobile crowdsens - ing systems . IEEE Access , 5 , pp . 20383 – 20392 . Duarte , A . M . B . , Brendel , N . , Degbelo , A . , and Kray , C . ( 2018 ) . Participatory design and participatory research : an HCI case study with young forced migrants . ACM Transac - tions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) , 25 ( 1 ) , p . 3 . Dubois , A . and Gibbert , M . ( 2010 ) . From complexity to transparency : managing the inter - play between theory , method and empirical phenomena in IMM case studies . Industrial Marketing Management , 39 ( 1 ) , pp . 129 – 136 . Dunn , O . J . ( 1961 ) . Multiple comparisons among means . Journal of the American statis - tical association , 56 ( 293 ) , pp . 52 – 64 . eBird ( 2019 ) . Publications - eBird . ( Accessed on 08 / 01 / 2019 ) . Esau , K . ( 2018 ) . Capturing Citizens’ Values : On the Role of Narratives and Emotions in Digital Participation . Analyse & Kritik , 40 ( 1 ) , pp . 55 – 72 . Estrin , D . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Participatory sensing : applications and architecture [ internet predictions ] . IEEE Internet Computing , 14 ( 1 ) , pp . 12 – 42 . References 89 European Citizen Science Association ( 2020 ) . Citizen Science and Open Science . ( Ac - cessed on 08 / 05 / 2020 ) . European Commission ( 2020 ) . Citizen science : Shaping Europe’s digital future . ( Ac - cessed on 08 / 05 / 2020 ) . European Parliament ( 2016 ) . REGULATION ( EU ) 2016 / 679 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL - of 27 April 2016 - on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data , and repealing Directive 95 / 46 / EC ( General Data Protection Regulation ) . Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Union . ( Accessed on 02 / 20 / 2020 ) . Feldman , S . ( 2003 ) . Values , ideology , and the structure of political attitudes . In : Oxford handbook of political psychology , pp . 477— - 508 . Oxford University Press . Ferrario , M . A . , Simm , W . , and Whittle , J . ( 2013 ) . SpeedPlay : Managing the Other Edge of Innovation . DE2013 : Open Digital . RCUK . Ferrario , M . A . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Software engineering for ’social good’ : integrating action research , participatory design , and agile development . Companion Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering - ICSE Companion 2014 , pp . 520 – 523 . ISSN 02705257 . Ferrario , M . A . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Values - ﬁrst SE : research principles in practice . In : Proceed - ings of the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering Companion , pp . 553 – 562 . Finnish Advisory Board on Research Integrity ( 2012 ) . Responsible conduct of research and procedures for handling allegations of misconduct in Finland . Finnish Advisory Board on Research Integrity Helsinki , Finland . FoldIt ( 2020 ) . Coronavirus binder designs queued for testing ! — Foldit . ( Accessed on 04 / 10 / 2020 ) . Foody , G . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Mapping and the Citizen Sensor . Mapping and the Citizen Sensor , pp . 1 – 12 . Foundation , C . C . ( 2014 ) . On having more than two sides : how do you describe values ? – Common Cause Foundation . ( Accessed on 04 / 06 / 2020 ) . Friedman , B . and Hendry , D . G . ( 2019 ) . Value sensitive design : Shaping technology with moral imagination . Mit Press . Fritz , S . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Citizen science and the United Nations sustainable development goals . Nature Sustainability , 2 ( 10 ) , pp . 922 – 930 . Ganti , R . K . , Ye , F . , and Lei , H . ( 2011 ) . Mobile crowdsensing : current state and future challenges . IEEE Communications Magazine , 49 ( 11 ) , pp . 32 – 39 . 90 References Gharesifard , M . and Wehn , U . ( 2016 ) . To share or not to share : Drivers and barriers for sharing data via online amateur weather networks . Journal of Hydrology , 535 , pp . 181 – 190 . Gilbert , S . ( 2017 ) . Portraits of participation : Exploring the relationship between social motivators and facets of participation in a Twitter - based community . In : Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences . Goldman , J . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Participatory Sensing : A citizen - powered approach to illumi - nating the patterns that shape our world . Foresight & Governance Project , White Paper , pp . 1 – 15 . Golsteijn , C . , Gallacher , S . , Capra , L . , and Rogers , Y . ( 2016 ) . Sens - Us : Designing Inno - vative Civic Technology for the Public Good . In : Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Con - ference on Designing Interactive Systems , pp . 39 – 49 . ACM . ISBN 9781450340311 . Graeff , E . ( 2014 ) . Notes on Monitory Democracy and a Networked Civil Society . ( Ac - cessed on 11 / 20 / 2020 ) . Grouzet , F . M . , et al . ( 2005 ) . The structure of goal contents across 15 cultures . Journal of personality and social psychology , 89 ( 5 ) , p . 800 . Gui , X . and Nardi , B . ( 2015 ) . Sustainability begins in the street : A story of Transition Town Totnes . In : EnviroInfo and ICT for Sustainability 2015 . Guo , B . , Yu , Z . , Zhou , X . , and Zhang , D . ( 2014a ) . From participatory sensing to mobile crowd sensing . In : 2014 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communication Workshops ( PERCOM WORKSHOPS ) , pp . 593 – 598 . Guo , B . , Yu , Z . , Zhou , X . , and Zhang , D . ( 2014b ) . From participatory sensing to mobile crowd sensing . In : 2014 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communication Workshops ( PERCOM WORKSHOPS ) , pp . 593 – 598 . Haklay , M . ( 2013 ) . Citizen science and volunteered geographic information : Overview and typology of participation . In : Crowdsourcing geographic knowledge , pp . 105 – 122 . Springer . Hamari , J . , Koivisto , J . , and Sarsa , H . ( 2014 ) . Does Gamiﬁcation Work ? – A Litera - ture Review of Empirical Studies on Gamiﬁcation . In : 2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ) , pp . 3025 – 3034 . Hand , E . ( 2010 ) . People power . Nature , 466 ( 7307 ) . Hanel , P . H . , Vione , K . C . , Hahn , U . , and Maio , G . R . ( 2017 ) . Value instantiations : the missing link between values and behavior ? In : Values and behavior , pp . 175 – 190 . Springer . References 91 Harding , M . , Knowles , B . , Davies , N . , and Rounceﬁeld , M . ( 2015 ) . HCI , civic engage - ment & trust . In : Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 2833 – 2842 . Hecker , S . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Citizen science : innovation in open science , society and policy . UCL Press . Heggen , S . ( 2013 ) . Participatory sensing : repurposing a scientiﬁc tool for STEM educa - tion . interactions , 20 ( 1 ) , pp . 18 – 21 . Hoang , C . ( 2018 ) . 10 Things : Citizen Science . NASA Science . ( Accessed on 08 / 05 / 2020 ) . Holmes , T . , Blackmore , E . , Hawkins , R . , and Wakeford , T . ( 2012 ) . The common cause handbook : a guide to values and frames for campaigners , community organisers , civil servants , fundraisers , educators , social entrepreneurs , funders , politicians , and every - one in between . Hsieh , G . , Chen , J . , Mahmud , J . U . , and Nichols , J . ( 2014 ) . You read what you value : understanding personal values and reading interests . In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 983 – 986 . Iacovides , I . , Jennett , C . , Cornish - Trestrail , C . , and Cox , A . L . ( 2013 ) . Do games attract or sustain engagement in citizen science ? : a study of volunteer motivations . In : CHI’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1101 – 1106 . IDEO ( 2015 ) . The ﬁeld guide to human - centered design . Technical report . Interaction Design Foundation ( 2020 ) . What is Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) ? ( Ac - cessed on 01 / 27 / 2020 ) . Irwin , A . ( 2002 ) . Citizen science : A study of people , expertise and sustainable develop - ment . Routledge . Jackson , C . ( 2019 ) . Characterizing Novelty as a Motivator in Online Citizen Science . PhD Thesis . Jaimes , L . G . , Vergara - Laurens , I . J . , and Raij , A . ( 2015 ) . A survey of incentive techniques for mobile crowd sensing . IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 2 ( 5 ) , pp . 370 – 380 . Jennett , C . and Cox , A . L . ( 2018 ) . Digital Citizen Science and the Motivations of Volun - teers . The Wiley Handbook of Human Computer Interaction , 2 , pp . 831 – 841 . Jennett , C . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Motivations , learning and creativity in online citizen science . Journal of Science Communication , 15 ( 3 ) . Johnson , I . G . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Reﬂections on Deploying Distributed Consultation Technolo - gies with Community Organisations . In : Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 2945 – 2957 . 92 References Kahneman , D . ( 2011 ) . Thinking , fast and slow . Macmillan . Kalimeri , K . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Predicting demographics , moral foundations , and human values from digital behaviours . Computers in Human Behavior , 92 , pp . 428 – 445 . ISSN 0747 - 5632 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2018 . 11 . 024 , url : http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0747563218305594 . Kasser , T . ( 2002 ) . Sketches for a self - determination theory of values . Handbook of self - determination research , 123 , p . 40 . Kasser , T . and Ryan , R . M . ( 1996 ) . Further examining the American dream : Differential correlates of intrinsic and extrinsic goals . Personality and Social Psychology bulletin , 22 ( 3 ) , pp . 280 – 287 . Kasser , T . , Ryan , R . M . , Couchman , C . E . , and Sheldon , K . M . ( 2004 ) . Materialistic values : Their causes and consequences . Psychology and consumer culture : The struggle for a good life in a materialistic world , 1 ( 2 ) , pp . 11 – 28 . Katmada , A . , Satsiou , A . , and Kompatsiaris , I . ( 2016 ) . Incentive mechanisms for crowd - sourcing platforms . In : International Conference on Internet Science , pp . 3 – 18 . Kauhondamwa , M . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Co - creating personal augmented reality accessories to enhance social well - being of urban San youth . In : Proceedings of the Second African Conference for Human Computer Interaction : Thriving Communities , p . 10 . Keane , J . et al . ( 2009 ) . Monitory democracy and media - saturated societies . Grifﬁth Re - view , ( 24 ) , p . 47 . Keele , S . et al . ( 2007 ) . Guidelines for performing systematic literature reviews in soft - ware engineering . Technical report . Technical report , Ver . 2 . 3 EBSE Technical Report . EBSE . Khan , W . Z . , Xiang , Y . , Aalsalem , M . Y . , and Arshad , Q . ( 2012 ) . Mobile phone sensing systems : A survey . IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , 15 ( 1 ) , pp . 402 – 427 . Kingston , T . ( 2016 ) . Cute , Creepy , or Crispy—How values , attitudes , and norms shape hu - man behavior toward bats . Bats in the Anthropocene : conservation of bats in a chang - ing world . Springer International AG , Cham , pp . 571 – 588 . Kitchenham , B . ( 2004 ) . Procedures for performing systematic reviews . Keele University , 33 , pp . 1 – 26 . Knowles , B . ( 2013a ) . Re - Imagining Persuasion : Designing for Self - Transcendence . Paris : ACM . ISBN 9781450319522 . Knowles , B . ( 2013b ) . Cyber - sustainability : towards a sustainable digital future . Ph . D . thesis . Lancaster University . References 93 Krippendorff , K . ( 2011 ) . Computing Krippendorff’s alpha - reliability . Annenberg School for Communication Departmental Papers : Philadelphia . Land - Zandstra , A . M . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Citizen science on a smartphone : Participants’ moti - vations and learning . Public Understanding of Science , 25 ( 1 ) , pp . 45 – 60 . Lavrakas , P . J . ( 2008 ) . Encyclopedia of survey research methods . Sage Publications . Le Blanc , D . ( 2020 ) . E - participation : a quick overview of recent qualitative trends . Lewis , J . R . ( 1995 ) . IBM computer usability satisfaction questionnaires : psychometric evaluation and instructions for use . International Journal of Human - Computer Interac - tion , 7 ( 1 ) , pp . 57 – 78 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 10447319509526110 . Liste , L . and Sørensen , K . H . ( 2015 ) . Consumer , client or citizen ? How Norwegian local governments domesticate website technology and conﬁgure their users . In - formation , Communication & Society , 18 ( 7 ) , pp . 733 – 746 . ISSN 1369 - 118X , doi : 10 . 1080 / 1369118X . 2014 . 993678 , url : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / doi / abs / 10 . 1080 / 1369118X . 2014 . 993678 . Liu , Y . , Alexandrova , T . , and Nakajima , T . ( 2011 ) . Gamifying intelligent environments . In : Proceedings of the 2011 international ACM workshop on Ubiquitous meta user interfaces , pp . 7 – 12 . Maio , G . R . ( 2016 ) . The psychology of human values . Routledge . Mapuva , J . ( 2015 ) . Citizen Participation , Mobilisation and Contested Participatory Spaces . International Journal of Political Science and Development , 3 ( 10 ) , pp . 405 – 415 . Mason , A . D . , Michalakidis , G . , and Krause , P . J . ( 2012 ) . Tiger nation : Empowering cit - izen scientists . In : Digital Ecosystems Technologies ( DEST ) , 2012 6th IEEE Interna - tional Conference on , pp . 1 – 5 . Massung , E . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Using crowdsourcing to support pro - environmental community activism . In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 371 – 380 . Morschheuser , B . , Hamari , J . , and Koivisto , J . ( 2016 ) . Gamiﬁcation in Crowdsourcing : A Review . In : 2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ) , pp . 4375 – 4384 . Muashekele , C . , Winschiers - Theophilus , H . , and Kapuire , G . K . ( 2019 ) . Co - Design as a Means of Fostering Appropriation of Conservation Monitoring Technology by Indige - nous Communities . In : Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Communi - ties & Technologies - Transforming Communities , pp . 126 – 130 . 94 References Mukta , M . S . H . , Ali , M . E . , and Mahmud , J . ( 2016 ) . User generated vs . supported contents : Which one can better predict basic human values ? In : International Conference on Social Informatics , pp . 454 – 470 . Nacke , L . E . and Deterding , S . ( 2017 ) . The maturing of gamiﬁcation research . Computers in Human Behavior , 71 , pp . 450 – 454 . ISSN 0747 - 5632 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2016 . 11 . 062 . Nelimarkka , M . , Laaksonen , S . M . , and Semaan , B . ( 2018 ) . Social Media Is Polarized , Social Media Is Polarized : Towards a New Design Agenda for Mitigating Polarization . In : Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference , pp . 957 – 970 . Newman , G . , et al . ( 2012 ) . The future of citizen science : emerging technologies and shifting paradigms . Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment , 10 ( 6 ) , pp . 298 – 304 . Nissenbaum , H . ( 2005 ) . Values in Technical Design . In : Mitcham , C . , ed . , Encyclopedia of Science , Technology , and Ethics , pp . lxvi – lxx . New York : MacMillan . Norton , E . C . and Dowd , B . E . ( 2018 ) . Log odds and the interpretation of logit models . Health services research , 53 ( 2 ) , pp . 859 – 878 . Nov , O . , Arazy , O . , and Anderson , D . ( 2011 ) . Dusting for science : motivation and partic - ipation of digital citizen science volunteers . In : Proceedings of the 2011 iConference , pp . 68 – 74 . Nyerges , T . , Barndt , M . , and Brooks , K . ( 2006 ) . Public Participation Geographic Informa - tion Systems . Annals of the Association of American Geographers , Volume 96 ( Smith ) , pp . 224 – 233 . OECD ( 2015 ) . Frascati Manual 2015 : Guidelines for Collecting and Reporting Data on Research and Experimental Development , The Measurement of Scientiﬁc , Technologi - cal and Innovation Activities . OECD . O’Neil , C . ( 2016 ) . Weapons of math destruction : How big data increases inequality and threatens democracy . Broadway Books . Orchard , S . ( 2019 ) . Growing citizen science for conservation to support diverse project objectives and the motivations of volunteers . Paciﬁc Conservation Biology , 25 ( 4 ) , pp . 342 – 344 . Osborne , J . W . ( 2014 ) . Best practices in logistic regression . Sage Publications . Palacin , V . , Nelimarkka , M . , Reynolds - Cu´ellar , P . , and Becker , C . ( 2020a ) . The Design of Pseudo - Participation . In : Proceedings of the 16th Participatory Design Conference 2020 - Participation ( s ) Otherwise - Volume 2 , p . 40 – 44 . ACM . Palacin , V . , et al . ( 2019 ) . SENSEI : Harnessing Community Wisdom for Local Environ - mental Monitoring in Finland . In : Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , p . CS01 . References 95 Palacin , V . , et al . ( 2020b ) . Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science : Case Stud - ies on J¨arviwiki and Safecast . Citizen Science : Theory and Practice , 5 ( 1 ) . Palacin - Silva , M . and Porras , J . ( 2018 ) . Shut up and take my environmental data ! A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices , participation approaches and chal - lenges . EPiC Series in Computing , 52 , pp . 270 – 288 . Palacin - Silva , M . , et al . ( 2016 ) . State - of - the Art Study in Citizen Observatories : Techno - logical Trends , Development Challenges and Research Avenues . Palacin - Silva , M . V . , et al . ( 2018 ) . The Role of Gamiﬁcation in Participatory Environmen - tal Sensing : A Study In the Wild . In : Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , p . 221 . Palacin - Silva , M . V . ( 2018 ) . Understanding Civic Participation in Environmental Sensing : A Values Driven Approach . In : Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1 – 4 . Preece , J . ( 2016 ) . Citizen science : New research challenges for human - computer interac - tion . International Journal of Human - Computer Interaction , 32 ( 8 ) , pp . 585 – 612 . Quick , K . S . and Bryson , J . M . ( 2016 ) . 12 . Public participation . Handbook on theories of governance , p . 158 . Reed , J . , Raddick , M . J . , Lardner , A . , and Carney , K . ( 2013 ) . An exploratory factor analy - sis of motivations for participating in Zooniverse , a collection of virtual citizen science projects . In : 2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , pp . 610 – 619 . Reed , M . S . ( 2008 ) . Stakeholder participation for environmental management : a literature review . Biological conservation , 141 ( 10 ) , pp . 2417 – 2431 . Restuccia , F . , Das , S . K . , and Payton , J . ( 2016 ) . Incentive mechanisms for participa - tory sensing : Survey and research challenges . ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks ( TOSN ) , 12 ( 2 ) , p . 13 . Rogers , Y . ( 2011 ) . Interaction design gone wild : striving for wild theory . Interactions , 18 ( 4 ) , pp . 58 – 62 . ISSN 10725520 , doi : 10 . 1145 / 1978822 . 1978834 . Rogers , Y . and Marshall , P . ( 2017 ) . Research in the Wild . Synthesis Lectures on Human - Centered Informatics , 10 ( 3 ) . Rokeach , M . ( 1973 ) . The nature of human values , The nature of human values . New York , NY , US : Free Press . ISBN 0029267501 ( Hardcover ) . Ross , J . ( 2011 ) . Pervasive Negabehavior Games for Environmental Sustainability . In : CHI’11 , pp . 1085 – 1088 . Vancouver : ACM . ISBN 9781450302685 . 96 References Rotman , D . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Dynamic changes in motivation in collaborative citizen - science projects . In : Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on computer supported cooper - ative work , pp . 217 – 226 . Rotman , D . , et al . ( 2014a ) . Does motivation in citizen science change with time and cul - ture ? In : Proceedings of the companion publication of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing , pp . 229 – 232 . Rotman , D . , et al . ( 2014b ) . Motivations affecting initial and long - term participation in citizen science projects in three countries . iConference 2014 Proceedings . Ruge , T . ( 2015 ) . Technology and people power : 5 ways to shape the sustainable develop - ment goals — Global Development Professionals Network — The Guardian . ( Accessed on 08 / 01 / 2019 ) . Ryan , R . M . and Deci , E . L . ( 2000a ) . Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations : Classic deﬁnitions and new directions . Contemporary educational psychology , 25 ( 1 ) , pp . 54 – 67 . Ryan , R . M . and Deci , E . L . ( 2000b ) . Self - determination theory and the facilitation of in - trinsic motivation , social development , and well - being . American psychologist , 55 ( 1 ) , p . 68 . Ryan , R . M . and Deci , E . L . ( 2017 ) . Self - determination theory : Basic psychological needs in motivation , development , and wellness . Guilford Publications . Safecast ( 2019 ) . About Safecast . ( Accessed on 08 / 01 / 2019 ) . Sanders , E . B . N . and Stappers , P . J . ( 2008 ) . Co - creation and the new landscapes of design . Co - design , 4 ( 1 ) , pp . 5 – 18 . Sauermann , H . and Franzoni , C . ( 2015 ) . Crowd science user contribution patterns and their implications . Proceedings of the national academy of sciences , 112 ( 3 ) , pp . 679 – 684 . Schrock , D . S . , Meyer , M . , Ascher , P . , and Snyder , M . ( 2000 ) . Reasons for becoming involved as a Master Gardener . HortTechnology , 10 ( 3 ) , pp . 626 – 630 . Schwandt , T . A . , Denzin , N . K . , and Lincoln , Y . S . ( 1994 ) . Handbook of qualitative re - search . Londres , Ed : Denzin & Lincoln . Schwartz , S . ( 2016a ) . From Item to Index — ESS EduNet . ( Accessed on 04 / 09 / 2019 ) . Schwartz , S . ( 2016b ) . Reliability — ESS EduNet . ( Accessed on 10 / 18 / 2020 ) . Schwartz , S . H . ( 2003 ) . A proposal for measuring value orientations across nations . Ques - tionnaire Package of the European Social Survey , 259 ( 290 ) , p . 261 . Schwartz , S . H . ( 2006 ) . Basic human values : An overview . Recuperado de http : / / www . yourmorals . org / schwartz . References 97 Schwartz , S . H . ( 2012 ) . An overview of the Schwartz theory of basic values . Online read - ings in Psychology and Culture , 2 ( 1 ) , p . 11 . Schwartz , S . H . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Reﬁning the theory of basic individual values . Journal of personality and social psychology , 103 ( 4 ) , p . 663 . Seaborn , K . and Fels , D . I . ( 2015 ) . Gamiﬁcation in theory and action : A survey . Inter - national Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 74 , pp . 14 – 31 . ISSN 1071 - 5819 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2014 . 09 . 006 . Seddig , D . and Davidov , E . ( 2018 ) . Values , attitudes toward interpersonal violence , and interpersonal violent behavior . Frontiers in psychology , 9 , p . 604 . See , L . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Crowdsourcing , citizen science or volunteered geographic informa - tion ? The current state of crowdsourced geographic information . ISPRS International Journal of Geo - Information , 5 ( 5 ) , p . 55 . Simm , W . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Co - Designing With and For Chaotic Lives : # Patchworks , a Cata - lyst Case . In : Proceedings of the 2013 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput - ing Systems . Simm , W . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Tiree energy pulse : exploring renewable energy forecasts on the edge of the grid . In : Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1965 – 1974 . Skarlatidou , A . , et al . ( 2019 ) . User experience of digital technologies in citizen science . Journal of Science Communication , 18 ( 01 ) . Smith , G . ( 2009 ) . Democratic innovations : Designing institutions for citizen participa - tion . Cambridge University Press . Smith , R . C . , Bossen , C . , and Kanstrup , A . M . ( 2017 ) . Participatory design in an era of participation . Taylor & Francis . Snyder , J . , Shilton , K . , and Anderson , S . ( 2016 ) . Observing the materiality of values in information systems research . In : 2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ) , pp . 2017 – 2026 . Sommet , N . and Morselli , D . ( 2017 ) . Keep Calm and Learn Multilevel Logistic Modeling : A Simpliﬁed Three - Step Procedure Using Stata , R , Mplus , and SPSS . International Review of Social Psychology , 30 , pp . 203 – 218 . Ssozi - Mugarura , F . , Blake , E . , and Rivett , U . ( 2017 ) . Codesigning with communities to support rural water management in Uganda . CoDesign , 13 ( 2 ) , pp . 110 – 126 . Stanley , C . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Ovahimba community in Namibia ventures into crowdsourcing design . In : Proc . IFIP WG , vol . 9 , pp . 277 – 287 . 98 References Stanley , C . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Formulating the obvious as a task request to the crowd : an inter - active design experience across cultural and geographical boundaries . In : Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Interactive Exhibitions , Workshops - Volume 2 , pp . 86 – 87 . Steinfeld , E . and Smith , R . O . ( 2012 ) . Universal design for quality of life technologies . Proceedings of the IEEE , 100 ( 8 ) , pp . 2539 – 2554 . Storey , A . ( 2014 ) . Safecast MiniDoc . url : https : / / vimeo . com / 113486504 . Subreddit Stats ( 2020 ) . r / Coronavirus subreddit stats ( Novel Coronavirus ( COVID - 19 ) ) . ( Accessed on 04 / 10 / 2020 ) . Tangmunarunkit , H . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Ohmage : A general and extensible end - to - end par - ticipatory sensing platform . ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology ( TIST ) , 6 ( 3 ) , p . 38 . Teli , M . , Di Fiore , A . , and D’Andrea , V . ( 2017 ) . Computing and the common : a case of Participatory Design with think tanks . CoDesign , 13 ( 2 ) , pp . 83 – 95 . Theobald , E . J . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Global change and local solutions : Tapping the unrealized potential of citizen science for biodiversity research . Biological Conservation , 181 , pp . 236 – 244 . Tyack , A . and Mekler , E . D . ( 2020 ) . Self - Determination Theory in HCI Games Research : Current Uses and Open Questions . In : Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . UNECE ( 1998 ) . Aarhus Convention : Convention on Access to Information , Public Par - ticipation in Decision - making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters . Aarus Convention , ( June ) , p . 25 . doi : 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511494345 . 010 . United Nations ( 1992 ) . Agenda 21 . url : http : / / www . un . org / esa / sustdev / documents / agenda21 / english / Agenda21 . pdf . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11671 - 008 - 9208 - 3 . United States Congress ( 2016 ) . Crowdsourcing and Citizen Science Act of 2016 . ( Ac - cessed on 08 / 05 / 2020 ) . University of Washington Center for Game Science ( 2020 ) . Recap of recent Foldit publi - cations — Foldit . ( Accessed on 08 / 01 / 2019 ) . Values in Computing ( 2019 ) . Values in computing : tools . ( Accessed on 10 / 30 / 2019 ) . Van Roy , R . and Zaman , B . ( 2015 ) . Moving Beyond the Effectiveness of Gamiﬁcation . In : CHI ’15 workshop ‘Researching Gamiﬁcation : Strategies , Opportunities , Challenges , Ethics’ . Seoul , South Korea . References 99 Venkatesh , V . ( 2000 ) . Determinants of perceived ease of use : Integrating control , intrinsic motivation , and emotion into the technology acceptance model . Information systems research , 11 ( 4 ) , pp . 342 – 365 . doi : 10 . 1287 / isre . 11 . 4 . 342 . 11872 . Venkatesh , V . , Morris , M . G . , Davis , G . B . , and Davis , F . D . ( 2003 ) . User Acceptance of Information Technology : Toward a Uniﬁed View . MIS Quarterly , 27 ( 3 ) , pp . 425 – 478 . ISSN 0276 - 7783 . Verplanken , B . and Holland , R . W . ( 2002 ) . Motivated decision making : effects of activa - tion and self - centrality of values on choices and behavior . Journal of personality and social psychology , 82 ( 3 ) , p . 434 . Vitos , M . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Supporting collaboration with non - literate forest communities in the congo - basin . In : Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing , pp . 1576 – 1590 . Vogiatzi , C . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Energy use and saving in residential sector and occupant be - havior : A case study in Athens . Energy and Buildings , 181 , pp . 1 – 9 . Wardle , C . J . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Exploring Co - design with Breastfeeding Mothers . In : Pro - ceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Wehn , U . , Rusca , M . , Evers , J . , and Lanfranchi , V . ( 2015 ) . Participation in ﬂood risk management and the potential of citizen observatories : A governance analysis . Environmental Science & Policy , 48 , pp . 225 – 236 . ISSN 14629011 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . envsci . 2014 . 12 . 017 , url : http : / / linkinghub . elsevier . com / retrieve / pii / S1462901114002457 . Williams , P . A . , Jenkins , J . , Valacich , J . , and Byrd , M . D . ( 2017 ) . Measuring Actual Behav - iors in HCI Research - A call to Action and an Example . AIS Transactions on Human - Computer Interaction , 9 ( 4 ) , pp . 339 – 352 . Winner , L . ( 1985 ) . Do artifacts have politics ? In : MacKenzie , D . and Wajcman , J . , eds , The social shaping of technology , pp . 26 – 38 . Buckingham : Open University Press . Winschiers - Theophilus , H . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Being participated : a community approach . In : Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , pp . 1 – 10 . Winschiers - Theophilus , H . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Moving away from Erindi - roukambe : Transfer - ability of a rural community - based co - design . IFIIP WG , 9 , pp . 363 – 374 . Winter , E . , Forshaw , S . , Hunt , L . , and Ferrario , M . A . ( 2019 ) . Towards a systematic study of values in SE : tools for industry and education . In : Proceedings of the 41st Inter - national Conference on Software Engineering : New Ideas and Emerging Results , pp . 61 – 64 . Winter , E . , Forshaw , S . , and Ferrario , M . A . ( 2018 ) . Measuring human values in software engineering . In : Proceedings of the 12th ACM / IEEE International Symposium on Em - pirical Software Engineering and Measurement , p . 48 . 100 References Witt , M . , Scheiner , C . , and Robra - Bissantz , S . ( 2011 ) . Gamiﬁcation of online idea com - petitions : Insights from an explorative case . Informatik schafft Communities , 192 . Wohlin , C . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Experimentation in software engineering . Springer Science & Business Media . Wolff , A . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Engaging with the Smart City Through Urban Data Games . In : Nijholt , A . , ed . , Playable Cities : The City as a Digital Playground , p . 47 – 66 . Singa - pore : Springer . Wolff , A . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Civic Data Literacies for Bottom - up Data Innovation . In : Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Communities & Technologies - Transforming Communities , pp . 306 – 309 . Woods , M . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Citizen Sensing : A Toolkit . Technical report . Technical Report . Zoouniverse project ( 2019 ) . Galaxy Zoo Data . ( Accessed on 08 / 01 / 2019 ) . Zwilling , M . L . ( 2013 ) . Negative Binomial Regression . ( Accessed on 10 / 31 / 2020 ) . APPENDIX I : Informed Consents and Instruments Appendix A . Publication II , Consent and Surveys Informed Consent agreement for participation in the Jarvi experimen - tal study Dear Participant , The following information is provided for you to decide whether you wish to participant in the present study . You should be aware that you are free to decide to not participate or to withdraw at any time without affecting your relationship with this department , the investigator or the Lappeenranta University of Technology . The purpose of this study is to understand the opportunities for engaging citizens in lakes monitoring via mobile applications . The procedure will be an experimental study where participants are asked to observe the progress of spring in the Finnish lakes by reporting changes in the snow and ice during 20 days from March 24th to April 12th . Participants , will be using the application and submitting observations of the lake in photo or text form at any time . Data collection involve , usage monitoring surveys and small surveys at the beginning and end of the study . Do not hesitate to ask any questions about the study either before participating or during the time that you are participating . We would be happy to share our ﬁndings with you after the research is completed . However , your name will not be associated with the research ﬁndings in any way , and your identity as participant will be known only to the researchers . There are no known risks and / or discomforts associated with this study . The expected beneﬁts associated with your participation are the opportunity to participate in a empiri - cal research study and the learning about nature monitoring relevance for climate change mitigation . If submitted for publication , a byline will indicate the respective acknowl - edgements . Please , sign your consent with full knowledge of the nature and purpose of the proce - dures . A copy of this consent form will be given to you to keep . Name and signature Date Maria Victoria Palacin Silva . Junior Researcher Lappeenranta University of Technology Jarvi : Pre - survey ( To see the interactive version of the survey use the following link : http : / / goo . gl / 8rk1sG ) Jarvi is a gamiﬁed mobile application to monitor lakes across Lappeenranta . Jarvi invites you to observe the progress of spring in the lakes by reporting changes in the snow and ice during 20 days from 24 March to 12 April via a mobile application . The observations are being collected for re - search purposes to help study the opportunities for engaging citizens in climate change mitigation . All collected data will be handled and stored conﬁdentially and , no data will be released for the use of any third party , with the exception of anonymized analysis as research results . From these published results , it will be impossible to deduct any information on names , products or answers from any individual participant . More information available from victoria . palacin @ lut . ﬁ 1 . Which application did you use ? • Jarvigo • Jarvida 2 . Select your your age range • 21 and Under • 22 to 34 • 35 to 44 • 45 to 54 • 55 to 64 • 65 and Over 3 . In a typical week and month , how often do you go to lakes ? ( Passing by also counts ) • Never • 1 to 2 times per month • More than 3 times a month • 1 to 2 times per week • More than 3 times a week 4 . Having used Jarvi for ﬁrst time . Please , rate the following statements in the scale from strongly disagree , somewhat disagree , neutral , somewhat agree to strongly agree . • I think that I would like to use this system frequently • I found the system unnecessarily complex • I thought the system was easy to use • I found the various functions in this system were well integrated • I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system • I would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly • I found the system very hard to use • I felt very conﬁdent using the system • I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system 5 . Do you know the ice condition observation can help to study the climate change , ﬂood forecasting , and security situation awareness ? • Yes • No • I knew it partially 6 . Please , match the images of the lake with the description about water status ( drag and drop ) Jarvi : Post - survey for those who used the gamiﬁed application ( To see the interactive version of the survey use the following link : http : / / goo . gl / JJB5k2 ) 1 . Which application did you use ? • Jarvigo • Jarvida Section I : Features and Usage 2 . Rate the following statements about Jarvi features in the scale from strongly disagree , somewhat disagree , neutral , somewhat agree to strongly agree . • I achieved my challenge ( 20 observations in 20 days ) • Seeing my name in the leaderboard motivated me to submit more observations • Seeing my points reduced motivated me to submit new observations • I learned about global warming with the storyboard • I followed my progress on the activity tab 3 . Rate the following statements on usage habits in the scale from strongly disagree , somewhat disagree , neutral , somewhat agree to strongly agree . • I was motivated to use the system regularly • I was motivated to submit many observations • I learned about global warming during the use of the program Section II : Use and Attitude 4 . Having used Jarvi for ﬁrst time . Please , rate the following statements about the ease of use in the scale from strongly disagree , somewhat disagree , neutral , somewhat agree to strongly agree . • I think that I would like to use this system frequently • I found the system unnecessarily complex • I thought the system was easy to use • I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use this system • I found the various functions in this system were well integrated • I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system • I would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly • I found the system very clumsy or difﬁcult to use • I felt very conﬁdent using the system • I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system • I ﬁnd it easy to get the system to do what I want it to do • Overall , I am satisﬁed with how easy it was to use the system 5 . Rate the following statements about the enjoyment in the scale from strongly disagree , some - what disagree , neutral , somewhat agree to strongly agree . • Using the mobile software for measurement is a good idea • The program makes measuring tasks more interesting • Working with the program is fun • I like using the program to measure lakes • I found using the system to be enjoyable • The actual process of using the system is pleasant 6 . How would you characterize yourself when you used Jarvi ( multiple selection question ) : • Spontaneous • Playful • Unimaginative • Unoriginal • Flexible • Uninventive • Creative Section III : Awareness 7 . Order the following statements according to their importance in your opinion ( drag and drop ) : 8 . Please , describe the major issues you experienced when using Jarvi : 9 . Open comments and questions Jarvi : Post - survey for those who used the non - gamiﬁed application ( To see the interactive version of the survey use the following link : http : / / goo . gl / 8rk1sG2 ) 1 . Which application did you use ? • Jarvigo • Jarvida Section I : Features and Usage 2 . Rate the following statements on usage habits in the scale from strongly disagree , somewhat disagree , neutral , somewhat agree to strongly agree . • I was motivated to use the system regularly • I was motivated to submit many observations • I learned about global warming during the use of the program Section II : Use and Attitude 3 . Having used Jarvi for ﬁrst time . Please , rate the following statements about the ease of use in the scale from strongly disagree , somewhat disagree , neutral , somewhat agree to strongly agree . • I think that I would like to use this system frequently • I found the system unnecessarily complex • I thought the system was easy to use • I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use this system • I found the various functions in this system were well integrated • I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system • I would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly • I found the system very clumsy or difﬁcult to use • I felt very conﬁdent using the system • I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system • I ﬁnd it easy to get the system to do what I want it to do • Overall , I am satisﬁed with how easy it was to use the system 4 . Rate the following statements about the enjoyment in the scale from strongly disagree , some - what disagree , neutral , somewhat agree to strongly agree . • Using the mobile software for measurement is a good idea • The program makes measuring tasks more interesting • Working with the program is fun • I like using the program to measure lakes • I found using the system to be enjoyable • The actual process of using the system is pleasant 5 . How would you characterize yourself when you used Jarvi ( multiple selection question ) : • Spontaneous • Playful • Unimaginative • Unoriginal • Flexible • Uninventive • Creative Section III : Awareness 7 . Order the following statements according to their importance in your opinion ( drag and drop ) : 8 . Please , describe the major issues you experienced when using Jarvi : 9 . Open comments and questions Appendix B . Publication III , Consent and Interview Guide Informed Consent to Participate in the Safecast Case Study Maria Palacin - Silva and Ari Happonen , researchers in the Business and Management School at Lappeenranta University of Technology under the supervision of Professors : Jari Porras and Maria Angela Ferrario , would appreciate your participation in a research interview designed to collect information about the motives among outstanding volunteers of Safecast . You are being asked to give an anonymous interview that should take up no more than an hour of your time . Also , you are being asked to ﬁll a survey , which takes about 10 minutes . It is hoped that we may gain valuable information about your experiences in monitoring that can help to improve our understanding of why citizens join and stay in initiatives like Safecast . We anticipate no safety risk to you or impact on your privacy as a result of your participation in this study other than the inconvenience of the time to provide the interview . The information that you give us on the interview will be recorded in anonymous form . We will not release information that could identify you . If you want to withdraw from the study at any time you may do so without penalty . The information on you up to that point will then be destroyed . Once the study has been completed , we will be glad to give you the results . In the meantime , if you have any questions , please contact : Maria Victoria Palacin - Silva Lappeenranta University of Technology Tel . ( 358 ) 503266296 Email : maria . palacin . silva @ lut . ﬁ Ari Happonen Lappeenranta University of Technology Tel . ( 358 ) 50 322 5358 Email : ari . happonen @ lut . ﬁ I have read the above explanation and agree to participate in the study by giving my signature or recorded verbal agreement for it . Name : Date : Signature : セセセ ーーー フフフキキキャャャススストトト ににに 関関関 すすするるる ケケケ ーーー ススススススタタタデデディィィ ーーー 参参参 加加加 にににあああたたたるるる 同同同 意意意 書書書 この 度 は 、 ケ ー ススタディ ー への 参 加 のご 連 絡 をいただきありがとうございます 。 ラッペ ー ンランタ 大 学 経 営 工 学 および マネジメント の 研究 者 である マリア ・ パラスィ ン ・ スィルヴァ （ Maria Palacin - Silva ）、 アリ ・ ハッポネン （ Ari Happonen ） また ス ー パ ー バイザ ー である ヤリ ・ ポラス （ Jari Porras ） 教 授 と マリア ・ アンジェラ ・ フェラリ オ （ Maria Angela Ferrario ） 教 授 より 感 謝 申 し 上 げます 。 今 回 の インタビュ ー 並 びに アンケ ー ト 調 査 は セ ー フキャスト の ボランティア の 皆 様 の 活 動 の 動 機 に 関 して 調 査 を するために 行 います 。 下 記 をお 読 みいただき 同 意 いただける 場 合 に 必 要 事 項 をご 記 入 ください 。 あなたは 、 電 話 による インタビュ ー への 応 答 をを 求 められます 。 その 際 所 要 時 間 は 1 時 間 以 内 を 予 定 しています 。 なお 、 あなたを 特 定 し 得 る 情 報 が 公 開 されることはありま せん 。 また 、 あなたは アンケ ー ト 調 査 への 回 答 を 求 められます 。 所 要 時 間 は 約 10 分 です 。 当 調 査 により 、 空 間 放 射 線測 定 に 関 するあなたの 経 験 から 有 益 な 情 報 を 得 、 市 民 が Safecast のような 組 織 に 参 加 し 活 動 を 続 ける 理 由 を 理 解 するために 役 立 てることが 期 待 されています 。 あなたがこの 研究 に 参 加 することによって 、 あなたの 時 間 を 割 いて インタビュ ー に 応 じていただくということ 以 外 には 、 あなたに 安 全 上 の リスク や プライバシ ー の 影 響 は ありません 。 インタビュ ー は 録 音 をし 、 あなたの 回 答 する 情 報 は 匿 名 の 形 で 記 録 されます 。 私 たちはあなたを 特 定 できる 情 報 を 公 開 しません 。 あなたは 当 研究 の 期間 中 もし 参 加 を 止 めたい 場 合 には 、 いかなる ペナルティ ー なしで それを 行 うことができます 。 その 場 合 のそれまでのあなたの 情 報 は 破 棄 されます 。 当 研究 の 終 了 後 、 私 たちはあなたに 研究結 果 を 報 告 することを 予 定 しています 。 研究 の 期間 中 、 何 かご 不 明 な 点 がございましたら 、 下 記 までご 連 絡 ください 。 Maria Victoria Palacin - Silva Lappeenranta University of Technology Tel . ( 358 ) 50 326 6296 Email : maria . palacin . silva @ lut . ﬁ Ari Happonen Lappeenranta University of Technology Tel . ( 358 ) 50 322 5358 Email : ari . happonen @ lut . ﬁ 私 は 上 記 の 説 明 を 読 み 、 メ ー ル に 返 信 することで 研究 に 参 加 することに 同 意 します 。 または インタビュ ー の 際 、 口 頭 によりその 旨 を 伝 えることで 研究 に 参 加 することに 同 意 します 。 Informed Consent to Participate in the J¨arviwiki Case Study Maria Palacin - Silva and Ari Happonen , researchers in the Business and Management School at Lappeenranta University of Technology under the supervision of Professors : Jari Porras and Maria Angela Ferrario , would appreciate your participation in a research interview designed to collect information about the motives among outstanding volunteers of J¨arviwiki . You are being asked to give an anonymous interview that should take up no more than an hour of your time . It is hoped that we may gain valuable information about your experiences in lake monitoring that can help to improve our understanding of why citizens join and stay in initiatives like J¨arviwiki . We anticipate no safety risk to you or impact on your privacy as a result of your participation in this study other than the inconvenience of the time to provide the interview . The information that you give us on the interview will be recorded in anonymous form . We will not release information that could identify you . If you want to withdraw from the study at any time you may do so without penalty . The information on you up to that point will then be destroyed . Once the study has been completed , we will be glad to give you the results . In the meantime , if you have any questions , please contact : Maria Victoria Palacin - Silva Lappeenranta University of Technology Tel . ( 358 ) 503266296 Email . maria . palacin . silva @ lut . ﬁ I have read the above explanation and agree to participate in the study by giving my name , date and signature or recorded verbal agreement for it . Name : Date : Signature : Tietoinen suostumukseni J¨arviwiki tapaustutkimukseen osallistumis - esta Maria Palacin Silva ja Ari Happonen , Lappeenrannan teknillisen yliopiston Business and Man - agement Schoolin tutkijat ( Professoreiden Jari Porras ja Maria Angela Ferrario valvonnan alaisu - udessa ) toteuttavat ja ohjaavat t¨at¨a J¨arviWikin vapaaehtoisten motiiveja kartoittavaa haastattelu - tutkimusta . Pyyd¨amme sinulta nimet¨ont¨a haastattelua , jonka on arvioitu kest¨av¨an alle yhden tunnin . Haastattelun ohessa pyyd¨amme t¨aytt¨am¨a¨an kyselylomakkeen ( arvioitu t¨aytt¨oaika n . 10 minuuttia ) . Pyrimme ymm¨art¨am¨a¨an j¨arvien tarkkailu kokemuksilla vapaaehtoisen osallistumisen motiiveja . Antamasi tiedot tallennetaan nimett¨omin¨a . Emmek¨a julkaise tietoja , joiden avulla tuloksista voisi tunnistaa yksitt¨aisen vastaajan . Sinulla on oikeus keskeytt¨a¨a haastattelu miss¨a tahansa vaiheessa , ilman seuraamuksia . Lis¨aksi halutessasi tuhoamme my¨os siihen saakka ker¨a¨am¨amme ja sinua koskevan tiedon . Tutkimuksen valmistuessa , jaamme sinulle mielell¨amme tutkimuksen tuloksen . Saat s¨ahk¨opostiin yhteystiedot , joihin voit ottaa yhteytt¨a Tutkimukseen liittyviss¨a kysymyksiss¨a . Maria Victoria Palacin - Silva Lappeenranta University of Technology Tel . ( 358 ) 503266296 Email : maria . palacin . silva @ lut . ﬁ Ari Happonen Lappeenranta University of Technology Tel . ( 358 ) 50 322 5358 Email : ari . happonen @ lut . ﬁ Nimi : P¨aiv¨am¨a¨ar¨a : Allekirjoitus : Interview Guide for J¨arviwiki Section 1 : Participant Portrait - Please tell me a little bit about yourself and your experiences working with lake monitoring Maybe a probe : Where did you hear about J¨arviwiki ? - When did you start reporting lake measures ? Maybe a probe : Did you use to monitor the lake before J¨arviwiki ? Section 2 : Initial motivations - When did you start using J¨arviwiki ? - Do you remember why did you joined J¨arviwiki in the ﬁrst place ? - Could you describe yourself at the time you started using J¨arviwiki ? Maybe a probe : At the time you started reporting lake measures , were you active in other sorts of volunteering ? Section 3 : Motivations to stay - Currently , how do you feel using J¨arviwiki ? Maybe a probe : How would you describe yourself as a J¨arviwiki volunteer ? Do you enjoy it ? - Is there any major reason ( s ) that drive you to use J¨arviwiki ? - Do you see any learnings from your experience with J¨arviwiki ? Please , describe them - What do lakes mean to you ? Maybe a probe : Why do you think the lake measures are important ? Section 4 : Motivations to leave - What have been your biggest challenges using J¨arviwiki ? Maybe a probe : How did you tackle those challenges ? - Have you ever stopped using J¨arviwiki for some periods of time ? Maybe a probe : Why did you stop ? Why did you start using it again ? - Where do you see potential problems in getting help from volunteers ? Section 5 : Dreams - Tell us , how you envision the future of lakes monitoring ? Part 6 : Open Feedback - Did we forget to discuss something ? Maybe a probe : Did your view of the J¨arviwiki change in any way through the interview ? Haastattelu J¨arviwiki Osa 1 : Haastateltava - Kerro hieman itsest¨asi ja kokemuksistasi j¨arvien seurannassa Maybe a probe : Mist¨a kuulit J¨arviwikist¨a ? Maybe a probe : Tunnetko paljonkin ihmisi¨a jotka tarkkailevat j¨arvien kuntoa ? Maybe a probe : Oletko mukana muun laisessa vapaaehtoisessa tarkkailemisessa ? - Milloin aloitit j¨arvien kunnon raportoinnin ? Maybe a probe : Tarkkailitko j¨arvien kuntoa jo ennen J¨arviwiki¨a ? Osa 2 : Syyt / motivaatio aloittamiselle - Milloin aloitit j¨arviwikin k¨ayt¨on ? - Muistatko miksi alun alkaen liityit J¨arviWikin k¨aytt¨aj¨aksi ? - Voitko kuvailla omia ajatusmallejasi ja ideologioitasi J¨arviWikiin liittymisen aikoihin ? Maybe a probe : Kun liityit mukaan raportoimaan j¨arvi¨a koskevaa dataa , olitko aktiivisesti mukana miss¨a¨an muussa vapaaehtoistoiminnassa ? Maybe a probe : Koetko ett¨a j¨arviwikiss¨a mukana oleminen on vapaaehtoistoimintaa , kuten es - imerkiksi SPR , partio tai vastaava ? Osa 3 : Syit¨a ja motiiveja pysy¨a mukana toiminnassa - Millainen nykyinen mielikuva sinulla on itsest¨asi J¨arviwikin k¨aytt¨aj¨an¨a ? - Millaiseksi nyky¨a¨an koet J¨arviWikin k¨aytt¨amisen ? Maybe a probe : Miten kuvailisit itse¨asi J¨arviWikin k¨aytt¨aj¨an¨a ? Maybe a probe : Pid¨atk¨o J¨arviWikin k¨aytt¨amisest¨a ? Maybe a probe : Mist¨a asioista saat toiminnassa nautintoa tai koet ett¨a t¨ast¨a on sinulle tai l¨aheisillesi etua , hy¨oty¨a tms ? - Jos kuvailisit parilla syyll¨a J¨arviwikiss¨a mukanaoloa , niin mit¨a ne olisivat ? - Koetko oppineesi jotain J¨arviWikin k¨ayt¨ost¨a ? Mit¨a ? - Mit¨a j¨arvien ja vesist¨ojen tila merkitsee sinulle ? Maybe a probe : Miksi j¨arvien mittaaminen on mielest¨asi t¨arke¨a¨a ? Maybe a probe : Koetko ett¨a mukana olemisella voit jotenkin vaikuttaa j¨arvien tilan parane - miseen ? Mitk¨a ovat perustelusi t¨alle n¨akemykselle ? Osa 4 : Syit¨a / tilanteista joissa koet ett¨a luultavasti luopuisit osallistumasta J¨arviwikiin - Mitk¨a koet J¨arviwikin k¨ayt¨on suurimmiksi haasteiksi ? Maybe a probe : Jos pystyt itse kiert¨am¨a¨an n¨am¨a haasteet , miten teet sen ? Maybe a probe : Oletko kuullut ulkopuolisilta kommentteja mukanaolostasi / ajatuksi ja perusteluja sille miksi sinun tulisi luopua t¨ast¨a toiminnasta ? Miten he perustelivat asian ? - Oletko koskaan lopettanut aktiivisen j¨arviwikiss¨a mukana olemisen ? - Onko J¨arviWikin k¨aytt¨aminen j¨a¨anyt jossain vaiheessa tauolle ? Maybe a probe : Miksi toimit n¨ain ? Miksi palasit uudestaan mukaan toimintaan ? Maybe a probe : Muuttuiko toimintamallisi jotenkin v¨aliaikaisen lopettamisen takia ? - Yleisesti , millaisissa asioissa n¨aet vapaaehtoistoiminnan olevan tehokkainta ? Maybe a probe : Miten perustelet mielipidett¨asi ? Maybe a probe : Miten j¨arviwiki rinnastuu n¨aihin ajatuksiin ? Osa 5 : Unelmat - Millaisena n¨aet j¨arvien tarkkailun tulevaisuuden ? Mit¨a toivot j¨arvien tarkkailun tulevaisuudelta ? Maybe a probe : Mit¨a haasteita n¨aet kuvailemasi tulevaisuuden toteutumisessa ? Maybe a probe : Mik¨a on haastavin asia visiosi ja nykytilan v¨aliss¨a omasta mielest¨asi ? Osa 6 : vapaamuotoinen palaute - Unohdimmeko keskustella jostakin asiasta ? Maybe a probe : Muuttuiko n¨akemyksesi j¨arviwikist¨a jotenkin haastattelun kautta ? Interview Guide for Safecast Section 1 : Participant Portrait - Please tell me a little bit about yourself and your experiences working with radiation monitoring Maybe a probe : Where did you hear about Safecast ? - When did you start reporting radiation measurements ? Maybe a probe : Did you use to monitor the radiation before Safecast ? Section 2 : Initial motivations - When did you start using Safecast ? - Do you remember why did you joined Safecast in the ﬁrst place ? - Could you describe yourself at the time you started using Safecast ? Maybe a probe : At the time you started reporting radiation measures , were you active in other sorts of volunteering ? Section 3 : Motivations to stay - Currently , how do you feel using Safecast ? Maybe a probe : How would you describe yourself as a Safecast volunteer ? Do you enjoy it ? - Is there any major reason ( s ) that drive you to use Safecast ? - Do you see any learnings from your experience with Safecast ? Please , describe them - What does the environment mean to you ? Maybe a probe : Why do you think the radiation measures are important ? Section 4 : Motivations to leave - What have been your biggest challenges using Safecast ? Maybe a probe : How did you tackle those challenges ? - Have you ever stopped using Safecast for some periods of time ? Maybe a probe : Why did you stop ? Why did you start using it again ? - Where do you see potential problems in getting help from volunteers ? Section 5 : Dreams - Tell us , how you envision the future of radiation monitoring ? Part 6 : Open Feedback - Did we forget to discuss something ? Maybe a probe : Did your view of the Safecast change in any way through the interview ? 面面面 接接接 ののの 質質質 問問問 Safecast Section 1 : Participant Portrait - あなたについて 、 および 、 あなたがどういう 流 れで 放 射 線 計 測 を 行 うようになったの か 、 聞 かせてください 。 Maybe a probe : セ ー フキャスト のことをどのように 知 ったのですか 。 - いつ 、 放 射 線 計 測 を 始 めましたか Maybe a probe : セ ー フキャスト 以 前 に 計 測 をしたことはありましたか ？ Section 2 : Initial motivations - いつから セ ー フキャスト での 活 動 をされていますか 。 - セ ー フキャスト に 参 加 しようと 思 った 最 初 の 動 機 は 何 でしたか 。 - あなたが セ ー フキャスト に 参 加 したときのあなた 自 身 のことを 教 えてください 。 Maybe a probe : その 時 、 あなたはその 他 の ボランティア に 参 加 していましたか ？ ボラン ティア の 活 動 など 積 極 的 におこなうほうでしたか Section 3 : Motivations to stay - 現在 、 セ ー フキャスト についてどう 考 えていますか ？ 放 射 能 測 定 の センサ ー を 使 う ことについてどう 感 じていますか 。 Maybe a probe : 自 分 が セ ー フキャスト の ボランティア であることについてどう 考 えてい ますか ？ - 放 射 能 値 の モニタリング を 続 けることの 主 な 理 由 はなんですか 。 - セ ー フキャスト の 活 動 の 経 験 であなたが 学 んだことを 聞 かせてください 。 それは 、 あ なたにとって 、 どういう 意 味 合 いがありますか ？ 計 測 器 を 使 うことによって 学 んだこ とは - あなたにとって 環 境 とは 何 ですか 。 Maybe a probe : なぜあなたにとって 放 射 線 計 測 は 重 要 なのですか ？ Maybe a probe : セ ー フキャスト 活 動 への 参 加 ？ 測 定 器 を 使 う こと ？ Section 4 : Motivations to leave - 放 射 能 計 測 の センサ ー を 使 っていて 大 変 だったことは 何 ですか 。 Maybe a probe : どのようにして 、 その 問 題 を 乗 り 越 えたのですか - 今 までに 、 センサ ー での 計 測 を 中断 したことはありましたか 。 Maybe a probe : どのような 理 由 でしたか - ボランティア からの サポ ー ト を 得 ることについて 考 えられる 問 題 はどこにあります か ？ Section 5 : Dreams - 放 射 能 計 測 の 未来 をどのように 想像 されていますか 。 Part 6 : Open Feedback - 何 か 話 し 合 うのを 忘 れましたか ？ Maybe a probe : インタビュ ー を 通 じて 、 セ ー フキャスト に 対 するあなたの 見 方 は 何 らか の 形 で 変 わりましたか ？ Appendix C . Publication IV and Sub - chapter 4 . 2 , Consent and Instruments Ethics Approval Statement Informed Consent to Participate in the Lappeenranta Environmental Sensing Initiative Tietoinen suostumus Lappeenrannan ymp¨arist¨on monitorointihankkeeseen osallistumiseen Dear participant , Hyv¨at osallistujat , The following information is provided to you to decide whether you wish to participate in the present initiative . You should be aware that you are free to decide to not participate or to with - draw at any time without affecting your relationship with this department , the investigator or the Lappeenranta University of Technology . Seuraava informaatio tarjotaan teille , jotta voitte p ¨ a ¨ att ¨ a ¨ a haluatko osallistutko esitettyyn han - kkeeseen . Sinun tulee tiet¨a¨a ett¨a voit halutessasi p¨a¨att¨a¨a olla osallistumatta hankkeeseen tai irtau - tua siit¨a milloin vain , p¨a¨at¨oksen vaikuttamatta suhteeseesi ko . yksik¨on , tutkijoiden sek¨a Lappeen - rannan teknillisen yliopiston kanssa . The purpose of this study is to understand the dynamics of motivation among volunteers in en - vironmental sensing . This study follows the participatory technology design methods and it will include the following activities : co - creation workshops aimed at ideating technological prototypes for environmental monitoring , data exploration events aimed at opening environmental informa - tion from the city for open discussion and brainstorming . Participants are asked to monitor one or more of the following environmental variables : smells , quiet places , invasive plants , blue algae and litter , for three months on a volunteer basis by using co - created technological prototypes . The data we collect are demographics and cultural values background , perceptions about the prototypes we develop , opinions about the study , usage statis - tics and environmental data which participants submit on a volunteer basis . The data you upload regarding the environmental issues will be archived at the Finnish Open Science Services . While your contact information and the data about surveys and interviews will be stored for 3 months , after that period of time , it will be destroyed . T¨am¨an tutkimuksen tarkoitus on ymm¨art¨a¨a osallistujien motivaation dynamiikkaa liittyen ymp¨arist¨on havainnointiin . T¨am¨a tutkimus seuraa osallistavan teknologiasuunnittelun metodeja ja se sis¨alt¨a¨a seu - raavia aktiviteetteja : yhteiskehityksen ty¨opajoja , joissa ideoidaan teknologiaprototyyppej¨a ymp¨arist¨on monitorointiin , datan tutkistelutapahtumia , joissa kaupungin ymp¨arist¨odataa avataan avoimeen keskustelu ja aivoriihi k¨aytt¨o¨on . Osallistujia pyydet¨a¨an monitoroidaan yht¨a tai useampaa seuraavaa ymp¨arist¨on muuttujaa ; hajuja , hiljaisia paikkoja , vieraslajeja , sinilev¨a¨a tai roskia , kolmen kuukauden ajan vapaaehtoispohjalta , k¨aytt¨aen yhteiskehitettyj¨a teknologiaprototyyppej¨a . Data , jota ker¨a¨amme , koskee osallistujien de - mograﬁsta ja kulttuurillista arvopohjaa , k¨asityksi¨a koskien kehitt¨ami¨amme prototyyppej¨a , mielip - iteit ¨ a koskien tutkimusta , k ¨ aytt ¨ ostatistiikkaa ja ymp ¨ arist ¨ odataa , jota osallistujat vapaaehtoispoh - jalta luovuttavat . Lataamanne data koskien ymp ¨ arist ¨ ohavainnointeja tullaan arkistoimaan Suomen Avoimen Tieteen Kansalliseen Palveluun . Data koskien teid¨an yhteystietoja , kyselyiden tuloksia ja haastatteluita tullaan s¨ailytt¨am¨a¨an kolmen kuukauden ajan , jonka j¨alkeen se tullaan tuhoamaan . The results will be used to improve our understanding about why citizens join and stay in this type of initiatives . All results will be shared with you and you will receive appropriate acknowledgment for your participation . All collected data will be handled and stored conﬁdentially and , this data will be anonymized as soon as possible , and analyzed as a part of a larger body of data . No per - sonal data will be released in any form and location will not be tracked . Any research publication related to this study will use anonymized analysis results . From these published results , it will be impossible to deduct any information from any individual participant . Tuloksia tullaan k¨aytt¨am¨a¨an kehitt¨am¨a¨an ymm¨arryst¨amme liittyen siihen miksi kaupunkilaiset li - ittyv¨at ja j¨a¨av¨at mukaan t¨am¨an tyyppisen hankkeeseen . Kaikki tulukset tullaan jakamaan teid¨an kanssa ja te tulette saaman osallistumisestanne hankkeeseen . Kaikkea ker¨atty dataa tullaan k¨asit - telem¨a¨an ja s¨ailytt¨am¨a¨an luottamuksellisesti ja se tullaan anonymisoimaan niin pian kuin mahdol - lista ja sit¨a tullaan k¨asittelem¨a¨an osana laajempaa dataa . Henkil¨okohtaista dataa ei tulla julkaise - maan miss ¨ a ¨ an muodossa eik ¨ a sijaintejanne jaeta . Kaikki tutkimukseen pohjautuvat tutkimusjulka - isut tulevat k¨aytt¨am¨a¨an anonyymeja tuloksia . N¨aist¨a julkaistuista tuloksista on mahdotonta tulkita mit¨a¨an yksitt¨aisten osallistujien tietoja . We anticipate no safety risk to you or impact on your privacy because of your participation in this study . The expected beneﬁts associated with your participation are the opportunity to participate in a research study and learning about environmental monitoring via everyday technologies . Also , you may gain relevant information about climate change mitigation . If you want to withdraw from the study at any time you may do so without penalty . The information on you up to that point will then be destroyed by the main custodian of the data MSc . Maria Palacin - Silva . Emme n¨ae ett¨a hankkeeseen osallistumisesta koituu teille turvallisuusriskej¨a tai ett¨a sill¨a olisi vaikutusta teid¨an yksityisyyteenne . Odotetut hy¨odyt osallistujille ovat mahdollisuus osallistua tutkimuksen ja oppia ymp¨arist¨on havainnointia jokap¨aiv¨aisten teknologioiden kautta . Voitte my¨os saada relevanttia informaatiota koskien ilmastonmuutoksen vaikutuksia . Jos haluatte vet¨ayty¨a han - kkeesta , voitte tehd¨a sen milloin vain seuraamuksitta . T¨ass¨a tapauksessa kaikki teist¨a ker¨atty in - formaatio tullaan tuhomaan datan p¨a¨ahaltijan , Maria Palacin - Silvan toimesta . Name and Signature : Nime ja allekirjoitus : Date : P¨aiv¨a : I have read the above explanation agree to participate in the study with full knowledge of the nature , purpose of the procedures . I have been informed on what data will be collected , how it will be used as well as what are my rights . I understand I can request more information on the study anytime . I thereby grant the representatives of the Lappeenranta University of Technology the permission to collect , store , analyze and publish this data . Olen lukenut yll¨amainitun selvityksen ja lupaudun osallistumaan t¨ah¨an tutkimukseen , tiedostaen sen luonteen ja toimien tarkoituksen . Minua on informoitu siit¨a mit¨a dataa ker¨at¨a¨an , kuinka sit¨a k¨aytet¨a¨an ja mitk¨a ovat oikeuteni . Ymm¨arr¨an ett¨a voin milloin vain pyyt¨a¨a lis¨ainformaatio koskien tutkimusta . T¨aten my¨onn¨an Lappeenrannan teknillisen yliopiston edustajille oikeuden ker¨at¨a , tallentaa , analysoida ja julkaista t¨at¨a dataa . If you have any questions or comments , please contact : Jos sinulla on kysymyksi¨a tai kommentteja , ole yst¨av¨allisesti yhteydess¨a : MSc . Maria Victoria Palacin - Silva Tel . ( 358 ) 503266296 Email : maria . palacin . silva @ lut . ﬁ Dr . Ari Happonen Puh . ( 358 ) 50 322 5358 Email : ari . happonen @ lut . ﬁ Suomen Tietosuojavaltuutettu valvoo datan ker¨ayst¨a ja tallennusta . Jos haluat tehd¨a valituksen henkil¨okohtaisen datasi ep¨aasiallisesta k¨ayt¨ost¨a , voitte olla yhteydess¨a Tietosuojavaltuutettuun . Katso tarkemmat tiedot . Jos osallistujilla on huolia koskien t¨at¨a tutkimusta , ja haluavat olla yhteydess¨a tutkimuksesta riippumattomaan henkil¨o¨on , olkaa yst¨av¨allisesti yhteydess¨a LTY : n eet - tisten asioiden edustajaan ( tutkimuskoordinaattori ) Victoria Kompanets : iin , s¨ahk¨opostiosoite vic - toria . kompanets @ lut . ﬁ , tai LTY : n tietosuojavaltuutettuun ( lakimies ) Anne Himankaan , s¨ahk¨opos - tiosoite anne . himanka @ lut . ﬁ . The Finnish data protection ombudsman is supervising the storage and handling of personal data . If you want to make a complaint about inappropriate use of personal data , you may contact The Ofﬁce of the Data Protection Ombudsman . See more information at http : / / www . tietosuoja . ﬁ . If participants have concerns about this study and wish to contact an independent person , please con - tact : LUT representative for ethics issues , Victoria Kompanets . e - mail victoria . kompanets @ lut . ﬁ or LUT legal ofﬁcer responsible for data protection , Ms Anne Himanka Anne . Himanka @ lut . ﬁ . Survey on human values ( PVQ - 21 ) and expectations ( English , he / him / his ) Name : Age : 1 . Now , we brieﬂy describe some people . Please read each description and think about how much each person is or is not like you . Tick the box to the right that shows how much the person in the description is like you . 2 . Tell us about yourself 3 . Why did you decide to participate in this environmental initiative ? 4 . What do you expect from this project ? Survey on human values ( PVQ - 21 ) and expectations ( English , she / her / hers pronouns ) Name : Age : 1 . Now , we brieﬂy describe some people . Please read each description and think about how much each person is or is not like you . Tick the box to the right that shows how much the person in the description is like you . 2 . Tell us about yourself 3 . Why did you decide to participate in this environmental initiative ? 4 . What do you expect from this project ? Survey on human values ( PVQ - 21 ) and expectations ( Finnish , gender neutral pronouns ) Name : Age : 1 . Now , we brieﬂy describe some people . Please read each description and think about how much each person is or is not like you . Tick the box to the right that shows how much the person in the description is like you . 2 . Kerro jotain itsest¨asi 3 . Miksi p¨a¨atit osallistua t¨ah¨an ymp¨arist¨onkartoitushankkeeseen ? 4 . Mit¨a odotat t¨alt¨a hankkeelta ? Interview guide Section 1 : Participant Portrait / Osa 1 : Osallistujasta kuvaus Please tell me a little bit about yourself and your hobbies , things you consider important in life Kerro minulle v¨ah¨an itsest¨asi ja harrastuksistasi , mit¨a asioita pid¨at t¨arke¨an¨a el¨am¨ass¨a ? Have you been a volunteer in other types of initiatives or associations in past ? Oletko ollut vapaaehtoinen jossain muussa aloitteessa tai yhdistyksess¨a aikaisemmin ? Section 2 : Initial Motivation / Osa 2 : Alustava motivaatio Why did you decide to join this environmental monitoring initiative ? Miksi halusit ryhty¨a t¨ah¨an ymp¨arist¨on seurantaan ? Did you participated in the workshops ? / Osallistuitko ty¨opajoihin ? How was your experience in the workshops ? Onko sinulla kokemusta ty¨opajoista ? Did you ﬁnd the workshops useful ? Oliko ty¨opajat hy¨odyllisi¨a ? What do you expect from this initiative ? Mit¨a odotuksia sinulla on t¨ast¨a aloitteesta ? Focus group guide ( This short focus group was used during the last meeting with locals . ) 1 . Please tell me a little bit about your experiences working with environmental monitoring this summer ? ( Maybe a probe : What environmental variables did you decide to monitor ? ) 2 . Do you remember why did you joined this initiative in the ﬁrst place ? 3 . Currently , how do you feel while performing environmental sensing activities ? ( Maybe a probe : Do you enjoy it ? , When do you submit environmental observations ? ) 4 . Why do you report environmental observations ? 5 . What does nature mean to you ? 6 . Do you see any learnings from your experience ? ( Maybe a probe : Why do you think the environmental monitoring is important ? ) 7 . What have been your biggest challenges during this summer ? ( Have you ever stopped doing environmental sensing for some periods of time ? Why ? ) 8 . How you envision the future of environmental monitoring ? Publication I Palacin - Silva , M , and Porras , J . Shut up and take my environmental data ! A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices , participation approaches , and challenges . In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Information and Communication Technology for Sustainability ICT4S2018 Reprinted from EPiC Series in Computing Vol . 52 , Pages 270 - 288 , 2018 c (cid:13) 2018 , The Author ( s ) . Shut up and take my environmental data ! A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices , participation approaches and challenges Maria Palacin - Silva and Jari Porras Lappeenranta University of Technology , Lappeenranta , Finland maria . palacin . silva @ lut . fi , jari . porras @ lut . fi Abstract Citizen Science initiatives have been around since the 20th century in numerous fields , from astronomy to health monitoring . In recent years , social changes mediated by the development of information and communication technologies have pivoted new types of civic actions , which have enabled an expansion in the breath of citizen science applications . This civic technology has become a genuine interactive and inclusive opportunity for engaging citizens in the continuous collection of data relevant to science , governance , businesses , communal living , as well as individual concerns . This article presents the practices , trends and challenges of 108 ICT enabled citizen science projects . In addition , we present a palette for participation in ICT enabled citizen science that depicts the shapes civic participation is currently taking in different contexts . We discuss the potential uses of this palette for improving the engineering of ICT citizen science platforms to better fit the needs of volunteers and build opportunities for active engagement . Keywords— ICT ; citizen science ; civic technology ; participation ; technology use ; practices ; challenges EPiC Series in Computing Volume 52 , 2018 , Pages 270 – 288 ICT4S2018 . 5th International Conference on Informa - tion and Communication Technology for Sustainability B . Penzenstadler , S . Easterbrook , C . Venters and S . I . Ahmed ( eds . ) , ICT4S2018 ( EPiC Series in Computing , vol . 52 ) , pp . 270 – 288 1 Introduction What do applications like Wikipedia , Fold . it , Waze , Ushahidi , and Galaxyzoo have in common ? The answer is “people” whom drive these civic technologies from their operational core . The activities that people carry on these platforms ranges from data collection , usage and classification all the way to dissemination and , represent a deliberative act of public participation via information and communication technologies ( ICT ) services . These activities hold a historical background tightly linked with human nature and humans’ inherent curiosity that has led us to try to observe and understand our surrounding nature and society since ancient times . For example , during the prehistoric age people would use tally marks on caves , wood , bones , etc . as a counting aid to monitor animal populations . During the 20 th century , it became clear that public participation was key for sustainable development , as international treaties and declarations started declaring it as a mean to enhance social development [ 1 ] , environmental management [ 2 ] , sustainable development [ 3 ] , decision making [ 4 ] and science advancement [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] . Having people carrying ( monitoring ) activities for a common good ( e . g . research ) , became popular and became known as “citizen science” . Due to the technological development of the last decades , this interaction between experts and citizens for monitoring purposes grew in reach , receiving multiple names in different fields [ 7 ] , from the well - known citizen science to collaborative mapping , community monitoring , science 2 . 0 , crowdsourcing , contributed geographic information , crowdsensing , participatory sensing , citizen sensing , among others . The development of ICT has broadened the world’s horizons in many ways . In particular , ICT tools have pivoted the development of new types of civic actions such as activism , mobilizations , public campaigning , community monitoring [ 8 ] and the web science [ 9 ] . As a result , fields such as civic technology and digital civics have emerged to support the design and use of technology to enhance public participation and dialogue [ 10 ] – [ 12 ] . Societies are heading towards a future that will increasingly involve partnerships mediated by ICT between citizens , communities and civic authorities to enhance civic engagement in planning , management and maintaining their living environments [ 13 ] – [ 15 ] . Already during the last decade ICT enabled monitoring applications have started booming across the world with applications in several domains , particularly in environmental monitoring ( see section 3 . 1 ) . For example , FixMyStreet 1 , supports city development by allowing citizens to report and track issues in their towns ( e . g . broken pavement ) . Ushahidi 2 helped the Kenyan government in 2007 to map violent acts across the country , and has been used in more than 10 countries for handling different issues since then . eBird 3 was launched in 2002 to gather basic data about bird distribution across the globe . By now eBird has collected hundreds of millions of observations from most countries in the world . Finally , Safecast 4 was launched as citizens ' initiative to monitor the radiation levels in Japan after the nuclear accident in Fukushima in 2011 . By now , it has become the largest monitoring network in history . In short , ICT enabled citizen science has been actively supporting citizen - driven data collection for a variety of purposes including scientific research [ 16 ] and crisis communication [ 17 ] , [ 18 ] , whilst serving as means for inclusive engagement , education , and public outreach [ 19 ] – [ 21 ] . However , despite the 1 http : / / www . fixmystreet . com 2 http : / / www . ushahidi . com 3 http : / / www . ebird . org 4 https : / / blog . safecast . org A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 271 outstanding success of these monitoring initiatives , there has been a limited attempt to study their day - to - day practices and their link with technology . The contribution of this article is two - fold . Firstly , we highlight key results from a state - of - the - art study about ICT enabled citizen science projects . This study was carried by Lappeenranta University of Technology and the Finnish Environmental Institute during 2015 – 2016 [ 22 ] and it systematically reviewed practices , trends , and challenges of 108 ICT - enabled citizen projects reported in academic literature . Secondly , we present a framework for participation in ICT enabled citizen science that depicts the shapes civic participation is currently taking in different contexts . We then discuss the potential uses of this framework for improving the engineering of ICT citizen science platforms to fit the needs of volunteers and civic authorities . In order to build opportunities for active engagement in community monitoring initiatives . 2 Methods The overreaching methodological approach of this study is thematic analysis ( TA ) , which is “ a method for identifying , analyzing and reporting patterns ( themes ) within data ” [ 23 ] . The phases of this study are detailed below . Systematic review techniques [ 24 ] , [ 25 ] are used as part of these phases to select relevant literature as data source for the analysis . A . Phase 1 . Familiarization with the data In this stage , a systematic literature review study was performed to find literature reporting ICT - enabled citizen science initiatives . The objective of this literature review was to find out about the current state of the art of the trends , practices , and challenges of ICT enabled citizen science projects . This phase was part of a larger research initiative by Lappeenranta University of Technology and the Finnish Environmental Institute during 2015 - 2016 and its part of a published as a report by Palacin et al . [ 22 ] , also the mined data is openly available at [ 26 ] . The literature corpus was created using the following steps : ( 1 ) Searching IEEE Digital Library , ACM Digital Library , Science Direct / Scopus , Web of Knowledge , Springer Link for articles matching the search string keywords such as ‘citizen’ ‘citizen science’ ‘observatory’ ‘environment’ ‘engagement’ . ( 2 ) Reading the metadata of 828 studies and include the ones with relevant link to this study . As a result , 70 papers were selected as relevant . Secondly , in this phase we also created a corpus of ICT enabled citizen science projects . ( 1 ) First we read in depth the 70 relevant papers and record each mention to an ICT enabled citizen science project . As a result , 108 projects were recorded . ( 2 ) Then each of the projects was further investigated by visiting its websites and reading its publications . B . Phase 2 . Generating Initial Codes The entire literature corpus ( 70 papers ) was classified according to common features such as research type , approach , relevance , and domain . In addition , the data gathered about the 108 ICT enabled citizen science projects was organized into major codes / categories , which are presented in table 1 . A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 272 Codes per Project Project title , environmental focus , participation model , domain , focus - domain , country , description , type of data measured , year of start , activeness , contact , website Stakeholder , activities description , techniques to engage IT platform , description , application type , goal , services use , detail IT infrastructure , social media Problem or limitation , cause , solution proposes Best practice , process Recommendations Standard in use , description , issuing institution , website Table 1 : Codes from Each ICT Enabled Citizen Science Project C . Phase 3 . Searching for Themes In this phase , the literature corpus , the 108 projects data and the codes from the previous phase were re - analyzed iteratively to identify major themes , minor themes and sub - themes based on the differences and similarities in the data . D . Phase 4 . Reviewing Themes This phase involved the refinement of themes by looking at the similarities and differences between themes and the data . Six major themes were found : domains of application , technologies , practices , stakeholders , challenges and recommendations . These major themes served to organize the lower level themes . E . Thematic Analysis : Phase 5 . Defining and Naming Themes and Sub - themes A final mapping was completed by visually representing the major themes , minor themes and sub - themes . 3 Findings This section presents the key findings from the report by Palacin et al . [ 22 ] and discusses their relevance . These key findings include a recollection of monitoring domains , data collection approaches , practices , stakeholders , volunteer’s motives extracted from the studied projects . 3 . 1 Monitoring Domains The 108 participatory sensing projects were classified into eight sub themes based on their monitoring domain . Those monitoring domains are presented in figure 1 and table 2 . Most of the projects were focused on some level of environmental monitoring such as species , water , streams , snow , sea , biodiversity , air , spectrum , and global monitoring . Also , there were a significant number of projects focused on city management issues and tools for creating monitoring projects from scratch . A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 273 Figure 1 : Domains of application Domain Description Examples City management City issues monitoring projects , such as transportation , bike routes , land usage , and energy consumption FixMyStreet , SeeClickFix , VizWiz , Waze , CiclePhilly Water , streams , snow , sea Collect data about water quality , precipitation , streams , lakes , snow , ice , and sea environments CURA H20 , Järviwiki , Brooklying Atlantis , LAKEWATCH , , CoCoRaHS Biodiversity monitoring Focus on monitoring biodiversity : flora , forests , mountains , biosphere , and trees . Plant Watch , Leaf Watch , iNatural , Mountain Watch , Air and spectrum monitoring Gather data about air quality , noise , sounds , and radiation , especially in cities . Common sense , SafeCast , Noise Tube , CitiSense , Bucket Brigades Global monitoring Monitor and report environmental variables to governments , also , projects that collect astronomy and climate - change observations . Galaxy zoo , Spring watch , GLOBE at Night Disaster monitoring Monitor and detect early possible disasters , such as floods and earthquakes . iShake , Did you feel it ? Tools for creating monitoring projects Allow the creation or integration of monitoring initiatives , such as plug - and - play tools , image classification components and sensors - monitoring components . Glassnost , Ushahidi , CitSci , Public Lab Table 2 : Domains of Application : Descriptions and Examples A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 274 3 . 2 Data Collection Approaches ICT enabled citizen science projects are a clear example of a data intensive sociotechnical systems as they are : • Used by multiple users : from citizens ( collecting data ) , scientists ( extracting patterns from the data available ) to organizations such as companies ( creating profits from the available and open data ) , • Highly available in multiple platforms , • For collecting , analyzing and disseminating data about certain phenomena of interest , • From a wide variety of data sources , data types and data locations . The technologies in use for data collection among the studied projects are presented in Table 3 . These technologies range from automatic devices ( such as sensors ) to intentive means ( such as web surveys ) depending on the level of human interaction they require to capture data . Approach Interaction Sensors Automated Intentive Social Media Mobile Apps Websites Interactive Voice Responders Surveys Table 3 : Data Collection Technology Spectrum This spectrum of technologies is reflected on the two data - collection modes ( opportunistic and participatory ) [ 27 ] , [ 28 ] . Mobile devices and sensor networks have enabled growth on monitoring projects , because they provide constant and accurate measures of specific variables . As a result , the so - called opportunistic data collection has steadily risen since 2000 . Also , the use of mixed approaches ( participatory and opportunistic ) have increased since 2010 ( Figure 2 ) . a ) Opportunistic data collection or device - centric data collection : A participant is an automatic sensor carrier , and “ sensor sampling occurs whenever the state of the device matches the application’s requirements described in a sensing task” [ 29 ] ( e . g . , Waze route tracking when driving or a mobility tracking app [ 30 ] ; and b ) Participatory data collection or user - centric data collection : A participant is an active data provider and is actively involved in the collection process by a prompted experience where the participant decides to record observations . This approach requires intentive interactions ( e . g . , reporting security issues with Ushahidi webpage ) . A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 275 Figure 2 : Data collection methods over the decades 3 . 3 Practices Seventeen practices ( Table 3 ) were identified from the studied projects . These practices are either ( i ) Technology - intensive practices , created to facilitate the collection , analysis , and dissemination of data or ( ii ) Engagement - driven practices aimed to combine strategies to locate and motivate observers . The top two practices among the projects are : ( 1 ) co - creation practices that involve co - creative solutions with citizens through direct and constant contact and ( 2 ) feedback from observations ( observers can visualize the results of their contribution ) . Top two , less common practices are : ( 1 ) data aggregation ( different data sets , often from different sources , are integrated ) and ( 2 ) interest - based projects ( allow people to set up monitoring projects based on their own interests ) . Technology Intensive Practices Engagement Driven Practices • Real Time Visualization • Observatory Component Based • Opportunistic data collection • Provide training material • Provide Technology • Data Aggregation • Co - Creation • Feedback from observations • Gamification • Identify stakeholders and their motivations • Participatory data collection • Environmental Campaign in Public Spaces • Interest based Observatories • Involve Decision Makers • Open Data for Engagement • Measure Motivation • Set common protocols for observers Table 3 : Practices among projects A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 276 3 . 4 Stakeholders Five categories of stakeholders were identified in the studied projects . Along these categories , four types of activities that stakeholders performed were recorded . Table 4 , summarizes the stakeholder groups according to their main activities and which type of domain involved them . ICT enabled citizen science projects are being used in multiple fields and involve several types of stakeholders , but they are also run by various types of organizations . These organizations range from universities , charities , companies , consortiums , government institutions , initiatives ( initiative is understood as an umbrella term for projects , companies , and their products ) , NGOs , to research institutes . Furthermore , these type of projects have been recognized for their potential for considerable improvements in terms of social innovations and democratization [ 1 ] . Stakeholder Main activities Domains of application Citizen Provide raw data ; Install sensors or apps that collect background data ; Deploy their own monitoring campaigns . All domains Academy and government Provide data ; Install sensors or apps that collect data ; Deploy their own monitoring projects , Use resulting information for decisionmaking Research and development . City management Tools for creating monitoring projects Species monitoring Air and spectrum monitoring Nature enthusiasts Provide data ; Install sensors and apps to collect background data ; Use the data for decisionmaking . Biodiversity monitoring Species monitoring Water , streams , snow , and sea monitoring City management Households Provide data ( 4 % ) ; Install sensors and apps that collect background data ( 4 % ) ; Use the information for personal decisionmaking ( 4 % ) City management Biodiversity monitoring Air and spectrum monitoring Developers Research and development ( 2 % ) Air and spectrum monitoring Table 4 : Stakeholders’ activities and domains of application A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 277 Figure 3 , presents a socio - technical vision of ICT enabled citizen science projects . In this socio - technical system , the data providers are the volunteers that provide the contextual data and sensors that collect or measure specific contexts . The ICT infrastructure includes interfaces , storage and the processing capabilities for data collection and analysis . The outcomes represent some of the dissemination channels for the information and patterns found in the collected data . The ultimate beneficiaries are stakeholders and institutions that use the monitoring outcomes for their concerns , for example , improving lifestyle , decision - making , or research and development . Figure 3 : Socio - technical vision of an ICT enabled citizen science project 3 . 5 Volunteers’ Motives to Participate Engaging volunteers is a major issue for ICT enabled citizen science projects . Because , volunteers tend to abandon the initiatives early or do not commit with them continuously . The studied projects reported five major reasons that drive their volunteers to join and stay in a monitoring project . These have been mapped against the volunteer functions inventory from social sciences [ 31 ] , [ 32 ] and are presented in table 5 . This inventory is aimed at assessing volunteers’ motivations . It highlights six motivations for volunteering : values ( altruistic concerns for others ) , understanding ( acquiring skills ) , enhancement ( self - development ) , career ( obtaining career benefits ) , social ( interactions according to social standards ) and protective ( ensuring own wellbeing ) . A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 278 Volunteers motives according to the analyzed projects Volunteer functions inventory Drive to change , e . g . monitoring a lake due to activism . Values Understand data benefits , e . g . monitoring air quality due to an allergy is good for society and , in particular , for oneself . Understanding Protective Need for challenges , e . g . Increase the performance during a recreational activity by adding an observation challenge or get immersed into games . Enhancement Social Self - interest gains , e . g . carrying monitoring activities to gain free movie tickets or money . Enhancement Career Social recognition , e . g . carrying monitoring activities to receive a local recognition by the city hall . Social Table 5 : Volunteers’ Motives to Participate in ICT Enabled Citizen Science Understanding what drives volunteers to join and stay in a monitoring initiatives has been focus of some studies [ 7 ] , [ 22 ] , [ 31 ] – [ 36 ] . In addition to the volunteer functions inventory , other study in social sciences identified four motives for community involvement [ 33 ] : egoism , altruism , collectivism , and principlism . In crowdsourcing , an integrated definition by [ 34 ] highlights four benefits that volunteers obtain by participating : self - esteem , economic , social recognition and skills development . In citizen science , based on experts’ experience , volunteers join monitoring initiatives because they want to keep individual listings , compete / win something or care about the data [ 37 ] . In practice , the iSPEX project reported two core motivators among their volunteers [ 35 ] : contributing to science and interest on the monitoring topic . The Zooniverse project , reported three motives among their volunteers : helping , interaction with the website and social engagement . Finally , a review of 100 sites of crowdsourced geographic information [ 7 ] , identified two generic incentives for participation among their volunteers : being part of a good cause and gaining something tangible . In participatory sensing , a common categorization of motivation is extrinsic and intrinsic [ 36 ] . Also , incentive mechanisms such as resource - awareness , privacy awareness , incentive driven design , QoI ( quality of information ) by recruitment , QoI by gamification , micropayment and reputation , auction and non - auction based mechanisms , are frequently proposed as a means to motivate volunteers [ 38 ] , [ 39 ] . In overall , there are two streams of research focused on civic engagement [ 13 ] : 1 ) smart city initiatives aimed at using urban sensing to monitor and manage the cities as complex systems and 2 ) civic engagement tools and mechanisms aimed at enhancing citizens role in the management and maintenance of their city . However , it is still unclear what are the changes in volunteers motives and engagement behavior during a monitoring initiative [ 38 ] , [ 40 ] , [ 41 ] . Human motivation is inherently dynamic ; what motivates us to start an action might change while we are performing that action . However , most of current literature in the field , reports motives as a static continuum among volunteers . A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 279 3 . 6 Challenges ICT enabled citizen science projects face numerous challenges . We identified nine common challenges from the point of view of the studied projects ( in order of importance ) : • Sustained participation : The target stakeholders are not always ready for start contributing and often abandon the initiatives soon after their start . • Data Aggregation Issues : Information is obtained only when multiple sources of information are combined . Hence , aggregating data from monitoring applications is important yet challenging due to the multiple data formats , metadata ontologies and data structures . • Technology : This challenge refers to issues with devices’ size , weight and reliability , power consumption limitations , calibration and configuration constraints , lack of systematic methods to reject false and spam observations . • Standardization : There is a current the lack of reusable methods or frameworks for creating new observatories , the lack of standards for inter – communication among monitoring platforms , semantic discrepancies , and lack of systematic evaluations . • Limited Knowledge : Several projects faced issues because of the lack of knowledge about how to build technically a monitoring application . • Limited Resources : The development of an ICT enabled citizen science project tends to have limited resources that are mostly spent during the initial phases , creating a debt for the monitoring and maintenance phases . • Privacy Issues : Understanding the concerns of stakeholder’s regarding the ownership and use of their data is fundamental from the start of a monitoring project . Adequate technologies should be used to capture the volunteers’ concerns and preferences regarding their data . • Recognition of Contribution : There is a need for more social fairness when it comes to ICT enabled citizen science projects , which need to properly acknowledge the contributions and support of observers . • Data Accessibility : Publishing raw data is not sufficient , stakeholders should be able to access , explore and analyze relevant information ( extracted from raw data ) in a simple and transparent fashion . In the context of these challenges , it becomes imperative to improve the understanding of volunteers’ motives and engagement behavior to be able to identify opportunities for building tools that enhance motivation and engagement . Some approaches researchers are exploring are auction based incentive mechanisms [ 38 ] , social media and gamification [ 42 ] . However , there is an acknowledged need to start also studying the changes in motivation among volunteers , and answer questions like why they stay in the projects ? [ 43 ] Why they dropout ? What is the link between the monitoring domain and the motives ? [ 40 ] . It is argued that limitations in knowledge or resources in a citizen science project could boost the civic action and innovation [ 44 ] . It is important to highlight that new frameworks are continuously emerging to tackle this challenge . For example , the city in common framework [ 45 ] , the citizen sensing toolkit [ 46 ] , the biodiversity guide to citizen science [ 47 ] , the European citizen science association collection of guidelines and principles for citizen science [ 48 ] . Also , tools such as Ushahidi , the citizen field engineer [ 44 ] , Alltagsspuren [ 49 ] , Citizense [ 50 ] support the process of initiating a citizen science initiative in an effective manner with limited resources . Yet , there is still a need to develop standards that are widely known for ensuring that in a future we can explore and integrate data from different data sources and projects . A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 280 In addition , other studies have reported similar challenges to the ones we reported in here . Which range from : privacy and security concerns [ 29 ] , [ 51 ] , [ 52 ] ; gaps in data protection laws between countries where the data is collected vs where it is stored [ 30 ] ; data quality and interoperability issues [ 29 ] , [ 53 ] – [ 57 ] ; need to improve the reach of reusable development methods and frameworks [ 58 ] – [ 61 ] and a need to develop approaches and tools to enhance sustained citizen engagement and participation [ 7 ] , [ 39 ] , [ 53 ] , [ 62 ] – [ 65 ] . 4 Civic Participation Palette ICT enabled citizen science initiatives are based on public participation but also serve the public in solving problems in people’s daily lives . Public participation is the right of citizens to become engaged in their governance process because they are directly affected by decision makers’ resolutions [ 4 ] , [ 66 ] . As such public participation can take different forms , from merely informing to allowing citizens to take control of power . A “hierarchy of involvement , ” defined in Arnstein ' s ladder of participation [ 66 ] , presents a view of participation as a balance of power that enables public inclusion in governance . This ladder remains the most cited approach in the field of public participation . However , the ladder model has been criticized , because it represents a hierarchy of roles where the top one is the most important ( whereas in society , every role is important ) . This ladder has been subsequently adapted , improved , and debated in multiple studies [ 67 ] – [ 70 ] . In citizen science , this ladder inspired the levels of participation and engagement by Harklay M . [ 71 ] . ICT enabled citizen science are often seen as mean for public participation and social innovation [ 72 ] . In recent years numerous grassroots movements led by ‘lay” people have started emerging around the world e . g . Ushahidi and Safecast . We observed that there was a gap in the literature reporting this participation spectrum . Hence , we developed a participation palette based on the studied 108 ICT enabled citizen science projects , additional 20 projects that were not reported in our literature review and existing frameworks . These frameworks include the Arnstein ' s ladder of participation , the democracy cube [ 69 ] and classifications of types of participation in citizen science [ 71 ] , [ 73 ] . The participation palette ( figure 4 ) can be described as a framework that portrays the current levels of participation when it comes to monitoring initiatives . Each of the five tones in the palette represents a deliberative act of civic participation . Some of the most important features in this palette are summarized below : • 180 degrees : In this palette , every level of participation is equally important thus , there is no hierarchy . • Spillover effect : More than one tone of participation can be activated at the same time . As one tone of participation can enhance other tones . • Temporality : The levels of participation are temporal and they can change over time based due to different contexts . • The participation tones are not user types : Each participation tone represents a deliberative act of civic participation , which may be mediated by ICTSs or by other types of resources . A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 281 Figure 4 : Palette of Participation The citizen as a data consumer depict a citizen who does not contribute with data collection . Rather uses the data available through services . For example , a data consumer would use the application Mustikka Go to find blueberry locations in the forest . Hence , at this level , the participation is limited to self - enhancement and the engagement is minimal . This type of participation is a clear example of the 1 % rule in the internet culture , the rule states that only 1 % of the users actively contribute with content on the web and the rest 99 % just use the content [ 74 ] . The citizen as data provider represents a citizen who provides data via data collection or classification using his own devices or borrowed devices from experts . Examples : Fix my street let people report city bugs . Galaxy zoo let people classify universe images telescopes using their computer . iBat borrows ultrasonic time expansion detectors to volunteers to record bats activity while driving in the nights . Waze finds you the best route while monitors your own velocity and location in background . A citizen as collaborator is a person who helps through the entire process of setting up a monitoring initiative led by experts . The participation involves facilitating or collaborating in the design , improvement , and dissemination of a project . Experts define the monitoring priorities and ask citizens to collaborate . Most citizen science projects fall under this category . A citizen as co - creator participates in the entire process of planning , designing , and implementing a monitoring initiative . Citizens decide along authorities what should be monitored based on what they feel it is important for their town . Example : The Bristol approach , the city is doing that and designing smart services based on citizens’ perspectives . A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 282 A citizen in control is a person who wants to start a monitoring initiative due to his own interests and due to lack of monitoring initiatives led by experts or authorities . Some examples include : Ushahidi ( let people report violence acts via text messages , web or calls ) and Safecast ( people build their own Geiger devices and measures radiation ) . 4 . 1 Potential Uses for the Palette of Participation The first potential use for this palette is to improving the engineering of ICT citizen science platforms to better fit the needs of volunteers and build opportunities for active engagement . This can be a tool to explore and understand what motivates them volunteers to participate at various levels of engagement . Secondly , this palette can improve the design and development of ICT enabled citizen science projects . As it can be a basis for user research , for example , in figure 5 , we show a way to integrate the palette of participation into a journey map . Thirdly , this palette can help understanding the human - data interactions for engagement , by supporting the development of customizable systems and approaches that allow citizens to explore and understand their data in relation to their living spaces . Figure 5 : Integrating the Palette of Participation into a Journey Map A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 283 5 Conclusion In this paper , we disseminate the results of a state - of - the - art study carried by Lappeenranta University of Technology and the Finnish Environmental Institute during 2015 - 2016 [ 22 ] , which systematically reviewed practices , trends , and challenges of 108 ICT - enabled citizen projects that have been reported in academic literature . As such , these key highlights give a good basis for conceptualizing the reach of ICT enabled citizen science as data intensive socio - technical systems . In addition , we presented a palette for participation in ICT enabled citizen science that depicts the shapes civic participation is currently taking in different contexts . We also discussed the potential uses of this palette for improving the engineering of ICT citizen science platforms to better fit the needs of volunteers and build opportunities for active engagement and meaningful human - data interactions . Even when the underlying technology is still evolving , ICT enabled citizen science has already shown its great potential , not only as a tool for citizens collecting data but also as a vehicle for engaging a large public community in solving social and environmental challenges . These systems have the potential to close the gaps among researchers , environmental experts , decisionmakers , and the people , while collecting data and building a whole new level of services ( from the people , for the people ) . However , the success of ICT enabled citizen science initiatives relies heavily on continuous citizen participation and the computational capacity to extract patterns from the data being collected . Which translates into a need for tighter interdisciplinary collaboration between diverse communities of civics , researchers and decisionmakers . In order to be able to tackle the privacy and security concerns , gaps in data protection laws , data quality and interoperability issues , improve the reach of reusable development methods and frameworks , and develop approaches and tools to build sustained citizen engagement and participation . Although , several studies have focused on studying the motives and incentives to improve and enhance sustained participation , it is still unclear what drives different volunteers to join , stay and abandon monitoring initiatives in specific domains . Hence , there is an opportunity to study the temporal and dynamic changes in user motivation and engagement in ICT enabled citizen science initiatives . This has been reinforced by recent calls for further studies to be performed to better understand the motivations of participants and the effectiveness of incentive mechanisms across different domains [ 38 ] , [ 39 ] , [ 53 ] . Acknowledgment The authors would like to thank the financial support from the Finnish Environment Institute for this study . In addition , we would like to acknowledge the scientific supervision and support from Prof . Ahmed Seffah and Dr . Ari Happonen . A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 284 References [ 1 ] M . S . Reed , “Stakeholder participation for environmental management : A literature review , ” Biol . Conserv . , vol . 141 , no . 10 , pp . 2417 – 2431 , 2008 . [ 2 ] United Nations , “Agenda 21 , ” in United Nations Conference on Environment & Development Rio de Janerio , 1992 , no . June , p . 351 . [ 3 ] G . Brundtland , M . Khalid , S . Agnelli , S . Al - Athel , B . Chidzero , L . Fadika , V . Hauff , I . Lang , M . Shijun , M . . de Botero , and M . Singh , “Our Common Future , ” 1987 . [ 4 ] UNECE , “Aarhus Convention : Convention on Access to Information , Public Participation in Decision - making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters , ” Aarus Conv . , no . June , p . 25 , 1998 . [ 5 ] R . Bonney , “Citizen science : A lab tradition , ” Living Bird , vol . 15 , no . 4 , pp . 7 – 15 , 1996 . [ 6 ] R . Bonney , H . Ballard , R . Jordan , E . McCallie , T . Phillips , J . Shirk , and C . C . Wilderman , “Public Participation in Scientific Research : Defining the Field and Assessing Its Potential for Informal Science Education , ” 2009 . [ 7 ] L . See , P . Mooney , G . Foody , L . Bastin , A . Comber , J . Estima , S . Fritz , N . Kerle , B . Jiang , M . Laakso , H . - Y . Liu , G . Mil č inski , M . Nik š i č , M . Painho , A . P ő dör , A . - M . Olteanu - Raimond , and M . Rutzinger , “Crowdsourcing , Citizen Science or Volunteered Geographic Information ? The Current State of Crowdsourced Geographic Information , ” ISPRS Int . J . Geo - Information , vol . 5 , no . 5 , p . 55 , 2016 . [ 8 ] J . Chilvers , I . Lorenzoni , G . Terry , P . Buckley , J . K . Pinnegar , and S . Gelcich , “Public engagement with marine climate change issues : ( Re ) framings , understandings and responses , ” vol . 29 , pp . 165 – 179 , 2014 . [ 9 ] J . Townsend , “Web for Sustainability Tackling Environmental Complexity with Scale , ” Proc . 2014 Conf . Ict Sustain . , no . Ict4s , pp . 68 – 76 , 2014 . [ 10 ] K . Boehner and C . DiSalvo , “Data , Design and Civics : An Exploratory Study of Civic Tech , ” in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2016 . [ 11 ] V . Vlachokyriakos , E . Gordon , C . Crivellaro , P . Wright , C . Le Dantec , and P . Olivier , “Digital civics : Citizen empowerment with and through technology , ” in Proceedings of the 2016 CHI conference extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems , 2016 , pp . 1096 – 1099 . [ 12 ] Knight Foundation , “The Emergence of Civic Tech : Investments in a Growing Field , ” no . December , p . 30 , 2013 . [ 13 ] M . Harding , B . Knowles , N . Davies , and M . Rouncefield , “HCI , Civic Engagement & Trust , ” in Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2015 , pp . 2833 – 2842 . [ 14 ] M . A . Ferrario , S . Forshaw , P . Newman , W . Simm , A . Friday , and A . Dix , “On the edge of supply : designing renewable energy supply into everyday life , ” Proc . 2014 Conf . ICT Sustain . , no . Ict4s , pp . 48 – 57 , 2014 . [ 15 ] X . Gui and B . Nardi , “Sustainability Begins in the Street : A Story of Transition Town Totnes , ” Proc . 2015 Conf . ICT Sustain . , pp . 361 – 370 , 2015 . [ 16 ] J . Bourgeois , J . Van Der Linden , G . Kortuem , B . a Price , and C . Rimmer , “Using Participatory Data Analysis to Understand Social Constraints and Opportunities of Electricity Demand - Shifting , ” Proc . 2nd ICT Sustain . 2014 Conf . , no . Ict4s , pp . 392 – 401 , 2014 . [ 17 ] D . Estrin , “Participatory Sensing : Applications and Architecture , ” IEEE Internet Computing , pp . 12 – 14 , 2010 . [ 18 ] J . Goldman , K . Shilton , J . Burke , D . Estrin , M . Hansen , N . Ramanathan , S . Reddy , and V . Samanta , “Participatory Sensing : A citizen - powered approach to illuminating the patterns that shape our world , ” 2009 . A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 285 [ 19 ] R . Bonney , C . b Cooper , J . Dickinson , S . Kelling , T . Phillips , K . V Rosenberg , and J . Shirk , “Citizen Science : A Developing Tool for Expanding Science Knowledge and Scientific Literacy , ” Bioscience , vol . 59 , no . 11 , pp . 977 – 984 , 2009 . [ 20 ] E . Hand , “People Power , ” Nature , vol . 466 , no . 5 , pp . 685 – 687 , 2010 . [ 21 ] J . L . Dickinson , J . Shirk , D . Bonter , R . Bonney , R . L . Crain , J . Martin , T . Phillips , and K . Purcell , “The current state of citizen science as a tool for ecological research and public engagement , ” Front . Ecol . Environ . , vol . 10 , no . 6 , pp . 291 – 297 , 2012 . [ 22 ] M . Palacin - Silva , A . Seffah , K . Heikkinen , J . Porras , T . Pyhälahti , Y . Sucksdorff , S . Anttila , H . Alasalmi , E . Bruun , and S . Junttila , State - of - the Art Study in Citizen Observatories : Technological Trends , Development Challenges and Research Avenues , 28th ed . Helsinki : Finnish Environment Institute ( SYKE ) , 2016 . [ 23 ] V . Braun and V . Clarke , “Using thematic analysis in psychology Using thematic analysis in psychology , ” Qual . Res . Psychol . , vol . 3 , no . 2 , pp . 77 – 101 , 2006 . [ 24 ] B . Kitchenham , “Procedures for Performing Systematic Reviews , ” 2004 . [ 25 ] S . Keele , “Guidelines for performing systematic literature reviews in software engineering , ” 2007 . [ 26 ] K . Palacin - Silva , Maria Seffah , Ahmed Heikkinen , J . Porras , S . Pyhälahti , Timo Sucksdorff , Yrjö Anttila , H . Alasalmi , E . Bruun , and S . Junttila , “Appendixes : State - of - the Art Study in Citizen Observatories : Technological Trends , Development Challenges and Research Avenues , ” Reports of the Finnish Environment Institute 28 / 2016 , 2016 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / helda . helsinki . fi / handle / 10138 / 164810 . [ Accessed : 29 - Nov - 2017 ] . [ 27 ] J . P . Cohn , “Citizen Science : Can Volunteers Do Real Research ? , ” Bioscience , vol . 58 , no . 3 , pp . 192 – 197 , 2008 . [ 28 ] H . Tangmunarunkit , J . Kang , Z . Khalapyan , J . Ooms , N . Ramanathan , D . Estrin , C . K . Hsieh , B . Longstaff , S . Nolen , J . Jenkins , C . Ketcham , J . Selsky , F . Alquaddoomi , and D . George , “Ohmage : A General and Extensible End - to - End Participatory Sensing Platform , ” ACM Trans . Intell . Syst . Technol . , vol . 6 , no . 3 , pp . 1 – 21 , 2015 . [ 29 ] I . Krontiris , M . Langheinrich , and K . Shilton , “Trust and Privacy in Mobile Experience Sharing : Future Challenges and Avenues for Research , ” no . August , pp . 50 – 55 , 2014 . [ 30 ] D . Bucher , F . Cellina , F . Mangili , M . Raubal , R . Rudel , A . E . Rizzoli , and O . Elabed , “Exploiting Fitness Apps for Sustainable Mobility - Challenges Deploying the GoEco ! App , ” 4th Int . Conf . ICT Sustain . ( ICT4S 2016 ) , no . September , pp . 89 – 98 , 2016 . [ 31 ] E . G . Clary , M . Snyder , R . D . Ridge , J . Copeland , A . A . Stukas , J . Haugen , and P . Miene , “Understanding and assessing the motivations of volunteers : A functional approach . , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , vol . 74 , no . 6 . American Psychological Association , US , pp . 1516 – 1530 , 1998 . [ 32 ] H . A . Van Den Berg , S . L . Dann , and J . M . Dirkx , “Motivations of adults for non - formal conservation education and volunteerism : Implications for programming , ” Appl . Environ . Educ . Commun . , vol . 8 , no . 1 , pp . 6 – 17 , 2009 . [ 33 ] C . D . Batson , N . Ahmad , and J . - A . Tsang , “Four Motives for Community Involvement , ” J . Soc . Issues , vol . 58 , no . 3 , pp . 429 – 445 , 2002 . [ 34 ] E . Estelles - Arolas and F . Gonzalez - Ladron - de - Guevara , “Towards an integrated crowdsourcing definition , ” J . Inf . Sci . , vol . 38 , no . 2 , pp . 189 – 200 , 2012 . [ 35 ] A . M . Land - Zandstra , J . L . A . Devilee , F . Snik , F . Buurmeijer , and J . M . van den Broek , “Citizen science on a smartphone : Participants’ motivations and learning , ” Public Underst . Sci . , vol . 25 , no . 1 , pp . 45 – 60 , 2016 . [ 36 ] R . M . Ryan and E . L . Deci , “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivations : Classic Definitions and New Directions , ” Contemp . Educ . Psychol . , vol . 25 , no . 1 , pp . 54 – 67 , 2000 . [ 37 ] C . McEver , R . Bonney , J . Dickinson , S . Kelling , K . Rosenberg , and J . Shirk , Eds . , “Citizen Science Toolkit Conference , ” in Proceedings of the 2007 Citizen Science Toolkit Conference , A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 286 2007 , pp . 225 – 232 . [ 38 ] F . Restuccia , S . K . Das , and J . Payton , “Incentive Mechanisms for Participatory Sensing : Survey and Research Challenges , ” ACM Trans . Sens . Networks , vol . 12 , no . 2 , pp . 1 – 40 , 2016 . [ 39 ] B . Guo , Z . Yu , X . Zhou , and D . Zhang , “From participatory sensing to Mobile Crowd Sensing , ” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communication Workshops , 2014 , pp . 593 – 598 . [ 40 ] C . Jennett and A . L . Cox , “Digital Citizen Science and the Motivations of Volunteers , ” vol . 2 , 2018 . [ 41 ] D . Rotman , “Collaborative science across the globe : The influence of motivation and culture on volunteers in the United States , India and Costa Rica . , ” p . 298 , 2013 . [ 42 ] C . Preist , E . Massung , and D . Coyle , “Competing or Aiming to Be Average ? : Normification As a Means of Engaging Digital Volunteers , ” 17th ACM Conf . Comput . Support . Coop . Work Soc . Comput . CSCW 2014 , pp . 1222 – 1233 , 2014 . [ 43 ] D . Rotman , J . Preece , J . Hammock , K . Procita , D . Hansen , C . Parr , D . Lewis , and D . Jacobs , “Dynamic changes in motivation in collaborative citizen - science projects , ” Proc . ACM 2012 Conf . Comput . Support . Coop . Work - CSCW ’12 , p . 217 , 2012 . [ 44 ] F . von Heland , A . Bondesson , M . Nyberg , and P . Westerberg , “The Citizen Field Engineer : Crowdsourced Maintenance of Connected Water Infrastructure , ” EnviroInfo ICT Sustain . 2015 , no . EnviroInfo , pp . 146 – 156 , 2015 . [ 45 ] M . Balestrini , “A City in Common : Explorations on Sustained Community Engagement with Bottom - up Civic Technologies , ” no . March , pp . 2282 – 2294 , 2017 . [ 46 ] M . Woods , M . Balestrini , S . Bejtullahu , S . Bocconi , G . Boerwinkel , M . Boonstra , D . - S . Boschman , G . Camprodon , S . Coulson , T . Diez , I . Fazey , D . Hemment , C . van den Horn , T . Ilazi , I . Jansen - Dings , F . Kresin , D . McQuillan , S . Nascimento , E . Pareschi , A . Polvora , R . Salaj , M . Scott , and G . Seiz , Citizen Sensing : A Toolkit . University of Dundee , 2018 . [ 47 ] J . C . Tweddle , L . D . Robinson , M . J . O . Pocock , and H . E . Roy , Guide to citizen science : developing , implementing and evaluating citizen science to study biodiversity and the environment in the UK . United Kingdom : NERC / Centre for Ecology & Hydrology . , 2012 . [ 48 ] ECSA , “European Citizen Science Association Documents , ” 2018 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / ecsa . citizen - science . net / documents . [ Accessed : 07 - Mar - 2018 ] . [ 49 ] B . Knoll , R . Hofmann , P . Busswald , C . Link , R . Dopheide , and P . Pfaffenbichler , “Multi - perspective ICT - toolkit supporting inclusive and sustainable mobility planning in rural areas , ” Proc . Ict Sustain . 2016 , vol . 46 , no . Ict4s , pp . 134 – 140 , 2016 . [ 50 ] N . M . Khoi , L . E . Rodriguez - Pupo , and S . Casteleyn , “Citizense - A generic user - oriented participatory sensing framework , ” 2017 Int . Conf . Sel . Top . Mob . Wirel . Networking , MoWNeT 2017 , 2017 . [ 51 ] R . K . Ganti , F . Ye , and H . Lei , “Mobile Crowdsensing : Current State and Future Challenges , ” IEE Communications Magazine , no . November , pp . 32 – 39 , 2011 . [ 52 ] D . Christin , A . Reinhardt , S . S . Kanhere , and M . Hollick , “A survey on privacy in mobile participatory sensing applications , ” J . Syst . Softw . , vol . 84 , no . 11 , pp . 1928 – 1946 , 2011 . [ 53 ] G . Foody , L . See , S . Fritz , P . Mooney , C . Fonte , V . Antoniou , G . Foody , L . See , and S . Fritz , Mapping and Citizen Sensor . London : Ubiquity Press Ltd , 2017 . [ 54 ] D . Miorandi , I . Carreras , E . Gregori , I . Graham , and J . Stewart , “Measuring net neutrality in mobile Internet : Towards a crowdsensing - based citizen observatory , ” 2013 IEEE Int . Conf . Commun . Work . ICC 2013 , pp . 199 – 203 , 2013 . [ 55 ] A . Psyllidis and N . Biloria , “OntoPolis : A Semantic Participatory Platform for Performance Assessment and Augmentation of Urban Environments , ” 2014 Int . Conf . Intell . Environ . , pp . 140 – 147 , 2014 . [ 56 ] A . Correia , J . Santos , D . Azevedo , H . Paredes , and B . Fonseca , “Putting ‘Human Crowds’ in A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 287 the Loop of Bibliography Evaluation : A Collaborative Working Environment for CSCW Publications , ” Procedia Technol . , vol . 9 , pp . 573 – 583 , 2013 . [ 57 ] S . R . Loss , S . S . Loss , T . Will , and P . P . Marra , “Linking place - based citizen science with large - scale conservation research : A case study of bird - building collisions and the role of professional scientists , ” vol . 184 , pp . 439 – 445 , 2015 . [ 58 ] R . Jacobs , S . Benford , M . Selby , M . Golembewski , D . Price , and G . Giannachi , “A Conversation Between Trees : What Data Feels Like In The Forest , ” Proc . SIGCHI Conf . Hum . Factors Comput . Syst . - CHI ’13 , pp . 129 – 138 , 2013 . [ 59 ] J . Zaman , “DisCoPar : Distributed Components for Participatory Campaigning , ” pp . 160 – 165 , 2015 . [ 60 ] M . Cottman - fields , M . Brereton , J . Wimmer , and P . Roe , “Collaborative Extension of Biodiversity Monitoring Protocols in the Bird Watching Community , ” pp . 1 – 4 , 2014 . [ 61 ] L . R . Larson , R . C . Stedman , C . B . Cooper , and D . J . Decker , “Understanding the multi - dimensional structure of pro - environmental behavior , ” vol . 43 , pp . 112 – 124 , 2015 . [ 62 ] T . Luo , S . S . Kanhere , and H . P . Tan , “SEW - ing a Simple Endorsement Web to incentivize trustworthy participatory sensing , ” 2014 11th Annu . IEEE Int . Conf . Sensing , Commun . Networking , SECON 2014 , pp . 636 – 644 , 2014 . [ 63 ] U . Wehn , M . Rusca , J . Evers , and V . Lanfranchi , “Participation in flood risk management and the potential of citizen observatories : A governance analysis , ” Environ . Sci . Policy , vol . 48 , pp . 225 – 236 , 2015 . [ 64 ] D . Yang , G . Xue , X . Fang , and J . Tang , “Crowdsourcing to smartphones , ” Proc . 18th Annu . Int . Conf . Mob . Comput . Netw . - Mobicom ’12 , p . 173 , 2012 . [ 65 ] G . D . Saxton , O . Oh , and R . Kishore , “Rules of Crowdsourcing : Models , Issues , and Systems of Control , ” Inf . Syst . Manag . , vol . 30 , no . 1 , pp . 2 – 20 , 2013 . [ 66 ] S . Arnstein , “A ladder of citizen participation , ” Jaip , vol . 35 , no . 4 , pp . 216 – 224 , 1969 . [ 67 ] D . M . Connor , “A new ladder of citizen participation , ” Natl . Civ . Rev . , vol . 77 , no . 3 , pp . 249 – 257 , 1988 . [ 68 ] P . M . Wiedemann and S . Femers , “Public participation in waste management decision making : Analysis and management of conflicts , ” J . Hazard . Mater . , vol . 33 , pp . 355 – 368 , 1993 . [ 69 ] A . Fung , “Varieties of participation in complex governance , ” Public Adm . Rev . , vol . 66 , pp . 66 – 75 , 2006 . [ 70 ] R . Hart , Children’s Participation : from Tokenism to Citizenship , vol . 4 . Florence , Italy : UNICEF , 1992 . [ 71 ] M . Haklay , “Citizen Science and Volunteered Geographic Information : Overview and Typology of Participation , ” in Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge , M . Sui , Daniel Z . , Elwood , Sarah , Goodchild , Ed . Dordrecht : Springer , 2013 , pp . 105 – 122 . [ 72 ] U . Wehn and J . Evers , “Citizen observatories of water : Social Innovation via eParticipation ? , ” in 2nd International Conference on ICT for Sustainability , 2014 , p . 10 . [ 73 ] J . L . Shirk , H . L . Ballard , C . C . Wilderman , T . Phillips , A . Wiggins , R . Jordan , E . McCallie , M . Minarchek , B . V . Lewenstein , M . E . Krasny , and R . Bonney , “Public Participation in Scientific Research : a Framework for Deliberate Design , ” Ecol . Soc . , vol . 17 , no . 2 : 29 , 2012 . [ 74 ] B . McConnell , “The 1 % Rule : Charting citizen participation , ” 2006 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / web . archive . org / web / 20100511081141 / http : / / www . churchofcustomer . com / 2006 / 05 / ch arting _ wiki _ p . html . [ Accessed : 29 - Nov - 2017 ] . A study on ICT enabled citizen science practices . . . M . Palacin - Silva and J . Porras 288 Publication II Palacin - Silva , M . V . , Knutas , A . , Ferrario , M . A . , Porras , J . , Ikonen , J . and Chea , C . The Role of Gamiﬁcation in Participatory Environmental Sensing : A Study In the Wild In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , No . 221 , pp . 1 - 13 , 2018 c (cid:13) 2018 . ACM . Reprinted with permission . The Role of Gamiﬁcation in Participatory Environmental Sensing : A Study in the Wild Maria V . Palacin - Silva 1 * , Antti Knutas 1 , 2 , Maria Angela Ferrario 3 , Jari Porras 1 , Jouni Ikonen 1 , Chandara Chea 1 1 Lappeenranta University of Technology Skinnarilankatu 34 , Finland name . lastname @ lut . ﬁ 2 Dublin City University Dublin 13 , Glasnevin , Ireland antti . knutas @ lero . ie 3 Lancaster University Bailrigg , Lancaster LA1 4YW , UK m . ferrario @ lancaster . ac . uk ABSTRACT Participatory sensing ( PS ) and citizen science hold promises for a genuinely interactive and inclusive citizen engagement in meaningful and sustained collection of data about social and environmental phenomena . Yet the underlying motivations for public engagement in PS remain still unclear particularly regarding the role of gamiﬁcation , for which HCI research ﬁndings are often inconclusive . This paper reports the ﬁndings of an experimental study speciﬁcally designed to further under - stand the effects of gamiﬁcation on citizen engagement . Our study involved the development and implementation of two versions ( gamiﬁed and non - gamiﬁed ) of a mobile application designed to capture lake ice coverage data in the sub - arctic region . Emerging ﬁndings indicate a statistically signiﬁcant effect of gamiﬁcation on participants’ engagement levels in PS . The motivation , approach and results of our study are outlined and implications of the ﬁndings for future PS design are reﬂected . ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . m . Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . HCI ) : Miscellaneous Author Keywords participatory sensing ; citizen science ; civic technology ; environmental sensing ; human behavior ; engagement ; gamiﬁcation INTRODUCTION The human - computer interaction ( HCI ) community has for long been investigating the role of digital technology in citizen participation [ 14 , 25 , 63 , 22 , 1 ] including its role in under - standing the impact of environmental change and in supporting sustainable practices [ 32 , 26 , 31 , 53 ] . Views that citizens can be persuaded into acting ‘more sustainably’ have also been challenged [ 25 , 30 ] together with the reductionist view of the rational “Resource Man” adapting his / her behavior to data [ 54 ] . However , it is undeniable that technology has enabled Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributedforproﬁtorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitationontheﬁrstpage . CopyrightsforcomponentsofthisworkownedbyothersthanACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspeciﬁcpermissionand / ora fee . Requestpermissionsfrompermissions @ acm . org . CHI2018 , April21 – 26 , 2018 , Montreal , QC , Canada ©2018ACM . ISBN978 - 1 - 4503 - 5620 - 6 / 18 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173795 citizen participation to far - reaching causes on a massive scale [ 7 ] , offering the opportunity for a deeper understanding of the mechanisms underpinning societal and environmental changes not only at global , but also at local level [ 50 , 64 , 1 , 28 ] . Participatory Sensing ( PS ) - often also referred as citizen sci - ence , crowd - sensing and crowdsourcing - is a form of civic technology designed to support public participation in the collection of meaningful , located data [ 27 , 5 ] . Over the last decade , PS has gained popularity with applications such as eBird , Fold . it , Waze , Ushahidi , and Galaxyzoo ; such tools have been actively supporting citizen - driven data collection for a varied of purposes including scientiﬁc research and crisis communication [ 16 , 21 ] , whilst serving as means for inclu - sive engagement , education , and public outreach [ 2 , 24 , 13 ] . Despite its widespread popularity , the motivations underlying citizen engagement are still unclear [ 39 ] and so is the role of gamiﬁcation in this context [ 49 , 39 , 30 ] . In particular , it is still unclear how effective gamiﬁcation is and in which PS contexts [ 24 ] , highlighting the need for empirical studies [ 12 , 23 , 43 , 52 , 60 ] . The aim of this paper is to further investigate the role of gami - ﬁcation in citizen participation in PS through empirical obser - vation . We do so by running a user study involving forty - one participants monitoring ice coverage of sub - arctic lakes . By using two versions ( gamiﬁed and non - gamiﬁed ) of a bespoke mobile app , we observe that the gamiﬁed version of the appli - cation has a statistically signiﬁcant higher PS engagement than the non - gamiﬁed one . Engagement is here measured by the number of submitted observations . From the study qualitative feedback , we also note that an increased use of the application can have additional impact on participants’ attitudes and be - havior , including spending more time outdoor , becoming more appreciative of the local environment and how it changes over time . The main contribution of this paper is a further insight into the role of gamiﬁcation in PS . Speciﬁcally , we ﬁnd that adding gamiﬁcation to an environmental monitoring application sig - niﬁcantly increases the number of participants’ observations . This paper outlines the rational , approach and results of our study and reﬂects on implications for future PS design . RELATED WORK It is argued that “environmental issues are best handled with the participation of all concerned citizens” [ 58 , 57 , 56 ] . This is a result of the signiﬁcant evolution of the relationship be - CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 221 Page 1 tween governments and citizens in the past 60 years from consciousness raising in the 1960s , the incorporation of local perspectives in the 1970s , the recognition of local knowledge in the 1980s , the participation as a norm as part of the sustain - able development agenda of the 1990s , and the e - participation governance in the 2000s [ 57 , 56 , 47 , 4 , 64 ] . Technology has played a key role in the evolution of partic - ipation . The publics are now actively engaging with diverse causes via ICT ( e . g . activism , mobilizations , public campaign - ing , community monitoring ) [ 7 ] . In this context , systems such as participatory sensing ( PS ) - often also referred to as citizen science , crowd - sensing or crowdsourcing - have emerged as an opportunity to monitor social and environmental phenomenon in detail ; since mobile technology has become pervasive and able to capture , classify and transmit location , image , voice and other data autonomously [ 49 , 6 , 16 , 21 ] . Participatory sensing is data collection and interpretation enabled by tech - nology [ 5 , 21 ] . The data being submitted in PS represents a deliberative act of public participation by the interaction of the public with the technology - enabled services . In the early 2000s , city develop - ment , urban crime surveillance , and forest conservation were highlighted as promising applications of participatory sensing [ 45 ] . Over a decade later , the applications in those domains ( among many others ) have widely spread among the publics . For example , FixMyStreet 1 FixMyStreet allows citizens to report city issues e . g . broken pavement ) to enhance city main - tenance ; Ushahidi 2 helped the Kenyan government in 2007 to map violent acts across the country and has been used in more than 10 countries since then ; eBird 3 was launched in 2002 to gather basic data about bird distribution across the globe . By now eBird has collected hundreds of millions of ob - servations from most countries in the world . Finally , Safecast 4 was launched by citizens’ initiative to monitor the radiation levels in Japan after the nuclear accident in Fukushima in 2011 . By now , it has become the largest monitoring network in the history of the planet . PS systems are built based on public participation , but they also serve the public in solving daily problems ( e . g . ﬁnding the best route home ) . Hence , citizens are found at these ap - plications’ very operational core for two main reasons : ﬁrstly , because of the way they are operated , any participatory sens - ing platform is doomed to fail if it has no participants ; and secondly , because of the great value of local knowledge and the intimate understanding the public has on the patterns and anomalies in their communities . This local knowledge can complement expert assessments as it includes important con - textual information [ 5 ] . Among the different challenges that PS holds ( from technology leaps , privacy and security con - cerns to data quality and standardization ) , active public en - gagement remains a key challenge in this ﬁeld . 1 FixMyStreet : http : / / www . fixmystreet . com 2 Ushahidi : http : / / www . ushahidi . com 3 eBird website : http : / / www . ebird . org 4 Safecast website : http : / / blog . safecast . org However , the underlying public motivation to actively engage and participate in PS is still unclear [ 19 , 15 ] . Particularly , the impact of gamiﬁcation mechanisms on human behavior in PS remains under discussion : with current HCI ﬁndings [ 49 , 39 , 30 , 17 , 18 ] often inconclusive / contradictory and do - main agnostic . For example , Knowles et al . [ 30 ] doubt that gamiﬁcation works based on the claim that game elements activate negative achievement values which might not support pro - environmental behavior change . In the other hand , Ross [ 49 ] , claims that pervasive games empower humans to take actions to improve society , and Massung et al . [ 39 ] argue that gamiﬁcation can impact extrinsic motivators that enhance pro - environmental practices . Meanwhile , one of the most successful participatory sensing projects so far is Foldit 5 , an online puzzle game which challenges participants to fold pro - tein structures as perfectly as possible using the game tools . Scientists can analyze the applicability of the highest scoring solutions for curing diseases ; it has been shown that the best Foldit players can match or exceed computational solutions [ 8 ] . By 2014 Foldit already exceeded 200 , 000 players [ 37 , 59 ] . Given this context , gamiﬁcation was selected as the method to study engagement , as it is a technique with a solid theoretical basis for impacting human behavior [ 52 ] . As such , gamiﬁ - cation is the application of game - like elements to non - game environments [ 11 ] . It has also been deﬁned as a process of enhancing a service with affordances for gameful experiences in order to support user’s overall value creation [ 29 ] . Ap - proaches that use some elements of gamiﬁcation have been shown to increase user motivation and engagement in a variety of environments [ 52 ] , including participatory sensing [ 42 ] . However , it is still not clear how well gamiﬁcation works and in which contexts [ 23 ] . For example in citizen science , gamiﬁcation has been used to encourage [ 38 , 39 , 36 ] and improve [ 66 ] participation . The results in these studies were positive [ 36 ] or inconclusive [ 38 , 39 , 66 ] . In yet another study fromtheﬁeldofsustainabilitygamiﬁcationwasusedtoengagecustomerswithpositiveoutcomes [ 20 ] . Therefore there have been calls for rigorous empirical studies to be performed to better understand the effects of gamiﬁcation [ 12 , 23 , 43 , 52 , 60 ] . For these reasons , we carried out a user study in - the - wild to further understand the effects of gamiﬁcation on human engagement and the perception in the context of environmental sensing . METHODOLOGY This study was aimed at understanding the effects of gam - iﬁcation on user engagement and user experience in a par - ticipatory sensing application . Both engagement and user experience were measured by quantitative indicators ( see table 1 ) . Nonetheless , it is important to highlight that a variable name might have a wider meaning in other contexts [ 67 ] . The user engagement was measured by three indicators : • Involvement : Total number of submissions per user , 5 Foldit website : http : / / www . fold . it CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 221 Page 2 • Activeness : Number of active users from beginning to end of the study . In this context , an active user is understood as a user that submits observations in a daily basis . • Dropout : Total number of users who left the study . On the other hand , the user experience was measured in terms of : • Effectiveness : Ratio of the number of submissions and application openings ( per user ) , • Learnability : Time to become familiar with the application at the ﬁrst use , • Satisfaction : Rates ( in a ﬁve Likert scale ) ease of use and usability satisfaction statements Table1 . VariablesandIndicators . Variable Indicator Measurement Engagement Involvement Number of submissions Activeness Number of users who were active for the entire duration of the study Dropout Number of who did not complete the study User Experience Effectiveness Number of submissionsperappusage Learnability Time to learn the app during the ﬁrst use Satisfaction Survey - based opinion During this study , the participants had to submit photos of the ice status of the largest lake in Finland ( lake Saimaa ) during a seasonal change . For this purpose , two applications were designed : a gamiﬁed application and a non - gamiﬁed application . Then , the participants were divided in two groups : a control group and an experimental group ; and they were randomly assigned to use one of the applications for 20 days . The length of our study is limited by the time between the freeze - up and break - up of the lake Saimaa , which is typically about 4 months [ 33 ] . This sets a maximum observation time frame for the public to be able to perform monitoring . Experiment Design We designed our experiment following the guidelines of Wohlin et al . [ 67 ] . In our study , the independent variable was gamiﬁcation elements and the dependent variables were a ) engagement and b ) user experience . Two hypotheses were deﬁned in order to understand the effects of gamiﬁcation on the dependent variables 1 ) Hypothesis for Engagement Variable : • Null hypothesis H0 1 : The use of gamiﬁed elements in a lake monitoring application produces equal or less user engagement than a non - gamiﬁed application . • Alternative hypothesis H1 1 : The use of gamiﬁed elements in a lake monitoring application produces a greater user engagement than a non - gamiﬁed application 2 ) Hypothesis for User Experience Variable : • Null hypothesis H0 2 : The use of gamiﬁed elements in a lake monitoring application produces the same user experience as a with a non - gamiﬁed application . • Alternative hypothesis H1 2 : The use of gamiﬁed elements in a lake monitoring application produces a better user ex - perience than a non - gamiﬁed application . Participants The selection followed a non - probabilistic convenience sam - pling where invitations to participate were sent to university students through mailing lists . As a result , 41 volunteers ( a person who carries and activity without being paid ) signed up to participate in the experimental study which took place from 24 March to 12 April 2017 ( 20 days ) . After signing informed consent agreement , the participants were randomly divided into 2 group ( see ﬁgure 1 ) : a ) the control group ( 20 participants ) received a non - gamiﬁed application and , b ) the experimental group ( 22 participants ) received a gamiﬁed appli - cation . The participants received an instruction session before the start of the experiment . This session provided informa - tion about the experiment motives , data treatment , application functionality and answered their questions . Figure1 . ParticipatorySensingSystemArchitecture . System Design In this study , two mobile applications - one non - gamiﬁed ap - plication and one gamiﬁed - were developed both for Android and iOS platforms . The architecture of these applications is presented in Figure 1 . The development process was mainly designer - led with feedback of different versions of the systems collated from students and researchers . Non - gamiﬁed application : Jarvida Jarvida was a regular water bodies monitoring application , inspired from existing tools in use ( such as Järviwiki 6 , Finnish 6 Järviwiki website : http : / / www . jarviwiki . fi CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 221 Page 3 Hydrological Citizen Observation Network 7 , CreekWatch 8 ) . The application logic was straightforward ( Figure 2 ) ; it would start from providing some educational examples about ice types on a lake then , the participants could proceed to submit . The user had to select a location for this observation ( so that the user would not be bounded to make a submission when the photo is taken but rather to be able to submit at any point of the day ) . Also , the submission could have an image attached or it could be just a report of the ice status , there were three observation values : no ice ( water is not frozen ) , partially ice - covered ( water is partially frozen or melted ) and compactly ice - covered ( water is compactly frozen and ice thickness can be measured ) . Finally the participant could , check the statis - tics about the ice status based on all the observations in his area . A use case example starts with the user logging in , then information about the ice types is displayed along some ed - ucational images . Next , the user can proceed to submit an observation and add locations along ice values . Finally , the user can see the statistics of ice condition in the area . Figure2 . Jarvidalogic Gamiﬁed application : Jarvigo Jarvigo provided the same features for environmental mon - itoring as Jarvida , but with game elements integrated . The gamiﬁcation elements [ 68 , 48 ] added to this version were as follows : • Interactive map : All submitted observations appeared on the map as pins . Users could tap on the map to add a new pin or use an existing pin then , they could submit an observation . Pins would change of color ( red to green ) when a submission was done . • Storytelling : A story describe the context of the task . Then it gives a mission that users need to accept ( challenge ) . The story was designed to raise participant’s awareness about environmental monitoring , and making users feel that their contributions make an impact to their community and the world . • Challenge : Each observation task was seen as a challenge or mission that users needed to carry on for a speciﬁc period of time . • Points : Points are the most basic but compulsory element in gamiﬁed systems . In this application , participants who submitted observations were rewarded the experience points ( XP ) . 7 Finnish hydrological citizen observation network website : http : / / www . kansalaishavainnot . fi / lumi 8 CreekWatch website : http : / / creekwatch . ca Figure3 . GamiﬁcationelementsinJarvigoapp . • Leaderboard : Participants were ranked according to their earned points . Top ten users were displayed in the leader - board . • Feedback : This technique was used to make users feel that their contributions were not taken for granted and it gave users the feeling of satisfaction from seeing their own progress and points earned . The logic in Jarvigo ( Figure 4 ) , would start with a story re - lated to global warming , highlighting the importance of lakes monitoring . Then it asks participants to accept a challenge ( submitting 20 observations in 20 days ) . After accepting the challenge , participants could view a map of the area with all the pins where other observations have been submitted . Then , they could submit an observation by tapping on the location they have observed . Again for the submission the user could attach an image or just report the ice status ( no ice , partially ice - covered and compact ice ) . When they submit an obser - vation , 20 points are awarded . Participants could track their progress and see the top ten ranked participants ( based on scores ) on the leaderboard . Finally the participant could also check the statistics about the ice status in their area . In order to balance the challenge effect among groups and avoid a " Hawthorne effect " ( where participants modify their behavior simply because they are being observed ) among the participants using the gamiﬁed application , participants who used the non - gamiﬁed application were recommended during the introductory meeting to use the application every day dur - ing the study duration ( which was the equivalent of the goal in the gamiﬁed version ) . CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 221 Page 4 Figure4 . Jarvigologic . Analysis Method The source data for this study came from the applications usage logs and pre - and post - questionnaires . Given the partici - pant pool size , the independence of the test groups , the ordinal and non - normal nature of the dataset , Mann - Whitney U test [ 67 ] - a nonparametric test for independent samples - was used to calculate the statistical signiﬁcance of the data sample and thus , reject or keep the null hypothesis . The pre - 9 and post - 10 surveys were designed to collect quan - titative and qualitative data regarding the perception and ex - perience of the participants during this study . Standardized questionnaires such as the systems usability scale [ 3 ] , the IBM computer usability satisfaction questionnaire [ 35 ] , the user acceptance of information technology scale [ 62 ] , and perceived playfulness questions [ 61 ] ; were included in the pre - and post - questionnaires . The overall data collected was : participants’ demographics and environmental interests and perceptions about user experience , usage habits , gamiﬁcation features , enjoyment and playfulness . FINDINGS 41 volunteers aged 20 – 35 participated in this study which lasted 20 days . Participants were randomly divided into two independent groups . Hence , there were 20 participants using non - gamiﬁed application ( Jarvida ) and other 21 participants using gamiﬁed application ( Jarvigo ) . A total of 304 observa - tions were submitted via both applications . A major concern during this period was the weather conditions as the temper - ature ranged between - 8C°and 12C° and , participants had to record their observations outdoors . The ﬁndings in this section are presented by variable and indicators . These ﬁndings derive from statistical tests and descriptive statistics onto each one of the indicators ( involvement , activeness , dropout , learnability , effectiveness and satisfaction ) . Also , to ensure data consis - tency and to avoid common issues in this type of applications ( such as spam or duplicate submissions ) [ 40 ] , the dataset was checked for duplicated submissions ( e . g . same observation submitted multiple times in order to gain points or by mistake ) . Engagement In this context , engagement refers to the number of obser - vations submitted by participants ( involvement ) , the level of 9 pre questionnaire : http : / / goo . gl / JJB5k2 10 post questionnaire : http : / / goo . gl / 8rk1sG activeness of the users from beginning to end in the study ( ac - tiveness ) and the number of participants abandoning the study ( dropout ) . The overall results ( see Table 2 ) , show that the involvement and activeness among the participants who used the gamiﬁed application was signiﬁcantly higher compared to the ones who used the non - gamiﬁed application . On the other hand , the dropout percentage was similar in both applications . Given this results , the null hypothesis is rejected and the al - ternative hypothesis is accepted " H1 1 : The use of gamiﬁed elements in a lake monitoring application produces equal or less user engagement than a non - gamiﬁed application . " . Each indicator and its results are explained below : Table 2 . Engagement Indicators : Results ( where : n ) not signiﬁ - cant , * * ) statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0 . 05 , * * * ) statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0 . 01 , * * * * ) statisticallysigniﬁcantatp < 0 . 001 ) . Indicator Measurment Non - gamiﬁed Jarvida GamiﬁedJarvigo Difference andsigniﬁcance Involvement Totalsubmissions 44 260 216 * * * Activeness VeryActiveusersfrombeginningtoend 17 % 50 % 33 % ( N / A ) Dropout Numberof participantswhodidnotcompletethestudy 10 % 5 % 5 % ( N / A ) • Involvement : The results show that the observations sub - mitted in the experimental group ( using the gamiﬁed ap - plication ) was statistically signiﬁcantly higher at than the control group ( using the non - gamiﬁed application ) ( U = 346 ; p = 0 . 0003612 ; at p < 0 , 001 ) . Figure 5 shows the distribution of the submissions from both applications over time . There were a total of 304 submissions from both applica - tions . From which , 44 observations came from the non - gamiﬁed application users ( control group ) and 260 came from the gamiﬁed application users ( experimental group ) . Hence , the submissions from the gamiﬁed application were 71 % higher . This result might be related with the user experience of participants . From the qualitative analysis of comments from participants in the post survey , we found that the par - ticipants who used the non - gamiﬁed application found the application easy to use and useful ( e . g . " It’s easy to use and ﬂexible " ; " Satisfactory and useful for understanding the climate change " ( P15 , P9 ) ) . While , the participants who used the gamiﬁed application found it easy to use , useful , interesting and fun ( e . g . " I found app very easy to use and effective way to get live data from different location . It was fun and a good experience to provide data for such cause . " ; " it was fun and desire to submit observations incentivized me to walk more : So I would say that it is useful not only for lakes , but for people as well . " ; " A great way to study such an important issue . Hopefully this will continue and I would participate also in the future . " ( P20 , P35 , P1 ) ) • Activeness : This indicator refers to the number of partici - pants who were very active using the application during the study . There were 18 participants using the non - gamiﬁed application ( from beginning to end ) , out of which , only three of them were very active users ( submitting observa - tions daily ) corresponding to 17 % of the group population . CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 221 Page 5 Figure5 . SubmittedObservationsperapplicationovertime . On the other hand , among the 20 participants using the gamiﬁed application ( from beginning to end ) , there were 10 very active participants corresponding to the 50 % of its population . • Dropout : The study started with 20 participants using the non - gamiﬁed application . Two of them did not complete the experiment to the end ( dropout = 10 % ) . On the other hand , with the gamiﬁed application , there were 21 partici - pants in the beginning , out of which 1 abandoned the study ( dropout = 5 % ) . This result shows that there were not major differences in the dropout rate between the two applications . User Experience : In this study , the user experience refers to : the submissions completed when the applications were open ( effectiveness ) , the time it took to the participants to understand their applica - tion ( learnability ) and the overall perceptions and satisfaction with their applications usability ( satisfaction ) . The overall results ( see Table 3 ) , show that the effectiveness among the participants who used the gamiﬁed application was twice as high compared to the ones who used the non - gamiﬁed appli - cation . On the other hand , there were no major differences on the learnability and satisfaction indicators between both appli - cations , which mean that participants were satisﬁed with both applications . Given this results , the null hypothesis is kept and the alternative hypothesis is rejected " H2 0 : The use of gami - ﬁed elements in a lake monitoring application produces the same user experience as a with a non - gamiﬁed application " . Each indicator and its results are explained below : • Learnability : This indicator measures the time a participant spends to get familiar with the application . Participants were called to attend a one to one meeting for this pur - pose , the meeting started with an explanation about the experiment purpose and a consent agreement signing . Then , participants were given their corresponding application on a testing device . Each participant would use the application until he / she would feel that has reached an understanding on Table 3 . User Experience Indicators : Results ( where : n ) not signiﬁ - cant , * * ) statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0 . 05 , * * * ) statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0 . 01 , * * * * ) statisticallysigniﬁcantatp < 0 . 001 ) . Indicator Measurment Non - gamiﬁed Jarvida GamiﬁedJarvi Differenceandsig . Effectiveness Submissionsuccessrate 36 % 68 % 32 % * * Learnability Timetolearntousetheapp 166sec 167sec 1sec n Satisfaction Averageeasetousepresurvey 2 , 9 3 0 . 1 n Averageeasetousepostsurvey 3 2 , 8 0 . 2 n Averageusabilitysatisfaction 4 , 4 4 , 2 0 . 2 n how the application works , once that feeling was reached , a voice signal was given to the researcher ( e . g . " I understand the application " ) . Then , the researcher gave a tutorial about the features of the corresponding application and answered questions and comments . The non - gamiﬁed application users spent 166 seconds in average to understand their application during their ﬁrst interaction . In comparison , the participants who used the gamiﬁed application spent 167 seconds in average . Simi - larly , the analysis of the dataset of this indicator shows that the learnability time in the experimental group ( who used the gamiﬁed application ) was similar to the control group ( who used the non - gamiﬁed application ) ( U = 144 . 5 ; p = 0 . 08693 ) . • Effectiveness : This indicator measured the submissions success rate . In this study , the effectiveness ratio was : E f fectiveness ( % ) = TotalSubmissions TimesApplicationOpenx 100 % As it can be seen in Figure 6 ( Where P is a participant ) , the effectiveness in the non - gamiﬁed application was 36 % ( to - tal submissions = 44 ; times the application was open = 122 ) . While the effectiveness in the gamiﬁed application was 68 % ( total submission = 260 ; times the application was open = 381 ) . Hence , the effectiveness was twice higher in the gamiﬁed application compared to the non - gamiﬁed one . Furthermore , the analysis show that the submission effectiveness in the experimental group ( who used the gam - iﬁed application ) was statistically signiﬁcantly higher than the control group ( who used the non - gamiﬁed application ) ( U = 111 ; p = 0 . 009844 ; at p < 0 . 01 ) . Participants were asked in the post survey to detail the major issues they experienced while using their corresponding application . The major reported issue was the reliability , in particular , application crashes and slow map loading . This issues can be observed in the previous calculations from the times the applications were open . This issue is further discussed in the next section . • Satisfaction : This indicator was measured by the rate that participants gave - in a ﬁve step Likert scale - to a list of statements in the pre and post surveys ( from strongly disagree to strongly agree ) . These statements were based on standardized questionnaires from [ 3 , 35 , 62 , 61 ] . CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 221 Page 6 Figure6 . ComparisonofEffectivenessRatesamongParticipants . In the pre survey statements about ease to use from [ 3 ] were included . As it can be seen in Table 4 , participants of both groups perceived their applications equally usable ( as no statistically signiﬁcant difference was found during the analysis ) . Table 4 . Mann - Whitney U test of pre survey ease to use statements ( where : n ) not signiﬁcant , * * ) statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0 . 05 , * * * ) sta - tisticallysigniﬁcantatp < 0 . 01 , * * * * ) statisticallysigniﬁcantatp < 0 . 001 ) . Statements U p - value Signiﬁcance I think that I would like to use this system frequently 183 0 . 6394 n I found the system unnecessarily complex 186 0 . 6786 n I thought the system was easy to use 204 0 . 9024 n I would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly 247 0 . 1492 n I found the system very hard to use 203 0 . 9210 n I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system 171 0 . 3582 n In the post survey , the same statements about ease to use from [ 3 ] were included and a statement about usability satis - faction [ 35 ] was added . Table5 presents the obtained results . Alike the pre survey ( Table 4 ) , both groups perceived their applications equally usable ( as no statistically signiﬁcant difference was found during the analysis ) . This is also the case for the overall satisfaction ( U = 158 ; p = 0 . 4889 ) . Gamiﬁcation Findings Below we present the gamiﬁcation related results from the study post survey : • Gamiﬁcation Mechanisms : Participants who used the gam - iﬁed application were asked to rank statements ( from 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree , in a ﬁve Likert scale ) about their experiences with each gamiﬁed mechanism in the post survey . The result show that the statements were ranked in the following order : 1 . Seeing my name in the leaderboard motivated me to submit more observations ( 3 . 4 ) Table 5 . Mann - Whitney U test of post survey ease to use and usability satisfaction statements ( where : n ) not signiﬁcant , * * ) statistically signif - icant at p < 0 . 05 , * * * ) statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0 . 01 , * * * * ) statistically signiﬁcantatp < 0 . 001 ) . Statements U p - value Signiﬁcance I think that I would like to use this system frequently 132 . 5 0 . 142 n I found the system unnecessarily complex 181 0 . 987 n I thought the system was easy to use 144 . 5 0 . 2484 n I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use this system 159 0 . 2597 n I would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly 157 0 . 4533 n I found the system very clumsy or difﬁcult to use 197 0 . 5877 n I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system 140 0 . 1464 n I ﬁnd it easy to get the system to do what I want it to do 166 0 . 6701 n Ov erall , I am satisﬁed with how easy it was to use the system 158 0 . 4889 n 2 . I followed my progress on the activity tab ( 3 . 2 ) 3 . I learned about global warming with the storyboard ( 2 . 9 ) 4 . Seeing my points reduced motivated me to submit new observations ( 2 . 9 ) 5 . I achieved my challenge of submitting 20 observations in 20 days ( 2 . 4 ) The qualitative data shows that participants paid particular attention to features such as points , leaderboard and the story . We found qualitative evidence that some participants tracked their points and reported issues they considered rele - vant such as : " didn’t limit observations or daily point " ( P18 ) or " I didn’t see that any points would have been taken from me on those days that I did submit a pic " ( P1 ) . Also , the leaderboard appeared to be a popular feature , during the study the researchers observed that some participants no - ticedthepresenceofsomeoftheirfriendsintheleaderboard . This triggered a healthy social competition . A participant who was involved in this sort competition pointed out that " it was fun and desire to submit observations incentivized me to walk more , So I would say that it is useful not only for lakes , but for people as well " ( P35 ) . Finally , the story mechanism seems to be an effective mean to raise aware - ness . Jarvigo participants read the task context from the story , our qualitative analysis of their post survey comments show that they considered lakes monitoring an important issue that needs monitoring ( " A great way to study such an important issue " ( P1 ) , " I think that measuring ice thick - ness would be useful for monitoring " ( P35 ) , " It was fun and a good experience to provide data for such cause " ( P20 ) ) . Also , participants were critic about the quality of their ob - servations for monitoring ( " I noticed I took many pictures of interesting rather than representative ice conditions , eg CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 221 Page 7 small area with no ice when the whole lake was otherwise frozen " ( P24 ) ) . • Enjoyment : In the post survey , statements about enjoyment from [ 62 ] were included . Table 6 presents the obtained results . Both groups perceived their applications equal in terms of : being a good idea , interesting , liking to use the applications , enjoyable and pleasant . However , the analysis show that the experimental group ( who used the gamiﬁed application ) had a slight higher perception of fun ( U = 197 ; p = 0 . 09659 ; at p < 0 . 1 ) than the control group ( who used the non - gamiﬁed application ) . This small difference in perception also arose in the qual - itative analysis . Where , Jarvigo participants reported that they found this application interesting , effective , fun and likeable ( " It was very interesting to participate in to this project " ( P16 ) , " effective way to get live data from different location " ( P20 ) , " Otherwise it was fun and desire to submit observations incentivized me to walk more " ( P35 ) , " Gen - erally I like the idea and the app " ( P35 ) ) . In contrast the Jarvida participants , found their application only interest - ing and relevant ( " Good idea and an important subject to study " ( P7 ) , " Good quest and raising awareness " ( P11 ) , " useful for understanding the climate change " ( P9 ) , " I think the idea of using the application for the lake monitoring is interesting and could make some help . And the society in general would be happy to assist " ( P23 ) ) . Also , in terms of motivation we noticed a inner motivated participant in Jarvigo who highlighted an interest in participating in future environmental sensing studies ( " Hopefully this will continue and I would participate also in the future " ( P1 ) ) . On the other hand , a Jarvida participant highlighted a lack of mo - tivation ( " I had some lack of motivation in the sense that I didn’t feel how pictures from my phone could help in lake condition monitoring " ( P23 ) ) . This puts in evidence a fun - damental challenge for participatory sensing , inner human motivation . The inner motivation or lack of it has a great role onto the behavior of participants . A participant who already has an inner motivation will see it increased by the use of this mechanisms . On the other hand a participant who lacks of it can experience an opposite effect . Table 6 . Mann - Whitney U test of post survey enjoyment statements ( where : n ) not signiﬁcant , * * ) statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0 . 05 , * * * ) sta - tisticallysigniﬁcantatp < 0 . 01 , * * * * ) statisticallysigniﬁcantatp < 0 . 001 ) . Statements U p - value Signiﬁcance Using the mobile software for measurement is a good idea 166 . 5 0 . 6648 n The program makes measuring tasks more interesting 197 0 . 6027 n Working with the program is fun 233 . 5 0 . 09659 n I like using the program to measure lakes 189 0 . 7904 n I found using the system to be enjoyable 186 0 . 8642 n The actual process of using the system is pleasant 171 . 5 0 . 8031 n • Playfulness : In the post survey , statements about playful - ness from [ 61 ] were included . Participants were asked to characterize themselves when they use their corresponding application ( " How would you characterize yourself when you used the system ? " ) . The results show ( Fig 7 ) that the participants who used the non - gamiﬁed application would characterize themselves mainly as ﬂexible , spontaneous and creative . On the other hand , the participants who used the gamiﬁed application would characterize themselves mainly as spontaneous , ﬂexible and playful . Figure7 . ApplicationPlayfulnessPerceivedbyParticipants . Summary and Reﬂection In summary , through our study we ﬁnd that the gamiﬁed fea - tures of the app increased participants’ submissions without affecting the perceived usability of the application . Perception of user experience vs . actual user behavior One of the most interesting results of this study is that per - ceived user experience and engagement did not vary between the test groups , however the test shows that the actual engage - ment ( in terms of participants’ submission ) did vary . Self - reporting survey are a popular in research and several engage - ment scales have previously been successfully validated [ 65 , 55 ] . However , in our study , the actual logging data tells a different story to the results collected from our self - reporting survey - this is in line with Moller et al . ﬁndings [ 41 ] . Gamiﬁcation literature suggests that effective gamiﬁcation in - volves leveraging on the game elements to foster users’ three innate needs for intrinsic motivation 11 [ 52 ] , originally adapted from Deci and Ryan’s self - determination theory ( SDT ) [ 9 ] . These principles were used to foster internal motivation in the application in regard to relatedness , competence , and auton - omy . Observed impact of gamiﬁcation onto engagement Gamiﬁcation depends on speciﬁc mixture and preparation of a system , which cannot be deconstructed by pieces and thus measured individually . Gamiﬁcation is about " experiences , not elements " [ 10 ] . A game - like system has to be fun and there is a limit to deconstruction until the individual elements stop being engaging [ 10 , 34 ] . Prior work in the ﬁeld of par - ticipatory sensing and HCI [ 39 , 46 ] have studied single game features such as the leaderboard , using also an experimental approach . The ﬁndings in this study bring insights about the 11 Intrinsic motivation in gamiﬁcation literature ; autonomous motiva - tion in self - determination theory literature CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 221 Page 8 effect of gamiﬁcation as a bundle of features onto human en - gagement . This reﬂects that there is no plug and play solution to engage humans into environmental sensing . Hence , gamiﬁ - cation design should move from stimulus - effect determinism to providing fun , engaging and playful experiences [ 10 ] . Design Reﬂections Our study provides new insights into the use of gamiﬁcation to enhance human engagement and user experience in participa - tory sensing systems for environmental monitoring . Based on our ﬁndings we suggest the following design considerations for future PS developments : • Support personalized notiﬁcation triggers : While some participants appreciate to not be hassled with notiﬁcations , others need notiﬁcations to remind them to submit obser - vations " The app could send reminds for us to use it more often " ( P2 ) , " Sometimes you need to have a reminder for submitting an observation , because it is easy to forget ! " ( P5 ) . The amount of notiﬁcations a participant can consider appropriate may change from person to person . Thus , PS should embedded mechanisms such as sliders to allow par - ticipants to adjust how often they wish to receive reminders . • Support customizable challenges to avoid negative feed - back ( e . g . discouragement ) triggered from the lack of achievement : Competition tends to encourage those on top of the leaderboard but , it can demotivate those who are not among the top [ 39 ] . A participant who ranked among the top in the jarvigo said that " it was fun and desire to submit observations incentivized me to walk more " ( P35 ) . On the other hand , there were participants whose lifestyle limited the amount of time they could spent using the ap - plication , they reported this limitation as a major issue " I wasn’t visiting the lake so often . " ( P2 ) " Perhaps the major issue was trying to use Jarvi more often , especially when walking near Lakes . Unfortunately , I didn’t spent much time near the Lake due to busy schedule " ( P38 ) . Mecha - nisms that allow the customization of the challenges ( e . g . choose a challenge ) and the leaderboards ( e . g . choose with whom to compete or weekly resets ) with the lifestyles of the participants could result into effective mechanisms for motivation . • Support social interaction between users : A number of participants were motivated by competing with other par - ticipants they knew beforehand . This triggered social in - teractions in person between the participants . Applications such as Pokemon GO provide opportunities for their players to meet and tackle challenges together ( e . g . raid battles ) . The sense of community is important in PS and support - ing social interaction beyond likes is a promising path that requires further research . • Allow users to explore submitted data : A number of par - ticipants were interested in seeing the photos recorded by other participants " Would have been nice to see the pic - tures of other people what they submitted . " ( P3 ) , " I Would have liked to get access to my own photos - and others’ as well . " ( P19 ) . This supports the previous design considera - tion related to social interaction . Participants do their bit but also want to be part of a community and see what others are doing , applications such as Instagram have designed simple mechanisms to have such interaction . Hence , opening the submitted data to the participants could strengthen the sense of purpose by allowing participants to see the effect and reach of their submissions . • Enhance indoor experiences : Going out to nature is part of the " fun " of contributing with an environmental PS ini - tiative " I like going to nature " ( P3 ) . However , ways to contribute indoors should be enhanced as well , so that par - ticipants can contribute even if they cannot go outdoors during a certain period of time ( e . g . weather conditions " It was a bit uncomfortable to use the app in cold conditions " ( P24 ) ) . This would enhance the feelings of competence and achievement . Applications such as Galaxy Zoo are built around indoor experiences , where participants perform classiﬁcation tasks at their computers . • Support interactive feedback : Several participants sug - gested new features and improvements to the current sys - tem via the surveys ; Maybe instead of google maps it would more reliable and robust to just have a static map like pic - ture with some coordinates system on it " ( P28 ) , " suggestion is to provide some lighter version of the application , espe - cially for slow connection internet " ( P32 ) , " In my opinion , the steps of adding new spot and then adding ice informa - tion to that spot could integrated into one step . Also , there could be some note that you can use the same spot for mul - tiple times to record observations . " ( P33 ) . This comments unveil an opportunity to involve the participants as a co - creators . This behavior needs to be enhanced via design mechanisms that encourage feedback and co - creation from participants . LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK Limitations The ﬁrst limitation of this study is its short duration which was not enough to explore how participants’ behavior change over time . However , this was out of scope of this study . Although some insight about the individual effect of each gamiﬁcation feature onto engagement was illustrated using the qualitative data collected via surveys . This analysis is limited by the current study data ( which is mainly quantitative ) and could be improved by more usage data statistics in future studies . Another limitation is the unfamiliarity of few participants with Android devices , as the developed sensing applications were only available for iOS and Android . As a result , six participants received devices with their respective sensing application installed for the time of the study . This might have had an effect on the learnability measure , because the participants had to learn to use a new device on top of learning how to use the application . Future Work Participatory Sensing faces several challenges including pri - vacy and security concerns , data quality and standardization . Yet , participation is fundamental to capture contextual local CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 221 Page 9 knowledge about patterns that often are ignored in bigger scales . Some studies have already looked into what motivates people to get involved in participatory sensing projects [ 19 , 15 ] . However , it still remains unanswered how could the effect of ICT on engagement be scaled up to larger time spans , and how PS could be used to engage citizens as designers and innovators . Following this study , we will design an action research intervention to explore the participants’ engagement over a longer period of time . This subsequent study will ex - plore whether co - creation as a design approach enhances both the feeling and perception of engagement , and longer - term effects [ 51 ] . CONCLUSIONS In this work , we present the results from an experimental user study that explored the impact of gamiﬁcation on engagement and user experience . We designed , deployed and evaluated two environmental sensing applications ( one gamiﬁed and one non - gamiﬁed ) via a 20 days experiment with volunteers . We found that gamiﬁcation affected the participants’ engagement in a positive way ( producing more submissions ) , without im - proving nor compromising their user experience . This led us to think that in order to produce human engagement , alter - ing interfaces is not enough . This supports the review results of Nacke et al . [ 44 ] that adding simple visual manifestation of gamiﬁcation elements or deterministic mechanics to the interface is not enough without considering other aspects of engagement . Deterding et al . propose [ 10 ] that gamiﬁed moti - vation design should move from stimulus - effect determinism to providing fun , engaging and playful experiences . Our par - ticipants mentioned " proving data for a good cause " , " I like going out to nature " and " it is useful not only for lakes , but for people as well " as motivating factors . This leads us to con - clude that the gamiﬁcation design for environmental sensing had a positive effect on participants’ engagement . Even when the underlying technology is still evolving , par - ticipatory sensing has already shown its great potential , not only as a tool for citizens’ collecting data but also as a vehicle for engaging a large public community in solving social and environmental challenges . These systems have the potential to close the gaps among researchers , environmental experts , decision - makers , and the people , while collecting data and building a whole new level of services ( from the people , for the people ) . However , the success of participatory sensing relies heavily on continuous citizen participation and the com - putational capacity to extract patterns from the data being collected . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank all the study participants for their time and dedica - tion . Also , we would like to thank the ﬁnancial and academic support of the following organizations : the European Eras - mus Mundus programme PERCCOM : Pervasive Computing and COMmunications for sustainable development , the Ulla Tuominen foundation , the UKRC grant n . EP / P002285 / 1 and the M . McLuhan Centenary Fellowship in Digital Sustainabil - ity , DCI , iSchool , University of Toronto . REFERENCES 1 . Mariam Asad , Christopher A Le Dantec , Becky Nielsen , and Kate Diedrick . 2017 . Creating a Sociotechnical API : Designing City - Scale Community Engagement . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2295 – 2306 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 3025963 2 . Rick Bonney , Caren b Cooper , Janis Dickinson , Steve Kelling , Tina Phillips , Kenneth V Rosenberg , and Jennifer Shirk . 2009 . Citizen Science : A Developing Tool for Expanding Science Knowledge and Scientiﬁc Literacy . BioScience 59 , 11 ( 2009 ) , 977 – 984 . http : / / bioscience . oxfordjournals . org / content / 59 / 11 / 977 . short 3 . John Brooke and others . 1996 . SUS - A quick and dirty usability scale . Usability evaluation in industry 189 , 194 ( 1996 ) , 4 – 7 . 4 . G Brundtland , M Khalid , S Agnelli , S Al - Athel , B Chidzero , L Fadika , V Hauff , I Lang , M Shijun , M . M de Botero , and M Singh . 1987 . Our Common Future . Technical Report . 300 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07488008808408783 5 . Jeffrey A Burke , D Estrin , Mark Hansen , Andrew Parker , Nithya Ramanathan , Sasank Reddy , and Mani B Srivastava . 2006 . Participatory sensing . In WSW’06 at SenSys ’06 . ACM , Colorado , USA . http : / / sensys . acm . org / 2006 / 6 . Alan Chamberlain , Mark Paxton , Kevin Glover , Martin Flintham , Dominic Price , Chris Greenhalgh , Steve Benford , Peter Tolmie , Eiman Kanjo , Amanda Gower , Andy Gower , Dawn Woodgate , and Danaë Stanton Fraser . 2013 . Understanding mass participatory pervasive computing systems for environmental campaigns . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing ( 2013 ) , 1 – 18 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 013 - 0756 - x 7 . Jason Chilvers , Irene Lorenzoni , Geraldine Terry , Paul Buckley , John K Pinnegar , and Stefan Gelcich . 2014 . Public engagement with marine climate change issues : ( Re ) framings , understandings and responses . Global Environmental Change 29 ( 2014 ) , 165 – 179 . 8 . Seth Cooper , Firas Khatib , Adrien Treuille , Janos Barbero , Jeehyung Lee , Michael Beenen , Andrew Leaver - Fay , David Baker , Zoran Popovi´c , and others . 2010 . Predicting protein structures with a multiplayer online game . Nature 466 , 7307 ( 2010 ) , 756 – 760 . 9 . Edward L . Deci and Richard M . Ryan . 2012 . Motivation , personality , and development within embedded social contexts : An overview of self - determination theory . The Oxford handbook of human motivation ( 2012 ) , 85 – 107 . 10 . Sebastian Deterding . 2014 . Eudaimonic Design , or : Six Invitations to Rethink Gamiﬁcation . SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2466374 . Social Science Research Network , Rochester , NY . https : / / papers . ssrn . com / abstract = 2466374 11 . Sebastian Deterding , Dan Dixon , Rilla Khaled , and Lennart Nacke . 2011 . From Game Design Elements to CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 221 Page 10 Gamefulness : Deﬁning " Gamiﬁcation " . In Proceedings of the 15th International Academic MindTrek Conference : Envisioning Future Media Environments ( MindTrek ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 9 – 15 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2181037 . 2181040 12 . Darina Dicheva , Christo Dichev , Gennady Agre , and Galia Angelova . 2015 . Gamiﬁcation in education : A systematic mapping study . Educational Technology & Society 18 , 3 ( 2015 ) , 75 – 88 . 13 . Janis L . Dickinson , Jennifer Shirk , David Bonter , Rick Bonney , Rhiannon L . Crain , Jason Martin , Tina Phillips , and Karen Purcell . 2012 . The current state of citizen science as a tool for ecological research and public engagement . Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 10 , 6 ( 2012 ) , 291 – 297 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1890 / 110236 14 . Sheena Erete and Jennifer O Burrell . 2017 . Empowered Participation : How Citizens Use Technology in Local Governance . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2307 – 2319 . 15 . Enrique Estelles - Arolas and Fernando Gonzalez - Ladron - de Guevara . 2012 . Towards an integrated crowdsourcing deﬁnition . Journal of Information Science 38 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 189 – 200 . http : / / jis . sagepub . com / content / 38 / 2 / 189 . full . pdf + html 16 . Deborah Estrin , K Mani Chandy , R Michael Young , Larry Smarr , Andrew Odlyzko , David Clark , Viviane Reding , Toru Ishida , Sharad Sharma , Vinton G Cerf , and others . 2010 . Participatory sensing : applications and architecture [ internet predictions ] . IEEE Internet Computing 14 , 1 ( 2010 ) , 12 – 42 . 17 . Derek Foster , Mark Blythe , Paul Cairns , and Shaun Lawson . 2010 . Competitive carbon counting : can social networking sites make saving energy more enjoyable ? . In CHI’10 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 4039 – 4044 . 18 . Jon Froehlich , Tawanna Dillahunt , Predrag Klasnja , Jennifer Mankoff , Sunny Consolvo , Beverly Harrison , and James A Landay . 2009 . UbiGreen : investigating a mobile tool for tracking and supporting green transportation habits . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1043 – 1052 . 19 . Mohammad Gharesifard and Uta Wehn . 2016 . To share or not to share : Drivers and barriers for sharing data via online amateur weather networks . Journal of Hydrology 535 ( 2016 ) , 181 – 190 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jhydrol . 2016 . 01 . 036 20 . Benjamin Gnauk , Lars Dannecker , and Martin Hahmann . 2012 . Leveraging gamiﬁcation in demand dispatch systems . In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint EDBT / ICDT workshops . ACM , 103 – 110 . 21 . Jeffrey Goldman , Katie Shilton , Jeff Burke , Deborah Estrin , Mark Hansen , Nithya Ramanathan , Sasank Reddy , and Vids Samanta . 2009 . Participatory Sensing : A citizen - powered approach to illuminating the patterns that shape our world . Technical Report May . UCLA’s Center for Embedded Networked Sensing . 22 . Connie Golsteijn , Sarah Gallacher , Licia Capra , and Yvonne Rogers . 2016 . Sens - Us : Designing Innovative Civic Technology for the Public Good . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . ACM , 39 – 49 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2901877 23 . J . Hamari , J . Koivisto , and H . Sarsa . 2014 . Does Gamiﬁcation Work ? – A Literature Review of Empirical Studies on Gamiﬁcation . In 2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ) . 3025 – 3034 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 2014 . 377 24 . Eric Hand . 2010 . People Power . Nature 466 , 5 ( 2010 ) , 685 – 687 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / news . 2010 . 106 25 . Mike Harding , Bran Knowles , Nigel Davies , and Mark Rounceﬁeld . 2015 . HCI , Civic Engagement & Trust . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2833 – 2842 . 26 . Mike Hazas and James Scott . 2012 . Sustainability Does Not Begin with the Individual . Interactions 19 , 5 ( 2012 ) , 14 – 17 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2334189 27 . Scott Heggen . 2013 . Participatory sensing : repurposing a scientiﬁc tool for STEM education . interactions 20 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 18 – 21 . 28 . Mike Hulme . 2010 . Problems with making and governing global kinds of knowledge . Global Environmental Change 20 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 558 – 564 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . gloenvcha . 2010 . 07 . 005 29 . Kai Huotari and Juho Hamari . 2012 . Deﬁning Gamiﬁcation : A Service Marketing Perspective . In Proceeding of the 16th International Academic MindTrek Conference ( MindTrek ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 17 – 22 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2393132 . 2393137 30 . Bran Knowles . 2013 . Re - Imagining Persuasion : Designing for Self - Transcendence . ( 2013 ) . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2479498 31 . Bran Knowles , Lynne Blair , Paul Coulton , and Mark Lochrie . 2014 . Rethinking Plan A for Sustainable HCI . In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems . ACM , 3593 – 3596 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2557311 32 . Bran Knowles and Janet Davis . 2017 . Is Sustainability a Special Case for Persuasion ? Interacting with Computers 29 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 58 – 70 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / iwc / iww005 33 . Johanna Korhonen and Eliisa Haavanlammi . 2012 . Hydrologinen vuosikirja 2006 – 2010 / Hydrological Yearbook 2006 – 2010 . ( 2012 ) . CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 221 Page 11 34 . Raph Koster . 2013 . Theory of fun for game design . " O’Reilly Media , Inc . " . 35 . James R . Lewis . 1995 . IBM computer usability satisfaction questionnaires : psychometric evaluation and instructions for use . International Journal of Human - Computer Interaction 7 , 1 ( 1995 ) , 57 – 78 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447319509526110 36 . Yefeng Liu , Todorka Alexandrova , and Tatsuo Nakajima . 2011 . Gamifying intelligent environments . In Proceedings of the 2011 international ACM workshop on Ubiquitous meta user interfaces . ACM , 7 – 12 . 37 . John Markoff . 2010 . In a Video Game , Tackling the Complexities of Protein Folding . ( 2010 ) . http : / / www . nytimes . com / 2010 / 08 / 05 / science / 05protein . html 38 . Aaron D Mason , Georgios Michalakidis , and Paul J Krause . 2012 . Tiger nation : Empowering citizen scientists . In Digital Ecosystems Technologies ( DEST ) , 2012 6th IEEE International Conference on . IEEE , 1 – 5 . 39 . Elaine Massung , David Coyle , Kirsten F Cater , Marc Jay , and Chris Preist . 2013 . Using crowdsourcing to support pro - environmental community activism . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 371 – 380 . 40 . Tanushree Mitra , Clayton J Hutto , and Eric Gilbert . 2015 . Comparing person - and process - centric strategies for obtaining quality data on amazon mechanical turk . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1345 – 1354 . 41 . Andreas Möller , Matthias Kranz , Barbara Schmid , Luis Roalter , and Stefan Diewald . 2013 . Investigating self - reporting behavior in long - term studies . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2931 – 2940 . 42 . B . Morschheuser , J . Hamari , and J . Koivisto . 2016 . Gamiﬁcation in Crowdsourcing : A Review . In 2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ) . 4375 – 4384 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 2016 . 543 43 . Lennart E . Nacke and Sebastian Deterding . 2017a . The maturing of gamiﬁcation research . Computers in Human Behavior 71 ( June 2017 ) , 450 – 454 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2016 . 11 . 062 44 . Lennart E . Nacke and Sebastian Deterding . 2017b . The maturing of gamiﬁcation research . Computers in Human Behavior 71 , Supplement C ( 2017 ) , 450 – 454 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2016 . 11 . 062 45 . Timothy Nyerges , Michael Barndt , and Kerry Brooks . 2006 . Public Participation Geographic Information Systems . Annals of the Association of American Geographers Volume 96 , Smith ( 2006 ) , 224 – 233 . 46 . Chris Preist , Elaine Massung , and David Coyle . 2014 . Competing or aiming to be average ? : normiﬁcation as a means of engaging digital volunteers . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing . ACM , 1222 – 1233 . 47 . Mark S Reed . 2008 . Stakeholder participation for environmental management : A literature review . 1 ( 2008 ) . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biocon . 2008 . 07 . 014 48 . Andrew Rollings and Ernest ( Ernest W . ) Adams . 2003 . Andrew Rollings and Ernest Adams on game design . New Riders . 621 pages . 49 . Joel Ross . 2011 . Pervasive Negabehavior Games for Environmental Sustainability . In CHI’11 . ACM , Vancouver , 1085 – 1088 . 50 . Sonia Royo , Ana Yetano , and Basilio Acerete . 2011 . E - participation and climate change : Are local governments actively promoting responsible behaviors and offering opportunities for citizen involvement ? Proceedings of the Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( 2011 ) , 2462 – 2471 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 2012 . 248 51 . Elizabeth B - N Sanders and Pieter Jan Stappers . 2008 . Co - creation and the new landscapes of design . Co - design 4 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 5 – 18 . 52 . Katie Seaborn and Deborah I . Fels . 2015 . Gamiﬁcation in theory and action : A survey . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 74 ( Feb . 2015 ) , 14 – 31 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2014 . 09 . 006 53 . Six Silberman , Eli Blevis , Elaine Huang , Bonnie Nardi , Lisa Nathan , Daniela Busse , Chris Preist , and Samuel Mann . 2014 . What Have We Learned ? A SIGCHI HCI & Sustainability Workshop . In CHI’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 143 – 146 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2559238 54 . Yolande Strengers . 2014 . Smart energy in everyday life : Are you designing for resource man ? Interactions 21 , 4 ( 2014 ) , 24 – 31 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2621931 55 . Sonia Talwar , Arnim Wiek , and John Robinson . 2011 . User engagement in sustainability research . Science and Public Policy 38 , 5 ( 2011 ) , 379 – 390 . 56 . UNECE . 1998 . Aarhus Convention : Convention on Access to Information , Public Participation in Decision - making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters . Aarus Convention June ( 1998 ) , 25 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511494345 . 010 57 . United Nations . 1992a . Agenda 21 . In United Nations Conference on Environment & Development Rio de Janerio . 351 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11671 - 008 - 9208 - 3 58 . United Nations . 1992b . RIO DECLARATION ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT . ( 1992 ) . http : / / www . un . org / documents / ga / conf151 / aconf15126 - 1annex1 . htm CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 221 Page 12 59 . University of Washington . 2014 . Foldit game engages the public in research . ( 2014 ) . https : / / www . engr . washington . edu / news / trend / aut10 60 . Rob van Roy and Bieke Zaman . 2015 . Moving Beyond the Effectiveness of Gamiﬁcation . In CHI ’15 workshop ‘Researching Gamiﬁcation : Strategies , Opportunities , Challenges , Ethics’ . Seoul , South Korea . 61 . Viswanath Venkatesh . 2000 . Determinants of perceived ease of use : Integrating control , intrinsic motivation , and emotion into the technology acceptance model . Information systems research 11 , 4 ( 2000 ) , 342 – 365 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 11 . 4 . 342 . 11872 62 . Viswanath Venkatesh , Michael G . Morris , Gordon B . Davis , and Fred D . Davis . 2003 . User Acceptance of Information Technology : Toward a Uniﬁed View . MIS Quarterly 27 , 3 ( 2003 ) , 425 – 478 . 63 . Vasilis Vlachokyriakos , Eric Gordon , Clara Crivellaro , Pete Wright , Christopher Le Dantec , and Patrick Olivier . 2016 . Digital civics : Citizen empowerment with and through technology . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI conference extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems . ACM , San Jose , CA , 1096 – 1099 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2886436 64 . Uta Wehn , Maria Rusca , Jaap Evers , and Vitavesca Lanfranchi . 2015 . Participation in ﬂood risk management and the potential of citizen observatories : A governance analysis . Environmental Science & Policy 48 ( 2015 ) , 225 – 236 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . envsci . 2014 . 12 . 017 65 . Eric N Wiebe , Allison Lamb , Megan Hardy , and David Sharek . 2014 . Measuring engagement in video game - based environments : Investigation of the User Engagement Scale . Computers in Human Behavior 32 ( 2014 ) , 123 – 132 . 66 . Maximilian Witt , Christian Scheiner , and Susanne Robra - Bissantz . 2011 . Gamiﬁcation of online idea competitions : Insights from an explorative case . Informatik schafft Communities 192 ( 2011 ) . 67 . Claes Wohlin , Per Runeson , Martin Höst , Magnus C Ohlsson , Björn Regnell , and Anders Wesslén . 2012 . Experimentation in software engineering . Springer Science & Business Media . 68 . Gabe Zichermann and Christopher . Cunningham . 2011 . Gamiﬁcation by design : implementing game mechanics in web and mobile apps . O’Reilly Media . 182 pages . CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 221 Page 13 Publication III Palacin , V . , Gilbert , S . , Orchard , S . , Eaton , A . , Ferrario , M . A . and Happonen , A . Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science : Case Studies on J¨arviwiki and Safecast Reprinted from Citizen Science : Theory and Practice Vol . 5 ( 1 ) , No . 22 , Pages 1 - 20 , 2020 c (cid:13) 2020 , The Author ( s ) . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License ( CC - BY 4 . 0 ) . Introduction Technology enables public participation ( Rotman et al . 2014a ; Ruge 2015 ) , by helping people to engage in projects that serve a breadth of purposes , in contexts such as open governance , community action , and participatory science . Participatory science has enjoyed considerable success through a wide variety of projects , from classifying galaxies in Galaxy Zoo , to protein folding in the game FoldIt , and the Audubon Society’s Christmas bird count , which has been running for a century . Digital citizen science projects such as these are playing an increasingly important role in scientific progress by raising public awareness , helping fos - ter informed decision - making , and supporting communal data literacy projects ( Balestrini et al . 2015 ) . In this work , we focus on digital citizen science plat - forms for environmental monitoring . These platforms are designed to support people - driven data collection of meaningful , geospatial data via mobile devices ( Burke et al . 2006 ; Goldman et al . 2009 ; Ganti et al . 2011 ; Guo et al . 2014 ) . These technologies have become widely popular in the last decade across the world ( Ruge 2015 ) , with digital citizen science platforms like Safecast and eBird engaging millions of people in observing environmental phenom - ena . Digital citizen science , however , faces numerous chal - lenges including privacy and security concerns ( Christin et al . 2011 ; Krontiris et al . 2014 ) , data quality and interoper - ability issues ( Loss et al . 2015 ; Foody et al . 2017 ) , lack of reusable development methods and frameworks ( Heggen 2013 ; Zaman and De Meuter 2015 ) , and a need for sus - tained participation ( Foody et al . 2017 ; Jennett and Cox 2018 ; Orchard 2018 ) . This last challenge is pivotal because without participation , these projects cannot exist . This has motivated numerous studies in digital citizen science to identify and report the motivations of partici - pants from interviews and surveys ( Rotman et al . 2012 ; Iacovides et al . 2013 ; Reed et al . 2013 ; Curtis 2015 ; Jennett and Cox 2018 ; Orchard 2018 ) . Also , scholars in the partici - patory sensing field have approached the study of partici - pation by designing reward - centric incentive mechanisms aimed at enhancing volunteers’ engagement ( Jaimes et al . 2015 ; Restuccia et al . 2016 ) . Despite these efforts , we still have little knowledge about how social and psychological factors can affect participatory behaviors that are funda - mental to the success of digital citizen science platforms ( Foody et al . 2017 ; Jennett and Cox 2018 ) . Palacin , V , et al . 2020 . Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science : Case Studies on Järviwiki and Safecast . Citizen Science : Theory and Practice , 5 ( 1 ) : 22 , pp . 1 – 20 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5334 / cstp . 290 CASE STUDIES Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science : Case Studies on Järviwiki and Safecast Victoria Palacin * , † , Sarah Gilbert ‡ , Shane Orchard § , Angela Eaton ‖ , Maria Angela Ferrario ¶ and Ari Happonen * Digital citizen science platforms are prominent examples of modern volunteerism that provide people with opportunities to observe natural phenomena and to engage in scientific processes . In this study , we explore the values and motivations underlying sustained participation in digital citizen science projects through the lenses of two social psychology theories ( Schwartz’s Human Values Theory and Self - Deter - mination Theory ) . We present in - depth analyses of interviews with 15 long - term volunteers in two digital citizen science initiatives ( Järviwiki and Safecast ) that have been collecting environmental data for a decade in Finland and Japan . Our results advance the understanding of the values underpinning motiva - tions . Our analyses show that openness - to - change values , such as self - direction , are important for initial participation , yet a diverse range of values , except for power , play a role in sustaining participation . Our study also shows that the values related to sustained participation are linked with extrinsic motivations , suggesting that when extrinsic motivators are self - directed , people will not only perform tasks willingly and enthusiastically but also in a sustained manner . Conceptualizing the behavioral continuum that drives volunteering actions provides practical insights that can assist the design , development , and evaluation of digital citizen science platforms . Keywords : digital citizen science ; human values ; motivation ; incentive mechanisms ; Safecast ; Järviwiki * LUT University , FI † MIT Center for Civic Media , US ‡ University of Maryland , US § University of Canterbury , NZ ‖ Safecast , US ¶ Lancaster University , GB Corresponding author : Victoria Palacin ( victoria . palacin @ lut . fi ) Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 2 of 20 Currently , there is a need to understand a ) how volun - teering behaviors ( actions ) in digital citizen science relate to behavioral drivers ( Jennett and Cox 2018 ; Palacin - Silva et al . 2018 ) and b ) the effect of temporal factors on these volunteering behaviors ( Rotman et al . 2012 ; Rotman et al . 2014b ) . It is not possible to study volunteering behav - iors ( actions ) or motivations alone without understand - ing the values that drive them ( Knowles 2013 ) . To learn more about what drives initial and sustained participa - tion we used two meta - theories from social psychology , Schwartz’s Human Values Theory ( Schwartz 2012 ) and Self - Determination Theory ( SDT ) ( Ryan and Deci 2000b ) , to explore volunteering dynamics in two digital citizen sci - ence cases . Schwartz’s Human Values Theory is an estab - lished theory in social psychology that seeks to measure universal values ( Schwartz 2006 ) , which are understood to be one of the drivers of individual action through their effect on people’s attitudes , emotions , and behav - iors across time and situations ( Maio 2016 , pp . 51 – 126 ) . This theory has been shown to be predictive of participa - tion decisions in online contexts ( Hsieh et al . 2013 ) and has been validated in several domains and dozens of dif - ferent countries ( Maio 2016 , pp . 53 – 59 ) SDT ( Ryan and Deci 2000b ) is a theory of motivation that addresses the source of underlying needs that give rise to activity , such as autonomy ( control over one’s goals and actions ) , com - petence ( sense of mastery at tasks and / or new learning ) , and relatedness ( experiencing a sense of social belonging ) . An advantage of SDT is that these needs are reported to be innate and universal , making the theory useful for under - standing motivations in a wide variety of contexts . In this study , we acknowledge the feedback relationship between actions , motivations , and values ( Knowles 2013 , p . 103 ; Maio 2016 ; Hanel et al . 2017 ; Palacin - Silva , 2018 , p . 4 ) . Our study helps to advance understanding of the values and motivations that drive participation in digital citizen science . Conceptualizing the behavioral continuum that drives volunteering actions can provide practical insights to inform digital citizen science design , guide the design of incentive mechanisms , map volunteer experiences , and evaluate and test technological platforms . We build on existing work on participation in digital citizen science platforms ( Balestrini et al . 2015 ; Jennett and Cox 2018 ) by presenting in - depth analyses of two case studies that have successfully engaged volunteers in Finland and Japan : Järviwiki , which is an environmental observatory main - tained by the Finnish government in which volunteers log information about the state of lakes and water bodies across Finland ; and Safecast , which is a Japanese volun - teer - run initiative , started in response to the Fukushima power plant disaster , in which participants collect data about radiation by carrying Geiger devices . These cases are particularly interesting for two reasons : first , they have engaged volunteers for more than a decade in environ - mental monitoring ; and second , they have collected the largest environmental datasets about the phenomena they monitor in the countries where they were launched . To better understand the success of these projects , we interviewed 15 long - term volunteers from Safecast and Järviwiki and conducted thematic analyses to map values and motivations that relate to participation . This paper begins with an overview of the two digital citizen science projects . We then review related work in the field and the two theoretical constructs that guide our analysis . The results are organized by each of the three research questions , identifying the underlying motiva - tions , values , and associations between them in the two case studies . Finally , in the discussion , we reflect on the relevance of these findings to the future of digital citizen science in the era of online participation , and we highlight potential engagement pitfalls . Case Studies Safecast Safecast was developed in response to a natural disaster . In March 2011 , a 9 . 0 Mw earthquake hit Japan’s coast and caused a nuclear energy accident in the Fukushima power plant . This accident was the second major event of its kind in the world and its effects will stand for decades to come . During massive disasters such as this , people rely on tra - ditional mass media , such as television , radio , and news - papers , to get information . In the weeks that followed the accident , activity on social media showed a growing mistrust of the government and mainstream media due to a delayed release of radiation records ( Hajikhani et al . 2018 ) . In response , people started buying Geiger counters . Commercially available supplies ran out quickly , which led to people become increasingly interested in building their own devices . This discussion was taken to the Tokyo Hackerspace by a multidisciplinary group of people , and a week later “bGeigie” was built . This was the beginning of the Safecast initiative . Safecast ( blog . safecast . org ) provided people with the opportunity to build their own Geiger devices and to collect radiation measures by providing instructions and hardware . This enables people to monitor their own envi - ronments rather than depend on governmental bodies for that information . Once participants collect the data , they upload it to an open site so anyone can use it . As of 2019 , Safecast has supported the collection of more radiation data than all citizen science projects in history ( more than 40 million data points ) , and is the largest monitoring pro - ject in the field . Safecast is entirely volunteer run . In exchange for their participation , volunteers get 1 ) real - time information about the radiation levels of places of interest to them ( e . g . , their home or their children’s school ) , and 2 ) learn - ing experiences from interactions with a community of people who share their knowledge on how to build and operate Geiger devices and how to make sense of open data . Järviwiki In Finland , data describing the condition of Finnish lakes were only narrowly available until 2009 , in that access was limited by government protocols . While some data had been moved to electronic databases , it was not freely and openly accessible over the Internet . In 2009 , however , Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 3 of 20 this changed with the introduction of national - level open data movements such as the Helsinki Region Infoshare—a service that aims to make all public regional information quickly and easily accessible through the Internet . The trend of opening public data continued , and as of April 2020 , the Finnish open data registry listed 1718 openly shared datasets and 791 organizations participating in open data movements . In 2011 , Järviwiki ( Lakewiki in English ) was launched in response to increasing interest in making public the observations that the Finnish Environment Institute ( SYKE ) had been receiving ( via post ) for decades from local people . Its monitoring schema relies fully on public par - ticipation : People write and maintain their observations on the wiki . Järviwiki supports the collection of data such as water temperature , surface status , sunlight penetration measurement ( Secchi depth ) and algae blooms . Järviwiki provides an information - sharing platform and generates a centralized visualization based on collected data , thus building additional knowledge on top of individuals’ per - sonally collected data . Through participation , people in Finland have become stewards of their lakes and are more actively joining and starting restoration initiatives across the country . Järviwiki is an observatory maintained by the Finnish government but is run by volunteers . In exchange for their participation volunteers get 1 ) information about the state of water bodies in places of interest to them ( e . g . , the lake near their cottage ) that has been processed by the platform and is plotted in usable charts , and 2 ) digi - tal social rewards by having their names publicly listed as contributors to the lake’s wiki . Related Work Public participation and participatory science Work by the United Nations suggests that environmental issues are best handled with the participation of all con - cerned people ( United Nations 1992 ; United Nations Eco - nomic Commission for Europe 1998 ) , Public participation has become a norm in policy and decision - making in most countries , ( Mapuva 2015 ; Quick and Bryson , 2016 ) and an irreplaceable part of the sustainable development agenda ( Brundtland et al . , 1987 ; United Nations 1992 ) . This is par - ticularly true for environmental decision - making , where public participation has been sought and embedded into environmental policy on local and international scales in an attempt to improve the quality , acceptance , and dura - bility of decisions ( Reed 2008 ) . Participatory science is a practice in which members of the public collaborate with professional scientists to con - duct scientific research ( Bonney et al . 2009 ; Hand 2010 ; Dickinson et al . 2012 ) . Often people conduct activities such as collecting , categorizing , transcribing , or analyzing scientific data about a phenomenon of interest ( Bonney et al . 2014 ) . This practice has become extremely popu - lar across many scientific disciplines in the past decade ( Rotman et al . 2014a ) , assisted by the rapid spread of mobile technologies . Digital citizen science has evolved to support people - driven data collection of meaningful , geospatial data via mobile devices ( Burke et al . 2006 ; Heggen 2013 ) . Participatory environmental sensing Digital citizen science includes a subset of projects known collectively as participatory environmental sensing , citi - zen sensing , crowdsensing , or community monitoring ( Burke et al . 2006 ; Goldman et al . 2009 ; Ganti et al . 2011 ; Guo et al . 2014 ) , which have been used for a variety of purposes including scientific research and crisis commu - nication ( Goldman et al . 2009 ; Estrin et al . 2010 ) . They also serve as an effective means for inclusive engagement , education , and civic outreach ( Bonney et al . 2009 ; Hand 2010 ; Dickinson et al . 2012 ) . The data submitted via digi - tal citizen science platforms represents a deliberative act of modern public participation ( Palacin - Silva et al . 2018 ) . Participatory environmental sensing presents an oppor - tunity to monitor social and environmental phenomena at large scales through technology ( Newman et al . , 2012 ; Guo et al . 2014 ; Balestrini et al . 2015 ) . Some sensing pro - jects have already achieved outstanding results , such as the creation of the largest radiation records in history by Safecast ( Safecast 2019 ) , large records of bird populations by eBird ( eBird 2019 ) , identifying new galaxy elements by Zooniverse ( Zooniverse project 2019 ) , and discoveries of different protein types by FoldIt ( University of Washington Center for Game Science 2019 ) . Motivations to volunteer in digital citizen science People join and participate in community projects for several reasons . Understanding the motivational aspect of volunteering in digital citizen science is still a devel - oping field of knowledge ( Jennett and Cox 2018 ) . Field projects such as iSPEX ( Land - Zandstra et al . 2016 ) , Zoou - niverse ( Reed et al . 2013 ) , Stardust @ home ( Nov et al . 2011 ) , Happy Match ( Crowston and Prestopnik 2013 ) , and the Great Pollinator ( Domroese and Johnson 2017 ) have reported that their participants are driven by a deep interest in contributing to science , followed by curiosity ( e . g . , to try new devices or experiences ) , learning interests , enjoyment of the activities and social engagements ( e . g . , a sense of community ) . In addition , some research studies of FoldIt ( Iacovides et al . 2013 ) , Eyewire ( Curtis 2015 ) , and small - scale citizen science projects ( Rotman et al . 2012 ; Rotman et al . 2014b ) , have highlighted that recognition is also a driver of participation . Still , the knowledge we have regarding the temporality of these motivations and how they change / evolve / strengthen / disappear during a project is still quite limited ( Rotman et al . 2014a ; Rotman et al . 2014b ) . Incentive mechanisms To meet the motivational needs of volunteers and nur - ture sustained participation behaviors , citizen science projects may use incentive mechanisms . These mecha - nisms provide incentives that range from remuneration ( e . g . , through micropayments , gamification , and repu - tation mechanisms ) to non - monetary incentives ( e . g . , social rewards and hedonism - enhancing features ) often Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 4 of 20 aligned with auction theories and / or resource or privacy awareness principles ( Khan et al . 2012 ; Jaimes et al . 2015 ; Restuccia et al . 2016 ) . Table 1 summarizes 25 metatypes of incentive mechanisms from two taxonomies ( Jaimes et al . 2015 ; Restuccia et al . 2016 ) . Most of these incentive mechanisms appeal to self - enhancement values , which means that these mechanisms are based on providing what is classified as wealth or reputation , online or offline , to increase participation . This may have unintended con - sequences , such as driving people to become more self - interested and less likely to support pro - social or pro - environmental activities in the longer term , as evidenced in the self - enhancement pitfall by the Common Cause Report ( Crompton 2010 , p . 37 ) . Thus , it is important to study incentive mechanisms beyond those that focus on self - enhancement . Human values , motivations , and actions Research on digital citizen science has focused on under - standing concrete actions ( i . e . , volunteering behaviors ) to nurture participation ( Nov et al . 2011 ; Rotman et al . 2012 ; Crowston and Prestopnik 2013 ; Iacovides et al . 2013 ; Reed et al . 2013 ; Curtis 2015 ; Land - Zandstra et al . 2016 ; Dom - roese and Johnson 2017 ; Jennett and Cox 2018 ; Orchard 2018 ) . Yet , sustaining participation in citizen science projects remains a major challenge ( See et al . 2016 ; Jen - nett and Cox 2018 ; Palacin - Silva et al . 2018 ) . As Knowles highlights in her work ( Knowles 2013 , p . 103 ) : “ trying to affect behavior without affecting the underlying motiva - tions for this behavior ( e . g . , values , frames , worldview ) is a Sisyphean task : no matter how much progress is made , there will continue to be powerful forces working against success . ” Scholarly work in social psychology argues that behavior is the result of the trade - off between values and motivations alongside other individual differences , including traits , habits , ideologies , attitudes , and life cir - cumstances ( Kasser and Ryan 1996 ; Kasser 2002 ; Grouzet et al . 2005 ; Maio 2016 , pp . 51 – 126 ) . Therefore , we explore participation through two theoretical lenses : the human values that underlie actions and the motivations that drive them . Human Values Theory As Rokeach noted , “ Every human has a set of values . ” ( Rokeach 1973 , p . 5 ) . Rokeach described human values as “beliefs that a specific mode of conduct or end - state of existence is personally or socially preferable to an oppo - site or converse mode of conduct or end - state of exist - ence ” ( Rokeach 1973 , p . 5 ) . These guiding principles of life organize people’s attitudes , emotions , and behaviors , and typically endure across time and situations ( Schwartz 2006 ) . Human values have been conceptualized by many theorists and researchers since the 1950s as a ) beliefs linked with emotion that are not objective ; b ) motiva - tional constructs that reflect desirable goals ; c ) trans - cendent actions and situations ( that differ from norms or attitudes ) ; d ) standards or criteria that guide one’s deci - sion making ; and e ) an interlinked system with values affecting one another ( Schwartz 1994 ) . Schwartz developed an empirically grounded theoreti - cal model considering 67 countries that identified 10 basic human values derived from three universal requirements Table 1 : Taxonomies of incentive mechanisms in digital citizen science / participatory sensing . Source Type Mechanism Taxonomy of incentive mechanisms for citizen science ( Jaimes et al . 2015 ) Monetary – Uniform micropayments – Macro micropayments – RADP - VP - RC – Credit satisfaction index – Multi - interaction – Regret minimization – Steered crowd sensing – Platform - centric – User centric – VGC reverse Collective motivations – Noise spy – P - Sense Social reward : interaction – Noisetube – Cenceme Social reward : self interest – Livecompare – Mobishop Intrinsic motivations and fun – Ebirding – Floracaching Taxonomy of incentive mechanisms in participatory sensing ( Restuccia et al . 2016 ) General purpose – Non - game theoretical – Auction based theory – Non - auction based theory Application specific – Quid pro quo – Information trade – Gamification Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 5 of 20 of a human being : social interaction , biological needs of individuals , and survival needs of groups . These basic human values are distributed along four higher - level dimensions : 1 ) self - enhancement ( concern for oneself ) ; 2 ) self - transcendence ( concern for others’ well being ) ; 3 ) openness to change ( readiness for change ) ; and 4 ) con - servationist ( preservation of the current status and resist - ance to change ) ( Schwartz 2003 , 2006 ) . As depicted in Figure 1 , the circumplex structure in Schwartz’s Values Theory indicates strengthening and suppressing dynamics between values such as the bleed - over effect and the seesaw effect . In the bleed - over effect , values that appear next to each other are more likely to be equally important to a person . Moreover , the activation of a value has a strengthening effect on neighboring val - ues . In the seesaw effect , values on opposing sides of the circumplex are rarely held strongly by the same person . When a value is activated , its opposing values tend to be suppressed ( Crompton 2010 ) . We introduce the ten basic human values along with quotation examples from this study in Table 2 . Schwartz’s Human Values Theory has been studied in domains like psychology ( Maio 2016 ) and social ( Bilsky et al . 2011 ) and political sciences ( Feldman 2003 ) . More recently , however , computing - related research areas such as human - computer interaction ( HCI ) ( Preece 2016 ; Preece and Shneiderman 2009 ) , value - sensitive design ( Friedman and Hendry 2019 ) , values - first software engi - neering ( Ferrario et al . 2016 ) , and social computing ( Chen et al . 2014 ) have used this theory in their studies . Prior research has shown correlations between people’s values and their corresponding actions and behaviors ( see , for example , Bardi and Schwartz 2003 ; Crompton 2010 ; Kingston 2016 ; Seddig and Davidov 2018 ) . It is argued that people feel a sense of achievement when their actions are aligned with their most important values ( Rokeach 1973 ) . This causes a conscious and / or unconscious pursuit of consistency between values and behavioral choices ( Bardi and Schwartz 2003 ; Crompton 2010 ) . Often , values are grouped as intrinsic and extrinsic ( Crompton 2010 , p . 77 ) . Intrinsic values represent values related to caring about issues bigger than the self ( e . g . , benevolence ) , and extrin - sic values are those related to individual self - enhance - ment ( e . g . , power ) . However , it is debatable whether this grouping is an oversimplification of values ( Common Cause Foundation 2014 ) because some values may seen as neither intrinsic nor extrinsic ( such as security ) , and the binary grouping gives the mistaken impression of one side being better than the other . SDT can offer some insights to inform this debate . Self - Determination Theory SDT is macro - theory of human motivation with a number of empirically testable aspects that have been widely vali - dated across varied contexts , such as learning ( Ryan and Deci 2000a ) , gaming and game design ( Tyack and Mekler 2020 ) , and peer production ( Benkler 2011 ) . The theory addresses the source of underlying needs that give rise to activity , such as autonomy ( control over one’s goals and actions ) , competence ( sense of mastery at tasks and / or Figure 1 : Schwartz’s Human Values circumplex ( adapted from Schwartz 2003 ) . Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 6 of 20 new learning ) , and relatedness ( experiencing a sense of social belonging ) , while acknowledging that support and nutriments from the social context of the environment are sought to satisfy growth development ( Ryan and Deci 2000a , b ; 2017 ) . A benefit of SDT is that it untangles prior binary under - standings of motivation by postulating the existence of six types of motivations that fall along a spectrum from intrin - sic to extrinsic ( see Figure 2 ) . Intrinsic motivations have often been emphasized as key to sustaining engagement , whilst extrinsic motivations have often been disregarded owing to the assumption that they lead to resentfulness or disinterest ( Ryan and Deci 2000b ) . However , SDT has evidenced that not all extrinsic motivators are the same ; rather , they have varying degrees of internalization and integration , where internalization refers to the process of taking a value as one’s own , and integration refers to the process by which individuals come to think of an externally motivated task as self - enforced . As extrinsic motivations are internalized , they move upwards in the continuum towards intrinsic motivation . Ryan and Deci ( 2000a ) suggest two ways that inter - nalization may be facilitated : first , by enhancing self - efficacy and autonomy , and second , by harnessing the social components of extrinsic motivations , such as sense of belonging and relatedness . Thus , while some extrin - sic motivations could lead to resentment , others are positively motivating and can drive people to perform tasks willingly and enthusiastically . Table 3 presents the scale of motivations as defined by Ryan and Deci ( 2000a ) with examples from the interviews . Studying motivations provides key insights into why people freely devote their time and energy to volunteer projects . However , Benkler ( 2011 ) argues that participation in user - driven enterprises , such as digital citizen science , occurs because humans are largely selfless . While self - interest is a factor , people are driven to social and collaborative production . This argu - ment makes SDT particularly compelling as an approach to help investigate these potential explanations . Connecting Values and Motivations In 2017 , new findings in values research noted that “value instantiations” were the bridge between abstract values and specific actions ( Hanel et al . 2017 ) . Researchers observed that even if the same level of importance is attributed to a specific value , different people might produce differ - ent actions in response to it . This was attributed to dif - ferences in contexts and personal experiences across the world ( Hanel et al . 2017 ) . Motivations , as such , are value instantiations that drive actions and have a highly contex - tual and temporal nature ( Maio 2016 ) . In this study , we acknowledge the feedback relationship between actions , motivations , and values ( see Figure 3 ) ( Knowles 2013 , p . 103 ; Maio 2016 ; Hanel et al . 2017 ; Palacin - Silva 2018 , p . 4 ) . Table 2 : Basic human values defined by Schwartz ( Schwartz 2003 ) , with examples extracted from the interviews . Value Definition Example from the interviews Universalism To pursue understanding , apprecia - tion , tolerance , and protection for the wellbeing of everyone and for nature . “As a old scout , nature is important . ” ( Participant 3 ) Benevolence To pursue the preservation and enhancement of the welfare of the people we know . “I thought this might be beneficial for someone . ” ( Participant 3 ) Conformity / Tra - dition To pursue respect , commitment and acceptance of traditional practices aligned with culture or religion . “I started already [ monitoring lakes ] as a child , I was 15 years old when it clicked . I think it’s the regularity . ” ( Participant 6 ) “Because the place itself was a like a community , like a part of Japan’s history and I thought it was important to preserve them . ” ( Participant 15 ) Security To pursue safety , harmony , and stabil - ity of society , of relations and of self . “We knew the real problems in the lake and let’s say that we have now dug into the problem and I was happy to start updating . ” ( Participant 7 ) Power To pursue social status and prestige , control or dominance over people and resources . “When you do radiation monitoring in partnership with universi - ties , you don’t get interruptions by government nor by researchers . ” ( Participant 9 ) Achievement To pursue personal success through demonstrating competence according to social standards . “I got to get high level knowledge of radiation which master’s degree students might learn . ” ( Participant 11 ) Hedonism To pursue pleasure and sensuous gratification for oneself . “I would do this as a side activity while warming up my sauna , I would upload data on the platform . ” ( Participant 8 ) Stimulation To pursue excitement , novelty , and challenge in life . “I’ve noticed that the system has been developed and there has been more features . Of course , it becomes more interesting the more there are differ - ent types of observations and data related to waters . ” ( Participant 5 ) Self - Direction To pursue independent thought and action , choosing , creating , exploring . “I had a notebook where I started putting them , every day . Then I started doing charts to a notebook . ” ( Participant 6 ) Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 7 of 20 Figure 2 : The spectrum of motivation according to the Self - Determination Theory ( adapted from Ryan and Deci 2000b ) . Table 3 : Motivations defined by Ryan and Deci ( 2000a ) with examples extracted from the interviews . Motivation Definition Example Amotivation Lacking intention to act , not feeling competent , and believing that acting will not yield the desired outcome . “Japan is a busy country ; Japanese volunteers were trying to find time to monitor data when they were also busy with work and family . So , we did not have much time . ” ( Participant 11 ) External Actions performed to satisfy a demand or externally imposed reward “At that time what made us anxious was that media was say - ing it was dangerous and other many things . ” ( Participant 13 ) Introjected Actions performed due to pressure , to avoid guilt , or to enhance ego , self - esteem , and / or self - worth “Compared to other users on the same lake [ I am ] most active , but [ I do ] envy some people on lake Saimaa that have auto - matic monitoring . ” ( Participant 3 ) Identification Actions on behalf of a goal that is of personal importance , so activities conducted are accepted as one’s own “After the earthquake everyone wanted to know the informa - tion about radiation , and I bought the device after two or three months . I started to measure radiation around my house and places inside my town including the streets my children use to go school . ” ( Participant 14 ) Integrated Activities are fully assimilated to the self . These motivations share qualities with intrinsic motivation but are extrinsic because they are still conducted for an outcome that is separate from the behavior , even though it is valued by the self “Lakes are part of Finnish nature . They are important to Finnish people . ” ( Participant 2 ) Intrinsic Behavior that is completely self - determined and , in contrast to extrinsic motivation , not a means to an end but rather pursued for its own sake . Intrinsically motivated behavior is sustained by the experience of interest and enjoyment . “Well this is only a hobby , some sort of thing to be proud as there are lot of my pictures there . ” ( Participant 1 ) “It is still fun now . It is community , community is fun . ” ( Participant 3 ) Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 8 of 20 Summary Participation in digital citizen science projects has been the focus of numerous studies that identify the motiva - tions of participants from interviews and surveys . Yet there is a lack of research on the role of psychological constructs in digital citizen science settings . Given that studies from social computing and HCI have shown that human values ( Chen et al . 2014 ; Boyd et al . 2015 ; Mukta et al . 2016 ; Esau 2018 ) and self - determined motivations ( Ryan and Deci 2000a ; Benkler 2011 ; Tyack and Mekler 2020 ) are impor - tant influences on digital behaviors , and that values and motivations are phenomena that exist together ; under - standing both is important to the concept of long - term participation . Thus , we explore sustained participation in two such initiatives and asked : • RQ 1 : What motivates participation in a digital citi - zen science initiative ? • RQ 2 : What are the values underpinning participa - tion in a digital citizen science initiative ? • RQ 3 : How do motivations align with values in the studied cases ? Methodology Case study design The main goal of this study was to learn more about why people join and participate actively for years in digital citi - zen science projects . Because these questions required an in - depth explanation of an ongoing social phenomenon , we opted to take a case study approach ( Yin 2018 ) . The two case studies , Safecast and Järviwiki , were analyzed using semi - structured interviews . The cases share com - mon features ; both have at least a national reach , use some type of technology for data collection , and have achieved continuous and sustained volunteer participa - tion for more than five years . However , they differ in their cultural background and level of governmental support . Therefore , this was an exploratory multiple – case study with multiple embedded units of analysis ( Yin 2018 ) . Data collection With the support of Safecast and Järviwiki , recruitment calls for this study were distributed via their official mail - ing lists . Recruitment continued until we exhausted the population of willing participants . A total of 15 exemplary volunteers ( Järviwiki : 8 , Safecast : 7 ) signed up for this study 1 . Interviews were conducted between January and April 2018 . All communications , including emails , sur - veys , and interviews with the participants , were held in their native languages ( Japanese , Finnish , or English ) and translated after data collection . The nature of the interview was semi - structured , the protocol was designed so that each interview would last 45 minutes , and the questions 2 and probes were organ - ized in five major sections ( see Table 4 ) . Data analysis Our approach to data analysis ( see Figure 4 ) followed a coding process that was based on the identification of units of meaning ( UoM ) in relation the Schwartz Human Values and Termination theories , guided by a codebook ( Boyatzis 1998 ; Campbell et al . 2013 ) . To improve data capture and consistency , we utilized two rounds of cod - ing , with two independent coders each , to allow for the contextualization and refinement of codebook defini - tions as recommended by ( Campbell et al . 2013 ) . Finally , inter - rater scores ( Krippendorff’s alpha ) were calculated to ensure reliability ( Krippendorff 2011 ) . 1 ) Thematic Analyses : The data analysis followed the semi - qualitative thematic analysis approach by Boy - atzis ( Boyatzis 1998 ) , where the units of analysis were units of meaning , described in detail below , and the themes were the Human Values and Self - Determination Theories . 2 ) Units of Meaning : A unit of meaning is a unit of analysis that represents a portion of sentences or single paragraphs that capture the full meaning and context of what a respondent says ( Garrison et al . 2006 ; Campbell et al . 2013 ) . An example of a UoM would be : “I talked with my neighbors and worker in my company and offered to use the devices . So , I lent devices and they were also monitoring radia - tion . ” This procedure reduces coder subjectivity and to improves the discriminant capability of the cod - ing scheme by ensuring that text would be unitized in a standard way ( Campbell et al . 2013 ) . A total of 1517 UoM were identified across the 15 interviews : 789 were related to human values and 728 to self - determination . Figure 3 : Feedback relationship between values , motivations , and actions ( adapted from Palacin - Silva 2018 , p . 4 and Knowles 2013 , p . 103 ) . Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 9 of 20 3 ) Codebook Development and Coding : Codebook de - velopment started with the first author creating initial versions of the two codebooks—the human values codebook , which was based on Schwartz’s Human Values Theory ( Schwartz 2012 ) , values de - scriptions by the Common Cause Report ( C rompton 2010 ) , and an example study that used the Schwartz Human Values Theory to perform a thematic analy - sis ( Knowles 2013 ) ; and the motivation codebook , was based on the definitions of human motivation by Ryan and Deci’s SDT ( Ryan and Deci 2000a ) , and an example study that used SDT to perform a thematic analysis ( Gilbert 2018 ) . A one - interview sample was coded by the three researchers using the initial codebooks . This coding cycle served to improve the codebooks , which were subsequently updated with more examples as the coding cycles continued . Intercoder reliability and agreement Intercoder reliability refers to the extent to which two or more independent coders , using the same coding schema , agree on the coding of the content ( SAGE Research Meth - ods Encyclopedia 2008 ) . Each interview was coded by two coders . One author coded interviews for the motiva - tions , another for the values , and the first author coded interviews for both values and motivations . After the interviews were coded , Krippendorf’s alpha was used to test agreement between the coders for each set of codes . The alpha score for the motivations codes was 0 . 98 , and for the values , it was 0 . 71 ( see Table 5 ) . As the minimum acceptable reliability score for the Krippendorff coeffi - cient is 0 . 67 ( Krippendorff 2018 ) , the scores confirmed a high degree of consistency between the respective coders for both code sets . Results The results are organized by each of the research ques - tions , which identify the underlying motivations , values , and associations between values and motivations in the two case studies . Quotations from the interviews are included in this section and its supplemental files . The format P ( number ) denotes the participant from whose interview the quotation was extracted . Table 4 : Interview design : sections and goals . Interview section Goal Section 1 : Participant portrait Understand participant’s profile and reporting practices Section 2 : Initial motivations Explore the past interactions with the monitoring platform and volunteering experiences Section 3 : Motivations to stay Understand current experiences , motivations , and emotions when using the monitoring platform Section 4 : Motivations to leave Identify key tensions and pain points that may have driven dropout from the initiative Section 5 : Dreams Explore future goals and emotions related to their participation in environmental monitoring Figure 4 : Data analysis overview ( UoMs : units of meaning ; TA : thematic analysis ) . Table 5 : Krippendorff’s alpha scores . N coders alpha N cases N decisions Human values TA 2 0 , 71 789 1 , 578 Motivations TA 2 0 , 98 728 1 , 456 TA : thematic analysis . Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 10 of 20 RQ 1 : What motivates participation in a digital citizen science initiative ? Below we report on the motivations for participating in each case , including initial participation and sustained participation . Safecast The most described initial motivations of Safecast inter - viewees were identified and integrated motivations . Simi - larly , these were also the two types of motivations that participants described when discussing their reasons for staying in Safecast . However , amotivation was also com - monly described by participants when discussing their continued participation in Safecast ( see Figure 5 ) . Each of the motivations are discussed in further detail in the Supplemental File 1 , Appendix A . Järviwiki Unlike Safecast , in which intrinsic motivators were described by few participants as an initial motivation , Järvi - wiki participants described intrinsic motivations most fre - quently when discussing their initial motivations , followed by identified motivations and integrated motivations . These three motivations also played an important role in sustained participation . However , as with Safecast , Järvi - wiki participants also described challenges to participation , reflected as amotivation , when discussing sustained partici - pation ( see Figure 6 ) . Each of the motivations are discussed in further detail in the Supplemental File 2 , Appendix B . RQ 2 : What are the values underpinning participation in a digital citizen science initiative ? We report on the values underlying participation ( initial par - ticipation and sustained participation ) in each of the two cases . Safecast Self - direction , stimulation , and achievement were impor - tant values to participants when joining Safecast . These were enhanced by a strong need for security and sense of benevolence , whilst conformity / tradition , universalism , and power were the least influential values to drive par - ticipation . However , the value of hedonism ( doing some - thing because it is enjoyable ) was not important at all at the time of joining Safecast ( see Figure 7 ) . Self - direction , universalism , conformity / tradition , and achievement were the most important values for staying in Safecast . These are enhanced by a strong need for secu - rity , stimulation , and benevolence , while hedonism and power were the least influential values among the inter - viewed Safecast participants ( see Figure 8 ) . Each of the values are discussed in further detail in the Supplemental File 3 , Appendix C . Järviwiki Self - direction , stimulation , conformity / tradition , and uni - versalism were found to be important values at the time of joining Järviwiki . These were enhanced by a strong sense of benevolence , hedonism , achievement , and security . Power was the least influential value driving participation in the case study sample ( see Figure 7 ) . Self - direction , universalism , conformity / tradition were reported to be the most important values for stay - ing in Järviwiki ; these values are enhanced by a strong feeling of benevolence , stimulation , achievement , hedonism , and security . Power was the least influential value driving sustained participation among the inter - viewed participants ( see Figure 8 ) . Each of the values are discussed in further detail in the Supplemental File 4 , Appendix D . Figure 5 : Motivations underlying participation among Safecast participants . Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 11 of 20 Figure 6 : Values underlying participation among Järviwiki participants . Figure 7 : Values underlying initial participation among Safecast and Järviwiki participants . Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 12 of 20 RQ 3 : How do motivations align with values in the studied cases ? The most frequent co - occurrences between values and motivations are shown in Figure 9 . To map these co - occurrences , all the UoMs were cross - analyzed using the codes for the values and motivations . Finally , we counted the unique co - occurrences per participant ( i . e . , if a co - occurrence was mentioned by the same participant sev - eral times , it counted as one . For instance , achievement and integrated motivations were determined to be related because all 15 volunteers had a UoM where integrated regulation and achievement co - occurred compared with one volunteer for whom achievement and external regula - tion co - occurred . Our analysis identified areas of overlap between the motivations and values that drive participation in Safecast and Järviwiki . These overlaps provide a starting point for understanding which values can be leveraged to drive more self - directed and autonomous actions . The co - occur - rences are shown in Figure 9 . Figure 9 builds on the Schwartz Human Values cir - cumplex ( Schwartz 2003 ) by adding an additional layer that showcases where motivations and values overlap in these two digital citizen science initiatives . The follow - ing section highlights these overlaps through illustrative quotes from the text , organized by motivation . Amotivation occurs when participants struggle with or lack intention to act . We found that this most often co - occurred with the combined values of conformity / tradi - tion . This example from P7 highlights one such overlap , where we can see how hesitance to adopt a new technol - ogy results in a reluctance to participate : “I wouldn’t like to play with IT , it’s kind of against my principles . ” Introjected motivations describe actions that are per - formed to enhance ego or in response to external pressure or guilt . We found that this motivation often overlapped with the value “power . ” This quotation from P9 highlights the important role leaders can play in collaborative online initiatives [ 69 ] : “So I can say those core members have attraction as a human . ” Identified motivations describe those in which a person begins to associate some personal importance with the action . We found that identified motivations often co - occurred with the values stimulation and self - direction . In our data , we observed co - occurrences between identified motivations and stimulation when participants described the technology they were using as a contributing factor in their participation : “Yeah it nicely visualizes statistical data with help of a machine” ( P8 ) . We also observed over - laps between self - direction and identified motivations . This connection is unsurprising , given that identified motivations are the first motivations in the spectrum that are self - directed . The following quotation from P11 high - lights one example of this overlap as they move away from relying on information provided by others to collecting it for themselves : “I want to find the truth and I want to find out by myself to know if the media shows correct data or if the data is changed by government on purpose . ” Integrated motivation results when an activity is con - gruent with personally endorsed goals and needs that are already part of the self . We found that integrated moti - vations co - occurred with values that are also personally important , such as universalism , benevolence , security , and achievement . First , this quotation from P11 pro - vides an example of overlap between integrated moti - vations and universalism , as their love of nature is fully Figure 8 : Values underlying sustained participation among Safecast and Järviwiki participants . Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 13 of 20 assimilated as part of themselves and is a core reason for contributing to Safecast : “When I was small my parents raised up me and taught me to appreciate and be close to and commune with nature . And I have been loving nature . ” Similarly , the value benevolence was also associ - ated with integrated motivations as participants described helping others as a value that was highly integrated . For example , P5 discusses how participation in Järviwiki cre - ates an archive of nature observances that anyone can con - tribute to : “It is a good tool to save observations to kind of common memory . ” We also observed overlaps between security and integrated motivations , such as in this quote from P14 : “It is still said our fundamental power resource is nuclear power plant , we don’t know when the next acci - dent will happen . So , I think what we need is to do some - thing to prepare ourselves . ” Because Japan continues to rely on nuclear power , Safecast allows participants to col - lect information that provides them with a greater degree of certainty regarding air quality . Finally , in this quotation from P9 , we see how achievement and integrated moti - vation overlap as P9 describes their ultimately successful learning process through participation in Safecast : “by hearing and talking those conversations about radiation and I started to understand more and more . ” Intrinsic motivations , where activities are conducted for their inherent satisfaction , were predictably associ - ated with the value hedonism , which is also associated with pleasure . For participants of Järviwiki , this was commonly found in descriptions of use of the system as a hobby , such as P6 : “It’s a hobby , I get to make the measurements , ” whereas in Safecast , this was commonly found in descriptions of participation as fun , such as in this statement by P12 : “It is still fun now . It is community , community is fun . ” Overall , we found that extrinsic motivators that are self - directed and autonomous can drive people to perform tasks willingly and enthusiastically in a sustained man - ner , particularly when they are associated with pro - social and pro - environmental values such as universalism and benevolence . Discussion We have described the values and motivations that drive long - term participation in two digital citizen science cases , Järviwiki in Finland and Safecast in Japan . In this section , we reflect on the implications of these findings . Integrated and identified motivations are important for sustained participation Our first research question focused on exploring what motivates participation in the two cases . For Safecast participants , identified and integrated motivations drove volunteering , whereas Järviwiki participants were driven by intrinsic , identified , and integrated motivations . These three types of motivations are the most self - determined , which means that their corresponding actions ( e . g . , to submit an observation ) are perceived as important activi - ties for the self . Figure 9 : Interaction between values and motivations underlying participation among Järviwiki and Safecast participants . Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 14 of 20 Although citizen science activities are a hobby for some , for most of these volunteers , monitoring is perceived as important because there is a direct benefit to their own interests . Both of these initiatives have demonstrated an understanding that support of the participants’ personal goals is key to sustaining participation . For instance , both Järviwiki and Safecast provide simple and readable visu - alizations based on the collected data . People can access , read , and understand the collected data in an open man - ner . Most importantly , they can understand what the data means for their own local contexts because they can find information about their area in few steps . Safecast and Järviwiki also have a long history of col - lecting ideas and feedback from volunteers about their platforms . In this process , they have created services and visualizations that provide both volunteers and scientists with what they need for their everyday decision - making . Although some researchers argue that to popularize citi - zen science activities , they must become volunteers’ hob - bies ( Haklay 2013 ) , these cases show that creating digital services ( based on citizen science data ) focused on pro - viding volunteers with what they need to pursue their personal goals , is also important to sustain long - term participation . Despite this , we also observed some differ - ences between the two cases , such as the more important role of intrinsic motivators among Järviwiki participants . Thus , it is important for designers of such initiatives to understand the specific goals of their volunteers through research methods such as user journeys , card sorts , or affinity maps ( IDEO 2015 ) . Appealing to power to sustain participation and the shortcomings of incentive mechanisms For research question 2 , we explored the values that underpin participation in the two initiatives . We found that values such as self - direction and stimulation were important for both Safecast and Järviwiki volunteers when they decided to begin their volunteering activities . Sustaining participation , however , was associated with a larger number of values , including stimulation , hedonism , achievement , security , conformity / tradition , benevolence , universalism , and self - direction . These observations are in line with previous studies by Rotman et al . ( 2014a , b ) , which show that a self - directed personal interest is key to initial participation . But broader motivations are needed for sustaining long - term participation . Across both cases , power seems to be the least influ - ential value . Power refers to the pursuit of social status , prestige , control , or dominance over people or resources ( Schwartz 2003 ) and is a self - enhancement type of value . Surprisingly , current incentive mechanisms are often focused on rewards that provide wealth or reputation online or offline to increase participation ( see , for exam - ple , the reward mechanisms listed in Table 1 ) . These types of rewards rely on values centered on self - enhancement , such as power . Focusing on values that appeal to personal gain can cause people to become more self - interested and less likely to support pro - social or pro - environmental activities in the long term ( Crompton 2010 , p . 37 ) . The use of mechanisms that appeal to self - transcendence by embracing universalist and benevolent values , for exam - ple , by centering their core project recruitment campaigns with the well - being of the community , appear to be rarer . However , in the case of Järviwiki and Safecast , focusing on values that appeal to universalism and benevolence are key elements of long - term sustained participation . These results suggest that as projects strive to engage more people in their activities , careful thought should be put into understanding the role of values on the temporal - ity and quality of engagement . Similarly , Knowles ( 2013 , p . 68 ) highlights that “ While appealing to Self - Enhancement values will likely generate more donations ( at least in the short term ) , they will be generated from people who are as a result less inclined to take further action on behalf of the cause ( i . e . , negative spillover ) . Self - Enhancement appeal is , therefore , a case of one step forward , two steps back . To consistently make progress in a positive direction , the cam - paign needs to communicate a consistent , issues - based , Self - Transcendence focused message . ” A way to avoid this pitfall is to use self - enhancement mechanisms ( e . g . , rewards ) as part of a larger engagement strategy that fosters values like self - direction , stimulation , universalism , benevolence , security , and achievement . As our results show , when extrinsically motivated values , such as universalism and benevolence , are self - directed , they can drive people to perform tasks willingly and enthusiastically in a sustained manner . Moving beyond intrinsic / extrinsic values In research question 3 , we explored how motivations align with values in the studied cases . The goal of this question was to explore the interactions between values and moti - vations . We know that values and motivations exist together and operate alongside other individual differences , such as culture , personality , and context ( Maio 2016 ) . However , a common integration between these two theories has been the grouping of values under an intrinsic / extrinsic binary ( Kasser and Ryan 1996 , p . 280 ; Common Cause Foundation 2014 ) . Here we untangle the different types of motivations in relation to human values , arguing that this can provide valuable insights for understanding the driv - ers of sustained participation at different stages in a digi - tal citizen science project . For example , project designers could understand that some of their participants value stimulation ( new experiences ) ; however , without know - ing if that value is related to an introjected or integrated motivation , the engagement strategies they design could fail by not addressing participants’ needs and personal goals . Furthermore , exploring the dynamics of partici - pation from the lenses of different theories can be ben - eficial to enhance the understanding of links between human experience and behavior and to explain enduring behaviors like sustained engagement ( Kasser 2002 , 2004 ; Grouzet et al . 2005 ) . Exploratory design reflections In this section , we reflect on the implications of this study for the design of digital citizen science platforms . Our insights are derived from interviews , further observations , Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 15 of 20 and conversations with the stakeholders running the studied projects . Fostering trust through digital citizen science In digital citizen science platforms , the volunteer has total control over the information they are giving and can see how it is being used for a common cause . People may develop trust in these platforms , because when you are part of a process it is easier to trust it . However , to build and sustain trust , these platforms must aim to have neutral and fact - based information . This can be achieved by designing mechanisms that enhance transparency , accountability , openness , and shared own - ership . For example , Safecast is largely trusted by the population in Japan , which in turn has led to its use by the Japanese government as an official source for radia - tion measures ( Brown et al . 2016 ) . This level of trust was achieved by opening the entire process of radiation moni - toring to everyone , from the recording of measures and data verification , to knowledge - sharing and the release of open data . Design for a diversity of values and motivations Digital citizen science platforms should be designed for diversity across all ages , genders , skillsets , values , and motivations . For example , although our findings showed patterns between motivations and values that were more common than others , we nonetheless observed a multi - tude of motivations and values that were important to individual participants . Although demographic statistical sampling is a well - accepted procedure for sub - sampling a larger population , sampling for different values / moti - vations is not a common practice . Hence , it is possible that a narrative or frame used to promote an initiative could attract only people with a similar value background . Organizers should be aware of the values and motivations linked with their initiative and its impacts on recruitment campaigns and participation . Approaches like value - sensi - tive design ( Friedman and Hendry 2019 ) and values - first software engineering ( Ferrario et al . 2016 ) have developed tools like envisioning cards ( Friedman et al . 2019 ) , values q - sort , starmaps , and others ( Values in Computing 2019 ) to support the creation of digital technology that accounts for the values of designers and participants . The critical role of incentive mechanisms The use of incentive mechanisms for engagement has to be aligned with long - term strategies for building sus - tained public engagement . As discussed above , current incentive mechanisms in the field are focused mainly on rewards ; they are centered on self - enhancement values that can cause that people to become more self - interested and less likely to participate in a sustained manner . Incen - tive mechanisms should be used in moderation , and as part of a larger engagement strategy . Limitations This study used rigorous and systematic procedures for data collection and analysis , which included different rounds of validations and inter - rater agreement calcula - tions . However , different types of research methods serve different needs . While we were able to investigate these two cases in depth , generalization is limited to theoreti - cal prepositions and not to populations or universes ( Yin 2018 ) . In the present study , the values of tradition and con - formity were studied in a bundle , due to the close mean - ings the coders assigned to both values . This study interviewed exemplary volunteers from Japan and Finland . However , we did not collect socio - demographic information ( i . e . , gender , education , or income ) as this was not seen as necessary for this study in the research - planning stage . Thus , this is a limitation of our data analysis . Lastly , this work interviewed only 15 long - term volun - teers . Hence , our observations and consequent results are limited by that number of participants . However , the nature of this work is exploratory and qualitative . The pro - cedures for data collection and analysis were designed to be deep and strict to counterbalance this limitation . Conclusions and Future Work Digital citizen science has the capacity to drive scientific breakthroughs , foster community trust , and support decision - making processes . We’ve explored the values and motivations that underlie initial and sustained participa - tion in digital citizen science projects from the lenses of Schwartz’s Human Values Theory and SDT . We present in - depth analyses of two case studies of digital citizen science initiatives ( Järviwiki and Safecast ) that have been collect - ing environmental data for a decade in Japan and Finland . Our analyses show that openness - to - change values such as self - direction and stimulation are important for initial par - ticipation . Yet , self - transcendence values such as univer - salism play a large role in sustaining participation . These values are related to identified and integrated motivations across the participation spectrum described by SDT . These types of motivations are the most self - determined forms of motivation , suggesting that when extrinsic motivators are self - directed , people will not only perform tasks will - ingly and enthusiastically but also in a sustained manner . The current incentive mechanisms in the field are focused mainly on rewards ; they are centered on self - enhancement values such as power and achievement , which can cause people to become more self - interested and less likely to support pro - social or pro - environmental activities in the long term . Our findings suggest that these pitfalls can be avoided by appealing to self - direction , uni - versalist , and hedonist values , especially as projects pro - gress beyond the initiation stage . In Järviwiki and Safecast , this was done by creating transparent processes , led , and controlled by the people , which provided opportunities to nuture and support these values in both the short and longer term . Finally , this study provides three suggestions for organ - izers / designers of participatory digital citizen science initiatives : 1 ) Foster trust through digital citizen science by designing mechanisms that enhance transparency , accountability , openness , and shared ownership of the commons ( e . g . , data and technology artifacts ) ; 2 ) design Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 16 of 20 for a diversity of values to assist the recruitment and ongo - ing engagement of volunteers , and ; 3 ) integrate and vary the use of incentive mechanisms within a holistic engage - ment strategy that aims at co - constructing the future we want to live in . Notes 1 This study was evaluated and approved by the LUT University ethics board in November 2017 . 2 The interview questions are available at : http : / / bit . ly / 2vvK2Yh . Supplementary Files The Supplementary files for this article can be found as follows : • Supplemental File 1 : Appendix A . Safecast inter - viewees’ motivations , ordered along the spectrum from amotivation to intrinsic motivation . DOI : htt - ps : / / doi . org / 10 . 5334 / cstp . 290 . s1 • Supplemental File 2 : Appendix B . Järviwiki inter - viewees’ motivations , ordered along the spectrum from amotivation to intrinsic motivation . DOI : htt - ps : / / doi . org / 10 . 5334 / cstp . 290 . s2 • Supplemental File 3 : Appendix C . Safecast inter - viewees’ values , ordered by importance for participa - tion . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5334 / cstp . 290 . s3 • Supplemental File 4 : Appendix D . Järviwiki inter - viewees’ values , ordered by importance for participa - tion . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5334 / cstp . 290 . s4 Acknowledgements The authors would like to acknowledge the support from Prof . Jari Porras for this study . Also , special thanks to Olli Kousa and Misato Yoshikawa who helped trans - lating the interviews in Japanese / Finnish to English . We would like to highlight the incredible support from the Safecast ( Azby Brown , Pieter Franken and Sean Bonner ) and Järviwiki ( Matti Lindholm ) teams who facilitated our recruitment calls . Finally , we are thankful for the financial support from the Erasmus + PERCCOM and Values - First SE EPSRC projects . Competing Interests The authors have no competing interests to declare . Author Contributions • Victoria Palacin conceived of the presented idea , designed the study , coordinated and carried out the interviews , analyzed the data , and led the synthesis and writing of this manuscript . • Sarah Gilbert supported the framing of the data analysis , analyzed the data , investigated specific details related to the Self - Determination Theory , and co - led the writing of this manuscript . • Shane Orchard supported the framing of the data analysis , analyzed the data , and contributed to the writing of this manuscript . • Angela Eaton contributed to the data synthesis of this study and investigated specific details related to the Safecast case study . • Maria Angela Ferrario contributed to the conception of the idea and the study framing , and supervised the findings of this work . • Ari Happonen contributed to the data collection of this study and investigated specific details related to the Järviwiki case study . All authors contributed intellectually to the final manuscript . References Balestrini , M , Diez , T and Kresin , F . 2015 . From partici - patory sensing to making sense . In Proceedings of the Conference of Environmental Infrastructures and Plat - forms 2015 co - located with the European Citizen Science Association General Assembly , Barcelona on October 2015 . Bardi , A and Schwartz , SH . 2003 . Values and behavior : Strength and structure of relations . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 29 ( 10 ) : 1207 – 1220 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0146167203254602 Benkler , Y . 2011 . The penguin and the leviathan : How cooperation triumphs over self - interest . New York : Crown Business . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145206 Bilsky , W , Janik , M and Schwartz , SH . 2011 . The struc - tural organization of human values - evidence from three rounds of the European social survey ( ESS ) . Jour - nal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 42 ( 5 ) : 759 – 776 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0022022110362757 Bonney , R , Cooper , CB , Dickinson , J , Kelling , S , Phillips , T , Rosenberg , KV and Shirk , J . 2009 . Citizen science : a developing tool for expanding science knowledge and scientific literacy . BioScience , 59 ( 11 ) : 977 – 984 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1525 / bio . 2009 . 59 . 11 . 9 Bonney , R , Shirk , JL , Phillips , TB , Wiggins , A , Ballard , HL , Miller - Rushing , AJ and Parrish , JK . 2014 . Next steps for citizen science . Science . 343 ( 6178 ) : 1436 – 1437 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1251554 Boyatzis , RE . 1998 . Transforming qualitative informa - tion : Thematic analysis and code development . Case Western Reserve University , USA : SAGE . Boyd , RL , Wilson , SR , Pennebaker , JW , Kosinski , M , Stillwell , DJ and Mihalcea , R . 2015 . Values in words : Using language to evaluate and understand personal values . In Proceedings of the Ninth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media , pp . 31 – 40 . Brown , A , Franken , P , Bonner , S , Dolezal , N and Moross , J . 2016 . Safecast : successful citizen - science for radiation measurement and communication after Fukushima . Journal of Radiological Protection , 36 ( 2 ) : S82 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 0952 - 4746 / 36 / 2 / S82 Brundtland , G , Khalid , M , Agnelli , S , Al - Athel , S , Chidzero , B , Fadika , L , Hauff , V , Lang , I , Shijun , M , de Botero , M and Singh , M . 1987 . Our Common Future . United Nations General Assembly Document A / 42 / 427 . New York , USA . Burke , JA , Estrin , D , Hansen , M , Parker , A , Ramana - than , N , Reddy , S and Srivastava , MB . 2006 . Partici - patory sensing . In the Proceedings of the WSW 06 at SenSys 06 , Boulder , Colorado on October 2006 . Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 17 of 20 Campbell , JL , Quincy , C , Osserman , J and Pedersen , OK . 2013 . Coding in - depth semi structured inter - views : Problems of unitization and intercoder reliability and agreement . Sociological Methods & Research , 42 ( 3 ) : 294 – 320 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0049124113500475 Chen , J , Hsieh , G , Mahmud , JU and Nichols , J . 2014 . Understanding individuals’ personal values from social media word use . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM confer - ence on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing , Baltimore , MD on February 2014 , pp . 405 – 414 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531608 Christin , D , Reinhardt , A , Kanhere , SS and Hollick , M . 2011 . A survey on privacy in mobile participatory sensing applications . Journal of Systems and Software , 84 ( 11 ) : 1928 – 1946 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jss . 2011 . 06 . 073 Common Cause Foundation . 2014 . On having more than two sides : how do you describe values ? Avail - able at https : / / valuesandframes . org / on - having - more - than - two - sides ( Last accessed on 04 / 06 / 2020 ) . Crompton , T . 2010 . Common cause : The case for working with our cultural values . WWF - UK’s Report . UK . Crowston , K and Prestopnik , NR . 2013 . Motivation and data quality in a citizen science game : A design science evaluation . In Proceedings of the 46th IEEE Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , pp . 450 – 459 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 2013 . 413 Curtis , V . 2015 . Online citizen science projects : an explo - ration of motivation , contribution , and participation . Thesis ( PhD ) , The Open University . Dickinson , JL , Shirk , J , Bonter , D , Bonney , R , Crain , RL , Martin , J , Phillips , T and Purcell , K . 2012 . The current state of citizen science as a tool for ecological research and public engagement . Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment , 10 ( 6 ) : pp . 291 – 297 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1890 / 110236 Domroese , MC and Johnson , EA . 2017 . Why watch bees ? Motivations of citizen science volunteers in the Great Pollinator Project . Biological Conservation , 208 : 40 – 47 . Available at . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biocon . 2016 . 08 . 020 eBird . 2019 . Publications – ebird . Available at https : / / ebird . org / science / publications ( Last accessed on 08 / 01 / 2019 ) . Esau , K . 2018 . Capturing citizens values : On the role of narratives and emotions in digital participation , Analyse & Kritik , 40 ( 1 ) : 55 – 72 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / auk - 2018 - 0003 Estrin , D , Chandy , KM , Young , RM , Smarr , L , Odlyzko , A , Clark , D , Reding , V , Ishida , T , Sharma , S , Cerf , VG , et al . 2010 . Participatory sensing : applications and architecture . IEEE Internet Computing , 14 ( 1 ) : 12 – 42 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MIC . 2010 . 12 Feldman , S . 2003 . Values , ideology , and the structure of political attitudes . In : Sears , DO , Huddy , L and Jervis , R Oxford handbook of political psychology . UK : Oxford University Press . pp . 477 – 508 . Ferrario , MA , Simm , W , Forshaw , S , Gradinar , A , Smith , MT and Smith , I . 2016 . Values - first se : research principles in practice . In Proceedings of the 38th ACM International Conference on Software Engi - neering Companion , pp . 553 – 562 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2889160 . 2889219 Foody , G , See , L , Fritz , S , Mooney , P , Olteanu - Raimond , A - M , Fonte , CC and Antoniou , V . ( eds . ) 2017 . Map - ping and the Citizen Sensor . London : Ubiquity Press . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5334 / bbf Friedman , B and Hendry , DG . 2019 . Value sensitive design : Shaping technology with moral imagina - tion . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7551 / mitpress / 7585 . 001 . 0001 Friedman , B , Nathan , L , Kane , S and John , L . 2019 . Envisioning cards . Available at https : / / www . envision - ingcards . com ( Last accessed on 09 / 23 / 2019 ) . Ganti , RK , Ye , F and Lei , H . 2011 . Mobile crowdsensing : current state and future challenges . IEEE Communi - cations Magazine , 49 ( 11 ) : 32 – 39 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MCOM . 2011 . 6069707 Garrison , DR , Cleveland - Innes , M , Koole , M and Kappelman , J . 2006 . Revisiting methodological issues in transcript analysis : Negotiated coding and reliability . The Internet and Higher Education , 9 ( 1 ) : 1 – 8 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . iheduc . 2005 . 11 . 001 Gilbert , SA . 2018 . Motivations for participating in online initiatives : exploring motivations across initiative types . Thesis ( PhD ) , University of British Columbia . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3022198 . 3024941 Goldman , J , Shilton , K , Burke , J , Estrin , D , Hansen , M , Ramanathan , N , Reddy , S , Samanta , V , Srivas - tava , M and West , R . 2009 . Participatory sensing : A citizen - powered approach to illuminating the patterns that shape our world . Foresight and Governance Project White Paper . California , Los Angeles . Grouzet , FM , Kasser , T , Ahuvia , A , Dols , JMF , Kim , Y , Lau , S , Ryan , RM , Saunders , S , Schmuck , P and Sheldon , KM . 2005 . The structure of goal contents across 15 cultures . Journal of Personality and Social Psychol - ogy , 89 ( 5 ) : 800 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 89 . 5 . 800 Guo , B , Yu , Z , Zhou , X and Zhang , D . 2014 . From par - ticipatory sensing to mobile crowd sensing . In the Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communication Work - shops , pp . 593 – 598 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / PerComW . 2014 . 6815273 Hajikhani , A , Silva , M and Porras , J . 2018 . Crowd intelligence participation in digital ecosystem : System - atic process for driving insight from social network services data . Academy of Management Global Proceed - ings , 54 . Haklay , M . 2013 . Citizen science and volunteered geographic information : Overview and typology of participation . In : Sui , D , Elwood , S and Goodchild , M Crowdsourcing Geo - graphic Knowledge . London : Springer . pp . 105 – 122 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 94 - 007 - 4587 - 2 _ 7 Hand , E . 2010 . People power : networks of human minds are taking citizen science to a new level . Nature , 466 ( 5 ) : 685 – 687 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 466685a Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 18 of 20 Hanel , PH , Vione , KC , Hahn , U and Maio , GR . 2017 . Value instantiations : the missing link between values and behavior ? In : Roccas , S and Sagiv , L Values and behavior . Cham : Springer . pp . 175 – 190 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 56352 - 7 _ 8 Heggen , S . 2013 . Participatory sensing : repurposing a scien - tific tool for stem education . Interactions , 20 ( 1 ) : 18 – 21 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2405716 . 2405722 Hsieh , G , Hou , Y , Chen , I and Truong , KN . 2013 . Wel - come ! : social and psychological predictors of volun - teer socializers in online communities . In Proceed - ings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported cooperative work , pp . 827 – 838 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2441776 . 2441870 Iacovides , I , Jennett , C , Cornish - Trestrail , C and Cox , AL . 2013 . Do games attract or sustain engagement in citizen science ? : A study of volunteer motivations . In the CHI13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1101 – 1106 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468553 IDEO . 2015 . The field guide to human - centered design , Canada : IDEO . org . Jaimes , LG , Vergara - Laurens , IJ and Raij , A . 2015 . A sur - vey of incentive techniques for mobile crowd sensing . IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 2 ( 5 ) : 370 – 380 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / JIOT . 2015 . 2409151 Jennett , C and Cox , AL . 2018 . Digital citizen science and the motivations of volunteers . In : Norman , KL and Kira - kowski , J The Wiley Handbook of Human Computer Inter - action . 2nd Edition . John Wiley & Sons Ltd . pp . 831 – 841 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 9781118976005 . ch39 Kasser , T . 2002 . Sketches for a self - determination theory of values . Handbook of self - determination research , pp . 123 – 40 . Kasser , T and Ryan , RM . 1996 . Further examining the American dream : Differential correlates of intrin - sic and extrinsic goals . Personality and Social Psy - chology Bulletin , 22 ( 3 ) : 280 – 287 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0146167296223006 Kasser , T , Ryan , RM , Couchman , CE and Sheldon , KM . 2004 . Materialistic values : Their causes and conse - quences . Psychology And Consumer Culture : The Strug - gle For A Good Life In A Materialistic World , 1 ( 2 ) : 11 – 28 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 10658 - 002 Khan , WZ , Xiang , Y , Aalsalem , MY and Arshad , Q . 2012 . Mobile phone sensing systems : A survey . IEEE Commu - nications Surveys and Tutorials , 15 ( 1 ) : 402 – 427 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / SURV . 2012 . 031412 . 00077 Kingston T . 2016 . Cute , Creepy , or Crispy—How Values , Attitudes , and Norms Shape Human Behavior Toward Bats . In : Voigt C and Kingston T Bats in the Anthro - pocene : Conservation of Bats in a Changing World . Cham : Springer . pp . 571 – 588 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 25220 - 9 _ 18 Knowles , B . 2013 . Cyber - sustainability : towards a sustain - able digital future . Thesis ( PhD ) , Lancaster University . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5040 / 9781474294102 . ch - 030 Krippendorff , K . 2011 . Computing Krippendorffs Alpha Reliability . Pennsylvania : University of Pennsylvania . Retrieved from http : / / repository . upenn . edu / asc _ papers / 43 . Krippendorff , K . 2018 . Content analysis : An introduction to its methodology . United States of America : SAGE . Krontiris , I , Langheinrich , M and Shilton , K . 2014 . Trust and privacy in mobile experience sharing : future challenges and avenues for research . IEEE Commu - nications Magazine , 52 ( 8 ) : 50 – 55 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MCOM . 2014 . 6871669 Land - Zandstra , AM , Devilee , JL , Snik , F , Buurmeijer , F and van den Broek , JM . 2016 . Citizen science on a smartphone : Participants motivations and learning . Public Understanding of Science , 25 ( 1 ) : 45 – 60 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0963662515602406 Loss , SR , Loss , SS , Will , T and Marra , PP . 2015 . Link - ing place - based citizen science with large - scale con - servation research : a case study of bird - building collisions and the role of professional scientists . Bio - logical Conservation , 184 : 439 – 445 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biocon . 2015 . 02 . 023 Maio , GR . 2016 . The psychology of human values . Abingdon : Routledge . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 9781315622545 Mapuva , J . 2015 . Citizen Participation , Mobilisation and Contested Participatory Spaces . International Journal of Political Science and Development , 3 ( 10 ) : 405 – 415 . Mukta , MSH , Ali , ME and Mahmud , J . 2016 . User gen - erated vs . supported contents : Which one can better predict basic human values ? In the Proceedings of the Springer International Conference on Social Informat - ics , pp . 454 – 470 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 47874 - 6 _ 31 Newman , G , Wiggins , A , Crall , A , Graham , E , Newman , S and Crowston , K . 2012 . The future of citizen sci - ence : emerging technologies and shifting paradigms . Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment , 10 ( 6 ) : 298 – 304 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1890 / 110294 Nov , O , Arazy , O and Anderson , D . 2011 . Dusting for science : motivation and participation of digi - tal citizen science volunteers . In Proceedings of the 2011 ACM iConference , pp . 68 – 74 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1940761 . 1940771 Orchard , S . 2018 . Growing citizen science for conserva - tion to support diverse project objectives and the motivations of volunteers . Pacific Conservation Biology , 25 ( 4 ) : pp . 342 – 344 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1071 / PC18011 Palacin - Silva , MV . 2018 . Understanding civic partici - pation in environmental sensing : A values driven approach . In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1 – 4 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3170427 . 317 3029 Palacin - Silva , MV , Knutas , A , Ferrario , MA , Porras , J , Ikonen , J and Chea , C . 2018 . The role of gamification in participatory environmental sensing : A study in the wild . In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM CHI Conference Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 19 of 20 on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 221 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173795 Preece , J . 2016 . Citizen science : New research challenges for human – computer interaction . International Jour - nal of Human - Computer Interaction , 32 ( 8 ) : 585 – 612 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2016 . 11941 53 Preece , J and Shneiderman , B . 2009 . The reader - to - leader framework : Motivating technology - mediated social participation . AIS Transactions on Human - Computer Interaction , 1 ( 1 ) : 13 – 32 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17705 / 1thci . 00005 Quick , KS and Bryson , JM . 2016 . Public Partici - pation . In : Ansell , C and Torbing , J Handbook on theories of governance . Northampton , MA : Edgar Elgar Publishing . p . 158 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4337 / 9781782548508 . 00022 Reed , J , Raddick , MJ , Lardner , A and Carney , K . 2013 . An exploratory factor analysis of motivations for participating in zooniverse , a collection of virtual citizen science projects . In the Proceedings of the 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sci - ences , pp . 610 – 619 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 2013 . 85 Reed , MS . 2008 . Stakeholder participation for environ - mental management : A literature review . Biological Conservation , 141 ( 10 ) : 2417 – 2431 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biocon . 2008 . 07 . 014 Restuccia , F , Das , SK and Payton , J . 2016 . Incen - tive mechanisms for participatory sensing : Survey and research challenges . ACM Transactions on Sen - sor Networks ( TOSN ) , 12 ( 2 ) : pp . 13 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2888398 Rokeach , M . 1973 . The Nature of Human Values . New York : Free Press . Rotman , D , Hammock , J , Preece , J , Hansen , D , Boston , C , Bowser , A and He , Y . 2014a . Motivations affecting initial and long - term participation in citizen science projects in three countries . In the Proceedings of the iConference 2014 . Rotman , D , Hammock , J , Preece , JJ , Boston , CL , Hansen , DL , Bowser , A and He , Y . 2014b . Does moti - vation in citizen science change with time and culture ? In the Proceedings of the companion publication of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported coop - erative work & social computing , pp . 229 – 232 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556420 . 2556492 Rotman , D , Preece , J , Hammock , J , Procita , K , Hansen , D , Parr , C , Lewis , D and Jacobs , D . 2012 . Dynamic changes in motivation in collaborative citizen - science projects . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on computer supported cooperative work , pp . 217 – 226 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145238 Ruge , T . 2015 . Technology and people power : 5 ways to shape the sustainable development goals . Available at https : / / www . theguardian . com / global - development - professionals - network / 2015 / jan / 15 / sustainble - devel - opment - goals - technology - participation - africa ( Last accessed on 08 / 01 / 2019 ) . Ryan , RM and Deci , EL . 2000a . Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations : Classic definitions and new directions . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 25 ( 1 ) : 54 – 67 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1006 / ceps . 1999 . 1020 Ryan , RM and Deci , EL . 2000b . Self - determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation , social devel - opment , and well - being . American Psychologist , 55 ( 1 ) : 68 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0003 - 066X . 55 . 1 . 68 Ryan , RM and Deci , EL . 2017 . Self - determination theory : Basic psychological needs in motivation , development , and wellness . New York : The Guilford Press . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1521 / 978 . 14625 / 28806 Safecast . 2019 . About Safecast . Available at https : / / blog . safecast . org / about / ( Last accessed on 08 / 01 / 2019 ) . SAGE Research Methods Encyclopedia . 2008 . Inter - coder reliability . Available at : http : / / methods . sage - pub . com / reference / encyclopedia - of - survey - research - methods / n228 . xml ( Last accessed on 06 / 25 / 2019 ) . Schwartz , SH . 1994 . Are there universal aspects in the structure and contents of human values ? Jour - nal of Social Issues , 50 ( 4 ) : 19 – 45 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 4560 . 1994 . tb01196 . x Schwartz , SH . 2003 . A proposal for measuring value ori - entations across nations . Questionnaire Package of the European Social Survey , 259 ( 290 ) : 261 . Schwartz , SH . 2006 . Basic Human Values : An Overview . Basic Human Values : Theory , Methods , and Applica - tions . Jerusalem : Jerusalem Hebrew University . Schwartz , SH . 2012 . An overview of the Schwartz theory of basic values . Online readings in Psychology and Cul - ture , 2 ( 1 ) : 11 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 9707 / 2307 - 0919 . 1116 Seddig , D and Davidov , E . 2018 . Values , attitudes toward interpersonal violence , and interpersonal violent behavior . Frontiers in Psychology , 9 : 604 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2018 . 00604 See , L , Mooney , P , Foody , G , Bastin , L , Comber , A , Estima , J , Fritz , S , Kerle , N , Jiang , B , Laakso , M , et al . 2016 . Crowdsourcing , citizen science or volunteered geographic information ? The current state of crowd - sourced geographic information . ISPRS International Journal of Geo - Information , 5 ( 5 ) : 55 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijgi5050055 Tyack , A and Mekler , ED . 2020 . Self - determination theory in HCI games research : Current uses and open questions . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1 – 22 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376723 United Nations . 1992 . Agenda 21 . Rio de Janerio , Brasil : UN . United Nations Economic Commission for Europe . 1998 . Aarhus Convention : Convention on Access to Information , Public Participation in Decision - making , and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters . Aarhus , Denmark : UN . University of Washington Center for Game Science . 2019 . Recap of recent foldit publications . Available at https : / / fold . it / portal / node / 992198 ( Last accessed on 08 / 01 / 2019 ) . Palacin et al : Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science Art . 22 , page 20 of 20 How to cite this article : Palacin , V , Gilbert , S , Orchard , S , Eaton , A , Ferrario , MA and Happonen , A . 2020 . Drivers of Participation in Digital Citizen Science : Case Studies on Järviwiki and Safecast . Citizen Science : Theory and Practice , 5 ( 1 ) : 22 , pp . 1 – 20 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5334 / cstp . 290 Submitted : 19 October 2019 Accepted : 07 August 2020 Published : 12 October 2020 Copyright : © 2020 The Author ( s ) . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License ( CC - BY 4 . 0 ) , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original author and source are credited . See https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . Citizen Science : Theory and Practice is a peer - reviewed open access journal published by Ubiquity Press . OPEN ACCESS Values in Computing . 2019 . Vic tools . Available at http : / / www . valuesincomputing . org / tools / ( Last accessed on 09 / 23 / 2019 ) . Yin , RK . 2018 ( sixth edition ) . Case study research : design and methods . Los Angeles : SAGE Publications . Zaman , J and De Meuter , W . 2015 . Discopar : Distrib - uted components for participatory campaigning . In the Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE International Con - ference on Pervasive Computing and Communications , pp . 160 – 165 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / PER - COMW . 2015 . 7134012 Zooniverse project . 2019 . GalaxyZoo Data . Avail - able at https : / / data . galaxyzoo . org / ( Last accessed on 08 / 01 / 2019 ) . Publication IV Palacin , V . , Ginnane , S . , Ferrario , M . A . , Happonen , A . , Wolﬀ , A . , Piutunen , S . and Kupiainen , N SENSEI : Harnessing Community Wisdom for Local Environmental Monitoring in Finland In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , No . CS01 , pp . 1 - 8 , 2019 c (cid:13) 2019 . ACM . Reprinted with permission . S E N S E I i s a c o mm u n i t y i n i t i a t i v e i n v o l v i n g l o - c a l s , r e s e a r c h e r s , c o mm u n i t y o r g a n i s a t i o n s a n d d e c i s i o n m a k e r s a i m i n g t o u n d e r s t a n d t h e c h a l - l e n g e s t h e y a ll c a r e a b o u t . T h e i n i t i a t i v e h a s s h o w n h o w t e c h n o l o g y a n d p a r t i c i p a t o r y p r a c - t i c e s c a n b e c o m b i n e d t o a dd r e ss i ss u e s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n , m a k e s e n s e o f d a t a a n d s o l v e p r o b l e m s c o ll e c t i v e l y . S E N S E I : H a r n e ss i n g C o mm u n i t y W i s d o m f o r L o c a l E n v i r o n m e n t a l M o n i t o r i n g i n F i n l a n d V i c t o r i a P a l a c i n L U T U n i v e r s i t y L a pp ee n r a n t a , F i n l a n d v i c t o r i a . p a l a c i n @ l u t . f i S i l e G i nn a n e L i b e r t y B e ll D u b l i n , I r e l a n d s i l e @ l i b e r t y b e ll . i e M a r i a A n g e l a F e rr a r i o L a n c a s t e r U n i v e r s i t y L a n c a s t e r , U K m . a . f e rr a r i o @ l a n c a s t e r . a c . u k A r i H a pp o n e n L U T U n i v e r s i t y L a pp ee n r a n t a , F i n l a n d n a m e . l a s t n a m e @ l u t . f i A nn i k a W o l ff L U T U n i v e r s i t y L a pp ee n r a n t a , F i n l a n d n a m e . l a s t n a m e @ l u t . f i S a r a P i u t u n e n L a pp ee n r a n t a E n v i r o n m e n t a l O ff i c e L a pp ee n r a n t a , F i n l a n d S a r a . P i u t u n e n @ l a pp ee n r a n t a . f i N ii n a K u p i a i n e n M E - t a l o L a pp ee n r a n t a L a pp ee n r a n t a , F i n l a n d n ii n a . k u p i a i n e n @ n i c e h e a r t s . c o m P e r m i ss i o n t o m a k e d i g i t a l o r h a r d c o p i e s o f p a r t o r a ll o f t h i s w o r k f o r p e r s o n a l o r c l a ss r oo m u s e i s g r a n t e d w i t h o u t f ee p r o v i d e d t h a t c o p i e s a r e n o t m a d e o r d i s t r i b u t e d f o r p r o f i t o r c o mm e r c i a l a d v a n t a g e a n d t h a t c o p i e s b e a r t h i s n o t i c e a n d t h e f u ll c i t a t i o n o n t h e f i r s t p a g e . C o p y r i g h t s f o r t h i r d - p a r t y c o m p o n e n t s o f t h i s w o r k m u s t b e h o n o r e d . F o r a ll o t h e r u s e s , c o n t a c t t h e o w n e r / a u t h o r ( s ) . C H I ’ 19 E x t e n d e d A b s t r a c t s , M a y 4 – 9 , 2019 , G l a g s g o w , S c o t l a n d , U K © 2019 C o p y r i g h t h e l d b y t h e o w n e r / a u t h o r ( s ) . A C M I S B N 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5971 - 9 / 19 / 05 . h tt p s : / / d o i . o r g / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3299047 C H I 2 019 C a s e S t u d y C H I 2 019 , M a y 4 – 9 , 2 019 , G l a s g o w , S c o t l a n d , U K C S 01 , P a g e 1 A B S T R A C T T h e w a y p e o p l e p a r t i c i p a t e i n d e c i s i o n m a k i n g h a s r a d i c a ll y c h a n g e d o v e r t h e l a s t f e w d e c a d e s . T e c h n o l o g y h a s f a c i l i t a t e d t h e s h a r i n g o f k n o w l e d g e , i d e a s a n d o p i n i o n s a c r o ss s o c i a l s t r u c t u r e s , a n d h a s a ll o w e d g r a ss - r oo t i n i t i a t i v e s t o f l o u r i s h . P a r t i c i p a t o r y c i v i c t e c h n o l o g y h a s h e l p e d l o c a l c o mm u n i t i e s e m b r a c e c i v i c a c t i o n o n m a tt e r s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n . I n t h i s c a s e s t u d y , w e d e s c r i b e S E N S E I , a y e a r - l o n g p a r t i c i p a t o r y s e n s i n g m o v e m e n t . L o c a l c o mm u n i t y o r g a n i s a t i o n s , d e c i s i o n m a k e r s , f a m i l i e s , i n d i v i d u a l s a n d r e s e a r c h e r s w o r k e d t o g e t h e r t o c o - c r e a t e c i v i c t e c h n o l o g i e s t o h e l p t h e m a dd r e ss e n v i r o n m e n t a l i ss u e s o f s h a r e d i n t e r e s t , s u c h a s i n v a s i v e p l a n t s p e c i e s , a b a n d o n e d i t e m s i n t h e f o r e s t s a n d n i c e p l a c e s . O v e r 240 l o c a l p a r t i c i p a n t s h a v e t a k e n p a r t t o t h e d i ff e r e n t s t a g e s o f t h i s y e a r l o n g p r o c e ss w h i c h i n c l u d e d t e n c o mm u n i t y e v e n t s a n d w o r k s h o p s . A s a r e s u l t , o v e r a h u n d r e d c o n c r e t e i d e a s a b o u t i ss u e s o f c o mm o n i n t e r e s t w e r e g e n e r a t e d , n e a r l y t h i r t y c i v i c t e c h p r o t o t y p e s w e r e d e s i g n e d a n d d e v e l o p e d , a l o n g w i t h h u n d r e d s o f e n v i r o n m e n t a l o b s e r v a t i o n s . I n t h i s p a p e r , w e d e s c r i b e t h e p r o c e ss o r o r c h e s t r a t i o n o f t h i s i n i t i a t i v e a n d p r e s e n t k e y r e f l e c t i o n s f r o m i t . F i g u r e 1 : P a l e tt e o f P a r t i c i p a t i o n i n P a r t i c - i p a t o r y S e n s i n g , a d a p t e d f r o m [ 10 ] . E v e r y i n t e r a c t i o n b e t w ee n p e o p l e a n d c i v i c t e c h n o l o g y i s a d e l i b e r a t e a n d i n t e n t i o n a l a c t o f p u b l i c p a r t i c i p a t i o n . A s s u c h , p u b l i c p a r t i c - i p a t i o n i n P S c a n t a k e d i ff e r e n t f o r m s - f r o m t h e p e r s o n c o ll e c t i n g d a t a a b o u t p r e d e f i n e d i s - s u e s ( d a t a p r o v i d e r ) ; t h e p e r s o n c o ll a b o r a t i n g w i t h a u t h o r i t i e s t o m o n i t o r i ss u e s p r e d e f i n e d b y a u t h o r i t i e s ( c o ll a b o r a t o r ) ; t h e p e r s o n c o - c r e a t i n g s o l u t i o n s t o a dd r e ss i ss u e s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n ( c o - c r e a t o r ) ; t h e p e r s o n w h o i d e a t e s c i v i c a c t i o n s ( i d e a t o r ) ; t o t h e p e r s o n w h o d i s - r u p t s e s t a b l i s h e d p r o c e ss e s b y p a ss i v e n o n - p a r t i c i p a t i o n o r n e g a t i v e p a r t i c i p a t i o n ( d i s r u p - t o r ) . CC S C O N C E P T S • H u m a n - c e n t e r e d c o m p u t i n g → F i e l d s t ud i e s ; I n t e r a c t i o n d e s i g n p r o c e ss a n d m e t h o d s ; K E Y W O R D S c i v i c t e c h ; c o - c r e a t i o n ; c i v i c p a r t i c i p a t i o n ; p a r t i c i p a t o r y s e n s i n g ; e n v i r o n m e n t a l m o n i t o r i n g A C M R e f e r e n c e F o r m a t : V i c t o r i a P a l a c i n , S i l e G i nn a n e , M a r i a A n g e l a F e rr a r i o , A r i H a pp o n e n , A nn i k a W o l ff , S a r a P i u t u n e n , a n d N ii n a K u p i a i n e n . 2019 . S E N S E I : H a r n e ss i n g C o mm u n i t y W i s d o m f o r L o c a l E n v i r o n m e n t a l M o n i t o r i n g i n F i n l a n d . I n C H I C o n f e r e n c e o n H u m a n F a c t o r s i n C o m p u t i n g S y s t e m s E x t e n d e d A b s t r a c t s ( C H I ’ 19 E x t e n d e d A b s t r a c t s ) , M a y 4 – 9 , 2019 , G l a g s g o w , S c o t l a n d , U K . A C M , N e w Y o r k , N Y , U S A , 8 p a g e s . h tt p s : / / d o i . o r g / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3299047 I N T R O D U C T I O N I n t h e p a s t f i v e y e a r s , H C I h a s s ee n a " c i v i c t u r n " , w h i c h h a s r e s u l t e d i n a r i c h b o d y o f s t u d y a b o u t t h e i n t e r p l a y b e t w ee n c i v i c s a n d t e c h n o l o g y [ 5 , 8 ] . R e s e a r c h i n t h e w i l d [ 12 ] , p a r t i c i p a t o r y d e s i g n [ 14 ] , s p e c u l a t i v e d e s i g n [ 5 ] a n d a c t i o n r e s e a r c h i n t e r v e n t i o n s [ 1 ] t o s t u d y t h i s i n t e r p l a y i n c o mm u n i t y s e tt i n g s h a v e i n c r e a s e d i n p o p u l a r i t y . C u rr e n t H C I r e s e a r c h i s f a c i n g a g r o w i n g c h a ll e n g e t o i m p r o v e t h e q u a l i t y a n d s u s t a i n a b i l i t y o f r e s e a r c h p r o j e c t o u t c o m e s . T h e f i e l d i s m o v i n g a w a y f r o m b e i n g c o n f i n e d t o t h e d e s i g n a n d d e p l o y m e n t o f c o n s u l t a t i o n t e c h n o l o g y [ 7 ] t o w a r d s a p r o c e ss o f w o r k i n g a l o n g s i d e l o c a l c o mm u n i t i e s t o c r e a t e a n d d e p l o y c i v i c t e c h n o l o g y t h a t a dd r e ss e s m a tt e r s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n [ 2 , 4 , 13 – 15 ] . I n t h i s p a p e r , w e d e s c r i b e t h e p r o c e ss o f c o - c r e a t i n g a y e a r l o n g p a r t i c i p a t o r y s e n s i n g m o v e m e n t b e t w ee n l o c a l p e o p l e , m u n i c i p a l o ff i c e r s a n d c o mm u n i t y o r g a n i s a t i o n s a r o u n d e n v i r o n m e n t a l i ss u e s o f C H I 2 019 C a s e S t u d y C H I 2 019 , M a y 4 – 9 , 2 019 , G l a s g o w , S c o t l a n d , U K C S 01 , P a g e 2 c o mm o n c o n c e r n . T h e a pp r o a c h f o c u s e d o n s u pp o r t i n g t h e c r e a t i o n , e n g a g e m e n t a n d s e n s e - m a k i n g o f c i v i c t e c h n o l o g y , w h i l e e m b r a c i n g d i ff e r e n t t y p e s o f p u b l i c p a r t i c i p a t i o n ( S ee F i g . 1 ) . W e u s e d d i ff e r e n t m e t h o d o l o g i c a l a pp r o a c h e s ( n a m e l y w o r k s h o p s , s u r v e y s a n d i n t e r v i e w s ) t o g e t a n u n d e r s t a n d i n g o f t h e p r e ss i n g n ee d s o f t h e d i ff e r e n t s t a k e h o l d e r s , t h e i r m o t i v e s f o r e n g a g i n g w i t h t h i s i n i t i a t i v e , h o w t h e y i m a g i n e c i v i c t e c h n o l o g y c a n b e u s e d , a n d h o w b e s t t o c o - d e s i g n w i t h t h e m . T h i s r e s e a r c h w a s d o n e i n s e v e n s t a g e s ( i d e n t i f y , f r a m e , i m a g i n e , c r e a t e , d e p l o y , o r c h e s t r a t e a n d s u s t a i n ) - e x p a n d i n g o n p r e v i o u s w o r k o n s u s t a i n a b l e c o mm u n i t y e n g a g e m e n t u s i n g c i v i c t e c h n o l o g y [ 2 ] a n d f o ll o w i n g a n i n - t h e - w i l d a pp r o a c h [ 12 ] . T h e k e y c o n t r i b u t i o n s o f t h i s p a p e r a r e t h r ee - f o l d : ( 1 ) o u t l i n e t h e a pp l i c a t i o n o f H C I a pp r o a c h e s t o i n f o r m a n d o r c h e s t r a t e a c o mm u n i t y i n i t i a t i v e a r o u n d i ss u e s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n ; ( 2 ) g i v e i n s i g h t s i n t o t h e u s e o f p a r t i c i p a t o r y s e n s i n g i n n u r t u r i n g a n d s u pp o r t i n g l o n g - t e r m s u s t a i n a b l e p r a c t i c e s ( 3 ) o u t l i n e l e a r n i n g s t h a t c o u l d b e h e l p f u l f o r f u t u r e c o - c r e a t e d e n v i r o n m e n t a l p a r t i c i p a t o r y s e n s i n g s y s t e m s . T H E S E N S E I I N I T I A T I V E F i g u r e 2 : S E N S E I A pp r o a c h b a s e d o n C i t y C o mm o n s [ 2 ] a n d S p ee d p l a y [ 6 ] T a b l e 1 : S t a g e s , G o a l s a n d O u t c o m e s S t a g e G o a l O u t c o m e I d e n t i f y 1 . I d e n t i f y m a tt e r s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n ; 2 . M a p o u t c o mm u n i t i e s , d e c i s i o n - m a k e r s , o r g a n i s a t i o n s a n d o t h e r b o d i e s t h a t m i g h t b e i n t e r e s t e d i n w o r k i n g t o g e t h e r t o f i n d s o l u t i o n s . a ) C r o ss - c u l t u r a l p a r t n e r s h i p a g r ee m e n t b ) P r e l i m i n a r y m a p o f m a tt e r s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n c ) A c t i o n p l a n F r a m e 1 . U n d e r s t a n d t h e m a tt e r s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n ; 2 . M a p t h e i n d i v i d u a l m o t i v e s o f t h e p a r t i c i p a n t s t o a d j u s tt h e s h a r e d p u r p o s e o f o u r i n i t i a t i v e ; 3 . E x p l o r e t h e p o ss i b l e u s e s o f t e c h n o l o g y t o a dd r e ss t h e m a tt e r s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n . a ) M a p o ff r a m e d m a tt e r s o f c o n c e r n I m a g i n e 1 . U n d e r s t a n d a s p i r a t i o n s a n d r e q u i r e m e n t s . a ) D e f i n e R e q u i r e m e n t s , b ) D e s i g n o f P r o t o t y p e s C r e a t e 1 . B u i l d a n d t e s tt h e p r o t o t y p e s y s t e m ( s ) . a ) P r o t o t y p e v 1 . 0 . . . v X . 0 D e p l o y 1 . U n d e r s t a n d h o w p e o p l e i n t e r a c t w i t h t h e t oo l s i n t h e i r n a t u r a l e n v i r o n m e n t s a n d w i t h o u t i n s t r u c t i o n s ; 2 . C o ll e c t f ee d b a c k f r o m p a r t i c i p a n t s t o i m p r o v e t h e p r o t o t y p e s y s t e m . a ) P r o t o t y p e i m p r o v e m e n t b ) U s a g e p a tt e r n s c ) U s e r f ee d b a c k l o g s O r c h e s t r a t e 1 . E n h a n c e s e n s e - m a k i n g s k i ll s b y d e m o n s t r a t i n g t h e u s e f u l n e ss o f t h e c o - c r e a t e d r e s u l t s . a ) D a t a l i t e r a c y p l a n S u s t a i n 1 . R e f l e c t o n t h e i n i t a t i v e 2 . R e l e a s e t oo l s a n d o p e n d a t a 3 . P l a n f o r f u t u r e s y s t e m d e v e l o p m e n t a ) O p e n r e p o r t o n l e a r n i n g s b ) M a k e t oo l s a cc e ss i b l e a s o p e n s o u r c e d ) O p e n D a t a e ) F o ll o w - u p b i d s = = – S E N S E I i s a c o mm u n i t y i n i t i a t i v e t h a t a i m s t o s h o w h o w t e c h n o l o g y a n d p a r t i c i p a t o r y p r a c t i c e s c a n b e c o m b i n e d t o m o n i t o r i ss u e s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n , m a k e s e n s e o f d a t a a n d s o l v e p r o b l e m s c o ll e c t i v e l y . O ff i c e r s f r o m e n v i r o n m e n t a l m a n a g e m e n t , n e i g h b o r h oo d p a r t i c i p a t i o n a n d s e r v i c e s d e v e l o p m e n t i n t h e m u n i c i p a l i t y w e r e i n v o l v e d i n t h e e n t i r e p r o c e ss . M E - t a l o 1 p l a y e d t h e r o l e o f c o mm u n i t y 1 M e - t a l o i s a n N G O a n d a c o mm u n i t y c e n t r e u s e d f o r a c t i v i t i e s f o r e v e r y o n e i n t o w n c oo r d i n a t o r . L i b e r t y B e ll 2 s h a r e d t h e i r f i e l d r e s e a r c h t oo l s f o r c o mm u n i t y m o n i t o r i n g p r o j e c t s . T h e 2 L i b e r t y B e ll i s a f i e l d r e s e a r c h p l a t f o r m u s i n g s m a r t b y c i c l e b e ll s a n d w r i s t b a n d s t o g a i n i n - s i g h t s i n t o t h e e x p e r i e n c e s o f p e o p l e o n t h e m o v e r e s e a r c h e r s i n f o r m e d a n d o r c h e s t r a t e d t h e p r o c e ss o f t h e i n i t i a t i v e u s i n g n o v e l r e s e a r c h f r a m e w o r k s f r o m H C I r e s e a r c h [ 2 , 6 , 12 ] . O v e r 240 p a r t i c i p a n t s , a g e d 7 t o 85 y e a r s , o f w h i c h 212 w e r e F i nn i s h s p e a k e r s a n d 28 w e r e E n g l i s h s p e a k e r s , w e r e i n v o l v e d o v e r a p e r i o d o f 10 m o n t h s . T e n e v e n t s a n d w o r k s h o p s g e n e r a t e d o v e r 100 i d e a s a b o u t i ss u e s o f s h a r e d i n t e r e s t , 28 c i v i c t e c h p r o t o t y p e s a n d d o z e n s o f s e n s e - m a k i n g a r t i f a c t s , i n c l u d i n g d a t a i n t e r a c t i o n s , a n a l y s i s o f d a t a s e t s a n d d a t a s c u l p t u r e s . A p l a t f o r m f o r e n v i r o n m e n t a l m o n i t o r i n g i n c l u d i n g s e n s i n g d e v i c e s , a w e b s i t e a n d a pp s w a s b u i l t d u r i n g t h i s p r o c e ss . T h i s p l a t f o r m h a s b ee n u s e d f o r 90 d a y s d u r i n g 2018 b y 64 p e o p l e t o m o n i t o r e n v i r o n m e n t a l i ss u e s i n t o w n . M E T H O D O u r a pp r o a c h c o m b i n e d t w o f r a m e w o r k s w h i c h d r a w i n s p i r a t i o n f r o m a c t i o n r e s e a r c h , d e s i g n t h i n k i n g , p a r t i c i p a t o r y d e s i g n , a g i l e d e v e l o p m e n t a n d a n i n - t h e - w i l d a pp r o a c h : i ) t h e c i t y c o mm o n s a pp r o a c h b y B a l e s t r i n i M . [ 2 ] a n d ii ) t h e S p ee d p l a y f r a m e w o r k b y F e rr a r i o M . A . [ 6 ] . T h e c i t y c o mm o n s i s a n o v e l a pp r o a c h t o o r c h e s t r a t e c o mm u n i t y e n g a g e m e n t a r o u n d i ss u e s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n , e n h a n c i n g c o mm u n i t y o w n e r s h i p , o p e nn e ss , s k i ll s d e v e l o p m e n t a n d p r o m p t i n g d i s c u ss i o n s a b o u t d a t a p r i v a c y , o w n e r s h i p a n d g o v e r n a n c e [ 2 ] . W h e r e a s t h e S p ee d p l a y f r a m e w o r k e n a b l e s t h e d e v e l o p m e n t o f C H I 2 019 C a s e S t u d y C H I 2 019 , M a y 4 – 9 , 2 019 , G l a s g o w , S c o t l a n d , U K C S 01 , P a g e 3 s o ft w a r e i n a r a p i d a n d a g i l e m a nn e r w i t h a n e m p h a s i s o n p a r t i c i p a t o r y r e f l e c t i o n [ 6 ] . W e s a w a n o pp o r t u n i t y t o c o m b i n e t h e o r c h e s t r a t i o n f e a t u r e s f r o m t h e c i t y c o mm o n s w i t h t h e t e c h n i c a l a d v a n t a g e s o f S p ee d p l a y t o e n g i n ee r t e c h n o l o g i e s u s i n g a g i l e d e v e l o p m e n t i t e r a t i o n s . A s a r e s u l t , t h e i n i t i a t i v e f o ll o w e d s e v e n s t a g e s i n a n i t e r a t i v e m a nn e r ( s ee F i g 2 ) . G o a l s a n d o u t c o m e s f o r e a c h o f t h e s t a g e s a r e d e t a i l e d i n T a b l e 1 . S t a g e 1 : I d e n t i f y ( 3 m o n t h s ) T h i s s t a g e w a s f o c u s e d o n i ) i d e n t i f y i n g m a tt e r s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n a n d ii ) m a pp i n g o u t c o mm u n i t i e s , d e c i s i o n - m a k e r s , o r g a n i s a t i o n s a n d o t h e r b o d i e s t h a t m i g h t b e i n t e r e s t e d i n w o r k i n g t o g e t h e r t o f i n d s o l u t i o n s [ 2 , 9 ] . T h e f o ll o w i n g a c t i v i t i e s w e r e c a rr i e d o u t : • O n l i n e m a pp i n g o f m a tt e r s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n : T h e r e s e a r c h e r s m a pp e d o n l i n e c o n v e r s a - t i o n s o n d i s c u ss i o n f o r u m s , n e w s a n d s o c i a l m e d i a t o c r e a t e a p r e l i m i n a r y u n d e r s t a n d i n g o f t h e i ss u e s i n t o w n . T h e s e d i s c u ss i o n s h a d i n c r e a s e d a r o u n d e n v i r o n m e n t a l i ss u e s , s u c h a s s m e ll s a n d p o ll u t i o n , i n t h e l a s t 3 y e a r s . F i g u r e 3 : P u b l i cc o n v e r s a t i o n s a t a p o p - u p s h o p i n t h e m a i n c i t y s h o pp i n g c e n t r e T a b l e 2 : T o p 10 e m e r g i n g i d e a s a b o u t i ss u e s o f i n t e r e s t e d ( g e n e r a t e d u s i n g d a t a B A S I C . i o ) T o p W o r d F r e q u e n c y P l a c e s 31 S p e c i e s 22 S t r ee t 19 O u t d oo r 16 A b a n d o n e d 14 T r a s h 11 F r ee 5 S n o w 5 R o a d s 5 B r o k e n 4 • L o c a l s t a k e h o l d e r i d e n t i f i c a t i o n : A p r e l i m i n a r y m ee t i n g w a s s e t u p w i t h m u n i c i p a l o ff i c e r s t o u n d e r s t a n d t h e i r w o r k a n d c h a ll e n g e s . T h e m a tt e r s m a pp e d i n t h e p r e v i o u s a c t i v i t y p r o v i d e d a g oo d f o c u s f o r d i s c u ss i o n a b o u t t h e i r r e l a t i o n s h i p w i t h l o c a l p e o p l e . T h i s m ee t i n g l e d t o t h e c r e a t i o n o f a l i s t o f e x i s t i n g a ss o c i a t i o n s , c o mm u n i t y g r o u p s a n d m u n i c i p a l o ff i c e s t h a t c o u l d b e i n t e r e s t e d i n w o r k i n g t o g e t h e r t o f i n d s o l u t i o n s f o r i ss u e s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n . S u b s e q u e n t l y , t h e s e p o t e n t i a l s t a k e h o l d e r s w e r e c o n t a c t e d . • P a r t n e r s h i p C o n v e r s a t i o n s : D i r e c t p h o n e c a ll s , e m a i l s a n d p a r t n e r s h i p m ee t i n g s w i t h s t a k e - h o l d e r s - a r a n g e o f n e i g h b o r h oo d a ss o c i a t i o n s , m u n i c i p a l o ff i c e s , N G O s a n d c o mm u n i t y g r o u p s - l e d t o : ( 1 ) t h e c r e a t i o n o f a n i n i t i a l m a p o f e x i s t i n g m u n i c i p a l p r i o r i t i e s , w h i c h i n c l u d e d i ss u e s s u c h a s s m e ll s , n o i s e , a l i e n p l a n t s p e c i e s , b l u e a l g a e a n d l i tt e r ; ( 2 ) c o mm i t m e n t s f o r f u t u r e a c t i o n s , t h r o u g h a c r o ss - c u l t u r a l p a r t n e r s h i p a g r ee m e n t [ 11 ] , w h i c h a r t i c u l a t e d o u r c o mm o n i n t e n t i o n s , a c t i o n s a n d g o a l s i n c l u d i n g s p e c i f i c r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s , e t h i c a l a n d l e g a l g u i d e l i n e s . T h i s a g r ee m e n t a ll o w e d t h e i n i t i a t i v e t o c o n t i n u e d e s p i t e t h e l a c k o f o ff i c i a l f u n d i n g , b e c a u s e e v e r y p a r t n e r c o mm i tt e d t o p r o v i d e s o m e r e s o u r c e s f o r t h e i n i t i a t i v e , i n c l u d i n g e x p e r t i s e , t i m e a n d m a t e r i a l s ; ( 3 ) a p l a n o f p u b l i c a c t i v i t i e s , i n c l u d i n g w o r k s h o p s a n d p u b l i c c o n v e r s a t i o n s , i n o r d e r t o o p e n t h e i n i t i a t i v e t o e v e r y o n e a n d h e l p r e a c h a c o mm o n u n d e r s t a n d i n g o f t h e s h a r e d m a tt e r s o f c o n c e r n i n t h e l o c a l c o mm u n i t y . • P u b l i c C o n v e r s a t i o n s : T h i s a c t i v i t y e n t a i l e d t a l k i n g t o p e o p l e i n p l a c e s w h e r e t h e y c o n g r e g a t e . M u n i c i p a l o ff i c e r s , i n d i v i d u a l v o l u n t ee r s a n d t h e r e s e a r c h e r s s e t u p a p o p - u p s h o p i n t h e c i t y ’ s s h o pp i n g c e n t r e a n d m i n g l e d w i t h p e o p l e ( s ee F i g 3 ) t a l k i n g a b o u t t h e i r c o n c e r n s a b o u t l o c a l e n v i r o n m e n t a l i ss u e s a n d i n v i t i n g t h e m t o u p c o m i n g i n i t i a t i v e e v e n t s . C H I 2 019 C a s e S t u d y C H I 2 019 , M a y 4 – 9 , 2 019 , G l a s g o w , S c o t l a n d , U K C S 01 , P a g e 4 S t a g e 2 : F r a m e ( 1 m o n t h ) T h e a i m o f t h i ss t a g e w a s t o i ) u n d e r s t a n d t h e m a tt e r s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n , ii ) m a p t h e i n d i v i d u a l m o t i v e s o f t h e p a r t i c i p a n t s t o a d j u s t t h e s h a r e d p u r p o s e o f o u r i n i t i a t i v e a n d iii ) e x p l o r e t h e p o ss i b l e u s e s o f t e c h n o l o g y t o a dd r e ss t h e m a tt e r s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n . T h i s s t a g e i n c l u d e d c o - c r e a t i o n w o r k s h o p s , w h e r e a n u m b e r o f d e s i g n t h i n k i n g a n d s c e n a r i o t e c h n i q u e s [ 3 ] w e r e c o m b i n e d . T h e t e c h n i q u e s u s e d i n t h i s s t a g e w e r e s e l e c t e d t o b oo s t i d e a t i o n , d e l i b e r a t i o n a n d c r e a t i v i t y a m o n g p a r t i c i p a n t s . T h e y i n c l u d e d i n t r o d u c t i o n s a n d i c e b r e a k e r s , r a p i d i d e a t i o n , c h a rr e tt e d i s c u ss i o n s a n d r e v e r s e t h i n k i n g . I d e a t i o n W o r k s h o p s : T w o w o r k s h o p o p e n d a y s w e r e o r g a n i s e d a tt h e c o mm u n i t y c e n t r e ( M E - t a l o ) t o c o n t i n u e i d e n t i f y i n g m a tt e r s o f c o mm o n c o n c e r n a n d d ee p e n t h e u n d e r s t a n d i n g o f t h o s e i ss u e s . T h e f a c i l i t a t o r s w e r e m u n i c i p a l o ff i c e r s , i n d i v i d u a l v o l u n t ee r s a n d t h e r e s e a r c h e r s . O v e r 50 p e o p l e a tt e n d e d t h e s e e v e n t s i n t o t a l . F i g u r e 4 : I d e a t i o n w o r k s h o p T h e w o r k s h o p p r o g r a mm e i n c l u d e d a c t i v i t i e s o f : i ) I n t r o d u c t i o n a n d i c e - b r e a k i n g ; ii ) R a p i d i d e a t i o n : P r o d u c e a s m a n y i d e a s a s p o ss i b l e , p i n t h e m o n a l a r g e s c a l e w a ll m a p , s h a r e y o u r t h o u g h t s w i t h o t h e r s ; iii ) C h a r e tt e s a b o u t " W h a t a r e t h e m a tt e r s o f c o n c e r n y o u w o u l d l i k e t o m o n i t o r i n t o w n ? " , " W h y a r e t h e y i m p o r t a n t f o r y o u ? " ; i v ) R e v e r s e t h i n k i n g a b o u t " H o w w o u l d y o u m o n i t o r m a tt e r s o f c o n c e r n i f t e c h n o l o g y d i d n o t e x i s t ? " . F i g u r e 5 : P r o t o t y p e s f o r O u t d oo r s A s a r e s u l t o v e r 100 s u gg e s t e d m a tt e r s o f c o n c e r n r e s u l t e d f r o m b r a i n s t o r m i n g ( s ee T a b l e 2 ) . T h e s e i d e a s w e r e a n a l y s e d a n d g r o u p e d t o g e t h e r i n t o 10 m a i n m a tt e r s o f c o n c e r n . P a r t i c i p a n t s o ft e n i ll u s - t r a t e d i d e a s b y p r o v i d i n g e x a m p l e s f r o m t h e i r d a y t o d a y e x p e r i e n c e s . I t q u i c k l y b e c a m e a pp a r e n t t h a t e n v i r o n m e n t a l i ss u e s - p o s i t i v e a n d n e g a t i v e - w e r e o f g r e a t e r i n t e r e s t t o p a r t i c i p a n t s o v e r o t h e r t o p i c s ( S ee T a b l e 2 ) . F o r e x a m p l e , s h a r i n g k n o w l e d g e a b o u t g oo d p l a c e s i n t o w n w a s a p o p u l a r i d e a . N e g a t i v e i ss u e s s u c h a s a b a n d o n e d i t e m s a n d l i tt e r w e r e o ft e n s u gg e s t e d . S t a g e 3 : I m a g i n e ( 1 m o n t h ) T h e g o a l h e r e w a s t o u n d e r s t a n d t h e p a r t i c i p a n t s ’ a s p i r a t i o n s a n d r e q u i r e m e n t s . T h i s w a s a c h i e v e d t h r o u g h c o - c r e a t i o n w o r k s h o p s t h a t d r e w b a s i s f r o m d e s i g n t h i n k i n g , u s e r - c e n t r e d d e s i g n a n d p a r t i c i - p a t o r y d e s i g n . P r o t o t y p i n g W o r k s h o p s T w o o p e n w o r k s h o p d a y s w e r e o r g a n i s e d a t t h e c o mm u n i t y c e n t r e ( M E - t a l o ) t o c o - d e s i g n t e c h n o l o g y p r o t o t y p e s t h a t w o u l d f o c u s o n t h e i d e n t i f i e d m a tt e r s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n . T h e s e w o r k s h o p s f o ll o w e d s i m i l a r o r g a n i z a t i o n s t r u c t u r e a s t h e f r a m i n g w o r k s h o p s . O v e r 50 p e o p l e a tt e n d e d t h e s e e v e n t s i n t o t a l . T h e w o r k s h o p p r o g r a mm e i n c l u d e d r o l e s t o r m i n g a n d p r o t o t y p i n g . 28 p r o t o t y p e s w e r e d e v e l o p e d b y t h e p a r t i c i p a n t s . T h e s e p r o t o t y p e s i n c l u d e d i ) w e a r a b l e s f o r h a n d , f oo t , a r m , w r i s t , h e a d ; ii ) m o b i l e a pp s ; ii i ) a tt a c h m e n t t o o t h e r t h i n g s e . g . h e a d p h o n e s , n e c k l a c e s , g l o v e s , p a dd l e - b o a r d s , p a dd l e s , b r a c e l e t s , w a l k i n g s t i c k s , s t ee r i n g w h ee l s ; i v ) c h a r a c t e r s e . g . a r e m o t e d u c k t o m o n i t o r a l g a e , a v i r t u a l p e t d r a g o n , a n e i g h b o r h oo d w a t c h c a t ( s ee F i g u r e s 6 , 7 , 5 ) . W e q u i c k l y r e a l i s e d t h a t m o b i l e a pp l i c a t i o n s w e r e a c o mm o n d e n o m i n a t o r t o a ll t h e s e p r o t o t y p e s - p a r t i c i p a n t s w o u l d o ft e n d e s c r i b e t h e i r p r o t o t y p e s a s p a r t o f a p l a t f o r m w h i c h t h e y c o u l d a cc e ss f r o m t h e i r o w n s m a r t d e v i c e s . C H I 2 019 C a s e S t u d y C H I 2 019 , M a y 4 – 9 , 2 019 , G l a s g o w , S c o t l a n d , U K C S 01 , P a g e 5 S t a g e 4 : C r e a t e ( 4 m o n t h s ) P r i o r t o c o mm e n c i n g S t a g e 4 , i n s e l e c t i n g t h e i ss u e s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n , w e n ee d e d t o s t r i k e a b a l a n c e b e t w ee n t h e i ss u e s p a r t i c i p a n t s h a d h i g h l i g h t e d i n t h e w o r k s h o p s a n d i ss u e s t h e m u n i c i p a l e n v i r o n - m e n t a l o ff i c e w e r e t a s k e d w i t h m o n i t o r i n g . A s a r e s u l t , t h e c h o s e n i ss u e s w e r e : i n v a s i v e p l a n t s p e c i e s , n i c e p l a c e s i n t o w n a n d a b a n d o n e d i t e m s i n n a t u r e ( a k a i ll e g a l l a n d f i ll s ) . I n t h i s s t a g e t h e t oo l s n ee d e d t o a dd r e ss t h e c h o s e n m a tt e r s o f s h a r e d c o n c e r n w e r e c r e a t e d . P a r t i c i p a n t s c r i t i q u e d a n d p i l o t t e s t e d t h e p r o t o t y p e s . A n A g i l e a pp r o a c h f o r p r o t o t y p e d e v e l o p m e n t w a s t a k e n w i t h t e n d a y s l o n g i t e r a t i o n s . A s a r e s u l t , t h e S E N S E I p l a t f o r m w a s c r e a t e d - a p l a t f o r m u s i n g f r o n t - e n d b l u e t oo t h d e v i c e s s u c h a s b i c y c l e b e ll s , w r i s t b a n d s a n d s t i c k y b u tt o n s ( s ee F i g 8 ) w h i c h p a r t i c i p a n t s c o u l d p r e ss t o r e p o r t a n i ss u e e . g : o n e c l i c k = i n v a s i v e p l a n t s ; t w o c l i c k s = n i c e p l a c e ; h o l d 3 s e c = a b a n d o n e d i t e m s . T h e s e d e v i c e s w e r e c o nn e c t e d t o a m o b i l e a pp l i c a t i o n ( s ee F i g 9 ) t h a t a ll o w e d p a r t i c i p a n t s t o s u b m i t p h o t o s a n d c r e a t e p r i v a t e m o n i t o r i n g s . F i g u r e 6 : W e a r a b l e P r o t o t y p e s F i g u r e 7 : A tt a c h m e n t P r o t o t y p e s S t a g e 5 : D e p l o y ( 3 m o n t h s ) T h e c r e a t e d t e c h n o l o g y w a s d e p l o y e d i n t h e w i l d a n d i t e r a t i v e l y i m p r o v e d . S t a g e 5 a ll o w e d u s t o u n d e r s t a n d h o w p a r t i c i p a n t s i n t e r a c t e d w i t h t h e t e c h n o l o g y i n t h e i r e v e r y d a y l i f e w i t h o u t i n s t r u c t i o n s . A t o t a l o f 64 l o c a l s v o l u n t ee r e d t o u s e S E N S E I o v e r a p e r i o d o f 12 w ee k s . T h i s p oo l o f p a r t i c i p a n t s i n c l u d e d l o c a l p e o p l e w h o h a d a tt e n d e d t h e w o r k s h o p s , o t h e r s w h o w e r e r e c r u i t e d b y t h e w o r k s h o p p a r t i c i p a n t s t h e m s e l v e s a n d t h o s e w h o h a d h e a r d a b o u t t h e i n i t i a t i v e f r o m t h e p a r t n e r s . A t o t a l o f 300 o b s e r v a t i o n s w e r e r e c o r d e d o n S E N S E I . S t a g e 6 : O r c h e s t r a t e ( C o n t i n u o u s ) M ee t - u p s w e r e r e g u l a r l y o r g a n i s e d w i t h p a r t i c i p a n t s t o d i s c u ss t h e i r c o n c e r n s a n d g a t h e r f ee d b a c k a b o u t t h e p l a t f o r m . E d u c a t i o n a l m a t e r i a l s a b o u t t h e i ss u e s b e i n g m o n i t o r e d w e r e d i s t r i b u t e d b y p o s t d i r e c t l y t o t h e p a r t i c i p a n t s . A p u b l i c i n t e r a c t i v e e x h i b i t i o n w a s o r g a n i s e d t o s u pp o r t s e n s e - m a k i n g w i t h c i v i c d a t a . T h e d a t a c o ll e c t e d i n t h e S E N S E I p l a t f o r m w a s u s e d t o c r e a t e s e v e r a l ’ u r b a n d a t a g a m e s ’ d e s i g n e d t o f a m i l i a r i s e p e o p l e w i t h t h e d a t a s e t s c o ll e c t e d t h r o u g h s o c i a l i n t e r a c t i o n s , b o t h d i r e c t i n t e r a c t i o n t h r o u g h c o n v e r s a t i o n o r i n d i r e c t i n t e r a c t i o n s t h r o u g h t e x t o r d a t a a r t e f a c t s l e ft i n p u b l i c v i e w . S t a g e 7 : S u s t a i n ( 2 m o n t h s ) A w o r k s h o p t o d i s c u ss t h e f u t u r e o f S E N S E I w a s o r g a n i s e d w i t h t h e p a r t i c i p a n t s . T h e d i s c u ss i o n s f o c u s e d o n t e c h n i c a l i m p r o v e m e n t s a n d n e w c i v i c a c t i o n s . T h e p a r t i c i p a n t s c o - c r e a t e d a r e p o r t o n t h e d a t a c o ll e c t e d b y S E N S E I a ss i s t e d b y r e s e a r c h e r s a n d t h e r e p o r t w i ll b e b r o u g h t t o m u n i c i p a l d e c i s i o n - m a k e r s t o i n f o r m t h e i r w o r k . C H I 2 019 C a s e S t u d y C H I 2 019 , M a y 4 – 9 , 2 019 , G l a s g o w , S c o t l a n d , U K C S 01 , P a g e 6 L E SS O N S L E A R N E D A N D K E Y R E F L E C T I O N S F i g u r e 8 : S E N S E I d e p l o y e d d e v i c e s F i g u r e 9 : S E N S E I a pp l i c a t i o n • F a c e - t o - f a c e m u l t i - c o n s t i t u e n c y c o mm u n i c a t i o n s u s t a i n s e n g a g e m e n t : D i r e c t c o mm u - n i c a t i o n w i t h t h e p a r t i c i p a n t s a n d d e c i s i o n - m a k e r s i n v o l v e d h e l p e d r a i s e a w a r e n e ss a b o u t t h e a pp r o a c h , e n h a n c e d p u b l i c e n g a g e m e n t a n d r e s u l t e d i n c l e a r c o mm i t m e n t s b y a ll t h o s e i n v o l v e d . T h e w o r k s h o p s a ll o w e d c o n s e n s u s t o b e r e a c h e d a s d i ff e r e n c e s a r o s e o v e r t h e s e l e c t i o n o f w h a t s h o u l d b e m o n i t o r e d . G i v i n g c o mm u n i t i e s a v o i c e i s a p o w e r f u l w a y o f h a r n e ss i n g t h e i r w i s d o m . H o w e v e r i t a l s o m e a n s t h a t e x p e c t a t i o n s n ee d t o b e m a n a g e d i n a t i m e l y w a y . • W e l c o m e d i ff e r e n t t y p e s o f p a r t i c i p a t i o n : O v e r t h e c o u r s e o f t h e I d e n t i f i c a t i o n s t a g e , i t b e c a m e c l e a r t h a t i n d i v i d u a l s w i s h e d t o g e t i n v o l v e d a t d i ff e r e n t l e v e l s . S o m e w e r e i n t e r e s t e d i n t h e w o r k s h o p s , w h e r e a s o t h e r s w a n t e d t o g e t i mm e d i a t e a cc e ss t o t oo l s . A s a r e s u l t , w e h a d t o r e - o r g a n i s e o u r c a ll f o r p u b l i c p a r t i c i p a t i o n i n t o t w o s t r a n d s : i ) t h o s e w i s h i n g t o g e t i n v o l v e d i n t h e w o r k s h o p s , a n d ii ) t h o s e w i s h i n g t o u s e t h e r e s u l t i n g c r e a t i o n s f o r c i v i c a c t i o n . I t w a s i m p o r t a n t t o b e f l e x i b l e a n d a ll o w f o r c h a n g i n g d y n a m i c s o v e r t h e c o u r s e o f t h e p r o c e ss . D e s i g n i n g f o r d i ff e r e n t ( o ft e n t e m p o r a l a n d p a r a ll e l ) l e v e l s o f p a r t i c i p a t i o n ( a s a c k n o w l e d g e d b y f r a m e w o r k s s u c h a s I A P 2 3 ) i s k e y t o b e g i n t o u n d e r s t a n d t h e a ff o r d a n c e s o f p a r t i c i p a t o r y 3 I A P 2 : S p e c t r u m o f P u b l i c P a r t i c i p a t i o n www . i a p 2 . o r g s e n s i n g t e c h n o l o g i e s i n t h e w i l d . • P a r t i c i p a t o r y s e n s i n g s h o u l d b e d e s i g n e d f o r d i v e r s i t y a c r o ss a ll a g e s , g e n d e r s a n d s k i ll s e t s : A ll e v e n t s w e r e o r g a n i s e d t o b e a s i n c l u s i v e a s p o ss i b l e . W o r k s h o p s w e r e h e l d i n b o t h F i nn i s h a n d E n g l i s h a n d b a l a n c e d t h e t e a m w o r k o f p a r t i c i p a n t s o f a ll a g e s , g e n d e r s a n d s k i ll s e t s . A s a r e s u l t a c o mm o n u n d e r s t a n d i n g w i t h a ll p a r t i c i p a n t s w a s b u i l t o r g a n i c a ll y . • I d e n t i f y a n d f i ll g a p s w i t h k n o w - h o w f r o m e x p e r t s : I n c o - c r e a t i n g t e c h n o l o g y , i t i s u s e f u l t o i d e n t i f y a n d f i ll a n y g a p s i n r e q u i r e d t e c h n i c a l s k i ll s . D u r i n g t h e I m a g i n e s t a g e , p a r t i c i p a n t s c a m e u p w i t h s e v e r a l p r o t o t y p e i d e a s w h i c h r e q u i r e d s p e c i f i c t e c h n i c a l s k i ll s o u t s i d e o f o u r c o r e s k i ll s e t . L i b e r t y B e ll g o t i n v o l v e d w i t h a n u m b e r o f d e v i c e s f o r t h e m o n i t o r i n g c a m p a i g n . S t u d e n t s w o r k e d o n t h e d e v e l o p m e n t o f t h e p l a t f o r m a n d m e m b e r s o f t h e c o mm u n i t y d e s i g n e d a n d p r i n t e d 3 D m o d e l s o f t h e p r o t o t y p e s w h i c h a ll o w e d u s t o e v a l u a t e t h e p r o t o t y p e s ’ s u i t a b i l i t y . • E n h a n c e s e n s e - m a k i n g s k i ll s b y u s i n g c i v i c d a t a : O u r p u b l i c e x h i b i t i o n h e l p e d f a m i l i a r i s e p e o p l e w i t h t h e d a t a s e t s c o ll e c t e d t h r o u g h p l a y f u l i n t e r a c t i o n s . • E n h a n c e t h e s e n s e o f o w n e r s h i p b y w e l c o m i n g c r i t i q u e a n d s u gg e s t i o n s : P i l o t t e s t i n g w i t h p a r t i c i p a n t s i n a r e a l - w o r l d c o n t e x t i s u s e f u l f o r d e t e c t i n g b u g s a n d i m p r o v i n g c i v i c t e c h b u t a l s o f o r e n h a n c i n g a s e n s e o f c o mm o n o w n e r s h i p . P a r t i c i p a n t s a c t i v e l y t e s t e d , c r i t i q u e d a n d s u gg e s t e d i m p r o v e m e n t s t o S E N S E I . T h e y a l s o n a m e d e a c h o f t h e p l a t f o r m r e l e a s e s . C H I 2 019 C a s e S t u d y C H I 2 019 , M a y 4 – 9 , 2 019 , G l a s g o w , S c o t l a n d , U K C S 01 , P a g e 7 C O N C L U S I O N I n t h i s p a p e r , w e d e s c r i b e t h e p r o c e ss a n d o r - c h e s t r a t i o n o f t h e S E N S E I i n i t i a t i v e a n d p r e s e n t k e y r e f l e c t i o n s f r o m i t . L o c a l c o mm u n i t y o r g a n - i s a t i o n s , d e c i s i o n m a k e r s , f a m i l i e s , i n d i v i d u a l s a n d r e s e a r c h e r s w o r k e d t o g e t h e r t o c o - c r e a t e c i v i c t e c h n o l o g i e s t o h e l p t h e m a dd r e ss e n v i - r o n m e n t a l i ss u e s o f s h a r e d i n t e r e s t , s u c h a s i n v a s i v e p l a n t s p e c i e s , a b a n d o n e d i t e m s i n t h e f o r e s t s a n d n i c e p l a c e s . T h e p u b l i c p a r t i c i p a t i o n c o n t i n uu m c o n t i n u e s t o e v o l v e , l a r g e l y d u e t o t h e r i s e i n c i v i c - t e c h w h i c hh a s f a c i l i t a t e d a c t i v i s m , p u b l i cc a m p a i g n - i n g a n d c o mm u n i t y m o n i t o r i n g . T e c h n o l o g y h a s o p e n e d u p a m y r i a d o f c o mm u n i c a t i o n c h a nn e l s b e t w ee n m u n i c i p a l d e c i s i o n - m a k e r s a n d t h e c o m m u n i t y t h e y s e r v e . C i v i c t e c h n o l - o g y a n d p a r t i c i p a t o r y s e n s i n g i n p a r t i c u l a r , a l - l o w s l o c a l g o v e r n m e n t s t o u s e c i v i c i n t e ll i g e n c e t o i d e n t i f y c o m m o n c a u s e s . L i m i t e d p u b l i c r e s o u r c e s a n d s e r v i c e s c a n a c t a s a b a rr i e r t o i m p l e m e n t i n g s o l u t i o n s t o t h e p r o b - l e m s i d e n t i f i e d . C r e a t o r s o f c i v i c p a r t i c i p a t o r y t e c h n o l o g y s h o u l d a c t i v e l y s ee k i n v o l v e m e n t a n d c oo p e r a t i o n f r o m d e c i s i o n - m a k e r s i n o r d e r t o e n s u r e t h a t t h e s u pp o r t s a n d i n f r a s t r u c t u r e a r e i n p l a c e t o a ll o w i nn o v a t i o n s t o f l o u r i s h a n d f r o m w h i c h t h e c o mm u n i t y c a n t r u l y b e n e f i t . A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S W e w o u l d l i k e t o t h a n k a ll t h e v o l u n t ee r s , p a r t - n e r s , a n d a u t h o r s w h o w r o t e a n d p r o v i d e d h e l p - f u l c o mm e n t s o n p r e v i o u s v e r s i o n s o f t h i s d o c - u m e n t . W e g r a t e f u ll y a c k n o w l e d g e t h e s u pp o r t f r o m t h e F i nn i s h C u l t u r a l F o u n d a t i o n f o r S o u t h K a r e l i a R e g i o n a n d t h e P E R CC O M p r o g r a mm e . R E F E R E N C E S [ 1 ] M a r a B a l e s t r i n i , J o n B i r d , P a u l M a r s h a ll , A l b e r t o Z a r o , a n d Y v o nn e R o g e r s . 2014 . U n d e r s t a n d i n g S u s t a i n e d C o mm u n i t y E n g a g e m e n t : A C a s e S t u d y i n H e r i t a g e P r e s e r v a t i o n i n R u r a l A r g e n t i n a . P r o c ee d i n g s o f t h e 2014 C H I C o n f e r e n c e o n H u m a n F a c t o r s i n C o m p u t i n g S y s t e m s ( 2014 ) . [ 2 ] M a r a B a l e s t r i n i , Y v o nn e R o g e r s , C a r o l y n H a ss a n , J a v i C r e u s , M a r t h a K i n g , a n d P a u l M a r s h a ll . 2017 . A c i t y i n c o mm o n : a f r a m e w o r k t oo r c h e s t r a t e l a r g e - s c a l e c i t i z e n e n g a g e m e n t a r o u n d u r b a n i ss u e s . I n P r o c ee d i n g s o f t h e 2017 C H I C o n f e r e n c e o n H u m a n F a c t o r s i n C o m p u t i n g S y s t e m s . [ 3 ] S u s a nn e B o d k e r . 1999 . S c e n a r i o s i n u s e r - c e n t r e dd e s i g n - s e tt i n g t h e s t a g e f o rr e f l e c t i o n a n d a c t i o n . I n P r o c ee d i n g s o f t h e 32 n d A nn u a l H a w a ii I n t e r n a t i o n a l C o n f e r e n c e o n S y s t e m s S c i e n c e s . I EEE . [ 4 ] S a s k i a C o u l s o n , M e l W oo d s , M i c h e ll e S c o tt , D r e w H e mm e n t , a n d M a r a B a l e s t r i n i . 2018 . S t o p t h e N o i s e ! E n h a n c i n g M e a n i n g f u l n e ss i n P a r t i c i p a t o r y S e n s i n g w i t h C o mm u n i t y L e v e l I n d i c a t o r s . I n P r o c ee d i n g s o f t h e 2018 o n D e s i g n i n g I n t e r a c t i v e S y s t e m s C o n f e r e n c e 2018 . A C M . [ 5 ] C a r l D i S a l v o , T o m J e n k i n s , a n d T h o m a s L o d a t o . 2016 . D e s i g n i n g s p e c u l a t i v e c i v i c s . I n P r o c ee d i n g s o f t h e 2016 C H I C o n f e r e n c e o n H u m a n F a c t o r s i n C o m p u t i n g S y s t e m s . A C M . [ 6 ] M a r i a A n g e l a F e rr a r i o , W i ll S i mm , S t e p h e n F o r s h a w , A d r i a n G r a d i n a r , M a r c i a T a v a r e s S m i t h , a n d I a n S m i t h . 2016 . V a l u e s - f i r s t S E : r e s e a r c h p r i n c i p l e s i n p r a c t i c e . I n P r o c ee d i n g s o f t h e 38 t h I n t e r n a t i o n a l C o n f e r e n c e o n S o ft w a r e E n g i n ee r i n g C o m p a n i o n . A C M , 553 – 562 . [ 7 ] C o nn i e G o l s t e i j n , S a r a h G a ll a c h e r , L i c i a C a p r a , a n d Y v o nn e R o g e r s . 2016 . S e n s - U s : D e s i g n i n g I nn o v a t i v e C i v i c T e c h n o l o g y f o r t h e P u b l i c G oo d . I n P r o c ee d i n g s o f t h e 2016 A C M C o n f e r e n c e o n D e s i g n i n g I n t e r a c t i v e S y s t e m s . A C M , 39 – 49 . [ 8 ] I a n G J o h n s o n , J o h n V i n e s , N i c k T a y l o r , E d w a r d J e n k i n s , a n d J u s t i n M a r s h a ll . 2016 . R e f l e c t i o n s o n D e p l o y i n g D i s t r i b u t e d C o n s u l t a t i o n T e c h n o l o g i e s w i t h C o mm u n i t y O r g a n i s a t i o n s . I n P r o c ee d i n g s o f t h e 2016 C H I C o n f e r e n c e o n H u m a n F a c t o r s i n C o m p u t i n g S y s t e m s . A C M . [ 9 ] B r u n o L a t o u r . 2004 . W h y h a s c r i t i q u e r u n o u t o f s t e a m ? F r o mm a tt e r s o ff a c tt o m a tt e r s o f c o n c e r n . C r i t i c a l i n q u i r y 30 , 2 ( 2004 ) . [ 10 ] M a r i a P a l a c i n - S i l v a a n d J a r i P o rr a s . 2018 . S h u t u p a n d t a k e m y e n v i r o n m e n t a l d a t a ! A s t u d y o n I C T e n a b l e d c i t i z e n s c i e n c e p r a c t i c e s , p a r t i c i p a t i o n a pp r o a c h e s a n d c h a ll e n g e s . . I n I C T 4 S . [ 11 ] C r o ss - C u l t u r a l P a r t n e r s h i p p r o j e c t . 2018 . C r o ss - C u l t u r a l P a r t n e r s h i p s : T o w a r d s C o nn e c t e d K n o w l e d g e . h tt p : / / c o nn e c t e d - k n o w l e d g e . n e t / . ( A cc e ss e d o n 09 / 1 7 / 2018 ) . [ 12 ] Y v o nn e R o g e r s a n d P a u l M a r s h a ll . 2017 . R e s e a r c h i n t h e W i l d . S y n t h e s i s L e c t u r e s o n H u m a n - C e n t e r e d I n f o r m a t i c s 10 , 3 ( 2017 ) . [ 13 ] W i ll S i mm , J o n W h i tt l e , R o d D i ll o n , J e n S o u t h e r n , a n d M a r i a - A n g e l a F e rr a r i o . 2013 . C o - D e s i g n i n g W i t h a n d F o r C h a o t i c L i v e s : # P a t c h w o r k s , a C a t a l y s t C a s e . I n P r o c ee d i n g s o f t h e 2013 C H I C o n f e r e n c e o n H u m a n F a c t o r s i n C o m p u t i n g S y s t e m s . [ 14 ] C h e l s e a - j o y W a r d l e , M i t c h e ll G r ee n , C h r i s t i n e W a n j i r u M b u r u , M e l i ss a D e n s m o r e , C a p e T o w n , a n d S o u t h A f r i c a . 2018 . E x p l o r i n g C o - d e s i g n w i t h B r e a s t f ee d i n g M o t h e r s . I n P r o c ee d i n g s o f t h e 2018 C H I C o n f e r e n c e o n H u m a n F a c t o r s i n C o m p u t i n g S y s t e m s . [ 15 ] A nn i k a W o l ff , A l a n - M i g u e l V a l d e z , M a tt h e w B a r k e r , S t e p h e n P o tt e r , D a n i e l G oo c h , E m i l i e G i l e s , a n d J o h n M i l e s . 2017 . E n g a g i n g w i t h t h e S m a r t C i t y T h r o u g h U r b a n D a t a G a m e s . I n P l a y a b l e C i t i e s . S p r i n g e r . C H I 2 019 C a s e S t u d y C H I 2 019 , M a y 4 – 9 , 2 019 , G l a s g o w , S c o t l a n d , U K C S 01 , P a g e 8 ACTA UNIVERSITATIS LAPPEENRANTAENSIS 897 . JÄRVISALO , HEIKKI . Applicability of GaN high electron mobility transistors in a high - speed drive system . 2020 . Diss . 898 . KOPONEN , JOONAS . Energy efficient hydrogen production by water electrolysis . 2020 . Diss . 899 . MAMELKINA , MARIA . Treatment of mining waters by electrocoagulation . 2020 . Diss . 900 . AMBAT , INDU . Application of diverse feedstocks for biodiesel production using catalytic technology . 2020 . Diss . 901 . LAAPIO - RAPI , EMILIA . Sairaanhoitajien rajatun lääkkeenmääräämistoiminnan tuottavuuden , tehokkuuden ja kustannusvaikuttavuuden arviointi perusterveydenhuollon avohoidon palveluprosessissa . 2020 . Diss . 902 . DI , CHONG . Modeling and analysis of a high - speed solid - rotor induction machine . 2020 . Diss . 903 . AROLA , KIMMO . Enhanced micropollutant removal and nutrient recovery in municipal wastewater treatment . 2020 . Diss . 904 . RAHIMPOUR GOLROUDBARY , SAEED . Sustainable recycling of critical materials . 2020 . Diss . 905 . BURGOS CASTILLO , RUTELY CONCEPCION . Fenton chemistry beyond remediating wastewater and producing cleaner water . 2020 . Diss . 906 . JOHN , MIIA . Separation efficiencies of freeze crystallization in wastewater purification . 2020 . Diss . 907 . VUOJOLAINEN , JOUNI . Identification of magnetically levitated machines . 2020 . Diss . 908 . KC , RAGHU . The role of efficient forest biomass logistics on optimisation of environmental sustainability of bioenergy . 2020 . Diss . 909 . NEISI , NEDA . Dynamic and thermal modeling of touch - down bearings considering bearing non - idealities . 2020 . Diss . 910 . YAN , FANGPING . The deposition and light absorption property of carbonaceous matter in the Himalayas and Tibetan Plateau . 2020 . Diss . 911 . NJOCK BAYOCK , FRANCOIS MITERAND . Thermal analysis of dissimilar weld joints of high - strength and ultra - high - strength steels . 2020 . Diss . 912 . KINNUNEN , SINI - KAISU . Modelling the value of fleet data in the ecosystems of asset management . 2020 . Diss . 913 . MUSIKKA , TATU . Usability and limitations of behavioural component models in IGBT short - circuit modelling . 2020 . Diss . 914 . SHNAI , IULIIA . The technology of flipped classroom : assessments , resources and systematic design . 2020 . Diss . 915 . SAFAEI , ZAHRA . Application of differential ion mobility spectrometry for detection of water pollutants . 2020 . Diss . 916 . FILIMONOV , ROMAN . Computational fluid dynamics as a tool for process engineering . 2020 . Diss . 917 . VIRTANEN , TIINA . Real - time monitoring of membrane fouling caused by phenolic compounds . 2020 . Diss . 918 . AZZUNI , ABDELRAHMAN . Energy security evaluation for the present and the future on a global level . 2020 . Diss . 919 . NOKELAINEN , JOHANNES . Interplay of local moments and itinerant electrons . 2020 . Diss . 920 . HONKANEN , JARI . Control design issues in grid - connected single - phase converters , with the focus on power factor correction . 2020 . Diss . 921 . KEMPPINEN , JUHA . The development and implementation of the clinical decision support system for integrated mental and addiction care . 2020 . Diss . 922 . KORHONEN , SATU . The journeys of becoming ang being an international entrepreneur : A narrative inquiry of the " I " in international entrepreneurship . 2020 . Diss . 923 . SIRKIÄ , JUKKA . Leveraging digitalization opportunities to improve the business model . 2020 . Diss . 924 . SHEMYAKIN , VLADIMIR . Parameter estimation of large - scale chaotic systems . 2020 . Diss . 925 . AALTONEN , PÄIVI . Exploring novelty in the internationalization process - understanding disruptive events . 2020 . Diss . 926 . VADANA , IUSTIN . Internationalization of born - digital companies . 2020 . Diss . 927 . FARFAN OROZCO , FRANCISCO JAVIER . In - depth analysis of the global power infrastructure - Opportunities for sustainable evolution of the power sector . 2020 . Diss . 928 . KRAINOV , IGOR . Properties of exchange interactions in magnetic semiconductors . 2020 . Diss . 929 . KARPPANEN , JANNE . Assessing the applicability of low voltage direct current in electricity distribution - Key factors and design aspects . 2020 . Diss . 930 . NIEMINEN , HARRI . Power - to - methanol via membrane contactor - based CO2 capture and low - temperature chemical synthesis . 2020 . Diss . 931 . CALDERA , UPEKSHA . The role of renewable energy based seawater reverse osmosis ( SWRO ) in meeting the global water challenges in the decades to come . 2020 . Diss . 932 . KIVISTÖ , TIMO . Processes and tools to promote community benefits in public procurement . 2020 . Diss . 933 . NAQVI , BILAL . Towards aligning security and usability during the system development lifecycle . 2020 . Diss . 934 . XIN , YAN . Knowledge sharing and reuse in product - service systems with a product lifecycle perspective . 2020 . Diss . 935 P A R T I C I P A T I O N I N D I G I T A L C I T I Z E N S C I E N C E M a r i a V i c t o r i a P a l a c i n S i l v a ISBN 978 - 952 - 335 - 590 - 3 ISBN 978 - 952 - 335 - 591 - 0 ( PDF ) ISSN - L 1456 - 4491 ISSN 1456 - 4491 Lappeenranta 2020