Culture and Problem - Solving : Congruency Between the Cultural Mindset of Individualism Versus Collectivism and Problem Type Sharon Arieli The Open University of Israel and The Hebrew University of Jerusalem Lilach Sagiv The Hebrew University of Jerusalem This research investigates how the cultural mindset influences problem - solving . Drawing on the notion that cultural mindset influences the cognitive process individuals bring to bear at the moment of judgment , we propose that the congruency between the cultural mindset ( individualistic vs . collectivistic ) and problem type ( rule - based vs . context - based ) affects success in problem - solving . In 7 studies we incorporated the traditional approach to studying the impact of culture ( i . e . , comparing cultural groups ) with contemporary approaches viewing cultural differences in a more dynamic and malleable manner . We first show that members of an individualistic group ( Jewish Americans ) perform better on rule - based problems , whereas members of collectivistic groups ( ultra - Orthodox Jews and Arabs from Israel ) perform better on context - based problems ( Study 1 ) . We then study Arabs in Israel using language ( Arabic vs . Hebrew ) to prime their collectivistic versus individualistic mindsets ( Study 2 ) . As hypoth - esized , among biculturals ( those who internalize both cultures ) Arabic facilitated solving context - based problems , whereas Hebrew facilitated solving rule - based problems . We follow up with 5 experiments priming the cultural mindset of individualism versus collectivism , employing various manifestations of the cultural dimension : focusing on the individual versus the collective ( Studies 3 , 6 , and 7 ) ; experiencing independence versus interdependence ( Study 4 ) ; and directing attention to objects versus the context ( Studies 5a – b ) . Finally , we took a meta - analytic approach , showing that the effects found in Studies 3 – 6 are robust across priming tasks , problems , and samples . Taken together , the differences between cultural groups ( Studies 1 – 2 ) were recreated when the individualistic / collectivistic cultural mindset was primed . Keywords : cultural mindset , individualism versus collectivism , problem - solving The present research investigates the role that cultural mindset plays in facilitating problem - solving . Integrating recent insights from the research on culture and cultural mindsets with the re - search on problem - solving , we aim to show that a match between the cultural mindset and the problem in question facilitates problem - solving . We build on two underlying assumptions . The first stems from the idea that different types of problems call for different thinking processes ( De Dreu , Baas , & Nijstad , 2008 ; Smith , Ward , & Finke , 1995 ; Weisberg , 1995 ) . Accordingly , we reason that success in problem - solving often depends on congru - ency between the type of problem people are trying to solve and the cognitive processes they bring to bear in doing so . The second assumption stems from the idea that the cognitive process people employ when they make a judgment is not random , nor is it exclusively based on idiosyncratic characteristics and circumstanc - es ; rather , it depends , at least in part , on the cultural mindset accessible at that moment ( Hong , 2009 ; Oyserman , 2011 , 2017 ) . Integrating these two underlying assumptions , we propose and show that the likelihood of solving a problem depends on the congruency between the problem in question ( the type of thinking that is required to solve the problem ) and the cultural mindset ( the type of thinking activated by particular cultural orientation ) . Past research demonstrates cross - cultural differences in cogni - tive performance and perception , investigating their consequences for social cognition and behavior ( see reviews in Nisbett , 2003 ; Nisbett , Peng , Choi , & Norenzayan , 2001 ; Varnum , Grossmann , Kitayama , & Nisbett , 2010 ) . Drawing on this literature , we aim to advance the understanding of how cultural mindset influences the way individuals think and perform . First , by focusing on problem - solving tasks , we go beyond cognitive - perception tasks and inves - tigate complex cognitive tasks requiring higher - order thinking and the application of several cognitive procedures in seeking a solu - Sharon Arieli , Department of Management and Economics , The Open University of Israel , and School of Business Administration , The Hebrew University of Jerusalem ; Lilach Sagiv , School of Business Administration , The Hebrew University of Jerusalem . This research was supported by grants from the Israel Foundations Trustees ( I . F . T ) , Peter Lougheed center for Canadian studies at the Hebrew University , the research authority of the Open University of Israel , and by the Israeli Science Foundation ( 655 / 17 ) to Sharon Arieli ; and by a grant from the Recanati Fund of the School of Business Administration at the Hebrew University to Lilach Sagiv . We thank Adva Liberman , Sari Men - tser , Liat Cohen , and Haneen Matar , for their help in conducting the studies , and Ruth Mayo , and Andrei Elster for their useful comments on earlier drafts of this article . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Sharon Arieli , Department of Management and Economics , The Open University of Israel , 1 University Road , P . O . Box 808 , Raanana , Israel 4353701 . E - mail : sharonal @ openu . ac . il or sharon . arieli @ mail . huji . ac . il T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General © 2018 American Psychological Association 2018 , Vol . 147 , No . 6 , 789 – 814 0096 - 3445 / 18 / $ 12 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / xge0000444 789 tion . Second , we build on the classification system distinguishing between analytic versus holistic processes and apply it to the domain of problem - solving , distinguishing between rule - based and context - based problems . Finally , in studying the impact of cultural mindset on problem - solving , we incorporated traditional and more contemporary approaches to studying the influence of cultures on their members . The traditional approach delineates chronic differ - ences between cultural groups . Contemporary approaches view cultural differences in a more dynamic and malleable manner , focusing on the interaction between the cultural knowledge avail - able in individuals’ minds and the cultural cues embedded in the immediate situation ( Hong , 2009 ; Oyserman , 2011 , 2017 ; Oyser - man & Sorensen , 2009 ) . We discuss the commonalities and dif - ferences between the approaches and propose an overarching hy - pothesis . We reason that finding consistent patterns of results across these approaches will demonstrate the robustness of our theorizing and shed new light on the role of culture in affecting problem - solving . Below , we first introduce the constructs of interest and present the different approaches to studying cultural influence . We review theoretical and empirical research on culture and cognition . We then apply the classification system established in the culture and cognition literature to the domain of problem - solving , and we outline our theoretical approach to the relationship between indi - vidualism versus collectivism and problem type . Following this , we introduce Studies 1 – 7 , and present a quantitative synopsis of Studies 3 – 6 , using a meta - analysis technique . We conclude by discussing the findings and offering suggestions for further re - search . Culture and Cultural Mindset There are numerous definitions in the literature for the term culture . Although the definitions vary in some aspects , most em - phasize that culture is built on recurring sets of situations and experiences that cultural members consistently encounter . To - gether , these provide cultural members with opportunities , con - straints , and expectations that , in turn , form their values , meaning systems , and patterns of thinking ( see review in Gelfand , Erez , & Aycan , 2007 ) . Thus , culture is often viewed as a metasituational factor that shapes the content and distribution of individuals’ values , beliefs , and behavior ( Schwartz , 2009 ) . Cultural values and norms represent the way the physical and social environments are captured and understood by a specific group ( Triandis , 2001 ) . The most prominent value dimension that distinguishes among cultures is the view of the relationship be - tween the individual and the collective . At the societal or cultural level , this dimension distinguishes individualistic or autonomous cultures , which view individuals as independent entities who are encouraged to choose their own way in life , from collectivistic or embedded cultures , which view individuals as integral parts of the group and expect them to find meaning in life through sharing and striving toward the group’s goals ( Hofstede , 1980 ; Schwartz , 1999 ; Triandis , 1995 ) . Research has also studied the manifestation of this dimension on the individual level , looking at chronic tendencies to embrace independent versus interdependent self - construal and personality ( Markus & Kitayama , 1991 ; Triandis , 2001 ) . In the present research , we focus on the cultural - level dimension , studying how individualism versus collectivism pene - trates individuals’ mindsets and shapes their performance . Ample research has investigated the chronic differences among cultural groups , revealing cross - cultural differences in values , norms , cognition , affect , and behavior ( see reviews in Hofstede , 2001 ; Nisbett , 2003 ; Oyserman , Coon , & Kemmelmeier , 2002 ; Sagiv , Schwartz , & Arieli , 2011 ) . Contemporary approaches to studying the influence of cultures on their members posit that cultural differences are not fixed but rather are malleable and dynamic , depending on the intersection between the cultural knowledge available to individuals and the contextual cues prom - inent in the situation ( Hong , 2009 ; Oyserman , 2017 ) . The dynamic constructive approach to culture focuses on mul - ticultural individuals , arguing that extensive exposure to multiple cultures results in acquiring the cultural mindset , or knowledge , of all these cultures ( Hong , 2009 ; Hong , Morris , Chiu , & Benet - Martínez , 2000 ) . Cultural knowledge is a configuration of con - cepts and procedures typical for a specific culture . Individuals store in their memory a representation of the cultural knowledge , building on their direct and indirect experiences with a particular culture ( Hong , 2009 ) . The cultural knowledge that multiculturals are likely to bring to mind at a specific moment is triggered by the context ( Hong , 2009 ; Hong et al . , 2000 ) . The dynamic constructive approach specifically accentuates the role of cultural ingredients , such as cultural icons and symbols ( e . g . , the language spoken in the specific culture ) , as immediate triggers activating a congruent cultural knowledge . Thus , for example , research has shown that Asian Americans react to cultural icons ( e . g . , the Great Wall as an Asian symbol ) by expressing cultural - congruent behavior ( e . g . , prioritizing the interests of the group by attributing greater impor - tance to collective duties than to individual rights ; Grossmann , Ellsworth , & Hong , 2012 ; Hong , Benet - Martínez , Chiu , & Morris , 2003 ; Hong , Chiu , & Kung , 1997 ; Hong et al . , 2000 ) . The culture - as - situated - cognition ( CSC ) approach takes a broader perspective in defining cultural influence , arguing that all individuals—multicultural or not—can shift from one cultural mindset to another . This approach draws on the core assumption that although societies differ in their emphasis on individualism versus collectivism , they all encompass both individualistic and collectivistic principles . This reflects the attempt of all societies to attain both the interests of the group ( ensuring the survival of the group , striving toward the goals of the group , and regulating relationships among individuals ) and the personal interests of individuals ( encouraging expression of free choice and unique - ness ; e . g . , Oyserman , 2017 ; Schwartz , 1999 ; Triandis , 1995 ) . The principles typical to individualism versus collectivism are thus rooted in social structures and are often accessible in everyday situations ( Oyserman , 2017 ) . Consequently , all individuals are exposed to both individualistic and collectivistic principles , and they may adopt both individualistic and collectivistic mindsets , albeit to different extents ( e . g . , Mourey , Oyserman , & Yoon , 2013 ; Oyserman , 2016 , 2017 ; Oyserman & Sorensen , 2009 ) . The CSC theory defines cultural mindset as a cognitive schema , composed of goals ( why to act ) , content ( mental knowledge about the self and the world ) , and procedures ( how to think and act ; Mourey et al . , 2013 ; Oyserman , 2011 ; Oyserman , Sorensen , Re - ber , & Chen , 2009 ) . The individualistic mindset consists of con - tent , goals , and procedures relevant to autonomy , separation , and distinction , whereas the collectivistic mindset consists of content , T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 790 ARIELI AND SAGIV goals , and procedures relevant to interdependence , connection , and assimilation . Thus , for example , an individualistic mindset in - cludes goals of self - direction and free choice ( vs . conformity and obedience ) , content such as words and narratives emphasizing the merit of novelty and originality ( vs . traditional solutions and norms - adherence ) , and procedures leading to focusing on indepen - dent objects ( vs . relationships between objects ) . The CSC theory predicts that all people can shift from one cultural mindset to another and that cultural mindsets are triggered by cultural cues prominent in the context ( e . g . , prominence of individualistic cues within a situation would evoke an individual - istic mindset ) . Priming one aspect of a cultural mindset ( e . g . , content ) should cue other aspects of that mindset ( e . g . , goals and procedures ) , thereby activating the entire schema of the cultural orientation ( e . g . , individualistic mindset ) . Consequently , the indi - vidual is likely to react or to behave in a culture - congruent way ( e . g . , expressing independence of thought ) . Thus , the cultural mindset assumed at a specific moment spills over to influence cognitive processes and behavior ( Oyserman , 2011 ; Oyserman & Lee , 2008 ) . The CSC theory postulates that people from individualistic cultures are prone to assume an individualistic mindset and behave accordingly because the frequency of individualistic cues in their society is more intense than in collectivistic cultures . Thus , the probability of triggering an individualistic mindset is higher . The opposite occurs for individuals in collectivistic cultures ( Oyser - man , 2017 ) . At the same time , people can go beyond their chronic cultural mindset and shift to an opposing cultural mindset , depend - ing on the intensity of cultural cues in the immediate situation ( Oyserman , 2017 ) . Thus , for example , situations accentuating in - dividualistic cues tend to evoke an individualistic mindset . The opposite is likely to occur in situations accentuating collectivistic cues . Overall , the CSC theory allows predicting chronic cultural differences among cultural groups , as well as situated cultural differences among individuals regardless of their cultural back - ground . Culture and Cognition The cultural dimension of individualism versus collectivism is conceptually and empirically associated with differences in cog - nitive performance , such as categorization , learning , and inductive and deductive inference ( Markus & Kitayama , 1991 ; Nisbett et al . , 2001 ; Oyserman et al . , 2002 ; Varnum et al . , 2010 ) . A great deal of this research focuses on differences between Western ( individual - istic ) countries and East Asian ( collectivistic ) countries , arguing that Westerners tend to pay attention primarily to focal objects , analyzing their attributes to identify rules that explain their behav - ior . East Asians , in contrast , pay attention primarily to the social context and relationships between objects , relying on traditional customs , social expectations , and habitual practices to understand behavior . Consequently , Westerners are prone to employ system - atic , analytic thinking , whereas East Asians are prone to employ more holistic , intuitive thinking ( Markus & Kitayama , 1991 ; Nis - bett , 2003 ; Nisbett & Masuda , 2003 ; Nisbett et al . , 2001 ; Noren - zayan & Nisbett , 2000 ) . In a study on categorization , for example , Americans tended to group items on a taxonomic basis ( e . g . , monkey and panda , be - cause they are both part of the animals category ) , whereas East Asians grouped items in a thematic relational manner ( e . g . , mon - keys and bananas , because monkeys eat bananas ; Ji , Zhang , & Nisbett , 2004 ) . Investigating the cognitive processes underlying categorization among Americans and Koreans , Norenzayan and colleagues ( Norenzayan , Smith , Kim , & Nisbett , 2002 ) showed that Americans are likely to rely on rules while grouping items , using them to distinguish among objects that belong to the cate - gory and those that deviate from the category ( e . g . , if an animal nurses its offspring , it belongs to the mammals clade ) . In contrast , Koreans are likely to rely on holistic resemblance between the target object and the group ( e . g . , if an animal shares similar attributes with a familiar mammal , it is regarded as a member of the mammal’s clade ) . Another study , focusing on contextual information , showed that when looking at a framed line , American participants focused on the line and were more accurate in estimating its absolute length . In contrast , Japanese participants were more sensitive to the con - text and more accurate in estimating its size relative to the frame ( Kitayama , Duffy , Kawamura , & Larsen , 2003 ) . In a similar vein , research shows that East Asians rely on contextual information when interpreting social events , whereas Westerners tend to ex - plain social events in terms of the specific attributes that charac - terize the leading players in the event ( F . Lee , Hallahan , & Herzog , 1996 ; Morris & Peng , 1994 ) . Cultural differences in cognition have typically been docu - mented in studies comparing participants from individualistic ver - sus collectivistic cultures , thus reflecting ingrained tendencies to employ individualistic versus collectivistic mindsets ( see reviews in Nisbett et al . , 2001 ; Oyserman et al . , 2002 ; Varnum et al . , 2010 ) . Differences in cognitive performance were also found in experi - ments studying bicultural individuals who were primed with dif - ferent configurations of cultural knowledge ( e . g . , Hong , Ip , Chiu , Morris , & Menon , 2001 ; see also review in Hong et al . , 2000 ) and in studies in which participants with similar cultural background were primed with different cultural mindsets ( e . g . , Kühnen & Oyserman , 2002 ; Oyserman et al . , 2009 ; see also review in Oyser - man & Lee , 2008 ) . These studies investigated cognitive - perception tasks , in which participants are typically prompted with a stimulus and are required to respond by identifying , interpreting , or recall - ing it ( e . g . , interpreting the behavior of a target in terms of dispositional vs . situational factors ) . What has rarely been investigated , however , is what happens when the cognitive task is more complex , going beyond basic cognitive processing to require higher - order thinking . In a notable exception , Oyserman and colleagues ( Oyserman et al . , 2009 ) investigated the influence of cultural mindset on performance in psychometric tasks taken from the verbal section of the GRE . In the current research , we take another step in filling this gap by investigating the impact of the cultural mindset of individualism versus collectivism on performance in problem - solving . A typical problem prompts a question or a puzzle that calls for organizing , incorporating , and transforming information in order to form or create a new solution , thus requiring higher - order thinking . Culture and Problem - Solving In an attempt to reveal the cognitive processes that underlie problem - solving , researchers have proposed various typologies of problems , such as insight versus noninsight problems ( e . g . , T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 791 CULTURE AND PROBLEM - SOLVING Duncker & Lees , 1945 ; Schooler , Ohlsson , & Brooks , 1993 ; Weisberg , 1995 ) , creative versus analytic problems ( e . g . , Förster , Friedman , & Liberman , 2004 ; Friedman & Förster , 2005 ) , and problems calling for divergent versus convergent thinking ( e . g . , Ashton - James & Chartrand , 2009 ; Guilford , 1950 ; McCrae , 1987 ) . We build on the literature of culture and cognition as well as on the classification of holistic versus analytic reasoning ( see reviews in Nisbett , 2003 ; Nisbett & Masuda , 2003 ; Nisbett et al . , 2001 ; Norenzayan & Nisbett , 2000 ; Varnum et al . , 2010 ) , applying the fundamental cognitive differences found among members of indi - vidualistic versus collectivistic cultures to the domain of problem - solving . We distinguish between rule - based and context - based problems , taking into consideration : ( a ) the focus of attention ( focusing on objects vs . on the context ) ; ( b ) the process ( looking for rules vs . similarities , links , and contextual clues ) ; and ( c ) the type of inference drawn ( employing analytic vs . holistic logic ) . We use the term “rule - based problems” for problems in which a solution is more likely to emerge through focusing the attention on objects , aiming to discover rules that describe the features of these objects and shed new light on their action . This process involves decomposition of the problem into its parts . We thus reason that analytical logic is instrumental in solving such problems . Con - sider , for example , the problem of how many squares appear in a complex geometrical configuration ( see the squares riddle in Ap - pendix A ) . To solve this problem , one needs to accurately count all the squares . The likelihood of solving it correctly is substantially increased when the prominent features of the geometrical config - uration are recognized , and a reliable rule is discovered and ap - plied . Specifically , one has to recognize that there are several quadrangles in the configuration ( e . g . , squares , rectangles ) and focus only on squares ( i . e . , quadrangles with equal sides ) . Also , it is critical to recognize that there are different sizes of squares ( e . g . , 1 (cid:2) 1 , 2 (cid:2) 2 , 3 (cid:2) 3 ) . Then , it is essential to identify a rule or a method that allows for systematically isolating the various squares and counting them ( e . g . , categorization of squares according to their size , followed by counting each size separately ) . Context - based problems , in contrast , cannot be solved by fo - cusing on objects and applying explicit , formal , analytical rules or by following manuals . Instead , the solution requires attending to the context and identifying contextual clues and links between elements , which may eventually lead to inferences about the entire picture . We reason that holistic logic is likely to facilitate solving such problems . Consider the following riddle : “Who am I ? Alive without breath ; as cold as death ; never thirsty , ever drinking ; all in mail never clinking” ( Tolkien , 1937 ; see Appendix A ) . To find the solution , one has to identify the specific context in which all the statements are related . Each statement ( i . e . , alive , being cold , not thirsty , and quiet ) could characterize various objects . It is only in the context of fish that they all come together . Thus context - based problems require holistic thinking , which facilitates the integration of associations , intuitions , and feelings , eventually leading to cap - turing the whole picture . Both rule - based and context - based problems are composed of objects and contextual cues . They differ , however , in the thinking process that is likely to facilitate successful problem - solving . We propose that problem - solving is more likely when the type of problem and the type of thinking employed are congruent . Solving rule - based problems should be facilitated by employing analytic ways of thinking , whereas solving context - based problems should be facilitated by employing holistic ways of thinking . Because cultural mindset affects the type of thinking individuals use , we hypothesize that matching the cultural mindset with the problem type affects success in problem - solving . That is , an individualistic mindset should evoke rule - based logic , facilitating success with rule - based problems . In contrast , a collectivistic mindset should evoke a context - based logic , facilitating success with context - based problems . Overview of Studies We investigated the role of cultural mindset in facilitating problem - solving in seven studies . We started by studying the problem - solving patterns of cultural groups that vary on individ - ualism versus collectivism , focusing on cultural groups that re - ceived relatively little attention in past research . Study 1 compared the problem - solving patterns of three cultural groups ( American Jews , ultra - Orthodox Jews , and Arabs in Israel ) . In Study 2 , language was used as a symbolic prime for cultural mindset among multicultural participants who were exposed to both individualistic and collectivistic cultural groups ( i . e . , Arab citizens in Israel ) . To further support our theorizing that it is the cultural mindset of individualism versus collectivism that accounts for these differ - ences , in Studies 3 – 6 we conducted controlled experiments . The priming tasks in these experiments elicit individualism versus collectivism , employing various manifestations of the cultural dimension ( e . g . , focusing on the individual vs . the group , experi - encing independence vs . interdependence ; focusing on objects vs . context ) . We then took a meta - analytic approach to demonstrate that the effects found in Studies 3 – 6 are robust across priming tasks and samples . In all studies , we used problems that do not require any specific expertise and can be classified as calling for either rule - based or context - based thinking . In Studies 1 – 6 we investigated riddles as instantiates for rule - based and context - based problems . We incor - porated several approaches to measure performance in riddle - solving , including cumulative performance across a set of riddles ( Studies 1 – 2 ) , performance in one fixed riddle ( Studies 1 – 5b ) , and performance in a random riddle raffled from samples of rule - based and context - based riddles ( Study 6 ) . To further strengthen the validity of our findings , in Study 7 we used another set of problems drawing on a well - known test for associative thinking ( i . e . , the Remote Associates Test ) . Study 1 Study 1 investigated three cultural groups with different empha - ses on the cultural dimension of individualism versus collectivism : non - Orthodox Jewish Americans ( henceforth referred to as Jewish Americans ) , Arabs , and ultra - Orthodox Jews in Israel . Ample research demonstrates the individualistic nature of the American society , advocating for individual independence and personal achievement ( e . g . , Hofstede , 1980 , 2001 ; Markus & Kitayama , 1991 ; Oyserman et al . , 2002 ; Schwartz , 2009 ) . More specifically , research showed that American non - Orthodox Jewish boys ex - pressed individualistic worldviews more and collectivistic world - views less than American ultra - Orthodox Jewish boys ( Dershow - itz , 1971 ) . In contrast , Arabs and ultra - Orthodox Jews in Israel have more traditional , communal cultures , highlighting group sol - T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 792 ARIELI AND SAGIV idarity , commitment , and support ( Cohen , 2007 ; Haj - Yahia , 1995 ; Lavee & Katz , 2003 ; Pines & Zaidman , 2003 ) . For example , in terms of Schwartz’s theory of cultural values , both groups hold a collective - oriented worldview , valuing embeddedness more than autonomy ( Cohen , 2007 ; Schwartz , 2009 ; for data on ultra - Orthodox Jews , see Zilberfeld , 2010 ) . 1 We therefore hypothesized that cultural group interacts with riddle type in predicting success in riddle - solving , such that Jewish Americans perform better in solving rule - based riddles , whereas Arabs and ultra - Orthodox Jews perform better in solving context - based riddles . Method Participants and procedure . The participants were 79 Jew - ish American high - school students who were spending a semester in Israel ( 73 % female , age 15 – 39 , M (cid:3) 17 . 5 ) ; 2 72 Arab under - graduates in an Israeli public university ( 69 % female , age 19 – 46 , M (cid:3) 25 . 1 ) ; and 119 ultra - Orthodox Israeli Jewish undergraduates at a private ultra - Orthodox college in Israel ( all female , age 19 – 47 , M (cid:3) 24 . 6 ) . The participants received either course credit ( Arabs ) or a chocolate bar ( Jewish Americans and ultra - Orthodox Israelis ) for their participation . All the participants volunteered to take part in this study , and anonymously completed a questionnaire in their native language ( English , Arabic , or Hebrew ) . To verify the differences in cultural values across the three groups , we first asked participants to complete the Schwartz Value Survey ( SVS ; Schwartz , 1992 ) . They then completed additional personality scales for filler or exploratory purposes . Afterward , the participants were presented with two rule - based and three context - based riddles . No time constraint was imposed . In this and in the following studies , all participants reported that this was the first time they came across these riddles . Measures . Verifying differences in cultural values . We drew on Schwartz’s theory to assess the cultural values of the three groups . The value orientation highlighting the individualistic worldview is termed autonomy , and the value orientation highlighting the col - lectivistic worldview is termed embeddedness ( Schwartz , 1999 , 2010 ) . The participants completed the Schwartz Value Survey ( SVS ; Schwartz , 1992 ) 3 in which they rated the importance of each value item as a guiding principle in their lives , using a 9 - point scale ranging from opposed to my values ( (cid:4) 1 ) , to not important ( 0 ) , to of supreme importance ( 7 ) . Autonomy was computed by averaging the ratings of eight value items ( e . g . , freedom , broadminded , curious , and varied life ) , and embeddedness was computed by averaging the ratings of 13 values ( e . g . , social order , respect for tradition , honoring of parents and elders , and obedience ) . All the value items included in these indices have cross - cultural equivalence of meaning ( Schwartz , 1999 ) . To control for cultural differences in scale use as well as to allow for comparison with previously published data , we followed a centering procedure proposed by Schwartz ( 1999 ) . The reliability of the value indices was satisfactory in all three cultural groups ( Cronbach’s al - phas ranged from . 71 to . 83 ) . To compare the values across the cultural groups , we conducted a mixed - design ANOVA where cultural value ( autonomy vs . em - beddedness ) served as the within - subject factor , and cultural group ( Jewish Americans , Arabs , and ultra - Orthodox Jews ) as the between - subjects factor . As expected , cultural group interacted with cultural value ( autonomy vs . embeddedness ) in predicting the value emphases , F ( 2 , 265 ) (cid:3) 103 . 361 , p (cid:5) . 001 , (cid:6) p 2 (cid:3) 0 . 43 ( see Figure 1 ) . A planned contrast indicated that , as hypothesized , the Jewish Americans emphasized Autonomy ( individualistic world - view ) more than the Arabs and the ultra - Orthodox Jews did , t ( 265 ) (cid:3) 9 . 33 , p (cid:5) . 001 , d (cid:3) 1 . 15 . In addition , the Jewish Americans emphasized embeddedness ( collectivistic worldview ) less than the other two groups did , t ( 265 ) (cid:3) (cid:4) 5 . 83 , p (cid:5) . 001 , d (cid:3) 0 . 63 . 4 We thus considered the Jewish American sample as an individualistic cultural group , and the Arab and ultra - Orthodox samples as collectivistic cultural groups . Classification of the riddles . The riddles used in this research ( see Appendix A ) do not require any specific knowledge or expe - rience . Each riddle has one correct answer , but it can be solved in diverse ways . The riddles include no instructions regarding how to solve them . The classification of the riddles used in this research was pretested in a series of pilot studies ( see Appendix B ) . Riddle index . Each participant solved five riddles ( rule - based riddles : squares and handshakes ; context - based riddles : egg , fish , and teeth ; see Appendix A ) . Correct answers were coded 1 , whereas wrong answers were coded 0 . The success rate differed substantially across riddles , ranging from 4 . 1 % to 30 . 9 % . To exclude riddles with too little variance , here and in subsequent studies , we dropped from further analyses riddles with a success rate of less than 10 % . Thus , in this study , we dropped the egg riddle ( success rate of 4 . 1 % ) . The index of the rule - based riddles is the mean of success in the squares and handshakes riddles ; the index of the context - based riddles is the mean of success in the fish and teeth riddles . Results and Discussion To test success in solving the riddles , we conducted a mixed - design ANOVA where riddle type ( rule - based vs . context - based indices ) served as the within - subject factor , and cultural group ( Jewish Americans , Arabs , and ultra - Orthodox Jews ) served as the between - subjects factor . As hypothesized , the cultural group in - teracted with the riddle type in predicting success in riddle - solving , F ( 2 , 267 ) (cid:3) 17 . 02 , p (cid:5) . 001 , (cid:6) p 2 (cid:3) 0 . 11 ( see Figure 2 ) . The analysis further yielded a significant main effect for cultural group , F ( 2 , 267 ) (cid:3) 4 . 23 , p (cid:3) . 015 and for riddle type , F ( 1 , 267 ) (cid:3) 31 . 70 , p (cid:5) . 001 . We conducted an additional ANOVA , controlling for age . The effect of the interaction remained significant . The effect of age was insignificant , thus ruling out age as an alternative 1 Schwartz’s project is the only one that studied these cultural groups at the cultural level . 2 The sample included two instructors who accompanied the students during their stay in Israel ( ages 26 and 39 ) . Excluding the two from the sample yields virtually the same results . 3 The Arabs and the Jewish American participants completed the 57 - item version of the SVS , whereas the ultra - Orthodox Jews completed the 44 - item version of the SVS . The items comprising the embeddedness and autonomy indices appear in both versions . Two ultra - Orthodox participants did not fill out the SVS and hence were not included in the value - comparison analysis . 4 Simple contrast analyses comparing the individualistic cultural group ( Americans ) with each of the collectivistic cultural groups ( Arabs and ultra - Orthodox Jews ) revealed that , as expected , the Americans attributed greater importance to autonomy and less importance to embeddedness than both the Arab and ultra - Orthodox groups did ( t s ranged from 2 . 94 to 8 . 47 , all p s (cid:5) . 00 , d s ranged from 0 . 37 to 8 . 47 ) . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 793 CULTURE AND PROBLEM - SOLVING explanation for the interaction effect . In this latter analysis , both main effects were not significant . A planned contrast comparing the performance of the Jewish Americans and the collectivistic cultural groups ( Arabs and ultra - Orthodox Jews ) indicated that , as hypothesized , the former were better at solving the rule - based riddles than the latter , t ( 267 ) (cid:3) 1 . 90 , p (cid:3) . 03 , d (cid:3) 0 . 23 . In contrast , the collectivistic cultural groups were better at solving the context - based riddles than the Jewish Americans , t ( 267 ) (cid:3) (cid:4) 5 . 27 , p (cid:5) . 001 , d (cid:3) 0 . 64 . 5 The findings of Study 1 thus support our hypothesis , indicating that members of individualistic cultures perform better in rule - based problems , whereas members of collectivistic cultures per - form better in context - based problems . The use of convenience samples is a limitation of this study : there are differences among the samples in addition to the cultural differences in individualism versus collectivism ( e . g . , age , differences in academic experience , differences in other cultural values ) . These differences render the findings susceptible to alternative interpretations . In Study 2 , we aim to address this limitation by applying an experimental ap - proach in which multicultural individuals ( Arabs citizens in Israel ) are randomly assigned to assume an individualistic or collectivistic mindset . Study 2 The dynamic constructive approach to culture argues that mul - ticultural individuals store in memory a representation of the cultural knowledge of all cultures they are exposed to . The acces - sibility of the cultural knowledge in an individual’s mind is acti - vated by cultural symbols and icons grounded in the cultural context ( Hong , 2009 ; Hong et al . , 2000 ) . In this study , we inves - tigated Arab citizens in Israel and used language as a symbolic prime for culture . Language is considered a natural and compelling cue for cultural knowledge , as it is deeply grounded in the cultural and social context in which it is used ( e . g . , Hong et al . , 2001 ; Kay & Kempton , 1984 ; Marian & Neisser , 2000 ; Trafimow , Triandis , & Goto , 1991 ) . Research shows that the language used by bilin - guals at a specific moment leads to a culture - congruent response ( e . g . , Harzing & Maznevski , 2002 ; Hong et al . , 2001 ; S . W . S . Lee , Oyserman , & Bond , 2010 ; Marian & Neisser , 2000 ; Ralston , Cunniff , & Gustafson , 1995 ; see also review in Oyserman & Lee , 2008 ) . This study focuses on Arab citizens in Israel . The Arab culture in Israel reflects a high emphasis on collectivism ( see Study 1 ) , whereas the larger Israeli society reflects a high emphasis on individualism ( Oyserman , 1993 ; Sagiv & Schwartz , 1995 ; Schwartz , 1999 ) . Arab citizens in Israel are exposed to both the Arab and the Israeli cultures . They are born into the Arab culture , which typically dominates their kinship and communal environment as well as the first levels of their education . They are also exposed to the Israeli culture , which dominates the social institutions and organizations in the larger Israeli society , includ - ing the media , the legal and governmental systems and , to some extent , the education system . While Arab citizens in Israel typi - cally identify with Arab society , they differ substantially in the extent to which they also identify with Israeli society ( Smooha , 1990 , 1992 ) : some consider themselves as biculturals ( i . e . , they identify with both the Arab and the Israeli cultures ) , whereas others identify themselves as monoculturals ( i . e . , they identify mainly as belonging to an Arab culture ) . We reason that bicultural Arabs acquire a comprehensive un - derstanding of both the Israeli and the Arab cultures , whereas monocultural Arabs are prone to focus solely on the Arab culture . These differences in cultural identity are likely to amplify or hinder the effect of language as a cultural prime . We propose that language serves as a cultural prime mainly for individuals who are deeply involved with the culture and identify with it . Otherwise , language use would be mainly instrumental , and the cultural load carried by language would be activated to a lower extent . For example , Arab citizens in Israel who identify with the Israeli culture ( i . e . , biculturals ) are likely to hold in memory a represen - tation of the Israeli culture . For them , using the Hebrew language 5 Simple contrast analyses comparing the individualistic cultural group ( Americans ) with each of the collectivistic cultural groups ( Arabs and ultra - Orthodox Jews ) revealed that , as hypothesized , each of the collectiv - istic cultural groups solved the context - based riddle better than the Amer - icans did , t ( 267 ) (cid:3) (cid:4) 4 . 89 , p (cid:5) . 00 , d (cid:3) 0 . 56 , and t ( 267 ) (cid:3) (cid:4) 4 . 32 , p (cid:5) . 00 , d (cid:3) 0 . 53 , respectively , for Arabs and ultra - Orthodox . The Americans solved the rule - based riddles better than the Arabs did , t ( 267 ) (cid:3) 2 . 17 , p (cid:5) . 00 , d (cid:3) 0 . 26 . When comparing Americans and ultra - Orthodox Jews , the effect was in the expected direction but insignificant , t ( 265 ) (cid:3) 1 . 08 , ns . In addition , simple contrast analyses comparing the performance of the two collectivistic groups revealed no significant differences ( rule - based riddles : t ( 267 ) (cid:3) 1 . 32 , ns ; context - based riddles : t ( 267 ) (cid:3) (cid:4) 1 . 14 , ns ) . 3 3 . 5 4 4 . 5 5 5 . 5 Jewish Americans Arabs ultra - Orthodox Jews E m ph as i s o f C u l t u r a l O r i e n t a t i on Autonomy values Embeddedness values Figure 1 . Cultural values : Jewish Americans , Arabs , and ultra - Orthodox Jews . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 794 ARIELI AND SAGIV ( the dominant language in Israel ) serves as a strong cue for the Israeli culture . We therefore expected the Arabic language to prime the cultural knowledge of the collectivistic Arab culture among both bicultural and monocultural Arabs in Israel . In con - trast , we expected the Hebrew language to prime the cultural knowledge of the individualistic Israeli culture mainly among those who view themselves as biculturals . Bicultural partici - pants—but not monocultural participants—are expected to solve rule - based riddles better in Hebrew than in Arabic , and to solve context - based riddles better in Arabic than in Hebrew . Thus , we hypothesized that language ( Hebrew vs . Arabic ) interacts with riddle type ( rule - based vs . context - based ) and cultural identity ( mono / biculturalism ) in predicting success in riddle - solving . Method Participants and procedure . The participants were 126 Arab undergraduates in an Israeli university ( 65 . 3 % female , age 18 – 46 , M (cid:3) 20 . 71 ) . All were fluent in both Arabic and Hebrew ( i . e . , they reported their Hebrew fluency as adequate or high : higher than 4 on a 1 – 7 scale , where 1 (cid:3) not fluent at all and 7 (cid:3) highly fluent ) . The participants were randomly assigned to one of the two lan - guage conditions ( Hebrew vs . Arabic ) . The data were collected as part of a larger research project and included a booklet of scales for filler or exploratory purposes ( Arieli , 2017 ) . The participants solved three rule - based and three context - based riddles . Then they reported whether they considered themselves as bicultural . Measures . Riddle index . Right answers were coded 1 , and wrong an - swers were coded 0 . The success rate differed substantially across riddles , ranging from 4 . 8 % to 63 . 5 % . We dropped from further analyses riddles with a success rate of less than 10 % ( in this study one of each type , squares and egg ) . The index of the rule - based riddles is hence the mean of success in the handshakes and hats riddles ; the index of the context - based riddles is the mean of success in the fish and teeth riddles ( see Appendix A ) . Subjective biculturalism . Participants were presented with the Bicultural Identity Integration Scale ( BII ; Benet - Martínez & Hari - tatos , 2005 ) and were asked to complete it if they considered themselves as bicultural . Seventy - six participants ( 60 . 3 % ) com - pleted the scale and were thus considered as biculturals . More participants in the Hebrew condition identified as bicultural than in the Arabic condition : 70 % versus 51 . 5 % , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 , N (cid:3) 126 ) (cid:3) 4 . 487 , p (cid:3) . 03 . Additionally , bicultural participants were more fluent in Hebrew than were monoculturals ( M (cid:3) 5 . 34 vs . 5 . 02 ) , t ( 74 ) (cid:3) 2 . 10 , p (cid:3) . 4 , d (cid:3) 0 . 49 . These results correspond with past research on bicultural individuals , which conceptualizes language fluency as one of the factors that reflects engagement with the cultural group ( see review , Benet - Martínez & Haritatos , 2005 ) . Results and Discussion We conducted a mixed - design ANOVA where riddle type ( rule - based vs . context - based ) served as the within - subject factor , and language condition ( Hebrew vs . Arabic ) and subjective bicultur - alism ( bicultural vs . monocultural ) as between - subjects factors ( see Table 1 ) . As hypothesized , the three - way interaction was significant , F ( 1 , 122 ) (cid:3) 4 . 14 , p (cid:3) . 04 , (cid:6) p 2 (cid:3) . 03 ( see Figure 3 ) . We next unpacked the interaction . Consistent with our hypothesis , Figure 2 . Means of correct answers : Jewish Americans , Arabs , and ultra - Orthodox Jews . Table 1 Mixed - Design ANOVA : Riddle Type ( Rule - Based vs . Context - Based ) as the Within - Subject Factor , Language Condition ( Hebrew vs . Arabic ) , and Subjective Biculturalism ( Bicultural vs . Monocultural ) as Between - Subjects Factors Factor df F p (cid:6) p 2 Within - subject effects Riddle type 1 27 . 276 . 000 . 183 Riddle Type (cid:2) Language 1 7 . 848 . 006 . 060 Riddle Type (cid:2) Subjective Biculturalism 1 . 204 n . s . . 002 Riddle Type (cid:2) Language (cid:2) Subjective Biculturalism 1 4 . 141 . 044 . 033 Between - subjects effects Language 1 3 . 040 n . s . . 024 Subjective biculturalism 1 . 958 n . s . . 008 Language (cid:2) Subjective Biculturalism 1 1 . 618 n . s . . 013 T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 795 CULTURE AND PROBLEM - SOLVING among bicultural participants , a simple contrast revealed that per - formance in the rule - based riddles was better in the Hebrew condition ( M (cid:3) 0 . 48 ) than in the Arabic condition ( M (cid:3) 0 . 34 ) , t ( 122 ) (cid:3) 2 . 13 , p (cid:3) . 02 , d (cid:3) 0 . 38 . In contrast , performance in the context - based riddles was better in the Arabic condition ( M (cid:3) 0 . 31 ) than in the Hebrew condition ( M (cid:3) 0 . 12 ) , t ( 122 ) (cid:3) 2 . 92 , p (cid:5) . 00 , d (cid:3) 0 . 53 . The results indicate that among bicultural partici - pants , matching the language ( i . e . , cultural mindset ) and riddle type facilitated riddle - solving . 6 These results are consistent with our hypothesis and with the pattern found in Study 1 . As expected , the results among monoculturals revealed a dif - ferent pattern . Again , the performance in context - based riddles was better in the Arabic condition ( M (cid:3) 0 . 26 ) than in the Hebrew condition ( M (cid:3) 0 . 11 ) , t ( 122 ) (cid:3) 1 . 86 , p (cid:3) . 04 , d (cid:3) 0 . 34 . The performance in rule - based riddles , however , was similar in the Hebrew ( M (cid:3) 0 . 31 ) and Arabic conditions ( M (cid:3) 0 . 41 ) , t ( 122 ) (cid:3) 1 . 12 , ns . In sum , among monocultural participants , Hebrew atten - uated performance in the context - based riddles but did not facili - tate performance in rule - based problems . Thus , the impact of Hebrew on monocultural participants is unclear . Further research is needed to clarify the role of Hebrew for monocultural Arabs in Israel . The analysis also revealed a significant two - way interaction between language and riddle type F ( 1 , 122 ) (cid:3) 7 . 85 , p (cid:5) . 00 , (cid:6) p 2 (cid:3) . 06 . This interaction is qualified by the three - way interaction reported above . All other two - way interactions were not signifi - cant . There was no main effect for language or for subjective biculturalism . There was a significant main effect for riddle type , showing that , in general , participants performed better in the rule - based than in the context - based riddles ( M (cid:3) 0 . 40 vs . M (cid:3) 0 . 21 ) , F ( 1 , 122 ) (cid:3) 27 . 28 , p (cid:5) . 00 , (cid:6) p 2 (cid:3) 0 . 18 . That is , in this study , the rule - based riddles were somewhat easier than the context - based riddles . This was not the case in Study 1 and may reflect , at least in part , the omission of a relatively difficult rule - based riddle ( squares , see above ) . We will return to the issue of the difficulty of the riddles below . In sum , the results confirmed our theorizing that language prime ( Hebrew vs . Arabic ) interacts with riddle type ( rule - based vs . context - based ) and cultural identity ( mono / biculturalism ) in pre - dicting success in riddle - solving . Using language as a cultural prime provides several advantages . First , it allows investigating cultural differences in a controlled experiment in which partici - pants are randomly assigned to cultural conditions . Second , lan - guage is a natural , unobtrusive prime for culture , carrying a wide range of meanings and linkages with multiple cultural factors , thus providing ecological validity . This strength , however , may also be a limitation , as priming language may elicit other factors in addi - tion to cultural individualism versus collectivism . For example , language proficiency is conceptualized as one of the factors of biculturalism and therefore is associated with the cultural identity of individuals ( see review in Benet - Martínez & Haritatos , 2005 ; Berry , 1990 ) . Thus , in this research , the measure of subjective biculturalism may be susceptible to the language prime . Overall , Studies 1 and 2 showed the impact of culture as a whole ( e . g . , the Arab culture ) . The findings , however , cannot clarify which cultural factor elicits the differences in problem - solving , as cultural groups ( e . g . , the Israeli vs . the Arab culture ) differ on many aspects from one another ( e . g . , social institutions , linguistic characteristics of the language spoken ) . To further support our theorizing that it is the cultural mindset of individualism versus collectivism that is responsible for these differences , we conducted an additional set of studies ( Studies 3 – 7 ) in which we employed cultural primes designed to prompt directly the individualistic versus collectivistic mindsets . As all cultures encompass elements of both individualism and collectivism ( e . g . , Schwartz , 1999 ; Triandis , 1995 ) , all people are expected to acquire both individualistic and collectivistic mindsets , at least to some extent ( Oyserman , 2017 ) . Each cultural mindset can be activated by directing attention to situational cues convey - ing a congruent cultural load ( see meta - analysis by Oyserman & Lee , 2008 ) . In Studies 3 – 5b , we conducted controlled experiments using different primes for cultural mindset , focusing on various elements of individualism versus collectivism . We predicted that 6 As a supplementary analysis , we added BII as a covariate to the ANOVA . As hypothesized , riddle type interacted with language in affect - ing performance , F ( 1 , 73 ) (cid:3) 14 . 64 , p (cid:5) . 001 , (cid:6) 2 (cid:3) . 17 . The effect of the BII measure and the interaction between BII and riddle type was insignif - icant , F ( 1 , 73 ) (cid:3) 0 . 01 and 0 . 46 , respectively . Figure 3 . Means of correct answers across language conditions ( Hebrew vs . Arabic ) among biculturals and monoculturals . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 796 ARIELI AND SAGIV the effect of the interaction between cultural mindset and problem type would be robust across primes . Study 3 Study 3 investigated how focusing attention on the individual versus the collective impacts problem - solving . The main distinc - tion between individualistic and collectivistic mindsets lies in defining the core unit in society as the individual or the group . In individualism , the individual is the focus , encouraged to act inde - pendently and to distinguish him / herself from the group . In con - trast , in collectivism , the focus of attention is directed at the group : Individuals are viewed as an integral part of the group , encouraged to strive toward the shared goals of the group ( Hofstede , 1980 ; Schwartz , 1999 ) . In Study 3 , we employed the “I – we” prime , one of the most frequently used tasks to prime individualistic versus collectivistic mindsets ( Oyserman & Lee , 2008 ) . This is a verbal exercise designed to direct participants’ attention either to the individual or to the group using words with individualistic or collectivistic semantic content ( e . g . , “I , ” “me , ” “my” for individ - ualistic and “we , ” “us , ” “our” for collectivistic ) . We hypothesized that a primed cultural mindset interacts with riddle type in pre - dicting success in riddle - solving , such that participants perform better in solving rule - based riddles after exposure to words em - phasizing the individual ( “I” priming condition ) than to words emphasizing the group ( “We” priming condition ) . The opposite pattern is predicted for context - based riddles . Method Participants and procedure . The participants were 171 Jew - ish Israeli 7 undergraduates ( 37 . 4 % female , age 19 – 30 , M (cid:3) 23 . 31 ) , all native Hebrew speakers , 8 who completed the experi - mental task in Hebrew and received course credit . Participation was voluntary and anonymous . The participants were randomly assigned to one of four experimental conditions in a 2 ( Cultural Prime : “I” vs . “we” ) (cid:2) 2 ( Riddle Type : “rule - based” vs . “context - based” ) between - subjects factorial design . Following the priming task , the participants were asked to solve either a rule - based or a context - based riddle . Finally , they were presented with several background questions . Measures . Cultural prime . We used an adaptation of the scrambled sen - tence priming task ( introduced by Srull & Wyer , 1979 ) . The participants engaged in a 20 - item task . Each item included five words , four of which can be arranged to create a meaningful sentence . To prime the individualistic mindset , we used words such as “I , ” “my , ” “different , ” “unique” ( e . g . , “the I walk sunset watch , ” “bigger is warm my house” ) . To prime the collectivistic mindset , we used words such as “we , ” “our , ” “similar , ” “usual” ( e . g . , “the we walk sunset watch , ” “are similar warm our houses” ) . In choosing the target words for the priming task we relied on past studies ( see Oyserman & Lee , 2008 , for review and meta - analysis on priming individualism vs . collectivism ) . Pretesting the cultural prime . We conducted a separate pilot study to verify that the “I – we” priming task leads participants to employ an individualistic mindset ( in the “I” condition ) or a collectivistic one ( in the “we” condition ) . We investigated the impact of the “I – we” manipulation on a prominent manifestation of cultural individualism versus collectivism : self - construal of independence versus interdependence ( Markus & Kitayama , 1991 ) . A sample of 52 undergraduates at an Israeli university ( 76 % female , age 17 – 31 , M (cid:3) 21 . 81 ) performed the cultural - priming task ( “I” or “we” ) and then completed the Twenty - Statement Test ( TST ; Kuhn & McPartland , 1954 ) , which is often used to measure self - construal ( see review in Cross , Hardin , & Gercek - Swing , 2011 ) . The participants were instructed to answer the question “Who am I ? ” by filling in 20 blank lines beginning with the preamble “I am _ _ _ _ . ” We expected the participants in the “I” priming condition to provide more independent ( e . g . , “I am good in math” ) and less interdependent ( e . g . , “I am a student” ) state - ments than those in the “we” priming condition . Two coders , unaware of the priming condition , classified the participants’ statements as independent , interdependent , or other . We utilized a coding system distinguishing between social ( i . e . , interdependent ) and nonsocial ( i . e . , dependent ) statements that has frequently been used in previous research ( Cousins , 1989 ; Gard - ner , Gabriel , & Lee , 1999 ; Rhee , Uleman , Lee , & Roman , 1995 ) . The interrater reliabilities were high for all participants’ answers ( Cohen’s kappa results ranged from . 81 to 1 . 00 , with an average of . 92 ) . The first coder’s classification was used in the analysis . An index was calculated as the number of independent statements minus the number of interdependent statements . The findings yielded the predicted difference across conditions : M (cid:3) 4 . 92 versus 2 , for the “I” versus “we” conditions , respectively , t ( 50 ) (cid:3) 2 . 23 , p (cid:3) . 02 , d (cid:3) 0 . 63 . Riddles . The participants were presented with either the squares ( rule - based ) or the fish ( context - based ) riddle ( see Appendixes A and B ) , depending on the condition to which they were assigned . The success rate of both riddles was higher than the cut - off criterion of 10 % ( 13 . 4 % for the rule - based riddle and 62 . 9 % for the context - based riddle ) . Results and Discussion To test the probability of successfully answering the riddles , we conducted a logistic regression with cultural prime ( (cid:4) 1 (cid:3) “I , ” 1 (cid:3) “we” ) , riddle type ( (cid:4) 1 (cid:3) “rule - based , ” 1 (cid:3) “context - based” ) , and the interaction term as independent variables , and success in riddle - solving ( 0 (cid:3) failure , 1 (cid:3) success ) as the dependent variable . As predicted , the results indicated a significant interaction between cultural prime and riddle type , B (cid:3) 0 . 59 , Wald (cid:3) 6 . 53 , p (cid:3) . 01 , OR (cid:3) 1 . 81 ( see Figure 4 ) . That is , more participants in the individualistic ( “I” ) mindset condition than in the collectivistic ( “we” ) mindset condition successfully solved the rule - based riddle ( 20 . 9 % vs . 5 . 1 % , B (cid:3) (cid:4) 0 . 79 , Wald (cid:3) 3 . 78 , p (cid:3) . 05 , OR (cid:3) 0 . 45 ) . The opposite pattern emerged for the context - based riddle , where more participants in the collectivistic ( “we” ) mindset condition than in the individualistic ( “I” ) mindset condition successfully solved it ( 71 . 7 % vs . 53 . 5 % ) . However , the effect was only mar - ginally significant ( B (cid:3) 0 . 40 , Wald (cid:3) 3 . 12 , p (cid:3) . 08 , OR (cid:3) 1 . 49 ) . The results yielded no main effect for cultural prime ( B (cid:3) (cid:4) 0 . 20 , Wald (cid:3) 0 . 73 , ns ) and an unexpected significant main effect for riddle type ( B (cid:3) 1 . 33 , Wald (cid:3) 32 . 57 , p (cid:3) . 01 , OR (cid:3) 7 The samples in Studies 3 – 7 did not include ultra - Orthodox Jews . 8 Eight students who reported a native language other than Hebrew were not included in the sample and analyses . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 797 CULTURE AND PROBLEM - SOLVING 3 . 78 ) : only 13 . 4 % of participants solved the rule - based riddle , whereas 62 . 9 % solved the context - based riddle . This main effect indicated that the rule - based riddle used in this study ( squares ) was more difficult than the context - based one ( Fish ) . Considering the findings of Studies 1 – 3 together , there is no consistent difference in difficulty between the two riddle types . In sum , the findings of Study 3 support our hypothesis , indicat - ing that for solving rule - based riddles , directing participants’ at - tention to the individual ( “I” priming condition ) resulted in better performance than directing participants’ attention to the group ( “we” priming condition ) . The opposite pattern emerged for context - based riddles . Study 4 primes individualism versus collec - tivism by focusing on the sense of being independent from the group versus being interdependent within the group . Study 4 Research has postulated that people from Western ( highly indi - vidualistic ) cultures tend to construe themselves as independent , whereas people from East Asian ( highly collectivistic ) cultures are inclined to construe themselves as interdependent ( Markus & Kitayama , 1991 , 1998 , 2003 ) . In spite of the cultural tendency toward independent versus interdependent representation of the self , individuals from any culture can assume both representations , depending on the situational cues to which they are exposed at the moment of judgment ( Gardner et al . , 1999 ; A . Y . Lee , Aaker , & Gardner , 2000 ) . Thus , for example , European Americans who were primed to think of their social identity ( interdependent rep - resentation of the self ) attributed greater importance to social values such as belongingness , friendships , and family safety com - pared with those primed to think of their personal identity ( inde - pendent representation of the self ; Gardner et al . , 1999 ) . To activate independence versus interdependence in this study , we developed a new priming task . Building on the idea that concrete physical experiences often shape the meaning of abstract concepts ( Ackerman , Nocera , & Bargh , 2010 ; S . W . S . Lee & Schwarz , 2010 ; Sweetser , 1990 ; Williams & Bargh , 2008 ) , we sought a physical experience that mimics the sense of feeling independence versus interdependence . Specifically , we focused on experiencing separation versus connection , a key element in dis - tinguishing individualism versus collectivisim ( Oyserman et al . , 2009 ; Schwartz , 1999 ) . For this purpose , we utilized the Hebrew sign - language alphabet , with signs formed by a single , separate finger used to create a physical experience of feeling independent , whereas signs formed by at least three entwined fingers used to create a physical experience of feeling connected and interdepen - dent ( see Appendix C ) . We predicted that solving rule - based and context - based riddles would be affected by physically experienc - ing independence versus interdependence . Thus , we hypothesized that the primed cultural mindset interacts with riddle type in predicting success in riddle - solving , so that participants perform better in solving rule - based riddles after physically experiencing independence ( “single - finger” priming condition ) than interdepen - dence ( “entwined - fingers” priming condition ) . The opposite pat - tern was predicted for context - based riddles . Method Participants and procedure . The participants were 117 un - dergraduates at an Israeli university ( 48 . 7 % female , age 18 – 37 , M (cid:3) 23 . 9 ) who received course credit . Participation was voluntary and anonymous . The participants were randomly assigned to one of four experimental conditions in a 2 ( Cultural Prime : “single - finger” vs . “entwined - fingers” ) (cid:2) 2 ( Riddle Type : “rule - based” vs . “context - based” ) between - participants factorial design . Following the priming task , the participants were asked to solve either a rule - based or a context - based riddle . They then completed two scales as fillers . Finally , they performed a memory test in which they were asked to identify the words they had practiced in sign language . Twenty - five participants who failed to recognize more than half of the signs were not included in further analysis ( see Footnote 7 ) . Dropout rate was equivalent across cultural - prime conditions ( 21 % and 21 . 67 % for the single - finger and the entwined - fingers conditions , respectively , (cid:7) 2 ( 1 , N (cid:3) 117 ) (cid:3) 0 . 01 , ns ) . Including all 117 participants in the analysis yielded virtually the same results . Measures . Cultural prime . All participants received a manual of the Hebrew sign - language alphabet and were asked to physically practice four words ( i . e . , moving their fingers to form the signs ) . The experimenters made sure that the instructions were clear to the participants and that the participants practiced the signs . In the Figure 4 . Means of correct answers : “I” ( individualistic mindset ) versus “we” ( collectivistic mindset ) condi - tions . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 798 ARIELI AND SAGIV individualistic “single - finger” condition , the participants practiced words that included signs formed by a single finger . In the collec - tivistic “entwined - fingers” condition , the words consisted of signs formed by at least three entwined fingers simultaneously ( see Appendix C ) . The length of the words was equivalent across conditions , ranging from two to four letters . The meanings of the words were neutral to the cultural dimension of autonomy – embeddedness ( e . g . , hand , young goat , secret , and search ) . Pretesting the cultural prime . This newly developed priming task was validated in another research project ( Arieli , Roccas , & Sagiv , 2017 ) , in which two studies investigated the effect of the priming task on self - construal as independent versus interdepen - dent . The first study included a sample of 108 Israeli undergrad - uates ( 68 % female , age 18 – 49 , M (cid:3) 28 . 67 ) who performed the cultural priming task ( “single - finger” or “entwined - fingers” ) and then completed the TST ( Kuhn & McPartland , 1954 ) . We followed the same procedure as in Study 3 . Eighty - eight participants passed the memory test and were included in the analysis . The interrater reliabilities of the two independent coders were high for all par - ticipants’ answers ( Cohen’s kappa results ranged from . 86 to . 95 , with an average of . 92 ) . As expected , the index of the number of independent statements minus the number of interdependent state - ments was higher in the “single - finger” condition ( M (cid:3) 6 . 75 ) than in the “entwined - fingers” condition ( M (cid:3) 1 . 46 ) , t ( 86 ) (cid:3) 3 . 95 , p (cid:5) . 001 , d (cid:3) 0 . 85 . The second study included 97 Israeli undergraduates ( 71 % female , age 19 – 47 , M (cid:3) 26 . 7 ) who performed the cultural priming task ( “single - finger” or “entwined - fingers” ) and then completed the Inclusion of Other in the Self ( IOS ) scale ( Schubert & Otten , 2002 ; Swann , Gómez , Seyle , Morales , & Huici , 2009 ) . Eighty - seven participants passed the memory test and were included in the analysis . The IOS uses Venn - like diagrams to represent different degrees of connection between the individual and the social group , ranging from total separation between the circles to full overlap . As expected , participants in the “entwined - fingers” condition re - ported greater self - group overlap than did the participants in the “single - finger” condition ( M (cid:3) 4 . 53 vs . 4 . 00 ) t ( 85 ) (cid:3) 2 . 16 , p (cid:3) . 02 , d (cid:3) . 47 . Riddles . The participants were presented with either the hand - shake riddle ( rule - based ) or the fish riddle ( context - based ; see Appendixes A and B ) , depending on the experimental condition to which they were assigned . The success rate of both riddles was higher than the cut - off criterion of 10 % ( 66 . 7 % for the rule - based riddle and 70 . 2 % for the context - based riddle ) . Results and Discussion We conducted a logistic regression in which success in riddle - solving ( 0 (cid:3) failure , 1 (cid:3) success ) was predicted by cultural prime ( (cid:4) 1 (cid:3) “separation , ” 1 (cid:3) “connection” ) , riddle type ( (cid:4) 1 (cid:3) “rule - based , ” 1 (cid:3) “context - based” ) , and the inter - action term . As hypothesized , the results indicated a significant interaction between cultural prime and riddle type , B (cid:3) 0 . 64 , Wald (cid:3) 7 . 20 , p (cid:5) . 001 , OR (cid:3) 1 . 90 ( see Figure 5 ) . That is , more participants in the individualistic ( “single - finger” ) mindset con - dition than in the collectivistic ( “entwined - fingers” ) mindset condition successfully solved the rule - based riddle ( 82 . 6 % vs . 50 % , B (cid:3) (cid:4) 0 . 78 , Wald (cid:3) 5 . 01 , p (cid:3) . 025 , OR (cid:3) 0 . 46 ) . The opposite pattern emerged for the context - based riddle , where more participants in the collectivistic ( “entwined - fingers” ) mindset condition than in the individualistic ( “single - finger” ) mindset condition successfully solved it ( 80 % vs . 59 . 1 % ) . How - ever , the effect was not significant ( B (cid:3) 0 . 51 , Wald (cid:3) 2 . 37 , ns , OR (cid:3) 1 . 66 ) . The analysis did not indicate a main effect of cultural prime ( B (cid:3) (cid:4) 0 . 13 , Wald (cid:3) 0 . 32 , ns ) or riddle type ( B (cid:3) 0 . 05 , Wald (cid:3) 0 . 04 , ns ) . Our findings reveal that success in problem - solving is af - fected by physically experiencing independence versus interde - pendence . In this study , all participants were instructed to enact the finger poses . Additional research is required to discern whether viewing the signs rather than physically experiencing them is enough to evoke the cultural - mindset prime . Overall , the pattern of findings is consistent across Studies 1 – 4 . To further generalize our investigation , Studies 5a and 5b distin - guish between the inclination to focus on focal objects , asso - ciated with individualism , and the inclination to focus on the contextual field and relationships between objects , associated with collectivism ( see reviews in Nisbett , 2003 ; Nisbett & Masuda , 2003 ; Nisbett et al . , 2001 ) . Figure 5 . Means of correct answers : “single - finger” ( individualistic mindset ) versus “entwined - fingers” ( collectivistic mindset ) conditions . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 799 CULTURE AND PROBLEM - SOLVING Study 5a The complexity of the environment in which we live influences the deployment of visual attention to the context or to salient objects ( Chun , 2000 ) . A study that measured the complexity ( op - erationalized as the number of objects ) of equivalent visual scenes from the U . S . and Japan revealed that the American environment included significantly fewer objects than the Japanese one ( Miy - amoto , Nisbett , & Masuda , 2006 ) . The researchers concluded that the less complex American surroundings allowed focusing on focal objects and separating them from their context , whereas the complex Japanese environment fostered focusing on the contextual field and on relationships between objects embedded in it ( Masuda & Nisbett , 2006 ) . We reasoned that these cross - cultural differences go above and beyond the American and Japanese cultures , and may be assumed to represent the social and physical surroundings in individualistic versus collectivistic cultures . Building on this literature , we developed a visual priming task simulating the typical environment in cultures that emphasize individualism versus collectivism . The picture priming the indi - vidualistic mindset consisted of relatively few noticeable objects , thus directing participants to focus on the objects and separate them from their background . In contrast , the picture priming the collectivistic mindset consisted of many crowded objects , embed - ded in the context , thus directing participants to focus on the contextual field and the connections between objects . We hypoth - esized that the primed cultural mindset interacts with the riddle type in predicting success in riddle - solving , such that participants perform better at solving rule - based riddles after being exposed to a visual scene emphasizing separated objects ( “separation” prim - ing condition ) than after being exposed to a visual scene empha - sizing connected objects ( “connection” priming condition ) . The opposite pattern is predicted for context - based riddles . Method Participants and procedure . The participants were 138 un - dergraduates at an Israeli university ( 41 . 9 % female , age 19 – 30 , M (cid:3) 24 . 15 ) who received course credit for their participation . Participation was voluntary and anonymous . The data collection combined several unrelated studies . The last part included our tasks . The participants were randomly assigned to one of four experimental conditions in a 2 ( Cultural Prime : “separation” vs . “connection” ) (cid:2) 2 ( Riddle Type : “rule - based” vs . “context - based” ) between - participants factorial design . Following the ma - nipulation , the participants were given either a rule - based or a context - based riddle to solve . Measures . Cultural prime . Each participant was presented with one of two versions of a picture portraying people at the seashore . In the “connection” condition , the picture included numerous objects ( individuals , animals , houses , vehicles , etc . ) and was extremely crowded , thus leading the viewer to concentrate on the context and on groups of objects . While looking at the picture , participants were asked to list three sets of related objects ( e . g . , a dog , a crab , and a pelican are all animals ) . The picture for the “separation” condition was created using Photoshop software , which allowed us to erase many of the objects in the original crowded picture , leaving relatively few objects . This version promoted concentrat - ing on each object separately . While looking at this picture , the participants were asked to list six different objects that appeared in the scene ( e . g . , a child , a starfish , a pelican ) . Both pictures were printed in color on postcards ( 10 cm (cid:2) 15 cm ) and attached to the top of an A4 page given to the participants . Pretesting the cultural prime . We followed the same proce - dure as in Study 3 . A sample of 50 undergraduates at an Israeli university ( 56 % female , age 20 – 46 , M (cid:3) 26 . 82 ) performed the “separation” or the “connection” priming task and then completed the TST . The interrater reliabilities of the two independent coders were high for all participants’ answers ( Cohen’s kappa results ranged from . 82 to 1 . 00 , with an average of . 94 ) . As predicted , the index of the number of independent statements minus the number of interdependent statements was higher in the “separation” con - dition ( M (cid:3) 3 . 64 ) than in the “connection” condition ( M (cid:3) 1 . 32 ) , t ( 48 ) (cid:3) 1 . 70 , p (cid:3) . 05 , d (cid:3) 0 . 49 . Riddles . The participants were asked to solve either the hats ( rule - based ) or the soul ( context - based ) riddle ( see Appendixes A and B ) , depending on the experimental condition to which they were assigned . The success rate of both riddles was higher than the cut - off criterion of 10 % ( 67 . 9 % for the rule - based riddle and 71 . 9 % for the context - based riddle ) . Results and Discussion We conducted a logistic regression with cultural prime ( (cid:4) 1 (cid:3) “separation , ” 1 (cid:3) “connection” ) , riddle type ( (cid:4) 1 (cid:3) “rule - based , ” 1 (cid:3) “context - based” ) , and the interaction term as the independent variables , and success in riddle - solving ( 0 (cid:3) failure , 1 (cid:3) success ) as the dependent variable . The analysis yielded a significant inter - action between cultural prime and riddle type , B (cid:3) 0 . 59 , Wald (cid:3) 8 . 52 , p (cid:5) . 001 , OR (cid:3) 1 . 80 ( see Figure 6 ) . Thus , as hypothesized , more participants in the individualistic ( “separation” ) mindset con - dition than in the collectivistic ( “connection” ) mindset condition successfully solved the rule - based riddle ( 80 . 5 % vs . 55 % ) , but the effect was only marginally significant , B (cid:3) (cid:4) 0 . 491 , Wald (cid:3) 3 . 16 , p (cid:3) . 075 , OR (cid:3) . 61 . The opposite pattern emerged for the context - based riddle , where more participants in the collectivistic ( “connection” ) mindset condition than in the individualistic ( “sep - aration” ) mindset condition successfully solved it , 82 . 8 % versus 60 . 7 % , B (cid:3) 0 . 68 , Wald (cid:3) 5 . 46 , p (cid:3) . 02 , OR (cid:3) 1 . 98 . There was no main effect of cultural prime ( B (cid:3) (cid:4) 0 . 02 , Wald (cid:3) 0 . 01 , ns ) or riddle type ( B (cid:3) 0 . 10 , Wald (cid:3) 0 . 23 , ns ) . Study 5b To test the robustness of our findings across cultural groups , we replicated Study 5a among students in a Canadian university from diverse cultural backgrounds . Method Participants and procedure . The participants were 215 Ca - nadian undergraduates ( 54 % female , age 18 – 40 , M (cid:3) 22 . 94 ) . The sample was culturally diverse : 38 % of participants were born in Canada , whereas the rest were first - generation immigrants and foreign students from 31 countries . The participants received a chocolate bar for their participation . The experimental design was the same as in Study 5a . Measures . The participants were asked to solve either the handshakes ( rule - based ) or the fish ( context - based ) riddle ( see T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 800 ARIELI AND SAGIV Appendixes A and B ) , depending on the experimental condition to which they were assigned . The success rate of both riddles was higher than the cut - off 10 % ( 18 . 7 % for the rule - based riddle and 19 . 4 % for the context - based riddle ) . Results and Discussion We conducted a logistic regression in which success in riddle - solving ( 0 (cid:3) failure , 1 (cid:3) success ) was predicted by cultural prime ( (cid:4) 1 (cid:3) “separation , ” 1 (cid:3) “connection” ) , riddle type ( (cid:4) 1 (cid:3) “rule - based , ” 1 (cid:3) “context - based” ) , and the interaction term . The find - ings revealed a significant interaction between cultural prime and riddle type , B (cid:3) 0 . 391 , Wald (cid:3) 4 . 59 , p (cid:3) . 03 , OR (cid:3) 1 . 48 ( see Figure 7 ) . Thus , as hypothesized , more participants in the individ - ualistic ( “separation” ) mindset condition than in the collectivistic ( “connection” ) mindset condition successfully solved the rule - based riddle ( 25 . 9 % vs . 11 . 3 % ) , but the effect was only marginally significant , B (cid:3) (cid:4) 0 . 50 , Wald (cid:3) 3 . 57 , p (cid:3) . 059 , OR (cid:3) 0 . 60 . The opposite pattern emerged for the context - based riddle , although the effect was not significant ( 23 . 6 % vs . 15 . 1 % , for the collectivistic and the individualistic mindset , respectively , B (cid:3) 0 . 277 , Wald (cid:3) 1 . 24 , ns , OR (cid:3) 1 . 32 ) . There was no main effect of cultural prime ( B (cid:3) (cid:4) 0 . 11 , Wald (cid:3) 0 . 39 , ns ) or riddle type ( B (cid:3) 0 . 05 , Wald (cid:3) 0 . 08 , ns ) . Overall , Studies 3 – 5b have supported our hypothesis indicating that cultural prime interacts with riddle type in affecting perfor - mance in riddle - solving . The experimental design employed in Studies 3 – 5b allowed testing the effect of cultural prime on only two riddles ( one from each type ) per study . To cross - validate our findings , we conducted additional larger - scale study , aiming to show that the specific riddles used in the study only instantiate the general category of rule - or context - based problems . Study 6 This study aims at strengthening the validity of the classification of riddles as rule - based versus context - based by enlarging the pool of riddles that was used in Studies 1 – 5b , and by treating the depended variable as a random factor . Method Participants and procedure . The participants were 382 Jew - ish Israeli undergraduates at an Israeli university ( 53 . 1 % female , Figure 6 . Means of correct answers in the Israeli sample ( Study 5a ) : “separation” ( individualistic mindset ) versus “connection” ( collectivistic mindset ) conditions . Figure 7 . Means of correct answers in the Canadian sample ( Study 5b ) : “separation” ( individualistic mindset ) versus “connection” ( collectivistic mindset ) conditions . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 801 CULTURE AND PROBLEM - SOLVING age 18 – 59 , M (cid:3) 24 . 98 ) . They completed the experimental task in Hebrew and received course credit or a small compensation ( choc - olate bar and an invitation to participate in a lottery with the likelihood of 1 : 100 to win the equivalent of US $ 75 ) . Participation was voluntary and anonymous . The participants were randomly assigned to a 2 ( Cultural Prime : “I” vs . “We” ) (cid:2) 2 ( Riddle Type : “rule - based” vs . “context - based” ) between - participants factorial design . For each riddle - type condition , we had a pool of four riddles ( see Appendix A : Riddles 4 – 7 for the rule - based condition and Riddles 12 – 15 for the context - based condition ) . The partici - pants were randomly presented with one of four riddles . In sum , all participants performed a priming task followed by one riddle , and then they answered several background questions . Measures . Cultural prime . We used the scrambled - sentence ( “I – we” ) priming task as in Study 3 to activate individualistic versus col - lectivistic mindset . Riddles . Aiming to enlarge our sample of riddles , we reviewed riddles on websites that specialize in insight riddles . Only riddles that were ranked as “difficult” and that did not require any prior knowledge or expertise were considered . Additionally , nonverbal riddles and riddles longer than 200 words were excluded from the pool . Then the two authors followed the classification criteria presented in the introduction , and independently classified the riddles as rule - based , context - based , or none . Only riddles that were classified by both authors as either rule - based or context - based left in the pool . Two pilot studies were conducted to assess the level of difficulty of riddles sampled from this pool . Each pilot tested different sets of riddles . In the first pilot 80 undergraduates in an Israeli university ( 71 . 2 % females , age 20 – 55 , M (cid:3) 31 . 75 ) were asked to solve seven riddles in a random order . In the second pilot 94 participants in an Israeli online panel ( 64 . 8 % females , age 18 – 35 , M (cid:3) 26 . 25 ) were asked to solve six riddles in a random order . Based on the results , we excluded four riddles that were very difficult to solve ( i . e . , the success rate was lower than 10 % ) . From this pool we sampled four rule - based and four context - based riddles for the current experiment ( Riddles 4 – 7 and 12 – 15 in Appendix A ) . The participants in Study 6 were presented with either a rule - based or a context - based riddle , depending on the riddle - type condition to which they were assigned . The specific riddle was raffled from the pool of four riddles . The success rate of all eight riddles was higher than the cut - off criterion of 10 % ( 12 % – 33 % for the rule - based riddle and 26 % – 65 % for the context - based riddle ) . Results and Discussion To test the probability of successfully answering the riddles , we conducted a logistic regression with cultural prime ( (cid:4) 1 (cid:3) “I , ” 1 (cid:3) “we” ) , riddle type ( (cid:4) 1 (cid:3) “rule - based , ” 1 (cid:3) “context - based” ) , and the interaction term as independent variables , and success in riddle - solving ( 0 (cid:3) failure , 1 (cid:3) success ) as the dependent variable . As predicted , the results indicated a significant interaction between cultural prime and riddle type , B (cid:3) 0 . 33 , Wald (cid:3) 8 . 03 , p (cid:3) . 005 , OR (cid:3) 1 . 39 ( see Figure 8 ) . That is , more participants in the individualistic ( “I” ) mindset condition than in the collectivistic ( “we” ) mindset condition successfully solved the rule - based riddle ( 28 . 9 % vs . 16 . 8 % , B (cid:3) (cid:4) 0 . 35 , Wald (cid:3) 3 . 85 , p (cid:3) . 05 , OR (cid:3) 0 . 71 ) . The opposite pattern emerged for the context - based riddle , where more participants in the collectivistic ( “we” ) mindset condition than in the individualistic ( “I” ) mindset condition successfully solved it ( 47 . 8 % vs . 33 % , B (cid:3) 0 . 31 , Wald (cid:3) 4 . 27 , p (cid:3) . 04 , OR (cid:3) 1 . 36 ) . The results yielded no main effect for cultural prime ( B (cid:3) (cid:4) 0 . 20 , Wald (cid:3) 0 . 27 , ns ) and an unexpected significant main effect for riddle type ( B (cid:3) . 425 , Wald (cid:3) 13 . 46 , p (cid:5) . 001 , OR (cid:3) 1 . 53 ) : only 22 . 9 % of participants solved the rule - based riddle , whereas 40 % solved the context - based riddle . This main effect indicated that on average the rule - based riddles sampled in this study were more difficult than the context - based ones . Meta - Analysis The results of Studies 3 – 6 consistently indicated that the inter - action between riddle type and cultural prime significantly affected performance in riddle - solving . The simple effects comparing the impact of the cultural prime on each one of the riddle types , while consistent in the hypothesized direction , varied in the level of significance ( five simple effects significant at a two - tailed level , three simple effects significant at a one - tailed level , or two - tailed marginal , and two nonsignificant simple effects ) . To test for the robustness of the simple effects , we conducted a meta - analysis Figure 8 . Means of correct answers ( Study 6 ) : “I” ( individualistic mindset ) versus “we” ( collectivistic mindset ) conditions . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 802 ARIELI AND SAGIV aggregating the effects of each riddle type across studies . We employed a random - effects analysis aiming to rule out three po - tential moderators : the particular priming tasks used in each study , the particular riddles used , and the samples . For rule - based riddles , the heterogeneity analysis showed that the effects were not heterogeneous , Q ( 4 ) (cid:3) 2 . 08 , p (cid:3) . 72 , indi - cating that a random - effects analysis should be employed . This analysis revealed that the effect of priming cultural mindset ( indi - vidualistic vs . collectivistic ) on solving rule - based problems was robust across studies , with the summary OR (cid:3) 2 . 79 , 95 % CI [ 1 . 78 , 4 . 37 ] , Z (cid:3) 4 . 46 , p (cid:5) . 001 . A sensitivity analysis ( Table 2 , columns 3 – 6 ) , in which we ran the meta - analysis procedure with each study removed separately , indicated that the overall effect of priming cultural mindset is not confined to any single study . The effects for the context - based riddles were , again , not heterogeneous , Q ( 4 ) (cid:3) 0 . 88 , p (cid:3) . 93 . A random - effects analysis revealed a robust effect across studies , with the summary OR (cid:3) 0 . 48 , 95 % CI [ 0 . 32 , 0 . 71 ] , Z (cid:3) (cid:4) 3 . 66 , p (cid:5) . 001 . Again , a sensitivity analysis indicated that the overall effect of priming cultural mindset is not confined to any single study ( see Table 2 , columns 7 – 10 ) . The results of the meta - analysis thus indicate that the effects of priming an individ - ualistic versus a collectivistic mindset on riddle - solving are robust across priming tasks , riddles , and samples . These robust effects show that the congruency between a cultural prime of individual - ism versus collectivism and problem type leads to successful riddle - solving . Taken together , Studies 1 – 6 demonstrate the effect of cultural mindset , chronic or primed , on performance in problem - solving tasks . In all the studies , we used riddles that can be classified as calling for either rule - based or context - based thinking . Study 7 aims at cross - validating the effect of cultural mindset on problem - solving patterns by investigating different context - based , problem - solving tasks . For that aim , we used the Remote Associates Test ( RAT , Mednick , 1962 ) . Another goal of this study was to include a culturally neutral control condition , aiming to deepen our under - standing of the effect evoked by the individualism versus collec - tivism primes . Study 7 RAT ( Mednick , 1962 ) is a widely known task in the literature , often used to measure creative problem - solving ( e . g . , Leung et al . , 2012 ; Miron - Spektor , Gino , & Argote , 2011 ; Roskes , De Dreu , & Nijstad , 2012 ) . The task was developed to prompt associative thinking in order to identify relationships . Research shows that building on gut feelings and associative thinking facilitates per - formance in the RAT , whereas employing an analytic approach attenuates performance ( Aiello , Jarosz , Cushen , & Wiley , 2012 ) . The RAT meets our criteria for context - based problems ( page 4 above ) : ( a ) it focuses attention on a common context rather than on a single object ; ( b ) it requires capturing similarities and associa - tions rather than identifying rules ; and ( c ) it calls for employing holistic rather than analytic logic . We therefore hypothesized that priming the cultural mindset of collectivism ( “we” priming con - dition ) would increase performance in the RAT , whereas priming the cultural mindset of individualism ( “I” priming condition ) would decrease performance in the RAT . The experimental design employed in Studies 3 – 5b included two mindset conditions , each priming a different cultural mindset . The design did not include a control condition of “no cultural prime . ” Without a control condition , the results and conclusions could point only to relative rather than absolute differences be - tween the experimental conditions . Thus , this design does not allow concluding if the cultural primes improved or attenuated performance compared with a baseline ( no - prime condition ) . In this study , we aimed to address this issue by including a control condition . However , developing an adequate control condition is challenging . We further discuss this issue below . Method Participants and procedure . The participants were 147 Jew - ish Israeli undergraduates at an Israeli university ( 51 % female , age 18 – 54 , M (cid:3) 28 . 54 ) , all native Hebrew speakers . They completed the experimental task and received course credit . Participation was voluntary and anonymous . The participants were randomly as - signed to one of four experimental conditions ( see below ) . Fol - lowing the priming task , the participants were presented with 10 RAT items . Finally , they were asked to respond to several back - ground questions . Measures . Cultural prime . We used the scrambled - sentence ( “I – we” ) priming task as in Study 3 to activate individualistic and collec - tivistic mindsets . Control conditions . The “I – we” priming task is designed to elicit the cultural mindset of individualism versus collectivism . In addition , however , it creates some cognitive load that may increase the difficulty of solving the problem . The two cultural experimen - Table 2 Meta - Analyses : Results of Sensitivity Analyses ( With Each Study Removed ) Study Cultural priming Rule - based riddles Context - based riddles Effect with study removed Effect with study removed Odds ratio ( OR ) 95 % Confidenceinterval Z score p - value (cid:5) Odds ratio ( OR ) 95 % Confidenceinterval Z score p - value (cid:5) 3 I vs . we 2 . 66 [ 1 . 66 , 4 . 25 ] 4 . 08 . 00 . 48 [ . 31 , . 76 ] (cid:4) 3 . 21 . 00 4 Single vs . entwined fingers 2 . 61 [ 1 . 62 , 4 . 21 ] 3 . 95 . 00 . 49 [ . 33 , . 75 ] (cid:4) 3 . 35 . 00 5a Separation vs . connection 2 . 65 [ 1 . 60 , 4 . 40 ] 3 . 79 . 00 . 50 [ . 33 , . 76 ] (cid:4) 3 . 25 . 00 5b Separation vs . connection 2 . 80 [ 1 . 70 , 4 . 61 ] 4 . 04 . 00 . 46 [ . 30 , . 71 ] (cid:4) 3 . 51 . 00 6 I vs . we 3 . 54 [ 1 . 96 , 6 . 40 ] 4 . 19 . 00 . 44 [ . 26 , . 74 ] (cid:4) 3 . 06 . 00 OR across studies 2 . 79 [ 1 . 78 , 4 . 37 ] 4 . 46 . 00 . 48 [ . 32 , . 71 ] (cid:4) 3 . 66 . 00 T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 803 CULTURE AND PROBLEM - SOLVING tal conditions are equivalent in terms of difficulty , as they include almost identical sentences that differ in focusing on an individual ( I ) versus a group ( we ) . Creating a suitable control condition , requiring an equivalent cognitive load , is challenging . For exam - ple , introducing no prime may result in lower cognitive load that would make solving the problem easier . Alternatively , using a different set of scrambled sentences could create either an easier or more difficult task . In this study , we chose to include both options in the experiment . The first control condition did not include any priming task , and the participants started the experiment with performing the RAT . In the second control condition , the partici - pants completed a culturally neutral version of the scrambled - sentences task . In this version , the sentences focused on mundane situations and did not include “I” or “we” pronouns ( e . g . , apples grow on trees , the sun is shining every day , listening to classical music is relaxing ) . The RAT . Participants were asked to complete a Hebrew version of the RAT that was originally translated by Nevo and Levin ( 1978 ) and used by others ( Goldstein , Revivo , Kreitler , & Metuki , 2010 ; Miron - Spektor et al . , 2011 ) . The participants were presented with 10 sets of three words ( e . g . , club , gown , mare ) , and for each set they were asked to find a fourth word that associates with all three words ( e . g . , night ) . The participants had 3 min to perform the test ( M (cid:3) 1 . 40 , SD (cid:3) 1 . 54 ) . Results and Discussion Figure 9 presents the mean performance of the four experimen - tal conditions . As hypothesized , performance was best in the collectivistic - mindset condition ( M (cid:3) 1 . 81 , SD (cid:3) 2 . 08 ) and worst in the individualistic - mindset condition ( M (cid:3) 1 . 00 , SD (cid:3) 1 . 20 ) , t ( 70 ) (cid:3) 2 . 014 , p (cid:5) . 05 , d (cid:3) 0 . 34 . The two control conditions fell in between ( no prime : M (cid:3) 1 . 53 , SD (cid:3) 1 . 48 ; culturally neutral prime : M (cid:3) 1 . 23 , SD (cid:3) 1 . 18 ) . Two contrast analyses assuming a linear trend across the individualistic mindset , control ( either no - prime or culturally neutral prime ) , and collectivistic mindset con - ditions were significant , t ( 105 ) (cid:3) 2 . 01 , p (cid:5) . 04 , d (cid:3) 0 . 39 ; t ( 108 ) (cid:3) 2 . 23 , p (cid:5) . 03 , d (cid:3) 0 . 43 , respectively , for the no - prime and the culturally neutral prime . In sum , the findings of Study 7 support our hypothesis , indicat - ing that a collectivistic mindset reinforces performance in the RAT , whereas an individualistic mindset attenuates the perfor - mance . This study thus supports our hypothesis regarding the effect of cultural mindset on performance in context - based prob - lems . General Discussion In seven studies , our findings consistently supported our over - arching hypothesis , showing that the likelihood of solving a prob - lem is affected by the congruency between the problem in question ( the type of thinking that is required to solve the problem ) and the cultural mindset of individualism versus collectivism ( the type of thinking activated by the cultural orientation ) . In the first two studies , we investigated the impact of culture , focusing on cultural groups that differ on individualism versus collectivism . Study 1 compared three cultural groups that vary in their emphasis on individualism versus collectivism . As hypothe - sized , the individualistic Jewish Americans performed better on the rule - based problems than on the context - based problems . Con - versely , the collectivistic cultural groups , Arabs and ultra - Orthodox Jews in Israel , performed better on the context - based problems than on the rule - based problems . These findings are consistent with the notion that the ingrained cultural mindset of individuals influences their performance in problem - solving . In Study 2 , we replicated these cultural differences in an experiment among multiculturals using language as a cultural prime . We focused on multiculturals ( Arab citizens in Israel ) who were ex - posed to two cultures , one collectivistic and one individualistic , and who are fluent in the languages spoken in both cultures ( Arabic and Hebrew ) . As expected among bicultural participants ( i . e . , those who identify with both the Arab and the Israeli culture ) , Hebrew facilitated performance in rule - based riddles , and Arabic facilitated performance in context - based problems . In Studies 3 – 7 we primed the cultural mindset of individualism versus collectivism among individuals from the same cultural group . The priming tasks employed in these studies focused on different manifestations of the cultural dimension . Studies 3 , 6 , and 7 investigated the effect of directing attention to the individual or to the group ; Study 4 physically simulated the sense of being independent from the group versus interdependent within the group ; and finally , Studies 5a – b manipulated context dependency by directing attention to focal objects versus to the context . The consistent effect across studies indicates that priming a cultural mindset of individualism versus collectivism recreates the problem - solving patterns found between cultural groups ( Study 1 ) . In Studies 1 – 6 , we operationalized rule - based and context - based problems similarly , focusing on riddles that do not require any previous knowledge . Together these studies investigated seven rule - based and seven context - based riddles . The results support our theorizing and show that the effect of cultural mindset on perfor - mance in riddle - solving goes beyond a specific riddle . Study 7 further supported our theorizing using another form of context - based problems ( i . e . , the RAT ) . Cultural Primes : Strengths , Limitations , and Future Research Studies 2 – 6 show how cultural cues in the environment recreate differences between cultural groups that vary on individualism Figure 9 . Performance in the RAT across conditions : “I” ( individualistic mindset ) , no - prime , culturally neutral prime , and “we” ( collectivistic mind - set ) . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 804 ARIELI AND SAGIV versus collectivism , as documented in Study 1 . In Study 2 , the cultural knowledge of two specific groups was primed using a natural cultural symbol ( language ) . This type of prime requires a close and intense involvement in the cultural group studied ( Hong , 2009 ) . For example , merely speaking Hebrew is not enough to prompt the mindset associated with the Israeli culture for Arab citizens in Israel . As expected , language served as a cultural prime among bicultural participants ( those who identify with both the Israeli and the Arab cultures ) , but not among monoculturals ( those who identify mainly with the Arab culture ) . Such a sym - bolic prime activates the entire configuration of cultural knowl - edge ( Hong , 2009 ) . It does not allow , however , untangling the general effect of culture and associating the differences in perfor - mance directly to a specific cultural factor , such as the cultural dimension of individualism versus collectivism . The priming tasks used in Studies 3 – 7 directly focus on individualism versus collec - tivism . Unlike the symbolic prime , they are not grounded in a specific cultural context ( e . g . , the Arab or the Israeli culture ) . They are targeted at activating basic manifestations of individualism versus collectivism ( e . g . , focusing on the individual vs . the group , experiencing independence vs . interdependence , focusing on ob - jects vs . context ) . They thus allow direct investigation of the influence of individualism versus collectivism on problem - solving . The priming tasks used in Studies 3 – 7 are subtle , requiring minimal effort . In today’s global world , people encounter multiple cultural cues—at work , with their family and friends , or through mass media and social media . Whereas some of the cultural cues are salient ( e . g . , dining in a Chinese restaurant ) , others are subtle and embedded in the context ( e . g . , the choice of words in an e - mail ) . Our findings reveal the power of these subtle , sometimes undetected , cultural cues to change the accessibility of the cultural mindset that people employ at any given moment . In the present research , the primes for cultural mindsets affected performance in problem - solving by matching or not matching the type of problem ( e . g . , rule - based problems ) with the type of thinking required to best solve it ( e . g . , analytic thinking ) . We reason that similar cues can be deliberately placed in real - life settings to facilitate problem - solving . Future research could consider how to effectively inte - grate these kinds of priming tasks in various fields , including educational systems , training programs , and business organiza - tions . In Studies 3 , 6 , and 7 we used a well - established cultural prime ( the “I – we” prime ) . In Studies 4 – 5b we introduced two novel priming manipulations . Finding consistent patterns across manip - ulations points to the robustness of our findings . Future research could also set the boundaries of priming cultural mindset . Thus , for example , the new priming task in Study 4 ( utilizing sign language ) requires further investigation . The design does not clarify whether eliciting cultural mindset requires physical engagement or merely exposure to the signs ( e . g . , seeing someone practicing the signs , or a picture of the sign ) . Additionally , the priming task was composed of words that are not related to individualism versus collectivism . Future research could further examine what happens if the content of the words changes . The samples studied may also make a difference . In Studies 3 – 7 , we primed an individualistic / collectivistic cultural mindset among members of cultural groups that endorse both individualism and collectivism , albeit to different extents ( Israelis , Studies 3 – 5a and 6 – 7 , and Canadians , Study 5b ) . The CSC theory predicts that individuals will be able to shift from one mindset to another as long as the priming brings to mind knowledge they already have ( Oyserman , 2016 ) . Thus , these primes may not be as effective in cultural groups that strongly emphasize individualism or collec - tivism in which cultural members have only minimal exposure to the opposing cultural orientation . Moreover , other cultural aspects may constrain the impact of these cultural primes for assuming individualistic versus collectivistic mindsets . For example , cultural tightness versus looseness , which distinguishes among cultures that enforce rigid social norms and those that have looser expec - tations ( Gelfand , Nishii , & Raver , 2006 ; Gelfand et al . , 2011 ) , may influence the effectiveness of these cultural primes . Tight cultures provide their members with strong situations that present explicit cues and expectations regarding how to act . In contrast , loose cultures provide weaker situations in which multiple ways of conduct are acceptable . Consequently , implicit primes for cultural mindsets may be more effective in loose cultures than in tight cultures . Individualism Versus Collectivism and Analytic Versus Holistic Thinking The current investigation joins the line of research that studies the impact of individualism versus collectivism on cognitive per - formance . Past research has typically investigated specific cogni - tive manifestations of analytic versus holistic cognition , such as context dependency ( e . g . , Kitayama et al . , 2003 ; Kühnen & Hab - erstroh , 2004 ; Kühnen & Oyserman , 2002 ) , attribution ( e . g . , Hong et al . , 2000 ) , focusing on norms versus personal attributes in justifying decision - making ( e . g . , Ybarra & Trafimow , 1998 ) , pref - erence for middle - way choices ( e . g . , Briley & Wyer , 2001 ) , or employing a decontextualized thinking process ( e . g . , Oyserman et al . , 2009 ) . Advancing this research , we focused on problem - solving tasks , which require higher - order thinking . The classifica - tion of problems considered multiple procedures distinguishing between analytic versus holistic thinking , including the focus of attention ( object vs . context ) , the underlying process ( looking for rules vs . similarities and links ) , and the type of inference drawn ( employing analytic vs . holistic logic ) . The difference between the two types of problems is not in their structure , as they both incorporate objects and contextual cues , but in the thinking process that is likely to lead to a successful problem - solving . Thus , for example , solving a rule - based problem is more likely when focus - ing on prominent objects , analyzing their characteristics , and iden - tifying a rule or a method that would untangle the problem . In contrast , focusing on the context and applying more holistic and associative thinking would not lead to successfully solving such problems . This research included controlled experiments , which allowed us to investigate the influence of culture on problem - solving . Problem - solving in real - life settings may be affected by multiple factors , including past experience , previous knowledge , quality of training , effort invested , and more . Thus , it is impossible to tease apart the impact of culture on performance . Consider the case of school - level mathematics , which requires analytic logic . Basic math problems typically require students to employ rules and methods that were previously acquired through the learning pro - cess . Thus , it is impossible to tease apart the action of identifying T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 805 CULTURE AND PROBLEM - SOLVING the rule from practicing previous knowledge . In our research , we focused on problems that do not build on previous knowledge , thus allowing investigation of the effect of cultural mindset on perfor - mance in rule - based problems . Our consistent findings shed light on the link between cul - tural individualism versus collectivism and problem - solving . They do not address , however , the process through which this link is established . Past research discussed potential mecha - nisms ( e . g . , Nisbett et al . , 2001 ) but did not examine them empirically . Future research is required to reveal the underlying mechanisms through which individualism versus collectivism influences cognitive performance , in general , and problem - solving , in particular . Future research could also delve deeper into the differences between rule - based versus context - based riddles . For example , the quantitative synopsis documented in Table 2 unexpectedly re - vealed an intriguing pattern : The effects of the cultural mindsets were somewhat stronger for rule - based riddles than for context - based riddles . Additional investigation is needed to clarify if this pattern is robust across other problem - solving tasks as well as other cultural groups , and to identify factors that may account for it . Thus , research could consider additional factors that may inter - act with cultural mindset in affecting performance , such as the time invested in riddle - solving or the subjective assessment of the task as interesting , fun , or irritating . Beyond Western and East Asian Cultures Past research on culture and cognition has often focused on the differences between the American and East Asian cultures ( e . g . , Kitayama , Park , Sevincer , Karasawa , & Uskul , 2009 ; Nisbett , 2003 ; Oyserman et al . , 2002 ) . Consequently , the differences doc - umented were frequently explained in terms of the histories of East Asia and the U . S . ( e . g . , Nisbett , 2003 ; Nisbett et al . , 2001 ) . In this research , we investigated non - Asian collectivistic cultures with markedly different origins and geopolitical history ( e . g . , Arabs and ultra - Orthodox Jews in Israel ) . The findings indicate that , similar to East Asians , individuals in these cultures are prone to think holistically . Explaining the cognitive differences between Western and East Asian cultures in terms of the cultural dimension of individualism versus collectivism allows a broader interpretation of these differences , beyond the impact of the Western and the East Asian traditions . Conclusions Taken together , the set of studies included in this research reveals that no cultural mindset is superior or inferior in problem - solving . That is , the individualistic versus the collec - tivistic mindsets do not differ in how successfully they promote problem - solving , but rather in the type of problem - solving they encourage and facilitate . Moreover , priming a cultural mindset can help match the problem with the type of thinking that is likely to promote its solution , thereby improving performance . References Ackerman , J . M . , Nocera , C . C . , & Bargh , J . A . ( 2010 ) . Incidental haptic sensations influence social judgments and decisions . Science , 328 , 1712 – 1715 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1189993 Aiello , D . A . , Jarosz , A . F . , Cushen , P . J . , & Wiley , J . ( 2012 ) . Firing the executive : When an analytic approach to problem solving helps and hurts . The Journal of Problem Solving , 4 , 116 – 127 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7771 / 1932 - 6246 . 1128 Arieli , S . ( 2017 ) . Culture , language and creativity . Unpublished manu - script . Arieli , S . , Roccas , S . , & Sagiv , L . ( 2017 ) . I feel it in my fingers : Impacting self - construal through physical experience . Unpublished manuscript . Ashton - James , C . E . , & Chartrand , T . L . ( 2009 ) . Social cues for creativity : The impact of behavioral mimicry on convergent and divergent thinking . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 45 , 1036 – 1040 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jesp . 2009 . 04 . 030 Benet - Martínez , V . , & Haritatos , J . ( 2005 ) . Bicultural identity integration ( BII ) : Components and psychosocial antecedents . Journal of Personal - ity , 73 , 1015 – 1049 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 6494 . 2005 . 00337 . x Berry , J . W . ( 1990 ) . Psychology of acculturation . In N . R . Goldberger & J . B . Veroff ( Eds . ) , The culture and psychology reader ( pp . 457 – 488 ) . New York , NY : New York University Press . Briley , D . A . , & Wyer , R . S . , Jr . ( 2001 ) . Transitory determinants of values and decisions : The utility ( or nonutility ) of individualism and collectiv - ism in understanding cultural differences . Social Cognition , 19 , 197 – 227 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1521 / soco . 19 . 3 . 197 . 21474 Chun , M . M . ( 2000 ) . Contextual cueing of visual attention . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 4 , 170 – 178 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1364 - 6613 ( 00 ) 01476 - 5 Cohen , A . ( 2007 ) . An examination of the relationship between commit - ments and culture among five cultural groups of Israeli teachers . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 38 , 34 – 49 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0022022106295440 Cousins , S . D . ( 1989 ) . Culture and self - perception in Japan and the United States . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 56 , 124 – 131 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 56 . 1 . 124 Cross , S . E . , Hardin , E . E . , & Gercek - Swing , B . ( 2011 ) . The what , how , why , and where of self - construal . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 15 , 142 – 179 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1088868310373752 De Dreu , C . K . W . , Baas , M . , & Nijstad , B . A . ( 2008 ) . Hedonic tone and activation level in the mood - creativity link : Toward a dual pathway to creativity model . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 94 , 739 – 756 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 94 . 5 . 739 Dershowitz , Z . ( 1971 ) . Jewish subcultural patterns and psychological dif - ferentiation . International Journal of Psychology , 6 , 223 – 231 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00207597108246686 Duncker , K . , & Lees , L . S . ( 1945 ) . On problem - solving . Psychological Monographs , 58 , 1 – 112 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0093599 Förster , J . , Friedman , R . S . , & Liberman , N . ( 2004 ) . Temporal construal effects on abstract and concrete thinking : Consequences for insight and creative cognition . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 87 , 177 – 189 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 87 . 2 . 177 Friedman , R . S . , & Förster , J . ( 2005 ) . Effects of motivational cues on perceptual asymmetry : Implications for creativity and analytical prob - lem solving . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 88 , 263 – 275 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 88 . 2 . 263 Gardner , W . L . , Gabriel , S . , & Lee , A . Y . ( 1999 ) . “I” value freedom , but “we” value relationships : Self - construal priming mirrors cultural differ - ences in judgment . Psychological Science , 10 , 321 – 326 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 9280 . 00162 Gelfand , M . J . , Erez , M . , & Aycan , Z . ( 2007 ) . Cross - cultural organizational behavior . Annual Review of Psychology , 58 , 479 – 514 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . psych . 58 . 110405 . 085559 Gelfand , M . J . , Nishii , L . H . , & Raver , J . L . ( 2006 ) . On the nature and importance of cultural tightness - looseness . Journal of Applied Psychol - ogy , 91 , 1225 – 1244 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0021 - 9010 . 91 . 6 . 1225 Gelfand , M . J . , Raver , J . L . , Nishii , L . , Leslie , L . M . , Lun , J . , Lim , B . C . , . . . Yamaguchi , S . ( 2011 ) . Differences between tight and loose cultures : T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 806 ARIELI AND SAGIV A 33 - nation study . Science , 332 , 1100 – 1104 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1197754 Goldstein , A . , Revivo , K . , Kreitler , M . , & Metuki , N . ( 2010 ) . Unilateral muscle contractions enhance creative thinking . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 17 , 895 – 899 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3758 / PBR . 17 . 6 . 895 Grossmann , I . , Ellsworth , P . C . , & Hong , Y . Y . ( 2012 ) . Culture , attention , and emotion . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 141 , 31 – 36 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0023817 Guilford , J . P . ( 1950 ) . Creativity . American Psychologist , 5 , 444 – 454 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0063487 Haj - Yahia , M . ( 1995 ) . Toward culturally sensitive intervention with Arab families in Israel . Contemporary Family Therapy , 17 , 429 – 447 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF02249355 Harzing , W . A . , & Maznevski , M . L . ( 2002 ) . The interaction between language and culture : A test of the cultural accommodation hypothesis in seven countries . Language and Intercultural Communication , 2 , 120 – 139 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14708470208668081 Hofstede , G . ( 1980 ) . Culture’s consequences : International differences in work - related values . Beverly Hills , CA : Sage . Hofstede , G . ( 2001 ) . Culture’s consequences : Comparing values , behav - iors , institutions , and organizations across nations ( 2nd ed . ) . Beverly Hills , CA : Sage . Hong , Y . ( 2009 ) . A dynamic constructivist approach to culture : Moving from describing culture to explaining culture . In R . S . Wyer Jr . , C . Chiu , & Y . Hong ( Eds . ) , Understanding culture : Theory , research and appli - cation ( pp . 3 – 23 ) . New York , NY : Psychology Press . Hong , Y . - Y . , Benet - Martínez , V . , Chiu , C . - Y . , & Morris , M . W . ( 2003 ) . Boundaries of cultural influence . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 34 , 453 – 464 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0022022103034004005 Hong , Y . - Y . , Chiu , C . - Y . , & Kung , M . ( 1997 ) . Bringing culture out in front : Effects of cultural meaning system activation on social cognition . In K . Leung , U . Kim , S . Yamaguchi , & Y . Kashima ( Eds . ) , Progress in Asian social psychology ( Vol . 1 , pp . 135 – 146 ) . Singapore : Wiley . Hong , Y . - Y . , Ip , G . , Chiu , C . - Y . , Morris , M . W . , & Menon , T . ( 2001 ) . Cultural identity and dynamic construction of the self : Collective duties and individual rights in Chinese and American cultures . Social Cogni - tion , 19 , 251 – 268 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1521 / soco . 19 . 3 . 251 . 21473 Hong , Y . - Y . , Morris , M . W . , Chiu , C . - Y . , & Benet - Martínez , V . ( 2000 ) . Multicultural minds . A dynamic constructivist approach to culture and cognition . American Psychologist , 55 , 709 – 720 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0003 - 066X . 55 . 7 . 709 Ji , L . J . , Zhang , Z . , & Nisbett , R . E . ( 2004 ) . Is it culture or is it language ? Examination of language effects in cross - cultural research on categori - zation . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 87 , 57 – 65 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 87 . 1 . 57 Kay , P . , & Kempton , W . ( 1984 ) . What is the Sapir - Whorf hypothesis ? American Anthropologist , 86 , 65 – 79 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1525 / aa . 1984 . 86 . 1 . 02a00050 Kitayama , S . , Duffy , S . , Kawamura , T . , & Larsen , J . T . ( 2003 ) . Perceiving an object and its context in different cultures : A cultural look at new look . Psychological Science , 14 , 201 – 206 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 9280 . 02432 Kitayama , S . , Park , H . , Sevincer , A . T . , Karasawa , M . , & Uskul , A . K . ( 2009 ) . A cultural task analysis of implicit independence : Comparing North America , Western Europe , and East Asia . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 97 , 236 – 255 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0015999 Kuhn , M . H . , & McPartland , T . S . ( 1954 ) . An empirical investigation of self - attitudes . American Sociological Review , 19 , 68 – 76 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 2088175 Kühnen , U . , & Haberstroh , S . ( 2004 ) . Self - construal activation and focus of comparison as determinants of assimilation and contrast in social comparisons . Cahiers de Psychologie Cognitive / Current Psychology of Cognition , 22 , 289 – 310 . Kühnen , U . , & Oyserman , D . ( 2002 ) . Thinking about the self influences thinking in general : Cognitive consequences of salient self - concept . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 38 , 492 – 499 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0022 - 1031 ( 02 ) 00011 - 2 Lavee , Y . , & Katz , R . ( 2003 ) . The family in Israel . Marriage & Family Review , 35 , 193 – 217 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1300 / J002v35n01 _ 11 Lee , A . Y . , Aaker , J . L . , & Gardner , W . L . ( 2000 ) . The pleasures and pains of distinct self - construals : The role of interdependence in regulatory focus . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 78 , 1122 – 1134 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 78 . 6 . 1122 Lee , F . , Hallahan , M . , & Herzog , T . ( 1996 ) . Explaining real - life events : How culture and domain shape attributions . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 22 , 732 – 741 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0146167296227007 Lee , S . W . S . , Oyserman , D . , & Bond , M . H . ( 2010 ) . Am I doing better than you ? That depends on whether you ask me in English or Chinese : Self - enhancement effects of language as a cultural mindset prime . Jour - nal of Experimental Social Psychology , 46 , 785 – 791 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jesp . 2010 . 04 . 005 Lee , S . W . S . , & Schwarz , N . ( 2010 ) . Washing away postdecisional dissonance . Science , 328 , 709 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1186799 Leung , A . K . , Kim , S . , Polman , E . , Ong , L . S . , Qiu , L . , Goncalo , J . A . , & Sanchez - Burks , J . ( 2012 ) . Embodied metaphors and creative “acts” . Psychological Science , 23 , 502 – 509 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0956797611429801 Marian , V . , & Neisser , U . ( 2000 ) . Language - dependent recall of autobio - graphical memories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 129 , 361 – 368 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0096 - 3445 . 129 . 3 . 361 Markus , H . R . , & Kitayama , S . ( 1991 ) . Culture and the self : Implications for cognition , emotion , and motivation . Psychological Review , 98 , 568 – 579 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 98 . 2 . 224 Markus , H . R . , & Kitayama , S . ( 1998 ) . The cultural psychology of per - sonality . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 29 , 63 – 87 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0022022198291004 Markus , H . R . , & Kitayama , S . ( 2003 ) . Models of agency : Sociocultural diversity in the construction of action . Nebraska Symposium on Moti - vation , 49 , 1 – 57 . Masuda , T . , & Nisbett , R . E . ( 2006 ) . Culture and change blindness . Cognitive Science , 30 , 381 – 399 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15516709 cog0000 _ 63 McCrae , R . R . ( 1987 ) . Creativity , divergent thinking , and openness to experience . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 52 , 1258 – 1265 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 52 . 6 . 1258 Mednick , S . A . ( 1962 ) . The associative basis of the creative process . Psychological Review , 69 , 220 – 232 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0048850 Miron - Spektor , E . , Gino , F . , & Argote , L . ( 2011 ) . Paradoxical frames and creative sparks : Enhancing individual creativity through conflict and integration . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 116 , 229 – 240 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . obhdp . 2011 . 03 . 006 Miyamoto , Y . , Nisbett , R . E . , & Masuda , T . ( 2006 ) . Culture and the physical environment . Holistic versus analytic perceptual affordances . Psychological Science , 17 , 113 – 119 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9280 . 2006 . 01673 . x Morris , M . W . , & Peng , K . ( 1994 ) . Culture and cause : American and Chinese attributions for social and physical events . Journal of Person - ality and Social Psychology , 67 , 949 – 971 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 67 . 6 . 949 Mourey , J . A . , Oyserman , D . , & Yoon , C . ( 2013 ) . One without the other : Seeing relationships in everyday objects . Psychological Science , 24 , 1615 – 1622 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0956797613475631 Nevo , B . , & Levin , I . ( 1978 ) . Remote associates test : Assessment of creativity in Hebrew . Megamot , 24 , 87 – 98 . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 807 CULTURE AND PROBLEM - SOLVING Nisbett , R . E . ( 2003 ) . The geography of thought . New York , NY : Free Press . Nisbett , R . E . , & Masuda , T . ( 2003 ) . Cultureandpointofview . Proceedingsofthe National Academy of Sciences , USA of the United States of America , 100 , 11163 – 11170 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1934527100 Nisbett , R . E . , Peng , K . , Choi , I . , & Norenzayan , A . ( 2001 ) . Culture and systems of thought : Holistic versus analytic cognition . Psychological Re - view , 108 , 291 – 310 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 108 . 2 . 291 Norenzayan , A . , & Nisbett , R . E . ( 2000 ) . Culture and causal cognition . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 9 , 132 – 135 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 8721 . 00077 Norenzayan , A . , Smith , E . E . , Kim , B . J . , & Nisbett , R . E . ( 2002 ) . Cultural preferences for formal versus intuitive reasoning . Cognitive Science , 26 , 653 – 684 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15516709cog2605 _ 4 Oyserman , D . ( 1993 ) . The lens of personhood : Viewing the self and others in a multicultural society . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 65 , 993 – 1009 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 65 . 5 . 993 Oyserman , D . ( 2011 ) . Culture as situated cognition : Cultural mindsets , cultural fluency , and meaning making . European Review of Social Psychology , 22 , 164 – 214 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10463283 . 2011 . 627187 Oyserman , D . ( 2016 ) . What does a priming perspective reveal about culture : Culture - as - situated cognition . Current Opinion in Psychology , 12 , 94 – 99 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . copsyc . 2016 . 10 . 002 Oyserman , D . ( 2017 ) . Culture three ways : Culture and subcultures within countries . Annual Review of Psychology , 68 , 435 – 463 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - psych - 122414 - 033617 Oyserman , D . , Coon , H . M . , & Kemmelmeier , M . ( 2002 ) . Rethinking individualism and collectivism : Evaluation of theoretical assumptions and meta - analyses . Psychological Bulletin , 128 , 3 – 72 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 2909 . 128 . 1 . 3 Oyserman , D . , & Lee , S . W . S . ( 2008 ) . Does culture influence what and how we think ? Effects of priming individualism and collectivism . Psy - chological Bulletin , 134 , 311 – 342 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 2909 . 134 . 2 . 311 Oyserman , D . , & Sorensen , N . ( 2009 ) . Understanding cultural syndrome effects on what and how we think : A situated cognition model . In R . Wyer , Y . - Y . Hong , & C . - Y . Chiu ( Eds . ) , Understanding culture : The - ory , research and application ( pp . 25 – 52 ) . New York , NY : Psychology Press . Oyserman , D . , Sorensen , N . , Reber , R . , & Chen , S . X . ( 2009 ) . Connecting and separating mind - sets : Culture as situated cognition . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 97 , 217 – 235 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0015850 Pines , A . M . , & Zaidman , N . ( 2003 ) . Israeli Jews and Arabs . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 34 , 465 – 480 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0022022103034004006 Ralston , D . A . , Cunniff , M . K . , & Gustafson , D . J . ( 1995 ) . Cultural accommodation : The effect of language on the responses of bilingual Hong Kong Chinese managers . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 26 , 714 – 727 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 002202219502600612 Rhee , E . , Uleman , J . S . , Lee , H . K . , & Roman , R . J . ( 1995 ) . Spontaneous self - descriptions and ethnic identities in individualistic and collectivistic cultures . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 69 , 142 – 152 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 69 . 1 . 142 Roskes , M . , De Dreu , C . K . W . , & Nijstad , B . A . ( 2012 ) . Necessity is the mother of invention : Avoidance motivation stimulates creativity through cognitive effort . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 103 , 242 – 256 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0028442 Sagiv , L . , & Schwartz , S . H . ( 1995 ) . Value priorities and readiness for out - group social contact . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 69 , 437 – 448 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 69 . 3 . 437 Sagiv , L . , Schwartz , S . H . , & Arieli , S . ( 2011 ) . Personal values , national culture and organizations : Insights applying the Schwartz value framework . In N . N . Ashkanasy , C . Wilderom , & M . F . Peterson ( Eds . ) , Handbook of organizational culture and climate ( pp . 515 – 537 ) . New - bury Park , CA : Sage . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4135 / 9781483307961 . n29 Schooler , J . W . , Ohlsson , S . , & Brooks , K . ( 1993 ) . Thoughts beyond words : When language overshadows insight . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 122 , 166 – 183 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0096 - 3445 . 122 . 2 . 166 Schubert , T . W . , & Otten , S . ( 2002 ) . Overlap of self , ingroup , and out - group : Pictorial measures of self - categorization . Self and Identity , 1 , 353 – 376 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 152988602760328012 Schwartz , S . H . ( 1992 ) . Universals in the content and structure of values : Theoretical advances and empirical tests in 20 countries . In M . Zanna ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psychology ( Vol . 25 , pp . 1 – 65 ) . New York , NY : Academic Press . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0065 - 2601 ( 08 ) 60281 - 6 Schwartz , S . H . ( 1999 ) . A theory of cultural value and some implications for work . Applied Psychology , 48 , 23 – 47 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1464 - 0597 . 1999 . tb00047 . x Schwartz , S . H . ( 2009 ) . Culture matters : National value cultures , sources and consequences . In R . S . Wyer , C . - Y . Chiu , & Y . - Y . Hong ( Eds . ) , Understanding culture : Theory , research and application ( pp . 127 – 150 ) . New York , NY : Psychology Press . Schwartz , S . H . ( 2010 ) . Mapping and interpreting cultural differences around the world . In H . Vinken , J . Soeters , & P . Ester ( Eds . ) , Comparing cultures , dimensions of culture in a comparative perspective ( pp . 43 – 73 ) . Leiden , the Netherlands : Brill . Smith , D . C . , Ward , T . B . , & Finke , R . A . ( Eds . ) . ( 1995 ) . Principles , paradoxes , and prospects for the future of creative cognition . In The creative cognition approach ( pp . 327 – 337 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Smooha , S . ( 1990 ) . Minority status in an ethnic democracy : The status of the Arab minority in Israel . Ethnic and Racial Studies , 13 , 389 – 413 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01419870 . 1990 . 9993679 Smooha , S . ( 1992 ) . Arabs and Jews in Israel ( Vol . 2 ) . Boulder , CO : Westview Press . Srull , T . K . , & Wyer , R . S . ( 1979 ) . The role of category accessibility in the interpretation of information about persons : Some determinants and implications . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 37 , 1660 – 1672 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 37 . 10 . 1660 Swann , W . B . , Jr . , Gómez , A . , Seyle , D . C . , Morales , J . F . , & Huici , C . ( 2009 ) . Identity fusion : The interplay of personal and social identities in extreme group behavior . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 96 , 995 – 1011 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0013668 Sweetser , E . E . ( 1990 ) . From etymology to pragmatics : Metaphorical and cultural aspects of semantic structure . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511620904 Tolkien , J . R . R . ( 1937 ) . The hobbit , or , There and back again . London , UK : George Allen & Unwin . Trafimow , D . , Triandis , H . C . , & Goto , S . G . ( 1991 ) . Some tests of the distinction between the private self and the collective self . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 60 , 649 – 655 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 60 . 5 . 649 Triandis , H . C . ( 1995 ) . Individualism & collectivism . Boulder , CO : West - view press . Triandis , H . C . ( 2001 ) . Individualism - collectivism and personality . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 69 , 907 – 924 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 6494 . 696169 Varnum , M . E . W . , Grossmann , I . , Kitayama , S . , & Nisbett , R . E . ( 2010 ) . The origin of cultural differences in cognition . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 19 , 9 – 13 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0963721409359301 Weisberg , R . W . ( 1995 ) . Prolegomena to theories of insight in problem solving : A taxonomy of problems . In J . R . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 157 – 196 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 808 ARIELI AND SAGIV Williams , L . E . , & Bargh , J . A . ( 2008 ) . Experiencing physical warmth promotes interpersonal warmth . Science , 322 , 606 – 607 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1162548 Ybarra , O . , & Trafimow , D . ( 1998 ) . How priming the private self or collective self affects the relative weights of attitudes and subjective norms . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 24 , 362 – 370 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0146167298244003 Zilberfeld , T . ( 2010 ) . Person - culture fit and subjective well being in Orthodox and non - religious Israeli Jews . Jerusalem , Israel : Hebrew University of Jerusalem . Appendix A Riddles Used in Studies 1 – 6 Rule - Based Riddles 1 . Squares . How many squares are there inside the big square ( not including the big square itself ) ? 2 . Handshakes . Every Saturday Dan and Danna invite their friends to dinner ( four married couples total , plus the hosts ) . At the beginning of the evening everyone shakes everyone else’s hand ( except for one’s spouse ) . After a few moments Dan asks everyone to stop the hand - shaking and tell him how many hands they had already shaken . He got nine answers ( from everyone but him - self ) that were all different from each other ( 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 ) . How many hands did Danna ( Dan’s wife ) shake ? _ _ _ ( Hint : What must be the relationship between the person who shook eight hands and the one who shook zero hands ? ) 3 . Hats . There were five hats in a box . Three of them were black and two were white . Three hats were picked randomly and given to three people standing in line . Each person could see only the hat ( s ) of the person ( s ) in front of him . The person last in line said “I don’t know what color my hat is . ” The person in front of him said “I don’t know what color my hat is . ” What is the color of the hat of the first person in line ? 4 . Birthday . Danny and Alon just become friends with Ronit , and they want to know when her birthday is . Ronit gives them a list of 10 possible dates : May 15 th , 16 th , 19 th , June 17 th , 18 th ; July 14 th , 16 th ; August 14 th , 15 th , 17 th . Ronit then tells Danny and Alon separately the month and the day of her birthday , respectively . Danny : I don’t know when Ronit’s birthday is , but I know that Alon doesn’t know either . Alon : At first I didn’t know when Ronit’s birthday is , but I know now . Danny : Then I also know when Ronit’s birthday is . When is Ronit’s birthday ? 5 . Traitors . In a military base , the soldiers were paired up for a drill . Each pair included a paratrooper and an artillery solider , and their success depends on their loyalty to one another . During the drill the commanding officer gathered all the paratroopers for an emergency meeting and revealed that there are artillery soldiers that are traitors , but he can’t disclose exactly who they are . The officer gave each paratrooper a list with the names of the traitors , excluding their partner , regardless of whether he’s a traitor or not . Each paratrooper was to read the list in their tent , without consulting with their friends . Whoever discovers that his partner is a traitor must shoot once in the air at midnight . The first two nights were uneventful , with no shots fired . On the third night shots were fired . How many artillery soldiers were traitors ? ( How many shots were fired ) ? ( Hint : Think what would have happened during the first night if there was only one traitor ? ) 6 . Dance party . Thirty teenage boys and girls attended a dancing party . Each girl was asked : “How many boys did you dance with ? ” Each gave a different answer : Yael danced with nine boys , Gali with 10 boys , Noga with 11 boys , and so on until Shlomit—who danced with all the boys . How many boys and how many girls were at the party ? ( Appendices continue ) T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 809 CULTURE AND PROBLEM - SOLVING 7 . Burning the fuse . At your disposal are two fuses , each with an hour - long safety delay , although they don’t burn at the same speed . Using the fuses , how would you measure 45 minutes without a clock , using only a matchbox ? Context - Based Riddles Who am I ? 8 . Fish . Alive without breath , As cold as death ; Never thirsty , ever drinking , All in mail , never clinking . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 9 . Teeth . Thirty white horses on a red hill , First they champ , Then they stamp , Then they stand still . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 10 . Soul . I cannot be felt , seen , or touched , Yet I can be found in everyone , My existence is always in debate , Yet I have my own style of music . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 11 . Egg . A box without hinges , key , or lid , Yet golden treasure inside is hid . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( Riddles 8 – 11 : Tolkien , 1937 ) 12 . Rooster . Whose head holds a red crown , Adorned in a lavish gown , Tall and proud walking around , Whose voice wakes from a slumber . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 13 . Seeds . What is dead on the Earth and discarded , Buried uncovered by humankind , Thriving in interment and continuing its legacy , Emerging vigorously . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 14 . Hand . Often grasped with strength , But in that shake , it rejoices , You lend it to your friend but always keep it near , Sometimes with might and others by sleight . 15 . Tongue . Oh , what is it that lies out of sight , Ruling over its ivory castle , Rescuing many from pitfalls , And tripping others into traps , It can open doors or plan ploys Deliberately or accidentally . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Appendix B Pretesting the Classification of the Riddles In these pretests we focused on six riddles ( three rule - based and three context - based ) . We asked 497 undergraduates at an Israeli university ( 47 % female , age 17 – 63 , M (cid:3) 23 . 45 ) to solve one riddle , either a rule - based one ( see Appendix A : squares , n (cid:3) 123 ; hand - shakes , n (cid:3) 54 ; hats , n (cid:3) 101 ) or a context - based one ( fish , n (cid:3) 104 ; teeth , n (cid:3) 53 ; soul , n (cid:3) 62 ) , and to explain in writing how they solved the riddle . For each riddle , two coders , blind to the research goals , classified the participants’ explanations . The coders were provided with the definitions of rule - based and context - based reasoning ( see the Introduction ) and were instructed to code the participants’ reasoning as “rule - based , ” “context - based , ” or “hard to determine” ( Appendix D provides examples for each one of these categories ) . The inter - rater reliability was satisfactory ( Cohen’s kappa across riddles was . 80 ) . Cases of disagreement were resolved by a third independent judge . The results reflect the coding agreed upon by at least two of the three coders ( see the summary of the classification in Figure B1 below ) . Consistent with our classification , the vast majority of partici - pants who were presented with the rule - based riddles ( 88 . 8 % ) provided explanations that were classified by the judges as reflect - ing rule - based reasoning . In contrast , the vast majority of partici - pants who were presented with the context - based riddles ( 81 . 8 % ) provided explanations that were classified as reflecting context - based reasoning . The differences were significant , (cid:7) 2 ( 2 , N (cid:3) 497 ) (cid:3) 363 . 87 , p (cid:5) . 001 , r (cid:3) 0 . 85 . To further verify our classification of riddles , we collected more data from two samples of external judges : experts and lay people . In both , the judges were blind to our classification . The judges completed an online survey in which they were presented with the definitions of rule - based and context - based problems . They were then asked to classify the six riddles as ( a ) rule - based , ( b ) context - based , or ( c ) cannot be determined . The riddles were presented to the judges in a random order . ( Appendices continue ) T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 810 ARIELI AND SAGIV Expert Judges The expert judges were 18 researchers who study decision - making and / or problem - solving . The findings verified our classi - fication ( see Appendix E ) : Of the 54 responses regarding rule - based riddles ( 3 riddles (cid:2) 18 judges ) , 51 ( 94 . 4 % ) were classified as expected . Of the 54 responses regarding context - based riddles , again 51 ( 94 . 4 % ) were classified as expected , (cid:7) 2 ( 2 , N (cid:3) 107 ) (cid:3) 93 . 38 , p (cid:5) . 00 , r (cid:3) 0 . 93 . Each riddle was classified as expected by at least 17 of the 18 judges ( 94 . 4 % ) . Finally , no judge “incorrectly” classified more than one riddle . Lay Judges The sample included 38 students ( age 24 – 36 , M (cid:3) 28 . 13 ) . Again , the findings were consistent with our classification ( Ap - pendix F ) : Of 113 responses for rule - based riddles ( 3 (cid:2) 38 , one missing ) , 101 ( 89 . 4 % ) were classified as expected ; of 111 re - sponses for context - based riddles ( three missing ) 98 ( 88 . 3 % ) were classified as expected , (cid:7) 2 ( 2 , N (cid:3) 224 ) (cid:3) 149 . 31 , p (cid:5) . 001 , r (cid:3) 0 . 82 . Looking at each riddle separately revealed a consistent pattern : The riddles were classified as expected by 81 . 58 % ( hats ) to 94 . 59 % ( squares ) of the judges . ( Appendices continue ) Figure B1 . Riddle classification : Summary of the classification of the participants’ explanations . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 811 CULTURE AND PROBLEM - SOLVING Appendix C Sign - Language Prime This priming task was constructed in Hebrew using the Hebrew sign language . The participants were asked to use the sign - language alphabet and to learn to sign four words . They were encouraged to practice each word at least five times . The signs used in the individualistic mindset condition are outlined with a continuous bold line , whereas those used in the collec - tivistic mindset condition are outlined with a dashed bold line . ( Appendices continue ) T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 812 ARIELI AND SAGIV Appendix D Examples for the Coding Categories Riddle type Coding Rule - based Context - based Hard to determine Rule - based Squares “The big square is 4 (cid:2) 4 , that is 16 squares . There are 9 squares of 2 (cid:2) 2 , and 4 of 3 (cid:2) 3 . . . ” “Small squares compile a bigger square . ” “You can divide it to many [ pieces ] . ” Handshakes “According to a rule I found—each couple shook together the hands of 8 people . ” “She is the hostess and therefore all the guests shook her hand first . ” “Ten people , each one of them shakes hands with 8 people . ” Hats “The last one sees both of them . If both of them had a white hat , he would have known . Therefore , the possibilities are black (cid:8) white , and black (cid:8) black . The second one says that the first one has a black hat , so he does not know the color of his hat . The first one understands that if both the second guy and he had a white hat , the last one would have known the color of his hat . Therefore , he must have had a black hat . ” “I followed commonalities , because two people had the same color . Maybe it is an intuitive answer . . . ” “The last one is not sure about the color of his hat because one is white and one is black . ” Context - based Fish “Fish answers all the criteria . ” “This association came to my mind after reading the riddle . ” “A flexible mail . ” Teeth “I recognized that the riddle describes a process of eating . ” “‘First they champ’ was the clue . ” “I thought about it a lot . ” Soul “I thought about different music styles , and checked if they fit the other clues in the riddles . ” “The answer just came to my mind after reading the riddle . ” “I thought about it . ” Appendix E Classification of Riddles by Experts Experts’ classifications Riddle type Rule - based Context - based Rule - based 51 1 Context - based 2 51 Cannot determine 1 2 Total 54 54 ( Appendices continue ) T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 813 CULTURE AND PROBLEM - SOLVING Appendix F Classification of Riddles by Student Sample ( Representing Lay People ) Students’ classifications Riddle type Rule - based Context - based Rule - based 101 9 Context - based 10 98 Cannot determine 2 4 Total 113 111 Received August 18 , 2015 Revision received February 25 , 2018 Accepted March 20 , 2018 (cid:2) Members of Underrepresented Groups : Reviewers for Journal Manuscripts Wanted If you are interested in reviewing manuscripts for APA journals , the APA Publications and Communications Board would like to invite your participation . Manuscript reviewers are vital to the publications process . As a reviewer , you would gain valuable experience in publishing . The P & C Board is particularly interested in encouraging members of underrepresented groups to participate more in this process . If you are interested in reviewing manuscripts , please write APA Journals at Reviewers @ apa . org . Please note the following important points : • To be selected as a reviewer , you must have published articles in peer - reviewed journals . The experience of publishing provides a reviewer with the basis for preparing a thorough , objective review . • To be selected , it is critical to be a regular reader of the five to six empirical journals that are most central to the area or journal for which you would like to review . Current knowledge of recently published research provides a reviewer with the knowledge base to evaluate a new submission within the context of existing research . • To select the appropriate reviewers for each manuscript , the editor needs detailed information . Please include with your letter your vita . In the letter , please identify which APA journal ( s ) you are interested in , and describe your area of expertise . Be as specific as possible . For example , “social psychology” is not sufficient—you would need to specify “social cognition” or “attitude change” as well . • Reviewing a manuscript takes time ( 1 – 4 hours per manuscript reviewed ) . If you are selected to review a manuscript , be prepared to invest the necessary time to evaluate the manuscript thoroughly . APA now has an online video course that provides guidance in reviewing manuscripts . To learn more about the course and to access the video , visit http : / / www . apa . org / pubs / authors / review - manuscript - ce - video . aspx . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 814 ARIELI AND SAGIV