www . ssoar . info Participatory research methods : a methodological approach in motion Bergold , Jarg ; Thomas , Stefan Veröffentlichungsversion / Published Version Zeitschriftenartikel / journal article Zur Verfügung gestellt in Kooperation mit / provided in cooperation with : GESIS - Leibniz - Institut für Sozialwissenschaften Empfohlene Zitierung / Suggested Citation : Bergold , J . , & Thomas , S . ( 2012 ) . Participatory research methods : a methodological approach in motion . Historical Social Research , 37 ( 4 ) , 191 - 222 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 12759 / hsr . 37 . 2012 . 4 . 191 - 222 Nutzungsbedingungen : Dieser Text wird unter einer CC BY Lizenz ( Namensnennung ) zur Verfügung gestellt . Nähere Auskünfte zu den CC - Lizenzen finden Sie hier : https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / deed . de Terms of use : This document is made available under a CC BY Licence ( Attribution ) . For more Information see : https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 Diese Version ist zitierbar unter / This version is citable under : https : / / nbn - resolving . org / urn : nbn : de : 0168 - ssoar - 383834 Historical Social Research 37 ( 2012 ) 4 , 191 - 222 │ © GESIS Participatory Research Methods : A Methodological Approach in Motion Jarg Bergold & Stefan Thomas ∗ Abstract : »Partizipative Forschungsmethoden : Ein methodischer Ansatz in Be - wegung« . This article serves as an introduction to the FQS special issue " Partici - patory Qualitative Research . " In recent years there has been a resurgence of interest in participatory research strategies . The articles in this special issue come from different disciplines . Against the background of concrete empirical research projects , they address numerous conceptual considerations and meth - odological approaches . After reading the contributions , and engaging with the authors ' arguments , we were prompted to focus in particular on those areas in which further work needs to be done . They include , on the one hand , funda - mental principles of participatory research , such as democratic - theory consid - erations , the concept of " safe space , " participation issues , and ethical questions . And , on the other hand , we focus on practical research considerations regard - ing the role and tasks of the various participants ; specific methodological ap - proaches ; and quality criteria – understood here in the sense of arguments jus - tifying a participatory approach . Our aim is to stimulate a broad discussion that does not focus only on participatory research in the narrower sense . Because participatory methodology poses certain knowledge - and research - related questions in a radical way , it has the potential to draw attention to hitherto neglected areas in qualitative methodology and to stimulate their further de - velopment . Keywords : academic requirements , ethical norms , focus group , degrees of par - ticipation , quality criteria , interview , marginalization , participatory research methods , reflexivity , subjectivity , safe space . ∗ Jarg Bergold , Freie Universität Berlin , Arbeitsbereich Klinische Psychologie und Psychothera - pie , Habelschwerdter Allee 45 , 14195 Berlin , Germany ; jarg . bergold @ fu - berlin . de . Stefan Thomas , Potsdam University of Applied Sciences FB1 : Sozialwesen , Friedrich - Ebert - Str . 4 , 14467 Potsdam , Germany ; stefan . thomas @ fh - potsdam . de . We would like to thank our translator , Miriam Geoghegan , who did a wonderful job . The cooperation with her was most pleasant . She helped transform our typical German writing into understandable English . Working with her was a real participative experience . From the translator : I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to my co - translators Jarg Bergold and Stefan Thomas for their collaboration . Print Version of : Bergold , Jarg , and Stefan Thomas . 2012 . Participatory Research Methods : A Methodological Approach in Motion . Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum : Qualita - tive Social Research 13 ( 1 ) , Art . 30 , < http : / / www . qualitative - research . net / index . php / fqs / issue / view / 39 > . HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 192 1 . Introduction Participatory research methods are geared towards planning and conducting the research process with those people whose life - world and meaningful actions are under study . Consequently , this means that the aim of the inquiry and the research questions develop out of the convergence of two perspectives – that of science and of practice . In the best case , both sides benefit from the research process . Everyday practices , which have long since established themselves as a subject of inquiry , introduce their own perspective , namely , the way people deal with the existential challenges of everyday life . The participatory research process enables co - researchers to step back cognitively from familiar routines , forms of interaction , and power relationships in order to fundamentally ques - tion and rethink established interpretations of situations and strategies . Howev - er , the convergence of the perspectives of science and practice does not come about simply by deciding to conduct participatory research . Rather , it is a very demanding process that evolves when two spheres of action – science and practice – meet , interact , and develop an understanding for each other . By participatory methodology we mean a research style , “an orientation to inquiry” ( Reason and Bradbury 2008a , 1 ) . The unity and justification of partic - ipatory research are to be found not so much on the level of concrete research methods . Rather , participatory research can be regarded as a methodology that argues in favor of the possibility , the significance , and the usefulness of involv - ing research partners in the knowledge - production process ( Bergold 2007 ) . Participatory approaches are not fundamentally distinct from other empirical social research procedures . On the contrary , there are numerous links , especial - ly to qualitative methodologies and methods . In practice , the participatory research style manifests itself in numerous par - ticipatory research strategies . Because of the individuality and self - determination of the research partners in the participatory research process , these strategies cannot be canonized in the form of a single , cohesive methodo - logical approach , such as , for example , the narrative interview or qualitative content analysis . The dictum of process orientation and the appropriateness of the method to the subject under study ( Flick 2009 ) is even more important in participatory research than in other approaches to qualitative research . In our view , in order to gain a deeper insight into the contextual structuredness of meaning and the dynamism inherent in social action , it is worthwhile consider - ing the inclusion of participatory research elements in research designs . More - over , we believe that – precisely because the participation of all research part - ners is the fundamental guiding principle for this research approach – a methodological design that can be classified as a participatory design process in the narrower sense , represents an attractive and fruitful knowledge - generating option when it comes to researching the social world in the sense of habitualized practice ( Bergold 2007 ) . HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 193 In order to place the articles compiled in this special issue of FQS 1 in an overarching context , we shall first provide a somewhat detailed introduction to participatory research . After reading the contributions , we were prompted to engage productively with the characteristics , aspirations , and desiderata of participatory research . In the following sections we focus , in particular , on those areas in which further work needs to be done – or in which work has not yet commenced . This will also help to identify the untapped knowledge - creating potential of qualitative methodologies . Because participatory method - ology poses certain questions about knowledge and research in a radical way , it has the potential to draw attention to hitherto neglected areas in qualitative methodology and to stimulate their further development . 2 . Participatory Research and Action Research In English - speaking countries , in particular , participatory research has gained increasing importance as a research strategy within qualitative social research ( Bergold 2007 ; Bergold and Thomas 2010 ) . Especially in the debate on action research , systematic reference is made to participatory research strategies . Although there are numerous points of convergence between action research and participatory research , we believe that by identifying the differences be - tween the two approaches one can more accurately define the distinctive fea - tures of participatory research ( cf . Bell et al . 2004 ) . Another good reason to undertake this differentiation is that a systematic discussion about a participa - tory methodology in the narrower sense is only just beginning . Of particular relevance in the present context is the fact that within the de - bate on action research there is a strong movement which describes itself with increasing self - assurance as “participative inquiry and practice” – the subtitle of the Sage Handbook of Action Research ( Reason and Bradbury 2008b ) . Nu - merous discussion strands , in which the participation of research partners is conceptualized in different ways , converge in the action research paradigm . The clear reference to participatory methodology is also reflected in the label - ing of various action research approaches , for example participatory action research ( Par , Kemmis and McTaggart 2005 ) , co - operative inquiry ( Heron 1996 ) , participatory rural appraisal ( PRA ) , participatory learning and action ( PLA ) , and participatory learning research ( overview in Chambers 2008 ) , etc . The common aim of these approaches is to change social reality on the basis of insights into everyday practices that are obtained by means of participatory 1 Cf . the complete FQS issue < http : / / www . qualitative - research . net / index . php / fqs / issue / view / 39 > . HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 194 research – that is , collaborative research on the part of scientists , practitioners , service users , etc . The articles in this special issue also differ in terms of thematic focus . The pupils’ research project with which Veronika Wöhrer and Bernhard Höcher illustrate the challenges of involving secondary school pupils in social science research perceives itself as PAR in the classical sense . A stronger accentuation of the participatory side can be observed in Hella v . Unger’s contribution . She explores on the basis of community - based participatory research ( CBPR ) the preventive healthcare opportunities opened up by involving members of the researched community in the research . Taking a research project in the area of home treatment for people experiencing mental health crisis as an example , Marit Borg , Bengt Karlsson , Hesook Suzie Kim , and Brendan McCormack identify processes that enhance the motivation for participatory work in profes - sional treatment teams and create communicative spaces . In her contribution , Tina Cook reflects on the problems that occurred when conducting two partici - patory studies which focused not only on the participation of patients / service users of psychiatric institutions , but also on joint reflection on , and the devel - opment of , shared understanding about the specific characteristics of the partic - ipants’ life situation . Against the background of experiences in research with young people , the contributions by Audrey M . Dentith , Lynda Measor , and Michael P . O’Malley , and by Claire McCartan , Dirk Schubotz , and Jonathan Murphy , focus on the possibilities and challenges of overcoming established power structures in participatory projects . Jean Rath presents a participatory approach aimed at extending the possibilities of co - constructing experiences and meanings . She crafts poems from interview transcripts . As part of a “lay - ered text , ” these poems provide access to the many meanings explicitly and implicitly expressed in the interviews with the research partners . Stephanie Goeke and Dagmar Kubanski propose that participatory research in the area of disability research in the German - speaking countries be extended to include emancipatory , inclusive , and trans - disciplinary approaches . Moreover – like Jasna Russo – they effectively argue in favor of a radicalization of participatory research . All three authors contend that responsibility for research should be assumed by the persons concerned – in Goeke and Kubanski’s paper , by the persons affected by disability , and in Russo’s contribution , by “survivors , ” that is , people who have experienced psychiatric treatment . Against the background of democracy theory , Monika Götsch , Sabine Klinger and Andreas Thiesen reflect on the requirements that arise in the course of the realization of a partic - ipatory research project . And finally , in her article on the development of par - ticipatory projects after the collapse of the military dictatorship in Argentina , Sylvia Lenz demonstrates the importance of democracy as a context for partic - ipatory research . The combination of practice change and collaborative research – as in the case of PAR – is possible and makes good sense . Nonetheless , action research HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 195 and participatory research are also conducted separately , or applied with differ - ent emphases in one research project . As Kemmis and McTaggart ( 2005 , 563 ) point out : “Not all theorists of action research place this emphasis on collabora - tion . ” Participatory research , in particular , shifts the emphasis from action and change to collaborative research activities . Especially in health research , even research funders now recognize that the involvement of service users in the research process makes good sense . In her article , Cook ( 2012 ) shows that , in the United Kingdom at least , public and patient involvement ( PPI ) in research is sometimes even explicitly required by funding bodies . In this framework , the primary aim is not to change practice in the course of research . Rather , the aim is to produce knowledge in collaboration between scientists and practitioners . Therefore , some representatives of the participatory research paradigm stress that , besides the mere participation of co - researchers in the inquiry , par - ticipatory research involves a joint process of knowledge - production that leads to new insights on the part of both scientists and practitioners . From an action research viewpoint , reflection is not without consequences for people’s every - day practices . From a scientific perspective , however , producers of knowledge would be well advised initially to evade demands for pragmatic utility . There - fore , the following elaboration of distinctive features of participatory research is intended as an invitation to the qualitative community to make greater use of participatory research elements – especially if they do not share the aspirations for change that are characteristic of action research . As the articles in this spe - cial issue reveal , participatory methods open up new and broader perspectives for the research of everyday practices , especially where the methodology and self - concept of qualitative social research are concerned . These find expression in the basic principles of openness , communication , and the appropriateness of the method to the subject under study . 3 . Fundamental Principles of Participatory Research 3 . 1 Democracy as a Precondition for Participatory Research Every type of research calls for social conditions that are conducive to the topic and to the epistemological approach in question . In contrast to nomothetic research , which can be carried out under almost any social conditions , partici - patory research requires a democratic social and political context . The partici - pation of under - privileged demographic groups , and the social commitment demanded of the researchers , are possible only if there is a political framework that allows it . The connection between democracy and participatory research can be clearly seen in Latin America , for example , where , after the collapse of dictatorships , a general increase in participation on the part of the population has been observed , and – linked to that – an upswing in both academically - HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 196 driven and practitioner - driven participatory research ( Lenz 2012 ) . To put it pointedly : The possibility of conducting participatory research can be regarded as a litmus test for a society’s democratic self - concept . Götsch et al . ( 2012 ) argue that in concrete research projects , too , the con - cepts of democracy held the participants shapes the design and the research process . The authors point out that a society’s understanding of democracy – as consensus democracy or majoritarian democracy – has consequences for the extent of participation , the research questions and aims , and the research re - sults . 3 . 2 The Need for a " Safe Space " Participatory research requires a great willingness on the part of participants to disclose their personal views of the situation , their own opinions and experi - ences . In everyday life , such openness is displayed towards good and trusted friends , but hardly in institutional settings or towards strangers . The fear of being attacked for saying something wrong prevents people from expressing their views and opinions , especially when they appear to contradict what the others think . However , participatory research specifically seeks these dissent - ing views ; they are essential for the process of knowledge production because they promise a new and different take on the subject under study , and thereby enable the discovery of new aspects . In order to facilitate sufficient openness , a “safe space” is needed , in which the participants can be confident that their utterances will not be used against them , and that they will not suffer any disadvantages if they express critical or dissenting opinions . It is not a question of creating a conflict - free space , but rather of ensuring that the conflicts that are revealed can be jointly discussed ; that they can either be solved or , at least , accepted as different positions ; and that a certain level of conflict tolerance is achieved . Building on Kemmis ( 2001 ) , Wicks and Reason ( 2009 ) draw on Habermas’s deliberations about “domination - free” discourse to develop the concept of “communicative space” – a transition zone between system and life - world – which , in their view , participatory research must open . The authors demon - strate how such communicative space must be produced anew in the various phases of the research process . They distinguish three phases in the process of participatory research : the “inclusion phase , ” the “control phase , ” and the “in - timacy phase . ” In each phase , three problem areas – “emotional issues , ” “task issues , ” and “organizational issues” – must be addressed . The authors also point out that the “practices of developing such communica - tive spaces are necessarily paradoxical and contradictory , ” with the result that negotiation processes must be continually engaged in . Therefore , the research contract ; the boundaries of the communicative space ; the type of participation ; leadership ; opportunities to express anxiety ; and the balance between order and HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 197 chaos must be continually negotiated . The outcome of this negotiation process is a symbolic space in which , in the best case , the participants can trust each other and , thus , express their views on the subject under study . Concepts such as “communicative space , ” “the counter public” ( Dentith et al . 2012 ) , or “discursive approach” ( Cook 2012 ) , which are encountered in participatory methodology , underline the fact that the challenge of participation lies in achieving understanding about the subject under study by means of communication . Although they draw on different concepts , authors continually stress how important it is that the research process open up spaces that facilitate communication . They argue that it is decisive for research that a safe space be created in which openness , differences of opinion , conflicts , etc . are permitted . 3 . 3 Who Participates ? How is " The Community " Defined ? With the acceptance of participatory research approaches by various funding bodies ( for example , the Department of Health in England and the World Bank ) , there are a growing number of programs that stipulate the use of partici - patory research strategies in the funded projects . However , “participation” is understood more as the involvement of any groups of people who are not pro - fessional researchers . As a result , the concept “participatory research” loses its clear contours . A fundamental dichotomy can be observed in participatory research . On the one hand , there are a large number of studies in which academic researchers and professional practitioners collaborate ; the practitioners are either involved in the research or carry it out themselves with the support of professional re - searchers . Prototypes of this kind of research in English - speaking countries include participatory action research ( PAR ) , co - operative inquiry , and partici - patory evaluation ; examples in German - speaking countries are action research and practice research ( Heiner 1988 ) . On the other hand , participatory research is conducted directly with the im - mediately affected persons ; the aim is the reconstruction of their knowledge and ability in a process of understanding and empowerment . In the majority of cases , these co - researchers are marginalized groups whose views are seldom sought , and whose voices are rarely heard . Normally , these groups have little opportunity to articulate , justify , and assert their interests . This is expressed succinctly by Fals - Borda and Rahman ( 1991 , viif . ) , who define PAR as the “enlightenment and awakening of common peoples , ” among other things . The basic dilemma revealed here is that these marginalized communities are in a very poor position to participate in participatory research projects , or to initiate such a project themselves . This can be observed clearly in two problem areas that are represented in contributions to this special issue , namely “psychi - atric disorders” and “disabilities . ” Traditionally , research in these two areas has been conducted as research about the people in question and their problems , HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 198 rather than with these people ( Russo 2012 ; Goeke and Kubanski 2012 ) . This has led to the development of theories and practices that may well be consid - ered helpful by those affected , but may also be perceived as hegemonial knowledge . Moreover , research is classified into different theoretical models depending on the labels used to describe the research partners – and this happens without explicit discussion ( see Cook 2012 and Russo 2012 ) . This , too , can be clearly observed in the psychiatric area . The label “service user” denotes an extremely heterogeneous group that might also include the family , friends , and neighbors of the patient , in other words , everyone who is affected directly or indirectly by a certain service offering . By using the term “consumer , ” research is classified into the economic market model ; the term “patient” assigns it to the medical model ; and , finally , the term “survivors” ( of psychiatric treatment ) classifies it into an alternative model of affected persons . Especially in England , psychiatric “survivors” stress the need for alternative models of psychiatric problems and ways of dealing with them – models that are not shaped by the medical model and thus by the economic interests of the medical profession and the pharmaceutical industry . Moreover , they argue that the development of such alternative models calls for independent research that is completely controlled by the survivors themselves . When research is conducted together with the affected persons , the method - ological question arises as to which persons , or groups of persons , should , or must , be involved . This question must be addressed , especially in view of the fact that different groups have developed different knowledge in the area under study . Furthermore , it is the declared aim of participatory research to access and harness these different types of knowledge . Therefore , it is important to determine exactly which groups will contribute their knowledge to the joint research results . Only by so doing , can the different types of knowledge be related to each other , and a possible practical use be outlined . It is generally argued that those persons , groups , and institutions who are af - fected by the research theme and the expected outcomes must be involved . However , criticism is voiced that , when it comes to sampling , participatory approaches frequently rely on the utterances of the local participants or the client and that the sample is inadequate or faulty as a result ( see v . Unger 2012 ; Caspari 2006 , 375 ) . Overall , what is lacking is a systematic procedure . However , there are vari - ous pragmatic strategies with which the groups to be included can be deter - mined more exactly . For example , v . Unger ( 2012 ) presents a solution with which diverse groups such as users and their organizations , community leaders , citizens , clubs and societies , professional practitioners , professional societies , etc . are involved . This can be carried out within the framework of a snowball system via those who are already included , and can take place step by step during the research process . HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 199 The methodological problem lies in a distortion of the research process and outcomes if relevant actors are not prepared to get involved in the participatory research process , or if some field participants are quasi invisible . These “invis - ible” field members can be groups who have been excluded by other actors , or who , for whatever reason , have not received information about the project . Moreover , it would appear plausible that the professional researchers cannot rely on the utterances of the field participants alone , because numerous exclu - sionary processes may occur in the field , and involvement in a participatory research project may represent a privilege and a distinction for which people compete . In the area of evaluation , Guba and Lincoln ( 1989 , 40f . ) developed the stakeholder approach , in which attention is also drawn to the victims – that is , to those who suffer disadvantages because of the project and the changes it brings , but who are unable to participate in decisions . However , these authors , too , do not go beyond a pragmatic list of groups of persons who may be disad - vantaged by the procedure in question . A systematic solution could be achieved only by a structural theory about the particular area under study . However , such a theory is frequently not avail - able ; nor can it be developed within the framework of individual projects . The social location of those people who are affected by the researched problem , who share a material or socio - psychological milieu , and have a common expe - riential background must be precisely identified . This common background will – at least in theory – facilitate communication and joint action . 3 . 4 Different Degrees of Participation Once it has been clarified who should be involved in the research project , fur - ther decisions must be made . Which activities the co - researchers should – or can – participate in , and whether there should be different degrees of participa - tion for different groups , are questions that are discussed in very different ways in the literature . Both v . Unger ( 2012 ) and Cook ( 2012 ) offer an overview of the concepts that have emerged from this discussion . The most well - known model of participation is the “ladder” proposed by Arnstein ( 1969 ) . Although developed with reference to citizen participation , it has been applied in various attempts to develop an overview of types of participation in research projects ( see account in v . Unger 2012 ) . To determine whether a project fulfils the basic criterion for classification as participatory research , one must ask who controls the research in which phase of the project ( see Cook 2012 ; Russo , Goeke and Kubanski 2012 ) ; whether control is exercised by the research partners ; or whether they have at least the same rights as the professional researchers when it comes to making decisions . These questions have been posed mainly by research participants – for example persons with experience of psychiatric institutions , or persons with learning HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 200 difficulties – who have traditionally been regarded as objects of research , and who have only recently spoken out . From this perspective , the proposal of ladder models that allow those on the lower rungs no control over research decisions , does little to clarify matters . Unless people are involved in decisions – and , therefore , research partners , or ( co - ) researchers – it is not participatory research . Ladder models suggest the existence of a continuum , and thereby blur basic differences ( Cook 2012 ) . Whether the affected persons are merely interviewed , or whether they partici - pate directly in research decisions , possibly implies completely different social - policy and professional - policy backgrounds and underlying philosophical posi - tions . So - called “early” forms of participation , such as the briefing of professional researchers by those who are affected by the problem under study , can , at most , be described as preparatory joint activities that may facilitate participation in the research project at a later date . However , the problem with these forms of participation is that they may constitute “pseudo participation . ” Goeke and Kubanski ( 2012 ) criticize the pseudo - participation of people with disabilities , while Caspari ( 2006 ) identifies pseudo - participation in the area of development co - operation . The phenomenon can also be observed in many other research fields , where such “early” forms of participation are abused in order to moti - vate the affected persons to co - operate and to disclose personal information by giving them the false impression that they have a say in the research process . To distinguish the various types of participation , we consider it more appro - priate to specify the decision - making situations in the research process , and the groups of participants , and to disclose who , with what rights , at what point in time , and with regard to what theme , can participate in decisions . Such a pro - cedure is presented in the present special issue by v . Unger ( 2012 ) . The situa - tion is quite different in the case of research projects controlled by the affected persons themselves – for example , “survivor - controlled research” ( Rosso 2012 ) . Here , by definition , the persons who are directly affected participate in all decisions . However , even in this case , it would appear necessary to specify who , or which group , participates in which decisions , because , here too , there are positions of power and competition between individuals or groups . 4 . Distinctive Features of the Participatory Research Methodology 4 . 1 Material Prerequisites The fundamental decision not to treat the research partners as objects of re - search , but rather as co - researchers and knowing subjects with the same rights as the professional researchers , gives rise to a number of questions about the HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 201 material resources needed for participation . As a rule , professional researchers receive a salary for their work – although , in academically - driven research , this remuneration is often quite low . Normally , the co - researchers receive – if any - thing – expenses , and they are expected to make their knowledge available free of charge . The taken - for - grantedness of this situation must be called into question be - cause co - researchers frequently belong to lower social classes or marginalized groups and have limited material resources at their disposal . This means that such resources must be guaranteed during their participation in the project . Direct remuneration is addressed in a number of articles in the present issue that describe projects in which young people are involved as research partners ( Wöhrer and Höcher 2012 ; McCartan et al . 2012 ; Schubotz and Murphy 2012 ) . The necessity of material support is not limited to the remuneration of direct co - operation in the research process . Rather , people from marginalized , low - income groups also need other forms of material support . Goecke and Ku - banski ( 2012 ) point out that , besides paying an independence - enhancing re - search fee , the willingness of persons with disabilities to participate in research projects can be increased by the provision of assistance on site , and barrier - free access . There is no rule about what material resources should be made availa - ble to research partners . It depends on the group in question . Resources provid - ed could include travel expenses , childcare costs , food for participants with special dietary needs , compensation for loss of earnings , etc . Such support for research partners has , of course , advantages and disad - vantages . On the downside , “paid” participation can become a job like any other and can cause people to distance themselves from , or compete with , other community members . However , what is decisive is that remuneration signaliz - es social recognition of the value of the individual’s contribution to research . If participatory research genuinely aims to put the relationship with research partners on an equal footing , then the socially dominant form of recognition must be used . It should be noted that financial resources for the co - researchers must be allowed for when planning participatory research projects , and that funding bodies must be requested to accept the inclusion of such resources in the financial plan . 4 . 2 Challenges and Tasks Facing all the Research Partners In the classical research setting , the relationship between researchers and re - searched seems to be clearly defined . Basically , it is a non - relationship in which the researcher is , as far as possible , neutral or invisible . Anything else is considered to lead to the distortion of the results or to threaten the internal validity . This situation changes radically when the relationship between the partici - pants is put on a participatory footing . In this case , the perspectives of the vari - HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 202 ous partners and their differences of opinion are important for the process of discovery ; objectivity and neutrality must be replaced by reflective subjectivity . This calls for willingness on the part of the research partners from the life - world under study to enter into the research process , and the necessary knowledge and ability to participate productively . An apparent dilemma inher - ent in participatory research becomes visible here . On the one hand , participa - tory research aims , in particular , to involve marginalized groups in the produc - tion of knowledge and , by so doing , to foster empowerment . On the other hand , these are the very demographic groups who are characterized by a lack of com - petencies and social capital ( cf . Bourdieu 1983 ) . For this reason , they are deemed also to be lacking the competencies necessary to participate in the research process . The only way out of this dilemma is to ask who defines these deficits and from what perspective . The answer is obvious : They are defined by representa - tives of the dominant social group – in this case scientists – who specify the necessary knowledge and ability against the background of their familiar worldview and their methodological requirements . In this way , research be - comes a very demanding task that calls for many competencies . By contrast , the primary aim of participatory research is to give members of marginalized groups a voice , or to enable them to make their voices heard . What counts is that they bring their experiences , their everyday knowledge , and their ability into the research process and thereby gain new perspectives and insights ( Russo 2012 ) . The difference between the academic worldview and that of the research partners from the field is actually an asset which must be exploited in the exploration process . Therefore , mutual curiosity about the knowledge and ability of those on the “other side” and what one can learn from them is so important . It enables all participants to acquire new roles and tasks that differ clearly from those of “classical” research . This means that all participants must change considerably in the course of the participatory research process – both on a personal and on a cognitive level . And yet , the importance of the individual participant and his or her personal competencies , motivation , etc . is seldom addressed in the literature . However , Evan and Jones ( 2004 , 5 ) clearly formulate the importance of the participants’ life experiences : One of the strands of argument running through this paper is that biography , one’s personal experience , is of significance f or research , whether one is the subject of research , the researcher , or the research reader . It shapes how we respond within and to the research process . If we have control , it also shapes the research process itself . In participatory research projects , professional researchers acquire new and unfamiliar roles – this is especially evident in the case of user - controlled re - search . With regard to academically trained researchers , Evans and Jones ( 9 ) HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 203 note : “The role here , however , is to be an ally , an advisor , an enabler , and maybe a partner , to users undertaking research . . . . ” However , role distribution in participatory research is not static . Rather , it is subject to continual change . This is due not least to the relatively long duration of participatory research projects . Months , or even years , can elapse between the beginning and the end of a project . During this time , various developments occur in the group of research partners that shape the way they relate to each other . Such changes in the role structure have long been familiar to us from ethnological studies , in which researchers spend a long time in the field . Heeg ( 1996 ) attempted to capture the temporal sequence of qualitative pro - cedures by using the metaphor of the curriculum vitae . The different stages he describes can be adapted to participatory research as follows : At first , the pro - fessional researchers enter the field as “foreigners” ; as time goes by they as - sume the role of “mobilizer , ” “service provider , ” “provider of information , ” and “ally” ; eventually they become “patrons” ; and , in the best case , they finally become “mentors . ” Within the framework of participatory research there are also other chal - lenges that researchers must face . The research themes , and the biographies and social background of the research partners , call for very intensive contact . However , collaborative research with people who have a history of marginali - zation is possible only on the basis of trust ( Rath 2012 ) . This trust must be allowed to develop ; it builds on long - term , honest relationships that are charac - terized by closeness , empathy , and emotional involvement . The balance be - tween closeness and distance in participatory research is described very clearly by Dentith et al . ( 2012 ) , who worked with research partners who had suffered traumatic , taboo experiences . Here it is important that researchers show their own emotional reactions . If they were to withhold such reactions and remain silent about the occurrences , they could possibly contribute to the re - traumatization of the research participant ( Rath 2012 ; Dentith et al . 2012 ) . The academic requirements described in detail in Subsection 4 . 6 below pose a further challenge to academic researchers . At the present point in time , one can safely say that , in a number of disciplines , scientists who pursue a partici - patory research project – within the framework of a qualification process , for example – become outsiders in the academic community . This calls for consid - erable courage and willingness to swim against the current , and , possibly , to put up with disadvantages . The diversity of requirements and roles demands from the researcher very different competencies and skills , and a high degree of flexibility and reflexivity – things that are not acquired in the course of conven - tional university education . In a similar way to the professional researchers , the roles of the non - professional research partners , and the way they perceive participation , change over time . At first , they may view the research project with anxiety , distrust , and detachment , and see themselves as outsiders who are expected to furnish HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 204 information as in conventional research processes . This changes in the course of participation if and when the participants find that they are taken seriously as co - researchers ; that they acquire more and more research competencies ; and that they can develop standpoints of their own which differ from those of the professional researchers ( Götsch , Klinger and Thiesen 2012 ) . At the same time , they are personally empowered and develop dispositions such as self - confidence , self - assurance , and a feeling of belonging . 2 However , participation in participatory research also calls for specific knowledge and skills – in other words , competencies , which the participants must gradually acquire . These include , for example , linguistic competencies , the ability to proceed systematically in the research process , communicative skills in dealing with groups , etc . Professional researchers should offer training courses and workshops on these thematic areas ( see “capacity building” in v . Unger 2012 ) and impart these skills in their everyday dealings with the co - researchers . A key task in this regard is to design training units and choose methodological approaches in such a way that they build on the initial state of knowledge of the participants and develop it further . The development of different roles is not without conflict . In the various phases , the relationships – and all other aspects of the research – must be con - tinually reflected upon , and emerging conflicts must be dealt with jointly . As elaborated , for example , by Marshall and Reason ( 2007 ) , continual self - reflection and reflective dialog become a necessity and a quality indicator for participatory research . 4 . 3 The Importance of Reflection In participatory research , all participants are involved as knowing subjects who bring their perspectives into the knowledge - production process . The potential of the individual subjects to acquire knowledge is shaped by their biological makeup , their personal and social biography , and their social status . 3 In order to reach mutual understanding in collaborative research action , individuals must , to some extent at least , disclose to their fellow researchers the background to their epistemological perspective . On this basis , different perceptions can then be negotiated and related to each other ( Dentith et al . 2012 ; v . Unger 2012 ) . This calls for a high degree of reflexivity in the sense of self - reflexivity and reflection on the research situation and the research process . 4 In their article in the present issue , Borg et al . ( 2012 ) note : 2 Arvidsson et al . ( 2008 ) , for example , found such dispositions in young people with slight disabilities who participated in social activities . As far as we are aware , no studies have yet been conducted on changes in disposition in the course of participatory research projects . 3 See Breuer ( 2009 ) , who analyzed the relationship between subjectivity , perspectivity , and self - / reflexivity within the research process in grounded theory . 4 See also Mruck , Roth and Breuer ( 2002 ) ; Roth , Breuer and Mruck ( 2003 ) . HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 205 Reflexivity requires the researcher to be aware of themselves as the instrument of research . This is a particularly important issue for action researchers who are intimately involved with the subject of the research , the context in which it takes place , and others who may be stakeholders in that context . This requires , on the one hand , a safe space with open communication – a “communicative space” ( see Subsection 3 . 2 above ) . On the other hand , it calls for numerous types of support on the part of both the professional researchers and the co - researchers . Therefore , the ability to be responsive to the needs of others , to give them time and space for reflection , etc . are decisive prerequisites for collaboration . Reflection can be focused on different things . Borg et al . ( 2012 ) distinguish between personal and epistemological reflexivity . Personal reflexivity focuses on personal assumptions , values , experiences , etc . that shape the research ; epistemological reflexivity requires the researcher to recognize the limits of the research that are determined by the basic research decisions such as research question , methodology , method of analysis , etc . We suggest distinguishing four focuses or types of reflection from which techniques and instruments can be derived that can facilitate reflexivity on the part of participants . 4 . 3 . 1 Reflection on Personal and Biographical Attributes and Dispositions The potential closeness of the research participants , and the type of research theme ( socially taboo issues such as sexual abuse , experiences in psychiatric institutions , poverty , etc . ) may elicit very personal reactions that can foster , or hinder , the process of knowledge production . Writing from a psycho - analytic perspective , Georges Devereux ( 1976 ) was one of the first to point out that reflection on such personal ways of reacting can be used as a source of knowledge . Whether a psycho - analytic theory background is needed for this type of reflection is , of course , debatable . However , what is undisputed , in our view , is the fact that , in a participatory research context , it is necessary to disclose such personal dispositions – at least to the extent that they impact collaborative work on the object of research . Conditions conducive to such openness can be created in group settings – for example , in the widely used focus groups – in which an accepting attitude is fostered ( Borg et al . 2012 ; Dentith et al . 2012 ; McCartan et al . 2012 ) . However , there appear to be inadequacies in the way such groups are run in practice . Ideas for improvement could perhaps be gleaned from the various therapeutic and consultation group concepts available . HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 206 4 . 3 . 2 Reflection on Social Relationships among the Research Partners As we pointed out earlier , the different interests of the participants inevitably lead to conflicts in the research group from time to time . This means that the relationships between the group members must also be regularly reflected upon in order to shed light on such conflicts and , if possible , to defuse them . As far as we are aware , there has been little discussion in the literature about the way in which such group conflicts can be reflected upon and moderated . This is surprising when one considers that there is a rich body of literature on group dynamics . The concept of “theme - centered interaction” ( TCI ) proposed by Ruth Cohn ( 1975 ) can be considered an example of an attempt to foster social learning and personality development in a group setting . When applying TCI , an effort is made to keep all the elements – the theme in question , the conflict in the group , the individual participants , and the political , ecological , and cul - tural context ( the “globe” ) – in view at all times and to reflect upon them . 4 . 3 . 3 Structural Reflection on the Social Field of the Research Project Following Pierre Bourdieu’s concept of sociological self - reflection ( 1993 ; 2002 ) , the social determination of the participating knowing subjects , and of the participatory project , must also be reflected upon . The focus here is on the social conditions of possibility and the limits of the individual subjects and the participatory research project as a collective knowing subject . It is a question of reflecting on the political , economic , and social context conditions in which the research theme and the research project are embedded . The aforementioned limits are dealt with explicitly in a number of contributions to the present spe - cial issue ( Cook 2012 ; Dentith et al . 2012 ; Measor and O’Malley 2012 ; Goeke and Kubanski 2012 ; Götsch et al . 2012 ; Russo 2012 ) . In fact , structural reflec - tion is undertaken in all the articles . Therefore , it is all the more important that it be recognized as a separate type – and an essential element – of reflective practice in participatory research . 4 . 3 . 4 Reflection on the Research Process This type of reflection is largely consistent with the concept of “epistemologi - cal reflexivity” employed by Borg ( 2012 ) . By now , it is accepted also as a quality criterion in qualitative research – especially in ethnology . A considera - ble number of methodological proposals as to how such reflection can be fos - tered have already been made . They range from research diaries and research workshops to research supervision ( see , for example Mruck and Mey 1998 ) . HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 207 4 . 4 Distinctive Features of the Production and Analysis of the " Data " To a certain extent , research with partners to whom the rituals of academic research are alien and unfamiliar – which is frequently the case in participatory research – calls for new methods of data collection . The question of the “ap - propriateness of the method to the participants” is particularly relevant here . From a methodological perspective , the involvement of field partners as co - researchers in the data collection process has various advantages and disad - vantages , each of which must be carefully considered . One major advantage is that the co - researchers have first - hand knowledge of the field . Therefore , they understand the way people think and may be able to obtain better and faster access to the desired informants . For example , McCartan et al . ( 2012 ) observed that young people in the role of co - researchers had greater empathy and under - standing for their peers in the field than the adult researchers did . This facili - tates the discovery of “natural codes” – in the grounded theory sense of the word . Goeke and Kubanski ( 2012 ) express a similar view with regard to re - search with people with disabilities . Methods of data collection should therefore build on the participants’ every - day experiences . This makes it easier for them to understand the concrete pro - cedures . However , it means that new methods of data collection must be devel - oped that are appropriate to the concrete research situation and the research partners . An example of the possible range of methods can be found in Cook ( 2012 , 22 ) , who notes : “The methods chosen by the group for their research included interviews and focus groups , but also incorporated a questionnaire , photography projects , blogs , diaries and mapping processes as ways of generat - ing data . ” The range of methods to be found in the literature is very broad and depends greatly on the research field and the research partners in question . In our view , therefore , it makes little sense to standardize methods of data collection . Ra - ther , it is necessary to follow the Glaserian dictum : “All is data” ( Glaser 2001 , 145 ) . It should also be remembered that , while many people from marginalized groups may have limited verbal communication skills , they have developed other communication strategies . In recent years , the many possibilities of using visual and performative methods of data collection and representation have been discussed in qualitative social research . These procedures have been doc - umented , for example , in three thematic issues of FQS devoted to 1 . “Per - formative Social Science , ” which was edited by Jones et al . ( 2008 ) ; 2 . “Visual Methods , ” edited by Knoblauch et al . ( 2008 ) ; and 3 . “Visualising Migration and Social Division : Insights from Social Sciences and the Visual Arts , ” edited by Ball and Gilligan ( 2010 ) . It is therefore not necessary to go into detail here . However , we would stress the point made by Rath ( 2012 ) that , when choosing HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 208 methods , the previous experiences of the research partners should be specifical - ly addressed . It can be difficult for people who have never had anything to do with re - search to understand the various methodological procedures . Therefore , special training programs are needed to enable them to carry out the procedures ap - plied within the framework of the project . Hella von Unger ( 2012 ) reports , for example , that capacity building on the part of research partners represents a core aim in community - based participatory research . It is interesting that , in this way , the participants develop not only specialized competencies required for participation in the research process , but also more general competencies , all of which contribute to personal development . McCartan et al . ( 2012 ) ob - served that the self - confidence of the young peer researchers grew in the course of the training sessions and that they took on a more proactive role as result . Despite the aforementioned diversity of data collection methods in participa - tory research , two procedures appear to be applied very frequently , namely interviews and focus groups . We shall now address certain aspects of these two procedures that are particularly visible in the participative approach but are not often mentioned in discussions on qualitative methods . The interviews conducted within the framework of participatory research are normally semi - structured – a type frequently used in qualitative research . Expe - rience has shown that , after appropriate training , the various research partners are well able to conduct these interviews – generally in teams of two . In the participatory research situation , it can be clearly seen that the outcome of an interview must be perceived as a situation - dependent co - construction on the part of the interview partners ( see McCartan et al . 2012 ) . This has already been discussed in the qualitative research literature . However , another aspect is also revealed , one that was demonstrated many years ago by Selvini Palazzoli ( 1984 ) on the basis of a systems - theory - based communication theory . The author does not perceive communication between two partners as a dyad , but rather as part of a much larger system of communication . She adapts Haley’s system of communication as follows : “1 . I ( the sender ) , 2 . say something ( a message ) , 3 . to you ( the apparent receiver ) and inevitably and simultaneously ( parallel circuit ) , 4 . to him / her / them ( simultaneous co - receivers ) , 5 . in this situation ( context ) ” ( 273 ; our translation ) . In our view , these considerations are of considerable relevance to participa - tory research because , here , the virtual presence of the participating community must always be borne in mind . Rath ( 2012 ) incorporates this notion into her study , although she derives it from a different theoretical background . In view of the imagined listeners , she contends that an interview is not purely a private conversation between the interview partners , but that it is , in a sense , public . The second instrument that is frequently used within the framework of par - ticipatory research is the focus group . This label stands for a lot of different procedures . The common denominator is that a group of different types of HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 209 research participants is formed , and that these participants are given the oppor - tunity to enter into conversation with each other in a safe setting and to deal with aspects of the project . It can be said that the focus group is one of the key instruments for the creation of a “communicative space” ( see Subsection 3 . 2 above ) . In the best case , all relevant issues are discussed . This open dialog becomes the central starting point for the entire participatory research enter - prise . However , focus groups can also assume other tasks . For example , if partici - pants do not hail from the same context , focus groups offer them an opportuni - ty to get to know each other ( Russo 2012 ) . Moreover , together with other methods of data collection , focus groups can make a taboo theme known in the community and “get things moving” there ( v . Unger 2012 , 47 ) . In teams of professionals , they can facilitate frank exchanges between the team members ( Borg et al . 2012 ) . They also frequently serve to collect data because in the open and – ideally – relaxed atmosphere , it is easier to address taboo themes ( v . Unger 2012 ; Dentith et al . 2012 ; Measor and O’Malley 2012 ; Cook 2012 ) . This succeeds also in the case of young research partners when the focus groups are run by peer researchers ( McCartan et al . 2012 ) . As far back as 1967 , Glaser and Strauss ( 1967 ) stressed the desirability of conducting data analysis in groups that include lay people . This applies particu - larly to participatory research because it ensures that the various perspectives flow into the interpretation during the data analysis process and that the re - search partners gain an insight into the background to their own viewpoints and that of the other members . It is not surprising , therefore , that a number of au - thors in the present special issue report that data were analyzed in focus groups together with the research partners ( Borg et al . 2012 ; Goeke and Kubanski 2012 ; McCartam et al . 2012 ; v . Unger 2012 ; Wöhrer and Höcher 2012 ) . For similar reasons , the research findings are also discussed in focus groups . Russo ( 2012 ) points out that it is possible to validate findings communicatively in focus groups and that other effects can be observed at the same time : “Focus groups in survivor - controlled research set off a collective process whereby participants start to take ownership of the research . ” Here the author is refer - ring to a central process that participatory research aims to foster . Hence focus groups can be considered as an instrument that encourages this process of ap - propriation . 4 . 5 Distinctive Features of the Representation of Findings The representation of participatory research findings also has a number of distinctive features . Above all , the multi - perspectivity and multivocality must be preserved in the representation of the results ( v . Unger 2012 ; Cook 2012 ; Russo 2012 ) . HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 210 In traditional academic writing , authors stay in the background . It is consid - ered somewhat unscientific to write a text in the first person . Indeed , in some cases , authors consistently refer to themselves in the third person . The required distance is symbolized by this third person , and the impression is given that the statements made are “objective . ” They have been cleansed of the personality of the scientist , so to speak . As a rule , the texts aspire to be unequivocal and to follow scientific logic . In participatory research , by contrast , the various contributions to the results must be clearly visible . Riecken et al . ( 2004 ) call for an “Ethics of Voice” in participatory action research . In their publication , all participants in the study were given a chance to voice their opinions and positions . In a report about a study accompanying a psychosis seminar , Hermann et al . ( 2004 ) experimented with various texts in order to identify the contributions of the participants , who commented on the scientist’s deliberations from the perspective of the persons affected . In the present issue , Rath ( 2012 ) takes a more radical step . She uses poetry to make “the emotional” visible ; to highlight the constructed nature of texts ; and to challenge the conviction that knowledge derived from academic texts is “certain . ” The research partners – women training to be rape crisis counselors – were amenable to this procedure because there is a tradition in the area of sexual abuse of using poetry to articulate traumatic experiences . However , the representation of the results of participatory research cannot be limited to texts . In order to render the findings understandable to affected persons , to give them a basis for further discussion , and to reach a wide audi - ence , other forms of representation are needed . When discussing data collection ( Subsection 4 . 4 above ) , mention was made of the use of visual and performa - tive methods . The application of such procedures in the representation stage , too , can make the research findings easier to understand . 4 . 6 Academic Requirements and Funding Conditions for Participatory Research Nowadays , participatory research strategies are accepted – or even desired – in many practice contexts . In academia , by contrast , participatory research enjoys much less recognition as a fully - fledged research method . If at all , it is per - ceived as a strategy in the “context of discovery . ” The following are some of the criticisms leveled against participatory research : - Participatory researchers do not formulate hypotheses that can subsequently be tested , and even the research questions emerge only gradually during the process of engagement with the research partners . - The closeness between the research partners prevents scientific distance on the part of the academic researchers , who are so entangled with the re - searched persons that it is not possible to separate the researchers’ contribu - HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 211 tion to the collected data from that of the researched ; hence the quality crite - rion of objectivity cannot be fulfilled . - Exact planning is not possible because the negotiation of the various deci - sions during the research process prevents the estimation of the duration of the project and the expected findings . And , above all : - When “classical” quality criteria are applied , the research is not acceptable because it is neither objective , nor reliable , nor is it valid . From the perspective of a methodology that invokes the normative theory of science , these arguments are by all means accurate . Although the standpoint outlined above is more widespread in some disciplines than in others , it domi - nates the science sector both in the universities , when it comes to assessing theses , dissertations , etc . , and in the major funding organizations , when appli - cations for research funding are being reviewed . This problem is faced by qualitative research in general . However , one out - come of the long - standing debate between the “exact” sciences and the hu - manities about the “object of science” is that interpretivist methods are increas - ingly being accepted as a basis for concrete research . This can be seen , for example , from the fact that qualitative approaches enjoy greater acceptance in certain disciplines , for example sociology and ethnology . That said , the afore - mentioned closeness between research partners in participatory research – and the skepticism that this provokes from some quarters – means that it has not been able to benefit as much from the increased acceptance as “conventional” qualitative research has done . The dissolution of the subject - object relationship between the researchers and the researched is a further grave problem for the academic recognition of participatory research . In participatory research projects , the role of active researcher – and knowing subject – is not held by the academic researchers alone but by all the participants , with all the consequences that this brings for data collection , analysis , interpretation , and the publication of the findings . This leads to considerable acceptance problems when it comes to research funding . These problems start with the tendering period , which is often quite short . As a result , it is not possible to develop the research proposal collabora - tively because negotiation processes with affected persons take much longer . Cook ( 2012 ) and McCartan et al . ( 2012 ) point to the problems that arise even when submitting the funding bid ; they demonstrate how difficult – or well - nigh impossible – it is to draw up funding bids in collaboration with the research partners . In most cases , a reviewer’s assessment of the quality of a project is based on the aforementioned nomothetic science model . However , as a result , require - ments are imposed that either cannot be fulfilled by participatory research , or that lead to nonsensical restrictions . This starts with the said research questions , which can be formulated only vaguely or in general terms before the project begins . Other characteristics of participatory research also hamper acceptance . HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 212 It is scarcely possible to produce an exact timetable because the duration of the negotiation processes among the research partners cannot be accurately fore - cast . All that is clear is that the overall life - span of such a research project frequently exceeds the normally expected timeframe for funded projects ( see Cook 2012 ) . Certain items in the finance plan also meet with rejection by fund - ing bodies . In Subsection 4 . 1 above , we pointed out that there are good reasons for financially supporting the research partners . However , such items in the finance plan are frequently rejected by the funders . The situation is similar at the universities , where it is very difficult for a young scientist to submit a thesis or dissertation that employs participatory research strategies . Here , too , the above - mentioned classical quality criteria are applied when reviewing research proposals and assessing the completed works ( see Goeke and Kubanski 2012 ; Cook 2012 ) . Moreover , it is scarcely possible to produce the exact timetables required by universities . In addition , the num - ber of reviewers who are in a position to assess such works is limited . This depends , once again , on the discipline in question . At the present point in time , it is almost impossible to gain a doctorate in psychology in Germany with a thesis based on participatory methodology . The problem of forging an academic career is further aggravated by the fact that projects with research partners who are practitioners or affected persons is much more time - consuming because extensive discussions must be conducted with them . This means that the production of scientific works lasts much longer and , as a result , the researcher’s list of publications is shorter . Moreover , for the reasons stated above , few scholarly journals accept participatory works . Furthermore , marginalized groups are studied more frequently in participatory research projects , and these groups are not the focus of interest of “normal science . ” This has an effect on the frequency with which the publication in question is cited . And because the Science Citation Index serves as an im - portant indicator of scientific qualification , authors who apply participatory methods are disadvantaged . Overall , it can be noted that the current scientific structure is extremely un - favorable for participatory research projects . In saying that , it cannot be disput - ed that it is sometimes very difficult to assess the quality and rigor of participa - tory projects . For these reasons , it will be very important for the future of participatory research to develop criteria that facilitate the assessment of such projects . On a more pragmatic level , Cook ( 2012 ) suggests , for example , that standardized application forms be developed . A checklist developed by Green et al . ( 2003 ) to facilitate the assessment of participatory research projects in the healthcare sector represents another pragmatic effort . However , there is un - doubtedly considerable need for further development in this regard – and a more intense discussion of quality criteria will be of central importance . HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 213 4 . 7 Justification of Participatory Research Projects The problem of quality criteria for participatory research is regularly raised by a diverse range of stakeholders : by the clients – be they institutions or the af - fected persons themselves , who are interested in obtaining empirically sound findings ; by the potential funders ; by academia , when participatory research strategies are employed in empirical theses , dissertations , and publications ; and in scientific discussions . In qualitative research , the question of appropriate quality criteria has been discussed at length , and various concepts have been proposed . They include , for example , adaptations of the classical , quantitatively oriented , quality criteria – objectivity , reliability , and validity – to qualitative research ; and quality criteria developed specially for qualitative research ( see , for example , Lincoln and Guba 1985 ; Steinke 1999 ) . This discussion will not be pursued here . How - ever , in our opinion , the question of quality criteria for participatory research reveals a number of underlying fundamental questions that are also of rele - vance to qualitative research in general . If one proceeds from the assumption that , in participatory research , all the perspectives and voices of the participants should be granted equal rights of expression , and that each group possesses qualitatively different knowledge about the social world under study , then it is to be expected that the participants will also have different views on the quality of the research process and its results . In our opinion , the question of what constitutes “good” research findings is answered very differently by the various research participants , and also by those who review , assess , use , or read these findings . This response depends on the system of values and norms to which the particular stakeholders subscribe ; on their individual interests ; and on the discourse that takes place in the context in question . Therefore , when asked by a stakeholder whether , and to what extent , a concrete project corresponds to its values and interests , the researchers must furnish convincing arguments derived from that stakeholder’s own dis - cursive context . The fact that diverse groups address the quality criteria ques - tion highlights the need for a more context - specific analysis of what is under - stood by “quality” in the sense of a good participatory research project . In other words , this question cannot be answered in an apparently general way or evad - ed with reference to the difference between “intra - scientific” and “extra - scientific” standards ( see Breuer and Reichertz 2001 ) . From the perspective of social constructivism – which can be drawn on here as a meta - theoretical approach ( Gerger 1985 ) – the concept of “quality” in the social constructivist sense is a socially defined concept . Westmeyer ( 2000 , 33 , our translation ) defines such concepts as follows : Socially defined concepts are constructions by groups of persons who have been commissioned , for example , by social institutions or organizations of in - ternational , national , public , or private provenance , and have been vested with HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 214 the necessary powers of definition . The constructions that arise in this way are then binding within the sphere of influence of these institutions or organiza - tions until such time as they are revised . Within the framework of the present Introduction , we shall briefly demonstrate how this perspective can offer a starting point for tackling the problem of quali - ty criteria in participatory research . To begin with , one must identify the various institutions and groups of par - ticipants to whom the participatory research project is accountable . A review of the literature reveals that one can roughly state that participatory research pro - jects are confronted with the task of demonstrating the quality of their work to such diverse social institutions as : science , politics , public administration , the system of psycho - social practice , medicine , and , above all , the users or user groups . In the course of the history of the western world , science has estab - lished itself as the social subsystem that judges whether something is “true , ” in the sense of correct knowledge . However , participatory research is accountable to many social institutions for whom the criterion of “truth” in the scientific sense of the word is of only secondary importance . Therefore , from now on we shall not refer to “quality criteria , ” but rather to justificatory arguments em - ployed in the institutional or contextual discourses in question . We argue that , in the course of social development in the various social spheres of activity , different systems of communication and action with different justificatory norms have evolved . 5 Each social institution has developed its own values and argumentative structures , and it uses all the powers at its disposal to enforce them . Therefore , the arguments used by researchers to justify a participatory research project and its findings must correspond to these structures because , otherwise , they will not be accepted . In everyday research practice , these diverse justificatory requirements lead to considerable difficulties because their systematic dissimilarity is not recog - nized . Rather , they are experienced as incompatible demands that can scarcely be adequately responded to at the one time . This can be clearly seen in a num - ber of contributions to the present special issue . On the basis of four examples derived from these articles , we shall outline the consequences that such diverse , subsystem - specific justificatory structures have . Several authors ( Cook 2012 ; Goeke and Kubanski 2012 ; Dentith et al . 2012 ) bemoan the lack of academic recognition – a problem that we have already addressed here . It should be borne in mind that the participatory projects pre - sented to scientific committees have been developed against the background of justificatory arguments and , above all , values that come from social contexts that differ greatly from the science world . The resulting justificatory arguments do not correspond to the “classical” quality criteria that can be considered to be 5 In a similar way , Breuer and Reichertz ( 2001 ) provide an overview of the areas and levels of the discussion on quality criteria . HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 215 a context - specific justificatory argument within the science system . Therefore , compatibility of the justificatory argument structures in the various discursive contexts can be expected in the long term only if efforts to extend the academic code are successful . The debate on the acceptance of qualitative research meth - ods could be considered an example of such efforts . The importance of the political system becomes very clear in the article by Sylvia Lenz ( 2012 ) , who highlights the incompatibility between dictatorship and participatory research . There can be no justificatory arguments for this particular political context without fundamentally denying the participatory research approach . This is an extreme example , but even in the history of the Federal Republic of Germany and other western countries there have been political constellations in which the justificatory arguments for participatory research have encountered acceptance problems because of their incompatibil - ity with political policy programs . For example , the justificatory arguments of research projects are accepted by state research funding programs only if they fit in with the prevailing political values . Another social sphere discussed in the present special issue is that of con - ventional medicine . Here , too , the consequences of incompatible justificatory arguments are highlighted . In the articles by Jasna Russo ( 2012 ) and Tina Cook ( 2012 ) , which focus on “psychiatry , ” and in Goeke and Kubanski’s ( 2012 ) article on “people with disabilities , ” it can be clearly seen how difficult it is to conduct genuinely participatory research – that is , research with or by the af - fected persons and from their perspective . Research by people who have expe - rienced psychiatric treatment ( “survivor research” ) , for example , explicitly aims at the development of an alternative to the dominant biomedical model of mental “illnesses” ( Russo 2012 ) . As the alternative model is based on personal experiences , the justificatory arguments are not compatible with the biomedical model . Such research is frequently dismissed as “unscientific” and “subjective” by conventional medicine , and its findings are not incorporated into the canon of knowledge of the discipline . The economic system is defined by the allocation or non - allocation of re - sources in the form of money . Numerous contributions to this special issue address problems of obtaining funding ; they draw attention to the inhibiting influence that various funding conditions have on participatory research ( Cook 2012 ; Goeke and Kubanski 2012 ; McCartan et al . 2012 ; Russo 2012 ; Wöhrer and Höcher 2012 ) . This is particularly striking in the case of psychiatric re - search funded by the pharmaceutical industry – an example furnished by Russo ( 2012 ) . This research aims at the development of marketable pharmaceutical products . The author notes that the massive funding of research by the pharma - ceutical industry has led to the dominance of the biomedical model of mental illness . By contrast , the development of alternative models from the perspective of the affected persons is hampered by lack of funding due to the fact that the justificatory arguments advanced do not comply with the central goal of the HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 216 economic market model espoused by the pharmaceutical industry – that is , profit maximization . Therefore , the answer to the question of who funds or rejects a research project , and what interests are behind the decision , must also be part of the statements on the quality of a research project . The considerations presented here are in line with the current debate on quality research . Flick ( 2011 ) also argues that the quality criteria in qualitative research should be context - specific . However , the contexts that he has in mind differ from those used here . In his opinion , the relevant contexts are “on the one hand theoretical and methodological schools , ” and “on the other hand , in recent years , the differentiation of the various fields of application of qualita - tive research” ( 403f . , our translation ) . Breuer and Reichertz ( 2001 , 37 , our translation ) identify eight quality crite - ria areas and levels that have been discussed since around the 1970s . They note that the “relevant discursive contexts . . . have become more numerous and , often , more differentiated . ” And they point out that there has been a distinct shift away from intra - scientific discourse about quality criteria towards an external discourse determined by industry , politics , and the media . The authors propose a strategy of clarification that entails acknowledging and developing the broad range of arguments and examining the importance of the social and scientific contexts for scientific activities . In our view , it would also be worthwhile to analyze the requirements of jus - tification of the various social institutions more closely in the manner described above in order to achieve a systematic conceptualization of these requirements and a more specific assessment of the extent to which individual qualitative and participatory projects must be justified in the context of specific social institu - tions . Against the background of such considerations , justificatory arguments such as usefulness , authenticity , credibility , reflexivity , and sustainability should be discussed . 4 . 8 Ethical Aspects of Participatory Research Participatory researchers are particularly called upon to address ethical ques - tions . The closeness to the research partners during participatory projects re - peatedly requires ethically sound decisions about the norms and rules that should apply in social dealings among the participants ; about how data should be collected , documented , and interpreted in such a way that they do not harm the participants and that their privacy is assured ; and about the reliability , dura - tion , and timeframe of the professional researchers’ availability , etc . The necessity for an ethical basis for such decisions becomes clear against the background of the fact – reported in various articles in this issue – that participatory research is always in danger of being used by very different par - ties for purposes that contradict its postulated fundamental concept . HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 217 On the one hand , the offer of involvement and participation in decisions can be used to entice people who normally do not have such possibilities to work in research projects . This is considered to be a way of gaining easier access to groups who have a critical view of research . The danger of misuse of participa - tory methods exists in evaluation research , for example . Caspari ( 2006 , 377 ) describes the instrumentalization of the concept of participatory methods in international development projects , which leads to “participatory concepts being reduced to individual data collection methods , their combination , and application” ( our translation ) . On the other hand , trust , and the closeness it engenders , facilitate access to deeper , and perhaps taboo , layers – both in the minds of the participants and in the life - world . Here the danger of transgression and , therefore , of serious dam - age is always acute . Hence the need for clear ethical standpoints , which should not be abstract , but must refer to the concrete situation ( Wöhrer and Höcher 2012 ) . It is especially those who have years of experience of research , and who perceive it as being directed partly against their interests , who will insist that ethical norms be adhered to . In the area of survivor research , there are guide - lines entitled “The Ethics of Survivor Research” ( Faulkner 2004 ) , in which the main points of ethical behavior in research are presented clearly and under - standably ( see Russo 2012 ) . As far back as 1998 , Wadsworth ( 1998 , 5 ) drew attention to the fact that re - searchers conducting participatory research must be aware that research is inevitably value - driven and that its action effects must be assessed . These ac - tion effects include : - “the effects of raising some questions and not others ; - the effects of involving some people in the process . . . and not others ; - the effects of observing some phenomena and not others ; - the effects of making this sense of it and not alternative senses ; - the effects of deciding to take this action . . . rather than any other action . ” Different value preferences with regard to these decisions also lead to conflicts and confrontation between the research partners and within the community under study . For example , even the decision to actively participate in a research project about a taboo theme can lead to alienation and to mistrust on the part of the other community members vis - à - vis the participants in the research team ( v . Unger 2012 ) . The research project and the publication of the results can have considerable negative consequences for the research participants . This is demonstrated by Dentith et al . ( 2012 ) in their contribution . They describe how the British tabloid press used government reports of research findings about teenage pregnancy to publish sensationalist reports . Neither the researchers nor the research funders can exercise sufficient control over the way findings are reported . Therefore , it is always necessary to reflect with the affected persons about what can happen HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 218 when hitherto invisible , taboo problems are made public . However , the con - crete consequences can scarcely be foreseen . This gives rise to the dilemma of having to choose whether to defer the publication of problems that are in urgent need of public discussion or to publish them for that very reason . If the latter option is chosen , counter - strategies must be developed with the research part - ners . We would like to conclude with a quotation from Dentith et al . ( 2012 ) that we consider to be a fitting description of the fundamental objective of ethical norms for participatory research : Insofar as one of the primary purposes of inquiry is to heal the alienations that characterize modern consciousness , participation provides a throughway to re - lationality and healing that objectivist and Cartesian methods necessarily rein - scribe via the distance and fragmentation that they evoke . References Arnstein , Sherry . 1969 . A ladder of citizen participation . Journal of the American Planning Association 35 ( 4 ) : 216 - 24 . Arvidsson , Patrik , Mats Granlund , and Mikael Thyberg . 2008 . Factors related to self - rated participation in adolescents and adults with mild intellectual disability – A systematic literature review . Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Dis - abilities 21 : 277 - 91 . Ball , Susan , and Chris Gilligan , eds . 2010 . Visualising migration and social divi - sion : Insights from social sciences and the visual arts . Forum Qualitative Sozi - alforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research 11 ( 2 ) : < http : / / www . qualitative - research . net / index . php / fqs / issue / view / 34 > ( accessed December 27 , 2011 ) . Bell , John , Gail Cheney , Cindy Hoots , Elaine Kohrman , Jesse Schubert , Lisa Sti - dham , and Scott Traynor . 2004 . Comparative similarities and differences between action research , participative research , and participatory action research . < http : / / www . arlecchino . org / ildottore / mwsd / group2final - comparison . pdf > ( accessed January 20 , 2012 ) . Bergold , Jarg . 2007 . Participatory strategies in community psychology research – a short survey . In Poland welcomes community psychology : Proceedings from the 6th European Conference on Community Psychology , ed . A . Bokszczanin , 57 - 66 . Opole : Opole University Press . Bergold , Jarg , and Stefan Thomas . 2010 . Partizipative Forschung . In Handbuch Qualitative Forschung in der Psychologie , ed . Günter Mey and Katja Mruck , 333 - 44 . Wiesbaden : VS Verlag . Borg , Marit , Bengt Karlsson , Suzie Hesook , and Brendan McCormack . 2012 . Opening up for many voices in knowledge construction . Forum Qualitative Sozi - alforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research 13 ( 1 ) : Art . 1 , < http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : 0114 - fqs120117 > . HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 219 Bourdieu , Pierre . 1983 . Ökonomisches Kapital , kulturelles Kapital , soziales Kapi - tal . In Soziale Ungleichheiten . Sonderband 2 der sozialen Welt , ed . Reinhard Kreckel , 183 - 98 . Göttingen : Schwartz . Bourdieu , Pierre . 1993 . Narzißtische Reflexivität und wissenschaftliche Reflexivi - tät . In Kultur , soziale Praxis , Text . Die Krise der ethnographischen Repräsenati - on , ed . Eberhard F . Berg and Martin Fuchs , 365 - 74 . Frankfurt / M . : Suhrkamp . Bourdieu , Pierre . 2002 . Ein soziologischer Selbstversuch . Frankfurt / M . : Suhrkamp . Breuer , Franz . 2009 . Subjektivität , Perspektivität und Selbst - / Reflexivität . In Refle - xive Grounded Theory . Eine Einführung in die Forschungspraxis , ed . Franz Breuer , 115 - 41 . Wiesbaden : VS Verlag . Breuer , Franz , and Jo Reichertz . 2001 . Standards of social research . Forum Qualita - tive Sozialforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research 2 ( 3 ) : Art . 24 , < http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : 0114 - fqs0103245 > ( accessed December 27 , 2011 ) . Caspari , Alexandra . 2006 . Partizipative Evaluationsmethoden – zur Entmystifizie - rung eines Begriffs in der Entwicklungszusammenarbeit . In Qualitative Evalua - tionsforschung . Konzepte , Methoden , Umsetzungen , ed . Uwe Flick , 365 - 84 . Reinbek : Rowohlt . Chambers , Robert . 2008 . PRA , PLA and pluralism : Practice and theory . In The Sage handbook of action research . Participative inquiry and practice , 2nd ed . , ed . Peter Reason and Hilary Bradbury , 297 - 318 . London : Sage . Cohn , Ruth C . 1975 . Von der Psychoanalyse zur themenzentrierten Interaktion . Von der Behandlung einzelner zu einer Pädagogik für alle . Stuttgart : Klett - Cotta . Cook , Tina . 2012 . Where participatory approaches meet pragmatism in funded ( health ) research : The challenge of finding meaningful spaces . Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research 13 ( 1 ) : Art . 18 , < http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : 0114 - fqs1201187 > . Dentith , Audrey M . ; Lynda Measor , and Michael P . O’Malley . 2012 . The research imagination amid dilemmas of engaging young people in critical participatory work . Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research 13 ( 1 ) : Art . 17 , < http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : 0114 - fqs1201176 > . Devereux , Georges . 1976 . Angst und Methode in den Verhaltenswissenschaften . Frankfurt / M . : Ullstein . Evans , Claire , and Ray Jones . 2004 . Engagement and empowerment , research and relevance : Comments on user - controlled research . Research Policy and Planning 22 ( 2 ) : 5 - 13 , < http : / / eprints . kingston . ac . uk / 4049 > ( accessed December 7 , 2011 ) . Fals - Borda , Orlando , and Mohammad A . Rahman . 1991 . Preface . In Action and knowledge : Breaking the monopoly with participatory action research , ed . Or - lando Fals - Borda and Mohammad A . Rahman , vii - viii . New York : Doubleday . Faulkner , Alison . 2004 . The ethics of survivor research . Guidelines for the ethical conduct of research carried out by mental health service users and survivors . Bristol : The Policy Press , < http : / / www . jrf . org . uk / publications / browse / category / u # user - involvement > ( accessed December 27 , 2011 ) . Flick , Uwe . 2009 . An Introduction to Qualitative Research , 4th ed . London : Sage . Flick , Uwe . 2010 . Gütekriterien qualitativer Forschung . In Handbuch Qualitative Forschung in der Psychologie , ed . Günter Mey and Katja Mruck , 395 - 407 . Wiesbaden : VS Verlag . HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 220 Gergen , Kenneth . 1985 . The social constructionist movement in modern psycholo - gy . American Psychologist 40 ( 3 ) : 266 - 75 . Glaser , Barney G . 2001 . The grounded theory perspective . Conceptualization con - trasted with description . Mill Valley , CA : Sociology Press . Glaser , Barney G . , and Anselm L . Strauss . 1967 . The dicovery of grounded theory . Chicago : Aldine . Goeke , Stephanie , and Dagmar Kubanski . 2012 . Menschen mit Behinderungen als GrenzgängerInnen im akademischen Raum – Chancen partizipatorischer For - schung . Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Rese - arch 13 ( 1 ) : Art . 6 , < http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : 0114 - fqs120162 > . Götsch , Monika , Sabine Klinger , and Andreas Thiesen . 2011 . “Stars in der Mane - ge ? ” Demokratietheoretische Überlegungen zur Dynamik partizipativer For - schung . Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Rese - arch 13 ( 1 ) : Art . 4 , < http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : 0114 - fqs120140 > . Green , Lawrence W . , M . Anne George , Daniel Mark , C . James Frankish , Carol P . Herbert , William R . Bowie , et al . 2003 . Guidelines for participatory research in health promotion . In Community - based participatory research for health , ed . Meredith Minkler and Nina Wallerstein , 419 - 28 . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass , < http : / / lgreen . net / guidelines . html > ( accessed December 27 , 2011 ) . Guba , Egon G . , and Yvonna S . Lincoln . 1989 . Fourth generation evaluation . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Heeg , Paul . 1996 . Informative Forschungsinteraktionen . In Qualitative Psychologie . Grundlagen , Methoden und Anwendungen eines Forschungsstils , ed . Franz Breu - er , 41 - 60 . Opladen : Westdeutscher Verlag . Heiner , Maya , ed . 1988 . Praxisforschung in der sozialen Arbeit . Freiburg : Lamber - tus . Hermann , Anja , Frank Partenfelder , Sabine Raabe , Bärbel Riedel , and Rolf Rus - zetzki . 2004 . “Miteinander statt übereinander” : Ergebnisse einer Begleitstudie zum Weddinger Psychoseseminar und Erfahrungen mit der Forschungspartizipa - tion von Psychoseerfahrenen . Journal für Psychologie 12 : 295 - 325 , < http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : 0168 - ssoar - 17286 > ( accessed December 27 , 2011 ) . Heron , John . 1996 . Co - operative inquiry : Research into the human condition . London : Sage . Jones , Kip , Mary Gergen , John J . Guiney Yallop , Irene Lopez de Vallejo , Brian Roberts , and Peter Wright , eds . 2008 . Performative social science . Forum Quali - tative Sozialforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research 9 ( 2 ) : < http : / / www . qualitative - research . net / index . php / fqs / issue / view / 10 > ( accessed December 27 , 2011 ) . Kemmis , Stephen . 2001 . Exploring the relevance of critical theory for action re - search : Emancipatory action research in the footsteps of Jürgen Habermas . In Handbook of action research : Participative inquiry and practice , ed . Peter Rea - son and Hilary Bradbury , 91 - 102 . London : Sage . Kemmis , Stephen , and Robin McTaggart . 2005 . Participatory action research . Communicative action and the public sphere . In Handbook of qualitative re - search , 3rd ed . , ed . Norman K . Denzin and Yvonna S . Lincoln , 559 - 603 . Thou - sand Oaks , CA : Sage . Knoblauch , Hubert , Alejandro Baer , Eric Laurier , Sabine Petschke , and Bernt Schnettler , eds . 2008 . Visual methods . Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Fo - HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 221 rum : Qualitative Social Research 9 ( 3 ) : < http : / / www . qualitative - research . net / index . php / fqs / issue / view / 11 > ( accessed December 27 , 2011 ) . Lenz , Sylvia . 2012 . Investigación participativa en Argentina : tres experiencias del campo educativo en el contexto de la restitución de la democracia . Forum Quali - tative Sozialforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research 13 ( 1 ) : Art . 3 , < http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : 0114 - fqs120133 > . Lincoln , Yvonna S . , and Egon G . Guba . 1985 . Naturalistic inquiry . London : Sage . Marshall , Judi , and Peter Reason . 2007 . Quality in research as “taking an attitude of inquiry” . Magement Research News 30 : 368 - 80 . McCartan , Claire , Dirl Schubotz , and Jonathan Murphy . 2012 . The self - conscious researcher – Post - modern perspectives of participatory research with young peo - ple . Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research 13 ( 1 ) : Art . 9 , < http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : 0114 - fqs120192 > . Mruck , Katja , and Günther Mey . 1998 . Selbstreflexivität und Subjektivität im Auswertungsprozeß biographischer Materialien – zum Konzept einer “Projekt - werkstatt qualitativen Arbeitens” zwischen Colloquium , Supervision und Inter - pretationsgemeinschaft . In Biographische Methoden in den Humanwissenschaf - ten , ed . Gerd Jüttemann and Hans Thoma , 384 - 406 . Weinheim : Beltz , PVU . Mruck , Katja , Wolff - Michael Roth , and Franz Breuer , eds . 2002 . Subjectivity and reflexivity in qualitative research I . Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research 3 ( 3 ) : < http : / / www . qualitative - research . net / index . php / fqs / issue / view / 21 > ( accessed December 27 , 2011 ) . Rath , Jean . 2012 . Poetry and participation : Scripting a meaningful research text with rape crisis workers . Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum : Qualita - tive Social Research 13 ( 1 ) : Art . 22 , < http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : 0114 - fqs1201224 > . Reason , Peter , and Hilary Bradbury . 2008a . Introduction . In The Sage handbook of action research . Participative inquiry and practice , 2nd ed . , ed . Peter Reason and Hilary Bradbury , 1 - 10 . London : Sage . Reason , Peter , and Hilary Bradbury , eds . 2008b . The Sage handbook of action research . Participative Inquiry and Practice , 2nd ed . London : Sage . Riecken , Ted , Teresa Strong - Wilson , Frank Conibear , Corrine Michel , and Janet Riecken . 2004 . Connecting , speaking , listening : Toward an ethics of voice with / in participatory action research . Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Fo - rum : Qualitative Social Research 6 ( 1 ) : Art . 25 , < http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : 0114 - fqs0501260 > ( accessed December 27 , 2011 ) . Roth , Wolff - Michael , Franz Breuer , and Katja Mruck , eds . 2003 . Subjectivity and reflexivity in qualitative research II . Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research 4 ( 2 ) : < http : / / www . qualitative - research . net / index . php / fqs / issue / view / 18 > ( accessed December 27 , 2011 ) . Russo , Jasna . 2012 . Survivor - controlled research : A new foundation for thinking about psychiatry and mental health . Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research 13 ( 1 ) : Art . 8 , < http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : 0114 - fqs120187 > . Selvini Palazzoli , Mara , L . Anolli , P . Di Blasio , L . Giossi , J . Pisano , C . Ricci , C . , et al . 1984 . Hinter den Kulissen der Organisation . Stuttgart : Klett - Cotta . Steinke , Ines . 1999 . Kriterien qualitativer Forschung . Ansätze zur Bewertung quali - tativ - empirischer Sozialforschung . Weinheim : Juventa . HSR 37 ( 2012 ) 4 │ 222 von Unger , Hella . 2012 . Partizipative Gesundheitsforschung : Wer partizipiert wo - ran ? . Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research 13 ( 1 ) : Art . 7 , < http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : 0114 - fqs120176 > . Wadsworth , Yolanda . 1998 . What is participatory action research ? Action Research International , Paper 2 , < http : / / www . scu . edu . au / schools / gcm / ar / ari / p - ywadsworth 98 . html > ( accessed December 27 , 2011 ) . Westmeyer , Hans . 2000 . Wissenschaftstheoretische Aspekte . In Lehrbuch der Verhaltenstherapie . Grundlagen Diagnostik – Verfahren – Rahmenbedingungen , 2nd completely revised and extended ed . , ed . Jürgen Margraf , 31 - 47 . Berlin : Springer . Wicks , Patricia Gayá , and Peter Reason . 2009 . Initiating action research : Challeng - es and paradoxes of opening communicative space . Action Research 7 ( 3 ) : 243 - 63 , < http : / / www . peterreason . eu / Papers _ list . html > ( accessed December 27 , 2011 ) . Wöhrer , Veronika , and Bernhard Höcher . 2012 . Tricks of the trade – Negotiations and dealings between researchers , teachers and students . Forum Qualitative Sozi - alforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research 13 ( 1 ) : Art . 16 , < http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : 0114 - fqs1201164 > .