Informational active matter Bryan VanSaders 1 and Vincenzo Vitelli 1 , 2 , 3 , ∗ 1 James Franck Institute , The University of Chicago , Chicago , Illinois 60637 , USA 2 Department of Physics , The University of Chicago , Chicago , Illinois 60637 , USA 3 Kadanoﬀ Center for Theoretical Physics , The University of Chicago , Chicago , Illinois 60637 , USA ( Dated : February 16 , 2023 ) Many biomolecular systems can be viewed as ratchets that rectify environmental noise through measurements and information processing . As miniaturized robots cross the scale of unicellular or - ganisms , on - board sensing and feedback open new possibilities for propulsion strategies that exploit ﬂuctuations rather than ﬁght them . Here , we study extended media in which many constituents display a feedback control loop between measurement of their microstates and the capability to bias their noise - induced transitions . We dub such many body systems informational active matter and show how information theoretic arguments and kinetic theory derivations yield their macroscopic properties starting from microscopic agent strategies . These include the ability to self - propel with - out applying work and to print patterns whose resolution improves as noise increases . We support our analytical results with extensive simulations of a ﬂuid of ‘thinker’ type particles that can selec - tively change their diameters to bias scattering transitions . This minimal model can be regarded as a non - equilibrium analogue of entropic elasticity that exempliﬁes the key property of this class of systems : self - propulsive forces grow ever stronger as environmental noise increases thanks to measurements and control actions undertaken by the microscopic constituents . We envision appli - cations of our ideas ranging from noise induced patterning performed by collections of microrobots to reinforcement learning aided identiﬁcation of migration strategies for collections of organisms that exploit turbulent ﬂows or ﬂuctuating chemotactic ﬁelds . The processes of life are informational in nature [ 1 ] . In its simplest incarnation a biological organism is endowed with two key capabilities : a receptive one that senses the environment the organism interacts with , and an ac - tive one used to aﬀect control over , or motion through , that environment . Crucially , feedback between receptiv - ity and action is needed , which entails information pro - cessing capabilities . At submicron scales where thermal ﬂuctuations dominate , biomolecular machines central to transmembrane transport [ 2 ] , chemical sensing [ 3 – 5 ] , and transcription [ 6 , 7 ] resort to memory - like structures to rectify noise into motion . Even at macro scales , organ - isms make decisions to harness ﬂuctuating food sources [ 8 ] or migration conditions [ 9 , 10 ] . Moreover , as micro - robots shrink , the need grows for exploiting ( rather than ﬁghting ) environmental noise through on - board sensing and feedback control [ 11 – 14 ] . An idealized example of such noise rectiﬁcation is the ‘information ratchet’ shown in Fig . 1a . Subject to the outcome of measurements of the random forces on the ratchet , a frictionless pawl is selectively inserted to block counterclockwise transitions . Such a feedback protocol can favor clockwise motion without the need of perform - ing any work on the ratchet ( aside from memory era - sure , as in the Maxwell demon paradox [ 15 – 21 ] ) , because thermal ﬂuctuations are supplying the forces . Complex biomolecular machines , such as the protein RNA poly - merase [ 22 ] shown in Fig . 1b can be modelled as infor - mation ratchets [ 23 – 28 ] . As it moves along a DNA tem - plate , the polymerase builds an RNA strand from the template by biasing the random addition of bases , ulti - ∗ vitelli @ uchicago . edu mately growing the strand only in the direction of the cor - rect sequence ( i . e . down the template ) . This way of nav - igating a noisy environment contrasts with the method typically used by synthetic swimmers or active colloids powered by catalytic reactions , that directly push against environmental noise with rocket - like propulsion [ 29 – 41 ] . Crucially , such ‘worker’ - type particles must dissipate en - ergy ﬁghting noise , while informational ratcheting agents turn noise into a useful motive force whose amplitude grows as environmental ﬂuctuations increase . Informa - tion ratchets are therefore reminiscent of entropic springs that get stiﬀer as thermal ﬂuctuations increase . However , entropic elasticity is an equilibrium phenomenon : stiﬀ - ness increases with the number of available microstates , as the temperature is raised [ 42 ] . What sets information ratchets apart from entropic springs is their ability to break detailed balance , as they bias transitions among microstates . Information ratchets have long been studied mostly as individual objects , notably in the context of molecular motors [ 26 , 43 – 48 ] . Here , we focus on extended me - dia where many constituent particles interact with each other using their information ratcheting capabilities and control actions [ 49 ] . More explicitly , these ‘thinker - type’ agents can execute the following actions : i . measure their respective microstates , ii . bias noise - driven transitions between microstates , iii . establish a feedback loop between ( i ) and ( ii ) , iv . operate with ﬁnite resources , e . g . the mechanical work W agents can exert during ( i - iii ) must be less than (cid:15) . We dub such many body systems informational ac - tive matter and derive their phenomenological properties from microscopic control actions using kinetic theory and information theoretic arguments . a r X i v : 2 3 02 . 07402v1 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 14 F e b 2023 2 FIG . 1 . Information ratchets in biology and active matter . a Schematic representation of an information ratchet process . After measuring the ﬂuctuating forces on the ratchet , a pawl is selectively inserted ( withdrawn ) to block ( allow ) counterclockwise ( clockwise ) rotations . With suﬃcient ﬁnesse , inserting the pawl requires negligible work ; this engine converts noise and information to biased rotation . b The action of an RNA polymerase protein , viewed as an information ratchet that converts noise and information into correct RNA sequences . This protein builds an RNA strand ( blue ) from a DNA template ( brown ) . Bases are added to the growing strand stochastically . When an incorrect base is randomly added , a ‘backtracking’ procedure is triggered that reverses the motion of the protein and ejects the incorrect base . c The thinker gas model of a material built from information ratchets . Agents are particles that measure their position , velocity , and the presence of nearby particles . This information is used to selectively avoid or enhance collisions by changing particle diameters . This distributed engine converts noise and information into coordinated many - body motion , as explored below . The thinker ﬂuid . We illustrate this general ap - proach using a minimal model : a ﬂuid comprised of ‘thinker’ particles ( Fig . 1c ) . Each thinker particle is a freely moving hard disk within a gas agitated by noise . Thinkers are able to measure their location , velocity , and the presence of nearby particles ( property i ) . They can also selectively change their diameter , inﬂuencing the likelihood of collision with other particles ( prop - erty ii ) . Crucially , diameter changes are made accord - ing to the outcome of measurements , creating a feed - back loop ( property iii ) . The choice of a diameter change as the controlled property , rather than a change in self - propulsive force or direction is not accidental . It is one of simplest ways to directly change how agents interact ( during collisions ) which allows us to focus on the emer - gence of simple forms of collective ( or social ) behavior . If the diameter change is restricted to periods between col - lisions , then thinkers need only exert a negligible amount of work ( (cid:15) ) to control their scattering transitions ( prop - erty iv ) . As (cid:15) → 0 this system can be viewed as a ﬂuid of Maxwell demons ( i . e . microscopic controllers ) that re - distribute particle density over volumes of phase space by biasing scattering events throughout the system in order to extract work . This minimal model generalizes single - demon devices such as the Szilard engine and pro - vides glimpses in the emergent behavior of more realis - tic ensembles of informational ratchets , while remaining mathematically tractable . An example of a simple diameter change rule is shown in Fig . 2a , where agents adopt a small diameter ( D s ) when traveling right , and a large diameter ( D l ) when traveling left . Obeying the bound set by (cid:15) = 0 re - quires prohibiting diameter expansions that cause over - laps ( Fig . 2b , dashed outline ) . Coupling velocity to di - ameter changes as in Fig . 2a generically breaks detailed balance , which can be seen by comparing a forward and reverse collision process ( Fig . 2c - d ) . After a collision modiﬁes an agent’s velocity ( ~ v → ~ v 0 ) a ‘reverse’ col - lision beginning from velocity − ~ v 0 will not recover the initial conﬁguration if a diameter change has also oc - 3 FIG . 2 . The thinker gas biases collisions to produce ﬂows . a A simple discrete diameter rule for a thinker particle . Thinkers traveling right ( left ) adopt small ( large ) diameters . b Collision of a thinker with diameter rule a and an immobile object ( blue disk ) . Diameter changes are prohibited when overlaps would occur ( dashed outline ) . c A forward collision between a thinker with diameter rule a and an immobile obstacle ( blue disk ) . Thinker velocity is transformed from ~ v to ~ v 0 . d The reverse process to c . Because of the diameter change , the collision starting from thinker velocity − ~ v 0 does not return to − ~ v , indicating broken detailed balance . e Velocity distribution function of a 2D isothermal simulation of thinkers ( with diameter rule shown in a ) immersed in a passive hard - disk gas . Thinkers are concentrated in the positive half of the velocity plane , as predicted by a kinetic theory developed below . f Mean bulk velocity u x of thinkers in e as a function of temperature , with ﬁxed ∆ D = 1 . Mean bulk ﬂow due to collisional biasing is a fraction α of the thermal speed , where α is not a function of temperature . g Ratio of mean bulk velocity to thermal speed as a function of diameter change for thinkers in e . h Positional distribution function in x for a 2D isothermal simulation of thinkers that choose a small ( large ) diameter when moving towards ( away ) from a ﬁxed reference point ( indicated by a star at the origin ) , immersed in a passive gas . Thinkers are concentrated near the target location . i Depth of an eﬀective potential consistent with the increased density of thinkers near the target in h , as a function of temperature . Eﬀective potential depth is ωk b T , where ω is not a function of temperature . j Ratio of the eﬀective potential depth and temperature for thinkers in h as a function of initial total density ρ 0 curred . We demonstrate the consequences of this broken collision microreversibility through a molecular dynamics ( MD ) implementation of the thinker gas ( in the package HOOMD - Blue v2 . 9 . 3 [ 50 ] , see methods ) . Active driving from local measurements . Fig - ure 2e shows the results of a simulation of thinkers held at constant temperature , with the diameter cou - pling shown in Fig . 2a and immersed in a ﬁxed - diameter gas . The resulting velocity probability distribution is not Gaussian : thinker velocities are concentrated along the positive - x direction , as they are more likely to en - ter regions of phase space with smaller scattering cross - sections . This departure from the Maxwell - Boltzmann ( MB ) distribution occurs despite energy and momentum conservation ( to algorithmic precision ) in the molecular dynamics simulation ( see SI Figure S1 ) , and while un - dergoing collisions with a passive , MB - distributed gas . Such asymmetric distributions have non - zero mean ve - locity , as revealed by computing the ﬁrst moment , u x = R v x P ( v x ) d ~ v , as shown in Fig . 2f . This mean velocity is u x = α p 2 k b T / m , a fraction ( α < 1 ) of the ther - mal speed for particles of mass m at temperature T . The quantity α is a temperature - independent function of the change of thinker diameter ( ∆ D = D l − D s , Fig . 2g ) . The shape of the velocity distribution , mean velocity , and temperature - independent driving strength α obtained from microscopic simulations ( red data in Fig . 2e - g ) can all be predicted to high accuracy using a kinetic theory of the thinker gas ( black curves ) , which we will describe in detail later . A more complex diameter rule is shown in Fig . 2h , where agents have diameters coupled to both velocity 4 FIG . 3 . The thinker gas as entropic active matter . a Work done to propel a thinker through a passive gas per measurement cycle ( duration ∆ t ) . Power dissipated in thinker propulsion is estimated from simulation by ﬁnding the density - dependent drift velocity ~ u and mobility coeﬃcient µ v . The black curve is the average free energy dissipated in deleting the thinker’s memory of prior measurements , ob - tained from a Markov chain model of the thinker measure - ment process ( see methods and extended Fig . E1 ) , where σ is the intrinsic eﬃciency of rectiﬁcation by collisional bias - ing and η is a ﬁtted constant of order one . b Conceptual categories of mechanical media . Spring networks at low tem - perature are equilibrium ( i . e . passive ) media with properties dominated by internal energy ( upper left ) . Rubber - like ma - terials at ﬁnite temperature are also in equilibrium , but have a mechanical response dominated by the entropy of avail - able chain conformations ( lower left ) . Non - equilibrium , or active , media driven by mechanical work include Janus par - ticles , submicron rocket - like devices that consume a chemical fuel ( upper right ) . Thinker particles complete the table as a non - equilibrium material with properties controlled by mea - surement and feedback ; essentially entropic processes ( lower right ) . and position - when moving towards ( away from ) a ﬁxed reference point , a small ( large ) diameter is chosen . In - tuitively , an initially homogeneous spatial distribution of agents densiﬁes near the reference point . When viewed without knowledge of the diameter change process , one might think that this isothermal thinker gas is in a potential well centered on the reference point . A po - tential consistent with this observation can be found by computing the potential of mean force deﬁned as U pmf ( ~ x ) = − k b Tlnρ ( ~ x ) / ρ 0 , which assumes that the like - lihood of observing a density conﬁguration ρ ( ~ x ) is Boltz - mann distributed according to a free energy U pmf ( ~ x ) [ 51 ] . The depth ∆ U pmf of this eﬀective potential scales linearly with temperature ( Fig . 2i ) , indicating that the high density of thinkers near the target location is in fact independent of temperature , unlike the case for an externally applied energetic potential , where increased temperature allows particles to escape conﬁnement . The logarithm of the relative density of thinkers near the tar - get , ω = ln ρ ( ~ x max ) / ρ ( ~ x targ ) , shown in Fig . 2j , increases with increasing initial total gas density ρ 0 . Information - theoretic arguments . Recall that a Szilard engine can lift an external load as long as infor - mation is not erased from the memory of the controller ( i . e . demon ) needed to operate it [ 19 ] . Similarly , thinker particles can extract the work needed to propel them - selves through a surrounding gas with speed u from the gas itself , solely by performing measurements and con - trol actions . The work needed is W = u 2 ∆ t / µ v where µ v is the particle mobility and ∆ t is the time between measurements . According to Landauer’s principle , the amount of work extracted is bounded by W ≤ k b TI , ( 1 ) the energy needed to erase the information I collected during such measurements [ 17 , 19 , 52 – 55 ] . we shall as - sume for simplicity that the thinkers are not allowed to do any mechanical work W to expand , i . e . (cid:15) = 0 . We ﬁrst provide a qualitative argument for the depen - dence of W on density . Information is encoded in the binary diameter state of the thinker particle . At low density , negligible information ( and hence W ) is gained because collisions are so rare that thinker velocity ( and hence diameter ) is nearly constant . Collision frequency ( and also information acquired ) increases with ρ , up un - til a characteristic density ρ ∗ ∼ 1 / A ( ∆ D ) , where A ( ∆ D ) is the area of the annulus deﬁned by the excluded area change of a thinker whose diameter expands by ∆ D . Crucially , expansion of a thinker reduces the phase - space volume available to the surrounding gas by the amount A ( ∆ D ) . Above ρ ∗ , thinkers are nearly always crowded by other particles and hence forbidden from changing their diameter . Assuming that particles are distributed over space uniformly , we can use a Poisson distribution to estimate the probability of a successful expansion as e − ρ / ρ ∗ . Information and work are therefore exponentially suppressed in the large ρ limit . To estimate the average information gained by mea - surement , I ( and hence the maximum W in Eq . 1 ) , we construct a two - state Markov chain model for the bi - nary diameter change process ( see methods and extended Fig . E1 ) . The mean information ( or entropy , for error - free measurements ) of a Markov chain at steady state per 5 FIG . 4 . Observable consequences of thinker measurements . Kinetic theory of the thinker gas reveals collective properties . i Diameter in the velocity plane , ii deviation from the Maxwell - Boltzmann ( MB ) distribution , iii distribution entropy ( S = R f t ln f t d ~ v ) relative to the MB distribution , iv pressure ( P ij = ρm R v i v j f t d ~ v ) relative to the MB distribution , and v heat ﬂux ( q i = ( ρm / 2 ) R v i | ~ v | 2 f t d ~ v ) for a a radially symmetric Gaussian diameter function , b an anisotropic quadratic function , and c a step function . d A thinker gas with an anisotropic diameter function in a ﬂexible container . Diameter function anisotropy produces an anisotropic pressure tensor , deforming an initially circular passive container into an ellipse . e Comparison of worker and thinker type propulsion , by analogy to rockets . In the case of a Janus particle ( top ) , heat from burning a fuel is directed backwards , into expanding exhaust which does work on its environment ; a propulsive force results as for a macroscopic rocket . Consider a ‘thinker’ rocket ( bottom ) in which the expansion of exhaust behind is paired always with a contraction ahead , exactly canceling the work of expansion . This would however require the ﬂow of heat from front to back ( and cold to hot ) , necessitating entropy production . step is [ 53 , 55 , 56 ] : I = − X ij µ i P ij ln P ij . ( 2 ) where P ij are the transition probabilities between dis - crete states occupied with probability µ i . Note that this entropy is distinct from the entropy production rate of - ten discussed in the stochastic thermodynamics of active systems [ 57 , 58 ] , which is zero because there are only two states corresponding to the binary diameter choices of a thinker particle moving through a passive isothermal gas . These diameter states encode the outcome of local measurements . Combining Eqs . 1 and 2 we obtain an estimate of the maximum work extracted W ≈ ησk b TI , where σ is a rectiﬁcation eﬃciency for hard disk collisions ( see methods ) and η is a ﬁtting parameter of order one . Our estimate for W , plotted in Fig . 3a ( black curve ) , qualitatively captures the trend observed in MD simula - tions ( red symbols ) , as well as our intuitive argument for the dependence of W on ρ . The thinker - gas example underscores the general point made in the introduction , namely that informational ac - tive matter is in a distinct category from energy - driven active matter ( e . g . autophoretic colloids [ 34 ] ) , because it derives its activity by harnessing information ( i . e . en - tropy ) and noise . With its ability to break detailed bal - 6 ance , it is a non - equilibrium counterpart to entropic pas - sive matter [ 42 , 59 ] such as rubber , which has mechani - cal properties that also scale with noise . The thinker gas ( and the larger category it exempliﬁes ) , completes the simple taxonomy of active / passive , energetic / entropic systems ( Fig . 3b ) . Kinetic theory : compressible phase - space ﬂows . We now sketch how kinetic theory yields an accurate pre - diction for the thinker self - propulsion speed , and more generally collective properties of informational active matter , such as pressure or heat ﬂux , starting from the microscopic agent strategy . Consider the force - free and spatially homogeneous Boltzmann equation , ∂f ∂t = Q ( f ) ( 3 ) where Q is the collision operator , which describes the manner in which particle collisions redistribute probabil - ity density in phase space , and f ( ~ v , t ) is a single parti - cle velocity distribution function . The collision operator here will be modiﬁed from its usual form to include the feedback process in Fig . 1c , which measures particle ve - locities ( property i ) and promotes or suppresses scatter - ing transitions ( property ii ) in a feedback loop ( property iii ) , all subject to a work bound ( property iv ) . Scattering events are modeled using the quadratic collision operator [ 60 ] : Q = 1 2 Z Z B ( σ , ∆ ~ v ) h βf ( ~ v 0 ) f ( ~ v 0∗ ) − f ( ~ v ) f ( ~ v ∗ ) i dσd ~ v ∗ ( 4 ) where ~ v and ~ v ∗ are the velocities of particles undergoing collision , and ~ v 0 and ~ v 0∗ are their post - collision veloci - ties . The collision kernel B describes the scattering of particles for a given impact parameter σ . Crucially , the function β weights the post - collision joint probabilities relative to the pre - collision ones and it is always equal to one if detailed balance ( i . e . microscopic reversibility ) holds . When β = 1 , the steady - state solution of Eq . 3 is the Maxwell - Boltzmann ( MB ) velocity distribution for ﬁxed diameter particles . This is not the case in informa - tional active matter ( see Fig . 2e for an example ) , where β is generically a function of measured microscopic prop - erties of the system , e . g . velocities . The feedback control strategies that bias the relative likelihood of transitions between states introduce distortions of phase space repre - sented by a β ( ~ v , ~ v 0 , ~ v ∗ , ~ v 0∗ ) 6 = 1 term . Dissipation in gran - ular media [ 61 ] or mechanical self - propulsion in ﬂocking media [ 62 ] can also introduce such compressible phase space ﬂows but for informational active matter β 6 = 1 even if collisions still conserve energy and momentum ( i . e . (cid:15) = 0 ) . Diameter change strategy and phase - space dis - tortion . For the thinker gas , the collision operator should describe the evolution of a variable - diameter hard disk gas . Therefore the collision kernel B takes on the form for hard disk collisions ( See S . I . section S4 . 2 ) , while β is a ratio of collision cross sections before and after the collision . For situations in which thinkers predominantly interact with a surrounding , ﬁxed diameter gas ( as in Fig . 2 ) , β can be shown to have the form ( see methods ) : β = D ( ~ v 0 ) + D fix D ( ~ v ) + D fix ( 5 ) where D is a function describing the diameter of thinkers in velocity space , D fix is the diameter of the passive species , and the passive species has been arbitrarily as - signed to starred velocity variables . For pure thinker gasses ( see SI ) , D fix should be replaced with functions of ~ v ∗ and ~ v 0∗ . Using this form of the collision operator , a single - particle distribution function f t can be found that is the steady state solution for the variable - diameter gas . This solution f t is a distribution that can be decomposed as f t = ( 1 + D ) f m , where D is a function of velocity and f m is the MB distribution . In a dilute gas with β = 1 , the MB distribution is prescribed by quantities conserved during particle collisions ( i . e . particle number , momenta , and kinetic energy ) . The same constraints apply to the thinker gas by construction ( as (cid:15) = 0 ) , and therefore the zeroth , ﬁrst , and second order moments of its distribution must be equal to their MB counterparts . This relation deﬁnes a suﬃcient set of constraining equations to solve for f t explicitly ( see methods ) . Kinetic theory and symmetries of the feedback control strategy . Symmetries of the microscopic con - stituents are crucial in determining material properties , and informational active matter is no exception . In this case , the symmetries of the feedback control strategy di - rectly set which macroscopic properties of the active gas depart from the passive MB distribution . We demon - strate this using the thinker gas operating with several strategies for D ( ~ v ) ( Fig . 4a - c ) . Isotropic diameter func - tions ( Fig . 4ai ) lower the gas entropy ( Fig . 4aiii ) , but have no consequences on gas pressure ( Fig . 4aiv ) or heat ﬂux ( Fig . 4av ) . Anisotropic diameter functions with re - ﬂection symmetry impact the entropy of the distribution and pressure , but not the heat ﬂux ( Fig . 4bi - bv ) . When a thinker gas with an anisotropic microscopic feedback strategy ( and therefore an anisotropic pressure ) is con - ﬁned within a ﬂexible , initially - circular container , defor - mation into an ellipse results ( Fig . 4d ) . Diameter functions that lack reﬂection symmetry mod - ify entropy , pressure , and the heat ﬂux vector ~ q ( Fig . 4ci - cv ) . A non - zero heat ﬂux is responsible for the striking propulsive eﬀects demonstrated in Fig . 2 . The velocity distribution of thinkers in Fig . 2e ( as well as pure thinker gases , see extended Fig . E2 ) can be accurately predicted from our kinetic theory , including the mean propulsion speed shown in Fig . 2g . Assuming that thinker bulk mo - tion accounts for the entirety of energy ﬂux in the system , i . e . ~ q / ρ + k b T ~ u = 0 , the self propulsion speed is u i = − m 2 k b T Z v i | ~ v | 2 f t d ~ v . ( 6 ) For mechanically active systems , the propulsive conse - quences of heat ﬂux are familiar : Janus particles , much 7 FIG . 5 . Thinker self - propulsion strategies and reinforcement learning . a The RL learning cycle . Actions are chosen according to a policy function , and experiences of transitions are accumulated in a buﬀer . This buﬀer is used to train a feed - forward artiﬁcial neural network that deﬁnes the policy function . b Locomotion task deﬁnition and legend . Agents are embedded in a periodic environment with a singly - peaked ( indicated by star ) reward function . Agent density after learning is shown in red . The RL algorithm searches for a probabilistic discrete diameter function of ~ v , ~ x that most rapidly moves agents towards the maximum . Plots in c - f follow the same color scheme . c - f RL diameter functions under various transport physics . c Isothermal environment . d Vibrated granular bed environment . e Isothermal dynamics with applied magnetic ﬁeld . f Langevin dynamics with applied shear ﬁeld . In all cases , the vector ﬁeld found by odd moments over the learned diameter distribution ( ~ ξ ) points along the shortest - time path towards the reward maximum ( white arrows ) . like rockets , move by transferring heat backwards to their expanding exhaust products ( Fig . 4e , top ) . However for informational active matter , exempliﬁed by the thinker gas , no analog of the combustible fuel is present . Heat is taken from the surrounding medium instead and di - rected backwards using on - board information processing ( Fig . 4e , bottom ) . Reinforcement learning : self - propulsion strate - gies for non - thermal noisy environments . Our ki - netic theory applies in the dilute , spatially homogeneous regime when the noise is thermal . But how can we pro - ceed at high densities or in more general chaotic environ - ments such as turbulent or non - thermally driven ﬂuids ? Reinforcement learning ( RL ) , a trial - and - error process whereby agents learn to maximize rewards supplied by an environment ( Fig . 5a ) [ 63 – 69 ] , provides an agnostic method to search for transition - bias strategies in regimes beyond the reach of our kinetic theory . Again , we em - ploy the thinker gas as our test system of choice , and seek to agnostically learn a diameter ( i . e . transition - biasing ) strategy D ( ~ x , ~ v ) . Standard techniques from the ﬁeld of policy optimization [ 70 ] ( see methods ) are used to train a single - particle probabilistic discrete diameter function ( P D l = 1 − P D s ) of position and velocity that climbs a singly - peaked ‘reward’ function in the shortest possible time ( Fig . 5b ) . This locomotion task is solved by self - propulsion along the least - time path from anywhere in the simulated do - main to the most - rewarded point . Thinker agents may experience various ﬂuctuating forces , but ultimately only those that persist after long time averaging ( i . e . external forces ) are important to the geometry of least - time paths . We can reveal this from RL - learned diameter functions by taking an odd moment over the probability of choos - ing a large diameter , P D l : ξ i ( ~ x ) = − Z v i P D l ( ~ x , ~ v ) d ~ v . ( 7 ) where the biasing vector ﬁeld ~ ξ is the direction of greatest reﬂection asymmetry for the learned diameter strategy , which we expect from kinetic theory to be parallel to the direction of greatest heat ﬂux , and therefore also propul - sion . Figure 5c - f illustrates how agents learn to navigate four diﬀerent mixtures of thinkers and passive agents : a 2D thermostat - coupled periodic domain , a 3D vertically agitated ( i . e . a granular bed ) domain , a 2D thermal gas with applied magnetic ﬁeld , and a 2D dissipative gas with applied shear ﬁeld ( See methods for numerical details ) . The biasing vector ﬁeld ~ ξ ( shown as white arrows ) adopts a simple geometry pointing towards the most - rewarded point ( i . e . ~ ξ = − ˆ x for targets at the origin ) , regardless of the type of agitating noise ( even when this noise is the re - sult of non - conservative collisions , see extended Fig . E3 ) . 8 FIG . 6 . Noise - driven active patterning . a A collection of variable - diameter particles are dropped into a hard - sided box . As particles undergo elastic collisions , their velocities are reduced by a linear drag term and they settle onto the bottom of the box . The two species ( red and blue ) have opposite ~ ξ ( ~ x ) ﬁelds ( inset ) , driving strong separation into a designed pattern . b Patterns can also be formed in continuously vibrated beds . Here , Boltzmann’s classic equation is written frame - by - frame while thinkers are agitated by a correlated noise source , approximating a vertical shaker table . c Worker ( self - propelled ) particles that exert a constant force in the direction speciﬁed by ~ ξ , constantly agitated as in b . As in a - b , red and blue particles move in opposite directions on the same ~ ξ ﬁeld . As agitation is increased ( k b T eff ) , pattern resolution degrades , since particles can only push with a ﬁxed amount of force . Frames are instantaneous snapshots of simulations at the time and eﬀective temperature indicated by the position of the inset lower left corner . d Thinker particles following the diameter rule of eq . 8 and the same ~ ξ ﬁeld and athermal agitation as c . The time required to obtain a given letter resolution decreases with increasing agitation , demonstrating the temperature dependence of informational active driving . Black curves are t = sL / p 2 mk b T eff for s = 0 . 15 → 2 where L is the size of the simulation domain . The biasing ﬁeld only changes in response to external forces such as the magnetic ﬁeld in Fig . 5e ( which causes ~ ξ to spiral about the target ) or shear ﬁeld in Fig . 5f . Also notice that the learned probabilistic diameter functions are well - approximated by the deterministic strategy : D ( ~ x , ~ v ) = D s + ∆ D H (cid:16) − ~ v · ~ ξ ( ~ x ) (cid:17) ( 8 ) where H is the Heaviside step function . We now demon - strate how to design a self - generated ﬂow of thinkers in any noisy environment , ( even environments of other thinker species ) using a chosen biasing ﬁeld ~ ξ ( ~ x ) and eq . 8 as the feedback protocol . Information landscapes and noise - driven active patterning . When the transition - biasing strategy of in - formational active agents is spatially dependent , it ef - fectively creates an entropically - derived free - energy land - scape . To illustrate this point , we design bias ﬁelds to produce a pattern formed by two species of thinker par - 9 ticles ( in three dimensions ) dropped from a hopper onto a surface ( Fig . 6a ) . Energy is dissipated via linear drag , eventually resulting in a stationary layer . By choosing the bias ﬁeld for each species , complex patterns can be formed from this apparently chaotic process . Note that gravity and interactions with the smooth container walls are the only potential energy ﬁelds acting on particles - patterns arise entirely from the biasing of collisions . Furthermore , the bias ﬁeld can also be a function of time , ~ ξ ( ~ x , t ) . Figure 6b shows thinkers continuously ag - itated by correlated noise ( approximating a shaker ta - ble ) . Rather than following a ﬁxed biasing ﬁeld , thinkers switch target conﬁgurations so as to write out Boltz - mann’s entropy equation ( See electronic S . I . for videos of these processes ) . Note that unlike a similar pattern formed by an externally applied potential , thinkers de - ﬁne their pattern by the bias ﬁeld which is carried on board the collective . Thinkers with the capacity to form a single pattern need only be given a slightly diﬀerent instruction set to form any other pattern ( or sequence of patterns ) with similar resolution . Entropically - derived free - energy landscapes exhibit a striking diﬀerence from their energetic counterparts : their depth is controlled by the level of noise . We high - light this phenomenon by contrasting pattern forma - tion by self - propelled worker and thinker particles . Two species of worker particles ( red and blue ) that exert a constant - magnitude force driving them oppositely along the direction of a bias ﬁeld will phase separate ( Fig . 6c ) , producing an eﬀect equivalent to an external potential ﬁeld . However as agitation ( approximating a shaker ta - ble , and resulting in a mean per particle kinetic energy of k b T eff ) is increased , pattern resolution drops as worker eﬀort is overwhelmed by noise . In contrast , the inﬁnite - time resolution of thinker particles experiencing the same agitation is not aﬀected by the strength of the noise ( see Fig . 2e for the thermal case ) , as informational driving grows with ﬂuctuations . In fact , the ﬁnite - time resolu - tion of these patterns is set by propulsion speed , which for thinker particles increases with temperature ( Fig . 2b ) . For a ﬁnite time , increasing k b T eff actually increases the resolution achieved by thinkers ( Fig . 6d ) , completely at odds with the trend for workers under the same condi - tions . Notice also that when random ﬂuctuating forces are comparable to the magnitude of worker driving ( as in Fig . 6c ) , the long - distance transport speed for workers is signiﬁcantly slower than that for thinkers . Workers must exert large forces to drive themselves rapidly through a ﬂuid , as collisions continually redistribute applied work into random motion . Conversely , thinkers harness ran - dom motion into a drift velocity that is on the order of the mean thermal speed . Informationally active agents can exploit chaotic , non - steady environments to form complex patterns by redis - tributing ( through measurements ) the ﬂow of energy be - tween their degrees of freedom . While we have empha - sized the limiting case where informational driving dom - inates , our results may shed light also on more realis - tic situations where mechanical and informational active processes coexist . For example , cells living in crowded conditions must make decisions to change or maintain their diameter , sometimes in response to external cues [ 71 – 73 ] . Such actions have constrained metabolic costs ( property iv ) . In addition , they alter the mechanical and chemical interaction cross section with their simi - larly changing neighbors ( properties i - iii ) . As miniatur - ized robots cross the cellular length scale [ 14 ] they must contend with omnipresent thermal ﬂuctuations , and also intense non - thermal ﬂuctuating forces in some environ - ments ( e . g . the human circulatory system ) . Our work oﬀers an organizing principle to understand when and how such small intelligent agents can exploit , rather than ﬁght , their noisy environment . METHODS Microscopic model implementation . Molecu - lar Dynamics ( MD ) simulations of the thinker gas were performed with the open - source software package HOOMD - Blue ( v2 . 9 . 3 ) [ 50 ] . The package was modiﬁed with a custom updater that performed the following actions on each thinker particle every ﬁxed interval of timesteps : 1 . Find neighbors ( of any type , including passive par - ticles in the environment ) within a distance of 1 . 5 times the maximum interaction cutoﬀ distance . Find the minimum distance between the particle center and the boundary of a neighbor particle ( r nmin = r ij − D j / 2 ) . 2 . Evaluate a function D ( ~ x , ~ v ) which determined the desired new diameter of the particle ( D new ) 3 . Change particle diameter . ( a ) D new > D old and D new / 2 > r nmin . Expansion would cause particle overlap . The diameter change is discarded . ( b ) D new < D old and D old / 2 > r nmin . This par - ticle is currently interacting with a neighbor . Reducing its diameter would cause a poten - tial energy change . The diameter change is discarded . ( c ) D old / 2 < r nmin and D new / 2 < r nmin . No over - laps will be added or removed by the diameter change , and it proceeds . This sequence of steps is done in series for all thinker par - ticles so as to avoid a race condition which would change the value of r nmin . All particles interact through a shifted Weeks - Chandler - Andersen potential ( sWCA ) [ 74 ] , where the origin is shifted so that the radius of the particle is the potential’s zero isoenergy surface . This potential ( implemented in the function hoomd . md . pair . slj ) takes the form : V sWCA ( r ) = 4 ε " (cid:18) σ r − ∆ (cid:19) 12 − (cid:18) σ r − ∆ (cid:19) 6 # + ε 10 for r < ( r cut + ∆ ) and V sWCA = 0 otherwise , where ∆ = ( D i + D j ) / 2 and D i , D j are the diameters of the interacting pair . The radial shifting was chosen with σ = 0 . 5 so that the minimum ( located at σ 2 1 / 6 in the un - shifted case ) is at a distance of D 0 = 2 1 / 6 . This sets the value of r cut in the interaction potential to σ 2 1 / 6 . The depth of the attractive well was set to ε = 1 . Isother - mal simulations in Fig . 2 were carried out with a velocity Verlet integration and a Nos´e - Hoover thermostat , as im - plemented in HOOMD - blue . System thermal energy was held at k b T / ε = 1 , and particle mass was ﬁxed at m = 1 ( in simulation units ) . Constant - energy simulations con - ﬁrmed that the diameter change protocol outlined above does not contribute to internal energy drift of the ensem - ble ( see SI section S2 ) during numerical integration . Simulations of thinker gases contained in ﬂexible con - tainers ( Fig . 4e ) were conducted using constant - energy Verlet integration of the gas and Langevin integration of the ﬂexible container ( k b T = 1 , damping parameter γ = 2 ) . The container consisted of two close - packed lay - ers of beads with diameter D l , bonded to nearest neigh - bors by harmonic springs of stiﬀness k = 100 . Thinker Markov model . The information gained by a thinker particle immersed in a passive gas can be estimated from a Markov chain model , as referenced in Fig . 3a . The model is constructed by ﬁrst considering the diameter transitions that depend upon gas collisions and crowding , shown schematically in extended Fig . E1a . Thinkers undergo random collision with the passive sur - rounding gas , with probability P coll , which then random - izes their velocities into the forward or reverse velocity half spaces with probabilities P + and P − , respectively . If a thinker’s velocity is such that a diameter expansion is attempted , no nearby particles must obstruct the ex - pansion . The probability that this requirement is met is denoted by P < , i . e . if an overlap is created the work ex - erted by the thinkers must be less than the value (cid:15) , which can be set to zero if desired . The transition diagram can be condensed into a binary model of the form shown in Fig . E1b . We utilized several elementary kinetic ap - proximations to deﬁne the terms P + , P − , P coll , and P < . Velocities are assumed to be randomly re - distributed by collisions on average , with P + = P − = 1 / 2 . We assume a collision timescale for the gas : τ icoll = l imfp c th = 1 ρ 0 σ icoll p 2 k b T / m ( 9 ) where superscripts indicate diﬀerent values for the large and small diameter states , l imfp is the mean free path for a gas of density ρ 0 , σ icoll is the collision cross section , and c th = p 2 k b T / m is the thermal speed of this isothermal gas . We take the likelihood of a collision having occurred in the time between actions ∆ t to be P icoll = 1 − e − ∆ t / τ icoll . ( 10 ) Assuming that particles are distributed over space uni - formly , we can treat their occurrence within an area A as obeying a Poisson distribution , P ( n ) = ( ρA ) n n ! e − ρA where n is the number of particles observed and A is the area of the annulus deﬁned by the expanding diameter , A = ( ( D l + D s ) 2 / 4 − D 2 s ) π . This yields : P < = P ( n = 0 ) = e − ρ 0 A . ( 11 ) The stochastic matrix describing this measurement se - quence is : P thinker = (cid:20) 1 − 12 P scoll P < 12 P scoll P < 12 P lcoll 1 − 12 P lcoll (cid:21) , ( 12 ) and the corresponding steady state population is µ thinker = h P lcoll P lcoll + P scoll P < P scoll P < P lcoll + P scoll P < i . ( 13 ) For error - free measurements , the information con - tained in an ensemble of measurements is equal to the Shannon entropy H . For a Markov chain in the steady state , the mean entropy ( and therefore information ) per step is given by [ 56 ] : I ( P ) = H ( P ) = − X ij µ i P ij ln P ij . ( 14 ) The Markov estimate of propulsive work W includes an eﬃciency term : σ = τ scoll − τ lcoll τ scoll + τ lcoll = ∆ D ∆ D + 4 D 0 , ( 15 ) which is the ratio of time moving forward over total time , assuming P + = P − = 1 / 2 . For the data shown in Fig . 3a , ∆ D is ﬁxed and σ = 1 / 5 , and the ﬁtting parameter η = 5 / 13 . Propulsive work was estimated from numerical data by ﬁnding the mobility constant from the self - diﬀusivity of the gas ( µ v = D self / k b T ) for the the given density and temperature conditions . An eﬀective force could then be deﬁned from the drift velocity of the thinker species , ~ F eff = ~ u / µ v , and the work per action as ~ u · ~ F eff ∆ t . Kinetic theory of variable diameter hard disks . We can ﬁnd the velocities after collision between a pair of hard disks by conservation of momentum and energy . As - suming uniform particle masses , momentum and kinetic energy are conserved through the collision process : ~ v + ~ v ∗ = ~ v 0 + ~ v 0 ∗ ( 16 ) | ~ v | 2 + | ~ v ∗ | 2 = | ~ v 0 | 2 + | ~ v 0∗ | 2 ( 17 ) If ˆ n is a unit vector that points between disk centers at the point of contact ( note that ˆ n therefore depends upon diameter ) , then the post - collision velocities can be written as ( for disks of equal mass ) : 11 ~ v 0 = ~ v − ( ( ~ v − ~ v ∗ ) · ˆ n ) ˆ n ( 18 ) ~ v 0∗ = ~ v ∗ + ( ( ~ v − ~ v ∗ ) · ˆ n ) ˆ n ( 19 ) For disks of ﬁxed diameter , this scattering process is mi - croreversible ; ( ~ v , ~ v ∗ ) maps to ( ~ v 0 , ~ v 0∗ ) and ( − ~ v 0 , − ~ v 0∗ ) maps to ( − ~ v , − ~ v ∗ ) , resulting in a Jacobian for the change of variables equal to − 1 [ 75 ] . This one - to - one mapping al - lows all four velocity terms to be collected under a com - mon unit disk integration in the typical quadratic Boltz - mann collision operator ( see supplemental information for additional details ) . When particle diameters are in - stead functions of velocity , the microreversibility of the collision process is broken , but can be restored with a shift of relative positions . In a coordinate frame centered on the point of contact for the forward collision , a shift in position of β = ( D ( ~ v 0 ) + D ( ~ v 0∗ ) ) / ( D ( ~ v ) + D ( ~ v ∗ ) ) along the reﬂection plane of the forward collision , applied to one particle during the reverse process restores the symme - try of velocity mapping ( see extended Fig . E4 ) . Note that when thinker particles are immersed in a ﬁxed - diameter gas , one set of diameters ( starred or unstarred ) is con - stant . We will now solve for the single particle probability dis - tribution function ( f ( ~ v ) ) that satisﬁes the steady state form of eq . 3 for the thinker gas collision operator by examining the collision invariants of the gas . If we con - sider a moment of the time - varying distribution function f ( ~ v , t ) with a non - time - varying test function φ : h φ i f = Z f ( ~ v , t ) φ ( ~ v ) d ~ v ( 20 ) the time evolution of this quantity is : d dt h φ i f = Z φ ( ~ v ) Q ( f ) ( ~ v , t ) d ~ v ( 21 ) The function φ can be brought into the integrand of the collision operator since it is not a function of time . As we are now considering an expression integrating over all ~ v and ~ v ∗ ( and by extension ~ v 0 and ~ v 0∗ ) , the choice of primed and starred variables is entirely arbitrary . A typical procedure is to average over the exchange of ve - locity variables [ 75 ] , producing the following for the case of β = 1 : 1 8 Z Z Z ( φ + φ ∗ − φ 0 − φ 0∗ ) ( f 0 f 0∗ − ff ∗ ) B ( σ , ∆ ~ v ) d ~ v ∗ d ~ vdσ ( 22 ) where B is the collision kernel and σ the impact parame - ter . If φ is a quantity that is conserved through the colli - sion , then it remains unchanged and ddt h φ i f = 0 . This de - ﬁnes a summational collisional invariant for the system . For the Boltzmann equation , summational invariants can only be linear combinations of the microscopically con - served quantities , M = 1 , ~ v , | ~ v | 2 , which are unchanged during collision by construction [ 76 ] . Therefore there ex - ist constants ( a , ~ b , c ) that deﬁne any summational colli - sion invariant : M ( ~ v ) = a + ~ b · ~ v + c | ~ v | 2 ( 23 ) For the thinker gas with β 6 = 1 , the same procedure of exchanging velocity variables allows a common term to be collected , g = ( D fix + D ( ~ v ) ) φ for the mixed thinker - passive case , or g = D ( ~ v ) φ more generally . This term must satisfy the same condition g + g ∗ − g 0 − g 0∗ = 0 for it to remain unchanged by collisions ( i . e . be an invariant ) . We will now deﬁne a system of moment equations allowing us to specify the constants that characterize the thinker gas collisional invariant . Beginning with the MB velocity distribution function in 2D : f m ( ~ v ) = mρ 2 πkT e − m | ~ p | 2 2 kT ( 24 ) where ~ p = ~ v −h ~ v i = ~ v − ~ u is the velocity of the gas in the ﬂow frame , we express the thinker gas distribution func - tion as f t = ( 1 + D ) f m , where D is a function of velocity only . We can treat the function ( 1 + D ) as a test func - tion operating on the MB distribution , with collisional invariant g = D ( 1 + D ) . The four constants a , b x , b y , c which deﬁne invariant g ( and therefore D ) can be found by requiring that the ﬁrst four conserved moments ( M ) of the thinker gas velocity distribution are equal to the ﬁrst four moments of the equilibrium MB distribution : Z M f m d ~ v = Z M ( 1 + D ) f m d ~ v 0 = Z MD f m d ~ v ( 25 ) which mathematically states that thinker gases conserve number , momentum , and energy in all collisions , just as the MB distribution . Note that this restriction does not constrain the third - order moments which deﬁne the heat ﬂux tensor , or the individual entries of the pressure tensor ( derived from second - order moments ) . Using the expression for the thinker gas collision in - variant , g = D ( 1 + D ) , we can trivially reorder to obtain ( 1 + D ) = gD − 1 . As a scalar function which must be greater than zero , division by D presents no problems ( see supplemental information section S4 . 6 ) . Using this expression for the thinker perturbation , and the notation for expectation value h φ i m = R φf m d ~ v , we can write : hMi m = hM ( 1 + D ) i m = hM gD − 1 i m = a hM D − 1 i m + b x hM v x D − 1 i m + b y hM v y D − 1 i m + c hM | ~ v | 2 D − 1 i m ( 26 ) 12 For each of the conserved moments ( M = 1 , v x , v y , | ~ v | 2 ) a new expression is found , allowing for the deﬁnition of a full rank system of linear equations : A · G = B ( 27 ) A =   h 1 D i m h v x D i m h v y D i m h | ~ v | 2 D i m . h v 2 x D i m h v x v y D i m h v x | ~ v | 2 D i m . . h v 2 y D i m h v y | ~ v | 2 D i m . . . h | ~ v | 4 D i m   ( 28 ) G = (cid:2) a b x b y c (cid:3) > ( 29 ) B = (cid:2) ρ ρu x ρu y ρ | ~ u | 2 / 2 + ρkT (cid:3) > ( 30 ) where the matrix A is symmetric and redundant entries are not shown . Using the solution of this system of equa - tions the thinker gas velocity distribution can be written as : f t = f m ( 1 + D ) = f m D − 1 g = f m D − 1 ( A − 1 B ) · G ( 31 ) For arbitrary diameter functions , the terms in the ma - trix A and its inverse are most easily found by numeri - cal methods . See the supplemental information for func - tional forms of A matrices for selected diameter func - tions . Reinforcement learning implementation . Stan - dard policy optimization algorithms [ 70 , 77 ] were imple - mented to allow thinker learning during MD simulations . Particles were rewarded by their location within a simu - lated domain , eﬀectively specifying a minimum - time lo - comotion task . Artiﬁcial feed - forward neural networks were used to encode two functions , the actor and critic . These functions are maps between a ‘state’ vector ( in this case S = [ x , y , v x , v y ] ) and other quantities of inter - est . The critic maps states to expected future rewards ( r ) : C ( S t ) → E (cid:20)Z ∞ τ γ t − τ r r t dt (cid:21) ( 32 ) where γ r < 1 is the discount factor that bounds predic - tions to a ﬁnite time horizon . The actor simply maps states to actions ( P ( S t ) → a t ) . The critic network is trained using the temporal diﬀerence ( TD ) target : C ( S t ) ←− C ( S t ) + α ( r t + γ r C ( S ( t + ∆ t ) ) − C ( S t ) ) ( 33 ) where α is the learning rate and ∆ t is the time inter - val between updates . Note that we must wait until time t + ∆ t to apply learning updates to functions evaluated at time t . The TD target is saved for use as an advan - tage estimator when training the actor network [ 78 ] . The actor function is updated in batches using the target : P θ ( S t ) ←− P θ ( S t ) + α ∇ θ ln P θ ( S t ) A t ( 34 ) where θ are the parameters of the network and A t is the TD advantage estimator . To improve stability , the actor’s evolution during a single update is clipped to a neighborhood in action probability space [ 70 ] . In these simulations , the thinker gas interacts with a bath of pas - sive , ﬁxed - diameter particles . At the shortest timescales ( t act = 1 ) , the thinkers choose new diameters as a func - tion of their experienced state S and actor network . At a longer timescale ( t learn = 5 ) , the parameters of the actor and critic networks are updated . State transition tuples are accumulated in a memory buﬀer , and the critic and actor networks are trained by stochastic descent on these samples . All particles contribute experience to the same networks , and since the thinkers comprise only 10 % of simulations , the eﬀect is equivalent to parallel simu - lations of single thinkers in passive baths with pooled network parameters ( centralized learning , decentralized actions ) . In all learning cases a simple feed - forward neu - ral network architecture was used with 3 hidden layers of size 10 . Neurons utilized the swish activation function [ 79 ] . A variety of simulation types were used as environ - ments for learning . In the isothermal setting ( Fig . 5c ) , a velocity Verlet integrator with Nos´e - Hoover thermostat was used ( temperature k b T = 1 ) in a two - dimensional periodic simulation domain . In the vibrated granular bed model ( Fig . 5d ) , a modiﬁed Langevin integrator was used in an xy - periodic simulation domain . Stochastic forces consistent with the ﬂuctuation - dissipation relation ( γ = 0 . 1 , unity mean kinetic energy ) were applied to par - ticles , albeit with the z - component of these forces empha - sized over in - plane components by a factor of 10 . A ﬂoor was simulated as a frictionless plane ( normal ˆ n = [ 0 , 0 , 1 ] ) that interacted via a potential with particles : V wall ( r n ) = 4 ε " (cid:18) σ r n (cid:19) 12 − (cid:18) σ r n (cid:19) 6 # + ε for r n < r cut and V wall = 0 otherwise , where ε = 1 , σ = 1 , r cut = 2 1 / 6 , and r n is the point - plane distance r n = ˆ n · ~ x + ~ x 0 ( plane normals are chosen so that r n is always positive ) . In the magnetic gas environment ( Fig . 5e ) , isothermal conditions were applied to a 2D gas in a periodic domain . A Lorentz force with magnitude B = 0 . 5 was applied to induce curved particle trajectories . Finally , in the sheared gas environment ( Fig . 5f ) a body force F y + = ( 0 . 1 , 0 ) was applied to particles with y - position greater than zero and F y − = ( − 0 . 1 , 0 ) otherwise . Sheared par - ticles evolved under standard ( isotropic ) Langevin inte - gration ( γ = 0 . 1 , k b T = 1 ) in a periodic 2D domain . Simulations of odd gases utilized a transverse recipro - cal force between particles of the form F Lub ( r ) = ε log (cid:18) r cut r − ∆ (cid:19) ( 35 ) for r < ( r cut + ∆ ) and F Lub = 0 otherwise , where ∆ = ( D i + D j ) / 2 and D i , D j are the diameters of 13 the interacting pair . Particles were integrated under Langevin dynamics , with damping parameter γ = 0 . 1 . The strength of the transverse force was chosen to pro - duce a gas with k b T eff = 1 in the steady state . Pattern design in dropped and vibrated thinker grains . Simulations of thinker grains falling from a hop - per and forming patterns were carried out using Langevin integration ( k b T = 0 ) . Particles were released from a square aperture of size 10 D l at a height of 300 / D s . Par - ticles accelerated under a vertical force of strength 10 γ , where γ = 0 . 01 is the Langevin damping parameter . Box walls , ﬂoor , and hopper surfaces were simulated as fric - tionless planes . Particles settled into a stationary layer on the ﬂoor of the chamber after a simulated time of t f = 1000 . Vibrated pattern simulations were conducted as de - scribed for the vibrated granular bed model , with γ = 0 . 01 , unity mean kinetic energy , and vertical stochastic forces 10 times as strong as those in - plane . To sequen - tially write out frames a new target conﬁguration was set for thinkers and evolution was simulated for t p = 450 time units . To prepare for the next frame , a ‘clearing’ run of duration t c = 150 was performed during which red thinkers sought the box edge and cyan thinkers sought the box center . This clearing procedure assisted in dis - tributing red thinkers equally over the domain and avoid - ing frame - to - frame correlations . Thinker behavior rules were generated from an image of the desired character . The image was binarized , skele - tonized , and converted to a set of points corresponding to bright pixels in the processed image . Thinkers decided their preferred diameter state by calculating the deriva - tive of a ﬁeld of Gaussian potentials ( ~ ξ ) emitted by these points ( with width σ = L box / 10 √ 2 ) . For red thinkers , when ~ v · ~ ξ > 0 , the small diameter state was adopted , and the large diameter otherwise . The cyan thinker species had the same rule , but ﬂipped the sign of calculated ~ ξ . The ability of thinkers to form and maintain patterns was principally a function of the ratio of their large and small diameter states . See the SI for images of patterned formed by other diameter ratios ( section S7 ) . For comparison with worker particles , the same direc - tor ﬁeld was used , however instead of feeding into eq . 8 , a constant force of magnitude F = D s / ε = 1 was ap - plied to particles along it ( for red particles ) , or anti - parallel to it ( for blue ) . Worker diameters were held con - stant at the average of thinker large and small diameters , D w = ( D s + D l ) / 2 . All other simulation conditions were identical to the thinker comparison . [ 1 ] Gaˇsper Tkacik and William Bialek , “Information pro - cessing in living systems , ” The Annual Review of Con - densed Matter Physics is 7 , 12 – 1 ( 2016 ) . [ 2 ] Ulrich Hopfer , “A maxwell’s demon type of membrane transport : possibility for active transport by abc - type transporters ? ” Journal of theoretical biology 214 , 539 – 547 ( 2002 ) . [ 3 ] Sosuke Ito and Takahiro Sagawa , “Maxwell’s demon in biochemical signal transduction with feedback loop , ” Na - ture communications 6 , 1 – 6 ( 2015 ) . [ 4 ] Yuhai Tu , “The nonequilibrium mechanism for ultra - sensitivity in a biological switch : Sensing by maxwell’s demons , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci - ences 105 , 11737 – 11741 ( 2008 ) . [ 5 ] Pablo Sartori , L´eo Granger , Chiu Fan Lee , and Jor - dan M Horowitz , “Thermodynamic costs of information processing in sensory adaptation , ” PLoS computational biology 10 , e1003974 ( 2014 ) . [ 6 ] Pablo Sartori and Simone Pigolotti , “Thermodynamics of error correction , ” Physical Review X 5 , 041039 ( 2015 ) . [ 7 ] David Andrieux and Pierre Gaspard , “Nonequilibrium generation of information in copolymerization pro - cesses , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105 , 9516 – 9521 ( 2008 ) . [ 8 ] David W Stephens and John R Krebs , “Foraging theory , ” in Foraging theory ( Princeton university press , 2019 ) . [ 9 ] E . E . van Loon , J . Shamoun - Baranes , W . Bouten , and S . L . Davis , “Understanding soaring bird migra - tion through interactions and decisions at the individ - ual level , ” Journal of Theoretical Biology 270 , 112 – 126 ( 2011 ) . [ 10 ] Gottfried Sachs , “Minimum shear wind strength re - quired for dynamic soaring of albatrosses , ” Ibis 147 , 1 – 10 ( 2005 ) . [ 11 ] Stefano Palagi and Peer Fischer , “Bioinspired micro - robots , ” Nature Reviews Materials 3 , 113 – 124 ( 2018 ) . [ 12 ] Tian - Yun Huang , Hongri Gu , and Bradley J Nelson , “Increasingly intelligent micromachines , ” Annual Review of Control , Robotics , and Autonomous Systems 5 , 279 – 310 ( 2022 ) . [ 13 ] Marc Z Miskin , Alejandro J Cortese , Kyle Dorsey , Ed - ward P Esposito , Michael F Reynolds , Qingkun Liu , Michael Cao , David A Muller , Paul L McEuen , and Itai Cohen , “Electronically integrated , mass - manufactured , microscopic robots , ” Nature 584 , 557 – 561 ( 2020 ) . [ 14 ] Michael F Reynolds , Alejandro J Cortese , Qingkun Liu , Zhangqi Zheng , Wei Wang , Samantha L Norris , Sun - woo Lee , Marc Z Miskin , Alyosha C Molnar , Itai Cohen , et al . , “Microscopic robots with onboard digital control , ” Science Robotics 7 , eabq2296 ( 2022 ) . [ 15 ] Harvey Leﬀ and Andrew F Rex , Maxwell’s Demon 2 En - tropy , Classical and Quantum Information , Computing ( CRC Press , 2002 ) . [ 16 ] L . Szilard , “On the decrease of entropy in a thermody - namic system by the intervention of intelligent beings , ” Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 53 , 840 – 856 ( 1929 ) . [ 17 ] R . Landauer , “Irreversibility and Heat Generation in the Computing Process , ” IBM Journal of Research and De - velopment 5 , 183 – 191 ( 1961 ) , conference Name : IBM Journal of Research and Development . [ 18 ] Charles H Bennett , “The thermodynamics of compu - tation—a review , ” International Journal of Theoretical Physics 21 , 905 – 940 ( 1982 ) . [ 19 ] Martin B Plenio and Vincenzo Vitelli , “The physics of forgetting : Landauer’s erasure principle and information theory , ” Contemporary Physics 42 , 25 – 60 ( 2001 ) . [ 20 ] Shoichi Toyabe , Takahiro Sagawa , Masahito Ueda , Eiro Muneyuki , and Masaki Sano , “Experimental demonstra - 14 tion of information - to - energy conversion and validation of the generalized jarzynski equality , ” Nature physics 6 , 988 – 992 ( 2010 ) . [ 21 ] Antoine B´erut , Artak Arakelyan , Artyom Petrosyan , Sergio Ciliberto , Raoul Dillenschneider , and Eric Lutz , “Experimental veriﬁcation of landauer’s principle linking information and thermodynamics , ” Nature 483 , 187 – 189 ( 2012 ) . [ 22 ] Averell L Gnatt , Patrick Cramer , Jianhua Fu , David A Bushnell , and Roger D Kornberg , “Structural basis of transcription : an rna polymerase ii elongation complex at 3 . 3 ˚a resolution , ” Science 292 , 1876 – 1882 ( 2001 ) . [ 23 ] Charles S Peskin , Garrett M Odell , and George F Oster , “Cellular motions and thermal ﬂuctuations : the brown - ian ratchet , ” Biophysical journal 65 , 316 – 324 ( 1993 ) . [ 24 ] H Wang and G Oster , “Ratchets , power strokes , and molecular motors , ” Applied Physics A 75 , 315 – 323 ( 2002 ) . [ 25 ] Elio A Abbondanzieri , William J Greenleaf , Joshua W Shaevitz , Robert Landick , and Steven M Block , “Direct observation of base - pair stepping by rna polymerase , ” Nature 438 , 460 – 465 ( 2005 ) . [ 26 ] Viviana Serreli , Chin - Fa Lee , Euan R Kay , and David A Leigh , “A molecular information ratchet , ” Nature 445 , 523 – 527 ( 2007 ) . [ 27 ] Joachim Frank and Ruben L Gonzalez Jr , “Structure and dynamics of a processive brownian motor : the translat - ing ribosome , ” Annual review of biochemistry 79 , 381 ( 2010 ) . [ 28 ] Wonmuk Hwang and Martin Karplus , “Structural ba - sis for power stroke vs . brownian ratchet mechanisms of motor proteins , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116 , 19777 – 19785 ( 2019 ) . [ 29 ] Roberto Di Leonardo , Luca Angelani , Dario Dell’Arciprete , Giancarlo Ruocco , Valerio Iebba , Serena Schippa , Maria Pia Conte , Francesco Mecarini , Francesco De Angelis , and Enzo Di Fabrizio , “Bacterial ratchet motors , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 , 9541 – 9545 ( 2010 ) . [ 30 ] M Cristina Marchetti , Jean - Fran¸cois Joanny , Sriram Ramaswamy , Tanniemola B Liverpool , Jacques Prost , Madan Rao , and R Aditi Simha , “Hydrodynamics of soft active matter , ” Reviews of modern physics 85 , 1143 ( 2013 ) . [ 31 ] Pawel Romanczuk , Markus B¨ar , Werner Ebeling , Ben - jamin Lindner , and Lutz Schimansky - Geier , “Active brownian particles , ” The European Physical Journal Special Topics 202 , 1 – 162 ( 2012 ) . [ 32 ] Amin Doostmohammadi , Jordi Ign´es - Mullol , Julia M Yeomans , and Francesc Sagu´es , “Active nematics , ” Na - ture communications 9 , 1 – 13 ( 2018 ) . [ 33 ] Lailai Zhu , Eric Lauga , and Luca Brandt , “Self - propulsion in viscoelastic ﬂuids : Pushers vs . pullers , ” Physics of ﬂuids 24 , 051902 ( 2012 ) . [ 34 ] Jeremie Palacci , Stefano Sacanna , Asher Preska Stein - berg , David J . Pine , and Paul M . Chaikin , “Living Crys - tals of Light - Activated Colloidal Surfers , ” Science 339 , 936 – 940 ( 2013 ) , publisher : American Association for the Advancement of Science . [ 35 ] Clemens Bechinger , Roberto Di Leonardo , Hartmut L¨owen , Charles Reichhardt , Giorgio Volpe , and Gio - vanni Volpe , “Active particles in complex and crowded environments , ” Reviews of Modern Physics 88 , 045006 ( 2016 ) . [ 36 ] J Tailleur and ME Cates , “Statistical mechanics of inter - acting run - and - tumble bacteria , ” Physical review letters 100 , 218103 ( 2008 ) . [ 37 ] Antoine Bricard , Jean - Baptiste Caussin , Debasish Das , Charles Savoie , Vijayakumar Chikkadi , Kyohei Shitara , Oleksandr Chepizhko , Fernando Peruani , David Saintil - lan , and Denis Bartolo , “Emergent vortices in popula - tions of colloidal rollers , ” Nature communications 6 , 1 – 8 ( 2015 ) . [ 38 ] Julien Deseigne , Olivier Dauchot , and Hugues Chat´e , “Collective motion of vibrated polar disks , ” Physical re - view letters 105 , 098001 ( 2010 ) . [ 39 ] Tzer Han Tan , Alexander Mietke , Junang Li , Yuchao Chen , Hugh Higinbotham , Peter J Foster , Shreyas Gokhale , J¨orn Dunkel , and Nikta Fakhri , “Odd dynam - ics of living chiral crystals , ” Nature 607 , 287 – 293 ( 2022 ) . [ 40 ] Mark J Bowick , Nikta Fakhri , M Cristina Marchetti , and Sriram Ramaswamy , “Symmetry , thermodynamics , and topology in active matter , ” Physical Review X 12 , 010501 ( 2022 ) . [ 41 ] John Toner and Yuhai Tu , “Flocks , herds , and schools : A quantitative theory of ﬂocking , ” Phys . Rev . E 58 , 4828 – 4858 ( 1998 ) . [ 42 ] Paul J . Flory and John Rehner , “Statistical mechanics of cross - linked polymer networks i . rubberlike elasticity , ” The Journal of Chemical Physics 11 , 512 – 520 ( 1943 ) . [ 43 ] Frank J¨ulicher , Armand Ajdari , and Jacques Prost , “Modeling molecular motors , ” Reviews of Modern Physics 69 , 1269 ( 1997 ) . [ 44 ] JMR Parrondo and B Jim´enez de Cisneros , “Energetics of brownian motors : a review , ” Applied Physics A 75 , 179 – 191 ( 2002 ) . [ 45 ] M´onica Alvarez - P´erez , Stephen M Goldup , David A Leigh , and Alexandra MZ Slawin , “A chemically - driven molecular information ratchet , ” Journal of the American Chemical Society 130 , 1836 – 1838 ( 2008 ) . [ 46 ] Dibyendu Mandal and Christopher Jarzynski , “Work and information processing in a solvable model of maxwell’s demon , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci - ences 109 , 11641 – 11645 ( 2012 ) . [ 47 ] Jordan M Horowitz , Takahiro Sagawa , and Juan MR Parrondo , “Imitating chemical motors with optimal in - formation motors , ” Physical review letters 111 , 010602 ( 2013 ) . [ 48 ] R Dean Astumian , “Kinetic asymmetry allows macro - molecular catalysts to drive an information ratchet , ” Na - ture communications 10 , 1 – 14 ( 2019 ) . [ 49 ] John Bechhoefer , Control Theory for Physicists ( Cam - bridge University Press , 2021 ) . [ 50 ] Joshua A Anderson , Jens Glaser , and Sharon C Glotzer , “Hoomd - blue : A python package for high - performance molecular dynamics and hard particle monte carlo sim - ulations , ” Computational Materials Science 173 , 109363 ( 2020 ) . [ 51 ] John G Kirkwood , “Statistical mechanics of ﬂuid mix - tures , ” The Journal of chemical physics 3 , 300 – 313 ( 1935 ) . [ 52 ] Takahiro Sagawa and Masahito Ueda , “Second law of thermodynamics with discrete quantum feedback con - trol , ” Physical review letters 100 , 080403 ( 2008 ) . [ 53 ] Francisco J Cao and M Feito , “Thermodynamics of feed - back controlled systems , ” Physical Review E 79 , 041118 ( 2009 ) . [ 54 ] Takahiro Sagawa and Masahito Ueda , “Generalized jarzynski equality under nonequilibrium feedback con - trol , ” Physical review letters 104 , 090602 ( 2010 ) . 15 [ 55 ] Chen Huang , Mingnan Ding , and Xiangjun Xing , “In - formation swimmer : Self - propulsion without energy dis - sipation , ” Physical Review Research 2 , 043222 ( 2020 ) . [ 56 ] Thomas M Cover and Joy A . Thomas , Elements of in - formation theory ( Wiley - Interscience , 2006 ) . [ 57 ] Juan MR Parrondo , Jordan M Horowitz , and Takahiro Sagawa , “Thermodynamics of information , ” Nature physics 11 , 131 – 139 ( 2015 ) . [ 58 ] Sunghan Ro , Buming Guo , Aaron Shih , Trung V Phan , Robert H Austin , Dov Levine , Paul M Chaikin , and Ste - fano Martiniani , “Model - free measurement of local en - tropy production and extractable work in active matter , ” Physical Review Letters 129 , 220601 ( 2022 ) . [ 59 ] LR G Treloar , The physics of rubber elasticity ( OUP Ox - ford , 1975 ) . [ 60 ] Mehran Kardar , Statistical physics of particles ( Cam - bridge University Press , 2007 ) . [ 61 ] Nikolai V Brilliantov and Thorsten P¨oschel , Kinetic the - ory of granular gases ( Oxford University Press on De - mand , 2004 ) . [ 62 ] Eric Bertin , Michel Droz , and Guillaume Gr´egoire , “Boltzmann and hydrodynamic description for self - propelled particles , ” Physical Review E 74 , 022101 ( 2006 ) . [ 63 ] L . Biferale , F . Bonaccorso , M . Buzzicotti , P . Clark Di Leoni , and K . Gustavsson , “Zermelo’s problem : Op - timal point - to - point navigation in 2D turbulent ﬂows us - ing reinforcement learning , ” Chaos : An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 29 , 103138 ( 2019 ) , pub - lisher : American Institute of Physics . [ 64 ] Gautam Reddy , Antonio Celani , Terrence J . Sejnowski , and Massimo Vergassola , “Learning to soar in turbulent environments , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113 , E4877 – E4884 ( 2016 ) , publisher : Proceed - ings of the National Academy of Sciences . [ 65 ] Siddhartha Verma , Guido Novati , and Petros Koumout - sakos , “Eﬃcient collective swimming by harnessing vor - tices through deep reinforcement learning , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 , 5849 – 5854 ( 2018 ) , publisher : Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . [ 66 ] Simona Colabrese , Kristian Gustavsson , Antonio Celani , and Luca Biferale , “Flow Navigation by Smart Mi - croswimmers via Reinforcement Learning , ” Physical Re - view Letters 118 , 158004 ( 2017 ) , publisher : American Physical Society . [ 67 ] Yuguang Yang , Michael A . Bevan , and Bo Li , “Eﬃcient Navigation of Colloidal Robots in an Unknown Environ - ment via Deep Reinforcement Learning , ” Advanced In - telligent Systems 2 , 1900106 ( 2020 ) . [ 68 ] S . Mui˜nos - Landin , A . Fischer , V . Holubec , and F . Ci - chos , “Reinforcement learning with artiﬁcial microswim - mers , ” Science Robotics 6 , eabd9285 ( 2021 ) , publisher : American Association for the Advancement of Science . [ 69 ] Martin J Falk , Vahid Alizadehyazdi , Heinrich Jaeger , and Arvind Murugan , “Learning to control active mat - ter , ” Physical Review Research 3 , 033291 ( 2021 ) . [ 70 ] John Schulman , Filip Wolski , Prafulla Dhariwal , Alec Radford , and Oleg Klimov , “Proximal policy opti - mization algorithms , ” CoRR abs / 1707 . 06347 ( 2017 ) , 1707 . 06347 . [ 71 ] Florian Lang , Gillian L Busch , Markus Ritter , Harald Volkl , Siegfried Waldegger , Erich Gulbins , and Dieter Haussinger , “Functional signiﬁcance of cell volume reg - ulatory mechanisms , ” Physiological reviews 78 , 247 – 306 ( 1998 ) . [ 72 ] Else K Hoﬀmann , Ian H Lambert , and Stine F Pedersen , “Physiology of cell volume regulation in vertebrates , ” Physiological reviews 89 , 193 – 277 ( 2009 ) . [ 73 ] Ming Guo , Adrian F Pegoraro , Angelo Mao , Enhua H Zhou , Praveen R Arany , Yulong Han , Dylan T Burnette , Mikkel H Jensen , Karen E Kasza , Jeﬀrey R Moore , et al . , “Cell volume change through water eﬄux impacts cell stiﬀness and stem cell fate , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114 , E8618 – E8627 ( 2017 ) . [ 74 ] John D . Weeks , David Chandler , and Hans C . Andersen , “Role of Repulsive Forces in Determining the Equilib - rium Structure of Simple Liquids , ” The Journal of Chem - ical Physics 54 , 5237 – 5247 ( 1971 ) . [ 75 ] C . Cercignani , R . Illner , and M . Pulvirenti , The Math - ematical Theory of Dilute Gases , Applied Mathematical Sciences ( Springer New York , 1994 ) . [ 76 ] Carlo Cercignani , “Are there more than ﬁve linearly - independent collision invariants for the boltzmann equa - tion ? ” Journal of statistical physics 58 , 817 – 823 ( 1990 ) . [ 77 ] Richard S . Sutton and Andrew G . Barto , Reinforcement Learing : An Introduction , 2nd ed . ( MIT Press , Cam - bridge , MA , 2018 ) . [ 78 ] John Schulman , Philipp Moritz , Sergey Levine , Michael Jordan , and Pieter Abbeel , “High - dimensional contin - uous control using generalized advantage estimation , ” arXiv preprint arXiv : 1506 . 02438 ( 2015 ) . [ 79 ] Prajit Ramachandran , Barret Zoph , and Quoc V . Le , “Searching for activation functions , ” CoRR abs / 1710 . 05941 ( 2017 ) , 1710 . 05941 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS V . V . acknowledges support from the Simons Founda - tion , the National Science Foundation under grant DMR - 2118415 and the University of Chicago Materials Re - search Science and Engineering Center , which is funded by the National Science Foundation under Grant DMR - 2011854 . B . V . S . acknowledges support from a MRSEC - funded ( DMR - 2011854 ) Kadanoﬀ - Rice fellowship . Re - search was sponsored by the Army Research Oﬃce and was accomplished under Cooperative Agreement Num - ber W911NF - 22 - 2 - 0109 . The views and conclusions con - tained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the oﬃcial poli - cies , either expressed or implied , of the Army Research Oﬃce or the U . S . Government . The U . S . Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Gov - ernment purposes notwithstanding any copyright nota - tion herein . This work was completed in part with re - sources provided by the University of Chicago Research Computing Center . The authors would like to thank M . Fruchart , K . Husain , D . Martin and A . Murugan for helpful conversations . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS B . V . S . and V . V . contributed to the design of the study and writing of the manuscript . B . V . S . performed the 16 numerical simulations and analytical calculations . 17 FIG . E1 . Markov chain model of the thinker measurement process . a Transition diagram for thinkers with a diameter rule as in ﬁg . 2 a . Thinkers select one of two diameters depending on their current velocity . Collisions occur in the time between thinker actions ( ∆ t ) with probability P lcoll ( for large particles or P scoll for small ) and randomize velocities ( scattering into negative or positive velocities with probabilities P − or P + respectively ) . For hard disks , shrinking diameter never requires the thinker to exert work on the surrounding gas ( W = 0 ) , but expansions are only possible if no other obstacles ( i . e . particles ) are nearby ( probability P < ) . b Condensed two - state Markov chain model transition diagram for the one - bit measurement that thinkers collect to determine which diameter state to adopt . In the steady state , the measurement sequence M = [ m t , m t + ∆ t , . . . ] has a mean entropy per measurement , H ( M ) . FIG . E2 . Comparison between kinetic theory of a pure thinker gas and a microscopic numerical model . A pure gas of thinkers , following the simulation protocol and diameter rule of Fig . 2e - g and compared against theoretical predictions supplied by a kinetic theory . a Diﬀerence between the thinker velocity distribution function and the MB distribution , as obtained by kinetic theory and simulation . b Pressure in the x direction ( ∆ P xx / P MB = − ∆ P yy / P MB ) . c Components of the heat ﬂux vector , ~ q , normalized by the mean free path length l mfp and most probable speed c mp . 18 FIG . E3 . RL learning in active and odd gases . Thinker gas agents immersed in an non - thermal gas . The learned solution is independent of the type of non - thermal agitation . a Thinkers learning a locomotion task ( move to the location indicated by the star ) within a gas of mechanically active particles . Mechanically active particles have a ﬁxed - magnitude force F a = 5 γ pointing along their director , where γ is the value of Langevin damping and the rotational diﬀusion constant of the active particles’ directors . b Thinkers in an odd gas . All particles experience an equal and opposite transverse force during collisions , in addition to the usual hard core repulsion . FIG . E4 . The microreversibility of hard disk collisions with velocity - dependent diameters . Two particles of diameter D ( ~ v ) = D and D ( ~ v ∗ ) = D ∗ with velocities ~ v and ~ v ∗ are shown as the collision of a point object ( with velocity ~ v ∗ − ~ v ) with a stationary disk of diameter D + D ∗ . a In the coordinate frame centered on the stationary disk , the forward ( black ) and reverse ( grey ) collisions are not symmetric . b In the coordinate frame centered on the point of contact forward and reverse collision processes are symmetric , provided that the stationary disk’s position is rescaled by a factor ( D 0 + D 0∗ ) / ( D + D ∗ ) c The symmetry of the collision can also be preserved in the frame centered on the stationary disk by rescaling the impact parameter of the incoming particle . Supplemental Information for “Informational active matter” Bryan VanSaders 1 and Vincenzo Vitelli 1 , 2 , 3 , ∗ 1 James Franck Institute , The University of Chicago , Chicago , Illinois 60637 , USA 2 Department of Physics , The University of Chicago , Chicago , Illinois 60637 , USA 3 Kadanoﬀ Center for Theoretical Physics , The University of Chicago , Chicago , Illinois 60637 , USA Contents S1 . Deﬁning informational activity 2 S1 . 1 . The Maxwell demon 2 S1 . 2 . Active Brownian particles 2 S1 . 3 . Vicsek - like ﬂockers 2 S1 . 4 . RNA polymerase 3 S2 . Energy conservation in Molecular Dynamics simulations of thinkers 3 S3 . Thermodynamics of information for active matter 3 S3 . 1 . Two state Markov chain model of an informational active process 5 S4 . The thinker gas velocity distribution function 7 S4 . 1 . Kinetic theory of hard disks 7 S4 . 2 . Hard disk collisions with non - constant diameter 8 S4 . 3 . The thinker gas collision invariant 9 S4 . 4 . Demonstration of f t as the steady - state solution to the variable - diameter collision operator 12 S4 . 5 . Invertibility of the matrix A 13 S4 . 6 . Diameter functions approaching zero 13 S5 . Explicit form of A for select D ( ~ v ) 14 S5 . 1 . Step function 14 S5 . 2 . Anisotropic gaussian diameter function 16 S6 . First order hydrodynamics of the thinker gas 17 S7 . Pattern resolution in dropped thinker grains 20 S8 . Description of Supplemental Videos 20 S8 . 1 . Supplemental video S1 20 S8 . 2 . Supplemental video S2 21 References 21 In § S1 the deﬁnition of informational activity is discussed along with several examples . In § S2 we demonstrate that the protocol used in Molecular Dynamics simulations of the thinker gas does not change the internal energy state of the system . Section § S3 describes how local measurements can drive non - equilibrium dynamics for a two - state Markov model . In § S4 a kinetic gas theory of the dilute pure thinker gas is developed in detail to accompany the abbreviated treatment in the main text methods . Section § S5 contains explicit functional forms for the moments of two thinker gases with special diameter functions . In § S6 the hydrodynamic consequences of the thinker kinetic gas theory are discussed . In § S7 compares pattern resolution for thinkers dropped from a hopper as a function of maximum thinker diameter . Finally , § S8 has descriptions of the two accompaning supplemental videos . ∗ Electronic address : vitelli @ uchicago . edu a r X i v : 2 3 02 . 07402v1 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 14 F e b 2023 2 S1 . DEFINING INFORMATIONAL ACTIVITY We are concerned here with active media , many - body systems comprised of ‘active’ subunits . Multiple deﬁnitions of ‘activity’ can be found - here we will deﬁne an active subunit as one that has an internal process which biases its microstate transition probabilities ( away from detailed balance , i . e . equilibrium ) . We focus on the distinction between two sub - classes of activity : ‘mechanical’ and ‘informational’ activity . Both varieties fulﬁl the transition biasing deﬁnition posed above , however their methods ( and dependence on environmental noise ) diﬀer . Mechanical activity is familiar from many studies of self - propelled particles [ 1 – 13 ] , and its key distinguishing feature is that subunits bias transitions by changing the free energy of the microstate currently occupied by the subunit . An iconic example is the active Janus particle , in which a local chemical reaction raises the free energy of the particle’s current microstate in such a way that relaxation occurs by forward motion . Informational activity is the complementary strategy - biasing transitions by changing the free energy of unoccupied microstates which may become occupied in the future . Many realistic active systems ( particularly biological ones ) will be driven by a mix of mechanical and informational activity . In order for informational activity to be possible , three key elements must be present : 1 . Noise . Forces outside the subunit’s control which act upon the d . o . f . s of interest are a requirement for infor - mational activity . As only unoccupied microstates can be biased , informational activity does not directly drive transitions . Instead , some other source of agitation must be present . 2 . Ability to bias unoccupied microstates . Microstates other than the one currently occupied by the subunit must be biased . Additionally , the applied bias must persist long enough for the subunit to interact with that microstate . Consider an unoccupied microstate , and a subunit about to transition into it . If a bias is applied , and immediately relaxes before the transition occurs , the bias has no eﬀect and the microstate is now occupied . 3 . Measurement and feedback . The capacity to measure the current microstate of the d . o . f . s of interest is central to informational activity . Unoccupied microstates can only be identiﬁed by determining the current subunit microstate . Furthermore , a feedback control loop must exist between the d . o . f . s of interest and the biasing of unoccupied states . If these two processes are decorrelated then biasing becomes merely another random process which is bound to obey detailed balance . We now examine several key examples using these criteria . S1 . 1 . The Maxwell demon In James Clerk Maxwell’s iconic paradox [ 14 ] , a ‘demon’ operates a trapdoor between two containers full of gas . By allowing only fast particles to cross from the left to right containers , and only slow to pass from right to left , a temperature gradient between the containers is produced . This happens despite the demon carefully opening or closing the trapdoor only when no gas particles are present at the junction between the containers . In this example , noise ( in the form of a thermalized gas ) plays a key role ( requirement 1 ) . The trapdoor fulﬁls requirement 2 - states where gas molecules occupy the doorway are not biased by closing the door . Rather , the door is closed preemptively to avoid an incoming particle crossing the wrong way . Feedback between the state of incoming gas particles and the state of the trapdoor fulﬁls requirement 3 . S1 . 2 . Active Brownian particles Active Brownian particles are self - propelled objects , usually smaller than a micron in size . In practice , they tend to operate by catalyzing a chemical reaction on half their surface , expansion of the reactants pushes them along . Such small objects exist at a scale where room temperature thermal ﬂuctuations are important , satisfying requirement 1 . However requirements 2 and 3 are not satisﬁed - particles have no capacity to measure their current microstate or modulate their chemically - derived force . Nor do they possess the capacity to bias unoccupied states ( in the commonly considered overdamped regime ) . S1 . 3 . Vicsek - like ﬂockers The ﬂocking of birds can be represented with a toy model of ‘ﬂying spins’ in which particles have a polar variable , their heading , which interact similarly to magnetic dipoles [ 15 ] . Particles also typically have a ﬁxed velocity magnitude 3 ( imagined to be the result of self - propulsion ) which points along their heading . Alignment interactions tend to draw nearby ﬂockers into parallel trajectories . While ﬂockers might be considered to ‘measure’ the heading of their neighbors , the resulting heading changes are deterministic processes , in which ﬂuctuations play no role . When present , orientational noise is simply a disturbing inﬂuence that heading alignments ﬁght against . Flocking models of this type are typically not informational because ﬂockers drive transitions in their heading by forces acting directly on their current state . As such , their active properties are evident even in the absence of noise . S1 . 4 . RNA polymerase The process of copying an RNA strand from template DNA is ubiquitous to cellular life , and is carried out by a complex molecular machine known as the RNA polymerase ( RNAP ) . High ﬁdelity [ 16 ] is important , as transcription errors could produce proteins that fail to fold , or are ineﬀective or harmful when folded . Like DNA polymerase , both selectivity and proofreading is employed to achieve high ﬁdelity . Selectivity mechanisms are thought to closely resemble those employed by DNA [ 17 , 18 ] , while proofreading mechanisms are diﬀerent . In RNAPs the active site where new nucleotides bind can be modulated . During elongation , this site facilitates the addition of incoming bases onto the growing RNA strand . For various reasons , RNAPs may undergo ‘pausing’ or ‘backtracking’ , in which the progress of elongation is interrupted [ 19 , 20 ] . Such events have been associated with expression regulation as well as error correction [ 21 – 23 ] . Single - molecule experiments on RNAPs have found evidence to support a ‘Brownian ratchet’ interpretation of the transcription process , whereby the polymerase moves down the template DNA stochastically and is rectiﬁed by the selectivity and proofreading processes [ 24 ] . The scale and stochastic behavior of RNAPs fulﬁll requirement 1 ( noisy operation ) . RNAPs can be interpreted as biasing unoccupied states - speciﬁcally the states corresponding to incorrect base additions , which fulﬁls requirement 2 . The ability of RNA polymerase to proofread ( and to be selective for the correct base ) are a form of measurement , where the conformation of the protein is changed according to an assessment of the template DNA strand or correct / incorrect state of the most recently added RNA base . Selectivity is relative to the pattern of the template DNA , a feedback process , fulﬁling requirement 3 . S2 . ENERGY CONSERVATION IN MOLECULAR DYNAMICS SIMULATIONS OF THINKERS The thinker gas diameter changing protocol described in the main text methods is designed to avoid changing the potential or kinetic energy of the system ( i . e . exert no mechanical work ) . As proof of the energy - conserving nature of the thinker gas numerical implementation , a test simulation using a constant - energy ensemble was prepared and the total energy of the system was monitored , shown in ﬁg . S1 . The implemented thinker gas algorithm does not inject or remove energy from the system at a rate greater than numerical precision eﬀects under standard ﬁxed - diameter dynamics . S3 . THERMODYNAMICS OF INFORMATION FOR ACTIVE MATTER To understand the origin of activity in informational systems like the thinker gas , we will begin from basics by ﬁrst describing the origin of mechanical activity in thermodynamic language . Consider an isothermal system which has had its Helmholtz free energy raised by an amount ∆ F ( perhaps as the result of an external ﬁeld applied by a ‘controller’ ) . The controller must exert W incont ≥ ∆ F ( S1 ) work to accomplish this change , with saturation of the bound only for reversible processes with no heat transfer . Now that the system is prepared in a high - energy state it can perform work on some external load as it relaxes . This work is similarly W outsys ≥ − ∆ F . ( S2 ) where the sign of W outsys is negative . The controller exerts work W incont so as to prepare the system to perform work −W outsys ≤ W incont on a load . Now consider replacing the controller with an active agent immersed in the system . If W out sys is used to move the active agent , then the above logic is unchanged except that the fate of W out sys is to be enventually converted completely to heat in dissipative processes . 4 Fig . S1 : Total kinetic and potential energy of a numerically simulated thinker gas for various values of the time step parameter dt . For times less than 5 × 10 4 , the system is evolved under ﬁxed - diameter dynamics with a constant - energy integrator . For t > 5 × 10 4 , diameter resizing is enabled . The diameter resizing procedure does not produce a detectable signature in the total energy drift of the system , which is controlled by the choice of dt . When the active agent has the ability to collect measurements , equation S1 must be ammended with another term accounting for how information changes the entropy of the system [ 25 ] , W incont + k b TI ≥ ∆ F . ( S3 ) Where I is the mutual information of a measurement outcome and the microstate of the system . Even in the absence of work exerted by the agent , free energy diﬀerences in the system can be created ( and therefore used to exert work on loads ) . Just as in the previous case , W outsys ≥ − ∆ F , yielding W outsys ≥ − W incont − k b TI = − W incont + T ∆ S ( S4 ) where ∆ S = − k b I is the amount that the system’s entropy has been reduced by the measurement . The work available to propel the active agent may be non - zero even for agents what exert no forces on the system that surrounds them . When the action of an informational active agent is repeated ( e . g . at intervals ∆ t ) , an additional complication arises where each new measurement outcome may be correlated with prior measurements . This dependence can be expressed as [ 26 ] : ∆ S t = − k b X t I ( X t ; m t | M 0 → t − ∆ t ) ( S5 ) where X t is the microstate measured at time t , m t is the collected measurement , and M 0 → t − ∆ t is the history of measurements collected at prior times . The gained information is conditional on prior measurement outcomes - entropy is only lowered if a new measurement collects novel information about the system . When the measurements are error - free ( i . e . they perfectly report the relevant microscopic information ) , eq . S5 can be expressed using the Shannon entropy of the measurement sequence : ∆ S t = − k b H ( M 0 → t ) ( S6 ) where the Shannon entropy takes its usual form : 5 H ( X ) = − X x ∈X P ( x ) ln P ( x ) ( S7 ) The entropy of the measurement history M 0 → t is potentially complex to calculate for non - ergodic measurement en - sembles . However our focus is on steady states of large collections of informational agents , so we will construct ergodic measurement ensembles with well - deﬁned steady states . In this case the rate of entropy decrease per measurement by agent can be expressed as a limit : lim t →∞ ∆ S t t = ∆ ¯ S . ( S8 ) If the system can be represented as a steady Markov process , eq . S5 can be expressed as an entropy rate given by the weighted Shannon entropy of the relevant stochastic matrix : ∆ ¯ S = − k b ¯ H ( M ) = k b X ij µ i P ij ln P ij ( S9 ) where P is the stochastic matrix that describes transitions between states [ 27 ] and µ is the accompanying stationary distribution . To organize the distinction between mechanical and informational driving , it is useful to consider a mixed active process with a bound on the work it can exert on the system ( W < (cid:15) ) . Each time the active process acts , it takes a measurement to check if the action can be taken without violating the bound (cid:15) . Note that in cases where the mechanical work is capped at some value W max ( e . g . the maximum possible output torque of a motor ) , the bound only becomes relevant if (cid:15) < W max . Similarly , taking actions may require mechanical work ( such as overcoming friction in a mechanism ) that has no dependence on the particle or system’s state . This kind of work is assumed to be small , or equivalently that the total bound includes an external and internal component , (cid:15) total = (cid:15) + (cid:15) int . The ‘internal’ work bound covers the cost of internal ineﬃciencies of the active process , such as friction . Here we only consider variations of the ‘external’ work bound , which constrains the work done by the active process on the particle’s , or system’s , state . A particle with such a mixed process can be driven at most by ¯ W ≥ −h W i ( < (cid:15) ) + k b T ∆ ¯ S ( S10 ) where h W i ( < (cid:15) ) is the expected amount of mechanical work per action from actions that obey the bound (cid:15) . The mechanical contribution is not directly scaled by temperature , whereas the informational part grows ( entropy changes due to measurement are always negative ) with temperature , indicating that informational active agents grow stronger as ﬂuctuations increase . This dependence on temperature is reminiscent of entropic elasticity [ 28 – 31 ] , in which rubber - like materials grow stiﬀer as temperature is increased . To gain further insight into the work and entropy terms that make up eq . S10 , we will now construct a Markov chain model of an active process with two discrete states . S3 . 1 . Two state Markov chain model of an informational active process Consider a binary active processes , i . e . one that has only two states . This process is part of a measurement and feedback loop - the active process measures the system and determines if a change of state is warranted . We can describe this situation by focusing on the results of the measurement , the answer to the question “which state should I adopt ? ” . This measurement m is binary valued ( m = 0 or m = 1 ) , and the answer ﬂuctuates due to the noisy system . Measured values of m = { 0 , 1 } correspond to control actions , c = { 0 , 1 } - e . g . when a measurement m = 0 is collected , the control action c = 0 is performed on the system . Therefore , measured answers must respect the bound imposed by (cid:15) . If we represent the dynamics of the measurement variable m with a Markov chain , and focus on the long time limit in which a stationary distribution µ has been reached , we can compute the entropy rate directly using eq . S9 . Let us start by specifying a simple but generic form of the transition matrix P , P = (cid:20) 1 − α Σ α Σ β Σ 1 − β Σ (cid:21) ( S11 ) where α Σ is the probability of the measured variable changing from m t = 0 to m t + ∆ t = 1 , and β Σ is the probability of the reverse transition of m t = 1 to m t + ∆ t = 0 . The terms β and α represent the transition outcomes of some 6 stochastic process in the surrounding system , while Σ is the likelihood that taking the control action associated with measurement m will respect the work bound (cid:15) . Said another way , the controller would implement the control action c = 1 at a time t + ∆ t , given a prior state m = 0 at time t , with probability α . However the bound (cid:15) only permits this with probability Σ . For the transition matrix deﬁned in eq . S11 , the stationary distribution is µ = h ββ + α αβ + α i , ( S12 ) in which Σ has dropped out due to its symmetry . Take as an instructive example the case of α = 1 / 2 , β = 1 / 2 , Σ = 1 . These parameters describe a delta - correlated random process ( coin ﬂips ) , in which the work bound never restricts the controller , and the entropy rate of this process reduces to ln 2 . Generally , when α , β 6 = 1 / 2 longer - time correlations exist in the measurement stream - the value of m t + dt becomes conditional on m t . As we saw before in eq . S5 , this reduces the amount of new information in each measurement . We can gain further understanding by choosing a form for the probability of an action respecting the work bound , Σ . Consider a process where switching from control action c = 0 to c = 1 ( or vice versa ) dissipates an amount of work , with a probability distribution given by P ( W ) = ( 1 − P 0 ) 1 σ r 2 π e − | W | 2 σ 2 + P 0 δ ( 0 ) , ( S13 ) where σ parameterizes the ﬂuctuations of the system that aﬀect expended work , δ is the impulse function ( R δ = 1 ) and P 0 is the probability that the action costs zero work . The likelihood of this work falling below the bound set by (cid:15) is the integral : Σ = Z (cid:15) 0 P ( W ) dW = ( 1 − P 0 ) erf (cid:16) (cid:15) σ (cid:17) + P 0 ( S14 ) where erf ( ) is the standard error function . We can also now write down the form of the mechanical work term in eq . S10 : h W i ( < (cid:15) ) = Z (cid:15) 0 W ( P ( W ) − P 0 δ ( 0 ) ) dW = ( 1 − P 0 ) σ √ 2 π (cid:16) 1 − e − (cid:15) 2 σ 2 (cid:17) ( S15 ) and so obtain a full expression for the bound of work done by the system per action on the active agent : ¯ W ≥ − ( 1 − P 0 ) σ √ 2 π (cid:16) 1 − e − (cid:15) 2 σ 2 (cid:17) + k b T ¯ H ( M ) . ( S16 ) For α = β = 1 / 2 , the terms of this equation are plotted in ﬁg . S2 as a function of the ratio of the mechanical work bound to the work ﬂuctuations ( (cid:15) / σ ) . Note that σ can be a function of the temperature of the system , as well as other parameters of interaction . Consider a case where actions are prohibited by obstacles in the environment - σ will depend upon the ﬂuctuations of those obstacles ( i . e . k b T ) as well as parameters such as their mass or mechanical stiﬀness . We see that the entropy - like contribution to the non - equilibrium free energy as (cid:15) → 0 is : − k b T ¯ H ( P 0 α ) = k b T ( P 0 α ln P 0 α + ( 1 − P 0 α ) ln ( 1 − P 0 α ) ) , ( S17 ) which is an entropy associated with the probability that actions will require zero work . Conversely , as (cid:15) → 0 the contribution from mechanical work approaches zero . In the limit of large (cid:15) , the informational contribution approaches − k b Tα = k b T ln 2 , losing any dependence on the statistics of the constraint . The mechanical contribution approaches a value set by the details of σ . In the example shown here , σ = 1 , however arbitrarily large values are possible . Despite this , the mechanical contribution will always equal zero as (cid:15) → 0 7 Fig . S2 : Propulsive power bounds for a mixed informational - mechanical Markov process . A binary variable , updated by a simple Markov process that includes the eﬀect of a mechanical work constraint , (cid:15) . Here σ is a variance associated with mechanical work exerted by the process , and P 0 is the likelihood of an action requiring no work . The transition probabilities are kept ﬁxed at α = β = 1 / 2 . The total available power has an informational ( black ) and mechanical ( red ) contribution . In the limit of large (cid:15) / σ the informational process approaches the entropy of unconstrained transitions , and the mechanical work approaches a value controlled by the variation in how much mechanical work actions require ( σ ) . Note that at ﬁnite (cid:15) the mechanical contribution may far exceed the informational contribution depending on the details of σ , however as (cid:15) → 0 the mechanical contribution always approaches zero . In contrast , informational driving only approaches zero as (cid:15) → 0 if P 0 = 0 . S4 . THE THINKER GAS VELOCITY DISTRIBUTION FUNCTION In order to derive an approximate description of the thinker gas velocity distribution function , we will outline key points from the derivation of the Boltzmann equation which describes the evolution of the same distribution for a hard sphere gas . More information on the derivation of the standard Boltzmann equation and its mathematical properties can be found in texts by Cercignani et al [ 32 ] and Kardar [ 33 ] . From there , the treatment is extended to the case of hard disks with non - constant diameters ( which are functions of particle velocity only ) . We show the form of the collision operator which describes the thinker gas , and demonstrate that this operator has a modiﬁed collision invariant expression which includes the diameter function D ( ~ v ) . We use this property to deﬁne a linear system of integral equations which permits solving for the deviation of the thinker gas velocity distribution function from the equilibrium Maxwell - Boltzmann ( MB ) distribution . S4 . 1 . Kinetic theory of hard disks The evolution of a gas in phase space under the inﬂuence of interparticle collisions can be described by the BBGKY hierarchy . In this set of coupled diﬀerential equations the evolution of N - particle distribution functions ( denoted P ( N ) ) are dependent upon the dynamics of N + 1 - particle distributions . The full hierarchy is in general too complex for useful prediction , and so it is often truncated to only include one and two - particle distributions . The single - particle distribution function ( P ( 1 ) ) is obtained from the full system distribution function of N particles by marginalization : P ( 1 ) ( ~ x 1 , ~ v 1 , t ) = Z R 2 N − 2 P ( ~ x 1 , ~ v 1 , ~ x 2 , ~ v 2 , . . . , ~ x N , ~ v N , t ) d ~ x 1 d ~ v 1 , . . . d ~ x N d ~ v N ( S18 ) This is the probability of ﬁnding a particle within the interval [ ~ x 1 + d ~ x , ~ v 1 + d ~ v 1 , t + dt ] . The evolution of P ( 1 ) in the absence of collisions proceeds only by the streaming of particles along straight trajectories ( ∂P ( 1 ) / ∂t = − ~ v · ∇ ~ x P ( 1 ) ) . Collisions between particles introduce a new operator to the equation of motion of the single - particle distribution : ∂P ( 1 ) ∂t + ~ v · ∇ ~ x P ( 1 ) = Q ( S19 ) Q describes the rate of change of particle number ( or density ) within the interval [ ~ x + d ~ x , ~ v + d ~ v , t + dt ] caused by collisions . For hard spheres , collisions occur only when two particles are found in contact . Naturally , Q must 8 involve the two particle distribution , P ( 2 ) ( the probability of ﬁnding two particles in a given conﬁguration ) . If we denote pre - collision velocities for a pair of particles as ~ v and ~ v ∗ , and their post - collision velocities as ~ v 0 and ~ v 0∗ , we can write the collision operator as the diﬀerence of two rates , the gain and loss of particles within the interval of interest ( Q = Q + − Q − ) . Particles are removed from the interval by collisions ( velocities are transformed from ~ v , ~ v ∗ to ~ v 0 , ~ v 0∗ ) . The likelihood of a collision is the same as the likelihood of ﬁnding a two - particle conﬁguration in contact . For particles of ﬁxed diameter ( D 0 ) : Q − = 1 2 Z R 2 Z S P ( 2 ) ( ~ x , ~ v , ~ x + D 0 ˆ n , ~ v ∗ , t ) d ~ v ∗ d ˆ n ( S20 ) here the variable ˆ n is a unit vector that lies along the particle contact vector and integration over d ˆ n occurs on the surface S of all possible contacts . For a gas in a periodic domain ( homogeneous spatial density ) the spatial aspect of P ( 2 ) can be approximated geometrically . A rectangular area with length | ( ~ v ∗ − ~ v ) · ˆ n | dt and width | D 0 d ˆ n | = D 0 contains the particles with velocity ~ v ∗ which are capable of striking the ﬁrst particle . The probability density of ﬁnding two particles with velocities ~ v , ~ v ∗ in contact can therefore be written as : Q − = 1 2 Z R 2 Z S − P ( 2 ) ( ~ v , ~ v ∗ , t ) | ( ~ v ∗ − ~ v ) · ˆ n | D 0 d ~ v ∗ d ˆ n ( S21 ) where now location variables in P ( 2 ) have been dropped due to the assumption of spatial homogeneity . The inner integration is carried out over half the unit disk ( S − , the half for which velocities ~ v and ~ v ∗ are approaching each other ) . This loss term is balanced ( at steady state ) by a similar term describing the gain of probability density by scattering from other regions of velocity space . The only diﬀerences being that the domain S − is replaced by S + , the complementary hemisphere , and the velocities in consideration are ~ v 0 , ~ v 0∗ , velocities which will undergo a scattering into ~ v , ~ v ∗ . As in the standard treatment , we will use the ‘molecular chaos’ assumption to replace two particle distribution terms with the product of single particle terms P ( 2 ) ( ~ v , ~ v ∗ , t ) ≈ P ( 1 ) ( ~ v , t ) P ( 1 ) ( ~ v ∗ , t ) . In the standard Boltzmann equation , the gain and loss terms are collected together under common integration limits by exploiting the time reversal symmetry of the collision process . Since we will now expand our treatment to include gases with diameters which are not constant in velocity space , we must examine the reversibility of hard disk collisions more closely . S4 . 2 . Hard disk collisions with non - constant diameter We can ﬁnd the velocities after collision between a pair of hard disks by conservation of momentum and energy . Assuming uniform particle masses , momentum and kinetic energy are conserved through the collision process : ~ v + ~ v ∗ = ~ v 0 + ~ v 0∗ ( S22 ) | ~ v | 2 + | ~ v ∗ | 2 = | ~ v 0 | 2 + | ~ v 0∗ | 2 ( S23 ) This collision process can be viewed as the exchange of velocities projected onto the vector which points from one disk’s center to the other . If ˆ n is a unit vector that points between disk centers at collision contact , then the post - collision velocities can be written as ( for disks of equal mass ) : ~ v 0 = ~ v − ( ( ~ v − ~ v ∗ ) · ˆ n ) ˆ n ( S24 ) ~ v 0∗ = ~ v ∗ + ( ( ~ v − ~ v ∗ ) · ˆ n ) ˆ n ( S25 ) For disks of ﬁxed diameter , this scattering process is microreversible ; ( ~ v , ~ v ∗ ) map to ( ~ v 0 , ~ v 0∗ ) and ( − ~ v 0 , − ~ v 0∗ ) map to ( − ~ v , − ~ v ∗ ) , resulting in a Jacobian for the change of variables equal to − 1 [ 32 ] . This one - to - one mapping allows all four velocity terms to be collected under the same unit disk integration in the standard Boltzmann collision operator . When particle diameters are instead permitted to be functions of velocity , the microreversibility of the collision process is broken . We can see this diagrammatically in Fig . S3a . In this representation , we view the two particle collision process as the scattering of a point object with velocity ~ v ∗ − ~ v oﬀ of a stationary disk with diameter ( D ( ~ v ) + D ( ~ v ∗ ) ) / 2 . By changing the location of the stationary disk , the mapping of velocities can be preserved ( ﬁg . S3b ) . In a coordinate frame centered on the point of contact , the forward and reverse scattering process are symmetric provided that the coordinates of the stationary particle are scaled by a factor ( D ( ~ v 0 ) + D ( ~ v 0∗ ) ) / ( D ( ~ v ) + D ( ~ v ∗ ) ) . The collision process can also be represented with the so - called ‘impact parameter’ ( σ ) as the integration variable ( as opposed to the vector ˆ n ) . Fig . S3c shows that a rescaling of the impact parameter has an equivalent eﬀect of 9 Fig . S3 : The microreversibility of hard disk collisions with velocity - dependent diameters . Two particles of diameter D ( ~ v ) = D and D ( ~ v ∗ ) = D ∗ with velocities ~ v and ~ v ∗ are shown as the collision of a point object ( with velocity ~ v ∗ − ~ v ) with a stationary disk of diameter D + D ∗ . a In the coordinate frame centered on the stationary disk , the forward ( black ) and reverse ( grey ) collisions are not symmetric . b In the coordinate frame centered on the point of contact forward and reverse collision processes are symmetric , provided that the stationary disk’s position is rescaled by a factor ( D 0 + D 0∗ ) / ( D + D ∗ ) c The symmetry of the collision can also be preserved in the frame centered on the stationary disk by rescaling the impact parameter of the incoming particle . preserving the velocity mapping . Naturally , the choice of rescaling one particle’s position or the other is arbitrary and should produce equivalent results . This mapping deﬁnes the procedure for exchanging unprimed and primed velocity variables in the collision operator of the thinker gas . From now on , we will refer to the single particle velocity distribution function as f ( ~ x , ~ v , t ) , and suppress the location and time arguments as we are concerned with the homogeneous steady - state solution . For brevity , functions of velocity will have their argument suppressed but retain distinguishing marks ( such as f ( ~ v 0∗ ) = f 0∗ and D ( ~ v 0∗ ) = D 0∗ ) . In this notation , we write the loss term of the thinker gas collision operator as : Q − = 1 2 Z R 2 Z S − ( D + D ∗ ) ff ∗ | ( ~ v ∗ − ~ v ) · ˆ n | d ~ v ∗ d ˆ n ( S26 ) The gain term can be expressed by the exchange of unprimed velocities for primed ones . The term ~ v ∗ − ~ v = ~ v 0∗ − ~ v 0 is conserved by the collision process , and so need not be transformed . Q + = 1 2 Z R 2 Z S + ( D 0 + D 0∗ ) f 0 f 0∗ | ( ~ v ∗ − ~ v ) · ˆ n | d ~ v 0∗ d ˆ n ( S27 ) These terms can be collected under a common integration , as the diameter function scaling acts a Jacobian term . The form of Q shown in the text is achieved by redistribution of diameter terms : Q = Q + − Q − = 1 2 Z R 2 Z S ( D + D ∗ ) | ( ~ v ∗ − ~ v ) · ˆ n | (cid:20) D 0 + D 0∗ D + D ∗ f 0 f 0∗ − ff ∗ (cid:21) d ~ v ∗ d ˆ n ( S28 ) Notice that the resulting collision operator is the sum of two terms that diﬀer only by D and D ∗ . We will next consider the invariants of the thinker gas collision operator . S4 . 3 . The thinker gas collision invariant We will ﬁrst discuss collision invariants for the standard Boltzmann equation , and then explore the consequences of our modiﬁed thinker gas collision operator . If we consider a moment of a distribution function f ( ~ v , t ) which is a solution to the Boltzmann equation with a non - time - varying test function φ : 10 h φ i f = Z R d f ( ~ v , t ) φ ( ~ v ) d ~ v ( S29 ) the evolution of this quantity is : d dt h φ i f = Z R 2 φ ( ~ v ) Q ( f ) ( ~ v , t ) d ~ v ( S30 ) The function φ can be brought into the integrand of the collision operator since it is not a function of time . As we are now considering an expression integrating over all ~ v and ~ v ∗ ( and by extension ~ v 0 and ~ v 0∗ ) , the choice of primed and starred variables is entirely arbitrary . A standard procedure is to average over the exchange of velocity variables [ 32 ] . We ﬁrst express the right side of eq . S30 ( with Q appropriate for constant disks , and dropping velocity arguments where obvious ) as : 1 2 Z R 2 Z R 2 Z S φ ( f 0 f 0∗ − ff ∗ ) | ( ~ v ∗ − ~ v ) · ˆ n | D 0 d ~ v ∗ d ~ vd ˆ n ( S31 ) The exchange of starred and unstarred variables results in no change to the expression , allowing the average over this exchange to be written as : 1 4 Z R 2 Z R 2 Z S ( φ + φ ∗ ) ( f 0 f 0∗ − ff ∗ ) | ( ~ v ∗ − ~ v ) · ˆ n | D 0 d ~ v ∗ d ~ vd ˆ n ( S32 ) Exchanging primed variables ( which can be done because of the microreversibility of the constant - diameter collision process ) , results in a change of sign . Therefore the result of averaging over both exchanges is : 1 8 Z R 2 Z R 2 Z S ( φ + φ ∗ − φ 0 − φ 0∗ ) ( f 0 f 0∗ − ff ∗ ) | ( ~ v ∗ − ~ v ) · ˆ n | D 0 d ~ v ∗ d ~ vd ˆ n ( S33 ) If φ is a quantity which is conserved through the collision , then ddt h φ i f = 0 . This deﬁnes a summational collisional invariant for the system . For the Boltzmann equation , summational invariants can only be linear combinations of the microscopically conserved quantities , M = 1 , ~ v , | ~ v | 2 , which are unchanged during collision by construction [ 34 ] . Therefore there exist constants ( a , ~ b , c ) ∈ R × R 2 × R such that : M ( ~ v ) = a + ~ b · ~ v + c | ~ v | 2 ( S34 ) The preceding discussion has been for the standard Boltzmann collision operator . We can follow the same logic for the thinker gas collision operator described in eq . S28 . If we temporarily shorthand the gain term in the collision operator as G = ( f 0 f 0∗ ) ( D 0 + D 0∗ ) / ( D + D ∗ ) and the loss term as L = ( ff ∗ ) , the result of averaging over primed and unprimed variables for the thinker gas can be written as : 1 8 Z R 2 Z R 2 Z S ( φ ( D + D ∗ ) + φ ∗ ( D + D ∗ ) − φ 0 ( D 0 + D 0∗ ) − φ 0∗ ( D 0 + D 0∗ ) ) ( G − L ) | ( ~ v ∗ − ~ v ) · ˆ n | d ~ v ∗ d ~ vd ˆ n ( S35 ) where the leading term involving the function φ can be written as : φ ( D + D ∗ ) + φ ∗ ( D + D ∗ ) − φ 0 ( D 0 + D 0∗ ) − φ 0∗ ( D 0 + D 0∗ ) = ( φD + φ ∗ D ∗ − φ 0 D 0 − φ 0∗ D 0∗ ) + ( φD ∗ + φ ∗ D − φ 0 D 0∗ − φ 0∗ D 0 ) . ( S36 ) If the entirety of eq . S36 is zero at all points in the velocity plane , then the quantity φ is stationary on the thinker distribution . The second term on the r . h . s . of eq . S36 contains only cross terms between starred and unstarred variables , and so all terms within it will integrate to the same value and the total term reduces to zero . An expression for the time evolution of a test function φ for the thinker gas can therefore be written with only the ﬁrst term in the r . h . s . of eq . S36 as : 11 d dt h φ i f t = − 1 2 Z R 2 Z R 2 Z S Dφ (cid:18) f 0 f 0∗ D 0 + D 0∗ D + D ∗ − ff ∗ (cid:19) | ( ~ v ∗ − ~ v ) · ˆ n | d ~ v ∗ d ~ vd ˆ n ( S37 ) From this representation , we can deﬁne a new test function , g = D ( ~ v ) φ . In order for the function φ to be stationary under the action of the thinker collision operator , the quantity g must be a collisional invariant ( unlike the case for ﬁxed - diameter disks , where φ itself must be invariant ) . For a collisionally invariant g there must exist constants which express it as a linear combination of microscopically conserved quantities : g = a + ~ b · ~ v + c | ~ v | 2 = D M . Note that an invariant test function for the MB distribution does not generically produce an invariant g for the thinker collision operator , due to the diameter rescaling . We will use this relation to deﬁne the velocity distribution function of the thinker gas . Beginning with the MB velocity distribution function in 2D : f m ( ~ v ) = mρ 2 πkT e − m | ~ p | 2 2 kT ( S38 ) where ~ p = ~ v −h ~ v i = ~ v − ~ u is the velocity of the gas in the ﬂow frame . We express the thinker gas distribution function as f t = ( 1 + D ) f m , where D is a function of velocity only . Since we seek the steady - state form of D , we can treat ( 1 + D ) as a non - time - varying test function operating on the MB distribution . We are searching for the form of this test function that has stationary expectation values on the MB velocity distribution under the action of the thinker gas collision operator . By substituting h ( 1 + D ) i f m , Q d for h φ i f in eq . S37 , we see that steady state will be reached when D ( 1 + D ) is a summational collision invariant . Finding the form of D amounts to specifying the four constants a , b x , b y , c which deﬁne the linear mixing of microscopically conserved quantities . These constants can be found if we require that the ﬁrst four moments of the thinker gas velocity distribution are equal to the ﬁrst four moments of the equilibrium MB distribution . This requirement reﬂects the fact that thinker gas collisions microscopically conserve number , momentum , and kinetic energy , just as elastic collisions between ﬁxed diameter disks . This requires that any re - sizing of the disks occurs between collisions . From a theoretical point of view , the gas is sparse enough to ignore the cases in which a diameter change post - collision must be delayed until the disks have suﬃciently separated . This limitation on the ability of the disks to change their size is likely the most signiﬁcant contributor to deviations from the theory at high densities or large maximum diameters . The requirement that the ﬁrst four moments of the thinker gas distribution are equal to those of the MB and can be written as : Z R 2 M f m d ~ v = Z R 2 M ( 1 + D ) f m d ~ v 0 = Z R 2 MD f m d ~ v ( S39 ) which highlights that the expectation value of the deviation of the thinker distribution ( D ) must be zero for the ﬁrst four moments . Note that this restriction does not constrain the third - order moments which deﬁne the heat ﬂux tensor , or even the individual entries of the pressure tensor ( derived from second - order moments ) . Only the trace of the pressure tensor is ﬁxed relative to the MB distribution . Using the expression for the thinker gas collision invariant , g = D ( 1 + D ) , we can trivially reorder to obtain ( 1 + D ) = gD − 1 . As a scalar function which must be greater than zero , division by D presents no problems . In practice , D need not even be non - zero everywhere , but instead only where the probability density of f m is not inﬁnitesimal . Using this expression for the thinker perturbation , and the notation for expectation value h φ i m = R φf m d ~ v , we can write : hMi m = hM ( 1 + D ) i m = hM gD − 1 i m = a hM D − 1 i m + b x hM v x D − 1 i m + b y hM v y D − 1 i m + c hM | ~ v | 2 D − 1 i m ( S40 ) For each of the conserved moments ( M = 1 , v x , v y , | ~ v | 2 ) a new expression is found , allowing for the deﬁnition of a full rank system of linear equations : 12 A · G = B ( S41 ) A =   h 1 D i m h v x D i m h v y D i m h | ~ v | 2 D i m . h v 2 x D i m h v x v y D i m h v x | ~ v | 2 D i m . . h v 2 y D i m h v y | ~ v | 2 D i m . . . h | ~ v | 4 D i m   ( S42 ) G = (cid:2) a b x b y c (cid:3) > ( S43 ) B = (cid:2) ρ ρu x ρu y ρ | ~ u | 2 / 2 + ρkT (cid:3) > ( S44 ) where A is symmetric and redundant entries are not shown . Using the solution of this system of equations the thinker gas velocity distribution can be written as : f t = f m ( 1 + D ) = f m D − 1 g = f m D − 1 ( A − 1 B ) · G ( S45 ) S4 . 4 . Demonstration of f t as the steady - state solution to the variable - diameter collision operator We can show directly that the above procedure for ﬁnding a thinker gas distribution function solves Q ( f t ) = 0 by examining the collision operator written as : Q = 1 2 Z R 2 Z S B ( ~ v ∗ , ~ v , ˆ n ) [ ( D 0 + D 0∗ ) f 0 f 0∗ − ( D + D ∗ ) ff ∗ ] d ~ v ∗ d ˆ n ( S46 ) in which the cross - section terms have been redistributed and the kernel term has been collected into a function B for brevity . Focusing on the term in brackets ( Q ) , we can replace f with f t = D ( 1 + D ) f m : Q ≡ ( D 0 + D 0∗ ) ( 1 + D 0 ) f 0 m ( 1 + D 0∗ ) f 0 m ∗ − ( D + D ∗ ) ( 1 + D ) f m ( 1 + D ∗ ) f m ∗ ( S47 ) First , note that the Maxwellian distribution is the exponential of a collision invariant , or : ln f m + ln f m ∗ − ln f 0 m − ln f 0 m ∗ = 0 ( S48 ) f m f m ∗ f 0 m f 0 m ∗ = 1 ( S49 ) Equation S49 allows for eq . S47 to be written as : Q = f m f m ∗ [ D 0 ( 1 + D 0 ) + D 0∗ D 0 ( 1 + D 0 ) + D 0∗ ( 1 + D 0∗ ) + D 0 D 0∗ ( 1 + D 0∗ ) ] + f m f m ∗ [ D ( 1 + D ) − D ∗ D ( 1 + D ) − D ∗ ( 1 + D ∗ ) − D D ∗ ( 1 + D ∗ ) ] ( S50 ) Recall that the quantity g = D ( 1 + D ) is also a collision invariant . We simplify eq . S50 to : Q = f m f m ∗ [ g 0 + g 0∗ − g − g ∗ ] + f m f m ∗ [ g 0 D 0∗ + g 0∗ D 0 − g D ∗ − g ∗ D ] ( S51 ) The ﬁrst term in eq . S51 is zero , by the deﬁnition of collision invariants . The second term is also equal to zero , because each of the four terms individually integrate to zero . The logic for each term is identical , so we will focus on f m f m ∗ g D ∗ : q ( g , D ∗ ) ≡ − 12 R R 2 R S B ( ~ v ∗ , ~ v , ˆ n ) f m f m ∗ g D ∗ d ~ v ∗ d ˆ n = − 12 gf m R R 2 R S B ( ~ v ∗ , ~ v , ˆ n ) D ∗ f m ∗ d ~ v ∗ d ˆ n ( S52 ) Recall that the collision kernel B for hard disk collisions is a linear function of relative velocity . Therefore , eq . S52 is a ﬁrst - order moment of D f m , which must equal zero by construction ( see eq . S39 ) . The other terms in eq . S51 can all be likewise shown to equal zero by exchange of velocity variables and use of eq . S49 . 13 S4 . 5 . Invertibility of the matrix A A can be written as the element - wise expectation over f m D − 1 of the symmetric matrix : E f m D − 1   1 v x v y | ~ v | 2 . v 2 x v x v y v x | ~ v | 2 . . v 2 y v y | ~ v | 2 . . . | ~ v | 4   ( S53 ) This matrix can be written as the outer product of two vectors ( therefore it has rank one ) : (cid:2) 1 v x v y | ~ v | 2 (cid:3) > (cid:2) 1 v x v y | ~ v | 2 (cid:3) ( S54 ) Despite this , A is generically invertible . The element - wise expectation promotes the matrix to full rank . If we temporarily adopt the notation of h φ i = R φD − 1 f m d ~ v , A can be written as :   h 1 i h v x i h v y i h | ~ v | 2 i h v x i h v 2 x i h v x v y i h v x | ~ v | 2 i h v y i h v x v y i h v 2 y i h v y | ~ v | 2 i h | ~ v | 2 i h v x | ~ v | 2 i h v y | ~ v | 2 i h | ~ v | 4 i   ( S55 ) The determinant of this matrix can be found by cofactor expansion along the ﬁrst column . If we examine the determinant of the ﬁrst of the four 3 × 3 matrices which make up A , we ﬁnd that a term composed of the diﬀerence of permutations of expectation values is produced : h 1 i (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) h v 2 x i h v x v y i h v x | ~ v | 2 i h v x v y i h v 2 y i h v y | ~ v | 2 i h v x | ~ v | 2 i h v y | ~ v | 2 i h | ~ v | 4 i (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ( S56 ) = h 1 i (cid:0) h v 2 x ih v 2 y i − h v x v y i 2 (cid:1) h | ~ v | 4 i + h 1 i (cid:0) h v x v y ih v x ih v y i + h v x i 2 h v y i 2 − h v 2 x ih v y i 2 − h v x i 2 h v 2 y i (cid:1) h | ~ v | 2 i 2 ( S57 ) which will be nonzero due to the non - independence of the terms being exchanged through the expectation operator . All four sub - matrices follow this same pattern , with no requirements on the form of D − 1 . Provided that D > 0 across the velocity plane , A can be numerically inverted without diﬃculty . S4 . 6 . Diameter functions approaching zero The expression for the thinker gas involves the term 1 / D , implying that particle diameters must always remain ﬁnite for reasonable solutions to exist . As a demonstration , we can construct a diameter function with a single minimum which is nonzero by a small value ε : D ( ~ v , ε ) = 1 − e − ( | ~ v | 2 / v th ) 2 + ε ( S58 ) where v th is the mean thermal speed of particles . In ﬁg . S4 slices through the velocity distribution function for various values of ε are shown . As ε → 0 , a probability density spike develops . This can be understood physically by considering the rate of collision for particles near the minimum . Such particles have greatly reduced collision rates ( and so change velocities very slowly ) compared to particles at velocities with ﬁnite diameters . For a D with a true zero , particles would never leave the point of phase space where collisions could not occur . This region would behave as a particle sink , from which it would be impossible to scatter back out of . Accordingly , the distribution function would become a delta function and the distribution entropy would diverge . The approach to that divergence is shown by the cuts in ﬁg . S4 . 14 Fig . S4 : Velocity distribution function for thinker gases with a minima approaching zero . A slice through v y = 0 of the velocity distribution function ( f t ) for a diameter function D = 1 − e − | ~ v | 2 / v 2 th + ε . As the minimum of D approaches zero , a density spike in velocity space develops . S5 . EXPLICIT FORM OF A FOR SELECT D ( ~ v ) The matrix A which deﬁnes the thinker gas velocity distribution function involves ﬁnding the expectation value ( over the MB distribution ) of several functions of velocity multiplied with the inverse diameter function ( D ) . For arbitrary D these Gaussian integrals may become too cumbersome to ﬁnd analytically , and numerical integration is expedient . In this appendix we will present explicit equations for the A matrices of two special D functions - a diameter step function , and an anisotropic Gaussian diameter function . These matrices may in principle be inverted analytically through a process such as ﬁnding the adjugate matrix . The equations for such a process rapidly become unwieldy however , so we will instead use a semi - analytical approach of ﬁnding A exactly , then performing a numerical inverse and estimating small - value derivatives of the relevant constants a , b x , b y , and c numerically . This numerical procedure can of course be extended to estimate the values of the A matrix for diameter functions which do not admit feasible analytic integration . S5 . 1 . Step function A convenient diameter function can be written using the Heaviside step function : D ( ~ v ) = D s + ( D l − D s ) H − ~ v · ~ ξ | ~ v | ! ( S59 ) As we will require D − 1 in many formulas , it is useful to express this also with the Heaviside function : D − 1 ( ~ v ) = 1 D l + (cid:18) 1 D s − 1 D l (cid:19) H − ~ v · ~ ξ | ~ v | ! ( S60 ) where D s and D l are the small and large diameters respectively , and ~ ξ is the normal vector of the large / small decision boundary . We will only consider ﬁxed ~ ξ = (cid:2) 1 0 (cid:3) here . The value of the Heaviside step function at zero will here be taken to be zero ( as opposed to 1 / 2 ) . With this choice of ~ ξ , integrals over the velocity plane can be split into an integral over the entire plane in addition to an integral over the half plane ( x > 0 ) . Using well - known expressions for Gaussian integrals of the form R x n N ( x ) [ 35 ] , the following components of the A matrix can be found for a Maxwell - Boltzmann distribution in 2D with bulk velocity ~ u , thermal energy k b T and gas density ρ . Where it appears , erf ( ) refers to the standard error function . 15 A 11 = Z D − 1 f m = 1 D l + 1 2 (cid:18) 1 D s − 1 D l (cid:19) (cid:18) 1 − erf (cid:18) − u x r m 2 k b T (cid:19)(cid:19) ( S61 ) A 12 = A 21 = Z v x D − 1 f m = 1 D l u x + (cid:18) 1 D s − 1 D l (cid:19) 1 2 u x (cid:18) erf (cid:18) − u x r m 2 k b T (cid:19) − 1 (cid:19) − r k b T 2 πme − m 2 kbT u 2 x ! ( S62 ) A 13 = A 31 = Z v y D − 1 f m = 1 D l u y + (cid:18) 1 D s − 1 D l (cid:19) 1 2 u y (cid:18) 1 − erf (cid:18) − u x r m 2 k b T (cid:19)(cid:19) ( S63 ) A 14 = A 41 = Z | ~ v | 2 D − 1 f m = Z v 2 x D − 1 f m + Z v 2 y D − 1 f m = A 22 + A 33 ( S64 ) A 22 = Z v 2 x D − 1 f m = 1 D l (cid:18) u 2 x + k b T m (cid:19) + 1 2 (cid:18) 1 D s − 1 D l (cid:19) (cid:18) u 2 x + k b T m (cid:19) (cid:18) 1 − erf (cid:18) − u x r m 2 k b T (cid:19)(cid:19) + u x r k b T 2 mπ e − m 2 kbT u 2 x ! ( S65 ) A 33 = Z v 2 y D − 1 f m = 1 D l (cid:18) u 2 y + k b T m (cid:19) + 1 2 (cid:18) 1 D s − 1 D l (cid:19) (cid:18) u 2 y + k b T m (cid:19) (cid:18) 1 − erf (cid:18) − u x r m 2 k b T (cid:19)(cid:19) ( S66 ) A 23 = A 32 = Z v x v y D − 1 f m = 1 D l u x u y + (cid:18) 1 D s − 1 D l (cid:19) u x u y 2 (cid:18) 1 − erf (cid:18) − u x r m 2 k b T (cid:19)(cid:19) + u y r k b T 2 πme − m 2 kbT u 2 x ! ( S67 ) A 24 = A 42 = Z v x | ~ v | 2 D − 1 f m = Z v 3 x D − 1 f m + Z v x v 2 y D − 1 f m ( S68 ) Z v 3 x D − 1 f m = 1 D l u x (cid:18) u 2 x + 3 k b T m (cid:19) + (cid:18) 1 D s − 1 D l (cid:19) u x 2 (cid:18) u 2 x + 3 k b T m (cid:19) (cid:18) 1 − erf (cid:18) − u x r m 2 k b T (cid:19)(cid:19) + (cid:18) u 2 x 2 + k b T m (cid:19) r 2 k b T πm e − u 2 x m 2 kbT ! ! Z v x v 2 y D − 1 f m = 1 D l u x (cid:18) u 2 y + k b T m (cid:19) + (cid:18) 1 D s − 1 D l (cid:19) (cid:18) u 2 y + kT m (cid:19) 1 2 u x (cid:18) 1 − erf (cid:18) − u x r m 2 k b T (cid:19)(cid:19) + r k b T 2 πme − m 2 kbT u 2 x ! A 34 = A 43 = Z v y | ~ v | 2 D − 1 f m = Z v y v 2 x D − 1 f m + Z v 3 y D − 1 f m ( S69 ) Z v y v 2 x D − 1 f m = 1 D l u y (cid:18) u 2 x + k b T m (cid:19) + (cid:18) 1 D s − 1 D l (cid:19) (cid:20) 1 2 u y r m 2 k b T (cid:18) u 2 x + k b T m (cid:19) (cid:18) 1 − erf (cid:18) − u x r m 2 k b T (cid:19)(cid:19) + u x u y 2 √ π e − u 2 x m 2 kbT (cid:21) Z v 3 y D − 1 f m = u y (cid:18) u 2 y + 3 k b T m (cid:19) (cid:20) 1 D l + 1 2 (cid:18) 1 D s − 1 D l (cid:19) (cid:18) 1 − erf (cid:18) − u x r m 2 k b T (cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:21) 16 A 44 = Z | ~ v | 4 D − 1 f m = Z v 4 x D − 1 f m + 2 v 2 x v 2 y D − 1 f m + v 4 y D − 1 f m ( S70 ) Z v 4 x D − 1 f m = (cid:18) u 4 x + 6 k b T m u 2 x + 3 k b T 2 m 2 (cid:19) × (cid:20) 1 D l + 1 2 (cid:18) 1 D s − 1 D l (cid:19) (cid:18) 1 − erf (cid:18) − u x r m 2 k b T (cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:21) + (cid:18) 1 D s − 1 D l (cid:19) r k b T 2 πmu x e − u x √ m 2 kbT (cid:18) u 2 x + 5 k b T m (cid:19) Z 2 v 2 x v 2 y D − 1 f m = 2 D l (cid:18) u 2 x + k b T m (cid:19) (cid:18) u 2 y + k b T m (cid:19) + (cid:18) 1 D s − 1 D l (cid:19) (cid:18) u 2 y + k b T m (cid:19) " (cid:18) u 2 x + k b T m (cid:19) (cid:18) 1 − erf (cid:18) − u x r m 2 k b T (cid:19)(cid:19) + r 2 k b T πm u x e − u 2 x m 2 kbT # Z v 4 y D − 1 f m = (cid:18) u 4 y + 6 k b T m u 2 y + 3 k b T 2 m 2 (cid:19) (cid:20) 1 D l + (cid:18) 1 D s − 1 D l (cid:19) (cid:18) 1 − erf (cid:18) − u x r m 2 k b T (cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:21) S5 . 2 . Anisotropic gaussian diameter function Another form for D with comparatively simple integrals to compute is an anisotropic Gaussian : D = e − γ x m 2 kbT ( v x − u x ) 2 e − γ y m 2 kbT ( v y − u y ) 2 ( S71 ) where ~ u is again the average velocity of the gas . The relative values of the constants γ x and γ x control the degree of anisotropy . This diameter function is particularly convenient because it can be merged with the MB distribution and integrated using the same functional forms : A 11 = Z D − 1 f m = 1 √ 1 − γ x p 1 − γ y ( S72 ) A 12 = A 21 = Z v x D − 1 f m = u x p 1 − γ y √ 1 − γ x ( S73 ) A 13 = A 31 = Z v x D − 1 f m = u y p 1 − γ y √ 1 − γ x ( S74 ) A 14 = A 41 = A 22 + A 33 ( S75 ) A 22 = Z v 2 x D − 1 f m = 1 p 1 − γ y √ 1 − γ x (cid:18) u 2 x + k b T m 1 ( 1 − γ x ) (cid:19) ( S76 ) A 33 = Z v 2 y D − 1 f m = 1 p 1 − γ y √ 1 − γ x (cid:18) u 2 y + k b T m 1 ( 1 − γ y ) (cid:19) ( S77 ) A 23 = A 32 = Z v x v y D − 1 f m = u x u y √ 1 − γ x p 1 − γ y ( S78 ) A 24 = A 42 = Z v x | ~ v | 2 D − 1 f m = Z v 3 x D − 1 f m + Z v x v 2 y D − 1 f m ( S79 ) Z v 3 x D − 1 f m = u x √ 1 − γ x p 1 − γ y (cid:18) u 2 x + 3 k b T m 1 ( 1 − γ x ) (cid:19) Z v x v 2 y D − 1 f m = u x √ 1 − γ x p 1 − γ y (cid:18) u 2 y + k b T m 1 ( 1 − γ y ) (cid:19) 17 A 34 = A 43 = Z v y | ~ v | 2 D − 1 f m = Z v y v 2 x D − 1 f m + Z v 3 y D − 1 f m ( S80 ) Z v 3 y D − 1 f m = u y √ 1 − γ x p 1 − γ y (cid:18) u 2 y + 3 k b T m 1 ( 1 − γ y ) (cid:19) Z v y v 2 x D − 1 f m = u y √ 1 − γ x p 1 − γ y (cid:18) u 2 x + k b T m 1 ( 1 − γ x ) (cid:19) A 44 = Z v 4 x D − 1 f m + 2 Z v 2 x v 2 y D − 1 f m + Z v 4 y D − 1 f m ( S81 ) Z v 4 x D − 1 f m = 1 √ 1 − γ x p 1 − γ y u 4 x + u 2 x 6 k b T m 1 ( 1 − γ x ) + 3 (cid:18) k b T m ( 1 − γ x ) (cid:19) 2 ! Z 2 v 2 x v 2 y D − 1 f m = 2 √ 1 − γ x p 1 − γ y (cid:18) u 2 x + k b T m 1 ( 1 − γ x ) (cid:19) (cid:18) u 2 y + k b T m 1 ( 1 − γ y ) (cid:19) Z v 4 y D − 1 f m = 1 √ 1 − γ x p 1 − γ y u 4 y + u 2 y 6 k b T m 1 ( 1 − γ y ) + 3 (cid:18) k b T m ( 1 − γ y ) (cid:19) 2 ! S6 . FIRST ORDER HYDRODYNAMICS OF THE THINKER GAS In this section we comment on the consequences of the thinker gas for ﬁrst order hydrodynamics by examining the pressure tensor and heat ﬂux . This procedure follows the standard treatment of a passive gas described by the Maxwell - Boltzmann distribution ( see for instance , Kardar [ 33 ] ) , but instead utilizes the thinker gas distribution derived in section S4 . Quantities which are conserved microscopically relax at longer timescales than quantities which are not conserved in pair collisions these are denoted ‘hydrodynamic’ variables and are the main quantities to be described by a hydrody - namic theory . For elastic collisions particle number , components of linear momenta , and kinetic energy are conserved which result in hydrodynamic ﬁelds of density , ﬂow velocity , and temperature . By deﬁnition , the thinker gas also conserves these quantities ( however it has the freedom to redistribute conserved quantities over microscopic degrees of freedom ) . Regardless of the detailed form , the collision term in equation S30 can be replaced with the left - hand side of the Boltzmann equation , yielding the following expression for the evolution of a test function φ : d dt h φ i = Z R 2 φ (cid:20) ∂ t + v i ∂ i + F i m ∂ ∂v i (cid:21) f ( ~ x , ~ v , t ) = 0 ( S82 ) where indices i are over Cartesian coordinates . This equation can be manipulated to yield an evolution equation for expectation values of the function φ : ∂ t ( ρ h φ i ) + ∂ i ( ρ h v i φ i ) − ρ h ∂ t φ i − ρ h v i ∂ i φ i − ρF i m h ∂φ / ∂v i i = 0 ( S83 ) Each of the conserved quantities can be evaluated with this expression to yield familiar hydrodynamic relations . First we deﬁne the local velocity , thermal velocity , pressure tensor , rate of strain tensor , and local kinetic energy and heat ﬂux : u i = h v i i ( S84 ) p i = v i − u i ( S85 ) P ij = mρ h p i p j i ( S86 ) u ij = 1 2 ( ∂ i u i + ∂ j u j ) ( S87 ) (cid:15) = h 1 2 m | ~ p | 2 i = h 1 2 m | ~ v | 2 − mv · ~ u + 1 2 m | ~ u | 2 i ( S88 ) q = 1 2 mρ h p i | ~ p | 2 i ( S89 ) 18 Hydrodynamic equations pertaining to the conservation of mass , momentum and energy read : ∂ t ρ + ∂ i ( ρu i ) = 0 ( S90 ) ∂ t u i + u j ∂ j u i = F i m − 1 mρ∂ j P ij ( S91 ) ∂ t (cid:15) + u i ∂ i (cid:15) = − 1 ρ∂ i q i − 1 ρP ij u ij ( S92 ) In order to close this set of equations a form for the pressure tensor and heat ﬂux is needed . These objects are found by taking expectation values of the single - particle probability distribution function , which is in general a function of space , velocity , and time . We will instead follow the standard approach of using a ﬁrst order approximation of these quantities , found by taking modiﬁed expectation values over the homogeneous , steady - state distribution function derived in appendix S4 . We begin in the usual way by noting that a mean free path timescale exists , which in the ﬁxed - diameter case is approximately τ × ≈ 1 ρv th D ( S93 ) where ρ is the number density of particles , v th is a typical particle speed , and D is a ﬁxed diameter . For the thinker gas , the above expression may be modiﬁed by considering that the mean diameter of the gas is the expectation of the diameter function over the velocity distribution : h D i f t = Z Df t = Z D ( 1 + D ) f m ( S94 ) For the purposes of this derivation , the mean diameter of the thinker gas will be considered to be ﬁxed , and so τ × is taken to be the same in all directions . If we denote the previously discussed thinker gas velocity distribution for a homogeneous , steady - state gas as f 0 t , we now seek a ﬁrst - order description of the deviations from this form ( denoted f 1 t ) . We set f 1 t = f 0 t ( 1 + h ) , where h describes this small deviation . Furthermore , we linearize the thinker collision operator as : Q Ld [ f 1 t ] ≈ − f 0 t h τ × ( S95 ) Using the following form of the Boltzmann equation which includes the eﬀects of external forces ( ~ F ) : ∂f ∂t + ~ v · ∇ ~ x f + ~ F m · ∇ ~ v f = Q ( f ) ( S96 ) L [ f ] = Q ( f ) ( S97 ) where L [ f ] = [ ∂ / ∂ t + v i ∂ / ∂ i + ( F i / m ) ∂ / ∂ v i ] f is a linear diﬀerential operator . Using the linearized collision operator approximation , L [ f 1 t ] ≈ − f 0 t h τ × ( S98 ) h = − τ × 1 f 0 t L [ f 1 t ] ≈ − τ × L [ ln f 0 t ] ( S99 ) where only the leading term as been retained . We now examine the term L [ ln f 0 t ] : ln f 0 t = ln ( f 0 m ( 1 + D ) ) = ln ( f 0 m D − 1 g ) ( S100 ) = ln f 0 m − ln D + ln ( a + ~ b · ~ v + c | ~ v | 2 ) ( S101 ) L [ ln f 0 t ] = L [ ln f 0 m ] − L [ ln D ] + L [ ln ( a + ~ b · ~ v + c | v | 2 ) ] ( S102 ) 19 We can express h = h m − h D + h g to emphasize that three terms contribute to the ﬁrst order deviations . The ﬁrst term , h m , is unchanged from the standard ﬁrst - order treatment of an equilibrium gas . Since we are only considering time - invariant diameter functions which are functions of velocity only , the second term will be equal to − h D = − ( F i / ( mD ) ) ∂D / ∂v i . Within the bulk of a gas with negligible body forces , this term will not contribute . The ﬁnal term pertaining to the collision invariant g will have time and space derivatives arising from variations in the ﬁelds T ( ~ x , t ) , ~ u ( ~ x , t ) , and ρ ( ~ x , t ) , as the values of a , ~ b , c are constant for constant T , ~ u , ρ . We will denote such ﬁelds as Φ , and approximate the derivative of the constants ( ∂ / ∂ Φ ) [ a , b i , c ] = [ a Φ , b Φ i , c Φ ] . If we focus on a single term of the L operator , v i ∂ / ∂ i ( i . e . a steady - state , boundary - less system ) , and assume only a single ﬁeld has spatial variation , we can illustrate the contributions from h g . v i ∂ln g ∂x i = ∂g / ∂r i g ( S103 ) = ( a Φ + v j b Φ j + c Φ | ~ v | 2 ) 1 g ∂ Φ ∂x i ( S104 ) The expectation of ﬁrst order - quantities like the pressure tensor and heat ﬂux can be found by integration over the perturbed zeroth - order distribution : hOi 1 = Z O f 0 t ( 1 + h ) = hOi 0 + h h Oi 0 ( S105 ) = hOi 0 + h h m Oi 0 − h h D Oi 0 + h h g Oi 0 ( S106 ) For the pressure tensor ( O = P ij ) and the heat ﬂux ( O = q i ) , the contributions from the term h h m Oi are unchanged from the standard treatment of a passive gas , resulting in heat ﬂux terms which relax thermal gradients and oﬀ - diagonal pressure terms which relax shear ﬂows . As noted above , the contributions from h D will often be unimportant , so we focus on the term h h g Oi . The following forms of the pressure tensor and heat ﬂux can be found : P ij = mρ X k Z f m D − 1 ( a Φ + v l b Φ l + c Φ | ~ v | 2 ) ∂ Φ ∂x k v k p i p j ( S107 ) q i = 1 2 mρ X k Z f m D − 1 ( a Φ + v l b Φ l + c Φ | ~ v | 2 ) ∂ Φ ∂x k v k p i | ~ p | 2 ( S108 ) Several remarks can be made about the ﬁrst - order thinker corrections to P ij and q i , however ﬁrst some comment about velocity reference frames must be made . The velocity , thermal velocity , and local velocity are related by ~ p = ~ v − ~ u . Kinetic theory is largely conducted in the ~ u co - moving frame , which allows for the deﬁnition of familiar pressures , ﬂuxes and temperatures . As the Maxwell - Boltzmann distribution is also deﬁned in this frame , all is well . However for the thinker gas , we may deﬁne the particle’s function of velocity in a global coordinate frame , or a local coordinate frame ( D ( ~ v ) or D ( ~ p ) ) . In this work we have chosen to use D ( ~ v ) , except in the case of the anisotropic Gaussian function deﬁned in appendix S5 . This is because in any practical realization of a device like the thinkers described here , it is likely that knowledge of velocity in the global coordinate frame will be desirable or even required . In order for the operation of thinkers to induce ﬂuxes towards a goal region , thinkers must be aware of the large - scale coordinate system which locates themselves and the target region . Furthermore , in such a case they are unconcerned with local ﬂuxes relative to nearby ﬂow , but rather absolute ﬂuxes towards or away from the target . Another consideration is the complexity of estimating the local average velocity of neighboring thinker particles . Simplistic methods of determining position ( and hence velocity ) such as utilizing a light gradient [ 36 ] inform particles of their coordinates in a global frame . Using similar methods to determine relative velocities to neighbors also raises a question of length scale - over what distance , practically , should particles consider their ‘local’ velocity neighborhood to extend ? Finally , the removal of a global coordinate frame for thinker particles would necessitate each particle to have an orientation vector . As this study concerns isotropic particles , particle orientations will not evolve during simulations unless an orientation - coupling force is deﬁned , in a manner analogous to the Toner - Tu model of ﬂocking [ 15 ] . For isotropic thinkers , such a choice would be arbitrary . The mixed velocity components in eqs . S107 and S108 reﬂect the diﬀerent considerations inherent to the operation of thinkers and the deﬁnition of the hydrodynamic equations of motion . First let us consider the case of | ~ u | = 0 , in which ~ p = ~ v . In that case , the pressure tensor contains only one even moment of velocity and the term f m D − 1 . If D and f m have inversion symmetry about the same point , then only the even term ( P k R f m D − 1 v l v k v i v j b Φ l ∂ Φ / ∂x i ) will contribute to the pressure tensor corrections . However in the case of inversion - symmetric D , the constants b i are 20 Fig . S5 : Expansion ratio controls pattern ﬁdelity . Patterns formed by dropping thinker grains with diﬀering large and small diameter ratios . Larger ratios substantially improve pattern ﬁdelity . zero and no heat ﬂuxes arise in the quiescent ﬂuid . Conversely , in the heat ﬂux tensor all terms except for derivatives of b i are even moments , and therefore contribute to heat ﬂuxes in the presence of temperature gradients . Fluids with bulk ﬂows ( | ~ u | 6 = 0 ) will have contributions from ﬁrst order - corrections to both heat ﬂuxes and the pressure tensor . S7 . PATTERN RESOLUTION IN DROPPED THINKER GRAINS The ability of thinkers to form and maintain patterns was principally a function of the ratio of their large and small diameter states . Figure S5 shows this trend for diameter ratios ranging from D l / D s = 1 . 5 → 4 . S8 . DESCRIPTION OF SUPPLEMENTAL VIDEOS S8 . 1 . Supplemental video S1 In this video , two species of thinker particles are dropped into a hard - sided box . They fall under a vertical force , while a drag force ( linear in velocity ) causes them to slowly lose energy and settle into a layer . Feedback control of thinker diameter allows the two species to separate and form a pre - programmed pattern . 21 S8 . 2 . Supplemental video S2 In this video , two species of thinker particles are continuously agitated while contained in a hard - sided box . Feedback control of thinker diameters allow the two species to form patterns , which are changed over time . The thinkers can therefore write sequences of symbols , as shown here with an equation . [ 1 ] L . Zhu , E . Lauga , and L . Brandt , Physics of ﬂuids 24 , 051902 ( 2012 ) . [ 2 ] P . Romanczuk , M . B¨ar , W . Ebeling , B . Lindner , and L . Schimansky - Geier , The European Physical Journal Special Topics 202 , 1 ( 2012 ) . [ 3 ] A . Doostmohammadi , J . Ign´es - Mullol , J . M . Yeomans , and F . Sagu´es , Nature communications 9 , 1 ( 2018 ) . [ 4 ] T . Sanchez , D . T . N . Chen , S . J . DeCamp , M . Heymann , and Z . Dogic , Nature 491 , 431 ( 2012 ) , ISSN 1476 - 4687 , URL http : / / www . nature . com / articles / nature11591 . [ 5 ] I . Buttinoni , J . Bialk´e , F . K¨ummel , H . L¨owen , C . Bechinger , and T . Speck , Physical Review Letters 110 , 238301 ( 2013 ) , publisher : American Physical Society , URL https : / / link . aps . org / doi / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 110 . 238301 . [ 6 ] J . Palacci , S . Sacanna , A . P . Steinberg , D . J . Pine , and P . M . Chaikin , Science 339 , 936 ( 2013 ) , publisher : American Association for the Advancement of Science , URL http : / / www . science . org / doi / full / 10 . 1126 / science . 1230020 . [ 7 ] C . Bechinger , R . Di Leonardo , H . L¨owen , C . Reichhardt , G . Volpe , and G . Volpe , Reviews of Modern Physics 88 , 045006 ( 2016 ) . [ 8 ] J . Tailleur and M . Cates , Physical review letters 100 , 218103 ( 2008 ) . [ 9 ] A . Bricard , J . - B . Caussin , N . Desreumaux , O . Dauchot , and D . Bartolo , Nature 503 , 95 ( 2013 ) . [ 10 ] A . Bricard , J . - B . Caussin , D . Das , C . Savoie , V . Chikkadi , K . Shitara , O . Chepizhko , F . Peruani , D . Saintillan , and D . Bartolo , Nature communications 6 , 1 ( 2015 ) . [ 11 ] J . Deseigne , O . Dauchot , and H . Chat´e , Physical review letters 105 , 098001 ( 2010 ) . [ 12 ] M . C . Marchetti , J . - F . Joanny , S . Ramaswamy , T . B . Liverpool , J . Prost , M . Rao , and R . A . Simha , Reviews of modern physics 85 , 1143 ( 2013 ) . [ 13 ] T . H . Tan , A . Mietke , J . Li , Y . Chen , H . Higinbotham , P . J . Foster , S . Gokhale , J . Dunkel , and N . Fakhri , Nature 607 , 287 ( 2022 ) . [ 14 ] H . Leﬀ and A . F . Rex , Maxwell’s Demon 2 Entropy , Classical and Quantum Information , Computing ( CRC Press , 2002 ) . [ 15 ] J . Toner and Y . Tu , Phys . Rev . E 58 , 4828 ( 1998 ) . [ 16 ] J . Gelles and R . Landick , Cell 93 , 13 ( 1998 ) . [ 17 ] J . F . Sydow and P . Cramer , Current opinion in structural biology 19 , 732 ( 2009 ) . [ 18 ] A . L . Gnatt , P . Cramer , J . Fu , D . A . Bushnell , and R . D . Kornberg , Science 292 , 1876 ( 2001 ) . [ 19 ] I . Artsimovitch and R . Landick , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 97 , 7090 ( 2000 ) . [ 20 ] V . R . Tadigotla , D . ´O . Maoil´eidigh , A . M . Sengupta , V . Epshtein , R . H . Ebright , E . Nudler , and A . E . Ruckenstein , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 , 4439 ( 2006 ) . [ 21 ] H . Kettenberger , K . - J . Armache , and P . Cramer , Cell 114 , 347 ( 2003 ) . [ 22 ] D . A . Erie , O . Hajiseyedjavadi , M . C . Young , and P . H . von Hippel , Science 262 , 867 ( 1993 ) . [ 23 ] M . T . Marr and J . W . Roberts , Molecular cell 6 , 1275 ( 2000 ) . [ 24 ] E . A . Abbondanzieri , W . J . Greenleaf , J . W . Shaevitz , R . Landick , and S . M . Block , Nature 438 , 460 ( 2005 ) . [ 25 ] J . M . Parrondo , J . M . Horowitz , and T . Sagawa , Nature physics 11 , 131 ( 2015 ) . [ 26 ] F . J . Cao and M . Feito , Physical Review E 79 , 041118 ( 2009 ) . [ 27 ] T . M . Cover and J . A . Thomas , Elements of information theory ( Wiley - Interscience , 2006 ) . [ 28 ] P . J . Flory and J . Rehner , The Journal of Chemical Physics 11 , 512 ( 1943 ) , URL https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1063 / 1 . 1723791 . [ 29 ] L . G . Treloar , The physics of rubber elasticity ( OUP Oxford , 1975 ) . [ 30 ] K . Wojciechowski and A . Bra´nka , Physics Letters A 134 , 314 ( 1989 ) , ISSN 0375 - 9601 , URL https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / 0375960189906427 . [ 31 ] B . VanSaders , J . Dshemuchadse , and S . C . Glotzer , Physical Review Materials 2 , 063604 ( 2018 ) . [ 32 ] C . Cercignani , R . Illner , and M . Pulvirenti , The Mathematical Theory of Dilute Gases , Applied Mathematical Sciences ( Springer New York , 1994 ) , ISBN 9780387942940 . [ 33 ] M . Kardar , Statistical physics of particles ( Cambridge University Press , 2007 ) . [ 34 ] C . Cercignani , Journal of statistical physics 58 , 817 ( 1990 ) . [ 35 ] N . E . Korotkov and A . N . Korotkov , Integrals Related to the Error Function ( CRC Press , 2020 ) . [ 36 ] S . Li , R . Batra , D . Brown , H . - D . Chang , N . Ranganathan , C . Hoberman , D . Rus , and H . Lipson , Nature 567 , 361 ( 2019 ) .